 Page 1 of 27 10-123  SBRT  for close or positive margins after resection of pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma  
A prospective evaluation in select patients with resected  pancreas cancer  (Version 4, 
6/29/2011)  
 
 
Study Chair:   Dwight E. Heron, MD, FACRO  
   Associate Professor  
   Department  of Radiation Oncology  
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute  
5230 Centre Avenue  
   Pittsburgh, PA 15232  
heronD2@upmc.edu  
Ph. (412) 623 6720  
Fax (412) 623-4050  
 
Co-Chair:   Rodney E. Wegner, MD  
   Resident Physician  
   Department of Radiation Oncology  
   University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute  
   5230 Centre Avenue  
   Pittsburgh, PA 15232  
   wegnerr@upmc.edu   
   Ph (412) 623 -6722  
   Fax (412)623 -6725  
 
 
Study Co -Investigators:  Radiation Oncology  
Susan Rakfal, MD  (rakfalsm@upmc.edu )  
Steven A. Burton, MD ( burtons@upmc.edu ) 
John C. Flickinger, MD( flickingerjc@upmc.edu ) 
Cihat Ozhasoglu, PhD  (ozhasogluc@upmc.edu ) 
Annette Quinn, M SN, OCN ( quinnae@upmc.edu ) 
 
Surgery  
Kenneth Lee, MD ( leek@upmc.edu )  
A. James Moser, MD ( moseraj@upmc.edu )  
Herbert Zeh, MD ( zehxhx@upmc.edu ) 
 
Pathology  
Alyssa Krasinskas, MD ( kasam@upmc.edu ) 
 
Biostatistics  
Hong Wang, PhD ( how8@pitt.edu ) 
 
 
 
 Page 2 of 27 10-123  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  …………………………………………………………………………… 4 
 
1.0 BACKGROUND  …………………………………………………………………………...……… 5 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  ……… …………………………………………………………………………….. 8 
 
3.0 INVESTIGATIONAL P LAN……………………………… …………………………………….. 9 
 
4.0 SUBJECT SELECTION AND ELIGIBILITY………………………………………………… 11 
 
5.0 TREATMENT EVALUATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND MODIFICATION  …………. 13 
 
6.0 STUDY EVALUATIO NS ……………………………………………………………………… 15 
 
7.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS …………………………………………………………. 18 
 
8.0 DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING ………………………………………………………... 20 
 
9.0 REFERENCES ……………………………………………………………………………… …22 
 
 
 Page 3 of 27 10-123  List o f Abbreviations  
 
3D CRT   3 Dimension Conformal External Beam Radiation Therapy  
5-FU   5-fluorouracil  
AE                               Adver se Event  
CR   Complete Response  
CT Scan   Computed Tomography Scan  
CTCAE   Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
CTV    Clinical Treatment Volume  
CXR    Chest X -Ray 
DSMC    Data Safety Monitoring Committee  
EBRT    External Beam Radiation Therapy  
ECOG    Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group  
FACT -G Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy - General  
FDG -PET/CT  [18F] -flourodeoxyglucose Positron Emissions Tomography / Computed 
Tomography  
Fx   Fraction  
Gy   Gray  
LPFS    Local Progression -Free Survival  
MD   Maximum Dose  
OS   Overall Survival  
PD   Prescription Dose  
PD   Progressive Disease  
PET/CT   Positron Emissions Tomography / Computed Tomography  
PIV   Prescription Isodose Volume  
PIV/TV   Prescription Isodose Volume/Tumor Volume  
PTV    Planning Target Volume  
QOL    Quality of Life 
RT   Radiation Therapy  
RTOG    Radiation Therapy Oncology Group  
SD   Stable Disease  
SBRT    Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy  
TTP   Time to Progression  
TV   Tumor Volume  
WOOCBP   Women of Child -Bearing Potential  
 
 Page 4 of 27 10-123  PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Title  
Stereotacti c Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) for close or positive margins following resection of 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma   
 
Objectives  
The primary  objectives of this study are to:  
1. To determine the rate of local progression -free survival (LPFS) achieved in subjects with  close (<2.5 
mm) or positive margins after pancreatic cancer resection treated with SBRT  
 
The secondary  objectives of this study are to:  
1. To determine the time to progression (TTP) and overall survival (OS)  
2. To evaluate the acute and late toxicities associated  with SBRT  in this patient population  
3. To evaluate quality of life (QOL) of locally -advanced pancreatic cancer subject s treated adjuvantly  
with SBRT  
 
Subject  population  
Subject s with primary adenocarcinoma of the pancreas that has been resected with positi ve margins or 
close margins (<2.5 mm)    
 
Specific inclusion and exclusion criteria are detailed in Section 4. 0 
 
Number of subject s 
50 
 
Study design and methodology  
This is a phase II study.  
 
Treatments administered  
12 Gy x 3 fractions (36 Gy total)  
 
 
Efficacy data collected  
The following evaluations will be conducted to assess the efficacy of SBRT:  
• Local progression -free survival (LPFS)  
• Locoregional and distant control  
• Time -to-progression (TTP)  
 
Safety data collected  
The following evaluations will be con ducted to assess the safety of SBRT:  
• Recording of all toxicity data per NCI CTC AE version 4.0 
• Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy – General (FACT -G) 
 
 Page 5 of 27 10-123   1.0 BACKGROUND  
 
1.1 Adenocarcinoma of the pancreas  
Pancreatic cancer is the 4th leading cause of death f rom cancer of both men and women in the United 
States.  There are expected to be 37,680 new cases and 34,290 deaths in the United States in 2008.  
Despite intensive research efforts into chemotherapy and radiotherapy, surgical resection remains 
the only tr eatment option associated with long -term survival.  Unfortunately, pancreatic cancer is 
rarely resectable upon diagnosis, with approximately 40% presenting with locally -advanced but 
unresectable disease and an additional 40% presenting with metastatic dise ase.  Within the United 
States, the 5 -year survivals for local, locally -advanced and distant disease are 20%, 8% and 2% 
respectively, resulting in an overall 5 -year survival f or pancreatic cancer of only 5% (1).   These 
values represent all pancreatic cance rs.  Adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, representing more than 
90% of all cases, is believed to be the most aggressive malignanc y with an even worse prognosis.  
For patients that are able to undergo surgical resection, the choice of adjuvant therapy remains 
controversial with data available for anything ranging from observation to chemoradiation.  
 
 
1.2 Radiation therapy as adjuvant treatment in  pancreatic adenocarcinoma  
For many years chemoradiation was considered the standard of care after patients underwent  
resection of pancreatic carcinoma.  This was mainly based on a small phase III randomized control 
trial by the Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group (GITSG) (2).  This trial randomized 43 patients to 
surgery with or without adjuvant 5 -FU based chemoradiation .  The radiation was delivered using 
outdated techniques (AP/PA and in a split course) to a total dose of 40 Gy.  The patients in the 
experimental arm also received 2 years of adjuvant 5 -FU.  The experimental arm had a median OS 
of 20 months compared to 11  months in the control arm.  Regardless, 50% of patients in both arms 
still developed local recurrence.  There are also two large retrospective series from Johns Hopkins 
and the Mayo clinic.  The JHU series contains over 600 patients, with 44% having recei ved 5 -FU 
based CRT to a median dose of 50 Gy.  The other 44% did not receive adjuvant therapy.  The CRT 
group had a median OS of 21.2 months compared to 14.4 months in the observation group (3).  The 
Mayo series had 472 patients, all with an R0 resection.  The median RT dose was 50.4 Gy and 
almost all patients received 5 -FU.  The median OS again favored CRT with a median OS of 25.2 
months compared to 19.2 months in patients who were observed (4).   
 
A few other studies have examined other adjuvant CRT regim ens utilizing non -5-FU-based 
chemotherapy.  RTOG 9704 compared gemcitabine to 5 -FU before and after 5 -FU based CRT.  The 
study included 451 patients with gross total resection.  The radiation dose was 50.4 Gy delivered 
using modern methods.  There was a tr end towards improved 3 year OS (31% vs. 22%) with the use 
of gemcitabine.  Local recurrence remained a significant source of failure, but was lower compared 
to older studies at approximately 25%.  Distant metastasis remained the most significant site of 
failure at greater than 70%, highlighting the importance of systemic therapy ( 5).  The ACOSOG also 
published a small phase II trial of 89 patients  with R0/1 resection of pancreatic head 
adenocarcinoma treated to 50.4 Gy along with chemotherapy.  The chemothe rapy was relatively 
intense, consisting of 5 -FU, cisplatin, and alpha interferon and 96% of patients had grade 3 toxicity 
or greater.  Despite such intense therapy local recurrence still remained around 50%, but systemic 
therapy only made up 35% of failure s (6).   
 
1.3 Chemotherapy alone as adjuvant therapy  
There are a few key studies supporting the adjuvant use of chemotherapy alone after resection of 
pancreatic cancer.  ESPAC -1 was a complex 2x2 factorial designed study with over 500 patients.  
The arms w ere 5 -FU based CRT (split course technique), adjuvant 5 -FU/leucovorin alone, both 
 Page 6 of 27 10-123  CRT followed by chemo, or observation.  For all patients, chemotherapy improved median survival 
from 14 months to 19.7 months.  For patients that received chemotherapy the 5 year OS was 21% 
compared to 8%.  When analyzing the effect of CRT, it appeared to have a detriment, with a 5 year 
OS of 10% compared to 20% when chemoradiation was not given.  Drawbacks of this study include 
its complex design, use of outdated radiation te chniques, lack of RT quality assurance, and the 
ability of treating physicians to give “background” therapy ( 7).  The CONKO -001 study 
randomized 368 patients with a R0/R1 resection to observation of gemcitabine alone for 6 cycles.  
The use of adjuvant gemc itabine improved disease free survival from 7 months to 14 months, but 
not OS (22 months vs. 20 months) ( 8).  There was also a metaanalysis published in 2005 examining 
outcomes of patients in randomized adjuvant trials.  This study included 875 patients fr om 6 trials.  
The investigators found that chemotherapy improved median OS from 14 months to 19 months.  
Chemoradiation did not provide a statistically significant benefit (15.2 months to 15.8 months).  Of 
interest, on subgroup analysis it was determined t hat CRT was more effective for patients wit h a 
positive margin resection ( 9).   
 
 
1.3 Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT)  
SBRT is technique that combines highly conformal radiotherapy with real -time imaging to deliver 
high doses of radiation in a small n umber of fractions.  Modeled after intracranial stereotactic 
radiosurgery, SBRT has now been studied in a variety of extracranial locations including the spine, 
lung, liver, pancreas, and head and neck cancers.  Because of the precise targeting, SBRT has t he 
potential to improve upon the local control achieved with conventional EBRT while minimizing the 
dose to normal tissue.  Most prospective randomized trials of conventionally fractionated EBRT for 
the treatment of locally -advanced pancreatic cancer have reported  local control rates of 35% -55%  
(2-5).  Koong, et al established the feasibility of using SBRT for locally -advanced pancreatic cancer 
in a phase I dose escalation study which achieved 100% local control with no treatment limiting 
toxicities at 25 Gy in a single fraction  (10). A follow -up study combined conventionally fractionated 
5-FU chemoradiotherapy with an SBRT boost resulting in 94% local control but no improvement in 
overall survival and an increase in toxicity compared to SBRT alone  (11). A recent study combining 
full dose gemcitabine with single fraction SBRT reported 81% local control and 100% 1 -year 
freedom from local progression.  While acute toxicities were minimal, a significant number of 
subject s (47%) experienced Grade 2 or greater la te toxicities, primarily duodenal ulcers  (12).  It is 
possible that these late toxicities may be reduced by increasing the degree of conformance of the 
radiation dose cloud and increasing the number of fractions, as studies comparing conventionally 
fractio nated RT with hypofractionated RT have found an increase d incidence of late GI toxicities in 
the hypofractionated group  (13). 
 
Another advantage to SBRT is the fractionation schedule.  First, the entire course of treatment is 
often completed over 1 to 7 da ys versus the 5 to 8 weeks required for conventionally fractionated 
EBRT.  Second, the accelerated fractionation schedule could improve overall survival by allowing 
earlier systemic doses of chemotherapy.  Because pancreatic cancer is often characterized b y 
progression to metastatic disease, early delivery of systemic chemotherapy is imperative to address 
potential sites of microscopic disease.  In fact, some studies have evaluated the delivery of systemic 
chemotherapy followed by combined chemoradiotherapy  for those subject s without evidence of 
disease progression. This strategy selects those subject s most likely to benefit from the local control 
provided by radiotherapy and in two separate studies has resulted in significant increases in TTP and 
OS for subjects treated with chemoradiotherapy compared to those receiving chemotherapy alone  
(14-15).  
 
1.3.1 Experience with SBRT at the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute  
 Page 7 of 27 10-123  A retrospective review from our institution evaluated the outcome in 71 subject s with  intact 
pancreatic cancer treate d with SBRT  (16).  With a median follow -up of 12.7 months the freedom 
from local progression at 6 months and 1 year was 72% and 49%, respectively.   Median overall 
survival for the entire group was 10.3 months .  Treatment -related toxicity was minimal with only 3 
patients experiencing acute grade 3 toxicity (4%).  There was no recorded late toxicity.  We have 
been treating patients with close or positive margins with SBRT as well.  We recently  examined 
outcomes in 24 patients treated post -operatively with SBRT  (17).  Sixty -six percent of the patients 
had positive margins and the remainder had close margins of 1 -2.5mm.  The median follow -up was 
1 year.  The freedom from local progression at 6 months and 1 year was 95% and 66%.  There was 
no acute or late grade 3 -4 toxicity, and two patients (8% ) had late grade 1 -2 toxicity, again 
demonstrating that when done properly, SBRT has a low potential for toxicity.  
The current study seeks to further investigate the impact of SBRT followin g resection with a close 
or positive margin .  We hope to improve local control, and through the use of a shortened treatment 
schedule, allow patients to begin systemic therapy earlier.   
 
 Page 8 of 27 10-123   
2.0 OBJECTIVES  
 
 Primary  
 
2.1 To determine the rate of local progr ession -free survival (LPFS) with two years of follow -up in subject s 
with margin positive or close margins following resection of  pancreatic adenocarcinoma  treated with 
SBRT.  
 
Secondary  
 
2.2 To determine the time to progression (TTP) and overall survival (O S) in this patient population  
 
2.3 To evaluate the impact of SBRT on the QOL of subject s in the adjuvant setting  
 
2.5 To evaluate the acute and late toxicities associated with SBRT for pancreas cancer  
 
 
 Page 9 of 27 10-123  3.0 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
 
3.1 Overall design and pla n of the study  
Detailed visit -by-visit study procedures and a study flow chart are provided in Section 6. 0.  Prior to 
enrollment, all subject s will be evaluated with physical examination, review of surgical pathology, 
discussion in a multi -disciplinary set ting, review of imaging with the operating surgeon, and review 
of post operative  imaging to establish the target volume .    
 
3.2 Radiation simulation  
Contrast -enhanced CT based simulation will be obtained prior to any adjuvant treatment  (2-4 weeks  
post-op depending on healing ).   The target volume will be indentified based on fiducial marker 
placement at time of surgery as well as a detailed discussion and image review with the operating 
surgeon.   This are a will be contoured on axial CT images obtained at  1.25 mm slice thickness.  
These volumes will then be reconstructed into a 3 -dimensional image set for SBRT planning.  
Subject s will be simulated in the treatment position (supine with arms raised) on the CT scanner 
table the appropriate  immobilization.   Optiray® contrast (125 mL Optiray 350; 350 mg/mL 
organically bound iodine; Ioversol; Mallinckrodt Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) will be administered 
intravenously at a flow rate of 2.5 mL/s. A helical CT scan of the abdomen will be acquired with 
intravenous con trast starting 30 seconds prior to CT acquisition.   
 
A 4D CT data acquisition for the same axial extent will be obtained. The images will then be 
electron ically transferred from the CT workstation via DICOM3 to the appropriate treatment 
planning workstati on in the department of radiation oncology.  Based on axial CT images, fiducial 
marker placement, review of the pathology report, and a detailed discussion with the operating 
surgeon, contours will be drawn of the clinical target volume (CTV), which is def ined as the area at 
risk for microscopic disease.  The planning target volume (PTV) will be equivalent to the CTV 
unless motion is detected on the 4D motion study.  If there is motion, the amount of motion in the 
superior -inferior, lateral, and anterior -posterior directions will be the margin given.   Surrounding 
normal and critical structures  will also be contoured by the treating radiation oncologist including 
the kidneys, liver, small bowel, spinal cord, and stomach if necessary.   
 
3.3 Stereotactic Body  Radiotherapy Planning  
An SBRT plan will be created by a medical physicist based on the PTV  contoured on the CT scan.  
The plan will be to deliver fractionated SBRT to the isodose line best encompassing the PTV : 
 
12 Gy x 3 fractions (36 Gy total)  
 
In deter mining the radiation dose and fractionation scheme for this protocol, we used the 
linear -quadratic formalism for radiation cell killing to “equate” schemes that vary the dose/fraction 
and number of fractions. This concept of biologically equivalent dose (B ED) states that the total 
effect is given by:   
  
nd x (1 + d/
  ()) 
  
where n is the # of fractions and d is the dose/fraction. The “alpha -beta ratio” characterizes the 
radiation response of a particular tissue; a higher value is indicative of a tissue that responds acutely 
to the effects of radiation. Due to their highly proliferative nature, most tumors fall into this 
category.  
This dose scheme (36 Gy in 3 fractions) is biologically equivalent to the previously studied doses in 
the literature (24 Gy in 1 fraction).  We would favor treating in three fr actions, as opposed to one, to 
 Page 10 of 27 10-123  allow more repair of normal tissue, reoxygenation of tumor cells, and redistribution of tumor cells 
to more radiosensitive parts of the cell cycle.  Using a smaller fraction size, 12 Gy compared to 24 
Gy, will also help reduc e late effects of radiation therapy.  SBRT treatment will be given on an 
every other day schedule, excluding weekends.  The prescription dose will be prescribed to the 
isodose line best encompassing the planning target volume (PTV) depending on the volume of 
tumor.  
 
Careful evaluation of each plan will be conducted by the radiosurgical team to ensure that normal 
tissues and critical structures tolerances are maintained.  
 
 
The maximum dose (in Gy) within the treatment volume (MD), prescriptions dose (PD), and the 
ratio of MD/PD (as a measure of heterogeneity within the target volume), prescription isodose 
volume (PIV in mm3), tumor volume (TV in mm3), and the ratio of PIV/TV (as a measure of dose 
conformity of the treatment relative to the target) will be r ecorded.  This concept is illustrated in 
Figure 2 . 
 
3.4 Quality of Life Assessment  
Quality of life assessment using the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy – General  
(FACT -G) tool, which is a validated tool, will be administered to all subjects prior to treatment and 
at each fo llow-up visit (Appendix A).   
 
3.5 Treatment following SBRT  
As described above, all patients will have been seen in a multi -disciplinary pancreatic cancer clinic.  
As such, they will be set up with a medical oncologist.  Followin g completion of SBRT as described 
in this protocol, the patient’s medical oncologist may, at his/her discretion, administer systemic 
therapy according to the current standard of care or the UPMC pathways.   
 Figure 2 : Example illustrating the concept of PIV/TV  
 
 
 Page 11 of 27 10-123  4.0 SUBJECT  SELECTION AND ELIGIBILITY  
 
4.1 Sele ction of subject s 
Enrollment is defined as the first day of protocol therapy.  
 
4.1.1 Number of subject s 
50 patients  will be enrolled to the study.  The study has been designed to detect a 20% improvement 
in the rate of local progression -free response over that of historical controls.  
 
4.1.2 Inclusion criteria  
Each subject  must meet all of the following inclusion criteria to be enrolled in the study:  
• Histologically or cytologically proven adenocarcinoma of the pancreas  that has been resected 
with a close  (<2.5mm) or positive margin based on surgical and pathological findings.  
• Subject s will be staged according to the 2010 AJCC staging system (Appendix D) with 
pathologic stage T1 -4, N0 -1 being eligible; and have a primary tumor of the pancreas (i.e., 
pancreatic  head, neck, uncinate process, body/tail  
• PTV  must be encompassed in a reasonable  SBRT “portal”  as defined by the treating radiation 
oncologist  
• Karnofsky performance status > 70 (ECOG 0 -1) 
• Age > 18 
• Estimated life expectancy > 12 weeks  
• Patient must have adeq uate renal function as defined by serum creatinine< -2.5 mg/dl obtained 
within 28 days prior to registration  
• Patient must have adequate hepatic function as defined by total bilirubin < 2.5 
xIULN(institutional upper limit of normal) and either SGOT or SGPT < 3.0 xIULN, obtained 
within 28 days prior to registration.  
• Patient must be able to swallow enteral medications.  Patient must not require a feeding tube.  
Patient must not have intractable nausea or vomiting, GI tract disease resulting in an inability to 
take oral medication, malabsorption syndrome, or uncontrolled inflammatory bowel disease 
(Chron’s, ulcerative colitis).   
• Ability to provide written informed consent  
• Patient must not have uncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to, ongoi ng or 
active infection, symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac 
arrhythmia, history of myocardial infarction or cerebrovascular accident within 3 months prior 
to registration, uncontrolled diarrhea, or psychiatric illness/so cial situations that would limit 
compliance with study requirements.  
• Patient must not be pregnant because of the risk of harm to the fetus.  Nursing women may 
participate only if nursing is discontinued, due to the possibility of harm to nursing infants f rom 
the treatment regimen.  Women/men of reproductive potential must agree to use an effective 
contraception method.  
  
4.1.3 Exclusion criteria  
Subject s meeting any of the following exclusion criteria are not to be enrolled in the study:  
• Non-adenocarcinoma s, adenosquamous carcinomas, islet cell carcinomas, cystadenomas, 
cystadenocarcinomas, carcinoid tumors, duodenal carcinomas, distal bile duct, and ampullary 
carcinomas are not eligible.  
• Evidence of distant metastasis on upright chest x -ray (CXR), computed  tomography (CT) or 
other staging studies  
• Subject s with recurrent disease  
 Page 12 of 27 10-123  • Prior radiation therapy to the upper abdomen or liver  
• . 
• Subject s in their reproductive age group should use an effective method of birth control.  
Subject s who are breast -feeding, o r have a positive pregnancy test will be excluded from the 
study  
• Any co -morbidity or condition of sufficient severity to limit full compliance with the protocol 
per assessment by the investigator  
• Concurrent serious infection  
• Previous or current malignancie s of other histologies within the last 5 years, with the exception 
of cervical carcinoma in situ, adequately treated basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma of the 
skin, and treated low -risk prostate cancer.  
 
 Page 13 of 27 10-123  5.0 TREATMENT EVALUATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND MO DIFICATION  
 
SBRT guidelines  
 
5.1 Tissue constraints  
Appropriate beam “nodes” or angles shall be selected to treat the primary site and areas at risk for 
occult disease spread.  Careful target definition of these areas at risk is essential for optimal outc ome.  
Beam shaping for treatment delivery shall be via conical or multi -leaf collimation (MLC).  Treatment 
shall be via linear accelerator (LINAC) commissioned and equipped to deliver SBRT. Normal tissues 
and sensitive critical structures (e.g. duodenum, s pinal cord, stomac h, bowel, kidneys, liver , etc) shall 
be countered and the dose to these organs limited.  See table below.  
 
Normal Tissue Constraints  
Organ  Maximum Dose in 3 fractions  
Liver (700 cm3)  15 Gy  
1/3 of total kidney volume (left and right)  15 Gy 
Spinal Cord  18 Gy  
Stomach  30 Gy  
Duodenum /small bowel  18 Gy 
 
 
As discussed above the CTV will be equivalent to the PTV, unless the motion study reveals motion in 
the target volume.  In that case, margins will be given to account for that motion.   
 
5.2 Dose Specification, Homogeneity Considerations & Plan Evaluation  
The treatment plan used shall be based on the assessment of the dose -volume histogram (DVH) with 
attention to coverage of the planning tumor volume (PTV) and critical normal structures.  
The prescription dose is the isodose cloud that encompasses at least 95% of the PTV.   
No more than 20% of any PTV shall receive doses >110% its prescribed dose  
No more than 2% of any PTV shall receive <93% of its prescribed dose  
No more than 5% of any norm al tissue shall receive doses in excess of 110%  
  of the primary PTV dose.  
 
5.3 On -Treatment assessment and post -treatment toxicity evaluation  
 
All subject s will be seen prior to delivery of each fraction of SBRT with toxicity evaluated by 
physical examina tion.  Subsequently, subject s will be evaluated for toxicity 10-12 weeks later and 
then every 3 months  until at least 2 years .  Toxicities will be scored by the NCI CTC AE version 4.0. 
Also see Section 6.0.  
 
5.4 Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy  Risks  
Short -term side effects include but not limited to skin reaction, local hair loss, fatigue, abdominal 
pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, increasing liver function abnormality, GI bleeding or perforation 
which may require surgical interven tion.  Long term side effects are less likely to occur but if they 
do occur are more likely to be permanent.  They include local hair loss, liver function abnormality, 
diarrhea, small bowel obstruction which may require surgical intervention, spinal cord i njury which 
could result in paralysis, and kidney function abnormality.   
 
5.3.4 Fidiucial placement  
 Page 14 of 27 10-123  It is currently standard practice at our institution for the operating surgeon to place fiducial markers 
intraoperatively at the areas he feels will be at  risk for positive or close margins.  As such, patients 
will not need to undergo a separate procedure for fiducial marker placement.   
 
5.3.5 CT Risks  
The subject will be exposed to radiation associated with the C T scans performed to assess response 
to the rapy.  CT scans are routinely performed as standard -of-care for tumor staging and to monitor 
response to therapy, and the radiation dose associated with these diagnostic scans are felt to 
represent minimal risk.    
 
Claustrophobia:  Possible anxiety, claus trophobia, and/or temporary discomfort may occur as a 
result of being placed in the scanning devices.   Subjects will be monitored and removed from the 
scanner if required  
 
 
 Page 15 of 27 10-123  6.0 STUDY EVALUATIONS  
 
6.1 Pretreatment evaluation  
The following tests/procedures  will be performed in order to ascertain subject eligibility within 28 days 
prior to registration unless otherwise specified.  
 6.1.1 Medical history  
 6.1.2 Physical examination, including Karnofsky status, ECOG performance status and vital signs.  
 6.1.3 Si gned informed consent  
 6.1.4 Subject body weight and height taken within 1 week of the study start.   
6.1.5 Histologic and/morphol ogic confirmation of diagnosis as well as margin status  
6.1.6 CBC including: WBC with complete differential, platelets, RBC, h emoglobin, hematocrit, 
within 30 days prior to study start.  
 6.1.7 Blood chemistries including BUN, creatinine, total bilirubin, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, 
sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphorus, chloride, magnesium within 30 days of study start.  
 6.1.8 Urine or blood HCG test for female subjects of child -bearing potential (women who are not at 
least 1 year post -menopause or who have not undergone a surgical sterilization procedure)  within 
14 days prior to study start.   Female subjects of child -bearing  potential will be instructed to use 
contraception from the time of the screening pregnancy test until study completion.  
 6.1.9 CT of the abdomen and pelvis  
 
6.2 Evaluation during treatment  
 The subject s will be carefully followed while on active treatment  and post -treatment for 24 months, or 
until death.  Evaluation during treatment will consist of the following activities:  
 6.2.1 Administration of SBRT  
 6.2.3 Interim medical history and physical examination at baselin e, prior to SBRT treatment , at the 
end of SBRT, and 10-12 weeks after SBRT  then every 3 months thereafter for up to 24 months .   
 6.2.4 Serum chemistry and electrolytes to include BUN, creatinine, sodium, potassium, bicarbonate, 
chloride, calcium, magnesium, glucose, total bilirubin, AST, ALT,  alkaline phosphatase 
post-treatment as clinically indicated  
6.2.5 Hematologic studies to include CBC with differential and platelet count prior to SBRT and 
repeated 10-12 weeks later and then at follow -up as clinically indicated . 
 6.2.6 CT scan will be ob tained  at 10-12 weeks post -treatment  and will be rev iewed for evidence of 
response.  Since these subjects will likely have no gross disease on imaging, the main goal of the 
follow -up scans is to monitor for local and distant progression  as defined below .   
 
 Page 16 of 27 10-123  6.3 Treatment schedule  
 
 
Parameter  Pre-Study  SBRT  10-12 weeks 
post-treatment  Q 3 months until 24 
months  
Fx 
1 Fx
2 Fx3 
History  X X  X X X 
Physical exam  X X  X X X 
Measurement of 
disease  X    X X 
Performance Status  X    X X 
Serum Chemistry  X*    X▲ X▲ 
Hematologic 
Studies including 
CBC  X*    X X▲ 
CT Scan  X    X XΩ 
Serum or Urine 
Pregnancy Test for 
WOCBP  X      
Histologic and 
Morphologic 
Confirmation and 
Margin Status  X      
QOL assessment  X    X X 
* Within 30 days of study start  
▲If clinicall y indicated  
Ω May be modified by oncology team if patient receives system therapy  
 
6.4 Post-treatment evaluation  and plan  
 
6.4.1 Evaluation of CT Imaging  
A follow -up CT scan will be obtained at 10-12 weeks post -SBRT and then every 3 months until end 
of stu dy.  If the patient goes on to receive systemic therapy, the follow -up CT schedule can be 
modified at the discretion of the oncology team.   
6.4.2.  Definition Local Progression Free Survival  
In this study, LPFS is defined as the time from enrollment to fir st documentation of progressive 
disease (PD) in the target lesion. Death or development of distant disease is not regarded as an 
event.   For patients that undergo surgical resection, local progression will be defined as disease 
recurrence detected on foll ow-up imaging (CT or FDG -PET/CT) that is located within the SBRT 
target volume.   
6.4.3  Definition of OS and TTP  
TTP is defined as the time from enrollment to disease progression. Disease progression will be 
defined as PD in the target volume, or developme nt of distant disease.  OS is defined as the length 
of time from enrollment to confirmed death from any cause.  
 Page 17 of 27 10-123  6.4.4 QOL evaluation  
QOL evaluation will be carried out according to the treatment schema in section 6.0.  The survey 
will be the FACT -G and wil l be administered prior to SBRT, after completion of SBRT, and at each 
follow -up.  See appendix A for more details.   
6.4.5  Safety evaluation  
All patients will be monitored for potential treatment -related toxicity throughout treatment as 
detailed in the sc hema .  Toxicity will be graded according to the CTCAE, which is further detailed 
in section 8.2.1.  Acute toxicity is defined as toxicity occurring within 3 months of completion of 
SBRT.  Late toxicity is defined as toxicity occurring greater than 3 months  after treatment.  
 
 
 
 Page 18 of 27 10-123  7.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS   
 
7.1 Study Objectives and Design  
 
The primary objective is to determine the LPFS in subjects with resected  pancreatic adenocarcinoma 
with close or positive margins treated with SBRT. Secondary objective s include the evaluation of 
TTP, OS, acute and late toxicities, and QOL. These study endpoints are defined in Section 6.4.  
 
This clinical trial is planned as a prospective single -arm phase II study. The treatment schema is 
shown in Section 6.3 a. 
 
7.2 Sampl e Size and Accrual Rate  
7.2.1 Sample Size  
 
From the Investigators’ treatment experience, the 2 -year local progression -free survival rate for the 
standard of care is 40%.  This phase II study aims to improve it to 60% with SBRT . We plan to have 
24 months of  accrual, and 24 months of follow -up beyond the last patient enrolled on study. Under 
assumption of exponential survival, a total of 50 patients will provide 94% power to detect a 
statistically significant improvement in survival by one -sided log -rank test  at significance level 0.05. 
Assuming that there will be no loss to follow up and no ineligible case, a total of 50 patients will be 
accrued  for this trial.  
 
7.2.2 Rate of Accrual  
 
We anticipate that 2 to 4 study -eligible patients will be enrolled per mon th. Thus, our planned study 
size of 50 patients to be enrolled within 24 months is well within our capacity.  
 
7.3. Statistical Analyses  
 
7.3.1. Analysis Set  
 
The data from all evaluable patients will be used in the analyses of survival, safety, tumor respo nse, 
and health related QOL. Evaluable patients are those meeting all of the protocol inclusion/exclusion 
criteria and receiving at least one fraction of SBRT . 
 
7.3.2. Baseline Characteristics  
 
Baseline descriptive statistics on all evaluable patients will  be provided on demographic variables 
(age, sex, race/ethnicity), ECOG performance status, laboratory parameters, the chemotherapy 
regimens that were previously used, the number of treatment cycles and irradiation fractions 
involved, and disease characteri stics, including tumor size and stage.   
 
7.3.3 Analysis of Study Endpoints  
 
Survival (LPFS, OS, TTP) will be estimated by the Kaplan -Meier method for all evaluable patients 
and the corresponding median survival times (with 95% confidence interval) reporte d. The 2 -year 
LPFS will also be estimated along with its 95% confidence interval. The effect of variables listed in 
Section 7.3.2 will be explored with Cox regression models.  
 
 
 Page 19 of 27 10-123  For the QOL data analysis, each item of the FACT -G will be individually assesse d. The mean and 
standard deviation of the observed data will be summarized at each collection time and plotted 
against time, from baseline through the end of patient follow -up. Generalized linear models (such as 
cumulative logit models18) for repeated meas ures will be used to explore if there are significant 
changes in HRQOL over time.  
 
Using NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE v4.0), the number of 
patients experiencing adverse events over their course of treatment will be characterize d by type of 
adverse event and grade, by the time of onset in relation to the first day of therapy, and whether the 
event is clinically significant. Attribution of adverse events to treatment (unrelated, unlikely, 
possibly, probably, or definitely) will al so be summarized for any serious adverse events (SAEs), 
CTCAE grade 3 or higher. The percentage of patients experiencing SAEs that are considered to be 
treatment -related (probable or definite) will be determined. The percentage of patients experiencing 
the acute and late toxicities associated with SBRT (as defined in Section 6.4) will also be estimated 
along with its 95% confidence interval.  
 
7.4. Early Stopping for Toxicity  
 
Toxicity will be monitored continuously, with protocol amendment being made as nee ded. For 
safety, we will consider that regimen to be excessively toxic and stop accrual if, at any time, the 
observed rate of grade 3 -5 acute or late toxicity as defined above in Section 6.4 .5  ≥ 33% and at least 
4 toxicities have been observed.  
 
 Page 20 of 27 10-123   
8.0 DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING  
 
8.1 Data safety monitoring plan  
All subject  data will be collected by the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute’s Protocol Office.  
All data will be secured in a password protected file with observance of all applicable HIPAA 
regulation.  A data safety monitoring board will meet monthly to evaluate toxicity for this trial. 
Subject s/adverse events will be discussed at these monthly disease center meetings. Unexpecte d 
serious adverse events will be reported to the IRB and DSMC, and minutes of the monthly disease 
center meetings will be reviewed at the DSMC meetings.  
 
8.1.1  Subject Removal Criteria  
 
1. Disease progression  
2. Development of a serious medical illness  
3. Evidence  of dose -limiting toxicity  
4. Voluntary withdrawal  
5. Protocol violation  
6. Discretion of the principal investigator  
7. Development of grade 4 toxicity related to experimental therapeutic  
 
 
8.2   Safety Reporting  
 
8.2.1   Adverse Event Characteristics  
 
CTCAE term (AE  description) and grade:  The descriptions and grading scales found in the 
revised NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 will be 
utilized for AE reporting.  All appropriate treatment areas will have access to a copy of the CTCAE 
version 4.0.  A copy of the CTCAE version 4.0 can be downloaded from the CTEP web site 
(http://ctep.cancer.gov ). 
 
An AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject  or clinical investigation subject 
administ ered a pharmaceutical product that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with 
this treatment.  An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an 
abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with t he use of a 
medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not related to the medicinal (investigational) 
product.  
 
It may include worsening or increase in severity  of signs or symptoms of the illness, increase in 
frequency of signs and symptoms of an int ermittent illness, or the appearance of a new 
manifestation/complication . 
 
Exacerbation of a pre -existing illness should be considered when a subject requires new or 
additional concomitant drug or non -drug therapy for the treatment of that illness during t he study.  
Lack of or insufficient clinical response, benefit, efficacy, or therapeutic effect should not be 
recorded as an adverse event.  The investigator must make the distinction between exacerbation of 
pre-existing illness and lack of therapeutic effi cacy.  
 
In addition, abnormal objective test findings (e.g., electrocardiogram changes, abnormal 
 Page 21 of 27 10-123  laboratory test results) that can result in a change in study drug dosage or in discontinuation of the 
drug, or require intervention or diagnostic evaluation to  assess the risk to the subject , should also 
be recorded as adverse events.  Clinically significant changes in physical examination findings 
should also be recorded as adverse events.  For all adverse events, the investigator must pursue and 
obtain informa tion adequate both to determine the outcome of the adverse event and to assess 
whether it meets the criteria for classification as a serious adverse event requiring immediate 
notification to UPCI or its designated representative.  
 
All observed or volunteer ed adverse events regardless of treatment group or suspected causal 
relationship to study drug will be recorded on the adverse event page(s) of the CRF.  The 
investigator will record all adverse events in the CRF and assess each event as to severity and 
causal relationship to study drug.  
‘Expectedness’ : AEs can be ‘Unexpected’ or ‘Expected’ for expedited reporting purposes only.   
 
Attribution  of the AE:  
Definite – The AE is clearly related  to the study treatment.  
Probable – The AE is likely related to the study treatment.  
Possible – The AE may be related  to the study treatment.  
Unlikely – The AE is doubtfully related to the study treatment.  
Unrelated – The AE is clearly NOT related  to the study treatment.  
 
For all adverse events, sufficient information shou ld be obtained by the investigator to determine 
the causality, (i.e., study drug or other illness).  The investigator is required to assess causality and 
indicate that assessment on the CRF.  Follow -up of the adverse event, after the date of therapy 
discon tinuation, is required if the adverse event or its sequelae persist.  Follow -up is required until 
the event or its sequelae resolve or stabilize at a level acceptable to the investigator.  Adverse 
events that continue, or emerge within 30 days, after the subject ’s discontinuation or completion of 
the study will be followed until the events resolve, are considered stable, or can be ascribed to 
causes other than study treatment.  
 
All serious AE shall be reported meeting criteria for reporting can be found on  the University of 
Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board’s website at http://www.irb.pitt.edu . In the event of such 
adverse event, the investigator must report the event(s) via phone within 24 hours and a written 
report filed within 24 hours to the Principal Investigator, or the UPCI’s Clinical Research Office.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 22 of 27 10-123  9.0 REFERENCES  
 
1.  Jemal A, Siegel E, Ward E, et al.  Cancer statistics, 2008.  CA Cancer J Clin  58:71 -69, 2008  
2. Kalser M,  Ellenberg S. Pancrea tic cancer.  Adjuvant combined radiation and chemotherapy 
following curative resection.  Arch Surg .  120(8): 899 -903, 1985.   
3.   Corsini MM, Miller RC, Haddock MG, et al.  Adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy for 
pancreatic carcinoma: The Mayo Clinic e xperience.  J Clin Oncol  21: 3511 -16, 2008.  
4. Herman JM, Swartz MJ, Hsu CC, et al.  Analysis of fluorouracil -based adjuvant chemotherapy and 
radiation after pancreaticoduodenectomy for ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.  J Clin 
Oncol .  26(21): 3503 -3510, 2008.   
5.   Regine WF, Winter KA, Abrams RA, et al.  Fluoruracil vs gemcitabine chemotherapy before and 
after fluorouracil -based chemoradiation.  JAMA  299(9): 1019 -26, 2008.   
6.    Picozzi VJ, Abrams RA, Traverso LW, et al.  ACOSOG Z05031: Initial r eport of a multi -center 
phase II trial of a novel CRT protocol.  ASCO 2008 GI Cancers Symposium, abstract 125.   
7.    Neoptolemos JP, Stocken DD, Friess H, et al.  ESPAC -1: A randomized trial of CRT and 
chemotherapy after resection of pancreatic cancer.  N Engl J Med .  350(12): 1200 -1210, 2004.   
8.    Oettle H, Post S, Neuhaus P, et al.  Adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine vs observation in 
patients undergoing curative -intent resection of pancreatic cancer.  JAMA.   297(3): 267 -76, 2007.   
9.   Stocken DD, Buchler WW, Dervenis C, et al.  Meta -analysis of randomised adjuvant therapy trials 
for pancreatic cancer.  Br J Cancer .  92(8): 1372 -81, 2005.    
10. Koong AC, Le QT, Ho A, et al. Phase I study of stereotactic radiosurgery in patients with 
locally -advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  58(4):1017 -21, 2004.  
11. Koong AC, Christofferson E, Le QT, et al.  Phase II study to assess the efficacy of conventionally 
fractionated radiotherapy followed by a stereotactic radiosurgery boost in pat ients with 
locally -advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys   63:320 -323, 2005  
12. Schellenberg D, Goodman KA, Lee F, et al.  Gemcitabine chemotherapy and single -fraction 
stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally -advanced pancreatic cancer.   Int J Radiat Oncol Biol 
Phys   2008 [epub ahead of print]  
13. Symon Z, Rabin T, Levin D, et al.  Tolerability of standard fractionation vs. hypofractionation in 
chemoradiotherapy of pancreatic cancer.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys  66:S284, 2006.  
14. Hugue t F, Andre T, Hammel P, et al.  Impact of chemoradiotherapy after diasease control with 
chemotherapy in locally -advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma in GERCOR phase II and phase III 
studies.  J Clin Oncol   25:326, 2007  
15. Krishnan S, Rana V, Janjan NA, et a l.  Induction chemotherapy selects patients with 
locally -advanced, unresectable pancreatic cancer for optimal benefit from consolidatitive 
chemoradiation therapy.  Cancer   110:47, 2007  
16. Rwigema JC, Parikh SD, Heron DE, et al.  SBRT in the treatment of a dvanced adenocarcinoma of 
the pancreas.  Am J Clin Oncol .  2010 Mar 19. [Epub ahead of print].   
17. Rwigema JC, Heron DE, Parikh SD, et al.  Adjuvant SBRT for resected pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma with close or positive margins.  J Gastrointest Cancer .  2010  [Epub ahead of 
print].  
18.     Agresti, Alan. Categorical data analysis . John Wiley & Sons (New York; Chichester). ISBN: 
0-471-36093 -7 
 
 Page 23 of 27 10-123    
APPENDIX A: Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy - General (FACT -G) 
 
Below is a list of statements that other peo ple with your illness have said are important . Please 
circle or mark one number per line to indicate your response as it applies to the past 7 days . 
 
 
  PHYSICAL WELL -BEING  
 Not 
at all  A little 
bit Some -
what  Quite
a bit  Very 
much  
 
GP1 I have a lack o f energy  ................................ ................................ ...  0 1 2 3 4 
GP2 I have nausea  ................................ ................................ .................   0 1 2 3 4 
GP3 Because of my physical condition, I have trouble meeting 
the needs of my family  ................................ ................................ ..   
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
GP4 I have pain  ................................ ................................ .....................   0 1 2 3 4 
GP5 I am bothered by side effects of treatment  ................................ ....  0 1 2 3 4 
GP6 I feel ill  ................................ ................................ ..........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GP7 I am forced to spend time in bed  ................................ ...................   0 1 2 3 4 
 
 SOCIAL/FAMILY WELL -BEING  
 Not 
at all  A little 
bit Some -
what  Quite
a bit  Very 
much  
 
GS1 I feel close to my friends  ................................ ...............................   0 1 2 3 4 
GS2 I get emotional support from my family  ................................ .......  0 1 2 3 4 
GS3 I get support from my friends  ................................ ........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GS4 My family has accepted my illness  ................................ ...............   0 1 2 3 4 
GS5 I am satisfied with family communication about my 
illness  ................................ ................................ .............................    
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
GS6 I feel close to my partner (or the person who is my main 
support)  ................................ ................................ ..........................    
0  
1  
2  
3  
4 
Q1 Regardless of your current level of sexual activity, please 
answer the following question. If you prefer not to answer it, 
please mark this box           and go to the next section.       
GS7 I am satisfied with my sex life  ................................ .......................   0 1 2 3 4 
 Page 24 of 27 10-123   
 
Please circl e or mark one number per line to indicate your response as it applies to the past 
7 days . 
 
 
 EMOTIONAL WELL -BEING  Not 
at all  A little 
bit Some -
what  Quite
a bit  Very 
much  
 
GE1 I feel sad  ................................ ................................ ........................   0 1 2 3 4 
GE2 I am satisfied with how I am coping with my ill ness ....................   0 1 2 3 4 
GE3 I am losing hope in the fight against my illness  ............................   0 1 2 3 4 
GE4 I feel nervous  ................................ ................................ .................   0 1 2 3 4 
GE5 I worry about dying  ................................ ................................ .......  0 1 2 3 4 
GE6 I worry that my condition will get worse  ................................ ......  0 1 2 3 4 
 
 
 
 FUNCTIONAL WELL -BEING  
 Not 
at all  A little 
bit Some -
what  Quite
a bit  Very 
much  
 
GF1 I am able to work (include work at home)  ................................ ....  0 1 2 3 4 
GF2 My work (include work at home) is fulfilling  ...............................   0 1 2 3 4 
GF3 I am able to enjoy life  ................................ ................................ ....  0 1 2 3 4 
GF4 I have accepted my illness  ................................ .............................   0 1 2 3 4 
GF5 I am sleep ing well  ................................ ................................ ..........   0 1 2 3 4 
GF6 I am enjoying the things I usually do for fun  ................................   0 1 2 3 4 
GF7 I am content with the quality of my life right now  ........................   0 1 2 3 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 25 of 27 10-123  APPENDIX B: Karnofsky Performance Scale  
 
 
100  Normal; no complaints; no evidence of disease  
 
90  Able to carry on normal activity; minor signs or symptoms of disease  
 
80  Normal activity with effort; some sign or symptoms of disease  
 
70  Cares for self; unable to carry on normal activity or do active work  
 
60  Requires occasional assistance, but is able to care for most personal needs  
 
50  Requires considerable assistance and frequent medical care  
 
40  Disabled; requires special care and assistance  
 
30  Severely disabled; hospitalization is indicated, although death not imminent  
 
20  Very sick; hospi talization necessary; active support treatment is necessary  
 
10  Moribund; fatal processes progressing rapidly  
 
0  Dead  
 Page 26 of 27 10-123  APPENDIX C:  ECOG Performance Status  
 
 
Grade  ECOG  
0  Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction  
1  Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out 
work of a light or sedentary nature, e.g., light house work, office work  
2  Ambulatory and capable of all selfcare but unable to carry out any work 
activities. Up and about  more than 50% of waking hours  
3  Capable of only limited selfcare, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of 
waking hours  
4  Completely disabled. Cannot carry on any selfcare. Totally confined to bed or 
chair  
5  Dead  
 
Oken, M.M., Creech, R.H., Tormey,  D.C., Horton, J., Davis, T.E., McFadden, E.T., Carbone, P.P.: Toxicity And 
Response Criteria Of The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group.  Am J Clin Oncol 5:649 -655, 1982.  
 
 
 Page 27 of 27 10-123  APPENDIX D: Staging for Pancreas  
 
Primary Tumor (T ) 
TX  Primary tumor cannot be assessed  
T0  No evidence of primary tumor  
Tis  in situ carcinoma  
T1  Tumor limited to the pancreas 2 cm or less in greatest dimension  
T2  Tumor limited to the pancreas more than 2 cm in greatest dimension  
T3  Tumor extends beyon d the pancreas but without involvement of the celiac axis or the superior 
mesenteric artery  
T4  Tumor involves the celiac axis or the superior mesenteric artery (unresectable primary tumor)  
 
Regional Lymph Nodes (N)  
NX  Regional lymph nodes cannot be asses sed 
N0  No regional lymph node metastasis  
N1  Regional lymph node metastasis  
 
Distant Metastasis (M)  
MX  Presence of distant metastasis cannot be assessed  
M0  No distant metastasis  
M1  Distant metastasis  
 
Stage Grouping  
Stage 0  Tis  N0  M0 
Stage Ia  T1  N0  M0 
Stage Ib  T2  N0  M0 
Stage IIa  T3  N0  M0 
Stage IIb  T1-3    N1 M0 
Stage III  T4  Any N  M0 
Stage IV  Any T  Any N M1  
 
From American Joint Committee on Cancer.  AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 6th ed.  New York :  
Springer -Yearlab, 2010 :157-164 
 
 
 
 
  
 