INSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW  BOARD  PROTOCOL  REVIEW  REQUEST  
1.Date: 12/1/2022  (Amendment 8)
2.Study Title : The Substance Use and Health Risk Intervention (SUHRI) for Justice- Involved Youth –
Pilot 2 
3.Principal Investigator (must be a TCU faculty or staff): Danica Knight, PhD & Jennifer Becan, PhD
(MPIs) 
4.College/School : Institute of Behavioral Research (IBR)
5.Other Investigators:  List all faculty, staff, and students conducting the study. For those not 
affiliated with TCU, please provide their names and institution.
Wayne Lehman, Ph.D., Kevin Knight, Ph.D., George Joe, Ed.D., Elizabeth Joseph, MS., Amanda Wiese, M.S.,  
Jennifer Pankow, Ph.D., Thomas Sease, B.S., Randi P. Proffitt, Ph.D., Heather Hines, BS, Ashley Gainey, MS; 
Anthea Ayebaze, MPH, Sarah Hill, PhD,  Summer Mengelkoch, MS; Lauren Taylor, Mansour Salami, Brooke  
Preston, Audrey Gandy,  Viridiana Munoz, Maria Welch, Savannah Hastings, Liliana Guadagno, Juliana  
Gomez, Renee Buenrostro , Christy Wootenstings , Tejas Sieber, Rippey Lane
6.Project Period: 9/30/2019- 8/31/2023
7.If you have internal or external funding for this project –
Funding Agency
: NIH Project  #: 1 R34 DA048065-01 Date for Funding : 09/13/2019
8.If you intend to seek/are seeking internal/external funding for this project –
Funding Agency: NIDA Amount Requested From Funding Agency: $594,949
Due Date for Funding Proposal : N/A
9.P
urpo s
e:Appendice s to the Protoco l Tabl e of Contents 
Append ix 1: You th Assen t (upda ted AM2)
Appendix 2: Paren tal/Guard ian Inform ed Con sent (upda ted AM2)
Append ix 3: Poster (add ed AM2)
Appendix 4: Flyer (added AM2 )
Appendix 5: Measure
5.1 Initial Submission Measures
5.2: AM1 Measures
5.3 AM2 Measures
5.4: AM4 Measures
5.5: AM5 Session Evaluation Measures  5.6 
AM6_Mo 1 & 3 Assessment Measures  5.7: 
WORK-IT App Processing Questions
5.8: AM7 SUHRI Baseline Updated
5.9: AM7 SUHRI 1st Follow-Up (1 month)  
5.10: AM7 SUHRI 2nd Follow-Up (3 month)
Appendix 6: End of Session Feedback questionnaire (added AM2) 
Appendix 7: New Personnel CITI 
Certificates (AM2 specific) 
*Appendix 8: Waiver of Documentation of Informed Consent (Initial IRB review/approval: 1/13/21)
*Appendix 9: TJJD Proposal & Approval (pulled from initial submission associate documents PDF binder)
Appendix 10: Appointment Reminder Card
Appendix 11: Completion Certificate ions" Leaflet for 
Mailing
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
Summary  
The purpose of the Substance Use and Health Risk Intervention (SUHRI) project is to adapt and 
test an integrated health risk -reduction and motivational enhancement intervention (a cloud - 
based app) for Juvenile Justice (JJ) youth that will ultimately be (after full testing through a 
subsequent large -scale RCT) a sustainable intervention implemented within a JJ supervision/case 
management cont ext to teach and facilitate positive, prosocial, and expected behaviors. The 
intervention will use interactive graphical approaches to encourage introspection and problem 
identification, enhance self -regulation, improve analytical problem -solving skills, a nd promote 
healthy behaviors in two inter -related target areas: substance use and risky sex practices. App 
sessions  will be self- directed  (require  minimal  instruction/interaction  assistance),  and also include 
a service referral  piece whereby  youth  are provided with additional  resources for seeking  services 
related to risky health behaviors and substance use.  
This research will be carried out in two pilots: (1) Intervention Adaptation and Feasibility and (2) 
Protocol  Feasibility.  The specific  aims  of the project  are to (a) examine  intervention  feasibility  and 
acceptability (Pilot 1), (b) test the feasibility of the study protocol (adherence, subject retention, 
instrumentation) with JJ -involved youth (Pilot 2).  
During  Pilot  1, intervention content  will be adapted  from existing  evidence -based  interventions  so 
that it is developmentally appropriate for the target population and suitable for a web -based 
format. During Pilot 2, a test of the intervention will yield data on intervention feasibility, 
acceptabi lity, and impact  on youth  outcomes.  Proximal  outcomes  include  improvements  in change 
mechanisms (e.g., problem recognition, decision making, intention to reduce personal risk) and 
service initiation (SU  or STI -related  services).  Distal  outcomes include red uction  in risky behaviors, 
including substance use (self -report and urinalysis) and sexual health risk (self -reported risky sex 
practices). Successful completion of the aims will result in an intervention that is appropriate and 
feasible for use with JJ -involved youth.  
Because  the project  will be carried  out in two phases,  IRB approval  was sought  separately  for Pilot 
1 (Intervention Adaptation and Feasibility; latest continuation approved 9/11/2020) and Pilot 2 
(Protocol Feasibility). This protocol review request is for Pilot 2 only. This protocol will be 
delivered either in -person at a Tarrant County Juvenile Justice office/public location, or 
virtually via an online platform such as Zoom.  
10.Background:
Juvenile  Justice  (JJ)-involved  youth are a vulnerable  population  involved  in illegal  and maladaptive
behaviors —substance use (SU), crime, delinquency, risk -taking behaviors (including risky sex
practices) —that present significant challenges to public health and safety. According to the US
Census Bureau (US Census Bureau, 2017)  there  were approximately 17  million youth  between  14
and 17 years of age  in 2015, with juvenile  courts  disposing 1.3  million delinquency cases annually
(Hockenberry & Puzzanchera, 2014; OJJDP, 2015). Adolescent SU, i ncluding nonmedical use and
abuse of prescription drugs (Palamar et al., 2016; Young et al., 2012), is a concern for its
immediatenegative  consequences,  including  potential  progression  to a SU disorder  (SUD;  Winters
& Lee, 2008) and as a risk factor for on set of adult SUDs, including opioid addiction (Englund,
Egeland,Oliva & Collins, 2008; Stone, Becker, Huber, & Catalano, 2012; Swift et al., 2008). JJ - 
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
involved youthare 9 times more likely to  have  SUDs than the US  youth population,  yet only  a third 
receive treatment annually (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2013). 
Furthermore, as they age, JJ -involved youth sustain great risk for sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs;  Romero  et al., 2013)  and suffer  high  rates  of sexual  health -related  problems  (Golzari,  Hunt,  & 
Anoshiravani, 2006). Because they have increased rates of STIs (Aalsma, Tong, Wiehe, & Wanzhu, 
2010) and pose a higher transmission risk to others, (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
2018) reducing  these health risks is of paramount importance. This includes the need to improve 
communication skills, particularly among youth who often have difficulty communicating 
assertively when negotiating safe sex (Crosby et al., 2003; Hutchinson & Cooney, 1998; Whitaker, 
Miller, May, & Levin, 1999). To address these issues effectively, a comprehensive intervention 
approach is needed that addresses health -related issues as well as crime and delinquency among 
substance -using youth.  
The scientific  premise  of our approach  is built  around  evidence -based  practices  (EBPs)  focused  on 
achieving  changes  in thinking  that lead  to changes  in emotion  and behavior  (Gonzales  et al., 2004; 
Magill & Ray, 2009). Two complimentary conceptual models guide the proposed project. The 
Integrated Judgment and Decision Making (IJDM) model (Dansereau, Knight, & Flynn, 2013) 
explicates the influence of analytic thinking on promoting  
self-regulation and behavior change. IJDM is based on 
theories of dual cognitive processing and applies both 
experiential and analytic processing systems (Kahneman, 
2011; Klaczynski, 2005) to addictive behaviors (Spada, 
Albery,  & Moss,  2015).  Judgments  and decisions  about  risk 
behaviors (such as  SU and risky sex  practices) are  based  in 
the experiential system (i. e., automatic, emotional) and 
emerge from previous experience and stored episodes.  
This system provides instantaneous and preconscious processing (without analysis) about 
behavioral  choices.  The analytic  system  is a more  deliberate  process  (i.e.,  slower,  conscious).  IJDM 
(see Figure  1) posits  that metacognitive  self-monitoring  activities  embedded  in the analytic  system 
are key to self - regulation and influence how and when the two systems are used. When  
maladaptive  behavior is repeated, decisions can become “automatic,” especially when attentional biases 
(Cox, Klinger, & Fadardi,  2015). When response inhibition occurs, automated responses have the potential 
to be overridden (Crone & Dahl, 2012). Based on this model,  the key to achieving behavior change is 
through  decision  making.  Through  repetition  and practice  using  problem -solving  strategies  that engage  the 
analytical thinking system, the decision making processes can be moved into the experiential thinking 
system,  reinforcing procedural memory. Thus, “expertise” or strategies for thinking through complex  
problems  become  incorporated  into a person’s  experiential  system  memory  bank  for future  use. 
Analytically -created  schemas  (ACS  or guide  maps  for decision  making)  have  been  shown  to be IJDM 
vehicles for organizing information and walks users through a series of steps, questions, and 
exercises that promote analytic thinking. Generating a visual exhibit of options allows for an  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
objective  evaluation  of choices  when  developing  plans  and making  decisions  (Dansereau,  Knight,  & 
Flynn,  2013).  A mapping -based  ACS trains  individuals  to monitor  and control  their  decision  making, 
increases knowledge in a specific topic area (e.g., SU, safe sexual practices, etc.), and improves 
judgment and behavioral choices (self -regulation). In essence, analytic repetition (analogous to 
practice  in athletic  training)  is used  to develop  procedural  memory  (i.e.,  skills  and tasks  that can be 
stored  in long -term  memory)  that can be accessed  rapidly  (during  efforts  to self-regulate  behavior) 
by pattern matching processes, facilitating use by individuals in real -life contexts. The goal is to  
replace  or “override”  inaccurate  or maladaptive  information,  expectations,  and behavior  patterns 
with accurate health -related information and appropriate attitudes and behavioral choices.  
While  IJDM  addresses  the decision  making  process,  the Information -Motivation -Behavioral  skills 
(IMB)  model  (Fisher,  2012;  Fisher  & Fisher,  1992;  Fisher,  Fisher,  Bryan, & Mishovich,  2002;  Fisher, 
Fisher, & Harman, 2003; Fisher, Williams, Fisher, & Malloy, 1999;;) provides a framework for 
understanding social and psychological determinants of health behavior. IMB advocates an 
integrated approach that simultaneously tar gets exposure to accurate information, increasing 
motivation to act, and improving requisite behavioral skills (Fisher, Fisher, & Harman, 2003). 
“Information” includes knowledge about disease prevention and beliefs about health risk  
behaviors; “motivation”  includes problem 
recognition and attitudes —including 
associated emotional factors —about social 
support and personal choices around risk 
avoidance;  “behavior  skills”  includes  the ability 
(actual or perceived) to successfully engage in 
healthy behavior.  
Figure 2 illustrates how joint IJDM and IMB 
models  inform  strategies  and interventions  for 
improving health risk. Through practice 
applying ACSs to different problem areas,  
users develop new skills in a logical, step -by-step sequence, increasing use of the  analytic system 
(thinking before taking action). The use of ACSs teaches youth to use effective problem solving 
approaches, and increase their capacity for metacognition and self -regulation by identifying steps 
for changing  behaviors  in future  settings.  The utility  of ACSs  for promoting  the essential  elements  of 
this framework  is well supported,  and the application  of ACSs  in clinical  practice  is incorporated  into 
our proposed study  through  the use of TCU Mapping  Enhanced  Counseling  (MEC; Dansereau,  2005; 
Dansereau, Simpson, 2009; National Registry of Evidence -based Programs and Practices, 2008).  
MEC is a communication and decision - making approach that uses graphic visualization tools to 
help  clients  focus  on critical  issues  and behavioral  choices,  and helps address  client  problems  more 
clearly than when relying strictly on verbal skills.  
It centers  on the use of graphical  nodes  to depict  interrelationships  among  people,  events,  actions, 
thoughts and feelings that underlie negative circumstances and the search for solutions. Clients 
exposed to MEC in SU treatment settings have lower drug use (Czuchry, Dansereau, Dees, & 
Simpson, 1995; Czuchry, Newbern -McFarland, & Dansereau, 2009; Dansereau, Joe, Dees, & 
Simpson, 1996; Dansereau, Joe, & Simpson, 1993; Dan sereau, Joe, & Simpson, 1995; Dees,  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
Dansereau,  & Simpson,  1997;  Joe, Dansereau,  Pitre,  & Simpson,  1997;  Joe, Dansereau,  & Simpson, 
1994; Knight, Simpson, Dansereau, 1994) and improved knowledge/avoidance of sexual risk 
(Lehman et al., 2015). Recent studies demonstrate effectiveness of MEC strategies for improving 
decision  making  (Knight  et al.,  2015;  Knight  et al., 2016),  motivation  for personal  change  (Becan  et 
al., 2015; Knight et al., 2018), and treatment (Knight et al., 2016).  
The Substance  Use and Health  Risk Intervention  (SUHRI).  The SUHRI  tablet  intervention  addresses 
the interrelated topics of SU and risky sex practices (Baglivio, 2009; Hubbard & Pratt, 2002) 
identified by JJ staff and youth as being important and needing greate r attention.  
Research  shows  that technology -based  interventions  are associated  with  reductions  in substance 
use (Champion, Newton, Barrett, & Teesson, 2013; Tait, & Christensen, 2010), and have 
comparable outcomes to counselor -led interventions, with the a dded benefits of greater cost - 
efficiency and treatment access (Bickle, Christensen, & Marsch, 2011; Rooke, 2010).  
Technology -based  interventions  can ensure  intervention  fidelity,  promote  greater  responsiveness 
to and  enjoyment of  program content (Carroll  et al., 2008), enable  customization and  participant 
choice in activities, and facilitate diffusion and widespread adoption.  
SUHRI will include four 60 – 90 minutes sessions proctored by a TCU Research Assistant (RA). 
Each session will entail interaction with the web -based intervention; and the last 10 minutes will 
involve interaction with the RA processing session content. RA prompts will include, "Do you 
have any questions about the material?" “Did anything about the material make you 
uncomfortable?" Thi s "check in" will enable youth to talk with someone if they have 
questions/concerns and allow the RA to intervene with an immediate referral to an identified 
clinician if needed (RAs will receive training in accordance with juvenile justice departmental 
procedures). Each session includes an introduction to the topic, key facts/strategies for making 
healthy choices, scenarios and games where youth practice decision making using ACSs, and 
information about services available to help. Throughout all sessions, ACSs based on a MEC 
worksheet  called  WORK -IT are used  to provide  information,  encourage  introspection  and problem 
identification, and develop/improve analytical problem -solving skills. Sessions encompass 3 core 
processes  that are recognized  components  of executive  function:  goal  setting,  evaluating  options, 
and implementing the best option. Sessions also will include additional activities to enhance 
decision -making skills: multiple perspective taking, rating options along several dimensions, and 
determining  implementation intentions.  
To ensure fidelity to the study protocol and to avoid any perceived coercion by JJ staff, TCU 
Institute  of Behavioral  Research  (TCU/IBR)  RAs will oversee  intervention  administration,  including 
voluntary study enrollment and withdrawal if requested. Following our NIDA -funded JJ - TRIALS 
study protocol, NO participant information (youth participation, youth assessment responses, 
choices/responses  selected  during  the intervention,  completion  of sessions)  will be shared  with  JJ 
staff; only aggregate information will be shared with JJ leadership.  
11.Location :
All intervention and assessments sessions will take place either online using a platform such as
Zoom, in -person at a Tarrant County Juvenile Services office or another public pl ace, or via a
tablet  hand -off in an agreed  upon  public  place.  All TCU rules  and regulations  regarding  COVID -19
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
protocols  will be followed  for in-person  interactions  including  masking,  hand - washing/sanitizing,  social 
distancing when able, and  sanitizing of all equipment.  
12.Subject  Population:
Participants will include juvenile justice-involved youth on probation within at least 1 local juvenile
probation department (Tarrant County, currently). The Tarrant County Board (TCJS) has granted
preliminary approval to submit appropriate requests to TJJD to move forward with planning this
study.
We expect to recruit approximately 60 youth who range in age from 14 to 18 years old.
Inclusion Criteria : Youth ages 14-18 on community supervision are eligible if they have 1 or more  
indicator(s) of substance use, are English-speaking , and have no indication of current suicide risk 
or severe cognitive impairment/thought disorders. Youth’s  parent/legal guardian may be Spanish - 
speaking. Upon approval of the parental consent document, it will be translated into Spanish and 
submitted to the IRB for approval. 
Exclusion criteria : Youth who are on TJJD (state) supervision rather than county supervision are not 
eligible to participate. In addition, youth who are currently suicidal, homicidal, or otherwise 
severely impaired (e.g., active psychotic symptoms) such as severe cognitive impairment or 
thought disorders are not eligible. Youth younger than 14 and youth 1 9 or older are likewise not 
eligible. 
13.Recruitment  Procedure:
Prior to study start, TCU will meet virtually with TCJS leadership to finalize recruitment,
compensation, study implementation,  and sharing of youth  records.  The TCJS Director  of Research
(DOR) will work  directly  with  TCU and TJJD  to ensure  that data  sharing  agreements  and procedures
for linking study data to youth records are appropriate and secure. For study management
purposes providing incentives to families, the DOR will know which youth  are participating in the
study but will keep this information confidential; supervising officers will not have access to this
information. Information shared between the DOR and research team will be retained in and
shared via a Box (account owned by TCU)  folder with access restricted to the DOR and research
team. Prior to participant recruitment, RAs will be trained on the general study protocol (e.g.,
recruitment,  eligibility,  consenting),  curriculum  content  (e.g.,  rationale,  content,  exercises),  delivery
strategies, tablet operation, web access (e.g., troubleshooting, technical problem resolution), and
how to address sensitive issues. RAs will be trained on identifying symptoms of trauma, handling
information disclosed by youth, and will follow sp ecific procedures required by the JJ department
for reporting abuse or trauma to health personnel.
We will  work  with  departmental  staff  to develop  recruitment  and administration  procedures, 
including  identifying  the best group(s)  from  which  to recruit  participants  and troubleshooting 
options for youth with challenges such as lack of access to Wi -Fi. 
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
As part of supervision orientation procedures, J J Probation Officers w ill distribut e and/or e-mail 
flyer s (see Appendic es 3- 4) describin g the stud y to youth under community supervision and their 
parents/guardians. Th e flyer will describ e the project (purpose, ti me commit ment, compensation, 
benefits, eligibility criteria), and provid e contact information for th e research study. Th ey will also 
give a brief description of th e study t o the youth and their caregive rs, and ask for permission to 
share the youth and caregiver’s contact information with the TCU research tea m. If th ey agree, the 
information w ill be conveyed usin g either a spreadsheet o r Qualtrics link with th e client s PID 
number , basic demographics, contact information for youth and caregiver, and eligibility criteria. 
The youth and/or car egiver will contact the study tea m from TCU if interested or th e RA will 
reach out to families that agree to shar e their contact information. The RAs will set up an initial 
virtual or in-person session to evaluate the family’s interest, screen for eligibility, and 
consent/assent. The project ends 8/31/22. 
All sessions that occur prior to 8/31/22 will be 
compensated.
14.Consenting Procedure:
The TCU RA will contact the client and family via phone or e-mail to schedule a time for the
consent/assent session that is convenient to the family. The RA will reach out to the families via
email and text messages
Consent and 
study sessions will either occur virtually, in-person, or via a tablet hand-off in a public 
place. A courtesy reminder e-mail and text message providing the information about the session 
will be sent 3 
days prior, 1 day prior and a few hours  prior the session with the prepared scripts The
RA will meet individually via a virtual platform or in-person with only those who express interest, 
screen the youth for eligibility and describe the study. 
To obtain youth assent and parental/guardian consent for participation, the RA will use an 
individualized link to pull up the parental/guardian informed consent document (Appendix 1) in 
Qualtrics. For those attending the consent/assent conference virtually, the RA will use the share 
the screen function within Zoom with the family. The RA will explain the study to the family, 
ensuring they 
understand the importance of giving informed consent and assent. The RA will 
answer any questions the youth or parent/guardian has regarding what participation it the study 
entails. Once the family understands the project and their rights, the youth and/or caregiver will 
indicate 
their agreement to participate by making yes/no on the assent and consent documents. 
The RA will share the consent/assent forms via e-mail with the youth and the guardian for their 
own records. Youth may provide assent to participate at the start of the first  intervention session if 
they are not available for the initial consent session with the parent/guardian. 
Additional Steps for Obtaining Youth Assent: Trained research staff will utilize a two-step assent 
process to decrease the chances of youth being coerced into participating in the study. The 
components of the 2-part assent process are: (1) complete disclosure of information and (2) 
assessment of comprehension. 
(1)The complete disclosure of information will include a thorough verbal description of the study
using the Youth Assent document (Appendix 2) and a clear statement that electing to participate
in the study will not affect the youth’s treatment by the juvenile justice agency, decisions by the
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
courts at hearings, or the  duration of the youth’s supervision; and that in contrast to court-mandated 
participation in conditions of the youth’s probation, this study is completely voluntary. We will also 
inform the family that while we will not inform their Probation Officers about their participation, we 
cannot fully guarantee that they will not learn about their participation through internal JJ 
communication or in the case the youth discloses their participation to their probation officer. (2) To 
ensure that both caregivers and youth understand the study and all it entails, the RA will assess their 
comprehension by asking them “what is the purpose of the study”, “what are the risks of the study”, 
and “what will happen if you choose not to participate”. If the youth and  caregiver are unable to 
answer or they respond incorrectly, the RA will go over the applicable study components again. This 
will be repeated until the youth and caregiver understand the study and its associated risks. 
Due to using Qualtrics to obtain informed consent, a waiver of signed informed consent request was 
approved by the IRB in the initial project submission (see Appendix 8). It was stamped & approved by 
the IRB on 1/13/21 and uploaded into Cayuse for AM2 to bring files up to date. 
15.Study Procedures:
Procedures
The project ends on 8/31/23 and no sessions will occur past this date. Youth and Caregivers will be
informed during consent and assent (verbally and written), that the project ends on 8/31/23. Project
referrals will cease on 05/31/2023 to allow clients an opportunity to participate in all study activities
prior to project end.
If consent is completed first, the RA will schedule the first session with the youth and perform the
assent process at the start of the session and assessment after. The RA will provide the youth with up
to 3 reminder  e- mails and text message before the session to ensure the youth has log-in information
if
 required, or
 address of the agreed location to meet. They will also be reminded of the day and time
of meeting. See appendices  3 
for email and text 
scripts.
Following assent and assessment the youth will receive a tablet to use during the study. The RA will 
walk through a tutorial with youth to ensure they learn how to use the tablet. The youth will then have 
the first intervention session with the RA. The RA will complete administrative procedures to ensure 
the youth is presented with the correct modules for the session, and the youth will complete the 
session independently with the RA available to answer questions. Once the youth completes the 
session, they will complete an end of session evaluation (using Qualtrics), and the RA will transition 
the youth out of the session and schedule the next session or the follow-up assessment (following the 
4th session of the intervention). 
The first intervention session will occur approximately a week after the consent/assent meeting, and 
each session will occur a week to several weeks apart (spanning across approximately 1 month). 
Following the last session, the youth will be scheduled to complete a 1-month assessment either in-
person or online with the RA. The youth will receive 2 reminder e-mails and text messages leading up 
to the assessment appointment. The youth will also complete a 3- month post- intervention 
assessment proctored virtually or in-person by the RA. The youth will also receive  3 reminder e-mails
and text messages leading up to the final assessment.  Reminder e-mails will come from the e-mail
address SUHRIProject@tcu.edu with the subject line “SUHRI Reminder” directly to the youth’s 
personal e-mail address to reduce the chance that another individual will see the e- mails. No 
reference to a research project will be made in the text. TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
Each follow- up assessmen t will last approximat ely 60 minut es, with interventio n session s lasting 
approximately 60 – 90 minutes each. 
To request corroborating data from the local JJ department as well as the Texas Department of 
Juvenile Justice (TJJD), the research team will request that the TCJS research director provide the 
TJJD-based identification number (PID) for consenting participants as well as demographic, 
substance screening and assessment, and relevant service attendance information. These data 
will be shared via a spreadsheet available to the director of research and the research team via 
Box.com– a secure file-sharing platform. The research team will provide the PID numbers along 
with headquarters county ID to the TJJD data team via spreadsheet in a Box folder in return for 
state-level data specific to the youth's substance use screening and assessments as well as 
offense, background, and service-seeking data. The TJJD research proposal submitted in 
September 2020 can be found in Appendix 9.  be found in Appendix 9.
Intervention 
The youth will receive 4 sessions of the interactive, cloud-based intervention administered via a 
tablet we give them. Each session of the intervention will focus on one of topics associated with 
drug use and risky sex practices. The final session will include an integrated module ensuring that 
youth process through a scenario that examines how drug use and risky sex behaviors are 
related. The youth will complete the final WORK-IT scenario within the  app with processing 
questions (see Appendix 5.7) to work through this integrated scenario and also a quiz-like activity 
on Kahoot to learn more about local resources for substance use and sexual health. 
Each session includes two modules including a WORK-IT module where youth will work through a 
scenario they select using the WORK-IT framework. The other module includes two interactive 
games; the Escaping the Downward Spiral (EDS) game and Jeopardy style trivia. In the EDS game, 
youth will play a game that focuses on decision-making in scenarios involving substance use and 
sex, while in the Jeopardy style game, they will learn about facts around substance use and risky 
sexual decision-making. Participants may receive a small token (e.g., fidget spinner or equivalent 
toy of size/cost) if they answer a certain number of questions correctly in the trivia game at the 
end of the intervention sessions. If the last session is virtual, RAs will offer to mail the token to 
participants and request their mailing address to do so. The tokens will be mailed with a 
"congratulations" leaflet (Appendix 12) that congratulates the participant on winning the trivia 
and requests them to be on the lookout for  a follow-up survey (the assessment session). 
Intervention sessions will last approximately 60 - 90 minutes. The youth will complete these 
independently on a tablet/computer but the RA will be available in-person or via virtual platform 
to proctor participation. Modules also include the provision of additional information and service 
information related to substance use and risky sex practices. 
Assessment 
Participants will be asked to complete a battery of assessments at baseline, 1-month post- 
baseline, and 3 months post baseline. The assessment/measures package has been approved in 
several submissions across the initial study submission, AM 1, AM 2, AM 4, and AM6.  Participants 
will also be asked to complete post-session feedback for each intervention session (approved on 
AM 2 & AM4).
Compensation / Community Service Hours 
Compensation will be provided to the youth either in form as a gift card or community service 
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
credit s for eac h intervention session . Yout h will get t o decid e at eac h sessi on if they wan t to 
receive a 
gift card or community service credit . They can receive $20 or 3 community service 
credits for each intervention session. They will also receive $20 for each follow-u p 
assessment session. Youth will also be reminded at each session that the project activities 
will end on August  and they will be compensated for the activities completed before then.
16.Potential Risks and Precautions to Reduce Risk:
Risks are minimal and include potential risks to breach of confidentiality. No physical risks are
involved in participation. Minimal risk of emotional discomfort may exist.
Because youth will be asked about substance use and risky sex behaviors, minimal risk of emotional
discomfort may exist. Exposure to some content within the intervention could trigger memories of
events if the individual has experienced something similar. TCU RAs will be trained on identifying
symptoms of trauma, handling information disclosed by the youth or caregiver, and will follow
specific procedures required by each department for reporting abuse or trauma to health
personnel. Steps will be taken to minimize risks introduced by meeting virtually (e.g., using meeting
specific links, HIPAA-comparable security settings for virtual meeting platforms, and passwords to
join, and emphasizing the need for maintaining confidentiality). Any reports or papers produced
with data, will maintain respondent confidentiality; no identifiable individual responses will be
disclosed.
SUHRI DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN
Our Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) will be consistent with plans and procedures we have
used in our other federally-funded research projects. These include installation of an 800 (toll free)
number in the US for research sites to use for reporting adverse events (AEs) to the PI, Co-Is, and
research team. The PI will serve as liaison with our university IRB and will monitor and report
problems and AEs as directed. Specific plans and reporting formats will be developed and reviewed
and approved by the IRB prior to the onset of any research involving the proposed pilot studies.
Reporting forms will be developed and participating staff will be trained to identify and report
problems and AEs. The agenda for the weekly data management team meetings also will include
problem and adverse events reports, and all reports will be immediately forwarded to the PI. The
PI will assume overall responsibility for assuring the safety of study participants and will assure that
the TCU IRB is informed of all safety issues.
Definitions of Adverse and Serious Adverse Events
The proposed studies will follow established procedures based on our previous NIDA studies
outlining Common Adverse Events (AEs) and Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) for substance abuse
research. Adverse events are defined as any event or outcome that has resulted in harm to the
participant, has affected the participant detrimentally, has worsened as a result of participation in
the study, or has resulted in increased risk to the participant or others whether or not the risk
actually results in harm.
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
SUHRI DATA AND SAFETY  MONITORING PLAN 
Our D ata and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) will  be consistent with plans and procedures we have used in our 
other federally-f unded research projects.  These include installation of an 800 (toll free) number in the US for 
research sites to use for r eporting adverse events (AEs) to the PI,  Co-I s, and research team. The PI will serve as 
liaison with our university IRB and will  monitor and report problems and AEs as directed. Specific plans and reporting 
formats will  be developed and reviewed and approved by the IRB prior t o the onset of any research involving the 
proposed pilot studies. Reporting forms will  be developed and participating staff will  be trained to identify and 
report problems and AEs. The agenda for t he weekly data management team meetings also will i nclude problem and 
adverse events reports, and al l reports will be immediately forwarded to the PI. T he PI will assume overall 
responsibility for assuring the safety of study participants and will  assure that the TCU IRB is informed of al l safety 
issues. 
Definitions of Adverse and Serious Adverse Events 
The proposed studies will  follow established procedures based on our previous NIDA studies outlining Common 
Adverse Events (AEs) and S erious Adverse Events (SAEs) for substance abuse research. Adverse events are defined as 
any event or outcome that has resulted in harm t o the participant, has affected the participant detrimentally, has 
worsened as a result of participation in the study, or has resulted in i ncreased risk to the participant or others 
whether or not the risk actually results in harm. 
Specific Adverse Events (as observed or r eported by participants or staff) include: 
Violation of confidentiality (e.g., release of participant data to a non-a uthorized 3rd party) 
Institutionalization in residential  treatment or substance use rehabilitation 
Probation revocation, re-arrest,  reincarceration (e.g., jail, prison, juvenile detention) 
Specific Serious Adverse Events (as reported by the partner JJ agency or youth participants) include: 
Drug overdose 
Death 
Serious injury 
Life-threatening experience 
Suicide attempt 
Hospitalization 
Impairment due to a persistent or significant disability or capacity
Unexpected events are defined as any event or outcome that was not described as a risk of participation in the 
research or, even though described as a risk, which has occurred with unexpected severity or frequency. These SAEs 
will be monitored in interim analyses and will be systematically assessed as part of the post-i ntervention 
assessment. Although the enrolled participants are not considered to be at elevated risk for suicide (due to exclusion 
criteria), our c ollaborating JJ agency screens, identifies, and monitors mental health and suicide risk on an on-g oing 
basis and adheres to all local, state and federal policies regarding required reporting and intervention procedures. 
Specifically, all departments within the state of Texas are required to administer the Massachusetts Youth Screening 
Instrument Version 2 (MAYSI-2 ) within 2 weeks of referral  to the department. Individuals with a “caution” score are 
identified and immediately referred to a Psychiatrist for a full evaluation. If a child is in a detention center, they are 
placed under “constant watch” for o bservation. If not in a detention center (i.e., living at home in the community), 
they are triaged into a crisis intervention program o perated by clinicians and supervised by a Psychiatrist. This 
information (suicide risk, referral to psychiatrist, program participation) is logged in the electronic record system. 
The same procedure is employed if a suicide risk is identified at any point during involvement with JJ.
Within 24 hours prior t o the first session,  the TCU research assistant (RA) will confirm with the TCJS Director of 
Research (DOR) that the youth has met eligibility requirements (one or more indicator of substance use; on 
community supervision; no indication of suicide risk or thought disorder). Biweekly, RAs will provide a list of active 
participants to the DOR, who will  identify any youth with a newly identified risk for suicide or thought disorder. 
Study staff also will monitor a nd report disclosures of suicidal ideation during study meetings as required by law and 
in accordance with TCJS  departmental procedures.
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
Plan for  Monitoring Adverse Consequences 
Training of staff will include information on the definitions of SAEs and AEs and reporting procedures. SAEs will 
be identified by a proactive system of “incident” reports filed in relation to providing interventions or 
participating in the research procedures. These events will be reviewed by the PI and graded for their s everity and 
attribution to the intervention, and ALL events will be reported in writing to the local IRB within 3 business days. 
Also, in accordance with local reporting requirements,  all AEs occurring during the course of the study will be 
collected, documented, and reported by the investigators to the IRB at the time of their annual  continuing 
reviews. The PI will prepare a summary report of all Adverse Events to be submitted to the IRB. The analysis of all 
adverse events accumulated-t o-date will include a listing of all AEs. 
Incident Reporting and Procedures 
Any SAE, whether or not related to study intervention, will be reported to the PI within 24 hours of detection. 
Within 3 business days, the PI will submit a completed SAE report to the IRB. Written reports of adverse 
experiences will follow statutory regulations. 
In the event that a subject either withdraws from t he study or the investigators decide to discontinue a subject 
due to an SAE, the subject will be monitored by PI via ongoing status assessment until  (1) a resolution is reached 
(e.g., the problem requiring hospitalization has resolved or stabilized with no further changes expected); (2) the 
SAE is determined to be clearly unrelated to the study intervention; or (3) the SAE results in death. Outcome of 
SAEs will be reported to the IRB in quarterly reports. A summary of the SAEs that occurred during the previous 
year will be included in the annual progress report to NIDA. 
The DSM report,  to be submitted with the annual progress report, will include information organized into the 
following sections: study description,  sociodemographic characteristics of the accumulated participants at baseline 
(pre-i ntervention assessment),  data on the status of study participants, quality assurance issues, regulatory issues, 
data on AEs and SAEs, and efficacy. 
Approach for Reviewing Problems 
Each AE will be classified by the PIs as serious or non-s erious and appropriate reporting procedures will be 
followed as stated above. The PIs will classify each SAE according to the following attribution of risk categories: 
Definite:  SAE is clearly related to the intervention 
Probable:  SAE is likely related to the intervention Possible:  
SAE may be related to the intervention Unlikely:  SAE is 
doubtfully related to the intervention Unrelated:  SAE is 
clearly not related to the intervention 
Participants’  descriptions of adverse events (incident reports) will be grouped in a reasonable way, counted, 
and compared by study groups. A designation of "more-c ommon" will be given to events occurring at an incidence 
of at least 5% in participants assigned to an interventi on group, and for which the incidence is at least twice that 
observed in a comparison group. St aff will be trained to carefully observe participants' reactions to the study 
protocol  and to take appropriate action including support,  discontinuance, or referral to additional  counseling 
services, if necessary. Based on previous experience and the current use of these TCU materials with other IBR 
research projects we have found that such occurrences are rare. 
Reporting Timeline 
SAEs will be reported to the PI within 24 hours of detection. Within 3 business days, the PI will send a full 
report on the SAE, including the action taken with regard to continued study participation to the IRB. Non-s erious 
AEs or adverse effects that lead to subject removal from t he protocol  will be reported to the IRB within 7 business 
days. The PI will maintain a record of the SAEs, which can be provided to the IRB electronically. The outcome of 
SAEs also will  be reported to NIDA in annual  reports. A summary of the SAEs and AEs that occurred during the 
previous year will be included in the annual  progress report to NIDA.  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
17. Potential Benefits:
Youth participation may result in introspection and problem identification, and promote and improve
analytical problem-solving skills and healthy behaviors. From a larger perspective, participation may help
to improve the quality of care for JJ- involved youth experiencing drug- related problems, and this may
benefit not only the individual by reducing his/her pain and suffering but also by lessening the burden
placed on their family and society at large. Formal adaptations of these materials for JJ youth will
provide information on the potential usefulness of a highly active and engaging intervention for
changing attitudes and intentions with regard to drug- related problems and health risk. We will also
gain valuable information about the use of computerized technologies for delivering the intervention.
The minimal and potential risks appear reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits.
18. Compensation:
Compensation will be provided to the youth either in form as a gift or community service credit for each 
intervention session. Youth will get to decide at the beginning of each session. They can receive $20 or 3 
community service credits for each intervention session. They will also receive 
$20 for each follow-up assessment session. 
Although we do not consider the token/toy given for participating in the trivia game as compensation, it 
is worth noting that participants will receive a small token/toy such as a fidget spinner or equivalent in 
size/cost for participating in the trivia game and getting a certain number of questions correct. 
Youth will also be reminded at each session that the project activities will end on August 31st, 2023 and 
they will be compensated for the activities completed before then.
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
19.Procedures  to Maintain
Confidentiality:
Procedures for protection of
participant confidentiality will be
followed (i.e., Human Subject
Certification of all research staff, all
data coded with an ID number,
identifying  information  and research
data  stored  in different  places  under
lock and key, e lectronic data on a
secure server without names).
The research design requires that client subjects be linked across assessment completion 
and to agency  records.  All participants  will be assigned  an arbitrary  research  ID that will be 
used to link all of their data. Data forms will only be identified with the research ID, 
personally  identifying  information  will not appear  on data  forms.  The PI will keep  a link file 
linking names and research IDs on a secure server that does not conta in other data. The 
assessments are intended to be administered online using Qualtrics. The RA will prepare 
the online  assessment,  which  the participant  will access  by using  a personalized  link that is 
connected with their unique participant ID.  
In order to personalize the virtual intervention and app experience, at the beginning of the 
first session, the RA  will log the youth into the system using the client research id, the client 
will be asked to create their own unique user name, called a “FROG NAME.” Similar to the 
games on social media that provide users with a formula for creating fantasy names (see 
image  to right),  the youth  will be presented  with  a formula  to create  their  Horned  FrogName.  
For example:  
First  letter  of your  first name:  R=Tangerine  Month  you were  born:  April=Canvas  Favorite  color: 
Black=17 Your FROG NAME is: TangerineCanvas17  
On subsequent  intervention  sessions,  the youth,  once  logged  in by the RA, will be greeted  with  their  unique  
frog name  (e.g.,  “Hello  TangerineCanvas17!”)  while  completing  the virtual  intervention  session.  
TCU computers are secured by redundant firewall and password access (to both the 
network domain and email user accounts). Procedures for confidentiality will include de - 
identified data to assure confidentialit y. The general policy adopted by the present 
investigators is based on those used successfully for many years in other similar projects. 
Research  files at the TCU Institute  of Behavioral  Research  (IBR)  do not include  the names  of 
the subjects involved in studies. In accordance with standard procedures used by the IBR, 
the confidentiality and privacy of client information will be protected by well -planned and 
comprehensive procedures. Only unique code numbers assigned by program staff during  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
the project  will identify  all research  records.  The data  files that are created  and retained  for 
research will remain anonymous and are entered into computer research files for analysis 
with only the code numbers as identificatio n. Reports issued will never include subject - 
level information that could be linked to any individual, and all published data and reports 
will be  based  on aggregate information.  Participants will  be informed that  they can choose 
not to answer uncomfortabl e questions in order to minimize potential discomfort when 
responding to survey questions or intervention material. Furthermore, information 
provided as part of the study will not be shared with participating probation department, 
including any reported dr ug use.  
This research is covered by a Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of 
Health. The researchers may not disclose or use information that may identify a person in 
any federal,  state,  or local civil, criminal,  administrative, le gislative,  or other action, suit,  or 
proceeding, or be used as evidence. The Certificate of Confidentiality will not be used to 
prevent  disclosure  as required  by federal,  state,  or local  law such  as, but not limited  to child 
abuse and neglect, or harm to self or others.  
Data shared with the research team by TCJS and TJJD will be transmitted via Box.com 
through a secure file -sharing folder that only the appropriate parties have access to. PID 
and headquarter  county  numbers  will be shared  with  TJJD  to ident ify the data  needed.  Files 
connecting youth to their PID will be kept secure on TCU - owned shares accessible by the 
PI. Once data are shared, they are stored on TCU - owned shares that are protected by 
firewalls  and passwords.  Any additional  security  measures  requested  by the department  or 
TJJD, such as scrambling PID numbers upon receipt of the data will be outlined in 
subsequent data sharing agreements and followed.  
20.Data  Analyses:
Implementation  feasibility  measures  will be recorded,  summarized,  and reviewed  monthly  by the
PI and team in order to inform real -time protocol adjustments (e.g., changes in recruiting
practices if  target  numbers  are not reached).  Once the  targeted  youth  recruitment  goal has  been
achieved, psychometric properties of baselin e measures will be conducted (means, SD,
coefficient  alpha,  exploratory/confirmatory  factor  analysis).  Because  the design  calls  for repeated
measures at baseline, month 1, and month 3, measures will not be revised between
administration points.
However, psychometrics (conducted on data from all time points) will be used to inform
modifications  prior  to a full-scale  R01 RCT and reliability  of scales  for use in exploratory  analyses  of
intervention efficacy.
Baseline characteristics will be include d as covariates in analyses. The distal outcome will be the 
percent of study subjects who use drugs (self -report, corroborated with positive urine test) at 
follow -up (1 - and 3 -months). All study  participants (regardless  of study retention) will  be included  
in analyses (i.e., an intent -to-treat approach; ITT). Baseline variables that directly relate to our 
aims  (e.g.,  drug  use, risky  sex practices)  will be evaluated  for use as covariates.  Abstinence  at each  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
follow -up time point will be compared using chi square test. Our proximal outcomes will include 
putative measures (e.g., problem recognition, decision making, intention to reduce personal risk) 
and receipt of SU services (dichotomous measure from youth records). Be cause proportions of 
females and their SU rates are generally lower among JJ youth compared to males,6 and 
males/females  may  respond  differently  to MEC  interventions,16  we will explore  sex (as a biological 
variable)  differences  in SU, risky  sex practices,  and exploratory  outcomes  using  univariate  analyses 
(e.g.,  chi square,  t-tests,  ANOVA).  We will also explore  potential  racial/ethnic  disparities  in order  to 
more fully inform  whether cultural modifications are needed for a subsequent application. A log 
rank test will be used to assess intervention dropout. Participants who withdraw consent or are 
lost to follow up will be missing on outcome measures. To address this, stochasti c multiple - 
imputation will be attempted, which will provide maximum likelihood estimates, account for 
uncertainty in missing values, and provide unbiased estimates of the treatment effect if data are 
missing at random. Effect sizes will be used to calcula te sample sizes needed for the larger R01.  
Calculations  will include  samples  needed  to assess  intervention  feasibility  across  sex and 
race/ethnicity subgroups.  
21. Check  List for the Items  That Need  to be Submitted:
a.Protocol
b.Consent  document
c.HIPAA  form  if applicable
d.Protecting  Human  Research  Participants  Training  certificate
for each investigator
e.Recruitment  flyers,  letters,  ads, etc.
f.Questionnaires  or other  documents  utilized  in screening  and
data  collection
Principal  Investigator  Assurance  
22.By signing  below,  I certify  to the following :
•The project described herein will be conducted in accordance with applicable TCU policies and
procedures, as determined by the IRB of record. All Human Subject Research projects occurring  at
TCU must  be conducted  in compliance  with  the Office  of Human  Protection  (“OHRP”)  regulations  at
45 CFR 46 and all other applicable federal and state laws and regulations (collectively “Applicable
Law”)
•I have  a working  knowledge  of Applicable  Law
•All personnel who work  with human  participants  under  this protocol  have  received,  or will receive,
appropriate  training  in protocol  procedures  and protection  of human  subjects  prior  to working  with
humans.
•All experiments involving human participants will be performed only by the qualified individuals
listed in this protocol and individuals not listed in this protocol will not participate in the protocol
experiments.
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
•Procedures  on experimental  subjects  described  in this IRB protocol  accurately  reflect  those
described in the funding applications and awards, if externally supported.
•I and all personnel  have  read  and will comply  with  any pertinent  safety  information,  IRB
requirements, and security procedures.
•I will maintain  records  of all human  participants  and the procedures  carried  out throughout  the
entire term of my project.
•As Principal  Investigator,  I am aware  that I have  the ultimate  responsibility,  on a day-to-day basis,
for the proper care, treatment, and protection of the human participants.
Jennifer Becan  12/1/22
Signature of Principal Investigator  Date  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
References  
Aalsma, M. C., Tong, Y., Wiehe, S. E., & Wanzhu, T. (2010). The impact of delinquency on young 
adult  sexual  risk behaviors  and sexually  transmitted  infections.  Journal  of Adolescent  Health, 
46(1), 17 -24. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2009.05.018  
Baglivio,  M. T. (2009).  The assessment  of risk to recidivate  among  a juvenile  offending  population.  
Journal  of Criminal  Justice,  37(6),  596–607.  
Becan , J. E., Knight,  D. K., Crawley,  R. D., Joe, G. W., & Flynn,  P. M. (2015).  
Effectiveness  of the Treatment  Readiness  and Induction  Program  for increasing  adolescent 
motivation for change. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 50, 38 -49. PMCID: 
PMC4304896  
Bickle,  W. K., Christensen,  D. R., & Marsch,  L. A. (2011).  A review  of computer -based  interventions 
used in the assessment, treatment, and research of drug addiction. Substance Use and 
Misuse, 46(1), 4 -9. 
Carroll,  K. M., Ball,  S. A., Martino,  S., Nich,  C., Babuscio, T.  A., Nuro,  K. F., . . . 
Rounsaville,  B. M. (2008).  Computer -assisted  delivery  of cognitive -behavioral  therapy  for addiction: 
A randomized trial of CBT4CBT. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(7), 881 - 888.  
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). (2018). HIV among youth. 
Retrieved April 25, 2018 from http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/group/age/youth/index.html  
Champion,  K. E., Newton,  N. C., Barrett,  E. L., & Teesson,  M. (2013).  A systematic  review  of school‐ 
based alcohol  and other drug  prevention programs facilitated by  computers or the Internet. 
Drug and Alcohol Review, 32(2), 115 -123.  
Cox,  W. M., Klinger,  E., & Fadardi,  J. S. (2015).  The motivational  basis  of cognitive  determinants  of 
addictive behaviors. Addictive Behaviors, 44, 16 -22. 
Crone, E.  A., &  Dahl,  R. E. (2012). Understanding  adolescence  as a period of social - 
affective  engagement  and goal  flexibility.  Nature  Review  Neuroscience,  13(9), 
636-650.
Crosby,  R. A., DiClemente, R.  J., Wingood,  G. M., Salazar,  L. F., Harrington,  K., Davis,  
S.L., & Oh, M. K. (2003).  Identification  of strategies  for promoting  condom  use: A prospective
analysis of high -risk African American female teens. Prevention Science, 4(4), 263 -270.
Czuchry,  M., Dansereau,  D. F., Dees, S.  M., & Simpson,  D. D. (1995). The use of node - link mapping 
in drug  abuse  counseling:  The role of attentional  factors.  Journal  of Psychoactive  Drugs,  27(2), 
161-166.
Czuchry,  M., Newbern -McFarland,  D., & Dansereau,  D.F. (2009).  Visual  representation  
tools  for improving  addiction  treatment  outcomes.  Journal  of Psychoactive  Drugs,  41(2),  181-187.  
Dansereau,  D. F. (2005).  Node -link mapping  principles  for visualizing  knowledge  and information.  In 
S.-O. Tergan & T. Keller (Eds.), Knowledge and information visualization: Searching for 
synergies (pp. 61 -81). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.  
Dansereau, D. F., Joe, G. W., Dees, S. M., & Simpson, D. D. (1996). Ethnicity and the 
effects  of mapping -enhanced  drug  abuse  counseling.  Addictive  Behaviors,  21(3), 
363-376.
Dansereau,  D. F., Joe, G.  W., & Simpson, D. D. (1993). Node -link mapping:  A visual representation 
strategy  for enhancing  drug  abuse  counseling.  Journal  of Counseling  Psychology,  40(4),  385- 
395.  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
Dansereau,  D. F., Joe,  G. W., & Simpson, D.  D. (1995). Attentional  difficulties and the effectiveness 
of a visual  representation strategy  for counseling  drug -addicted  clients.  International  Journal 
of the Addictions, 30(4), 371-386.  
Dansereau,  D. F., Knight,  D. K., & Flynn,  P. M. (2013).  Improving  adolescent  judgment  
and decision  making.  Professional  Psychology:  Research  and Practice,  44(4),  274-282.  PMCID: 
PMC3877916  
Dansereau,  D. F., & Simpson,  D. D. (2009).  A picture is  worth  a thousand  words:  The 
case for graphic representations. Professional Psychology: Research & Practice, 40(1), 104 -110. 
Dees,  S. M., Dansereau,  D. F., & Simpson,  D. D. (1997).  Mapping -enhanced  drug  abuse  counseling:  
Urinalysis  results  in the first year  of methadone  treatment.  
Journal  of Substance  Abuse  Treatment,  14(1),  45-54. 
Englund,  M. M., Egeland,  B., Oliva,  E. M., & Collins,  W. A. (2008).  Childhood  and 
adolescent  predictors  of heavy  drinking  and alcohol  use disorders  in early  adulthood:  A longitudinal 
developmental analysis. Addiction, 103(1), 23 -35. 
Fisher,  C. M. (2012).  Adapting  the information -motivation -behavioral  skills  model:  
Predicting  HIV-related  sexual  risk among  sexual  minority  youth.  Health,  Education,  & Behavior, 
39(3), 290 -302.  
Fisher,  W. A., Williams,  S. S., Fisher,  J. D., & Malloy,  T. E. (1999).  Understanding  AIDS  risk behavior 
among sexually active urban adolescents. An empirical test of the information - motivation - 
behavioral skills model. AIDS and Behavior, 3(1), 13 -23. 
Fisher,  J. D., Fisher,  W. A., Bryan,  A. D., & Misovich,  S. J. (2002).  Information - 
motivation -behavioral  skills  model -based  HIV risk behavior  change  intervention  for inner  city high 
school youth. Health Psychology, 21(2), 177 -186.  
Fisher,  W. A., Fisher,  J. D., & Harman,  J. (2003).  The information -motivation -behavioral  
skills  model:  A general  social  psychological  approach  to understanding  and promoting  health 
behavior. In J. Suls & K. A. Wallston (Eds.), Social psychological foundations of health and 
illness  (pp. 82-106).  Malden,  MA:  Blackwell  Publishing  Ltd. doi: 10.1002/9780470753552.ch4  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
Golzari,  M., Hunt,  S.J., & Anoshiravani,  A. (2006).  The health  status  of youth  in juvenile  detention 
facilities. Journal of Adolescent Health, 38(6), 776 -782.  
Gonzalez,  Je. E., Nelson,  J. R., Gutkin,  T. B., Saunders,  A., Galloway,  A., & Shwery,  C. 
S.(2004).  Rational  Emotive  Therapy  with  children  and adolescents:  A meta - analysis.  Journal  of
Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 12, 222 -235 
Hockenberry,  S., & Puzzanchera,  C. (2014,  July).  Juvenile  Court  Statistics  2011.  
Pittsburg,  PA: National  Center  for Juvenile  Justice.  Retrieved  April  25, 2018  from 
http://ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/njcda/pdf/jcs2011. pdf 
Hubbard,  D. J., & Pratt,  T. C. (2002).  A meta -analysis  of the predictors  of delinquency  among  girls.  
Journal  of Offender  Rehabilitation,  34(3),  1-13. 
Hutchinson,  K. M., & Cooney,  T. M. (1998).  Patterns  of parent -teen  sexual  risk communication: 
Implications for intervention. Family Relations, 47(2), 185 -194.  
Joe, G. W., Dansereau, D. F., Pitre, U., & Simpson, D. D. (1997). The role of node -link 
maps  in enhancing  counseling  efficiency.  Journal  of Addictive  Diseases,  16(3),  39- 
49. 
Joe, G. W., Dansereau, D.F., & Simpson, D. D. (1994). Node -Link Mapping for counseling cocaine users in 
methadone  treatment.  Journal  of Substance  Abuse,  6(4),  393-406.Kahneman,  D. (2011).  Thinking  fast 
and slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux.  
Klaczynski, P. A . (2005).  Metacognition and  cognitive variability:  A dual -process model  of decisions  making 
and its development. In J. E. Jacobs & P. A. Klaczynski (Eds.), The developmentof judgment and 
decision  making  in children  and adolescents  (pp. 39-76). Mahwah,  NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates.  
Knight,  D. K., Dansereau,  D. F., Becan,  J. E., Rowan,  G. A., & Flynn,  P. M. (2015).  
Effectiveness  of a theoretically -based  judgment  and decision  making  intervention  for adolescents.  
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 44, 1024 -1038. PMCID: PMC4208977 
Knight,  D., Joe, G. W., Becan,  G. W., Crawley,  R. D., Theisen,  S. E., & Flynn,  P. M. 
(2018).  Effectiveness  of the Treatment  Readiness  and Induction  Program  (TRIP)  for improving 
intrinsic motivation among males in secure juvenile justice settings.  
Manuscript  submitted  for publication.  
Knight, D. K., Joe, G. W., Crawley, R. D., Becan, J. E., Dansereau, D. F., & Flynn, P. M. (2016). The 
effectiveness  of the Treatment  Readiness  and Induction  Program  (TRIP)  for improving  durin g- 
treatment outcomes. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 62, 20 - 
27.PMCID:  PMC4724560
Knight, D. K., Joe, G. W., Crawley, R. D., Becan, J. E., Dansereau, D. F., & Flynn, P. M. (2016). The
effectiveness  of the Treatment  Readiness  and Induction  Program  (TRIP)  for improving  during - 
treatment outcomes. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 62, 20 - 
27.PMCID:  PMC4724560
Knight,  K., Simpson,  D. D., & Dansereau, D.  F. (1994).  Knowledge mapping: A  psychoeducational
tool in drug  abuse  relapse  prevention  training.  Journal  of Offender  Rehabilitation,  20(3/4), 
187-205.
Lehman,  W. E. K., Rowan,  G. A., Greener,  J. M., Joe, G.  W., Yang,  Y., & Knight,  K. (2015).  Evaluation 
of WaySafe:  A disease -risk reduction  curriculum  for substance - abusing  offenders.  Journal  of 
Substance Abuse Treatment, 58, 25 -32. PMCID: PMC4581912  
Magill,  M., & Ray,  L. A. (2009).  Cognitive -behavioral  treatment  with  adult  alcohol  and illicit  drug  users:  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
A meta -analysis  of randomized  controlled  trials.  Journal  of Studies  on Alcoh ol and Drugs,  70(4),  516- 
527 
NREPP (National Registry of Evidence -based Programs and Practices). (2008, July).TCU (Texas Christian 
University)  Mapping -Enhanced  Counseling.  Washington,  DC: SAMHSA’s  National  Registryof  Evidence - 
based Programs and Practices. Retrieved April 25, 2018 fromhttps://nrepp.samhsa.gov/Legacy/ 
ViewIntervention.aspx?id=161  
OJJDP  (Office  of Juvenile  Justice  and Delinquency  Prevention).  (2015,  April).  Easy  access  to juvenile 
court statistics: 1985 -2015. Retrieved April 26, 2018 from 
http://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/ezajcs/  
Palamar,  J. J., Shearston,  J. A., Dawson,  E. W., Mateu -Gelabert,  P., & Ompad,  D. C. 
(2016).  Nonmedical  opioid  use and heroin  use in a nationally  representative  sample  of US high 
school seniors. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 158, 132 -138.  
Rooke, S., Thorsteinsson, E., Karpin, A., Copeland, J., & Allsop, D. (2010). Computer - delivered 
interventions  for alcohol  and tobacco  use: A meta-analysis.  Addiction,  105(8),  1381 -1390.  
Romero,  E. G., Teplin,  L. A., McClelland,  G. M., Abram,  K. M., Welty,  L. J., & 
Washburn, J. J. (2007). A longitudinal study of the prevalence, development, and persistence of 
HIV/Sexually  transmitted  infection  risk behaviors  in delinquent  youth:  Implications  for health 
care in the community. Pediatrics, 119(5), 1126 -1141.  
SAMHSA  (Substance  Abuse  and Mental  Health  Services  Administration).  (2013,  
September).  Results  from  the 2012  National  Survey  on Drug  Use and Health:  Summary  of national 
findings (NSDUH Series H -46, HHS Publication No. SMA 13 -4795).  
Rockville,  MD:  Substance  Abuse  and Mental  Health  Services  Administration.  Retrieved  April  25, 
2018 from https:// www.samhsa. gov/ data/ sites/default/files/ 
NSDUHresults2012/NSDUHresults2012.pdf  
Spada,  M. M., Albery,  I. P., & Moss,  A. C. (2015).  Editorial:  Contemporary  perspectives  on cognition 
in addictive behaviors. Addictive Behaviors, 44, 1 -2. 
Stone, A. L., Becker, L. G., Huber, A. M., & Catalano, R. F. (2012). Review of risk and protective 
factors  of substance  use and problem  use in emerging  adulthood.  Addictive  Behaviors,  37(7), 
747-775.
Swift,  W., Coffey,  C., Carlin,  J. B., Degenhardt,  L., & Patton,  G. C. (2008).  Adolescent  
cannabis  users  at 24 years:  Trajectories  to regular  weekly  use and dependence  in young  adulthood.  
Addiction,  103(8),  1361 -1370.  
Tait,  R. J., & Christensen,  H. (2010).  Internet -based  interventions  for young  people  with  problematic 
substance use: A systematic review. Medical Journal of Australia, 192(11), S15 -S21.  
United  States  Census  Bureau.  (2017,  April).  National  population  projections  tables.  
Retrieved  April  26, 2018  from  https:// www.census.gov/data/tables/2012/demo/  popproj/2012 - 
summary -tables.html  
Winters,  K. C., & Lee, C.-Y. (2008).  Likelihood of developing  an alcohol and  cannabis  use disorder 
during  youth:  Association with recent  use and age. Drug  and Alcohol  Dependence,  92(1 -3), 
239-247.
Whitaker,  D. J., Miller,  K. S., May,  D. C., & Levin,  M. L. (1999).  Teenage  partners’ communication 
about sexual  risk and condom  use: The importance of  parent -teenager  discussions.  Family 
Planning Perspectives, 31(3), 117 -121.  
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024
Young,  A., McCabe,  S. E., Cranford,  J. A., Ross -Durow,  P., & Boyd,  C. J. (2012).  
Nonmedical  use of prescription  opioids  among  adolescents:  Subtypes  based  on motivation  for use. 
Journal  of Addictive  Diseases,  31(4),  332-341. 
TCU
1920-347
Approved on 2-8-2023
Expires on 1-24-2024