 
1 
  
   
COVER PAGE 
 
 
Official Title 
Clinical Trial of Sound-Based Versus  Behavioral Therapy for Tinnitus 
  
NCT number 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
  
Document Date 
Last IRB approval date 13 MAR 2018 
 
2 
  
 Research Protocol  
 
Title: Clinical Trial of Sound-B ased versus Be havioral Therapy  for Ti nnitus 
 Investigators   
PI: James A. Henry, Ph.D.  
Co-PI: Sarah T heodoroff, Ph.D. 
 Specific Aims 
The purpose of this study is to determine if  a customized therapy, Acoustic Coordinated 
Reset (CR) Neuromodulation (also referred to  as Desyncra) reduces tinnitus-related 
distress with comparable efficacy as for C ognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) for people 
who have bothersome tinnitus.  Inclusion Criteria 
 Age ≥18 years  
 Primary and persistent tinnitus [defined by AAO-HNSF guidelines (Tunkel et al, 
2014); 6 months or longer in duration] 
 Tonal tinnitus  
 Dominant tinnitus frequency measured between 0.2 and 10 kHz 
 Tinnitus Questionnaire (TQ) score ≥30 at screening (to confirm moderate to 
severe tinnitus) 
 No current participation in other tinnitus therapy program 
 Willing and able to listen to the acoustic prescription for 4-6 hours daily during the 
trial 
 Able to pass the Tone Audibility Assessment with fact or of 1.1   
 Exclusion Criteria 
 Secondary/somatic tinnitus due to a su spected underlying disease (defined by 
AAO-HNSF guidelines) 
 Atonal, pulsatile, intermittent, or occasi onal tinnitus (determined by self-report 
and by the Tinnitus Screener) 
 Any hearing threshold >70 dB HL from  .25-8 kHz, unless subject passes the 
Tone Audibility Assessment screening with a factor of 1.1 
 Any health or other problems that may prevent the person from completing the 
study procedures as determined by investigator 
 Participant reports current (within t he past week) suicidal ideation and/or 
homicidal ideation 
 Use of medication that may trigger  tinnitus [e.g., quinine derivatives, 
aminoglycoside antibiotics, daily high dose non-steroidal anti-in flammatory drugs 
≥1000 mg, salicylates (when not prescribed as  a low dose for cardiac health), 
loop diuretics and chemotherapy  agents like cis-platin] at  the discretion of the 
Principal Investigator 
 Conductive hearing loss defined as an air- bone gap of 15 dB or greater at more 
 
3 
 than two frequencies in one ear 
 Visible congenital or traum atic deformity of the ear 
 History of active drainage from  the ear within the past 90 days 
 History of sudden or rapidly progressive hearing loss within the past 90 days 
 Inability to read and respond appropriately to instructions that appear on the 
computer screen, and/or to perfo rm all of the study procedures 
 Desyncra Group.  Subjects randomized to the Desyncra group will be fit with the 
devices. The Research Audiologists will be trained by a Desyncra representative to 
dispense the Desyncra for Tinnitus Therapy System according to company guidelines. 
The devices are fitted and programmed based on the subject’s tinnitus characteristics 
and hearing ability at the first visit and the subject will use the device for 4-6 hours per 
day for 24 weeks.   In the case of a subject reporting his/her ti nnitus has completely vanished, the subject 
will be instructed to reduce t he amount of time using the therapy device to 1 hour per 
day. In the event that the tinnitus percept ion comes back, the subject would increase 
the amount of time using the device back to 4-6 hours per day. 
 
If a subject’s tinnitus characteristics become outside the range where tinnitus is 
treatable (e.g., too-high or too- low tinnitus pitch), the clinicia n may stop therapy for up to 
2 weeks. Any changes in the therapy schedu le will be documented  accordingly.  
 
CBT Group.  Subjects randomized to this group wi ll receive CBT consistent with best 
practice guidelines.  Subjects will attend 6 CBT therapy sessions over the course of 8 
weeks following baseline performed by a psyc hotherapist as per the recommendations 
outlined in the AAO-HNSF gui deline (Tunkel et al 2014).  
 Step-by-Step Guidance on Conducting the Study Recruitment 
 Post ads at the VA Portland Health Ca re System (VAPORHCS; e.g., audiology, 
primary care, women’s health clini cs) and in the surrounding community 
 Place ads in newspaper (paper and/or online); post online advertising; contact 
previous participants who consented to contribute their information into data 
repositories  
 Mail recruitment letters to heath ca re clinics and facilities in Oregon and 
Washington (USA) 
 Telephone Screening  
 Screen candidates over the phone usi ng screening script; if eligible, gather 
information from candidate and schedule initial appointment 
 Visit 1: In-Person Screening/Baseline  
 Administer informed consent 
 
4 
  HIPAA authorization 
 Administer questionnaires 
 Study staff may opt to us e the Sound Finder with candidates (classifies tinnitus 
as tonal vs. noisy perception) 
 Audiologic testing 
 Tinnitus pitch matching procedure using procedure specified by Desyncra Inc. 
 Visit 2 (1 week after screening comp leted, approximately ±1 week) 
 All subjects will complete the pitch matching procedure and questionnaires  
 Subjects in the Desyncra group will hav e their device adjusted according to 
manufacturer guidelines 
 Subjects in the CBT group will complete their 1st CBT session 
 Subjects are paid $40 fo r attending the visit 
 Follow-up to Visit 2 for subjects randomized to the Desyncra arm 
 An audiologist will call subjects random ized to the Desyncra arm approximately 1 
to 2 weeks after Visit 2 to follow-up and see how the subject is doing with the 
sound-based therapy 
 Visit 3 (4 weeks after screening comp leted, approximately ±1 week) 
 All subjects will complete the questionnaires  
 Subjects in the Desyncra group will co mplete the pitch matching procedure and 
have their device adjusted accord ing to manufacturer guidelines 
 Subjects in the CBT group will complete their 4th CBT session 
 Subjects are paid $40 fo r attending the visit  
 Visit 4 (8 weeks after screening comp leted, approximately ±2 weeks) 
 All subjects will complete the pitch matching procedure and questionnaires 
 Subjects in the Desyncra group will hav e their device adjusted according to 
manufacturer guidelines 
 Subjects in the CBT group will complete their 6th and final CBT session 
 Subjects are paid $40 fo r attending the visit 
 
Visit 5 (16 weeks afte r screening completed,  approximately ±2 weeks) 
 All subjects will complete the questionnaires 
 Subjects in the Desyncra group will co mplete the pitch matching procedure and 
have their device adjusted accord ing to manufacturer guidelines 
 Subjects are paid $40 fo r attending the visit 
 Visit 6 (24 weeks after screening comp leted, approximately ±2 weeks) 
 All subjects will complete the pitch matching procedure and questionnaires 
 All subjects will complete an exit interview 
 Subjects in the Desyncra group will discontinue use of the device 
 Subjects are paid $40 fo r attending the visit 
 
5 
  
Visit 7 (28 weeks after screening comp leted, approximately ±2 weeks) 
 All subjects will complete the pitch matching procedure and questionnaires 
 Subjects are paid $40 for at tending this final visit 
 Desyncra group will have the oppor tunity to keep their devices 
 CBT group will have the oppor tunity to be fit with and receive the Desyncra 
device  
 Any participant who keeps the Desyncra device will be given information on how 
to receive assistance from a local provi der or company representative for device-
related concerns 
 Statistical Analysis Plan 
A Bayesian approach to the analysis of outcome data will be used. Based on simulations across several conditions, we ant icipate requiring a total of no more than 
200 subjects to have at least 80% power to identify a significant benefit of Desyncra 
therapy compared to CBT.  Data from this study will be provided to t he NCRAR Data Manager who will develop and 
maintain a database with all study data. Either the Data M anager or other study 
personnel (e.g. Research Assistant) will enter  the data. The Data Manager will perform 
double entry of the data and che ck for any errors, which will be remediated. After the 
study is complete and all data are entered and verified, the Data Manager will conduct 
preliminary analyses of the data to determine if there are any differences in outcomes 
between groups. These analyses will be overs een by the NCRAR Biostatistician who 
will conduct further analyses as necessary.   A preliminary analysis will be conducted afte r a total of ~30 subjects have been 
randomized and completed the 16 week follow -up visit. The first formal interim analysis 
will be conducted after a tota l of ~30 subjects have been r andomized and completed the 
24 week follow-up visit or ~16 subjects per  treatment arm. A second formal interim 
analysis will occur after a total of ~72 s ubjects have been randomized (~31 subjects per 
treatment arm) and completed the 24-week follow-up. The primary endpoint of this 
study occurs 24 weeks after being dispensed the Desyncra device at which time the 
primary outcome measure,  the TQ, is repeated.  
 The efficacy of Desyncra will be assessed by contrasting the Desyncra and CBT subjects’ change from baselin e on the TQ outcome. The δ parameters describe the 
overall change from baseline comm on to both treatment arms. The φ parameters 
describe the benefits of Desyncra over CBT in  this study. We assume that the TQ 
observations are Gaussian random variables  with population mean defined above plus 
a subject-specific random intercept θ
i, and with residual standard deviation σ.  