Mayo Clinic  
 
 
RECOVER:  Phase  2 Randomized, Double- Blind  Trial  TREating  hospitalized  patients with COVID-19 
with Camostat MesilatE, a TMPRSS2 Inhibitor  
Amendment  3 – March  3, 2023  
 
 
 
Summary  of Changes  
Protocol  section  updated  Nature  of change  
Title  Page • Updated  Document  History  to reflect  Version  3 
Section  4.0, Test Schedule  • Footnote  ‘o’ added  to allow  remote  monitoring  after 
day 1 for patients discharged from the hospital  
Section  7.0, Protocol  Treatment  • Section  7.1 updated  to allow  NG tube as a potential 
route for Camostat or Placebo  
Section  8.0, Adverse  Event  (AE) 
Monitoring and Reporting  • 8.4.1  updated  to send reports  to Ono 
• 8.6 pregnancy reporting added  
Section  9.0, Biospecimens  • 9.1 Table  updated  allowing  all specimen  collection  to 
be mandatory on day 1, optional on all other days 
• 9.2 Mayo  Clinic  Florida  will assemble  kits for their 
site 
• 9.2.6 Specimens that are drawn during the evening 
hours (Monday through  Wednesday) can be shipped 
the next morning  
• 9.3.2 Mayo Clinic Florida will store specimens and 
ship batch  at end of study  enrollment  to Mayo  Clinic 
Arizona  
Section  11.0,  Drug  Information  • 11.1.4  Updated  to allow  NG tube as a potential  route 
for Camostat or Placebo  
Section  13.0,  Statistical  Considerations  and 
Methodology  • 13.4 Primary  analysis  updated  for clarification  on 
minimizing loss to follow -up 
• 13.7 Stopping rule updated to specify  the stopping 
rule criteria will be evaluated separately for each 
treatment arm  
Editorial  and administrative  changes  have  been  made  throughout  the protocol  but do not affect  the 
scientific content or meaning. 
A replacement  protocol is provided.  Please replace the current  copy  with  the one attached.  
 
Please  keep  this summary  of changes  with  your protocol  
CAM20CV  
Amendment  3 
 
 
 
RECOVER:  Phase  2 Randomized, Double- Blind  Trial  TREating  hospitalized  patients with COVID-19 
with Camostat MesilatE, a TMPRSS2 Inhibitor  
 
 
FDA IND 
Sponsor/Principal  Investigator:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-Investigators :  
 
 
Statistician:  
 
 
IND #: 150171  
 
 
Drug  Availability:  
Drug  Company  Supplied:  Camostat  mesilate  or placebo  
 
Commercial: Remdesivir  
 
√ Study contributor(s) not responsible for patient  care 
 
Research  Coordinating Center  
 
 
 
 
 
Document  History  (Effective  Date)  
 
Version  1.0 April  28, 2020  
Version  2.0 June 12, 2020 
Version  2.1 July 29, 2020  
Version  3.0 March  2, 2023 

3 
3  
  
4 
4  
  
Table  of Contents  
Schema  .......................................................................................................................................................... 5  
1.0 Background ........................................................................................................................................ 6  
2.0 Goals  .................................................................................................................................................. 7  
3.0 Patient  Eligibility  ............................................................................................................................... 8  
4.0 Test Schedule  ..................................................................................................................................... 9  
5.0 Stratification  Factors  ........................................................................................................................ 10 
6.0 Registration/Randomization  Procedures  .......................................................................................... 11 
7.0 Protocol Treatment  .......................................................................................................................... 13 
8.0 Adverse Event (AE)  Monitoring and Reporting  .............................................................................. 14 
9.0 Biospecimens  ................................................................................................................................... 20 
10.0 Treatment/Follow –up Decision  at Evaluation of Patient  ................................................................. 22 
11.0 Drug  Information  ............................................................................................................................. 24 
12.0 Treatment  Evaluation Criteria  .......................................................................................................... 29 
13.0 Statistical  Considerations and Methodology  .................................................................................... 30 
14.0 Records and Data  Collection  Procedures  ......................................................................................... 37 
15.0 Bibliography  .................................................................................................................................... 39 
Appendix I: Clinical Safety  Labs ................................................................................................................ 40  
 
5 
5  
 
1:1 randomization  Schema  
 
 
 
 
Hospitalized  patients  with 
SARS -CoV-2 infection   
 
(Control) 
Placebo  + SOC* 
 
(Experimental) 
Camostat + SOC*  
 
 
 
 
 
 *As the Standard  of Care  (SOC) is rapidly  evolving,  the control  arm will be at the discretion  of 
the treating physician and in accordance with institutional standards.  Institutions will be 
responsible for obtaining SOC medications.  The following SOC medications will not be 
provided by this study.  
 
• Remdesivir  
• Anticoagulation  of hospitalized  patients  per institutional  standard  
6 
6  
  
 
1.0 Background  
 
COVID -19 infections caused by SARS- CoV -2 have overwhelmed health care systems  around the 
globe due to the profound respiratory failure that is characteristic of severe disease and which 
constitutes the primary reason for death1. Immune responses to SARS- CoV -2 infection follow a 
two phase pattern. In the first phase, adaptive immune responses are protective and lead to mild 
disease.  However,  if immunity  is impaired  or otherwise  deficient,  severe cases are associated  with 
Lymphopenia and a cytokine storm at which point the  immune response is maladaptive and leads 
to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and pulmonary failure.2,3 
COVID -19 is a Coronavirus that is similar  to the pathogen  (SARS -CoV)  which  caused  the SARS 
epidemic of 2002-2003. Research into SARS-CoV demonstrated the potential role of TMPRSS2 in the pathogenicity of that disease and in particular the link to pulmonary manifestations. Previous work has shown that the SARS S (spike) protein is proteolytically processed by TMPRSS2. SARS S is cleaved into several fragments upon coexpression of TMPRSS2 (cis- 
cleavage) and upon contact between SARS S- expressing cells and TMPRSS2 -positive cel ls 
(trans -cleavage)
4. SARS S protein is associated with inhibition of antibody mediated 
neutralization  of the virus,  and thus promotes  viral spreading.  TRMPSS2  is also a coreceptor  for 
SAR -CoV (with ACE2), and is thus associated with SARS-CoV infectivity, shedding, and 
resistance to protective antibodies. Like SARS, SARS- CoV -2 has been shown to use the ACE2 
and TMPRSS2 receptors for cell entry.5 
Camostat is a serine protease inhibitor that is currently approved in Japan for the treatment of chronic pancreatitis and reflux  esophagitis.  It exhibits anti TMPRSS2  activity  in cell line studies
3. 
Camostat  successfully abrogated SARS S cleavage, inhibited cell entry, and decreased viral 
replication.  
There  is currently  no proven therapy for COVID-19 infection.  Multiple  trials  are currently  active, 
with multiple agents having shown some promise based on small case series. These include hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin.  
A key national priority  in the current pandemic as well as for the individual patients  is to decrease 
the need for ICU admissions and ventilator support. Current projections estimate a national shortage of over 19,000 ICU beds and 31,000 ventilators at the peak of the infection
6. In a case 
series of 138 hospitalized patients with SARs- CoV -2 pneumonia in Wuhan, 26% required 
admission to the ICU2. Therefore,  any intervention  that can lessen  the need  for respiratory  support 
will improve survival both by helping the patient under treatment and by reducing  the availability 
of limited resources for other patients.  
Remdesivir has recently received emergency use authorization from the US FDA as a treatment 
for hospitalized patients with severe cases of COVID -19. In its letter authorizing emergency use, 
the FDA describes remdesivir  as “a direct acting  antiviral  drug that inhibits  viral RNA  synthesis.” 
Based  on review  of the topline data from  the randomized, double- blinded,  placebo -controlled trial 
conducted by NIAID ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) and from the Gilead-sponsored open- label trial that 
evaluated different durations of remdesivir ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]), it is reasonable to believe that the 
known and potential benefits of RDV outweigh the known and potential risks of the drug for the 
treatment of patients hospitalized with severe COVID -19.”7 The EUA is based on preliminary  
7 
7  
  
 
data from  the National Institute of Allergy  and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)  sponsored Adaptive  
COVID -19 Treatment  Trial  (ACTT)  indicate  that patients  who received  remdesivir  had a median 
time to recovery of 11 days compared with 15 days for those who received placebo(p<0.001). 
The mortality  rate was 8.0% for the group receiving remdesivir  versus  11.6% for the placebo 
group (p=0.059)8. 
 
Other drugs that are frequently used for patients admitted with COVID -19 include 
anticoagulation, tocilizumab,  and convalescent  plasma.  The use of convalescent  plasma  is based 
on an EUA and is currently being tested in a clinical trial.  
 
2.0 Goals  
 
2.1 Primary  Objective  
To determine if the reduction in TMPRSS2 activity via direct inhibition with Camostat 
mesilate combined with standard of care (SOC) treatment will increase the proportion of 
patients alive  and free from  respiratory  failure  at Day  28 in SARS -CoV -2 as compared  to 
SOC treatment with placebo.  
2.2 Secondary Objectives include the following:  
 
2.2.1 To determine if reduction in TMPRSS2 activity via direct inhibition with Camostat mesilate combined with SOC  treatment will increase the proportion of 
patients alive  and free of ventilator use or ECMO  at Day 28 as compared  to SOC 
treatment combined with placebo.  
2.2.2 To determine if the combination of Camostat mesilate combined with SOC 
treatment  will result  in a decreased  mortality  rate at 28 and 56 days as compared 
to SOC treatment combined with placebo. 
2.2.3 To determine if time to clinical improvement is reduced in patients receiving SOC  treatment  combined with Camostat  mesilate  as compared  to SOC  treatment 
combined with placebo. 
2.2.4 To determine if Camostat  mesilate  combined with SOC  treatment  is associated 
with overall improved clinical status at Days 14 and 28 as compared to SOC 
treatment combined with placebo.  
2.2.5 To determine if Camostat  mesilate  combined with SOC  treatment  is associated 
with a reduced length of stay in the hospital as compared to SOC treatment 
combined with placebo. 
2.2.6 To determine if Camostat  mesilate  combined with SOC  treatment  is associated 
with reduced duration of: 
a) mechanical  ventilation  or ECMO  use, 
 
b) non-invasive ventilation  or high- flow oxygen use, and 
8 
8  
  
 
c) supplemental oxygen use as compared  to SOC  treatment  combined  with 
placebo.  
2.2.7 To compare  the safety  and toxicity  profile  of Camostat  mesilate  combined with 
SOC treatment as compared to SOC treatment combined with placebo.  
2.2.8 To determine if treatment  with Camostat  mesilate  combined  with SOC  treatment 
is associated with decreased incidence of thrombotic events and bleeding 
complications as compared to SOC treatment combined with placebo.  
2.3 Exploratory Objectives  
 
2.3.1 To determine  changes in viral load over the course of treatment  as determined by 
assays of nasopharyngeal secretions, oral secretions, stool, and serum. 
 
3.0 Patient  Eligibility  
 
3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 
3.1.1 Laboratory confirmed  SARS -CoV -2 infection  
 
3.1.2 Admitted  to hospital for management  of SARS -CoV -2 
 
3.1.3 Age ≥18 
 
3.1.4 Subject or legal  representative able to give informed  consent  
 
3.1.5 Ability  to take all study drugs  
 
3.1.6 Respiratory  status  of 3 or greater  on the WHO ordinal  scale  
 
3.1.7 ALT  or AST  ≤5 x ULN  
 
3.1.8 Creatinine clearance  ≥50 mL/min  using  the Cockroft -Gault  formula  
 
3.1.9 Willingness to provide  mandatory  specimens for correlative research  and 
banking (see Section 6.0 and 9.0). 
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
3.2.1 Women  who are pregnant or breastfeeding  
 
3.2.2 Known  hypersensitivity to the study drug, the metabolites  or formulation 
excipient  
9 
9  
  
 
 
4.0 Test Schedule  
 
 Baseline/Prior  to 
Registration   
Randomized  Treatment  Period 
(Day 1 -Day 14)   
Follow -Up Evaluation  
Day 0 (≤ 2 days)  Day 1 (1st 
Dose )  Day 2- 
13(l) Day 14 Day 28(k) Day 56(k) 
Informed Consent(a) X      
Complete  medical  and 
surgical history  X      
Update  of medical  history  X      
Record  medications  and 
therapies(b) X      
Record  Concomitant 
medications   
X X X X X 
Height(c) X      
Body weight  X   X   
Comprehensive  physical 
examination(d), (o) X   X X X 
Targeted  physical 
examination(e), (o) X  X X   
Vital Signs(f), (o) X X X X X X 
12-Lead  ECG  X   X   
Chest  CT     X X 
CBC with differential(g) X   X X X 
Comprehensive  metabolic 
panel(g) X   X X X 
Procalcitonin,  IL-6, ferritin, 
azotemia,  Ca, triglycerides, 
glucose, LDH, GGT, CPK,  
D-dimer, PT/INR, 
fibrinogen,  and troponin   
 
X    
 
X  
 
X  
 
X 
Thrombotic  Events(m)   X X X X 
Renal  profile(g) X  X X X X 
Urinalysis  with 
microscopic(g) X   X   
Serum  pregnancy  test for 
WCBP  X    X X 
Urine  pregnancy  test for 
WCBP  X      
Ordinal  
Scale  Assessment(h) X  
X X X X 
PCR  based  COVID -19 
test(i) X  
Only  Day 7 X X X 
SpO2  by pulse  oximetry 
with FiO2(j) X X X X X X 
Blood sample for future 
analysis  (See Section  9.0)R  X Only  Day 7 X X X 
Blood  Sample  for GBPA 
(See Section 9.0)R  X Only  Day 7 X X X 
10 
10  
  
 
Stool  (See Section  9.0)n, R  X Only  Day 7 X X  
Saliva  (See Section  9.0)R  X Only  Day 7 X X  
PBMC  (See Section  9.0)R  X    X 
Nasal  Pharyngeal  (See 
Section 9.0)   X Only  Day 7 X X X 
Adverse  Event  Evaluation   X X X X X 
a. ICF must be signed prior to performing Baseline evaluations.  
b. Record  medications  and therapies taken  or received  within  30 days prior  to Baseline (or  longer for 
investigational drugs for which 5 half-lives of the drug exceed 30 days). 
c. If subject is able to stand.  
d. Comprehensive physical examination will include the following organ or body system assessments: 
skin;  head,  eyes,  ears, nose, and throat; thyroid; lungs; cardiovascular;  abdomen (liver,  spleen);  lymph 
nodes; and extremities, as well as an abbreviated neurological exam.  
e. Targeted  physical  examination will specifically  target  the pulmonary system,  as well as any areas  of 
concern from the  medical history or noted on the prior  physical examination  or indicated by subject 
systems or other findings as determined by the Investigator or designee. 
f. BP, pulse rate, respiration rate, and temperature. Vital signs will be measured at Baseline, and twice daily  at least  8 hours apart  while  hospitalized, and once daily  as an outpatient. Timing  of assessments 
in accordance with institutional SOP for hospitalized patients. 
g. See Appendix I for a list of specific CBC with differential,  comprehensive metabolic  panel,  renal 
profile, and urinalysis with microscopic tests. 
h. See Section  12.0 for description of scale.  
i. Collect  nose or throat swab  to measure for the  presence  or absence of SARS -SoV-2 by a PCR based 
COVID -19 test. The swabbing site (nose or throat) used for the Baseline evaluation should be 
maintained for all subsequent assessments of the study. If only one nostril will be sampled, use the same nostril for collections.  
j. SpO2  determined  by pulse  oximetry  with simultaneous recording of FiO2  to be recorded twice  daily 
at least 8 hours apart while hospitalized, and once daily as an outpatient. Timing of assessments in 
accordance with institutional SOP for hospitalized patients.  
k. A + 3 day window will be allowed. 
l. Patients who are discharged prior  to Day 14 will not need to come  into the clinic  to follow Day 1- 14 
Test Schedule. Patients will be called  by Study Team  for remote  evaluation and will  resume visits  on 
Day 14 unless needing to be seen sooner. 
m. Assess  as
  clinically  indicated  by the treating  physician.  
n. Stool samples  can be ± 1 day and will be collected  only if patient  is able to produce. 
o. Since  patients  may improve and be discharged from  the hospital at any point during  the study period, 
remote  monitoring without  an in-person exam  may be  utilized  for all Physical  exam and  assessments 
after day 1 in accordance with institutional SOP. 
 
 
R Research  Funded  
 
5.0 Stratification  Factors  
 
5.1 Age:  ≥65 vs. <65 years  
 
5.2 Clinical status  ordinal  score  at enrollment:  3-4 (hospitalized  with mild disease)  vs. 
Score 5 (hospitalized with severe disease)  
11 
11  
  
 
 
 
 
 
6.0 Registration/Randomization  Procedures  
 
6.1 Registration  Procedures  
 
6.1.1 To register a patient, access the Research Registration Application at 
 The Research Registration Application is available 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week.  Back  up and/or system  support contact information  is 
available on the website. If unable to access the website, contact Research 
Registration Office at be tween the 
hours of 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Central Time (Monday through Friday). 
Access and training instructions for the Research Registration Application are 
avai
lable on the Office of Clinical Trials web page 
 
 
6.1.2 Verification  of materials  
 
Prior  to accepting  the registration,  registration/randomization  application  will 
verify the following:  
• IRB approval at  the registering  institution  
• Patient  eligibility  
• Existence  of a signed  consent form  
• Existence  of a signed  authorization  for use and disclosure  of protected 
health information  
 
6.1.3 Documentation of IRB approval  
 
Documentation of IRB approval must  be on file in the Registration  Office  before 
an investigator may register any patients.  
 
In addition to submitting  initial  IRB approval documents,  ongoing IRB  approval 
documentation must be on file (no less than annually) at the Registration Office 
 If the necessary  documentation  is not submitted  in advance 
of attempting patient registration, the registration will not be accepted and the 
patient may not be enrolled in the protocol until the situation is resolved. 
 
When  the study has been  permanently  closed  to patient  enrollment,  submission  of 
annual IRB approvals to the Registration Office is no longer necessary. 
 
6.1.4 Correlative  Research  

12 
12  
  
 
 
6.1.4.1  Mandatory  
 
A mandatory correlative research  component  and banking is part of this 
study, the patient will be automatically registered onto this component 
(see Sections 3.0, and 9.0).  
 
6.1.5 Banking 
 
At the time of registration,  the following will be recorded:  
• Patient  has/has  not given  permission  to store  and use his/her  sample(s) 
for future research of SARS -CoV -2 infection. 
• Patient  has/has  not given  permission  to store  and use his/her  sample(s) 
for future research to learn, prevent, or treat other health problems.  
• Patient  has/has  not given permission  for MCCC to give his/her sample(s) 
to researchers at other institutions.  
 
6.1.6 Pretreatment  
 
Pretreatment  tests/procedures (see Section  4.0) must be completed  within  the 
guidelines specified on the test schedule.  
 
6.1.7 Treatment  
 
Treatment  cannot begin  prior  to registration  and must  begin ≤ 5 days after 
registration. 
 
6.1.8 Kits are available on site.  
 
6.2 Randomization Procedures  
 
6.2.1 The factors  defined  in Section  5.0, together with the registering  membership  (site 
of institution) will be used as stratification factors.  
6.2.2 After  the patient  has been  registered  into the study, the values of the  stratification 
factors will be recorded, and the patient will be assigned to one of the following 
treatment groups using the Pocock and Simon dynamic allocation procedure 
which  balances the marginal  distributions of the stratification  factors  between  the 
treatment groups.11 
All patients  must  be registered  before  starting  therapy. Under no circumstances 
will non -registered patients be retrospectively eligible for the study.  
6.3 Procedures for Double-Blinding the Treatment  Assignment  
13 
13  
  
 
6.3.1 After the treatment assignment has been ascertained by the 
registration/randomization application, the patient’s treatment assignment (SOC 
treatment + Camostat mesilate OR SOC treatment + placebo) will be electronically sent to McKesson’s Clinical Research  Services. Upon receipt of 
orders, McKesson  will send per patient  supplies to participating institutions.  The 
Camostat mesilate/placebo will be prepared and labeled by McKesson.  
 
7.0 Protocol Treatment  
 
7.1 Patients  will be randomized  to either  the control  arm (placebo) or the treatment  arm 
(camostat).  
Control Therapy Placebo combined with SOC:  Patients will be randomized 1:1 to 
camostat or placebo taken as 2 tablets four times daily on an empty stomach at least 30 minutes before each  meal,  2 hours since the  last meal,  and at bedtime. Remdesivir  will be 
administered once daily IV for 5 or 10 days. Remdesivir must be obtained commercially. Remdesivir  will not be supplied for this study. Other  management  decisions are left to the 
discretion of the treating physicians and may include any medicines deemed necessary 
and appropriate such as anticoagulation.  
 
 
 
Agent  Dose  Level  Route  Day 
 
Camostat  or 
placebo  200 mg four times daily 
on an empty stomach 30 minutes  before  each meal, 
2 hours since last meal, 
and at bedtime   
 
PO/NG €  
 
1-14 
Remdesivir¥  200 mg IV 1 
 
 
 
 
Remdesivir¥   
 
 
 
100 mg   
 
 
 
IV 2, 3, 4, 5  (5 day 
course) 
OR 
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,  
10 (10 day course 
per local  provider 
recommendation§  
Anticoagulation  Per institutional  standard  
¥ The suggested  dose is for adults and pediatric  patients  weighing ≥ 40 kg. 
14 
14  
  
 
§ A treatment course of 10 days is recommended for adults and pediatric patients 
requiring invasive mechanical ventilation and/or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. 
A treatment course of 5 days is recommended for adults and pediatric patients not requiring invasive mechanical ventilation and/or ECMO. If a patient does not demonstrate clinical improvement,  treatment  may be extended for up to 5 additional  days 
(i.e. a total of 10 days). 
€ Doses may be administered  via NG tube  by dissolving tablets in 55 ml of warm  water 
until tablets  dissolve  into solution. Resulting  solution can be administered  via NG tube. 
Note, if a patient is on continuous tune feedings, camostat doses must be held.  
7.2 Dose  Modifications  
 
Treatment  discontinuation  in the event  of investigator assessed  treatment 
associated toxicity rather than dose reduction. 
Missed doses should not be replaced. Rather, treatment should resume with the 
next scheduled  dose.  Doses  missed  due to clinical  inability  to administer  the dose 
(e.g. patient is undergoing a procedure at the scheduled time) shall not be 
counted as a protocol deviation  and should simply be recorded as “unable to  give 
dose”.  
7.3 Breaking  Codes  in Double- Blinded  Studies  
 
7.3.1 In the event of an emergency, email the Research Registration Office at 
to break t he  code on Monday through Friday, 8:00 
a.m. to 4:30 p .m. Central  Time.  If the code  must  be broken  after hours, 
assume the patient was assigned to active treatment and treat 
accordingly. Send an email to the Research Registration Office 
informing them of the need  to un -blind  a patient. Provide your contact 
information so that the personnel can respond to the email the next 
business day.  
7.3.2 If, in the judgment of the attending physician, it would be helpful for the 
future clinical care of the individual patient, the code may be broken after the patient has completed the study. That is, after the patient has been  fully  evaluated  and all evaluation  information  has been  recorded  by 
the attending physician and the patient (if appropriate), the Research Registration Office may be emailed at to find out 
which study therapy the patient was receiving. 
 
8.0 Adverse Event  (AE)  Monitoring and Reporting  
 
The site principal  investigator  is responsible for reporting  any/all  serious adverse events to the 
sponsor as described within the protocol, regardless of attribution to study agent or treatment procedure  

15 
15  
  
 
The sponsor/sponsor-investigator is responsible for notifying  FDA and all participating 
investigators in a written safety report of any of the following: 
• Any suspected  adverse reaction  that is both serious and unexpected.  
• Any clinically  important increase in the rate of a serious  suspected  adverse reaction  over 
the rate stated in the protocol or Investigator’s Brochure (IB).  
• Any findings from  laboratory  animal  or in vitro  testing  that suggest  a significant risk for 
human subjects, including reports of mutagenicity, teratogenicity, or carcinogenicity.  
• Any findings from epidemiological studies, pooled analysis of multiple studies, or 
clinical  studies,  whether  or not conducted under an IND and whether or not conducted  by 
the sponsor, that suggest a significant risk in humans exposed to the drug.  
 
Definitions  
 
Adverse Event  
Any untoward me dical  occurrence associated  with the use of a drug in humans,  whether 
or not considered drug related. 
 
Suspected Adverse Reaction  
Any adverse event  for which  there  is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused  the 
adverse event.  
 
Expedited  Reporting  
Events reported  to sponsor within  24 hours, 5 days or 10 days of study team  becoming 
aware of the event.  
 
Routine Reporting  
Events reported to sponsor via case report  forms  
Events of Interest  
Events that would  not typically  be considered  to meet  the criteria  for expedited reporting, 
but that for a specific protocol are being reported via expedited means in order to facilitate the review of safety data (may be requested by the FDA or the sponsor).  
 
8.1 Adverse Event Characteristics 
 
CTCAE  term (AE  description) and  grade: The descriptions  and grading scales found 
in the revised  NCI Common  Terminology Criteria  for Adverse Events (CTCAE)  version  
5.0 will be utilized  for AE reporting. All appropriate  treatment  areas  should have  access 
to a copy of the CTCAE version 5.0. A copy of the CTCAE version 5.0 can be downloaded from the CTEP web site: 
 
 
a. Adverse event monitoring and reporting is a routine  part of every  clinical  trial. 
 
b. Identify the grade  and severity  of the event  using the CTCAE  version 5.0. 
 
c. Determine whether the event is expected  or unexpected (see Section  8.2). 
 
d. Determine if the adverse event  is related  to the study intervention  (agent, treatment or 
procedure) (see Section 10.3). 

16 
16  
  
 
 
e. Determine whether  the event must  be reported  as an expedited  report.  If yes, 
determine the timeframe/mechanism (see Section 8.4).  
 
f. Determine if other  reporting  is required  (see Section  8.5). 
 
g. Note:  All AEs reported  via expedited mechanisms must  also be reported  via the 
routine data reporting mechanisms defined by the protocol (see Sections 8).  
 
Each CTCAE term in the current version is a unique representation of a specific event 
used for medical  documentation  and scientific  analysis and is a single  MedDRA  Lowest 
Level Term (LLT).  
NOTE:  A severe AE, as defined  by the above grading  scale,  is NOT  the same  as serious 
AE which is defined in the table in Section 8.4. 
 
8.2 Expected  vs. Unexpected Events  
 
Expected  events - are those described  within  the Section  11.0 of the protocol,  the study 
specific consent form,  and the  investigator  brochure,  (if an investigator brochure  is not 
required, otherwise described in the general investigational plan). 
 
Unexpected  adverse  events or suspected  adverse reactions  are those not listed  in Section  
11.0 of the protocol, the study specific consent form, or in the investigator brochure (or are not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed); if an investigator 
brochure is not required  or available,  is not consistent  with the risk information  described 
in the general investigational plan.  
 
Unexpected also refers to adverse events or suspected adverse reactions that are 
mentioned  in the investigator brochure as occurring with a class  of drugs but have  not 
been observed with the drug under investigation. 
 
 
8.3 Assessment  of Attribution  
 
When  assessing  whether  an adverse event  is related  to a medical  treatment  or 
procedure, the following attribution categories are utilized:  
 
Definite - The adverse event is clearly related to the agent(s). 
Probable - The adverse event is likely related to the agent(s). 
Possible - The adverse event may be related to the agent(s).  
Unlikely - The adverse event is doubtfully related to the agent(s). 
Unrelated  - The adverse event  is clearly NOT  related  to the agent(s). 
 
Events determined to be possibly, probably or definitely attributed to a 
medical  treatment  suggest  there  is evidence to indicate  a causal relationship 
between the drug/device and the adverse event.  
 
8.4 Expedited Adverse Event  Reporting Requirements for IND/IDE  Agents  
 
8.41 Expedited Reporting via the Adverse Event  Expedited  Report  Form  for Adverse 
Events That Occur Within 30 Days1 of the Last Dose of the Investigational Agent 
17 
17  
  
 
 
FDA REPORTING  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  SERIOUS  ADVERSE  EVENTS (21 CFR Part  312) 
NOTE: Investigators  M UST  immediately  report to the sponsor  ANY  Serious  Adverse  Events,  whether  or not they are 
considered related to the investigational agent(s)/intervention (21 CFR 312.64)  
An adverse even t is considered serious  if it results  in ANY of the following  outcomes:  
1) Death  
2) A life-threatening  adverse event  
3) An adverse event  that results  in inpatient  hospitalization or  prolongation  of existing  hospitalization  for ≥ 24 hours  
4) A persistent  or significant  incapacity  or substantial disruption  of the ability  to conduct  normal  life functions  
5) A congenital  anomaly/birth  defect.  
6) Important Medical Events (IME) that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require hospitalization may be 
considered serious  when,  based upon  medical  judgment, they may  jeopardize the patient  or subject  and may require 
medical  or surgical  intervention to prevent  one of the outcomes  listed  in this definition.  (FDA,  21 CFR  312.32;  ICH 
E2A and ICH E6).  
ALL  SERIOUS  adverse events  that meet  the above  criteria  MUST  be immediately  reported to the sponsor  within  the 
timeframes detailed in the table below.  
Hospitalization Grade 1 and Grade  2 Timeframes  Grade 3 -5 
Timeframes  
Resulting in 
Hospitalization  ≥ 
24 hrs   
7 Calendar Days   
 
24-Hour;  3 Calendar  Days  
Not resulting  in 
Hospitalization  ≥ 
24 hrs  
Not required  
Expedited  AE reporting  timelines  are defined  as: 
o “24-Hour;  3 Calendar  Days”  - The AE must  initially  be reported  within  24 hours  of learning  of the AE, followed 
by a complete expedited report within 3 calendar days of the initial 24- hour report.  
o “7 Calendar  Days”  - A complete expedited report on the AE must  be submitted  within  7 calendar  days of learning 
of the AE.  
1Serious  adverse events  that occur  more than 30 days after the last administration  of investigational  agent/intervention 
and have an attribution of possible, probable, or definite require reporting as follows:  
 
Expedited  24-hour  notification  followed  by complete report  within  3 calendar days  for: 
• All Grade  3, 4, and Grade  5 AEs 
Expedited  7 calendar day reports  for: 
• Grade  2 AEs resulting  in hospitalization  or prolongation  of hospitalization  
2 For studies  using  PET or SPECT  IND agents,  the AE reporting  period is limited  to 10 radioactive half-lives,  rounded 
UP to the nearest whole day, after  the agent/intervention was last administered. Footnote “1” above applies after this 
reporting period.  
Effective Date:  May 5, 2011  
Special  Instructions:  
 
• Follow site-specific reporting  guidelines.  
• Submit the Adverse Event  Expedited Report  Form  to the SAE  Coordinator email 
The SAE Coordinator will forward to Ono at 
within 24 hours of receiving.  
• The SAE Coordinator will forward to IND Coordinator  
as
 appropriate.  Th e IND Coordinator will assist  the sponsor- investigator  in notifying the FDA 
if required.  
8.5 Other R equired  Reporting  

18 
18  
  
 
8.5.1 Unanticipated  Problems  Involving Risks  to Subjects  or Others  (UPIRTSOS)  in 
general, include any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the 
following criteria:  
 
1. Unexpected (in terms  of nature, severity, or frequency) given (a) the research 
procedures that are described in the protocol- related documents, such as the 
IRB-approved research  protocol  and informed  consent document; and (b) the 
characteristics of the subject population being studied;  
 
2. Related  or possibly related  to participation  in the research  (in this guidance 
document, possibly related means there is a reasonable possibility that the 
incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by the procedures 
involved in the research); and 
 
3. Suggests that the research  places subjects  or others at a greater  risk of harm 
(including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was 
previously known or recognized. 
 
Some unanticipated problems involve social or economic harm instead of the 
physical or psychological harm associated with adverse events. In other cases, 
unanticipated problems place  subjects or others  at increased  risk of harm,  but no 
harm occurs. 
 
 
8.5.2 Submit via appropriate Case  Report  Forms  the following AEs experienced  by a 
patient and not specified in Section 8.5:  
 
8.5.2.1  Grade  1 and 2 AEs deemed  possibly, probably, or definitely  related  to the 
study treatment or procedure. 
 
8.5.2.2  Grade  3 and 4 AEs regardless  of attribution  to the study treatment  or 
procedure  
 
8.5.2.3  Grade  5 AEs (Deaths)  
 
8.5.2.3.1  Any death  within  56 days after registration  on the trial must 
be submitted as a Grade 5 AE, with a CTCAE type and 
attribution assigned. 
19 
19  
  
 
8.6 Pregnancy  
 
The investigator should report all pregnancies, including those of partners of male 
patients, within 24 hours to ACCRU at The SAE 
Coordinator will forward  to Ono at  within 24 hours of being 
notified. 
 
Prior to obtaining private information about a pregnant woman and her infant, the investigator must obtain consent from the pregnant woman and the newborn infant’s 
parent  or legal  guardian  before any data collection  can occur. A consent  form  will need  to 
be submitted to the IRB for these subjects if a pregnancy occurs. If informed consent is 
not obtained, no information may be collected. In cases of fetal death, miscarriage or abortion the  mother is  the patient. In cases where 
the child/fetus  experiences a serious  adverse event other than fetal death,  the child/fetus 
is the patient. 
 
NOTE: When submitting ACCRU Adverse Event Report reports for “Pregnancy”, 
“Pregnancy  loss”,  or “Neonatal  loss”,  the potential  risk of exposure of the fetus  to the 
investigational agent(s) should be documented in the “Description of Event” section. Include any available medical documentation.  

20 
20  
  
 
 
 
9.0 Biospecimens  
 
9.1 Summary  Table  of Research  Blood/Blood Products to Be Collected  for This Protocol  
 
  
 
Specimen 
Purpose   
 
 
Mandatory 
or Optional   
Blood or 
Body  Fluid 
being 
Collected   
Type of 
Collection 
Tube  (color 
of tube  top) Volume  to 
collect per 
tube (# of 
tubes  to be 
collected)   
 
Day 1  
 
Day 7  
 
Day 14  
 
Day 28  
 
Day 56  
Process 
at site? 
(Yes  or 
No)1,2 
 
 
 
-C1 ☒ Correlative  
 
 
 
☐ Banking  
Mandatory 
on day 1, 
optional all 
other days  
 
Nasal 
Pharyngeal   
 
 
Swab  
 
 
1  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
N 
 
 
 
-C2 ☒ Correlative  
 
 
 
☐ Banking  
Mandatory 
on day 1, 
optional all 
other days  
 
 
Whole blood   
 
SST (red 
and black 
marble  top)  
 
 
8.5mL (1)  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
N 
 
 
C33 ☒ Correlative  
 
 
 
☐ Banking  
Mandatory 
on day 1, 
optional all 
other days  
 
 
Stool   
 
Brown  and 
white  bottle   
 
 
25mL   
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X   
 
 
N 
 
 
 
-C4 ☒ Correlative  
 
 
 
☐ Banking  
Mandatory 
on day 1, 
optional all 
other days  
 
 
Saliva   
 
 
Oragene  
 
 
1  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X  
 
 
X   
 
 
N 
21 
21  
  
 
  
 
Specimen 
Purpose   
 
 
Mandatory 
or Optional   
Blood or 
Body  Fluid 
being 
Collected   
Type of 
Collection 
Tube  (color 
of tube  top) Volume  to 
collect per 
tube (# of tubes  to be 
collected)   
 
Day 1  
 
Day 7  
 
Day 14  
 
Day 28  
 
Day 56  
Process 
at site? 
(Yes  or 
No)1,2 
 
 
 
-C5 ☒ Correlative  
 
 
 
☐ Banking  
Mandatory 
on day 1, 
optional all 
other days  
 
PBMC,  
plasma   
 
Na Heparin 
(green  top)  
 
 
10mL   
 
 
X     
 
 
X  
 
 
N 
1. All samples  will be processed  and stored  by Arizona  BAP.  
2. All Mayo  sites using RLIMS  must  add MCA processing  instructions to RLIMS  builds.  
3. Stool samples  can be ± 1 day and will be  collected  only if  patient is  able to produce. 
 
9.2 Kits will be used  for this study. 
 
9.2.1 Kits will be supplied by the MCA Biospecimen  Accessioning and Processing 
Shared Resource (BAP).  
 
NOTE:  Mayo  Clinic  Florida  BAP  will assemble  the kits for specimen  collection 
at Mayo Clinic Florida.  
 
9.2.2 The kit contains supplies and instructions for collecting,  processing and shipping 
specimens.  
 
9.2.3 Participating institutions may obtain kits by emailing the Supply Order Form to 
the number listed  on the form  (D: ARZ  Biobank). Because  we are charged for all 
outgoing kits, a small, but sufficient, supply of the specimen collection kits should be ordered prior to patient entry. Supply  Order Forms must be filled  in 
completely and legibly for quick processing.  
 
9.2.4 Kits will be sent via Fed Ex Ground at no additional cost to the participating 
institutions. Allow at least two weeks to receive the kits.  
 
9.2.5 Kits will not be sent via rush delivery  service unless  the participating  institution 
provides their own Fed Ex  account number or alternate billing number for 
express mail. Cost  for rush delivery  of kits will not  be covered by  the study.  
 
9.2.6 Specimens  must  be collected  and shipped Monday  – Thursday  ONLY.  MCA 
may collect Monday- Friday. Specimens that are drawn during the evening 
hours (Monday through Wednesday) can be shipped the next morning.  
 
9.3 Shipping Specimens  
22 
22  
  
 
9.3.1 Verify ALL section of the Blood Specimen Submission Form (see Forms 
Packet),  BAP  Requisition  Form  (provided  in kit), and specimen  collection  labels 
are completed and filled in correctly.  
 
9.3.2 Specimens must  be shipped the same  day they are drawn/collected.  
 
NOTE: Mayo Clinic Florida will process and store specimens at Mayo Clinic 
Florida Biobank and then ship specimens in batch  to Mayo  Clinic  Arizona  at the 
end of study enrollment. 
 
 
9.3.3 Ship all samples via Priority Overnight service. The nasal pharyngeal swabs, saliva,  Na Heparin,  SST tubes  and brown  and white  stool  bottles  will be shipped 
in a dual-temperature shipping container. Place the refrigerated SST red and black marble top and the brown and white stool container with a properly 
prepared cold pack in one compartment. See kit instructions for specific details 
for cold pack preparation (i.e., frozen or refrigerated)  and proper packing of 
blood and cold pack to avoid freezing of specimen. Place the nasal pharyngeal 
swab, Oragene saliva samples, and NA Heparin green top tube with an ambient 
cool pack in the other compartment of the dual -temperature shipping container. 
 
9.3.4 Ship specimens  via Priority  Overnight service.  Do not send  samples  on 
weekends or just prior to federal holidays.  
 
9.3.5 The BAP kits will include a smart shipper label (3x5 white barcoded label) affixed  to the shipping boxes. The smart  shipper label  is a pre- addressed  return 
label, which replaces the need for an airbill. Shipping costs will be covered by the funding sponsor if the shipping box provided with the BAP kit is used for 
shipping specimens to BAP Receiving.  
 
Recipient Name: BAP 
Company Name:  Mayo  Clinic  
Address Line 1: 5779 E. Mayo  Blvd. 
Address Line 2: MCSB C -303 
City: Phoenix State: AZ 
Zip: 85054  
Phone: (480) 342- 4036 
 
9.3.6 BAP Arizona will receive the samples, accession and process and store the 
samples as indicated  at MCA  BAP.  Samples will be processed  and stored  per the 
protocol and then sent weekly in batches to: 
 
 
 
 
10.0 Treatment/Follow –up Decision  at Evaluation of Patient  

23 
23  
  
 
10.1 Continuation of treatment  
Patients  who are responding and show signs  of clinical  improvement to treatment  per the 
investigator’s judgement will continue treatment per protocol. 
10.2 Clinical deterioration  
Patients  who develop clinical  deterioration  while  receiving therapy will go to the clinical 
follow-up phase. 
10.3 Off protocol  treatment  
Follow the table  below for patient  follow -up after patient  goes off protocol  treatment.  
 
 
CFU=Clinical Follow -Up 
 
 
Reason  Off Treatment  Go to CFU,  or end 
follow -up 
Treatment  (Intervention)  Completed  Per Protocol  Criteria  CFU 
Patient  Withdrawal/Refusal  After  Beginning  Protocol  Therapy 
(Intervention)  CFU 
Adverse  Events/Side  Effects/Complications  CFU 
Clinical  deterioration  During  Active  Treatment  (Intervention)  CFU 
Alternative  Therapy  No follow -up 
Patient  Off-Treatment  (Intervention)  For Other  Complicating 
Disease  CFU 
Death  On Study  No follow -up 
Other  CFU 
Clinical  deterioration  Before  Active  Treatment  (Intervention)  No follow -up 
Patient  Withdrawal/Refusal  Prior  To Beginning  Protocol  Therapy 
(Intervention)  No follow- up 
 
 
10.4 Clinical Follow-up occurs at Day 28 and Day 56 after registration  unless patient 
withdrawal has occurred. 
If the patient  has achieved  clinical improvement,  the patient  will be observed  at 56 days, 
from time of registration.  
10.5 Ineligible  
 
A patient is deemed ineligible if after registration, it is determined that at the time of 
registration,  the patient  did not satisfy  each and every  eligibility  criteria  for study  entry. 
• If the patient  received  treatment,  the patient  may continue treatment  at the discretion 
of the physician  as long as there  are not safety  concerns.  The patient  will continue in 
the Active Monitoring/Treatment phase of the study, as per section 4.0 of the 
protocol.  
• If the patient  never received  treatment,  on-study material  must  be submitted.  Clinical  
24 
24  
  
 
Follow-up will be required  per Section  4.0 of the protocol.  
 
10.6 Major  violation  
 
A patient  is deemed  a major  violation , if protocol requirements  regarding  treatment  of the 
initial therapy are severely violated that evaluability for primary end point is 
questionable. If the patient received treatment, the patient may continue treatment at the 
discretion of the physician as long as there are no safety concerns. The patient will continue in the Active Monitoring/Treatment phase of the study, as per section 4.0 of the protocol, and all data submission should continue per protocol. If the patient does not continue with treatment, the patient will go off treatment and be followed in Clinical 
Follow -up. 
10.7 Cancel  
 
A patient is deemed  a cancel if he/she  is removed  from the  study  for any reason  before 
any study treatment is given. On- study material and the Off Treatment form must be 
submitted. No further data submission is necessary.  
 
11.0 Drug  Information  
 
11.1 Camostat  mesilate  (Foipan®):  
 
11.1.1  Background: Camostat mesilate is a serine protease inhibitor that is currently 
approved in Japan  for pancreatitis and reflux  esophagitis. Camostat  mesilate  acts 
promptly on kinin formation, fibrinolytic, coagulation and complementary systems to immediately inhibit enzyme activities and their abnormal increases. 
For the purposes of this study, camostat mesilate also exhibits anti - 
transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) activities. It can also void severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) S cleavage, inhibit cell entry and decrease 
viral replication.  
11.1.2  Formulation: Camostat  mesilate  is available  as a 100 mg film coated  tablet.  Each 
tablet also contains hydroxypropylcellulose, carmellose  calcium, magnesium 
stearate, polyoxyethylene (105) polyoxyethylene (5) glycol, and lactose hydrate.  
11.1.3  Preparation  and storage:  Camostat  mesilate  are packaged in bottles  of 28 tablets. 
The recommended storage condition for camostat mesilate film coated tablets is 
15° to 30°C. 
11.1.4  Administration:  Camostat mesilate tablets should be taken by mouth or via 
nasogastric tube four times  daily  on an empty  stomach  at least 30 minutes  before 
each meal, 2 hours since last meal, and at bedtime. For nasogastric administration, place tablets into 55 ml of room temperature water until tablets 
dissolve into solution. Once tablets have dissolved, deliver the solution to  
25 
25  
  
 
patients via nasogastric tube.  If a patient  is receiving continuous tube feedings, 
camostat dosing must be held while on continuous tube feedings. 
 
 
11.1.5  Pharmacokinetic information:  
 
Absorption: After  a single  dose of camostat  mesilate  at 200 mg, Tmax  values 
were 40 minutes with a maximum of 87.1 ng/mL 
Protein  binding: Protein  binding to human serum  was 25.8- 28.2%  
 
Metabolism: Carboxylate ester moiety of camostat mesilate is hydrolyzed to an 
active metabolite 4 -(4-guanidinobenzoyloxy) phenylacetate, which is further 
hydrolyzed to 4-guanidinobenzoic acid. Camostat mesilate is mainly hydrolyzed by carboxyesterase and 4- (4-guanidinobenzoyloxy) phenylacetate by arylesterase 
(in vitro). Camostat mesilate and its metabolite 4 -(4-guanidinobenzoyloxy 
phenylacetate did not inhibit CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and 
CYP3A4 (in vitro). 
Half-life elimination:  Mean  half- life is 100 minutes  +/- 40 minutes.  
 
Excretion: Urinary  excretion  rates at 5-6 hours post administration  were  20% and 
0.8%, respectively, and little was further recovered in urine during later periods. 
11.1.6  Potential  Drug  Interactions:  Camostat  mesilate  did not appreciably inhibit 
CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 (in vitro). 
11.1.7  Known  potential toxicities:  
 
Clinically  significant toxicities:  
• Shock or anaphylactic symptoms  
• Thrombocytopenia  
• Hepatic function disorder or jaundice  
• Hyperkalemia  
 
Toxicities  ≥ 0.1 to < 0.5%:  
Hypersensitivity: Rash,  pruritus  
Gastrointestinal: Nausea,  abdominal discomfort,  abdominal  fullness, diarrhea 
Hepatic:  Increased AST (GOT), ALT (GPT)  
 
Toxicities  < 0.1%:  
Hematologic: Leukopenia, erythrocytopenia 
Gastrointestinal: Anorexia, vomiting, dry mouth, heartburn, 
abdominal pain, constipation 
Renal:  Increased  BUN,  increased  creatinine 
Other:  Edema, hypoglycemia 
26 
26  
  
 
Incidence unknown: Eosinophilia  
 
11.1.8  Drug procurement: Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. will supply the drug to 
McKesson Specialty Pharmacy’s Clinical Research Services. After the patient is 
registered,  McKesson  will receive an electronic order  with the patient’s  treatment 
assignment. Upon receipt of orders, McKesson will send per patient supplies to participating institutions. The Camostat mesilate will be prepared and labeled by 
McKesson.  
11.1.9  Temperature  excursions that occur  at the site should be reported  by the site by 
contacting McKesson Speciality Pharmacy at 
 
 
11.2 Placebo  for camostat  
 
11.2.1  Formulation: Placebo will be available as a film coated tablet. Each tablet contains D- mannitol,  low substituted  hydroxypropyl cellulose, and magnesium 
stearate.  The film coating contains hydroxypropyl methylcellulose  and purified 
water.  
11.2.2  Preparation  & storage:  The recommended  storage  condition for placebo  film 
coated tablets is 15° to 30°C. 
11.2.3 Administration:  Take  by mouth four times  daily  on an empty  stomach  at 
least 30 minutes before each meal, 2 hours since last meal, and at bedtime.  
11.2.4  Drug Procurement: Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. will supply the drug to 
McKesson Specialty Pharmacy’s Clinical Research Services. After the patient is 
registered,  McKesson  will receive an electronic order  with the patient’s  treatment 
assignment. Upon receipt of orders, McKesson will send per patient supplies to 
participating institutions. The placebo will be prepared and labeled by McKesson.  
11.2.5  Temperature  excursions that occur  at the site should be reported  by the site by 
contacting McKesson Speciality Pharmacy at 
 

27 
27  
  
 
11.3 Remdesivir  (GS-5734, Veklury®) ) 
 
11.3.1  Background: Remdesivir is a nucleotide prodrug that is intracellularly 
metabolized into an analog of adenosine triphosphate that inhibits viral RNA 
polymerases and has broad  activity  against  members  of the filoviruses  [i.e. Ebola 
virus, Marburg virus, CoVs (SARS- CoV, MERS -CoV) and paramxoviruses 
(respiratory syncytial virus, Nipha virus, and Hendra virus)]. 
11.3.2  Formulation: Remdesivir for Injection, 100 mg, is a preservative- free, white to 
off-white  or yellow lyophilized solid  containing 100 mg of remdesivir.  It requires 
reconstitution and then further dilution prior to administration by intravenous infusion. The inactive ingredients are 3 g betadex sulfobutyl ether sodium and may include hydrochloric acid and/or sodium hydroxide for pH adjustment. 
 
 
Remdesivir injection contains 100 mg/20 mL (5 mg/mL) as a sterile, 
preservative- free, clear, colorless to yellow solution in a single -dose clear glass 
vial. It requires dilution prior to administration by intravenous infusion. The inactive ingredients  are 6 g betadex  sulfobutyl ether  sodium,  Water  for Injection, 
USP, and may include hydrochloric acid and/or sodium hydroxide for pH 
adjustment.  
11.3.3  Preparation  and storage:  Remdesivir  for Injection should be stored  refrigerated  at 
at 2˚C  to 8 ˚C [36 ˚F  to 46 ˚F] prior to use.  
 
There are differences in the way the two formulations are prepared. 
Carefully  follow  the product -specific preparation instructions  below. 
Remdesivir for Injection 100 mg lyophilized powder is to be reconstituted with 19 mL of Sterile Water for  Injection. Immediately shake the vial for  30 seconds. 
Allow the contents of the vial to settle for 2 to 3 minutes. A clear, colorless to 
yellow solution,  free of visible  particulates,  should results.  If the contents are not 
completely dissolved, repeat the process of shaking for 30 seconds and allowing 
contents to settle for 2  to 3 minutes. Following reconstitution, each vial contains 
5 mg/mL remdesivir concentrated solution with sufficient volume to allow 
withdraw of 20 mL (100 mg of remdesivir). 
 
Remdesivir should be diluted into 100 to 250 mL 0.9% NaCL prior to administration by intravenous infusion. Invert 20 times to mix. Remdesivir for 
injection is recommended to be reconstituted and diluted within the same day as 
administration. The prepated infusion solution is stable for 24 hours at room temperature  (20°C to 25°C  [68°F to77°F]) or 48 hours at refrigerated  temperature 
(2°C to 8°C [36°F to 46°F]).Any unused remdesivir should be discarded. 
28 
28  
  
 
11.3.4  Administration:  Infuse intravenously over 30 minutes.  The infusion time may be 
extended up to 120 minutes. Flush the tubing with 30 mL of 0.9% NaCL post- 
remdesivir infusion.  
11.3.5  Pharmacokinetic information:  
 
Protein  binding:  Remdesivir:  88% to 93.6%; GS-441524: 2%; GS-704277: 1% 
Half -life elimination:  Remdesivir:  ~1 hour; GS-441524: 27 hours; GS704277:  
1.3 hours  
Excretion: Urine: Remdesivir: 10%; GS -441524: 49%; GS- 704277: 2.9%; 
Feces:  Remdesivir: not detected;  GS-441524: 0.5%; GS-704277: not detected  
 
11.3.6  Potential  Drug  Interactions:  Due to potential  antagonism  based  on data from  cell 
culture experiments, concomitant use of remdesivir with chloroquine phosphate 
or hydroxychloroquine sulfate is not recommended.  
Drug -drug interaction  trials  have not been  conducted in humans. Remdesivir  and 
its metabolites are in vitro substrates and/or inhibitors of certain drug 
metabolizing enzymes and transporters. The clinical relevance of these 
assessments has not been established.  
11.3.7  Known  potential toxicities:  
 
Common known  potential  toxicities  ≥ 10%:  
Endocrine & metabolic:  Increased  serum  glucose 
Renal: Decreased creatinine clearance  
 
Less common  known potential  toxicities  1-10%:  
Dermatologic: Skin rash 
Gastrointestinal:  Nausea  
Hematologic  & oncologic: Decreased  hemoglobin, lymphocytopenia, prolonged 
prothrombin time  
Hepatic: Increased ALT, increased AST 
Hypersensitivity: Hypersensitivity  reaction 
Frequency not defined: Hepatic:  Increased  serum  alkaline  phosphatase 
Hypersensitivity: Anaphylaxis, angioedema Local: Erythema at injection sites 
Miscellaneous: Infusion related reaction  
 
Postmarketing:  
Cardiovascular:  Bradycardia,  heart  failure,  hypotension 
Hepatic: Acute hepatic failure  
 
11.3.8  Drug  procurement: Commercial  supplies. Pharmacies or clinics  shall  obtain 
supplies from normal commercial supply chain or wholesaler. 
29 
29  
  
 
12.0 Treatment Evaluation Criteria  
 
The ordinal scale used for assessment of the clinical and respiratory status on each day of the study is 
included below. Each  day, the worst  (i.e., highest ordinal)  score  from  the previous day will be recorded, 
i.e., on Day 3, the highest ordinal score from Day 2 is obtained and recorded for Day 2. The scale is as 
defined by the WHO as follows7: 
 
 
 
Patient  State  Descriptor  Score  
Uninfected  No Clinical  or Virological  Evidence  of 
Infection  0 
Ambulatory  No Limitation  of activities  1 
Limitation  of activities  2 
Hospitalized,  Mild  Disease  Hospitalized,  no oxygen  therapy  3 
Oxygen  by mask  or nasal prongs  4 
Hospitalized,  Severe  Disease  Non-invasive  ventilation  or high flow 
oxygen  5 
Intubation  and Mechanical  Ventilation  6 
Ventilation  + additional  organ  support - 
pressors, RRT, ECMO  7 
Dead  Death  8 
 
 
In addition, patients  will be  stratified  at baseline based  on the  ordinal scale  below. A score  of 3-4 is 
associated with hospitalized with mild disease versus score of 5 is associated with severe disease.  
The primary  outcome assessment  for efficacy  will be evaluated  based  on the number  of patients  who are 
alive AND respiratory failure -free at Day 28 after study entry. 
Respiratory  failure at Day  28 will be defined  by clinical diagnosis of respiratory  failure corresponding to 
a score of 5-8 on the above ordinal scale  at Day  28. Specifically,  respiratory  failure  is defined by meeting 
any of the following criteria: 
 
• Requiring ICU admission,  
• mechanical  ventilation,  
• ECMO,  
• non-invasive ventilation,  
• or high  flow oxygen devices,  
30 
30  
  
 
13.0 Statistical  Considerations  and Methodology  
 
13.1 Statistical  Design  
 
The study design will be a randomized (1:1 ratio), double- blinded, placebo- controlled 
phase II  trial of  264 patients. Randomization will be stratified  based on age (< 65 years 
versus >= 65 years) and disease severity at study entry (hospitalized with mild disease 
versus hospitalized with moderate/severe disease). The purpose of this study is to evaluate the efficacy  of Camostat  mesilate  in addition to SOC  treatment  as compared  to 
SOC treatment combined with placebo with respect to clinical status on Day 28. The proportion of patients alive AND free from respiratory failure at Day 28 will be the primary outcome. 
Patients will be analyzed according to their randomization assignment. All patients 
meeting  eligibility  criteria  who received  at least1  dose of study drug will be included in 
the analysis.  
Formal interim analysis will be conducted after the first 66 patients (33 treated in the 
treatment  arm and 33 in the control group)  have  completed  the 28 Day  assessment  period. 
Safety analyses will be done to assess occurrence of any differences in adverse events between the treatment arms.  A second interim analysis will occur after 132 patients (66 
in the treatment arm and 66 in the control group) have completed the 28 Day assessment period.  
13.2 Accrual  Time  and Study  Duration  
 
We expect to accrue approximately 20 patients a week  across the clinical trial sites. With 
a total sample  size of 264 and a follow -up duration of 56 days for all  patients,  accrual  will 
require approximately 14 weeks with a total study duration of 22 weeks. The primary 
endpoint will be evaluable after 28 days of follow-up in all patients. 
13.3 Study Endpoints  
 
13.3.1  Primary  Endpoint:  
 
The primary endpoint will be evaluated based on the number of patients who are alive AND free from respiratory failure at Day 28 after study entry divided by the number of total patients  enrolled  for each treatment  arm. A respiratory  failure  event  is defined in the 
Treatment evaluation criteria section 12.0. 
13.3.2  Secondary Endpoints  
 
1.  Proportion of patients alive AND free of ventilator use or ECMO at Day 28: The 
proportion will be evaluated  based  on the number of patients  who are alive  AND free of 
ventilator use or ECMO (clinical status score of 5 or less) at Day 28 after study entry 
divided by the number of total patients enrolled for each treatment arm. 
2.  Time to death:  Time  to death  will be measured  as the number of days from  the date  of 
randomization/study entry  until death  date.  Deaths  due to any cause  will be considered  an 
31 
31  
  
 
event. All-cause mortality  rate at 28 and 56 days after study entry  will be evaluated.  If the 
patient is lost to follow -up or withdraws from the study early, or doesn’t experience a 
death event, they will be censored at Day 28. 
3.  Time to clinical improvement: Clinical improvement will be defined as a 2 or more 
point decrease on the WHO ordinal scale (see Section 12.0). Time to clinical 
improvement will be calculated  as the number of  days from  study  entry  until the earliest 
date of clinical improvement as defined above. The number of patients who achieve clinical improvement by Day 14 and 28 will be evaluated. In addition, time to clinical improvement will also be assessed.  
4.  Clinical status  at Days  14 and 28: Evaluation of the distribution  of clinical  status 
scores by the ordinal scale will be done at days 14 and 28. 
5.  Length of Hospitalization  Stay:  This will be defined  as the time from  randomization/ 
study entry until the time of hospital discharge. Time in the ICU will be described in 
number of days spent receiving ICU care, if applicable.  
6.  Duration of Mechanical  ventilation  / ECMO:  Ventilator  / ECMO  days will be defined 
as the number of days where the clinical status score is equal to 6  or 7 for those subjects 
who have a baseline score of 6-7 at study entry. Total  number of days will be the sum of 
all reported days, regardless of whether the days occur consecutively or in disjoint 
intervals.  
 
7.  Duration of non-invasive ventilation  / high-flow oxygen: Non-invasive ventilation  / 
high-flow oxygen days will be defined as the number of days where the clinical status score is equal to 5 for those with a baseline score of 5 at study entry. Total number of 
days will be the sum of all reported days, regardless of whether the days occur 
consecutively or in disjoint intervals. 
 
8.  Days  of supplemental  oxygen use: Oxygen days will be defined  as the number of days 
where the clinical status score is equal to 4 -7 for those who have a clinical status score 
greater than or equal to 4 at study entry. Total number of days will be the sum of all reported days, regardless of  whether the days occur consecutively  or in disjoint  intervals.  
 
9.  Occurrence of adverse events related  to treatment:  Adverse  Events  will be recorded 
and graded according to CTCAE version 5.0 criteria. Occurrence of grade 3 or higher 
adverse events and SAEs will be assessed between arms.  
10.  Development of thrombosis / bleeding complications: Incidence of arterial and 
venous thrombosis or bleeding  complications will be described  in both treatment  groups. 
 
 
13.3.3  Exploratory Endpoint(s)  
 
1. Time to Viral Clearance:  Viral clearance will be assessed at days 1, 7, 14, 28, 56 after 
study entry  and the proportion of patients  having viral clearance  at each of these  days will 
be estimated as the proportion of patients who are documented as having non- detectable  
32 
32  
  
 
viral shedding  divided by the total number of patients  in each treatment  arm. Serum  and 
nasopharyngeal assays will be used for this analysis.  
13.4 Planned Analyses  
 
Primary  Analysis  
 
Frequency distributions  and chi-square tests will be used to screen  for major  imbalances 
in the two randomization groups for qualitative variables; graphical displays including 
box plots and summary statistics (e.g., mean, median, standard deviation, ranges, etc.) 
will be used for quantitative variables with t -tests (after appropriate transformations if 
necessary to meet the assumptions of the methods).  
 
The primary outcome will include the number of patients who are alive AND free from respiratory failure at Day 28 divided by the total number of patients in each arm. This 
endpoint will be analyzed  in a binary fashion using  properties of the  binomial distribution 
and will be compared  between  randomized arms  by the use of independent samples Z- test 
for proportions and a 95% confidence interval will be constructed for the difference 
between arms. Proportions will also be compared using 
Cochran -Mantel- Haenszel tests, 
including the stratification factors of age and baseline disease severity. Multivariable 
logistic regression models will be used to assess the influence of treatment while 
controlling for covariates of interest (gender, symptom onset, comorbidities) along with 
stratification factors.  Primary analysis for this efficacy outcome will include all 
participants who are randomized and received at least 1 dose of study treatment.  
Participants  will be analyzed  according to the treatment  to which  they were  randomized.  
 
Efforts to minimize loss to -follow-up will be considerable. However, small amounts of 
missing  data may occur.  In such cases,  participants without Day  28 outcome data will be 
excluded from the analysis. Sensitivity analyses will evaluate the impact of making 
different assumptions about the missing observations. 
 
Interim  analyses : Two interim  analyses  will be conducted  after 25% and 50% of patients 
have completed the 28 day study period. The interim analysis will include the below 
stopping rules for efficacy and futility based on a Lan-DeMets spending function with O’Brien -Fleming boundaries. Occurrence of adverse events will also be evaluat ed at the 
interim analysis.  
 
Accrual  Control 
arm (#) Camostat 
arm (#)  Total 
number  
(#) Efficacy 
boundary  
(Z scale ) Alpha 
spent  Futility 
boundary  
(Z scale)  Beta 
spent  
25% 33 33 66 +/- 4.33 0.001  +/- 0.007  0.002  
50% 66 66 132 +/- 2.96 0.003  +/- 0.34 0.04 
100%  132 132 264 +/- 1.97 0.05 +/- 1.97 0.20 
 
 
13.5 Secondary Analyses  
 
1.  Proportion of patients alive AND free of ventilator use / ECMO at Day 28:  The 
proportion will be evaluated  based  on the number of patients  who are alive  AND free of 
33 
33  
  
 
ventilator  use or ECMO at Day 28 after study entry divided by the number of total 
patients enrolled  for each treatment  arm. The proportion  of patients  who have  this event 
will be analyzed  similarly  to the primary  endpoint. Comparisons will be done by use of 
independent samples Z-test for proportions and a 95% confidence interval will be 
constructed for the difference between groups. The Cochran -Mantel- Haenszel test will 
be used to include stratification  factors.  Multivariable  logistic  regression  models  will be 
used to assess the influence of treatment arm on while adjusting for other factors of interest.  
2.  Time to death and Mortality rate: The Kaplan -Meier method will be used evaluate 
differences in the distributions of time- to-death between treatment arms. Rates of 
mortality at day 28 and day 56 mortality will be estimated. Patients lost to follow -up or 
who withdraw early will be considered censored  at their last assessment date for the Day 
28 rate.  The stratified  log-rank test will be used to compare differences  in distributions of 
time to death  based  on stratification  factors.  Cox proportional hazards model will  be used 
to compare treatment arms with inclusion of stratification factors or adjustment for covariates of interest.  
3.  Time to clinical improvement: Time to clinical improvement will be evaluated using 
Kaplan -Meier  methods and Cox regression  models. Rates of clinical  improvement at days 
14 and 28 will be estimated. Time to clinical improvement will be assessed after all 
patients have reached day 14 and 28; no clinical improvement at day 14 or 28 or death 
before day 14 or 28 will be considered as right censored. Hazard ratios with 95% confidence intervals will be calculated by the Cox proportional- hazards model.  
Covariates of interest will be included in regression models.  
 
4.  Clinical status at Days 14 and 28: The distribution of the clinical status will be 
summarized by arm at days 14 and 28. A proportional odds model with treatment arm and disease  severity  at baseline  as covariates will be used to evaluate whether the odds of 
improvement on the ordinal scale are higher for the treatment arm as compared to  
control.  
 
5.  Length of Stay:  Length of stay will be defined as the time from study entry until the 
time of hospital discharge and the number of days hospitalized  will be compared  between 
groups by use of non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test. The proportions of patients 
who require an ICU admission will be compared between randomized groups by the use 
of independent samples Z-test for proportions and a 95% confidence interval will be 
constructed for the difference between groups. In addition, time in the ICU will be 
described in number of days spent receiving ICU care, if applicable. 
6.  Duration of Mechanical  ventilation  / ECMO:  Duration  of ventilator  / ECMO  use will 
be summarized by medians or quartiles by arm for those subjects who have a baseline 
score of 6 -7 at study entry. 
 
7.  Duration of non-invasive ventilation / high-flow oxygen: Duration of non-invasive 
ventilation  / high-flow oxygen will be summarized  by medians  and quartiles  by arm for 
those patients who have a clinical status score of 5 at study entry. 
34 
34  
  
 
8.  Duration of supplemental oxygen use: Duration of supplemental oxygenation use will 
be summarized by medians and quartiles by arm for those patients who have a clinical 
status score greater than or equal to 4 at study entry.  
 
9.  Occurrence of adverse events related  to treatment:  Analyses for safety  will include  all 
participants who are randomized and received at least 1 dose of study treatment. 
Participants will be grouped according to the treatment to which they were randomized. Events will be summarized  on the basis of the date  of onset  for the event. The maximum 
grade for each type of adverse event will be recorded for each patient. Frequency tables 
of adverse events will be constructed based on maximum grade for each treatment arm. 
Overall adverse event rates, rates of grade 3 or higher events and serious adverse events will be compared between treatment groups using Chi- square or Fisher’s exact test.  
10.  Development  of thrombosis / bleeding complications: Incidence of arterial  and 
venous thrombosis or bleeding complications will be described and compared by 
treatment arms by use of chi -square or Fisher’s exact test.  
 
Subgroup analyses  for the primary and  secondary analyses will  examine  the treatment 
effect  across  the following subgroups of interest.  Forest  plots  with odds ratio and 95% 
confidence intervals will be presented along with interaction tests. 
 
• Duration of symptoms  prior to enrollment:  <= Median  versus > Median  number of 
days, • Comorbidities,  presence of Hypertension/CHF/COPD/coronary artery  disease:  Yes 
versus No,  
• Age:  <65 versus >= 65 years,  
• Sex: Female  versus  Male,  
• Baseline severity  of disease:  Mild/moderate  versus  Severe disease 
Exploratory Analysis 
Time  to Viral  Clearance:  Viral  clearance will be assessed  at days 1,7, 14, 28 and 56 after 
study entry and the viral clearance rate at each of these days will be estimated as the 
proportion of patients who are documented as having non- detectable viral shedding 
divided by the total number  of patients  in that treatment arm.  The rates  at each  time point 
will be compared using chi- square tests to assess differences between treatment arms  
Missing  Data  Considerations  
 
All efforts will be made to minimize the occurrence of missing data. Subjects who 
discontinue treatment  in either  arm will be encouraged to remain  in the study and to 
continue with follow-up visits for key outcomes at Day 28 and 56. 
 
For time to event outcomes, subjects who are lost to follow -up or withdrawal  from  the 
study prior  to Day  28 and prior  to observing/experiencing the event  will be censored  at 
the time of their last observed assessment.  
 
For duration of non- invasive ventilation/high -flow oxygen, ventilation/ECMO or 
supplemental oxygen, subjects will be considered to have the event  of interest  until Day 
35 
35  
  
 
28 if they have  the event  of interest  at their last follow -up assessment  day before Day 28 
in the case of lost to follow-up or patient withdrawal. Likewise, if they do not have the 
event of interest at their last follow-up assessment, they will be considered to not have this event through Day 28.  
 
If the subject  is discharged  and no further hospitalization  data are available,  then the 
subject will be assumed to not have been readmitted to the hospital. 
 
13.6 Sample  Size 
 
Randomization will be done according to a 1:1 ratio. Based on data from Wang et al(9) , 
82% of patients treated with Remdesivir were alive and free from respiratory failure at day 28. In the preliminary report of Remdesivir for the treatment of COVID-19 in 1059 
hospitalized patients, approximately 70% of patients treated with Remdesivir we re alive 
and free from  respiratory  failure  at Day  15; Day  28 data are not yet available
(12). Using  an 
expected proportion of 80% for the SOC control arm, this study would require 132 
patients in each arm (total of 264 patients). Sample sizes of 132 in each arm achieves 
80% power to detect a difference between the group proportions of 12% for the primary 
endpoint. The proportion in the treatment arm is assumed to be 80% under the null 
hypothesis and 92% under the alternative hypothesis. The proportion in the SOC arm is 
80%. The test statistic used is the two -sided Z -Test with unpooled variance. The 
significance level of the test is 0.05 (two -sided).  
 
13.7 Data  & Safety  Monitoring  
 
The study  chair(s)  and the study statistician  will review  the study every  week  to identify 
accrual, adverse event, and any endpoint problems that might be developing. A Data 
Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will be formed to monitor the conduct of this study 
and for reviewing safety data. 
The DSMB will be comprised of disease experts who are not investigators or involved 
with the study. The DSMB  will review  the study safety  data and interim analysis  based 
on reports provided by the Statistical Office. 
Adverse Event Stopping Rules: The stopping rules specified below are based on the 
knowledge available  at study  development. The stopping  rule applies to the overall study. 
We note that the Adverse Event Stopping Rule may be adjusted in the event of either (1) the study re-opening to accrual or (2) at any time during the conduct of the trial and in 
consideration of newly acquired information regarding the adverse event profile of the 
treatment(s) under investigation. The study team may choose to suspend accrual because 
of unexpected adverse event profiles that have not crossed the specified rule below. 
 
Accrual will be temporarily suspended to this study if at any time we observe events 
considered  at least possibly related  to study treatment  (i.e. an adverse event  with  attribute 
specified as “possible”, “probable”, or “definite”) that satisfy the following:  
 
•  If 3 or more  of the first 10, or 30% or more of patients  thereafter  (in either 
treatment arm) experience a grade 3 or higher toxicity considered at least 
possibly related to study treatment.  
36 
36  
  
 
• The stopping rule criteria  will be evaluated  separately  for each treatment  arm. 
 
13.8 Results Reporting  
 
At study activation, this study will have been registered within the “ClincialTrials.gov” 
website.  The Primary  and Secondary Endpoints along with other  required  information  for 
this study will be reported on  For purposes of timing of the 
Results Reporting, the initial estimated completion date for the Primary Endpoint of this 
st
udy is 28 days after the study opens to accrual. The definition of “Primary Endpoint 
Completion Date” (PECD)  for this study is at the time the last patient  registered has been 
followed for at least 28 days. 
 
13.9 Inclusion of Women  and Minorities  
 
13.9b This study will be available  to all eligible  patients,  regardless  of race,  gender, or ethnic 
origin.  
 
13.9c  There  is no information  currently  available  regarding differential  effects of this regimen 
in subsets defined by race, gender, or ethnicity, and there is no reason to expect such 
differences to exist. Therefore, although the planned analysis will, as always, look for 
differences in treatment effect based on racial and gender groupings, the sample size is not increased in order to provide additional power for subset analyses. 
13.9d The geographical region served by Mayo Clinic has a population which includes 
approximately  30% minorities.  Based  on the burden of COVID in our community, we 
expect about 30%  of patients  will be classified  as minorities  by race and about 40%  of 
patients will be women. Expected sizes of racial by gender subsets are shown in the 
following table: 
 
Accrual  Estimates  by Gender/Ethnicity/Race  
 
Ethnic  Category  Sex/Gender  
Females  Males  Unknown  Total  
Hispanic  or Latino  21 32  53 
Not Hispanic  or Latino  84 127  211 
Ethnic  Category:  Total  of all subjects*  105 159  264 
Racial  Category  
American  Indian  or Alaskan  Native  31 48  79 
Asian  5 8  13 
Black  or African  American  6 23  39 
Native  Hawaiian  or other  Pacific  Islander  0 0  0 

37 
37  
  
 
Ethnic  Category  Sex/Gender  
Females  Males  Unknown  Total  
White  53 80  133 
Racial  Category:  Total  of all subjects*  105 159  264 
 
 
Ethnic 
Categories:  Hispanic  or Latino  – a person  of Cuban,  Mexican,  Puerto  Rico,  South  or Central  American,  or 
other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race. The term “Spanish origin” can also be used 
in addition to “Hispanic or Latino.”  
Racial Categories:  American  Indian or Alaskan  Native  – a person having origins  in any of the original  peoples 
of North, Central, or South America, and who maintains tribal affiliations or community attachment.  
 
Asian – a person having origins in any of the  original  peoples of the Far East, Southeast  Asia, 
or the Indian subcontinent including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia,  Pakistan,  the Philippine  Islands,  Thailand,  and Vietnam.  (Note: Individuals  from  the 
Philippine Islands have been recorded as Pacific Islanders in previous data collection 
strategies.)  
 
Black  or African  American  – a person  having origins  in any of the black  racial  groups  of 
Africa. Terms such as “Haitian” or “Negro” can be used in addition to “Black or African 
American.”  
 
Native  Hawaiian  or other  Pacific  Islander  – a person having origins  in any of the original 
peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.  
White  – a person  having origins  in any of the original  peoples  of Europe,  the Middle  East,  or 
North Africa.  
 
 
 
14.0 Records and Data  Collection  Procedures 
 
14.1 Submission Timetable  
 
Data  submission  instructions  for this study can be found in the Data  Submission 
Schedule.  
 
14.2 CRF  completion  
 
This study  will use Medidata Rave®  for remote  data capture (rdc) of all study data.  Data 
collection for this study will be done exclusively through the Medidata Rave® clinical 
data management system. Access to the trial in Rave is granted through the iMedidata 
application to all persons with the appropriate roles assigned in Regulatory Support System (RSS). To access Rave via iMedidata, the site user must have an active account 
and the appropriate Rave role (Rave CRA, Read -Only, Site Investigator) on the 
organization roster at the enrolling site.  
 
NOTE:  Due to the design  and length  of study, treatment  and follow -up data will be  
38 
38  
  
 
collected cumulatively on like forms and not divided into Treatment and Follow- up 
folders.  Any questions regarding form  completion and content should be directed  to the 
Data Manager.  
 
14.3 Site responsibilities  
 
Each  site will be responsible for insuring that all materials  contain  the patient’s  initials, 
registration number, and protocol number. All PHI must be redacted from any 
documentation.  
 
14.4 Supporting documentation  
 
Upload a copy of documentation  of clinical improvement or clinical  deterioration in 
RAVE on the Supporting Documentation Form. 
 
Baseline:  The following  documents  are required  for diagnosis and eligibility  verification: 
(Imaging report (if available), Lab report, Clinic note, COVID viral assays, etc.). These documents should be submitted within 14 days of registration. 
 
Treatment/Follow -up: The following documents  are required: (Imaging  report,  Lab 
report, Clinic note, etc.) 
 
At patient progression or restaging  for evidence of response:  (Imaging  report,  Lab report, 
Clinic note, etc.)  
 
14.5 Labeling of materials  
 
Each  site will be responsible for insuring that all materials  contain  the patient’s  initials, 
registration number, and protocol number. Patient’s name must be removed. 
39 
39  
  
 
15.0 Bibliography  
 
 
1. Jingchun F, Xiaodong L, Weimin P, Mark WD, Shisan B. Epidemiology of 2019 Novel 
Coronavirus Disease-19 in Gansu  Province, China, 2020. Emerging  Infectious Disease journal. 
2020;26(6).  
2. Wang  D, Hu B, Hu C, et al. Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized  Patients  With  2019 
Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA. 2020. 
3. Shi Y, Wang  Y, Shao  C, et al. COVID-19 infection: the perspectives on immune  responses.  Cell 
Death Differ. 2020.  
4. Hoffmann M, Kleine -Weber  H, Schroeder S, et al. SARS -CoV -2 Cell Entry  Depends on ACE2 
and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell. 2020. 
5. Wang  Q, Li W, Liu XS, et al. A hierarchical  network  of transcription  factors governs androgen 
receptor -dependent prostate cancer growth. Mol Cell. 2007;27(3):380-392. 
6. Evaluation IfHMa.  COVID -19 Projections.  2020.  
7. Ashley Rhoades M, RAC. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issue an Emergency Use 
Authorization (EUA)  for emergency  use of remdesivir  for the treatment  of hospitalized  2019 
coronavirus disease (COVID -19) patients. In: Administration UFaD, ed2020. 
8. NIH Clinical Trial  Shows Remdesivir  Accelerates  Recovery  from  Advanced COVID-19 [press 
release]. National Institutes of Health2020. 
9. Wang  Y, Zhang D, Du G, et al. Remdesivir  in adults  with severe  COVID-19: a randomised, 
double- blind, placebo -controlled, multicentre trial. The Lancet. 2020. 
10. Organization WH.  WHO R&D  Blueprint: Novel  Coronavirus. COVID-19 Therapeutic Trial 
Synopsis. In:2020. 
11. Pocock SJ, Simon  R. Sequential Treatment  Assignment with Balancing for Prognostic Factors  in 
the Controlled Clinical Trial. Biometrics 31(1):103 -115, 1975 Mar.  
12. Beigel,  John H. “Remdesivir  for the Treatment  of Covid -19 — Preliminary  Report.” New 
England Journal of Medicine , 22 May 2020, 10.1056/nejmoa2007764. 
40 
40  
  
 
Appendix  I: Clinical Safety  Labs  
 
 
The CBC with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel, and urinalysis tests listed below will be 
performed at each visit specified in the Test Table (Section 4.0). A renal profile is a subset of the 
comprehensive metabolic  panel,  and includes sodium,  potassium, chloride, carbon dioxide (total),  BUN, 
creatinine, BUN: creatinine ratio, glucose, and eGFR. 
 
CBC  with  Differential  Comprehensive  Metabolic  Panel  Urinalysis  
Hematocrit  Alanine  aminotransferase  Color  
Hemoglobin Aspartate  aminotransferase  Clarity  
Mean  corpuscular  hemoglobin Alkaline  phosphatase  pH 
Mean  corpuscular  hemoglobin  concentration  BUN  Specific  gravity  
Mean  corpuscular  volume  Creatinine  Bilirubin  
Mean  platelet volume  BUN:creatinine  ratio Glucose  
Platelet count  eGFR*  Ketones  
Red blood cell distribution  width  Bilirubin,  total Leukocytes  
Red blood  cell count  Carbon dioxide,  total Nitrite  
White  blood cell count  Calcium  Blood (hemoglobin)  
White  blood cell differential Chloride  Protein  
(% & absolute):  Potassium  Urobilinogen 
Basophils  Sodium  Red blood cells 
Eosinophils  Glucose  White  blood cells 
Lymphocytes  Albumin  Epithelial cells 
Monocytes  Globulin,  total Bacteria, yeast, & parasites  
Neutrophils  Albumin:globulin ratio Casts  
 Protein,  total Crystals  
 Cholesterol,  total  
 Triglycerides   
 Uric acid  
*eGFR  will be calculated  as follows: eGFR  (mL/min/1.73  m2) = 175 × (serum  creatinine  in mg/dL)-1.154 × 
(age in years)-0.203 × (0.742 if female) × (1.212 if African American)  