 
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  
 Pharmacogenetic Study of Ondansetron in Alcohol Use Disorder  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Responsible Party David A. Gorelick, MD, PhD  
 
September 5, 2018  
 
  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page ii 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  CLINICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Multicenter, Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled, Phase 2 
Pharmacogenetic Study of Ondansetron in Alcohol Use Disorder  
 
 
 
     
     
 
Principal Investigator:         David A. Gorelick, MD, PhD, DLFAPA  
           Clinical Neurobehavioral Center  
           University of Maryland, Baltimore School of Medicine   
           Department of Psychiatry  
           5900 Waterloo Rd.  
           Columbia, MD 21045  
           Tel : (667) 214 -2111 
            Email: dgorelick@ som.umaryland.edu  
  
Henry R. Kranzler,  M.D.  
Treatment Research Center  
University of Pennsylvania  
3535 Market Street  
Philadelphia, PA 1910 4 
Tel: (215) 386 -6662  
Email: kranzler@mail.med.upenn.edu  
Funding Sponsor:  National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA)  
National Institutes of Health  
Division of Treatment and Recovery Research  
5635 Fishers Lane  
Bethesda MD 20892  
Study Product:  Ondansetron  
  
IND Number:  IND #45,228  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page iii 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
  
STUDY SUMMARY  1 
1 INTRODUCTION  2 
1.1 BACKGROUND  2 
1.2 INVESTIGATIONAL AGENT  3 
1.3 PRECLINICAL DATA 4 
1.4 CLINICAL DATA TO DATE 4 
1.5 DOSE RATIONALE AND RISK/BENEFITS  7 
2 STUDY OBJECTIVES  11 
3 STUDY DESIGN  12 
3.1 GENERAL DESIGN  12 
3.2 PRIMARY STUDY ENDPOINTS  13 
3.3 SECONDARY STUDY ENDPOINTS  13 
3.4 PRIMARY SAFETY ENDPOINTS  14 
4 SUBJECT SELECTION AN D WITHDRAWAL  16 
EXCLUSION CRITERIA   
4.1 SUBJECT RECRUITMENT AND SCREENING  20 
4.2 EARLY WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS  21 
5 STUDY DRUG  22 
5.1 DESCRIPTION  22 
5.2 TREATMENT REGIMEN  22 
5.3 METHOD FOR ASSIGNING SUBJECTS TO TREATMENT GROUPS  22 
5.4 PREPARATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF STUDY DRUG 23 
5.5 SUBJECT COMPLIANCE MONITORING  23 
5.6 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT THERAPY  25 
5.7 PACKAGING  27 
5.8 BLINDING OF STUDY DRUG 27 
5.9 RECEIVING , STORAGE , DISPENSING , AND RETURN  27 
6 STUDY PROCEDURES  28 
6.1 INITIAL TELEPHONE SCREEN (APPROXIMATELY 20 MINUTES ) 28 
6.2   SCREEN PART-1 VISIT (V0-1; STUDY WEEK -1) 29 
6.3 SCREENING PART-2 VISIT (WEEK 0) 31 
6.4 ON-TREATMENT VISITS (WEEKS 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 16, AND 20) 32 
6.5 END OF STUDY VISIT (WEEK 16)/EARLY TERMINATION VISIT 32 
6.6. SAFETY FOLLOW -UP PHONE VISIT (WEEK 20) 33 
6.8  GENETIC EVALUATION  37 
7 STATISTICAL PLAN  38 
7.1 SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION  38 
7.2 STATISTICAL METHODS  38 
7.3 SUBJECT POPULATION (S) FOR ANALYSIS  40 
8 SAFETY AND ADVERSE E VENTS  40 
8.1 DEFINITIONS  40 
8.2 RECORDING OF ADVERSE EVENTS  42 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page iv 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  8.3 REPORTING OF SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS AND UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS  43 
8.4 UNBLINDING PROCEDURES  45 
8.5 MEDICAL MONITORING  46 
9 DATA HANDLING AND RE CORD KEEPING   
9.1 CONFIDENTIALITY   
9.2 SOURCE DOCUMENTS   
9.3 CASE REPORT FORMS  49 
9.4 RECORDS RETENTION  49 
10 STUDY MONITORING, AU DITING, AND INSPECTI NG  
10.1    STUDY MONITORING PLAN  
11 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIO NS 53 
12 STUDY FINANCES   
12.1  FUNDING SOURCE   
12.2  CONFLICT OF INTEREST   
12.3  SUBJECT STIPENDS OR PAYMENTS  53 
13 REFERENCES   
 
 
 
 
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  
 Study Summary  
Title A Multicenter, Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled, Phase 2 
Pharmacogenetic Study of Ondansetron in Alcohol Use Disorder  
Short Title  Ondansetron  for Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD)  
Protocol Number  HP 00061575    
Phase  Phase 2  
Methodology  This is a randomized, two-center, double -blind, parallel -group, placebo -
controlled study.  Comparable, but not identical studies will be conducted at 
the two sites  
Study Duration  5 years  
Study Center(s)  University of Pennsylvania (Penn) and University of Maryland Baltimore 
(UMB)  
Objectives  Primary specific aim : to test the hypothesis that alcohol -dependen t 
individuals of  European ancestry (EAs) or of African American ancestry (AAs) 
carrying any one or a combination  of specific  genotypes will have a 
significantly lower number of drinks/drinking day (DDD) in response to  
ondansetron 0.33 mg twice daily , compared to those who are not carrying 
any of the selected genotypes or those who we re treated with the placebo .  
Secondary exploratory aim) : We further hypothesize that specific 
genotypes (which differ for AAs and EAs) will moderate the response to 
ondansetron. The genotypes of interest reflect polymorphisms in the genes 
encoding the ser otonin transporter ( SLC6A4 ) and the 5 -HT3A ( HTR3A ) and 
5-HT3B ( HTR3B ) receptor subunits.  
 
We also will test the additional secondary predictions  that the differences 
seen in  our primary specific aim (above ) will extend to secondary drinking 
measures and measures of quality of life. Additionally, we will use genome -
wide expression studies of total RNA and miRNA - from blood samples and 
supported by supplemental funding -to compare the 15 most responsive 
subjec ts (whose drinking is reduced most significantly) and the 15 least 
responsive subjects on DDD and the 15 subjects with the greatest number of 
adverse events and the 15 with the fewest to identify changes that mediate 
ondansetron’s efficacy and adverse even ts profile, respectively.  
Number of Subjects  366 at two sites (18 3 at each site)  
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria  Current DSM -5 diagnosis of Alcohol Use Disorder ; AUDIT score  8; >6 
Heavy Drinking Days (HDDs) - define as a day with alcohol consumption of >5 
standard drinks for men, and >4 standard drinks for women in the last 28 
days;  currently drinking an average of 14 standard drinks /week (women ) 
and 21 standard drinks /week (men) in the last 28 days  (and have met these 
criteria for the 7 days prior to randomization ); and e xpressed a wish to reduce 
or stop drinking.  
Study Product, Dose, 
Route, Regimen  Ondansetron 0.33 mg or matching placebo by mouth twice daily.  
Duration of 
administration  16weeks  
Reference therapy  Placebo  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 2 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  Statistical 
Methodology  All randomized subjects will be included in the analysis using the intent -to-
treat principle.  We will use a mixed -models approach, adjusting for baseline 
covariates (when significantly different by group) and the same drinking 
variables for baseline.  For  the drinking variables, the baseline value is the 
average for the 30-day period prior to the screening visit.  Other potential 
covariates shall include age, race, and sex.  The primary outcome measure 
will be  DDD  during the 16-week treatment period.    
1 Introduction  
 This document is a protocol for a human research study. This clinical trial will  be 
conducted according to US and international standards of Good Clinical Practice (FDA Title 21 
part 312 and International Conference on Harmonization guidelines) , applicable government 
regulations and institutional research policies and procedures.  
1.1 Background  
 Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a heterogeneous and chronic relapsing disorder that 
includes both acute (binge drinking) and chronic (frequent heavy drinking ) dimensions.  Globally 
and in the United States, AUD ranks 5th and 3rd, respectively, among the most common 
preventable causes of morbidity and mortality.  
 Approximately 7.2 percent or 17 million adults in the United States ages 18 and older 
had an AUD in  2012. This includes 11.2 million men and 5.7 million women. AUD can cause 
serious health, family, and economic problems. Finding treatments that are effective in 
decreasing heavy drinking among individuals with AUD is, therefore, an important scientific a nd 
health goal. Only a fraction of the people who could benefit from AUD treatment receives  
treatment . In 2012, for example, 1.4 million adults received treatment for an AUD at a 
specialized facility (8.4 percent of adults in need).        
 A novel and imp ortant strategy to improve AUD treatment outcomes uses a personalized 
medicine approach to optimize treatment response . This approach matches a subject   with 
specific genotypes to an appropriate medication with a high probability of a positive treatment 
outcome while also potentially minimizing adverse events.  Despite the development of new 
medications to treat AUD, pharmacotherapy remains an underutilized approach. This is, in large 
measure, a function of modest effect sizes associated with the FDA -approv ed medications for 
AUD.  
Personalized medicine offers the prospect of greater efficacy and safety by matching subjects 
with optimal treatments.  
 This proposed study will address important limitations in a previously published Phase ΙΙ 
study  (Johnson et al. 2011) conducted in a sample of European Americans (EA ). In the first 
study12, Johnson et al. reported that 5 -HTTLPR:LL genotype in the gene that encodes the 
serotonin transporter molecule (SLC6A4) either alone or in combination with rs1042 173:TT of 
the same gene predicted response to ondansetron.  In a secondary analysis of the same 
sample, the authors reported three additional genotypes in the two genes that encode the 
primary binding site of ondansetron – the 5 -HT3 sub unit genes HTR3A an d HTR3B1. As the 
primary aim of this study, we will test the replicability of these findings with following 
modifications to address several limitations of the prior studies.  First, we will stratify the 
population into two main groups of participants base d on whether a participant is carrying any of 
the responsive genotypes (Genotype responsive group vs. Genotype non -responsive group). 
There are three main differences between the Genotype -responsive group defined by Johnson 
et al 2013 and the present study . 
(1) In this study, we will use the tri -allelic classification for 5 -HTTLPR of SLC6A4, the gene 
encoding the serotonin transporter (LA, LG or S alleles) to avoid the underestimation of 
pharmacogenetic effects associated with the use of the bi -allelic clas sification (L or S alleles). 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 3 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  We will limit the LL group to include o nly those who are LALA, will be considered as Genotype -
responsive as the LG allele has been shown to be associated with lower expression levels of 5 -
HTT mRNA similar to the S allele (2).  
(2) Carriers of rs1042173:TT (without 5 -HTTLPR:LALA) will be included in the Genotype 
responsive group, based on the findings that indicated a significant risk effect of rs1042173:TT 
on heavy drinking3.  
(3) Treatment assignment within Genotype Responsive g roup will be balanced at 
randomization according to genotype subgroups listed below, to accurately characterize the 
degree to which ondansetron’s therapeutic effect is enhanced by either one of SLC6A4 or any 
of the HTR3A/B genotypes.  
a. LALA in the absence  of rs1042173:TT and regardless of presence/absence of HTR3A/B 
genotypes  
b. rs1042173:TT in the absence of  LALA and regardless of presence/absence of HTR3A/B 
genotypes  
c. LALA together with rs1042173:TT and regardless of presence/absence of HTR3A/B 
genoty pes 
d. Any one or more HTR3A/B genotypes in the absence of  both LALA and rs1042173:TT   
Number of participants in the two main groups (Genotype responsive vs. non -responsive) as 
well as the four subgroups will represent population frequencies of constitue nt genotypes. This 
approach, as opposed to having equal numbers in each group, was adopted in order to include 
all participants who are otherwise qualified to be enrolled in this study.  At the UMB  site, we will 
enroll both African Americans (AAs) and EAs.  Because of differences in population frequencies 
and linkage disequilibrium structures, in AAs, we will explore the moderating effect of a non -
synonymous, functional SNP ( rs1176744)  that has been shown to be associated with alcohol 
dependence in AAs (Enoc h et al. 2011).  This SNP is in HTR3B , a gene in which variation was 
shown in the published Phase II study (Johnson et al. 2013) to moderate the response to 
ondansetron. (3) We will use the tri -allelic classification for 5 -HTTLPR of SLC6A4 , the gene 
encodi ng the serotonin transporter (L A, LG or S alleles) to avoid the underestimation of 
pharmacogenetic effects associated with the use of the bi -allelic classification (L or S alleles). 
We will limit the LL group to include only those who are L ALA, as the L G allele has been shown to 
be associated with lower expression levels of 5 -HTT mRNA similar to the S allele and will 
balance individuals within genotype (L ALA vs. non - LALA between the ondansetron and placebo 
groups in the primary randomization (4) We will al so balance individuals in the primary 
randomization within the two genotype groups of the SLC6A4  3′-UTR SNP rs1042173 (TT vs 
TG/GG). This will make it possible to characterize accurately the degree to which ondansetron’s 
therapeutic effect is moderated by rs1042173 and determine the independent therapeutic effect 
of ondansetron in individuals with the TT genotype. Finally, we will examine mRNA expression 
in a subset of individuals from the study to test whether the observed moderating effects of 
genotype ar e evident also in the expression of HTR3B  and SLC6A4 . 
  
In addition to conducting analyses separately using genotypes that are relevant to each  
racial group, we will  examine the findings from the two sites in a joint analysis.  
 
1.2 Investigational Agent  
Ondansetron, a specific serotonin -3 (5-HT 3) antagonist  is FDA approved to treat 
chemotherapy -induced nausea and vomiting, radiation -induced nausea and vomiting, and 
postoperative nausea and vomiting.  In the present study, subjects will be given on dansetron  
0.33 mg  or matching placebo capsules twice daily.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 4 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  The active ingredient in ondansetron tablets is ondansetron hydrochloride (HCl) as the 
dihydrate, the racemic form of ondansetron.  Chemically it is (±) 1, 2, 3, 9-tetrahydro -9-methyl -3-
[(2-methyl -1H-imidazol -1-yl)methyl] -4H-carbazol -4-one, monohydrochloride, dihydrate.  
Ondansetron’s empirical formula is C18H19N3O•HCl•2H2O, representing a molecular weight of 
365.9.  
1.3 Preclinical Data  
Ondansetron’s effects are mediat ed through 5 -HT 3 receptors in the brain.  Transgenic 
mice over -expressing 5 -HT 3 receptors in the forebrain have been used to study alterations in 5 -
HT current induced by ethanol within the brain  (Engel & Allan, 1999; Engel, Lyons, &  Allan, 
1998; Sung, Engel, Allan, & Lovinger, 2000) . These studies have shown that 5 -HT 3 over-
expression reduced ethanol consumption, improved contextual fear conditioning, reduced 
anxiety, increased inspective behavior toward a novel object and increased dopamine release in 
the nucleus accumbens  (Allan, Galindo, Chynoweth, Engel, & Savage, 2001; Engel & Allan, 
1999; Engel, Lyons, & Allan, 1998; Sung, Engel, Allan, & Lovinger, 2000; Metz, Chynoweth, & 
Allen; 2006) . Using a transgenic mouse model lacking the  gene for the 5 -HT 3A receptor subunit, 
Hodge and colleagues (2004) showed that the reduction of alcohol drinking produced by 5 -HT 3 
antagonism is dependent on the presence of 5 -HT 3A subunit -containing receptor complexes. 
While these data, especially the dir ectional effect, cannot be extrapolated directly to studies in 
wild-type animals that can differ in the density and neuroanatomical distribution of 5 -HT 3 
receptors or to human studies, they do provide a framework which suggests that differential 5 -
HT 3 expression can influence alcohol consumption.  
1.4 Clinical Data to Date  
Serotonin (5 -HT) function is an important regulator of alcohol consumption. The 
serotonin transporter (5 -HTT), which is encoded by the gene SLC6A4 , is the major modulator of 
neuronal 5 -HT function. Variation in SLC6A4  has been associated in humans with differences in 
alcohol craving and consumption. Specifically, in some studies, alcohol -dependent individuals 
who are homozygous for the long (L) allele of an insertion deletion polymorphism in the 5′ -
regulatory region of SLC6A4  (5-HTTLPR) or the T allele of the single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) rs1042173 in the 3′ -untranslated region (3′ -UTR) of that gene report increased craving 
and consumption of alcohol.   
SLC6A4 , which is located on ch romosome 17q11.1 –q12, is the only known gene 
encoding the serotonin transporter (5 -HTT) in the human genome The  SLC6A4 promoter 
contains a functional insertion -deletion polymorphism (5′ -regulatory region of the 5 -HTT; 5 - 
HTTLPR) that results in a long (L) form, which possesses 44 base pairs that are absent in the 
short (S) allele. The 5 -HTTLPR polymorphism has been investigated extensively for a possible 
association with a wide range of psychiatric disorders including alcohol dependence. Recent 
research sug gests a gene -by environment interaction. A neuroimaging study showed that 
alcohol -dependent LL genotype individuals had lower binding of the radioligand 123β-CIT (2 
beta-carbomethoxy -3 beta -(4-iodophenyl) tropane)  to the 5 -HTT in the raphe nuclei of the br ain 
than did healthy LL genotype individuals  (Heinz et al., 2000) . In contrast, within S -carriers 5-
HTT availability did not differ significantly between control and  alcoholic  subjects . Previous 
studies conducted by our own research team have also shown similar patterns of 5-HTTLPR 
genotype -based differences in 5 -HTT availability and function. Specifically, among individuals  
with the L allele,  a greater quantity of lifetime alcohol consu mption was associated with lower 
levels of 5 -HT uptake and binding  (Javors et al., 2005; Johnson et al., 2008) .  Taken together, 
these findings suggest a potential selective susceptibility of L -allele carr ying individuals to the 
neurotoxic effects of chronic excessive alcohol consumption . Johnson et al. (2013)  discovered 
that another functional allelic variant, the SNP rs1042173 (T/G) in the 3′ - untranslated region (3′ -
UTR) of SLC6A4 , is associated with the  intensity of alcohol consumption measured by the 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 5 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  number of standard drinks (1 standard drink = about 14g of 100% alcohol) consumed per 
drinking day  (Seneviratne, Huang, Ait -Daoud, & Johnson, 2009) . TT homozygotes at this locus, 
compared with G -allele carr iers, had a significantly greater intensity of alcohol consumption. T -
allele -transfected HeLa cells had lower levels than their G allele counterparts of expression of 
both 5 -HTT mRNA and protein. Because rs1042173 is located at or near a potential binding site 
for several microRNAs in the 3′ -UTR of the gene, the variant may alter expression levels by 
reducing the stability of mRNA.  
Lowered 5 -HTT expression would, paradoxically, be associated with reduced rather than 
increased 5 -HT synaptic neurotransmissio n and consequent upregulation of postsynaptic 5 -HT 
receptors. This is because the 5 -HTT in the raphe nuclei is somatodendritic, and, therefore, 
negative feedback mechanisms would decrease 5 -HT neuron firing rates and upregula te 
postsynaptic 5 -HT receptors.  In sum, these findings suggest that blockade of upregulated 5-HT 3 
receptors by ondansetron (a specific 5-HT 3 receptor antagonist) would reduce heavy drinking . 
We hypothesize that, among  individuals with an AUD , the alcohol consumption -promoting 
effects of  the 5 -HTTLPR and 3′ -UTR variants are due to lower 5 -HTT function and decreased 5 -
HTT expression through reduced stability of mRNA, respectively —effects that individually lead 
to substantial postsynaptic 5 -HT upregulation and, when combined, a supra -additi ve effect.  
 In a phase 2, randomized, double -blind clinical trial of 283 alcohol -dependent individuals 
of EA or AA  ancestry , treatment with the specific serotonin -3 (5-HT 3) antagonist ondansetron, 
presumably through its neuromodulatory effects at postsynap tic 5-HT receptors, significantly 
reduced drinking among those who were homozygous for the L allele of the 5 -HTTLPR —an 
effect that was enhanced in individuals who were T -allele homozygotes for the 3′ -UTR SNP  
(Johnson et al., 2011) . Further analysis of this  data set revealed additional polymorphisms 
located on the genes for the A and B subunits of the serotonin  5-HT 3 receptor that were also 
associated with a therapeutic response to ondansetron  (Johnson, Seneviratne, Wang, Ait -
Daoud, & Li, 2013  
The proposed s tudy is designed to address several important limitations of the above 
mentioned phase 2 clinical trials  that tested the efficacy of ondansetron in AUD. Addressing 
these limitations (listed below), would further establish the use of ondansetron as an effic acious 
pharmacotherapy for AUD utilizing a personalized genetic (pharmacogenetic) approach.  The 
current study is a proof -of-concept, double -blind, randomized clinical trial to test whether, 
treatment -seeking, alcohol -dependent AA and EA adults  carrying s pecific genotypes show  a 
significantly greater and more robust treatment response to ondansetron than placebo and/or 
non-carriers of the genotypes, as reflected in greater reductions in DDD.  
 
Genetic association studies : An examination of 360 treatment -seeking AA male subjects 
with DSM -IV lifetime diagnos es of alcohol, cocaine, a nd heroin dependence  and   187 showed a 
significant association between alcohol dependence and the functional SNP rs1176744  in  
HTR3B which encode s a subunit of the  5-HT 3AB receptor (Enoch et al., 2011) .  These findings 
were supported by earlier work from the same group that showed an association between a 5 -
HT 3B genotype and alcohol dependence with antisocial behaviors  (Ducci et al., 2009) .  A recent 
candidate gene association analysis in EAs also showed a strong interactive effect of 5 -
HTTLPR, rs1042173 and 5-HT 3AB variants associated with AUD  (Seneviratne et al., 2013) . 
Taken together, these studies suggest that variation in the genes encoding the 5 -HT3 receptor 
and serotonin transporte r may contribute  to the development of alcoholism and lay the 
foundation for an examination of how certain polymorphic variants in the genes may 
differentially influence response to ondansetron treatment.  Nevertheless, because poly morphic 
variants associated with alcoholism may differ from those that moderate the ondansetron 
treatment response, effects of polymorphisms on treatment response will have to be 
demonstrated in a clinical study of ondansetron, rather than only in disease risk association 
studies.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 6 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  Clinical Study : Based on the expectation that allelic variants within e ither homomeric or 
heteromeric 5-HT 3 receptors could impact the response to ondansetron, Johnson et al. (2011)  
conducted an additional analysis on the same sam ple included in the  phase 2 ondansetron 
study described above that considered multiple SNPs located on genes for the 5 -HT 3A and 5 -
HT 3B subunits of the 5 -HT 3 receptor. Th e latter analysis  (Johnson et al. 2013)  investigated the 
associations between drinking severity and 18 SNPs across HTR3A  and HTR3B  genes using 
blood samples for genetic testing and ondansetron response data from the Phase 2 trial of 
ondansetron ( 4 μg/kg, twice daily)  versus placebo in 283 alcohol -dependent individuals with or 
without the LL/TT genotypes of the 5 -HTT (described above: Johnson et al., 2011) .  The 
analysis focused on 18 SNPs selected based on their minor allele frequency (≥ 0.05), their 
physical distribu tion on the HTR3A  and HTR3B  genes to obtain uniform physical coverage, and 
results from previous genetic association studies.  
This analysis identified three HTR3A  and HTR3B  genotypes that were significantly 
associated with a positive response to ondansetron  in the EA sample  (see Table 1) .  Because of 
population differences in allele frequencies and linkage disequilibrium structure, the study of 
AAs will examine ondansetron r esponse in relation to genetic variants that overlap, but are not 
identical, with those being examined in the EA sample  (see section 3.1 below) .  
Table 1: HTR3A and HTR3B genotype associations with response to ondansetron  in EAs  
 
    Use of a larger ancestry -informative SNP panel for assessment of population admixture 
between samples in the two treatment groups:  
Allelic differences among populations are potential confounders in genetic association 
analyses, which may result in spurious associations . The differences in population admixture 
between subjects included in ondansetron and placebo groups  of the Phase 2 study described 
above were tested using the program STRUCTURE   
(http://pritch.bsd.uchicago.edu/software/structure2_2.html) , which revealed no statistically 
significant difference between the two groups.  As the subjects  consisted of two groups, 
Caucasians and Hispanics, individual genetic ancestry proportions were calcul ated for all 
283 subjects and were used as  covariates in all of the above -mentioned statistical models that 
tested HTR3A , HTR3B and SLC6A4  genotype effects.  Genetic ancestry proportions are 
increasingly being used as covariates in genetic association anal yses as a strategy to limit type 
I error  (Piwkham et al., 2011; Sucheston et al., 2011) 1-3.  In this Phase 2 trial, to prevent 
spurious associations resulting from population stratification, genetic ancestry proportions will 
be assessed using a panel of 186 ancestry informative SN Ps described by Hodgkinson et al.,  
(2008) as opposed to the 24 -marker panel that we used in the phase 2 study.  Genetic ancestry 
proportions will be calculated for each individual subject during data analysis , using the 
statistical software p ackage  Structur e (Pritchard, Stephens, & Donnelly, 2000) 4 and genetic 
ancestry proportions for  each individual subject will be used as covariates in statistical analyses.  
 
 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 7 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  1.5 Dose Rationale and Risk/Benefits  
 Dose Selection:  Selection of the 0.33 mg dose is based on the results of prior Phase 2 
studies (Johnson et al., 2011; Johnson et al., 2000; Sellers et al., 1994) ). Johnson et al.  (2011) 1-
3 showed  that ondansetron at a dose equivalent of 0. 33 mg twice daily was well tolerated and 
effective in reducing alcohol consu mption in subjects with targeted genotypes vs. subjects 
without the targeted genotypes.  Based on that study, we chose a dosage of 0.33 mg twice daily 
of ondansetron  for use in the present trial . 
 Each subject will receive ondansetron doses at the CNC  under direct observation during 
the baseline visit (first dose at study Week 0) and on study Weeks 4  and 8 (first dose of the 
week). All other doses will be take -home. The investigator will closely monitor the subject for 
any adverse events or lack of tol erability.  Subjects will continue twice -daily dosing at home, and 
will be counseled to take the study medication at approximately the same times each day.  
 Subject s will be asked to return all unused study medication  and packaging to the study 
staff.  Throughout the study, the staff will closely monitor the subject for dosing compliance and 
adverse events or lack of tolerability to the study medication.  If the subject stops taking study 
medication for any reason and later, upon discussion with the inve stigator, wishes to  restart the 
study medication, he/she  will be provided with that opportunity no later than the study visit 
immediately following the request.  Interruption in study medication will be documented on the 
case report form.  If the subject w ishes not to restart the medication, he/she  will be encouraged 
to continue to participate in all scheduled study visits and assessments.  The case report form 
will document the duration through which the subject took study medication.  
 Contraindications :  The concomitant use of apomorphine  with ondansetron is 
contraindicated based on reports of profound hypotension and loss of consciousness when 
apomorphine was  administered with ondansetron. Ondansetron is also  contraindicated for 
patients known to have hyp ersensitivity to the drug.  
 Warnings :  
 Hypersensitivity reactions  have been reported in patients who have exhibited 
hypersensitivity to other selective 5-HT 3 receptor  antagonists.  
ECG changes  including QT interval prolongation has been seen in patients receiving 
ondansetron. In addition, post -marketing cases of Torsade de Pointes have been reported in 
patients using ondansetron.  Ondansetron should not be administered to patients with 
congenit al long QT syndrome. ECG monitoring is recommended in patients with electrolyte 
abnormalities (e.g., hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia), congestive heart failure, 
bradyarrhythmias or patients taking other medicinal products that lead to QT prolongation.  
High-dose, intravenous ondansetron (32 mg) has been associated with prolongation of 
the QTc interval. Freedman et al. (201 4) reviewed t he risk of cardiac arrhythmia associated with 
ondansetron).  Over the 22 years since ondansetron has been approved, no one case  of an 
arrhythmia following a single oral dose of ondansetron has been reported. Furthermore, the 
maximal QTc lengthening from a 32 mg IV dose (100 x the dose proposed in the stud y) of 
ondansetron is 17 -20 msec  but only 5 .8 msec  after an 8 mg  oral dose  (24 x the dose proposed 
in this study) .  Additionally, the peak serum level of oral ondansetron is only 3 to 35% of IV 
ondansetron.   Individuals identified by Freedman et al. (2014) to be  most at risk of developing 
an arrhythmia were treated with ondansetron IV and had either an underlying arrthymogenic 
condition or were receiving other pro -arrthymic medications. As a precaution , we have 
incorporated appropriate exclusion criteria (long QTc syndrome) even though it would require 
that approximately 16,000 peopl e be screened by  ECG to find one case of asymptomatic long -
QT syndrome.  A 12-lead ECG assessment will be performed prior to the in itiation of drug 
therapy and at visit 5, week 5 to assess possible effect s of the currently proposed chronic low 
dose of onda nsetron (0.66 mg/day) on the QTc interval.  Subjects will also be screened for 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 8 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  electrolyte abnormalities, which are not uncommon in this patient population and could lead to 
cardiac arrhythmias.  
           Serotonin syndrome  has been reported with 5-HT 3 receptor antagonists alone. Most 
reports have been associated with concomitant use of serotonergic drugs (e.g., selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors, mirtaza pine, fentanyl, lithium, tramadol, and intravenous 
methylene blue). Some of the reported cases were fatal. Serotonin syndrome occurring with 
overdose of ondansetron  alone has also been reported. The majority of reports of serotonin 
syndrome related to 5-HT 3 receptor antagonist use occurred in a post -anesthesia care unit or an 
infusion center.  Serotonin syndrome may include the following combination of signs and 
symptoms: mental status changes (e.g., agitation, hallucinations, delirium, and coma), 
autonomic instability (e.g., tachycardia, labile blood pressure, dizziness, diaphoresis, flushing, 
hyperthermia), neuromuscular symptoms (e.g., tremor, rigidity, myoclonus, hyperreflexia, 
incoordination), seizures, with or without gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., na usea, vomiting, 
diarrhea). Patients should be monitored for the emergence of serotonin syndrome, especially 
with concomitant use of ondansetron  and other serotonergic drugs. If symptoms of serotonin 
syndrome occur, discontinue ondansetron  and initiate supp ortive treatment. Patients should be 
informed of the increased risk of serotonin syndrome, especially if ondansetron  is used 
concomitantly with other serotonergic drugs .   
 Drug Interactions : Ondansetron does not appear to induce or inhibit the cytochrome P-
450 drug -metabolizing enzyme system of the liver but is metabol ized by this system.  
Theoretically , inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes may change the clearance and, hence, 
the half -life of ondansetron. On the basis of available data, however, no dosage adjustment is 
recommended for patients on these drugs.  Thus, we will inform patients being treated with 
serotonergic antidepressants that the potential exists for an interaction with the study 
medication and we will monitor their progress accordingl y.  It should be noted, however, that the 
low dose of ondansetron that is being used in this study (0.6 6 mg/day), is unlikely to contribute 
to serotonin syndrome. Notably, the dosage of ondansetron that is commonly prescribed to 
prevent nausea and vomiting  is 16 mg/day, thus the dosage used in the current study is less 
than 1/2 4 the anti -emetic dosage.  
 Apomorphine : Based on reports of profound hypotension and loss of consciousness  
when apomorphine was administered with ondansetron, concomitant use of apomo rphine 
with ondansetron is contraind icated.  
 Phenytoin, Carbamazepine, and Rifampicin : In patients treated  with potent inducers  
of CYP3A4 (i.e., phenytoin, carbamazepine, and rifampicin), the clearance of ondansetron 
was significantly increased and ondanse tron blood concentrations were decreased. 
However, on the basis of available data, no dosage adjustment for ondansetron is 
recommended for patients on these drugs . 
 Tramadol:  Although no pharmacokinetic drug interaction between ondansetron and  
tramadol  has been observed, data from 2 small studies indicate that ondansetron may be 
associated with an increase in patient controlled administration of tramadol.  
 Serotonergic Drugs : Serotonin syndrome (altered mental status, autonomic  
instability, and neuromus cular abnormalities) has been associated with the concomitant use of 5-
HT 3 receptor antagonists and other serotonergic drugs, including selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs; e.g. fluoxetine, sertraline, and citalopram,) and serotonin and noradren aline 
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs; e.g. venlafaxine). As indicated above, the likelihood of such an 
interaction is very small given the very low dosage of ondansetron being used in this study.  To 
ensure the safety of participants, we will monitor the appea rance of signs and symptoms of the 
serotonin syndrome at every study visit  after screening , using a standardized Serotonin Syndrome 
Symptom Checklist. Two or more positive responses on the Serotonin Syndrome Symptom Checklist will 
trigger further clinical evaluation. If there is clinical suspicion of the serotonin syndrome, the study 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 9 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  medication will be immediately stopped and the participant told to also immediately stop taking the 
serotonergic concomitant medication.  (See section 5.6).  
 Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:  Ondansetron was not mutagenic 
in standard tests for mutagenicity.  
 Pregnancy: Teratogenic Effects:  Pregnancy Category B. Should a woman become 
pregnant at any point in the study, we will immediately discontinue the tr eatment and refer her 
to an obstetrician for evaluation. We will also maintain contact with her via phone for the 
duration of the pregnancy to obtain self -reported safety information and, with her permission 
and that of her physician, will obtain informati on from her medical chart.  
 Adverse Reactions:  Studies examining adverse events associated with ondansetron 
(at a dosage much higher than th e one  being used in the present study) have focused on two 
patient groups: individuals receiving high -dose chemother apy and subjects being treated for 
post-operative nausea and vomiting. Ondansetron was well  tolerated in the postoperative 
nausea and vomiting population (n = 1081), which is more representa tive of our proposed 
population.  In this group,  adverse events we re similar between ondansetron and placebo  (see 
Table 2 ) 
 Post-marketing reports : Post-marketing  reports are voluntar y, therefore  the frequency  of 
the following adverse events  are unknown: transient ECG c hanges ( rare and predominantly with 
intravenous ondansetron) ; flushing ; hypersensitivity reactions (rare), sometimes severe (e.g., 
anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid reactions, angioedema, bronchospasm, shortness of breath, 
hypotension, laryngeal edema, stridor) ; allergic reactions, including laryngospasm, shock, and 
cardiopulmonary arrest ( predominantly the injectable formulation). Also reported: liver enzyme 
abnormalities, hiccups, o culogyric crisis  (alone, as well as with other dystonic reactions ), 
urticaria , and transient blindness (predominantly  with the intravenous formulation and resolve d 
within a few minutes up to 48 hours ). 
 
 
 
 Table 2: Adverse Events Associated with ondansetron and placebo  
Adverse Event  ondansetron 16 mg   Placebo  
Wound problem  152 (28%)  162 (31%)  
Drowsiness/sedation  112 (20%)  122 (23%)  
Headache  49 (9%)  27 (5%)  
Hypoxia  49 (9%)  35 (7%)  
Pyrexia  45 (8%)  34 (6%)  
Dizziness  36 (7%)  34 (6%)  
Gynecological disorder  36 (7%)  33 (6%)  
Anxiety/agitation  33 (6%)  29 (5%)  
Bradycardia  32 (6%)  30 (6%)  
Shiver(s)  28 (5%)  30 (6%)  
Urinary retention  28 (5%)  18 (3%)  
Hypotension  27 (5%)  32 (6%)  
Pruritus  27 (5%)  20 (4%)  
 
Physical Risks:  Peripheral venipuncture poses a small risk of bruising and local infection at 
the needle puncture site.  
 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 10 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  Minimization of the risks: This risk of bruising and local infection at the needle site will be 
minimized by  adherence to sterile techniques and standard, simple procedures to ensure 
hemostasis.  
 
    Psychological Ri sks: Psychological risks can include distress and heightened sensitivity, 
which can occur as part of the  behavioral treatments, clinical interviews, or completion of self -
reported ratings and questionnaires. While the  possibility of such events is low, we will monitor 
these situations and provide an appropriate level of support.  
Such events will be documented fully in the case records.  
 
Minimization of the risks: The potential for psychological harm will be reduced by adherence to 
FDA guidelines for Good Cl inical Practice and by formal supervision and training of clinical 
personnel. Subjects will be allowed to take session breaks at any time, or reschedule a session 
(consistent with the overall study schedule).  Experienced clinical personnel are available a t the 
CNC to evaluate subjects who express distress or discomfort over study procedures. We  have 
surveyed our subjects and found good satisfaction with the quality of care that they have 
received.  
Overall, the development of carefully standardized and supe rvised SOP has allowed us to 
develop a high standard of care  
  
   Social and Legal  Risks:  Social and legal risks can include the disclosure of sensitive 
information about a subject to some other agency or an employer.  
 
Minimization of the risks: The likelihood of information from our clinic being disseminated 
without the  subject’s consent to an outside source is remote. No information about a subject is 
disclosed without his or her  written authority. Case records also are kept at a secure location in 
locked files. Access to these files is  restricted to known personnel, who must fill out an entry 
form to receive any subject’s records. Computer based  information contains subject numbers 
and codes that cannot be traced directly back to the original  records. The computer records are 
protected by passwords and encrypted files that meet the C2 security  standards of the U.S. 
Department of Defense.  
 
     Risk of participation becoming part of the medical record:  If a participant needs to be 
seen by a non -study physician and/or admitted to the hospital during the study, in order to provide 
medical treatment; it may be necessary to inform treatment providers (medical staff) of his/her 
participation in this study. This may include information regarding the u se of alcohol in this study. 
This information can become part of the participant’s medical records. When insurance 
companies review medical record information, they might see the documentation of alcohol use 
and/or abuse as justification for denying covera ge or charging higher premiums. Also it is possible 
for medical records to be entered as evidence in court.  
 
   Risks associated with questionnaires:   Participants will be asked questions of a sensitive 
nature concerning their medical, psychiatric, drug, and personal history, which some may find 
anxiety -provoking.  
 
Minimization of risk: To minimize this risk, research personnel are highly trained to be sensitive 
and responsive. All answers will be strictly confidential. In addition, a federal Certificate of 
Confidentiality will be obtained pending IRB approval of the protocol.  
 
 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 11 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018      Risk  associated with pregnancy :   The safety of ondansetron to an unborn child is not 
established. For these reasons, pregnant women will not be allowed to participate.  
 
Minim ization of risk: Women of childbearing potential must be using an acceptable form of birth 
control to participate in this study and have no intention of becoming pregnant.  
 
   Risk of alcohol withdrawal:   Alcohol withdrawal may occur from suddenly stopping  the use of 
alcohol after chronic or prolonged ingestion.  
 
Minimization of risk: Presence and severity of acute alcohol withdrawal will be assessed at 
baseline and subjects who are experiencing significant alcohol withdrawal symptoms will be 
referred for treatment . 
 
   Risk of breach of confidentiality:  The research team is highly experienced providing care 
and doing research of this nature.  
 
Minimization of risk: All subject contact will occur in a private room.  All study staff are well -trained 
and experienced in practices to protect confidentiality.  
 
 
The risks to subjects in this study are low. The medication, ondansetron, is well tolerated, and 
we have experience with its use in alcohol -dependent subjects for whom no serious a dverse 
events were re ported. We will minimize the risks to subjects participating in this study by 
adhering carefully to the eligibility criteria and our SOP.  
 
An alternative to participation in the study is for subjects to seek treatmet for alcohol use 
disorder from a treatme nt facility.  Alternative treatment may include taking a medication (other 
than ondansetron) that is FDA -approved for the treatment of AUD (disulfiram, naltrexone, and 
acamprosate), or psychosocial treatment without any medication  
 
 
2 Study Objectives  
The primary study objective is to determine the efficacy of ondansetron 0.33 mg  twice 
daily, administered orally for a period of 16 weeks in reducing  heavy drinking  ( characterized by 
DDD) in carriers of specific SLC6A4, HTR3A and HTR3B “responsive” genoty pes and 
secondary measures of drinking and quality of life  among current drinking subjects. We will also 
compare ondansetron with placebo in subgroups of the sample based on  alcohol  intake . We 
also will test the additional secondary predictions that the differences seen in our primary 
specific aim will extend to secondary drinking measures and measures of quality of life. 
Additionally, we will use genome -wide expression studies of total RNA and miRNA - from blood 
samples and supported by supplemental fundi ng-to compare the 15 most responsive subjects 
(whose drinking is reduced most significantly) and the 15 least responsive subjects on DDD and 
the 15 subjects with the greatest number of adverse events and the 15 with the fewest to 
identify changes that medi ate ondansetron’s efficacy and adverse events profile, respectively.  
AUD  is a heterogeneous and chronic relapsing disorder that includes both acute (binge 
drinking) and chronic (frequent heavy drinking) dimensions. Perhaps because of this 
heterogeneity, th e therapeutic effect size of the approved medicines for  the treatment of AUD 
has been small  (Johnson & Ait -Daoud, 2011) .  In an effort to overcome the heterogeneity of 
response to a particular medication, recent studies have instituted a personalized appro ach to 
therapy  (Kranzler and McKay  2012). Major breakthroughs in pharmacogenetics have made it 
possible to identify discrete subgroups of the AUD population according to genetic profiles in 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 12 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  order to target the subjects who are most likely to respond to tre atment with a particular agent. 
In addition, genetic variation contributing to the risk of alcohol dependence may be differentially 
associated with treatment response  (Johnson et al., 2011; Kranzler et al., 2014; Oslin et al., 
2003) . Thus, a successful personalized pharmacologic approach should ensure that targeted 
subgroups achieve an optimal treatment response with high predictability.  Such an approach 
holds the potential to identify not only robust responders to treatment but als o those who might 
have minimal or modest adverse effects from the putative therapeutic medication.  From a 
practical clinical standpoint, a personalized medicine approach starts with a screen to identify 
the subject ’s salient genotypes, in order to match t he subject with the appropriate  medication  to 
ensure  a high probability of a positive treatment outcome . This approach has the potential to 
exert  a substantial  positive  impact on public health  (Kranzler and McKay, 2012) . 
Hypothesis:  
Our overarching hypoth esis is that , in both AAs and EAs, ondansetron 0.33 mg twice 
daily will decrease the intensity of  drinking (i.e., the number of DDD)  more than placebo.  We 
further hypothesize that the effect will be greater in specific genotype groups in the two 
populations and we will b alance the randomization on this genetic variation separately by 
population group to explore this prediction.  
Other exploratory aims will be examined in separate str ata across both study sites , with 
treatment assignment at randomization  balanced based on the genotypes that are relevant to 
each population :  to test the hypothesis that alcohol -dependent individuals with 5 -HTTLPR LALA 
genotype in SLC6A4  (which encodes th e serotonin transporter protein). We also will test the 
secondary  prediction s that the differences in our primary specific aims will extend to secondary 
drinking measures and measures of quality of life .  
Finally,  we will use   
genome -wide expression studie s of total RNA and miRNA - from blood samples and 
supported by supplemental funding - to compare the most responsive subjects  (whose 
drinking is reduced most significantly) and 15 least responsive  subjects on DDD as well as 
the 15 subjects with the greatest number of adverse events and the 15 with the fewest  to 
identify changes that mediate ondansetron’s efficacy and adverse events profile, 
respectively.  
 
3 Study Design  
3.1 General Design  
 
This is a, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, parallel -group, phase 2 clinical trial to 
explore the safety and efficacy of ondansetron to reduce drinking in tensity in AA and EA adult 
subjects with AUD who commonly engage in heavy drinking . We will use selected  genotype 
polymorphisms  of the serotonin transporter and 5-HT 3B receptor genes  to examine ondansetron 
effects in subgroups based upon genotype . Analyses based on genotype will be conducted 
separately in EA and AA because different, but overlapping, genetic variants are relevant as 
potential moderators of ondanse tron response  in the two populations . The UPENN site is 
conducting a parallel study with both EAs and AAs.  
Probability of group assignment and potential for subjects to be randomized to placebo 
group :   
European Americans  
Participants with EA  race will be  selected based on absence/presence of any one of the 
combination of the following genotypes and will have equal  probability (i.e., 50 -50 chance) of 
being assigned to receive ondansetron (active medication) or placebo.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 13 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   
Subjects will be balanced  based on their SLC6A4 genotypes , • 5-HTTLPR:LL together with 
rs25531:AA (L ALA genotype) in SLC6A4 gene;  
• SLC6A4 -rs1042173: TT;  
• HTR3A -rs1150226: AG;  
• HTR3A -rs1176713:  GG; 
• HTR3B -rs17614942: AC  
  
African Americans  
 Participants with AA will be selected based on having a CC or TC genotype at rs176744 , 
with each participant having an equal probability (i.e., 50 -50 chance) of being assigned to 
receive ondansetron (active medication) or placebo.  
Participants  will be bal anced based on their SLC6A4 genotypes:  
 5-HTTLPR -LALA vs. non - LALA genotypes  
 rs1042173*TT vs. TG/GG genotypes .  
…. 
  
 
Eligible subjects will be stratified into two groups (Genotype responsive vs. non -responsive). 
Genotype responsive group will include the carriers of the above mentioned genotypes and the 
non-responsive group will include those who do not carry any of the above genotypes.  
 
 Genotypes will be determined within one week of the Screen  Visit. Primary Study 
Endpoints  
 Drinking variables will be derived from the data collected by the  Timeline Follow -back 
Interview ( TLFB ). Baseline for the drinking variables is defined as the 90 days  preceding the 
baseline visit. One month is defined as 4 weeks (28 days).  
 Primary Efficacy Variable : Change from baseline in the number of drinks per drinking 
day (DDD) during the last 8 weeks  of the 16 week treatment period . 
3.2 Secondary Study Endpoints  
 Key Secondary Variables  
o Responder analysis: Number of subjects with no HDDs  during the last 8 weeks of the 
16-week treatment period.  
o Change from baseline in the total alcohol consumption, def ined as mean daily alcohol 
consumption in standard drinks /day over the last 4 weeks of the 16-week treatment 
period.  
 
 .   
Change from baseline in the percentage  of heavy drinking days ( PHDDs) defined as a 
day on which men drink >5  
drinks  and women drink >4 drinks.  
   
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 14 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  3.3 Primary Safety Endpoints  
Safety evaluations, including laboratory assessments, physical examination, vital signs, 
12-lead ECG and assessment of alcohol withdrawal, depression and suicidal risk, and querying 
for adverse events will be performed  to identify safety issues in the study.   
 Hematology, clinical chemistry, urinalysis, urine drug screen, medical history, psychiatric 
history, and physical examination will be performed at baseline and at varying intervals during 
the 16-week tre atment, a s described in detail in Table 3 below . 
Body weight and    
vital signs (including temperature , systolic and diastolic  blood pressure , heart rate and 
respiratory rate)  will be measured at screening/baseline and at every study visit.  
The Clinical In stitute Withdrawal Assess ment for Alcohol scale  (CIWA -Ar) is a reliable 
and well -validated , 10-item scale to assess the severity of alcohol withdrawal symptoms . 
Alcohol withdrawal symptoms at the screening visit constitute a screen failure.   Any post -
scree ning physical finding from the CIWA -Ar that is considered to be clinically significant will be 
reported as an adverse event.  
The 21 -item Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) will be used to measure depressive 
symptoms. Questions focus on topics such as mood,  suicidal  thoughts , sleep habits, and eating 
behaviors. The BDI will be administered at every study visit.  At screening/baseline, subjects 
with severe, untreated depression or who endorse suicidal intent will be excluded from the study 
and referred for treatment or immediate intervention.  At each post -baseline visit, the staff will 
review the findings on the BDI to ensure that the subject’s safety is not compromised by 
changes in depression symptoms.  
 Careful screening using  the MINI International Neuro psychiatric Interview 6.0  (MINI)  
Suicide Risk Assessment Scale (module B)  will serve to exclude individuals with s ignificant 
suicidal risk.  O ngoing monitoring using that instrument throughout the study will serve to reduce 
the risk of intentional overdose  or other suicidal behavior.  The MINI B   will also be used to 
assess suicide risk  at each study visit, and if rated equal to or greater than 9 (i.e., clinically 
significant suicidal ideation), a study physician will be consulted to decide the appropriate 
clinical management.  
 
Table 3: Schedule of Study Procedures  
Assessments  
Study Visit  
V0-1 (Screen)  
V0-2 (Baseline ) 
V1 
V2 
V3 
V4 
V5 
V6 
 
V7  (Midpoint)  
 
V8 
 
V9 
 
 
 
V10(endpoint)  
V11 
Study Week  
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
20 
BrACa  X X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X X 
Weight, vital signs, heightb X X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X X 
TLFBc  X X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X X 
                    
SCREENIING                     
Informed Consent X                   
SORT  X                   
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 15 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   Race/Ethnicity 
Questionnaire  X                   
Medical  and Psychiatric 
History, Demographics  X                   
SCID -IV, AUDITd X                   
SSADDA Nicotine  
Dependence Module  X                   
AUD criteria  and clinical 
status (DSM -5) X                 X  
Names and contact 
information for two locators   X                  
                    
LABORATORY TESTS                     
Blood sample for g enotyp ing X                   
Blood sample for 
hematology & clin. chem.  X                 X  
Blood sample for %dCDT  
and GGTP  X         X        X  
Blood sample for mRNA and 
miRNA expression studies  X     X    X    X    X X 
Urinalysis  X                 X  
Urine drug screen  X             X    X  
Urine pregnancy test  X X    X    X    X    X  
Urine specimen for riboflavin   X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
                    
OTHER ASSESSMENTS                     
Other Drug Use 
questionnaire   X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
SF-12, SIP   X            X    X  
OCDS, PSQI   X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
ADS  X        X        X  
STUDY VISIT  
V0-1 (Screen Part -1) 
V0-2 (baseline ) 
V1 
V2 
V3 
V4 
V5 
V6 
 
V7 
 
V8 
 
V9 
 
 
 
V10 
V11 
STUDY WEEK                     
                    
NON -LABORATORY 
CLINICAL MONITORING                     
Physical exam  X                 X  
ECG   X     X             
CIWA -Ar X X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
BDI  X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
MINI Suicide Risk 
Assessment Scale  X X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
Clinical Global Impression 
Scales (CGI)  
(CGI -I, CGI -S)  X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 16 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  BBCET   X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
SSS Checklisth  X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
                    
STUDY MEDICATION                     
Administration of Study 
Drug (witnessed ingestion)   X    X    X          
Dispensing of study drug   X X X X X X X  X  X  X      
Compliance and drug 
accountability    X X X X X X  X  X  X    X  
Adverse eventse   X X X X X X  X  X  X    X Xi 
, Concomitant medications 
and treatments   X X X X X X X  X  X  X    X Xg 
 
a. BrAC will be the first procedure at all visits ; 
b. Height measured at screen part -1 visit only;  
c. At screen part -1 visit, subjects will complete the TLFB for the preceding 90 days.  At subsequent visits, the 
TLFB will span the time since the prior vi sit; 
d. AUDIT ( at phone screen)  
e. Subjects will be monitored for the occurrence of adverse events from the date the informed consent is 
signed ; 
f. Final visit can be a telephone call unless an SAE has occurred since the last visit. Safety follow -up should 
include  subjects who withdrew their consent but the safety follow -up data must only be included in the 
medical records and not in the CRF.  
g. Adverse events only  
h. Only for participants taking a serotonergic concomitant medication  
Abbreviations in the table:  ADS=Alco hol Dependence Scale ; AUD=Alcohol Use Disorder; AUDIT= Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identification Test ; BBCET =Brief Behavioral Co mpliance Enhancement Treatment; BDI=Beck Depression Inventory ; CGI-I & 
CGI-S=Clinical Global Impression Scales (Improvement & Severity) ; CIWA -Ar=Clinical Institute Withdrawal  Assessment for 
Alcohol -revised; GGTP=gamma -glutamyltranspeptidase;  dCDT=disialotransferrin ; MINI=Mini International Neuropsychiatric 
Interview ; PSQI=Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index ; SCID=Structured Clinical I nterview for DSM -IV; SF-12=Short Form Health 
Survey ; SIP=Short Index of Problems ; SORT= Slosson Oral Reading Test ; SSS Checklist = Serotonin Syndrome Symptom 
Checklist   
 
4 Subject Selection and Withdrawal  
 Men and women,  18 to 70 years old, will b  recruited : 183 AA and 183 EA. EAs will be 
self-identified as White, non-Hispanic or Hispanic individuals . Approximately 30% of the total 
cohort will be women.  Minorities and women will, therefore, be well represented in this trial. 
Children between the ages of 18 y ears and 21 years will be included in this study.  This is in 
accordance with NIH guidelines for the inclusion of children in clinical studies, if appropriate. 
The inclusion of children enhances the generalizability of the results of clinical studies to the  
general population.  
 The ethnic group commonly known as “Hispanic” or “Latino” is an admixed population 
that primarily resulted from two -way admixture between Native American and European 
populations or three -way admixture among Native American, European,  and West African 
populations. In admixed individuals with a disease, chromosomal segments harboring 
susceptibility variants will show an excess of ancestry from the parental population in which the 
risk alleles are more frequent  (Mao et al., 2007) , leadin g to genetic subgroups within a 
population. The existence of genetic subgroups or substructure in a population may lead to 
spurious associations if the subgroups are not equally represented in cases and controls  (Lai et 
al., 2009) . Balancing for subgroups in a genetic association study examining a common disorder 
such as AUD will require a large number of subjects to permit an analysis of  the subtle effects of 
multiple polymorphisms with sufficient statistical power.   For this reason, the current study will  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 17 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  be limited to subjects of predominantly (>75%) European and African ancestry.  This will include 
Hispanic/ Latino individuals who self -report being of African  or European  ancestry.   
Number  of subjects (at each site ) needed to complete the protocol :  128 subjects of 
African -American ancestry and 128 subjects of European ancestry  are needed to complete the 
protocol . Also, e ach site will aim to have a total of 128 completing subjects (from either race).  
 
Expected rate of screen failure/ dropouts/withdrawals from all sites :  Allowing for a 30% 
drop-out rate (during the course of the study , which is about 4 months), as seen in previous 
studies conducted by the PI’s research team, we will need to randomize about 183 subjects at 
each site in order to have 128 subjects complet e the protocol.    
   Inclusion Criteria  
 Men and women who have given written informed consentAged 18 to 70. 
 The subject has a breath alcohol concentration ( BrAC) = 0.00% at the screening  visit 
 Self-reported African -American or European ancestry (mixed ancestry individuals will not be 
included in this study)  
 The subject has a breath alcohol concentration ( BrAC) = 0.00% at the screening  visit 
 Diagnosis of alcohol use disorder (AUD) using Diagnostic and Statisti cal Manual of Mental 
Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM -5) criteria  
 Able to provide TLFB  alcohol consumption information for the 90-day period prior to the 
Screen Part-1 Visit.  
 During  the 4 weeks preceding the Screening Visit, the subject reports : 
o >6 Heavy Drinki ng Days ( HDDs ) – defined as a day with alcohol consumption of > 5 
standard drinks (i.e., 12 g of ethanol)  for men, and > 4 standard drinks  for women  
o <14 consecutive abstinent days  
o Total alcohol consumption of  an average of  >21 standard drinks/week for men and 
>14 standard drinks/week for women in past 30 days  and have met these criteria 
during the 7 days prior to randomization  
 An expressed wish to reduce or stop drinking  
 Willingness to participate in  a research study with  behavioral treatment and medicinal 
treatments  or placebo study medication  for Alcohol Use Disorder  
 Stable residence in the 28 days prior to the Baseline Visit and no plans to move in the next 9 
months.  A  stable residence is a domicile in which an indivi dual can operate as if it were his 
or her own homestead and does not include shelters or halfway houses.  
 Provides contact information for 1 or 2 "locator s" who can be used to contact the subject  
 Able to read and understand English and accurately complete the rating scales and 
questionnaires, follow instructions, and make use of the behavioral treatments.  This will be 
assessed with the Slosson Oral Reading Test -Revised, on which the subject must 
demonstrate at least a 6th grade reading level.  
 If the subject is a woman of child -bearing age, she must:  
 Agree not to try to become pregnant during the study, and use adequate contraception 
(defined as oral/ systemic contraception,  such as Norplant, Depo -Provera, or birth 
control pills or patches, an  intraute rine device, a combination method such as a 
diaphragm  or male condom combined with spermicide, jellies or foam, withdrawal, a 
sponge, the rhythm method, or a cervical cap) or  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 18 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   Be postmenopausal, (i.e., h ave had her last natural menstruation at least 24 mon ths 
prior to baseline ) or  
 Have had a hysterectomy or been surgically sterilized prior to the Baseline Visit, or  
 Plan not to be sexually active vaginally with men during the entire duration of the trial.  
 Weight >110 Kg  (242 lb) 
 Exclusion Criteria  
A subject presenting with any of the following  criteria will be excluded from the study:  
 
o The subject has fewer  than 6 heavy drinking days (HDD)  (defined as >5 standard 
drinks for men and >4 or greater standard drinks for women)  in the 4 weeks 
preceding the Screening Visit.  
o The subject has greater  than 14 consecutive abstinent days in the 4 weeks 
preceding the Baseline Visit.  
o The subject has a Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol Scale (CIWA -
Ar), Revised, score >10 at Baseline visit.  
o The subject  has a  current diagnosis of any of the following psychiatric disorders: 
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, other psychotic disorder,  severe  major depressive 
disorder, post -traumatic stress disorder, panic d isorder, eating disorder, or substance 
use disorder (except alcohol, tobacco, or cannabis).  
o Current or recent (within 4 weeks prior to Baseline Visit) treatment with 
antipsychotics  or any medications  likely  to interact with ondansetron to produce 
adverse  effect, as judged by a study physician . 
o Treatment with any investigational medicinal product within 30 days or 5 half -lives 
(whichever is longer) prior to the Randomization  
o Currently participating or has recently (4 weeks prior to the Randomization ) 
participated in a treatment program for alcohol use disorders.  
o MINI 6.0 Suicide Risk Assessment (module B ) will be used to assess subjects’ r isk of 
suicide . Subjects who receive a  score of >9 on this assessment will be evaluated by 
the PI or designee to de termine their eligibility .  Subjects who are deemed by the PI 
or designee to be at risk of suicide will be excluded.  
o Clinically significant , unstable physical illness  (e.g., hematologic disorders,  hepatic or 
renal insufficiency, or a cardiovascular, pulmon ary, gastrointestinal, endocrine, 
neurological, infectious, neoplastic,  or metabolic disturbance ), as judged by the PI or 
designee  to be exclusionary  
o Clinically significant abnormal vital signs, as judged by the PI or designee  
o Clinically significant abnorm al 12 -lead ECG at the Screen Visit, clinically significant 
cardiovascular disease requiring regular or intensive clinical monitoring,  or a current 
or past history of clinically significant QT prolongation, including:  QTcF > 450 ms 
(average of 3 12 -lead me asurements)  
 Serum potassium, magnesium or calcium levels outside the central laboratory's  
reference range  that are  deemed clinically significant by the PI or designee . 
 
Taking medication (within the last 7 days prior to the Baseline Visit) that ha s the pot ential 
to clinical ly significantly  prolong the QT interval , as judged by a study physician.  or may 
require such medications during the course of the study (see Table  below for a list of 
medications ).  For patients taking these medications, a study physician will evaluate the 
potential for ondansetron to interact with the medication to produce a clinically significant 
risk for the pa rticipant .  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 19 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   Clinically unstable cardiac disease, including unstable atrial fibrillation, symptomatic 
bradycardia, unsta ble congestive heart failure, active myocardial ischemia or indwelling 
cardiac pacemaker  
 Complete left bundle branch block  
 History of Long QT Syndrome or a first -degree biological family member with this 
condition  
o Evidence of hepatic failure and/or ascites , prolonged prothrombin time (International 
Normalized Ratio [INR] >1.7), bilirubin >10% above the upper limit of the central lab's 
normal range and/or esophageal variceal disease  
o Active hepatitis and/or serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), seru m 
glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) or lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) > 3x the 
upper limit of normal  
o Treatment, either current or within 28 days prior to the Randomization , with any 
medications having a potential effect on alcohol consumption and related behaviors.  
These include opi oid antagonists (e.g., naltrexone, Vivitrol®, Selincro®), glutamate 
antagonists (e.g., acamprosate), anticonvulsants (e.g., topiramate , gabapentin ), 
dopamine antagonists (e.g., haloperid ol), and disulfiram (Antabuse®)  
o At the Screen visit , the subject's urine contains opiates, cocaine, 
meth amphetamines, benzodiazepines , or opiates that cannot be explained by  
appropriate  use of  a prescribed medication . 
o History of severe or life -threatening adverse reactions to ondansetron  
o Female subjects of childbearing potential who have a positive pregnancy test at 
Baseline Visit or are pregnant, breast feeding, not adhering to an acceptable form of 
contraception at screening or any time during the study, or unwilling to maintain  an 
acceptable f orm of con traception throughout the study   
o Prior to randomization , the subject is compelled to participate in an alcohol treatment 
program to maintain his/her liberty  
o As of Screen Visit , the subject is sharing a household with a subject randomized to 
any i nvestigational trial of ondansetron  
o Any other condition or therapy that, in the investigator's opinion, may pose a risk to 
the subject, prevent the subject from completing the required study procedures or 
interfere with the study objectives  
o Less than 75% European ancestry  proportions or African -American ancestry 
proportions . If ancestry is  determined by a 24-marker ancestry panel , the participant 
will not start  treatment  until after the results are known . 
 
 
Table 4   
 Some drugs associated with QTc  prolongation  
 
 
 Antibiotics  
azithromycin  
clarithromycin  
erythromycin  
roxithromycin  
metronidazole  
(with  alcohol)  
moxifloxan  
 
Antifungals  Anaesthetics  
halothane  
 
Antiarrhythmics  
disopyramide  
procainamide  
quinidine  Antipsychotics  
risperidone  
fluphenazine  
haloperidol  
clozapine  
thioridiazine  
ziprasidone  
pimozide  
droperidol  
 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 20 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  fluconazole  
(in cirrhosis)  
ketoconazole  
 
Antivirals  
nelfinavir  
 
Antimalarials  
chloroquine  
mefloquine  amiodarone  
sotalol  
 
Antidepressants  
amitriptyline  
clomipramine  
imipramine  
dothiepin  
doxepin  Antihistamines  
terfenadine * 
astemizole * 
 
Other  
probucol  
cisapride  
 
 
4.1 Subject Recruitment and Screening  
Subjects will be recruited at research centers at the Clinical Neurobehavioral Center 
(CNC) at UMB .  Advertisements for the study will state clearly that there will be no cost to the 
subject for participation.  Only recruitment ma terials and methods approved by the UMB IRB will 
be utilized.  We recognize that our recruit ment  efforts may yield individuals in need of treatment 
who do not qualify for the present study.  We will try to enroll these individuals in other ongoing 
studies at our sites.  Should subjects fail to qualify or decline to participate in other ongoing 
treatment studies at our research centers, we will assist with a referral to another treatment 
facility.  
 Subjects will be recruited through  local advertisements , possibly including posters, flyers, 
newspaper, radio, television, electronic communications (including email and social media),  
Craig slist, advertisements on mass transit, referrals from local treatment programs and centers , 
and commercial sites such as such as gambling casinos, race tracks (horse, auto), hunting and 
fishing supply stores, auto supply stores, and stores selling alcoholic beverages.  
 University health systems , community agencies, and local college campuses that offer 
services and means of po sting and distributing recruitment materials in the community settings 
with public posting areas or providing community access to materials ( such as hospitals, town 
halls, public libraries, YMCAs, health fairs, etc.) We will obtain permission at selected locations 
before distributing or posting the approved recruitment materials (ensuring  compliance with 
other institution guidelines , including seeking IRB approval as needed) . We will also screen  
patient databases as permitted by the institution and approve d by the IRB . We will search the 
University of Maryland Medical Center and FPI EPIC  medical record  databases to identify 
potential subjects based on demographics, medical diagnosis codes related to AUD and 
exclusionary comorbid diagnoses, and residence wit hin commuting distance of CNC. We will 
contact the individuals with IRB -approved outreach letters from the study PI.  About a week 
after sending the letter, we will make a follow -up phone call to these individuals if no response 
has been received.   
Subjects  who express interest will be invited  to participate in a telephone screening interview. 
Prior to initiating screening, w e will describe the nature of the study  to the subject , including the 
number of visits to the center, subject protections , and confidentiality. If the caller remains  
interested, we will obtain  oral consent for the phone screening. Screening questions cover 
general health, psychiatric history and alcohol consumption  (AUDIT, see section 6.7 below) . If 
we determine the applicant  to be  eligible based on this screening, s/he will be asked whether 
they wish to participate.  If so, s/he will be scheduled for an initial  in-person  appointment , at 
which informed consent will be obtained .  
 We will request a  partial waiver of HIPAA Autho rization from the IRB to allow for 
preliminary telephone screening for calls initiated  or invited (e.g., following our having contacted 
them by letter)  by potential subjects.  Individuals deemed eligible for in -person screening will 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 21 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  sign a HIPAA Authoriza tion and study consent form at their first visit. These procedure s have 
been approved by the Institutional Review Boards of both UMB  and UP enn to ensure 
compliance with HIPAA requirements.  The telephone screening interview will include: a) 
demographic dat a; b) medical status; c) a brief psychiatric history; d) a brief TLFB for alcohol 
consumption ; e) drug use history  and e) questions to assess motivation to engage in treatment.  
Prospective participants will contact the CNC by telephone. On the telephone, recruiting staff 
will provide information about the trial and will provide the caller with the eligibility criteria. 
Recruitment staff will follow an IRB approved telephone script. If the caller remains interested in 
participation, he or she will be inform ed about a time to come to the CNC for medical screening. 
Our intake interviewers have been trained specifically in these tasks.  This enhances data 
quality and increases the likelihood of suitable subjects being invited for intake.  Collection of 
these da ta, which are identical to some of the measures in the proposed study, will allow for 
comparison of the target and study populations.  Additionally, it will improve the efficiency of the 
study and reduce the likelihood of unsuitable subjects having to unde rgo a full screening before 
being excluded.  The telephone screening interviews will be conducted only by trained study 
staff.  Once subjects pass this telephone screen, we will schedule an intake examination within 
14 days.  
4.2 Early Withdrawal of Subjects  
4.2.1  When and How to Withdraw Subjects  
It is recognized that subjects are free to withdraw from the study at any time.  However, 
if a subject wishes to withdraw from the study before completing all study visits during the 
treatment phase , the study staff will a sk him or her  to schedule an early termination visit.  The 
early termination visit will include all Week 16 procedures and assessments.   Following an early 
termination, an effort will be made to interview the subject at the previously scheduled study 
endpo int, either in person or by telephone.  This will make it possible to record drinking history 
during the period between early termination and the scheduled endpoint.  
The following efforts will be made to contact subjects who discontinue treatment prior to  
completing the 16-week treatment period: 2 telephone calls by the research coordinator or 
technician resulting in contact (either with the subject or by leaving a message on voicemail or a 
person answering the subject’s telephone), followed by 2 telephone  calls by a study physician, 
followed by calls to the 2 locators nominated by the subject, followed by a letter. Only if all of 
these efforts are unsuccessful in obtaining follow -up information (either during an in -person visit 
or a telephone interview), w ill the subject be considered to be lost to follow -up.  
An investigator may discontinue medication and withdraw the subject from the study if 
he or she deems it clinically appropriate or for any of the following reasons: 1) significant side 
effects from th e medication, 2) serious or unexpected adverse events, 3) inability to comply with 
the study protocol, 4) protocol  violation, or 5) serious inter current illness.  A subject may 
withdraw from the study anytime he or she wishes.  In the event that a subject is discontinued 
from receiving the research medication but may be able to continue with the psychosocial 
intervention, the subject will be allowed to continue the psychosocial intervention visits with the 
approval of the investigator.   
At week 16, subject s that request ongoing care will be given a referral to an alcohol 
treatment facility or may be given a list of alcohol treatment facilities to contact.  
4.2.2  Data Collection and Follow -up for Withdrawn Subjects  
Any subject who discontinues treatment prematurely, regardless of the reason, will be 
requested to return for a final visit to do the necessary procedures and obtain data for end -of-
study/early -termination and follow -up visits.   Following an early termination, an effort will be 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 22 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  made to intervie w the subject at the previously scheduled study endpoint, either in person or by 
telephone.  This will make it possible to record drinking history during the period between early 
termination and the scheduled endpoint.  
5 Study Drug  
5.1 Description  
 The only inv estigational agent to be used in this study is ondansetron, a specific 
serotonin -3 (5-HT 3) antagonist that is FDA approved to treat chemotherapy -induced nausea and 
vomiting, radiation -induced nausea and vomiting, and postoperative nausea and vomiting.  In 
the present study, subjects will be given ondansetron at a dosage of 0.33 mg  or matching 
placebo capsules  by mouth  twice daily.  
 The active ingredient in ondansetron tablets is ondansetron hydrochloride (HCl) as the 
dihydrate, the racemic form of ondanset ron.  Chemically it is (±) 1, 2, 3, 9 -tetrahydro -9-methyl -3-
[(2-methyl -1H-imidazol -1-yl)methyl] -4H-carbazol -4-one, monohydrochloride, dihydrate.  
Ondansetron’s empirical formula is C18H19N3O•HCl•2H2O, representing a molecular weight of 
365.9.  
5.2 Treatment Reg imen  
 Ondansetron 0.33 mg or matching placebo by mouth twice daily for 16 weeks.  
5.3 Method for Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups  
 Randomization : Subj ects within each of the 2 above -mentioned genotype groups will be 
randomly assigned to receive ondansetron or placebo. The clinical coordinator will collate intake 
data essential to assign subjects  to a treatment group , including genotype information , which  
will be used to complete a Subject Randomization Form . The Randomization List Form 
records the subject ’s ID number and UMB Investigational Drug Service (IDS)  randomization  to 
ondansetron or placebo . The UMB pharmacist is responsible to keep  the treatment assignments  
recorded on the Randomization List Forms  confidential and completely blinded from the staff  
involved in the trial , except as specified under the emergency conditions for which both sites 
have written Standard Operating Procedures (SOP s). Upon receipt of the Subject 
Randomiza tion Form for a particular participant, the pharmacist shall communicate to the 
research staff which of the medication kits provided to the site is to be used for that subject . All 
clinical staff members directly involved with the assessment of subjects ar e always blind to the 
medication condition. These procedures have been designed to avoid delay. An IDS staff 
person , who is not otherwise involved in the study , will perform the  randomization and 
assignment o f eligible subjects into treatment groups . All p articipants and other investigators will 
be blinded.  
 Only subjects who meet all inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria will be randomized  
to treatment .  One hundred eighty -three  subjects with  a DSM -5 AUD will be randomized into  two 
medication groups (ondansetron or placebo ; N=~91/group) .  Randomization will be stratified by 
site, race, gender and genotype.  There will be 8 genotype strata (based on all combinations of 
3 loci or SNP’s) for AAs and 2 genotype strata  (“responsive ”  vs. “non-respon sive” genotype 
combinations)  for EAs,   based on the race -specific genotypes defined in section 3.1 above ). 
Treatment g roup assignment will be  assigned using a block randomization procedure  that 
balances the treatment groups  within the above defined strata.    
 The IDS at UMB  will implement the randomization for both participating sites.   The 
clinical coordinator will collate intake data essential for assignment to a treatment group, 
including genotype information that will be  used to complete a Subject Randomization Form.  A 
study physician or nurse practitioner must sign the Subject Randomization Form.  This signature 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 23 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  functions as a prescription for the U MB IDS to distribute medication to the participating sites at 
both unive rsities.  A copy of the form is kept in the Case Report Form (CRF), and the original is 
provided to the pharmacist at U MB.  The U MB pharmacist will then complete all identifying 
information required on the Subject Dose Record Form.  The Subject Dose Record  Form 
records the subject  ID number.   The pharmacist is responsible to keep the dose assignments 
recorded on the Subject Dose Record Form confidential and completely blinded from the local 
investigative research staff, except as specified under the emerge ncy conditions for which all 
the sites have written Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs).  Upon receipt of the faxed 
Subject Randomization Form for a particular participant (which will  be faxed to the UMB IDS  
Monday through Friday, from 8 AM to 4 PM ), the UMB pharmacist will fax back to the site the 
identity of the medication kit to be dispensed to the subject.  Medication starter kits for the first  
three  week s of treatment will be shipped in a batch to UPenn  from the U MB IDS. Once the 
subject has been rand omized, the UMB IDS  will provide medication for subsequent weeks of 
treatment in batches , as described below . The UMB IDS will track the number of starter kits 
dispensed at UPenn and will replenish them to ensure that medication is available for ongoing 
enrollment.  All clinical staff members directly involved with the assessment of subjects will 
always be blind to the medication condition.  These procedures have been designed to avoid 
delay.  
5.4 Preparation and Administration of Study Drug  
 Ondansetron  will be purchased commercially and formulated by the  UMB  School of 
Pharmacy Good Manufacturing Practices facility  in opaque capsules.  Placebo capsules will be 
formulated to match the active medication, so that inspection of the capsules will no t allow th em 
to be differentiated. The  UMB IDS will be responsible to blind  study medication according to the 
protocol outlined by the study statistician.  
5.5 Subject Compliance Monitoring  
 Compliance with ondansetron will be assessed using the methods below:  
 Pill Count : An account of dispensed and returned study  drug will be kept at the study  
center for each subject.  Subject reports of discrepancies (e.g., lost or discarded capsules ) will 
be documented in the case report form (CRF).  
 Presence of urinary riboflavin (an i nternal tracer for assessing medication compliance):  
Both the active and placebo drug will be packaged with the internal tracer, 12.5 mg of crushed 
riboflavin tablets. At screening, a research team member will query subjects as to whether they 
are taking any vitamins that contain riboflavin. If so, the subject will be asked to provide the 
name of the vitamin, and if the daily dose of riboflavin  taken exceeds 2 mg, the subject will be 
asked to replace the formulation with a low -riboflavin formulation. Urine  samples will be 
collected at each visit following the initiation of medication to measure riboflavin amounts in 
urine. Percentage of optical density of riboflavin in samples will be compared to that of a control 
sample containing a set amount of riboflavin to objectively determine medication compliance . 
Optical densities will be meas ured using a urinary fluorescence assay to be conducted at UMB 
using frozen urine samples sent from both sites.  
 Dosing Diary:  The clinician will use a calendar -based TLFB -style technique  to elicit this  
information , which increases precision for the exact times of medication ingestion.   
 BBCET: Brief Behavioral Compliance Enhancement Treatment (BBCET) . Subjects in  
both medication groups will receive BBCET ( described  below). BBCET emphasizes maintaining 
compli ance and avoiding early discontinuation of the medication. Adverse events are monitored 
and protocol -permitted remedies or over -the-counter medications are provided if necessary to 
deal with them. 
 
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  
 Figure 1: Stratification and Randomization Scheme:
 
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  
                                                      EA 
 
 
Genotype Non -Responsive Group  Genotype Responsive Group  
5-HTTLPR: L ′L′ 
And 
rs1042173 :TT 
 
With or without  
HTR3A -rs1150226:AG;  
HTR3A -rs1176713:GG;  
HTR3B -rs17614942:AC  
 
(Apr. Population 
frequency =0.13 of total 
sample)  5-HTTLPR: L ′L′ 
And 
rs1042173:TG/GG  
 
With or without  
HTR3A -rs1150226:AG;  
HTR3A -rs1176713:GG;  
HTR3B -rs17614942:AC  
 
(Apr. Population 
frequency =0.18 of total 
sample)  
 5-HTTLPR: L ′LG/LGLG/LS/SS  
And 
rs1042173:TT  
 
With or without  
HTR3A -rs1150226:AG;  
HTR3A -rs1176713:GG;  
HTR3B -rs17614942 :AC 
 
(Apr. Population frequency 
=0.17 of total sample)  
 5-HTTLPR: L ′LG/ LGLG/LS/SS  
And 
rs1042173:TG/GG  
And 
HTR3A -rs1150226:AA/GG;  
HTR3A -rs1176713:AA/AG;  
HTR3B -rs17614942:AA/CC  
 
(Population frequency =0.39 of total sample)  
 
ONDANSETRON  
 
N=32  
PLACEBO  
 
N=32  
ONDANSETRON  
 
N=32  
PLACEBO  
 
N=32  5-HTTLPR: L ′LG/LGLG/LS/SS  
And 
rs1042173:TG/GG  
And 
One/more of the following:  
HTR3A -rs1150226:AG;  
HTR3A -rs1176713:GG;  
HTR3B -rs17614942:AC  
 
(Apr. Population frequency 
=0.13 of total sample)  
 
 
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  
  
5.6 Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
Subjects who enter this study must not be on any medication that may affect alcohol 
cons umption.  We also will avoid the prescription of medications with potential ly clinically 
significant  interactions with ondansetron.  It is, however, recognized that concomitant 
medication may be prescribed or self -administered to treat minor physical ailme nts during the 
study.  Such appropriate medications will be allowed and documented in the concurrent 
medications section, and the physical ailment recorded in the adverse events section, of the 
subject’s study book.  A list of allowable concomitant medicat ions will be compiled and placed in 
the appendix section of each case study book for easy reference (see the table 5 below).  
 
 Table 5: Allowed and disallowed concomitant medications  
 
Drug Class  Episodic 
Use Chronic  
Use 
Analgesics  Yi N 
Anorexics  N N 
Antacids  Y Y 
Anti-anginal  drugs  N N 
Anti-anxiety/alcohol withdrawal agentsii N N 
Anti-arrhythmic s N N 
Anti-asthma agents  Y Y 
Antibiotics  Y Y 
Anticoagulantsiii N N 
Anticonvulsants  N N 
Anti-dependence drugs (e.g., bupropion  or naltrexone)  N N 
Anti-diarrheal  agents  Y N 
Antihistamines  Y Y 
Antihypertensives  N Y 
Anti-psychotics  N N 
Cough/cold preparations  iv Y N 
      Diabetes medications (oral hypoglycemics, insulin)  N Y 
Dietary supplementsv N N 
Digitalis preparations  N N 
Hormones/steroidsvi N Y 
Laxatives  Y N 
Nicotine replacement t herapy  N N 
Non-steroidal anti -inflammatory agents  vii Y Y 
Tricyclic Antidepressants  N N 
     Y=allowed, N=not allowed  
 
Definitions  
Chronic use: 4 days per week or more, for a month or more.  Additionally, the medication must have been 
started and stabilized for at least 2 weeks prior to study enrollment.  Periodic or episodic use: 3 days per 
week or less, or more frequent use for less than a month’s duration.  
   
Key 
I Episodic use  of Opiate -containing analgesics will be allowed if there is a clear indication and the time of 
administration is noted relative to the timing of the urine drug screen.  
ii Benzodiazepine use will not be allowed  
iii  Aspirin up to 325 mg/day  for cardiovascular  prophylaxis will be allowed.  
iv Episodic use of opiate -containing formulations will be allowed  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 27 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   
v Riboflavin is not allowed. We will allow multi -vitamins that contain less than 2 mg of riboflavin.  
vi Topical steroid preparations for episodic use will be allowed.  
viiChronic NSAID use is not allowed for participants with a history of gastritis or ulcers.  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
* 
 
 
  
 
5.7 Packaging  
 The UMB  School of Pharmacy  Good Manufacturing Practice facility will package bulk 
drug on -site.  The bottle will  contain an extra two days of  medication  to ensure that subjects 
have adequate medication to continue the prescribed regimen if a visit needs to be rescheduled. 
Half of the participants will receive an inactive placebo. Placebo will be opaque , gelatin capsules 
of the same size, color, and shape packaged with cornstarch. All capsules (active and placebo) 
will be packaged with 12.5 mg of riboflavin for detection of urinary riboflavin to measure 
medication adherence.  
5.8 Blinding of Study Drug  
 All subjects and research staff will be blinded as to whether the subject is in the 
ondansetron  or placebo group until the decision to break the study blind is determined at the 
end of the study (after study database lock). Codes linking randomization numb er for each 
subject to actual treatment will be secured in a sealed, opaque envelope and maintained in a 
locked drawer in the IDS. Research subjects will be given the emergency contact number for 
the study during the consenting process. See section 8.4 (Un blinding Procedures) for a 
description of the process for unblinding a study subject.   
5.9 Receiving, Storage, Dispensing , and Return  
5.9.1  Receipt of Drug Supplies :   
 There is no industry sponsor for this study. The  UMB  School of will prepare  the study 
medication using commercially available product.  The IDS will dispense coded, blinded study 
drug kits to the research coordinator  at each site .  Starter kits containing three weeks of study 
medication will be following by three other kits , 2 of which will contain 4 weeks of study 
medication ( for week 4 -7 and for weeks 8 -11)and one of which will contain 5 weeks of study 
medication (for weeks 12 -16). Each  kit will contain medication divided into weekly prescriptions 
that contain 9 days of medicati on (i.e., an extra two days of medication (i.e., 4 capsules) to 
ensure that subjects have adequate medication to continue the prescribed regimen if a visit 
needs to be rescheduled ).   The research coordinator will maintain 100% d rug accountability at 
the c linic for the duration of the study. The research coordinator will document all medication 
using a drug accountability log  to track the study medication from time it leaves the  IDS until the 
time that it is returned to the IDS for reconciliation and dispos al.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 28 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  5.9.2  Storage  
 Study drug will be stored at the IDS at controlled r oom temperature (36 -86 F). Study 
drug kits dispensed from the UMB IDS to the clinic s at UPenn and UMB  will be stored in a 
locked cabinet in a room that is temperature controlled and double locked until dispensed. Any 
returned study medication will also be kept under locked condition s until returned to the UMB 
IDS for disposal.  
5.9.3  Dispensing of Study Drug  
 Upon receipt of the Subject Randomization Form for a particular part icipant, the study 
staff will  have the medication  for that subject ready for dispensing.  Medication will be dispensed 
to subjects at each study visit, with enough medication provided to last until the next scheduled 
visit (with two days of additional medi cation to ensure that the subject has adequate medication 
if the appointment is  not scheduled for the exact number of weeks or has to be rescheduled).  
All clinical staff members directly involved with the assessment of subjects are always blind to 
the med ication condition. These procedures have been  designed  to avoid delay. The 
randomization and assignment of eligible subjects into groups will be conducted at by an 
individual  who is not otherwise involved in the study. All participants and other investigat ors will 
be blinded.  
 The study nurse and study coordinator will maintain a dispensing record , documenting 
the amount of medication dispensed to the subject, the amount returned, and the amount taken. 
A log will be used to document the amount of study drug returned to the IDS and the date it was 
returned.  
5.9.4  Return or Destruction of Study Drug  
 A final reconciliation of all remaining study medication will be made at the end of the 
study. All unused kits and medications dispense d and later returned by the subjects will be 
returned to  the UMB IDS, which  will be responsible for the disposal/  destruction of all unused 
study medication. The study coordinator will reconcile all remaining study medication for each 
subject as they compl ete the study and return all unused study medication a nd empty 
medication bottles to the UMB IDS for reconciliation in batches on a quarterly basis.  All 
attempts will be made to collect the study medication and bottles from subjects at the end of the 
study and during follow -up sessions as needed.  
6 Study Procedures  
6.1 Initial Telephone Screen ( approximately 20 minutes)  
Subjects will be recruited through local advertisements  in print and broadcast media, through 
leaflets and posters distributed throughout the Greater Baltimore regions, and by advertising on -
line and through social media , and by communicating with them by mail ( as described in 
section 4.1) . Subjects who expre ss interest by responding to this advertising will be contacted to 
participate in a telephone screening interview. Prior to eliciting any information, w e will describe 
the nature of the study, including the number of visits to the center, subject protectio ns and 
confidentiality. If the caller is still interested, we will obtain oral consent for the phone screening. 
Screening questions cover general health, psychiatric history and alcohol consumption. If , in 
consultation with the principal investigator or his designee,  we determine  that the applicant is 
eligible based on this screening, s/he will be invited to come to the clinic for an in -person screen 
visit.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 29 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  6.2   S creen Visit  (V0-1; Study  Week -1)  
 This visit is designed for genetic screening to allow s tratification on the tested genotypes 
Upon arriving to the visit, which will be conducted at the CNC in Columbia, MD,  subjects will be 
asked to show legal photo iden tification and to provide informed consent. They will then 
undergo  a breathalyzer test to e nsure a breath alcoho l concentration (B rAC) of 0.00%, which  
will be used to assess alcohol intoxication at every visit.  The allowable alcohol concentration at 
all visits following the screening visit is less or equal to 0.02.  The informed consent will be 
considered valid and no assessments will be performed at the screening or any subsequent visit 
unles s subjects have BrAC readings of 0.00%  
 If the subject attends the clinic and records a B rAC greater than this level, the study staff 
will encourage the sub ject to wait in the clinic for a sufficient time to permit testing.  If a subject 
coming to the UMB site  records a BrAC level >0.02 mg/dl , and does not agree to wait, or it is 
impractical for the subject to wait until the B rAC falls to the desired level f or testing, he or she 
should be advised not to leave until the B rAC is below the legal level.  If the subject insists on 
leaving at a level at or above the legal limit, this should be documented in the appropriate 
section of the CRF.  The investigator shou ld make a reasonable effort to reach the subject after 
he or she leaves the clinic to ascertain his or her safety and to encourage him or her  to attend 
the next clinic visit.    
 The screening visit can be done in one or more visits , depending on participa nt’s 
availability and co nvenience . If necessary, because of technical issues preventing a valid test or 
for clinical considerations, we will allow repeating any screening clinical laboratory test at least 
twice (at the same or future visit).  
  
 
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  
  
 
 
Subjects will be given the informed consent form to read, after which a study staff member will 
review it with the sub ject, providing an explanation of the study protocol, its risks, potential 
benefits, and a lternative treatments. Following resolution of any questions, subjects will be 
asked to sign the study informed consent form.  An entire signed copy of the informed consent 
form will be given to the subject, who will be reminded that the consent addresses his or her 
willingness to participate but that the subsequent screening process will determine his or her 
eligibility to do so. Further, the subject will be reminded that pa rticipation is vo luntary, and at any 
time, he or she may withdraw from the study.  
 The study personnel will inform the subject that the purpose of this visit is to determi ne 
Eligibility based on whether or not it is medically safe for them to participate . The study 
personnel will also describe the Brief Behavioral Compliance Enhancement Treatment (BBCET; 
see section 6.8, below), the psychosocial treatment that will be employed for this study.  
 
 
 
The Screen Part -1 Visit  will consist of the following:  
 BrAC, vital signs  ,body weight, and height  
 Obtain informed consent (signature by subject)  
 Race/ Ethnicity questionnaire  
 Demographics   
 Names and addresses of one or two locators (people who will know the whereabouts of 
the subject to assist in locating him/her during treatment, if needed)  
 Medical/ Psychiatric history  and physical exam  
 Electrocardiogram (ECG)  
o Blood collection – 45 mL for:   
o Hematology and clinical chemistry tests , DNA extraction and genotyping  
o Gamma -glutamyl transferase (GGT) to assess the validity of self -reported 
drinking.  
o Carbohydrate -deficient transferrin (%dCDT; to assess the validity of self -reported 
drinking)  
o RNA and miRNA expression studies (To be stored at -800C for future studies ) 
 Urine collection for  
o Urine toxicology (presence of psychoactive drugs)  
o Urinalysis  
o Urine p regnancy test (for women of child bearing potential)  
 Complete assigned questionnaires and rating scales  (see section 6.7, below)  
o SORT  
o AUDIT  
o SCID -IV with the Alcohol Use Disorder module to include DSM -5 criteria  
o SSADDA Nicotine Dependence Module  
o TLFB (for 90 days prior to the visit)  
o CIWA -Ar 
o MINI Suicide Risk Assessment Scale  (every visit)  
 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 31 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  If the Principal Investigator (or designee) deems it necessary, all or part of any screening 
assessment or laboratory test may be repeated up to two times (at the same or a future visit), if 
needed because of te chnical issues preventing a valid result or for clinical considerations.  
 
6.3 Baseline  Visit (Week 0)  
 Subjects who have one of the specific desired genotype combinations will be notified of 
that fact within one week and asked to return to the CNC  within 30 days from screen ing  visit for 
additional screening procedures.  If the subject continues to be eligible, he/she will be 
randomized and will receive the first dose of ondansetron or placebo based on their assigned 
randomization schedule.  The baseline visit can be spread out over 2 visits, depending on 
participant’s  availability and convenience.  
  
The Baseline  Visit will consist of the following:  
Before the first dose of ondansetron:  
 BrAC, weight and vital signs  
 Urine collection for:  
o Ribofl avin measurement for compliance  
o Urine pregnancy test  
 Complete assigned questionnaires and rating scales (see section 6.7 below)  
o TLFB  
o CIWA -Ar 
o Other Drug Use questionnaire  
o SF-12 
o SIP 
o ADS 
o OCDS  
o BDI 
o PSQI  
o MINI Suicide Risk Assessment Scale ( every visit)  
o CGI-I and  CGI-S 
o Administer BBCET  
 Names and addresses of two locators (people who will know the whereabouts of the 
subject to assist in locating the subject during treatment, if needed  
 Review of eligibility  
 Record medication changes and treatment history since screening  
NB: If an abnormality is found during screening  that could  pose a risk to the subject, prevent the 
subject from completing study procedures, or interfere with study results, the investigator may 
decide not to administer study medication . 
Once it has been determined that the subject meets all inclusion and no exclusion criteria, the 
study nurse or physician will administer first dose of study medication and dispense first week of 
medication to subject, giving instructions on how to take the  medication twice daily for 16 
weeks.  Study nurses will instruct subjects to call at any time to discuss any problems or 
concerns that they may have while taking the study medication.   
 
 
After the first dose of ondansetron  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 32 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   BBCET  (see section 6.8 below)  will be administered.  
6.4 On-Treatment Visits (Weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 16, and 20)  
Subjects will be seen at every week ( + 4 days) for the first  six weeks , every two weeks ( + 4 
days) from weeks 6 -12 and 4 weeks following week 12, at week 16. At the baseline, week 4, 
and week 8 visits, a dose of the study medication  will be administered in the clinic . The following 
study procedures will be performed at the  on-treatment  visits.  
 BrAC , body weight, and vital signs (every visit)  
 Blood sample: 1 5 mL for GGT, %dCDT (Week 8) and 15 ml for future RNA and miRNA 
expression studies (weeks 4, 8 and 12) as close as possible to the same time of day   
 Urine to screen for drugs of abuse ( Week 8), pregnancy test (for women of child bearing 
potential) (Weeks 4, 8, 16 , and 12) and riboflavin measurement for compliance (every 
visit)  
 ECG (visit 5 only)  
 Other Drug Use questionnaire  
 Administer a scheduled dose of medication (first or second of the day) in the clinic 
(weeks 4  and 8) 
 Complete questionnaires and rating scales (see section 6.7 below)  
o TLFB (every visit)  
o CIWA -Ar (every visit)  
o MINI Suicide Risk Assessment Scale ( every visit)  
o OCDS ( every visit)  
o BDI (every visit)  
o PSQI (every visit)  
o CGI-I and CGI_S (every visit)  
o SF-12 ( week 8) 
o SIP ( week 8) 
o ADS (week 8)  
 Administer BBCET (every visit)  
 Record concomitant medication and treatment use since last visit (every visit)  
 Document study medication compliance (every visit)  
 Record adverse events  
 If a subj ect stops study medication  at any time during the study, he/she  will be 
encouraged to continue to attend study vis its and participate in all non -study -drug-related 
procedures of the study.  
6.5 End of Study Visit (Week 16)/Early Termination Visit  
The subject will return to the CNC at Week 16 (±4 days) for the End of Study visit.  Subject will 
have completed 16 weeks.  
of study medication prior to the last visit.  
 
 The following procedures will be performed at the Week 24 (End of Study) visit:  
 BrAC, body weight and vital signs  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 33 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   Blood sample  – 15 mL for  GGT, %dCDT, hematology and clinical chemistry tests  and 15 
ml for RNA and miRNA extractions  (this sample will not be obtained at an early 
termination visit)  
 Physical examination  
 Urine pregnancy test ( for women of child bearing potential) and urinalysis  
 DSM -5 AUD criteria  
 Complete all assigned questionnaires and rating scales  (see section 6.7 below)  
o CIWA -Ar 
o TLFB  
o SIP 
o OCDS  
o BDI 
o PSQI  
o CGI-I and CGI -S 
o SF-12 
o ADS  
o MINI Suicide Risk Assessment Scale  
 BBCET session  
 Record concomitant medication and treatment use since screening  
 Document compliance  
Record adverse events This visit should be conducted not only for all subjects who 
complete the treatment but those who discontinue from the study early  as well . 
  
6.6. Safety F ollow -up Visit (Week 20) 
At this visit,  a BrAC and vital signs will be measured and study personnel will assess  persistent 
adverse events following the cessation of study medication. If the subject discontinues the study 
early, the visit can be by telephon e unless an SAE occurred during the study and  it has not 
been fully resolved by Week 16.  Individuals who complete the study medication period will be 
invited to give an optional blood draw for mRNA and miRNA expression studies.       
                   6.7.   Assessments  
 Structured Clinical Interview for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental  
Disorders , 4th Edition  (SCID -IV).  Diagnosis by trained clinicians will be based on DSM -IV 
diagnoses (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) except for the alcohol use disorder  
diagnosis, which will be based on  the 5th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders  (DSM -5) (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).  For the AUD diagnosis, we 
will adapt  the Structured Clinical Interview for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders  (SCID -IV) (First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1994),  to ensure that subjects meet at 
least two of the 11 diagnostic criteri a. The SCID will also be used to exclude subjects  with 
exclusionary psychiatric  diagnoses.  
 The Semi -Structured Assessment for Drug Dependence and A lcoholism (SSADDA). The 
SSADDA is a polydiagnostic instrument developed for use in genetic studies of alcohol  
and drug dependence. Because the SCID -IV does not assess nicotine dependence, the 
Nicotine dependence module of SSADDA interview will be used to characterize the 
study sample with respect to a DSM -IV diagnosis of nicotine independence.  
 Alcohol Dependence Scale  (ADS total score) . The ADS was designed to provide a  
quantitative measure of the severity of alcohol dependence consistent with the concept of the 
alcohol dependence syndrome.  The Alcohol Dependence Scale is a rater -administered, 25 -
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 34 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  item questionnaire covering alcohol withdrawal symptoms, impaired control over drinking, 
awareness of a compulsion to drink, increased tolerance to alcohol, and drink seeking behavior.  
The ADS will be administered by a trained member of the research team.  
 The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT)  will be used to screen potential   
study participants for alcohol use and related problems.  The AUDIT is a 10 -item self -report 
questionnaire that measures alcohol consumption, dependence symptoms, and personal and 
social harm reflective of drinking.  The AUDIT has demonstrated good content, criterion and 
construct validity  (Babor, de la Fuente, Saunders, & Grant, 1992) , and reliability (Cronbach’s 
alphas ranging from 0.77 to 0.83)  (Bohn, Babor, & Kranzl er, 1995) .  The AUDIT will be 
administered at the site as part of the telephone screening interview.  
 The Timeline Follow -back (TLFB) method  to quantify alcohol consumption will be   
administered at every study visit by a trained member of the study team. Th e TLFB is a daily 
calendar for alcohol consumption that employs memory aids, such as a calendar, to help 
subjects provide retrospective estimates of their daily drinking as the number of standard drinks 
for each day. A day is defined as a 24 -hour period st arting at 6.00 a.m. and ending at 6.00 a.m. 
the following morning. A month is a period of 28 consecutive days.  Th e TLFB can be completed 
in a reasonable length of time (approximately 10 -15 min) and has been used extensively in 
pharmacotherapy trials for a lcohol dependence. At the Baseline Visit, the TLFB will be used to 
measure alcohol consumption for the prior 28 days.  At each subsequent visit, the TLFB will be 
used to obtain alcohol consumption since the prior visit.  If the subject misses a scheduled v isit 
and returns for a later visit, the TLFB will be administered to document alcohol consumption 
during the misse d period.  For example, if the subject attends Visit 6 (Week 4), does not attend 
Visit 7 (Week 5) and returns to the study center for Visit 8 (Week 6), the TLFB administered at 
Visit 8 will elicit consumption data for the period of time since the Visit 6 T LFB administration.  If 
the subject has not withdrawn consent for participation in the study, every effort should be made 
to conduct a Week 28  visit.  If the subject refuses to participate in an on -site study visit, the 
study center may administer the TLFB via phone, at Week  20 to obtain the missing data.  
 Mini International Psychiatric Interview (MINI)  Suicide Risk Assessment Scale  (Module 
B) is a subscale of the MINI neuropsychiatric interview. It has been shown to help 
identify patients at risk for self -harm.  
 Obsessive Compulsive Drinking Scale (OCDS)  is a 14 -item, self -report measure that  
assesses  aspects of alcohol craving, including obsessive thoughts about alcohol use and 
compulsive behaviors toward drinking.  
 Revised Clinical Institute Withd rawal Assessment for Alcohol scale  (CIWA -Ar)  
consists of 10 items, 9 of which (nausea and vomiting, tremo r, paroxysmal sweats, anxiety, 
agitation, tactile disturbances, auditory disturbances, visual disturbances, headache , fullness in 
head) are rated on a scale of from 0 to 7. The 10th item (orientation and clouding of sensorium) 
is rated on a scale of from 0 -4. It takes approximately 2 minutes to administer and score the 
CIWA -Ar.  The CIWA -Ar scale must be administer ed by the investigator or another qualified 
member of the research team.  The research team member who administer s the CIWA -Ar 
assessment will be  trained in the scoring conventions for the scale.  
 Clinical Global Impression -Improvement Scale  (CGI -I The CGI -I is rated on a 7 -point  
scale: 1=very much improved; 2=much improved; 3=minimally improved; 4=no change; 
5=minimally worse; 6=much worse; or 7=v ery much worse and permits a global evaluation of 
the subject’s improvement (or worsening) over time. The clinician is required to assess the 
subject's condition relative to baseline at every study visit. In all cases, the assessment should 
be made indepen dent of whether the rater believes the improvement is drug -related or not. CGI -
1 will be administered by the investigator or other qualified member of the research team, after 
training. Due to the simplicity of the scale, the CGI will be used in the origin al English version.    
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 35 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   Clinical Global Impression -Severity Scale  (CGI -S)  The CGI -S assesses the  
clinician's impression of the subject's current clinical condition, and is rated on a 7 -point scale: 
1= normal, not at all ill; 2= borderline ill; 3= mildly il l; 4= moderately ill; 5= markedly ill; 6= 
severely ill; 7= among the most extremely ill subjects. The clinician should use his/her total 
clinical experience with this subject population and rate the current severity of the subject's 
clinical condition on a  7-point scale. CGI -S will be administered by the investigator or other 
trained, qualified member of the research team . Short Index of problems (SIP)  is a 15-item self -
report instrument  
that will be administered at the screening, baseline, Week 4, Week 8, Week 12and Week 16 
(End of Study) visits.  The SIP measures  specific and direct harmful consequences of drinking.  
Each item is assessed on a 3 -point scale ranging from “never or once or a fe w times” to “daily or 
almost every day.”  A lower score indicates fewer adverse consequences of drinking. The 
DrInC, which contains items that measure a wide range of alcohol -related problems (including 
alcohol dependence symptoms and medical, psychologica l, social, occupational, and legal 
problems), has been shown to be a reliable and valid measure of alcohol -related problems.  The 
SIP is simpler to administer and, like the DrInC, has been shown to measure a single factor of 
alcohol -related problems.  
 Beck  Depression Inventory  (BDI)  The 21 -item BDI will be used to measure  
depressive symptoms. Questions focus on topics such as mood, thoughts of suicide, sleep 
habits, and eating behaviors. The BDI will be used to assess the severity of any depressive 
symptom s, particularly suicidal risk.  The BDI will be administered at every study visit.  At 
screening/baseline, subjects with severe, untreated depression or who endorse suicidal intent 
will be excluded from the study and referred for treatment or immediate inte rvention.  At each 
post-baseline visit, the staff will review the findings on the BDI to ensure that the subject’s safety 
is not compromised by changes in depression symptoms.  
 Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI)  is a self -rated questionnaire assessing  
sleep quality and disturbances during a 1 -month period.  It contains 19 items that generate 7 
component scores on subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep duration, habitual sleep 
efficiency, sleep disturbances, use of sleep medication, and daytime d ysfunction, all of which 
add up to a global score.  Because sleep disturbance is common in alcoholis m, recovery may 
be associated with improved sleep.  
 Other Drug Use questionnaire  is a brief self -report questionnaire on which the  
subject  is asked to list his/her  use of any prescribed or non -prescrib ed drug use occurring since 
the last study visit.  Upon its completion, a study staff member reviews the questionnaire and 
obtains details about any reported drug use.  
 RAND 12 -Item Health Surve y (SF -12), a self -report measure of life functioning in  
various domains.  It yields a n overall health -related quality of life  score and physical and mental 
health component  summary scales . 
 6.8  Brief Behavioral Compliance Enhancement Treatment (BBCET)  
 Delivery of BBCET:  BBCET is  the psychosocial adjunct intervention for the study. A 
BBCET manual has been developed  by the UMB group . A BBCET -trained staff member from 
UMB will train the BBCET provider(s) at the UP enn site and will meet monthly  by telephone  with 
the staff members who administer the BBCET  to address any issues.  BBCET sessions shall 
occur at every study visit  and will be delivered by a trained nurse or masters level clinician .  
All BBCET sessions will be audiotaped. Study staff will not use n ames or disclose PHI 
during the audio -taped sessions. Study staff will identify the subject by study ID and the audio 
recording will be uploaded to a secure server until reviewed by study staff (exclusively) and then 
deleted. The BBCET supervisors will rev iew 10% of these tapes to ensure adherence to its 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 36 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  uniform delivery. Including the pre -randomization and termination BBCET sessions, there  will be 
a total of 1 1 BBCET sessions for the 16-week trial. Each BBCET session lasts about 10 –15 
minutes and is delive red contemporaneously with the accounting of the amount of study 
medication taken from the last visit and the ascertainment of adverse events. BBCET sessions 
focus on compliance with the medication and reinforce adherence to the protocol. BBCET 
sessions al so reinforce the importance of taking study medication and provide general 
motivation, encouragement, and support for continuing in treatment. BBCET provides  education 
on the negative effects of excessive alcohol use on physical and mental health. The rati onale for 
using the medication is discussed in simple language. Physical examination and laboratory 
results are discussed with each participant. BBCET helps subjects to overcome ambivalence, 
which may interfere with their  desire to change. Adherence to med ication and compliance with 
the protocol are praised and reinforced.  
BBCET emphasizes that alcohol dependence is a disease process that can be tackled 
by compliance with the study regimen. BBCET mimics a naturalistic doctor/patient relationship 
in function  and duration and will  feel familiar to most participants. BBCET does not allow for the 
interpretation of feelings, psychological interpretations about the nature of alcohol dependence, 
or applying problem -solving techniques to matters other than medicatio n compliance. One 
hallmark of BBCET is that subjects set their target drinking goal for the next period at each 
session. BBCET can be more readily generalized than formal psychotherapies for use in 
generic  treatment or family practitioner settings because it is much briefer. General health care 
workers can  be trained to deliver it, thereby increasing greatly clinical access to care for the 
treatment of alcohol  dependence. BBCET has been used successfully in previous 
pharmacotherapy trials.  
BBCET is delivere d in 3 phases.  
In Phase 1  (Baseline and Weeks 1 –3), the BBCET provider builds rapport with the 
subject to inspire confidence, trust, and warmth, discusses medication effects, instructs on the 
importance of taking the medication regularly, provides a basic and easily understandable 
model of how the medicatio n(s) might work, addresses concerns about taking medication, 
adverse events, and compliance barriers with the subject in understandable terms, and clearly 
conveys his or her knowledge and experience with the pharmacotherapy of alcohol problems. 
The BBCET p rovider allows the subject to air prejudices, corrects any misconceptions (which 
may include “all or none” expectations), and provides a medication information sheet with an 
emergency contact card that describes the possible medication being taken and appr opriate 
contact numbers for the investigator or study staff.  
In Phase 2  (Weeks 4 –10), the emphasis is on maintaining compliance and avoiding 
early discontinuation of the medication. Adverse events are monitored and protocol -permitted 
remedies or over -the-counter medications are provided if necessary to deal with them.  
In Phase 3  (Weeks 12 and 16 ), the BBCET provider and the subject discuss the 
subject’s experience throughout the study. Typically, the subject will be offered referrals, and 
the termination v isit will take place.  
The BBCET provider will discuss plans regarding how to discontinue the medication and 
will provide a rationale of how the medication may have helped the participant to achieve his or 
her goal. It is expected that a significant provide r-subject relationship has been developed 
during the study, and care should be taken in the termination of this relationship.  
Subject Compliance with BBCET Administration: BBCET is the only allowed 
psychosocial treatment.  Subject participation in BBCET se ssions will be tracked.  Evidence of 
non-compliance could result in discontinuation of the subject from the study.   
Practitioner Adherence to BBCET : BBCET sessions will be audiotaped. A random 
selection of 10% of the tapes will be reviewed at each site to ensure adherence to the protocol. 
Recertification and/or retraining of those administering BBCET will be used to correct any 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 37 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  protocol deviations. A  provider checklist (PSC) will be administered as an additional check on 
compliance.  
6.9  Genetic Evaluation  
Blood sample collection:  Two vaccutainer tubes containing ACD buffer (to prevent 
coagulation) will be used to collect a total of 15  ml of peripheral venous whole blood from each 
subject as shown in Table  1 .  All blood samples collected for DNA , mRNA and miRNA  
extraction will be processed and stored at 4 C to be sent t o Dr. Seneviratne’s laboratory at the 
UMB Institute for Genome Scien ces (IGS).  
Genotyping for subject stratification and randomization :  All genotyping for the subjects 
enrolled at both UMB and UP enn will be performed at the IGS.  Genomic DNA will be extracted 
from whole blood samples using established procedures from Dr. Seneviratne’s previous work  
(Ait-Daoud et al., 2009; Johnson et al., 2011; Seneviratne et al., 2009 ).  
The 5 -HTTLPR genotypes LL, LS and SS and the rs25531 genotypes AA, AG and GG will be 
will be performed simultaneously using restriction fragment -length polymorphism (RFLP) 
method. Genotyping for the SNPs of interest (listed below) will be performed with co mmercially 
available TaqMan® allelic discrimination assays (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California). 
Applied Biosystems 7900HT Fast Real -Time PCR system will be used for amplification and 
capture of the resulting florescent signals.  
 
 rs1042173 (TT, TG , and GG genotypes) in the 3′ -untranslated region of SLC6A4 that 
encodes the serotonin transporter;  
 rs1150226 (AA, AG and GG genotypes) in the 5′UTR of HTR3A gene that encodes 
subtype A of the serotonin -3 receptor;  
 rs1176713 (GG, GA and AA genotypes), a sy nonymous SNP in exon 9 of HTR3A 
gene that encodes subtype A of the serotonin -3 receptor;  
 rs17614942 (AA, AC and CC genotypes), an intron 8 SNP in HTR3B gene that 
encodes subtype B of the serotonin -3 receptor  
 rs1176744 (AA, AC, CC genotypes), an exon 5SNP i n HTR3B gene that encodes 
subtype B of the serotonin -3 receptor ( for UPENN site only)  
All samples will be genotyped in duplicate and any discrepancies will be repeated to ensure the 
accuracy of the procedure.  No results of genetic testing (including ance stry genetic panel, if 
done) will be provided to participants, even if they request it. A requesting participant will be 
reminded that the informed consent form stated that no genetic test results would be provided to 
participants.  
mRNA  and miRNA expression studies:  The total RNA extractions will be performed after 
completing the entire proposed study, using supplemental funding. Until then, the blood 
samples will be stored securely in -800C freezers. The genome -wide expression levels o f mRNA 
and miRNA in WBC (cellular mRNA and miRNA) as well as circulating miRNA in serum will be 
quantified with next generation sequencing based technologies available at the sequencing core 
of the IGS.    
 6.10 Missed Visit  
If a subject anticipates missing a study visit (e.g., due to a vacation ), the study nurse will provide 
the subject with enough study medication to ensure the maint enance of  the daily dosage of 
study medication until the next scheduled visit as per the dosing schedule , either in person or  
via mail.  Subjects will be instructed to call the UPENN study staff at any time to discuss 
problems or concerns that they may have while participating in the study .  They  will be provided 
with phone numbers to contact the study staff during office hours a nd a pager  number for off -
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 38 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  hours contact. Subjects will be asked to come in for their next study visit as soon as possible.  A 
subject  unable to attend an in -person visit  will be asked to provide  all scheduled  assessment 
information by telephone.  A study  physician will approve all study medication mailed to the 
subjects.  
If a subject calls to cancel a scheduled study visit due to an unforeseen event, the study visit will 
be rescheduled to occur  as soon thereafter as possible. Study staff will send  study m edication 
to the subject via overnight mail  under the su pervision of a study nurse to avoid having the 
subject run  out of study medication. S ubjects will be given only  enough study medication to 
ensure that they maintain their daily dosage of study medicat ion until their next scheduled visit. 
The subject will be asked to record any adverse events that  may have occurred since the last 
study visit. Study nurses will instruct subjects to call at any time to discuss any problems or 
concerns that they may have w hile taking the study medication. A study physician  will determine 
how many additional weeks of study medication a subject will be allowed to receive without 
attending a study visit  and will approve the mailing of all study medication .  
 
 
7 Statistical Plan  
7.1 Sample Size Determination  
  
For the 2 EA genotype groups discussed above  (section 3.1) , we are expecting that 61% of the 
EA sample will be in the responsive genotype strata and 29% of the EA sample will be in the 
non- responsive genotype strata based on prior studies5. Block  randomization will balance 
allocation of the 2 treatment conditions (within each racial group) with the responsive and non -
responsive  genotype strata. Hence, after 30 % dropout, the expected cell frequency for the 2 
treatment arms  for EAs  will each be 39 i n the responsive strata and 25 in the non -responsive 
strata. For two of the AA genotype grouping discussed above (section 3.1), we are expecting 
that the 5 -HTTLPR LALA group, which in the randomized sample is estimated to include 55 AAs 
subjects (i.e., ~30 % of the total randomized sample based on the frequency of the L ALA 
genotype in AAs)  and subjects with rs1042173*TT genotype (which is estimated to include 106 
subjects, i.e., 58% of AAs have the TT genotype) . Power analysis was done using the methods 
in Section 8.3 in Cohen  (1988) .  For the power calculations, we estimated that the effect size for 
reduction of D DD between the ondansetron and placebo groups in the responsive genotype 
group would be 0. 595.  Assuming an alpha level of 0.05  and a sample size of 3 9 in each arm we 
will have power equal to 0.84.   Because the intent -to-treat principle on which our analysis is 
based includes all randomized subjects in the statistical analyses, and because we will use 
enhanced techniques to ensure that we obtain most of  the drinking data, our study has more 
than adequate power to test the stated hypotheses.  
  
We will also test whether ondansetron is better than placebo overall (i.e. regardless of 
genotype). For this comparison we expect to have 64 EA subjects in each tr eatment arm  and 64 
AA subjects in each treatment arm . With alpha= .05, we  have  power equal to .81 to detect effect 
sizes down  to .44 . 
 
 
7.2 Statistical Methods  
 We expect  to have n=128 treatment -seeking alcohol dependent individuals who 
complete the 16 week trial  at each site . However, we will include all randomized subjects in the 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 39 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  main intent -to-treat analyses. Stratified r andomization will ensure  approximate  balance betw een 
the 2 treatment conditions ( ondansetron and placebo) within genotype strata  (as discussed 
above)   Group assignment will be achieved using a permuted block randomization 
procedure  that further  balances the treatment groups on  study site, race and gende r.  
Statisticians who will have no contact with subjects or with clinical staff involved in direct patient 
care have created the randomization  list which will be used by the UMB Investigational Drug 
Services.  Subjects also will receive Brief Behavioral Compliance Enhancement Treatment 
(BBCET) as their psychosocial adjunct weekly in weeks 1 –8 and then every 2 weeks in weeks 
8-16.  
 Descriptive summaries and group comparisons:   Data will be summarized for the 
primary and secondary outcome measures, demographics, and baseline characteristics.  
Generally, quantitative variables will be summarized with standard descriptive sta tistics (e.g., 
range, quartiles, means, and standard deviations), while frequency tables w ill summarize 
categorical variables.  Group comparison for quantitative variables will be done using standard 
two-sample t-tests or analysis of variance as appropriate.  Highly skewed variables may be 
transformed before inferential comparison, or non -param etric methods may be used.  Group 
comparison for categorical variables will be analyzed with two -sample proportional comparisons 
or chi -square tests as appropriate.  
 Analyses of primary and secondary outcomes:   The primary efficacy variable will be 
change from baseline in D DD.  Secondary outcome variables will include other measures of 
drinking —percent heavy drinking days  (PHDD)  and the percentage of days abstinent.  
Exploratory drinking outcomes will include the novel measure —percentage of subjects with no  
heavy drinking days  (Falk et al., 2010) , which presently is the standard identified by the FDA as 
an outcome measure for registration trials in alcohol dependence.  
 The general approach to statistical analyses will be the same as that utilized in our 
previous studies  (Johnson et al., 2011; Johnson et al., 2000) .  All randomized subjects will be 
included in the analysis using the intent -to-treat principle.  We will use a mixed -models 
approach, adjusting for baseline covariates (when significantly different  by group) and the 
same drinking variables for baseline .  For the drinking variables, the baseline value is the 
average for the 90 -day period prior to the screening visit.  Other potential covariates shall 
include age, race, and sex.   In the first model, we will assess whether individuals who are 
hypothesized  to be in the  responsive  genotype group and treated with ondansetron will have 
greater reduction in DDD than the corresponding placebo group.  In the second model, we will 
test whether EA  subjects  who are treated with ondansetron will show fewer DDD than the 
corresponding placebo group overall (regardless of genotype ).  We also will explore the 
‘difference in differences’ hypothesis that the difference in DDD will be greater in the 
hypothesized res ponsive genotype group than the difference in the hypothesized non -
responsive genotype group, however the study is not powered for this.  The residuals from our 
analyses will be checked for normality by computing their skewness and kurtosis and will be 
chec ked for homogeneity of variance by plotting them in a histogram and against predicted 
outcomes.  Standard (i.e., square root or log) transformations will be employed to improve the 
distributions when required.   
 Before we conduct the analyses, the groups will be compared to verify balance on the 
age, gender, and drinking severity variables, as well as other important baseline demographics 
and clinical characteristics.  If, as expected, there are no significant group differences, these 
baseline and balanc ing variables will be dropped from further analyses.  Possible (though 
unexpected) group differences will be further examined and interpreted as to their clinical 
meaning and whether they may confound the interpretation of planned comparisons.  Since this 
is a simple factorial model, the interpretation of main effects and their interaction is 
straightforward.  Where there is a significant main effect for an independent variable with three 
or more levels or an interaction, post -hoc comparisons will be done.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 40 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   The mixed -models approach is our first analytic choice as it assumes a random effect for 
missing data.  If, however, there is a differential attrition rate (i.e., if dropout is informative), we 
shall consider other approaches (e.g., joint models of longi tudinal drinking outcome and time to 
dropout) to account for informative dropout to obtain valid results  (Liu, 2009; Wulfsohn & Tsiatis, 
1997) .  Statistics will be run using SAS 9.1 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).  
 In secondary analyses we will conduct analyses similar to the main analyses only with 
change from baseline in number of heavy drinking days (HDDs) during the last 8 weeks of 
treatment as the outcome variable.  We will also conduct a responders analysis on this 
secondary outcome with endpoint: no heavy drinking days over the last 8 weeks of treatment 
versus one or more heavy drinking days  in the last 8 weeks of treatment.  For this outcome we 
will use an ordinary logistic regression model to compare the trea tment groups in the whole 
sample and within the hypothesized responsive  genotype  adjusting for the same covariates as 
in the main model.  One additional alternative endpoint that we will examine is mean daily 
alcohol consumption (in standard drinks/day) ov er the last 4 weeks of the 16 -week treatment 
period.  This will be analyzed with ordinary linear regression for a continuous outcome.  
 As an exploratory procedure, we also will use the more advanced two -part random 
effects model  (Olsen & Schafer, 2001; Too ze, Grunwald, & Jones, 2002)  to analyze the daily 
drinking record.  This model can simultaneously characterize the frequency (odds of daily 
drinking being zero) and quantity (the number of drinks on a drinking day) of drinking.  It is more 
efficient and can tackle non -normality in th e drinking level.  We also will do trajectory analyses 
of different treatments over time to capture differences in drinking outcomes  (Chen et al., 2011) .  
Such an analysis is more clinically intuitive and could be more powerful than the analysis based 
on endpoints.  
 Furthermore, as an additional exploratory step to provide information on whether 
ondansetron treatment has differential efficacy for specific genotypes in a “relapse prevention” 
model rather than with the “currently drinking” approach, we will d o secondary analyses on 
those who quit drinking during the study to determine whether, and by how much, these results 
differ from our primary analyses.  We will report and discuss these secondary analyses along 
with the primary approach in our publications .   
7.3 Subject Population(s) for Analysis  
 The primary efficacy  analys is will be conducted with the intent -to-treat population 
consisting of all individuals who are randomized to treatment and take at least one dose of study 
medication.  This will require at least one post -randomization measurement of outcomes.  
Similarly, all safety evaluations will include all available subjects on whom any safety 
information is obtained.  
8 Safety and Adverse Events  
8.1 Definitions  
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risk to Subjects  or Others :  Any incident, experience, or 
outcome that meets all of the following criteria:  
 Unexpected in nature, severity, or frequency   (i.e. not described in study -related 
documents such as the IRB -approved protocol or consent form, the investigators 
brochure, etc)  
 Related or possibly related to participation in the research  (i.e. possibly related means 
there is a reasonable possibility that the incident experience, or outcome may have been 
caused by the procedures involved in the research)  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 41 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   Suggests tha t the research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm  (including 
physical, psychological, economic, or social harm).  
 
An Adverse Event (AE):  is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that develops or worsens 
in severity during the course of th e study.  Intercurrent illnesses or injuries should be regarded 
as adverse events.  Abnormal results of diagnostic procedures are considered to be adverse 
events if the abnormality:  
 results in study withdrawal  
 is associated with a serious adverse event  
 is associated with clinical signs or symptoms  
 leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic tests  
 is considered by the investigator to be of clinical significance  
 
A Serious Adverse Event  (SAE): Any AE that is:  
 fatal 
 life-threatening  
 requires or prolongs hospital stay  
 results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
 a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
 an important medical event  
 
Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening, but are clearly 
of major clinical significance.   They may jeopardize the subject, and may require intervention to 
prevent one of the other serious outcomes noted above.  For example, drug overdose or abuse, 
a seizure that did not result in in -patient hospitalization, or intensive  treatment of bronchospasm 
in an emergency department would typically be considered serious.  
 
All adverse events that do not meet any of the criteria for serious should be regarded as non-
serious adverse events .  
 
Adverse Event Reporting Period :  The stud y period during which adverse events must be 
reported is normally defined as the period from the initiation of any study procedures to the end 
of the study treatment follow -up.  For this study, the study treatment follow -up is defined as 30 
days following the last administration of study treatment.   
 
Preexisting Condition : A pre -existing condition is one that is present at the start of the study.  
A preexisting condition should be recorded as an adverse event if the frequency, intensity, or 
the character of  the condition worsens during the study period.  
 
General Physical Examination Findings : At screening, any clinically significant abnormality 
should be recorded as a preexisting condition.  At the end of the study, any new clinically 
significant findings/ab normalities that meet the definition of an adverse event must also be 
recorded and documented as an adverse event.   
 
Post -study Adverse Event :  All unresolved adverse events should be followed by the 
investigator until the events are resolved, the subject is lost to follow -up, or the adverse event is 
otherwise explained.  At the last scheduled visit, the investigator should instruct each subject to 
report any subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal physician, believes 
might reasonabl y be related to participation in this study.  The investigator should notify the 
study sponsor of any death or adverse event occurring at any time after a subject has 
discontinued or terminated study participation that may reasonably be related to this stu dy.  The 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 42 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  sponsor should also be notified if the investigator should become aware of the development of 
cancer or of a congenital anomaly in a subsequently conceived offspring of a subject that has 
participated in this study.  
 
Abnormal Laboratory Values : A clinical laboratory abnormality should be documented as an 
adverse event if any one of the following  conditions is met:   
 The laboratory abnormality is not otherwise refuted by a repeat test to confirm the 
abnormality  
 The abnormality suggests a disease and /or organ toxicity  
 The abnormality is of a degree that requires active management; e.g. change of dose, 
discontinuation of the drug, more frequent follow -up assessments, further diagnostic 
investigation, etc.  
 
Hospitalization, Prolonged Hospitalization or Surgery : Any adverse event that results in 
hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization should be documented and reported as a serious 
adverse event unless specifically instructed otherwise in this protocol.  Any condition 
responsible for surgery should be  documented as an adverse event if the condition meets the 
criteria for and adverse event.   
 
Neither the condition, hospitalization, prolonged hospitalization, nor surgery are reported as an 
adverse event in the following circumstances:  
 Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization for diagnostic or elective surgical procedures 
for a preexisting condition.  Surgery should not be reported as an outcome of an adverse 
event if the purpose of the surgery was elective or diagnostic and the outcome was 
uneventful.  
 Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization required to allow efficacy measurement for the 
study.  
 Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization for therapy of the target disease of the study, 
unless it is a worsening or increase in frequency of hospital a dmissions as judged by the 
clinical investigator.  
8.2 Recording of Adverse Events  
 At each contact with the subject, the investigator must seek information on adverse 
events by specific questioning and, as appropriate, by examination.  Information on all adver se 
events should be recorded immediately in the source document, and also in the appropriate 
adverse event module of the case report form (CRF).  All clearly related signs, symptoms, and 
abnormal diagnostic procedures results should recorded in the source document, though should 
be grouped under one diagnosis.  
 All adverse events occurring during the study period must be recorded.  The clinical 
course of each event should be followed until resolution, stabilization, or until it has been 
determined that the study treatment or participation is not the cause.  Serious adverse events 
that are still ongoing at the end of the study period must be followed up to determine the final 
outcome.  Any serious adverse event that occurs after the study period and is consid ered to be 
possibly related to the study treatment or study participation should be recorded and reported 
immediately.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 43 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  8.3 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated 
Problems  
Investigators and the protocol sponsor must conform to the adverse event r eporting timelines, 
formats and requirements of the various entities to which they are responsible, but at a 
minimum those events that must be reported are those that are:  
 related to study participation,  
 unexpected, and  
 serious or involve risks to subject s or others  
(see definitions, section 8.1).   
 
If the report is supplied as a narrative, the minimum necessary information to be provided at the 
time of the initial report includes:  
 Study identifier  
 Study Center  
 Subject number  
 A description of the event  
 Date of onset   Current status  
 Whether study treatment was discontinued  
 The reason why the event is classified as 
serious  
 Investigator assessment of the association 
between the event and study treatment  
8.3.1  Investigator reporting: notifying the study sponsor  
 Each study site will be responsible for reporting any  study -related unanticipated problem 
posing risk of harm to subjects or others, and any type of serious adverse event,  and all other 
adverse  events  as required by the UMB/UPENN IRB sites (see sections 8. 3.2) to the study 
sponsor (NIAAA) and FDA. Both IRB sites will be notified of all reported events and outcomes at 
both sites .  The investigator will keep a copy of  these reports on file at the study site.   
 Within the following 48 hours, the investigator m ust provide further information on the 
serious adverse event or the unanticipated problem in the form of a written narrative.  This 
should include a copy of the completed Serious Adverse Event form, and any other diagnostic 
information that will assist the  understanding of the event.  Significant new information on 
ongoing serious adverse events should be provided promptly to both sites.  
      8.3.2. Investigator reporting: notifying the Institutional Review  
                Board  
 This section describes th e requirements for safety reporting by investigators who are 
UMB/ Penn faculty, affiliated with a UMB/ Penn research site, or otherwise responsible for safety 
reporting to the IRB. The Institutional Review Board s at UPenn and UMB  require expedited 
reporting of those events related to study participation that are unforeseen and indicate that 
participants or others are at increased risk of harm.  The IRB will not acknowledge safety 
reports or bulk adverse event submissions that do n ot meet the criteria outlined below.  The IRB 
requires researchers to submit reports of the following problems within 5 business  days from the 
time the investigator becomes aware of the event:  
 Any adverse event (regardless of whether the event is serious or non -serious, on -site or 
off-site) that occurs any time during or after the research study, which in the opinion of 
the principal investigator is:  
Unexpected  (An event is “unexpected” when its specificity and severity are not accurately 
reflected in the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -approved research protocol, 
any applicable investigator brochure, and the current IRB -approved informed consent 
document and other relevant sources of information, such as product labeling and 
package inserts.)  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 44 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  AND 
Related  to the research procedures (An event is “related to the research procedures” if in 
the opinion of the principal investigator or sponsor, the event was more likely than not to 
be caused by the research procedures.)  
 
Reporting Process :  Unanticipa ted problems posing risks to subjects or others as noted above 
will be reported to the UMB  IRB in CICERO under reportable new information within 5 business 
days.   
 Copies of each report and documentation of IRB notification and receipt will be kept in 
the Clinical Investigator’s study file.  
Reporting Deaths :  more rapid reporting requirements  
Deaths that occur during the course of a research study and that are:  
1) Unexpected; AND  
2) Related to the research study; AND  
3) When other participants are believed to be  at an increased risk of harm  
Must be reported to the IRB within 3 business days from the time the investigator becomes 
aware of the death.  
Other Reportable events:  For clinical drug trials, the following events are also reportable to the 
IRB: 
 Any adverse  experience that, even without detailed analysis, represents a serious 
unexpected adverse event that is rare in the absence of drug exposure (such as 
agranulocytosis, hepatic necrosis, Stevens -Johnson syndrome).  
 Any adverse event that would cause the spons or to modify the investigators brochure, 
protocol or informed consent form, or would prompt other action by the IRB to assure 
protection of human subjects.  
 Information that indicates a change to the risks or potential benefits of the research, in 
terms of severity or frequency. For example:  
 An interim analysis indicates that participants have a lower rate of response to treatment 
than initially expected.  
 Safety monitoring indicates that a particular side effect is more severe, or more frequent 
than initial ly expected.  
 A paper is published from another study that shows that an arm of your research study is 
of no therapeutic value.  
– Change in FDA safety labeling or withdrawal from marketing of a drug, device, or 
biologic used in a research protocol.  
– Breach of confidentiality  
– Change to the protocol taken without prior IRB review to eliminate apparent 
immediate hazard to a research participant.  
– Incarceration of a participant when the research was not previously approved under 
Subpart C and the investigator believ es it is in the best interest of the subject to 
remain on the study.  
– Complaint of a participant when the complaint indicates unexpected risks or the 
complaint cannot be resolved by the research team.  
– Protocol violation (meaning an accidental or unintention al deviation from the IRB 
approved protocol) that in the opinion of the investigator placed one or more 
participants at increased risk, or affects the rights or welfare of subjects.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 45 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  8.3.3  Sponsor reporting: Notifying the FDA:   
The stud y sponsor is  required to r eport  certain study events in an expedited 
fashion to the FDA.  These written notifications of adverse events are referred 
to as IND safety reports. The following describes the safety reporting 
requirements by timeline for reporting and associated type of event:  
   
 
 
– Within 7 calendar days  
Any study event that is : 
– associated with the use of the study drug  
– unexpected,  
– fatal or life -threatening, and  
 
– Within 15 calendar days  
Any study event that is : 
– associated with the use of the study drug,  
– unexpected, and  
– serious, but not fatal or life -threatening  
-or- 
 a previous adverse event that was not initially deemed reportable but is later found to fit 
the criteria for reporting (reporting within 15 calendar days from when event was deemed 
reportable).  
Any finding from tests in laboratory animals that:  
– suggest s a significant risk for human subjects including reports of mutagenicity, 
teratogenicity, or carcinogenicity.  
Additional reporting requirements :  Sponsors are also required to identify in IND safe ty 
reports all previous reports concerning similar adverse events and to analyze the significance of 
the current event in light of the previous reports.  
Reporting Process :  Adverse events may be submitted on FDA Form 3500A or in a narrative 
format. If supp lied as in a narrative format, the minimum information to be supplied is noted 
above at the beginning of section 8.3.  
8.3.4  Sponsor reporting: Notifying participating investigators  
 It is the responsibility of the study sponsor to notify all participating inves tigators, in a 
written IND safety report, of any adverse event associated with the use of the drug that is both 
serious and unexpected, as well as any finding from tests in laboratory animals that suggest a 
significant risk for human subjects.  Additionall y, sponsors are also required to identify in IND 
safety reports all previous reports concerning similar adverse events and to analyze the 
significance of the current event in light of the previous reports.  
8.4 Unblinding Procedures  
 On the day of randomization , participants are given an emergency notification card.  The 
emergency notification card has a 24 -hour emergency number by which to contact a PI or 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 46 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  physician co -investigator in case of an after -hours emergency.  At UP enn, the number is a 
pager that is in the possession of one of the study physicians.  The coverage physician will then 
be responsible to contact the participant to determine the nature of the emergency and to 
provide reassurance, advice, or treatment referrals as appropriate.  In the morning, the study 
physician is responsible to inform the PI,  document the event, and follow -up with the participant.   
 Only the PI or another study physician is authorized to break the blind dose code , which 
will be done in collaboration with the IDS at UMB, where the randomization information will be 
retained .  The decision to break the study blind for an individual subject lies with the study PI (or 
a designated co -investigator if a PI is not available) and would be resorted to only in cases of 
anemergency when knowledge of the treatment arm investigational agent will influence clinical 
management.  
8.5 Medical Monitoring  
 It is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator to oversee the safety of the study at 
his/her site.  This safety monitoring wil l include careful assessment and appropriate reporting of 
adverse events as noted above, as well as the construction and implementation of a site data 
and safety -monitoring plan (see section 9 Auditing, Monitoring and Inspecting).  Medical 
monitoring will include a regular assessment of the number and type of serious adverse events.  
8.5.1  Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
 The DSMB will include relevant experts at  UPenn.  The DSMB members wi ll include 
James McKay, Ph.D. (chair ), Kevin Lynch, Ph.D. ( biostatistician), Richard Feinn, Ph.D., David 
Metzger, Ph.D. , Daniel Weintraub, M.D., Deb Dunbar, MSN, CRNP , and Cynthia Clark, Ph.D.  
The DSMB will meet by teleconference annually or more often if warranted to review progress 
pursuant to presentation of a sum mary report from the principal investigator, ensuring  that 
policies on the identification and reporting of adverse events to the appropriate regulatory 
bodies, which can include the local IRB, the FDA, and the project officer at the NIH, have been 
implemen ted diligently and promptly.  Prompt and due diligence reporting of adverse events 
(i.e., within 24 hours during the week and on the next working day following a weekend) to the 
regulatory bodies remains the express duty of the principal investigator.  The  DSMB will retain 
the right to make independent representation to the regulatory bodies if there has been a failure 
or lapse in reporting by the principal investigator.  The DSMB also will have the capacity to 
instruct the principal investigator to pause o r terminate pursuance of research if regulatory body 
guidelines are contravened.  The DSMB will provide regular independent reports to the IRB 
concerning the protection of human subjects in this study.  These DSMB procedures have been 
approved previously b y the NIH for our ongoing clinical studies.   
 
Frequency of data and safety monitoring reviews:  These investigators have extensive  
experience with clinical trials using pharmacotherapy for the treatment of substance abuse  and 
with the recruitment and retention of substance -dependent subjects.  In the past, such trials 
have been done with minimal risks to participants.  Therefore, the DSMP will include two items:  
The research members  at each site , including the PI, co -inves tigators, research nurses , and 
project coordinator s, will meet weekly to discuss progress on the study and to address any 
issues related to  the research procedures.  The DSMB  will meet annually and will generate a 
report that is sent to the PI  at each site .  The report will summarize the Board’s review of 
cumulative serious and unexpected adverse events  and any other concerns that may arise . 
 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 47 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  Content of data and safety monitoring report:  The PI at each university will be responsible to 
monitor the safety a nd efficacy of this trial, executing the DSMP, providing the DSMB with the 
needed information, and complying with t he reporting requirements.  The overall PI will provide 
a summary of the data and safety monitoring report to staff at the NIAAA on an annual  basis as 
part of the progress report.   
9 Data Handling and Record Keeping  
9.1 Confidentiality  
 Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the 
requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 199 6 (HIPAA).  Those 
regulations require a signed subject authorization informing the subject of the following:  
 What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
 Who will have access to that information and why  
 Who will us e or disclose that information  
 The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
 
 In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, 
by regulation, retains the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject 
authorization.  For subjects that have revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, attempts 
should be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. that the subject is alive) 
at the end of their scheduled study period.  
Records, filed in the IRB office, verify that all research project personnel have completed 
training in the protection of human research subjects in accordance with the guidelines of the 
U.S. Department of Health and  Human Services (DHHS) and the Office for Human Research 
Protection (OHRP).  The study staff (PI, Clinical research coordinator, etc.) will keep all study 
medical records (including any codes to de -identified data) under lock and key in a secure 
location, as required by law. Only date and time of the research visit and lab specimen data will 
be placed in the client’s existing electronic medical record. All electronic data and files (e.g., 
database, spreadsheet, etc.) containing identifiable subject informat ion shall be password 
protected.  Any computer hosting such files shall have a BIOS password to prevent access by 
un-authorized users.  If subject data are to be exchanged with others, the data will be coded. If 
identification is necessary, then the data w ill be encrypted while en route to the recipient with 
strong encryption levels (≥ 128 bits for symmetric encryption (DES) and ≥ 1024 bits for 
asymmetric encryption (RSA).    
All data and blood specimens will be stored without direct identifiable informatio n, but will 
be identifiable via a linking code. The secured research records are labeled with code numbers 
only (names and other identifying information are kept separate from research records). Access 
to data is only given to staff members working on the study. Only staff members designated to 
handle or analyze study samples will have access to the samples and their storage. Coded 
blood samples are stored in clinic -specific refrigerators and freezers, which are located in 
secure rooms. As per routine in th e UPenn Center for Studies of Addiction ( CSA), all electronic 
files (e.g., database, spreadsheet) will be password protected. Any computer hosting such files 
will have a BIOS password to prevent access by un -authorized users. Further information 
concerning  the CSA’s Data Management Unit (DMU) is provided below.   
Blood will be collected for DNA analysis.  The information derived from analysis of the 
subjects’ DNA will not be provided to the subject, since at the present time the existing 
preliminary genetic d ata for predicting response to ondansetron do not provide a basis for 
genetic counseling. Should that situation change over the course of the study, procedures will 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 48 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  be developed in conjunct ion with the UPenn and UMB IRBs  to provide subjects with relevant 
information on their genotype s and to counsel them in relation to that information. While the 
study is open, DNA samples will be coded with a number that provides an indirect link to the 
subject’s identity (samples will be accessible only by the researchers  and staff involved with this 
study). Upon completion of the study, the sample will be kept in storage indefinitely. However, 
the sample will forever be separated from all identifiers. These de -identified samples may be 
shared with other researchers and us ed in other projects. The lab procedures for storage 
include a passcode -protected locked room, and secure storage freezers.  All samples will be 
retained securely as per lab protocols.  
A certificate of confidentiality has been obtained for this study. The  following conditions 
apply to the protection provided under this certificate:  
(l) This certificate does not authorize the University of Maryland, Baltimore, School 
of Medicine, their contractors or cooperating agencies to refuse to reveal identifying 
information concerning research subjects if any of the following conditions exist:  
 
(a) The research subject (or, if he or she is legally incompetent, his or her guardian) 
consents in writing to disclosure of the subject's own identifying information;  
 
(b) Authorized personnel of  the United States Department of Health and Human 
Services request such information for an audit or program evaluation of the research project, 
or for an  investigation of the University of Maryland, Baltimore, School of Medicine, or their 
contractors or cooperating agencies in carrying out the research project;  
 
(c) Release is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 
et seq.) or regulations promulgated  thereunder (Title 21, Code of Federal Regulations).  
 
(2) This certificate is issued with the expectation that there will be no disclosures of 
identifying characteristics of research subjects in any Federal, State, or local civil, criminal, 
administrative, legislative, or other proceedings to compel disclosure of the identifying 
characteristics of research subjects, except as provided for in paragraph (1), above.  
 
(3) The confidentiality certificate does not govern the voluntary disclosure of 
identifying characteristics of research subjects , but only protects su bjects from compelled 
disclosure of identifying characteristics.  Sponsors/investigators  are therefore not prevented 
from the voluntary disclosure of such matters as child abuse or a subject's threatened 
violence to self or others; however, the consent form  should indicate clearly  the 
investigators’  intention to make any such voluntary disclosures.  
 
(4) This certificate does not represent an endorsement of the research project by the 
Department of Health and Human Services, or the Food and Drug Administratio n. 
 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 49 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  (5) All research subjects in the project will be given a fair, clear explanation of the 
protection which this certificate affords, and of the limitations and exceptions to the 
protection.  
 
(6) This authority granted to the  sponsors/investigators  by thi s certificate is effective 
upon issuance, and will expire on the date on which the IND application is terminated or 
withdrawn, or sooner if the sponsor /investigator  is notified of cancellation by the Food and 
Drug Administration.   However, regardless of a ny subsequent expiration or cancellation of 
the sponsor s/investigator s’ authority under this certificate of confidentiality, the privacy 
protection afforded to the individual subjects by this certificate of confidentiality is permanent 
(including after the  death of a subject) and will continue for all persons who were research 
subjects in the study during any time the sponsor /investigator  held this certificate of 
confidentiality.  
 
 
9.2 Source Documents  
 Source data is all information, original records of clinic al findings, observations, or other 
activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  Source 
data are contained in source documents.  Examples of these original documents, and data 
records include: hospital recor ds, clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, 
subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, dispensing records, recorded data from automated 
instruments, copies or transcriptions certified after verification as being accurate and complete, 
microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, x -rays, subject files, and 
records kept at the IDS, at the laboratories, and at medico -technical departments involved in the 
clinical trial.  
9.3 Case Report Forms  
 The study will use the web -based direct entry data management system of the CSA’s 
DMU , with data  stored on secure servers located in the Perelman School of Medicine’s  Data 
Center. Interview data and self -report data from both UPenn and UMB will be  entered directly 
onto computers by research staff and/or patients under supervision by staff.  A range of checks 
for the validity of responses (including field validation to ensure that no out -of-range or 
otherwise invalid responses are accepted), and form validat ion to ensure that logically 
impossible responses to different questions are not  accepted) are built into this entry 
process.  After entry, the research staff performs a brief review to ensure that the form has been 
completed.  On completion of this review , the technician will transmit the data (in 128 -bit 
encrypted form) over the Internet to the DMU data servers.   After a seri es of online reviews, the 
data are  archived on the servers.   Protected health information  will not be included in these 
research dat a.  Permission to modify the archived data  is limited to designated  DMU 
personnel .  Audit logs record any modification to the original entry.   Various levels of password 
protection , determined by the UPenn PI, Dr. Kranzler, will  allow different members of the 
research team access to the data.   Once the dataset is complete, it will be exported to the 
biostatistical group  for use in modeling.  
9.4 Records Retention  
 It is the investigator’s responsibility to retain study essential documents for at least 2 
years af ter the last approval of a marketing application in their country and until there are no 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 50 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  pending or contemplated marketing applications in their country or at least 2 years have elapsed 
since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the invest igational product.  These 
documents should be retained for a longer period if required by an agreement with the sponsor.  
In such an instance, it is the responsibility of the sponsor to inform the investigator/institution as 
to when these documents no long er need to be retained.  
10 Study Monitoring, Auditing, and Inspecting  
                   10.1   Study Monitoring Plan  
This study will be monitored according to the monitoring plan described below. The 
Principal Investigator will allocate adequate time for such monitoring activities. The Investigator 
will also ensure that the monitor or other compliance or quality assurance reviewer is given 
access to all the above noted study -related documents and study related facilities (e.g., 
diagnostic laboratory, etc.) , and has adequate space to conduct the monitoring visit.  
The Principal Investigator and research staff will monitor the study. Written monitoring 
procedures for monitoring clinical investigations will be implemented to assure the quality of the 
study and to assure that each person involved in the monitoring process carries out his or her 
duties.  
The Principal Investigator will maintain a record of the findings, conclusions, and action 
taken to correct errors noted by the monitor for each visit.  
Monitorin g Responsibilities: The monitor, in accordance with local and NIH 
requirements, should ensure that the study is conducted and documented properly by carrying 
out the following activities:  
 Verifying that the investigator has adequate qualification a nd reso urces and that these  
remain adequate throughout the study period, and that the staff and facilities, including 
laboratories and equipment, are adequate to safely and properly conduct the study and 
these remain adequate throughout the study period.  
 Verifyi ng that the investigator follows the app roved protocol and all approved  
amendment(s), if any.  
 Verifying that written informed consent was obtained befo re each subject's participation  
in the study.  
 Verifying that the investigator is enrolling only eligibl e subjects.  
 Reporting the subject recruitment rate.  
 Verifying that source data/documents and other study records are accurate, complete, 
kept up to date, and maintained.  
 Verifying that the investigator provides all the required reports, notifications, applications, 
and submissions, and that these documents are accurate, complete, timely, legible, 
dated and identify the study.  
 Checking the accuracy and completeness of the CRF entries, source data/documents, 
and other study related records against each other.  
 Informing the investigator of any CRF entry error, omission, or illegibility. The monitor 
should ensure that appropriate corrections, additions, or deletions are made,  dated, 
explained, and initialed by the investigator or by a member of the study staff who is 
authorized to initial CRF changes for the investigator. This authorization should be 
documented.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 51 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018   Determining whether all adverse events (AE's) are appropriately reported within the time 
periods required by GCP, the protocol, the IRB/IEC, the applicable regulatory 
requirement(s).  
 Determining whether the investigator is maintaining the essential documents.  
 Communicating deviations from the protocol, SOP's, GCP, an d the applicable regulatory 
requirements to the investigator and taking appropriate action designed to prevent 
recurrence of the detected deviations.  
 Follow ing the University ’s SOP's, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
Study Monitoring  
The study Principal Investigator and research staff have prepared a case record form (CRF) that 
is designed to reduce coding errors and promote data quality. Each page of the CRF will contain 
a header that includes the title of the protocol, the protocol num ber, the subject randomization 
number, subject screening number, and visit number. The technicians are responsible for data 
entry. The research charts will be maintained separately from the CRF and will contain subject 
information that is not entered in th e study CRF database.  
Regulatory Binder:  A detailed Regulatory Binder will be assembled.  Any changes to 
procedures are documented in this section. This binder is the backbone of quality assurance.  
We use this binder to train any new study personnel and  for reference so that our policies and 
procedures are standard throughout all phases of the protocol. The ‘Measures’ section of the 
binder addresses, specifically all forms and instruments that comprise the CRF. A Table of 
Contents has been prepared that contains all the forms used in the study.  
The study manual will include : 
 study protocol research team names, titles, roles and responsibilities, work and home 
phone numbers  
 purpose of study, study intent and rationale  
 all study procedures for each team m ember (PIs, technicians, study coordinator, 
pharmacists, nurses,  nurse practitioner,  physicians, etc.)  
 recruitment and screening procedures  
 intake procedures  
 study phase procedures  
 completion/discontinuation procedures  
Data Collection Training  
The CNC  provides comprehensive data collection training for the study staff. Study staff  receive 
training on how to proceed with problematic subjects. Study staff is trained to follow the general 
data collection guidelines listed below.   
 Study staff should be present when subject is completing instruments.  
 Research interviews and evaluations should be administered in a private, quiet office or 
area.  
 Instruments are introduced and explained the same way each time to each subject.  
 Order of research assessments sh ould be maintained, as much as possible.  
 Order  of specimens obtained should be maintained as much as possible.  
 Study staff should show an interested, polite, appropriate, and helpful demeanor.  
 
Quality assurance (QA) procedures  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 52 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  Changes to the CRF and the study database are strictly monitored.  After a single line is drawn 
through the corrected data point, the study staff  documents the change by placing his or her 
initials and the date of the change adjacent to the correction. Typical QA responsibilities of  the 
study staff  include:  
 Checking all data during or immediately after study visits.  
 Checking charts at predetermined points during the study (i nitials and date of checker 
are required on each form checked).  
 Performing the initial data check after a few c harts have been entered.  
 Performing a 10% data check when all data have been entered.  
 
Typical responsibilities of the PI include:  
 Monitoring and reporting on study staff  interviewing and data collecti on proficiency at 
subject study visits.  
 Checking charts  at predetermined points during the study (initials and date of PI are 
required on each form checked).  
 Supervising study database checks.  
 When databases, in Filemaker Pro or other applications, are d eveloped by the research 
staff, only the data checked by the study staff  are entered.  Data sets  are double 
checked in pairs by  UPENN technicians.  The PI supervises any corrections to the data 
set and reviews the completed database before the information is used in any reports or 
analyses.  
 The PI holds meetings  with the study staff  to report and review the project and data entry 
status.  
 PI reviews lab results and screening information for potential subjects.  
 PI reviews adverse events on at least a weekly basis.  
  
Study Logs and Reports  
Study logs are routinely maintained in order to keep computerized back up records of identifying 
and socio -demographic characteristics and experimental group status.  The study subject log 
usually includes subjects’ initials, study number, CRF number, date of birth, race , medication 
start dates, subject status (active, drop -out, completer, follow -up) and relevant dates and 
comments.  
 
Data Storage on Site   
The CRFs and research charts are stored in file rooms specifically designed for data 
storage.  All study data are hou sed in locked file cabinets.  Only designated members of the 
research team have access to the file cabinets containing research data.  Data are kept on site 
for not less than three years after the subject has completed the final assessment.  Data are 
then eligible for archiving.  
 The Principal I nvestigator will permit study -related monitoring, au dits, and inspections by 
the IRB, government regulatory bodies, and University compliance and qualit y assurance 
groups of all study -related documents (e.g. , source documents, regulatory documents, data 
collect ion instruments, study data ).  The investigator will ensure that  inspections can be made of 
applicable study -related facilities (e.g. , Data Management Unit).  
 Participation as an investigator in this stu dy implies acceptance of potential inspection by 
government regulatory authorities and applicable University compliance and quality assurance 
offices.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 53 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  11 Ethical Considerations  
 This study is to be conducted according to US and international standards of Good  
Clinical Practice (FDA Title 21 part 312 and International Conference on Harmonization 
guidelines), applicable government regulations and Institutional research policies and 
procedures.  
 This protocol and any amendments will be submitt ed to a properly con stituted  
Institutional Review Board (IRB), in agreement with local legal prescriptions, for formal approval 
of the study c onduct.  The decision of the IRB concerning the conduct of the study will be made 
in writing to the investigator and a copy of this d ecision will be provided to the sponsor before 
commencement of this study.  The investigator should provide a list of EC/IRB members and 
their affiliate to the sponsor.  
 All subjects for this study will be provided a consent form describing this study and 
providing sufficient information for subjects to make an informed decision about their 
participation in this study.  The consent form will be submitted with the protocol fo r review and 
approval by the IRB for the study.  The formal consent of a subject, us ing the IRB -approved 
consent form, must be obtained before that subject undergoes any study procedure.  The 
consent form must be signed by the subject or legally acceptable surrogate, and the 
investigator -designated research professional obtaining the cons ent.  
12 Study Finances  
12.1 Funding Source  
 This study is funded by  a grant from the US National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism.  
12.2 Conflict of Interest  
 Any investigator who has a conflict of interest with this study (patent ownership, 
royalties, or fina ncial gain greater than the minimum allowable by their institution, etc.) must 
have the conflict reviewed by a properly constituted Conflict of Interest Committee with a 
Committee -sanctioned conflict management plan that has been reviewed and approved by t he 
study sponsor prior to participation in this study.  All University of Pennsylvania investigators will 
follow the University conflict of interest policy.  
12.3 Subject Stipends or Payments  
 Subjects will receive payments of $ 25 for each screening visit(s) and  baseline visit (s), $20 
each for Visits 1 -9 and  $50 for the last treatment visit (Visit 10) , $10 for returning all medication 
bottle s at each visit  ($100 for all 10 medication visits) , and $25 if you complete the follow -up 
visit. Subjects who can not  complete the follow -up visit in person can do the assessments by 
telephone, for which they will be paid $10 when they come to the study clinic . A $100 
completion bonus will be given to the participant if he/she completes all study visits and returns 
all m edication bottles . The total amount that subjects can receive for full participation in the 
research study  is up to $ 555.00. Subjects will receive payment prorated on the basis of the 
number of visits completed and for incomplete visits, the portion of the  visit completed .  If a 
participant does not have transportation to come to a study visit, we can provide transportation 
at no cost; for example a taxi , bus pass, or providing a car and driver hired through a UMB -
approved vendor . If a study visit extends over a mealtime, we will provide them  with a meal or 
snacks at no cost.  
 
Ondansetron Study Participants Payments  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 54 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018    
Study 
Visit Study 
Week  Payment for Visit  Payment for 
medication’s 
bottles  TOTAL 
MAX  
V 0 -1 
Screen  
(SV)  $ 25 for each visit 0 Up to $ 50  
V 0 -2 
Baseline  
(BL) 0 $ 25 for each  0 Up to $ 50  
V 1 1 $ 20 $ 10 $ 30 
V 2 2 $ 20 $ 10 $ 30 
V 3 3 $ 20 $ 10 $ 30 
V 4 4 $ 20 $ 10 $ 30 
V 5 5 $ 20 $ 10 $ 30 
V 6 6 $ 20 $ 10 $ 30 
V 7 8 $ 20 $ 10 $ 30 
V 8 10 $ 20 $ 10 $ 30 
V 9 12 $ 20 $ 10 $ 30 
V 10 16 $ 50 $ 10 $ 60 
V 11 20 $ 10 – by phone  
$ 25 – in person (with blood draw)  
$ 100 – completion bonus    
TOTAL   If V11 by phone $ 10  + $ 280 (or $305 if 2 SV or $330 if 2 SV 
and 2 BL) = $ 290  (or $315  if 2 SV or $340  if 2 BL)  
If V11 in person $ 25  + $ 280 (or $305 if 2 SV or 330 if 2 SV 
and 2 BL) = $ 305  (or $330  if 2 SV or $355  if 2 SV and 2 BL)  
$ 100 bonus  – if all study visits completed and all med. bottles 
returned  MAX $ 100  MAX 
payment 
UP to:   
 $ 355 + $ 
100 + $ 100 
= $ 555  
 
13 References  
 
Ait-Daoud, N., Roache, J.D., Dawes, M.A., Liu, L., Wang, X.Q., Javors, M.A., Seneviratne, C., 
and Johnson, B.A. (2009). Can serotonin transporter genotype  predict craving in 
alcoholism? Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research 33, 1329 -1335. 
Allan, A.M., Galindo, R., Chynoweth, J., Engel, S.R., and Savage, D.D. (2001). Conditioned 
place  preference for cocaine is attenuated in mice over -expressing the 5 -HT(3) receptor.  
Psychopharmacology 158, 18 -27. 
American Psychiatric Association. (1994).  Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 
4th edition.(Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association).  
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 
5th edition.(Washington, D.C.: Americ an Psychiatric Association).  
Anton, R.F. (1996). New methodologies for pharmacological treatment trials for alcohol 
dependence.  Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research 20, 3A -9A. 
Anton, R.F., Oroszi, G., O'Malley, S., Couper, D., Swift, R., Pettinat i, H., and Goldman, D. 
(2008). An evaluation of mu -opioid receptor (OPRM1) as a predictor of naltrexone 
response in the treatment of alcohol dependence: results from the Combined 
Pharmacotherapies and Behavioral Interventions for Alcohol Dependence (COMBIN E) 
study. Archives of general psychiatry 65, 135 -144. 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 55 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  Babor, T.F., de la Fuente, J.R., Saunders, J., and Grant, M. (1992). AUDIT. The Alcohol Use 
Disorders Identification Test: guidelines for use in primary health care.(Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Or ganization).  
Bohn, M.J., Babor, T.F., and Kranzler, H.R. (1995). The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification 
Test (AUDIT): validation of a screening instrument for use in medical settings. J Stud 
Alcohol 56, 423 -432. 
Buysse, D.J., Reynolds, C.F., 3rd, Monk, T .H., Berman, S.R., and Kupfer, D.J. (1989). The 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. 
Psychiatry Res 28, 193 -213. 
Chen, J., Johnson, B.A., Wang, X.Q., O'Quigley, J., Isaac, M., Zhang, D., and Liu, L. (2011) . 
Trajectory analyses in alcohol treatment research. Alcohol Clin Exp Res (submitted and 
in revision).  
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences.(Hillsdale, NJ: L. 
Erlbaum Associates).  
Ducci, F., Enoch, M.A., Yuan, Q., Shen, P.H., White, K.V., Hodgkinson, C., Albaugh, B., 
Virkkunen, M., and Goldman, D. (2009). HTR3B is associated with alcoholism with 
antisocial behavior and alpha EEG power --an intermediate phenotype for alcoholism and 
co-morbid behaviors. Alcohol 43, 73 -84. 
Engel, S.R., and Allan, A.M. (1999). 5 -HT3 receptor over -expression enhances ethanol 
sensitivity in mice. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 144, 411 -415. 
Engel, S.R., Lyons, C.R., and Allan, A.M. (1998). 5 -HT3 receptor over -expression decreases 
ethanol self administ ration in transgenic mice. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 140, 243 -248. 
Enoch, M.A., Gorodetsky, E., Hodgkinson, C., Roy, A., and Goldman, D. (2011). Functional 
genetic variants that increase synaptic serotonin and 5 -HT3 receptor sensitivity predict 
alcohol and  drug dependence. Mol Psychiatry 16, 1139 -1146.  
Enoch, M.A., Schuckit, M.A., Johnson, B.A., and Goldman, D. (2003). Genetics of alcoholism 
using intermediate phenotypes. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 27, 169 -176. 
Falk, D., Wang, X.Q., Liu, L., Fertig, J., Mattson, M., Ryan, M., Johnson, B., Stout, R., and 
Litten, R.Z. (2010). Percentage of subjects with no heavy drinking days: evaluation as an 
efficacy endpoint for alcohol clinical trials. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 34, 2022 -2034.  
Feinn, R., and Kranzler, H.R. (2005). Doe s effect size in naltrexone trials for alcohol 
dependence differ for single -site vs. multi -center studies? Alcohol Clin Exp Res 29, 983 -
988. 
First, M.B., Spitzer, R.L., Gibbon, M., and Williams, J.B.W. (1994). Structured Clinical Interview 
for DSM -IV Axis I Disorders - Patient Edition (SCID -I/P, Version 2.0).(New York: New 
York State Psychiatric Institute, Biometrics Research Department).  
Freedman SB, Uleryk E, Rumantir M, Finkelstein Y. (2014) Ondansetron and the risk of cardiac 
arrhythmias: a systematic r eview and postmarketing analysis.  Ann Emerg Med 64, 19 -
25. 
Heinz, A., Jones, D.W., Mazzanti, C., Goldman, D., Ragan, P., Hommer, D., Linnoila, M., and 
Weinberger, D.R. (2000). A relationship between serotonin transporter genotype and in 
vivo protein expre ssion and alcohol neurotoxicity. Biological psychiatry 47, 643 -649. 
Hodge, C.W., Kelley, S.P., Bratt, A.M., Iller, K., Schroeder, J.P., and Besheer, J. (2004). 5 -
HT3A receptor subunit is required for 5 -HT3 antagonist -induced reductions in alcohol 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 56 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  drinking.  Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology 29, 1807 -1813.  
Hodgkinson, C.A., Yuan, Q., Xu, K., Shen, P.H., Heinz, E., Lobos, E.A., Binder, E.B., Cubells, 
J., Ehlers, C.L., Gelernter, J., et al. (2008).  Addictions biology: haplotype -based analysis 
for 130 candidate genes on a single array. Alcohol Alcohol 43, 505 -515. 
Hu, X.Z., Lipsky, R.H., Zhu, G., Akhtar, L.A., Taubman, J., Greenberg, B.D., Xu, K., Arnold, 
P.D., Richter, M.A., Kennedy, J.L., et al. (2 006). Serotonin transporter promoter gain -of-
function genotypes are linked to obsessive -compulsive disorder. American journal of 
human genetics 78, 815 -826. 
Javors, M.A., Seneviratne, C., Roache, J.D., Ait -Daoud, N., Bergeson, S.E., Walss -Bass, M.C., 
Akhta r, F.Z., and Johnson, B.A. (2005). Platelet serotonin uptake and paroxetine binding 
among allelic genotypes of the serotonin transporter in alcoholics. Progress in neuro -
psychopharmacology & biological psychiatry 29, 7 -13. 
Johnson, B.A. (2008). Update on n europharmacological treatments for alcoholism: scientific 
basis and clinical findings. Biochem Pharmacol 75, 34 -56. 
Johnson, B.A., and Ait -Daoud, N. (2011). Pharmacotherapy for alcoholism and some related 
psychiatric and addictive disorders: scientific bas is and clinical findings. In Addiction 
Medicine: Science and Practice Vol 2, B.A. Johnson, ed. (London UK, Springer Science 
+ Business Media LLC), pp 943 -980. 
Johnson, B.A., Ait -Daoud, N., Seneviratne, C., Roache, J.D., Javors, M.A., Wang, X.Q., Liu, L., 
Penberthy, J.K., DiClemente, C.C., and Li, M.D. (2011). Pharmacogenetic approach at 
the serotonin transporter gene as a method of reducing the severity of alcohol drinking. 
The American journal of psychiatry 168, 265 -275. 
Johnson, B.A., Javors, M.A., Roache , J.D., Seneviratne, C., Bergeson, S.E., Ait -Daoud, N., 
Dawes, M.A., and Ma, J.Z. (2008). Can serotonin transporter genotype predict 
serotonergic function, chronicity, and severity of drinking? Progress in neuro -
psychopharmacology & biological psychiatry 3 2, 209 -216. 
Johnson, B.A., Roache, J.D., Javors, M.A., DiClemente, C.C., Cloninger, C.R., Prihoda, T.J., 
Bordnick, P.S., Ait -Daoud, N., and Hensler, J. (2000). Ondansetron for reduction of 
drinking among biologically predisposed alcoholic patients: A rando mized controlled trial. 
JAMA  284, 963 -971. 
Johnson, B.A., Seneviratne, C., Wang, X.Q., Ait -Daoud, N., and Li, M.D. (2013). Determination 
of genotype combinations that can predict the outcome of the treatment of alcohol 
dependence using the 5 -HT(3) antagoni st ondansetron. Am J  Psychiatry 170, 1020 -
1031.  
Kranzler HR, Covault J, Feinn R, Armeli S,  Tennen T, Arias AJ,  Gelernter J, Oncken C, Pond T, 
Kampman KM.  (2014) Topiramate treatment for heavy drinkers: Moderation by a GRIK1  
polymorphism, Am J Psychiatry, 171: 445 -452.  
Kranzler HR, McKay JR. (2012) Personalized treatment of alcohol dependence.  Curr 
Psychiatry Rep, 14:486 -93. 
Lai, C.Q., Tucker, K.L., Choudhry, S., Parnell, L.D., Mattei, J., Garcia -Bailo, B., Beckman, K., 
Burchard, E.G., and Ordovas, J.M. (2009). Population admixture associated with 
disease prevalence in the Boston Puerto Rican health study. Human genetics 125, 199 -
209. 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 57 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  Liu, L. (2009). Joint modeling longitudinal semi -continuous data and survival, with applica tion to 
longitudinal medical cost data. Stat Med 28, 972 -986. 
Mao, X., Bigham, A.W., Mei, R., Gutierrez, G., Weiss, K.M., Brutsaert, T.D., Leon -Velarde, F., 
Moore, L.G., Vargas, E., McKeigue, P.M., et al. (2007). A genomewide admixture 
mapping panel for Hi spanic/Latino populations. American journal of human genetics 80, 
1171 -1178.  
Matsui, T., Kondo, T., Nakatani, S., Omawari, N., Sakai, M., Mori, H., Ogata, A., Kato, J., Ohno, 
H., Obata, T., et al. (2003). Synthesis, further biological evaluation and 
pharma codynamics of newly discovered inhibitors of TNF -alpha production. Bioorganic 
& medicinal chemistry 11, 3937 -3943.  
Metz, A.V., Chynoweth, J., and Allan, A.M. (2006). Influence of genetic background on alcohol 
drinking and behavioral phenotypes of 5 -HT3 rec eptor over -expressing mice. 
Pharmacology, biochemistry, and behavior 84, 120 -127. 
Myrick, H., Anton, R.F., Li, X., Henderson, S., Randall, P.K., and Voronin, K. (2008). Effect of 
naltrexone and ondansetron on alcohol cue -induced activation of the ventral s triatum in 
alcohol -dependent people. Archives of general psychiatry 65, 466 -475. 
Nakamura, M., Ueno, S., Sano, A., and Tanabe, H. (2000). The human serotonin transporter 
gene linked polymorphism (5 -HTTLPR) shows ten novel allelic variants. Molecular 
psychi atry 5, 32 -38. 
Olafsdottir, E.S., Omarsdottir, S., Paulsen, B.S., and Wagner, H. (2003). Immunologically active 
O6-branched (1 -->3)-beta-glucan from the lichen Thamnolia vermicularis var. 
subuliformis. Phytomedicine : international journal of phytotherapy and 
phytopharmacology 10, 318 -324. 
Olsen, M.K., and Schafer, J.L. (2001). A two -part random -effects model for semicontinuous 
longitudinal data. J Am Stat Assoc 96, 730 -745. 
Oslin, D.W., Berrettini, W., Kranzler, H.R., Pettinati, H., Gelernter, J., Volpicel li, J.R., and 
O'Brien, C.P. (2003). A functional polymorphism of the mu -opioid receptor gene is 
associated with naltrexone response in alcohol -dependent patients. 
Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmaco logy 28, 1546 -1552.  
Piwkham, D., Gelfond, J.A., Rerkamnuaychoke, B., Pakakasama, S., Rebel, V.I., Pollock, B.H., 
Winick, N.J., Collier, A.B., 3rd, Tomlinson, G.E., and Beuten, J. (2011). Multilocus 
association of genetic variants in MLL, CREBBP, EP300, and  TOP2A with childhood 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia in Hispanics from Texas. Cancer epidemiology, 
biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the American Association for Cancer 
Research, cosponsored by the American Society of Preventive Oncology 20, 1204 -1212. 
Praschak -Rieder, N., Kennedy, J., Wilson, A.A., Hussey, D., Boovariwala, A., Willeit, M., 
Ginovart, N., Tharmalingam, S., Masellis, M., Houle, S., et al. (2007). Novel 5 -HTTLPR 
allele associates with higher serotonin transporter binding in putamen: a [ (11)C] DASB 
positron emission tomography study. Biological psychiatry 62, 327 -331. 
Pritchard, J.K., Stephens, M., and Donnelly, P. (2000). Inference of population structure using 
multilocus genotype data. Genetics 155, 945 -959. 
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 58 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  Sellers, E.M., Toneatto , T., Romach, M.K., Somer, G.R., Sobell, L.C., and Sobell, M.B. (1994). 
Clinical efficacy of the 5 -HT3 antagonist ondansetron in alcohol abuse and dependence. 
Alcohol Clin Exp Res 18, 879 -885. 
Seneviratne, C., Ait -Daoud, N., Ma, J.Z., Chen, G., Johnson, B. A., and Li, M.D. (2009). 
Susceptibility locus in neurokinin -1 receptor gene associated with alcohol dependence. 
Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology 34, 2442 -2449.  
Seneviratne , C., Franklin, J., Beckett, K., Ma, J.Z., Ait -Daoud, N., Payne, T.J., Johnson, B.A., 
and Li, M.D. (2013). Association, interaction, and replication analysis of genes encoding 
serotonin transporter and 5 -HT3 receptor subunits A and B in alcohol dependence.  
Human genetics 132, 1165 -1176.  
Seneviratne, C., Huang, W., Ait -Daoud, N., Li, M.D., and Johnson, B.A. (2009). Characterization 
of a functional polymorphism in the 3' UTR of SLC6A4 and its association with drinking 
intensity. Alcoholism, clinical and exper imental research 33, 332 -339. 
Srisurapanont, M., and Jarusuraisin, N. (2005). Opioid antagonists for alcohol dependence. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev (1), CD001867.  
Stout, R.L., Wirtz, P.W., Carbonari, J.P., and Del Boca, F.K. (1994). Ensuring balanced 
distribution of prognostic factors in treatment outcome research. J Stud Alcohol Suppl 
12, 70 -75. 
Sucheston, L.E., Zhao, H., Yao, S., Zirpoli, G., Liu, S., Barlow, W.E., Moore, H.C., Thomas 
Budd, G., Hershman, D.L., Davis, W., et al. (2011). Genetic predictors of taxane -induced 
neurotoxicity in a SWOG phase III intergroup adjuvant breast cancer treatment trial 
(S0221). Breast Cancer Res Treat.  
Sung, K.W., Engel, S.R., Allan, A.M., and Lovinger, D.M. (2000). 5 -HT3 receptor function and 
potentiation by alcohols in  frontal cortex neurons from transgenic mice overexpressing 
the receptor. Neuropharmacology 39, 2346 -2351.  
Tooze, J.A., Grunwald, G.K., and Jones, R.H. (2002). Analysis of repeated measures data with 
clumping at zero. Stat Methods Med Res 11, 341 -355. 
Wend land, J.R., Martin, B.J., Kruse, M.R., Lesch, K.P., and Murphy, D.L. (2006). Simultaneous 
genotyping of four functional loci of human SLC6A4, with a reappraisal of 5 -HTTLPR 
and rs25531. Molecular psychiatry 11, 224 -226. 
Wulfsohn, M.S., and Tsiatis, A.A. (1 997). A joint model for survival and longitudinal data 
measured with error. Biometrics 53, 330 -339. 
 
 
1. Barnes, N.M., and Sharp, T. (1999). A review of central 5 -HT receptors and their function. 
Neuropharmacology 38, 1083 -1152.  
2. Piwkha m, D., Gelfond, J.A., Rerkamnuaychoke, B., Pakakasama, S., Rebel, V.I., Pollock, B.H., Winick, 
N.J., Collier, A.B., 3rd, Tomlinson, G.E., and Beuten, J. (2011). Multilocus association of genetic 
variants in MLL, CREBBP, EP300, and TOP2A with childhood acut e lymphoblastic leukemia in 
Hispanics from Texas. Cancer epidemiology, biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the 
American Association for Cancer Research, cosponsored by the American Society of Preventive 
Oncology 20, 1204 -1212.  
3. Sucheston, L.E., Zh ao, H., Yao, S., Zirpoli, G., Liu, S., Barlow, W.E., Moore, H.C., Thomas Budd, G., 
Hershman, D.L., Davis, W., et al. (2011). Genetic predictors of taxane -induced neurotoxicity in a 
SWOG phase III intergroup adjuvant breast cancer treatment trial (S0221). B reast Cancer Res 
Treat.  
  
HP-00061575, Pharmacogenetic Treatments for Alcoholism  Page 59 
Version 11.1 09 -05-2018  4. Pritchard, J.K., Stephens, M., and Donnelly, P. (2000). Inference of population structure using 
multilocus genotype data. Genetics 155, 945 -959. 
5. Johnson, B.A., Seneviratne, C., Wang, X.Q., Ait -Daoud, N., and Li, M.D. (2013). D etermination of 
genotype combinations that can predict the outcome of the treatment of alcohol dependence 
using the 5 -HT(3) antagonist ondansetron. Am J Psychiatry 170, 1020 -1031.  
 