CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
1
Protocol Title: A Multicenter, Long-term, Open-label Study to Evaluate the Safety of 
MT10109L (NivobotulinumtoxinA) for the Treatment of Glabellar Lines and Lateral Canthal 
Lines
Protocol Number: MT10109L-004
Amendment Number: Amendment 5
Product: MT10109L (NivobotulinumtoxinA)
Brief Protocol Title: MT10109L in the Long-term, Open-label Treatment of Glabellar Lines
and Lateral Canthal Lines
Development Phase: 3
Sponsor Name and Legal Registered Address:
Medytox Inc.
Regulatory Agency Identifying Numbers: IND Number 121473;
EudraCT Number 2014-005303-24
Emergency Telephone Number: Refer to the study contacts page
SAE Repo rting Fax Number/Email:
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
2
Sponsor Signatory:
Refer to the final page of this protocol for signature and date of approval. 
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
 3 
 
 
DOCUMENT HISTORY 
Document Date 
Amendment 5 
Amendment 4 June 2022 
October 2019 Amendment 3 June 2019 
Amendment 2 November 2018 
Amendment 1 September 2018 
Original Protocol July 2018 
 
Amendment 5 (June 2022) 
This amendment is considered to be not substantial based on the criteria set forth in Article 10(a) 
of Directive 2001/20/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union 
because it neither significantly impacts the safety or physical/mental integrity of participants nor 
the scientific value of the study. 
 
Overall Rationale for the Amendment: 
The overall rationale for the changes implemented in this open-label, extension study was to 
reflect the new study sponsor and safety reporting information,  
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
4

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
5

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
6

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
7

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
8

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
9

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
10
1.
1.1.
Protocol Title: A Multicenter, Long-term, Open-label Study to Evaluate the Safety of 
MT10109L (NivobotulinumtoxinA) for the Treatment of Glabellar Lines and Lateral Canthal 
Lines
Protocol Number: MT10109L-004
Brief Title: MT10109L in the Long-term Treatment of Glabellar Lines and Lateral Canthal 
Lines
Study Phase: 3
Study Rationale:
The purpose of this open-label, extension study is to evaluate the long-term safety of repeated
MT10109L treatment of GL and/or LCL in participants with moderate to severe GL, LCL, or 
both (GL and LCL) who completed the lead-in pivotal Phase 3 studies (MT10109L-001, -002,
-005, and -006) over an additional 24 months.
Objectives and Endpoints:
To evaluate the long-term safety of repeat
treatments of MT10109L in participants with 
moderate to severe GL, LCL, or both 
(GL and LCL)Incidence of adverse events, change from baseline 
in vital sign parameters, and presence of binding 
and neutralizing antibodies
Overall Study Design:
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
11
Number of Participants:
All eligible participants who complete the lead- in pivotal Phase 3 studies (MT10109L -001, -002,
-005, and - 006) can enroll in the current study .
Number of Sites:
All sites from the lead-in Phase 3 studies will participate (approximately 44 global sites).
Intervention Groups and Study Duration:
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
12
Data Monitoring Committee: No
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
13
1.2.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
14

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
15

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
16
2.
2.1.
The purpose of this open-label, extension study is to evaluate the long-term safety of repeated 
MT10109L treatment of GL and/or LCL in participants with moderate to severe GL, LCL, or 
both (GL and LCL) who completed the lead-in pivotal Phase 3 studies (MT10109L-001, -002,
- 005, and -006) over an additional 24 months.
The clinical development program for MT10109L in the treatment of GL and LCL includes 
4 pivotal Phase 3 double-blind, randomized, parallel-group, placebo-controlled, multicenter 
clinical studies. Each of these studies will provide the primary safety and efficacy data for 
MT10109L treatment of GL (Studies MT10109L-001 and -005) and LCL 
(Studies MT10109L-002 and -006). Participants completing these studies will be eligible to 
enroll into the current 24-month open-label extension study (Study MT10109L-004) and 
continue their treatment of GL, LCL, or both GL and LCL.
2.2.
Glabellar lines are deep furrows or frown lines in the glabellar area of the face and LCL (or CFL) 
are horizontal smile lines by the sides of the eyes. Both types of facial lines result from the 
repetitive functional action of the underlying mimetic facial musculature during animation 
(Blitzer 1993). When injected at therapeutic doses, MT10109L produces partial chemical 
denervation of the muscle, resulting in localized reduction in muscle activity. Because GL and 
LCL result from muscular activity, the muscle relaxation leads to a temporary relief of facial 
lines. While it was previously thought that these facial lines were structural and permanent, the 
effects of these injections demonstrate the lines are part functional and remain because of 
constant muscle tone ( Ferreira 2004; Garcia 1996).
The development of facial lines (such as GL and LCL) is an age-related change of the face that 
occurs because of the repetitive muscle contractions that are associated with common facial 
expressions. Thus, these facial lines can be observed with contraction (dynamic rhytides) or in 
more severe cases in repose (static rhytides). Increasing severity in the appearance of facial lines 
has been associated 
self-esteem and sense of well-being (Koblenzer 1996 ). Furthermore, the appearance of these 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
17
facial lines can lead to a miscommunication of an emotional state of anger, anxiety, disapproval, 
or sadness ( Khan 2001) causing distress and affecting social interactions ( Finn 2003).
The popularity of BoNT/A cosmetic treatment of LCL and GL in adults is related to its proven 
efficacy for reducing moderate to severe facial lines ( Beer 2006 ); well documented safety profile 
(Brin 2009); and positive impact on psychological well-being and the resulting psychosocial 
benefits (Finn 2003).
The purpose of this open-label, extension study is to evaluate the long-term safety of repeated 
MT10109L treatment of GL and/or LCL in participants with moderate to severe GL, LCL, or 
both (GL and LCL) who completed the lead-in pivotal Phase 3 studies (MT10109L-001, -002,
- 005, and -006) over an additional 24 months. This information will supplement the primary 
safety and efficacy data from the 4 pivotal lead-in Phase 3 studies. Together with their lead-in
Phase 3 study participation, participants who complete this study will provide up to 3 years of 
continuous treatment exposure data.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
18
2.3.
Generally, the popularity of BoNT/A cosmetic treatment of GL and LCL in adults is related to its 
proven efficacy for reducing moderate to severe facial lines ( Beer 2006 ); well documented safety 
profile ( Brin 2009 ); and positive impact on psychological well -being and the resulting 
psychosocial benefits ( Finn 2003 ).
In some cases, botulinum toxin effect may be observed beyond the site of local injection. The 
symptoms may include asthenia, generalized muscle weakness, diplopia, eyelid ptosis, 
dysphagia, dysphonia, dysarthria, urinary incontinence, and breathing difficulties. Swallowing 
and breathing difficulties can be life threatening and there have been reports of death related to 
distant spread of toxin effects with other BoNT/A treatments for noncosmetic indications. The 
risk of symptoms is probably greatest in children treated for spasticity, but symptoms can also 
occur in adults treated for spasticity and other conditions.
Reduced blinking after BoNT/A product injection to the orbicularis muscle can lead to corneal 
exposure, persistent epithelial defect, and corneal ulceration with perforation. In the use of 
another BoNT/A product for treatment of blepharospasm, 1 case of corneal perforation in an 
aphakic eye requiring corneal grafting has occurred because of this effect.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
19

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
20
3.
Primary
To evaluate the 
long-term safety of 
repeat treatments of 
MT10109L in 
participants with 
moderate to severe
GL, LCL, or both 
(GL and LCL)Incidence of adverse events, change from baseline in vital signs, and presence of binding 
and neutralizing antibodies
Othera
aThere are no objectives associated with the efficacy endpoints in this study.
bBaseline is from the lead-in studies for all efficacy endpoints in this study. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
21
4.
4.1.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
22

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
23
4.2.
MT10109L is a BoNT/A product being developed for IM injection in the treatment of GL and 
LCL. These indications are currently treated with other BoNT/A products. 
This study is designed to assess the 
long- term safety of repeat treatments of MT10109L in the treatment of GL, LCL, or both (GL
and LCL). Efficacy after repeated treatments will also be expl ored.
4.3.
4.4.
The end of the study is defined as the date of the last scheduled procedure shown in the SoA for 
the last participant in the study globally.
A participant is considered to have completed the study if he/she has completed all phases of the 
study including the last scheduled procedure shown in the SoA.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
24
5.
Participants who complete Studies MT10109L-001 (GL), MT10109L-002 (LCL),
MT10109L-005 (GL with or without LCL), and MT10109L-006 (LCL with or without GL) will 
be eligible to enroll into this 24-month open-label extension study.
Prospective approval of protocol deviations to recruitment and enrollment criteria, also known as 
protocol waivers or exemptions, is not permitted.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
25

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
26
5.3.
No restrictions are required.
5.4.
.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
27
6.
Study intervention is defined as any investigational intervention(s), marketed product(s), or
placebo intended to be administered to a study participant according to the study protocol.
Retreatment criteria are described in Section 6.6.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
28
6.1.2.
Only trained and medically qualified physicians experienced with BoNT/A injections are 
authorized to administer the study interventions. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
29
The GL study interventions will be administered as IM injections at 5 injection sites in the 
glabellar complex, 2 in each corrugator muscle and 1 in the procerus ( Figure 6-1 A). The LCL 
study interventions will be administered as bilaterally symmetrical IM injections at 3 injection 
sites in the lateral aspect of each orbicularis oculi ( Figure 6-2 A). When GL and LCL are treated 
together, the appropriate injection technique for each area will be followed, as described below.
Participants must be observed for adverse events for 30 minutes after each study intervention
injection.
Glabellar Line Injection Technique
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
30

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
31

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
32
GL and LCL Participants
GL and LCL will be treated together, following the appropriate injection technique for each area, 
as described above.
6.2.
1. The investigator or designee must confirm appropriate temperature conditions have been 
maintained during transit for all study intervention received and any discrepancies are 
reported and resolved before use of the study intervention.
2. Only participants enrolled in the study may receive study intervention, and only authorized 
site personnel may administer study intervention. All study intervention must be stored in a 
secure, environmentally controlled, and monitored (manual or automated) area in accordance 
with the labeled storage conditions with access limited to the investigator and authorized site 
personnel.
3. The investigator, institution, or the head of the medical institution (where applicable) is 
responsible for study intervention accountability, reconciliation, and record maintenance 
(ie, receipt, reconciliation, and final disposition records).
4. Further guidance and information for the final disposition of unused study interventions are 
provided in the study manual.
All unused study intervention and empty vials must be returned to the sponsor at the termination 
of the study. Unit counts will be performed when the study intervention is returned, and all study 
intervention must be accounted for. Unused drug supplies and empty vials will be returned to the 
sponsor.
6.3.
This is an open-label study. 
The participant s identification number from the lead-in Phase 3 study will be used in this 
extension study. This will serve as the participant identification number on all study documents.
.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
33
6.4.
Participants will receive all doses under the direct supervision of study site personnel. Study 
intervention compliance will not be calculated.
The study site will keep an accurate drug disposition record that specifies the amount of study 
intervention administered to each participant and the date of administration.
6.5.
The use of any concomitant medication or vaccine (including prescription or over-the-counter
medication, vitamins, and/or herbal supplements) CRF at 
each visit along with the reason the medication is taken.
At each study visit, study site personnel will question each participant specifically on the use of 
concomitant medications. Study site personnel must notify the sponsor immediately if a 
participant consumes any concomitant medications not permitted by the protocol. Participants
who admit to using prohibited concomitant medications may be discontinued from the study at 
the discretion of the investigator or sponsor.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
34
6.5.2.
Any medication or vaccine (including prescription or over-the-counter medication, vitamins, 
and/or herbal supplements) that the participant is receiving at the time of enrollment or receives 
during the study must be recorded along with:
investigator. If the permissibility of a specific medication/intervention is in question, please 
contact the sponsor.
The sponsor must be contacted if there are any questions regarding concomitant or prior therapy.
Any medication taken during the study between the date of the first dose of study intervention 
and the date of the end-of-study visit will be recorded in the eCRF as a concomitant medication; 
any medication started after the end-of-study visit will not be considered a concomitant 
medication and should not be captured in the eCRF.
6.5.3.
Rescue medicine is not applicable.
6.6.
This protocol does not allow for alteration from the currently outlined dosing schedule.
Participants entering from the lead-in Phase 3 studies will receive open-label study intervention
based on meeting retreatment criteria.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
35
6.7.
There is no further intervention following the end of the study.
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
36 
 
7. 
A premature discontinuation will occur if a participant who signs the ICF ceases participation in 
the study, regardless of circumstances, before the completion of the protocol-defined study 
procedures.  
Notification of early participant discontinuation from the study and the reason for 
discontinuation will be made to the sponsor and will be clearly documented on the appropriate 
eCRF. 
Definitions of the standard terms are provided in Appendix 5 . 
Reasons for discontinuation from the study intervention and/or the study may include the 
following commonly used terms: 
 
Adverse event 
Lost to follow-up 
Lack of efficacy 
Other 
Physician decision 
Pregnancy 
Protocol deviation 
Site terminated by sponsor 
Study terminated by sponsor 
Withdrawal by subject 
 
7.1. 
Study intervention must be discontinued for the following reasons: 
 Pregnancy (see Appendix 7 and Section 8.3.5. Pregnancy) 
 Other safety criteria (eg, hypersensitivity to the study intervention, failure to continue to meet 
study entry criteria) 
Women who test positive for urine pregnancy test will NOT receive further interventions and 
will be discontinued from the study. They must complete study exit procedures and be followed 
up for pregnancy outcome. See the SoA  for data to be collected at the time of intervention 
discontinuation and follow-up and for any further evaluations that need to be completed. 
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
37 
 
7.2. 
 A participant may withdraw from the study at any time at his/her own requestor may be 
withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the investigator for safety, behavioral, compliance, 
or administrative reasons. 
 If the participant withdraws consent for disclosure of future information, the sponsor may 
retain and continue to use any data collected before such a withdrawal of consent. 
 See the SoA  for data to be collected at the time of study discontinuation and follow-up and 
for any further evaluations that need to be completed. 
7.3. 
A participant will be considered lost to follow-up if he or she repeatedly fails to return for 
scheduled visits and is unable to be contacted by the study site. 
The following actions must be taken if a participant fails to return to the study site for a required 
study visit: 
 The study site must attempt to contact the participant and reschedule the missed visit as soon 
as possible and counsel the participant on the importance of maintaining the assigned visit 
schedule and ascertain whether or not the participant wishes to and/or should continue in the 
study. 
 Before a participant is deemed lost to follow-up, the investigator or designee must make 
every effort to regain contact with the participant (where possible, 3 telephone calls and, if 
necessary, a certified letter to the participant
methods). These contact attempts will be documented in the participant . 
 Should the participant continue to be unreachable, he/she will be considered to have 
withdrawn from the study. 
Discontinuation of specific sites or of the study as a whole are handled as part of Appendix 1. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
38
8.
Study procedures and their timing are summarized in the SoA. Protocol waivers or 
exemptions are not allowed.
Immediate safety concerns must be discussed with the sponsor immediately upon occurrence 
or awareness to determine if the participant should continue or discontinue study 
intervention.
Adherence to the study design requirements, including those specified in the SoA, is essential 
and required for study conduct.
All assessments must be completed after the participant removes their make-up (if wearing 
any) and before administration of study intervention. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
39

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
40
8.2.
Planned timepoints for all safety assessments are provided in the SoA.
8.2.1.
The investigator will question the participant to ascertain whether any adverse events were 
experienced since the previous visit. Additionally, at treatment visits, the participants will be 
observed for 30 minutes following study intervention. All pertinent information regarding 
adverse events (ie, date of onset and stop, duration, outcome, severity, relationship to study 
intervention, action or treatment required) will be obtained and recorded in the source documents 
and appropriate eCRF page.
8.2.2.
Pulse rate (beats per minute): Participants are to be seated for at least 2 minutes, and pulse 
rate will be counted over 60 seconds and recorded in the source document and eCRF as 
beats per minute.
Blood pressure (mm Hg): Participants are to be seated for at least 2 minutes, and 
systolic/diastolic blood pressure will be measured.
Respiration rate (breaths per minute): Participants are to be seated for at least 2 minutes, and 
breaths will be counted for 30 seconds and multiplied by 2.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
41
8.2.3.
Urine dipstick kits will be used to conduct pregnancy tests at the timepoints specified in the SoA,
or more fre discretion.
8.2.4.
Suicidal risk monitoring is not applicable for this study.
8.3.
The definitions of an adverse event or SAE can be found in Appendix 3.
Adverse events will be reported by the participant.
The investigator and any qualified designees are responsible for detecting, documenting, and 
recording events that meet the definition of an adverse event or SAE and remain responsible for 
following up adverse events that are serious, considered related to the study intervention or study 
procedures, or that caused the participant to discontinue the study intervention (see Section 7).
The following expected adverse drug reactions are based on BOTOX clinical trial data for the 
treatment of GL and LCL ( Tables 8-1 and 8-2, respectively).
Table 8-1 Expected Adverse Reactions for Treatment of Glabellar Lines
Expected Adverse ReactionsaIncidence
Eyelid ptosis 3%
Facial pain 1%
Facial paresis 1%
Muscular weakness 1%
aData are based on BOTOX glabellar lines clinical trial data ( BOTOX Cosmetic US Package Insert, 201 7)
Table 8-2 Expected Adverse Reactions for Treatment of Lateral Canthal Lines
Expected Adverse ReactionsaIncidence
Eyelid oedema 1%
aData are based on BOTOX lateral canthal lines clinical trial data ( BOTOX Cosmetic US Package Insert, 2017 )
The adverse drug reactions of eyelid edema, eyelid ptosis, facial pain, facial paresis, and 
muscular weakness with BOTOX are usually mild in severity, reversible, and have a low 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
42
incidence. Therefore, no treatment for these reactions is recommended. If these reactions are 
moderate or severe, medical help should be sought as needed.
8.3.1.
All adverse events will be collected from the signing of the ICF at the timepoints specified in the 
SoA (Section 1.3), and as observed or reported spontaneously by study participants until 30 days 
Medical occurrences that begin before the start of study intervention, but after obtaining 
informed consent will be recorded in the adverse event section of the eCRF.
All SAEs will be collected from the signing of the ICF study at the timepoints specified in the 
SoA (Section 1.3), and as observed or reported spontaneously by study participants, until at least 
12 weeks after the last administration of MT10109L intervention. 
All SAEs will be recorded and reported to the sponsor or designee within 24 hours, as indicated 
inAppendix 3. The investigator will submit any updated SAE data to the sponsor within 
24 hours of it being available.
Investigators are not obligated to actively seek adverse event or SAE information after 
conclusion of the study participation. However, if the investigator learns of any SAE, including a 
death, at any time after a participant has been discharged from the study, and he/she considers 
the event to be reasonably related to the study intervention or study participation, the investigator 
must promptly notify the sponsor.
The method of recording, evaluating, and assessing causality of adverse events and SAEs and the 
procedures for completing and transmitting SAE reports are provided in Appendix 3.
8.3.2.
Care will be taken not to introduce bias when detecting adverse events and/or SAEs. Open-ended 
and nonleading verbal questioning of the participant is the preferred method to inquire about 
adverse event occurrences.
8.3.3.
After the initial adverse event/SAE report, the investigator is required to proactively follow each 
participant at subsequent visits/contacts. All TEAEs including SAEs, AESIs (Section 8.3.6), and 
TEAEs that lead to study discontinuation will be followed until resolution, stabilization, the 
event is otherwise explained, or the participant is lost to follow-up (as defined in Section 7.3).
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
43 
 
The investigator is obligated to perform or arrange for the conduct of supplemental 
measurements and/or evaluations as medically indicated or as requested by the sponsor to 
elucidate the nature and/or causality of the adverse event or SAE as fully as possible. This may 
include additional laboratory tests or investigations, histopathological examinations, or 
consultation with other health care professionals. 
If a participant dies during participation in the study or during a recognized follow-up period, the 
investigator will provide the sponsor with a copy of any postmortem findings including 
histopathology. 
New or updated information will be recorded in the originally completed eCRF. 
The investigator will submit any updated SAE data to the sponsor within 24 hours of receipt of 
the information. 
8.3.4. 
 Prompt notification by the investigator to the sponsor of an SAE is essential so that legal 
obligations and ethical responsibilities towards the safety of participants and the safety of a 
study intervention under clinical investigation are met.  
 The sponsor has a legal responsibility to notify both the local regulatory authority and other 
regulatory agencies about the safety of a study intervention under clinical investigation. The 
sponsor will comply with country-specific regulatory requirements relating to safety 
reporting to the regulatory authority, IRBs/IECs, and investigators.  
 Investigator safety reports must be prepared for SUSARs according to local regulatory 
requirements and sponsor policy and forwarded to investigators as necessary. 
 An investigator who receives an investigator safety report describing an SAE or other 
specific safety information (eg, summary or listing of SAEs) from the sponsor will review 
and then file it along with the ochure and will notify the IRB/IEC, if 
appropriate according to local requirements. 
8.3.5. 
 Urine pregnancy testing will be conducted for women of childbearing potential prior to each 
study intervention and at the study exit visit. See Appendix 7 for detailed information on 
definition of women of childbearing potential, use of contraceptives, and pregnancy.  To minimize the risk of pregnancy, all women of childbearing potential must agree to use a 
highly effective or acceptable contraception method (Appendix 7) consistently and correctly 
throughout the duration of the study. For participants of childbearing potential in Germany 
and Belgium , only highly effective contraception methods are allowed for this study. 
 Women who test positive for urine pregnancy test will NOT receive further intervention and 
will be discontinued from the study.  
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
44
Women who test positive for urine pregnancy test must complete end-of-study procedures 
and be followed up for pregnancy outcome.
Any termination of pregnancy will be reported, regardless of fetal status (presence or absence 
of anomalies) or indication for the procedure
If a pregnancy is reported, the investigator should inform the sponsor within 24 hours of
learning of the pregnancy and should follow the procedures outlined in Appendix 7.Abnormal pregnancy outcomes (eg, spontaneous abortion, fetal death, stillbirth, congenital 
anomalies, ectopic pregnancy) or genetic abnormalities (whether leading to an elective 
abortion or not) are considered SAEs.
8.3.7.Medication error refers to any unintended error in the dosing and/or administration of the study 
intervention as per instructions in the protocol. Medication errors generally fall into 4 categories 
as follows:
Wrong study intervention
Wrong dose (including dosing regimen, strength, form, concentration, amount)
Wrong route of administration
Wrong participant (ie, not administered to the intended participant)
Medication errors include occurrences of overdose and underdose of the study intervention.
Overdose: Unintentional administration of a quantity of the study intervention given per 
administration or per day that is above the maximum recommended dose according to the 
reference safety information or protocol for the study intervention or comparator as applicable. 
See Section 8.4 for information on the treatment of overdose. 
Underdose: Unintentional administration of a quantity of the study intervention given per 
administration or per day that is under the minimum recommended dose according to the 
protocol. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
45
8.4.
Overdose of MT10109L is a relative term and depends upon dose, site of injection, and 
underlying tissue properties. Signs and symptoms of overdose are likely not to be apparent 
immediately postinjection. Excessive doses may produce local, or distant, generalized and 
profound neuromuscular paralysis.
Because MT10109L is administered as injections by physicians, for this study, the chance of 
overdose is extremely low. Should accidental injection or oral ingestion occur, or overdose be 
suspected, the participant should be medically monitored for up to several weeks for progressive 
signs or symptoms of systemic muscular weakness that could be local or distant from the site of 
injection, which may include ptosis, diplopia, dysphagia, dysarthria, generalized weakness, or 
respiratory failure. For GL or LCL, eyelid ptosis, diplopia, and vision blurred are known local 
effects of the toxin. These participants should be considered for further medical evaluation and 
appropriate medical therapy immediately instituted, which may include hospitalization.
If the musculature of the oropharynx and esophagus is affected, aspiration may occur, which may 
lead to development of aspiration pneumonia. If the respiratory muscles become paralyzed or 
sufficiently weakened, intubation and assisted respiration may be necessary until recovery takes 
place. Supportive care could involve the need for a tracheostomy and/or prolonged mechanical 
ventilation, in addition to other general supportive care.
In the event of an overdose, the investigator should educate the participant, monitor the course of 
overdose, contact the MSP as needed, document the quantity of the excess dose, associated 
adverse events as well as the duration of the overdose in the eCRF.8.5.
Pharmacokinetic parameters are not evaluated in this study.
8.6.
Pharmacodynamic parameters are not evaluated in this study.
8.7.
Genetics are not evaluated in this study.
8.8.
Immunogenicity Assessments
The presence of antidrug antibodies, including binding antibodies and neutralizing antibodies to 
MT10109L, will be assessed during the course of the study using validated assays.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
46
A 2-stage assay approach will be used for the detection of binding antibodies against MT10109L 
will be screened for the presence of binding antibodies using the validated ELISA in a 3-tier 
format (screening, confirmation, and titering). The screen positive serum samples will be 
subsequently immunodepleted to confirm that the binding antibodies are specific to MT10109L
and titered to assess the extent of antibodies present. In Stage 2, only samples that are confirmed 
positive in the ELISA will be tested for neutralizing antibodies to MT10109L.
8.9.
Medical resource utilization and health economics parameters are not evaluated in this study.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
47
9.
9.1.
Not applicable.
9.2.
For this long- term follow -up study, no formal statistical power/sample size calculation was used. 
Approximately 800 participants are anticipated to be enrolled into this study. 
9.3.
9.4.
The SAP will be developed and finalized before database lock and will describe the participant 
populations to be included in the analyses, and procedures for accounting for missing, unused, 
and spurious data. This section is a summary of the planned statistical analyses of the efficacy
endpoints.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
48

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
49
9.4.2.
The safety parameters will include:
Adverse events
Vital signs
Immunogenicity analyses
.
An adverse event that occurs more than 30 days after study exit will not be counted as a TEAE.
An adverse event will be considered a TESAE if it is a TEAE that additionally meets any SAE 
criteria.
The number and percentage of participants reporting TEAEs in each study intervention group 
will be tabulated by system organ class and preferred term and by system organ class, preferred 
term, and severity .
The number and percentage of participants reporting treatment-related TEAEs in each study 
intervention group will be tabulated by system organ class and preferred term by MT10109L
cycle.
If more than 1 adverse event is coded to the same preferred term for the same participant, the 
participant will be counted only once for that preferred term using the most severe and most 
related occurrence for the summarizations by severity and by relationship to MT10109L
intervention.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
50
Summary tables will be provided for participants with SAEs and participants with adverse events
leading to discontinuation if 5 or more participants reported such events. Listings of all adverse 
events, SAEs, and adverse events leading to discontinuation by participant will be presented.
The definitions of an adverse event and SAE can be found in Appendix 3.
Descriptive summaries (n, mean, SD, median, minimum, and maximum) of actual values and 
changes from baseline will be calculated for vital signs (systolic and diastolic blood pressure,
pulse and respiration rate). These summaries will be presented by study intervention for each 
intervention and by visit .
9.4.3.
Immunogenicity results, manifested as the presence of binding antibodies and neutralizing 
antibodies to MT10109L, will be summarized in a table.
9.5.
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
51 
 
10. 
10.1. 
10.1.1. 
 This study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol and with the following: 
 Consensus ethical principles derived from international guidelines including the 
Declaration of Helsinki and CIOMS International Ethical Guidelines 
 Applicable ICH/ISO GCP guidelines 
 Applicable laws and regulations 
 The protocol, protocol amendments, ICF, rochure, and other relevant 
documents (eg, advertisements) must be submitted to an IRB/IEC by the investigator and 
reviewed and approved by the IRB/IEC before the study is initiated.  
 Any amendments to the protocol will require IRB/IEC approval before implementation of 
changes made to the study design, except for changes necessary to eliminate an immediate 
hazard to study participants.  
 The investigator will be responsible for the following: 
 Providing written summaries of the status of the study to the IRB/IEC annually or more 
frequently in accordance with the requirements, policies, and procedures established by 
the IRB/IEC 
 Notifying the IRB/IEC of SAEs or other significant safety findings as required by 
IRB/IEC procedures 
 Providing oversight of the overall conduct of the study at the site and adherence to 
requirements of applicable local regulations, for example 21 CFR, ICH guidelines, the 
IRB/IEC, and European regulation 536/2014 for clinical studies (if applicable) 
10.1.2. 
Investigators and subinvestigators will provide the sponsor with sufficient, accurate financial 
information as requested to allow the sponsor to submit complete and accurate financial 
certification or disclosure statements to the appropriate regulatory authorities. Investigators are 
responsible for providing information on financial interests during the course of the study and for 
1 year after completion of the study. 
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
52 
 
10.1.3. 
 The investigator or his/her representative will explain the nature of the study to the 
participant or his/her legally authorized representative and answer all questions regarding the 
study.  
 Participants must be informed that their participation is voluntary. Participants or their 
legally authorized representatives will be required to sign a statement of informed consent 
that meets the requirements of 21 CFR 50, local regulations, ICH guidelines, HIPAA 
requirements, where applicable, and the IRB/IEC or study center.   The medical record must include a statement that written informed consent was obtained 
before the participant was enrolled in the study and the date the written consent was obtained. 
The authorized person obtaining the informed consent must also sign the ICF.  Participants must be reconsented to the most current version of the ICF(s) during their 
participation in the study.  
 
authorized representative.  
10.1.4. 
 Participants will be assigned a unique identifier. Any participant records or datasets that are 
transferred to the sponsor will contain the identifier only; participant names or any 
information which would make the participant identifiable will not be transferred.  
 The participant must be informed that his/her personal study-related data will be used by the 
sponsor in accordance with local data protection law. The level of disclosure must also be 
explained to the participant.  
 The participant must be informed that his/her medical records may be examined by clinical 
quality assurance auditors or other authorized personnel appointed by the sponsor, by 
appropriate IRB/IEC members, and by inspectors from regulatory authorities. 
10.1.5. 
 Study data and information may be published in nonpromotional, peer-reviewed publications 
either by or on behalf of the sponsor.  
 Clinical study reports, safety updates, and annual reports will be provided to regulatory 
authorities as required. 
 Company-sponsored study information and tabular study results will be posted on the US 
www.ClinicalTrials.gov and other publicly accessible 
sites. 
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
53 
 
10.1.6. 
 All participant data relating to the study will be recorded on printed or eCRFs unless 
transmitted to the sponsor or designee electronically (eg, laboratory data). The investigator is 
responsible for verifying that data entries are accurate and correct by physically or 
electronically signing the eCRF.  
 The investigator must maintain accurate documentation (source data) that supports the 
information entered in the eCRF.  
 The investigator must permit study-related monitoring, audits, IRB/IEC review, and 
regulatory agency inspections and provide direct access to source data documents.  
 The sponsor or designee is responsible for the data management of this study including 
quality checking of the data.  
 Study monitors will perform ongoing source data verification to confirm that data entered 
into the eCRF by authorized site personnel are accurate, complete, and verifiable from source 
documents; that the safety and rights of participants are being protected; and that the study is 
being conducted in accordance with the currently approved protocol and any other study 
agreements, ICH GCP, and all applicable regulatory requirements.  
 Records and documents, including signed ICFs, pertaining to the conduct of this study must 
be retained by the investigator as stated in the clinical trial agreement. No records may be 
destroyed during the retention period without the written approval of the sponsor. No records 
may be transferred to another location or party without written notification to the sponsor.  
10.1.7. 
 Source documents provide evidence for the existence of the participant and substantiate the 
 
 Data reported on the CRF or entered in the eCRF that are transcribed from source documents 
must be consistent with the source documents or the discrepancies must be explained. The 
investigator may need to request previous medical records or transfer records, depending on 
the study.  
 Definition of what constitutes source data can be found in Section 4.0 of ICH E6, Good 
Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guidance and must follow ALCOA, ie, records must be 
attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, and accurate.  
10.1.8. 
The sponsor designee reserves the right to close the study site or terminate the study at any time 
for any reason at the sole discretion of the sponsor. Study sites will be closed upon study 
completion. A study site is considered closed when all required documents and study supplies 
have been collected and a study-site closure visit has been performed. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
54
The investigator may initiate study-site closure at any time, provided there is reasonable cause 
and sufficient notice is given in advance of the intended termination.
Reasons for the early closure of a study site by the sponsor or investigator may include but are 
not limited to:
Failure of the investigator to comply with the protocol, the requirements of the IRB/IEC or 
local health authorities, the sponsors procedures, or GCP guidelines
Inadequate recruitment of participants by the investigator
Discontinuation of further study intervention development
10.1.10.
The investigator is responsible for compliance with the protocol at the investigational site and 
ensure the availability of appropriate study personnel and compliance with GCP regulations and 
procedures. Trainings are provided by the sponsor to discuss the protocol procedures and study 
requirements. A representative of the sponsor will make frequent contact with the investigator 
and his/her research staff and will conduct regular monitoring visits at the site to review 
participant and study intervention accountability records for compliance with the protocol. 
Protocol deviations will be discussed with the investigator upon identification. The use of the 
data collected for the participant will be discussed to determine if the data are to be included in 
the analysis. The investigator will enter data that may be excluded from analysis as defined by 
the protocol deviation specifications. Significant protocol deviations will be reported to the 
IRB/IEC according to the IRB/I
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
55 
 
10.2. 
Not applicable. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
56
10.3.
10.3.1.
AE Definition
An AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical study participant, 
temporally associated with the use of study intervention, whether or not considered related 
to the study intervention.
An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease (new or exacerbated) temporally associated with 
the use of study intervention.
.
Events Meeting the AE Definition 
Any abnormal safety assessments (eg, vital signs measurements), including those that 
worsen from baseline, considered clinically significant in the medical and scientific 
judgment of the investigator (ie, not related to progression of underlying disease); for 
example:
The test result is associated with accompanying symptoms, and/or
The test result requires additional diagnostic testing or medical/surgical intervention, 
and/or
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
57 
 
 The test result leads to a change in study dosing (outside of any protocol-specified dose 
adjustments) or discontinuation from the study, significant additional concomitant drug 
treatment, or other therapy, and/or 
 The test result is considered to be an AE by the investigator or sponsor. 
 Exacerbation of a chronic or intermittent pre-existing condition including either an 
increase in frequency and/or intensity of the condition  New condition detected or diagnosed after study intervention administration even though 
it may have been present before the start of the study 
 Signs, symptoms, or the clinical sequelae of a suspected drug-drug interaction 
 Signs, symptoms, or the clinical sequelae of a suspected overdose of either study 
intervention or a concomitant medication. Overdose per se will not be reported as an AE 
or SAE unless it is an intentional overdose taken with possible suicidal/self-harming 
intent. Such overdoses should be reported regardless of sequelae. 
 Lack of efficacy or failure of expected pharmacological action per se will not be reported 
as an AE or SAE. Such instances will be captured in the efficacy assessments. However, 
the signs, symptoms, and/or clinical sequelae resulting from lack of efficacy will be 
reported as AEs or SAEs if they fulfil the definition of an AE or SAE.  
 
Events NOT Meeting the AE Definition  
 Any clinically significant abnormal laboratory findings or other abnormal safety 
assessments that are associated with the underlying disease, unless judged by the Merely 
repeating an abnormal test, in the absence of any of the above conditions, does not 
constitute an AE. Any abnormal test result that is determined to be an error does not 
require recording as an AE. 
 The disease/disorder being studied or expected progression, signs, or symptoms (clearly 
defined) of the disease/disorder being studied, unless more severe than expected for the 
 
 Medical or surgical procedure (eg, endoscopy, appendectomy): the condition that leads to 
the procedure is the AE 
 Situations in which an untoward medical occurrence did not occur (social and/or 
convenience admission to a hospital) 
 Anticipated day-to-day fluctuations of pre-existing disease(s) or condition(s) present or 
detected at the start of the study that do not worsen 
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
58 
 
10.3.2. 
SAEs must meet both the AE criteria described above and the seriousness criteria listed below. 
An SAE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence that, at any dose: 
a. Results in death 
b. Is life threatening 
The term life threatening  in the definition of serious  refers to an event in which the participant 
was at risk of death at the time of the event. It does not refer to an event, which hypothetically 
might have caused death, if it were more severe. 
c. Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization 
In general, hospitalization signifies that the participant has been detained (usually involving at 
least an overnight stay) at the hospital or emergency ward for observation and/or intervention 
Complications that occur during hospitalization are AEs. If a complication prolongs 
hospitalization or fulfills any other serious criteria, the event is serious. When in doubt as to 
whether hospitalization occurred or was necessary, the AE should be considered serious. 
Hospitalization for elective intervention of a pre-existing condition that did not worsen from 
baseline is not considered an AE. 
d. Results in persistent disability/incapacity 
 
life functions. 
 This definition is not intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as uncomplicated headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, and 
accidental trauma (eg, sprained ankle) which may interfere with or prevent everyday life 
functions but do not constitute a substantial disruption.  
e. Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect 
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
59 
 
f. Other situations: 
 Medical or scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether SAE reporting is 
appropriate in other situations such as important medical events that may not be 
immediately life threatening or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize the 
participant or may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other 
outcomes listed in the above definition. These events should usually be considered 
serious. 
Examples of such events include invasive or malignant cancers, intensive intervention in 
an emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm, blood dyscrasias or 
convulsions that do not result in hospitalization, or development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.  
10.3.3. 
AE and SAE Recording 
 When an AE or SAE occurs, it is the responsibility of the investigator to review all  
documentation (eg, hospital progress notes, laboratory reports, and diagnostics reports) 
related to the event. 
 The investigator will then record all relevant AE or SAE information in the eCRF. 
 It is not  
records to the sponsor in lieu of completion of the AE or SAE eCRF page. 
 There may be instances when copies of medical records for certain cases are requested by 
the sponsor. In this case, all participant identifiers, with the exception of the participant 
number, will be redacted on the copies of the medical records before submission to the 
sponsor.  The investigator will attempt to establish a diagnosis of the event based on signs, 
symptoms, and/or other clinical information. Whenever possible, the diagnosis (not the 
individual signs/symptoms) will be documented as the AE/SAE. 
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
60 
 
Assessment of Intensity 
MILD A type of adverse event that is usually transient and may require only minimal 
treatment or therapeutic intervention. The event does not generally interfere with 
usual activities of daily living. 
MODERATE A type of adverse event that is usually alleviated with additional specific 
therapeutic intervention. The event interferes with usual activities of daily living, 
causing discomfort but poses no significant or permanent risk of harm to the 
research participant. 
SEVERE A type of adverse event that interrupts usual activities of daily living, or 
significantly affects clinical status, or may require intensive therapeutic 
intervention. 
An event is defined as serious  when it meets at least one of the predefined outcomes as 
described in the definition of an SAE, NOT when it is rated as severe. 
Assessment of Causality 
 The investigator is obligated to assess the relationship between study intervention and 
each occurrence of each AE or SAE. 
 A reasonable possibility  of a relationship conveys that there are facts, evidence, and/or 
arguments to suggest a causal relationship, rather than a relationship cannot be ruled out. 
 The investigator will use clinical judgment to determine the relationship. 
 Alternative causes, such as underlying disease(s), concomitant therapy, and other risk 
factors, as well as the temporal relationship of the event to study intervention 
administration will be considered and investigated. 
 The investigator will also consult the IB and/or product information, for marketed 
products, in his/her assessment. 
 For each AE or SAE, the investigator must  document in the medical notes that he/she has 
reviewed the AE or SAE and has provided an assessment of causality. 
 There may be situations in which an SAE has occurred and the investigator has minimal 
information to include in the initial report to the sponsor. However, it is very important 
that the investigator always make an assessment of causality for every event before 
the initial transmission of the SAE data to the sponsor.  The investigator may change his/her opinion of causality in light of follow-up information 
and send an SAE follow-up report with the updated causality assessment. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
61
The causality assessment is one of the criteria used when determining regulatory reporting 
requirements.
Follow-up of AEs and SAEs
See Section 8.3.3
10.3.4.
SAE Reporting
In rare circumstances and in the absence of facsimile equipment, notification by telephone 
is acceptable with a copy of the SAE form, sent by overnight mail or courier service.
Initial notification via telephone does not replace the need for the investigator to complete 
and sign the SAE form within the designated reporting time frames.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
62
10.4.
AE adverse event 
AESI adverse event of special interest
ANCOVA analysis of covariance
BoNT/A botulinum toxin type A
CFL
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIOMS Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
DVD digital versatile disc
ECG electrocardiogram
eCRF electronic case report form
ELISA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EU European Union
FDA US Food and Drug Administration
FSH follicle-stimulating hormone
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GL glabellar lines
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HRT hormonal replacement therapy
IB
ICF informed consent form
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
IEC institutional ethics committee
IM intramuscular
IND investigational new drug application
IRB institutional review board
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
63
ISO International Organization for Standardization
ITT intent-to-treat
IUD intrauterine device
IUS intrauterine hormone-releasing system
IWRS interactive web response system
LCL lateral canthal lines
LD 50 median lethal intraperitoneal dose
MSP medical safety physician
PRO patient-reported outcome
SAE serious adverse event
SAP statistical analysis plan
SoA schedule of activities
SUSAR suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions
TCA trichloroacetic acid
TEAE treatment-emergent adverse event
TESAE treatment-emergent SAE
U unit
UFL upper facial lines
US United States
WOCBP woman of childbearing potential
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
64 
 
10.5. 
  
Adverse event Any untoward medical occurrence in a participant 
or clinical investigation subject administered a 
pharmaceutical product and which does not 
necessarily have a causal relationship with this 
treatment. An AE can therefore be any unintended 
sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), 
symptom, or disease temporally associated with 
the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, 
whether or not related to the medicinal 
(investigational) product. For further information, 
see the ICH Guideline for Clinical Safety Data 
Management: Definitions and Standards for 
Expedited Reporting (modified from ICH E2A) 
Synonyms: side effect, adverse experience. See 
also serious adverse event, serious adverse 
experience. (CDISC glossary) Completed To possess every necessary or normal part or 
component or step; having come or been brought 
to a conclusion (NCI) 
Death The absence of life or state of being dead (NCI) 
Disease relapse The return of a disease after a period of remission 
Failure to meet randomization criteria An indication that the subject has been unable to 
fulfill/satisfy the criteria required for assignment 
into a randomized group 
Lack of efficacy The lack of expected or desired effect related to a 
therapy (NCI) 
Lost to follow-up The loss or lack of continuation of a subject to 
follow-up 
Non-compliance with study drug An indication that a subject has not agreed with or 
followed the instructions related to the study 
medication (NCI) 
Other Different than the one(s) previously specified or 
mentioned (NCI) Physician decision A position, opinion or judgment reached after 
consideration by a physician with reference to 
subject (NCI) 
Pregnancy Pregnancy is the state or condition of having a 
developing embryo or fetus in the body (uterus), 
after union of an ovum and spermatozoon, during 
the period from conception to birth. (NCI) Progressive disease A disease process that is increasing in extent or 
severity (NCI) 
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
65 
 
Protocol deviation An event or decision that stands in contrast to the 
guidelines set out by the protocol (NCI) 
Recovery A healing process and/or an outcome implying 
relative health. The term is typically used in the 
context of direct and indirect effects of sickness 
or injury. (NCI) Screen failure The potential subject who does not meet one or 
more criteria required for participation in a trial Site terminated by sponsor An indication that a clinical study was stopped at 
a particular site by its sponsor (NCI) 
Study terminated by sponsor An indication that a clinical study was stopped by 
its sponsor (NCI) Technical problems A problem with some technical aspect of a 
clinical study, usually related to an instrument 
(NCI) 
Withdrawal by parent/guardian An indication that a study participant has been 
removed from the study by the parent or legal 
guardian 
Withdrawal by subject An indication that a study participant has 
removed itself from the study (NCI)  
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
66 
 
10.6. 
Parameter Group Parameter Value 
Trial information Trial Title A Multicenter, Long-term, Open-label 
Study to Evaluate the Safety of 
MT10109L (NivobotulinumtoxinA) for 
the Treatment of Glabellar Lines and 
Lateral Canthal Lines  Clinical Study Sponsor Medytox, Inc.  
 Trial Phase Classification Phase 3 
 Trial Indication Glabellar Lines and Lateral Canthal Lines 
 Trial Indication Type Intervention 
 Trial Type Safety 
 Trial Length Approximately 24 months  
 Planned Country of Investigational Sites United States, Canada, European Union, 
and Russia 
 Planned Number of Participants Approximately 800 participants 
 FDA-Regulated Device Study No 
 FDA -Regulated Drug Study  Yes 
 Pediatric Study  No 
Participant 
information Diagnosis Group Participants who completed lead-in 
Phase 3 studies MT10109L-001 (GL), 
MT10109L-002 (LCL), MT10109L-005 
(GL with or without LCL), and 
MT10109L-006 (LCL with or without 
GL) 
 Healthy Participant  Indicator  No 
 Planned Minimum Age of Participant s 19 
 Planned Maximum Age of Participants Not applicable 
(66 years of age for studies in Russia)  
 Sex of Participants  Both  
 Stable Disease Minimum Duration  Not applicable  
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
67
Parameter Group Parameter Value
Interventions Investigational Therapy or Intervention MT10109L (NivobotulinumtoxinA)
Intervention Type Drug
Pharmacological Class of Invest. Therapy NivobotulinumtoxinA
Dose Units 4 U per 0.1 mL
Dosing Frequency Up to 9 interventions
Route of Administration Intramuscular
Current Therapy or Intervention Not applicable
Added on to Existing Intervention s No
Control Type None
Comparative Intervention Name Not applicable
Trial design Study Type Interventional
Intervention Model Open -label
Planned Number of Arms 3
Trial is Randomized No
Randomization Quotient Not applicable
Trial Blinding Schema Open -label
Stratification Factor Not applicable
Adaptive Design No
Study Stop Rules Not applicable
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
68 
 
10.7. 
10.7.1. 
Woman of Childbearing Potential (WOCBP) 
A woman is considered fertile following menarche and until becoming postmenopausal unless 
permanently sterile (see below). 
Women in the following cate gories are not considered WOCBP: 
1. Premenarchal 
2. Premenopausal female with 1 of the following: 
 Documented hysterectomy 
 Documented bilateral salpingectomy 
 Documented bilateral oophorectomy 
medical records, medical examination, or medical history interview. 
3. Postmenopausal female 
 A postmenopausal state is defined as no menses for 12 months without an alternative 
medical cause. A high FSH level in the postmenopausal range may be used to confirm a 
postmenopausal state in women not using hormonal contraception or HRT. However, in 
the absence of 12 months of amenorrhea, a single FSH measurement is insufficient.  
 Females on HRT and whose menopausal status is in doubt will be required to continue to 
use one of the nonestrogen hormonal highly effective contraception methods from the 
lead-in study if they wish to continue their HRT during the current study.  
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
69
10.7.2.
Female Participants
Table 10-1 Highly Effective Contraceptive Methods
Highly Effective Contraceptive Methods That Are User Dependenta
Failure rate of < 1% per year when used consistently and correctly
Combined (estrogen- and progestogen- containing) hormonal contraception associated with inhibition of ovulation 
Oral 
Intravaginal 
Transdermal 
Progestogen-only hormonal contraception associated with inhibition of ovulation
Oral 
Injectable 
Highly Effective Methods That Are User Independenta
Implantable progestogen-only hormonal contraception associated with inhibition of ovulation
IUD
IUS
Etonogestrel implant (ie, Nexplanon)
Bilateral tubal occlusion
Intrauterine copper contraceptive (ie, ParaGard)
Vasectomized Partner 
A vasectomized partner is a highly effective contraception method provided that the partner is the sole male 
sexual partner of the WOCBP and the absence of sperm has been confirmed. If not, an additional highly effective 
method of contraception should be used.
Sexual Abstinence 
Sexual abstinence is considered a highly effective method only if defined as refraining from heterosexual 
intercourse during the entire period of risk associated with the study intervention. The reliability of sexual 
abstinence needs to be evaluated in relation to the duration of the study and the preferred and usual lifestyle of the participant.
aTypical use failure rates may differ from those when used consistently and correctly. Use should be consistent 
with local regulations regarding the use of contraceptive methods for participants participating in clinical studies. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
70
Table 10-2 Acceptable Contraceptive Methods
Acceptable birth control methods that result in a failure of more than 1% per year include:
Progestogen-only oral hormonal contraception, where inhibition of ovulation is not the primary mode of 
action
Male or female condom with or without spermicide 
Cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide
Nonhormonal intrauterine device
A combination of male condom with either cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide (double barrier methods) 
are also considered acceptable, but not highly effective, birth control methods.10.7.3.
Pregnancy testing, with a sensitivity of  will be performed according to 
instructions provided in the pregnancy test kit .
WOCBP should only be included after a confirmed menstrual period and a negative highly 
sensitive urine pregnancy test at Day 1 and, if a participant meets retreatment criteria, a
negative urine pregnancy test prior to retreatment.
Additional pregnancy testing is not required during the study intervention period.
Pregnancy testing will be performed whenever a menstrual cycle is missed or when 
pregnancy is otherwise suspected.
10.7.4.
Female Participants Who Become Pregnant 
The investigator will collect pregnancy information on any female participant who becomes 
pregnant while participating in this study. Information will be recorded on the appropriate 
form and submitted to the sponsor within 24 hours
The participant will be followed to determine the outcome of the pregnancy. The 
investigator will collect follow-up information on the participant and the neonate, and the 
information will be forwarded to the sponsor. Generally, follow-up will not be required for 
longer than 6 to 8 weeks beyond the estimated delivery date. Any termination of pregnancy 
will be reported, regardless of fetal status (presence or absence of anomalies) or indication 
for the procedure.
While pregnancy itself is not considered to be an AE or SAE, any pregnancy complication 
will be reported as an AE or SAE. Abnormal pregnancy outcomes (eg, spontaneous 
abortion, fetal death, stillbirth, congenital abnormalities, ectopic pregnancy) or genetic 
abnormalities (whether leading to an elective abortion or not) are always considered to be an 
SAE and will be reported as such. Any poststudy pregnancy-related SAE considered 
reasonably related to the study intervention by the investigator will be reported to the 
 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
71 
 
sponsor as described in Section 8.3.4. While the investigator is not obligated to actively seek 
this information in former study participants, he or she may learn of an SAE through 
spontaneous reporting.  
 Any female participant who becomes pregnant while participating in the study will 
discontinue study intervention and be withdrawn from the study. 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
72

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
73

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
74

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
75

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
76

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
77

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
78

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
79

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
80

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
81

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
82

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
83

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
84

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
85

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
86

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
87

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
88

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
89

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
90
10.9.
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
91

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
92

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
93

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
94

CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5
MT10109L
95

 
CONFIDENTIAL Protocol MT10109L-004 AMD 5  
MT10109L 
96 
 
11. 
Beer KR. Comparative evaluation of the safety and efficacy of botulinum toxin type A and 
topical creams for treating moderate-to-severe glabellar rhytids. Dermatol Surg. 
2006;32:184-192. 
Blitzer A, Brin MF, Keen MS, Aviv JE. Botulinum toxin for the treatment of hyperfunctional 
lines of the face. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1993;119:1018-1022. 
BOTOX Cosmetic (onabotulinumtoxinA) for injection [package insert]. Irvine, CA: Allergan, 
Inc; October 2017. 
Brin MF, Boodhoo TI, Pogoda JM, James LM, Demos G, Terashima Y, et al. Safety and 
tolerability of onabotulinumtoxinA in the treatment of facial lines: A meta-analysis of individual 
patient data from global clinical registration studies in 1678 participants. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2009;61:961-970.e1-11. 
Ferreira MC, Salles AG, Gimenez R, Soares MFD. Complications with the use of botulinum 
toxin type A in facial rejuvenation: report of 8 cases. Aesthet Plast Surg. 2004;28:441-444. 
Finn CJ, Cox SE, Earl ML. Social implications of hyperfunctional facial lines. Dermatol Surg. 
2003;29:450-455.Garcia A,  
Garcia A, Fulton JE Jr. Cosmetic denervation of the muscles of facial expression with botulinum 
toxin: A dose-response study. Dermatol Surg. 1996;22:39-43.  
Khan JA. Aesthetic surgery: Diagnosing and healing the miscues of human facial expression. 
Ophthal Plastic Reconstr Surg. 2001;17:4-6. 
Koblenzer CS. Psychologic aspects of aging and the skin. Clin Dermatol. 1996;14:171-177. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 