 
Official Title: Neurobiology of a Mutation in Glycine Metabolism in Psychotic Disorders  
 
NCT number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: 11/11/2012  
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 2 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
 Protocol Title:  Neurobiology of a Mutation in Glycine Metabolism in Psychotic Disorders  
 
Principal Investigator:  Deborah L. Levy, Ph.D.  
 
Site Principal Investigator: Deborah L. Levy, Ph.D.  
 
Description of Subject Population:  4 members of a family in which two members have a 
mutation in glycine metabolism and two members do not.  
 
 
About this consent form  
 
Please read this form carefully.  It tells you important information about a research study.  A 
member of our research team will also talk to you about taking part in this research study.  
People who agree to take part in research studies are called “subjects.”  This term will be used 
throughout this consent form.  
 
If you have any questions about the research or about this form, please ask us.  Taking part in 
this research study is up to you.  If you decide to take part in this research study, you must sign 
this form to show that you want to take part.  We will give you a signed cop y of this form to 
keep.  
 
Why is this research study being done?  
 
Dr. Levy and colleagues at McLean Hospital are investigating the effects of a specific genetic 
mutation on brain structure and metabolism.   
 
Three magnetic resonance imaging techniques  
 
1) Diagnostic Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 2) Diffusion Tensor Imaging at 3T (3T MRI & DTI) 
and 3) Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy at 4T (4T MRS) are brain imaging techniques use 
magnetic fields and radio waves to give detailed anatomical and chemical pictures  of the brain, 
but involve no radiation. These techniques allow us to measure the levels of chemicals in the 
brain that help brain cells communicate with each other. Some of these chemicals are 
glutamate, GABA, glycine, and glutamine. The purpose of this s tudy is to examine the effects of 
a specific genetic mutation in glycine metabolism on brain levels of these chemicals. You have 
been asked to take part in this study because you have a specific mutation in glycine 
metabolism or are genetically related to someone who does. There may be up to 4 individuals 
enrolled in this study. The findings from these 4 individuals will be compared with large groups 
of adults diagnosed with bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, delusional 
disorder as w ell as from healthy adults. A condition of your participation in this study is that you 
also participate in other imaging studies and you will be asked to sign the consent forms for 
these studies as well. These other studies include Proton Magnetic Resonan ce Imaging and 
Spectroscopy Studies of Brain Chemistry in Bipolar Disorder, Schizophrenia, and Related 
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 3 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
Disorders and Proton Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Studies of Glutathione and Gamma -
aminobutyric Acid in Bipolar Disorder, Schizophrenia and Related Di sorders, both of which are 
directed by Dr. Dost Ongur. These procedures will be done at McLean Hospital.  
 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy  
Magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy will also be used to measure brain glycine levels 
before and f or 2 hours after a single oral dose of glycine. You will be asked to drink a mixture 
that contains up to about 30 grams of glycine and lemon juice. Glycine is an amino acid that 
exists naturally in the body. The typical diet contains about 2 grams of glyci ne/day.  High -protein 
foods, such as fish, meat, beans, and dairy products, contain glycine.  This procedure will 
measure how the brains of different people absorb and breakdown glycine. You have been 
asked to take part in this study because you have a spe cific mutation in glycine metabolism or 
are genetically related to someone who does. There may be up to 4 individuals enrolled in this 
study. The findings from these 4 individuals will be compared with large groups of healthy adult 
men. A condition of your  participation in this study is that you also participate in another imaging 
study and you will be asked to sign the consent form for this study as well. The other study is 
Acute Glycine Pharmacodynamic Study, directed by Dr. Marc J. Kaufman. This procedur e will 
be done at McLean Hospital.  
 
Neuropsychological Tests  
An additional procedure involves some neuropsychological tests that test things memory, 
attention, and planning. There may be up to 4 individuals enrolled in this study. The findings 
from these 4  individuals will be compared with large groups of adults diagnosed with bipolar 
disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, delusional disorder as well as from healthy 
adults.  
 
Dr. Levy and colleagues at McLean Hospital are also investigating whet her daily treatment with 
glycine will improve the beneficial effects of standard psychiatric drug treatment. There may be 
up to 2 individuals enrolled in this study. The findings from these 2 individuals will be compared 
while on glycine and on placebo (no  active substance).  
 
These studies are funded by the National Institute of Mental Health and the Brain and Behavior 
Research Foundation.  
 
How long will I take part in this research study?  
The imaging procedures at McLean will take place on several days. O n one day, you will have a 
health screen involving a physical exam, urine toxicology screen, a pregnancy test (if 
necessary), an EKG, a movement examination, and routine medical blood tests (5 cc of blood, 
less than 1 teaspoon) and urinalysis. These proced ures, along with the consenting procedures, 
will take about 3 hours.  
 
On another day there will be a structural MRI (at 3.0 T), which takes 15 minutes, and a 
spectroscopy a MRI at 4.0 T, which takes one hour.  The neuropsychological evaluation will 
take ab out 2 hours.  
 
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 4 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
These procedures will be carried out on consecutive days on two occasions, before the glycine -
placebo and open -label glycine trial, and at the end of the open -label glycine trial.  
 
On a different day, there will be the glycine administration and spectroscopy scans using a 4T 
scanner. The pre -glycine (or baseline) scan takes one hour. After the glycine drink, the scan will 
last 2 hours. This procedure will be carried out before the glycine -placebo and open -label 
glycine trial only.  
 
The glycine -placebo clinical treatment period will take 16 weeks. There will 6 weeks on glycine 
or placebo followed by 2 weeks of no treatment. There be another period of 6 weeks on glycine 
or placebo. If you received placebo during the first 6 -week period, you will receive glycine during 
the second, and vice versa. After the second 6 -week period, there be 2 weeks of no treatment.  
 
The open label glycine treatment period will last for 6 weeks. You will be receiving glycine 
during this time. In the 5th week you will be  flown to Boston to repeat the original scans (except 
for the glycine loading one) and other procedures, which will take about one week. Depending 
on scheduling issues, the three arms of the glycine clinical trial may occur in sequence or there 
may be a br eak in between them.  
 
Length of the Study:  
 
Part I:  
Baseline measures will take up to  9 days including travel time  
Part II:  
Glycine -Placebo and Open -label Glycine Clinical Trials will take up to 16 weeks.  
Part III:  
Glycine Extension Study will take up to  8 weeks  
Total Participation may take up to 25 weeks and 2 days including travel time.  
 
What will happen in this research study?  
Brain Imaging Scans at McLean Hospital  
The MRI and MRS studies conducted at the McLean Hospital Brain Imaging Center will use 
scanners that have field strengths of 1.5T, 3T and 4T. This refers to the amount of magnetism 
used to collect the brain image. The magnetic resonance (MR) scanner looks like a large 
cylinder with a tube running down the center. You will be asked to lie down  on your back on a 
foam -padded table and place your head into a special holder. The table will slide you inside the 
“hole” of the scanner. Soft foam rubber sponges may be placed on both sides of your head for 
comfort and to help keep your head from moving.  Because the scanner contains a strong 
magnet, you will be asked to remove all metal objects from your person including, but not limited 
to: watches, rings, necklaces, bracelets, earrings, other body piercings, belts, loose change, 
wallet (with credit card s), cell phones, items of clothing containing magnetic materials (for 
example, underwire bras, certain types of zippers), and shoes. These items will be secured in a 
safe place until your scan is completed. You will be able to remain in your street clothes . 
 
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 5 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
During the scanning procedure you will hear different sounds. Some of these sounds are loud 
and are part of the normal operation of the scanner. These noises vary with the type of scan 
being performed and include: sounds like a hammer hitting a piece of  wood, repetitive buzzing 
noises, and long series of loud beeps. Some scans are silent. These sounds, or combinations of 
them, may be repeated several times. In both scanners, you will be given earplugs to help 
muffle the sounds of the scanners and you can  also wear headphones. These headphones may 
further muffle the sounds, and they will allow you to more directly hear and speak to research 
staff and/or the technician. The longest session may be up to 50 minutes for the MRI scan and 
no more than 90 minutes  for the MRS scan. You will be given breaks between scanning 
sessions. You can talk during the preparation time and during breaks, but you should not talk 
during the actual scanning process. During scans, you should try to remain as still as possible. 
The entire time that you will be in the scanner will be about 50 minutes or 90 minutes. When 
your session is over the technician will move you out of the scanner and assist you from the 
table. You may feel cramped inside the scanner, but in the 3T MR scanner a  mirror has been 
placed so you can look out through the scanner "hole" into the scanning room. The technologist 
will be able to see and hear you at all times and you may end the procedure at any time. You 
will be given a squeeze -ball to hold while in both scanners. If you squeeze this ball, it will trigger 
an emergency alarm that will notify research staff and/or the technician that you need to be 
removed from the scanner.  
 
Glycine Imaging Study  
For the glycine imaging study, you will drink a single dose of  glycine, which will be mixed with 
lemon juice. Before you consume the glycine drink, magnetic resonance spectroscopy will be 
used to measure levels of chemicals in your brain. This scan will take about 1 hour. . After you 
drink the drink, the scan will be  repeated over the next two hours to measure changes in the 
levels of brain chemicals compared with baseline.   
 
Beginning at midnight before the scan, you will begin fasting overnight. You will not eat or drink  
any foods or drinks that contain caffeine o r smoke tobacco cigarettes on the day of the glycine 
study. When you come to McLean Hospital you will be asked to: 1) provide a urine sample, 
which will be analyzed for the presence of drugs of abuse, and 2) have your breath tested for 
alcohol and carbon m onoxide. If you are a woman, your urine will be tested for pregnancy. You 
will not be able to participate if your pregnancy test is positive.  
 
If your breath and urine screens are negative, you will undergo a baseline scan that will take 
about 1 hour. Aft er that, a catheter (IV) will be inserted into your arm and blood will be drawn to 
determine baseline blood serum glycine levels. Then you will drink the glycine drink (250 ml, 
about 8 ounces) over a 10 -minute period. After you drink the glycine drink, you  will be 
positioned in the 4.0 Tesla scanner for 2 hours to undergo repeat scans. After each scan, a 
small blood sample will be drawn using the catheter in your arm. The amount of blood taken 
from you during each sample is 5 ml. There will be up to 10 bloo d samples, for a total of 50 ml, 
or about 2 tablespoons. These blood samples will be sent to the Nathan Kline Institute in 
Orangeburg, NY, where they will be analyzed for glycine levels. By signing this consent form, 
you give permission for Dr. Raymond Suk ow and the Nathan Kline Institute permission to 
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 6 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
provide Dr. Levy and her colleagues with the results of any blood samples that were analyzed at 
NKI. 
 
The glycine drink is prepared using lemon juice and dissolved glycine powder. If you know that 
you are all ergic to either of them you must let us know in advance. You will be asked to notify 
your personal physician that you will be participating in a study in which you will drink a mixture 
of glycine powder and lemon juice to make sure that you can safely part icipate. Your physician 
will be asked to provide a written statement indicating that he/she believes that there is no 
medical reason why you should not be able to drink lemon juice or glycine.  
 
Neuropsychological Tests  
The neuropsychological tests assess aspects of cognitive function like memory, attention, and 
planning.  
 
Glycine -Placebo and Open -label Glycine Clinical Trials  
After the first set of scans and procedures, you will receive either placebo or glycine for 6 weeks 
each, with two weeks of no extra  treatment between the two treatment periods. Neither you nor 
the investigators will know which substance you are taking. You will continue to take your usual 
medications as prescribed. Your medications will not be changed as part of your participation in 
this study. By signing this consent form, you give Dr. Levy permission to be notified by your 
psychiatrist or internist if any of your medications changes, what changes occurred and the date 
on which the changes occurred.  
 
Glycine comes in the form of a po wder. The placebo will look and taste like glycine. It will 
consist of Isomaltulose (Palatinose®), a fully digestible, low glycemic, and  tooth -friendly sugar 
that is lactose - and gluten -free.   
 
The McLean Hospital Pharmacy will know whether you are receiv ing glycine or placebo. The 
McLean Pharmacy will prepare the appropriate dose of glycine powder or placebo in a re -
closable plastic bottle. Each bottle will be marked with a fill line, indicating how much cold water 
should be added to the glycine or placeb o dose. Each dose will include both the bottle of glycine 
or placebo and individual packets of lemon crystals and Splenda. Each dose will be labeled by 
the pharmacy with the date, dose (breakfast, lunch, dinner) and instructions (for example, fill the 
bottle with cold water to the fill line, shake, pour into a glass, add lemon crystals and Splenda. 
May be mixed with ice in a blender. Drink over a 15 -20 minute period after a meal). Each dose 
will be in a self -contained package with instructions. Two weeks wo rth of doses will be FedEx’ed 
to you at a time by the McLean Pharmacy. The amount of glycine or placebo in each drink will 
gradually be increased until you are receiving 0.8 grams/kg/d of body weight. You will take a 
dose of glycine or placebo three times/ day, after each meal. You will be given a log and asked 
to fill in the date and time of day that you took each dose of glycine or placebo.  
 
While you are at McLean for the scans, you will meet with the pharmacist and Dr. Levy and we 
will review exactly wha t to do to make the glycine drink, including a demonstration.  
 
Phone Calls with Dr. Levy and Dr. Bodkin or Dr. Ongur  
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 7 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
At least once every week, you will receive a phone call from Dr. Levy to discuss how you are 
feeling. At the end of the first week of glyci ne or placebo, and at the end of weeks 3, 5, 9, 11, 
and 13 (more often if necessary), you will also be called by a study physician (Dr. Bodkin or Dr. 
Ongur) to assess how you are reacting to the glycine or placebo.  Your psychiatrist will also be 
monitorin g your clinical state and side effects throughout the study.  Your internist will be 
informed when the glycine -placebo and open -label glycine periods begin.  
 
You will also receive a phone call from Dr. Levy each week during the two weeks following 
glycine or placebo to discuss how you are feeling. You may be called by a study physician (Dr. 
Bodkin or Dr. Ongur) to follow up on your conversation with Dr. Levy if it seems medically 
necessary.  
 
Clinical Assessments  
In addition, every two weeks there will be a  one-hour clinical assessment using a secure skype -
like connection (weeks 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16). In order to protect your confidentiality, you will 
not be using your usual skype credentials. Partners Collaborative Media, which is affiliated with 
McLe an Hospital, will create generic credentials for you and will ensure that your computers and 
web cameras are secure. You will be provided with any additional hardware and software that 
are needed at no cost to you. The movement examination will also be rep eated using a secure 
skype -like connection at the end of weeks 6 and 14. The neuropsychological tests will also be 
re-administered at the end of weeks 6 and 14 in the city in which you live.  You will be 
periodically weighed and your weight recorded.  
 
Blood Work  
Before the first treatment period, at the end of each treatment period, two weeks after the end of 
each treatment period, there will be blood work at a local medical center. This blood work is to 
measure the levels of various chemicals (such as glyc ine) in your blood as well as the level of 
psychiatric medications in your blood. The amount of blood drawn on each occasion will be 113 
or 114 cc (less than 4 ounces). These blood samples will be sent to the Nathan Kline Institute in 
Orangeburg, NY, where  they will be analyzed for various amino acid levels and psychotropic 
medication levels. By signing this consent form, I give permission for Dr. Raymond Suckow and 
the Nathan Kline Institute to provide Dr. Levy and her colleagues with the results of the an alyses 
of any blood samples that were performed at NKI. I also give permission for the Clinical 
Laboratories at McLean Hospital and the medical center of the city in which I live to provide Dr. 
Levy and her colleagues with the results of any blood tests th at were performed at their 
facilities.  Throughout the study, you will continue to take all of your other medications as usual.  
 
Open -Label Glycine  
At the end of these 16 weeks, there will be two weeks of no treatment. This will be followed by 6 
weeks when  you are on glycine (this 6 -week period may or may not occur immediately after you 
finish the 16 weeks on glycine -placebo combination).  The McLean Pharmacy will prepare 
plastic containers containing glycine powder. Each container will be marked with a fil l line, 
indicating how much water should be added to the glycine dose. Each dose will include both the 
container and individual packets of lemon crystals. Each dose will be labeled by the pharmacy 
with the date, dose (breakfast, lunch, dinner) and instruct ions (for example, fill the bottle with 
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 8 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
cold water to the fill line, shake, pour into a glass, add lemon crystals and Splenda. May be 
mixed with ice in a blender. Drink over a 15 -20 minute period after breakfast). Each dose will be 
in a self -contained pack age with instructions. Two weeks’ doses will be FedEx’ed to you at a 
time by the McLean Pharmacy. The amount of glycine in each drink will gradually be increased 
until you are receiving 0.8 grams/kg/d of body weight. You will take a dose of glycine three 
times/day after meals.  
 
Phone Calls with Dr. Levy and Dr. Bodkin or Dr. Ongur  
At least once every week, you will receive a phone call from Dr. Levy to discuss how you are 
feeling. At the end of the first week of glycine, and at the end of weeks 3 and 5, you  will also be 
called by a study physician to assess how you are reacting to the glycine.  
 
You will also receive a phone call from Dr. Levy each week during the two weeks following 
glycine to discuss how you are feeling. You may be called by a study physic ian (Dr. Bodkin or 
Dr. Ongur) to follow up on your conversation with Dr. Levy if it seems medically necessary.  
 
Clinical Assessments  
In addition, every two weeks there will be a one -hour clinical assessment using secure skype -
like video conferencing. You will be periodically weighed and your weight recorded.  
 
Repeat Scans, Electroencephalogram, Neuropsychological Tests, Clinical Assessment, and 
Blood Work  
At the end of week 5, you will be flown to Boston to repeat the original set of brain imaging 
scans (b ut not the one involving glycine), the movement examination, clinical assessment, and 
the neuropsychological test assessment. The same blood work described above will be 
repeated. The amount of blood drawn will be 113 or 114 cc (less than 4 ounces). These blood 
samples will be sent to the Nathan Kline Institute in Orangeburg, NY, where they will be 
analyzed for various amino acid levels and psychotropic medication levels.  
 
Participation in each part of this study is completely voluntary. You may refuse to p articipate or 
withdraw at any time without jeopardy to the medical care you will receive at this institution. 
Should you choose to withdraw, you will notify Dr. Levy or the research staff. If you withdraw in 
the middle of the glycine study after blood has been withdrawn, Dr. Levy or her colleagues may 
request that you remain in the facility until it is safe for you to travel. This restriction is for your 
safety. Dr. Levy and her colleagues, or the FDA can remove you from the study at any time if it 
is deter mined that this is in your best interest or the best interest of the study.  
 
Discontinuation of the Study  
Although it is unlikely that you will experience side effects warranting permanent discontinuation 
of the study, it may be slowed down (slower dose i ncreases, temporary discontinuation) if you 
develop side effects such as GI upset, nausea, or vomiting. If you develop side effects that 
make you too uncomfortable or that make it medically necessary to discontinue the study, the 
study will be stopped.  
 
What are the risks and possible discomforts from being in this research study?  
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 9 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
 
There may be unknown risks in taking part in the study.  
 
Confidentiality  
One potential risk is a breach of your confidentiality. This could lead your employer, insurance  
company,  or others to find out that you participated in a research study.  
 
Steps we take to prevent this are as follows:  
 
Appropriate precautions will be taken to preserve confidentiality and your privacy. Your private 
health information is maintained in a secure  manner and your identity is never associated with 
research records, which are assigned an alpha -numeric code that is kept in a password -
protected file. However, there is some risk that identifying personal information could be shared 
or intercepted. Risks  also include compromising identifying personal information on computers 
and compromising study documents with identifying information. These risks will be minimized 
by storing your data and personal information on a password protected computer or in a loc ked 
filing cabinet in a locked office that will be accessible only to study staff.  
 
MRI/MRS  
MRI/MRS technology does not use ionizing radiation. Instead, it uses strong magnetic fields and 
radio waves to collect the images and data.  
 
There are no known haza rds or risks associated with MR techniques. Significant risks may exist  
for people with:  
Cardiac pacemakers  
Metal clips on blood vessels (also called stents)  
Artificial heart valves  
Artificial arms, hands, legs, etc.  
Brain stimulator devices  
Implanted drug  pumps  
Ear implants  
Eye implants or known metal fragments in eyes  
Exposure to shrapnel or metal filings (wounded in military combat, sheetmetal workers, welders,  
and others)  
Other metallic surgical hardware in vital areas  
Certain tattoos with metallic ink (please tell us if you have a tattoo)  
Certain transdermal (skin) patches such as NicoDerm (nicotine for tobacco dependence),  
Transderm Scop (scopolamine for motion sickness), or Ortho Evra (birth control)  
Metal containing IUDs  
 
If you are unsure whether yo u have any of these items in your body, you should know that most  
would have been implanted as part of a surgical procedure. So, trying to remember any past  
operations may help you remember. You will be asked whether you have any implanted devices  
or histo ry of exposure to shrapnel or metal filings, and if so, you will not be able to participate in  
this study.  
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 10 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
 
Significant risks also can arise if certain materials (many types of metal objects) are brought into  
the scanning area, as they can be pulled into t he magnet at great speed. Such items can cause  
serious injury if they hit you. Therefore, these types of items are not permitted in the scanning  
area. You will not be allowed to bring anything with you into the scanning room. The MR exams 
are painless, and  except for pulsating sounds, you will not be aware that scanning is taking 
place.  
 
3T scanners are approved by the FDA for routine clinical studies in children or adults. Although 
there are no known risks from these scans, there could be adverse effects that are delayed or 
very mild, such that they have not yet been recognized. Most people experience no ill effects 
from these scans, but some people do report claustrophobia (fear of being in enclosed small 
spaces), dizziness, mild nausea, headaches, a meta llic taste in their mouth, double vision, or 
sensation of flashing lights. These symptoms, if present, disappear shortly after leaving the 
scanner.  
 
Unlike a standard clinical MRI scanner (1.5 or 3 Tesla), one scan of the present study will be  
conducted in  a high field (4T) MRI Scanner. This scanner is not used for routine clinical studies  
in children or adults, but the FDA has determined (July 14, 2003) that scanners with a magnetic  
field strength of less than 8 Tesla (double this scanner) or less do not r epresent a significant risk  
to adults, children, or infants aged more than 1 month. There could be adverse side effects that  
are delayed or very mild, such that they have not been recognized. Most people experience no 
ill effects from 4T scans, but some pe ople do report claustrophobia (fear of being in enclosed 
small places), dizziness, and the other symptoms described in the previous paragraphs. These  
symptoms, if present, disappear shortly after leaving the scanner. No serious effects have been  
reported t o date at any site operating at 4T strength.  
 
In rare cases, a very slight, uncomfortable tingling of the back due is induced in some people  
undergoing certain types of scans. If you experience this sensation, you are asked to report this  
immediately so th e scan can be stopped. Although these precautions will avoid all known risks  
associated with MRI, this procedure may involve risks to you that are currently unforeseeable.  
The sounds that you hear inside the scanner are the normal operating sounds the scan ner 
makes while it takes pictures of your brain. While they may be annoying, their intensity is not 
harmful to your hearing. However, you will be given a pair of earplugs to wear to muffle the 
sounds. You also may be asked to wear a set of headphones, whic h further reduces the noise 
level and permits the technician to speak to you.  
 
Women of childbearing age:  
While there are also no known risks for fetuses, the safety of MRI for pregnant women, women  
of childbearing potential, and nursing mothers has not be en established. If you are a woman of  
childbearing potential, you must be using an IUD, oral contraceptive, or barrier methods or must  
be abstinent prior to each MRI scan. In addition, you must have a negative pregnancy test prior  
to each MRI scan. Nursing  mothers may not participate in any brain imaging procedures.  
 
 
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 11 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
Glycine  
Glycine is a dietary supplement. Side effects that have been associated with glycine include 
fatigue, stomachache, and vomiting (>10% of subjects in a prior study). Very rarely, (<1% o f 
subjects), individuals who have a genetic abnormality that prevents them from metabolizing 
glycine normally may develop dangerously high blood glycine levels. To our knowledge, you do 
not have such an abnormality. Glycine is generally well tolerated with out any negative effects. In 
research studies in which people consumed doses of glycine similar to (and even higher) than 
those used in this study, and for longer time periods, blood glycine levels rose, but no side 
effects occurred. In prior research stud ies we have conducted, 2/14 (14.3%) people who 
consumed more than 30 grams of glycine at one time developed nausea and vomiting. For that 
reason, the maximum glycine dose used in the glycine imaging study is 30 grams. The glycine 
mixture contains 300 calor ies per serving for a total of 900 calories per day. You may gain 
weight.  
 
You may receive a bruise at the site of the catheter and your arm may be sore for a few hours 
after the catheter sticks. There is also the risk of infection at the site of blood withdrawal, but 
standard aseptic techniques will be used making this an unlikely event (<1% of subjects).  
 
Neuropsychological Test Procedures  
No adverse effects of the neuropsychological procedures are expected, but the testing may be 
tiring.  
 
Glycine -Placebo Treatment  
During the glycine -placebo treatment period and the open label -glycine treatment period: When 
you are taking glycine, you may experience nausea and vomiting, but this is unlikely. In 
research studies in which people consumed the same dose of glycine (0.8 g/kg/d) side effects 
were not common. If you experience any side effects, you must report them to Dr. Levy 
immediately (617 -855-2854 or page through the McLean Hospital operator at 617 -855-2000) so 
the dose can be lowered or the treatment peri od ended. If you are unable to reach Dr. Levy, you 
may also contact Dr. Alexander Bodkin at 617 -855-3186 M -F 9-5 (can also be paged through 
617-855-2000), Dr. Dost Ongur at 617 -855-3922 M -F 9-5 (can also be paged through 617 -855-
2000), or Dr. Marc Kaufman at 617 - 855-3469 M -F 9-5. Should you experience vomiting, you 
should go to your nearest emergency room and tell the medical staff that you are taking glycine 
as part of a research study.  
 
Blood Tests  
During the glycine -placebo and open -label glycine phase s of the study, you will receive multiple 
blood tests. You are asked not to donate blood for at least one month after completion of the 
study.  
 
You will be told of any significant new findings that develop during the course of this study that  
may relate to  your willingness to continue to participate.  
 
You may end any of these procedures at any time without penalty to current or future treatment.  
 
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 12 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
What are the possible benefits from being in this research study?  
There are no direct benefits to participating in this research. The information obtained in this  
study may to explain the effects of a mutation in glycine metabolism on brain structure, function, 
and metabolism. One potential benefit of participating in this research is that structural scans  
obtained for this research will be analyzed by a radiologist and significant findings will be  
reported to you.  An additional potential benefit is that glycine may reduce your psychotic 
symptoms and improve your cognitive abilities.  
 
What other treatments or proced ures are available for my condition?  
You may choose not to participate in any of these procedures and continue to receive standard 
psychiatric care. The treatment provided in this study, Glycine, is a nutritional supplement that 
may be available to you wit hout taking part in this study.    
 
Can I still get medical care within McLean if I don’t take part in this research study, or if I 
stop taking part?  
Yes.  Your decision won’t change the medical care you get within McLean now or in the future.  
There will be no penalty, and you won’t lose a ny benefits you receive now or have a right to 
receive.  
 
Taking part in this research study is up to you.  You can decide not to take part.  If you decide to 
take part now, you can change your mind and drop out later.  We will tell you if we learn new 
information that could make you change your mind about taking part in this research study.  
 
What should I do if I want to stop taking part in the study?  
 
If you take part in this research study, and want to drop out, you should tell us.  We will make 
sure that  you stop the study safely.  We will also talk to you about follow -up care, if needed.  
 
It is possible that we will have to ask you to drop out before you finish the study.  If this 
happens, we will tell you why.  We will also help arrange other care for y ou, if needed.  
 
Will I be paid to take part in this research study?  
Yes. You will be paid $2,000 for completing these procedures, $1,000 for completing the 
baseline procedures and $1,000 for completing the glycine treatment studies and the follow -up 
proced ures. If you do not complete the study, you will be compensated for the procedures that 
you did complete. All of your travel, lodging, food and local transportation expenses will also be 
paid.  
 
As an identifier for internal auditing purposes, your social security number is needed because 
you are receiving payment for participation in this study.  McLean Hospital is required to inform 
the IRS of any payments to you as a subject in research studies in a given calendar year 
totaling $600 or more.  If that occ urs, you will receive a 1099 form at the end of the year.  No 
information identifying why you received payment is communicated to either the Hospitals 
accounting department or the government.  This information is kept strictly confidential.  
 
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 13 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
What will I ha ve to pay for if I take part in this research study?  
Study funds will pay for the cost of all of the research procedures, including your travel, lodging, 
food, and local transportation expenses while you are participating.  
 
What happens if I am injured as a result of taking part in this research study?  
We will offer you the care needed to treat any injury that directly results from taking part in this 
research study.  We reserve the right to bill your insurance company or other third parties, if 
appropriate , for the care you get for the injury.  We will try to have these costs paid for, but you 
may be responsible for some of them.  For example, if the care is billed to your insurer, you will 
be responsible for payment of any deductibles and co -payments requi red by your insurer.  
 
Injuries sometimes happen in research even when no one is at fault.  There are no plans to pay 
you or give you other compensation for an injury, should one occur.  However, you are not 
giving up any of your legal rights by signing thi s form.  
 
If you think you have been injured or have experienced a medical problem as a result of taking 
part in this research study, tell the person in charge of this study as soon as possible.  The 
researcher's name and phone number are listed in the next  section of this consent form.  
 
For the blood draws at Bozeman Medical Center, McLean Hospital will not be involved in 
mitigation of any injuries that may occur.  
 
If I have questions or concerns about this research study, whom can I call?  
You can c all us with your questions, concerns or complaints.  Our telephone numbers are listed 
below.  Ask questions as often as you want.  
 
Deborah L. Levy, Ph.D., is the person in charge of this research study.  You can call her at 617 -
855-2854. Dr. Le vy is available M -F 9-5 and can be paged 24/7 through the McLean Hospital 
operator by calling 617 -855-2000.  You can also call Dr. Alexander Bodkin at 617 -855-3186 M -F 
9-5, Dr. Dost Ongur at 617 -855-3922 M -F 9-5 or Dr. Marc Kaufman at 617 - 855-3469 M -F 9-5. 
Any of these people can also be reached through the McLean Hospital operator (617 -855-2000) 
24/7. If you have questions about the scheduling of appointments or study visits, call Dr. Levy at 
617-855-2854. 
 
If you want to speak with someone not directly involved in this research study, please contact 
the McLean Human IRB office.  You can call them at 617 -855-2932.  
 
You can talk to them about:  
 Problems and questions that you may have  
 Information that you may want  
 Input or suggestions that you may have  
 Your  rights as a research subject  
 Your concerns about the research  
 A complaint about the research  
 
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 14 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
Also, if you feel pressured to take part in this research study, or to continue with it, they want to 
know and can help.  
 
If I take part in this research study, how will you protect my privacy?  
Federal law requires McLean Hospital, its health care providers and researchers to protect the 
privacy of health information that identifies you.  This information is called Protected Health 
Information.  In the rest of thi s section, we refer to this simply as “health information.”  
 
If you decide to take part in this research study, your health information may be used within 
McLean and may be shared with others outside of McLean, as explained below.  
 
In addition, to protect the study participants and prevent any potential risk to the participants’ 
privacy, Dr. Levy will apply for a Certificate of Confidentiality from the Department of Health and 
Human Services.  To reduce the possibility that information learned from DNA/RNA studies will 
affect the subject’s access to health insurance or employability, no research study data will be 
included in the subject’s medical records.  Further, with the Certificate of Confidentiality from 
DHHS, the PI cannot be forced (e.g., by court su bpoena) to disclose information that may 
identify a study participant in any federal, state, or local criminal, administrative, legislative, or 
other proceeding.  
 
We have marked with a  how we plan to use and share your health information.  If a 
box is not checked , it means that type of use or sharing is not planned for in this 
research study.  
 
We will  also give you the McLean Hospital Notice for Use and Sharing of Protected Health 
Information.  The Notice gives more details about how we use and share your health 
information.  
 
 Health Information About You That Might be Used or Shared During This Researc h 
 Information from your hospital or office health records within McLean or elsewhere 
that may be reasonably related to the conduct and oversight of the research study.  
This may  include information about hospital admissions or visits during this study, 
so that we know about any possible problems or side effects.  If health information 
is needed from your doctors or hospitals outside McLean, you will be asked to give 
permission fo r these records to be sent to researchers within McLean.  
 New health information  from tests, procedures, visits, interviews, or forms filled out 
as part of this research study  
 
 Why Health Information About You Might be Used or Shared with Others  
The reasons we might use or share your health information are:  
 To do the research described above  
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 15 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
 To make sure we do the research according to certain standards - standards set 
by ethics and law, and by quality groups  
 For public health, and safety - for example, if we learn information that could mean 
harm to you or others, we may need to report this to a public health or public 
safety authority, or to specific individuals as required by l aw 
 For treatment, payment, or health care operations  
 
 People and Groups That May Use or Share Your Health Information  
1. People or groups within McLean  
 Researchers and the staff involved in this research study  
 The McLean review board that oversees the research  
 Staff within McLean who need the informa tion to do their jobs (such as billing, or 
for overseeing quality of care or research)  
2. People or groups outside McLean  
 People or groups that we hire to do certain work for us, such as d ata storage 
companies, our insurers, or our lawyers  
 Federal and state agencies (such as the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, the Food and Drug Administration, the N ational Institutes of Health, 
and/or the Office for Human Research Protections) and other U.S. or foreign 
government bodies, if required by law or involved in overseeing the research  
 Organizations that make sure hospital standards are met  
 The sponsor(s) of the research study, and people or groups it  hires to help 
perform this research study  
 Other researchers and medical centers that are part of this research study  
 A group that oversees the data (study information) and safety of this research 
study  
 Other:  
Some people or groups who get your health information might not have to follow the 
same privacy rules that we follow.  We share your health information only when we 
must, and we ask anyone  who receives it from us to protect your privacy.  However, 
once your information is shared outside McLean, we cannot promise that it will remain 
private.  
 
 Time Period During Which Your Health Information Might be Used or Shared With 
Others  
 Because researc h is an ongoing process, we cannot give you an exact date when we 
will either destroy or stop using or sharing your health information.  
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 16 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
 
 Your Privacy Rights  
 You have the right not to sign this form permitting us to use and share your health 
information for  research.  If you don’t sign this form, you can’t take part in this research 
study.  This is because we need to use the health information of everyone who takes 
part in this research study.  
 You have the right to withdraw your permission for us to use or s hare your health 
information for this research study.  If you want to withdraw your permission, you must 
notify the person in charge of this research study in writing.  
If you withdraw your permission, we will not be able to take back information that has 
already been used or shared with others.  This includes information used or shared to 
carry out the research study or to be sure the research is safe and of high quality.  
If you withdraw your permission, you cannot continue to take part in this research stu dy. 
 You have the right to see and get a copy of your health information that is used or 
shared for treatment or for payment.  To ask for this information, please contact the 
person in charge of this research study.  
 
In this research study, you ma y only get such health information after the research is 
finished.  
 If Research Results Are Published or Used to Teach Others  
The results of this research study may be published in a medical book or journal, or used to 
teach others.  However, your name or other identifying information  will not be used for these 
purposes without your specific permission.  
 
Informed Consent and Authorization  
Statement of Study Doctor or Person Obtaining Consent  
 
 I have explained the research to the study subject.  
 I have answer ed all questions about this research study to the best of my ability.  
 
 
    
Study Doctor or Person Obtaining Consent  Date/Time  
 
 
Statement of Person Giving Informed Consent and Authorization  
 
 I have read this consent form.  
McLean Hospital  
Research Consent Form  
 
 
 
General Template  
Version Date:  June 2009  
   
 
Version 7 – 11/11/2012                                    Page 17 of 17 
  
Subject Identification  
 This research study has been explained to me, including risks and possible benefits (if 
any), other possible treatments or procedures, and other important things about the 
study.  
 I have had the opportunity to ask questions.  
 I understand the information given to me.  
 
 
Signature of Subject:  
 
I give my consent to take part in this research study and agree to allow my health information to 
be used and shared as described above.  
 
 
    
Subject  Date/Time  
 
 
Consent Form Version Date:  11/11/2012  
 
 