p. 2 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 SYNOPSIS 5
2 INTRODUCTION 9
2.1 BACKGROUND AND R ATIONALE 9
2.2 BENEFITS AND RISKS TO P ATIENTS 10
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 10
3.1 OBJECTIVES 10
3.2 PRIMARY ENDPOINTS 11
3.3 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 11
3.4 SAFETY EVALUATIONS AND POTENTIAL ENDPOINTS 11
3.5 BIOMARKER RESEARCH 13
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 13
4.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 13
4.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 17
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES 18
5.1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 18
5.2 CONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 21
5.3 PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND T HERAPY 22
5.4 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT T HERAPY 24
5.5 WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY AND /OR STUDY TREATMENT 24
5.6 FOLLOW -UP FOR SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM S TUDY AND /OR STUDY TREATMENT 25
5.7 STUDY DRUG 25
5.8 DRUG ASSIGNMENT 26
5.9 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 27
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATION S 27
6.1 COMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 27
6.2 TOXICITY MANAGEMENT 30
7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF S AMPLE SIZE 31 
p. 3 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.1 STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 31
7.2 DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE S IZE 31
7.3 DEFINITION FOR ANALYSIS POPULATIONS 31
7.4 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 31
7.5 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 31
7.6 STUDY INTERIM ANALYSIS 31
7.7 DATA MONITORING COMMITTEE 32
8 ETHICS 32
8.1 INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IRB) 32
8.2 ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE S TUDY 32
8.3 SUBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 32
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM CO MPLETION 33
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURAN CE 33
11 COMPLETION OF THE ST UDY 33
12 REFERENCES 33
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. STUDY SCHEMATIC 13
FIGURE 2. DEBULKING PERIOD SCH EMATIC 14
FIGURE 3. VENETOCLAX OUTPATIEN T DOSING SCHEMA (20 MG AND 50 MG INITIAL DOSES) 15
FIGURE 4. VENETOCLAX OUTPATIEN T DOSING SCHEMA (100 MG, 200 MG, AND 400 MG INITIAL DOSES) 16
FIGURE 5. VENETOCLAX PLUS OBIN UTUZUMAB PERIOD SCHE MATIC 17
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 35
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 38 
p. 4 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES 39
APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 40
APPENDIX E. DEFINITIONS OF LABOR ATORY AND CLINICAL TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME 45
APPENDIX F. 2008 MODIFIED IWCLL NCI-WG CRITERIA FOR TUMOR RESPONSE 46
APPENDIX G. INTERNATIONAL WORKSH OP ON CLL RECOMMENDA TIONS REGARDING INDI CATIONS FOR 
TREATMENT IN CLL 48
APPENDIX H. SAMPLE LIST OF EXC LUDED AND CAUTIONARY MEDICATIONS 50
APPENDIX I. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES 52 
p. 6 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Secondary Endpoints:
 Overall Response Rate (ORR):  Defined as the proportion of 
subjects with an overall response (complete remission, 
complete remission with incomplete marr ow recovery, 
nodular partial remission [nPR] or partial remission [PR]) (per 
the 2008 Modified IWCLL NCI -WG criteria).
 Duration of Response (DoR):  Defined as the number of days 
from the date of first response (CR, CRi, nPR , or PR) (per the 
2008 Modified IWCLL NCI -WG criteria) to the date of disease 
progression or death, whichever occurs first.  All disease 
progression will be included regardless whether the event 
occurred during or after the subject was taking any study dru g 
(either venetoclax, obinutuzumab, or bendamustine).
 Progression -Free Survival (PFS):  Defined as the number of 
days from the date of first dose of any study drug (either 
venetoclax, obinutuzumab, or bendamustine) to the date of 
disease progression or dea th, whichever occurs first.  All 
disease progression will be included regardless whether the 
event occurred during or after the subject was taking any 
study drug.
 Time to Progression (TTP):  Defined as the number of days 
from the date of first dose of any study drug (either 
venetoclax, obinutuzumab, or bendamustine) to date of 
disease progression.  All disease progression will be included 
regardless of whether the event occurred during or after the 
subject was taking any study drug.
 Overall Survival (OS):  Defined as number of days from the 
date of first dose of any study drug (either venetoclax, 
obinutuzumab, or bendamustine) to the date of death.
 Undetectable Minimal Residual Disease (UMRD) Rate:  The 
level of MRD will be assessed in the peripheral blood o f all 
subjects at 5 months after last dose of obinutuzumab, and at 
the end of treatment (including early study termination) to 
determine the rate of UMRD.  Undetectable Minimal Residual 
Disease will be defined as less than one CLL cell per 
10,000 leukocyte s (< 10–4).  Rate of UMRD status will be 
defined as the proportion of subjects who have UMRD.
Safety Evaluations and Potential Endpoints:
 Adverse Event (AE) monitoring
 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) monitoring
 Vital sign measurements
 Physical examinations
 Laboratory assessments
 Incidence and reasons for any premature discontinuation, 
dose reductions, or interruptions of obinutuzumab, 
bendamustine, and/or venetoclax 
p. 9 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why Is This Study Being Conducted
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common of the chronic leukemias, comprising 30% of all 
adult leukemias.1  The World Health Organization classification of hematopoietic neoplasias describes 
CLL as leukemic, lymphocytic lymphoma, being only distinguishable from small lymphocytic lymphoma 
(SLL) by its leukemic appearance.2  Patients' median age at first diagnosis is 71 years.3  Chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia is a clonal disease of unknown etiology, characterized by the acc umulation of 
mature B cells in blood, lymph nodes, spleen, liver, and bone marrow.  Morphologically, CLL cells are 
relatively mature looking but immunologically incompetent.  About 95% of CLL is of B -cell origin (B -CLL) 
with a characteristic phenotype (CD19+, CD5+, CD23+ and FMC7 –; weak expression of surface 
immunoglobulin (sIg) and membrane CD79b).  The most common chromosomal abnormalities of 
leukemia cells in CLL are deletion 13q14 (incidence 51%), deletion 11q22 -q23 (17 –20%), trisomy 12 
(15%), and deletion 17p13 (5%) and 6q21 (6%).4  Response rates to initial chemoimmunotherapy 
treatment tend to be high, but residual disease often remains and pat ients tend to relapse or progress, 
eventually becoming resistant to chemotherapy, (i.e., fludarabine, alkylator).
Bendamustine is an alkylating agent, which also has properties of a purine and amino acid antagonist.  
Bendamustine is mainly metabolized in t he liver via cytochrome P450; renal elimination accounts for 
about 20% of its excretion.  Bendamustine was developed in the 1960s and is approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) for treatment of CLL.5,6
Obinutuzumab is a humanized and glycoengineered type II anti -CD20 monoclonal antibody that 
recognizes the CD20 antigen present on normal and malignant B cells.  It was developed for the 
treatment of hematological malignancies by F. Hoffmann -La Roche LTD and was approved by the FDA in 
November 20137and by the EMA in July 20148for the use i n combination with chlorambucil in patients 
with previously untreated CLL.  The combination of bendamustine and obinutuzumab has recently 
shown high overall response rates in frontline CLL patients, with an overall response rate (ORR) of 90%.9
The B -cell lymphoma -2 (Bcl -2) family proteins are important regulators of the intrinsic apoptosis 
pathway.  Bcl -2 overexpression is a major contributor to the pathogenesis of some types of lymphoid 
malignancies, including in chronic leukemias.  Chronic lymphocytic leukemia is a genetic disease where 
the microRNAs miR15a and miR16 -1 that negatively regulate the transcription of Bcl- 2 are deleted or 
downregulated, resulting in uncontrolled expression of Bcl -2.10-13  The Bcl2 -antagonist venetoclax has 
very promising efficacy and a favorable toxicity profile in del(17p) CLL and is currently being studied in 
frontline CLL patients in combination with obinutuzumab.14  Preliminary data in the first 12 treated 
patients reported 100% ORR and 90% peripheral blood Undetectable Minimal Residual Disease (UMRD).  
However, due to the fast and overwhelming ac tivity of venetoclax, tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) has 
occurred in patients with high tumor burden.  TLS can be managed and prevented with certain measures 
of precaution, especially during dose -escalation.
As most patients with frontline CLL/SLL are likely t o present with medium to high tumor cell burden, the 
ability to start patients with newly diagnosed CLL/SLL on venetoclax is complicated by the risk of TLS.  As  
p. 10 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.such, this trial explores the role of obinutuzumab, or obinutuzumab in combination with bendamu stine, 
in safely debulking patients prior to the initiation of venetoclax therapy.
Clinical Hypothesis
Obinutuzumab or obinutuzumab and bendamustine may safely be used to achieve low tumor burden 
status prior to initiation of venetoclax in subjects with pr eviously untreated CLL/SLL.
2.2 Benefits and Risks to Patients
Clinical data show efficacy of venetoclax therapy in the treatment of CLL/SLL.  Clinical safety data 
indicate that the adverse effects of venetoclax, when administered with appropriate measures, ar e 
manageable and as expected from a treatment targeting hematologic cells.  Due to the medium to high 
tumor burden of subjects with newly diagnosed CLL/SLL, treatment with venetoclax is associated with a 
higher risk of TLS.  Successful debulking before tre atment initiation with venetoclax may significantly 
reduce the risk of TLS.
For further details, please see findings from completed studies, including safety data in the current 
venetoclax Investigator's Brochure.14
3STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objectives
Primary
1.To evaluate the anti -tumor effects of both induction therapies of obinutuzumab (Group A), or 
obinutuzumab in combination with bendamustine (Group B), prior to initiation of venetoclax 
and obinutuzumab therapy, with the goal of initiating venetoclax in all subjects with low -tumor 
burden as defined by peripheral lymphocyte counts of < 25 × 109/Land all lymph nodes < 5 cm 
per compu ted tomography (CT) scans.
2.To evaluate the efficacy of this regimen as defined by the rate of complete remission (CR) and 
complete remission with incomplete marrow recovery (CRi) following the debulking regimens 
and subsequent venetoclax and obinutuzumab t herapy per 2008 Modified International 
Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia National Cancer Institute -sponsored Working 
Group [IWCLL NCI -WG] criteria.15
Secondary
3.To evaluate Overall Response Rate (ORR), Duration of Overall Response (DoR), Progression -Free 
Survival (PFS), Time to Progression (TTP), Overall Survival (OS), and the level of Minimal Residual 
Disease (MRD) defined as rate of subjects w ho achieve Undetectable Minimal Residual Disease 
(UMRD; < 10–4) in the peripheral blood.
4.To evaluate safety and tolerability of the debulking regimens, venetoclax ramp -up, and the 
venetoclax and obinutuzumab combination. 
p. 11 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.2 Primary Endpoints
The primary endpo ints are:
Percent of subjects achieving low tumor burden status after 2, 4 and 6 cycles of therapy with 
obinutuzumab or obinutuzumab and bendamustine.
The rate of complete remission (CR) and complete remission with incomplete marrow recovery 
(CRi):  Define d as the proportion of subjects who achieved CR or CRi (per the 2008 Modified 
IWCLL NCI -WG criteria).15
3.3 Secondary Endpoints
Key Secondary Endpoints
Overall Response Rate (ORR):  Defined as the proportion of subjects with an overall response 
(complete remission, complete remission with incomplete marrow recovery, nodular partial 
remission [nPR] or partial remission [PR]) (per the 2008 Modifie d IWCLL NCI- WG criteria).
Duration of Response (DoR):  Defined as the number of days from the date of first response (CR, 
CRi, nPR, or PR) (per the 2008 Modified IWCLL NCI -WG criteria) to the date of disease 
progression or death, whichever occurs first.  A ll disease progression will be included regardless 
whether the event occurred during or after the subject was taking any study drug (either 
venetoclax, obinutuzumab, or bendamustine).
Progression -Free Survival (PFS):  Defined as the number of days from the date of first dose of 
any study drug (either venetoclax, obinutuzumab, or bendamustine) to the date of disease 
progression or death, whichever occurs first.  All disease progression will be included regardless 
whether the event occurred during or after th e subject was taking any study drug.
Time to Progression (TTP):  Defined as the number of days from the date of first dose of any 
study drug (either venetoclax, obinutuzumab, or bendamustine) to date of disease progression.  
All disease progression will be included regardless of whether the event occurred during or after 
the subject was taking any study drug.
Overall Survival (OS):  Defined as number of days from the date of first dose of any study drug 
(either venetoclax, obinutuzumab, or bendamustine) to the date of death.
Undetectable Minimal Residual Disease (UMRD) Rate:  The level of MRD will be assessed in the 
peripheral blood of all subjects at 5 months after last dose of obinutuzumab, and at the end of 
treatment (including early study termination) to determine the rate of UMRD.  Undetectable 
Minimal Residual Disease will be defined as less than one CLL cell per 10,000 leukocytes (< 10–4).  
Rate of UMRD status will be defined as the proportion of subjects who have UMRD.
3.4 Safety Evaluations and Potentia l Endpoints
The following safety evaluations will be performed during the study:  Serious Adverse Event (SAE) and 
Adverse Event (AE) monitoring, vital signs, physical examinations, and laboratory assessments.  Certain  
p. 12 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.types of events require immediate repo rting to the Sponsor, as outlined in Section 6.1.  Safety will be 
monitored on an ongoing basis and summarized periodically in aggregate safety repo rts and end of 
study.  All AEs will be graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) version 4.03.16
The safety evaluations for this study are as follows:
All SAEs during and after treatment with obinutuzumab, bendamustine, and/or venetoclax up to 
2 years or until another anti -cancer therapy has been started.
Incidence, nature and severi ty of all AEs during and after treatment with obinutuzumab, 
bendamustine, and/or venetoclax up to 2 years or until another anti -cancer therapy has been 
started.
Incidence and nature of all Grade 3 –4 AEs during and after treatment with obinutuzumab, 
benda mustine, and/or venetoclax up to 2 years or until another anti -cancer therapy has been 
started.
Grade 5 AEs or AEs leading to death while receiving obinutuzumab, bendamustine, and/or 
venetoclax and up to 30 days after receiving last dose of study drug.
Incidence and reasons for any premature discontinuation, dose reductions, or interruptions of 
obinutuzumab, bendamustine, and/or venetoclax.
For venetoclax:
Single laboratory abnormalities that meet the following criteria:  calcium < 1.75 mmol/L 
(<7mg/dL), phosphorus > 1.5 mmol/L (> 4.5 mg/dL), potassium > 6 mmol/L (> 6 mEq/L), and 
uric acid > 476 µmol/L (> 8 mg/dL) will be collected through up to 53 weeks o f treatment.
Incidence and prevalence of cytopenias from initiation of venetoclax through up to 53 weeks of 
treatment will be collected.
For obinutuzumab:
Grade 1 or 2 AEs (related and unrelated) up to 28 days after the last dose of obinutuzumab or 
until another anti -cancer therapy has been started.
Grade 3 or 4 AEs other than infections (related and unrelated) for up to 6 months after the last 
dose of obinutuzumab or until another anti -cancer therapy has been started.
Grade 3 to 4 infections (related and unrelated) for up to 2 years after the last dose of 
obinutuzumab or until another anti -cancer therapy has been started.
Unrelated SAEs for up to 12 months after the last dose of obinutuzumab or until another anti -
cancer therapy has been started.
Study drug -related SAEs will be collected from the last study drug administration up to 2 years 
or until another anti -cancer therapy has been started. 
p. 13 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.All events of second malignancies will be collected from the last study drug administration 
indefinitely (or until another anti -cancer therapy has been started) even after study closure, but 
not after study termination.
3.5 Biomarker Research
Peripheral blood will be collected at specified time points ( Appendix D ) throughout the study to evaluate 
known and/or novel disease -related or drug -related biomarkers.  Types of biomarkers may include 
nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and/or metabolites.  The planned analyses in clude identification and 
tracking of CLL cells for determination of minimal or measurable residual disease in the peripheral 
blood.  Additional analyses (e.g., UMRD [< 10–4] in bone marrow and/or other known or novel 
biomarkers) may be conducted but may not be included in the clinical study report.  Furthermore, 
biomarker analyses which are exploratory in nature may be performed in non -Good Laboratory 
Practice/Good Clinical Practice (GLP/GCP) laboratories.  Further details regarding the biomarker 
research r ationale and collection time points are located in the Operations Manual, Section 3.17 and 
Table 2.  The samples may be retained for no longer than 20 years after study completion or per local 
requirements.
4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Pla n
This is a multi -cohort, open -label study in previously untreated CLL/SLL patients, excluding those with 
the 17p deletion, to evaluate a debulking strategy that would enable all patients to receive subsequent 
venetoclax as outpatients, with lower risk of tumor lysis.
The schematic of the study is shown in Figure 1.  Further details regarding study procedures are located 
in the Operations Manual.
Figure 1. Study Schematic
Abbreviations:  1L = first line; ALC = absolute lymphocyte count; CLL = chronic lymphocytic leukemia; CT = computed 
tomography 
 
     
      
   
   
        
     
      
p. 17 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Figure 5. Venetoclax Plus Obinutuzumab Period Schematic
Abbreviations:  CR = complete remission; CRi = complete remission with incomplete marrow recovery; CT = computed 
tomography; D = day; MRD = minimal residual disease
Previously untreated subjects with CLL/SLL excluding those with the 17p deletion will be enrolled in this 
study.  See Section 5for information r egarding eligibility criteria.
At the time the 20thsubject completes the venetoclax ramp -up, an internal safety committee will review 
data from all subjects who have been enrolled and received study drug in order to determine the 
relative safety of the de bulking and ramp -up regimen, as well as to assess feasibility of modification to 
monitoring.  An interim safety and efficacy analysis will be conducted after 50 subjects have completed 
the Week 38 disease assessment.  This analysis will include review by a n advisory steering committee as 
well as the Data Monitoring Committee (DMC).
4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
This is a single -arm study without control group.
Appropriateness of Efficacy and Safety Measurements
Standard statistical, cli nical, and laboratory procedures will be utilized in this study.  All efficacy 
measurements in this study are standard for assessing disease activity in subjects with CLL/SLL.  All 
clinical and laboratory procedures in this study are standard and generally accepted.
Suitability of Subject Population
Previously untreated subjects with CLL/SLL excluding those with the 17p deletion are expected to 
respond well to the debulking regimen followed by venetoclax treatment.  Subjects with 17p deletion 
were excluded due to their expected poor response to the proposed debulking regimen.
Selection of Doses in the Study
After a weekly ramp -up schedule over 5 weeks, venetoclax will be administered at a daily dose of 
400 mg.  Bendamustine will be administered intravenously at a dose of 90 mg/m2during debulking on  
   
   
 
    
                
              
           
    
  
       
p. 18 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Days 1 and 2 of Cycles 1 and 2 (Days 2 and 3 at the investigator's discretion during Cycle 1), for 
subsequent cycles (up to Cycle 6) as needed based on debulking achieved.  During debulking, 
obinutuzumab will be a dministered intravenously at a dose of 100 mg on Day 1 of Cycle 1, 900 mg on 
Day 2 of Cycle 1, and 1000 mg on Days 8 and 15 of Cycle 1.  In subsequent debulking cycles, 
obinutuzumab will be administered intravenously at a dose of 1000 mg on Day 1 of each cycle.
During the venetoclax/obinutuzumab regimen, obinutuzumab will be administered intravenously at a 
dose of 1000 mg on Day 1 of Cycles 1 through 5.  The dose selection in this study is based on prior 
clinical experience with the study drugs.
5STUDY ACTIV ITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria in order to be included in the study.  Anything other than 
a positive response to the questions below will result in exclusion from study participation.
Consent
1.Subjects, or their legally authorized representative, must voluntarily sign and date an 
informed consent , approved by an Independent Ethics Committee (IEC)/Institutional Review 
Board (IRB), prior to the initiation of any screening or study -specific proced ures.
Demographic and Laboratory Assessments
2.Adult male or female , at least 18 years old.
3.Laboratory values meeting the following criteria within the screening period prior to the 
first dose of obinutuzumab or obinutuzumab plus bendamustine:
Creatinine clearance (CrCl) ≥ 30 mL/min unless bendamustine will be used, in which case 
CrCl must be ≥ 40 mL/min
Adequate marrow function independent of growth factor or transfusion support within 
2weeks of Screening as follows, unless cytop enia is due to marrow involvement of CLL/SLL:
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1.0 × 109/L
Platelet counts ≥ 25 × 109/L without any of the following:
Transfusion support within 14 days of screening
Evidence of mucosal bleeding
Known history of major bleeding episode within 3 months of screening
Total hemoglobin ≥ 8 g/dL (without transfusion support, unless anemia is due to marrow 
involvement of CLL/SLL)
Adequate liver function as indicated by a total bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 
and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ≤ 3 times the institutional upper limit of normal (ULN),  
p. 19 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.unless bendamustine will be used, in which case bilirubin ≤ 1.5 × ULN, and AST and ALT 
≤2.5× ULN, unless directly attributable to the subject's CLL/SLL.
No positive test res ults for, or suspicion of, active infection, including hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
infection (defined as positive hepatitis B surface antibody [HBsAg] serology), based on site 
standard practices prior to anti- CD20 antibody infusion and obinutuzumab prescribing
information.7  Testing should be conducted prior to initiation of obinutuzumab per site 
standard of care and obinutuzumab prescribing information.
For subjects who show evidence of hepatitis B infection (HBsAg positive [regardless of 
antibody status] or HBsAg negative but anti- HBc positive), consult physicians with 
expertise in managing hepatitis B regarding monitoring and consideration for HBV 
antiv iral therapy.  Subjects may be included if HBV deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is 
undetectable, provided that they are willing to undergo monthly DNA testing, during 
and for several months following treatment with obinutuzumab.  Subjects who have 
protective ti ters of hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb) after vaccination or prior but 
cured hepatitis B are eligible.
No positive test result for hepatitis C (hepatitis C virus [HCV] antibody serology testing), 
based on site standard practices prior to anti -CD20 ant ibody infusion and obinutuzumab 
prescribing information.7  Testing should be conducted prior to initiation of obinutuzumab 
per site standard of car e and obinutuzumab prescribing information.
Subjects who are positive for HCV antibody are eligible only if polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) is negative for HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA).
No known infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or Human T -Cell Leukemia 
Virus 1 (HTLV -1).
4.No serious medical condition or abnormality in a clinical laboratory test that, in the 
investigator's judgment, precludes the subject's safe participation in, and completion of, the 
study.
5.Are willing and able to comply with procedures required in this protocol.
Disease Activity
6.Diagnosis of previously untreated CLL/SLL according to IWCLL criteria.15  Subjects must not 
have received systemic therapy for CLL/SLL prior to the time of study enrollment.
7.Subject meets the following disease activity criteria:
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance score of 0 –1.
CLL/SLL requires treatment according to the IWCLL criteria ( Appendix G ).
Medium tumor burden (any lymph node [LN] 5 to < 10 cm OR absolute lymphocyt e count 
[ALC] ≥ 25 × 109/L) OR High tumor burden (any LN ≥ 10 cm OR ALC ≥ 25 × 109/L AND LN 
≥ 5cm).
8.No presence of 17p deletion at Screening (or within 2 years if an historical test result is used).
9.No Richter's syndrome (transform ation of CLL/SLL to aggressive non -Hodgkin's lymphoma or 
Hodgkin's lymphoma). 
p. 20 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.10.No prolymphocytic leukemia.
11.No known central nervous system involvement.
12.No uncontrolled autoimmune hemolytic anemia or immune thrombocytopenia within 
2weeks of study entry.
Subject History
13.No history of confirmed progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).
14.No history of prior malignancy, except for conditions as listed below if subjects have 
recovered from the acute side effects incurred as a result of previous therapy:
Malignancies surgically treated, or treated with radiation, with curative intent and with no 
known active disease present for ≥3 years before randomization.
Adequately treated non -melanoma skin cancer or lentigo maligna without evidence of 
disease.
Adequately treated cervical carcinoma in situ without evidence of disease.
Surgically/adequately treated low grade, early stage, localized prostate cancer without 
evidence of disease.
15.No history of an allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to constituents of the study drug 
(and its excipients) and/or other products in the same class.
16.No history of severe allergic reaction or anaphylactic reactions to humanized or murine 
monoclonal antibodies or known sensitivity or allergy to murine products.
17.No history of clinically significant (per Investigator's judgment) drug or alcohol abuse within 
the last 6 months.
18.No conditions that could interfere with drug absorption including but not limited to short 
bowel syndrome.
19.No history of clinically significant medical conditions or any other reason that in the opinion 
of the Investigator would interfere with the subject's participation in this study or would make 
the subject an unsuitable candidate to receive study drug.
20.Nohistory of clinically relevant or significant electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities , 
including ECG with QT interval corrected for heart rate (QTc) using Fridericia's formula (QTcF) 
>450 msec (males) or > 470 msec (females).
Contraception
21.A negative serum pregnancy test for all female subjects (except post -menopausal) at the 
Screening Visit and a negative urine pregnancy test for all female subjects (except post -
menopausal) at baseline prior to the first dose of study drug. 
              
p. 21 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.22.If fema le, subject must be either postmenopausal , OR permanently surgically sterile OR for 
women of childbearing potential practicing at least 1 protocol -specified highly effective method 
of birth control , that is effective from Study Day 1 through at least 30 days after the last dose of 
venetoclax or 18 months after the last dose of obinutuzumab or 3 months after the last dose of 
bendamustine, whichever is longer.
23.If male , and subject is sexually active with female partner(s) of childbearing potential , he 
must agree, from Study Day 1 through at least 18 months after the last dose of obinutuzumab or 
3 months after the last dose of bendamustine, whichever is longer, to practice the protocol -
specified contraception.
24.Female who is not pregnant, breastfeeding, or considering becoming pregnant during the 
study or for at least 30 days after the last dose of venetoclax or 18 months after the last dose of 
obinutuzumab or 3 months after the last dose of bendamustine, whichever is longer.
25.Male who is not considering fathering a child or donating sperm during the study or for at 
least 18 months after the last dose of obinutuzumab or 3 months after the last dose of 
bendamustine, whichever is longer.
Concomitant Medications
26.Subject must not have been treated with any investigational drug within 30 days or 
5half-lives of the drug (whichever is longer) prior to the first dose of study drug or is currently 
enrolled in another clinical study.
27.Subject must not have received any live vaccine within 4 weeks prior to the first dose of 
study drug, or expected need of live vaccination during study participation including at least 
4weeks after the last dose of study drug.
5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Contraception Requirements for Females
Subjects must follow the following contraceptive guidelines as specified:
Females, Non -Childbearing Potential
Females do not need to use birth control during or following study drug treatment if considered 
of non -childbearing potential due to m eeting any of the following criteria:
Postmenopausal, age > 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an 
alternative medical cause.
Postmenopausal, age ≤ 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an 
alternative medical cause AND a f ollicle -stimulating hormone (FSH) level > 40 IU/L.
Permanently surgically sterile (bilateral oophorectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, or 
hysterectomy). 
p. 22 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Females, of Childbearing Potential
Females of childbearing potential must avoid pregnancy throughout the s tudy including at 
least 30 days after the last dose of venetoclax or 18 months after the last dose of 
obinutuzumab or 3 months after the last dose of bendamustine, whichever is longer.
Females must commit to one of the following methods of birth control:
Combined (estrogen and progestogen containing) hormonal birth control (oral, 
intravaginal, transdermal) associated with inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 
1month prior to study Cycle 1 Day 1.  Also, barrier method must be used during this 
study fro m initial study drug administration to 30 days after the last dose of venetoclax 
as drug -drug interaction with venetoclax upon the hormonal contraception is unknown.
Progestogen -only hormonal birth control (oral, injectable, implantable) associated with 
inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 1 month prior to study Cycle 1 Day 1.  Also, 
barrier method must be used during this study from initial study drug administration to 
30 days after the last dose of venetoclax as drug -drug interaction with venetoclax upon 
the hormonal contraception is unknown.
Bilateral tubal occlusion/ligation at least 1 month before study Cycle 1 Day 1.
Bilateral tubal occlusion via hysteroscopy (i.e., Essure), provided a hysterosalpingogram 
confirms success of the procedure at leas t 1 month before study Cycle 1 Day 1.
Intrauterine device (IUD).
Intrauterine hormone -releasing system (IUS).
Vasectomized sexual partner(s) (the vasectomized partner(s) provided the vasectomized 
partner has received medical assessment of the surgical success and is the sole sexual 
partner of the trial participant).
True abstinence:  Refraining from heterosexual intercourse when this is in line with the 
preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject (periodic abstinence [e.g., calendar, 
ovulation, symptotherm al, post -ovulation methods] and withdrawal are not acceptable).
Contraception Requirements for Males
Male subjects who are sexually active with a female partner of childbearing potential must agree to use 
condoms, even if the male subject has undergone a successful vasectomy, from Study Day 1 through at 
least 18 months after the last dose of obinutuzumab or 3 months after the last dose of bendamustine, 
whichever is longer, and his female partner(s) must use at least one of the contraceptive measures (as 
defined above for female study subjects of childbearing potential).
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
During treatment with venetoclax:
Steroid therapy for anti- neoplastic intent will not be allowed either during, or within 7 days prior 
to, the first dose o f venetoclax with the exception of inhaled steroids for the treatment of  
p. 23 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.asthma or Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), topical steroids, replacement 
corticosteroid therapy for an inherited or acquired deficiency.
Anticancer therapies including chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or other investigational therapy, 
including targeted small molecule agents are excluded 5 half -lives prior to first dose and 
throughout venetoclax administration.
Biologic agents (e.g., monoclonal antibodies) for anti -neoplastic intent are excluded 30 days 
prior to first dose and throughout venetoclax administration.
Excluded during initiation and dose -titration (ramp -up) of venetoclax and cautionary at 400 mg steady 
daily dose (See Appendix H ):
Exclude strong cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) inhibitors (Appendix H) during initiation and the 
dose -titration (ramp -up) phase.  If subject requires use of these medications after the dose 
titration phase at steady daily doses, use with caution and reduce the venetoclax dose by at 
least 75% during co -administration.  Resume the venetoclax dose that was used prior to 
initiating the CYP3A inhibitor 2 to 3 days after discontinuation of the inhibitor.
Do not consume grapefruit, grapefruit products, Seville oranges (often used in marmalades), or 
star fruit.
Avoid concomitant use o f venetoclax with moderate CYP3A inhibitors .  Consider alternative 
treatments.  If a moderate CYP3A inhibitor must be used, reduce the venetoclax dose by at least 
50%.  Monitor these subjects more closely for signs of toxicities.  Resume the venetoclax dos e 
that was used prior to initiating the CYP3A inhibitor 2 to 3 days after discontinuation of the 
inhibitor.
Avoid concomitant use of venetoclax with strong or moderate CYP3A inducers .  Consider 
alternative treatments with less CYP3A induction.
Avoid concom itant use of venetoclax with P-glycoprotein (P -gp) inhibitors .  If a moderate P -gp 
inhibitor must be used, reduce the venetoclax dose by at least 50%.  Monitor these subjects 
more closely for signs of toxicities.
For subjects being treated with bendamusti ne (See Appendix H ):
Inhibitors of CYP1A2 (e.g., fluvoxamine, ciprofloxacin) have potential to increase plasma 
concentrations of bendamustine and de crease plasma concentrations of active metabolites.  
Inducers of CYP1A2 (e.g., omeprazole, smoking) have potential to decrease plasma 
concentrations of bendamustine and increase plasma concentrations of its active metabolites.  
Caution should be used, or a lternative treatments considered if concomitant treatment with 
CYP1A2 inhibitors or inducers is needed.
Due to the risk of toxic skin reactions (e.g., Stevens -Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal 
necrolysis), concomitant administration of bendamustine and allopurinol should be avoided.  If 
allopurinol is indispensable, it should be stopped > 24 hours before and reinitiated ≥ 24 hours 
after administration of bendamustine. 
p. 24 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.4 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
Any medication or vaccine (including over the counter or pre scription medicines, vitamins and/or herbal 
supplements) that the subject is receiving at the time of enrollment or receives during the study must be 
recorded through the post -treatment visit for venetoclax (Week 157).
Please refer to Appendix H .  Any questions regarding concomitant or prior therapy should be raised to 
the AbbVie emergency contact (see title page).  Information regarding potential drug interactions with 
obinutuzumab, bendamustine, or venetoclax can be located in the respective In vestigator's Brochures.
Subjects must be able to safely discontinue any prohibited medications 5 half -lives or 4 weeks prior to 
initial study drug administration, whichever is shorter.  Subjects must be consented for the study prior 
to discontinuing any pr ohibited medications for the purpose of meeting study eligibility.
5.5 Withdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study and/or Study 
Treatment
A subject may voluntarily withdraw or be withdrawn from the study and/or study drug treatment at any 
time for reas ons including, but not limited to, the following:
Clinically significant abnormal laboratory results or AEs, which rule out continuation of the study 
drug, as determined by the Investigator or the AbbVie TA MD.
The Investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
The subject requests withdrawal from the study.
The subjects' response to therapy is unsatisfactory, as evidenced by progression of disease while 
on study drug.
The subject requires other cancer treatment (e.g., radiotherapy, altern ate anti- neoplastic 
agent).
Eligibility criteria violation was noted after the subject started study drug and continuation of 
the study drug would place the subject at risk.
Introduction of prohibited medications or dosages and continuation of the study dr ug would 
place the subject at risk.
The subject becomes pregnant while on study drug.
Subject is significantly non -compliant with study procedures which would put the subject at risk 
for continued participation in the trial.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow -up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the final status of the subject.  At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 
1certified letter must be sent and documented in the subject's so urce documentation. 
p. 25 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site.  The Investigator may 
also stop the study at his/her site if he/she has safety concerns.  If AbbVie terminates the study for 
safety reasons, AbbVie will promptly notify the Investigator.
In the event AbbVie is notified in writing that a subject withdraws consent to participate in the clinical 
study and no longer consents to the biomarker research, no new biomarker data will be collected for the 
withdrawn subject or added to the existing data or database(s).  Data generated from biomarker 
research collected before subject withdrawal of consent is received will remain part of the study results.
5.6 Follow -Up for Subject Withdrawal from Study and/or Study 
Treatme nt
To minimize missing data for efficacy and safety assessments, subjects who prematurely discontinue 
study drug treatment should continue to be followed up, unless subjects have decided to discontinue 
the study participation entirely (e.g., withdrawal of informed consent).  Subjects should be advised on 
the continued scientific importance of their data even if they discontinue treatment with study drug 
early.
If a subject prematurely discontinues study participation (e.g., withdrawal of informed consent) a nd/or 
study treatment, the procedures outlined for the early termination visit should be completed as soon as 
possible, preferably within 2 weeks of early termination, but before initiation of another treatment 
algorithm, if applicable.  In addition, if su bject is willing, a 30 -day follow -up phone call after the last dose 
of study drug may be completed to ensure all treatment -emergent AEs/SAEs have been resolved.  If the 
subject refuses, this should be noted in the subject's source documentation.
Subjects p rematurely discontinuing study treatment will be followed for disease progression and 
survival.  Post -treatment follow -up calls will be performed every 3 months until discontinuation from 
the study.  Survival information (e.g., the date and cause of death, post -treatment cancer therapies, 
date of progression) will be collected.  This period will continue for 2 years following discontinuation of 
venetoclax.
All attempts must be made to determine the date of the last study drug dose and the primary reason for
discontinuation of study drug or study participation.  The information will be recorded on the 
appropriate electronic Case Report Form (eCRF) page.  However, these procedures should not interfere 
with the initiation of any new treatments or therapeutic mo dalities that the Investigator feels are 
necessary to treat the subject's condition.  Following discontinuation of study drug, the subject will be 
treated in accordance with the Investigator's best clinical judgment, irrespective of whether or not the 
subject decides to continue participation in the study.
5.7 Study Drug
Venetoclax will be initiated when lymphocyte count is < 25 × 109/Land all lymph nodes are < 5 cm at 
restaging evaluation with CT scan.  If the subject has not achieved low tumor burden status after 
6cycles of debulking, the subject may proceed to venetoclax per the discretion of the treating physician 
after discussion with the study physician.  The venetoclax dose will be administered according to a 
weekly ramp -up schedule over 5 weeks to the recommended daily dose of 400 mg.  Subjects will be  
p. 26 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.instructed to take venetoclax tablets with a meal and water at approximately the same time each day.  
Venetoclax tablets should be swallowed whole and not chewed, crushed, or broken prior to swallowing.  
If a subject misses a dose of venetoclax within 8 hours of the time it is usually taken, the subject should 
take the missed dose as soon as possible and resume the normal daily dosing schedule.  If a subject 
misses a dose by more than 8 hours, the subject should not take the missed dose and should resume the 
usual dosing schedule the next day.
If a subject vomits following dosing, no additional dose should be taken that day.  The next prescribed 
dose should be taken at the usual time.
Subjects will be instr ucted to return all drug containers (even if empty) to the study site personnel at 
each study visit.  The study site personnel will document compliance.
Obinutuzumab (100 mg on Day 1 of Cycle 1, 900 mg on Day 2 of Cycle 1, and 1000 mg on Days 8 and 15 
of Cycle 1 and Day 1 of Cycle 2; for Cycles 3 –6 (1000 mg on Day 1) only as needed for subjects to 
achieve low tumor burden) will be administered via intravenous infusion during the debulking regimen.  
After debulking, obinutuzumab (1000 mg) will be administe red via intravenous infusion on Day 1 of 
one 5-week and four 4 -week cycles during the obinutuzumab/venetoclax combination part of the 
regimen.
Bendamustine (90 mg/m2) will be administered in subjects with nodes or nodal mass > 10 cm, or with 
del(11q) and > 5 cm nodes, or at the discretion of the investigator as above, via intravenous infusion 
over 10 minutes on Days 1 and 2 (or Days 2 and 3 at the discretion of the investigator during Cycle 1) of 
each 28 -day cycle for up to 6 cycles during the debulking reg imen.
Bendamustine and obinutuzumab will be packaged in vials and venetoclax will be packaged in blister 
cards and bottles with quantities sufficient to accommodate study design.  Each kit will be labeled per 
local requirements and this label must remain a ffixed to the kit.  Upon receipt, study drug should be 
stored as specified on the label and kept in a secure location.  Each kit will contain a unique kit number.  
This kit number is assigned to a subject via interactive response technology (IRT) and encod es the 
appropriate study drug to be dispensed at the subject's corresponding study visit.  All blank spaces on 
the label will be completed by the site staff prior to dispensing to subjects.  Study drug will only be used 
for the conduct of this study.
Instructions for drug preparation will be provided by AbbVie.
AbbVie will not supply drugs other than obinutuzumab, bendamustine and venetoclax.
5.8 Drug Assignment
All subjects will be assigned a unique identification number by the IRT at the Screening visit.  For
subjects who rescreen, the screening number assigned by the IRT at the initial screening visit should be 
used.
Subjects with 1) > 10 cm lymph nodes or nodal mass or 2) with del(11q) and > 5 cm nodes, or 3) for 
whom aggressive debulking would be beneficial in the opinion of the investigator, should be assigned to 
the obinutuzumab plus bendamustine debulking regimen to ensure adequate cytoreduction.  All other 
subjects should be assigned to the obinutuzumab debulking regimen.  For all subjects, but particula rly  
p. 27 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.for those receiving obinutuzumab plus bendamustine during the debulking period, use of growth factor 
support in treating or preventing neutropenia is allowed and encouraged.
5.9 Protocol Deviations
The Investigator is responsible for complying with all protocol requirements, written instructions and 
applicable laws regarding protocol deviations.  Protocol deviations are prohibited except when 
necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  If a protocol deviation occurs (or is 
identified), th e Investigator is responsible for notifying Independent Ethics Committee 
(IEC)/Independent Review Board (IRB), regulatory authorities (as applicable) and AbbVie.
6SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the 
physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or 
performance of a product/device.  Complaints associated with any com ponent of this investigational 
product must be reported to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or drug component of the product or to the 
medical device component(s).
For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device not wor king properly, 
or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
within 24 hours of the study site's knowledge of the event.  Product complaints occurring during the 
study will be follow ed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
An adverse event is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation 
subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which d oes not necessarily have a causal 
relationship with this treatment.  An adverse event can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended 
sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use 
of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally related to the 
use of the product. 
p. 28 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evidence of adverse events on a 
routine basis throughout the study.  All adverse events will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion; 
improvements in grade should not be captured as a separate event.
An elective surgery/procedure scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an adverse 
event if the surgery/procedure is being performed for a pre -existing condition and/or the 
surgery/procedure has been pre planned prior to study entry.  However, if the pre -existing condition 
deteriorates unexpectedly during the study (e.g., surgery performed earlier than planned), then the
deterioration of the condition for which the elective surgery/procedure is being done will be considered 
an adverse event.
If an adverse event, whether associated with study drug or not, meets any of the following criteria, it is 
to be reported to AbbVie clinical pharmacovigilance as a serious adverse event within 24 hours of the 
site being made aware of the serious adverse event (refer to Section 4.5 of the Operations Manual for 
reporting details and contact information):
Death of Subject An event that re sults in the death of a subject.
Life-Threatening An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have 
resulted in immediate fatality if medical intervention had not been 
taken.  This does not include an event that would have been fatal if it 
had occurred in a more severe form.
Hospitalization or 
Prolongation of 
HospitalizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length 
of time or prolongs the subject's hospital stay.  This does not include 
an emergency room visit or adm ission to an outpatient facility.
Congenital Anomaly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in 
fetal loss.
Persistent or Significant 
Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with
the activities of daily living of a study subject.  Disability is not 
intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle). 
p. 29 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Importan t Medical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent 
Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately life -
threatening or result in death or hospitalization, but based on 
medical judgment may jeopardize the subject an d may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes 
listed above (i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, 
prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity).   Additionally, any elective or 
spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important 
medical event.  Examples of such events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room 
or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsio ns that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.
All adverse events reported from the time of study drug administration until 30 days after 
discontinuation of study drug administration will be colle cted, whether solicited or spontaneously 
reported by the subject.  In addition, protocol -related serious adverse events and nonserious adverse 
events will be collected from the time the subject signs the study -specific informed consent.
AbbVie will be resp onsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting for 
the Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) in accordance with global and local guidelines.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special in terest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Adverse Events of Special Interest 
The following adverse events of special interest (AESI) will be monitored during the study:
Tumor lysis syndrome;
Second primary malignancies;
Serious infections.
These AESIs are to be entered into the electronic data capture (EDC) system immediately (i.e., no more 
than 24 hours after the site becoming aware of the event), also if they do not meet seriousness criteria.  
Adverse events of lab or clinical TLS need to be reported as adverse events of special interest.
Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigators will rate the severity of each adverse event according to the National Cancer Institute 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Event s (NCI CTCAE) v4.03.  If a reported AE increases in 
severity, the initial AE should be given an outcome date and a new AE must be reported on a different 
onset date than the end date of the previous AE to reflect the change in severity.  The dates on the A Es 
cannot overlap.  For all reported SAEs that increase in severity, the supplemental eCRFs also need to be 
updated to reflect any changes due to the increase in severity. 
p. 30 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of th e adverse event to the 
use of study drug:
Reasonable Possibility –After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, 
clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is sufficient evidence (information) to sugge st 
a causal relationship.
No Reasonable Possibility –After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is insufficient evidence 
(information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Pregnancy
While not an adverse event, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours of 
the site becoming aware of the pregnancy.  Subjects who become pregnant during the study must be 
discontinued (see Section 5.5).  If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject or in the partner of a study 
subject, information regarding the pregnancy and the outcome will be collect ed.
In the event of pregnancy occurring in a subject's partner during the study, written informed consent 
from the partner must be obtained prior to collection of any such information.  A separate consent will 
be provided by AbbVie for this purpose.  Pregn ancies in study subject's partners will be collected from 
the date of the first dose through 90 days after the last dose of venetoclax or 18 months after the last 
dose of obinutuzumab, whichever is longer.
The medical outcome for either mother or infant, m eeting any serious criteria including an elective or 
spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, or congenital anomaly is considered a serious adverse event and must 
be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours of the site becoming aware of the event.
6.2 Toxicity Management
The management of specific AEs and laboratory parameters is described in the Operations Manual.  This 
includes AEs of TLS, febrile infections, and any grade 3/4 AEs non -hematologic AEs, and Grade 3 
neutropenia with infection or fever, or Grade 4 hematologic toxicities (except lymphopenia).  For 
allowed study drug interruption, the following rules apply:
1.Allow study drug interruption up to 14 consecutive days for AEs and emergency surgery.  
Elective surgery will not be allowed during the debulking period, or within 4 weeks of 
completion of the venetoclax ramp up period.  If study drug administration is interrupted for 
more than 3 days (i.e., AE), the site will contact the AbbVie study team or AbbVie Therapeutic 
Area Medical Director (TA MD) to adjust the subject's visit schedule, procedures and/or dosing 
on a case by case basis.  For subjects who have had a dosing interruption greater than 1 week 
during the first 5 weeks of dose titration or greater than 2 weeks when at the daily dose of 
400 mg, TLS risk should be reassessed to determine if restarting at a reduced dose is necessary 
(e.g., all or some levels of the dose titration).
2.If the subject must undergo emergency surgery, the study drug should be interrupted at the 
time of the surgery and the AbbVie study t eam must be notified, but does not need to be 
consulted.  After emergency surgery, consult with AbbVie study team before reintroduction of  
p. 31 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.study drug, once the physician has examined the surgical site and determined that it has healed 
and there is no sign of infection.
7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described and fully documented in the 
Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  All statistical anal yses will be performed using SAS version 9.4 or newer 
(SAS Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina, USA).
7.2 Determination of Sample Size
Given that this is a hypothesis generating study, no formal statistical comparisons will be performed.  
The planned study wi ll enroll total sample size of 120 subjects.
7.3 Definition for Analysis Populations
The Full Analysis Set (FAS) includes all enrolled subjects who received at least 1 dose of any study drug.  
The FAS will be used for all safety, efficacy and baseline analyses .
7.4 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
Analysis of the primary endpoint will be conducted on the FAS.  Only descriptive statistical analyses will 
be performed on both induction therapies of obinutuzumab (Group A) or obinutuzumab plus 
bendamustine (Group B) at 2, 4, and 6 cycles of therapy.
Point estimates and 95% confidence interval of complete remission rate (defined as % of CR + CRi) will 
be calculated based on the 2008 Modified IWCLL NCI -WG criteria.  Details of the analysis methods for all 
efficacy endpoin ts will be provided in the SAP.
7.5 Statistical Analyses for Safety
Details pertaining to the safety analyses can be found in the SAP.
7.6 Study Interim Analysis
After 20 subjects have completed the ramp -up regimen with venetoclax, an exploratory analysis will be 
performed to assess the overall safety profile among all subjects who have been enrolled and received 
study drug, with an emphasis on the risk of TLS.  As it is expected that all 20 subjects will be in the low -
risk group for tumor lysis, further subgroup a nalyses will be performed to better understand risk 
stratification in these subjects.  These results may identify new subsets of risk based on 1) disease -
related factors such as lymphadenopathy and absolute lymphocyte count and 2) individual subject - 
p. 32 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.relate d factors such as renal function, performance status and co -morbidities.  In addition, safety and 
efficacy data for the debulking regimens will be reviewed by an advisory committee of experts in 
treating CLL/SLL and the use of venetoclax.  Based on that feedback the study team may choose to 
modify the safety monitoring plan and treatment regimens by amendment to the protocol.
An additional interim analysis for efficacy and similar safety measures will be performed once 
50subjects have completed the Week 38 disease assessment.  This data will also be reviewed by the 
steering committee and, in the case of the safety data, by the DMC.
7.7 Data Monitoring Committee
A DMC comprised of persons independent of the study team and with relevant expertise in their field 
will review data from all subjects who have been enrolled and received study drug at the time the 
first 20 subjects complete the venetoclax ramp -up, in order to determine relative safety of the debulking 
and ramp up regimen, as well as to assess feasibility of modification to monitoring.  The primary 
responsibility of the DMC will be to protect the safety of the subjects participating in this study.
A separate DMC charter will be prepared outside of the protocol and will describe the roles and 
responsibiliti es of the DMC members, frequency of data reviews, relevant safety data to be assessed 
and expectations for blinded communications.
8ETHICS
8.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB)
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject materi als will be 
submitted to the IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the informed consent 
form(s) must be obtained before any subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will require 
review and approval by the IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  In addition, all 
changes to the consent form(s) will be IRB approved.
8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International Council 
for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines, applicable regulations, and guidelines governing clinical study 
conduct and the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Responsibilities of 
the Investigator are specified in Appendix B .
8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie. 
p. 33 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The Investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the 
data reported.  All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clinical site monitoring is conducted 
to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data 
are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the 
currently approved protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory 
requirement(s).
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensu re that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define 
quality tolerance limits in order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data 
will be generated, documented and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP and applicable 
regulatory requirements.
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end -of-study is defined as the date of the last subject's last visit or date of last follow -up contact, 
whichever is later.
Subjects will be followed for disease progression and survival.  Post -treatment follow -up calls will be 
performed every 3 months until discontinuation from the study.  Survival information (e.g., the date and 
cause of death, post -treatment cancer therapies, date of progression) will be collected.  This period will 
continue for 2 years following discontinuation of venetoclax.
12 REFERENCES
1.Jaglowski S, Jones JA.  Choosing first -line therapy for chronic lymphocytic leukemia.  Expert Rev 
Anticancer Ther.  2011;11(9):1379 -90.
2.Müller- Hermelink HK, Montserrat E, Catovsky D, et al.  Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small 
lymphocytic lymphoma.  In:  Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Stein H, Vardiman JW, eds.  World Health 
Organization Classification of Tumours:  Pathology and Genetics of Tumours of Haematopoietic
and Lymphoid Tissues.  Lyon, France:  IARC Press; 2001:127 -30.
3.Roswell- Turner RB, Barr PM.  Treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia in older adults.  J 
Geriatr Oncol.  2017; 8(5):315 -9.
4.Boelens J, Lust S, Vanhoecke BA, et al.  Chronic Lymphocytic Leukae mia.  Anticancer Res.  
2009;29(2):605 -16.
5.Bendeka® (bendamustine hydrochloride) injection, for intravenous use [prescribing 
information].  North Wales, PA; Teva, Current edition. 
p. 34 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.European Medicines Agency:  
http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/medicines/human/referrals/Levact/hum
an_referral_000199.jsp&mid=WC0b01ac0580024e9a; last accessed 23 August 2017.
7.GAZYVA® (obinutuzumab) [prescribing information].  South San Francisco, CA; Genentech, Inc., 
Current edition.
8.European Medicines Agency:  
http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/medicines/human/medicines/002799/h
uman_med_001780.jsp&mid=WC0b01ac058001d124; last accessed 23 August 2017.
9.Brown JR, O'Brien S, Kingsley CD, et al.  Obinutuzuma b plus fludarabine/cyclophosphamide or 
bendamustine in the initial therapy of CLL patients:  the phase 1b GALTON trial.  Blood.  
2015;125(18):2779 -85. 
10.Willis S, Day CL, Hinds MG, et al.  The Bcl -2-regulated apoptotic pathway.  J Cell Sci.  
2003;116 (Pt 20 ):4053 -6.
11.Cory S, Adams JM.  The Bcl2 family:  regulators of the cellular life -or-death switch.  Nature 
Reviews.  Cancer.  2002;2(9):647 -56.
12.Borner C.  The Bcl- 2 protein family:  sensors and checkpoints for life -or-death decisions.  
Molecular Immunology.  2003;39(11):615 -47.
13.Cory S, Huang DCS, Adams JM.  The Bcl- 2 family:  roles in cell survival and oncogenesis.  
Oncogene.  2003;22(53):8590 -607.
14.AbbVie.  Venetoclax Investigator's Brochure.  Current edition.
15.Hallek M, Cheson BD, Catovsky D, et al.  Guideline s for the diagnosis and treatment of chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia:  a report from the International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic 
Leukemia updating the National Cancer Institute -Working Group 1996 guidelines.  Blood.  
2008;111(12):5446 -56.
16.National Cance r Institute.  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE), v4.03.  
Accessed on:  08 October 2017.  Available from:  
http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm.
17.Fischer K, Al -Sawaf O, Fink AM, et al.  Safety and efficacy of venetoclax and obinutuzumab in 
patients with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and coexisting medical 
conditions:  final results of the run -in phase of the randomized CLL14 Trial (BO25323).  Blood.  
2016;128:2054.
18.Levin A, K ellum JA, Mehta RL, et al.  Acute kidney injury:  toward an integrated understanding 
through development of a research agenda.  Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.  2008;3(3):862 -3.
19.Howard SC, Jones DP, Pui CH.  The tumor lysis syndrome.  N Engl J Med.  2011;364(19):18 44-54.
20.Hallek M, Cheson BD, Catovsky D, et al.  iwCLL guidelines for diagnosis, indications for 
treatment, response assessment and supportive management of CLL.  Blood.  
2018;131(25):2745 -60. 
p. 35 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
AE Adverse Event
AESI Adverse Event of Special Interest
ALC Absolute Lymphocyte Count
ALT Alanine Aminotransferase
AST Aspartate Aminotransferase
ANC Absolute Neutrophil Count
Bcl-2 B-cell lymphoma -2
CLL Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
COPD Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
CR Complete Remission
CrCl Creatinine Clearance
CRi Complete Remission with Incomplete Marrow Recovery
CT Computed Tomography
CYP3A Cytochrome P450 3A 
DMC Data Monitoring Committee
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid
DoR Duration of Overall Response
ECG Electrocardiogram
ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
eCRF electronic Case Report Form
EDC Electronic Data Capture
EMA European Medicines Agency
FAS Full Analysis Set
FDA Food and Drug Administration
FISH Fluorescence in -situ hybridization
FSH Follicle -Stimulating Hormone
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GLP Good Laboratory Practice
HBsAb Hepatitis B surface Antibody
HBsAg Hepatitis B surface Antigen 
p. 36 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.HBV Hepatitis B Virus
HCV Hepatitis C Virus
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HTLV-1 Human T -Cell Leukemia Virus 1
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
IEC Independent Ethics Committee
IgHV Immunoglobulin variable region heavy chain 
IMP Investigational Medicinal Product
IRB Institutional Review Board
IRT Interactive Response Technology
IUD Intrauterine device
IUS Intrauterine hormone -releasing system
IWCLL International Workshop for Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
LDH Lactate dehydrogenase
LN Lymph Node
MRD Minimal Residual Disease
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging
NCI CTCAE National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
NCI- WG National Cancer Institute –Working Group 
nPR Nodular Partial Remission
ORR Overall Response Rate
OS Overall Survival
PCR Polymerase Chain Reaction
PD Progressive Disease
PFS Progression -Free Survival
P-gp P-glycoprotein
PI Principal Investigator
PML Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy
PR Partial Remission
QTc QT interval corrected for heart rate
QTcF QT interval corrected for heart rate using Fridericia's formula
RNA Ribonucleic Acid
SAE Serious Adverse Event
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan 
p. 37 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.SD Stable Disease
sIg Surface Immunoglobulin
SLL Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma
SUSAR Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions
TA MD Therapeutic Area Medical Director
TLS Tumor Lysis Syndrome
TTP Time To Progression
ULN Upper Limit of Normal
UMRD Undetectable MRD 
p. 38 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M16 -788:  Debulking Regimens Prior to Initiating Venetoclax Combination Therapy in Frontline 
CLL Excluding 17p Deletion
Protocol Date:  1 9December 2019
Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Council for Harmonisation 
(ICH) Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and local regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site 
location.  In signing the Investigator Agreement, the investigator is agreeing to the following:
1.Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying 
AbbVie and the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee 
(IEC), except when necessary to protect the subject from immediate harm.
2.Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3.Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4.Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVie.
5.Reading the information in the Investigator's Brochure/safety material provided, includi ng the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6.Informing all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7.Main taining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study -related documents until notification from AbbVie .
8.Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
9.Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving 
risks to human sub jects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, 
institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
10.Providing direct access to source data documents for study -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed) 
p. 39 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Study Project Manager Clinical Program Development
Assistant Medical Director Global Medical Affairs
Hematology Lead Medical Affairs
Director Statistics Statistics
Principal Medical Writer Medical Writing 

p. 43 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.* The Week 1 Day 1 visit may be performed within +3 days/ – 0 days; thereafter Day 1 of each subsequent Cycle may be performed within +/– 3 days of the expected visit date 
provided that the planned 28- day interval between cycles is maintained.
** The Week 3 Day 1, Week 4 Day 1, and Week 5 Day 1 (+/ – 3 days) visits are optional if the investigator wants to recheck lab values. 
p. 45 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E. DEFINITIONS OF LABOR ATORY AND CLINICAL 
TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME
Metabolic AbnormalityCriteria for Classification of Laboratory 
Tumor Lysis SyndromeCriteria for Classification of Clinical 
Tumor Lysis Syndrome
Hyperuricemia Uric acid > 8.0 mg/dL (475.8 µmol/liter) in 
adults or above the upper limit of the 
normal range for age in children
Hyperphosphatemia Phosphorus > 4.5 mg/dL (1.5 mmol/liter) in 
adults or > 6.5 mg/dL (2.1 mmol/liter) in 
children
Hyperkalemia Potassium > 6.0 mmol/liter Cardiac dysrhythmia or sudden 
death probably or definitely caused 
by hyperkalemia
Hypocalcemia Corrected calcium < 7.0 mg/dL 
(1.75 mmol/liter) or ionized calcium < 1.12 
(0.3 mmol/liter)†Cardiac dysrhythmia, sudden death, 
seizure, neuromuscular irritability 
(tetany, paresthesias, muscle 
twitching, carpopedal spasm, 
Trousse au's sign, Chvostek's sign, 
laryngospasm, or bronchospasm), 
hypotension, or heart failure 
probably or definitely caused by 
hypocalcemia
Acute kidney injury‡Not applicable Increase in the serum creatinine 
level of 0.3 mg/dL (26.5 µmol/liter) 
(or a single value > 1.5 times the 
upper limit of the age -appropriate 
normal range if no baseline 
creatinine measurement is available) 
or the presence of oliguria, defined 
as an average urine output 
<0.5mL/kg/hr for 6 hrs
† The corrected calcium level in milligrams per deciliter = measured calcium level in milligrams per deciliter + 0.8 × 
(4-albumin in grams per deciliter).
‡ Acute kidney injury is defined as an increase in the creatinine level of at least 0.3 mg per deciliter (26.5 µmol per liter) or a 
period of oliguria lasting 6 hours or more.  By definition, if acute kidney injury is present, the subject has clinical tumor lysis 
syndrome.  Data about acute kidney injury from Levin et al.18
Note: In laboratory tumor lysis syndrome, two or more metabolic abnormalities must be present during the same 24 hour
period within 3 days before the start of therapy or up to 7 afterward.  Clinical tumor lysis syndrome requires the 
presence of laboratory tumor lysis syndrome plus an increased creatinine level, seizures, cardiac dysrhythmia, or 
death.
Source:  Howard et al., 201119 
p. 46 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX F. 2008 MODIFIED IWCLL NCI- WG CRITERIA FOR 
TUMOR RESPONSE
ParameterComplete 
Remission (CR) All 
Criteria Must Be 
Meta,bPartial Remission (PR) 
at Least 2 Criteria 
from Group A AND at 
Least 1 Criterion from 
Group B Must Be MetProgressive Disease 
(PD) at Least 
1Criterion from Group 
A OR 1 Criterion from 
Group B Must Be MetcStable Disease 
(SD) All Criteria 
Must Be Met
Group A
Lymphadenopathy None > 1.5 cm Decrease ≥ 50%d 
from baselineIncrease ≥ 50%e
from baseline or any 
new LN > 1.5 cmChange of –49% 
to +49%f
from baseline
Blood 
Lymphocytes< 4000/µL Decrease ≥ 50% 
from baselineIncrease ≥ 50% over 
baseline ( ≥ 5000/µL)Change of –49% 
to +49% 
from baseline
HepatomegalygNone Decrease ≥ 50% 
from baselineIncrease ≥ 50%h
from baselineChange of –49% 
to +49% 
from baseline
SplenomegalygNone Decrease ≥ 50% 
from baselineIncrease ≥ 50%h
from baselineChange of –49% 
to +49% 
from baseline
Marrow Normocellular, 
<30% 
lymphocytes, no B 
lymphoid nodules; 
hypocellular 
marrow defines 
CRiN/A N/A N/A
Group B
Platelet Count > 100,000/µLi> 100,000/µL or 
increase ≥ 50% 
over baselineiDecrease of ≥ 50% 
from baseline 
secondary to CLLChange of –49% 
to +49% 
from baseline
Hemoglobin > 11.0 g/dLi> 11.0 g/dL or 
increase ≥ 50% 
over baselineiDecrease of > 2 g/dL 
from baseline 
secondary to CLLIncrease to 
≤11.0 g/dL over 
baseline, or 
decrease 
< 2g/dL
Neutrophils > 1500/µLi> 1500/µL or 
increase ≥ 50% 
over baselineiDecrease ≥ 50% 
from baseline 
secondary to CLLN/A 
p. 47 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.ParameterComplete 
Remission (CR) All 
Criteria Must Be 
Meta,bPartial Remission (PR) 
at Least 2 Criteria 
from Group A AND at 
Least 1 Criterion from 
Group B Must Be MetProgressive Disease 
(PD) at Least 
1Criterion from Group 
A OR 1 Criterion from 
Group B Must Be MetcStable Disease 
(SD) All Criteria 
Must Be Met
Other Considerations
New Lesions None None Appearance of new 
palpable lymph nodes 
(> 1.5 cm in longest 
diameter) or any new 
extra nodal lesion 
(regardless of size) or 
transformation to a 
more aggressive 
histology, e.g., Richter 
SyndromeeNone
Non -Target 
LesionsNodes must be 
normal size as 
visually estimated; 
extra nodal and 
other assessable 
disease should be 
absentNo change/decreased Unequivocal 
progressionNo change or 
decrease or non -
substantial 
increase
Target Extra Nodal 
DiseaseAbsence of any 
extra nodal 
disease by physical 
examination 
(palpable, 
visualized extra 
nodal) and CT scan≥ 50% decrease in SPD ≥ 50% increase in the 
longest diameter of any 
extra nodal lesionNot CR, CRi, nPR, 
PR, or PD
Abbreviations:  CLL = chronic lymphocytic leukemia; CR = complete remission; CRi = complete remission with incomplete 
marrow recovery; CT = computed tomography; LN = lymph nodes; N/A = Not applicable; nPR = nodular partial remission; 
PD=progressive disease; PR = partial remission; SD = stable disease; SPD = sum of the products of di ameters
a. CR also requires the lack of disease -related constitutional symptoms.
b. Complete Remission plus the presence of persistent lymphoid nodules on bone marrow biopsy is nodular partial remission 
(nPR).
c. Transformation to a more aggressive histolo gy (e.g., Richter Syndrome) would also qualify as a PD.
d. Sum of the products of multiple LNs (as evaluated by CT scans).  Note in eCRF if by physical examination only.
e. Increase in SPD of multiple nodes, or in greatest diameter of any previous site, or appearance of any new 
lymphadenopathy or organomegaly.  Degree of change in LN or lymphocyte counts should be measured from nadir (lowest 
post- treatment) values.
f. Sum products of up to 6 LNs or LN masses (target lesions), with no increase in an LN or new enlarged LN.  Increase of 
<
25% in small LNs (< 2 cm) not significant.  Decreases should be measured compared to baseline (pre -treatment) values.
g. If enlarged before therapy.
h. An increase in the previously noted enlargement of the liver or spleen by 50% or more or the de novo appearance of 
hepatomegaly or splenomegaly.
i. Without the need for exogenous growth factors or transfusions. 
p. 49 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.Symptomatic or functional extranodal involvement (e.g., skin, kidney, lung, spine).
7.Disease -related symptoms as defined by any of the following:
a) Unintentional weight loss ≥ 10% within the previous 6 months.
b) Significant fatigue (i.e., ECOG PS 2 or worse; cannot wor k or unable to perform usual 
activities).
c) Fevers ≥ 100.5° F or 38.0° C for 2 or more weeks without evidence of infection.
d) Night sweats for 1 month without evidence of infection.
Source:  Hallek et al., 201820 
p. 52 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX I. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 07 December 2017
Version 2.0 13 July 2018
Version 3.0 25 October 2018
Version 4.0 18 July 2019
The purpose of this Version is to correct minor inconsistencies within the protocol in addition to the 
following:
Section 3.1, Objectives, and Section 3.3:  Seconda ry Endpoints:  Changed the term "MRD negativity" to 
"Undetectable MRD (< 10–4)" or "UMRD ;" updated text throughout to indicate this change in 
terminology.
Rationale:   To update the terminology used to define minimal residual disease status of < 10–4
Section 4.1:  Overall Study Design and Plan:  Clarified in Figure 1and in text that venetoclax therapy 
would continue for a total treatment period of up to 53 weeks; clarified that in addition to bone marrow 
aspirate, biopsy is required to confirm CR or CRi; updated Figure 5to correct inconsistencies; clarified 
that interim analysis will occur after 50 subjects have completed the Week 38 disease assessment; 
Rationale:   Clarifications.
Sectio n 5.5:  Withdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study and/or Study Treatment:  Clarified 
that subjects may be withdrawn from the study and/or st udy drug treatment; specified two additional 
reasons for withdrawal from the study and/or study drug treatment, including that subject's response to 
therapy is unsatisfactory, as evidenced by progression of disease while on study drug, or requiring other 
cancer treatment.
Rationale:   Clarifications and to ensure consistency with other AbbVie protocols in this therapeutic area.
Section 5.6:  Follow -Up fo r Subject Withdrawal from Study and/or Study Treatment:  Clarified that 
subjects who discontinue study participation and/or study treatment should have an early termination 
visit before initiation of another treatment, if applicable; clarified post -treatme nt follow -up for subjects 
who prematurely discontinue study treatment.
Rationale:   Clarifications.
Section 7.6, Study Interim Analysis:  Clarified that interim analysis will occur after 50 subjects have 
completed the Week 38 disease assessment.
Rationale:   Clarification. 
p. 53 of 53
STUDY M16 -788  |  Version 5.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Appendix D , Activity S chedule:  Specified that MRD assessment will use peripheral blood; removed term 
"Treatment Completion Visit" from Week 65 Day 1 visit; clarified that Week 38 and Week 65 bone 
marrow aspirate and biopsy will be collected only if needed to confirm CR or CRi.
Rationale:   Clarifications. 