October 30, 2018  
 Impact of Behavioral Treatment of Insomnia on Nighttime Urine  
Production 
University of Pittsburgh STUDY19110063  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
INTRODUCTION  
Nocturnal polyuria (NP) has long been known to be a major contribut or to nocturia in the 
elderly.  NP has a strong  bidirectional relation with poor sleep especially in the elderly; 
however, to the best of our knowledge, an intervention directed solely at sleep has never 
been tried f or NP. O ur previous studies have shown that improving sleep with BBTI 
improves nocturia.  However, we do not know the mechanisms by which behavioral sleep 
treatments improve nocturia. The proposed study will be the first to directly examine two 
plausible mediators: first uninterrupted sleep period (FUS P) and NP. The knowledge 
gained from this study can help identify 1) impact of sleep intervention on nighttime urine 
production, and 2) mechanisms by which sleep intervention improves nocturia 
 
STUDY OVERVIEW  
This pilot study will provide critical preliminary data regarding the relation between sleep and nighttime urine production in seniors by: 1) examining the impact of behavioral sleep 
treatment (BBTI - brief behavioral treatment of insomnia) on nighttime urine production- 
NP and 2) exploring the potential mechanisms  by which BBTI impacts nocturia. To 
address the proposed aims we will perform a randomized controlled pilot  trial of 60 
healthy community -dwelling men and women aged 65 and over with nocturia and NP. 
The participants will be randomized to receive the 4- week behavioral sleep intervention 
BBTI by a trained therapist or an information control intervention. The participants will undergo detailed sleep and bladder  assessments pre- and post -intervention to assess 
the effect of treatment. Data from this study  will provide feasibility and pilot data for  a 
subsequent, larger, and more definitive trial.  
 Outcome measures : 
1) Change in NP - measured by NPi - nocturnal polyuria index= (nocturnal urine 
volume/24- hour volume) *100 
2) Change in nocturia frequency  
3) Change in FUSP or duration of uninterrupted sleep before the first awakening to void 
  
October 30, 2018  
 STUDY FLOW  /STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
Study Flow Chart  
Screening  Baseline assessment  R 
A N D 
O 
M 
I 
S 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N Intervention  
Post -
intervention 
assessment  
 
Visit 1  In-home 
Assessments  BBTI  ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ 
Sleep/ Bladder 
diary  
Z-machine  
ISI Wk 1  Wk 2  Wk 3  Wk 4  
Session  Tele 
call Session  Tele 
call 
Telephone 
Screening  Apnea 
Link 
Plus® Detailed 
history & 
physical  Sleep/  
Bladder diary  
Z-machine      
 
IC ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ 
Wk 1  Wk 2  Wk 3  Wk 4  
 Tele 
call  Tele 
call 
 
   
October 30, 2018  
 Screening  
Screening procedures include: a) telephone interview and b) Visit 1 to study research suite - 
Continence Research Unit at UPMC Montefore Hospital. If the subject is interested and 
qualifies, then the other visits are scheduled.  
Telephone Interview 
Use IRB approved telephone script to determine eligibility (5- 20mins; study nurse/coordinator)  
ApneaLink mailed to participants who screened eligible upon telephone interview  
 
Visit 1  
2 hour; study nurse; in- person  
1. Obtain informed consent and sign document.  
2. Questionnaires:  
• Medical and Surgical history  
• Current medication  
• Current incontinence  
• ISI 
• MoCA (paper)  
3. Uroflow  and dip (at appropriate bladder fullness)  
4. Measure flow rate and volume of normal void 
5. Post-void residual measurement by ultrasound  
6. Physical examination: Short physical examination. 
7. Sleep/ bladder  diary: Explain 3 day sleep and voiding  diary instructions . 
8. Zmachine: watch instruction video. The device to be worn on the 3rd night of voiding diary  
9. Schedule visit 2 with enough  time to complete diary . 
 
Visit 2  
Randomization  
1. Follow study procedure according to the group randomized to. 
 
Telephone follow -up 
Week 2 after the visit 2 - both groups (BBTI and Control)  
Week 4 after the visit 2 - both groups  
 
Visit 3  
For participants randomized to BBTI group   
 
Post intervention  
4 weeks post visit 2  
1. Sleep/ Bladder  diary  (send in mail ) 
2. Zmachine ( send in mail ) 
3. ISI- completed telephonically . 
  
October 30, 2018  
 Inclusion/exclusion criteria  
 
For this study researchers shall enroll: ambulatory and functionally -independent community -
dwelling men and women 
aged 65+ years, with nocturia ≥2/night.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
• Unstable or acute medical or c entral nervous system conditions  
• Untreated, current, severe psychiatric condition  
• Untreated, current, severe overactive bladder syndrome 
• Post void residual > 30ml  
• Sleep apnea with AHI≥15 
• Currently diagnosed and/or treated Obstructive Sleep Apnea,  Restless Legs Syndrome, 
parasomnia  
• CHF, by exam or NT- proB natriuretic peptide (NT -proBNP)> 30 pmol/L56  
• Chronic kidney disease, stage III -V (eGFR<60)  
• >14 alcohol drinks per week  
• >3 caffeinated drinks (~300mg) per day  
  
October 30, 2018  
 Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Randomization: After all baseline assessments are complete, researchers  will randomize 
the participants in to the intervention groups in a 1:1 ratio, with random block sizes chosen 
from small even numbers, stratified by  severity of baseline nocturia (≤3 or  >3/night . To 
prevent educated guessing, the study statistician will reveal  exact details of blocking 
strategy only at study completion.  
 
Data Analysis: In addition to statistical significance, researchers  will employ descriptive 
statistics and graphical  techniques to draw conclusions. Specifically, as appropriate for a 
pilot study, researchers  will focus interpretations on magnitudes of effects from standard 
statistical methods rather than their p- values, and apply graphical  techniques such as 
needle plot s to represent data at the individual level rather than based on averages.  
Researchers  will use SAS® version 9.3 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North Carolina) 
software, intention- to-treat philosophy, and multiple imputation for missing data in all 
inferential analyses.  
 
First, researchers  will compare baseline characteristics between the group using 
independent samples t -, Wilcoxon rank sum, chi -square and Fisher’s exact tests, as 
appropriate. Any significant differences will be used as additional covariates in sensitivity 
analyses. Second, researchers  will fit a series of analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) 
models with pre-  to post -intervention change in each outcome as the dependent variable, 
intervention group as the independent factor of interest, and baseline value of outcome as 
a covariate. Magnitude and significance of  intervention group term will serve as evidence 
for Aim 1 efficacy hypotheses. Third, for Aim 2, researchers  will begin by  exploring 
correlations of pre-  to post -intervention changes in nocturi a with those in FUSP and NPI. 
In keeping  with Baron and Kenny’s fr amework for mediation analysis, researchers  will add 
FUSP change and NPI change (both  individually and together) as additional independent 
variables to the Aim 1 ANOVA models. Any subsequent  reduction in intervention effect 
will be interpreted as supporting the Aim 2 mediation hypotheses. Statistical  significance 
of the extent of mediation will be obtained using %SOBEL, %INDIRECT and %MEDIATE 
SAS®  macros, as appropriate.  
 