Ticagrelor versus Clopidogrel and Eptifibatide Bolus in Patients 
with Stable or Unstable Angina Undergoing Coronary 
Intervention: A Randomized Pharmacodynamic Study  
 
 
     Study Protocol & Statisti cal Analysis Plan  
       
            [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
      
        December  17, 2019  
 
 
  Massoud A. Leesar , M.D.,  Principal Investigator  
    University of Alabama at Birmingham  
    Birmingham, AL 35294  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 Ticagrelor versus  Clopidogrel and Eptifibatide B olus in 
Patients with Stable  or Unstable Angina Undergoing 
Coronary Intervention : A Randomized Pharmacodynamic 
Study  
 
 
 
Moazez Marian, PhD, Olseun Alli, MD, Firas Al soliman, MD; Mark Sasse, MD, Arka 
Chatterjee, MD, Himanshu Ag garwal, MD, Andrew Kurtlinsky, MD Massoud 
Leesar, MD  
Division of Cardiology, UAB Center for T hrombosis Research, University of 
Alabama, Birmingham  
 
 
 
Address for Correspondence:  Massoud A. Leesar, MD     
Division of Cardiology  
     University of Alabama -Birmingham  
     Birmingham, AL, 35294  
     Telephone: ( 205) 975 -0816  
     E-mail: mleear@uab.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
In the Ad Hoc percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) study (Presented at the SCAI meeting, 
2015 ), 100 patients with troponin -negative acute coronary syndrome were randomized to receive 
ticagrelor (180mg loading dose [LD] and 90mg afte r 12hr) or clopidogrel (600mg LD and 75 mg 
after 12 h) with aspirin 75 –100mg daily. P2Y12 reactivity uni t [PRU] using VerifyNowTM assay was 
measured pre -LD, and at 0.5, 2 and 8  h post LD. At 2 h, PRU was lower with ticagrelor vs. 
clopidogrel (98.4 ± 95.4 vs. 257.5 ± 74.5, respectively; p<0.001). PRU  diverged as early as 0 .5 h 
post ticagrelor LD and there was  a significant reduction in the PRU level with ticagrelor . The r ate 
of hig h on -treatment PRU level was  significantly reduced with ticagrelor compared with 
clopidogrel at 2 h (13.3% vs . 78.3%, respectively ; p<0.001). However, ticagrelor still did not cover 
the first 30 min of the procedure.  
 
The Intracoronary Stenting and Antithrombotic Regimen –Rapid Early Action for Coronary 
Treatment (ISAR -REACT) study reported  that pretreatment with 600 mg clopidogrel provides 
outcomes similar to those achieved with a st rategy of pretreatment w ith the addition of abciximab 
[1] However, an important consideration in the decision for pretreatment is the associated risk of 
bleeding in those patients requiring coronary bypass surgery.  The Clopidogrel Loading w ith 
Eptifibatide  to Arrest the Reactivity of Platelets  (CLEAR PLATELETS study ) [2] showed  that the 
administration of eptifibatide with either a 300 mg or 600 mg of clopidogrel provides the most 
sustained platelet inhibition and was  associated with th e lowest incidence of  myonecrosis  
compared with those who received clopidogrel alone . The incremental increase  in myonecrosis 
observed in patients with higher levels of post-treatment platelet reactivity lend strong suppo rt to 
the concept that activated  platelets  during PCI  play a central role in the mediation of post -stent 
myonecrosis . However, the fin dings of ISAR -REACT trial is not relevant when physicians decide 
not to pretreat patients whose coronary anatomy is un known before the stenting . 
Since stenting and the use of thienopyridines have become routine, there has been a decrease 
in the incidence of acute closure, but because of concern with respect to bleeding complications 
after PCI, adopting a bolus injection or brief infusion of glycopr otein inhibitors ( GPI) has reduced 
such complications. In this respect, Kini et al [3] demonstrated that among patients undergoing 
PCI, GPI  bolus only reduced vascular/bleeding complications with similar MACE and reduced 
cost when compared with GPI bolus p lus continuous infusion. In addition, GPI bolus only 
improved ambulatory PCI and reduced length of stay.  Marmur et al. [4] compared long-term 
mortality after bolus only administration of abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban during PCI and 
demonstrated t hat eptifibatide, when given as bolus -only during PCI, improved the long -term 
survival compared to abciximab. Furthermore, Fung et al. [5] demonstrated that in patients 
undergoing non -emergent PCI, the post -procedural infusion of eptifibatide  can be abbrev iated to 
<2 h and that was not inferior to 18 -h infusion in preventing ischemic events. Furthermore, they 
concluded that the abbreviated infusion of eptifibatide  reduced both cost and post -procedural 
major bleeding.  
 
We recently randomized 70 patients wit h Non-ST-Segment Myocardial I nfarction ( NSTEMI ) to 
ticagrelor 190 mg loading and eptifibatide bolus -only (TEP) vs. ticagrelor loading and eptifibatide 
bolus plus 2 h infusion  (TEPI) administrated before stenting  [Fig. 1] . Light transmission 
aggregometry wa s performed and percent inhibition of platelet aggregation ( %IPA ) was calculated 
at baseline, and at 2 , 6 , and 24 h using ADP,TRAP, collagen, and arachidonic acid (AA). Cardiac 
enzymes, hemoglobin and hematocrit were measured at baseline and at 24 h. The  event rates 
were determined at 30 -day follow -up. We demonstrated that in patients randomized to TEP vs. 
TEPI, there were no significant difference in the %IPA values at 2 h and 6 h with ADP 5  μM (100% 
± 0.01 vs. 99% ± 0.25 and 99% ± 2.4 vs. 99% ± 1.2, res pecti vely) and with ADP 20 μM as well as 
with collagen. However, %IPA was lower at 24 h (still >60 % platelet inhibition ) compared with that 
at 2 h and 6 h. Percent IPA with TRAP 10 or 20 μM was higher at 6 h in patients randomized to 
 3 
TEPI vs. TEP (87% ± 13  vs. 74% ± 17; P<0.01, respectively), but t his had no bearing on outcomes 
since ADP was highly inhibited by ticagrelor at 6 h. There were no significant differences in 
troponin or hemoglobin levels among the groups. During follow - up, and there was no sten t 
thrombosis or myocardial infarction.  
 
 
We concluded that % IPA values with ADP and collagen were not significantly different comparing 
ticagrelor with eptifibatide bolus only vs. ticagrelor and eptifibatide bolus plus 2 h infusion. 
Eptifibatid e bolus only highly inhibited platelets aggregation while allowing bridging to the 
antiplatelet effect of ticagrelor and circumventing the need for continuous eptifibatide infusion. 
There was no significant difference in bleeding or MI between the 2 groups . 
RATIONALE  
The antiplatelet effect of clopidogrel is slow in onset, variable, and irreversible; approximately 15 
to 30% o f patients are non -responsive [6 ]. Furthermore, a 75 -mg/d clopidogrel maintenance dose 
requires at least 5 days, and a 600 -mg loading dose of clopidogrel requires up to 8 hours to 
achieve a 50% steady state of inhibition of ADP -induced platelet aggregation [7 -9]. The difference 
in the clinical effects of ticagrelor compared with clopidogrel lies in the fact that ticagrelor exerts 
more ra pid, more potent, and more consistent inhibition of platelets  [10,11 ].  In the CLEAR 
Fig. 1  
 4 
PLATELETS study [2],  administration of eptifibatide with either a 300 mg or 600 mg of clopidogrel 
provided the most sust ained platelet inhibition and was  associated with the lowest incidence of 
myonecrosis compared with 600 mg loading dose of clopidogrel  administered in the cath lab . 
The Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes ( PLATO ) trial [12] demonstrated that d ual 
antiplatelet therap y with aspirin an d ticagrelor was  superior to aspirin and clopidogrel in reducing 
thrombotic complications in patients with acute coro nary syndrome undergoing PCI . Glycoprotein 
IIb/IIIa inhibitors (GPI) bolus and infusion was used wit h ticagrelor in 40% of patients in the PLATO 
trial. However, GPI use was  not randomized and the benefit of which cannot be substantiated. 
On the other hand, the CLEAR PLATELET study showed clopidogrel and e ptifibatide bolus and 
infusion was associated  with reduced myonecrosis . In addition, they  showed that platelet 
inhibition was significantly higher with 600 mg vs. 300 mg of clopidogrel . In the Ad Hoc PCI study, 
ticagrelor or clopidogrel was administered before PCI in patients with unstable angi na and there 
was a significant reduction in the PR U level with ticagrelor  as compared with clopidogrel. We 
demonstrated that %IPA with ticagrelor and eptifibatide bolus was not significantly different than 
ticagrelor and eptifi batide bolus and short infusion.  
The inhibition of platelets  is significantly faster and stronger with Ticagrelor than clopidogrel.  W e 
hypothesi zed that inhibition of platelet aggregation with ticagrelor alone will be non -inferior to that 
of clopidogrel and eptifibatide bolus. The present study wi ll be the first to in vestigate the 
pharmacodynamic  effects of ticagrelor vs. clopidogrel plus eptifibatide bolus in patie nts 
undergoing elective PCI  in patients with troponin negative unstable angina  or stable angina . If 
ticagrelor alone is indeed non -inferior to clopidogrel a nd eptifibatide bolus, this will pave the way 
for a large randomized study to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of ticagrelor alone as 
compared with concomitant administration of clopidogrel and eptifibatide.  
Study Hypothesis: To compare  the percent inh ibition of platelet aggregation with ti cagrelor 
compared with clopidogrel and eptifibatide bolus in patients with stable angina or in patients with 
troponin -negative unstable angina.  
 
Inclusion Criteria :  
Patients with s table angina with evidenc e for at least >10% per fusion defect (moderate to large  
ischemia ) or patients with t roponin -negative  unstable angina .  
 
Exclusion Criteria: A need fo r oral anticoagulation therapy; an increased risk of bradycardia, 
and concomitant therapy with a strong cytochrome P -450 inhibitors;  surgery<4 weeks; The use 
of any thienopyridine s prior to randomization ; upstream use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors;  
bleeding diathesis or major bleeding episode w ithin 2 weeks; thrombocytopenia ; incessant chest 
pain; hemodynamic instability; NSTEMI as evidenced by elevation of troponin  levels; renal fai lure 
with a serum creatinine >2.0 mg/dL; and anemia with HCT<30% . 
 
Methods    
In this study, 100  patients  with stable angina or troponin negative unstable angina, will be 
randomized to ticagrelor loading dose versus clopidogrel loading dose and eptifibatide bolus only 
administrated  before PCI. Platelet function testing will be performed at baseline, at 30 min post -
loading dose, 2 h, and 4  h, and 24 h . All patients w ill be started on aspirin 81 mg  prior to procedure  
. Heparin 60 units/kg will be administered  intravenously before PCI. PCI will be performed in 
accordance with standard clinical practice. Please see Fig. 2, Design of the study below and Table 
1. 
 
 
 5 
Fig. 2  
 
Blood Sampling for Platelet Function Testing  
Blood will be collected from  an antecubital vein into vacutainer tubes (Becton -Dickinson, Franklin 
Lakes, NJ) that contain 3.2% trisodium citrate for l ight-transmittance aggregometry. All 
measurements will be performed at the UAB thrombosis research laboratory.  
 
Light -Transmittance Aggregometry  
Platele t aggregation induced by ADP (5 and 20  m), TRAP (10 and 20 m) platel et-rich plasma 
will be measured with a Chrono log Optical Agg regometer (m odel 490 -4D; Chrono log Corporation, 
Havertown, Pa). The final extent of aggregation, measured at 6 minutes after agonist addition, 
and the maximal extent of aggregation will be expressed as the percent change in lig ht 
transmittance from baseline with plate let-poor plasma as a reference. Inhibition of platelet 
aggregation (IPA) will be  calculated as follows:  
  
IPA(%)=100% X PAt - PAb 
PAb 
Where PA is platelet aggregation, b is predosing, and t is postdosing.  
 
Statistical Analysis  
The present study is an exploratory trial to investigate the percent inhibition of platelet activity 
(%IPA) (measured by light-transmittance aggregometry)  comparing the loading dose of ticagrelor 

 6 
with loading dose of clopidogrel and 2 boluses of eptifibati de measured at all time -points.  Since 
there are no preliminary data available, no power calculation was performed. Statistical analysis 
will be performed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences, version 22.0, software 
package for Windows (SPSS, I nc., Chicago, Illinois). Data will be presented as mean ± 1 SD or 
frequencies; a value of P< 0.05 will be considered statistically significant. %IPA  of ticagrelor and 
2 boluses of eptifibatide  vs. loading dose of clopidogrel  and 2 boluses of eptifibatide  will be 
compared at all time -points using repeated measures ANOVA. Continuous variables will be 
compared between the 2  treatment groups with Student  t test. For comparisons of categorical 
data, the Chi -Square test will be performed.   
 
End-Points  
The primar y end point of the study is to compare %IPA induced by ADP  at 2 h, in patients 
randomized to the loading dose of ticagrelor with loading dose of clopidogrel and 2 boluses of 
eptifibatide  measured at 2 h  post loading dose. Secondary endpoints of the study  are to 
compare %IPA induced by ADP and TRAP in patients randomized to the loading dose of ticagrelor 
with loading dose of clopidogrel and 2 boluses of eptifibatide   at all time -points.   Other secondary 
outcomes include: 1) the occurrence of post -procedural myonecrosis comparing the 2 groups. 
Ischemic myonecrosis will be defined as elevated post -procedure troponin -1 level >0.26 µg/l; and 
2) the rate minor  (a fall in hemoglobin of 3 to <5  g/dL) and major bleeding  ( a fall in the hemoglobin 
>5 g/dL)  between the groups . 
 
Anticipated Findings   
Since platelet inhibition with ticagrelor starts rapidly, we expect that %IPA  at 2 h will be no 
significantly different than clopidogrel and eptifibati de bolus. In addition, since eptifibatide half -life 
is short, we expect that %IPA at 24 h will be higher with ticagrelor than clopidogrel and eptifibatide 
bolus.  
We anticipate the results of the present study will set the stage for a large randomized tria l 
comparing myonecrosi s, stent thrombosis, death, myocardial infarction, bleeding, and costs in 
patients randomized to ticagrelor onl y vs. loading dose of clopidogrel and 2 boluses of eptifibatide .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Schedule of treatment  
 Index Hospitalization  
 
 7 
Time -range  Baseline  Procedure  Discharge  4 weeks  
Time range for completion  Same day  
prior  During   1 week  
Point of Interest  Hospital  
 Physician  
office  
Informed consent  X    
History  X    
Physical exam  X   X 
ECG  X  X X 
Hgb/Hct X  X X 
Troponin  X Q 8 h  X  
Platelet function testing  X X   
Adverse Event assessment 
including chest pain score 
and number of antianginal 
medications   X X X 
 
  
 8 
REFRENCES  
 
1.  Kastrati H, Dirschinger J, Berger PB, Schömig A . Abciximab in patients with acute coronary 
syndromes A, Mehilli J, Neumann F -J, Dotzer F, ten Berg J, Bollwein H, Graf I, Ibrahim M, Pache J, 
Seyfarth M, Schühlen undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention after clopidogrel 
pretreatment. The ISAR -REACT 2  randomized trial. JAMA 2006; 295:1531 –8 
 
2. Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Zaman KA, et al. Clopidogrel loading with eptifabitide to arrest the reactivity 
of platelets: Results of the clopidogrel loading with eptifabitide to arrest the reactivity of platelets 
(CLEAR PLATELETS) Study. Circulation 2005;111:1153 -59 
3. Kini AS , Chen VH , Krishnan P , Lee P , Kim MC , Mares A , Suleman J , Moreno PR , Sharma 
SK. Bolus -only versus bolus + infusion of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors during percutaneous 
coronary intervention. 2008 156:513 -9. 
4. Marmur JD, Poludasu s, Lazar J. Long -term mortality after bolus -only administration of abciximab, 
eptifibatide, or tirofib an during Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. Cath Cardiovasc Interv 
2009; 73:214 –221.  
 
5. Fung AY, Saw J, Starovoytov A, Densem C, Jokhi P, Walsh SJ, Fox RS, Humphries KH, Aymong E, 
Ricci DR, Webb JG, Hamburger JN, Carere RG, Buller CE. Abbreviated infusi on of eptifibatide after 
successful coronary intervention. The BRIEF -PCI (Brief Infusion of Eptifibatide Following 
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention) randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:837 –45 
 
6. Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Hiatt BL, O’Connor CM. Clopidogrel for coronary stenting: response 
variability, drug resistance, and the effect of pretreatment platelet reactivity. Circulation 2003; 
107: 2908 –13. 
 
7. Wiviott SD, Trenk D, Frelinger AL, et al. Prasugr el compared with high loading - and maintenance -
dose clopidogrel in patients with planned percutaneous coronary intervention: the Prasugrel in 
Comparison to Clopidogrel for Inhibition of Platelet Activation and Aggregation -Thrombolysis in 
Myocardial Infarct ion 44 trial.  Circulation  2007;  2923 –32. 
 
8. Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al. Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute 
coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 2007; 357: 2001 –15 
 
9. Storey RF, Husted S, Harrington RA, et al. Inhibition of platelet aggregation by AZD6140, a 
reversible oral P2Y12 receptor antagonist, compared with clopidogrel in patients with acute 
coronary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50: 1852 –56. 
 
10. Husted S, Emanuelsson H, Heptinstall S, Sandset PM, Wickens M, Peters G. Pharmacodynamics, 
pharmacokinetics, and safety of the oral reversible P2Y12 antagonist AZD6140 with aspirin in 
patients with atherosclerosis: a double -blind comparison to clopidogrel with aspir in. Eur Heart J 
2006; 27: 1038 –47. 
 9 
 
11. Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Butler K, et al. Randomized double -blind assessment of the ONSET and 
OFFSET of the antiplatelet effects of ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with stable coronary 
artery disease: the ONSET/OFFSET study. Circulation 2009; 120:  2577–85. 
 
12. Cannon CP, Harrington RA, James S, et al. Comparison of ticagrelor with clopidogrel in patients 
with a planned invasive strategy for acute coronary syndromes (PLATO): a randomised double -
blind study Comparison of ticagrelor with clopidogrel in  patients with a planned invasive strategy 
for acute coronary syndromes (PLATO): a randomised double -blind study. Lancet 2010; 375 : 283–
93 
 
 
 
 