Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
December 19, 2017  
1 
       
 
 
 
Title of Project : Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive 
Procedures  
   
Principal Investigator : Jeffrey L Carson, MD, Rutgers University  
   
Funding Source(s) : National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), National 
Institutes of Health (NIH)  
  
Co-Investigators  Paul Ness, MD, Johns Hopkins University  
Darrell Triulzi, MD, University of Pittsburgh  
Terry Gernsheimer , University of Washington  
Monica Pagano, University of Washington   
Maria Mori Brooks, PhD,  University of Pittsburgh  
Claire Philipp, MD, Rutgers University  
Lauren Hogshire, MD, Rutgers University  
 Arthur Bracey, MD, Baylor College of Medicine  
 
1. Purpose/Specific Aims  
 
Patients with prolonged clotting times (INR ≥1.5), who are to undergo invasive procedures  (e.g., 
central venous catheter placement, endoscopy, bronchoscopy, cysto scopy , angiography ), may be 
at increased risk of bleeding for which physicians commonly order pre-procedure plasma  
trans fusion.  However the efficacy of prophylactic plasma transfusion has not been established.  
This pilot study will determine the feasibility and optimal study design of a large randomized 
NIH-Defined Phase III Clinical Trial that w ill provide critical clinic evidence to guide 
transfusion practice.  
 
 1.1 Objectives  
  
Objective 1 : To evaluate the feasibility of a research protocol that will lead to a large -scale 
clinical trial designed to evaluate the effectiveness of plasma in patients with prolonged INR 
undergoing an invasive procedure.   
   
 To determine the eligibility and  enroll ment rate into the study protocol   
 To assess the patient characteristics of patients enrolled in this trial.  
 To determine adherence rates for the plasma  transfusion  protocol and test methods to 
minimize protocol violations.  
 To establish  frequencies of bleeding,  transfusion a ssociated  cardiac  overload  (TACO), 
and t ransfusion related acute lung i njury (TRALI) in patients  enrolled in this pilot study  
to calculate  sample size for large definitive trial.  
 

Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 2 -   Objective 2 : To compare the risk of major bleeding and complications in patients with an 
INR of 1.5 to 2.5 undergoing an invasive procedure who are randomly allocated to receive 
plasma versus no treatment.   
 
 To compare the risk of major bleeding defined as drop in hemoglobin level 2 g/dL or 
greater, mean hemog lobin concentration, and use of red blood cell transfusion in patients 
randomly assigned to plasma compared to  no treatment.   
 To determine if use of plasma is associated with higher rate TACO, TRALI, infection, 
transfer to ICU and ICU days, mortality, or length of hospital stay  compared to no 
treatment.  
 
  
1.2 Hypotheses   
 
The primary study hypothesis is that prophylac tic plasma transfusion in patients with INR s 
between 1.5 and 2.5 will reduce  post procedure  major bleeding  (drop in hemoglobin of 2 
g/dL  or greater) compared t o patients who do not receive plasma .   
 
 
2. Background and Significance  
 
Plasma from whole blood  is a frequently administered blood product,1,2 and its  usage in the U.S. 
approaches 4 milli on units transfused annually .3  Recent data demonstrate that relative to red 
blood cell transfusion, the number of plasma  units transfused in the United States is higher than 
in other countries with  advanced medical care.1,2 Plasma may be used to manage active bleeding 
(e.g. tr auma) or prophylactically to reduce risk of bleeding. The transfusion of plasma  prior to an 
invasive procedure in order to correct a perceived bleeding risk is common, and in a recent 
survey of plasma  transfusion approximately 30% of requests for plasma  were for patients 
scheduled t o undergo an invasive procedure .4 However, there is no definitive clinical trial 
evidence t o substantiate this practice.  
  
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) contains all of the coagulation factors and proteins present in whole 
blood but slightly diluted by the anticoagulant solution used to collect the blood. Technically, 
fresh frozen plasma  is plasma placed in an -18o to -30o C freezer  within 8 hours of phlebotomy . 
Each unit is derived from single donor and is about 250cc. Frozen Plasma (PF 24) is plasma that 
is frozen within 24 hours of phlebotomy and is often used interchangeably with fresh frozen 
plasma.  Frozen plasma 24 has the same levels of clotting factors as fresh frozen plasma except 
for factor VIII levels, which are 65% to 80% of normal levels. Thawed Plasma is made by 
thawing fresh frozen plasma or frozen plasma 24 and then storing it up to 5 days at 1 -6 o C. All 
factors remain stable at refrigerator temperatures except factor V that declines to approximately 
80% of normal and factor VIII to 50% normal. Thawed plasma is used in terchangeably with 
fresh frozen plasma or frozen plasma 24.  This protocol  uses “plasma” to refer to fresh frozen 
plasma, frozen plasma 24 or thawed plasma.  
   
In general, hemostasis is considered adequate if the factor concentrations are 25% to 30% of 
normal.5  Since plasma volumes are 40 cc/Kg, a dose of 10 -15cc/kg is required (assuming 
coagulation factor level equal t o 0). Thus, three to five units are required in the average patient.  
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 3 -   In general, each unit of plasma is infused over 30 -60 minutes (3 -6cc/kg/hour) in patients with 
reasonable cardiac function and up to a maximum of 4 hours per unit in patients with reduce d 
left ventricular function (1 cc/kg/hour).  
 
Clinicians usually assess blood coagulation (and hence the need for plasma) by the results for in 
vitro tests of prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and platelet 
count.  The proth rombin time evaluates the extrinsic pathway and may be prolonged with 
Vitamin K deficiency due to use of warfarin, poor nutrition, antibiotics, liver disease, or many 
other less common disorders. The prothrombin time is also reported as INR (International Ratio), 
which adjusts for different sensitivities of reagents used for the test.  A normal INR is 1.0 and 
INR from 2.0 -3.0 is in the therapeutic range for patients treated with the anticoagulant warfarin 
(Coumadin). Patients with INR from 1.5 -2.5 may be at  increased risk of bleeding especially after 
an invasive procedure.  The PTT is used to evaluate the intrinsic system and to monitor treatment 
with unfractionated heparin. The PTT is prolonged in patients with factor deficiencies of the 
intrinsic system.  
 
 When deciding to use plasma  prophylactically or prior to an invasive procedure, the clinician 
makes several assumptions. The first assumption is that elevated laboratory measures of 
coagulati on such as prothrombin time  and INR confer an increased risk of bleeding. However, 
prothrombin time  and INR were never validated for use in this setting. Highlighting this point, a 
recent systematic review assessed whether abnormalities in pre -procedure coagulation tests 
correlated with a n increased risk of bleeding .6 Analysis of 24 observational studies and 1 RCT 
included nearly 2000 procedures performed on patients with abnormal coagulation studies and 
concluded that there is not sufficient data to support PT and INR as predi ctors of bleeding risk.  
 
A second assumption that the clinician makes when deciding to transfuse plasma  is that 
administration of plasma  will improve the INR value and thereby reduce the procedure’s risk of 
bleeding complications. In fact, there is surpris ingly little evidence to support the ability of 
plasma  to correct an abnormal INR .7,8 Given that the INR of plasma  can be as high as  1.3, 
transfusion will have little effect on a minimally elevated INR. This point is emphasized  by a 
prospective study evaluating the effectiveness of transfusing plasma  to correct an increased INR 
in patients with a mildly prolo nged PT (13.1 to 17 seconds ).9 Of 121 patients studied, <1% 
normalized their INR and only 15% demonstrated improvement at least halfway to normal. It is 
important to emphasize  that pre -procedural doses of plasma are often inadequate to consistently 
correct coagulation factor deficiencies. Highlighting this point, a recent study of plasma use in 
the critical care setting observed that prophylactic transfusions were ofte n given at 10 mL/kg or 
under, while evidence suggests that correction of low coagulation factor levels may require 
plasma  doses as high as 30 mL/ kg (approximately 8 units) .10,11 Data from analysis of plasma use 
in 10 hospitals also shows that plasma is usually under dosed (see below).12 
 
Given the paucity of high quality evidence to guide prophylactic transfusion of plasma , in 2010 
the AABB published practice guideli nes to assist practitioners .2,13 Importantly, no studies of 
nonsurgical invasive procedures met review inclusion criteria.  Acknowledging this lack of data 
regarding peri -procedural management of patients with abnormal coagulation parameters, the 
Society of Interventional Radiology recently pub lished consensus guide lines .14 These guidelines 
recommend that in the absence of warfarin treatm ent or liver disease, pre -procedure INR testing 
be conducted only prior to procedures with moderate to high bleeding risk. In patients scheduled 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 4 -   to undergo moderate or high bleeding risk procedures, these guidelines recommend that the INR 
be corrected to < 1.5, although this recommendation was derived by Delphi consensus of expert 
practitioners not high quality evidence from randomized clinical trials.14 
 
We know of three clinical trials that evaluated  the use the plasma prior to an invasive procedure 
outside the operating room.6,15,16 The only published trial f ound no difference in bleeding in 72 
patients with either prolonged protime or thrombocytopenia undergoing percutaneous 
dilatational tracheotomy.17 The other two trials did not successfully recruit  (ICU patients (N=81 
of 400)18 and hepatic procedures (N=3 of 1172).  This experience highl ights the need to expand 
eligibility criteria and for a pilot study to demonstrate feasibility.   
 
Clinicians must also consider the adverse effects of plasma.  The risks of transfusion virus 
transmission are similar to a red blood cell transfusion, which has decreased greatly throughout 
the past two decades.19,20 Currently, t he transmission of infectious diseases by blood is rare.   
However, non -infectious risks are more common.  Transfusion associated circulatory overload 
(TACO) is of greatest concern, and may be under -recognized.  A prospective surveillance study 
of the risk of TACO in patients receiving plasma found a 5% incidence.21 A similar risk has been 
reported with red blood cell transfusion, also estimated to be from 1% to 6%.22-24 The per unit 
risk of transfusion related acute lung injury (TRALI) associated with plasma is declining and is 
estimated to be on the order of 1:12,000.25  Recalling that pre -procedural plasma  is typically 
under -dosed, it stands that larger volumes of plasma  would confer increased risk to patients 
receiving plasma  in order to correct a perceived coagulopathy prior to a procedure.  Thus it is 
critical to define whether the current practice to provide  plasma when correctly dosed is doing 
more harm than good or whether this risk can be easily managed with a prophylactic dose of 
diuretic.  
  
Despite the absence of data, there are several reasons why clinicians frequently use plasma prior 
to invasive proce dures.  First, a markedly prolonged coagulation tests clearly increase the risk of 
bleeding so that it is reasonable to anticipate that modest INR (1.5 -2.5) may also increase risk of 
bleeding. Second, it is possible that plasma may benefit a subset of pati ents with modest 
prolongations of PT/INR such as those with thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunction. Third, 
there is a common concern of medicolegal consequences of performing a procedure in the face 
of an “abnormal” coagulation test result. Fourth, there  are no high quality trials that prove that it 
is beneficial and/or safe not to give plasma.  Supporting the rationale to give plasma is findings 
from plasma epidemiology study that shows about 20% of patients have a drop in hemoglobin 
greater than 2 g/dL after procedure.26 Thus, despite the ongoing campaign to reduce plasma use 
and the generation of many sets of clinical guidelines suggesting it s lack of efficacy without 
clinical trial evidence, it may be that the problem is not that plasma is not indicated but rather the 
dose of plasma is too low and ineffective 9,12  
 
Conclusions:  
Plasma is widely used before invasive procedures in patients with moderately prolonged INR 
with the expectation that bleeding will be prevented or reduced. Yet there are no randomized 
clinical trials that demonstrate plasma is efficacious… using the proper dose….or prove that is 
safe not to administer pl asma.  Furthermore, there are no trials that describe how common or 
clinically important are the side effects of plasma. Thus, a large pragmatic clinical trial is needed 
to definitively establish or refute the efficacy and safety of properly dosed plasma.  Only a high 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 5 -   quality clinical trial will provide the essential evidence to demonstrate to clinicians that the risks 
of plasma outweigh the minimal if any hemostatic benefits in patients with moderately prolonged 
INR undergoing an invasive procedure OR show  that clinically significant bleeding can be 
reduced with appropriately dosed plasma and that infrequent side effects like TACO than can be 
easily managed with a dose of a diuretic . Because of the challenges in the past of enrolling 
patients into similar t rials it is essential that a pilot trial be performed which provides the 
necessary and sufficient experience needed to plan and successfully complete a large multicenter 
trial that provides the essential evidence to guide the transfusion of plasma.  
   
3. Research  Design and Methods  
 
We will perform a randomized clinical trial using  simplified inclusion  criteria  along with 
minimal exclusions to ensure implementation of a  pragmatic study whose results will be widely 
generalizable.   
 
Eligible study subjects will be randomly allocated to either receive either plasma transfusion 
prior to the invasive procedure, or to no treatment. Treatment arm will be assigned according to a 
1:1 ratio to plasma or no treatment using a permuted block des ign with variable block sizes of 4 
and 6 and stratified by clinical site and liver disease  via a predetermined randomization table.  
The treatment allocation is provided in real time, using the web based study application. 
Treatment assignment is not maske d.   
 
Outside of pre -procedure plasma transfusion, all medical care is per treating physician.  Each of  
the transfusion strategies is consistent with medically established guidelines for the study 
population, patients with moderately elevated INRs. Study su bjects will be followed (via medical 
record review) through the hospitalization . 
 
At time of randomization, a baseline (within 24 hours prior to randomization and plasma 
transfusion) hemoglobin level and INR will be obtained.  Those allocated to plasma wil l be 
transfused a target dose of 15 cc per kilogram to a maximum dose of 5 units .  Hemoglobin levels 
and INRs will be collected following the procedure and on the following 2 days (if still in the 
hospital). In the rare instances that these laboratory test s have not been ordered for clinical 
reasons, they will be ordered as research tests.   
 
Detailed information related to bleeding and plasma complications within the 2 days following 
the procedure  will be abstracted  from the medical chart ( transfusion of al l blood products 
including red blood cells, plasma, platelets and cryoprecipitate ), as will hemoglobin level s and 
all red cell  or fresh frozen plasma transfusions within  7 days after randomization . Post procedure 
medical events will be recorded.  
 
If, within the 2 post procedure days,  the subject experiences  any new cardiopulmonary 
symptoms, relevant sections of the medical record, including progress notes, relevant consults, 
the official interpretation of chest x -rays or CT scans, laboratory studies ( BNP, troponin, and 
electrocardiograms), and t reatments including diuretics, will be copied.  These records will be 
redacted of all personal health identifiers (PHI)  and sent to the Outcome Classifications 
Committee. The  Outcome Classifications Committee , comprised of two of the study co -
investigators  masked  to treatment allocation , will adjudicate occurrence of TACO and TRALI , 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 6 -   medically  important outcomes which are susceptible to misclassification  and bias  in this 
unblinded  clinical setting . 
 
 
3.1. Duration of Study  
 
The enrollme nt phase of the study will be 28 months , and each subject entered into the trial 
will be followed through the hospitalization, for up to 30 days.  A total of 110 subjects will be 
enrolled.   It will take 3 years to complete th e study.  
 
 
3.2 Study Sites  
 
There are  4 clinical sites  in the pilot study :  Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital (PI:  
Jeffrey Carson, Co -investigators Lauren Hogshire  and Claire Phillip), Johns Hopkins 
University Hospital (PI:  Paul Ness), University of Pittsburgh Medical Center - Presbyterian 
Hospital (PI : Darrell Triulzi) , University of Washington Medical Center  (PI: Terry 
Gernsheimer , Monica Pagano ), and Baylor St L uke’s Medical Center (PI: Arthur Bracey) .  
Each clinical site will have a team composed of P I and clinical site coordinator.  
 
The University of Pittsburgh  under the direction of Maria Brooks will generate the 
randomization table used to allocate treatment assignment.  
 
 
3.3 Sample Size Justification   
 
Pilot:   For the enrollment, adherence and event rates needed for planning and feasibility 
analyses, we determined that the width of a 90% confidence interval should be  0.10 or less for 
true proportions equal to 0.10 (or equivalently 0.90) and 0.15 or less for pr oportions equal to 
0.30 (or equivalently 0.70).  With 110 persons enrolled in the pilot trial, the 90% confidence 
intervals for estimated proportions equal to 0.10, 0.20 and 0.30 will have widths 0.10, 0.13, 
and 0.15, respectively, based on data from the c ombined sample, and widths 0.15, 0.19, and 
0.22, respectively, based on data from one treatment arm (i.e. n=55).  The 90% confidence 
intervals for estimated means for continuous measures will have precision +/ - 0.16*SD for the 
combined sample and +/ - 0.22* SD for each treatment arm.  A pilot trial with a total sample 
size of N=110 will have 90% power to detect a difference of 0.62 SD between the mean 
hemoglobin change between the two assigned treatment groups.  For example, estimating that 
hemoglobin change has a SD of approximately 1.0 g/dL, this pilot trial would have 90% power 
to detect difference of 0.62 g/dL in the change of hemoglobin level from baseline to the nadir 
between the two assigned treatment groups.  
 
3.4 Subject Selection   
 
3.4.1 Inclusion Cr iteria  
 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 7 -   A patient is eligible for enrollment when the following criteria are met:  1) 21 years of 
age or older, 2 ) an INR between 1.5 and 2.5, 3) undergoing an invasive procedure at the 
bedside, endoscopy laboratory, or in radiology.  
 
These criteria will enroll  a broad , generalizable group of study subjects with  moderately 
prolonged INR s in whom many clinicians transfuse plasma prior to an invasive 
procedure with the expectation that this will lower the risk of bleeding.  The lower 
range of INR (1.5)  close ly approximates that recommended by Society of Interventional 
Radiolog y and  the upper range ( 2.5) is below that for which plasma is clearly required.   
Recent data  confirm that a large proportion of plasma is given to patients with INRs in 
this range and thus reflects current practice.26 
 
3.4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
Patients will be excluded if any of the following criteria  are met : 1) undergoing a 
surgical procedure in the operating room; 2) active bleeding; 3) undergoing a procedure 
involving or proximal to  the central nervous system or spinal cord; 4) cardiac 
cathe terization, 5) using 4 factor plasma concentrates 6) using direct factor X inhibit ors 
and other anticoagulants for which plasma will not correct prolonged INR; 7) platelet 
count less than 40,000/ul, 8) congenital coagulation disorders; 9) acquired disorders 
(i.e., lupus anticoagulant) for which plasma will not correct the disorder ; 10) women 
who are pregnant; 1 1) Patients on intravenous heparin that is not discontinued > 4 hours 
prior to the procedure  and; 1 2)Patients unwillingness to consider blood transfusion . 
. 
 
Patients undergoing surgical procedure s in the operating room are excluded because 
blood loss will occur in all these patients regardless of their coagulation status and 
change in hemoglobin level will not be as useful an outcome compared to patients 
undergoing more minor procedures that would not ordinarily lead to signific ant 
bleeding. P atients undergoing procedures proximal or involving the central nervous 
system  are excluded  because even minimal blood loss could be dangerous. Patients  
using anticoagulants , for whic h plasma does not correct INR, as well as  those re ceiving 
4 factor plasma concentrates , are excluded. P atients undergoing cardiac catheterization 
are excluded since they received multiple anticoagulants and platelet inhibitors as part 
of the procedure and patients with platelet counts less than 40,000/ul  are excluded  since 
these patients may be at greater risk of bleeding.  
 
Patients receiving platelet transfusions prior to the procedure are not excluded.  
However, since a platelet transfusion includes about 300 ccs of plasma,  the INR level 
confirming elig ibility must be performed after the platelet transfusion.  
 
 
3.4.3 Heparin Treated Patients  
 
In patients on intravenous heparin, it is not possible to stop heparin, check an INR, 
consent, and administer plasma prior to procedure.  Given the minimal effect o f heparin 
on INR, patients will be eligible for the trial if the INR is between 1.5 and 2.5 while 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 8 -   receiving heparin .  In patients on intravenous heparin, the medication must be stopped > 
4 hours prior to the procedure and plasma will not be started until 4 hours after 
discontinuation of heparin.  An INR will be checked 4 hours after stopping heparin but 
plasma may be a dministrated without waiting for the results of the INR off heparin . 
Heparin may be restarted after the procedure at the discretion of the clinical team.  
 
4. Study Variables  
  
4.1 Independent Variables or Interventions   
 
4.1.1  Interventions   
 
Plasma :  Patients randomized to plasma will receive the standard target dose of 15cc per 
Kg (acceptable range 10 -20 cc/Kg) to maximum of five units up to four hours prior to the 
procedure (and 6 hours in patients with documented or clinically suspected reduced 
ejection fraction). We will limit the maximum dose of plasma to five units since this 
emulates what clinicians often do and the concerns about fluid overload from the 
administration of larger doses of plasma. The attending physician will determine the rate 
of administration of the plasma.  
 
No Treatment :  We will compare to the alternative, which is no treatment prior to 
procedure  
 
There are several procedures in place to ensure adherence to the assigned treatment arm.  
Following randomization, the subject’s chart will be labeled in the progress note to 
indicate the assigned transfusion strategy.  The Clinical Site Coordinator will contact 
the attending, house  staff, fellow, and nurse to inform them of the patient’s assignment 
and review the protocol. The bloo d bank will be notified of the subject’s treatment 
assignment and asked to  notify study  personnel if plasma is ordered for a patient 
assigned to the no -treatment arm. If administration of plasma is a violation of the 
protocol, study staff will contact the ordering physician to discuss transfusion plans and 
to clarify the study protocol.  However, study staff does not approve or disapprove the 
transfusion and will not delay emergent transfusion; the treating physician controls care.  
 
4.2 Dependent Variables or Outcome Measures  
 
Outcomes Assessing Trial Performance and Feasibility : 
   
The primary feasibility outcome will be enrollment rate, overall and by center.  
Secondary outcomes will include a) Eligibility rates overall and by center; b) Adherence 
rates fo r the plasma protocol, overall and by center; c) Frequencies of proposed study 
outcomes.  With the proposed sample size, this  pilot study will only provide an 
approximation of rates. d) Patient characteristics of patients enrolled in this trial 
including t he procedures the patients underwent and the location of the procedure (i.e., 
ICU, radiology)  
 
Secondary Outcomes Assessing Treatment Effectiveness and Safety : 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 9 -      
During the 2 days  following randomization, we will compare: 1) Major Bleeding. 2) 
Mean Change  in Hemoglobin Level:  This continuous variable will be much more 
sensitive measure of bleeding and will be the primary clinical outcome in the pilot 
study.   3) Red blood cell transfusion :  We will compare the percentage of patients and 
number of red blood  cell units transfused between the two arms. 4) Transfusion 
Associated Cardiac Overload (TACO) i.e., congestive heart failure.  5) Transfusion 
Related Acute Lung Injury (TRALI). 6) Change in INR.   We will determine the change 
in INR from baseline to measu rement after procedure, day 1, and day 2.  We also will 
determine the frequency in which the post transfusion INR is less than 1.5.  7) Other 
outcomes:  sites and characteristics of major bleeding, all cause in -hospital mortality, 
length of hospital stay f rom time of randomization to discharge, pneumonia or blood 
stream infection, transfer to intensive care unit, and number of days in intensive care 
unit. 
 
We will also compare plasma and red cell transfusions received between the treatment 
arms during  the 7  days following the procedure .  
 
The following criteria will be used to define the secondary outcomes:  
 
Major Bleeding : Major bleeding will be defined as decline of 2 g/dL or more in 
hemoglobin level from the baseline to nadir hemoglobin level within 2 day s of the 
procedure.  In patients receiving red blood cell transfusions, the change in hemoglobin 
level (baseline level minus the nadir) will be increased 1 g/dL for each unit transfused . 
 
 Mean Change in Hemoglobin Level:   Mean change in hemoglobin level within 2 days 
will be defined as the difference between the hemoglobin level before and the nadir 
hemoglobin within 2 days of the procedure.   In patients receiving red blood cell 
transfusions, the change in hemoglobin leve l will be increased 1 g/dL for each unit 
transfused.   
 
Transfusion Associated Cardiac Overload (TACO) :  TACO is equivalent to congestive 
heart failure in patients receivin g transfusion.  C ongestive heart failure will be 
diagnosed by the Outcomes Classific ation Committee . The essential components are:  
1) Clinical symptoms of heart failure (New or worsening symptoms such as dyspnea, 
orthopnea and two or more signs including edema, pulmonary crackles, tachypnea, S3 
gallop, radiographic evidence of worsening heart failure) 2) Need for 
additional/increased therapy (Initiation of or a significant augmentation in oral therapy 
for the treatment of congestive heart failure or initiation of intravenous diuretic, 
inotrope, or vasodilator therapy and 3) No other non -cardiac etiology for signs or 
symptoms is identified.  
 
Transfusion Related Acute Lung Injury (TRALI ):  TRALI  will be diagnosed  by the 
Outcomes Classification Committee using the Canadian Consensus Conference 
definition.27  The criteria include 1) acute onset, 2) h ypoxemia defined as PaO 2/FIO 2 < 
300 or SpO 2 < 90% on room air, 3) bilateral infiltrates on chest radiograph, 3) no 
evidence for circulatory overload, 4) no preexisting acute lung injury before transfusion, 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 10 -   5) occurs within 6 hours of transfusion, and 6) no  temporal relationship to alternative 
risk factor for acute lung injury.   
 
Pneumonia and Blood Stream Infection : The CDC criteria  will be used for clinically 
defined pneumonia based on two or more serial x -rays and blood stream infection. 28,29  
 
Length of stay, Intensive Care Unit days :  The number of days post randomization that 
patient is in the hospital , along with the number of days post rand omization the patient 
is in ICU, if applicable, will be collected.  
 
4.3 Chart Review Selection  
 
Local study staff will abstract data for each  potential study subject  from  the medical 
record  to assess eligibility and patient demogr aphics . The subject will be identified with 
a unique sequential study identification number. If the subject has any of the exclusion 
criteria , or the treating physician does not agree to enroll su bject, or consent is not 
obtained, no further data will be collected.  If a consented subject does not undergo a 
procedure (i.e., consent is obtained in anticipation of a procedure which does not occur 
or a procedure is canceled)  no data other than the INR level will be collected.   
 
For each consented patient  who undergoes a procedure , abstracted data will include: 
baseline medical status and comorbidities;  pre-procedure INR,  hemoglobin levels and 
plasma transfusions; specific procedure  performed  and setting; post procedure INR, 
hemoglobin levels, plasma, and red blood cell transfusions; and the clinical data to 
determine the study outcomes listed above.   Other than dates, PHI will not be collected.  
 
 
 
4.4 Risks of Harm   
 
Transm ission of infectious diseases (e.g., hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV) via plasma 
transfusion is less than 1 in 10,000 .  The estimated risk of t ransfusion associated 
circulatory overload (TACO) is 5% and transfusion related acute lung injury (TRALI)  is 
estimated to be on the order of 1:12,000 .  
 
The two transfusion strategies are within medically established guidelines for the study 
population.  No compelling evidence shows one approach to be better than the other, 
i.e., a state of equipoise exists.  Physicians commo nly believe that patients with 
moderately elevated INR levels are at increased risk for bleeding following an invasive 
procedure, and that plasma transfusion will mitigate that risk.  However there is no 
medical evidence to support this use of plasma.  Fur thermore there are risks associated 
the plasma transfusion including TACO and TRALI which could outweigh any 
potential benefit.  Thus, clinical risks to study subjects above those of usual practice are 
not a consideration.  An independent Data and Safety M onitoring Board (DSMB) will 
monitor the study to assure patient safety.  
 
There are no other alternative treatments.  
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 11 -    
 
4.5 Potential for Benefit  
 
There are no direct benefits to the study participants.  This pilot study will be the first 
step in attain ing the essential clinical tr ial data to understand the true risk of bleeding, and 
the impact of plasma on that risk, for patients with a moderate elevation in INR who 
undergo invasive procedures.  
 
 
5.  Subject  Recruitment  and Enrollment Considerations  
 
5.1 Subject Recruitment  
 
Potential study subjects are likely to be identified in the intensive care units where 
bedside procedures are performed or via a scheduled procedure by interventional 
radiologists or gastroenterologists  and by blood banks .  Study personnel wil l present the 
trial to the medical staff prior to the initiation of patient recruitment.  Only patients 
whose treating physician has agreed to cooperate with the study protocol will be 
considered  for participation.   Study staff will screen  the medical reco rds of  patients 
identified in these settings  (details below)  to determine those who have an INR 
measurement in the study range  and who are eligible for the study .   
 
1) Intensive Care Unit : Many bedside procedures are performed in the intensive care 
unit a nd plasma is often administered if the INR is prolonged.  We will identify 
collaborators in all the major ICUs in the hospital and seek help in identifying patients 
eligible for the trial.  We will request that someone from the ICU team contact the 
researc h nurse with potential subjects.  In addition, the research nurse will visit each 
ICU daily to identify potential patients for the trial.  In the ICU setting, consent will be 
sought for all potential subjects likely to undergo a bedside procedure (as compar ed to 
scheduled for the procedure), as the majority of  these patients may require that the 
procedure be performed (e.g., insertion of a swan ganz catheter)  urgently.   
2) Interventional Radiology and Endoscopy Laboratory :  A prothrombin time/INR 
along with PTT, and platelet count are required prior to performing most procedures. 
We will review daily the patients scheduled for a procedure.  In any inpatient with an 
INR between 1.5 and 2.5, we will contact the patient ’s attending physician and request 
permission to consent the patient.  We will also confirm that the interventional 
radiologist or gastroenterologist/pulmonologist is willing to follow the transfusion 
protocol and perform the procedure if the patient is enrolled  in the trial.  
3) Blood Bank :  The research nurse will telephone the blood bank twice daily to determine 
if plasma has been ordered for a patient and the medical record will be reviewed to 
determine eligibility for the trial.  
 
 
5.2 Consent Procedures  
 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 12 -   The clinical site  coordinator will identify him/herself to the patient as a member of the 
research team and request permission to tell the patient about the study.  The 
coordinator will describe the purpose of the study and the two transfusion strategies 
(plasma transfusion or no transfusion) and the collection of medical information.  If the 
patient agrees to participate in the trial, the signed IRB approved consent form will be 
placed in the medical record and the coordinator will keep make a copy to keep wi th the 
subject’s study file .  
 
To minimize placing undue pressure on the patient to agree to participate, the person 
obtaining consent will not be directly involved in the patient’s medical care.  It will be 
emphasiz ed that consent is voluntary,  that the medical care the patient receives will not 
be influenced by his or her decision , and that, should the patient agree to participate, he 
or she is free to withdraw from the study at any time.  After the study has been introduced, 
the coordinator wi ll leave a copy of the unsigned consent with the patient for 
consideration.  The coordinator will arrange to return at a time convenient for the patient 
to determine his or her participatory status.  If the patient agrees, he or she will sign the 
consent a t that time.  
 
 
5.3 Subject  Costs and Compensation  
 
The trial is being performed under usual care conditions and there are no costs to the 
subjects for study participation. In the ( rare) instance  a protocol required hemoglobin or 
INR has not been ordered by  the treating physician , the cost of the test will be covered 
by the trial.  
 
There is no compensation to study subjects.  
 
 
 
6.   Data Handling  
 
Study data will be  collected and managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools30 
hosted at  Rutge rs Robert Wood Johnson Medical School . REDCap (Research Electronic 
Data Capture) is a secure, web -based application designed to support data capture for 
research studies, providing 1) an intuitive interface for validated data entry; 2) audit trails for 
tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3) automated export procedures for 
seamless data downloads to common statistical packages; and 4) procedures for importing 
data from external sources.  
 
 
Each study subject will be assigned a unique sequential study identification number. Local 
site staff will enter the de -identified study data directly onto the web application  via a secure 
web connection with authentication , using the study number to ident ify the individual 
subject.   Other than dates, the study does not collect PHI.   The REDCap entry module is 
programmed to have  real-time data validation and integrity checks .  Access to the electronic 
data is permitted on a need to know basis through user rights assigned by the coordinating 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 13 -   center at Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School .   Staff at the coordinating center 
will download  the data from the web application into SAS  software  and perform all data 
analyses.    
 
The study -wide de -identified database will not be destroyed.  
 
All medical records that are copied as source documentation for adjudication of TACO and 
TRALI will be labeled with the study identification number and striped of identifiers.  
 
Only the staff at the local site will have the  link to PHI for the subjects that are enrolled at 
that site.  
 
 
7. Statistical Analysis  
 
Eligibility and Enrollment : The feasibility of enrollment will be evaluated by determining 
1) the number of patients that undergo invasive procedures with an INR between 1.5 and 2.5; 
2) the number of patients that meet the eligibility criteria for the trial 3) the proportion of 
eligible patients that are willing to be randomized and the proportion of eligible patients who 
are enrolled in the trial.  These proportions will be estimated directly as the observed ratio of 
numbers of patients, and 90% confidence intervals will be calculated to understand the likely 
range of values for a larger study with a comparable research protocol.  For each center, the 
reasons why patients are not enrolled including frequencies of individual exclusions and the 
proportion of patients declining participation will be described.    
 
Adherence : Adherence rates for the plasma protocol will be ascertained as the proportion 
of enrolled patients who adhere to the intervention as assigned and the proportion of patients 
who complete the follow -up evaluations for each assigned group, overall and by center.  
Estimated proportions and 90% confidence intervals will be created.   
 
Estimates for Trial Outcome s:  We will estimate the mean change in hemoglobin between 
baseline and the 2 day nadir, the proportion of patients who have a drop in hemoglobin level 
of 2 g/dL or greater defined as major bleeding, as well as the mean change in INR from 
baseline to after  the index procedure, baseline to day 1, and baseline to day 2, and the 
proportion of patients in whom the post transfusion  INR is less than 1.5  from the observed 
pilot data.  We will also estimate the proportion of patients who during the 2 days following  
randomization experience transfusion associated cardiac overload (TACO), and, as well 
mortality, and the mean length of hospital stay and ICU stay. TRALI is likely to be too rare 
to estimate rates. Estimated proportions and means and 90% confidence interv als will be 
created for each outcome using the data from the entire pilot trial (i.e. combining the data 
from the two assigned treatment arms).  The change in hemoglobin level will be compared 
according to assigned plasma strategy using a Wilcoxon rank sum  test with an alpha level of 
0.05.  Absolute and relative differences for continuous levels and event rates by assigned 
treatment will be estimated and 90% confidence intervals will be calculated to identify 
potential treatment differences for safety and f or study planning purposes. We will use alpha 
of 0.01 for secondary outcomes to account for multiple comparisons . We will examine the 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 14 -   following subgroups:  liver disease, ICU patients, INR 1.5 to 1.75 vs 1.76 to 1.99 , 2.0 to 2.5 
and procedure with biopsy v s no biopsy.   
  
Characteristics of Enrolled Sample of Patients : Descriptive statistics, including means, 
standard deviations, medians, ranges, and frequency distributions, will be examined for all 
relevant measures.  Transformations of measures will be considered based on distribution 
diagnostics and outlier analyses .  The baseline characteristics of the patients in the entire trial 
will be described.  Moreover, the characteristics of patients in the two arms of the trial will 
be compared using chi -square statistics for categorical variables and t -tests or Wilcoxon 
rank-sum statistics for continuous variables in order to identify major imbalances that may be 
relevant to the pilot outcome comparisons by assigned treatment.  We will compare INR 
before and 4 hours after discontinuation of heparin.  
 
 
 
 
8. Data and Safety Monitoring   
 
An independent  Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) consisting of members appointed 
by the Principal I nvestigator and approved by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
(NHLBI) will monitor the study, advise the NIH Program Office an d provide input to the 
Steering Committee.   Prior to each meeting the members of the DSMB will declare any 
conflicts. In the event of a conflict, the remaining members will determine if conflict limits the 
member’s ability to participate. The DSMB will in clude experts in transfusion, biostatistics, 
and ethics.   
 
The DSMB will approve the study protocol before patient recruitment is initiated , as well as 
any subsequent  changes to the study protocol and consent.  The P rincipal Investigator will 
notify the NI H of all changes and local IRB approval will be required.   The DSMB will monitor 
accruing data, protocol deviations, and SAEs at a formal review half way through (55 patients) 
study enrollment to confirm that the patients in the trial are being cared for s afely.  
 
Adverse events will be monitored in two distinct ways: the expedited reporting of deaths  
(within 24 hours of notification)  and Serious Adverse Events (SAE) that are unexpected and 
related to the study protocol  (within 1 week of notification) to the DSMB members and NHLBI 
staff, and the scheduled reporting of adverse events and study outcome event rates to DSMB 
members at the meeting half way through the study and at the end of the trial.  
 
Adverse events that are study outcomes : 1) Major Bleeding. 2)  Mean Change in Hemoglobin 
Level  3) Red blood cell transfusion 4) Transfusion Associated Cardiac Overload (TACO) 
i.e., congestive heart failure, and  5) Transfusion Related Acute Lung Injury (TRALI) , will be 
systematically collected.  In addition, clinical sites will submit an SAE report for all 
unexpected serious adverse events that are possibly associated with the study intervention 
and for all deaths.  The DSMB chairperson/medical safety officer  will review the SAE report  
and supporting documentation  provide by the site (including local investigator assessment of 
relationship to the protocol)  to determine whether the event is related to the study 
intervention and whether the event was unexpected.   
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 15 -    
The NHLBI or the DSMB chairperson may decide to convene t he entire DSMB to discuss 
issues related to the individual event.   
 
The DSMB will review all reported adverse events and transfusion arm at the regularly 
scheduled meetings.  
 
The DSMB may advise early termination of the trial for safety reasons or make ot her 
recommendations regarding modifications to the protocol.   
 
Each clinical site will comply with local IRB adverse event reporting.  
 
 
9. Reporting Results  
 
9.1 Individual Results  
 
This study is performed under usual care conditions. Patient care is managed by the treating 
physicians who will notify subjects of medical test results, as they deem necessary.  The 
study staff will not provide any medical results to the subjects.  
 
9.2 Ag gregate Results  
 
The study will not notify participants of the trial results.  
 
 
9.3 Professional Reporting  
 
The results of the study will be presented at medical conferences and submitted to peer 
review journals for publication .  
 
 
10. Bibliography  
 
 
1. Wallis JP, Dzik S. Is fresh frozen plasma overtransfused in the United States? 
Transfusion. 2004;44(11):1674 -1675.  
2. Murad MH, Stubbs JR, Gandhi MJ, et al. The effect of plasma transfusion on morbidity 
and mortality: a systematic revi ew and meta -analysis. Transfusion. 2010;50(6):1370 -
1383.  
3. Whitaker BIS, K.;Schulman,J.;Green,J. The 2009 national blood collection and 
utilization survey report. 2011. Accessed October 14, 2011, 2011.  
4. Dzik W, Rao A. Why do physicians request fresh fro zen plasma? Transfusion. 
2004;44(9):1393 -1394.  
5. Callum J.L D, W.H. The use of blood components prior to invasive bedside procedures: 
A critical appraisal. In: Minttz PD, ed. Transfusion Therapy: Clinical Principles and 
Practice . 3rd ed. Bethesda, MD: AAB B Press; 2010:1 -35. 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 16 -   6. Segal JB, Dzik WH, Transfusion Medicine/Hemostasis Clinical Trials N. Paucity of 
studies to support that abnormal coagulation test results predict bleeding in the setting of 
invasive procedures: an evidence -based review. Transfusion.  2005;45(9):1413 -1425.  
7. Dzik WH. Predicting hemorrhage using preoperative coagulation screening assays. 
Current hematology reports. 2004;3(5):324 -330. 
8. Desborough M, Stanworth S. Plasma transfusion for bedside, radiologically guided, and 
operating room  invasive procedures. Transfusion. 2012;52 Suppl 1:20S -29S. 
9. Abdel -Wahab OI, Healy B, Dzik WH. Effect of fresh -frozen plasma transfusion on 
prothrombin time and bleeding in patients with mild coagulation abnormalities. 
Transfusion. 2006;46(8):1279 -1285.  
10. Stanworth SJ, Walsh TS, Prescott RJ, et al. A national study of plasma use in critical 
care: clinical indications, dose and effect on prothrombin time. Crit Care. 
2011;15(2):R108.  
11. Chowdary P, Saayman AG, Paulus U, Findlay GP, Collins PW. Efficacy o f standard dose 
and 30 ml/kg fresh frozen plasma in correcting laboratory parameters of haemostasis in 
critically ill patients. Br J Haematol. 2004;125(1):69 -73. 
12. Triulzi DGJM, E.L. A Descriptive Analysis Of Plasma Use In The REDSIII Hospital 
Network. Transfusion (in press). 2013.  
13. Roback JD, Caldwell S, Carson J, et al. Evidence -based practice guidelines for plasma 
transfusion. Transfusion. 2010;50(6):1227 -1239.  
14. Patel IJ, Davidson JC, Nikolic B, et al. Consensus guidelines for periprocedural 
mana gement of coagulation status and hemostasis risk in percutaneous image -guided 
interventions. Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR. 2012;23(6):727 -
736. 
15. Stanworth SJ, Brunskill SJ, Hyde CJ, McClelland DB, Murphy MF. Is fresh frozen 
plasma clinically effective? A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Br J 
Haematol. 2004;126(1):139 -152. 
16. Yang L, Stanworth S, Hopewell S, Doree C, Murphy M. Is fresh -frozen plasma clinically 
effective? An update of a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Transfusion. 
2012;52(8):1673 -1686; quiz 1673.  
17. Veelo DP, Vlaar AP, Dongelmans DA, et al. C orrection of subclinical coagulation 
disorders before percutaneous dilatational tracheotomy. Blood transfusion = Trasfusione 
del sangue. 2012;10(2):213 -220. 
18. Muller MC, Arbous MS, Spoelstra -de Man AM, et al. Transfusion of fresh -frozen plasma 
in critica lly ill patients with a coagulopathy before invasive procedures: a randomized 
clinical trial. Transfusion. 2014.  
19. Zou S, Stramer SL, Notari EP, et al. Current incidence and residual risk of hepatitis B 
infection among blood donors in the United States. Transfusion. 2009;49(8):1609 -1620.  
20. Zou S, Dorsey KA, Notari EP, et al. Prevalence, incidence, and residual risk of human 
immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus infections among United States blood 
donors since the introduction of nucleic acid tes ting. Transfusion. 2010;50(7):1495 -1504.  
21. Narick C, Triulzi DJ, Yazer MH. Transfusion -associated circulatory overload after 
plasma transfusion. Transfusion. 2012;52(1):160 -165. 
22. Li G, Rachmale S, Kojicic M, et al. Incidence and transfusion risk facto rs for transfusion -
associated circulatory overload among medical intensive care unit patients. Transfusion. 
2011;51(2):338 -343. 
Does Plasma Reduce Bleeding in Patients Undergoing Invasive Procedures  
Jeffrey L Carson, MD  
 
Protocol Version 2. 5 – 12/19/17 - 17 -   23. Popovsky MA, Audet AM, Andrzejewski C, Jr. Transfusion -associated circulatory 
overload in orthopedic surgery patients: a mul ti-institutional study. Immunohematology. 
1996;12(2):87 -89. 
24. Bierbaum BE, Callaghan JJ, Galante JO, Rubash HE, Tooms RE, Welch RB. An analysis 
of blood management in patients having a total hip or knee arthroplasty. J.Bone Joint 
Surg.Am. 1999;81(1):2 -10. 
25. Toy P, Gajic O, Bacchetti P, et al. Transfusion related acute lung injury: incidence and 
risk factors. Blood. 2011.  
26. Triulzi DGJM, E.L.;Fiebig, E.; Wu, Y.; Ness P.M.; Kor D.; Chowdhury D.; Fleischmann 
D. A Descriptive Analysis of Plasma use in the  REDS -III Hospital Network. Transfusion. 
2013;53(Supplement S2):38A.  
27. Kleinman S, Caulfield T, Chan P, et al. Toward an understanding of transfusion -related 
acute lung injury: statement of a consensus panel. Transfusion. 2004;44(12):1774 -1789.  
28. CDC. Pneumonia (Ventilator -associated [VAP] and non -ventilator - associated 
Pneumonia [PNEU] Event. 2015; 
http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/PDFs/pscManual/6pscVAPcurrent.pdf . Accessed June 4, 2015, 
2015.  
29. CDC. Bloodstream Infection Event (Central Line -Associated Bloodstream Infection and 
Non-central line associated Bloodstream Infection). 2015; 
http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/PDFs/pscManual/4PSC_CLABScurrent.pdf . Accessed June 4, 
2015.  
30. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic 
data capture (REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for 
provid ing translational research informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009;42(2):377 -
381. 
 