   
 
   
  
Improving Emergency Department Discharge 
Referral s with Automated Text and Phone 
Messages  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Brent Ruoff  
Emergency Medicine Department  
Study Protocol, version 4. 1 
Sponsor: None 
IRB#  
June  26, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  2 
  
Content  
A Introduction …..................……………..........……………………………………………………………………………………….. 3  
A1 List of Abbreviations  
A2 Protocol Synopsis  
B Background & Rationale …………………………………………….………………………………………………………………….. 3 -4 
B1 Background (clinical problem)  
B2 Pilot Data  
B3 Study Overview (hypothesis)  
C Study Objectives …………….………………………………………………………………………………….………………………….. 4 -5 
C1 Specific Aims  
C2 Outcomes of Interest  
D Research Team …................................................................................................................................. 5  
D1 Key Personnel  
D2 Key Personnel Training Certifications  
D3 Organization and Participating Centers  
D4 Funding Source and C onflicts of Interest and Their Management  
E Data Collection and Analysis …............................................................................................................. 5 -6 
E1 Data Quality Assurance  
E2 Data Analysis, Sample Size Estimation, and Study Power  
F General Assurances …........................................................................................................................... 6  
G Risks and Benefits …...................................................................... ....................................................... 6  
H Publication Plan …................................................................................................................................ 6  
I References ….......................................................................................................................................... 6 -7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  3 
 A. Introduction  
A1. List of Abbreviations  
ECRC – Emergency Care Research Core  
ED – Emergency Department  
EMR – Electronic Medical Record System  
HIPAA – Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
SMS – Short Message Service (texting)  
 
A2. Protocol Synopsis  
This was a prospective randomized open blinded end -point (PROBE) trial that  took place at a large urban 
Emergency  Department ( ED) to test if a two -way phone messaging system improved  patient adherence 
to referral follow-up visits at outpatient clinics. The primary outcome was  patient attendance for follow -
up care and the secondary outcome was  ED re -admissions within 4 months after initial discharge.  
 
B. Background & Rationale  
B1. Background: Adherence to Follow -up Visits After Emergency Department Discharge  
Patient adherence to ED follow -up instructions and appointments varies from  26-56% [1] . According to 
Kangovi et al. (2012), the most common reason a patient gave for readmission to the ED was “feeling unprepared for discharge” after the first visit [2]. The transition from ED to discharge  requires the 
patient to be responsible for following  discharge instructions, obtaining prescriptions, and finding time 
and resources to attend follow -up visits. Readmissions to the ED are  not primarily a result of lack of 
access to services [3], pointing attention toward follow -up communication, which can improv e transition 
to outpatient care [4 -6]. ED clinical staff  try to sit down with patients  after ED visits  to review 
instructions and sometimes schedule follow -up appointments [7]. An outpatient hemodialysis clinic that 
tried this model found it to be suc cessful  initially , but could not afford the extra staff to sustain it.[8]  
 Time and money  could be saved by implementing automated appointment reminders through voice or 
text messages . No-show patients were reduced by 10% when one  primary care clinic began  using a text 
and phone call reminder for appointments, resulting in a positive cost -benefit analysis [9]. A similar 
improvement in successful follow -up appointments was found in an ED setting with a diverse population 
[10]. Historically , successful follow -up appointment rates of patients discharged from the Barnes Jewish 
Hospital Emergency Department (BJH -ED) have ranged from 9% to 37.5%, the highest rate of follow -ups 
were for next -day appointments [11]. It’s difficult to know how much o f a difference a simple 
appointment reminder  system  would make since a previous study of  BJH-ED patients found the major 
identifiable causes for  missing appointments were  “other” (34%), no transportation (25%), fear of 
medical cost (18%), feeling better (1 3%), and unsure of where to go for the visit (9%) [12].  A 
sophisticated and robust reminder system may be capable of addressing some of these barriers. .  
Recently complex modalities of electronic follow -up, such as video conferencing or remote physiologic al 
monitoring [13 -15] have been introduced, further complicating follow -up care adherence,  especially in 
an ED setting.  
 A two -way automated SMS system that provides a way for patients to respond has shown promise in 
improving communication and follow -up care with complex patients, w ith engage ment  rates between 
80-90% [16]. A pilot study found a two -way system helped dialysis patients improve attendance and had 
potential to reduce emergency hospitalization [17].   
 
  4 
 We hypothesize that a bi -directional aut omated text and phone system which facilitates   scheduling 
follow -up referrals for discharged ED patients will improve follow -up adherence.  
 
B2. Hypotheses   
We hypothesize that compared to standard of care, an automated bidirectional phone messaging 
syste m will: (1) improve ED patient adherence to follow -up appointments and (2) reduce ED re -
admissions.  
 
C. Study Objectives  
C1. Specific Aims  
The primary objective of this study is to determine whether follow -up appointment adherence is 
improved within 120 days  after an initial discharge from the ED by using an automated bi -directional 
phone messaging system.  
• Specific Aim 1: Did more patients successfully attend follow -up appointments?  
• Specific Aim 2: Was there a reduction in ED re -admissions?  
 
C2. Outcomes of Interest  
• Primary: Time to attending a follow -up visit with referred primary or specialty care  within 120 
days  post -discharge  
• Secondary:  
o Time to re-visit to the ED (BJH or other) within 120 days  post -discharge.  
• Tertiary:  
o Patient engagement levels with t he intervention: number of successful attempts to 
reach participant, number of successful attempts to schedule a follow -up appointment, 
length of phone call to schedule an appointment, and number of successful follow -up 
appointments with a specialist provi der versus a primary care provider.  
 
D. Research Team  
 
D1. Key Personnel  
PI: Brent Ruoff, MD  
 
D2. Key Personnel Training Certification  
All current research team members complete Washington University HIPAA and CITI training courses. 
They are also registered with the Washington University Human Research Protection Office at 
myIRB.wusm.wustl.edu and added to the study’s research team prior to viewing PHI. The research 
assistant and medical student are  given “View Only” access to the EMR to help with patient chart 
reviews.  
 
D3. Organization and Participating Centers  
Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine  
Barnes Jewish Hospital Emergency Department  
Clinical Research and I nnovation  Student Program at Washington University School of Medicine  
 
  5 
 D4. Funding Sources and Conflict of Interest 
There is no funding being used for this research project and there are no financial conflicts of interest.  
 
E. Data Collection and Analysis  
 
E1. Data Quality Assurance  
 Brent Ruoff, M.D. is the principal investigator who is the Chief of Division of Emergency Medicine and 
Associate Professor of Emergency Medicine at Washington University School of Medicine. He is an 
expert on helping BJC reduce re-admissions and has been doing clinical research since 1990.  
 
E2. Data Analysis, Sample Size Estimation, and St udy Power 
The sample size from the trial was determined to meet criteria to be sufficiently powered at 90% for a 
two-sided α = 0.05, for a 10% improvement of the primary outcome. We will conduct an Intention -to-
Treat analysis to test the impact of the intervention on participant follow -up attendance and ED re-
admissions. We will also conduct descriptive statistics regarding user engagement.  
 We might experience missing outcome data if a participant set up a follow -up appointment with a 
provider who was not their referral provider and is not a part of the BJH EMR network or Missouri 
Health Connection. These appointments will not be accessible to our study team and a participant may 
be labeled as non-compliant  erroneously; however, since most  Missouri health clinics participate in the 
Missouri Health Connection, this issue will be rare and should  apply to both the control and intervention 
arm equally.  
 
F. General Assurances  
The study team agrees to comply with all applicable Washington Univer sity policies and procedures, and 
applicable federal, state and local laws. The research will only be performed by qualified personnel. All 
persons assisting with the research are adequately informed about the protocol and their research-
related duties and  functions. We will not implement any changes in the approved IRB application 
without prior IRB approval.  
G. Risks and Benefits  
Potential risks include possible breach of confidentiality involving PHI/study data.  
 
Efforts will be dedicated to minimize the risk of breach of privacy. All patient information and study data will be password protected in computer files stored on Box and only shared with research team 
members. Participants are assigned study ID numbers th at will be used to minimize risk of exposure of 
patient information. Data collected from the Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Platform are  deidentified 
before being stored in Box.  
 
H. Publication Plan  
We will submit a manuscript describing our results wit hin approximately 12 months of finalizing them. 
Any results published from this study will not contain any participant identifiers. 
 
  6 
 References  
1. Arora S, Burner E, Terp S, Nok Lam C, Nercisian A, Bhatt V, Menchine M. Improving Attendance 
at Post –Emergency D epartment Follow -up Via Automated Text Message Appointment 
Reminders: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Academic Emergency Medicine . Jan 2015; 22(1):31 -
37.  
2. Kangovi S, Grande D, Meehan P, Nitra N, Shannon R, Long JA. Perceptions of readmitted patients on the transition from hospital to home. J Hosp Med.  Nov-Dec 2012; 7(9): 709-12.  
3. McCarthy ML, Hirshon JM, Ruggles RL, Docimo AB, Welinsky M, Bessman ES. Referral of 
medically uninsured emergency department patients to primary care. Acad Emerg Med . Jun 
2002; 9(6) : 639-42.  
4. Cain CH, Neuwirth E, Bellows J, Zuber C, Green J. Patient experiences of transitioning from hospital to home: an ethnographic quality improvement project. J Hosp Med. May -Jun 2012; 
7(5): 382-7.  
5. D’Amore J, Marray J, Powers H, Johnson C. Does telephone follow -up predict patient satisfaction 
and readmission? Popul Health Manag. Oct 2011; 14(5): 249-55. PMID: 21504311
. 
6. Soong C, Kurabi B, Wells D, Caines L, Morgan MW, Ramsden R, Bell CM. Do Post Discharge 
Phone Calls Improve Care Transitions? A Cluster -Randomized Trial. PLoS One . 2014; 9(1): 
e112230.  
7. Murnik M, Randal F, Guevara M, Skipper B, Kaufman A. Web -based primary care referral 
progr am associated with reduced emergency department utilization. Fam Med. Mar 2006; 
38(3): 185-9.  
8. Lamping, Donna L., and Kent A. Campbell. "Hemodialysis Compliance: Assessment, Prediction, and Intervention —Part II." Seminars in Dialysis. Vol. 3. No. 2. Blackw ell Publishing Ltd, 1990.   
9. Cummings, K. Michael, et al. "Intervention strategies to improve compliance with medical 
regimens by ambulatory hemodialysis patients." Journal of Behavioral Medicine 4.1 (1981): 111 -
127.  
10. Sanjay A, Burner E, Terp S, Nok Lam C, Nercisian A, Bhatt V and, Menchine M. Improving 
attendance at post-emergency follow -up via automated text message appointment reminders: a 
randomized controlled trial. Academic Emergency Medicine . Nov 2014; 22(1): 31-37.  
11. Scherer TM, Lewis LM. Follow -up to a Federally Qualified Health Center and Subsequent 
Emergency Department Utilization. Academic Emergency Medicine . 2010;17(1): 55-62.  
12. Dziuba D, Lewis LM. Barriers to follow -up from an urban ED. ACEP Research Forum Abstracts 
2009.   
13. Dixon RF. Enhancing primary care through online communication. Health Aff (Millwood) . Jul 
2010; 29(7): 1364-9.  
14. Kilo CM. Transforming care: medical practice design and information technology. Health Aff (Millwood) . Sept -Oct 2005; 24(5): 1296- 301.  
15. Zhou YY,  Garrido T, Chin HL, Wiesenthal AM, Liang LL. Patient access to an electronic health 
record with secure messaging: impact on primary care utilization. Am J Manag Care : Jul 2007; 
13(7): 418-24.  
16. Som A, Patel K, Sink E, Peters RM, Javaherian K, Groenendyk J,  An T, Xu Z, Polites GM, Blanchard 
M, Ross W. A novel patient engagement platform using accessible text messages and calls 
(Epharmix/CareSignal ): feasibility study. JMIR Formative Research . 2017; 1(1):e2.  
17. Som A, Groenendyk J, An T, Patel K, Peters RM, Polites GM, Ross W. Improving dialysis 
adherence for high risk patients using automated messaging: proof of concept. Sci Rep . Jun 
2017; 7: 4177.  
 
 
  7 
  
Protocol from IRB #201504079: Improving medical care in ED discharge referral in patients with 
electronic interventions based on automated text and phone messages   
 
Content  
A Overview of Study  ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………....……… 9 -10 
A1 Study Design Summary  
A2 Pilot Data  
A3 Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder Summary  
B Pre -Enrollment Period, Screening, Informed Consen t & Study Entry ……………..…………………….…….. 10 -12 
B1 Participant Identification  
B2 Eligibility Criteria  
B3 Screening  
B4 Informed Consent  
B5 Study Entry  
B6 Randomization and Blinding  
B7 Follow -Up Communication  
B8 Clinical Workflow Precaut ions 
B9 Participant Withdrawal  
C Study Procedure ..……………………………………………………………………………………………………..…………..…… 12 -13 
C1 Intervention Treatment  
C2 Participant Education on Research vs Clinical Care  
C3 Changes to Standard of Care  
D SMS and Phone Application ……………………………….… ………………………………..…………………………………… 13 -14 
D1 Epharmix/CareSignal   
D2 Regulatory Status  
D3 Method of Use of Epharmix/CareSignal  
D4 Alert Management  
E Follow -up Visit Schedule.................................................................................................................. 14  
F Data Collection and Analysis …………………….……………………….………..………………………………..…….….…. 14 -15 
F1 Outcome Assessments  
F2 Confidentiality and Security  
F3 Data Quality Assurance  
F4 Data Analysis and Sample Size Estimation  
G Sa fety and Adverse Events............................................................................................................... 15-16 
G1 Definitions  
G2 Reporting of Adverse Events  
G3 Data Collection Procedures for Adverse Events 
G4 Follow -up of Serious Adverse Events 
H Risk and Benefits  ……………………..……………………………..……………………………………….………….………..…… 16 -17 
I Study Administration …............................................................................................... ....................... 17 
I1Key Personnel  
I2 Key Personnel Training Certification  
I3 Funding Source and Conflicts of Interest  
I4 Subject Stipends or Payments  
  8 
 Appendix ……….….................................................................................................... ............................. 18 -37 
1 Written Consent Form  
2 Demographic Survey  
3 Verbal Consent Form  
4 Pilot Study Timeline  
5 Pseudocode  
6 Adverse Events Log  
7 Security Clearance  
8 Text Message Example Screenshots  
 
A. Overview of Study  
 
A1. Study Design Summary 
 
Key elements of study design under 2015040479   
Type of study  PROBE  
Total N  ~330 
Intervention Arm  Automated text and phone messages + Standard 
of Care  
Control Arm  No phone messages + Standard of Care  
Power  90%  
Hypothesis  Adherence to follow -up visits will improve in 
intervention arm  
 Data will be collected regarding scheduling and attendance of follow -up appointments by assessing an 
automated bi -directional text or phone intervention and reviewing patient charts [see Section C1. 
Inter vention Treatment].  
 
This intervention was an add -on to standard of care with the goal to research the efficacy of an 
automated two -way phone system in improving follow -up appointment adherence in ED discharge 
patients.  
 
A2. Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder Summary  
An electronic intervention platform was developed by Epharmix/CareSignal , a WUSTL IDEA Labs 
(ideas.wustl.edu) company, which uses an automated two -way text or phone system for various uses to 
supplement clinical care, such as tracking patient adherence, collecting additional data, or delivering 
educational follow -up. The platform is called Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder and is uploaded 
on Washington University (WU) servers as an application. On this platform our resea rch team has a 
unique account on which we built a series of messages [see Appendix 5. Pseudocode] to test our 
hypothesis. Automated text or phone messaging was delivered from this account to intervention participants and participant responses returned directly to this unique account, allowing research team members to supervise responses and have control over the intervention.  
 
Epharmix/CareSignal , Inc. and Epharmix/CareSignal  employees are only involved in this project as a 
service provider, giving WUSTL p ersonnel access to create an account on their platform. One employee, 
the Chief Developer, assists in aggregating and deidentifying data from our account [see Section D3. 
Method of Use of Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder].  
  9 
  
B. Pre- Enrollment, Screening, Informed Consent & Study Entry  
 
B1. Participant Identification 
The trial enrolls any interested adult who is discharged from the Barnes Jewish ED and is recommended 
to see a referral provider. Discharge instructions have to be complete and the patien t needs to be able 
to use a consistent phone, have a way to understand English communication, and be capable of 
consenting.  
 B2. Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion criteria: 
1. 18 years and older.  
2. Accessible SMS capable mobile phone or residential landline.  
3. Able and willing to provide consent and authorize access of participant medical record for study 
use.  
4. Able to read English or have English-speaking family member to assist with phone communications. 
5. Supplied a clinical referral with recommended outpatient  follow -up timeframe or date within 4 
months of discharge.  
 
Exclusion criteria: 
1. Unable to be contacted by a phone call and/or SMS text message, or unwilling to provide a phone number. 
2. Unwilling to consent and follow the assigned regimen and complete the required follow -up. 
3. Non -English speaking.  
4. Neurologic, anatomic, or cognitive disorders and thus unable to consent and/or answer text 
messages/phone calls.  
5. Already had a follow -up appointment scheduled before being discharged.  
 
B3. Screening  
Enrollment for the trial occurs on a rolling basis for a six -month period. Treating physicians in the ED 
identify potential participants after completing a patient’s discharge and follow -up instructions. The 
treating physician notifies the Emergency Care R esearch Core (ECRC) research coordinator with the 
patient’s name and ED room number. While the patient is in their room, the research coordinator 
approaches the patient to introduce the study and discuss participation.  
 B4. Informed Consent  
The research co ordinator identifies him/herself as a research staff member that is separate from clinical 
care. Follow -up care is not affected by a patient’s choice to enroll. The research coordinator review s the 
consent form [see Appendix 1. Informed Consent Form] with patients and obtain s written consent along 
with a demographic survey [see Appendix 2. Demographic Survey].  
 
Patients who are unsure about enrollment can take the consent form home with them and decide to 
join from home, but before they attend a follow -up a ppointment. A phone number to the study’s 
primary contact is listed at the top of the consent form. Some patients are also contacted by phone by 
the research coordinator about participating in advance of a scheduled follow -up appointment. When 
  10 
 consent is given over the phone, the research coordinator follow s the verbal consent form [see 
Appendix 3. Verbal Consent Document]. 
 
B5. Study Entry  
Once a patient provid es written consent, they are enrolled as a study participant. After a  research 
coordinator obtain s consent, s/he enter s a participant’s preferred phone number, contact method (text 
or phone message), and preferred contact times into the research account on the Epharmix/CareSignal  
Intervention Builder platform via the web portal epx.wustl.edu. They als o include the referral clinic 
name, clinic phone number, and clinic address that the treating ED staff instruct s the patient to call for a 
follow -up appointment. It is possible to include more than one referral clinic if the ED staff provide s a 
second option.  
 
B6. Randomization Method and Blinding 
Once a participant is added to the Intervention Builder account, the integrated software independently 
randomizes  participants to either the control or the intervention arm. The software s  randomly allocate s 
participants in a 1:1 ratio to intervention and control arms.  
 
Even though participants are not informed if they were enrolled in the intervention or control arm, they 
are capable of inferring this information ( if they did or did not receive a t ext or phone call ). 
 
Treating clinical staff are blinded to arm allocation.  They  complete treatment before a participant 
enrolls in the study.  
 
The research team will be blinded to arm allocation whenever possible . EMR  review  to identify attended 
follow -up appointments and ED re-visits  will be completed before intervention responses are reviewed 
and analysis commences.  
 
B7. Follow -Up Communication 
There was not any follow -up communication in this research study. 
 
B8. Clinical Workflow Precautions  
Following discharge from an emergency department (ED), it is standard of care that patients receive written instructions and counseling from ED staff (physicians, nurses and as-needed social workers). 
Discharged patients are not normally contacted by ED staff after leaving the ED. The intervention is 
considered an add -on to this standard of care by facilitating communication to the participant’s 
designated provider  for their follow -up appointment.  
 In the event that a discharged patient begins  showing new  signs or symptoms that required clinical 
evaluation before leaving the ED, the patient is required to start the standard clinical care process over 
again in compliance with ED guidelines and the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act. Depending on the outcome of the subsequent evaluation, the patient may or may not meet  research 
criteria, which is determined by the patient’s final disposition. 
 
If a participant’s ED visit result s in scheduling a follow -up appointment at the time of their discharge, 
such  as for a specialist consultation or social worker visit, they are not included in the study . 
 
  11 
 B9. Participant Withdrawal  
If any participant want s to withdraw from the #201504079 study they may  call the number listed at the 
top of the written consent form and ask the project lead or principal investigator to send a copy of a 
withdrawal letter to fill out, or they could follow instructions in the consent form to go to the Human 
Research Protectio n Office website and print off their own copy of a withdrawal letter. They would mail 
the letter to the address given at the top of the consent form [see Appendix 1. Written Consent Form].  
 
The research coordinator review s this process with the participan t at the time of their written consent. 
Participant data collected up to the time of withdrawal will still be analyzed. If the participant was still 
receiving automated messages when the research team received a withdrawal letter, the project lead 
located the participant’s information in the Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder and discontinues 
the intervention from the research account.  
 
C. Study Procedure  
C1. Intervention Treatment  
After providing written informed consent, participants in the intervention arm begin receiving text or voice messages to help them schedule a follow -up appointment with the referral provider per the 
pseudocode template attached [see Appendix 5. Pseudocode]. By default, participants receive automated messages starting one ho ur following discharge if it is normal business hours (Monday 
through Friday 0900 to 1700), or at 1000 the next business day if they are discharged outside of normal 
business hours. Automated messages are sent up to three days in a row or until the partici pant 
responded or the participant opted out, whichever occur s first. The participant is able to respond to all 
messages by either using alphanumeric (1 -3) or binary answers (Yes or No). The primary goal of the 
intervention is to connect the participant dir ectly to the referral provider’s office to schedule an 
appointment. Once the participant h angs up with the office, the intervention ask s if they were 
successful with scheduling an appointment.  
 
If the participant fail s to respond to the intervention, the intervention leaves a voicemail detailing 
instructions on how to reach the referral provider’s office via a toll- free phone number. This toll -free 
number is the same number that showed up on the participant’s cell phone or landline caller ID when 
the inter vention reached out to them. If the participant call s the toll -free number, the intervention 
work s as it normally would.  
 
Once an appointment is made, the system sen ds reminders at 14 days, 7 days, 3 days, and 1 day before 
the appointment date. The day af ter the appointment, the intervention contact s the participant to see if 
they attended it. If the participant did attend, the intervention stop s. If the participant did not attend 
and needs  to reschedule, the intervention reset s and start s over again.  
 
Participants can voluntarily opt -out of receiving any further messages at any time if they text STOP or if 
they press * on the keypad during an automated phone message.  
 
Participants in the control arm d o not receive any messages.  
 
C2. Participant Education  on Research vs Clinical Care  
At the time of written consent the research coordinator will advise participants that the messages they 
may receive are not coming from their treating physicians or clinical staff, but from an automated 
system that is separate from their medical care because it is only part of a research study. Participants 
  12 
 are advised that if they ha ve any health concerns, the automated system would not be able to help 
them and they need to reach out to their doctor or the emergency room as they normally would. If the 
participant fe els they are having a health concern related to the  study, they a re encouraged to call the 
phone number to the main study contact at the top of their consent form. If the research team is  
notified, they w illfollow reporting procedures for an adverse event [see Section F2. Reporting of Adverse 
Events].  
 C3. Changes to Standard of Care  
No automated clinical judgements  are included in this study. The purpose of utilizing the 
Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder in this study was purely to facilitate follow -up visits to referral 
providers. 
 
D. SMS and Phone Application  
D1. Epharmix/CareSignal  
This study under umbrella IRB 201504079 use s the Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder platform to 
develop an automated outreach that facilitate s patient follow -up visits with referral providers and 
collect s appointment follow -up rates. The platform utilize s two-way text messaging or automated phone 
calls to acquire data from participants, at intervals set by the principal investigator. The research team’s unique account on the Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder  collected follow -up appointment data. 
Only one Epharmix/CareSignal  employee, the Chief Developer, had access to the Intervention Builder 
platform in order to provide routine maintenance. This employee had updated HIPAA and CITI training. The Epharmix/Care Signal  Intervention Builder was not a phone application; participants did not need to 
download or install anything on their phones in order to receive the research texts or phone messages. 
Participant phone responses were automatically stored on the Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder 
site, epx.wustl.edu, in the specific research account that is password protected. Epharmix/CareSignal , 
Inc does not have access to this password. In addition, the site is SSL -encrypted, ensuring password 
safety in transmi ssion.  
 
D2. Regulatory Status  
The FDA has not made an assessment of risk with regard to this study, and as a communication tool we 
are not requesting to conduct this study under FDA NSR requirements. Epharmix/CareSignal  
Intervention Builder is not an impl ant and does not present a potential for serious risk, does not support 
or sustain human life, and is not of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or treating 
disease, and does not have serious risk for health, safety, or welfare of a subject.  
 
D3. Method of Use of Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder  
After enrollment, the research coordinator will initiate use of the research account’s intervention that 
was built on the Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder. The research account will send  an initial text 
message or phone call as described in Section C1. Intervention Treatment. Since patients discharged 
from the ED do not have any further contact with ED providers, this intervention is not designed to sustain communication between the clinical provider and the participant. This intervention i s instead 
fully automated to connect participants to a referral provider or service. It does not  request health 
information from participants nor deliver any health information to them. The pseudocode respond s to 
a participant’s success in setting up a follow -up appointment and provides  alternate choices if a follow -
up appointment could not be made [see Appendix 5. Pseudocode].  
  13 
 Once the interventio n is completed with the last enrolled participant, the project lead will request  that 
the Epharmix/CareSignal  Chief Developer aggregate and extract a raw data file (.csv) from the research 
account that the study manager encrypted so that the data is unviewable by the Chief Developer. The 
Chief Developer place s this encrypted data file on an encrypted flash drive t hat is handed off to the  
project lead. The project lead upload s the encrypted file onto a secure database on box.wustl.edu.  
 
D4. Alert Management  
No alerts were used as a part of the intervention.  
 
E. Follow- up Visit Schedule  
No additional follow -up visits were required for this study. Participants followed up with their referral 
providers as they normally would.  
 
F. Data Collection and Analysis  
F1. Outcome Assessments  
The outcomes of interest are: 
• Primary: Participant follow -up attendance to a referral clinic or provider (compliant / non-
compliant).  
• Secondary:  
o Number of re -admissions to the ED (BJH or other) within 30 days and again within four 
months post -discharge.  
• Tertiary:  
o Patient engagement levels with the intervention: number of successful attempts to reach participant, number of successful attempts to schedule a follow -up appointment, 
length of phone call to schedule an appointment, and nu mber of successful follow -up 
appointments with a specialist provider versus a primary care provider.  
 
To minimize bias, all clinical staff and research team members conducting patient chart reviews will be 
blinded to participant arm allocation [see Section  B6. Randomization Method and Blinding]. We 
anticipate the study will have no impact on clinical workflow since the intervention will take  place during 
a gap in clinical care when a participant is transferred between providers and we will only be completing 
patient chart assessments and data analysis to finalize th e study.  
 
F2. Confidentiality and Security  
The Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder has been evaluated by WU IT security before and 
approved for other studies [see Appendix 7. Security Clearan ce]. Participant responses to the 
intervention are stored on a HIPAA compliant WU server at epx.wustl.edu that has both encryption and 
penetration testing. Data was exported upon request after being de-identified in a .csv file and uploaded 
to Box [see D3.  Methods of Use of Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder].  
 
Hard copies of consent forms and demographic surveys will be  kept in a  research binder in a locked 
cabinet in a locked office at the ECRC by the research coordinator until digitally archived. All patient 
identifiers will be destroyed at the earliest   time possible.  
 
  14 
 F3. Data Quality Assurance  
An interim patient chart assess ment and analysis of intervention responses will be performed four 
months after enrollment of the 85th participant. The principal investigator is responsible for monitoring 
participant responses. 
 
F4. Data Analysis, Sample Size Estimation, and Study Power  
As detailed in Section A.2 Pilot Data, we calculated that we need to recruit at least 333 participants to 
have a power of 90% for a two -sided α = 0.05, to detect a 10% improvement of the primary outcome. As 
a Phase II study, we are attempting to identify t he effect size of the intervention.  
 
We obtained the estimated improvement in the primary outcome from our pilot study. The number of 
eligible patients in the ED over a 6 -month period were approximately 21% of admitted patients. We 
needed a sample size of 266 patients, and anticipated that roughly 20% of participants would be lost to follow -up, which means we needed to recruit 333 participants. We calculated our sample size using the 
G*Power3 program.  
 
G. Safety and Adverse Events  
 
G1. Definitions  
Adverse Events (AE) would include a data breach in this study.  
 
Serious Adverse Events (SAE) are defined as any medical occurrence that results in death, is life 
threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability, is a 
congenital anomaly or birth defect, or is an event requiring medical intervention to prevent any of these 
examples of an SAE. SAEs may be mild (transient, easily tolerated by participant), moderate (causes 
discomfort or interrupts the study or the partic ipant’s usual activities), or severe (causes considerable 
interference with usual activities).  
 G2. Reporting of Adverse Events  
In the study, all adverse events, whether expected or unexpected, will be reported to Washington 
University’s Human Research Pro tection Office (HRPO) [see Appendix 6. Adverse Events Log]. The HRPO 
office will be notified of any serious adverse experience within ten working days of the occurrence. If the 
event is fatal or life threatening, HRPO will be notified immediately, but not more than twenty -four 
hours after occurrence. Other adverse events will be reported to HRPO in annual reports. Adverse 
events will be reported from the time of participant enrollment to four months post -enrollment.  
 
In the case of a data breach, Informatio n Security (IS) will be notified immediately and the IS security 
date and number will be recorded. Participants will be notified by a phone call from the research 
coordinator.  
 G3. Data Collection Procedures for Adverse Events  
In cases where the principal investigator deem s it necessary for a participant to stop receiving the 
intervention prior to end point (e.g. change in health rendering patient unable to participate), data w ill 
be included up to the date of the event.  
 
  15 
 G4. Follow -up of Serious Adverse Events  
All SAEs will be followed until resolution, permanent outcome of the event or until stabilization. Some 
SAEs will require study discontinuation. For example, participants will discontinue the study if they are 
unable to tolerate study participation. T hese participants will continue to undergo follow -up evaluation 
by the investigator, direct consultation between the investigators and the treating physicians and establishment of ongoing care plans before being discharged from the study. For participants 
experiencing an SAE that does not require study discontinuation, continuing study participation will 
require discussions of the potential risks and benefits of continuing participation, involving the 
participant and their treatment team, the investigators and the participant’s treating physicians.  
 
H. Risks and Benefits  
Potential risks include possible breach of confidentiality involving PHI/study data and possible risk of 
annoyance by the subject due to repetition of messages. 
 
Efforts will be dedicated to minimize the risk of breach of privacy. All patient information and study data 
will be password protected in computer files and all paper forms will be kept in a secure locked office within a locked suite, controlled by the res earch staff. Additionally each patient will be assigned a study 
ID number to minimize risk of exposure of patient information. The ID number will be used to code all 
the data assigned to each patient as they are included sequentially into the study. This number will be 
used for the electronic spreadsheet and placed on the paper documents (if created) and a list of the assigned numbers will be maintained in a password -protected electronic spreadsheet.  
 
Communication via phone and text are unsecured and pote ntially non-confidential. Additionally the 
information stored on a patient’s phone is outside the control of the study investigator. The patient was 
informed of these risks and was required to consent to exchange potential Protected Health Information 
(PHI) via these communication lines to participate in the study. To prevent the accidental disclosure of 
PHI from pop -up phone notifications, the text message read: “Confidential message” and the content 
began 3 lines later, which was not seen on an automatic notification preview [see Appendix 8. Text 
Message Example Screenshots].  
 
The major side-effect of this intervention is potential annoyance and disruption to patient lives. To 
reduce these risks, text messages and phone calls are reduced to the minimum pos sible to meet 
reminder or patient communication guidelines. In addition, efforts are made to ensure that the text 
message and phone calls are kind, courteous, respectful, and timely .  Patients are also given the 
opportunity to opt out at any time via a “STOP” message or the * dial key.  
 
 
I. Study Administration 
 
I1. Key Personnel  
PI: Brent Ruoff, MD  
 I2. Key Personnel Training Certification  
All research team members complete Washington University HIPAA and CITI training courses. They are 
also registered with the Washington University Human Research Protection Office at 
myIRB.wusm.wustl.edu and added to the study’s research team prior to viewi ng PHI.  
 
  16 
 I3. Funding Source and Conflicts of Interest  
This study was supported by the NIH/National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCAT), grant 
ULI TR000448. Epharmix/CareSignal , Inc is also providing in kind services that allows us to creat e a free 
account for this study on the Epharmix/CareSignal  Intervention Builder platform where we can design 
and build our own unique intervention. Automated phone or text messages that we send out from our 
account are free of charge to the study, as well as the phone responses that participants send back to 
our account. Phone companies may still charge participants for their responses based on participants’ 
individual data and phone plans. These charges are outside of our control.  
 
I4. Subject Stipends or Payments  
No payment or reimbursement is offered for this study.  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  17 
 Appendix  
1. Informed Consent Document  
 
 

  18 
  

  19 
  
Brent Ruoff  
  20 
  

  21 
  

  22 
  

  23 
  

  24 
  
 
 
 

  25 
 2. Demographic Survey  
 
 
 
 

  26 
 3. Verbal Consent Document  
 
 
 

  27 
  
 
 
 

  28 
 4. Pilot Study Timeline  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   

  29 
 5. Pseudocode 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

  30 
  
6. Adverse Events Log  
 
 

  31 
 7. Security Clearance  
 

  32 
  

  33 
  
 
 

  34 
 8. Text Message Example Screenshots  
 
 
 
 

  35 
  
 
 
 
 
  
