Dr. Matt Rouse   
 1  
 
 

Dr. Matt Rouse   
 2 Clinical Evaluation of a Universal  Adhesive in Non-Carious  Cervical Lesions  
 
Background/ Relevance : For decades,  resin  adhesives  have  been  used  to restore  non-carious  cervical 
lesions  for esthetics and/or  patient  comfort.  New “universal  adhesives”  claim  to simplify  the process  of 
bonding resin  composites  to tooth structure  while  maintaining or exceedin g the quality  of previous  adhesive 
systems. Since  dentin and enamel  substrates  are vastly different  with respect  to composition and therefore  
require different  bonding protocols,  some  have advocated a “selective etch”  procedure in which  the enamel  
and dentin are etched differently  but may still be bonded  using  a similar  bonding agent.  The purpose of this 
study  is to determine whether  or not a selective  etch protocol  used  with a universal  adhesive provides  
significantly  improved results  in comparison to a self-etch protocol  when  restoring non-carious  cervical 
lesions.   
Rationale:  In vitro studies  have  shown  statistically  significantly  superior  marginal  adaptation and color  
stability  with a selective  etch technique,  but there are currently  no prospective in vivo studies  greater  than 6 
months  comparing  the efficacy  of selective  vs. self- etch techniques in conjunction with a universal  
adhesive.   
Methods:  Thirty -three p atients  with at least  two non-carious  cervical lesions  (NCCLs)  will receive one 
restoration utilizing  the self-etch universal  adhesive (Adhese Universal,  Ivoclar  Vivadent)  with no separate  
enamel  etching and another  restoration utilizing  the universal  adhesive and a selective etch protocol  in 
which  enamel  is etched  with 37% phosphoric  acid.  The adhesive and Tetric  composite will be provided  by 
Ivoclar and manufacturer’s  instructions  will be followed  for placement  of the restorations.   
Alternate Hypothesis:  Selective-etch restorations  will show  superior  retention rates,  marginal  adaptation,  
and color  stability  after 2 years  compared to self-etch restorations.  
Relevance : With so many  different  types  of resin  adhesives  and numerous  proposed methods,  this study  
could provide evidence supporting one protocol  and eliminate some  of the confusion associated with resin  
bonding protocols.    
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 3 Clinical Evaluation of a Universal Adhesive in Non- Carious Cervical Lesions  
Background:  
Non-carious cervical lesions  (NCCLs) have been well documented in the dental 
literature for over a century1,2. Differing opinions exist concerning the etiology of NCCLs, 
but many agree that the etiologies  differ and include abrasion, erosion, attrition, and 
abfraction, a term coined in 19913,4. Although a few patients may not experience 
adverse effects from the presence of NCCLS, many patients experience sensitivity 
ranging from mild to severe. The esthetics of the dentition may also be compromised by the presence of NCCLs.  For decades, resin adhesives have been used to restore non-carious cervical lesions for esthetics and/or patient comfort; restoration of these lesions with a bonded resin restoration has been shown to be more effective than no treatment or topical treatment with a desensitizing dentifrice
5. Since the advent of “fourth 
generation” (also referred to as “3- bottle”) resin bonding agents in the 1990s, the 
primary focus in the development of resin adhesives has been simplifying the components and thus the protocol for placing resin composite restorations. New 
“universal adhesives” claim to simplify the process of bonding resin composites to tooth structure while maintaining or exceeding the quality of previous adhesive systems. Since dentin and enamel substrates are vastly different with respect to their composition and therefore require different bonding protocols, some have advocated a “selective etch” procedure in which the enamel and dentin are etched differently but may still be 
bonded using the same bonding agent.  An in vitro study by Hanbusa et al (2012) 
indicated that use of a universal adhesive with selective etching of enamel with 
phosphoric acid provides better bonding efficacy than when the adhesive is used as a 
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 4 self-etch alone6. An in vivo study performed by Mena- Serrano et al (2012, 2013) has 
also shown similar results7,8, but since significant hydrolysis of the dentin- resin interface 
continues to occur after six months or even twelve months, a longer clinical trial is 
indicated which more accurately depicts longer term clinical success9. Conversely, a 3-
year study was previously conducted by Can Say, et al (2013) to compare self -etch and 
selective -etch techniques, but with a two- step bonding system instead of a one- step 
system10. 
Purpose/Specific Aims:  
The purpose of this prospective clinical trial will be to evaluate the efficacy of a newly 
formulated “universal” dental adhesive formulation in adult noncarious cervical lesions 
using self -etch and selective etch approaches; the aim is to determine whether or not 
selective etching provides significantly  improved retention and/or  better  resistance to 
enamel  margin  discoloration in comparison to self -etching  over a 24 month period.  
Hypothesis:  
The alternate hypothesis is that the restorations placed utilizing a selective etch method 
will yield superior retention, marginal adaptation, and less marginal discoloration than restorations placed with the self -etch method.  
The null hypothesis is that there will be no significant differences with respect to retentio n, marginal adaptation, or marginal discoloration when comparing restorations 
placed with selective etch and self -etch methods.  
 Materials and Methods 1.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
A total of 33 patients ranging in age from 20 to 75 years of age will be recruited for this 
study. Roughly 10 patients will be in the following age groups: 20- 39, 40 -59, and >60.  
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 5 The study population will be targeted to be comparable in terms of the ratio of men to 
women.  Subjects will be selected that meet the following criteria:  
 
1.1. Inclusion criteria  
1. Willing to provide written consent and authorization for participation.  
2. Be between 20 and 75 years of age at the time of recruitment  
3. Have at least two non- carious cervical lesions present in canine or premolar 
teeth;  
4. Anticipates availability for recalls (roughly 6 month, 12 month, and 24 month) through the two- year study period  
5. The lesions selected will be at least 1 mm in depth (measured with a perio probe) and contain both enamel and dentin margins.   
 
1.2. Exclusion criteria  
1. Severe medical complications (organ transplants, cancer, immunocompromised, long term antibiotic or steroid therapy);  
2. Active caries on study teeth;  
3. Bleeding on probing of study teeth;  
4. Generalized severe periodontitis;  
5. Patient reported symptoms (burning mouth, loss or diminished taste, saliva amount too little, needs liquids to eat dry foods) or clinical signs (erythematous tongue, chelitis, lack of pooled saliva) associated with dry mouth;  
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 6 6. Patients determined to be at a high risk of caries as determined by a Caries Risk 
Assessment 
. 2.0 Enrollment/Randomization 
The clinical design will use each technique (self -etch and selective etch & rinse) in each 
of thirty -three subjects. Each subject will have at least two teeth selected for inclusion in 
the study. The first tooth to be treated will be randomly assigned to one of the two treatment groups using a randomization table. The second tooth will be placed in the second group.  If a third tooth is included, a randomization table will determine which treatment it receives.   
 3.0 Study Procedures  
3.1 Subject Recruitment  
Subjects for this investigation will be selected from patients of record at Indiana 
University School of Dentistry Clinics that meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria.  Dental students, dental hygiene students, and faculty will be briefed on the study criteria to assist in identifying potential subjects.  When a potential subject is identified who dentally appears to meet the criteria, the student or faculty member will either contact the principal investigator or student investigator to visit the patient chairside in real time or ask the patient if they would be willing to complete an IRB approved recruitment brochure to allow the investigators to contact them by phone later about the study.   
 
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 7 For those expressing interest in the project, the student investigator will complete the 
IRB approved telephone interview with the potential subject and schedule them for their study screening/restorative appointment, as applicable.   
 
3.2 Screening/Restorative Visit  
3.2.1. Consenting  
The Principal Investigator or Student Investigator will complete the consenting process with the subjects.   Potential subjects will attend a screening visit in which they will be 
given the IRB approved informed consent and authorization for the release of health information for researc h form.  Upon reading the documents, subjects will be asked if 
they have any questions.  The purpose, procedures, risks and benefits of the study will be reviewed with the subject and the subject will again be asked if they have any questions.  If the subject feels they would like to participate, they will be asked to sign and date the consent and authorization forms after having his/her questions answered to his/her satisfaction and feeling he/she has had enough time to make a decision about participating.   The person who completed the consenting process with the subject will 
also sign and date the consent.  Copies of both documents will be given to the subject.   
 3.2.2. Study Screening Procedures  
After informed consent has been obtained, the Principal Investigator or Student Investigator will review the subject’s on file medical record to ensure accuracy (Axium files), ask the inclusion/exclusion questions and perform an exam of the mouth.  If the 
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 8 subject qualifies to participate, the teeth involved in the research study will be identified 
and randomized to product as described under section 4.   
 3.2.3. Restorative Procedures  
Prior to the placement of restorations, the following information will be recorded in the format of the table below:  
• Evidence of sclerosis (as determined by glossy appearance and glassy feel when examined with explorer; percentage will be visually estimated)  
• The lesion morphology (predominantly saucer -shaped or predominantly notch-
shaped)  
• Evidence and location of occlusal facets  
• Pre-operative sensitivity to a blast  of air (from approximately 1cm for 1s
12) using 
the “0- 10 Numeric Pain Scale”
 
Patient #: xx  
     Age: xx  
     
  # Sclerosis  Lesion 
Morphology  Occlusal 
Facets  Pre-Op Sensitivity  
Self-Etch Tooth            
Selective etch Tooth            
Tooth # (       )            

Dr. Matt Rouse   
 9       
      Legend:      
   Sclerosis:  0= no sclerosis  
     1= <50% sclerotic  
     2= >50% sclerotic  
     
   
   Lesion Morphology  S= saucer shape  
     V= "V" shape  
     
   
   Occlusal Facets  Yes   
     No   
     
   
   Pre-Op Sensitivity  0-10   
    
Intraoral digital photographs will be obtained.   Restorative procedures will be performed by a single provider on each tooth following standard of care procedures for a Class V restoration.  Any x -rays needed will be taken as standard of care and not specifically for 
research purposes.   All teeth will be cleaned with pumice in a rubber prophy cup prior to 
treatment.   The subject (patient) will read and sign the Indiana University School of 
Dentistry’s co nsent for treatment.  Standard of care treatment will include:  
 
• No mechanical preparation or beveling of the tooth surface will occur for either treatment group.   
• Local anesthetic will be offered to each subject and its use guided by the patient response.   
• Rubber dam isolation using a 212 clamp will be used for each restoration.  
 
3.2.4.  Placing of the Etching Materials and Restorative Materials  
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 10 At the point in the  restorative procedure where the etching and restorative material 
placement occurs, the operator will follow procedures for each tooth as identified by the 
randomization schedule and as described below:   
 
a. Self-etch placement  
The universal adhesive (Adhese Universal; Ivoclar Vivadent) will be applied utilizing the 
following instructions from  the manufacturer :   
Starting with enamel, thoroughly coat the tooth surfaces to be treated with Adhese Universal. The adhesive must be scrubbed into the tooth for at least 20 seconds. This time must not be shortened. Disperse Adhese Universal with oil and moisture free compressed air until a glossy, immobile film layer results. Light -cure Adhese Universal for 10 seconds using a light intensity of > 
500mW/cm2 
If the lesion is greater than 2 mm in any dimension, incremental placement of Tetric EvoCeram composite (Ivoclar Vivadent) will occur with the first increment being placed 
against enamel.  Instructions are described below:  
Apply Tetric EvoCeram in increments of max 2mm and adapt with a suitable instrument. Sufficient exposure to light prevents incomplete polymerization. Remove excess material with suitable finishers or fine diamonds after polymerization. Use silicone polishers as well as polishing disks and strips to polish the restoration to a durable high gloss.  
  Each increment will be light -cured using the intensity and duration prescribed by the 
manufacturer; the curing light will be calibrated at the beginning of each clinic session. 
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 11 Final restorations will be finished and polished with fluted composite finishing burs and 
flexible abrasive disks, respectively.  
 
b. Selective etching placement  
Total Etch (37% phosphoric acid; Ivoclar) will be placed on the enamel margin with no intentional placement on the dentin within the lesion.  The adhesive (Adhese Universal) will then be applied as instructed by the manufacturer.  Tetric EvoCeram composite  will 
be placed, light -cured, finished, and polished in the same manner as for the self -etch 
group.  
 
Materials  Table  
 
Adhese  Unive rsal 
Solvent:  25.0% 
Ethanol  (64-17-5*) 
Water (7732-18-5*) 
Monomer  mixture: 67.1% 
HEMA (868-77-9*) 
Bis-GMA  (1565- 94-2*) 
Decandiol dimethacrylate (6701- 13-9*) Methacry lated 
phosph oric acid ester (855 90-00-7 *) Methacry lated 
polyacrylic acid (9003-01-04; 106-91-2*) 
Filler: 4.0% 
Fumed Silica  (7631-86-9*) 
Initiators: 3.8% 
Ethyl p-Dimethylamino-benzoate (10287-53-3*) 
Campherquinone (10373- 78-1*) 
Dimethylamino  ethylmethacrylate (2867-47-2*) 
Stabili sers: 0.1% 
Butyl hydroxy toluene (128-37-0*) 
Hydroquinone monomethylether (150-76-5*) 
* CAS No. 
 3.2.5  Post Procedure Images and Impressions  
Post- operative intraoral images will be obtained and impressions made using polyvinyl 
siloxane and poured in epoxy for future SEM marginal analysis.  Each restoration will have a baseline evaluation to document retention, marginal discoloration, and marginal adaptation.  
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 12  
3.3.      Follow Up Visits  
Recall examinations will be conducted by two IUSD faculty members (Dr. Blaine Cook, 
Dr. Jeff Platt, Dr. Oriana Capin, Dr. Michele Kirkup, Dr. Brooke Adams , Dr. Kim 
Diefenderfer ) at approximately 6, 12, and 24 mon ths from the screening/restorative visit.  
The subject’s medical history will be updated in Axium and the subject will answer questions to assure continued eligibility in the study.  Evaluation of sensitivity and modified USPHS criteria to include retention, marginal discoloration, and marginal adaptation will occur and recorded in the table (below).  In addition, an overall determination of clinically acceptable or not clinically acceptable will be made at each evaluation visit. Intraoral digital images and impressions will be made at each recall appointment. The subjects will be compensated with checks in the amounts of $25, $50, and $75 at 6,12, and 24-month  follow -up visits, respectively. Restorations deemed to be 
not clinically acceptable within the timeframe of the study will be replaced using normal dental school protocol at no cost to the patient.  
 
Baseline  # Retention  Marginal Adapt.  Marg. 
Discoloration  Sensitivity  Clinically 
Acceptable?  
Tooth # (SfE)  
       
Tooth # (SelE)  
       
Tooth # (       )  
       
  
       
6 Month Recall  # Retention  Marginal Adapt.  Marg. 
Discoloration  Sensitivity  Clinically 
Acceptable?  
Tooth # (SfE)  
       
Tooth # (SelE)  
       
Tooth # (       )  
       
              
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 13 12 Month Recall  # Retention  Marginal Adapt.  Marg. 
Discoloration  Sensitivity  Clinically 
Acceptable?  
Tooth # (SfE)  
       
Tooth # (SelE)  
       
Tooth # (       )  
       
  
       
24 Month Recall  # Retention  Marginal Adapt.  Marg. 
Discoloration  Sensitivity  Clinically 
Acceptable?  
Tooth # (SfE)  
       
Tooth # (SelE)  
       
Tooth # (       )              
USPHS Criteria  
Marginal  
Discoloration  A: There is no discoloration between the tooth and the restoration  
B: Discoloration is present without axial penetration  
C: Discoloration is present with axial penetration  
 
Retention  A: Present  
B: Partial loss  of restoration  
C: Absent /complete loss of restoration  
Marginal 
adaptation  A: Excellent continuity at resin –enamel interface; explorer exhibits no 
catch or one way catch when drawn across  margin  
B: Explorer exhibits a two -way catch, indicating a crevice, when drawn 
across margin  
C: Marginal crevice present; exposes base or dentin  
  3.4 Lost Restorations  
For any restoration that is lost during the 24- months of follow -up, an offer will be made 
to replace the restoration using normal IUSD techniques and materials at no charge.  
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 14 4.0 Statistical Considerations 
 The two techniques will be compared for differences in s ensitivity, retention, marginal  
discoloration, marginal adaptation, and clinical acceptability at each follow -up visit using 
Cochran- Mantel -Haenszel tests for stratified, ordered categorical outcomes. The study 
subjects are considered the ‘strata’ in this method so that the comparisons properly 
account for the use of both techniques in each subject. This method also easily extends 
to having multiple teeth receiving each technique for each patient.  
With a final sample size of 30 subjects, the study will have 80% power to detect a 35% difference between the two treatment methods, ass uming two -sided tests of paired 
proportions and a 5% significance level. To account for attrition the study will enroll 33 subjects. 
5.0 Investigator Responsibilities and Regulatory Requirements  
This study will be conducted in accordance with the applicable GCPs, 21 Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR)  50, 56, and 312; International Conference on Harmonization 
(ICH) Good Clinical Practice published in the Federal Register:  9- May-97 (volume 62, 
number 90), pages 25691 –25709.  
 
The Principal Investigator will perform or directly supervise the performance of all the study procedures in accordance to the highest standards of medical and clinical research practice.  Delegation of any study responsibility will be documente d in writing. 
The Investigator and Student Investigator will follow the protocol as written and to ensure that all members of the assisting staff also understand and follow the protocol.  If 
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 15 changes to the protocol are needed, an IRB approved amendment will be gained prior 
to initiation of any new or changed procedures.  
5.1 Advertising  
Advertisements including brochures and telephone interview text for subject recruitment will be approved by the IRB prior to study initiation.    
5.2 Institutional Review  
The protocol, informed consent, and all other pertinent documents for this study will be 
approved by:  
Human Subjects Office  
Office of Research Administration  
Indiana University  
Lockefield Village, 3rd Floor  
980 Indiana Avenue  
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202  
 The study will not begin until the IRB approval for the study has been granted in writing.   
5.3 Subject Consent  
Written informed consent will be obtained from also subjects prior to their participation in any research procedure. This consent form will comply with all applicable regulations governing the protection of human subjects.  The elements of informed consent and the documentation of informed consent will follow specifications in 21 CFR 50.25 and 50.27 and/or ICH GCPs chapter 4.  
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 16 Each subject will sign and date an informed consent prior to participation in the study.  A 
signed copy of the consent form will be given to the subject and the original will be retained by the Investigator.  Subjects may withdraw from participation in the study at any time.  Additionally, the Investigator may withdraw subjects from the study if it is in the best interest of the subjects.  The reason for all subject withdrawals from the study will be documented on the appropriate CRF.  
5.4 Data Collection  
The Investigator will ensure that all source documents (i.e., study and/or medical records) and Case Report Forms (CRFs) are completed and maintained according to the study protocol.  
5.4.1. Case Report Forms  
The Investigator will supply the paper and/or electronic CRFs to be used in this study.  It is the responsibility of the Investigator to maintain accurate CRFs.  All hard copy CRFs will be filled out legibly in ink.  
 For paper CRFs, if an entry requires correction, a single line will be placed through the entry so as not to obscure the original record, the corrected entry will be initialed and dated by the individual making the change.  There will be no whiteouts or erasures.  For electronic CRFs, if an entry requires correction, the change is made directly to the CRF in the database, the user is prompted to provide a reason for the change, and the correction is logged in by an electronic audit trail.  If, for any reason, the subject does 
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 17 not complete the study, an explanation will be entered on the Subject Accountability 
CRF.  
5.4.2. Source Documents  
All source documents (i.e., study and/or medical records) and CRFs will be completed and maintained according to the study  protocol.  Any CRF used as a source document 
must be identified as such in the Investigator’s Study Notebook.  
5.5 Study Device Dispensing, Storage, and Accounting 
The study device to be used in this study will be supplied by Ivoclar. Upon receipt of the study devices, the Investigator will store them in a secured area.  Records of all study devices will be maintained by the Investigator’s staff using a Device Dispensing Record.   The dispensing of the study devices will be under the Investigator’s supervision, and only administered to those subjects who meet the entry criteria.  
5.6 Adherence to Protocol  
The Investigator will adhere strictly to the protocol (See Section 3.7 for preparing protocol amendments).  The Investigator will ensure that all protocol deviations are documented, as they occur, in the Investigator’s Study Notebook.  
5.7 Adverse Event Reporting  
Any adverse events spontaneously expressed by the panelists or observed by the Study Dentist or Investigator will be recorded giving full details including: date of onset, duration, severity, treatment given, final resolution, and will include the investigator’s assessments.  The Investigator will determine the need for further examination.  Should 
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 18 a serious adverse event occur, the Investigator will instruct the subject to report back to 
the study site at appropriate intervals until remission has occurred.  All such visits will be documented.   The Investigator will prepare a written statement describing the serious adverse event and the medical management of the adverse event.  All Adverse Events will be reported to the IRB in the annual report.  Serious Adverse Events that are directly related to the study will require IRB notification within 3 working days. A serious event is defined as an event that  suggests a definite hazard or handicap to the subject.  
Serious events are any events resulting in death, decreased life expectancy, life-threatening situation, permanent disability, hospitalization, drug overdose with study medication, or congenital anom aly. 
5.8 Records Retention  
Study records will be stored for a minimum of 7 years after the last regulatory approval has been received or the discontinuation of the study.  Study records will be made available for inspection and copying upon the request of authorized personnel.  
 References:  
1. Miller WD. Experiments and observations on the wasting of tooth tissue variously 
designated as erosion, abrasion, chemical abrasion, denudation, etc. Dental Cosmos 
1907;XLIX(1):1–23;XLIX(2):109– 124;XLIX(3):225– 47. 
2. Black GV. A work on operative dentistry. Pathology of hard tissues of the teeth. Vol. 1. 1st ed. Chicago (IL):Medico -Dental Publishing; 1907, pp. 39 –59.  
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 19 3. Grippo J, Simring M, Coleman T. Abfraction, Abrasion, Biocorrosion, and the Enigma 
of Noncarious Cervical Les ions: A 20- Year Perspective. Journal of Esthetic and 
Restorative Dentistry 2012; 24(1): 10- 23. 
4. Grippo J. Abfraction: a new classification of hard tissue lesions of teeth. J Esthet Dent 
1991;3:14– 8. 
5. Veitz -Keenan A, Barna J, Strober B, Matthews A, Collie D, Vena D, Curro F, Thompson 
V. Treatments for hypersensitive noncarious cervical lesions: a Practitioners 
Engaged in Applied Research and Learning (PEARL) Network randomized clinical 
effectiveness study. J Am Dent Assoc. 2013 May;144(5):495- 506.  
6. Hanabusa M, Mine A, Kuboki T, Momoi Y, Van Ende A, Van Meerbeek B, De Munck J.  
Bonding effectiveness of a new 'multi- mode' adhesive to enamel and dentine.  J 
Dent. 2012 Jun;40(6):475- 84. doi: 10.1016/j.jdent.2012.02.012. Epub 2012 Feb 28.  
7. Mena- Serrano A, Kose C, De Paula EA, Tay LY, Reis A, Loguercio AD, Perdigão J. A 
new universal simplified adhesive: 6 -month clinical evaluation. J Esthet Restor Dent. 
2013 Feb;25(1):55- 69. doi: 10.1111/jerd.12005. Epub 2012 Nov 15.  
8. Perdigão J , Kose C , Mena -Serrano A , De Paula E , Tay L , Reis A , Loguercio A . A New 
Universal Simplified Adhesive: 18 -Month Clinical Evaluation. Oper Dent.  2013 Jun 
26. [Epub ahead of print]  
9. Hashimoto, M. (2010), A Review —Micromorphological evidence of degradation in 
resin- dentin bonds and potential preventional solutions. J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 
92B: 268– 280. doi: 10.1002/jbm.b.31535  
10. Can Say E1, Ozel E , Yurdagüven H , Soyman M . Three -year clinical evaluation of 
a two -step self -etch adhesive with or without selective enamel etching in non-
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 20 carious cervical sclerotic lesions. Clin Oral In vestig.  2013 Nov 22. [Epub ahead of 
print]  
11. Chen A, et al. Using the modified Schirmer test to measure mouth dryness: a 
preliminary study. J Am Dent Assoc. 2005 Feb;136(2):164- 70 
12. Sharma D, McGuire JA, Gallob JT, Amini P.  Randomised clinical efficacy trial of 
potassium oxalate mouthrinse in relieving dentinal sensitivity.  J Dent. 2013 Jul;41 
Suppl 4:S40-8 
13. Fontana M1, Zunt S , Eckert GJ , Zero D . A screening test for unstimulated salivary 
flow measurement. Oper Dent.  2005 Jan- Feb;30(1):3- 8. 
  Budget:  
Anticipated Start Date: February 1, 2013  
  Requested from Research  Supplied “in kind” from Other   
  Committee             Sources   
Category  Description  Amount  Description  Amount  Source  
Personnel:   $ 0 Calibrators, 
Evaluators, 
Assistant  $ 28,762  Ivoclar 
Vivadent  
Equipment:   $ 0 Clinical 
equipment  $ 750  Ivoclar 
Vivadent  
Supplies:   $ 0 Adhesive, 
composite  $ 3,000  Ivoclar 
Vivadent  
Panelist 
Payments   $ 0  $  
Bio-
statistics   $ 0 Statistical 
analysis  $ 320  IUSD  
Other   $ 0 Patient 
Incentives,  
IRB Fee  $ 7,700  Ivoclar 
Vivadent  
   Cost of 
Procedures  $ 3,201  Ivoclar 
Vivadent  
Total Requested from $ 0 Total of funds provided $ 43,733  
Dr. Matt Rouse   
 21 Research Committee  from other sources:  
               Total Cos t of Proposed Project:  $ 43,733  
 
 