 Page 1 w COMIRB Protocol  
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
CAMPUS BOX F -490    TELEPHONE:  303- 724-1055  Fax:  303- 724-0990   
 
 
Protocol #: 18-1798  
Project Title: Hybrid Closed- Loop Therapy in Pregnancies Complicated by Type 1 Diabetes (T1D)  
Study Tit le: PICLS (Pregnancy Intervention with a Closed- Loop System) Study  
Principal Investigator:  Sarit Polsky, MD, MPH  
Version Date:   01-19-2021        
 
I. Introductory Background: 
Pregnancies associated with diabetes mellitus are accompanied by high risks of 
adverse maternal and fetal outcomes. Uncontrolled glucose levels in pregnancy can lead 
to fetal loss (miscarriage, stillbirth), congenital malformations, preterm delivery, cesarean 
section, macrosomia, neonatal hypoglycemia, and the like1-4. Given these high risks, the 
American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends rigorous glucose control throughout 
gestation with a glycated hemoglobin A1C (A1C) of <6% for women with preexisting 
diabetes5. The strict glycemic targets are especially difficult to achieve for women 
dependent on insulin throughout gestation, such as those with Type 1 Diabetes (T1D). 
Their rates of severe hypoglycemia (SH, hypoglycemia requiring 3rd party assistance ) are 
critically high6-10. Strategies are needed to optimize glucose control both pre - and post -
prandially without significantly increasing the risk of hypoglycemia throughout gestation. 
Closed -loop (CL) insulin therapy employs a continuous subc utaneous insulin infusion 
pump with feedback from a continuous glucose monitor  (CGM)11.  Several CL systems 
evaluated in non- pregnant populations have been found to improve glucose control11-17. 
One of these Hybrid CL (HCL) systems was recently approved by the Federal Drug 
Administration (FDA) and has been evaluated in non- pregnant adolescents and adults18, 
19.  In this proposal, we aim to improve maternal and fetal health through a novel insulin 
delivery system, and to obtain pilot data to ultimately reduce birth complications.  
The effects of CL therapy on glucose and pregnancy outcomes are largely unknown. 
Only one investigational CL system has been studied in women with diabetes throughout 
most of pregnancy20. This single hormone HCL system was found to increase the glucose 
target time in range (TIR) compared to sensor -augmented pump therapy (SAPT), however 
rates of large- for-gestational age (LGA) infants remained high20. There is currently one 
HCL system on the market approved by the FDA, the Medtronic 670G system with the 
Guardian sensor21. The 670G system can be used in auto, closed mode (HCL therapy) or 
manual, open mode (SAPT) using the same insulin pump and continuous glucose 
monitor, offering a unique opportunity to compare therapies with the same devices. 
Women across the United States are beginning to use this HCL therapy, which has never 
been studied in pregnancy. As rates of unintended pregnancy remain high in the United 
States (~45%)22, 23, many women may be using the 670G without knowing they are 
pregnant for many weeks. Thus, it is critical that we understand how this system will 
perform th roughout pregnancy with regards to safety, glucose control, quality of life, and 
maternal and fetal outcomes in comparison to SAPT therapy.  
 
II. Hypotheses and Specific Aims:   
 
The PICLS (Pregnancy Intervention with a Closed- Loop System) Study is a two -center , 
prospective, ‘open- label’, single -blind, investigator -initiated randomized controlled pilot 
 Page 2 study evaluating hybrid closed- loop (HCL) insulin delivery among pregnant women with 
T1D compared with sensor -augmented pump therapy (SAPT) throughout gestation and 
the first 6 weeks of the post -partum period at the Barbara Davis Center for Diabetes and 
Ohio State University.  The HCL system being used is the Medtronic 670G system, which 
has been FDA -approved in non -pregnant populations  but has never been studied in 
pregnancy.   
 
Specific Aim (SA) 1:  Evaluate safety of HCL therapy (Medtronic 670G with Guardian 
sensor) compared to SAPT in women with T1D throughout the 2nd and 3rd trimesters of 
gestation and the early post -partum period.  
Hypothesis SA 1.1:  We hypothesiz e that time spent with glucose <54 mg/dL will be the 
same or reduced among women using the HCL system compared to those using SAPT.  
Hypothesis SA 1.2:  We hypothesize that the episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis and rates 
of adverse skin reactions will be si milar between groups.  
 
Specific Aim 2:  Evaluate indices of glucose control and fear of hypoglycemia in pregnant 
women with T1D using HCL therapy compared to those using SAPT throughout the 2nd and 
3rd trimesters of gestation and in the early post -partum pe riod. 
Hypothesis SA 2.1:  We hypothesize that HCL therapy will increase time spent in the 
glucose target range (63 -140 mg/dL), reduce time spent in mild and more severe 
hypoglycemia (<63  mg/dL and <54 mg/dL, respectively), and reduce time spent in 
hyperglyc emia (>140 mg/dL) over time compared to SAPT.  
Hypothesis SA 2.2:  We hypothesize that HCL therapy will reduce fear of hypoglycemia 
as measured by the Hypoglycemia Fear Survey24, starting in the 1st trimester of pregnancy 
compared to SAPT.  
 
Specific Aim 3:  Evaluate quality of life and device acceptability in pregnant women with 
T1D using HCL therapy compared to those using SAPT throughout the 2nd and 3rd trimesters 
of gestation and in the early post -partum period.  
Hypothesis SA 3.1:  We hyp othesize that pregnant women with T1D randomized to HCL 
therapy or SAPT will report similar quality of life (general mental health and general health 
perceptions), as measured by the Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) Short -Form 36 (SF -
36)25, without a significant difference between groups .  
Hypothesis SA 3 .2: We hypothesize that HCL will be more acceptable to subjects than 
SAPT, as measured by Insulin Delivery Satisfaction Survey26 and the Glucose Monitoring 
Satisfaction Survey27. 
Hypothesis SA 3.3:  We hypothesize that HCL in mid- pregnancy,  late pregnancy , and 
post-partum will be more acceptable to subjects than SAPT in the first trimester in the 
same women using both modes of therapy, as measured by the INSPIRE 
Questionnaire28. 
 
Specific Aim 4 (Exploratory Aim):  Evaluate maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant 
women with T1D using HCL therapy compared to those using SAPT throughout gestation 
and in the early post -partum period.  
Hypothesi s SA 4.1:  We hypothesize that rates of fetal loss, preeclampsia, cesarean 
section, and neonatal hypoglycemia will be similar between groups .  
Hypothesis SA 4.2:  We hypothesize that rates of large- for-gestational age infants and 
macrosomia (birth weight >4, 000 grams) will be similar between groups.  
 
 
III. Background and Significance :  
 Page 3  
 Pregnancies associated with type 1 diabetes  (T1D)  are accompanied by high risks 
of adverse maternal and fetal outcomes4. To reduce the risk of adverse health outcomes 
occurring, it is recommended that women obtain and maintain tight glycemic control 
throughout gestation5. This task i s difficult given the ever -changing insulin requirements in 
pregnancy. The insulin- sensitive 1st trimester predisposes women to nocturnal 
hypoglycemia29, 30. Insulin resistance begins 14 to 20 weeks gestation becaus e of 
increased placental -fetal unit demands, free fatty acid production, and placental/maternal 
hormonal influences29, 31. The early post -partum period cuts insulin requirements 35 -90% 
from pre -pregnancy doses because of cessation of placental hormones29, 30, 32. Achieving 
tight glycemic targets under these conditions, without causing SH, is one of the biggest 
challenges of diabetes pregnancy care. For women with T1D, the high  stakes and strict 
goals of pregnancy can negatively impact QOL and mental health33. CL therapy is a novel 
way to improve care and QOL among pregnant women with diabetes.  
CL in Pregnancy:  Three studies have been done in this field, all with crossover 
designs. (1) The Deltec Cozmo insulin pump and FreeStyle Navigator CGM (HCL system 
with a model predictive control algorithm) was worn by 10 women for 24 hours at a time at 
14.8 and 28 weeks gestation. Plasma TIR (63- 140 mg/dL) overnight increased (84% early 
to 100% in late gestation, p=0.09), though nocturnal hypo-  and hyperglycemia did not 
change34. (2) The Animas 2020 Insulin Pump with FreeStyle Navigator CGM or CSII alone 
was used for 24 hours at a time at 19 and 23 weeks gestation (n=12). Hypoglycemia was significantly reduced with HCL wear (time spent <45 mg/dL, lower low blood glucose 
index, and fewer hypoglycemic episodes), but overnight plasma TIR was similar in both 
groups
35. Overall, both sessions were in the plasma TIR 81% of the time. (3) Finally, 16 
women were randomly assigned to HCL therapy (DANA Diabecare R Insulin Pump with 
FreeStyle Navigator II CGM) or SAPT (control condition) for 4 weeks of over -night use 
then crossed over after a washout period. Women were then allowed t o continue HCL 
therapy, if they wanted to do so. The HCL system used was investigational20 and utilized a 
model predictive control (MPC) algorithm34. Semi -structured interviews and validated 
questionnaire data from thi s study showed that HCL wear was associated with some 
modest benefits with respect to quality of life (feelings of better glucose 
control/excitement/empowerment and less worry about hypoglycemia occurring overnight) 
but also concerns about device visibilit y and varying degrees of attention to data and 
hypo- /hyperglycemia symptoms36. Time spent <63 mg/dL was low in both groups (1.9% 
HCL vs 1.8% SAPT, p=0.67). HCL wear significantly increased TIR (66.3% HCL vs 56.8% 
SAPT, p<0.001), decreased time >140 mg/dL (31.6% HCL vs 40.9% SAPT, p<0.001) and 
>180 mg/dL (12.6% HCL vs 17.3% SAPT, p=0.001), and lowered mean glucose (128 
mg/dL HCL vs 137 mg/dL SAPT, p<0.001). After crossover, 87.5% (14/16) of the women 
continued using H CL therapy until delivery. There were 26 adverse events (skin reactions 
and minor illnesses) and 95 device deficiencies with no differences between groups. 
Serious adverse events were unrelated to the devices. For the 24 hours prior to delivery 
the median glucose level was 110 mg/dL (86.8% TIR). Adverse outcomes were: 5 cases 
of pre -eclampsia, 15 cesarean section deliveries (10 prior to onset of labor), 7 deliveries 
<37 weeks gestation, 13 LGA infants (birth weight >90th percentile), 14 infants with 
neonatal hypoglycemia, and 12 cases of neonatal intensive care admissions20. Thus, 
hypoglycemia was reduced with one35 and TIR increased with two out of the three HCL 
systems 20, 34. None of the HCL systems studied are approved in the United States. No 
HCL system has been compared to SAPT for the duration of a pregnancy and early post -
partum or has been shown to improve maternal and fetal outcomes. None of the HCL 
systems studied in pregnancy used a PID control algorithm, which may perform differently 
 Page 4 than then MPC algorithms in situations of dramatic shifts in insulin requirements such as 
pregnancies complicated by diabetes and the transition from extreme insulin resistance in 
the 3rd trimester to insulin sensitivity post -partum.  
This novel study  will compare the only approved HCL system (novel therapy) to 
SAPT (often -used therapy) throughout pregnancy and early post -partum. The FDA -
approved device we will use has a proportional -integral -derivative (PID) controller, which 
has never been studied in pregnancy. We will assess safety (SA 1)  by measuring: 1) SH, 
2) episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), and 3) adverse skin reactions. We will 
compare indices of glycemic variability  (SA 2)  and fear of hypoglycemia (SA 2) 
between groups. Pregnancy often leads to hypervigilance with self -care, but also 
increased emotional stress and burden33. This study will assess psychological factors 
(QOL, SA 3)  during and after pregnancy: QOL (SF- 36)25 and device satisfaction ( 3 
surveys for people with T1D26-28). We will c ollect data about maternal and fetal health 
outcomes  (SA 4) . 
 
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
 
(1) CGM Therapy in Pregnancy with or without Remote Monitoring: The Barbara 
Davis Center (BDC) for Diabetes has experience with research during pregnanc y37-39. 
BDC’s clinical staff has cared for hundreds of pregnant women with diabetes (mostly with 
T1D), 60 -70 per year. The principal investigator (PI) of the proposed study directs the 
Pregnancy and Women’s Health C linic. The PI completed an open -label, investigator -
initiated, study in pregnant women with T1D prospectively (n=40) stratified to (1) CGM Alone [women with Apple devices], or (2) CGM Share (DexCom, San Diego, CA) [women 
with an iPhone and followers with data -viewing devices), and retrospectively (n=8) to (3) 
no CGM. There were 48 women enrolled in the study (15 during preconception, 25 during the 1
st trimester, 8 on retrospective chart review). All pregnant women were trained and 
started on a Dexcom G4 sys tem. Women prospectively enrolled were given sensors 
throughout pregnancy for the G4 (provided by the study) or G5 system (provided by patient’s health insurance). In the preconception group, 53% (8/15) became pregnant 
during the study period. Final analys es include 13 women in the CGM Alone group, 15 in 
CGM Share, and 8 in no CGM. SAPT was used in 86% (24/28) of the prospective and 75% (6/8) of the retrospective pregnancies. There were 3 episodes of SH  (severe 
hypoglycemia, which is hypoglycemia requiring the assistance of a 3
rd party)  in 2 women. 
Interim data were presented at the ADA Scientific Sessions in 201638 and 201739, 
complete data  were presented at ATTD in 201840. A1C over time, time spent >180 mg/dL, 
hypoglycemia fear scores, and neonatal hypoxemia were significantly lower in CGM 
Share users. The BDC can recruit and retain pregnant women with T1D into studies, and 
train them on SAPT devices.  
 
(2) CL in non -Pregnant Adults: The BDC has extensive experience studying insulin 
pump technology11, 19, 41 -45. The BDC was 1 of the 10 sites involved in the pivotal study on 
the Medtronic 670G HCL system , which has been assessed in hotel11 and free- living 
conditions19. The HCL system was studied in adolescents (n=30) and adults (n=94) with 
T1D for 3 mon ths in free -living conditions. Adults were in the HCL mode a median of 88% 
of the time, A1C decreased from a mean of 7.3% to 6.8% (p<0.001), TIR (70- 180 mg/dL) 
increased from 68.8% to 73.8% (p<0.001), and hypoglycemia (≤70 mg/dL) decreased 
from 6.4 to 3.4%  (p<0.001) from run -in to study end19. For adults, fasting TIR significantly 
increased (70 ± 21.2% run- in to 84.4 ± 12.1% study end, p<0.001)19. There were no 
episodes of SH or DKA19. The sensor accuracy, measured as mean amplitude of relative 
 Page 5 difference (MARD) ± standard deviation between the sensor glucose (SG) and i -STAT 
venous glucose values, was 10% ± 8.7% in adults (10.3% for SG > 180 mg/dL and 12.2% 
for SG ≤70 mg/dL)19. The BDC can train subjects on the HCL system, follow glucose 
outcomes and device deficiencies, and retain subjects.  
 
 
IV. Research  Methods  
 A.  Outcome  Measure(s):   
 
Primary  Outcomes:  
1) Safety of HCL therapy compared to SAPT in women with T1D throughout gestation and 
the early post -partum period assessed through episodes of severe hypoglycemia and time 
spent with glucose <54 mg/dL .   
2) Indices of glucose control and fear o f hypoglycemia in pregnant women with T1D using 
HCL or SAPT therapy throughout pregnancy and early post -partum . Indices of glucose 
control are time spent in the glucose target ranges <54 mg/dL and <63  mg/dL 
(hypoglycemia), 63 -140 mg/dL (time in range), and  >140 mg/dL and >180 mg/dL 
(hyperglycemia).  Fear of hypoglycemia is assessed as behavior, worry, and total scores of 
fear of hypoglycemia determined by the Hypoglycemia Fear Survey.  
 
Secondary Outcomes :   
3) Safety of HCL therapy compared to SAPT in women with T1D throughout gestation and 
the early post -partum period assessed through episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis and skin 
reactions.  
4) Indices of glucose control and fear of hypoglycemia in pregnant women with T1D using HCL or SAPT therapy throughout pregnancy and early post -partum. Secondary outcomes 
of indices of glucose control are mean glucose ± standard deviation, J index, High Blood Glucose Index (HBGI), Low Blood Glucose Index (LBGI), duration of hypoglycemic episodes, Mean Amplitude of Glycemic Ex cursions (MAGE), and Continuous Overall Net 
Glycemic Action (CONGA
n). 
5) Quality of life and device acceptability in women with T1D throughout gestation and the 
early post -partum period as measured by scores from the MOS Short -Form 36 (quality of 
life) and Insulin Delivery Satisfaction Survey , Glucose Monitoring Satisfaction Survey , and 
INSPIRE  (HCL only) questionnaires (device acceptability).  
6) Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with T1D using HCL therapy 
compared to those using SAPT throughout  gestation and in the early post -partum period.   
Maternal outcomes include preeclampsia/eclampsia, cesarean delivery, and gestational weight gain. Fetal outcomes include fetal loss (miscarriage or stillbirth), large -for-
gestational age, and neonatal hypogl ycemia.  
 
 
B. Description of Population to be Enrolled :   
 
We anticipate recruiting women with T1D for at least a year who are pregnant ( 11 
weeks gestation or earlier) between the ages of 18 and 45 years old. We expect to screen 
up to 3 7 individuals , randomize up to 2 4 women, and have 2 0 completers ( 10 women per 
group).  
 
 
C. Study Design and Research Methods    
 Page 6  
Overview: This is a two -center, prospective, ‘open- label’, single -blind, investigator -initiated 
randomized controlled pilot study evaluating HCL insulin delivery among pregnant women 
with T1D compared with SAPT throughout the 2nd and 3rd trimesters of gestation and the first 
6 weeks of the post -partum period at the BDC and Ohio State University. Each institution 
will obtain IRB approval separately.  The statistician will be blinded to treatment 
assignment, but the participants and clinical research team will not.  
 
Study Design:  Up to 3 7 women will be screened in the 1st trimester of pregnancy ( ≤11 
weeks gestation) over 10 months. All subjects meeting the initial inclusion/exclusion 
criteria will be invited to sign informed consent and participate in the study. The consent 
form must be signed by all women who wish to participate in the study, how ever there are 
two optional consent procedures: (1) providing specimens (blood and urine) to be stored in a biorepository for future research studies and (2) providing permission to be contacted 
for other research studies in the future. Consent for the optional procedures will be 
voluntary and will not affect regular clinical care for participants in any way.  
If potential subjects are not available or not able to consent in person, they will 
have the option of to do a phone consent or consent through a videoconference. A HIPAA- compliant videoconferencing tool formally approved by the University of Colorado 
(e.g., Zoom) will be used. In order for individuals to consent remotely, subjects who want to consent by phone or video will be e- mailed or mailed a PDF of the consent form, for 
them to read over. They will set up a time and date with the research personnel to 
thoroughly go over the consent form. The prospective subject will have a written copy of 
the consent form in- hand at the time of the informed consent  discussion, and will ask any 
questions she may have. For video consenting, an impartial witness must be present  (site-
dependent stipulation), i.e., a friend or family member of the subject or someone on the 
research staff who is not involved in this study . If the subject agrees to participate, the 
witness must sign the copy of the consent form to verify that the subject’s questions were 
answered, and that the subject agreed to participate. The subject will send the original 
consent form with her signature and the witness’s signature back to the Barbara Davis 
Center.  
All subjects will fill out a questionnaire about personal demographics and baseline 
health history. All women will be counseled on glucose targets in pregnancy, per standard of care. Women will be given handout s on general guidelines for care of pregnant women 
with diabetes and on specific conditions of which they should be aware during the first trimester (see appendix). If the woman was seen at the Barbara Davis Center or Ohio 
State University  prior to the consent visit, we will do a retrospective chart review for 
medications, vital signs, height/weight, A1C, insulin doses, glucose meter downloads, 
insulin pump downloads (if applicable), and CGM downloads (if applicable) for the most -
immediate pre-conception clinic visit and for  previous  visits during the current pregnancy , 
if she was not seen at either institution prior to signing the consent form, then we will have 
her fill her a medical release form to request these records . Women will be asked to 
participate in a run- in phase. The run- in phase requires CGM wear, but not insulin pump 
wear. Women previously using a CGM, but not the device to be used during the run- in 
phase, will receive a targeted educational and training session on the study C GM system 
and its differences from their previous systems. Women naïve to CGM wear will receive a targeted educational and training session on CGM systems in general, on sensor wear, 
and on the study CGM system in particular. Both institutions in this prot ocol are 
experienced in training and starting CGM systems in pregnant women with diabetes. 
Women will undergo a run- in phase wherein they will wear the study CGM for 1 week and 
 Page 7 be asked to calibrate per device instructions, log self -monitored glucose values (7 per 
day), insulin doses, carbohydrate intake, and exercise. Women who are compliant with 
device wearing and log sheets, who do not have an adverse reaction to device adhesives 
or wearing, who are willing to wear the study devices, and who are otherwis e deemed 
appropriate candidates by the study PI will be invited to continue in the study (see Figure 
1). The operational definition of compliance for the run -in phase is device wearing for 
≥80% of time during the run- in phase, changing infusion sets every 3-4 days, performance 
of a minimum of 2 finger -sticks per day (as the HCL system requires 2 -4 calibrations per 
day), filling out ≥80% of the log sheets, successful remote uploading of the CGM data, 
and communication with the study team during the run- in ph ase. Women will also be 
asked to record dietary (food and beverage) intake for three days during the run- in phase 
using log sheets . Food records will be reviewed to assess dietary compliance with the 
personalized pregnancy nutrition goals provided to parti cipants and carbohydrate counting 
skills.  Targeted enrollment after the run- in phase will be 28 women and by the end of the 
study will be 20  women ( 10 completers per group allowing for a drop -out rate of 36 % due 
screen failures, miscarriages, dropping out , or subjects being lost to follow up).  
 
Figure 1: Overall Study Design  
 
*2 weeks for pump -experienced participants at baseline and 4 weeks for pump -naïve participants 
at baseline.  
**Visits 7 through 14 for pregnancy care and study follow -up. 
Abbreviatio ns: CGM, continuous glucose monitor; HCL, hybrid closed -loop insulin therapy; SAPT, 
sensor -augmented pump therapy  
 
Women meeting the above criteria will be trained to start SAPT mode  with the 
Medtronic Minimed 670G insulin pump and Guardian CGM and will co ntinue SAPT mode  
throughout the remainder of the 1st trimester of  pregnancy. Insulin adjustments will be 
made every 1- 7 days for the first 2 weeks. Frequency of insulin adjustments will be guided 
by participant experience with pump therapy, glucose levels,  level of insulin sensitivity, 
and willingness to contact study staff to ask for assistance, where (in general) women with 
less pump experience, a larger -than-expected number of glucose levels above or below  
ADA targets, dramatic insulin sensitivity, and unwilling to proactively contact study staff for assistance will be contacted more frequently for pump follow -up and adjustments as 
necessary. Women will be counseled on the maternal and fetal health risks in pregnancies 
associated with T1D, on the ability to reduce these risks with optimal glycemic control, on 
 Page 8 the ADA -recommended targets for glycemic control (HbA1c <6.5% prior to conception/1st 
trimester, HbA1c <6% as pregnancy progresses, fasting glucose target <95 mg/dL, 1- hour 
postprandial glucose target  <140 mg/dL, and 2 -hour postprandial glucose target <120 
mg/dL if these can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia), and on the need for 
multidisciplinary care in pregnancy (diabetes expert, CDE, RD, RN, social worker, high-
risk OB, eye provider, and other specialists as needed). Women with hypoglycemia 
unawareness will be given modified glycemic targets per ADA guidelines and the 
discretion of the clinical investigator. Women will be counseled on their individualized 
gestational weight gain goals based on guidelines from the Institute of Medicine and the 
American College of Gynecology, their body mass indices, lifestyle, and stage of 
pregnancy. They will be advised to contact the study team or study clinicians as needed to trouble shoot (e.g., for fur ther pump adjustments, for re- training about using the 670G 
system, etc.) and to report AEs and SAEs throughout the duration of the study.
 
Women will be counseled on nutrition goals in pregnancy and will be given 
personalized carbohydrate goals prior to tr aining. Table 1 provides general guidelines for 
appropriate gestational weight gain and changes to caloric intake based on pre -pregnancy 
body mass index and stage of pregnancy, however modifications will be made based on each woman’s individual situation. For example, women who are avid exercisers may have increased caloric intake goals. Guidelines are based on singleton pregnancies. 
Women will be given a dietary guidelines sheet describing general nutrition goals in 
pregnancies complicated by diabetes  and their personalized goals  (see appendix). 
Women will be asked to record all their food and beverage intake for 3 days (at least one 
weekday and at least one weekend day) at baseline (during the run- in phase and once  
each trimester ). Training will include in structions for recommended infusion set changes 
with the appropriate time intervals and insulin reservoir fills per the relevant insulin and device labels, with set changes to be done according to the appropriate label or more 
frequently (if required). While in the SAPT mode, the  suspend on low and suspend before 
low features will be disabled for the remainder or study. Women will be instructed to self -
monitor blood glucose per standard of care in terms of sites allowed for sampling and frequency of checks.  Women will be instructed to provide post- meal corrections as 
necessary, per standard of care. 
 
 
Table 1: Guidelines for Weight Gain and Changes to Caloric Intake throughout Pregnancy* 
Pre-
Pregnancy 
Weight 
Status and 
BMI (kg/m2) 1st Trimester  2nd Trimester  3rd Trimester  Total 
Pregnancy 
Weight 
Gain 
(pounds)  Weight 
Gain per 
Week 
(pounds)  Additional 
Calories 
per Day 
(kcal)  Weight 
Gain per 
Week 
(pounds)  Additional 
Calories 
per Day 
(kcal)  Weight 
Gain per 
Week 
(pounds)  Additional 
Calories 
per Day 
(kcal)  
Under weight 
<18.5  1.0-1.3 100-200 1.0-1.3 300-400 1.0-1.3 300-500 28-40 
Normal  
18.5-24.9 0.8-1.0 0-100 0.8-1.0 200-300 0.8-1.0 300-450 25-35 
Overweight 
25-29.9 0.3-0.5 0 0.5-0.7 150-200 0.5-0.7 200-350 15-25 
Obese  
>30 0.0-0.3 0 0.4-0.6 100-200 0.4-0.6 200-300 11-20 
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index.  
*Based on recommendations by the Institutes of Medicine and the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists46, 47. 
 Page 9  
At the beginning of the 2nd trimester, women will be randomized to HCL therapy or SAPT. 
Women who were on multiple daily injections at baseline will complete a minimum of 4 weeks of therapy in SAPT mode prior to being randomized. All women in the HCL arm will 
be trained on the HCL technology. For the first 2 weeks after training, women will be 
contacted daily for insulin adjustments (if applicable) and trouble -shooting of device 
wearing. Frequency of insulin adjustments will be guided by glucose levels, level of insulin 
resistance, and willingness to contact study staff to ask for assistance, where (in general) women with a larger -than-expected number of glucose levels above or below ADA 
targets, dramatic insulin resistance, and unwilling to proactively contact study staff for assistance will be contacted more frequently for pump follow -up and adjustments as 
necessary. For the HCL group, insulin adjustments will be changes to carbohydrate- to-
insulin doses and/or active insulin time. For the SAPT group, insulin adjustments will be changes to basal rates,  carbohydrate -to-insulin doses, correction factors, and/or active 
insulin time. The first 5 women in each arm of the study will be asked to complete 7- point 
profiles for 2 weeks after randomization.  Women will attend research and clinic visits at 
the Barbara Davis Center and Ohio State University every 4 weeks for routine diabetes care in pregnancy, downloading of study devices, and outcomes measurements. CGM, glucose meter, and pump downloads will also be reviewed throughout the study to ensure 
compliance with treatment assignment and the study protocol.
 Insulin pump adjustments 
will be made at least once every 4 weeks at face- to-face clinic/research visits and every 
week in between face- to-face visits, as per routine clinical care. When recommendations 
for pump adjustments are made during the interim weekly remote monitoring, we will 
verify that participants correctly entered the new settings. Acceptable forms of verification will include, verbal or written confirmation of new pump settings by the participant, a new 
upload of settings in CareLink, sending screen shots or pictures of the new settings from 
the participant’s pump. Women will be contacted every week in between research visits to 
inquire about open - and closed- loop wear (HCL group) and for pump adjustments as 
needed (both groups)  (See Table 2 and Figure 2) . As per routine clinical care, we will 
recommend that women start low- dose aspirin therapy  (81-162 mg orally daily)  between 
12 and 16  weeks gestations, to reduce the risk of preeclampsia, unless  there is a 
contraindication to aspirin therapy
48. At the start of the 2nd and 3rd trimesters, women will 
be given handouts describing conditions of which they should be aware for that trimester (see appendix).   
 
Table 2: Study Procedures for Subjects  
Visit‡ 1 2 3 4-5 6 7-14 15 16 
Study Week^  0-1 1 1-5 3-9 5-11 7-36 30-32 36-42 
Informed Consent and Eligibility 
Criteria for Run -in Phase  X        
Urine or Blood Pregnancy Test, 
Demographic Data, Medical History  X        
CGM sensor insertion, use, and log 
sheets (Run -In Phase)  X        
Eligibility Criteria  for Continuation   X       
Device insertion, training, insulin 
adjustments daily    X 
(SAPT)   X 
(HCL)   X  
Randomization (HCL and SAPT)      X    
 Page 10 Device wearing, pump adjustments 
and mode (open vs closed) weekly     X 
(SAPT)  X X X X 
Concomitant Medications and 
Adverse Events  X X X X X X X X 
Hemoglobin A1C  X  X X X X X X 
Vital Signs, Height, Weight, Physical 
Exam*  X  X X  X X X 
Lab tests† (A1C, creatinine, 24 -hour 
urine protein with creatinine, 
cholesterol panel, TSH, TPO ) X    X* X*  
X 
Serum , plasma , and urine  collection 
for biorepository  X  X* X* X X*  X 
Glucose Meter, Insulin Pump, and 
CGM Downloads  X X X X X X X X 
Questionnaires (Hypoglycemic Fear, 
SF-36, IDSS, GMSS, INSPIRE^^, 
Post-partum)  X   X*  
X*  
X** 
‡ Visit may take place  virtually  by phone or Zoom , if an in -person visit is not possible. 
Participant will download devices remotely.  Laboratory assessments can be collected by 
study site at a different time or can performed at commercial labs for virtual vis its. 
Biorepository specimens  can be collected at a different  time or may not be collected for 
virtual visits . Physical assessments will not be performed at virtual visits.  
^ Study week from visit 2 onwards depends on gestational age at enrollment, training 
period of 2- 4 weeks for SAPT depending on mode of insulin delivery at baseline, 
completion of 4 weeks of SAPT training for MDI patients prior to randomization, weeks 
remaining in 1st trimester prior to randomization, and date of delivery.  
* Once per trimester.  
† Not all tests performed at each visit.   
^^ SAPT and HCL  arms at baseline, but after randomization HCL arm only . 
** The only time point for the post -partum questionnaire.  
 
Figure 2: Study Design Scheme and Timelines  
 
Prior to  
Enrollment  
 
 
 
 
Visit 1A Screening  
   
 
 
 Visit 1B  
Run- In Phase  
  
 37 women to be screened for inclusion/exclusion criteria and sign informed 
consent.  
Initial assessments:  
1) Demographic data, 2) medical history, 3) physical exam and vital signs, 4) 
medication use, 5) urine pregnancy test and 24- hour urine protein with 
creatinine, 6) HbA1c, serum creatinine, lipid panel, TPO, and TSH, 7) 
collection for biorepository, 8) device downloads (glucose meter for all, CSII 
and CGM if applicable), 9) questionnaires [Hypoglycemia Fear Survey,  SF-
36, IDSS, GMSS, INSPIRE] 
 
Start Run- in Phase for One Week:  
1) Place sensor, 2) calibrate per instructions, 3) administer log sheet for self -
monitored glucose values (7/day), insulin doses, carbohydrates, and insulin, 
4) download CGM, 5) contact with st udy staff, 6) record food intake (3 days)  
 Page 11  
 
 
  
Visit 2A   
End of Run- In Phase  
 
 
Visit 2B  
Continuation  
   
Visit 3  
Device  
Insertion and  
Training  
 
 
 
 
 Visits 4  
Through 5  
Pregnancy Visits  
(monthly)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visit 6  
Randomization  
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 Follow -up assessment s 
1) Physical exam and vital signs, 2) medication use, 3) HbA1c, 4) device 
downloads (glucose meter for all, CSII and CGM if applicable), 5) log any adverse events  
 
Device Insertion and Training for SAPT therapy  
Follow -up asses sment s 
1) Physical exam (once per trimester) and vital signs (every visit), 2) medical history since last visit, 3) medication use, 3) HbA1c every 4 weeks, 4) 24-
hour urine protein with creatinine, serum creatinine, and TSH once per 
trimester, repeat lipid panel (3
rd trimester) 5) collection for biorepository once 
per trimester, 6) record food and beverage intake for three days (once per 
trimester), 7) device downloads (glucose meter, CSII and CGM), 8) 
questionnaires each trimester (Hypoglycemia Fear Survey , SF-36, IDSS, 
GMSS, INSPIRE), 9) log any adverse events  
 
         Follow -up assessments:  
1) Device downloads (glucose meter and CGM for all, CSII if applicable), 2) 
medication use, 3) return log sheets, 4) log any adverse events  
 
Determine Study Eligibility:  
Assign continuation status  
Interim  Analysis:  
Safety analysis after 5 subjects in 
each group complete the 2- weeks 
of glucose logs in 2nd trimester  
 Follow -up assessments:  
1) Device downloads (glucose meter and CGM for all, CSII if applicable), 2) medication use, 3) return log sheets, 4) log any adverse events  
 
Determine Study Eligibility:  
Assign randomization  status  
 Page 12   
Visits 7  
Through 14  
Pregnancy  
Visits  
(monthly)  
 
  
 
 
 
Visit 15  
3-7 Days  
Post-Partum  
 
 
 
 
Visit 16  
Post-Partum  
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
Study Device:  The Medtronic 670G insulin pump with Medtronic Guardian® 3 Sensor and 
Contour® Next Link blood glucose meter  (Medtronic, Northridge, CA) has 2 modes: open 
(manual) and closed (auto). The research team will set the necessary parameters for 
open mode (basal rates, glucose targets, active insulin time, carbohydrate -to-insulin 
ratios, and correction [sensitivity] factors) at baseline and throughout the study period. For 
closed mode, the team will set the active insulin time and carbohydrate- to-insulin ratios. 
The HCL system requires multiple days of data from open mode to personalize HCL control parameters in closed mode, therefore subjects will be started in open mode and 
transitioned to closed mode after 5 days. The HCL system algorithm utilizes sensor 
glucose to deliver microboluses every 5 minutes to achieve the target glucose level. The glucose target is fixed at 120 mg/dL but one can temporarily set the glucose target to 150 
mg/dL for exercise. The closed mode requires calibrations (optimally 3- 4 times daily) and 
announcements for carbohydrate consumption and exercise. Participants will be Final Analyses:  
1) Safety (SH and DKA),  
2) glycemic variables,  
3) psychological f actors,  
4) gestational outcomes  Follow -up assessment s 
1) Physical exam and vital signs, 2) medical history since last  visit and 
review of medical records from hospital admission for labor and delivery, 3) 
medication use, 3) HbA1c, TSH 4) collection for biorepository, 5)  device 
downloads (glucose meter, CSII and CGM), 6) record food and beverage 
intake for three days, 7) questionnaires (Hypoglycemia Fear Survey, SF -36, 
IDSS, GMSS, INSPIRE, Post -partum Survey), 8) log any adverse events  
 
         Follow -up assessment s 
1) Physical exam (once per trimester) and vital signs (every visit), 2) medical history since last visit, 3) medication use, 3) HbA1c every 4 weeks, 4) 24-
hour urine protein with creatinine, serum creatinine, and TSH once per trimester, 5) collection for biorepository once per trimester, 6) record food and beverage intake for three days (once per trimester), 7) device downloads (glucose meter, CSII and CGM), 8) questionnaires each trimester (Hypoglycemia Fear Survey, SF -36, IDSS, GMSS, INSPIRE), 9) log any 
adverse events  
 
         
Follow -up assessment s 
1) Physical exam and vital signs, 2) medical history since last visit and review of medical records from hospital admission for labor and delivery, 3) medication use, 3) HbA1c, 4) device downloads (glucose meter, CSII and CGM), 5) re -initiate HCL therapy (if applicable, HCL arm only), 6) log any 
adverse events  
 
         
 Page 13  counseled that finger stick blood glucose values must be checked and used for pre-meal 
and correction insulin boluses. Participants will be counseled that should they experience 
symptoms of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia, then should confirm with a finger stick blood 
glucose measurement and treat according to the value obtained. Patients can stop closed 
mode therapy at any time and will be given specific instructions on when this is 
appropriate. The system exits open mode for a variety of reasons (e.g., lost sensor signal, persist ent glucose readings below or above predesignated limits, pump occlusions, insulin 
delivery rates persistently below or above predesignated limits), which can be recorded. These parameters have been well- described in previous studies
19, 49, 50. For this study, 
glucose targets will be set at 80 -100 mg/dL during the day and 90- 110 mg/dL over night 
for both arms of the study during pregnancy. Bolus targets will be set at 90 -120 mg/dL 
during the day and 100 -130 mg/dL ove r night in the post -partum period.   
 
Subject Selection and Recruitment:  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:  Inclusion criteria will be women with T1D, pregnant within the 
first 11 weeks of gestation, 18 – 45 years of age, diabetes duration >1 year, using MDI or 
CSII therapy, willingness to routinely check at least 3 -8 blood glucose measurements per 
day, ability and willingness to receive routine and specialty obstetric care throughout the 
course of the study,  ability and willingness to adhere to the protocol including scheduled 
study visits for the duration of the pregnancy and early post -partum period, A1C 5.5 – 9%, 
willing to participate in the run -in phase and full study (if eligible), and able to speak, read, 
and write English. Exclusion criteria will be women with T2D, gestational diabetes, or 
other type of diabetes (e.g., MODY), pregnancy beyond gestational week 11 or higher, 
age <18 years, age >45 years, T1D duration <1 year, screening A1C <5.5% or >9%, use 
of basal insulin alone, use of bolus insulin alone,  extensive skin changes/diseases that 
inhibit wearing an infusion set, insulin pod, or sensor on normal skin, known severe 
allergic reaction to device adhesives within the last 3 months, unwillingness to use an 
insulin pump with tubing, unwillingness to be  randomized to study group, unwillingness to 
switch from MDI to CSII and CGM use (if applicable), unwillingness to switch from MDI or 
to change from current insulin pump to HCL system (if applicable), severe hypoglycemic 
episode requiring the assistance of a 3rd party within the last 6 months, non- compliance 
with run -in phase, inadequate access to a phone and computer (for downloading devices 
and web- based communications), intention to move out of state within the next year, a 
multiple pregnancy (2 or more fetuses), and any other condition determined by the PI 
which could make the subject unsuitable for the trial or impairs the validity of the informed consent.  
 
Insulin Pump Adjustments throughout the Study:  
Insulin pump adjustments will be made weekly based on routine clinical care for 
both the SAPT and HCL arms of the study. The following conditions will encompass unusual situations or study -specific conditions and how to address the insulin pump 
settings for each condition, in order to ensure that procedures are similar between the two study sites.  
There are times when women in the HCL arm will be unable to deliver an 
adequate insulin bolus using auto mode. Thus, they will be instructed to put in “fake carbohydrates” under these conditions, this means that they will administer a bolus putting 
carbohydrates into the pump even though they do not intend to consume these 
carbohydrates. Subjects will be asked to mark these episodes as “other” in the event 
marker of the insulin pump so that they can be identified.  These conditions and their 
justifications  are outlined in Table 3. 
 Page 14  
Table 3 Conditions for Administering “Fake Carbohydrates” in Auto Mode  
Condition  Justification  Amount of Fake 
Carbohydrates*  
Caffeine 
intake^  Caffeine can increase blood glucose levels b y increasing 
hepatic glucose production, decreasing glucose uptake in 
skeletal muscle, and increasing glucose counter -
regulatory hormone secretion51 Start: 10 grams per 
cup 
Range: 5- 15 gra ms 
per cup  
Glucose level 
of ≥135 mg/dL 
over night  Corrections for hyperglycemia with a bolus while in auto 
mode are determined by the pump and will always target 
a sensor glucose level of 15 0 mg/dL (though the 
automated basal target glucose remains 120 mg/dL) , 
thus a utomated corrections for mildly elevated glucose 
are often very small or even nothing.  Start: 5 grams  
Range: 2- 20 grams  
Post-prandial 
glucose ≥200 
mg/dL and no 
advised 
correction 
bolus ^^ An individual can put in a blood glucose measurement 
into the pump while in auto mode and ask to give a bolus 
of insulin to correct hyperglycemia, but sometimes the 
pump will not advise a bolus (e.g., active insulin on 
board). It may thus be necessary to provide an extra 
bolus to amend the hyperglycemia more quickly.  Start: 10 grams  
Range: 5- 20 grams  
Exercise that 
increases 
glucose to ≥180 
mg/dL^  Anaerobic exercise can raise blood glucose levels in 
some individuals because of metabolites that restrict 
glucose disposal and increases in glucose counter -
regulatory hormones52. Auto mode will automatically 
increase micro- bolus insulin administration, but it may not 
be done rapidly enough to mitigate hyperglycemia.  Start: 5 grams  
Range: 2- 20 grams  
*Exact amount to be determined by subject’s individual response to carbohydrate amount. 
If deemed safe by the investigator, s ubjects will be instructed to start with the amount 
denoted by “start” but the amount will be lowered or raised based on the individual 
response within the “range” indicated.  If the starting amount is t hought to be too 
aggressive, the investigator may recommend a different amount that is within the “Range” indicated above and alter as needed.  
^Applicable for both SAPT and HCL therapy.  
^^Subjects will be advised that timing should be 1 -2 hours after a meal and should not be 
repeated for 2 hours afterwards. If the reason for the hyperglycemia was under -estimation 
of carbohydrates, then subjects should bolus for half the amount of carbohydrates missed because the automated basal likely increased basal insuli n already in efforts to mitigate 
the hyperglycemia.  
  In the event of consumption of a high- fat/high -carbohydrate meal, like pizza or 
Mexican food, subjects will be instructed to divide the amount of the carbohydrate load into two boluses. The first carbohydrate bolus will be 50%  ± 15%  of the entire bolus, and 
the second carbohydrate bolus will be 50 ± 15 % of the entire bolus administered 1- 2 
hours later , per the discretion of the study clinician.  The distribution of the bolus for the 
first and second carbohydrate loads can be altered based on each subject’s individual 
response to the meal.  This mimics a “dual -wave bolus” that can be utilized in manual 
mode, which is an automated split bolus administered by the pump for certain meal 
conditions. While consumption of these types of meals will be discouraged in this 
population, this study does not provide food/drink to subjects. Thus, parameters for 
appropriate glucose management in real -world settings are important.  
 Page 15  For subjects in the HCL arm in auto mode, th e targeted glucose value is 120 
mg/dL with the insulin pump algorithm. However, subjects may temporarily raise the target 
to 150 mg/dL using the “temp target” function of the pump for a pre- determined amount of 
time. Conditions for using temp target and parameters of use are outlined in Table 4 . 
 
Table 4: Conditions for Entering “Temp Target” in Auto Mode  
Condition  Justification  Duration of Use*  
Exercise  Aerobic exercise causes blood glucose concentrations to 
fall in most people with type 1 diabetes52. While auto 
mode will automatically reduce micro- bolus insulin 
administration if sensor glucose values fall, it cannot take 
away active insulin from the circulation and thus may not 
act quickly enough to prevent hypogly cemia.  Start up to 6 0 
minutes prior to 
activity, continue 
throughout exercise 
bout, stop up to 2 
hours after exercise.  
Impending 
hypoglycemia 
(glucose ≤70 
mg/dL)  Auto mode will automatically reduce or shut off micro -
bolus insulin delivery when hypoglycemia is predicted, 
however it cannot take away active insulin from the 
circulation and thus may not act quickly enough to 
prevent hypoglycemia. In  the event that it is still 
delivering insulin, engaging “temp target” will reduce the amount of insulin delivered. In the event that insulin has 
been shut off, then engaging “temp target” for a 
prolonged period will allow micro- boluses to be smaller 
when automatic delivery resumes.  If sensor or blood 
glucose is 101- 120 
mg/dL and sensor 
glucose is trending 
down, start for 30 
minutes. If sensor or 
blood glucose is 
<100 mg/dL and 
sensor glucose is 
trending down, start 
for 45 minutes.  
Hypoglycemia 
(glucose ≤70 
mg/dL) for 
more than 15 
minutes  Auto mode does significantly reduce time spent in the 
hypoglycemic range in studies of non- pregnant 
populations19, but hypoglycemia may still occur. In the 
event that this occurs, subjects will be instructed to 
confirm with a blood glucose measurement, consume 
carbohydrates, and start a temp target. Engaging “temp 
target” for a prolonged period will allow micro- boluses to 
be smaller when automatic delivery res umes.  If blood glucose 
level is <50 mg/dL, 
start for 30 minutes. 
If blood glucose 
level is 51 -69 
mg/dL, start for 15 
minutes.  
*Exact duration to be determined by subject’s individual responses for each condition.  
 
Exercise is encouraged in pregnant women  with diabetes5, however it may induce 
hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia52. Subjects will be asked to mark exercise at the start and 
stop of each exercise bout using the “exercise” marker in the pump, regardless of study 
arm (SAPT or HCL), throughout the study. Subjects in the HCL arm may additionally 
require the use of the temp target for exercise- induced hypoglycemia (see Table 4 ) or 
administration of “fake carbohydrates” for exercise- induced hyperglycemi a (see Table 3 ). 
Subjects in the SAPT arm may use a “temp basal” mode for exercise. “Temp basal” is a 
mode wherein a user can tell the insulin pump to administer more or less insulin for a pre-
determined amount of time. Subjects who experience exercise- induced hypoglycemia will 
be instructed to start a temp basal rate of 50% less insulin 30 minutes prior to activity, 
continue it for the duration of activity, and 1 hour afterwards. Based on an individual’s 
response, she will be instructed to change the amount within the range of 10 to 100% less 
insulin, pre- exercise duration 15- 60 minutes, and post -exercise duration 0- 2 hours. 
Subjects who experience exercise -induced hyperglycemia will be instructed to start a 
temp basal rate of 20% more insulin at the start of activity, continue it for the duration of 
activity, and stop it at the end of activity. Based on an individual’s response, she will be 
 Page 16 instructed to change the amount within the range of 10 to 50% less more, pre- exercise 
duration 0 -30 minutes, and post -exercise duration 0- 1 hour.  
As preterm deliveries are common among pregnant women with diabetes1-4, 
between 30 and 33 weeks gestation women will be given an instruction sheet detailing 
how to manage their insulin pumps during labor and delivery, goals for glucose 
management during labor and delivery, and post -partum doses and instructions (see 
appendix). The study staff will provide the same instructions sheets to each woman’s 
obstetric team. We will also discuss wit h women their intended plan for post -study insulin 
delivery and glucose monitoring. Should they choose to continue therapy with a new 
insulin pump or glucose monitoring system, based on personal preference and health 
insurance coverage, we will work them t o initiate paperwork for the new devices around 
the time of labor and delivery. They will be given instructions for transitioning to the post -
study mode of insulin delivery and new glucose monitoring system (if applicable) at the final study visit. Women r andomized to HCL therapy will be instructed to switch from auto 
mode to manual mode (until they contact the study clinician) if they are given high- dose 
steroids, such as betamethasone, to induce fetal lung maturation. Women in either the 
SAPT or HCL arms of the study will be advised to contact the study provider for 
instructions on pump adjustments to reduce steroid- induced hyperglycemia. The study 
clinician will determine when auto mode should be re- started based on the relative 
stability of glucose level s following steroid administration.  
Women will be instructed to use manual mode for labor and delivery and until post -
partum insulin sensitivity stabilizes in the immediately post -partum period. Women in the 
SAPT arm will remain in manual mode throughout t he hospital admission if the hospital 
protocol allows it. Women in the HCL arm will switch to and then remain in manual mode 
throughout the hospital admission if the hospital protocol allows it. Women will return to 
clinic  (or have a visit remotely by phone or Zoom)  between 3 and 7 days post -partum: (1) 
for review of CGM, glucose meter, and pump downloads, (2) for pump adjustments to be 
made per the discretion of the clinical investigator, and (3) to re -initiate auto mode for 
women in the HCL arm per the di scretion of the clinical investigator. 
 
The study MD or PA will examine each woman’s glucose control prior to 
conception, during conception, and throughout pregnancy, along with A1C in the 3rd 
trimester, amount of gestational weight gain, and intention to breastfeed to determine the 
post-partum dosing. Breastfeeding often induces hypoglycemia32, thus post -partum dosing 
will be lower for women intending to breastfeed. Because numerous clinical factors are 
taken into account, post -partum dosing must be individualized for each women based on 
the basic parameters described above and the clinical judgement of the provider. Thus, Table 4 describes basic conditions with general guidelines for post -partum pump 
recommendations  based on changes from pre -pregnancy (or first trimester insulin pump 
settings, if know n). If the pre -pregnancy pump settings are unknown, pump settings from 
term or delivery will be reduced 50 -70% for the post -partum settings, with more 
aggressive changes in women who are intending to breastfeed.  Active insulin time ranges 
for each individual, but typically ranges from 3 -4 hours. The post -partum active insulin 
time recommended will be 3:15 hours ± 15 minutes  (HCL group) and 3:45 hours ± 15 
minutes (SAPT) , per the pr ovider’s clinical judgement. W e will recommend blood glucose 
targets over 90- 120 mg/dL during the day and 100- 130 mg/dL over night for the post -
partum doses.  
 
Figure 3:  Conditions with General Guidelines for Post -Partum Pump Dosing 
(Changes noted from pre- pregnancy settings, if known)  
 Page 17 
 
Abbreviations: CFs, correction factors; CIs, carbohydrate -to-insulin ratios; IOM, Institute of 
Medicine 
*IOM guidelines for weight gain during pregnancy  based on maternal body mass index46 
 
Hemoglobin A1C w ill be measured every 4 weeks in pregnancy and 4 -6 weeks 
post-partum. The A1C measurements will be those used for clinical point of care at each 
site.  These assays are DCCT aligned for both sites.  Routine blood and urine tests will be 
performed in all subjects in each trimester (see Table 2), and serum , plasma, and urine 
samples will be collected and stored at - 80 degrees as a biorepository for future assays. 
The Hypoglycemia Fear Questionnaire24,  Insulin Delivery Satisfaction Survey26, Glucose 
Monitoring Satisfaction Survey27, INSPIRE Questionnaire (HCL only)28, and Medical 
Outcomes Study (MOS) Short Form -36 (SF- 36)25 will be administered at baseline, once 
every trimester (6 -8 weeks, 18 -20 weeks, 30- 32 weeks) and 4- 6 weeks post -partum. We 
will screen for diabetes complications at baseline, once per trimester, and post -partum. 
Women will be administered a questionnaire inquiring about breastfeeding at their final 
post-partum visit. We will request records of the hospital admission at delivery to collect 
data about maternal and fetal outcomes.  Should subjects experience emotional distress 
during the pregnancy or post -partum period, a licensed clinical psychologis t will provide 
 Page 18  them with resources for therapy either at the Barbara Davis Center or closer to where they 
live per subject preference.  
We will assess safety of HCL therapy by collecting data about episodes of SH 
requiring the assistance of a 3rd party and time spent <54 mg/dL (SH range), DKA, and 
skin reactions throughout the study. After the first 5 participants in each group complete 2 
weeks of therapy after randomization, we will analyze interim data to compare SMBG measurements for time in the American Diabetes Association’s recommended pregnancy 
target ranges (fasting <95 mg/dL and 2- hour post -prandial <120 mg/dL) and compare 
groups (see Table 2). Bedtime values will be considered post -prandial if they are within 2 
hours of a meal ± 30 minutes but will be considered fasting (pre -meal) if they are >3.5 
hours after a meal. If the average fasting blood glucose levels are 20% higher and the 
average 2- hour post -prandial values are 20% higher in the HCL arm compared to the 
SAPT arm, this would be considered worsening of glycemic control in the HCL arm. In the event that these interim analyses demonstrate worsening of glycemic control in the HCL 
arm, the study would be suspended until further investigation into the safety of the 
participants is undertaken.
 After  the first 5 participants in each group have completed the 
2nd trimester, we will analyze the interim data and compare episodes of SH between 
groups to ensure no increased risk of SH with HCL therapy (see Table 1). Episodes of SH will be used for the interim analysis as SH events can be life -threatening for pregnant 
women and their fetuses.  
 
Virtual (Remote) Visits:  For the duration of the study, in- person visits are the preferred 
mode of conducting study visits. However, in the event that a study visit cannot take place in-person, a virtual visit by phone or a HIPAA -compliant video platform (e.g., Zoom) will be 
accepted. Examples of reasons why a virtual visit may be required include, but are not limited to, a participant or a research staff member has a confirmed or suspected COVID -
19 infection, a participant or research staff member is required to quarantine for COVID -
19 infection or exposure to someone with a COVID -19 infection, participant is required to 
be on bed rest per instructions of a medical provider (e.g., obstetrician), and weather 
conditions prohibit safe travel to the study site (e.g., snow storm). The mode of study visit 
should be noted. Participants will be required to upload study devices to CareLink for each 
virtual study visit. Vital sign s will not be performed. A physical exam, if required for that 
study visit, will not be performed. Laboratory assessments can be performed at the study 
site at a different time or at a commercial lab. A commercial laboratory assessment will be 
noted as a protocol deviation. Laboratory assessments collected out of the study window 
time frame will be considered protocol deviations. Biorepository samples will either be 
collected at the study site at a different time or will not be collected for that study visi t (if 
required). As biorepository collections are optional procedures, if the specimens are not 
collected they will be considered missed samples and will not be considered as  protocol 
deviations.  Study supplies can be picked up at the study site by the par ticipant at a 
different time o r will be mailed to the participant. In the event that handouts are due to be 
given to the participant  at the time of the study visit, they can be e- mailed or sent in the 
mail to the participant per her preference.  
 
Data Colle ction and Analyses:  All glycemic data will be collected at each study visit. All 
other data will be collected at enrollment, 1st trimester ( 6-8 weeks gestation), 2nd trimester 
(18-20 weeks gestation), 3rd trimester (3 0-32 weeks gestation), and post -partum (4-6 
weeks after delivery) except where otherwise indicated. Subjects enrolled between 8 
weeks 1 day gestation and 11  weeks gestation who continue in the study after the run- in 
phase, will be allowed to complete the 1st trimester study assessments at the c ompletion 
 Page 19  of the run -in phase (outside the 6 -8 week gestational time point). Each category of data 
and the pertinent specific aim (SA) to which it applies are outlined below.  
 
(1) Screening (enrollment only):  We will screen subjects with a history, physical ex am, and 
urine or blood pregnancy test. Gestational age will be calculated based on the last 
menstrual period (or by viewing records of a uterine ultrasound). Subjects meeting inclusion/exclusion criteria will be invited to participate in the run- in phase. In our 
experience most women present to their diabetes provider for care during pregnancy prior to getting an ultrasound with an obstetrician. Eight to 11 weeks is the time frame 
when ultrasound dating is most accurate, but in our previous study 76.7% (33/ 43) of 
women presented prior to 8 weeks gestation. Thus, the LMP will be used for determining 
initial eligibility based on inclusion/exclusion criteria. Once an ultrasound is obtained, it 
will be used to determine the final gestational ages for each study visit.  
 
(2) Run-in Phase: Subjects will wear the Medtronic Guardian CGM sensor continuously 
for 7 consecutive days. Subjects will calibrate per device instructions. Subjects will record self-monitoring blood glucose (SMBG) measurements (before meals, 2 hours after meals, 
and at bedtime), insulin doses, carbohydrate intake, and exercise on standardized log 
sheets. Subjects will be asked to download devices (glucose meter, insulin pump, and 
CGM) once during the run- in phase. The research staff will contact each subject after 2 
days to ensure that they have access to communication methods in between research visits. Subjects will fill out a questionnaire about adverse reactions to device adhesives 
and wearing, as well as willingness to proceed further in the study . 
 
(3) Safety Factors (SA 1):  Subjects will be asked at each visit if they had any episodes of 
SH requiring the assistance of a 3rd party, DKA, adverse skin reactions, or 
hospitalizations since the last study visit. DKA in pregnancy will be defined as positive symptoms (nausea, vomiting, malaise, polyuria, polydipsia, abdominal pain, change in mental status) with positive laboratory findings (glucose >300 mg/dL, arterial pH <7.3, 
anion gap >12 mEq/L, elevated blood or urine ketone levels, serum bicarbonate <15 
mEq/L) or medical documentation of DKA by a healthcare facility.  Subjects will be 
instructed to contact study staff immediately should any of these events occur in between study visits. We will request records of any urgent care visits, emergency room visi ts, and 
hospital admissions that occurred. Time spent <54 mg/dL  (SH range) will be collected 
through CGM data.  
 
(4) Glycemic Factors (SA 2): Insulin pumps, glucose meters, and CGMs will be 
downloaded at each visit. Data collected will be used to calculate perc ent of time spent in 
glucose ranges (hypoglycemic: <54 and <63 ; in range: 63- 140 (per recommendations 
from the International Consensus on Time in Range53); hyperglycemic: >140, and >180 
mg/dL), mean glucose ± standard deviation, J index, High Blood Glucose Index (HBGI), 
Low Blood Glucose Index (LBGI), duration of hypoglycemic episodes, Mean Amplitude of 
Glycemic Excursions (MAGE), and Continuous Overall Net Glycemic Action (CONGA n). 
Subjects will download from study devices weekly from home using CareLink® Clinical 
Software. At study visits and weekly in between study visits, subjects will provide data on frequency and duration of open -mode and closed- loop HCL mode. Data will be confirmed 
through HCL pump downloads, along with the reasons HCL mode was exited.  
 
(5) Psychological Factors (SA 2 and 3):  
 Page 20  (a) Fear of hypoglycemia: We will measure fear with the Hypoglycemia Fear Survey24 
which is a psychometric instrument wherein subjects rank frequency of 10 behaviors and 
17 worries based on a 5- point Likert scale.  
(b) Quality of life (QOL): We will measure QOL over the past 4 weeks with the MOS Short -
Form 36 (SF- 36)25 which uses a multi- item scale from 36 questions to assess 8 health 
concepts (physical functioning, physical role, emotional role, pain, general health, vitality, 
social functioning, and emotional well -being)54. 
(c) Device acceptability: We will measure HCL and SAPT device acceptability with the 
Insulin Delivery Satisfaction Survey (IDSS)26 and the Glucose Monitoring Satisfaction 
Survey (GMSS)27 in both the SAPT and HCL arms of the PICLS Study. The IDSS 
provi des a 14- item questionnaire for people with T1D to assess patient attitudes and 
perspectives about insulin- related devices. The IDSS provides a total score, as well as 
subscales related to devices being effective, burdensome, and inconvenient26. The 
GMSS asks 15 questions about glucose monitoring device satisfaction and provides a 
total score and subscales related to device openness, emotional burden, behavioral 
burden, and trust27. We will measure HCL device acceptability with the INSPIRE 
Questionnaire28. The INSPIRE Questionnaire provides a 22 -item questionnaire for people 
with diabetes to assess patient thoughts and feelings specifica lly about how automated 
insulin delivery systems, such as HCL therapy, affect their worries/concerns, burdens, 
and management of diabetes28. 
 
(6) Maternal and Fetal Outcomes (SA 4):  We will administer a survey we previously 
developed for the CGM pregnancy study in the preliminary data section. It inquires about 
breastfeeding. We will obtain records of the hospital admission at delivery for mother and 
baby to collect data about the labor and delivery process, maternal and fetal 
complications before and after delivery, baby’s anthropometrics at birth (weight and length), and baby’s age at delivery. 
 
Data will be entered into REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture). REDCap is an 
internal secure, computerized database system at the University of Colorado Denver. This 
system allows data entry, questionnaire building, data exportation to statistical packages, 
and is HIPAA compliant.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  
A Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) with providers not connected with the 
study will oversee safety data throughout the study by convening once each quarter to 
review adverse events and severe adverse events. If after the first 6 months, the DSMB 
notes no increased harm from study participation then ongoing meetings will convene 
once every 6 months thereafter. It will also review stopping rules based on the number of 
SH events  and other criteria as below (Table 5), either for  an individual  or for the total  
study group, and provide recommendations about study continuation.  
This study’s risks are minimized by use of extensive inclusion and exclusion 
criteria and close monitoring of research subjects.  The key personnel are qualified and experienced in all of the study procedures.  We will reduce the risk of severe 
hypoglycemia by setting a low glucose alarm of 80 mg/dL for women with hypoglycemia 
unawareness and 70 mg/dL for all other women, rather than relying on the mandatory 55 
mg/dL low glucose alarm pre- set by the Medtronic 670G system. We will also ask each 
participant to keep an active glucagon kit if she already possesses one or to get an active 
glucagon kit if she does not have a kit or if it expired. Further, we will instruct all subjects in the HCL arm of the study that should they develop conditions that significantly reduce 
 Page 21 insulin requirements, such as hyperemesis gravidarum, adrenal insufficiency, or placental 
insufficiency, that they should go into manual mode and contact the study provider for 
further instructions /pump adjustments . We will reduce the ris k of DKA and excessive post -
prandial glucose excursions by setting a high glucose alarm of 180 mg/dL for all women.  
We will also instruct subjects to contact the study provider if they have  symptoms of DKA, 
elevated glucose  that does not resolve with appropriate treatment , and moderate or 
severe ketones on testing.  
The collaborators and consultants provide necessary expertise for ensuring the 
safety of subjects and the integrity of the study procedures. We will also use a volunteer 
Safety Officer to oversee  the study’s safety. The Safety Officer will be an independent 
investigator (not a member of the research team) with experience in similar clinical 
research. S/he will review reports of adverse events, recruitment and enrollment statistics 
(ethnicity and numbers of subjects disqualified, withdrawn, randomized, and who 
completed the study) every 6 months. This information will be reviewed during meetings 
with study investigators and recorded by the Safety Officer in meeting minutes.   
 Table 5: Stopping Rule s for Individual Subjects and for the Study  
 State of the 
Study  Conditions to Meet for Stopping Rules  
Criteria for 
Individual 
Stopping Rules  Pre-
Randomization  • Subject is unable to demonstrate safe use of the study 
CGM during the run- in phase, as judged by  the 
investigator  
• Subject fails to demonstrate compliance with using the 
study CGM during the run- in phase, as defined in the 
protocol  
Pre- and Post -
Randomization  • Significant protocol violation or non -compliance  
• Any severe hypoglycemic event related to t he use of 
the HCL system*  
• Three severe hypoglycemic events from any cause  
• DKA unrelated to an infusion site failure and related to 
the use of the HCL system**  
• Two episodes of DKA regardless of the cause  
• Four pump occlusions  
• Decision by the investigator or the sponsor that 
termination of study participation is in the subject’s best 
medical interest  
• Allergic reaction to insulin  
• Severe allergic reaction to adhesive surface of the 
infusion set or glucose sensor that prohibits further use 
of the HCL system  
Criteria for Total 
Study Stopping 
Rules  Pre-
Randomization  • Four subjects are unable to demonstrate safe use of 
the study CGM during the run- in phase, as judged by 
the investigator  
Pre- and Post -
Randomization  • Seven  severe hypoglycemic events in the total cohor t 
in at least two  different subjects  
• Four DKA episodes in at least two different subjects  
• Decision by the investigator or the sponsor that termination of study participation is in the subjects’ best 
medical interest  
Abbreviations: CGM, continuous glucose monitor; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; HCL, hybrid 
closed- loop.  
 Page 22 * A severe hypoglycemic event related to the use of the HCL system refers to the 
following device deficiencies: CGM transmission failure of low sensor glucose values, an 
absence of low -glucose alarms when the low -alert function is turned on, or delivery of the 
maximum basal rate when the sensor glucose is falling that results in a severe 
hypoglycemic event.  
** DKA unrelated to an infusion site failure and related to the use of the HCL system ref ers 
to the following device deficiencies: CGM transmission failure of high sensor glucose values, an absence of high- glucose alarms when the high- alert function is turned on, or 
delivery of the minimum basal rate when the sensor glucose is rising and there is 
adequate intake of carbohydrates by the research participant that results in a DKA event.  
 
Device -related adverse events will be monitored and addressed promptly. These 
include:  
1) a severe hypoglycemic event occurring from CGM transmission failure of low  sensor 
glucose values (SAPT and HCL), an absence of low -glucose alarms when the low -
alert function is turned on (SAPT and HCL), or delivery of the maximum basal rate 
when the sensor glucose is falling (HCL only).  
2) hypoglycemia <54 mg/dL lasting >20 minutes  that did not result in the need for 3
rd 
party assistance but that occurred from CGM transmission failure of low sensor 
glucose values (SAPT and HCL), an absence of low -glucose alarms when the low -
alert function is turned on (SAPT and HCL), or delivery of the maximum basal rate 
when the sensor glucose is falling (HCL only).  
3) an episode of DKA unrelated to an infusion site failure and related to CGM 
transmission failure of high sensor glucose values (SAPT and HCL), an absence of 
high- glucose alarms when the high -alert function is turned on (SAPT and HCL), or 
delivery of the minimum basal rate when the sensor glucose is rising (HCL only) and 
there is adequate intake of carbohydrates by the research participant.  
4) an episode of DKA related to the absence of an inf usion site occlusion alarm (SAPT 
and HCL) and there is adequate intake of carbohydrates by the research participant.  
5) hyperglycemia >300 mg/dL lasting >2 hours that did not result in DKA and was not 
from an infusion site failure but that occurred from CGM t ransmission failure of high 
sensor glucose values (SAPT and HCL), an absence of high- glucose alarms when 
the high- alert function is turned on (SAPT and HCL), or delivery of the minimum 
basal rate when the sensor glucose is rising (HCL only) and there is adequate 
intake of carbohydrates by the research participant.  
6) hyperglycemia >300 mg/dL lasting >2 hours that did not result in DKA but that 
occurred from an infusion site failure and an absence of an infusion site occlusion 
alarm (SAPT and HCL) and there is adequate intake of carbohydrates by the 
research participant.  
Should any of these criteria be met, the participant will be given the appropriate 
replacement device(s) (e.g., insulin pump, transmitter, or sensor). Participants in the HCL 
arm will be instruc ted to exit auto mode until replacement device(s) are provided and the 
malfunction is investigated.  
 
A Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will also be established and led by the 
Safety Officer.  The DSMB will be comprised of the Safety Officer (from t he University of 
Colorado), and additional faculty members from outside the BDC (Barbara Davis Center 
for Diabetes at the University of Colorado) or OSU (Ohio State University) who are 
selected by the JAEB Center for Health Research. The Juvenile Diabetes Research 
Foundation (JDRF) is funding this study. JDRF created an Artificial Pancreas Project 
 Page 23  Consortium, where artificial pancreas projects include HCL therapy and closed- loop 
therapy, which is coordinated by the JAEB Center for Health Research. JAEB is a n 
organization that conducts diabetes -related human clinical trials. This partnership allows 
investigators with artificial pancreas projects funded by JDRF to utilize resources from the 
JAEB Center for Health Research without added cost to the investigator. For this study, 
the JAEB Center for Health Research has provided feedback for the Investigational Device Exception application submitted to the Food and Drug Administration, feedback on 
the statistical analyses, and will work with the study PI and JDRF t o form the DSMB.  It 
will be notified immediately of severe adverse events (SAEs). It will review the details of the SAE and the study protocol to determine if the SAE was possibly, definitely, or not 
related to study procedures. It will advise the study PI of its determination and of corrective action that needs to take place (if at all). The DSMB will be notified of SAEs 
within 1 business day. They will review the details of the SAE and the study protocol to 
determine if the SAE was possibly, definitely, or not related to study procedures. It will 
advise the study PI of its determination and of corrective action that needs to take place (if 
at all). The study PI will manage and report the SAEs and adverse events (AEs) to the 
IRB. Additionally, the DSMB will conduct phone or video conference calls every quarter to 
every 6 months to review all the SAEs and AEs that have taken place. The DSMB will also review the planned interim analyses of data (severe hypoglycemic events) after the first 
trimester in the fir st 5 participants of each group.  
There are study MDs at each study site who will closely oversee and monitor the 
study. The study PI will continually review all adverse events during screening, data 
collection, and insulin delivery with SAPT or HCL therapy. Subjects who fail screening will be informed of the reasons for failure. Adverse events will be reported to the Safety 
Officer as they occur for each individual occurrence and monthly in aggregate form, as 
well as documented by standard IRB procedures and reported to them during the annual 
protocol review. All serious adverse events will be immediately reported to the Safety 
Officer, COMIRB, OSU’s IRB (if applicable), and JDRF u sing the COMIRB Serious 
Adverse Report Event (SAE) form. The PI will sign each  SAE and include a copy of the 
signed consent form of the subject with relevant sections highlighted. Serious adverse events are defined as death, life threatening injuries, inpatient hospitalization (other than 
that related to planned labor and delivery),  persistent or significant disability/incapacity, 
and congenital anomaly/birth defect. All serious adverse events determined by COMIRB 
to be definitely, probably, or possibly related to the study or intervention will be addressed 
by COMIRB as appropriate with actions including but not limited to: protocol modification, 
consent form modification, modification of the timetable for continuing review 
requirements, new study enrollment suspension, or study suspension or termination. If the 
study is suspended or terminated, prompt reporting to the JDRF  will be provided. Events 
not requiring suspension or termination shall be reported during the annual progress 
report.  
 
D.   Description, Risks and Justification of Proc edures and Data Collection Tools: 
 
Risks: 
Weari ng insulin infusion sets and sensors can cause adverse skin reactions such as 
pain at the site of infusion set or sensor insertion. The adhesive pads may cause skin 
erythema for 1 to 2 days or more. An allergic reaction to 1 or more parts of CSII and CGM devices may occur which can be mild, moderate, or severe (rare). In rare cases, an 
infection at the infusion set or sensor site may occur. In rare cases, the sensor or needle may break inside the body and would require a minor surgical procedure to remove i t. 
 Page 24 These risks are likely during the run- in phase, but individuals unable to wear devices will 
not continue on. We also screen out individuals with a history of serious skin reactions to 
adhesives. These issues remain possible as the study continues, but w ill be less likely in 
those women able to be randomized.  
Severe hypoglycemia is defined as a hypoglycemic episode requiring assistance of a 
3rd party or hospitalization with or without an SMBG. The risk of severe hypoglycemia is 
high in pregnancy, especial ly in the 1st trimester. It will be reported as a severe adverse 
event (SAE).  A hypoglycemic event “requiring assistance” is determined when the subject 
is unable to treat the event on her own.  We have determined our sample size based on 
the ability to c ompare rates of severe hypoglycemia between groups. Severe 
hypoglycemia can lead to coma, seizure, or death, however the likelihood of these 
extreme adverse events is low. Any untoward event resulting in hospitalization, extension 
of hospitalization, death , or threat of death will also be considered an SAE.  SAEs will be 
reported to the Drug Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).  
Medtronic CGM systems may experience reduced sensor accuracy  (falsely elevated 
glucose levels)  if the user takes acetaminophen- containing products. The level of sensor 
glucose inaccuracy may vary by participant and may depend on the quantity of 
acetaminophen administered. Therefore, all participants will be advised to mark 
acetaminophen use on paper and in the insulin pump as an “Injection” event marker. They 
will also be advised to rely on fingerstick glucose measurements for 12 hours after 
acetaminophen use for insulin dosing.  
Pregnancies complicated by diabetes are inherently high- risk for adverse outcomes 
such as fetal loss, gestational  hypertensive disorders, congenital malformations, abnormal 
fetal size, cesarean delivery, neonatal jaundice, neonatal hypoglycemia, and the like. 
SAPT has been used in pregnancy in previous studies and does not appear to 
significantly increase these risks  in most cases. We do not anticipate that the HCL therapy 
used in this study will significantly increase these risks either.  A viable pregnancy is 
defined as a pregnancy with detectable blood or urine human chorionic gonadotropin 
(hCG) level  and confirmati on of a fetal heart beat by Doppler ultrasound. Fetal loss is 
defined as loss of a viable pregnancy.  
There is a risk of a breach in confidentiality. Thus, a confidential subject database will 
be established to maintain study data. Data will be entered into REDCap (Research 
Electronic Data Capture). REDCap is an internal secure, computerized database system at the University of Colorado Denver. This system allows data entry, survey/questionnaire 
building, data exportation to statistical packages, and is HIPA A compliant. Each subject 
will be assigned an identification number, which will be used to code and identify all of that subject’s records. This will avoid the continual use of subject names. REDCap surveys 
can be sent to study participants via e -mail for direct input into the database. All study 
data will be locked in the PIs’ offices and all relevant computer study files will be input on 
staff computers, which are password protected and contain encryption software. Data 
storage will be take place on a sec ured server maintained by the University of Colorado. 
The server is backed up nightly and a copy of the back -up file is kept off site in a secure 
facility. Data access will be limited to study personnel. Study results may be presented in 
the form of poster s, abstracts, oral presentations, or publications at academic meetings or 
in journals. In all forms of study result reporting, subject identification will not be disclosed. 
A study subject may access his/her protected health information at any time by requesting 
said information in writing of the investigator. The investigative team has been trained in 
IRB and HIPAA compliance issues and will maintain confidentiality and protect health 
information. The above -stated procedures have been highly effective in p reventing 
 Page 25  breaches of patient confidentiality for the prior and current research studies in which the 
PI has been and continues to be involved.  
All AEs, reported spontaneously by the subject, as well as those noted by the 
investigator or study staff, regar dless of seriousness, severity or expectedness will be 
recorded on source documents from the time of obtaining the informed consent.   
 
Protection Against Risks:  
Consenting Procedures:  
Subjects will be recruited from the BDC and OSU diabetes clinics, which  both contain 
experts in gestational diabetes care (site PIs). Some subjects may be referred to each center by maternal fetal medicine specialists who are aware of the study, but only the site PIs will be allowed to determine possible eligibility for study  participation. Subjects will 
have to be patients at each center to be included in the study. Subjects meetings initial inclusion/exclusion criteria will be invited to sign informed consent. They will be taken to a 
private room where the consent form will be discussed with them in detail, they will be 
asked to state their understanding of the study procedures, and will be asked if they have 
any inquiries. All questions will be answered. If they do not feel comfortable to sign the 
consent form at that point,  they will be allowed to take it home and re -read it, then contact 
us with any further questions and with their decision about enrollment. All subjects will be 
provided a copy of the signed consent form.  
Site PIs will determine initial eligibility for stud y inclusion. They will go over the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria with each potential subject and discuss the study 
procedures with women interested in participating. Private consenting procedures will be performed by trained research staff (PIs or professional research assistants). Completed, 
signed consent forms will be kept in their original form by study staff and a copy will be 
provided to subjects. The date of consent procedure completion will be recorded in 
REDCap.     
 
Safety Monitoring:  
This study’s risks are minimized by use of extensive inclusion and exclusion 
criteria and close monitoring of research subjects.  The key personnel are qualified and 
experienced in all of the study procedures.  The collaborators and consultants provide 
necessary expertise for ensuring the safety of subjects and the integrity of the study procedures. We will also use a volunteer Safety Officer to oversee the study’s safety. The 
Safety Officer will be an independent investigator (not a member of the research team) 
with experience in similar clinical research. S/he will review reports of adverse events, 
recruitment and enrollment statistics (ethnicity and numbers of subjects disqualified, withdrawn, randomized, and who completed the study) every 6 months. This informati on 
will be reviewed during meetings with study investigators and recorded by the Safety 
Officer in meeting minutes.  A Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will also be 
established and led by the Safety Officer.  The DSMB will be comprised of the Safety  
Officer  (from the University of Colorado), and additional faculty members from outside the 
BDC or OSU who are selected by the JAEB Center for Health Research.  It will be notified 
immediately of severe adverse events (SAEs). It will review the details of the SAE and the study protocol to determine if the SAE was possibly, definitely, or not related to study procedures. It will advise the study PI of its determination and of corrective action that 
needs to take place (if at all). The DSMB will be notified of  SAEs within 1 business day. 
They will review the details of the SAE and the study protocol to determine if the SAE was possibly, definitely, or not related to study procedures. It will advise the study PI of its 
determination and of corrective action that  needs to take place (if at all). The study PI will 
 Page 26  manage and report the SAEs and AEs to the IRB. Study staff will also identify, evaluate, 
and report anticipated and unanticipated device -related AEs . Additionally, the DSMB will 
conduct phone or video conference calls every quarter to review all the SAEs and AEs that have taken place. The DSMB will also review the planned interim analyses of data 
(especially glucose <63 m/dL) after the first trimester in the first 5 participants of each 
group.  
There are study MDs at each study site who will closely oversee and monitor the 
study. The study PI will continually review all adverse events during screening, data 
collection, and insulin delivery with SAPT or HCL therapy. Subjects who fail screening will 
be informed of the reasons for failure. Adverse events will be reported to the Safety 
Officer as they occur for each individual occurrence and monthly in aggregate form, as well as documented by standard IRB procedures and reported to them during the annual 
protocol  review. All serious adverse events will be immediately reported to the Safety 
Officer, COMIRB, and OSU’s IRB (if applicable) using the COMIRB Serious Adverse 
Report Event (SAE) form. The PI will sign each SAE and include a copy of the signed 
consent form of the subject with relevant sections highlighted. Serious adverse events are 
defined as death, life threatening injuries, inpatient hospitalization (other than that related 
to planned labor and delivery), persistent or significant disability/incapacity, and congenital anomaly/birth defect. All serious adverse events determined by COMIRB to be definitely, 
probably, or possibly related to the study or intervention will be addressed by COMIRB as 
appropriate with actions including but not limited to: protocol modification, consent form 
modification, modification of the timetable for continuing review requirements, new study enrollment suspension, or study suspension or termination. If the study is suspended or terminated, prompt reporting to the  JDRF (the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, 
who is sponsoring this study)  will be provided. Events not requiring suspension or 
termination shall be reported during the annual progress report.  
 Data Monitoring  
Data will be collected and managed using REDCap (Research Electronic Data 
Capture).  The database is hosted at the University of Colorado Denver Development and Informatics Service Center (DISC), which will be a central location for data processing and 
management. This server has a high level of security, controlled access, daily back -up, 
and long- term retention of back -up files.   All members of the BDC research team in this 
study have individual computers that are part of the institution network with institutional oversight of security.  Field and range checks  will be programmed to minimize data entry 
errors.  Data distribution will be checked periodically and outliers verified; missing data will be tracked and checked.  
 
Justification of Procedures:  
There may not be benefits to subjects. However, CSII and CGM therapies have both 
been shown to have benefits over MDI and SMBG, respectively, thus for women who were not on these technologies prior to study inclusion, they will likely experience better 
glucose control and potential better gestational outcomes.      
Both CSII and CGM therapies have been investigated in pregnancies associated with 
diabetes, as has SAPT. Thus, the SAPT arm incurs no extra risks. Only investigational HCL systems have ever been studied in pregnancy before now. The knowledge gained 
from a s tudy examining a device being used by the public but in a new capacity is 
extremely valuable. The subjects would receive the same, high- quality care throughout 
pregnancy regardless of study participation, but would additionally be under closer 
supervision because of the new therapy being used. This supervision would include 
 Page 27 prompt reporting of AEs and SAEs to the study MDs, DSMB, and IRBs, as well as interim 
safety analyses. Thus, the risks to the subjects would be minimized as much as possible, 
while the k nowledge gained would be high impact and extremely important.     
Given the importance of tight glycemic control in pregnancy, there are risks of HCL 
therapy that has never been studied during pregnancy. However, subjects will get 
additional education and personalized nutrition guidelines for carbohydrate counting and 
adhering to ADA guidelines for nutrition with limitations on carbohydrate content for each 
meal and snack to limit post -prandial excursions. In addition, they will be in contact with 
research staff who are also experienced clinicians every week during the pregnancy to 
change pump settings, optimize care, and reduce extreme glycemic variations that could 
have adverse effects. Finally, in studies outside of pregnancy, HCL therapy has been shown t o improve glucose control and reduce hypoglycemia over CSII alone and SAPT, 
thus we feel that under controlled conditions, HCL therapy has great potential to have similar effects in pregnancy, which would outweigh the potential risks.     
 
E.   Potential S cientific Problems:   
 
Potential Pitfall #1: The HCL system does not allow a lower glucose target than 120 
mg/dL. An estimated average glucose of 120 mg/dL correlates to an A1C of 5.8%, which 
is within the recommended target range in pregnancy5. A study among women with T1D 
using CGM found that they spent ~8 hours/day with a glucose >140 mg/dL and ~3.25 
hours/day with glucose <70 mg/dL in each trimester55. Both extremes are detrimental. 
Maternal hypoglycemia is one of the major barriers to achieving optimal glucose control. Maternal SH can lead to coma, road traffic  accidents, and death
30. Animal studies link 
hypoglycemia early in gestation with growth retardation and congenital anomalies56. In 
multiple studies demonstrating good overall glucose control among women with diabetes, rates of infant LGA and macrosomia remained high
20, 56- 59. This phenomenon may result 
from maternal hypoglycemia leading to treatment with carbohydrate consumption, fetal hyperinsulinemia, and then excess fetal growth
60. Moreover, there is evidence that an 
intervention that improves TIR (even without a large difference in A1C) can improve maternal and fetal outcomes
57. Studies in non -pregnant groups using the 670G system 
demonstrate little hypoglycemia among adults (3.4% time ≤70 and 0.6% ≤50 mg/dL) with 
increased TIR and decreased hyperglycemia19, thus this system will potentially also 
improve overall maternal glucose cont rol and reduce adverse pregnancy outcomes. 
Benefits of HCL therapy will likely outweigh risks. The study protocol includes collection of 
safety measurements throughout and review of these data through an independent 
DSMB. Should evidence arise that HCL is associated with significant harm, directive 
measures will be taken immediately.  
 
Potential Pitfall #2: The HCL system may not remain in auto mode continuously. The HCL system is designed to leave HCL mode under certain conditions that would affect its 
efficacy (e.g., prolonged loss of sensor signal). Thus, all subjects randomized to HCL 
therapy will also have regular adjustments made to their basal patterns and bolus wizard 
settings for the manual mode. Manual mode is equivalent to SAPT. Data will be collec ted 
weekly to assess frequency and etiology for leaving HCL mode. HCL exits due to subject behaviors will be addressed promptly (e.g., not wearing the sensor). A previous study 
done under free -living conditions wherein patients had significant alternations  in glucose 
from exercise, medication changes, and the like showed that participants remained in 
HCL mode ~88% of the time
19. Subjects in this proposal who have HCL mode enabled 
≤80% of the time will be identified s o that corrective measures can be taken (e.g., if HCL 
 Page 28  is exited from under -calibrations then the subject will be reminded that she must calibrate 
3-4 times each day).  
 
F.   Data Analysis Plan:   
 
Statistical Analysis Plan:  
Data will be blinded to the study statistician. For the interim safety analysis, a fter 
the first 5 participants in each group have completed the 1st trimester, we will analyze the 
interim data to compare episodes of SH between groups to ensure no increased risk of 
SH with HCL therapy . Episodes of SH will be used for the interim analysis as SH events 
can be life- threatening for pregnant women and their fetuses.  If interim safety analyses 
demonstrate no increased harm in either group, then the statistician will remain blinded 
until the end of the study. If the interim safety analyses demonstrate increased harm in one group  necessitating evaluation of whether the study should be stopp ed, then the 
statistician will be unblinded at that point.
 
To address Specific Aim 1, we will compare  percent of time spent in the SH range 
of <54 mg/dL  on CGM  (primary outcome)  using a non- inferiority t -test with a margin of 
1%.  Counts of  DKA and adverse skin reactions (secondary outcomes) will be compared 
between groups (HCL vs. SAPT) using t -tests for normally  distributed variables and 
Wilcoxon Rank -Sum test for non- normal variables. As the purpose of this study is to 
demonstrate that HCL has a similar safety profile compared to SAPT during pregnancy, we will use a non -inferiority test. As a secondary analysis of events such as SH, DKA, and 
skin reactions, we will account for potential differential follow -up times due to miscarriage, 
drop- out, and withdrawal using Poisson regression with an offset for follow -up time.  To 
address Specific Aim 2 , we will compare C GM glucose variables (primary outcomes for 
glucose variables will be time spent <54, <63 , 63-140, >140, >180 mg/dL; secondary 
outcomes will be glucose SD, J index, HBGI, LBGI, MAGE, and CONGA
n) and fear of 
hypoglycemia score between groups (HCL vs. SAPT) using t -tests for normally distributed 
variables and Wilcoxon Rank -Sum test for non -normally distributed variables. We will 
examine the buckets of time spent in each range (hypoglycemia, in range, and hyperglycemia) by day and night, as well as day -to-day v ariation. Mean glucose variables 
and hypoglycemia fear scores will be compared during each trimester of pregnancy and 4 -
6 weeks post -partum  using mixed models. To address Specific Aim 3, we will compare 
SF-36 scores, insulin device satisfaction and glucose device satisfaction by group (HCL 
vs. SAPT) using t -tests if scores are normally distributed and Wilcoxon Rank -Sum test if 
scores are non- normal. We will analyze changes in INSPIRE Questionnaire scores over 
time in the HCL group. Specific Aim 4  is an expl oratory aim, and for this aim we will 
examine rates of fetal loss, preeclampsia, cesarean section, LGA, and neonatal hypoglycemia using Chi- square tests. We will account for potential differential follow -up 
times due to miscarriage, drop- out, and withdrawal using Poisson regression with an 
offset for follow -up time as a sensitivity analysis, in addition to the proposed chi -square 
tests in the exploratory analyses of fetal loss, preeclampsia, Caesarean section, LGA, and neonatal hypoglycemia. We will u se mix ed models to analyze changes in repeated 
measures, such as glycemia variables and hypoglycemia fear scores by trimester. We will 
evaluate the percent of time spent in closed loop by trimester as a feasibility outcome that 
is important to the next step of a  larger clinical trial with efficacy outcomes.  
For women who discontinue CGM therapy during the study, we will do an intention to treat 
analysis of above- stated outcomes. The alpha level will be 0.05 for all analyses, except 
the non- inferiority tests (alpha = 0.025).  The use of mixed models and Poisson regression 
will allow for analysis of data for the portion of the study completed with CGM therapy. 
 
 Page 29  Power and Sample Size Calculations:  The primary outcome for Specific Aim 1 is percent 
of time spent <54 m g/dL on CGM. W ith a sample size of 10 women per group ( 20 study 
completers), we will have 80% power to detect non- inferiority using a one- sided alpha of 
0.025 and a non -inferiority margin of 1.5 % of time spent <54 mg/dL for HCL compared to 
SAPT, using estimates of variability from the PI’s current study of CGM use during 
pregnancy . The standard deviation of time spent <54 mg/dL based on data from the PI’s 
current study of CGM use during pregnancy was 1.1% . For Specific Aim 2, with a sample 
size of 10  women per group ( 20 study completers), we will have 83% power to detect a 
difference in time spent in target glucose range (65- 140 mg/dL , this range was used in the 
power calculations because at that time there was no consensus on optimal time in range 
in pregnancy ) of 3.3 hours/day (13.8 %) between HCL to SAPT, assuming a standard 
deviation of 2.5 hours/day (effect size=1.0  SD). This is similar to effect sizes reported in 
another artificial pancreas study showing a difference of 2.5 hours/day (10.4%) between groups
61 and a study of HCL in pregnancy (in a crossover design) showing a difference of 
3.6 hours/day (15.2%)20. While this study is not powered to detect significant differences 
in maternal -fetal outcomes as described in  Specific Aim 4 , our goal is to provide 
estimates and preliminary data on these outcomes to inform the sample size needed for a larger trial focused on these outcomes, once the safety of the HCL system in pregnancy has been established.  
 
G.  Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
 
This would be the first study to compare an FDA -approved HCL system to SAPT 
throughout pregnancy and the early post -partum period. Women across the USA are 
already using the HCL system being investigated in this proposal, and most pr egnancies 
are unplanned, thus there are likely many women getting pregnant while on HCL therapy 
without knowing its effects on gestation. This study would demonstrate if the HCL system 
is safe in pregnancy. This study would provide pilot data to design and  implement a larger, 
randomized controlled trial with adequate power to detect differences in maternal and fetal outcomes.  
 
 H. References:  
 
References  
 
1. Crowther CA, Hiller JE, Moss JR, McPhee AJ, Jeffries WS, Robinson JS. Effect of  
treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus on pregnancy outcomes. New England 
Journal of Medicine. Jun 16 2005;352(24):2477- 2486.  
2. Kitzmiller JL, Block JM, Brown FM, et al. Managing preexisting diabetes for 
pregnancy: summary of evidence and consensus r ecommendations for care. 
Diabetes Care. May 2008;31(5):1060 -1079.  
3. Catalano PM, McIntyre HD, Cruickshank JK, et al. The hyperglycemia and adverse 
pregnancy outcome study: associations of GDM and obesity with pregnancy 
outcomes. Diabetes Care. Apr 2012;35(4):780 -786. 
4. Jensen DM, Damm P, Moelsted- Pedersen L, et al. Outcomes in type 1 diabetic 
pregnancies: a nationwide, population- based study. Diabetes Care. Dec 
2004;27(12):2819 -2823.  
5. American Diabetes Association. Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy. Sec. 12. In Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes  - 2016. Diabetes Care. Jan 2016;39 
Suppl 1:S94- 98. 
 Page 30 6. Evers IM, de Valk HW, Visser GH. Risk of complications of pregnancy in women 
with type 1 diabetes: nationwide prospective study in the Netherlands. BMJ. Apr 
17 2004;328(7445):915.  
7. Evers IM, ter Braak EW, de Valk HW, van Der Schoot B, Janssen N, Visser GH. 
Risk indicators predictive for severe hypoglycemia during the first trimester of type 
1 diabetic pregnancy. Diabetes Care. Mar 2002;25(3):554- 559. 
8. Nielsen LR, Pedersen -Bjergaard U, Thorsteinsson B, Johansen M, Damm P, 
Mathiesen ER. Hypoglycemia in pregnant women with type 1 diabetes: predictors and role of metabolic control. Diabetes Care. Jan 2008;31(1):9- 14. 
9. Ringholm L, Secher AL, Pedersen- Bjerg aard U, et al. The incidence of severe 
hypoglycaemia in pregnant women with type 1 diabetes mellitus can be reduced with unchanged HbA1c levels and pregnancy outcomes in a routine care setting. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract. Aug 2013;101(2):123 -130. 
10. Chico A,  Herranz L, Corcoy R, et al. Glycemic control and maternal and fetal 
outcomes in pregnant women with type 1 diabetes according to the type of basal 
insulin. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. Nov 2016;206:84 -91. 
11. Bergenstal RM, Garg S, Weinzimer SA, et al. Safety of a Hybrid Closed -Loop 
Insulin Delivery System in Patients With Type 1 Diabetes. JAMA. Oct 4 
2016;316(13):1407 -1408.  
12. Hovorka R, Kumareswaran K, Harris J, et al. Overnight closed loop insulin delivery (artificial pancreas) in adults with type  1 diabetes: crossover randomised controlled 
studies. BMJ. Apr 13 2011;342:d1855.  
13. Del Favero S, Place J, Kropff J, et al. Multicenter outpatient dinner/overnight reduction of hypoglycemia and increased time of glucose in target with a wearable 
artificial pancreas using modular model predictive control in adults with type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab. May 2015;17(5):468- 476. 
14. Phillip M, Battelino T, Atlas E, et al. Nocturnal glucose control with an artificial pancreas at a diabetes camp. N Engl J M ed. Feb 28 2013;368(9):824- 833. 
15. Thabit H, Tauschmann M, Allen JM, et al. Home Use of an Artificial Beta Cell in 
Type 1 Diabetes. N Engl J Med. Nov 26 2015;373(22):2129- 2140.  
16. Kropff J, Del Favero S, Place J, et al. 2 month evening and night closed- loop 
glucose control in patients with type 1 diabetes under free -living conditions: a 
randomised crossover trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. Dec 2015;3(12):939- 947. 
17. El-Khatib FH, Balliro C, Hillard MA, et al. Home use of a bihormonal bionic 
pancreas versus insulin pump therapy in adults with type 1 diabetes: a multicentre 
randomised crossover trial. Lancet. Jan 28 2017;389(10067):369- 380. 
18. de Bock M, Dart J, Roy A, et al. Exploration of the Performance of a Hybrid Closed 
Loop Insulin Delivery Algorit hm That Includes Insulin Delivery Limits Designed to 
Protect Against Hypoglycemia. J Diabetes Sci Technol. Sep 12 2016.  
19. Garg SK, Weinzimer SA, Tamborlane WV, et al. Glucose Outcomes with the In -
Home Use of a Hybrid Closed- Loop Insulin Delivery System i n Adolescents and 
Adults with Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther. Jan 30 2017.  
20. Stewart ZA, Wilinska ME, Hartnell S, et al. Closed -Loop Insulin Delivery during 
Pregnancy in Women with Type 1 Diabetes. New England Journal of Medicine. 2016;375(7):644 -654. 
21. US Food and Drug Administration: Approval Letter: Medtronic MiniMed 670G 
System. P160017. Silver Spring, MD: Health and Human Services; 2016.  
22. Finer LB, Zolna MR. Declines in Unintended Pregnancy in the United States, 
2008- 2011. N Engl J Med. Mar 03 2016;374(9):843- 852. 
 Page 31  23. Cyganek K, Hebda- Szydlo A, Katra B, et al. Glycemic control and selected 
pregnancy outcomes in type 1 diabetes women on continuous subcutaneous 
insulin infusion and multiple daily injections: the significance of pregnancy 
planning. Diabetes Technol Ther. Jan 2010;12(1):41- 47. 
24. Cox DJ, Irvine A, Gonder -Frederick L, Nowacek G, Butterfield J. Fear of 
hypoglycemia: quantification, validation, and utilization. Diabetes Care. Sep -Oct 
1987;10(5):617 -621. 
25. Ware JE, Jr., Sherbou rne CD. The MOS 36 -item short -form health survey (SF- 36). 
I. Conceptual framework and item selection. Medical Care. Jun 1992;30(6):473-
483. 
26. Polonsky WH, Fisher L, Hessler D, Edelman SV. Development of a New Measure 
for Assessing Insulin Delivery Device Satisfaction in Patients with Type 1 and Type 
2 Diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther. Nov 2015;17(11):773- 779. 
27. Polonsky WH, Fisher L, Hessler D, Edelman SV. Development of a New Measure 
for Assessing Glucose Monitoring Device- Related Treatment Satisfaction and 
Quality of Life. Diabetes Technol Ther. Sep 2015;17(9):657- 663. 
28. Naranjo D, Suttiratana SC, Iturralde E, et al. What End Users and Stakeholders 
Want From Automated Insulin Delivery Systems. Diabetes Care. Nov 2017;40(11):1453 -1461.  
29. Keely E, Bar bour L. Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy. 2014. 
http://www.endotext.org/chapter/diabetes -treatment -strategies/management -of-
diabetes -in-pregnancy/ . Published Last Modified Date|. Accessed Dated 
Accessed|. 
30. Ringholm L, Mathiesen ER, Kelstrup L, Damm P. Managing type 1 diabetes 
mellitus in pregnancy --from planning to breastfeeding. Nat Rev Endocrinol. Nov 
2012;8(11):659 -667. 
31. Mathiesen JM, Secher AL, Ringholm L, et al. Changes in basal rates and bolus 
calculator settings in insulin pumps during pregnancy in women with type 1 
diabetes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. May 2014;27(7):724 -728. 
32. Stage E, Norgard H, Damm P, Mathiesen E. Long-t erm breast -feeding in women 
with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. Apr 2006;29(4):771- 774. 
33. Rasmussen B, Hendrieckx C, Clarke B, et al. Psychosocial issues of women with type 1 diabetes transitioning to motherhood: a structured literature review. BMC 
Preg nancy Childbirth. Nov 23 2013;13:218. 
34. Murphy HR, Elleri D, Allen JM, et al. Closed -loop insulin delivery during pregnancy 
complicated by type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. Feb 2011;34(2):406- 411. 
35. Murphy HR, Kumareswaran K, Elleri D, et al. Safety and efficacy of 24- h closed-
loop insulin delivery in well- controlled pregnant women with type 1 diabetes: a 
randomized crossover case series. Diabetes Care. Dec 2011;34(12):2527 -2529.  
36. Farrington C, Stewart ZA, Barnard K, Hovorka R, Murphy HR. Experiences of closed- loop insulin delivery among pregnant women with Type 1 diabetes. Diabet 
Med. Oct 2017;34(10):1461- 1469.  
37. Voelmle M, Ritchie P, McFann K, Naik R, Garg S. Significantly Improved A1c 
Values with No Increase in Hypoglycemia in Pregnant Women with Type 1 
Diabetes Using Real -time Continuous Glucose Monitors. Paper presented at: 
American Diabetes Association 68th Scientific Sessions; June 6- 10, 2008; San 
Francisco, California.  
38. Polsky S, Voelmle M, Joshee P, et al. Improved Glucose Control in Pregnant 
Women with Type 1 Diabetes Using Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM) Share 
 Page 32 System. Paper presented at: American Diabetes Association 76th Scientific 
Sessions; June 12, 2016, 2016; New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.  
39. Polsky S, Garcetti R, Joshee P, et al. C ontinuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM) Use 
throughout Pregnancies Associated with Type 1 Diabetes (T1D). Paper presented 
at: American Diabetes Association 77th Scientific Sessions; June 11, 2017, 2017; 
San Diego, California.  
40. Polsky S, Garcetti R, Pyle L, e t al. CGM Use with or without Remote Monitoring 
during Pregnancies Associated with Type 1 Diabetes (T1D). Paper presented at: Advanced Technologies & Treatments for Diabetes (ATTD); February 14, 2018, 
2018; Vienna, Austria.  
41. Garg S, Brazg RL, Bailey TS,  et al. Reduction in duration of hypoglycemia by 
automatic suspension of insulin delivery: the in- clinic ASPIRE study. Diabetes 
Technol Ther. Mar 2012;14(3):205- 209. 
42. Bergenstal RM, Klonoff DC, Garg SK, et al. Threshold- based insulin- pump 
interruption f or reduction of hypoglycemia. N Engl J Med. Jul 18 2013;369(3):224 -
232. 
43. Weiss R, Garg SK, Bergenstal RM, et al. Predictors of Hypoglycemia in the 
ASPIRE In -Home Study and Effects of Automatic Suspension of Insulin Delivery. J 
Diabetes Sci Technol. 2015;9(5):1016 -1020.  
44. Weiss R, Garg SK, Bode BW, et al. Hypoglycemia Reduction and Changes in 
Hemoglobin A1c in the ASPIRE In- Home Study. Diabetes Technol Ther. Aug 
2015;17(8):542 -547. 
45. Buckingham BA, Bailey TS, Christiansen M, et al. Evaluation of a Predictive Low -
Glucose Management System In- Clinic. Diabetes Technol Ther. Feb 16 2017.  
46. . In: Rasmussen KM, Yaktine AL, eds. Weight Gain During Pregnancy: 
Reexamining the Guidelines . Washington (DC); 2009.  
47. American College of O, Gynecologists. ACOG Committee opinion no. 548: weight gain during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. Jan 2013;121(1):210 -212. 
48. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 743: Low -Dose Aspirin Use During Pregnancy. 
Obstet Gynecol. Jul 2018;132(1):e44 -e52. 
49. Ruiz JL, Sherr JL, Cengiz E, et al. Effect of insulin feedback on closed- loop 
glucose control: a crossover study. J Diabetes Sci Technol. Sep 01 2012;6(5):1123 -1130.  
50. Grosman B, Ilany J, Roy A, et al. Hybrid Closed- Loop Insulin Delivery in Type 1 
Diabetes During Supervised Outpatient Conditions. J Diabetes Sci Technol. May 
2016;10(3):708 -713. 
51. Zaharieva DP, Riddell MC. Caffeine and glucose homeostasis during rest and exercise in diabetes mellitus. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. Aug 2013;38(8):813- 822. 
52. Riddell MC, Gallen IW, Smart CE, et al. E xercise management in type 1 diabetes: 
a consensus statement. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. May 2017;5(5):377 -390. 
53. Battelino T, Danne T, Bergenstal RM, et al. Clinical Targets for Continuous 
Glucose Monitoring Data Interpretation: Recommendations From the International 
Consensus on Time in Range. Diabetes Care. Jun 8 2019.  
54. Patel AA, Donegan D, Albert T. The 36 -item short form. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 
Feb 2007;15(2):126- 134. 
55. Murphy HR, Rayman G, Duffield K, et al. Changes in the glycemic profiles of  
women with type 1 and type 2 diabetes during pregnancy. Diabetes Care. Nov 2007;30(11):2785 -2791.  
 Page 33 56. ter Braak EW, Evers IM, Willem Erkelens D, Visser GH. Maternal hypoglycemia 
during pregnancy in type 1 diabetes: maternal and fetal consequences. Diabetes 
Metab Res Rev. Mar-Apr 2002;18(2):96- 105. 
57. Feig DS, Donovan LE, Corcoy R, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring in pregnant 
women with type 1 diabetes (CONCEPTT): a multicentre international randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. Sep 14 2017.  
58. Law GR,  Ellison GT, Secher AL, et al. Analysis of Continuous Glucose Monitoring 
in Pregnant Women With Diabetes: Distinct Temporal Patterns of Glucose Associated With Large- for-Gestational -Age Infants. Diabetes Care. Jul 
2015;38(7):1319 -1325.  
59. Evers IM, Bos AM , Aalders AL, et al. [Pregnancy in women with diabetes mellitus 
type I: maternal and perinatal complications, in spite of good blood glucose 
control]. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. Apr 22 2000;144(17):804- 809. 
60. Tyrala EE. The infant of the diabetic mother. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. Mar 
1996;23(1):221 -241. 
61. Pinsker JE, Lee JB, Dassau E, et al. Randomized Crossover Comparison of 
Personalized MPC and PID Control Algorithms for the Artificial Pancreas. Diabetes 
Care. Jul 2016;39(7):1135- 1142.  
 