Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 1 of 22 Project OOPEN, Opioid Overdose Prevention, Education and Intervention  
Study Protocol  
1R01 DA030351- 01A1, (A Trial to Prevent Opioid Overdose: E.D. Based Intervention & Take -home Naloxone)  
Caleb Banta -Green, 
PhD, MSW, MP H Principal Investigator  Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Institute  206-543-0937  
Joseph Merrill, MD , 
MPH  Acting Assistant 
Professor  UW School of Medicine  206-744-1834  
Dennis Donovan, PhD  Director  UW Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Institute  206-543-0937  
Phillip Coffin, MD , MIA Director of Substance 
Abuse Research  San Francisco 
Department of Public 
Health  415-554-8176  
Christopher Dunn, PhD  Associate Professor  Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences  206-251-4890  
Norbert Yanez, PhD  Associate Professor  School of Public Health  206-543-8027  
Jean ne Sears, PhD, RN  Senior Research 
Scientist  Health Services  206-543-1360  
Lauren Whiteside, MD  Acting Clinical 
Instructor  Harborview Medical 
Center  206-744-8464 
Anthony Floyd, PhD , CIP  Project Director  Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Institute  206-616-7382  
Melissa Phares, MSW  Interventionist  Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Institute  206-543-0937  
Jonnae Tillman  
 Interventionist  Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Institute  206-543-0937  
Paul Greki n, MD  Medical Director  Evergreen Treatment 
Services  206-223-3644  
Michelle Peavy, PhD  Assistant Treatment 
Director  Evergreen Treatment 
Services  206-223-3644  
Esther Ricardo -Bulis, MA  Research Coordinator  Evergreen Treatment 
Services  206-223-3644  
    
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 2 of 22 Abstract  
Fatal overdoses involving pharmaceutical opioids have increased dramatically over the past 
decade, surpassing those related to heroin, and are the leading cause of drug overdose in much of the U.S. In Seattle -King County, 75% of drug overdoses involved pha rmaceutical opioids 
and/or heroin in 2009. Opioid overdoses, heroin and pharmaceutical, are preventable and reversible. Research indicates that drug users and their partners can be successfully trained to recognize and reverse overdoses with naloxone (an o pioid antagonist medicine or “antidote”).  
Despite active heroin overdose prevention, education  and inte rvention programs with naloxone 
(OOPE N) in 15 states with thousands of overdose reversals and no serious adverse events, 
rigorous studies of these progr ams on rates of subsequent heroin overdoses have not been 
conducted. N o OOPE N programs or studies have yet been implemented for pharmaceutical 
opioid users at elevated risk for overdose..  
Unique to this setting is the potential to identify high risk pharmaceutical opioid users, a 
population that is difficult to locate and engage. I nterventions using brief behavior change 
counseling (BBCC) have been shown to significan tly improve health behaviors such as alcohol 
use and injury, to increase entry into drug treatment as well as to reduce costs. Evidence is promising, but limited, regarding the impact of BBCC on opio id related risk behaviors.  
This prospective, multi -site, randomized trial will study the effectiveness of an interv ention that 
combines OOPE N with BBCC for both heroin users (n=500) and pharmaceutical opioid users at 
elevated risk for overdose (n=500). The primary outcome is subsequent opioid overdoses, 
ascertained by follow up interviews conducted at 3, 6 and 12 months as well as via 
administrative  records for up to 24 months ( i.e. medical records, ambulance responses, and 
death certificates). Hypotheses to be investigated include that the intervention recipients will 
have: 1) lower rates of opioid overdose, 2) reduced drug use and overdose risk  behaviors, 3) 
more appropriate health care utilization, and 4) lower total health care costs.  We will also 
explore whether the intervention impacts HIV risk behaviors.  
Introduction  
This research proposes the first prospective, clinical trial to test the effectiveness of an 
intervention to prevent opioid overdoses among pharmaceutical opioid users and heroin users.  
Naloxone distribution programs for heroin users are widespread and descriptive studies have 
been conducted, but prospective, randomized studies  necessary to prove effectiveness have 
not been conducted. To date no research has been published on how to prevent overdoses among pharmaceutical opioid users, now the largest group represented in fatal drug overdoses 
nationally.  The intervention combine s two widely used interventions  for related health 
behaviors that have not previously been combined: 1) opioid overdose prevention, education  
and intervention with naloxone (OOPE N) for heroin users, and 2) brief behavior change 
counseling (BBCC) which has been shown to prevent future harms for a range of substances.  
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 3 of 22 Opioid overdose is increasingly common, associated with substantial morbidity and mortality 
and should be responsive to prevention and intervention programs.  Brief behavior change 
counseling is  likely to increase the effect of these programs. There is an urgent need for 
evidence based interventions that can readily access and engage people at elevated risk for overdose, including the under -studied population of pharmaceutical users.  Evidence of the 
impact of interventions on overdose rates, overdose risk behaviors, health care utilization and 
potential costs savings is needed.  
Background and Rationale  
Use, misuse and abuse of pharmaceutical opioids and heroin are relatively common and negative h ealth consequences are severe, often fatal, and increasingly frequent. Opioid  
overdoses involving heroin persist, while overdoses related to pharmaceutical opioids have 
increased dramatically over the past decade and have surpassed those related to heroin both 
locally and throughout much of the United States. Health care utilization and costs associated 
with caring for those with problematic opioid use are substantial and increasing.  
Recent, local data indicate the following:  
• Of 256 drug caused deaths in Seattle -King County, Washington in 2008, 195 involved 
pharmaceutical opioids and/or heroin. The opioid caused death rate in Washington State is 
higher than the national average and the overall drug caused death rate in King County has 
increased significant ly over the past decade, driven by the increase in pharmaceutical opioid 
involved deaths.   
• Non -fatal opioid overdose was reported by 16% of heroin users, with 41% reporting 
witnessing an overdose,  in the prior year  according to a 2009 survey conducted at Seattle 
area syringe exchanges.   These rates are likely conservative as evidence suggests that 
syringe exchange users have lower overdose rates than non -users.  
• Heroin related visits to the Harborview Medical Center (HMC) emergency department (ED) 
in 2008 totaled at least 966 and at least 768 for pharmaceutical opioid users who did not 
report current heroin use (case types included: drug abuse, overmedication, adverse 
reaction, and seeking detox). The rate of ED visits for non- medical uses of pharmaceutical 
opioids was higher in the Seattle area than any other metropolitan area included in the U.S. 
Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) in 2007 and Seattle ranked fourth nationally for heroin
i. 
• Naloxone (opioid antidote) was administered approximately once a day  in Seattle by medics 
attending to opioid overdoses  in 2011. Almost all are transported to the HMC ED.  
• On August 22, 2012 the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, Gil Kerlikowske, called for increas ed action to prevent drug overdose deaths, including wider 
distribution of naloxone.  
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 4 of 22 Objectives  
Primary  Aims  
The primary aims  are to test whether those who receive the intervention compared to standard 
care have:  
1) Lower rates of opioid non-fatal and fata l overdose   
2) Reduce  drug use , in appropriate medication use,  and other overdose risk behaviors  
Secondary  Aims  
The secondary aims  are to test whether those who receive the intervention compared to 
standard care have:  
3) M ore appropriate health care utilization (e.g. fewer emergency department vis its and 
admissions to inpatient care)  
4) Lower total health care costs  
5) Determine the  prevalence of HIV risk behaviors among heroin and pharmaceutical op ioid 
users at risk for overdose  and whether the inter vention impacts these behaviors.  
  
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 5 of 22 Study Design  
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
 
This prospective, multi -site, randomized clinical trial will compare standard care to a novel 
intervention that combines OOP EN with BBCC for heroin users (n=500) and pharmaceutical 
opioid users at elevated risk for overdose (n=500). The study will take place at Harborview 
Medical Center (HMC) , University of Washington Medical Center (UWMC) , and Evergreen 
Treat ment Services . The primary outcomes are subsequent opioid overdoses, ascertained by 
self-report interviews at 3, 6 and 12 months after recruitment as well as via administrative 
records for at least  24 months and self- reported drug use and other overdose ri sk behaviors. 
Secondary outcomes include: health care utilization , direct  health care costs  and impact on HIV 
risk behaviors .  
HEROIN USERS  
Intervention  
OOPEN + BBCC  
Standard Care  
PHARMACEUTICAL OPIOID,  
NOT HEROIN, USERS  
Randomization  
(n=500)  
OOPEN= Opioid overdose prevention, education and intervention  
BBCC= Brief behavior change counseling  
Outcomes  
Interviews                Admin. Data  
(3, 6 & 12 months)      (Up to 10 years)   
Screening  
Eligible & Interested  
Baseline Assessment  
Informed consent  
Baseline data collected  
Potential Subjects Identified  
Intervention  
OOPEN + BBCC  
Standard Care  
Randomization  
(n=500)  
Outcomes  
Interviews                Admin. Data  
(3, 6 & 12 months)     (Up to 10 years)    
Screening  
Eligible & Interested  
Baseline Assessment  
Informed  consent  
Baseline data collected  
Potential Subjects Identified  
 
Screening consent  
 
  
  
Screening consent  
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 6 of 22 Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion for all subjects:  
1) Meets study definition of elevated risk of future opioid  overdose  
•  Reason for visit is opioid overdose  (regardless of frequency of use) , or 
• Use of pharmaceutical opioids not prescribed to the patient 2 or more times in the 
prior month, or  
• Use of other opioids, alcohol, benzodiazepines or stimulants within two hours of 
using opioids 2 or more times in the prior month, or  
• Average daily dose of prescribed opioids consumed is greater than 10 mg morphine 
equi valent analgesic dose or higher for 15 or more days in the last 30.    
• Enrolled in opioid substitution program (e.g. methadone or suboxone) and receiving doses.  
Inclusion for heroin users:  
2) Use of heroin through any route of administration at least 2 times in the last 30 days (or if 
institutionalized recently, in the most r ecent month they were not institutionalized)  with or 
without other risk s being present.  
Inclusion for prescription -type opioid users:  
3) Use of pharmaceutical opioid s at least 2 times in the last 30 days (or if institutionalized 
recently, in the most recen t month they were not institutionalized)  with other risk s being  
present . 
Inclusion for opiate registry users:  
4) Average daily dose of prescribed opioids consumed is 30  mg morphine equi valent 
analgesic dose or higher  without other risks being present.  
In the case of known pregnancy, subjects will not be excluded and will be offered naloxone if 
randomized to the intervention arm.  
Exclusion criteria  
1) Unwilling to allow further access to medical or drug treatment records.  
2) Inability to communicate in E nglish.  
3) Current active suicidal ideation.  
4) Significant cognitive or psychiatric impairment (per judgment of clinical staff)  
5) Inability to provide adequate contact information  to assist with follow -up.  
6) Under age 18 or over age 70  at time of recr uitment .  
7) Not currently living in Washington State  or planning to move from Washington State  
within the following year.   
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 7 of 22 8) Receiving treatment for sexual assault.  
9) Have non -expired take -home naloxone at home, on their person, or in their possessions.  
Participation in the study is not appropriate for subjects under care for terminal illness, as 
known reduced life expectancy may skew study results, and the use of high doses of opioid 
medications may be used during end of life care.  
Potential  Subjects Identified  
Some subject will be identified through prescreening of intake records and medical history for 
patients admitted to hospital , including  those admitted for overdose, or in transit to the ER for 
overdose. In the emergency departments  several large monitors display information related to 
admission. Some subject s initially seen in the ER will be admitted to the main hospital, but will 
be listed in ER medical records for  the past 3 days. Some subjects may bypass emergency 
services and be  admitted directly into inpatient care. Medical records would again be screened 
for eligibility. Finally some patients will be recruited through flyers and word of mouth without 
the use of medical records screening.  
We will use this information in combination with information available from prescreening 
medical records to identify potential subjects. We will communicate with clinical staff pointing 
out potential subjects identified in prescreening, and reminding clinical staff of potential subjects to be aw are of for inclusion.  Study staff will regularly attend staff meetings to educate 
them about the study, enlist their help in identifying potential subjects  and obtain feedback on 
recruitment protocols . 
Clinical staff will be asked to look for patients who have experienced overdose, exhibit physical 
symptoms of drug use (such as abscesses or track marks), present for care with symptoms of 
pain without apparent injury, or exhibit signs of overmedication (such as pinpoint pupils) for 
admissions unrelated to drug use or overdose. Clinical staff will also be asked to look for 
subjects  who use opioid medications, have a high number of prescriptions or prescribers  for 
controlled substances (such as opioids or benzodiazepines) , or high emergency room utilization 
or admissions.  
If a potential subject is appropriate and medically stable clinical staff may either inform the 
subject of the availability of the study  or confirm that research staff may make the initial 
approach with subjects . A study flyer will also be made available to clinical staff. If patients 
express interest , we will appro ach the potential subject.      
 
 
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 8 of 22  
 
Subject Approach and Consent for Screening  
If the potential subject is interested in hearing more about the study , research staff will briefly 
explain the study purpose. To assist with the presentation of the study, a brief video slideshow  
with audio narration  that describes the study and requests permission for eligibility screening 
will be presented. Subjects will listen to the narration using closed headphones with disposable 
one-time use covers. After the presentation, we will review the written material, address any 
questions and concerns the subject may have and confirm their agreement to answer screening 
questio ns with a signed consent document.  
Eligibility Screening  
Subjects will be asked to complete an eligibility screening questionnaire. The items cover ed are 
general, such as proximity to the research settings, drug use questions, and medical health 
questions.  Screening questions will be completed by the subject, with assistance from research 
staff, if required. Research staff will assist subjects with the calculation of their average 
morphine equivalent dose  if the only opioids used are those prescribed to the m (not including 
subjects in opioid substitution treatment) .   
Subjects who endorse the broader question about having thoughts of being better off dead or 
of hurting oneself will be asked 5 follow -up questions related to active suicidal ideation using 
the Modified Scale for Suicidal Ideation (MSSI). Subjects with MSSI values above cut -off levels 
will be excluded and referred to clinical staff for further care.  
We hope to afford as much privacy as possible for subjects who would like to hear more about the s tudy. Screening data will be kept for all subjects  whether eligible or not and whether 
enrolled or not . 
Obtain Informed Consent 
Written informed consent will be obtained from all subjects who wish to continue further with 
the study. Subjects will also be asked to complete HIPAA authorization agreements for medical records information from their ED or inpatient visit along with medical care and drug treatment 
records from secondary data sources.  
Baseline Assessments  
Eligible subjects will undergo baseline assessments and provide information on person al 
information and health:  
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 9 of 22 1) Education, Employment, Income and Housing: This assessment captures other 
demographic information related to subject’s resources and social stability.  
2) Overdose Risk Assessment: This assessment is used to determine the potential for 
future overdose based on prior overdose history, current drug use practices and s ocial 
context for current drug use. This assessment is not standardized but is compiled from 
individual items of known risk factors for overdose.  
3) World Health Organization Quality of Life (WHOQOL -BREF). This is a short assessment to 
measure general health  and physical, social and emotional functioning.  
4) World Health Organization Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (WHO -ASSIST v.3). This is a multi- item tool to determine areas of substance use and 
misuse. This assessment battery screens for recent and lifetime use of a variety of 
substances, including illicit drugs, alcohol, pharmaceuticals and tobacco products.  
5) Age of First Use: Subjects are asked to provide the ages they first used a variety of 
substances.  
6) HIV Risk Assessment Battery: This assessment is used to determine the potential for 
contracting HIV, hepatitis and other blood -borne illnesses based on drug use and sexual 
use behaviors.  
7) Overdose History: This assessment will collect information related to any prior overdose 
that the subject has experienced or witnessed.  
8) EQ-5D-3L: This validated quality of life measure asks about problems in mobility, self -
care, usual activities, pain and discomfort, anxiety and depression and overall health.  
Locator information:  
Subjects will be asked  to provide a number of sources to ensure they can be contacted for 3, 6 
and 12 month follow -up visit s. However, because we anticipate a number of high risk subjects 
to be indigent, subjects may be enrolled if they provide at least one primary source of lo cator 
information.  
Randomization  
Subjects will be randomized to receive either standard of care  or the study intervention. We 
will recruit equal numbers  of subjects in the intervention and control arms of the study, 
meeting eligibility criteria as heroin user or primarily pharmaceutical opioid u sers.  
Follow -up Visits  
Follow -up visits will occur at 3, 6 and 12 -month after enrollment. All interviews  will be by 
phone. Most assessments given at the baseline interview will be repeated at each follow -up 
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 10 of 22 point. In addition to the assessments subjects will be asked questions about whether they have 
naloxone and, if not, what happened to any naloxone that wa s given to them.  
Secondary Data Sources  
Secondary data on health care and drug treatment utilization will be obtained from Washington 
State (separate IRB action pending) using the following sources:  
• Treatment and Assessment Report Generation Tool ( TARGET ) for drug treatment 
admissions data   
• The Comprehensive Hospital Abstract Reporting System (CHARS)  for hospital 
admissions  
Information on any ambulance transports  will be ob tained from  the Seattle Fire Department’s  
Medic 1 unit.  
In the event of a subject death during the study will we request information on cause of death 
from the King Co unty Medical Examiner’s Office.  If a su bject cannot be located we will also 
check this source to see if they have died and if so to obtain data on the  cause of death.  If we 
are unable to locate a subject during the course of the study or at final follow -up we will utilize 
the King County Jail Inmate Look -up Service. At no time will subjects be contacted or study 
procedures attempt ed while the subject is incarcerated.  
Intervention Description  
Standard care for patients  who have used opioids would vary according to individual clinical 
need and might include referral to drug treatment or detoxification services.  Standard care 
would not include OOP EN and BBCC intervention s as specified in this grant.  After baseline data 
are obtained subjects assigned to the intervention undergo the following procedures:  
A brief behavior change counseling (BBCC) session  
• Conveys subjects’ risk for overdose, based on the baseline measures  
• Engages them in a reflective discussion of the pros and cons of their current patterns of use  
• Has the patients identify behavior change(s) they are interested in making to improve their 
health  
• Encourages them to share opioid overdose prevention and interven tion inform ation and 
materials with their family, friends, housemates, and/or drug using partners.  
Education and training on opioid overdose prevention and intervention with naloxone (OOP EN) 
• Subjects will view a training video on study laptops that reviews : 
o Information on risk factors for overdose and how to prevent and reduce the risk of 
overdose  
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 11 of 22 o How to recognize an opioid overdose  
o The importance of calling 911  
o How to intervene in an overdose  
 Positioning a victim in rescue position  
 Brief overview of rescue breathing  
 Training on how and when to administer naloxone  
• Subjects will be given a study brochure that covers  the information in the video  and review s 
the Washington State 911 Good Samaritan overdose law which provides immunity from 
prosecution  for drug possession charges to overdose victims and bystanders who seek aid in 
an overdose event .  
• Prescribing and dispensing overdose rescue kits including 2 do ses of intra -nasal naloxone, a 
disposable rescue breathing mask, and disposable gloves.  
• Subjects in the intervention group will be informed that they may have one replacement of 
the naloxone kit (2 doses) during the 12 month study period.  
We expect the in tervention to take 30 -45 minutes on average based on our experience and that 
this is feasible and reasonable for subjects and interventionists.  
Fidelity assessment for the BBCC will be done with the  shortened Motivational Interviewing 
Treatment Integrity ( MITI ) instrument.  
Schedule of and Sources Data Obtainment  
 DATA SOURCES AND TIMING  
 Interview  Administrative  
 Case Report Form      
MEASURES  Base -
line 3 & 6 
mos.  12 
mo.  Up to 
10 yrs.  Up to 
10 yrs.  
PRIMARY AIMS            
Aim 1: Overdose    
      
Subject overdosed prior 3/6* months    Y/N  x x x     
Subject overdosed       Y/N  &   Date    
    x 
Aim 2: Drug use and other overdose risk behaviors    
      
Alcohol/Drugs 3/6 month use frequency  
  x x x     
      
Opioid use following interruption past 3/6 months  x x x     
Using opioids without others present  x x x     
Avg. daily opioid dose - Prescribed Opioid Users  x x x     
Opioid substitution drug treatment prior 3/6 
   x x x   x 
Other drug treatment sought or used prior 3/6 
   x x x   x 
SECONDARY AIMS            
Aim 3: Health care utilization    
      
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 12 of 22 ED, Outpatient, Inpatient and Ambulance - # & 
   
  x x 
Aim 4: Health care costs    
      
Hospital -based total direct health care costs   
 
 
    x x 
Aim 5: HIV Risk Behaviors  
       x x x   
CO-VARIATES & POTENTIAL EFFECT MODIFIERS            
Demographics  x 
      
Employment, health insurance, income, housing  x x x     
Alcohol/Drugs ages of first use  x 
      
Medical statu s and satisfaction (WHO QOL BREF,           
EQ-5D- 3L) x x x     
Behavior change plans and readiness  x 
      
Overdose lifetime history  x 
      
Possessed, "carried" naloxone, # of days past 3/6 
 x x x     
Overdose # witnessed events past 3/6 months  x x x     
Source of naloxone - Study, other  x x x     
Subject had naloxone administered to them, #, by 
 x x x   x 
Disposition of naloxone  x x x     
Subject had negative/allergic reaction to naloxone  x x x     
FIDELITY ASSESSMENT OF BASELINE 
           
Overdose prevention & intervention training . Item 
 x 
      
Motivational Interviewing Treatment Integrity 3.1.1  x         
      *Past 3 months  timeline for 3 and 6 month follow ups, past 6 months used at 12 month 
follow up . 
   Brief Behavioral Change Counseling (BBCC)  
The BBCC will be conducted according to the demeanor and guidelines of Motivational 
Interviewing (MI), a style for counseling patients about sensitive behaviors  and for giving them 
information to enhance their health and safety  in a non- judgmental manner. MI has been 
widely implemented in brief intervention studies for drug use and other  behavior change. MI is 
non-confrontational and respectful of subjects’ autonomy to discuss or not discuss sensitive 
topics The BBCC will consist of 4 elements:  
1) The interventionist will show to the patient an approximately 8-minute video on 
overdose prevention , recognition and intervention, which subjects will view on a laptop  
while they are using  headphones. The interventionist will debrief the video with 
subjects and answe r questions.  
2) Next, the interventionist will review with subjects their overdose risk . This task involves 
informing subjects of the “good news” about overdose  risks they are NOT incurring in 
their current behaviors  for the purpose of reinforcing and hopefully continuing more 
positive health behaviors  (e.g., not inappropriately  mixing other drugs or alcohol with 
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 13 of 22 opiates). Next, the interventionist will respectfully and in a neutral tone review with 
subjects the behav iors that currently place them at risk for opiate overdose (e.g., using 
opiates when alone or after a long period of abstinence).  
3) From the video and risk feedback, the interventionist will segue into an open discussion 
of any changes subjects are thinking  of making to increase their safety from overdosing. 
If at any time during the interview, subjects indicate that they would prefer to quit opiates or to seek opiate detox or treatment, the interventionist will help with these 
referrals . The discussion will  culminate in a summary of healthy  changes, if any, that 
subjects  intend to make. Subjects  will take with them a handout that has been 
customized to summarize any changes subjects indicate that they want to make.  
4) Finally, the Overdose Prevention Kit will b e shown to the patient. This involves a hands 
on demonstration of how to set up and administer the naloxone  nasally , with the goal of 
subjects’ learning this well enough to be able to use or teach significant others to 
administer naloxone  to the subjects, if ever needed. The entire intervention is 
conducted in a Motivational Interviewing style of counseling. The interventionist will 
then summarize the conversation . 
All interventions will be audio recorded if subjects permit, allowing the trainer/supervisor of the 
interventionists to monitor MI and overdose education fidelity throughout the course of the 
study.  
Study Medication  
The medication, naloxone, is being used for an indicated condition, opioid  overdose. The 
specific formulation of Naloxone we plan to use is a 2mg/ml- 2ml syringe that is made by 
International Medication Systems in El Monte, California (NDC # 00548336900).  
The device used to deliver the medication nasally is a mucosal atomizer device (MAD300). The 
mucosal atomization device is licensed fo r intranasal atomization of prescription medications.   
At usual doses, naloxone is relatively free of adverse effects. Because the duration of action of naloxone may be shorter than that of the narcotic being reversed, patients being treated for opioid in toxication with symptoms of respiratory depression should be closely monitored as 
additional doses of naloxone may be required.  Administration of naloxone to opioid -
dependent patients may provoke an acute withdrawal syndrome (including body aches, diarrhe a, tachycardia, fever, runny nose, sneezing, piloerection, sweating, yawning, nausea or 
vomiting, nervousness, restlessness or irritability, shivering or trembling, abdominal cramps, weakness, and increased blood pressure). 
Withdrawal reaction are not life  threatening.  Agitation 
and paresthesia have been infrequently reported with the postoperative use of naloxone hydrochloride injection.  
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 14 of 22 Hypersensitivity reactions, such as allergic reactions, are theoretically possible, but have never 
been documented with naloxone.  We will ask about allergic reactions to naloxone during the 
baseline interview and at each of the three follow up interviews. Any allergic reactions will be reported to the University of Washington’s human subjects division and the sponsor the National Institute on Drug Abuse.  
Several articles have been published showing  the effectiveness of nasally administered 
naloxone in overdose situations and the comparability of effect between intranasal administration with other routes of administration fo r naloxone. The intra -nasal route of 
delivery of naloxone with a mucosal atomization device has been used in 1,000’s of reversals safely and effectively by both medical professionals and lay persons.  
According to the naloxone package insert “ When administered in usual doses and in the 
absence of opioids or agonistic effects of other opioid antagonists, it exhibits essentially no 
pharmacologic activity.” Its use on an unconscious person who did not use opioids is very likely 
to be benign.  
There is n o known mechanism by which naloxone could potentially be converted into an opioid 
agonist that could be abused. Nothing has ever been published that suggests such a conversion 
of naloxone has been accomplished and discussions with professors in schools of medicine (Dr. 
Andy Saxon) and pharmacology (Dr. Charles Chavkin) at the University of Washington indicated no evidence that naloxone has ever been modified in such a way as to facilitate its being 
abused. According to the naloxone package insert:  “ NARCAN is an essentially pure opioid 
antagonist,  i.e., it does not possess the "agonistic" or morphine -like properties characteristic of 
other opioid antagonists. “  
Subjects will be educated about withdrawal reactions. The overdose intervention training and all education materials will clearly and strongly encourage calling 911 during any suspected 
overdoses.  Emergency medical services are well equipped to handle any withdrawal reactions. Intra -nasal administration of naloxone generally results in more mild withd rawal symptoms 
than other routes of administration.    
Regulatory Compliance and Safety  
Regulatory binder  
The regulatory files should contain all required documents, study -specific documents, and all 
important communications. Regulatory files will be checke d for compliance prior to study 
initiation, throughout the study, as well as at study closure.  
Study documentation includes all case report forms, data collection forms, workbooks, source 
documents, monitoring logs and appointment schedules, sponsor -investigator correspondence, 
and signed protocol and amendments, or Institutional Review Board  correspondence and 
approved current and previous consent forms and signed participant consent forms.  
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 15 of 22 Source documents include all reports and records necessary for the evaluation and 
reconstruction of the clinical research study. The original recording of an observation should be retained as the source document. Because direct data entry through the REDCap electronic data capture system will be employed relatively few source documents are anticipated for the collection of primary data.  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Oversight Committee  
The Data Safety Monitoring Oversight Commit tee will have three representatives who have 
clinical and research expertise relevant to the study.  They are not directly involved in the study. 
They will meet during the period of study planning, one month after the study is initiated and 
quarterly from then on.  The committee will receive regular reports on the progress of the 
study, including the number and characteristics of subjects and those who declined to 
participate.  Any serious adverse events (SAE) will be discussed with the committee to 
determine if the risks of SAE could be modified by any changes in study procedures.  Other 
reports will be provided as the committee requests.  
The committee will include two physicians: Andy Saxon, MD a psychiatrist at the Veterans 
Affairs Puget Sound Health Care Network, where he is the medical director of addiction 
treatment services, he is also a Co -Investigator for medication studies for the Pacific Northwest 
Node of NIDA’s Clinical Trials Network and conducts clinical trials and medical trainings on 
Suboxone - a medication which contains naloxone.  The other physician member is Matthew 
Golden, MD the director of HIV/STD programs for Public Health - Seattle & King County and 
Associate Professor of Medicine at the University of Washington. An additional committee 
member will have expertise in community based substance abuse treatment and the 
epidemiology of opioid abuse: T. Ron Jackson, MSW is the director of Evergreen Treatment 
Services a methadone maintenance clinic serving more than 1,000 patients in the Seattle  area, 
he is also the co -investigator for community treatment programs for the Pacific Northwest 
Node of NIDA’s Clinical Trials Network.  
Drug accountability  
Study medication will be ordered, stored, maintained and dispensed by the Investigational Drug 
Serv ice Pharmac ies at Harborview Medical Center  and UW Medical Center  and the clinical 
dispensary at Evergreen Treatment Services . Upon receipt, the investigator, pharmacist, or 
authorized designee  is responsible for taking invento ry of the investigational agent . A record of 
this inventory will be kept and usage will be documented. Any unused or expired investigational 
agent shall be accounted for.  
 
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 16 of 22 Adverse event reporting   
The risks expected from trials employing behavioral interventions are presumed minimal and 
the medication being prescribed for possible future use is designed to be used to prevent a 
fatal overdose with side effects being rare . However, given the nature of ongoing drug and/or 
medication use the population studied in this trial is possibly at risk for an overdose.  Adverse events (AEs)  will be categorized as serious or non -serious, as related or not related to the study, 
and as expected or unexpected. An AE is defined as any reaction, side effect, or untoward event that occurs during the course of the clinical trial. Stable chronic conditions, such as substance abuse, which are present prior to clinical trial entry and do not worsen, are not considered AEs. 
Common, minor ailments and complaints will be excluded from any type of documentation.  
These may include: colds, flu’s, cuts, scrapes, coughs, headaches, stomach complaints, and general fatigue.  
Serious adverse events (SAEs) are defined as any fatal event, any immediately life threatening 
event, any permanent or substantially disabling eve nt, any event that requires or prolongs 
inpatient hospitalization, congenital anomaly or birth defect, or any event requiring 
intervention to prevent any of the previously listed serious events. Hospital visits that do not 
result in admittance are not cons idered SAE’s (e.g. emergency room visit for a non - study -
related injury that does not result in admittance). Normal childbirth and pre -planned elective 
procedures are not considered SAEs. AE/SAE’s will be elicited by interventionists/research 
interviewers at each assessment visit by asking the participants if they have noticed any new 
problems or existing problems that have gotten worse (using the Adverse Events Worksheet).  
Disclosure of an AE/SAE may also occur in an unsolicited manner to a research or clinical staff 
member. The interviewers should be focused on gathering data to aid in determining study 
relatedness. Study -relatedness will be determined by the interviewers in consultation with one 
of the investigators. All AEs and SAEs will be recorded in the AE/SAE log and entered into the 
secured project database. AEs that are not study related do not require any further paperwork 
documentation besides the AE Log. In this study, potential AEs that may be related to the study 
would be an increase in emotio nal distress in relation to discussion of past or current drug use 
behaviors or side effects of naloxone.   
University of Washington Adverse Events reporting requirements  
The term adverse event is generally used to refer to any untoward or unfavorable medic al 
occurrence in a human subject, including any abnormal sign (for example, abnormal physical 
exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the subject's 
participation in the research, whether or not considered related to the  subject's participation in 
the research. Adverse events encompass both physical and psychological harms. They occur 
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 17 of 22 most commonly in the context of biomedical research although, on occasion, they can occur in 
the context of social and behavioral research.  
Unanticipated problems, in general, include any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all 
of the following criteria:  
1. unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency) given (a) the research procedures that are described in the protocol -related  documents, such as the IRB -
approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the characteristics 
of the subject population being studied;  
2. related or there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by the procedures involved in the research; and  
3. suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm (including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or 
recognized.  
The adverse event report form is to be used to report an adverse event where there is a 
reasonable probability that the event was attributable to a study procedure. The UW IRB 
defines reasonable probability as "more likely than not" - that is, there is a g reater than 50% 
likelihood of the even t having been caused or partially caused by the research or arising from 
the circumstances of the research.  
Per HSD policy the form is required to be submitted as soon as possible but no later than 10 
business days aft er becoming aware of the event.  
Data security  
Data will be uploaded to ADAI servers weekly . Only authorized individuals are permitted access 
to the project database. Data are backed up nightly so there is minimal risk of data loss. Any 
edits to previously  saved data are fully tracked in an electronic audit table and include the 
date/time stamp and user ID of the person making the edit. Ongoing data monitoring will be 
the responsibility of the research coordinator.  
Confidentiality  
We will obtain a federal C ertificate of Confidentiality (CoC), protecting participants against 
disclosure of sensitive information (e.g., drug use). The Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS) office that issues the CoC will be advised of any changes in the CoC application information.  
Participant records will be kept confidential by the use of study codes for identifying 
participants on data collection forms , secure separate storage of any documents that have 
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 18 of 22 participant identifiers, and secure computing procedures for enter ing and transferring 
electronic data.  
Study  monitoring  
The monitoring of study records  will be conducted on a regular basis by the research 
coordinator . The purpose of these visits is to encourage and assess regulatory compliance and 
to document the integrity of the trial progress. Monitoring activity will assure that submitted 
data are accurate and in agreement with source documentation and will also review regulatory/essential documents such as correspondence with the IRB. Areas of particular concern will be participant informed consent, protocol adherence, safety monitoring, IRB reviews and approvals, regulatory documents, participant records, study drug accountability, and principal investigator supervision and involv ement in the trial. The research coordinator 
will ensure that  staff are trained and able to conduct the protocol appropriately and that study 
procedures are properly followed. If additional training of study personnel is needed, project 
staff will undertak e or arrange for that training.  
Data monitoring  
Study data will be entered by interventionists directly into password protected, study specific 
laptop computers.  Data will be captured using the REDCap electronic data capture system  
which uses a secure co nnection to local REDCap servers located at ITHS.  Only authorized users 
will be allowed access to the data entry system and no identifiable data will be entered into 
REDCap.  Research staff will use password protected UW works for data entry.  
Data completi on will be verified when study interviews are completed. Baseline data and study 
arm assignment will be captured by  secure data servers at ITHS as data are collected in REDCap .  
Data will be managed by the  principal investigator and  research coordinator, w ho will access 
study data from  desktop computer s connected via local area network to computer servers that 
are in a locked room in a locked office suite at the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Institute (ADAI). 
Similarly, follow -up interview data will be entered dir ectly into password protected, study 
specific laptop computers using REDCap, with data uploaded to servers at ADAI weekly .   
Health services and cost data will be obtained, cleaned and made into analytic data sets by Dr. 
Sears. Data will be transferred sec urely and stored on ADAI servers which are backed up nightly. 
The research coordinator will be responsible for the integrity of all study data and will prepare regular reports for the 3 -person data and safety monitoring oversight committee which will 
revie w any adverse events as well as monitor study progress to ensure that study results are 
scientifically valid.  
The research c oordinator for the study will conduct software programming and data 
management activities. Data will be stored on computer servers a t ADAI that are fully HIPAA-
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 19 of 22 compliant in accordance with the University of Washington School of Medicine. The senior 
computer specialist at ADAI maintains nightly tape backups and active disaster recovery 
protection and procedures. The research coordinator  will develop data collection forms used by 
research staff.  These forms will also have a companion data dictionary which comprehensively defines each data element. The data dictionary specifies missing, illogical, out of range, and 
inconsistent value chec ks for each data element, in addition to logic checks and assists the 
project data analysis.  
Intervention fidelity monitoring  
The primary threat to the integrity of the intervention is that the intervention may not be delivered as intended. This potential problem is minimized because the intervention is highly 
structured and intervention fidelity will be regularly monitored by co -investigators who will 
monitor audio recordings of intervention sessions after the interventionist has initially been 
approved to  conduct interventions without supervision.  
Data Analysis  
Sample Size Calculation  
The study was powered to address aim 1, the impact of the intervention on non -fatal overdose. 
For the  study of each opioid user type (heroin and pharmaceutical opioids) the number of 
subjects needed in each arm of the study (intervention and comparison) to achieve power of 
0.80 to detect a decline in the overdose rate from 20% to 10% at a confidence level  of 0.05, is 
219 subjects. To increase power somewhat and account for potential loss to follow up, we plan 
to enroll more subjects, 250 in each arm of each study, for a total of 500 heroin using subjects 
and 500 pharmaceutical opioid, non -heroin using subj ects. Other outcomes to be analyzed 
include drug use and services utilization. Data on brief interventions in ED’s shows declines in 
drug use and ED utilization of at least 40%. Specifically in Washington State, the Screening and 
Brief Intervention Referra l and Treatment (SBIRT) found a 45% reduction in average days of 
drug use among high risk heroin users who received a brief intervention in an ED (from 15.8 days to 8.7 days in the prior month) and 41% reduction among high risk pharmaceutical opioid  
users (12.8 to 7.5 days).   
Assumptions behind the power estimate are based upon an annual rate of non- fatal heroin 
overdose estimated to be a median of 25% across studies and for fatal overdoses 
approximately 1%. For the purposes of this sample size estimate we  are conservatively 
assuming a total annual overdose rate for heroin users of 20%.  We believe that a reduction of the OD rate by 50% may be possible based on the potential for additive effects of the OOP EN 
and the BBCC interventions. Preliminary data on o verdose rates for pharmaceutical opioid 
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 20 of 22 abusers (no regular heroin use) indicates a rate approximately half that of heroin users based 
upon analyses conducted by Dr. Banta -Green of interviews from 1,661 clients entering 
methadone maintenance treatment whic h indicate a lifetime  overdose rate for pharmaceutical 
opioid abusers (25%) that is half the rate of heroin abusers (49%). These findings were 
extrapolated to a 50% lower rate of annual  overdose, the validity of which cannot currently be 
determined, but wi ll be ascertained at the conclusion of this proposed study. We are assuming 
an annual overdose rate of 10% for pharmaceutical opioid users, or 20% over two years which is the amount of time over which follow up via administrative data will be collected. Th e power 
estimates above therefore address one year overdose rates for heroin and 2 years f or 
pharmaceutical opioid users.  
 
Planned methodology  
Intent to treat analyses  will be the primary analytic approach used to analyze the data resulting 
from this randomized controlled study.  Intent to treat analyses compare those assigned to the 
intervention group to those in the standard care group, regardless of whether those in the 
standard care group receive some amount of the intervention.  
Planned analyses  
Aim 1 Test whether the intervention group has lower rates of opioid overdose and longer time 
to occurrence of overdose. Overdose will be ascertained at 12 months via self -report and across  
at least 24 months via administrative  data. Because randomized controlled studies are designed 
to account for potential confounding factors by  distributing confounders, measured and 
unmeasured, equally across comparison and intervention gro ups, the  initial unadjusted analysis 
will be a logistic regression analysis comparing the probability of opioid overdose in  the two 
study arms. To examine differences in the time to overdose and to account for time varying 
covariates, such as overdose  risk factors, survival analyses will be conducted with the outcome 
time to overdose(s). A Cox proportional  hazards model will be used to investigate the possible 
association between these factors and event time. We  will use sandwich standard error 
estimates in  all statistical tests. Multivariable logistic regression analyses will be conducted to 
examine the association between predictors and moderators and of the odds of overdose  
occurrence. Predictors will include treatment assignment and overdose risk factors  such as 
concomitant drug  use, interruption in tolerance and homelessness. Potential effect 
modification will be assessed by including  interaction terms for the treatment assignment by 
severity of opioid and other substance use as measured by  the ASSIST. F or the pharmaceutical 
opioid only group, effect modification by opioid user type will be assessed;  opioid user 
typologies will be based upon which i nclusion criteria subjects met.  
Aim 2 Test whether the intervention group has fewer overdose risk behaviors.  These are 
measured as both binary and continuous data. Binary data will be examined with logistic 
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 21 of 22 regression and continuous data analyzed with ordinary least -squares regression. Analyses will 
adjust for the overdose risk behavior level or frequency reported at baseline as a concomitant 
variable, the outcome is the overdose risk behavior at 12 months, and the primary predictor is the treatment group assignment. We will compute robust standard error estimates for each model and use them in all hypothesis tes ts and confidence intervals.  
Aims 3 and 4 Test whether the intervention group has more appropriate health care utilization and lower total health care costs . We will analyze utilization for three separate outcomes: ED 
visits, outpatient visits, and  inpatient hospital admissions as we would expect the intervention 
to result in declines in ED and inpatient care  with concomitant increases in outpatient care over 
time  as patients stabilize their health status . For these analyses we will use a rate modeling  
approach (negative binomial or Poisson regression, with an exposure adjustment should there be a need to  account for differing  amounts of follow -up time) . We will examine health care 
costs (combined hospital  and ambulance costs) from the health care sys tem perspective.  
 Mean -per-month health care costs will be  calculated for both pre - and post -randomization 
periods for each individual. We will assess the difference in  health care costs across the two 
study arms by regressing post -randomization mean healt h care costs on  study arm, and 
controlling for pre -randomization mean health care costs (which should reduce variance and  
increase power) along with other important covariates. We expect that 500 per arm will be an 
adequate  number to support the use of Ordinary Least -Squares (OLS) regression to model 
mean cost differences, but will use Generalized Linear Models (GLM) models to examine the 
sensitivity of OLS results . In addition,  we will calculate unadjusted and adjusted cost offsets by 
adding the cost of th e intervention to health care  costs and comparing average monthly total 
costs of services for the intervention group to the average for the  standard care group.  
Aim 5  Test whether the intervention group has fewer HIV  risk behaviors. These are measured as 
both binary and continuous data. Binary data will be examined with logistic regression and continuous data analyzed with ordinary least -squares regression.  
Other analyses  
In order to determine whether there is recruitment reactivity , whether those enrolled  in either 
arm of the study have a change in behaviors compared to those not enrolled, we will examine 
ED re -visit rates at two years for those receiving standard care compared to those with similar 
demographic characteristics, CPT codes and ED visit dates , but were not enrolled. While this will 
not directly measure the impact of recruitment on overdose, it will provide some information about recruitment reactivity. Subsequent to intent to treat analyses we will examine whether any subjects in the standard care group received take -home naloxone and overdose prevention 
and intervention training i.e. “crossed over”. If so, it is possible that this intermediate group might be more similar to the intervention than the standard care group. Crossovers will be 
iden tified by as interview question, such as  “Did you possess or have ready access to naloxo ne 
during the past 3/6 months?”  If there is a group that crossed over, post -hoc analyses will 
compare overdose rates at two years for the cross over group compared to e ach of the other 
two study arms. Completion level of administrative data will be assessed by the interview questions at each follow up that document what types of services, in broad categories, were 
Project OOPEN Study Protocol v1.9 8 -22-2014  Page 22 of 22 obtained at non- HMC or non -UWMC facilities or ambulance s ervices not in Seattle -King County. 
This will allow for an evaluation of ascertainment bias , that is, how complete data based on 
HMC/UWMC  and King County ambulance data are and whether there are differential levels of 
data comp letion by study arm assignmen t. 
Missing data and dropouts  
Missing data will be minimized by the study procedures described above. However, missing 
data are inevitable and could lead to biased results.  Baseline data values and study arm assignment will be examined to determine the relationship with missingness. Sensitivity 
analyses will be conducted that assume any person lost to follow up had constant levels of drug 
use based upon their most recent measurement point. This will provide some guidance as to 
the amount of bias possib ly introduced by missing data.  
                                                           
 