1  ALCHEPNET CONSORTIUM CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
Protocol Title  
A multicenter, randomized, double blinded,  placebo -controlled 
clinical trial of Anakinra (plus zinc), or prednisone in patients 
with severe alcoholic hepatitis by the AlcHepNet Consortium 
 
Protocol Number: AlcHepNet – 02 IRB:  20190963  
IND:  144031  
Version 6: January 25, 2022 
 
Primary Investigators at each site: Indiana University in Indianapolis, Indiana, (PI: Dr. Samer 
Gawrieh  (IND holder) and Dr.Kavish Patidar ), University of Louisville in Louisville, Kentucky (PI: Dr. 
Craig McClain and Dr.Vatsalya Vatsalya), Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston 
Massachusetts (PI: Dr. Gyongyi Szabo), Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota (PI: Dr. Vijay Shah and Dr. 
Patrick  Kamath), Cleveland Clinic Foundation in Cleveland, Ohio (PI: Dr. Srinivasan Dasarathy), 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (PI: Dr. Ramon Bataller), 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, Texas (PI: Dr. Mack Mitchell), and 
Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond, Virginia (PI: Dr.  
Arun  Sanyal).  
 
    
Disclosure  
 
This study is conducted by the AlcHepNet consortium which is funded by the National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism (NIAAA) to pur sue translational investigations in Alcoholic hepatitis (AH). The AlcHepNet Consortium is 
made up of investigators from Indiana University (Indianapolis, IN), Mayo Clinic (Rochester, MN), Virginia 
Commonwealth University (Richmond, VA), University of Pitts burgh (Pittsburgh, PA), University of Louisville (Louisville, 
KY), Beth Israel Deaconess  Medical Center ( Boston MA), Cleveland Clinic  Foundation  (Cleveland,  OH),  and University  
of Texas  Southwestern  (Dallas,  TX).  
 
Some of the information contained herein is the property of and may not be reproduced, published, or disclosed to 
others without written authorization from SOBI.  
2   
 
SPONSOR’S approval of the protocol reviewed and approved by:  
 
 
     1/31/2022  
______________________________________   ____________________  
 
Samer Gawrieh, MD      Date  
Primary Investigator (Indiana University)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  _____________________________________   ____________________  
  
  Institutional Signing Official  (If Applicable)   Date        

3  Table of Contents  
 
 
 Page number  
Ethical Conduct of Study and Regulatory Requirements  5 
Executive Summary  6 
Investigator’s Affirmation  19 
Abbreviations  20 
Introduction & Rationale  22 
Rationale for Trial Design and Dose for Study Medicine  23 
Clinical Experience with Study Medicine  24 
Summary of Known Risks of Study Medicine  27 
Trial Objectives  29 
Investigational Plan  30 
Schedule of Study Procedures  33 
Participant Selection (Inclusion & Exclusion Criteria)  35 
Participant Mandatory Hold  38 
Participant  Discontinuation  from the Trial  40 
Investigational Product/ Study Medication  41 
Dose, Administration and Blinding  44 
Randomization  46 
Holding and Unblinding Procedures  47 
Treatment Compliance  51 
Trial Procedures  52 
Efficacy Evaluations  61 
Safety Evaluations  62 
Adverse Events  64 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  66 
Reporting of AEs  68 
Statistical Methods  71 
Data and Safety Monitoring Board  74 
Administrative and Regulatory Considerations  76 
4  Trial Monitoring & Auditing  78 
List of Planned Laboratory Values  80 
Exploratory Evaluations  81 
References  82 
 
 
 
Tables  
 
Table 1: Schedule of Trial  Procedures 
Table 2: Severity of AEs 
Table 3: Relationship of AEs to Study Medicine  
Table 4: Requirements for Reporting AEs to Various  Stakeholders  
Table 5: Total Blood  Volumes  
5  1. ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE STUDY AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS  
1.1 Institutional Review Board  (IRB)  
The study protocol and any amendments will be reviewed by the Western Institutional Review 
Board (WIRB). The IRB will review the participant safety, informed consent form (ICF), their updates (if any), and  any written materials given to the participants.  
1.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study  
This study will be conducted in accordance with the ethical principles that have their origins in the Declaration of Helsinki, in compliance with the approved protocol, Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and applicable regulatory requirements.  
1.3 Participant Information and  Consent  
The investigator will obtain a freely given written consent from each participant after an appropriate explanation of the aims, methods, anticipated benefit s, potential hazards, and any other aspects of 
the study that are relevant to the participant's decision to participate. In appropriate language, the consent form must be signed and dated by the participant before he/she is exposed to any protocol - 
specifi c procedure.  
The investigator  will explain  that the participants  are completely  free to refuse  to enter  the study  or to 
withdraw from it at any time, without any consequences for their further care and without the need to justify.  
The participant will receive a copy of the signed informed consent.  
The participant will be told if information becomes available that may be relevant to his/her willingness to continue participation in the study.  
Each participant will be informed  that a monitor or a health authority inspector, in accordance with 
applicable regulatory requirements, may review the portions of their source records and source data related to the study. Data protection and confidentiality will be handled in compliance with federal, state, local and  university  guidelines.
6  2. EXECUTIVE  SUMMARY  
Title of Trial  
A multicenter, randomized, double blinded, placebo- controlled clinical trial of Anakinra (plus zinc) 
or prednisone in participants with severe alcoholic hepatitis by the AlcHepNet Consortium . 
 
Name of Active Ingredient(s) 
a. Anakinra  
b. Prednisone  
c. Zinc-Sulfate  
 
Pharmacological Class of the Drugs  
a. Anakinra is immunological agent, an inhibitor of the Interleukin- 1 receptor  (IL-1). 
b. Prednisone is an adrenal  glucocorticoid.  
c. Zinc-sulfate is a nutritional supplement.  
Indication  
 
Severe alcoholic hepatitis.  
 
Study Type  
 
Phase 2B multicenter randomized, 2 -arm, double blinded, placebo controlled clinical trial.  
 
Investigational Sites  
Indiana University, Mayo Clinic, Virginia Commonwealth University, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 
University of Louisville, Beth  Israel Deaconess Medical Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center, and University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center  
 
Planned Number of Participants  
Approximately  258 participants  will be randomized  in a 1:1 ratio into 1 of 2 treatment  arms (129 
participants per arm): (1) Prednisone + Placebo for Anakinra/Zinc (2) Anakinra +  Zinc + Placebo 
for Prednisone .  
7  Objectives  
 
This multicenter, randomized, double blinded, placebo- controlled clinical trial is focused on novel 
treatments  for severe  alcoholic  hepatitis  (AH),  a life-threatening  stage  of alcoholic  liver injury  that has 
a short -term mortality rate much higher than that of other liver  diseases.  
 
The primary objective of the study is to determine the clinical efficacy and safety of Anakinra (plus 
zinc) compared to the current standard medical treatment consisting of prednisone in participants with clinical ly severe AH. Key secondary objectives broadly are as follows: (a) to evaluate the use of 
biomarkers to assess disease severity and treatment response; and (b) to develop novel endpoints to overcome the limitations of current assessment strategies for seve re AH.  
 
Overview of Study Design and Conduct  
 
The proposed study is a Phase 2b, multicenter, prospective, randomized, 2 -arm, double blinded, 
placebo -controlled clinical trial to assess the efficacy of Anakinra, an interleukin (IL) -1 receptor 
antagonist plus zinc compared to prednisone for the treatment of severe AH (Model for End Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score ≥ 20). All participants will receive standard care for treatment of severe AH as described in recent guidelines endorsed by American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) and American Gastroenterological Association (AGA). The study will be conducted at 8 clinical sites across the United Stated selected by the National Institute of Alcoholic Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) and will be supported by a Data Coordinating Center at Indiana University (DCC -IU). The biorepository will be managed by University of Massachusetts.  
 
The study will be conducted according to Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and in compliance with local, state,  and federal regulatory requirements. Adverse events during the course of the trial will 
be identified, recorded, assessed for causality , and reported  in accordance with FDA guidance. In 
addition to general  assessment,  we will specifically  focus on (1) rates and types  of infection  as well as 
their severity,  (2) potential  development  of drug-induced  liver injury,  (3) injection  site reactions,  and 
(4) hematological adverse  events.  
 
This study will be approved by an appropriately convened single IRB, Western Institutional Review Board (WIRB), and will be monitored by an NIAAA appointed Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).  We will conduct  this study  under  an Investigational  New Drug  (IND)  application  from  the 
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
8  
It is anticipated that a centrally located 
investigational pharmacy located at Indiana University will dispense the study medications to all participating sites under close coordination from the DCC -IU. Anakinra plus zinc, prednisone 
and matching placebos will be provided by the study to the participants.  
 
Interventions to be tested  
Concomitant treatments in this trial inclu de standard 
care for severe AH for all participants as 
recommended in recent guidelines1. The standard of 
care for severe AH includes attention to early 
diagnosis and treatment of bacterial and fungal infections, portal hypertension and its complications including acute kidney injury, gastrointestinal bleeding, fluid overload (ascites and edema) and hepatic 
encephalopathy.  
In addition, all participants will be offered as part of the standard of care, non-  pharmacologic 
intervention for treatment of alcohol use disorders, such as cognitive behavioral therapy and 12 -step 
programs intervention as aligned with the best practices at the participating study site.  
 
Participants with severe AH are very sick and often have multiple active medical problems requiring intervention. The use of specific interventions during this time has the potential to modify treatment response. Ideally, these interventions would be completely standardized. However, the standard of care varies by region, institution and the specialties involved in the care of the participant. The decision regarding treatments for these complications will be delegated to the primary physicians caring for the participants during hospitalizations and to the investigators during the ambulatory follow -up of t he participants. Other than the general guidelines noted, no specific treatments for 
specific  complications  such as those  noted  are required.  However,  such treatments  might  include,  but 
are not limited to , the administration of IV fluids, intravenous human serum albumin, antibiotics 
including antifungal medications, renal replacement therapy, supplemental oxygen, assisted ventilation and intravenous pressors. Diagnostic procedures such as paracentesis, upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, endoscopic ultrasound,  and liver biopsy will be permitted as required to provide 
standard  care. 
 
During the initial six months of trial, the investigators will develop a “manual of clinical operations” that will include best practices on the use of vasopressors, albumin, ICU care, mechanical ventilation and renal replacement therapy using Surviving Sepsis Campaign, International Guidelines for Management of Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock. The investigators will also provide best practices for management of nutrition and alcoho l counseling and minimization of recidivism. Although the 
management of these complications will not be mandated by protocol, the care provided will be recorded to develop novel designs for future trials and for practice guidance and quality improvement programs.  
 
After informed consent has been obtained and all of the inclusion are met and none of the exclusion,  participants  will be randomized  to receive  one of the following  interventions  in addition  to 
standard  care. 

9  Group 1 : Standard of care plus prednisone 40 mg orally once daily  on Days 1 -30 and matching 
placebos for Anakinra (1 syringe  s.c. once daily on Days 1 -14), and zinc (matched pill once daily on 
Days 1 -90). 
Group  2: Standard  of care plus Anakinra  (100 mg s.c.) once daily on Days 1 -14 zinc sulfate 220 mg once 
daily on Days 1 -90, and placebo for prednisone (matched pill once daily on Days 1 -30). 
Lille score will be calculated from day 7 labs, participants will stop prednisone or prednisone 
placebo if Lille score >0.45.  
 
Figure 1. Distribution of study drug and placebo  
 
 
Participants or guardian will be instructed in subcutaneous injection techni que to continue self - 
administration  of these  experimental  treatments  after discharge  from  the hospital.  Study  personnel  will 
ensure participants and guardian are proficient in the technique before the end of study visit and an instructional document will be  provided.  

10  Primary and Important Secondary Endpoints  
 
Primary Endpoints  Survival at 90 days  
 
 
Secondary Endpoints 
• Changes in score(s): Changes in Lille score, change in MELD score, development of 
AKI, multi- organ failure, SIRS, transfer to ICU, changes in liver function will all be 
evaluated at 7, 30 and 90  days.  
• Organ dysfunction: Measure of changes in Sequential Organ Failure Assessment 
(SOFA) scores and proportions requiring hemodynamic support for MAP < 65 mm Hg and lactate >  2 mmol/l, renal replacement therapy or mechanical ventilation. The 
SOFA score will be modified and re -evaluated without platelet counts given that these 
are usually low in  AH. 
• Infections and Sepsis: The endpoints and case definitions related to sepsis may vary 
depending on what will be used (clinical care, research, surveillance or quality improvement). Given the central role of sepsis as a driver of outcomes, measuring the types  of infection  will occur  but also identify  the proportions of those with sepsis, septic 
shock or quick- SOFA (qSOFA) criteria based on SEPSIS -3 guidance
2,3. Key parameters 
will be captured and needed for various sepsis related endpoint construction aligned by the recent guidance from the European Drug Development Hub (http://eddh-  
cro.wixsite.com/fdtsfv).  
• Renal dysfunction: In alignment with guidance from the acute disease quality initiative, the AKI development  will be quantified  and its progression through persistent AKI,  acute 
kidney disease to chronic kidney disease.  
• Need for care escalation: Proportion of participants requiring transfer to ICU for care, intubation for airway control, need for ventilator support or  RRT. 
• Indicators of gut permeability: (endotoxin and bacterial 18S DNA) and pro - 
inflammatory  cytokine/chemokines  (TNFa,  MCP1,  IL-6, IL-1ß) will be assessed in 
serum/plasma samples.  
• Survival at 30 days and 180 days  
Limitations of mortality as an endpoint in AH and plans to overcome these 
All-cause mortality is most relevant when mortality is substantial and attributable to a single 
mechanism in a homogeneous population. Participants  with severe  AH are highly heterogeneous  with 
respect  to disease severity,  end organ  involvement  and the care they receive.  Moreover,  as in sepsis and 
heart  failure,  death  involves  failure  of multiple  organs (liver, heart,  kidney,  lungs) making  it difficult  to 
ascertain which one is the primary cause of death. This has led to development and regulatory 
acceptance  of composite endpoints including mortality  and key parameters  driving  mortality  for acute 
heart failure trials. These guiding principles to construct a novel and innovative key secondary 
composite endpoint which  will include death  or worsening of the modified  SOFA  score4,5 by ≥2 points 
and worsening of MELD  score by ≥2 points. These are associated  with mortality  and capture  the organ 
recruitment that marks progression of AH towards death. This endpoint will also be validated with 
respect to reliability, construct -, criterion - and content validity to establish this as a primary endpoint 
in future trials.  Model changes  in SOFA  scores  and MELD  scores  against  mortality  to further  optimize 
this endpoint and cross- validate it in the observation cohort will  occur.  
11   
Novel (experimental) endpoints to overcome limitations of conventional endpoints Efficacy  
endpoints must capture “clinically meaningfu l benefit”. While traditional endpoints such as mortality 
are meaningful, they also have multiple shortcomings in the context of AH as noted below.  
Innovation will be used to construct, measure , and validate novel additional endpoints to overcome 
the limit ations of currently used endpoints and cross- validate them in the observational cohort. The 
combined expertise in endpoint development and the use of harmonized measurements will make 
this feasible. These will provide novel assessments in AH and provide the scientific evidence -base to 
use these as primary endpoints in future trials.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. AH, as defined by the NIAAA pan -consortia for  AH6: 
a) Onset  of jaundice  (defined  as serum  total  bilirubin  >3 mg/dL)  within  the prior  8 
weeks to screening  visit 
b) Regular consumption of alcohol with an intake of > 40 gm daily or >280gm weekly on average  for women  and > 60 gm daily or >420gm  weekly  on average  for men for 6 months 
or more,  with less than 8 weeks  of abstinence  before  onset  of jaundice  
c) AST > 50 IU/l 
d) AST: ALT  > 1.5 and both values < 400  IU/l 
e) and/or histological evidence of  AH* 
 
2. MELD 20 -35 on day of  randomization.  
3. Ages ≥  21 
 
* In patients with possible AH or AH with confounding factors such as possible ischemic 
hepatitis, possible DILI, uncertain history of alcohol use (e.g., patient denies excessive  
alcohol use), and atypical/abnormal laboratory tests (e.g., AST < 50 IU/L or > 400  
IU/L, AST/ALT ratio < 1.5), antinuclear antibody > 1:160 or SMA > 1:80, a standard  of care 
liver biopsy may be performed during current hospital admission to confirm AH and 
exclude  competing etiologies 17 
12  Exclusion Criteria  
1. MELD SCORE <20 or >  35 
2. Active sepsis (positive blood or ascitic cultures) with Systemic Inflammatory Response 
Syndrome (SIRS) or hemodynamic compromise requiring intravenous pressors to maintain tissue  perfusion 
3. Pneumonia as evidenced by radiological  exam 
4. Multi -organ  failure  
5. Renal failure defined by GFR < 35 mL/min  by CKD - EPI. 
6. Clinically acti ve C. diff  infection  
7. History of imaging of the liver (ultrasound, computerized tomography,  or magnetic 
resonance) showing other causes of  jaundice  
8. History of other liver diseases including hepatitis B (positive HBsAg or HBV DNA), hepatitis C (positive HCV RNA), autoimmune hepatitis, Wilson disease,  genetic  
\hemochromatosis, alpha1 -antitrypsin deficiency,  or strong suspicion of Drug Induced 
Liver Injury (DILI) . Previously treated hepatitis C that was cured (sustained virological 
response with negative RNA ≥24 weeks following treatment) is not an exclusion.  
9. History of HIV infection (positive HIV RNA or on treatment for HIV  infection)  
10. History or presence of cancer (including hepatocellular carcinoma) other than non - 
melanoma skin  cancer  
11. History of other significant medical problems such as autoimmune diseases, severe asthma, psoriasis, Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD), etc. that might require immunosuppressive treatments  
12. Pregnancy or  breastfeeding  
13. Prior exposure to experimental therapies in last 3  months  
14. Prior exposure to systemic corticosteroid (glucocorticoid) or immunosuppressive therapy for more than 4 days within previous 30  days 
15. Need  for inotropic  pressor  support to maintain  perfusion to critical  organs within  prior  48 
hours before randomization and initiation of experimental  treatment  
16. Clinically  significant  pancreatitis - abdominal  pain, elevated  lipase  (> 3 X ULN)  and at least 
edema of pancreas with fat -stranding on CT scan 
17. Total WBC count > 30,000/mm3  
18. Known allergy or intolerance t o therapeutic agents to be  tested  
19. Inability to voluntarily obtain informed consent from participant or  guardian 
20. Perceived inability to follow study procedures and comply with  protocol  
21. Platelet count < 40,000 k/cumm.  
22. Positive PCR test for COVID -19 within 7 days prior to the baseline  day 0 visit * 
23.  
Active gastrointestinal bleeding defined as hematemesis or melena with a decrease in 
hemoglobin more than 2 g/dl in 24 hrs. Due  to gastrointestinal bleeding, or with a 
decrease in mean arterial BP to < 65 mmHg  
*Pos itive PCR test for COVID -19 is exclusionar y only during screening period. If a patient tests 
positive any time after baseline randomization, a positive  PCR  test for COVID -19 wi ll be 
considered as a SAE.   
The participants for this study will be recruited from a hospitalized population of participants 
meeting the eligibility criteria outlined above who live within one day travel from one of the 
13  participating clinical centers and who have provided informed consent to participate in this clinical 
trial and who are willing to continue their participatio n for the anticipated follow -up period of the 
trial. Although the primary endpoint is survival at 90 days, follow -up visits will be continued up to 6 
months.  
14  Study Visits and Data Collection Schedule ***** 
 
  
Screening  Treatment Phase  Follow -up 
phase  
D0 D3 D7 D14 D28 D60 D90 D180  
Window  (days)   ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±7 ±7 ±7 ±7 
Informed consent  x         
History and physical  x x x x x x x x x 
Vital signs, weight  
*** x x x x x x x x x 
Alcohol 
consumption history  x x   x x x x x 
Randomization   x        
Concomitant  
medicines  x x x x x x x x x 
Dispense Study 
Drug   x  *      
Adverse events    x x x x x x x 
Electrocardiogram **
**** x         
Evaluation of 
compliance    x x x x x x  
CBC, PT/INR,  
Hepatic Function 
Panel, BMP  x x x x x x x x x 
Test for COVID -
19****  x         
Sepsis studies, as 
indicated  x x x x x x x x x 
Pregnancy test, 
serum ** x         
Pregnancy test, 
urine **  x   x x x x x 
Blood collection for 
trough Anakinra 
levels   x x x x     
Specimen Banking¶   x  x x x x x x 
Saliva Banking+   x      x  
Questionnaires δ x     x x x x 
15  ¶Specimen banking includes blood and stool (when possible) D0, D7, D14, D28, D60, D90, D180, 
and, when available , urine and liver biopsy/tissue. Blood will be used to extract germline DNA at 
baseline and at Day 180 as well as to extract serum/plasma/PBMC at all visits. Type of specimen 
collection is site specific.  
+ Saliva collection at D0 and D90. Collected until an adequate number of samples are collected.  
δ Questionnaires include Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT), Alcohol Timeline 
Follow Back (TLFB), and Chronic Liver Disease Questionnaire (CLDQ ). The timeline follow back 
questionnaire will be the only questionnaire administered at days 28, 60, 90, and 180. All are given at screening.  
*Day 7 study drug dispensation will be unscheduled and only on an as-needed basis, based on safety lab evaluations (outpatient only.)  
** if applicable  
*** height at screening only. 
**** Test for COVID -19 PCR only if not done as SOC with 7 days prior to the  baseline Day 0 
visit.
  
***** In response to COVID- 19, we are lessening restrictions  if applicable or necessary  such as: 
allowing wider windows  D14, D28, D60 to +/ - 10 days.  Allowing replacement of protocol 
mandated in -person study visits with one or more of the following, phone calls, telemedicine virtual  
visits, implement  digital technology to record responses to questionnaires. Lastly, allowing blood 
draws at remote or commercial  laboratories  
******ECG can be done as standard of care within 7 days of screening  
 
Abbreviations: CBC: Complete blood count, BMP : Basic metabo lic, INR: International normalized 
ratio and PT: Prothrombin Time . 
Data Collection  
Clin= clinical (relevant elements of history, physical exam), Biosamples: whole blood, plasma, 
serum, PBMC, DNA, and stool (when possible) at all time -points, liver  biopsy/tissue and urine 
(20ml) if available, Questionnaires= AUDIT, alcohol timeline follow back, CLDQ, SOC (standard of care) labs= CBC, Hepatic Function Panel, BMP : Basic Metabolic Panel ,  PT/ INR, Sepsis 
studies at baseline and during trial duration, as indicated (blood cultures, chest X ray, stool for WBC and C. Diff as indicated, ascites tap, UA with culture, liver ultrasound or other imaging, endoscopy if available within 6 months). 
 
Relevant  clinical  care parameters  will be recorded  on days specified.  As noted  above,  attention  will be 
paid to recording concomitant care provided to treat complications related to AH and/or portal hypertension including those treatments not specified by protocol, including but not limited to antibiotics, IV fluids, albumin, pressors, renal replacement,  etc. 
 
Standardizing study conduct and good clinical practice (GCP)  
 
Variations in protocol implementation and clinical care can have a major impact on trial outcomes. 
This will be optimized by: (1) GCP training and certification of all study personnel, (2) investigator/coordinator training and certification prior to site activation, (3) monthly performance 
reports, (4) development of manual of operations that provide best practices, and (5) annual 
investigator meeting to review developments and clinical and trial practice patterns. (6) DSMB will convene every 6 months to ensure relevant study procedures are followed. 
 
Study Population 
16  The study population will be comprised of men and women of all races, ethnic groups and 
socioeconomic status of the ages of 21  and greater admitted  to the hospital with a clinical diagnosis 
of AH. A full description of the statistical  analysis  and calculat ion of sample  size is recorded  below.  
The definition of AH is established by the NIAAA pan-consortia for AH. A conscious decision not to require a liver biopsy for inclusion was made based on the current low rate of liver biopsy used 
to establish this diagnosis in the US and the ability to diagnose the condition with relative accuracy  
based on the experience in the first cycle of funding. Eligible participants will be identified based 
on inclusion/exclusion criteria as defined above. 
 
 
 
Enrollment sites  
 
Enrollment sites will be limited to the 8 clinical sites selected during the competitive renewal of the 
U01 study for treatment of acute AH. These enrollment sites include: Indiana University School of 
Medicine affiliated hospitals in Indianapolis, Indiana (PI: Dr.  Kavish Patidar ), University of 
Louisville affiliated hospitals in Louisville, Kentucky (PI: Dr. Craig McClain) , Beth Israel Deaconess  
Medical Center in Boston, Massachusetts  (PI: Dr. Gyongyi Szabo), Mayo Clinic in Rochester, 
Minnesota (PI: Dr. Vijay Shah and Patrick Kamath), Cleveland Clinic Foundation in Cleveland, Ohio (PI: Dr. Srinivasan Dasarathy), University of Pittsburgh Medical Center in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (PI: Dr. Ramon Bataller), University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, Texas (PI: Dr. Mack Mitchell), and Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond, Virginia (PI: Dr. Arun Sanyal). Each site will be permitted to use more than one hospital or other healthcare facility to recruit participants based on the inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
 
Expected enrollment per site : 32-33 severe AH participants  
 
Central IRB : The DCC- IU with WIRB as the central I RB for this study. This will require that IRBs 
from all 8 participating centers establish the contractual agreements with WIRB . 
 
Statistical Design and Power  
 
The primary analysis will be comparisons of 90-day mortality of Anakinra plus zinc vs Prednisone 
using survival analysis. Mortality event times greater than 90 days will be censored at 90 days or at time of liver transplant, whichever comes first. The experiment -wise significance leve l will be 5%. 
The most recent data from the AlcHepNet consortium suggest a 90- day mortality rate for 
prednisone is approximately  20%. We estimate that with a total of 258 participants (1 29 per 
treatment arm), we will be able to detect a clinically significant hazards ratio of 0.325, which 
translates to a 13% reduction in 90 -day mortality , i.e., 80 % survival in prednisone vs 93% in 
anakinra plus zinc groups with 8 5% power by using two -sided logrank tests.  We use O’Brien and 
Fleming α -spending function to determine the efficacy stopping boundaries for the sequential tests. 
Specifically, if the test statistics of the log -rank test is greater than 2.963 or less than - 2.963, we will 
claim a significant difference between the two treatments and stop the trial. Otherwise, we will 
continue enrolling more patients until the full sample size is reached and then the final analysis will 
be performed. For the final analysis, if the test statistic value is greater than 1.969 or less than - 1.969, 
we will claim a significant difference between the treatments. Otherwise, we will declare that no 
statistically significant difference is detected.  
 Besides the group sequential tests, we have in place  an early stopp ing rule for futility based on 
conditional power. At the time of interim analysis, we will calculate the conditional power, i.e., the 
probability of claiming difference at the end of the trial given the data at the interim analysis. We will 
stop the trial for futility when the conditional power is less than 0.1. In other words, based on data that become available at the interim analysis, assuming that the current trend continues, we should 
17  early stop the trial if the probability of declaring anakinra + zinc  superior in the final analysis is low 
(e.g., less than 10%). We use this early stopping rule to limit patient exposure to a potentially 
inefficacious treatment.  
 
 
Group Assignment  
Participants will be randomized to the two  treatment groups with matching placebos for drugs in 
the other arm, in equal proportions. Randomization will be stratified by site and MELD score. 
Random blocks of size 4 will be generated  to ensure treatment assignments are balanced between 
the two treatment arms within each block. Both participants , coordinators, and investigators will be 
blinded to the randomization plans. 
 
Statistical Analyses  
The primary analyses of 90 -day mortality wi ll be performed in an  Intention -to-Treat (ITT) 
framework  using survival analysis . Specifically,  
 
(1) we will use all -cause mortality in the first 90 -days as the primary outcome event of interest. We 
will compare the distributions of time to mortality between the two treatment arms. In the primary analysis, mortality event time s greater than 90 days will be censored at the 90 days or at 
the time of liver transplant, whichever comes first. We will use the Logrank test to compare the survival functions of the two treatment groups. Cox regression analysis can be performed if it is necessary to control for the influences of unbalanced patient characteristics, such as MELD score, between the treatment groups. If evidence suggests a violation of the hazard function proportionality, we will conduct an analysis of the restricted mean survival time (RMST) of the first 90 days.  
(2) as a secondary analysis, we will compare transplant -free survival in the first 90 days of treatment 
initiation as between the two treatment arms, as  done in other clinical trials. We will perform 
logrank test, Cox regression, and RMST analyses as appropriate. 
(3) we plan to conduct one interim analysis and one final analysis for this trial. The interim analysis 
will be conducted when 129 patients, half of  the enrollment number, complete the 90 -day 
follow-up. We use the group sequential method to control the type 1 error rate of the trial. 
(4)  as another secondary analysis, we will examine the treatment effects in patients with baseline 
MELD scores ≤ 25 and >25 by assess ing the equality of treatment effects of the anakinra in high 
and low MELD groups, we will test the interaction between the intervention indicator and 
baseline MELD score  in the Cox regression model .  
  
Subject Participation Duration  
 
180 days  
Recruitment and Retention Plan  
 
Sources of participants: 
Identification of participants with severe AH requires collaboration with those physicians who manage these participants within the hospital and the emergency department. Almost 100% of participants are admitted to hospital based on the severity of their liver disease. Occasionally participants are seen in free -standing urgent care centers, free -standing emergency rooms or in 
office/clinic practices. Since the standard of care is to admit these participants for further evaluation to exclude infections as a precipitating cause of decompensated liver disease, most will ultimately be identified in a hospital setting. Letters will also be sent to referring MDs and referring hospitals.  
18   
Some sites in the current U01 have found that screening laboratory results for elevated AST and 
total bilirubin is a useful way to identify potential participants. In accordance with Institutional Review Board Policies, once identified the primary team caring for these participants must be contacted by the investigators and agree to ask the participant about their interest in participating in a clinical trial as part of the treatment of the underlying AH. Once the participant expresses willingness to be contacted the investigators may discuss details of the study and obtain informed consent prior to beginning treatment.  
 
Management of barriers for recruitment:  
Special conferences with medicine, ICU and ER staff will increase awareness of the trial , and  its 
significance . Contact information  for study personnel will be made available so that they can meet 
with participants and their family to educate them about AH and the trial. For those who live at a distance, travel costs will be budgeted in alignment with local practices  for other trials. 
 
Contingency plans: 
Recruitment will be tracked with monthly review of expected versus actual enrollment. Screen fail rates will also be assessed. There will be direct communication between DCC -IU, NIAAA and study 
leadership with site -PI and staff to better understand the barriers for recruitment and 
develop/implement solutions. Best practices from high- performing sites will be shared with the 
under-performing sites. For continued failure, the site budgets will be cut,  and funds redirected 
towards supporting enrollment at high performing sites after discussion with NIAAA project officer.  
  
19   
Retention plan: 
It is anticipated that some participants will drop out after the initial hospitalization. This will be 
minimized by participant education, frequent communication by study coordinator and provision of ways for participants and their family to communicate with the study team. Travel support will be provided when needed. 
 
Competition from other trials:  
The participating clinical centers will not engage in other trials for AH that have similar eligibility criteria for the duration of the trial . 
Safeguards : 
Each clinical center will establish safeguards for vulnerable population s, especially institutional 
employees,  and the ir familie s, in close collaboration with their institutional review boards. 
 
Investigator’s Affirmation  
 
I have received and read the current version of the Investigator’s Brochure (IB) for Anakinra, zinc, and prednisone and this protocol AlcHepNet - 02. H aving fully considered all the 
information available, I agree that it is ethically justifiable to give Anakinra, zinc, and prednisone to selected participants/participants according to this protocol.  
 
I understand that all information concerning Anakinra, zinc, and prednisone supplied to me by the AlcHepNet Consortium and from SOBI Pharmaceuticals  and not previously published is 
confidential.  This includes the IB, Clinical Trial Protocol, Case Report Forms (CRF) and any other 
preclinical and clinical  data. 
 
I understand that no data are to be made  public or published without prior knowledge and written 
approval by the AlcHepNet Steering  Committee.  
 
By my signature below,  I hereby  attest  that I have read, understood and agreed  to abide by all  the 
conditions, instructions and restrictions  contained  in protocol AlcHepNet  - 02 and in accordance 
with Good Clinical Practice (CPMP/ICH/135/95), 21CFR Part 312 and all applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
I acknowledge that the Steering Committee of the AlcHepNet Consortium has the right to discontinue this trial at any time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investigator’s Name (Printed)    
Investigator’s Signature   Date  
20  Abbreviations  
 
Abbreviation  Definition  
6-ECDCA  6α-ethyl chenodeoxycholic acid  
AASLD  American Association for the Study of Liver Disease  
AAH  
AE(s)  acute alcoholic hepatitis  
adverse event(s)  
AGA  American Gastroenterological Association  
AH alcoholic hepatitis  
AKI acute kidney injury  
ALT alanine aminotransferase  
ALP alkaline phosphatase  
ANR  anakinra 
AST aspartate aminotransferase  
AUDIT  alcohol use disorders identification test 
BL baseline 
BP blood pressure 
BAS bile acid sequestrants  
BUN blood urea nitrogen 
CBC complete blood count 
CDCA chenodeoxycholic acid  
C.Diff  clostridium difficile  
CFR 
CLDQ code of federal regulations  
chronic liver disease questionnaire 
CMP complete metabolic panel  
Cmax maximum concentration  
CRA clinical research associate  
COVID -19 Coronavirus disease 2019 
CRF case report form  
CT computerized tomography 
DCC  data coordinating center  
DCA  deoxycholic acid  
DCC -IU data coordinating center -Indiana University 
DILI  drug induced liver injury 
dL deciliter(s)  
DSMB  data and safety monitoring board  
20  ECG  electrocardiogram  
ER emergency room 
FDA  Food and Drug Administration 
FGF -19 fibroblast growth factor -19 
FXR  farnesoid X receptor  
GGT  gamma- glutamyltransferase  
GMP  good manufacturing practice  
GCP  good clinical practice  
HBsAg  hepatitis B surface antigen  
HBV DNA  hepatitis B Virus deoxyribonucleic acid  
HCV RNA  hepatitis C virus ribonucleic acid 
HDPE high- density polyethylene  
HIV human immunodeficiency virus  
HIV RNA  human immunodeficiency virus ribonucleic acid  
IB investigator’s brochure  
IBD inflammatory bowel disease  
ICF informed consent form  
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
ICU intensive care unit  
IgM immunoglobulin M  
IL-1 interleukin -1 
IL-1β interleukin -1beta  
IL-6 interleukin -6 
IND investigational new drug  
INR international normalized ratio  
IRB institutional review board  
ISF investigator site file  
ITT intention to treat  
IU/L  international units per liter  
IV intravenous 
LTSE  long term safety extension  
MAP  mean arterial pressure  
MCP1  monocyte chemoattractant protein -1 
MELD  model for end stage liver disease  
mg milligram(s)  
21  mL milliliter(s)  
mm Hg  millimeter of mercury  
mmol/l  millimoles per liter  
NAFLD  nonalcoholic fatty liver disease  
NASH  nonalcoholic steatohepatitis 
NDB  nutrition database  
NIAAA  National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism  
NIH  National Institute of Health  
PBC primary biliary cirrhosis  
PI principal investigator  
PLB placebo  
PK pharmacokinetic(s)  
PROMIS  patient reported outcomes measurement system  
qSOFA  quick -sequential organ failure assessment  
SAE serious adverse event  
SIRS  systemic inflammatory response syndrome  
SOC  standard of care  
SOFA  sequential organ failure assessment  
SUSAR  suspected, unexpected serious adverse reaction  
SAP statistical analysis plan  
TEAE(s)  treatment -emergent adverse event(s)  
TIPS  transjugular  intrahepatic portosystemic shunt  
TNF -α tumor necrosis factor -alpha  
TNF -β tumor necrosis factor -beta 
UA urinary analysis  
UDCA  ursodeoxycholic acid 
U/L units per liter  
ULN  upper limit(s) of normal  
US United States (of America)  
vs versus  
WBC white blood cell  
WIRB  Western Institutional Review Board  
22  2.1 Introduction and Rationale - Anakinra, Prednisone and Zinc in Severe AH 
2.1.1 Clinical  Experience  
Anakinra, prednisone and zinc used in this trial have FDA-approved labeling for other 
indications. FDA-approved labeling is included in the Investigator’s Brochure. 
1. Anakinra is indicated for reduction in signs and symptoms and slowing the progression of 
structural damage in moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis. It has been previously 
studied in AH7. 
2. Zinc-sulfate  is a nutritional supplement. Zinc supplementation reverses the clinical signs of zinc 
deficiency in participants with alcoholic liver  disease.  
3. Prednisone is indicated  for numerous conditions including inflammatory  disease.  Corticosteroids, 
such as prednisolone, are considered standard of care in alcoholic liver  disease.  
 
2.1.2 Status of Drugs in Other  Countries  
Anakinra, zinc sulfate, and prednisone are licensed in numerous other countries and have not 
been withdrawn.  
 
2.1.3 Pharmacology and Toxicology Information  
Drug Interactions : 
 
There are no drug interactions listed in MicroMedex or PubMed with the other agents given 
concurrently in the protocol –Anakinra + zinc sulfate (current as of 23 Jan 2019). Prednisone is given as the single study agent in arm 1. The investigator at each site will check for drug 
interactions between study drugs and other concurrent medications for each participant.  
23  2.2 Rationale for Trial Design and Dose for Study  Medication 
2.2.1 Study  Rationale:  
Severe AH continues to be associated with a high mortalit y and represents a significant public health 
burden8-13. Prednisone is the standard of care but is associated with a modest and transient survival 
benefit at best and increased risk of severe bacterial and fungal infections14-16. A recent large study 
indic ated that pentoxifylline is not significantly superior to placebo15. While several new targets are 
being evaluated, they are not sufficiently powered to provide definitive data. There is therefore a 
need for well -designed, appropriately powered efficacy (p hase 2B or 3) trials to define the utility of 
newer therapies for severe AH against prednisone.  
 
2.2.2 Rationale for Prednisone in Severe AH, current standard of care for severe Acute Alcoholic 
Hepatitis  (AAH):  
 
Corticosteroid therapy is recommended by the American Association for the Study of Liver 
Diseases as primary treatment for participants with severe AAH, defined by the Maddrey DF > 32 
based on Class I, level A evidence1. Participants with DF < 32 have six -month survival of > 85% 
whereas those with DF > 32 have a survival of only 60%. Almost all trials of corticosteroids have 
treated participants for 28 days. Although short -term mortality is reduced by 28 days of 
corticosteroids, 6 -month survival is similar to standard care. Many reasons account for late 
deterioration in steroid treated participants. Infections develop after the first 30 days in some participants treated with steroids. Tapering the dose of steroids (median of 15 days) after 50% improvement in  total bilirubin and prothrombin time combined with enteral nutrition reduced the 
risk of late infections
17. The investigators postulated that the benefit of enteral nutrition was 
mediated through improvement in integrity of the gut mucosal barrier and red uced gut bacterial 
translocation and  endotoxemia.  
 
Early improvement in bilirubin within the first week is predictive of a good response to 
corticosteroids at 28 days18. Although corticosteroids improve survival in a subset of participants 
with severe AAH,  some participants do not respond, either because of steroid “resistance” or due to 
the underlying severity of the disease. Steroids are not well tolerated in participants with active GI 
bleeding or systemic  infections.  
 
Corticosteroids represent a clinically tested treatment for severe AH and will be offered to a third of 
the participants in this randomized clinical trial.  
 
2.2.3 Rationale for testing anakinra plus zinc as novel drugs for severe AH against  the standard 
treatment (Prednisone in Arm 2): 
 
There are  currently no new drugs formally approved by the FDA for severe AH. The rationale to 
repurpose already available agents for AH treatment is to generate evidence to support moving to pivotal trials by the drug manufacturers or support the off -label use of t hese compounds and thus 
provide much needed benefit to those with severe AH.  
24  2.2.4 Clinical applications of anakinra:  
Preliminary data from the interim analysis of the ongoing clinical trial from the Defeat Alcoholic 
Steatohepatitis (DASH) UO1 consortium suggests that the treatment arm with anakinra plus 
pentoxiphylline plus zinc may provide better survival at day 90 and 180 compared to the steroid 
treated group. Side effects including infection rates were comparable between the anakinra and steroid arms.  
 
Anakinra blocks the effects of IL -1 by inhibiting the binding of IL -1ß and IL -1α to the IL -1 
receptor. It is FDA -approved for treatment of moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis (RA) since 
2001, and is used also in patients with Still's disease, and in familial cold autoinflammatory and 
Muckle -Wells syndromes20-22. 
 
Anakinra has an excellent safety profile compared to ot her biological therapies. The rate of serious 
infections was 3.2 per 100 participant -years in participants exposed to Anakinra23. A meta -analysis of 
trials evaluating anakinra in RA reported a 1.4% incidence of serious infections with anakinra, 
compared wi th 0.5% with placebo, although this difference was not significant after adjustment for 
underlying comorbidities24. This is important given that participants with severe AH are prone to 
bacterial infections. No adverse reactions or microbial superinfections were attributable to anakinra 
treatment in participants with severe sepsis25. Other FDA approved drug candidates for inhibiting 
IL- 1 are canakinumab and rilonacept26,27, that are human monoclonal antibodies and both target IL - 
1ß (and not IL -1α). The advantage of anakinra is that it prevents both IL -1ß and IL -1α effects. An 
additional advantage of the anakinra is its short half -life for participants with alcoholic liver disease 
given the concern of susceptibility to infections in this parti cipant population.  
Anakinra, a human recombinant IL -1 receptor antagonist, prevents IL -1 receptor signaling 28-30. IL- 
1ß, that activates the IL -1receptor, is a unique therapeutic target in AH because unlike other pro - 
inflammatory cytokines, IL -1ß secret ion is under control of two cytokines, IL -1ß secretion is under 
control of two signals31. This dual regulation suggests that accumulation of multiple danger signals 
will trigger IL -1ß secretion28. We have recently identified that gut -derived LPS and steril e danger 
signals such as ATP and uric acid from alcohol -damaged hepatocytes act in concert to activate the 
multiprotein complex, NLRP3 inflammasome, that results in activation for IL -1ß secretion via 
caspase -1/pro- IL-1ß cleavage32,33. The biological signif icance of increased IL -1ß production extends 
beyond the direct pro -inflammatory effects of IL -1ß29. IL1ß, after engaging the IL- 1 receptor, 
amplifies pro -inflammatory cytokine production including IL -1, TNF, MCP -1, and IL -634. In 
addition, IL -1ß mediates b iological effects that contribute to salient pathological features of ALD 
and AH. Specifically, IL -1ß promotes steatosis, hepatocyte death, liver fibrosis and inhibits liver 
regeneration19,30,35. All of these biological effects of IL -1ß and IL -1receptor ac tivation are blocked by 
the naturally occurring IL1receptor antagonist (IL -1ra). Testing of the IL -1 receptor antagonist, 
anakinra, in mice fed with the Lieber -DeCarli alcohol or control diet for 4 weeks revealed that 
alcohol -induced increase in serum ALT,  liver steatosis and upregulated inflammatory cytokine 
production (TNFα, pro -IL-1β, mature IL -1β) were all significantly reduced by IL -1ra administration . 
25  (Fig 1)30. 
 
 
 
2.2.5 Clinical applications of Zinc  supplementation: 
Zinc is an essential trace element required for normal cell growth, development, and 
differentiation36. It is a critical component of many proteins/enzymes, including zinc - dependent 
transcription factors. Importantly, oxidative stress (e.g., resulting from ethanol metabolism) may 
cause release of zinc from critical zinc -finger proteins and subsequent loss of DNA- binding activity 
and function36. Zinc deficiency/altered zinc metabolism is regularly observed in people with AH and 
may result from decreased dietary intake, increased urinary excretion, abnormal activation of certain 
zinc transporters, and induction of hepatic metallothionein37. Zinc deficiency has been shown to 
cause/exacerbate gut barrier dysfunction, endotoxemia, increased proinflammatory cytokine 
production, oxidative stress, decreased zinc finger function, and hepatocyte steatosis/injury/death in 
experimental ALD36,38- 51. Similarly, zinc supplementation improved experimental ALD, in part, by 
stabilizing tight junctions, reducing endotoxemia, lowering levels of metabolic toxins such as 
ammonia, decreasing production of pro- inflammatory cytokines, reducing oxidative stress, and 
attenuating hepatocyte steatosis/injury/death . (Figure 2) 36,38-51. 

26  Moreover, limited studies in human ALD have generally shown similar mechanistic beneficial effects 
of zinc (Figure 2 -unpublished data). The dose of zinc used for treatment of ALD usually is 50 mg of 
elemental zinc taken with a meal to decrease the potential side effect of nausea. This clinical trial will use zinc supplementation to inhibit multiple mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis/progression 
of AAH and possibly other organ failure, beginning with intestinal barrier dysfunction (Figure 2).  
 
2.2.5 Impact  Statement:  
The proposed trial will provide definitive evidence of the safety and efficacy of Anakinra plus zinc vs prednisone in severe AH; if positive, it will change the standard of care for severe AH and, if 
negative, it will discourage their off label  use thereby saving cost and potential exposure to an 
ineffective drug in afflicted participants. In either case, the proposed study will alter how participants with severe AH are managed.  
27  2.3 Summary of Known Potential Risks with Study  Medication  
Corticosteroids  (including prednisone) are the standard medical care for severe acute AH and 
have anti -inflammatory effects that can alter the body’s reaction to other injuries.  Prednisone 
may cause some, all or none of the side -effects listed below at the  dose and duration used in the 
study. 
 
Side effects  Frequent  
>20% of 
participants  Occasional  
2 - 20%  of 
participants  Rare 
Less than 2% of 
participants  
Serious  Infection  Psychosis, 
Pancreatitis, 
Ulcerative esophagitis, Cushing’s syndrome Anaphylaxis, 
Hypersensitivity reaction, Peptic ulcer, Bone necrosis, Blood clot in a deep 
vein 
Less Serious  Weight gain  High blood 
sugar, High 
blood pressure, Wound healing impairment, 
Increased 
intraocular pressure, Increased liver enzymes  Muscle weakness  
Minor  Facial swelling 
Fluid retention Indigestion 
Increased appetite  Difficulty 
sleeping, Mood changes, Euphoria, Headache, 
Bruising  
 
28  Anakinra  (study drug) is another anti -inflammatory treatment. It can alter the body’s 
reaction to other injuries. Anakinra may cause some, all or none of the side -effects listed 
below at the dose and duration used in the study. 
 
 
Side Effects  Frequent  
>20% of participants  Occasional 
2 - 20% of  
participants  Rare 
Less than 2% of 
participants  
Serious   Infection, including 
cellulitis, pneumonia 
and bone and joint infections) Anaphylaxis, 
hypersensitivity reactions, Angioedema, 
Malignancy  
Less Serious   Low blood count, 
(Neutropenia), Joint 
pain Low blood count 
(Eosinophilia, Platelets), Nausea, Diarrhea 
Minor  Injection site redness  Fever, 
Nasopharyngitis, Skin 
rash  
 
 
Zinc  is an essential  nutrient found in highest quantities  in oysters,  shellfish, meat,  chicken , 
and fish. It is essential  for the body’s cells to function. When given  in tablets,  zinc may 
cause  some,  all or none of the side-effects listed below at the dose and duration used in 
the study. 
 
 Side effects  Frequent  
>20% of participants  Occasional 
2 - 20% of  
participants  Rare 
Less than 2% of 
participants  
Serious     
Less Serious  Nausea, Vomiting, 
Dizziness, Headache, 
Abdominal cramps, 
Diarrhea   
Minor  Indigestion    
29  3. TRIAL  OBJECTIVES 
The primary purpose of this study is to determine whether Anakinra plus zinc is superior to 
standard treatment with Prednisone in the treatment of severe AH.  
 
Primary Endpoint  
• Survival at 90 days.  
Secondary Endpoints  
• Change in Lille score,  change  in MELD  score,  development  of AKI,  multi -organ  failure,  SIRS, 
transfer  to ICU, changes  in liver function will all be evaluated  at 7, 30 and 90 days.  
• Organ dysfunction: Changes in Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores and 
proportions requiring hemodynamic support for MAP < 65 mm Hg and lactate > 2  mmol/l, 
renal replacement therapy or mechanical ventilation. We will also modify and re -evaluate the 
SOFA score without platelet counts given that these are usually low in  AH. 
• Infections and Sepsis: It is now recognized that the endpoints and case definitions related to 
sepsis may vary depending on what these will be used for (clinical care, research, surveillance , or 
quality improvement). Given the central role of sepsis as a driver of outcomes, we will not only measure  the types  of infection  but also identify  the proportions of those with sepsis, septic  shock 
or quick- SOFA (qSOFA) criteria based on SEPSIS -3 guidance
2,3. Capturing the key parameters 
needed for various sepsis rel ated endpoint construction aligned by the recent guidance from the 
European Drug Development Hub (http://eddh- cro.wixsite.com/fdtsfv).  
• Renal  dysfunction:  In alignment  with guidance from  the acute  disease quality initiative, we will 
quantify AKI development and its progression through persistent AKI, acute kidney disease to chronic kidney disease.  
• Need  for care escalation:  Proportion of participants  requiring transfer  to ICU for care. 
• Indicators of gut: Permeability (endotoxin and bacterial 18S DNA) and pro - inflammatory 
cytokine/chemokines (TNFa, MCP1, IL -6, IL-1ß) will be assessed in serum/plasma samples. 
• Survival at 30 and 180 days.  
 
Limitations of mortality as an endpoint in AH and plans to overcome these:  
All-cause mortality is most relevant when mortality is substantial and attributable to a single 
mechanism in a homogeneous population. Participants with severe AH are highly heterogeneous 
with respect to disease severity, end organ involvement and the care they receive. Moreover, as in 
sepsis and heart failure, death involves failure of multiple organs (liver, heart, kidney, lungs) making it difficult to ascertain which one is the primary cause of death. This has led to development and regulatory acceptance of composite endpoints including mortality and key parameters driving mortality for acute heart failure trials. We will leverage these guiding principles to construct a novel 
and innovative key secondary composite endpoint whi ch will include death or worsening of the 
SOFA score
4,5 by ≥2 points and worsening of MELD score by ≥2 points. These are associated with 
mortality and capture the organ recruitment that marks progression of AH towards death. This 
endpoint will also be validated  with respect  to reliability, construct -, criterion - and content  validity  to 
30  establish this as a primary endpoint in future trials. We will also model changes in SOFA scores and 
MELD scores against mortality to further optimize this endp oint and cross- validate it in the 
observation cohort.  
 
Novel (experimental) endpoints to overcome limitations of conventional endpoints Efficacy 
endpoints must capture “clinically meaningful benefit”. While traditional endpoints such as mortality are meani ngful, they also have multiple shortcomings in the context of AH as noted below. We will 
therefore innovate to construct, measure and validate novel additional endpoints to overcome the limitations of currently used endpoints and cross- validate them in the  observational cohort. Our 
combined expertise in endpoint development and the use of harmonized measurements will make this feasible. These will provide novel assessments in AH and provide the scientific evidence -base to 
use these as primary endpoints in f uture trials.  
4. INVESTIGATIONAL  PLAN  
4.1 Overall Trial Design and Plan 
Overview of Study Design and Conduct  
The proposed study is a Phase 2b, multicenter, prospective, randomized, 2 -arm, double blinded, 
placebo -controlled clinical trial to assess the efficacy of Anakinra, an IL -1 receptor antagonist plus 
zinc compared  to prednisone  for the treatment  of severe  AH (Model  for End Stage  Liver Disease 
(MELD) score ≥ 20). All participants will receive standard care for treatment of severe AH as 
described in recent guidelines endorsed by AASLD and AGA1. The study will be conducted at 8 
clinical sites across the United Stated selected by the NIAAA and will be spearheaded by a Data 
Coordinating Center (DCC- IU) at Indiana  University . 
 
The study will be conducted according to good clinical practice (GCP) and in compliance with local, 
state, and federal regulatory requirements. Adverse events during the course of the trial will be 
identified, recorded, assessed for causality , and reported in accordance with FDA guidance. In 
addition to general assessment, we will specifically focus on (1) rates and types of infection as well as their severity, (2) potential development of drug -induced liver injury, (3) injection site reactions , and  
(4) hematological adverse events. These are related to the mechanisms of action of the drugs to be tested.  
 
It is anticipated that this study will be approved by an appropriately convened single IRB and will be monitored by an NIAAA appointed data and safety monitoring board. We will conduct this study under an Investigational New Drug (IND) application from the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
 
It is anticipated that a centrally located investigational pharmacy locat ed at Indiana University will 
dispense the study medications to all participating sites under close coordination from the DCC-  IU. 
Anakinra plus zinc and prednisone and matching placebos will be provided by the study to the participants.  
 
Interventions to be tested  
 
Concomitant treatments in this trial include standard care for severe AH for all participants as recommended in recent guidelines. The standard of care for severe AH includes attention to early diagnosis and treatment of bacterial and fungal inf ections, portal hypertension and its complications 
including acute kidney injury, gastrointestinal bleeding, fluid overload (ascites and edema) and hepatic encephalopathy. As part of the standard of care, all participants will be offered non - 
31  pharmacologic intervention for treatment of alcohol use disorders, such as cognitive behavioral 
therapy and 12 -step programs intervention as aligned with the best practices at the participating 
study site.  
 
Participants with severe AH are very sick and of ten have multiple active medical problems requiring 
intervention. The use of specific interventions during this time has the potential to modify treatment 
response. Ideally, these interventions would be completely standardized. However, the standard of care varies by region, institution and the specialties involved in the care of the participant. The 
decision regarding treatments for these complications will be delegated to the primary physicians caring for the participants during hospitalizations and to the investigators during the ambulatory follow -up of the participants. Other than the general guidelines noted, no specific treatments for 
specific  complications  such as those  noted  are required.  However,  such treatments  might  include,  but 
are not limited to  the administration of IV fluids, intravenous human serum albumin, antibiotics 
including antifungal medications, renal replacement therapy, supplemental oxygen, assisted 
ventilation and intravenous pressors. Diagnostic procedures such as paracentesis, uppe r endoscopy, 
colonoscopy, endoscopic ultrasound,  and liver biopsy will be permitted as required to provide 
standard  care. 
 
During the initial six months of trial, the investigators will develop a “manual of clinical operations” that will include best pract ices on the use of vasopressors, albumin, ICU care, mechanical ventilation 
and renal replacement therapy using Surviving Sepsis Campaign, International Guidelines for 
Management of Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock. The investigators will also provide best pr actices for 
management of nutrition and alcohol counseling and minimization of recidivism. Although the management of these complications will not be mandated by protocol, the care provided will be recorded to develop novel designs for future trials and for practice guidance and quality improvement 
programs.  
 
After  ensuring  that participants  meet  all of the inclusion criteria and none  of the exclusion criteria,  and 
after the informed consent has been obtained participants will be randomized to receive one of the 
following interventions in addition to standard care. 
 
Group 1 : Standard of care plus prednisone (40 mg orally) once daily on Days 1 -30 and matching 
placebos for Anakinra (1 syringe s.c. once daily on Days 1 -14) and zinc (matched pill on ce daily on 
Days 1 -90). 
Group  2: Standard  of care plus Anakinra  (100 mg s.c.) once daily  on Days  1-14, zinc sulfate 220 mg 
once daily on Days 1 -90, and placebo for prednisone (matched pill once daily on Days 1 -30).  
Lille score will be calculated from day 7 labs, participants will stop prednisone or prednisone 
placebo if Lille score >0.45.  
 
 
32   
 
Figure 1. Distribution of study drugs and placebo  
 
 
Participants or guardian will be instructed in subcutaneous injection technique to continue self- 
administration  of these  experimental  treatments  after discharge from  the hospital. Study personnel will 
ensure participants  and guardian  are proficient in the technique before the end of study visit. 
 
Relevant  clinical  care parameters  will be recorded  on days specified.  As noted  above,  attention  will be 
paid to recording concomitant care provided to treat complications related to AH or portal hypertension including those treatments not specified by protocol, including , but not limited to , 
antibiotics, IV fluids, albumin, pressors, renal replacement,  etc. 
 
Standardizing study conduct and good clinical practice (GCP)  
 
Variations in protocol implementation and clinical care can have a major impact on trial outcomes. 
This will be optimized by: (1) GCP training and certification of all study personnel, (2) investigator/coordinator training and certification  prior to site activation, (3) monthly performance 
reports, (4) development of manual of operations that provide best practices and study procedures 
to follow, and (5) annual investigator meeting to review developments and clinical and trial practice 
patte rns. 

33  4.2 Schedule of Trial  Procedures  
Table 1. Study Visits and Data Collection Schedule ***** 
 
  
Screening  Treatment Phase  Follow -up 
phase  
D0 D3 D7 D14 D28 D60 D90 D180  
Window  (days)   ±2 ±2 ±2 ±2 ±7 ±7 ±7 ±7 
Informed consent  x         
History and physical  x x x x x x x x x 
Vital signs, weight  
*** x x x x x x x x x 
Alcohol 
consumption history  x x   x x x x x 
Randomization   x        
Concomitant  
medicines  x x x x x x x x x 
Dispense Study 
Drug   x  *      
Adverse events    x x x x x x x 
Electrocardiogram *
*****  x         
Evaluation of 
compliance    x x x x x x  
CBC , PT/INR,  
Hepatic Function 
Panel, BMP  
 x x x x x x x x x 
Test for COVID -
19****  x         
Sepsis studies, as  
indicated  x x x x x x x x x 
Pregnancy test, 
serum ** x         
Pregnancy test, 
urine **  x   x x x x x 
Blood collection for 
trough A nakinra 
levels   x x x x     
Specimen Banking¶   x  x x x x x x 
Saliva Banking+   x      x  
Questionnaires δ x     x x x x 
34  ¶Specimen banking includes blood and stool (when possible) D0, D7, D14, D28, D60, D90, D180, 
and, when  available, urine and liver biopsy/tissue. Blood will be used to extract germline DNA at 
baseline and  at Day 180 as well as to extract serum/plasma/PBMC at  all visits. Type of specimen 
collection is site  specific.  
+ Saliva banking at D0 and D90 . Collected until an adequate number of samples are collected.  
δ Questionnaires include Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT), Alcohol Timeline  
Follow Back  (TLFB), and Chronic Liver Disease Questionnaire (CLDQ). The timeline follow back 
questionnaire will be the only questionnaire administered at days 28, 60, 90, and 180. All are given 
at screening.  
*Day 7 study drug dispensation will be unscheduled and only on an as- needed basis, based on safety  
lab evaluations (outpatient only.)  
** If applicable  
*** Height at screening only.  
**** Test for COVID -19 PCR only if not done as SOC with 7 days prior to the baseline  Day 0 
visit.  
***** In response to COVID -19, we are lessening restrictions  if applicable or necessary  such as:  
allowing wider windows  D14, D28, D60 to +/ - 10 days.  Allowing replacement of protocol 
mandated in -person study visits with one or more of the  following, phone  calls, telemedicine virtual  
visits , implement  digital technology to record responses to questionnaires. Lastly, allowing blood 
draws at remote or commercial laboratories . 
******ECG can  be done as standard of care within  7 days of screening  
 
 
Abbreviations: CBC: Complete blood count, BMP: Basic metabolic panel, INR: International  
normalized ratio and PT: Prothrombin Time.  
Data Collection  
Clin= clinical (relevant elements of history, physical exam), Biosamples: whole blood, plasma, serum,  
PBMC, DNA, (and stool (when possible) at all time -points, Liver biopsy/tissue and urine (20ml) if 
available,  Questionnaires= AUDIT, alcohol timeline follow back, CLDQ.  SOC (standard of care) 
labs= CBC,  Hepatic Function Panel, BMP, PT/ INR, Sepsis studies at baseline and during trial 
duration, as indicated (blood cultures, chest X ray, stool for WBC and C. Diff, as indicated, ascites 
tap, UA with  culture, liver ultrasoun d or other imaging, endoscopy if available within 6 months).  
 
4.3 Duration of Trial by  Phase  
 
 
Time expected for all participants to be 
enrolled:  5 years  
Duration of individual participant 
participation:  90 days during the treatment phase 
90 days during the follow up phase  
180 days total participation  
Total duration of trial (excluding data  
collection and analysis):  5 years  
35  5. PARTICIPANT SELECTION  
5.1 Participant  Population  
The study population will be comprised of men and women of all races, ethnic groups and 
socioeconomic status of the ages of 21  and greater  admitted to the hospital with a clinical diagnosis 
of AH. The definition of AH is based on criteria established by NIAAA. A conscious decision not to require a liver biopsy for inclusion was made based on the current low rate of liver biopsy used to estab lish this diagnosis in the US and the ability  to diagnose  the condition with relative  accuracy  based 
on the experience in the first cycle of funding. Eligible participants will be identified based on inclusion/exclusion criteria as defined  below.  
Inclusion  Criteria/  Exclusion  Criteria  
Inclusion  Criteria  
 
1. AH, as defined by the NIAAA pan -consortia for  AH: 
a) Onset  of jaundice  (defined  as serum  total  bilirubin  >3 mg/dL)  within  the prior  
8 weeks  
b) Regular consumption of alcohol with an intake of > 40 gm daily or >280gm weekly on average  for women  and > 60 gm daily or >420gm  weekly  on average  for men for 6 months 
or more,  with less than 8 weeks  of abstinence  before  onset  of jaundice  
c) AST > 50 IU/l 
d) AST: ALT  > 1.5 and both values < 400  IU/l 
e) and/or histological evidence of  AH* 
 
 
2. MELD 20 -35 on day of  randomization.  
 
3. Ages ≥  21 
 
* In patients with possible AH or AH with confounding factors such as possible ischemic 
hepatitis, possible DILI, uncertain history of alcohol use (e.g., patient denies excessive  
alcohol use), and atypical/abnormal laboratory tests (e.g., AST < 50 IU/ IU/L  or > 400 
IU/IU/L , AST/ALT ratio < 1.5), antinuclear antibody > 1:160 or SMA > 1:80,  
standard of  care liver biopsy may be performed during current hospital admission to 
confirm AH and  exclude competing etiologies 17. 
36  Exclusion Criteria  
1. MELD SCORE <20 or >  35 
2. Active sepsis (positive blood or ascitic cultures) with Systemic Inflammatory Response 
Syndrome (SIRS) or hemodynamic compromise requiring intravenous pressors to maintain tissue  perfusion 
3. Pneumonia as evidenced by radiological  exam 
4. Multi -organ  failure  
5. Renal failure defined by GFR < 35 mL/min  by CKD EPI . 
6. Clinically active C. diff  infection  
7. History of imaging of the liver (ultrasound, computerized tomography,  or magnetic 
resonance) showing other causes of  jaundice  
8. History of other liver diseases including hepatitis B (positive HBsAg or HBV DNA), hepatitis C (positive HCV RNA), autoimmune hepatitis, Wilson disease,  genetic 
\hemochromatosis, alpha1 -antitrypsin deficiency,  or strong suspicion of Drug Induced 
Liver Injury (DILI) . Previously treated hepatitis C that was cured (sustained virological 
response with negative RNA ≥24 week s following treatment) is not an exclusion.  
9. History of HIV infection (positive HIV RNA or on treatment for HIV  infection)  
10. History or presence of cancer (including hepatocellular carcinoma) other than non - 
melanoma skin  cancer  
11. History of other significant m edical problems such as autoimmune diseases, severe asthma, 
psoriasis, Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD), etc. that might require immunosuppressive treatments  
12. Pregnancy or  breastfeeding  
13. Prior exposure to experimental therapies in last 3  months  
14. Prior exposur e to systemic corticosteroid (glucocorticoid) or immunosuppressive therapy 
for more than 4 days within previous 30  days 
15. Need  for inotropic  pressor  support to maintain  perfusion to critical  organs within  prior  48 
hours before randomization and initiation of  experimental  treatment  
16. Clinically  significant  pancreatitis - abdominal  pain, elevated  lipase  (> 3 X ULN)  and at least 
edema of pancreas with fat -stranding on CT scan 
17. Total WBC count > 30,000/mm3  
18. Known allergy or intolerance to therapeutic agents to be  tested  
19. Inability to voluntarily obtain informed consent from participant or  guardian 
20. Perceived inability to follow study procedures and comply with  protocol  
21. Platelet count < 40,000 k/cumm.  
22. Positive PCR test for COVID - 19 within 7 days prior to the baseline day 0 visit * 
23. 
Active gastrointestinal bleeding defined as hematemesis or melena with a decrease in hemoglobin more than 2 g/dl in 24 hrs. Due to gastrointestinal bleeding, or with a decrease in mean arterial BP to < 65 mmHg.   
 
*Pos itive PCR test for COVID -19 is exclusionary only during screening period. If a patient tests 
positive any  time after baseline randomization, a positive  PCR  test for COVID -19 will be considered 
as a SAE.   
The participants for this study will be recruited from a hospitalized population of participants 
meeting the eligibility criteria outlined above who live within one day travel from one of the 
37  participating clinical centers and who have provided informed co nsent to participate in this clinical 
trial and who are willing to continue their participation for the anticipated follow -up period of the 
trial. Although the primary endpoint is survival at 90 days, follow -up visits will be continued up to 6 
months.  
 
38  5.2 Participant Compensation and  Recruitment  
5.3.1 Participant  Compensation  
Participant compensation is site  specific.  
 
5.3.2 Participant  Recruitment  
Sources of participants: 
Identification of participants with severe AH requires collaboration with those physicians who 
manage these participants within the hospital and the emergency department. Almost 100% of  
participants are admitted to hospital based on the severity of their liver disease. Occasionally  
participants are seen in free -standing urgent care centers, free -standing emergency rooms or in  
office/clinic practices. Since the standard of care is to admit these participants for further evaluation  
to exclude infections as a precipitating cause of decompensated  liver disease, most will ultimately be  
identified in a hospital setting. Letters will also be sent to referring MDs and referring hospitals.  
 
Some sites in the current U01 have found that screening laboratory results for elevated AST and  
total bilirubin is a useful way to identify potential participants. In accordance with Institutional  
Review Board Policies, once identified the primary team caring for these participants must be  
contacted by the investigators and agree to ask the participant about their interest in participating in  
a clinical trial as part of the treatment of the underlying AH. Once the participant expresses  
willingness to be contacted the investigators may discuss details of the study and obtain informed 
consent prior to beginni ng treatment.  
 
5.4.1 Individual Drug Discontinuation Criteria Reasons for Mandatory Trial Hold – Infection  
If one of the following criteria is met, the study drugs should be held for 3 days:  
1. Documented  Infection  
• Pneumonia defined as new infiltrate by CXR or chest CT  scan 
• Positive cultures (blood, ascites) for bacteria or  fungus 
• Positive fungal cultures in urine (> 50,000 colonies/ml )  
• CNS infection defined as positive cultures or WBC > 5 in CSF 
• Severe soft tissue or bone infections including clinical diagnosis of  cellulitis  
 
2. SIRS (defined as two or more abnormalities in temperature, increased heart rate, 
respiration, or white blood cell count) with increase in SOFA score ≥2  points 
 
Participants will be reassessed on the third day of the study drugs hold: If infection clears and 
participant stabilizes, study drugs will be resumed. 
 
For participants with documented infection: If infection is responsive to antibiotics and participant is stabilized or improved, study drugs may be resumed at the discretion of the clinical care team. If there is no improvement after 3 days, study drugs will be stopped  
39  For participants meeting only SOFA+SIRS (#2 above)  criteria for stopping: if cultures of urine, 
blood, ascites, stool (including C. diff) are negative and CXR is unchanged, study drugs may be 
resumed at the discretion of the clinical care team.   
If the participant has a second hold of study drugs due to infection/SIRS +SOFA  criteria, study 
drugs will be stopped. 
 
5.4.2 Reasons for Mandatory Trial  Discontinuation  
1. Persistent  infection:  a) Participants  with documented  infection  will be reassessed  on 3rd day of 
the study drugs hold. If infection is responsive to antibiotics and participant is stabilized or 
improved, study drugs may be resumed at the discretion of the clinical care team. If there is no 
improvement after 3 days, study drugs will be stopped. b) For participants meeting only SOFA +SIRS cr iteria for stopping: if cultures of urine, blood, ascites, stool (including C. diff) are 
negative and CXR is unchanged, study drugs may be resumed at the discretion of the clinical 
care team. c) If the participant has a 2
nd hold of study drugs due to infec tion/ SOFA +SIRS 
criteria, study drugs will be stopped.  
 
2. Pregnancy: If a female participant becomes pregnant, she must stop taking study 
medication and must be withdrawn from the trial. The participant must be followed by the investigator through the end of her pregnancy. The mother (and infant) will be followed as considered appropriate by the investigator and the study designated physician (Dr. Gawrieh or 
his designee).  For reporting purposes, pregnancy  is not considered a serious adverse  event  (SAE).  
 
3. Clinical deterioration: During the trial, if Maddrey’s Discriminant Factor (DF) increases by 5 
points and also exceeds 32, or MELD scores increases by 5 points and also exceeds 20, the study 
medication should be stopped, however the participant will remain  in the trial, completing 
procedures as detailed in the Schedule of Procedures (Table 1). The study drugs will also be 
stopped if severe  leukocytosis  (≥100,000/mm3)  develops. Treating  physicians may offer any other 
treatment  that is considered as medically  indicated  and appropriate.  
 
4. Suspected drug induced liver injury (DILI): Hold the study drug if MELD increases by 5 from baseline or Child’s score increases by 3 points from baseline plus >3- fold increase in ALT 
from baseline on two consecutive occasions. These instances may represent either lack of 
therapeutic efficacy or DILI or some other etiology. If there is a competing etiology and DILI 
can be excluded, study drug can be resumed within 3 -4 days. However, if DILI cannot be 
excluded, then the s tudy drug will be permanently discontinued. Additional reasons for study 
drug discontinuation include unexplained elevation in ALT > 5 x baseline or > 500 U/L on two consecutive occasions or unexplained elevation in Alk P > 3 x baseline or >500 U/L on two 
consecutive occasions. It should be noted that cholestatic DILI may have a devastating impact on 
participant survival in individuals with advanced liver  disease.  
 
5. Lille score : Participants in either arm who have a Lille score of >0 .45 on day 7 will stop bottle 
1(prednisone/ placebo) and will continue with bottle 2 (zinc/zinc placebo.) 
 
40  a) Other Reasons for Trial or Treatment  Discontinuation  
The following events are considered appropriate reasons for a participant to discontinue from the 
trial: 
• The participant  withdraws  consent  or requests  to be withdrawn  from  the trial. It is fully 
understood that all participants volunteer for the trial and that they may withdraw their 
consent at any  time.  
• The participant experiences an adverse event that in the opinion of the  site investigator or 
the primary investigator of the trial (i.e., study designated physician, Dr. Gawrieh) is caused 
by or exacerbated  by any of the trial procedures or study medication,  of sufficient  intensity  
to warrant discontinuation . 
• The participant refuses to comply with the requirements for  trial participation.  
• Termination of the trial due to DILI concerns: The Data Safety and Monitoring Board 
(DSMB) should carefully  monitor  the number  of discontinuations due to MELD/Child’s Score  
worsening  in three treatment groups. Since this trial is not powered for rare adverse events, 
one should not look for statistically significant imbalance among treatment groups, but the DSMB should consider numerical imbalances that its members deem clinically significant. While it may be straight forward in some instances (for example, 2 discontinuations in groups 
A but 5 discontinuations in group B) but in other instances it may not be as clear cut and one 
may continue the trial for a g rowing trend. In any case, the DSMB is advisory in nature,  and it 
makes a recommendation to the Sponsor, NIAAA. In addition to seeking the AlcHepNet Steering Committee input, the NIAAA may seek external input to assist in its deliberation if 
the DSMB recommends that the clinical trial must be terminated due to safety  concerns.  
 
When possible, the investigator should discuss the potential discontinuation of a participant with the 
study designated physician (Dr. Gawrieh or his designee) in advance.  
 
b) Participant Discontinuation  Notification  
 
The investigator must notify the study designated physician (Dr. Gawrieh or his designee) as soon as 
possible if any participant prematurely discontinues from the trial. The date when the participant is withdrawn and the pr imary reason for discontinuation must be recorded in the CRF; additional 
information may be requested to complete a discontinuation narrative. Participants will be considered “lost to follow up” only after reasonable, documented attempts to reach the parti cipant 
prove unsuccessful. In all cases, a reasonable effort must be made to determine the reason(s) that a 
participant fails to return for required trial visits or discontinues from the trial.  
 
If a participant stays in the study but discontinues study medication (either by participant’s choice, or by the investigator’s decision), then study measurements should be performed according to the 
Schedule of Trial Procedures, Table 1 (rather than expediting study visits, or measurements).  
Patients will be followed until the final evolution (stability, worsening, or resolution) of the event 
that invoked drug discontinuation and followed until the end of the trial, if they are willing to do so.  
41  6. INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT (IP)/ STUDY  MEDICATION  
6.1 Description of IP/ Study  Medication  
For the purpose of  this protocol, the term ‘investigational product (IP)’ is interchangeable with the 
term ‘study medication’. Descriptions of the drugs, physical and chemical characteristics, and 
biological effects are included in the Labeling Information filed the Investi gator’s Brochure.  
 
6.1.1 Study  Medication  
A. Prednisone, Zinc Sulfate and Placebo Oral  Therapy  
 
1. The University of Iowa Pharmaceuticals (UIP) will over -encapsulate the active 
prednisone and zinc sulfate tablets and manufacture placebo  capsules.  
 
a. The UIP will purchase commercially available prednisone and zinc  sulfate.  
 
1. Prednisone 20 mg tablets (Westward  Pharmaceuticals)  
 
2. Zinc Sulfate 220 mg  tablets  
 
3. The UIP will use stock excipients to manufacture placebo  capsules.  
 
2. Prednisone, Zinc Sulfate and Placebo capsule s will be identical, encapsulated in a size 
AAA empty capsule  shell 
 
3. UIP will package study medications  as 
 
a. Prednisone 40 mg capsules,  50 capsules per  bottle  
 
b. Zinc Sulfate 220 mg capsules,  50 capsules per  bottle  
 
c. Placebo for Prednisone 40 mg/Zinc Sulfate 220 mg Capsules, 100 capsules per 
bottle  
B. Anakinra and Placebo Subcutaneous Therapy  
 
1. Anakinra 100 mg/0.67 mL Prefilled Syringes will be  procured by IU Health 
Investigational Drug Service through wholesaler Cardinal Health  (NDC 66658 -0234- 07, 
SOBI  Pharmaceuticals)  
 
2. Placebo for Anakinra 100 mg ) will be prefilled syringes  purchased directly from SOBI 
Pharmaceuticals  and distributed by  IU Health Investigational Drug Service. Each 
syringe is labeled by Sobi Pharmaceuticals as  “Placebo for Kineret.” Each 1 mL syringe 
is filled to 0.67 mL. 
42  6.1.2 Treatment  Phase  
Study  medication  will be provided to each site (pharmacy)  as unblinded product, over labeled  at each  
site and blinded based  on the randomization  scheduled,  and then provided to participants  in a 
blinded manner (i.e., pharmacy, investigator, site staff and participant will be unable to distinguish 
treatment assignment). Study medication will consist of  either  
1. Group 1 : Standard of care plus prednisone (40 mg orally) once daily on Days 1 -30 and 
matching placebos for Anakinra (1 syringe s.c. once daily on Days 1 -14) and zinc 
(matched pill once daily on Days 1 -90). 
2. Group  2: Standard  of care plus Anakinra  (100 mg s.c.) once daily on Days  1-14, zinc sulfate 
220 mg once daily on Days 1 -90, and placebo for prednisone (matched pill once daily on 
Days 1 -30).  
 
6.2 Packaging, Labeling, and  Storage  
The packaging and labeling of study medication for provision to the clinical trial sites will be performed according to GMP standards by designated qualified vendors.  
 
The designated  IP distribution vendor  will be responsible  for the distribution of the study  medication 
to the clinical trial sites.  Prednisone,  Zinc Sulfate  and Placebo  capsules should be stored  at controlled 
room  temperature  (15°C  to 30°C)  and protected  from  excess  humidity.  Anakinra  and Placebo prefilled 
syringes should be stored in the refrigerator (2°C to 8 °C) and protected from light. Avoid shaking 
and protect from freezing.  
 
Study medication will be packaged for the trial as described below.  
  
43  6.3 Labels for Study Drugs and Study Drug Dispensing Units:  
Study medication will be packaged for the trial as described below.  
 
Anakinra Prefilled Syringes, and the Placebo Prefilled Syringes provided by SOBI will have the 
manufacturers label on the study drug. Prednisone, Zinc Sulfate and Placebo Capsules will be labeled by the University of Iowa Pharmaceuticals.  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 Over -Encapsulation of Prednisone (2 x 20 mg Tablets) 40 
mg C  
 
    Lot #: XXXXXXXXX  
 
50 Capsules per Bottle  
 
Store at Controlled Room Temperature  
 
Caution: New Drug – Limited by Federal Law to 
Investigational Use Only.  
The University of Iowa Pharmaceuticals – College of 
Pharmacy – The University of Iowa – Iowa City, Iowa 
52242  Over -Encapsulation of Zinc Sulfate 220 mg Capsules  
 
 
Lot #: XXXXXX  
Store at Controlled Room Temperature  
 
Caution: New Drug – Limited by Federal Law to 
Investigational Use Only.  
The University of Iowa Pharmaceuticals – College of 
Pharmacy – The University of Iowa – Iowa City, Iowa 
52242  
Placebo Capsules for Prednisone and Zinc Sulfate  
50 Capsules Lot #: 
XXXXXX  
 
Store at Controlled Room Temperature  
 
Caution: New Drug – Limited by Federal Law to 
Investigational Use Only.  
The University of Iowa Pharmaceuticals – College of 
Pharmacy – The University of Iowa – Iowa City, Iowa 
52242  
44  6.4 Dose, Administration and  Blinding  
Two treatment groups will be evaluated in the trial: 1) Prednisone,  and 2) Anakinra plus zinc 
 
Participants  will be instructed  to begin  dosing on day 1.  Oral study medication should be taken with 
water  as instructed on study drug label. Patients will receive two oral medications. Bottle 1 will be 
Prednisone or Placebo and will be taken daily on Days 1- 30 per protocol. Bottle 2 will be Zinc 
Sulfate or Placebo and will be taken daily on Day 1 -90 per protocol.  
Participants must be instructed to swallow the capsule whole; they must not open capsule. 
Subcutaneous study medication should also begin on Day 1 and be administered daily on Day s 1 to 
14. 
 
6.4.1 Dispensing  Procedures  
On Day 0, after confirmation of participant eligibility and randomization, the investigator or 
designee will dispense study medication to the participant. Before leaving the clinic/hospital, the 
study staff will ensure that the participant fully understands the dosing instructions. We will dispense a sharps container for each subject discharged before day 14. The clinical trial site investigator may 
adjust the number of study medication dispensed to the participant based on clinical judgment and 
visit scheduling to ensure an adequate supply of study medication is available for dosing between clinic visits. An  unscheduled distribution of study medication Anakinra/ Placebo may occur on Day 
7 if needed to comply with medication changes necessitated by safety lab results.  
  
45  6.4.2 Blinding  
Study medication bottles will be labeled in a blinded manner to ensure that neither participant nor 
investigator is unblinded.  Examples of labels for the initial  dispense:  
 
BOTTLE 1, DAY 0  BOTTLE 2, DAY 0  
 
 
SYRINGE BAG, DAY 0  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Pharmacy Name, Address, Phone Number  
Caution: Federal law prohibits transfer of this drug to any person other than the patient 
for whom pr escribed.  
 
Rx: Number                               Prescriber:  
Patient Name                             MRN:  
 
Take 1 capsule by mouth daily on Days 1 through 30.  
 STUDY Prednisone / Placebo 40 mg Capsule  
Quantity: 30 Capsules                IRB: 1904- 6501 21/AlcHepNet -02 
Date Filled:  
Do Not Use After: Date 
 
 Pharmacy Name, Address, Phone Number  
Caution: Federal law prohibits transfer of this drug to any person other than the patient 
for whom prescribed.  
 
Rx: Number                               Prescriber:  
Patient Name                             MRN:  
 
Take 1 capsule by mouth daily on Days 1 through 90.  
 STUDY Zinc Sulfate / Placebo 220 m g Capsule 
Quantity: 90 Capsules                IRB: 1904- 650121/AlcHepNet -02 
Date Filled:  
Do Not Use After: Date 
 
 
Pharmacy Name, Address, Phone Number  
Caution: Federal law prohibits transfer of this drug to any person other than the patient 
for whom prescribed.  
 
Rx: Number                               Prescriber:  
Patient Name                             MRN:  
 
Inject 1 syringe subcutaneously every morning daily on Days 1 through 14.  
 STUDY Anakinra / Placebo 100 mg/0.67 mL Prefilled Syringe  
Quantity: 90 Capsules                IRB: 1904- 650121/AlcHepNet -02 
Date Filled:  
Do Not Use After: Date  
 
46  6.4.3 Missed  Doses  
Participants who miss a dose of study medication should be instructed to take it later the same day, 
as soon as they remember , but no more than 12 hours past normal dosing time for the injectable  
study medications . ‘Missed’ doses should not be taken on a subsequent day (i.e., the participant 
should not take more than the prescribed daily dose). Participants will make note of missed dose on 
medication compliance log.  
 
6.4.4 Environmental  Assessment  
Is requested for categorical exclusion for this proposed clinical trial as provided for in 21 
CFR.25.31(e) in that the drug shipped under this notice is intended to be used in clinical trials in 
which the amount of waste expected to enter the environment may reasonably be expected to be 
non-toxic.  
 
6.5 Randomization 
6.5.1 Method of Assigning Participants to Treatment  Groups  
The trial will be conducted in a double -blind, placebo- controlled manner. Participants will be 
randomized to the two treatment groups in equal proportions. The randomization plan will be 
stratified by site and MELD score. Blocks of size 4  will be generated randomly based on a 
predefined randomization code generated by the AlcHepNet IU data coordinating unit (DCC - IU). 
Both participants and investigators will be blinded to the randomization plans.  
 
The investigator or designee will be requi red to register the participant into the REDCap system 
(AlcHepNet’s data management system) and will provide participant data to properly randomize and 
allocate the participant to treatment. A randomization number will be assigned and study medication dispensing information ( e.g., arm assignmen t) will be provided.  
 
In the unlikely event of a system failure, the randomization will occur outside of REDCap according  
to the back -up emergency plan detailed in the Manual of Operations. IU DCC will maintain at all  
times a current, off -line randomization list and will be able to act as the Emergency Support team 
until the system is restored to its full capacity.  
 
6.5.2 Site Numbers  
Each trial site selected to participate in this trial will be assigned a Site Number by the AlcHepNet consortium. The Site Number will be used to categorize participant data and to identify the site and or investigator within trial documents.  
 
6.5.3 Screening  Numbers  
At the Screening  Visit, after the participant  has provided written  informed  consent,  the participant  will 
be assigned a unique 5 -digit participant ID number.  
  
47  6.6 Holding and Unblinding  Procedures  
The site pharmacist will be unblinded to randomization codes and corresponding treatment 
assignment . Additionally, the randomizat ion codes and corresponding treatment  assignment will be 
maintained by the AlcHepNet DCC -IU. The biostatisticians performing the analyses will also be 
blinded. The study designated physician (Dr. Gawrieh or his designee), or the individual investigators wi ll not have access to this information. In the event that a medical emergency 
necessitates unblinding (i.e., in situations where knowledge of the blinded treatment is necessary for further medical management of the participant), the site investigator (or h is/her designee) will 
contact the designated study physician to discuss the rationale for unblinding. If there is a difference of opinion between the designated study physician and the site investigator, then the site investigator will defer to the sub -investigator who retains the final right to seek unblinding. The designated sub-
investigator will communicate with the DCC -IU about the decision to unblind the participant and 
then the DCC -IU will unblind the participant by interacting directly with the sub - investigator.  
 
The Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will be able to unblind participants. Cases of premature unblinding (as noted above) will be reviewed by the DSMB.  
 
Access to randomization codes and corresponding treatment assignment will also be  made available 
to the designated study physician who is responsible for reporting SAEs and suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions (SUSARs) to the Regulatory Authorities and should be accessed only in the event that reporting necessitates unblinding. Aside from the IU IDS pharmacist who conducts the drug over labeling , site pharmacy staff will be unblinded to the subject’s treatment. Treatment  will be 
assigned through REDCap. Pharmacy staff will be responsible for blinding the subject’s treatment  before 
dispensing. Pharmacy will be trained to maintain the blind.  No other site personnel will have direct 
access to blinded participant treatment codes until all trial data have been entered onto the trial database and validated and the databas e locked.
 
6.6.1 Treatment and holding/stopping rules for infection and sepsis  
Leukocytosis is common in AH and may be further exacerbated by administration of prednisone. 
Such iatrogenic rise in leukocytosis may alarm participant care teams who are blinded to the 
treatment arm and may raise concern for development of infection or sepsis.  
 
While many AH participants may develop the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) (defined as two or more abnormalities in temperature, increased heart rate , respiration, or white 
blood cell count), SIRS may not always be indicative of infection in participants with AH and may 
be reflective of the dysregulated inflammatory state with AH.  
  
48  Drug Holding Rules (Day 0 -Day 30):  
If one of the following criteria met, the study drugs should be held for 3 days:  
1. Documented  Infection  
• Pneumonia defined as new infiltrate by CXR or chest CT scan 
• Positive cultures (blood, ascites) for bacteria or  fungus  
• Positive fungal cultures in urine (> 50,000 colonies/ml)   
• CNS infection defined as positive cultures or WBC > 5 in CSF 
• Severe soft tissue or bone infections including clinical diagnosis of  cellulitis  
2. SIRS (defined as two or more abnormalities in temperature, increased  heartrate,  
respiration, or whit e blood cell count) with increase in SOFA score ≥2 points.  
Participants will be reassessed on 3rd day to determine if study drugs could be resumed or 
should be stopped.  
Drug Stopping rules (Day 0 -Day 30):  
 
Participants will be reassessed on third day of the study drugs hold: If infection clears and 
participant stabilizes, study drugs will be resumed.  
 
1. For participants with documented infection: If infection is responsive to antibiotics and 
participant  is stabilized  or improved,  study  drugs may be resumed  at the discretion  of the 
clinical care team. If there is no improvement after 3 days, study drugs will be  stopped.  
2. For participants meeting only SOFA +SIRS criteria for stopping: if cultures of urine, 
blood, ascites, stool (including C. diff) are negative and CXR is unchanged, study drugs may be resumed at the discretion of the clinical care  team.  
3. If the participant has a second hold of study drugs due to infection/SOFA+SIRS criteria, study drugs will be  stopped.  
4. Participants in either arm who have a Lille score of > 0.45 on day 7 will stop bottle 1 
(prednisone/ placebo) and will continue with bottle 2 (zinc/zinc placebo.)  
 
Drug stopping Rules (Day 0 -Day 30):  
• No improvement or stabilization after holding study drugs for 3  days 
• 2nd hold of study drugs due to infection/SOFA+SIRS criteria 
• Development of severe leukocytosis  (≥100,000/mm3). 
 
Treatment holding and stopping rules for Drug Induced Liver Injury (DILI)  
 
Identifying the instances of suspected drug induced liver injury (DILI) in individuals with underlying 
liver disease with abnormal liver biochemistries is difficult and this issue becomes far more 
challenging in individuals with severe alcoholic hepatitis because (a) aminotransferases and alkaline phosphatase may not reliably inc rease due to burnt out hepatocytes in this population and (b) liver 
test worsening may be due to myriad of other reasons including worsening of underlying alcoholic hepatitis or sepsis.  
 
49  Therefore, we propose the following:  
 
1) When to hold or discontinue the study medicine in a participant? In individuals with 
severe alcoholic hepatitis participating in our RCT, we will hold the study medicine if 
MELD increases by 5 from baseline or Child’s score increases by 3 points from baseline 
plus >3-fold increase in AL T from baseline on two consecutive occasions. These 
instances may represent either lack of therapeutic efficacy or DILI or some other etiology. If there is a competing etiology and DILI can be excluded, study drug can be resumed within 3- 4 days. However, if DILI cannot be excluded, then the study drug will 
be permanently discontinued. Additional reasons for study drug discontinuation include unexplained elevation  in ALT > 5 x baseline  or > 500 
U/L on two consecutive occasions 
or unexplained elevation in Alk P > 3 x baseline or >500 U/L on two consecutive occasions. It should be noted that cholestatic DILI may have a devastating impact on participant survival in individuals with advanced liver  disease.  
2) When to terminate the trial due to DILI c oncerns? The Data  Safety  Monitoring 
Committee (DSMB) should carefully monitor the number of discontinuations due to MELD/Child’s Score worsening in the  three treatment groups. Since this trial is not 
powered for rare adverse events, one should not look for statistically significant imbalance among treatment groups, but the DSMB should consider numerical imbalances that its members deem clinically significant. While it may be straight forward 
in some instances (for example, 2 discontinuations in groups A but 5 discontinuations in 
group B) but in other instances it may not be as clear cut and one may continue the trial for a growing trend. In any case, the DSMB is advisory in nature and it makes a recommendation to the Sponsor which is the NIAAA for this trial. In addition to seeking the AlcHepNet Steering Committee input, the NIAAA may seek external input to assist 
in its deliberation if the DSMB recommends that the clinical trial must be terminated due 
to safety  concerns.
 
Treatment holding/stopping rules for laboratory abnormalities  
 
• If platelet counts drop to < 40,000 while on injectable study drugs, injectable study drugs 
will be held and resumed when platelet count is ≥ 40,000 . 
 
• Worsening renal function 
As all patients are randomized to treatment arms while hospitalized, the site’s dispensing pharmacy  
will check the GFR before dispensing the study drugs for the day. Pharmacy will enter the daily lab 
values into a REDCap -based decision support form, which will aid  the pharmacy by providing 
guidance on daily dispensation. This REDCap form is in addition to the pharmacy manual of procedures, which also provides guidance on daily dispensation. For weekend coverage, the GFR and platelet values from the Friday l abs may be used to generate the dispensation schedule at some 
sites. If the subject’s GFR has dropped to <30 but ≥20 and the subject is in the anakinra group, 
Redcap will provide instructions for pharmacy to  dose reduce to every other day by providing 
anakinra placebo one day, alternating with active anakinra the following day. If the GFR drops to < 20 mL/min, the instructions from REDCap  will hold active anakinra and substitute with anakinra 
placebo  
 
When the patient is discharge d and now outpatient, all injectable drugs will be dose reduced and 
administered every other day when the GFR drops to <30 but ≥ 20 mL/min. All injectable drugs 
50  will be stopped if GFR drops to <20 mL/min. 
 
6.6.2 Unscheduled, Emergency  Unblind ing 
6.6.2.1  Rules for unblinding participants  for leukocytosis  and concern  for infection/sepsis  (Day 0- 
Day 30): 
In this placebo- controlled , blinded and  randomized trial, Principal Investigators, enrolled 
participants, and any study team member who will/is interpreting data will remain blinded.  
1. If the participant develops leukocytosis >)  WBC > 30 x 109/L or WBC > 30,000/mm3, the clinical 
care team may request unblinding if the team believes that knowing the treatment would impact care 
decisions such as starting antibiotics.  
2. If the participant  develops  hypotension (systolic  BP < 90) and/or requires  transfer  to an ICU, the 
clinical care team may request unblinding if the team believes that knowing the treatment would 
impact  care decisions such as administration  of pressors, fluids or other  supportive therapy.  
3. If the participant develops any other serious adverse event that  is, in the opinion of the investigator , 
probably related to one of the study drugs, the clinical care team may request unblinding if it would impact care  decisions. 
 
Who to unblind?  
• Only  sub- investigator  
• Clinical care  team  
• DCC contact 
Unblinding procedure:  
1. Each site will designate a sub -investigator who can be contacted if the participant care team has 
concerns about rising leukocytosis  
2. The contacted sub- investigator will communicate with IU DCC to unblind the participant then 
inform participant care team of the study drug/s participant is  receiving  
3. IU DCC will build this into the database system and keep track of unblinded participants  
4. The decision to begin antibiotics for possible infection is left to the judgment of the clinical care 
team.  
 
6.7 Prior and Concomitant Medications or  Procedures  
Relevant information about all concomitant drugs (including prescribed, over the counter, or herbal 
preparations) taken prior to 30 days of screening and during the trial must be recorded in the sour ce 
documents and CRF, as well as any dose or dose regimen changes that occur during the trial. The 
clinical care team should be advised not to give supplemental zinc to subjects in the trial as that 
could result in an excessive dosing particularly in subje ct with renal dysfunction. No interaction 
between zinc and anakinra is reported. Zinc may interfere with absorption of certain oral antibiotics such as quinolones and tetracyclines. To avoid potential interference with concomitant medications, we will admi nister the morning blinded capsules (zinc/zinc placebo or prednisone/prednisone 
placebo) at least 3 hours apart from other medications the participant will take.  
 
51  6.8 Treatment  Compliance  
The investigator  should assess the participant’s  compliance  with dosing  of study  medication  on an 
ongoing basis, at least at each visit, and confirm by conducting drug accountability (i.e., count of 
returned capsules , syringes).  
Participants should be instructed to retain all study medication, even if empty, and to return them to the investigator at the subsequent visit. The investigator or designee should perform drug 
accountability and, if applicable, follow up with the participant to retrieve any study medication that 
has not been returned.  
If the investigator has  concerns about a participant’s dosing compliance s/he should discuss this 
with the participant, assess the reasons for noncompliance and the likelihood that the participant 
will remain  noncompliant,  and notify  the designated  study  physician  accordingly.  Continued  trial 
eligibility should be assessed based on the participant’s compliance with study medication dosing 
and clinic visits. 
 
6.9 Study Medication Accountability and  Retention  
IU Health Investigational Drug Services representative will send study medica tion to the trial sites 
under  appropriate  storage  conditions.  All shipments of study  medication  should be unpacked,  and the 
contents reviewed immediately upon receipt. The pharmacist or designee should verify the study medication against the shipment documentation. The pharmacist or designee should contact the designee of IU Health Investigational Drug Services immediately to report any concerns regarding 
the shipment.  
All study medication will be provided for use only in this trial and is not to be used for any other 
purpose. The investigator or designee will maintain a full record of study medication accountability, including records of individual participant dispensing and final return or disposition.  
 
The monitor  from  DCC -IU, will review  accountability  records  against  study  medication  dispensed and 
that remaining in stock, during on- site monitoring visits and when the trial is completed, or if it is 
prematurely terminated. The CRA will retrieve documentation detailing and confirming the re turn 
or destruction of the study  medication.  
  
52  6.10 Trial or Site  Termination  
The AlcHepNet consortium reserves the right to terminate the trial at any time. It is normal 
procedure to review the emerging clinical and safety data. As a result of such a review or  a 
recommendation by the DSMB, it may be necessary to stop the trial before all participants have 
completed the trial.  
 
It is the responsibility of the individual site’s PI to report to the Western Institutional Review Board 
(WIRB) of discontinuation of the trial and the reason for doing so in a timely fashion according to 
institutional policies. 
 
7. TRIAL PROCEDURES  
7.1 Screening  
7.1.1 Informed  Consent  
The investigator  or designee  will explain  the nature,  purpose and risks of the trial to the participant  or 
legally authorized representative (LAR/guardian) and will provide him/her with a copy of the written information and informed consent form (ICF). The participant or LAR will be given sufficient time to consider the trial before deciding whether or not to participate. The participant or LAR will be informed that participation is voluntary and that her/his future medical treatment will not be compromised by participation in the trial and that s/he can withdraw from the trial at any 
time. The participant or  LAR must be willing and able to provide written informed consent before 
entering the trial. The investigator or a medically qualified designee is responsible for administering 
and documenting the written informed consent of the participant.  
7.1.2 Participant Identification  Assignment  
After the participant has met eligibility criteria and enrolls into the study, the participant will be 
assigned a unique 5- digit ID number. This 5- digit number will be used to identify the participant 
throughout the tr ial and during the data analysis.  
 
7.2 Visit  Procedures  
Participants should be instructed to fast , when possible , overnight (at least 8 hours) immediately prior 
to all at - clinic visits, Screening Visit. While fasting, water is permitted.  
  
53   
7.2.1 Screening Period  – Fasting  for at least 8 hours, when  possible  
The screening period will consist of ≤ 7 days prior to the randomization visit (Day 0). During the 
screening period,  participants’  eligibility  criteria must be confirmed.  Patients  with clinical  suspicion 
of sepsis  will have  an initial  run-in period  of 48 hours  while  being  screened  for eligibility  for 
enrollment.  Patients  with evidence  of sepsis  at the end of this run-period  will be excluded from  
participation.  Participants  or LAR must sign an informed  consent prior to initiating  any of the 
screening procedures. Participants who do not fulfill all eligibility criteria cannot continue in the 
protocol (screening failures).  
Screening period procedures are as follows:  
 
• The participant  or LAR is to review  and sign the informed  consent document. Informed  consent 
must be obtained from the participant or LAR before performing any trial related procedures, 
including screening procedures 
• Verify inclusion and exclusion criteria for  eligibility  
• Assess MELD score.  
• Physical  exam 
• Collect medical history including the alcohol consumption specifics  
• Have participant s complete d the TLFB questionnaire , CLDQ, and AUDIT  
• Record vital signs, including height and weight  
• Record prior (within 30 days of Day 0) and current concomitant  medications  
• Perform a baseline standard 12 -lead electrocardiogram (ECG) , if not already done as standard of 
care within 7 days  of screening  
• Assess availability of liver biopsy samples (if applicable) which may have been obtained as part of 
standard of care 
• Obtain blood samples for  hematology,  hepatic function panel, BMP, and coagulation tests 
• Perform a serum pregnancy test in females of childbearing  potential  
• Perform a  PCR  test for COVID-19, if not done as SOC.  
**The participant should be reminded that fasting (8 hours) is requested, when possible, prior  to 
his/her next visit. 
  
54  7.2.2 Day 0 Procedures (Randomization) – Fasting for at least 8 hours, when possible   
• Collect medical history including the alcohol consumption specifics  
• Perform a physical  examination  
• Record vital signs, including weight  
• Assess and record any pretreatment emergent  AEs 
• Record prior (within 30 days of Day 0) and current concomitant medications, noting any changes 
from screening, if applicable. Perform a urine pregnancy test in females of childbearing potential, if greater than one day has elapsed since screening pregnancy  test. 
• Confirm inclusion and exclusion criteria for eligibility  
• Assess MELD score s 
• Randomize the participant only if s/he meets all inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria 
• Obtain blood samples for  hematology,  hepatic function panel, BMP, and coagulation tests, if 
greater than one day has passed since screening . 
• Obtain biospecimens f or specimen banking and measuring anakinra trough levels as outlined in 
Table 1 . 
• Dispense study medication and instruct the participant on medication dosing and administration. Instruct the participant to swallow the capsules whole; s/he must not open, chew, divide,  open 
or crush the  capsule.  Verbally instruct participant and caregiver (if applicable) on subcutaneous 
injection procedures and provide IRB-approved instruction handout  
• The participant should be reminded that fasting (8 hours) is reques ted, when possible, prior  to 
his/her next visit. 
  
55   
7.2.3 D3 Procedures (± 2 days) -– Fasting for at least 8 hours, when possible  
• Perform a physical  examination  
• Record vital signs, including weight  
• Assess and record any emergent AEs 
• Record any changes to concomitant  medications  
• Assess MELD scores  
• Obtain blood samples for  hematology, hepatic function panel, BMP, and coagulation tests  
• Obtain biospecimens for specimen banking and measuring anakinra trough levels as outlined in 
Table 1. 
• The participant should be reminded that fasting (8 hours) is requested, when possible , prior  to 
his/her next visit. 
• Assess medication compliance  form  
7.2.4 D7 Procedures (± 2 days) – Fasting for at least 8 hours, when possible   
• Perform a physical  examination  
• Record vital signs, including weight  
• Assess and record any emergent AEs 
• Record any changes to concomitant  medications  
• Assess MELD and Lille scores.  
• Obtain blood samples for  hematology , hepatic function panel, BMP, and coagulation tests  
• Obtain b iospecimens for specimen banking and measuring anakinra trough levels  as outlined in 
Table 1. 
• The participant should be reminded that fasting (8 hours) is requested, when possible , prior  to 
his/her next visit. 
• Assess medication  compliance . 
• Calculate Lille score. If >0.45, participant should stop the bottle Prednisone/placebo.  
• Dispense study medication if required by safety lab results (outpatient  only.)  
7.2.5 Day 14 procedures (± 2 days) -– Fasting for at least 8 hours, when possible   
• Collect medical history including the alcohol consumption specifics  
• Perform a physical examination, including a urine pregnancy  test 
• Record vital signs, including weight  
• Assess and record any emergent AEs 
• Record any changes to concomitant  medications  
• Assess MELD scores  
• Obtain blood samples for  hematology,  hepatic function panel, BMP, and coagulation tests. 
56  • Obtain  biospecimens for specimen  banking and measuring anakinra trough levels  as outlined in 
Table 1. 
• The participant should be reminded that fasting (8 hours) is requested, when possible , prior  to 
his/her next visit. 
• Assess medication  compliance . 
7.2.6 D28, D60 and D 90 Procedures (±  7 days) -– Fasting for at least 8 hours, when  possible  
 
• Collect medical history including the alcohol consumption specifics  
• Perform a physical  examination  
• Record vital signs, including weight  
• The participant is to complete the Alcohol Timeline Follow  back  
• Assess and record any emergent AEs 
• Record any changes to concomitant  medications  
• Assess MELD  scores.  
• Obtain blood samples for  hematology , hepatic function panel, BMP, and coagulation tests. 
• Obtain biospecimens for specimen banking as outlined in Table 1.  
• The participant  should be reminded  that fasting  (8 hours) is requested,  if possible,  prior to 
his/her next visit. 
• Assess medication  compliance  
7.2.7 Follow up phase  D180 (±  7 days) – Fasting for at least 8 hours,  when possible   
 
• Collect medical history including the alcohol consumption specifics  
• Perform a physical  examination  
• Record vital signs, including weight  
• The participant is to complete the Alcohol Timeline Follow  back  
• Assess and record any emergent AEs 
• Record any changes to concomitant  medications  
• Assess Liver Scores: MELD  
• Obtain blood samples for hematology, hepatic function panel, BMP, and coagulation  tests. 
• Obtain  biospecimens for specimen  banking as outlined in Table 1.  
60  7.2.8 Missed  Visits  
Participants who miss a visit will receive a phone call from the coordinator who will read and collect 
information from the phone script. If a person is unable to be reached by phone, a medical record review will take place.  
 
7.2.9 Early Termination Procedures  
Participants who withdraw consent  or discontinue treatment prematurely during the Treatment 
Phase should complete the assessments required on Day 60 , if patient is  willing . Participants who 
discontinue prematurely during the Follow-up Phase should complete the assessments required on Day 180.  
 
7.2.10  Unscheduled Safety  Visits  
The investigator may schedule an at -clinic Unscheduled/Safety Visit at any time if clinically warranted. 
Unscheduled and/or repeat assessments may be conducted. As appropriate, the designated study physician should be contacted. 
 
7.2.11  Specimen  Banking  
Specimens to be banked include genomic DNA, blood mononuclear cells, blood (PBMC, serum and plasma),  saliva (only until an adequate number of samples are collected determined by PIs),  stool 
(when possible), urine, and liver biopsy when ava ilable.  
 Type specimen collection is site specific.
61  8. EFFICACY EVALUATIONS  Primary Endpoint Survival at 90 days  Secondary  Endpoints 
• Change in Lille score,  change  in MELD  score,  development  of AKI,  multi -organ  failure,  SIRS, 
transfer to ICU, changes in liver function will all be evaluated at 7, 30 and 90  days.  
 
• Organ dysfunction: We will measure changes in Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) 
scores and proportions requiring hemodynamic support for MAP < 65 mm Hg and lactate > 2 mmol/l,  renal  replacement  therapy  or mechanical  ventilation.  We will also modify and re-evaluate 
the SOFA  score without platelet  counts  given  that these are usually low in  AH. 
 
• Infections and Sepsis: It is now recognized that the endpoints and case definitions related to sepsis may vary depending on what these will be used for (clinical care, research, surveillance , or 
quality improvement). Given the central role of sepsis as a driver of outcomes, we will not only measure  the types  of infection  but also identify  the proportions of those with sepsis, septic  shock 
or quick- SOFA (qSOFA) criteria based on SEPSIS -3 guidance
2,39. We will also capture the key 
parameters needed for various sepsis related endpoint construction aligned by the recent guidance from the European Drug Development H ub (http://eddh- cro.wixsite.com/fdtsfv).  
 
• Renal  dysfunction: In alignment  with guidance from  the acute  disease quality  initiative56, we will 
quantify AKI development and its progression through persistent AKI, acute kidney disease to chronic kidney disease.  
• Need for care escalation: Proportion of participants requiring transfer to ICU for care 
• Indicators of gut permeability (endotoxin and bacterial 18S DNA) and pro - inflammatory 
cytokine/chemokines (TNFa, MCP1, IL -6, IL-1ß) will be assessed in serum/plasma samples. 
• Survival at day 30 and  180. 
Limitations of mortality as an endpoint in AH and plans to overcome the se 
All-cause mortality is most relevant when mortality is substantial and attributable to a single 
mechanism in a homogeneous population. Participants with severe AH are highly heterogeneous 
with respect to disease severity, end organ involvement and the care they receive. Moreover, as in 
sepsis and heart failure, death involves failure of multiple organs (liver, heart, kidney, lungs) making it hard to ascertain which one is the primary cause of death. This has led to development and regulatory acceptance of composite endpoints including mortality and key parameters driving mortality for acute heart failure trials. We will leverage these guiding principles to construct a novel 
and innovative key secondary composite endpoint which will include death or worsen ing of the 
SOFA score
4,5 by ≥ 2 points and worsening of modified MELD score by ≥ 2 points. These are 
associated with mortality and capture the organ recruitment that marks progression of AH towards 
death. This endpoint will also be validated with respect to reliability, construct -, criterion - and 
content validity to establish this as a primary endpoint in future trials. We will also model changes in SOFA scores and MELD scores against mortality to further optimize this endpoint and cross- 
validate it in the  observation cohort.   
62  9. SAFETY  EVALUATIONS  
9.1 Adverse  Events  
Adverse event (AE) data will be collected from Day 0 through the double -blind phase, until the 
participant fully completes her/his trial participation at the Follow Up visit.  
 
9.2 Physical Examination and  Vital  Signs  
To assess for clinical findings, the investigator or designee will perform a physical examination at the 
time points specified in the Schedule of Trial Procedures (Table 1). All above physical exams may be extracted from medical records if patient is inpat ient. This includes height only at Screening. The 
physical examination must include the following:  
 
9.2.1 Physical  Examination  
• General  appearance  
• Weight  
• Eyes 
• Ears, nose, and throat  
• Neck  
• Respiratory  system  
• Cardiovascular  system  
• Abdominal  region  
• Mental  status  
• Neurological  system  
9.2.2 Vital  signs  
The following vital signs will be assessed at indicated visits: body temperature, sitting heart rate, sitting blood pressure (BP ), respiratory rate, body weight in kilograms without shoes, and height in  
centimeters (screening only) . When taking heart rate and BP readings, participants should be seated 
quietly for a minimum of 3 minutes before the reading is taken.  
 
9.3 Clinical  Laboratory  
Blood samples for serum chemistry, hematology, and coagulation will be collected at every visit as detailed in the Schedule of Trial Procedures. The number and volume of samples to be collected at each visit will be detailed in a separate document. These tests will be conducted at local laboratories at 8 participating sites.  
 
All participants with laboratory tests containing clinically significant abnormal values should be followed regularly until the values return to normal ranges, until a valid reason for the AE (other than study medication related AE) is identified, or unti l further follow up is deemed medically 
unnecessary.   
63  9.4 Other Safety Related Clinical  Outcomes  
The following clinical outcomes will be assessed:  
 
• Death (from hepatic and non -hepatic related  causes)  
• Complications of portal hypertension including gastroesophageal bleeding, interventions to 
manage variceal bleeding (e.g., variceal banding/sclerotherapy or TIPS placement) and diuretic 
resistant  ascites  
• Complications of Cirrhosis: new -onset  ascites,  hepatic  encephalopathy,  hepatorenal 
syndrome (type I  or II), and spontaneous bacterial  peritonitis).  
• Hospitalization 
• Change to a higher level of care ( i.e., floor to ICU) is an SAE 
Each of these events including hospitalizations will be adjudicated by the site investigator as 
expected  as part of the natural  history  of severe  AH, or unexpected  (e.g., suicide,  motor  vehicle 
accident, or myocardial  infarction).
64  10. ADVERSE EVENTS  
10.1 Definition of Adverse Events & Reporting Period for Adverse  Events  
Safety will be assessed in terms of AEs. All AEs, whether observed by the investigator, reported by 
the participant, noted from laboratory findings, or identified by other means, will be recorded from Day 0 until the participant completes trial participation (D- 180).  
 
AEs are defined as any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of the study 
medication in humans, whether or not considered related to study medication. An AE (also referred to as an adverse experience) can be any unfavorable and unintended sign (e.g., an abnormal 
laboratory  findi ng), symptom,  or disease temporally  associated  with any use of the study medication, 
without any judgment about causality and irrespective of route of administration, formulation, or 
dose, including an overdose. For this trial, study medication refers to A nakinra, zinc,  Prednisone, or 
placebo in the double-blind phase. 
 
AEs include but  are not limited to: (1) a worsening or change in nature, severity, or frequency of 
condition(s) present at the start of the trial;  (2) participant  deterioration  due to  primary  illness; (3) 
intercurrent illness; and (4) drug interaction.  
 
Participants  should  be questioned in a general  way, without leading  the participant  or asking about the 
occurrence of any specific symptom. The investigator should attempt to establish a diagnosis of the event based on signs, symptoms, and/or other clinical information. The diagnosis and not the individual signs/symptoms should be documented as the AE. For example, if the underlying disease process is a stroke, it would not be appropriate to record the AE by describing the symptoms 
“sudden numbness, dizziness, and difficulty speaking.” The AE medical term of “stroke or 
cerebrovascular accident” should be recorded as it more accurately describes the AE. Following questioning and evaluation, all AEs, whether believed by the investigator to be related or unrelate d 
to the study medication,  must be documented  in the participant’s  medical  records, in accordance  with 
the investigator’s normal clinical practice and on the AE source Document . Each AE is to be 
evaluated for duration, intensity, frequency, seriousness, outcome, other actions taken, and 
relationship to the study medication.  
 
10.1.1.1 Pretreatment Event(s)  
Untoward events that occur during screening phase (prior to randomization) should be recorded as 
medical history.  
10.1.2  Severity of  AEs 
AEs must be graded  for severity  (i.e., intensity).  A severity  category  of mild, moderate,  or severe,  as 
defined  in Table 2, must be entered  on the AE source document. It should be noted  that the term 
“severe”  used to grade intensity is not synonymous with the term “serious.” For example, severe 
headache is a  severe AE, but may not be a serious AE.  The assessment of severity is made 
regardless of study medication relationship or of the seriousness of the AE. 
  
65  Table 2: Clinical Description of Adverse Event Severity  
 
Grade  Clinical Description of Severity  
1 = Mild  Causing no limitation of usual activities; the participant may experience 
slight discomfort.  
2 = 
Moderate  Causing some limitation of usual activities; the participant may experience 
annoying discomfort. 
3 = 
Severe  Causing inability to carry out usual activities; the participant may 
experience intolerable discomfort or pain.  
 
10.1.3  Relationship of AEs to Study  Medication  
The investigator  will document  her/his opinion of the relationship  of the AE to treatment  with study 
medication using the criteria outlined in Table 3 An AE for which there is a ‘reasonable possibility’ 
that the study medication caused the AE is otherwise referred to as suspected adverse reaction (SAR). ‘Reasonable possibility’ means there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the study medication and the AE. 
Table 3. Relationship of AEs to Study Medication  
 
Relationship  Description  
Definite  A reaction that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of the 
drug or in which the study medication level has been established in body fluids or 
tissue; that follows a known or expected response pattern to the suspected drug; and 
that is confirmed by improvement on stopping or reducing the dosag e of the study 
medication, and reappearance of the reaction on repeated exposure.  
Probable  A reaction that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of the 
study medication; that follows a known or expected response pattern to the suspected 
study medication; that is confirmed by stopping or reducing the dosage of the study 
medication; and that could not be reasonably explained by other factors.  
Possible  A reaction that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of t he 
study medication; that follows a known or expected response pattern to the suspected 
study medication; but that could readily be produced by a number of other factors.  
Unlikely  A reaction that does not follow a reasonable temporal sequence from administration 
of the study medication; that does not follow a known or suspected response pattern 
to the suspected study medication; and that could reasonably be explained by known 
characteristics of the participant’s clinical state.  
Not Related  Any event that does not meet the above criteria.  
66  10.2 Serious Adverse  Events  
10.2.1  Definition of a Serious Adverse  Event 
An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered ‘serious’ if, in the view of the 
investigator, it results in any of the following  outcomes:  
 
(a) Death;  
(b) Is life  threatening;  
(c) Results in persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life  functions;  
(d) A congenital anomaly/birth  defect;  
(e) Requires in- participant hospitalization or prolongs an existing  hospitalization;  
(f) An important  medical  event  that may jeopardize  the participant  or participant  and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed  above.  
10.2.2  Serious Adverse Events (SAE ) Classifications  Common  in Severe AH 
Acute kidney  injury:  
• Increase in creatinine of 50% above baseline over a period of 7  days 
• Increase in creatinine of 0.3 mg/dl within a period of 48  hrs. 
• Onset of renal failure requiring  dialysis  
Sepsis:  
• Life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response  to infection  
• An increase in SOFA score of 2 points of  more  
• Note: most participants with severe AH have 4 points based on bilirubin only 
Infection:  
• Pneumonia defined as new infiltrate by CXR or Chest CT scan not explained by “fluid overload”  
• Positive blood cultures for bacteria or fungus, not suspected as contaminant  
• Positive urine fungal culture > 50,000  colonies/ml  
• Positive urine bacterial culture >  100,000 colonies/ml (mixed flora is  excluded)  
• Soft tissue or bone infections including cellulitis or abscess documented by exam or  scan 
• CNS infection defined as positive culture of CSF or > 5  WBC/ml  
• Ascitic fluid white cell count >500/ml or neutrophils>250/ml. with or without positive bacterial 
or fungal  cultures  
 
Decompensation of liver disease:  
• New onset of ascites if not present on admission to  study  
• New onset of variceal  hemorrhage  
• New onset of hepatic encephalopathy  (HE).  
67  Hepatic failure defined as increase in MELD score ≥ 5 on two consecutive occasions  
 
Cerebral failure defined as worsening HE ≥ Grade 3 if hepatic encephalopathy present  on admission  
 
Renal failure defined as serum creatinine ≥3 milligrams per liter or requirement for  renal replacement therapy 
despite adequate volume replacement  
 
Respiratory failure defined as need for BIPAP therapy or ventilation  
 
Circulatory failure defined as shock or requirement of vasopressor support to maintain  mean arterial pressure ≥  
60 mm Hg despite adequate volume replacement  
 
Multiple organ failure defined as failure ≥2 organs 
 
Note: Sepsis will often be an SAE that precedes documented infection by 1 -5 days. If sepsis is 
reported as an SAE and infection is never documented, then it  should be classified separately, 
i.e., sepsis with documented infection or sepsis without documented infection.  
 
Sepsis can be diagnosed by minor changes in lab parameters such as decrease in platelet count from 
160,000 to 90,000 or increase in creatinine to 1.3 and drop in platelet count to 100 -150,000 from 
normal on admission. However, these changes may also occur due to worsening liver disease 
without infection as a cause.   
68  10.2.3  Reporting SAEs  
In agreeing  to the provisions of this protocol, the investigator  accepts  all legal responsibilities for 
immediate reporting of SAEs to the study designated physician (Dr. Gawrieh or his designee) as 
described  below.  
Table 4: Requirements for Reporting AEs to Various Stakeholders 
 
  
WIRB and 
Local IRB   
NIAAA   
DSMB   
Other 
centers   
Drug 
Company   
FDA 
AEs  
Continuing 
Review   
Annual 
Report  
Every 6 
months DSMB 
reports (every 
6 months) DSMB 
reports  (every 
6 months) Annual 
Report 
TEAEs   
Continuing 
Review   
Annual 
Report  
Every 6 
months DSMB 
reports (every 
6 months) DSMB 
reports  (every 
6 months) Annual 
Report 
SAEs  Continuing 
Review  2 
working 
days Every 6 
months DSMB 
reports (every 
6 months) DSMB 
reports  (every 
6 months) Annual 
Report 
SUSAR  5 days  2 
working 
days 2 
working 
days 2 working 
days 2 working 
days 7 days if 
death  
15 days if 
other  
Fatality  If unrelated Follow SAE timeline  
If related follow SUSAR timeline  
AE: Adverse Event; TEA S: Treatment Emergent Adverse Event; SAE: Serious Adverse Event; 
SUSAR: Serious Unsuspected Adverse Reaction; DSMB: Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
 
The study designated physician for AlcHepNet - 02 is Samer Gawrieh, MD, who as the IND holder  
will assume the responsibility of monitoring safety concerns internally and serve as the lia ison 
between the AlcHepNet and the DSMB.  
 
All SAEs must be reported to the DCC -IU (i.e., within 2 working days) after the investigator 
identifies the SAE. SAEs should be entered into the REDCap system within 2 working days of the investigator becoming aw are of the event. An initial report by telephone should then be followed, as 
soon as possible , by completion of the SAE CRF. Any supporting source documentation should be 
emailed to the assigned contact information as soon as possible. At a minimum the fol lowing 
information should be provided at the time of the initial report: 5-digit Study ID, a description of the event, at least one criterion classifying the event as Serious and the name and title of the reporting individual. Additionally, judgment of causality by the investigator must be provided as soon as possible to ensure timely reporting to regulatory authorities.   
69  Following the initial report,  any additional  information  obtained  by the investigator  about the SAE 
must be reported promptly to the  DCC -IU. 
The site investigator will assess whether the event is causally related to the study medication. The 
study designated physician (Dr. Gawrieh) will consider the investigator’s assessment, however, since Dr. Gawrieh holds the IND and is primarily res ponsible for the overall safety of the participants, his 
causality assessment will take precedence over that of the site investigator. The study designated physician will determine if an SAE meets the criteria for an IND safety report (suspected,  
unexpected serious adverse reaction (SUSAR) in accordance with the FDA regulations, 312.32(c)(1)(i). 
 
We will monitor safety closely, including all SAEs, AKI, and infection. We will provide unblinded data on SAEs including infections and AKI to the DSMB on monthly basis and hold the first DSMB after 3 months from the start of enrollment. We also propose a risk -based monitoring 
(RBM) approach which will create a more efficient and timely monitoring of accumulating data on the adverse events of interest, namely AKI an d infections. The FDA has issued a final guidance in 
2013 (Guidance for Industry. Oversight of Clinical Investigations — A Risk-Based Approach to Monitoring. August 2013) with a follow -up draft guidance in March  2019 (A Risk- Based Approach 
to Monitoring of Clinical Investigations. Questions and Answers. Guidance for Industry) that indicated the acceptability of RBM in studies with FDA oversight. While the details and implementation are left to the trial investigators, the overall concepts are included in th ese two 
documents – and in the Transcelerate RBM Position Paper (available at https://www.transceleratebiopharmainc.com/wp -content/uploads/2013/10/TransCelerate-RBM-
 
Position- Paper -FINAL -30MAY2013.pdf ). The essential elements of t he study- specific AE/SAE 
monitoring plan would be for the RBM tools to interface with the main REDCap database so that any new AEs or SAEs would be immediately passed to the data driven RBM tools to determine if a trigger threshold has been reached. This i nteraction between receipt of data by REDCap and the 
comparison of the data to the triggers (and reporting of it on study dashboards) by the RBM tools will be virtually instantaneous. In addition, levels of thresholds can be set so that data trends of SAEs  accumulating within treatment groups can be identified before significance is reached. A 
complete monitoring plan, including RBM details, will be developed for review  by the FDA 
and the DSMB within three months of study initiation. We will also include St atistical Process 
Control (SPC) techniques in the monitoring plan to ensure that appropriate statistical controls are also utilized during the study. 
 
10.2.3.1 Additional Principal Investigator Responsibilities for SAEs  
The safety data recorded in the source document represent the official record of all AEs and SAEs 
reported in the trial. The investigator should comply with requests by the designated study physician 
to record the SAE on the participant’s AE source document and, if necessary, provide a c opy of this 
source document to the DCC -IU. Other supporting documents such as radiology reports, hospital 
discharge summaries  and autopsy reports  should also be provided, when  appropriate,  in anonymized 
fashion. Additionally, upon request by the designated  study physician, the investigator  should provide 
input into the SAE narrative and provide timely information to ensure prompt follow up and closure of the SAE report. 
 
The investigator and supporting personnel responsible for participant care should discuss with the designated study physician any need for supplemental investigations of SAE(s). The results of these additional assessments must be reported to the designated study physician. 
 
10.3 SAEs that are Anticipated to Occur in the Study Population  (Expected  SAEs)  
Certain SAEs are anticipated to occur in this study population at some frequency independent of 
70  drug exposure. Examples of these expected SAEs include variceal bleeding, ascites, spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis, jaundice, hepatorenal syndrome, or hepatic encephalopathy. These expected SAEs as well as any related hospitalization will not be expeditiously reported as IND safety reports but will be reported in the manner described above (Table 4.). However, if an aggregate analysis indicates  that these events are occurring more frequently in the drug treatment group than in a 
concurrent or historical control group, the SAEs will be reported as an IND safety report (21 CRF 312.32(c)(1)(c) ). Follow  up of AEs 
All AEs, including clinically signif icant laboratory values or physical examination findings relative to 
pretreatment assessments, must be followed during the trial until the AE resolves, is no longer of 
clinical concern, has stabilized or is otherwise explained, or the participant is lost t o follow up. 
 
AEs ongoing at the final visit that are deemed to be ‘possibly, probably, or definitely” related or of other clinical significance must be followed for as long as necessary to adequately evaluate the safety of the participant or until the eve nt stabilizes, resolves, or is no longer of clinical concern. If 
resolved, a resolution date for the AE should be documented on the CRF. The investigator must ensure that follow up includes any supplemental investigations indicated to elucidate the  nature 
and/or causality of the AE. This may include additional laboratory tests or investigations, or consultation with other healthcare professionals, as considered clinically appropriate by the investigator.  
 
Note:  Some SAEs like AKI, GI bleeding, infections, etc . can be both expected and common
71  11. STATISTICAL  METHODS  
11.1 Analysis  Sets 
The primary analyses of 90 -day mortality will be performed in an Intention -to-Treat (ITT) 
framework using survival analysis. Specifically, 
 
(1) we will use all -cause mortality in the first 90 -days as the primary outcome event of interest. We 
will compare the distributions of time to mortality between the two treatment arms. In the 
primary analysis, mortality event time s greater than 90 days will be censored at the 90 days or at 
the time of liver transplant, whichever comes first. We will use the Logrank test to compare the survival functions of the two treatment groups. Cox regression analysis can be performed if it is necessary to control fo r the influences of unbalanced patient characteristics, such as MELD 
score, between the treatment groups. If evidence suggests a violation of the hazard function proportionality, we will conduct an analysis of the restricted mean survival time (RMST) of th e 
first 90 days.  
(2) as a secondary analysis, we will compare transplant -free survival in the first 90 days of treatment 
initiation as between the two treatment arms , as done in other clinical trials . We will perform 
logrank test, Cox regression model, and RMS T analyses as appropriate.  
(3) we plan to conduct one interim analysis and one final analysis for this trial. The interim analysis 
will be conducted when 129 patients, half of the enrollment number, complete the 90 -day 
follow -up. We use the group sequential me thod to control the type 1 error rate of the trial.  
(4)  as another secondary analysis, we will examine the treatment effects in patients with baseline 
MELD scores ≤ 25 and >25 by assessing the equality of treatment effects of the anakinra in high 
and low MELD groups, we will test the interaction between the int ervention indicator and 
baseline MELD score in the Cox regression model .  
 
Complete details of the proposed statistical analyses, including a single interim analysis, can be 
found in the Revised Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  
 
11.2 Determination of Sample Size 
The primary analysis will be comparisons of 90 -day mortality of Anakinra plus zinc vs Prednisone 
using survival analysis. Mortality event times greater than 90 days will be censored at 90 days or at 
time of liver transplant, whichever comes first. The ex periment -wise significance level will be 5%. 
The most recent data from the AlcHepNet consortium suggest a 90 -day mortality rate for 
prednisone is approximately 20%. We estimate that with a total of 258 participants (1 29 per 
treatment arm), we will be able to detect a clinically significant hazards ratio of 0.325, which translates to a 13% reduction in 90 -day mortality, i.e., 80% survival in prednisone vs 93% in 
anakinra plus zinc groups with 85% power by using two- sided logrank tests. We use O’Brien and 
Fleming α -spending function to determine the efficacy stopping boundaries for the sequential tests. 
Specifically, if the test statistics of the log -rank test is greater than 2.963 or less than - 2.963, we will 
claim a significant difference between the two tre atments and stop the trial. Otherwise, we will 
continue enrolling more patients until the full sample size is reached and then the final analysis will be performed. For the final analysis, if the test statistic value is greater than 1.969 or less than - 1.969, 
we will claim a significant difference between the treatments. Otherwise, we will declare that no statistically significant difference is detected.  
 
Besides the group sequential tests, we have in place  an early stopping rule for futility based on 
condi tional power. At the time of interim analysis, we will calculate the conditional power, i.e., the 
probability of claiming difference at the end of the trial given the data at the interim analysis. We will stop the trial for futility when the conditional po wer is less than 0. 1. In other words, based on data 
that become available at the interim analysis, assuming that the current trend continues, we should 
early stop the trial if the probability of declaring anakinra + zinc superior in the final analysis is l ow 
72  (e.g., less than 1 0%). We use this early stopping rule to limit patient exposure to a potentially 
inefficacious treatment.  
 
11.3 Safety Analysis  
Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize safety data to allow a comparison between groups. 
Safety  data, including  AEs,  clinical  and laboratory  observations and physical  examination  findings,  and 
other safety related outcomes will be summarized by treatment group.  
11.3.1  AEs 
AEs will be labeled according to standard medical terminology using the case report forms provided. 
Summary tables of treatment -emergent AEs will be provided. A TEAE is any AE that newly 
appeared, increased in frequency, or worsened in severity following initiation of study medication.  
The incidence of TEAEs will be tabulated by sy stem organ class and preferred term for each 
treatment  group,  and by severity  and relationship to treatment.  Tables  of TEAEs  leading  to study 
medication discontinuation and SAEs will be  provided.  
 
11.3.2  Clinical Laboratory Evaluations  
Descriptive statistics summarizing central laboratory data (hematology, chemistry, and coagulation) will be presented for all trial visits. Changes from pretreatment to each trial visit will also be 
summarized by treatment group/arm.  
 
a. The primary analyses of 90 -day mo rtality will be carried out in  an ITT framework  using  the 
logrank test or Cox regression.  Time -to-death will be censored at 90 days or at liver transplant, 
whichever comes first. In addition to the logrank test, we will perform Cox regression analyses. 
The models will include baseline MELD score as well as other covariates deemed to be 
unbalanced or to effect survival. Tests will be performed at a two -sided nominal significance level 
of 5%.  If the proportional hazard assumption is not met, we will compare t he restricted mean 
survival time at 90 days.  
 
Comparisons of binary survival indicators will be performed as alternative analyses, by using 
either chi -square tests or logistic regression models. In the logistic regression analysis , MELD 
score as well as ot her covariates deemed to be unbalanced or to effect survival will be included  as 
covariates .  
b. We will also compare the transplant -free survival functions of the two treatment groups, at  30, 90 
and 180  days.  
c. We will also secondarily compare the occurrence of events such as s epsis and renal  dysfunction 
by using survival analysis (logrank test and Cox regression) . 
 
 
Before the groups are compared on these instruments, the baseline data will be examined to look for 
group imbalance  among  the survivors.  Comparisons will be  made  using  linear  regression  models  that 
include baseline MELD score and other relevant and/or unbalanced  covariates.  
 
11.3.3  Additional Safety and Clinical  Findings  
Additional safety assessments include vital signs, lab results, and physical examinations. Descriptive 
statistics of the vital sign and lab measures will be provided ; comparisons between the two treatment 
73  groups will be made using mixed effects models . Changes of these variables  from baseline at each 
visit will be analyzed similarly .  
   
74  11.3.4  Other Safety Related Clinical  Outcomes  
The following clinical outcomes will be assessed:  
 
• Death (from hepatic and non -hepatic related  causes)  
• Complications of portal hypertension including gastroesophageal bleeding, interventions to 
manage variceal bleeding (e.g., variceal banding/sclerotherapy or TIPS placement) and diuretic resistant  ascites  
• Complications  of Cirrhosis:  new-onset  ascites,  hepatic  encephalopathy,  hepat orenal  syndrome 
(type I or II), and spontaneous bacterial  peritonitis).  
• Hospitalization 
• Liver transplantation  
11.4 Interim  Analyses  
Interim analyses for efficacy or futility to determine if the study may be terminated prior to 
completion will be conducted once after the cohort associated with at least 50% of the participants have been in the study for 90 days. Formal efficacy analyses will be based on the Lan -Demets 
version of the O’Brien- Fleming boundary to provide an overall two- sided P = 0.05 t est. Futility will 
be assessed based on conditional power
.57,58 . For example, termination due to futility may be 
considered if conditional power is very low (e.g. less than 0.10), under the assumption that the 
hypothesized treatment difference is correct.  In other words, based on data that become available at 
the interim analysis, assuming that the current trend continues, we should early stop the trial if the 
probability of declaring anakinra + zinc superior in the final analysis is low (e.g., less than 1 0%). We 
use this early stopping rule to limit patient exposure to a potentially inefficacious treatment.  
The efficacy interim analyses will be performed on unblinded data. Additional data that will be 
included in the interim analyses are:  
 
• Tables of labora tory data by  group 
• Tabulated safety  data by group  
• Listings of adverse events and serious adverse events by  group 
 
11.5 Handling of Missing  Data  
Missing values will not be imputed and only observed values will be used in data analyses and 
presentations.  
 
11.6 Data and Safety Monitoring Board  (DSMB)  
An independent DSMB will be formed to review safety data at periodic intervals from this and all other AlcHepNet studies. Members of the DSMB will not be allowed to participate as investigators in thi s trial.  
 
The DSMB will review blinded safety data and unblinded safety data (as necessary in their opinion) to ensure the safe and property treatment of participants. The frequency of their standard meetings 
will be according to the agreed upon DSMB chart er. In addition, Chair of the DSMB or the 
designated study physician may call for an ad -hoc DSMB if deemed necessary by either party. Based 
on review  of these  data, the DSMB  will send a written  report  to the designated  study  physician  and to 
the DCC -IU. It  is the responsibility of the designated study physician and the DCC- IU to distribute 
75  these  reports  to all other  stakeholders  (NIAAA, FDA,  and individual  sites)  
 
The DSMB will operate under an appropriate charter (in compliance with relevant regulatory 
guidance) that will define its organization and operation. The DSMB will prepare written minutes of 
both its open and closed sessions. The closed minutes will be made available to the investigators only 
after the database is locked and the blind  for the trial has been broken. All investigators and 
responsible  IRBs will be informed  of any decisions made  which  alter the conduct  of this trial based  on 
recommendations  from  the DSMB  relating  to participant  safety.  The investigators  will inform  the 
participants of such actions and the protocol and ICF will be revised, as appropriate.  
 
Changes to the protocol or to the ICS may be initiated by any investigator, but it is the final 
responsibility of the designated study physician as the IND holder to approve/finalize any such 
changes and to communicate to other stakeholder.  
76  12. ADMINISTRATIVE  AND REGULATORY  CONSIDERATIONS  
12.1 Ethical Conduct of the Trial  
This trial will be conducted in accordance with 21CFR Part 312, Good Clinical Practice 
(CPMP/ICH/135/95), and with the ethical principles laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki and applicable re gulatory requirements.  
 
12.2 Institutional Review Board  (IRB)  
Western Institutional Review Board (WIRB) will review and approve this study prior to its initiation. Amendments can be implemented only following the IRB approval unless the amendment is necessary t o reduce immediate risk to trial participants. The IRB will be informed of any new safety 
information that negatively affects the risk assessment of the trial as soon as it becomes available.  
Investigators will report various categories of the AEs to the IRB according to  the schedule 
described in Table 4.  
 
12.3 Patient Confidentiality and Data  Protection  
All information obtained during the conduct of the trial with respect to the participant will be  
regarded as confidential and confidentiality of all participants will be maintained. Clinical monitors (e.g., CRAs), auditors and inspectors will require access to a participant’s medical notes for the purpose  of source  document  verification,  but the participant’s  confidentiality  will be maintained  at all 
times. An agreement for disclosure of any such information will be obtained in writing and is included in the statement of informed consent. The trial data shall not be disclosed to a third party (with th e exception of auditors and/or regulatory authorities) without the written consent of the 
AlcHepNet consortium. All data shall be secured against unauthorized access.  
 
Apart from the site investigators, no one will have access to participant’s identity . Each site will  
securely  maintain  the code that links participants’  identity  to their study  numbers to prevent  access to 
unauthorized third parties. Participants will be i dentified according to  their study numbers in the 
data management system (REDCap) and by the investigators during any  communications.  
 
The written ICF will explain that, for data verification purposes, authorized representatives of the funding agency, IRB or drug companies which are supplying the study medicine may require direct access to parts of the hospital or practice records relevant to the trial, including participant’s medical history.  
  
77  12.4 Access to Source Documents and  Data  
12.4.1  Source documents 
Source documents may include, but are not limited to, medical records, charts, appointment books, 
participant questionnaires, original laboratory records, equipment print -outs. All source documents 
must be made available to the CRA. The following data must  be included in the source data:  
a) Consent to P articipate in  Trial 
b) Letter to Primary Care Physician, if  applicable  
c) Participants  visit dates  
d) Screening and Randomization Numbers  
e) Demographic information  
f) Medical  history  
g) Disease  history  
h) Physical  examination  
i) Vital signs 
j) Laboratory assessments (copy of laboratory  reports)  
k) AEs and concomitant  medications  
l) Dates of dispensing study  medication  
m) ECGs  
n) Liver biopsy reports (if  applicable)  
o) Participant  questionnaires 
p) Drug  accountability  
q) Issues with protocol  compliance  
r) Completion of, or withdrawal from,  trial 
 
12.5 Investigator  Obligations  
The investigator or a medically trained designee will be responsible for obtaining written informed 
consent and for the care of the participants for the duration of the trial. If  the investigator is not 
present in the clinical research facility during the assessment, he or she will leave instructions for the trial site staff and a telephone number where he or she can be reached.  
 
12.5.1  AE Reporting  
The investigator is responsible for re cording AEs reported by the participant or discovered by any 
other  means  during  the trial. In agreeing  to the provisions of this protocol,  the investigator  accepts  all 
legal responsibilities for immediate reporting of SAEs to the designated study  physician.  
 
12.5.2  Protocol  Deviations  
The investigator is not permitted to deviate from the protocol in any significant way without proper notification to the DCC -IU and the study designated physician (Dr. Samer Gawrieh). Changes to the 
protocol or to the informed consent (ICF) may be initiate d by any investigator, but it is the final 
responsibility of the designated study physician, Dr. Samer Gawrieh, as the IND holder to approve/finalize any such changes and to communicate to other stakeholder Although protocol amendments can be initiated by any study personnel, it is the final responsibility of the designated 
78  study physician as the IND holder to approve/finalize any protocol amendments. Any protocol 
amendments can be implemented at each site only after WIRB approval. The only exception is whe n 
the investigator considers a participant’s safety to be compromised if immediate action is not taken.  
 
12.5.3  Regulatory Documentation  
The following regulatory documentation must be completed or provided, and maintained:  
 
(a) Approved ICF 
(b) IRB approvals (of protocol /amendments, participant questionnaires,  etc.) 
(c) Form FDA 1572 equivalent  
(d) Current medical license of the primary site investigator and sub  investigators  
(e) Financial disclosure  forms  
(f) GCP CITI  Certificate  
(g) Delegation of Authority  Log 
(h) Protocol Training Log  
(i) Sponsor Master Trial  Files 
 
12.6 Data Quality Assurance and Quality Control  
Logic and consistency checks will be performed on all data entered into the source document to ensure accuracy and completeness.  
 
Training sessions, regular monitoring of the trial at the trial sites, instruction manuals, data verification, cross -checking and data audits will be performed to ensure quality of all trial data. 
Investigators’ meetings and/or on- site trial initiations will be performed to prepare investigators and 
other tri al site personnel for appropriate collection of trial data.  
12.7 Site monitoring & auditing  
12.7.1  Trial  Monitoring  
Trial records at each site will be monitored at regular intervals by a clinical research associate (CRA). The role of the CRA is to aid the investigator  in the maintenance and documentation of complete, 
accurate, legible, well organized,  and easily retrievable data. In addition, the CRA will ensure the 
investigator ’s understanding of all applicable regulations concerning the clinical evaluation of the 
study medication and will ensure an understanding of the protocol, reporting responsibilities and the 
validity of the data. This will include ensuring that full and appropriate essential documentation is available. Responsibility for properly implementing the  protocol and maintaining complete trial 
records remain with each investigator.  
 
In order to perform this role, the CRA must perform source data verification (SDV) and as such must be given access to the participant’s primary source documentation (e.g., paper or electronic medical records) that support data entries in the CRF. The investigator may exercise judgment in allowing the CRA access to particular sections of the participant ’s medical records if these are 
deemed irrelevant to the performance, observ ations or conduct of this trial.  
  
79   
12.7.2  Trial  Auditing  
The investigator should understand that it may be necessary for the IRB and / or a regulatory 
agency  to conduct  one or more  site audits  during  or after the trial and agrees  to allow  access  to all 
trial related  documentation  and information and be available  for discussion about  the trial. 
12.8 Archiving and Record  Retention  
The investigator should retain all correspondence relating to this trial in the Investigator Site File (ISF). Any trial documents stored elsewhere should have their location referenced in the ISF.  
 
All documents relating to the trial including the ISF itself, source documents and participant medical files), completed trial participant log and confidential participant identi fication list will be retained by 
the investigator for a minimum period of 15 years, in accordance with regulations. In the event that storage of records becomes a problem at any time during this period, the Sponsor should be consulted for assistance. At t he end of the minimum period, the investigator should obtain written 
authorization from the Sponsor prior to the destruction of any records. The investigator will notify the Sponsor if ownership of documents or responsibility for the trial site is transfer red. The Sponsor 
will inform investigators should it become aware of any changes in storage requirements.  
 
12.9 Publication  Policy  
No data are to be made public or published without prior knowledge and written approval by the AlcHepNet Consortium Steering Commi ttee. 
 
The AlcHepNet consortium publication policies will be applied.  
80  LIST OF PLANNED LABORATORY ANALYTES  
 
 
Serum Chemistry  
sodium 
potassium 
calcium  
chloride 
bicarbonate  
albumin  
BUN creatinine  
total bilirubin  
unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin 
conjugated (direct) bilirubin  
aspartate aminotransferase (AST; SGOT)  
alanine transaminase (ALT; SGPT)  
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 
glucose 
total protein  
 
MELD Score Calculation  
http://www.mayoclinic.org/meld/mayomodel6.html  
Lille Score Calculation  
 
https://www.mdcalc.com/lille -model -alcoholic- hepatitis  
 
 
81  Hematology  
hemoglobin 
hematocrit  
WBC with differential  
 
platelets  
RBC count (incl. MCV, HBE [MCH], MCHC)  
prothrombin time (PT and INR) 
Urine and/or Serum pregnancy test  
 
 
 
The following are the analyses that might be analyzed in the serum/plasma and peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMC): Cytokines/chemokines, NK cells, Cytotoxic T cells, Dendritic Cells (DC), 
Complement  activation.  
 
Table 5: Total Blood Volumes¶ 
 
 Sample Blood Volume (ml)    
Sample Type  Screen  Day 0 Day 3 Day 7 Day 
14 Day 28  Day 60 Day 
90 Day 180  Total 
Volume 
(ml) 
Chemistry  5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 40 
Hematology  3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 24 
Coagulation  3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 24 
Serum Pregnancy  3         3 
Biospecimen 
Banking1  60  60 60 60 60 60 60 420 
Total  14 71 11 71 71 71 71 71 71 522 
 
¶These are estimated volume and may vary from center to center, depending on local laboratory requirements.  Special investigations  
Pro-inflammatory cytokine/chemokines measurements (serum TNF -α, MCP1, IL -6, and IL- 1β) 
Indicators of gut permeability (endotoxin and bacterial 18S DNA) and pro -inflammatory 
cytokine/chemokines (TNFa, MCP1, IL -6, IL-1ß) 
EXPLORATORY EVALUATIONS  
82  References 
1. O'Shea RS, Dasarathy S, McCullough AJ, Practice Guideline Committee of the American 
Association for the Study of Liver D, P ractice Parameters Committee of the American College of G. 
Alcoholic liver disease. Hepatology.  2010;51(1):307- 328. 
2. Seymour CW, Liu VX, Iwashyna TJ, et al. Assessment of Clinical Criteria for Sepsis: For the Third 
International  Consensus Definitions  for Sepsis and Septic  Shock  (Sepsis -3). JAMA.  2016;315(8):762-  
774. 
3. Giamarellos -Bourboulis EJ, Tsaganos T, Tsangaris  I, et al. Validation  of the new Sepsis- 3 definitions: 
proposal for improvement in early risk identification. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2017;23(2):104 -109. 
4. Duseja A,  Choudhary  NS, Gupta S, Dhiman  RK, Chawla Y. APACHE  II score  is superior  to SOFA, 
CTP and MELD in predicting the short -term mortality in  patients with acute -on-chronic liver failure 
(ACLF). J Dig Dis. 2013;14(9):484- 490. 
5. Kim HY, Kim CW, Kim TY, et al. Assessment of scoring systems for acute -on-chronic liver failure 
at predicting short -term mortality in patients with alcoholic hepatitis. Wo rld journal of gastroenterology. 
2016;22(41):9205 -9213.  
6. Crabb DW, Bataller R, Chalasani NP, et al. Standard Definitions and Common Data Elements for 
Clinical Trials  in Patients  With  Alcoholic  Hepatitis:  Recommendation  From  the NIAAA Alcoholic 
Hepatitis Consortia. Gastroenterology.  2016;150(4):785- 790. 
7. Szabo G, Mitchell MC, McClain CJ, et al. IL -1 Receptor Antagonist in Combination with 
Pentoxifylline and Zinc for Severe Alcoholic Hepatitis: A Multicenter Randomized Double -Bind 
Placebo -Controlled Clinical Trial. Hepatology.  2018;68(6):1445a -1445a.  
8. Liangpunsakul S. Clinical characteristics and mortality of hospitalized alcoholic hepatitis patients in 
the United States. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2011;45(8):714- 719. 
9. Jinjuvadia  R, Liangpunsakul  S, Translational  R, Evolving  Alcoholic  Hepatitis  Treatment  C. Trends in 
Alcoholic Hepatitis -related Hospitalizations, Financial Burden, and Mortality in the United States. J 
Clin Gastroenterol. 2015;49(6):506- 511. 
10. Sahlman P, Nissinen M, Pukkala E, Farkkila M. Incidence, survival and cause -specific mortality in 
alcoholic liver disease: a population- based cohort study. Scand J Gastroenterol.  2016;51(8):961- 966. 
11. Nguyen TA, DeShazo JP, Thacker LR, Puri P, Sanyal AJ. The Worsening Profile of Alcoholic 
Hepatitis  in the United States. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2016;40(6):1295- 1303.  
12. Grant BF, Chou SP, Saha  TD, et al. Prevalence of 12 -Month Alcohol Use, High- Risk Drinking, and 
DSM - IV Alcohol Use Disorder in the United States, 2001 -2002 to 2012- 2013: Results From the 
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017;74(9):911- 923. 
13. Doycheva I, Watt KD, Rifai G, et al. Increasing Burden of Chronic Liver Disease Among 
Adolescents  and Young  Adults in the USA:  A Silent  Epidemic.  Dig Dis Sci. 2017;62(5):1373- 1380.  
14. Singh S, Murad MH, Chandar AK, et al. Comparative Effec tiveness of Pharmacological 
Interventions  for Severe  Alcoholic  Hepatitis:  A Systematic  Review  and Network  Meta- analysis. 
Gastroenterology. 2015;149(4):958- 970 e912.  
15. Thursz MR, Richardson P, Allison M, et al. Prednisolone or pentoxifylline for alcoholic hepatitis. N 
Engl J Med.  2015;372(17):1619 -1628.  
16. Vergis N, Atkinson SR, Knapp S, et al. In Patients With Severe Alcoholic Hepatitis, Prednisolone 
Increases Susceptibility to Infection and Infection -Related Mortality, and Is Associated With High 
Circulating Levels of Bacterial DNA. Gastroenterology. 2017;152(5):1068 -1077 e1064.  
17. Alvarez MA, Cabre E, Lorenzo -Zuniga V, Montoliu S, Planas R, Gassull MA. Combining steroids 
with enteral  nutrition:  a better  therapeutic  strategy  for severe  alcoholic  hepatitis?  Results of a pilot 
83  study. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2004;16(12):1375- 1380.  
18. Mathurin P, Abdel nour M, Ramond MJ, et al. Early change in bilirubin levels is an important 
prognostic  factor  in severe  alcoholic  hepatitis  treated  with prednisolone.  Hepatology.  2003;38(6):1363 - 
1369.  
19. Iracheta- Vellve A, Petrasek J, Gyogyosi B, et al. Interleukin -1 inhibit ion facilitates recovery from 
liver injury and promotes regeneration of hepatocytes in alcoholic hepatitis in mice. Liver Int. 
2017;37(7):968- 973. 
20. Cohen S, Hurd E, Cush J, et al. Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with anakinra, a recombinant 
human interleukin -1 receptor antagonist, in combination with methotrexate: results of a twenty - 
four-week, multicenter, randomized, double -blind, placebo- control led trial. Arthritis Rheum. 
2002;46(3):614- 624. 
21. Giampietro C, Ridene M, Lequerre T, et al. Anakinra in adult -onset Still's disease: long -term 
treatment  in patients  resistant  to conventional  therapy.  Arthritis  Care Res (Hoboken).  2013;65(5):822-  
826. 
22. Kuemmerle -Deschner JB, Tyrrell PN, Koetter I, et al. Efficacy and safety of anakinra therapy in 
pediatric and adult patients with the autoinflammatory Muckle -Wells syndrome. Arthritis Rheum. 
2011;63(3):840- 849. 
23. Listing J, Strangfeld A, Kary S, et al. Infections in patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with 
biologic agents. Arthritis Rheum.  2005;52(11):3403 -3412.  
24. Salliot C, Dougados M, Gossec L. Risk of serious infections during rituximab, abatacept and 
anakinra treatments for rheumatoid arthritis: meta- analyses of randomised placebo -controlled trials. 
Ann Rheum Dis. 2009;68(1):25- 32. 
25. Shakoory B, Carcillo JA, Chatham WW, et al. Interleukin -1 Receptor Blockade Is Associated With 
Reduced Mortality in Sepsis Patients With Features of Macrophage Activation Syndrome: Reanalysis of a Prior Phase III Trial. Crit Care Med.  2016;44(2):275- 281. 
26. Church LD, Savic S, McDermott MF. Long term management of patients with cryopyrin -associated 
periodic syndromes (CAPS): focus on rilonacept (IL -1 Trap).  Biologics. 2008;2(4):733 -742. 
27. Lachmann HJ, Kone -Paut I, Kuemmerle -Deschner JB, et al. Use of canakinumab in the cryopyrin - 
associated periodic syndrome. N Engl J Med.  2009;360(23):2416- 2425.  
28. Szabo  G, Petrasek  J. Inflammasome  activation  and function in liver disease.  Nat Rev Gastroenterol 
Hepatol.  
2015;12(7):387- 400. 
29. Tilg H, Moschen AR, Szabo G. Interleukin -1 and inflammasomes in alcoholic liver disease/acute 
alcoholic hepatitis and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease/nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepatology. 2016;64(3):955- 965. 
30. Petrasek J, Bala S, Csak T, et al. IL -1 receptor antagonis t ameliorates inflammasome -dependent 
alcoholic steatohepatitis in mice. J Clin Invest.  2012;122(10):3476 -3489.  
31. Schroder K, Tschopp J. The inflammasomes. Cell. 2010;140(6):821- 832. 
32. Petrasek J, Iracheta- Vellve A, Saha B, et al. Metabolic danger signals, uric  acid and ATP, mediate 
inflammatory cross -talk between hepatocytes and immune cells in alcoholic liver disease. J Leukoc 
Biol. 2015;98(2):249- 256. 
33. Iracheta- Vellve A, Petrasek J, Satishchandran A, et al. Inhibition of sterile danger signals, uric acid 
and ATP, prevents  inflammasome  activation  and protects  from  alcoholic  steatohepatitis  in mice.  J 
Hepatol.  2015;63(5):1147- 1155.  
34. Cosgrove BD, Cheng C, Pritchard JR, Stolz DB, Lauffenburger DA, Griffith LG. An inducible 
autocrine  cascade  regulates  rat hepatocyte  proliferation  and apoptosis responses to tumor  necrosis 
84  factor -alpha. Hepatology.  2008;48(1):276- 288. 
35. Petrasek  J, Dolganiuc  A, Csak T, Kurt-Jones EA, Szabo  G. Type  I interferons  protect  from  Toll-like 
receptor 9 -associated liver injury and regulate IL -1 receptor antagonist in mice. Gastroenterology. 
2011;140(2):697- 708 e694.  
36. Mohammad MK, Zhou Z, Cave M, Barve A, McClain CJ. Zinc and liver disease. Nutr Clin Pract.  
2012;27(1):8- 20. 
37. McClain CJ, Van Thiel DH, Parker S, Badzin LK, Gilbert H. Alterations in zinc, vitamin A, and 
retinol - binding protein in chronic alcoholics: a possible mechanism for night blindness and 
hypogonadism. Alcohol Clin Exp Res.  1979;3(2):135- 141. 
38. Lambert  JC, Zhou Z, Kang  YJ. Suppression of Fas-mediated  signaling  pathway  is involved  in zinc 
inhibition of ethanol -induced liver apoptosis. Exp Biol Med (Maywood).  2003;228(4):406 -412. 
39. Lambert JC, Zhou Z, Wang L, Song Z, McClain CJ, Kang YJ. Prevention of alterations in intestinal 
permeability is involved in zinc inhibition of acute ethanol -induced liver damage in mice. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther.  2003;305(3):880- 886. 
40. Zhou Z, Wang L, Song Z, Saari JT, McClain CJ, Kang YJ. Zinc supplementation prevents alcoholic 
liver injury in mice through attenuation of oxidative stress. Am J Pathol.  2005;166(6):16 81-1690.  
41. Zhou Z, Liu J, Song Z, McClain CJ, Kang YJ. Zinc supplementation inhibits hepatic apoptosis in 
mice subjected to a long -term ethanol exposure. Exp Biol Med (Maywood).  2008;233(5):540- 548. 
42. Kang X, Song Z, McClain CJ, Kang YJ, Zhou Z. Zinc supplementation enhances hepatic 
regeneration  by preserving  hepatocyte  nuclear  factor -4alpha  in mice subjected  to long-term ethanol 
administration. Am J Pathol.  2008;172(4):916- 925. 
43. Zhong  W, McClain  CJ, Cave  M, Kang  YJ, Zhou Z. The role of zinc deficiency  in alcohol -induced 
intestinal barrier dysfunction. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol.  2010;298(5):G625- 633. 
44. Zhong W, Zhao Y, McClain CJ, Kang YJ, Zhou Z. Inactivation of hepatocyte nuclear factor - 
4{alpha} mediates  alcohol -induced downregulation  of intestinal  tight junction proteins.  Am J Physiol 
Gastrointest Liver Physiol.  2010;299(3):G643- 651. 
45. Zhou Z. Zinc and alcoholic liver disease. Dig Dis.  2010;28(6):745- 750. 
46. Zhao Y, Zhong W, Sun X, et al. Zinc deprivation mediates alcohol -induced hepatocyte IL -8 analog 
expression in rodents via an epigenetic mechanism. Am J Pathol.  2011;179(2):693- 702. 
47. Zhong W, Zhao Y, Sun X, Song Z, McClain CJ, Zhou Z. Dietary zinc deficiency  exaggerates 
ethanol - induced liver injury in mice: involvement of intrahepatic and extrahepatic factors. PLoS One. 
2013;8(10):e76522.  
48. Sun Q, Li Q, Zhong W, et al. Dysregulation of hepatic zinc transporters in a mouse model of 
alcoholic liver disease. Am J  Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014;307(3):G313- 322. 
49. Zhong W, Li Q, Sun Q, et al. Preventing Gut Leakiness and Endotoxemia Contributes to the 
Protective  Effect  of Zinc on Alcohol -Induced Steatohepatitis  in Rats.  J Nutr.  2015;145(12):2690 - 
2698.  
50. Sun Q , Zhong W, Zhang W, et al. Zinc deficiency mediates alcohol -induced apoptotic cell death in 
the liver of rats through activating ER and mitochondrial cell death pathways. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol.  2015;308(9):G757- 766. 
51. Sun Q, Zhong W, Zhang W, Zhou Z. Defect of mitochondrial respiratory chain is a mechanism of 
ROS overproduction in a rat model of alcoholic liver disease: role of zinc deficiency. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol.  2016;310(3):G205- 214. 
52. Spahr L, Lambert JF, Rubbia -Brandt L, et al. Granulocyte -colony stimulating factor induces 
proliferation  of hepatic  progenitors in alcoholic  steatohepatitis:  a randomized trial. Hepatology. 
2008;48(1):221- 229. 
85  53. Singh V, Sharma AK, Narasimhan RL, Bhalla A, Sharma N, Sharma R. Granulocyte colony - 
stimulating factor in severe alcoholichepatitis: a randomized pilot study. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2014;109(9):1417 -1423.  
54. Moreau R, Rautou PE. G- CSF therapy for severe alcoholic hepatitis: targeting liver regeneration or 
neutrophil function? Am J Gastroenterol.  2014;109(9):1424 -1426.  
55. Engelmann  C, Splith  K, Berg T, Schmelzle  M. Effects  of granulocyte -colony  stimulating  factor  (G- 
CSF)  on stem cell mobilization  in patients  with liver failure.  Eur J Intern Med. 2016;36:e37 -e39. 
56. Chawla LS, Bellomo R, Bihorac A, et al. Acute kidney disease and renal recovery: consensus report 
of the Acute Disease  Quality  Initiative  (ADQI)  16 Workgroup.  Nat Rev Nephrol.  2017;13(4):241- 257. 
57. Lachin JM. A review of methods for futility stopping based on conditional power. Stat Med. 
2005;24(18):2747 -2764.  
58. Davis BR, Hardy RJ. Data Monitoring in Clinical -Trials -  the Case for Stochastic Curtailment. Journal 
of Clinical Epidemiology. 1994;47(9):1033- 1042.  
59. Wittes  J, Brittain  E. The Role of Internal  Pilot-Studies  in Increasing  the Efficiency  of Clinical- Trials.  
60. Lakatos, E. Sample sizes based on the log -rank statistic in complex clinical trials. Biometrics 
1988;44(1):229- 241. 
61. Royston, P, Parmar, MK. Restricted mean survival time: an alternative to the hazard ratio for the 
design and analysis of randomized trials with a time -to-event outcome. BMC Med Res Methodol 
2013; 13:152 . 
62. Koch, D.G., Tillman, H., Durkalski, V., Lee, W.M. and Reuben, A., 2016. Development of a model 
to predict transplant -free survival of patients with acute liver failure. Clinical Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, 14(8), pp.1199- 1206.  