2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 1 
THEUNIVERSITY OF TEX AS MD ANDERSON CANCER CENTER 
DIVISION OF CANCER MEDICINE  
TITLE PAG
E 
Protocol 2015-0393 : A Phase II Study of Ramucirumab for Advanced, Pre- treated Biliary 
Cancers  
PI: 
Mil
ind Javle, M.D. 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology  
1515 Holcombe Blvd. Unit 0426 (713) 792-2828(713) 745-9926 (fax)mjavle@mdanderson.org
MD And
erson Cancer Center Collaborators : 
Robert A. Wolff, M.D. 
Gauri V aradhachary, M.D.  
Kanwal Raghav, M.D. Ahmed Kaseb, M.D.  
Linus Ho, M.D. Xuemei Wang, M.S. Priya Bhosale, M.D. Asif Rashid, M.D.  
Lianchun Xiao , M.S. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 2 
 
 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS   
 
1.0 Study Rationale  
2.0 Background 3.0 Drug Information  
4.0 Objectives  
5.0 Patient Eligibility  
6.0 Treatment Plan  
7.0 Evaluation during Study 8.0 Criteria for Removal from the Study  
9.0 Response Evaluation 10.0 Statistical Methods 
11.0     Data and Protocol Management  
12.0  Correlative Studies  
13.0     Safety Reporting of Ad verse Events  
14.0 References  
 APPENDICES     
Appendix 1 – ECOG Performance Status  
Appendix 2 – Ramucirumab - Additional I nformation 
  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 3 
 
1. STUDY RATIONALE   
Biliary cancers are a heterogeneous group of malignancies with a limited number of 
chemotherapeutic opt ions in advanced disease. The current standard of care for palliative 
treatment of biliary cancers is the combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin1. There is no clear  
second -line therapy in biliary cancers after progression on gemcitabine and cisplatin. A 
retrospective study of second-line therapies at MD Anderson demonstrated a median progression free survival in this population of 2.7 months with a multitude of thera pies used
2. 
Angiogenesis has been shown to be a potential target for biliary cancers in a variety of small phase II studies
3-5. Ramucirumab  is a novel monoclonal antibody that targets the vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2). It is FDA -approved for the treatment of 
advanced gastric canc er, and inhibits tumor-induced angiogenesis through high affinity binding 
to VEGFR26.  
  
2. BACKGROUND  
 
2.1 Bilia ry Cancers  
 
Biliary cancers are comprised of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, extrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma, and gallbladder carcinoma. They are an aggressive group of malignancies but heterogeneous in their presentations and clinical pictures. The major ity of patients present at 
an advanced stage, and median survival of locally- advanced or metastatic biliary tract cancers is 
less than one year. These malignancies are characterized by lymph node involvement and distant metastases
7.  
 Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is the most common form of biliary tract cancers. Internationally, 
Israel has the highest incidence worldwide, with 7.5 cases per 100,000 men and 13.8 case s per 
100,000 women. Other countries with significant incidence rates include Mexico, Bolivia, Chile, and northern Japan
8. In the US, about five thousand new cases are reported every year. 
The incidence has been on the decline owing to the increase in the number of cholecystectomies for other reasons like acute or chronic symptomatic cholecystitis.  Less than 10 percent of patients with GBC live more than f ive years after diagnosis. The mortality is very high and is 
attributed to the late diagnosis and an advanced stage of the disease
9. 
 At the same time, cholangiocarcinoma is a highly fatal cancer of the biliary tree.  In the United States, approximately 5,000 new cases of cholangiocarcinoma are diagnosed annually; these cases are equally distributed between intra -hepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) and extrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma (ECC)
10. Data from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, 
Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) indicate that t he incidence of ICC is increasing11. The 
incidence of ICC in the US almost tripled between 1975 and 199912. The reasons behind this 
increase are not clear.  
 
 
   
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 4 
 
 
  
Chemotherapy for biliary cancers  
 
Gemcitabine has been the mainstay of  chemotherapy in biliary cancers . The ABC -01 study was 
a phase II trial that examined the combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin in advanced biliary cancers. 86 patients were randomized to gemcitabine alone versus the doublet regimen. The primary endpoint of 6 -month progression-free survival was 45.5% vs. 57.1% in the two arms 
with median time to progression being 8 months with the gemcitabine and cisplatin combination
13. The benefit of the addition of cisplatin to gemcitabine was verified with the 
ABC -02 study, a randomized phase III trial of 410 patients with overall survival as the primary 
endpoint. The authors found that the combination of gemcitabine and cispla tin significantly 
improved median overall survival (11.7 months vs. 8.1 months) and progression- free survival 
(8.0 months vs. 5.0 months) compared to gemcitabine alone1. 
 
Therapy  in refractory biliary cancers  
There has  not been any randomized controlled phase II o r III trials of second or third -line 
therapies in biliary cancers  thus far. A recent review of second-line therapy that included 14 
phase II trials indicated a mean overall survival (OS) of 7.2 months, progression- free survival 
(PFS) of 3.2 months and response rate (RR) of 7.7% with second- line therapy14. Similarly, a 
large retrospective review of second line therapy for 300 BC patients from Italy also showed a median OS of 7.2 months
15. A retrospective review from MD Anderson Cancer Center 
indicated a median PFS of 2.7 months (95% CI 2.3-3.8 months) with a median OS of 13.8 
months (95% CI 12-19.3 months) in those receiving second- line chemotherapy for 
cholangiocarcinoma2. There is no “standard” second -line c hemotherapy af ter gemcitabine and 
cisplatin; FOLFOX, irinotecan, capecitabine and erlotinib are used in practice16-20. 
 
Rationale for targeting angiogenesis in biliary cancers  
Expression of pro-angiogenic factors such as VEGFs and angiogenesis play an important role in biliary cancers . VEGF and VEGFR overexpression has been reported in 30-50% of biliary 
cancer  cases and are associated with worse prognosis
21-23. Estrogens interact with insulin -like 
growth factor (IGF1) and its receptor (IGF1 -R) to simulate the growth of cholangiocarcinoma. 
Estrogens also stimulate the expression an d secretion of VEGF- A, VEGF -C and VEGFRs in 
cholangiocarcinoma cell lines potentially altering cholangiocarcinoma proliferation and tumor neoangiogenesis
24. Conversely, inhibition of cholangiocarcinoma proliferation also inhibits 
VEGF expression. Endothelin 1 (ET-1) inhibited the proliferation of cholangiocarcinoma xenografts in nude mice, which was associated with a down-regulation of VEGF- A and VEGF -
C expression
25. 
 A phase II trial of gemcitabine, oxaliplatin, and bevacizumab  enrolled 35 patients with biliary 
cancers and  resulted in a RR of 40% and PFS/OS of 7.0/12.7 months, which compared 
favorably with historic controls
5. Lubner and colleagues reported a multicenter phase II trial of 
bevacizumab and erlotinib in patients with unresectable biliary cancer. The confirmed partial response rate in this study was 12%, median OS was 9.9 months, and TTP was 4.4 months, suggesting an effect of bevacizumab in this disease
4. In the ABC-03 trial, Valle and colleagues 
examined the effects of adding cediranib, a pan-VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, to 
traditional treatment with cisplatin/gemcitabine. This group performed a randomized phase II 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 5 
 
study that included 124 chemotherapy- naive biliary cancer  patients who received 
cisplatin/gemcitabine with or without cediranib.  Patients assigned to cediranib had a 
significantly improved RR compared with patients assigned to placebo. (44% vs. 19%, 
respectively (p = .0036). Patients receiving placebo were also more likely to progres s (28% 
progressive disease vs 10% for cediranib). However, this did not result in improved OS26. 
Modest anti- tumor efficacy against biliary cancers  was also demonstrated with multi- targeted 
anti-angiogenic tyrosine kinase inhibitors including sorafenib and sunitinib3,27-29. 
 
Ramucirumab is a fully human IgG1 monoclonal antibody that is a specific and direct inhibitor 
of VEGFR -2, where it binds to the extracellular VEGF-binding domain with high degree of 
specificity and affinity, at picomolar dose range. It thus prevents the binding of the VEGF ligand to the VEGF-R2 receptor. In the phase I trial for patients with advanced solid tumors, (n=37) ramucirumab demonstrated encouraging early evidence of efficacy at a range of dose levels including the one enrolled patient with biliary cancer who experienced stable disease lasting over 5 months
30. Ramucirumab was recently shown to improve survival compared with 
placebo in advanced gastric cancer, with a median overall survival of 5.2 months in the ramuciru mab arm, and 3.8 months in the placebo arm. The main toxicity seen was an increase 
in hypertension in the ramucirumab group
31. Additionally, a double- blind, randomi zed, phase 
III study of previously treated gastric and gastroesophageal junction cancers included 665 
patients randomized to raumucirumab plus paclitaxel versus placebo plus paclitaxel32. In this 
study, the combination arm showed an improvement in overall survival (9.6 months vs. 7.4 mths, p=0.017), providing further rationale for the use of ramucirumab in refractory gastric 
cancer.  
 
Initial data with ramucirumab in biliary cancer  
In the initial 43 patient cohort that was enrolled in this phase II trial, 42 patients with cholangiocarcinoma and gallbladder cancers received treatment.  Ramucirumab was well tolerated with 9 grade 3 toxicities including anorexia, dehydration, hypertension, hyponatremia, proteinuria and vomiting.  There were no grade 4 toxicities.  The median PFS for all patients who received treatment was 2.73 months (95% CI 1.91-8.03 months) and median OS was 6.31 months (95% CI 4.7 months – not reached).   The overall response rate was 0% and disease 
control rate (SD + PR + CR) was 44%.  Importantly, 6 patients (13%) were on treatment for > 24 weeks.  Of these, 3 were on treatment for at least 44 weeks.  In reviewing the genomic data on the 6 patients with prolonged periods of stable disease, we noted that 4 of the 6 harbored mutations in DNA repair pathways (BRCA, FANCA, ARID1A) and 1 patient had an FGFR alteration  
 
3.  DRUG INFORMATION 
 
3.1 RAMUCIRUMAB  
1. The Product 
Ramucirumab is an anti -VEGF Receptor 2 recombinant human monoclonal antibody of the 
IgG1 subclass. Ramucirumab drug product is a sterile, preservative-free solution for 
infusion oframucirumab formulated in an aqueous solution at a concentration of 10 mg/mL (500 mg/50-mL vial). The buffer contains 10 mM histidine, 75 mM sodium chloride, 133 
mM glycine, and 0.01% polysorbate 80. It is administered as an intravenous infusion at a 
dose of 8 mg/kg over 60 minutes every two weeks.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 6 
 
2. Indication 
In the United States, ramucirumab is indicated for the treatme nt of advanced gastric and 
gastroesophageal cancers  either alone or in combination with paclitaxel after prior 
fluoropyrimidine- or platinum- containing chemotherapy .  
 
It is also indicated in combination with docetaxel for treatment of metastatic non -small cell 
lung cancer with disease progression after platinum- therapy.  
 Accessed via:  http://pi.lilly.com/us/cyramza -pi.pdf
 
3. Introduction 
Ramucirumab is a recombinant human monoclonal antibody of the immunoglobulin G subclass 1 that specifically binds to the extracellular domain of the VEGFR2. This prevents the binding of activating ligands (VEGF- A, VEGF -C, VEGF -D) to the receptor. This 
inhibition results in inactivation of downstream signaling pathways that promote migration and proliferation of human endothel ial cells.  
 
4. Preclinical Studies with Ramucirumab
  
Preclinical pharmacodynamic data demonstrated that ramucirumab binds        specifically and with high affinity to human VEGFR2 , and not to murine VEGFR2  or the related human 
VEGF receptors, VEGFR -1 and VEG FR-3. Furthermore, a surrogate antibody for 
ramucirumab was tested with demonstration of potent antiangiogenic effects in multiple mouse xenograft solid tumor models, including gastric, hepatic, breast, colorectal, non-small cell lung , and pancreatic cancer models (Ramucirumab investigator’s brochure).    
 
5. Clinical Studies In Gastrointestinal malignancies with Ramucirumab
 
The REGARD trial randomized patients with advanced gastric or GE junction cancers in a 2:1 fashion to ramucirumab versus best supportive care. These patients had previously 
received platinum or fluoropyrimidine therapy. Patients who received ramucirumab has an improvement in 12-week PFS from 15.8% to 40.1% with overall survival being significantly improved as well (5.2 vs. 3.8 months)
31. 
 The RAINBOW trial randomized 665 advanced, refractory gastric or GE junction patients 
to receive paclitaxel plus ramucirumab versus paclitaxel plus placebo. The addi tion of 
ramucirumab to paclitaxel significantly improved median PFS from 2.9 months to 4.4 months. Objective response rate was similarly improved from 16% to 28%. Further, the combination of paclitaxel with ramucirumab resulted in a significant improvement in overall survival from 7.4 months to 9.6 months
32.  
 
6. Potential Risks of Ramucirumab  Toxicities  
The most common toxicities reported with Ramucirumab  as monothera py include 
hypertension (16%), diarrhea (14%), headache (9 %), and hyponatremia (6%). Class -related 
effects such as hemorrhage (3.4%), arterial thromboembolic events (1.7%), and gastrointestinal perforations (0.7%) were rarely noted. Infusion- related reactions were 
initially seen in 16% of patients prior to the institution of premedication recommendations.  
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 7 
 
 
7.   Further Information and Storage 
      See Appendix 2 for Package Insert and Investigator’s Brochure  
       
 
4.     OBJECTIVES  
 
PRIMARY  
Determine th e progression -free survival (PFS) of ramucirumab  in advanced biliary cancers 
(intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, extrahepatic cholangiocarci noma, and gallbladder cancer ) 
who have received prior chemotherapy.  
 
SECONDAR Y 
• Determine the response rate (RR) and di sease control rate (partial response + 
complete response + stable disease) of ramucirumab  in advanced biliary cancers  
• Determine overall survival ( OS) of ramucirumab  in advanced biliary cancers  
• Evaluate the toxicity of ramucirumab  in advanced biliary cancer s 
 
EXPLORATORY  
• Correlate the carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19 -9 response (defined as >50% decrease 
from baseline) with tumor response, PFS and OS 
• Correlate baseline tumor gene expression profile with PFS   
• Correlate pre- and post- therapy CT imaging to quantify iodine content, atomic 
numbers, and Z-values and correlate with response 
5. PATIENT ELIGIBILITY  
Patients will be included in the study based on the following inclusion and exclusion criteria.    
INCLUSION CRITERIA 
1. Patient must have cholangiocarcinoma, gall bladder cancer or adenocarcinoma on liver 
biopsy with clinical features consistent with biliary primary/ cholangiocarcinoma .   
 
2. Metastatic or unresectable disease documented on diagnostic imaging studies. 
 
3. Must have received at least one regimen containing  gemcitabine chemotherapy.  
 
4. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status of 0 to 1 (Appendix 1).   
 
5. The patient has adequate hepatic function as defined by a total bilirubin ≤1.5 mg/dL (25.65 μmol/L), and aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) ≤ 3.0 times the upper limit of normal (ULN; or 5.0 times the ULN in the setting of liver metastases).  
 6. The patient has adequate hematologic function, as evidenced by an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥1000/µL, hemoglobin ≥9 g/dL (5.58 mmol/L), and platelets ≥100,000/µL. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 8 
 
 
7. The patient does not have: 
a. Cirrhosis at a level of Child -Pugh B (or worse) or 
b. Cirrhosis  (any degree) and a history of hepatic encephalopathy or clinically 
meaningful ascites resulting from cirrhosis. Clinically meaningful ascites is 
defined as ascites from cirrhosis requiring diuretics or paracentesis.  
8. The patient has adequate r enal function as defined by a serum creatinine ≤1.5 times the 
ULN, or creatinine clearance (measured via 24 -hour urine collection) ≥40 mL/minute 
(that is, if serum creatinine is >1.5 times the ULN, a 24 -hour urine collection to 
calculate creatinine clearan ce must be performed).  
 
9. The patient’s urinary protein is ≤1+ ( ≤30-100 mg/dl) on dipstick or routine urinalysis 
(UA; if urine dipstick or routine analysis is ≥2+ ( ≥100-300 mg/dl) , a 24-hour urine 
collection for protein must demonstrate <1000 mg of protein in 24 hours to allow 
participation in this protocol). 
 10. The patient must have adequate coagulation function as defined by International Normalized Ratio (INR) ≤1.5 and a partial thromboplastin time (PTT) (PTT/aPTT) < 1.5 x ULN.). Patients on full-dose anticoagulation must be on a stable dose (minimum duration 14 days) of oral anticoagulant or low molecular weight heparin. If receiving warfarin, the patient must have an INR ≤3.0 and no active bleeding (that is, no bleeding within 14 days prior to first dose of protocol therapy) or pathological condition present that carries a high risk of bleeding (for example, tumor involving major vessels or known varices). 
 11. Because the teratogenicity of ramucirumab is not known, the patient, if sexually active, must be postmenopausal, surgically sterile, or using effective contraception (hormonal or barrier methods).  
 12. Female patients of childbearing potential must have a negative serum pregnancy test within 7 days prior to enrollment.  
13. Patients must sign an Informed Consent and Authorization indicating that they are aware of the investigational nature of this study and the known risks involved.  
14.  Patient is ≥ 18 years of age on the day of consenting to the study. 
 
15. In the ten patient expanded cohort, patients diagnosed with DNA repair or FGFR genetic aberrations will be enrolled.  
 
EXCLUSION CRITERIA 
 
1.  The patient has experienced any Grade 3 -4 GI bleeding within 3 months prior to 
enrollment.  
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 9 
 
2. Prior therapy with any agent targeting the VEGFR pathway  to include bevacizumab, 
pazopanib, and other anti-angiogenesis inhibitors. 
 3.   The patient has a history of deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary emboli sm, or any other 
significant thromboembolism, including portal venous thrombos is (venous port or catheter 
thrombosis, incidental pulmonary embolism diagnosed on imaging studies or superficial 
venous thrombosis are not considered “significant”) during the 3 months prior to randomization.  
4. The patient has experienced any arterial thromboembolic events, including but not 
limited to myocardial infarction, transient ischemic attack, cerebrovascular accident, or unstable angina, within 6 months prior to enroll ment.  
 
5. The patient has uncontrolled or poorly-controlled hypertension (>160 mmHg systolic or 
> 100 mmHg diastolic for >4 weeks) despite standard medical management.  
 6. The patient has a serious or non-healing wound, ulcer, or bone fracture within 28 da ys 
prior to enrollment.  7. The patient has undergone major surgery within 28 days prior to enrollment, or subcutaneous venous access device placement within 7 days prior to enrollment. 
 
8. The patient is receiving chronic antiplatelet therapy, including a spirin, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, including ibuprofen, naproxen, and others), dipyridamole or clopidogrel, or similar agents. Once-daily aspirin use (maximum dose 325 mg/day) is 
permitted.  
 
9. The patient has elective or planned major s urgery to be performed during the course of 
the clinical trial.  
 
10. The patient is pregnant or breast- feeding.  
 
6.  TREATMENT PLAN  
This is an open-label phase II study.  P atients with advanced biliary cancers will be enrolled .  
All patients must be registered on the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Clinical Oncology 
Research (CORe) system prior to initiation of treatment. 
This study will enroll up to 60 patients to at MD Anderson Cancer Center .  Accrual is projected 
to be 2.5 subjects per month. If this study proceeds to a future trial for patients with DNA repair 
gene of FGFR mutations, data obtained from this expanded cohort of 10 patients will be 
included in final analysis.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 10 
 
This will be an open- label, single arm study with each cycle being 14 days. Ramucirumab  will 
be administered at 8 mg/kg intravenously on day 1 of the cycle. Restaging will be done every 4 
cycles (+/ - 1week).  Treatment will be continued until progression unless other reasons for 
study discontinuation occur as listed in section 8 “ Criteria  for Removal from the Study .” 
Additionally, patients who have therapy interrupted for consolidative therapies (including, but 
not limited to radiation therapy, radioembolization, and chemoembolization) or at the physician’s discretion, will remain on study  for survival analyses.  
 
Table 2 : Starting Dose Level  
Drug  Dose  Infusion Time  Schedule  (in 14-day 
cycle ) 
IV 
Ramucirumab  8 mg/kg  60 min (+/ - 5 min)  Day 1  
 
Dosing and Administration 
The study drug  will be provided by the sponsor and administered in the following order with 
the specified pre- medications:  
o Premedication should be with an IV H 1 agonist, diphenhydramine 50 mg in NS 
50 mL IV within 30 minutes prior to treatment  
o Ramucirumab  8 mg/kg in NS to final volume of 250 mL IV ov er 60 minute on 
day 1  repeated every 14 days  
Dose Modifications and Toxicity Management  
Dose modifications and treatment delays based on observed drug- related toxicity will be 
performed as described below. Any toxicity  associated or possibly associated with 
ramucirumab  treatment shou ld be managed according to standard medical practice.  
 
Specific ad verse events  of concern, whic h may or may not be assoc iated with ramucirumab  
therapy, includ e infusi on reactions, hypertension, arterial  or venous thrombotic events,  
bleeding (hemorrhagic) e vents, and proteinuria. These are specified in greater detail below.  
A cycle of therapy may be delayed up to 3 weeks  to all ow for weather events, patient’s personal 
emerg
encies, observation of holidays, or other unforeseen delays that the Investigator deems to 
be in the
 best interest of the patient. For any dose interruptions, re- initiation of therapy may be 
delayed for a maximum of 30 days to allow recovery from any toxicity. In exceptional cases where subjects are responding, re- initiation of therapy after missing >  30 consecutive days of 
treatment may be done on a case -by-case basis after confirmation with the Primary Investigator.  
 Toxici
ty will be graded according to the NCI CTCAE, Version 4.0 (which is available at: 
http://ctep.info.nih.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm) . For any event 
which is apparent at baseline, the dose modification will apply according to the corresponding shift in toxicity grade if the investigator feels this is appropriate, (e.g. if a patient has grade 1 asthenia at baseline which increases to grade 2 during treatment, this will be considered as a shift of 1 grade and treated as a grade 1 toxicity for dose modification purposes).    Dose modifications of ramucirumab  will be done based on the specific toxicit y. Once a dose of 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 11 
 
any study drug  has been reduced, it should not be increased at a later time.  Reasons for dose 
modifications or delays, the supportive measures taken, and the outcome will be documented in 
progress notes. Growth factors may be used to tre at hematologic toxicity and will not constitute 
a dose reduction. A maximum of a 3 -week treatment delay is permitted to allow recovery of 
toxicities.  
Table 3: Dose Levels  
Dose Level  Ramucirumab (mg/kg ) 
0 – baseline  8 
-1 6 
-2 5 
 
Hematologic Toxicity  
Though myelosuprression is expected to be rare, in the event dose modifications are required at 
the beginning of a cycle due to hematologic toxicities, dose of ramucirumab may be adjusted as detailed below .  
Table 4: Dose Modifications for Day 1 of Each Cycle (Hematologic Toxicity) 
ANC   Platelets  Timing  
≥ 1,500 cells/mm3 AND  ≥ 75,000/uL Treat on time  
< 1,500 cells/mm3 OR < 75,000/uL  Delay by 1 week 
intervals until 
recovery  
 
Special Instructions Regarding Treatment of Chemotherapy- related Toxicity  
Dose modification or delay may occur in the setting of lower Grade toxicity if the treating physician believes that it is in the interest of a subject’s safety.  Alopecia and nausea and/or vomiting that can be controlled by antiemetics do not require dose modification or interruption.  No dose reduction or inter ruption will be required for anemia as it can be satisfactorily 
managed by transfusions. Dose reductions for non- hematologic toxicity  should be as below.  
 
Table 5 : Dose Modifications for Ramucirumab  on Day 1 of Each Cycle (Non-
Hematologic Toxicity)* 
Toxic ity/Dose Held  Ramucirumab  dose this cycle  
Grade 0 -2 toxicity  Same as Day 1 previous cycle  
Grade 3 toxicity  Decrease ramucirumab  
to next lower dose level  
Grade 4 toxicit y Off protocol treatment  
Dose held in 2 previous 
consecutive cycles  Decrease ramuci rumab  to next lower dose level and 
continue throughout the rest of treatment  
   * Drug -specific toxicities are explained in greater detail below  with appropriate modifications  
 
6.1 G-CSF Administration  
The exact dosage amount and schedule for G-CSF support wi ll be left to the treating 
physician’s  discretion.  A recommended approach would be to a dminister G -CSF 5 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 12 
 
mcg/kg/day (rounded to the nearest vial size per investigator’s standard of care) 24 hours 
after chemotherapy until recovery to the predetermined neut rophil count. 
 
6.2 Infusion- related reactions  
Infusi on react ions are defined accordin g to the NCI-CTCA E Vers ion 4.02 defini tion of 
infusi on-related react ions, (Genera l disorders and administratio n site conditions, p. 23).  
Symptom s occurrin g durin g or fo llowing  infusi on of investigati onal therap y may also 
be defined accordin g to advers e event categor ies such as allergic reaction, anaphylaxis , 
or cytokine release syndro me (Immune system  disorders, p. 26). In the settin g of 
symptoms occurrin g during or follo wing  infusi on of i nvestigationa l therapy, the advers e 
event  term “Infusion-related  Reaction ” and any additional ter ms (including those not 
listed here) that best describ e the event should be used. Those described above should be  
graded as fo llows: 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 13 
 
 
Tabl e 6:  NCI-CTCAE v 4.02 Infusion-related Reactions  
 
Adverse 
Even t Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  Grade 4  Grade 5  
 
Infusio n- 
related  
reaction   
Mild transient  
reaction ; infusion  
interruptio n not 
indicated;  
interventio n not 
indicated   
Therap y or infusion  
interruptio n indicate d but 
responds promptl y to 
symptomati c treatment  
(eg, antihistamines,  
NSAIDS , narcotics , I.V. 
fluids) ; prophylactic  
medication s indicate d for 
≤ 24 hrs  
Prolonge d (eg, not rapidly  
responsive to symptomatic  
medicatio n and/o r brief 
interruptio n of infusion);  
recurrence of symptoms  
followin g initial 
improvement;  
hospitalizatio n indicated  
for clinica l sequelae  
Life-threatening  
consequences;  
urgent  
intervention  
indicated   
Death  
 
Definition : A disorde r characterize d by an advers e reactio n to the infusio n of pharmacologica l or biologica l substances.  
 
Allergic  
reaction   
Transien t flushing  
or rash, drug fever  
<38 degrees C 
(<100. 4 degrees F); 
interventio n not 
indicated   
Interventio n or infusion  
interruptio n indicated;  
responds promptl y to 
symptomati c treatment  
(eg, antihistamines,  
NSAIDS , narcotics);  
prophylacti c medications  
indicate d for ≤ 24 hrs  
Prolonge d (eg, not rapidly  
responsive to symptomatic  
medicatio n and/o r brief 
interruptio n of infusion);  
recurren ce of symptoms  
followin g initial 
improvement;  
hospitalizatio n indicated  
for clinica l sequela e (eg, 
renal impairment,  
pulmonar y infiltrates)   
Life-threatening  
consequences;  
urgent  
intervention  
indicated   
Death  
 
Definition : A disorde r characterize d by an advers e local or general respons e from exposur e to an allergen.  
 
Anaphylaxi s - - Symptomatic  
broncho spasm , with or 
withou t urticaria;  
parentera l intervention 
indicated ; allerg y-related  
edema/angioedema;  
hypotension  
Life-threatening  
consequences;  
urgent  
intervention  
indicated   
Death  
 
Definition : A disorde r characterize d by an acute inflammator y reactio n resultin g from the releas e of histamin e and histamin e-
like substance s from mast  cells, causin g a hypersensitivit y immun e response . Clinically , it  present s  with breathin g difficulty , 
dizziness , hypotension , cyanosis , and loss of consciousnes s and may lead to death.  
 
Cytokine  
release 
syndrome   
Mild reaction;  
infusion interruption  
not indicated;  
interventio n not 
indicated   
Therap y or infusion  
interruptio n indicate d but 
responds promptl y to 
symptomati c treatment  
(eg, antihistamines,  
NSAIDS , narcotics , I.V. 
fluids) ; prophylactic  
medication s indicate d for 
≤ 24 hrs  
Prolonge d (eg, not rapidly  
responsive to symptomatic  
medicatio n and/o r brief 
interruptio n of infusion);  
recurrence of symptoms  
followin g initial 
improvement;  
hospitalizatio n indicated  
for clinica l sequela e (eg, 
renal impa irment,  
pulmonar y infiltrates)   
Life-threatening  
consequences;  
presso r or 
ventilator  
support  
indicated   
Death  
 
Definition : A disorder  characterized by nausea,  headache , tachycardia, hypotension , rash, and shortnes s of breath ; it is 
caused by the releas e of cytokine s from the cell. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 14 
 
 
If a patient experi ences  a Grad e 1 or 2 infusion react ion, the infusi on rat e should  be 
decreased for the duration of the infusi on and all subsequent infusi ons, as directed  in the 
protocol. In addition, patients with G rade 1 and 2 infusio n reactions should be treated 
accordin g to standard medical pract ices. After a Grad e 1 or 2 infusi on reaction, patient s 
should be premedicated  with anti histamines , steroids, acetaminophen,  etc, as appropr iate for 
subsequen t infusi ons. 
A Grade 3 or 4 infusi on reaction will require immediate  treatment, including the use of 
epinephrine, bronchodilators, and/o r glucocorticoids for sympto matic bronchospasm, I.V. 
fluids and/or pressors  for hypotension, and immediat e and permanent  discontinuation of 
ramucirumab  with appropri ate supportive care.  
Consisten t with us ual medical practice, selected  parenteral  medications may be ut ilized for 
Grad e 2 infusi on-related  react ions as detailed  below .  
The followin g are general treatment guidelines  for ramucirumab  infusi on-related react ions: 
Grade1  
• Slow the infusi on rate by  50% 
• Moni tor the pati ent for worsenin g of condition 
• For subsequent infusi ons, continue to premedicate with diphenhydramine 
hydrochloride 50 mg 
I.V. (or equivalent); additional prem edication may   be administere d at   the 
investigator’s discre tion 
 
Grade2  
• Stop the infusion 
• Administer  diphenhydramine hydrochloride 50 mg I.V. (or equivalent), 
acetaminophen  650 mg orally for fever, and oxy gen 
• Resum e the infusion at 50% of the prior rate once the infus ion react ion has resolved 
or decreased to Grad e 1; the infusi on duration should not exceed  2 hours 
• Moni tor for worsenin g of conditi on 
• For subsequent infusi ons, continue to premedicate with diphenhydramine 
hydrochloride 50 mg 
I.V. (or equivalent); additional prem edication may   be administere d at   the 
investigator’s discre tion
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 15 
 
For a secon d Grad e 1 or 2 infusi on react ion, administer  dexamethasone 8-10 mg I.V. (or 
equivalent); th en, for subsequen t infusi ons, premedicat e with diphenhydramine hydrochloride 
50 mg I.V. (or equivalent), acetaminophen 650 mg orally , and dexamethasone 8 -10 m g I.V. 
(or equivalent). 
Grade 3  
• Stop the infusion and disconnect the i nfusi on tubin g from the patient 
• Administer  diphenhydramine hydrochloride 50 mg I.V. (or equivalent), 
dexameth asone 10 mg I.V. (or equivalent), bronchodilators for bronchospasm, and 
other m edicat ions/treatment  as medically indicated  
• Patients who have a Grade  3 infusi on react ion will not receiv e further 
ramucirumab  treatment, but will cont inue to be fo llowed on the protocol 
 
Grade 4  
• Stop the infusion an d disconnect the infusion tubin g from the patient 
• Administer  diphenhydramine hydrochloride 50 mg I.V. (or equivalent), 
dexamethasone 10 mg I.V. (or equivalent), and other medicatio ns/treatmen t as 
medically indicated  
• Give epinephrine or bronchodilators as indicated 
• Hospital admissi on for observation may be indicated  
• Patients  who  have  a  Grade  4  infusi on  reaction  will  not  receive  further  
ramucirumab  treatment, but will cont inue to be followe d on the protocol 
 
6.3 Hypertension  
If a patien t develops hypertensi on during the study, he/she should be treated wi th 
antihypertensive medications accordin g to standar d medical prac tice. 
 
Grade<3  
• If the hypertensi on is not associated with symptoms, continue ramucirumab  and 
initiate anti-hypertensive therap y. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 16 
 
• If the hypertensi on is associate d wit h symptoms , hold ramucirumab  until 
symptoms resolv e and in itiate an ti-hypertensive therap y. 
• If ramucirumab  therapy is held more than onc e for hypertensi on (ie, symptomatic 
hypertension, m arkedly  elevated blood pressure unresponsive to anti- hypertensive 
therap y), the dose of ramucirumab  should be reduced upon re- treatment (refer to 
protocol for dose and frequency).  A second dose-reduction (refer t o protoco l for 
dose an d frequency) should be undertaken if an addi tional postponement of therapy is 
required. 
 
Grade 3 (systolic  BP ≥ 160 mmH g or di astoli c BP ≥ 100 mmHg; medica l interven tion 
indicated; more than one drug or more intensive therapy than previously used indicated) 
• For Grade 3 hype rtensi on not associ ated with sympto ms, continue 
ramucirumab  with more intensiv e anti-hypertensi ve therap y.  If systolic BP remains ≥ 
160 or di astolic BP  ≥ 100 mmH g > 2 week s after initiation of additional anti-
hypertensive therap y, hold ramucirumab  whil e cont inuin g appropriate anti-
hypertensive therap y. 
• If the hypertensi on is associate d wit h symptoms , hold ramucirumab  until symptom s 
resolv e and initiate anti-hypertensive therap y. 
• If ramucirumab  therapy is held more than onc e for hypertensi on (ie, symptomatic 
hypertension, m arkedly  elevated blood pressure unresponsiv e to anti-hypertensive 
therap y), the dose of ramucirumab  should be reduced upon re- treatment . A second 
dose- reductio n should be undertaken if an additional postponement of therapy is 
required. 
 
Grade 4 or refractory  
Patients with Grade  4 hy pertens ion (life-threatening consequences, e g, malignant 
hypertension, transient or permanent neurologic deficit, hy pertensive crisis; or urgent 
intervention indicated ) or patients whos e hypertensi on is poorly controlled (> 160 mmH g 
systoli c or > 100 mmH g diastoli c for > 4 weeks ) despit e appropriate ora l medicat ion (> 2 oral 
agent s at maximu m tolerate d dose) wil l be discont inued from study therap y. 
 
6.4 Thrombotic Events  
Inves tigator s shoul d perform all testin g required to fu lly character ize arterial  or venous 
thromboti c/vascular events . The incidence, t ype, and diagnostic tests used for the diagnost ic 
confirmation of thrombotic/vascular events will be collected and repo rted. Becaus e of the 
high rate of venous th romb otic events  in patients  with upper gastrointestinal malignancies , 
and becaus e therapy with anti angiogenic agents has been shown to be feasible in the settin g 
of ant icoagulation in patients with upper gastrointestina l maligna ncies, patients who 
develop Grad e 3-4 venous th romboti c events  (deep  vein thrombosis [DVT]  or pulm onary 
embolism [PE]) may continue study therapy  if the even t is not considered to be lif e-
threaten ing in the opinion of the inves tigator , the patient is asymptomatic,  and/or th e 
event can be adequately  treated with low m olecular  weigh t hepari n-based therap y. 
Grad e 3-4 arteria l thromboembo lic events,  or any PE/DVT  occurrin g or intensifyin g during 
anticoagulant therap y, will warrant  discontinuation of study therap y. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
  August 29 , 2018  
Page 17 
 
 
6.5 Hemorrhagic Events  
Ramuciru mab therapy should be discont inued in the even t of any Grad e 3-4 bleeding 
(hemorrhagic) event.  
 
6.6 Proteinuria  
If, while on th erapy, a patient h as proteinuria ≥ 2+ per a dipstick (equivalent to 
≥ 100- 300 mg/dl) or routine urinalysis, ramucirumab  therapy will cont inue as 
schedu led, and a 24-hour urine collection will be conducted prior to the subsequen t 
scheduled treatment cycle.   If the protein level is < 2g/24  hours, the pati ent will 
continue on study t herap y at the same dose without in terruption. I f the prot ein level is 2 to 
3 g/24 hours , study therapy  for the subsequent cy cle will be held for up to 2 week s and a 
24-hour urine collection will be repeated.  Treatment will resume at a reduced dose level (6  
mg/kg every other week) once the protein level returns to < 2g/24 hours . A secon d dose 
reduct ion (to 5 mg/k g every other week ) is perm itted if the protei n level > 2g/24 hours 
recurs.  The patient w ill be discontinued from the study if th e protein  level  is > 3g/24 
hours, if  there is  a third  occurrence of proteinuria  > 2 g/24 hours, or if the protein level doe s 
not return to < 2g/24 hour s withi n 2 weeks.  
 
6.7 Gastrointestinal Perforation  
An infrequen t incidence of gastrointestinal perforat ions has been associated  with so me 
antiangiogenic th erapeu tic agents, most specif ically in the context  of colo rectal  cancer 
(treated  with co mbina tion regimens  including anti-VEGF antibodie s and cytotoxic 
chemother apy)  and  in  advanced  ovarian  cancer .    Thes e  events  may be  associated  
with
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 18 
extensive abdominal/peritoneal disease burden. Gastrointestinal perforation has 
been reported  from clinical  studies inves tigating ramucirumab . The incidences  of 
these events  to date and presence of s ignificant comorbidities and risk factors  
preclude any defini tive assoc iation with ramucirumab , although ongoing surveillance 
remains  essen tial. Three gastrointestinal perforations have been  reported  in Phase 2 
studi es inves tigating ramucirumab  (overall  incidence,  0.8% of patient s). Two of 
these events  occurred  on the ovarian cancer study (CP12 -0711) and one on the 
prostate cancer  study (CP18-0601). All three cases  were reported  as SAEs;  the events  
on the ovarian  cancer  study included a Grade 4 colo nic perforation (considered 
probably related by the investigator) and a Grade 5 bowel perforation (consi dered  
unrelated);  the perforation occurring  on the prostate cancer study was a Grade 3 
rectal  perforation (possibly related) . Each of these events was character ized by 
extensive abdomina l and/o r pelvic  tumor burden, including an obstructing lesion 
immediately  dista l to an area of d ilated  intestine and perf oration (Grade  5 event  on 
the ovari an cancer  study), a diffusely  infiltrated peritoneum (Gr ade 4 even t on the 
ovarian cancer study), and prior pelvic rad iation (Grade 3 event on the prostate cancer 
study ). Ramucirumab  shou ld be per manen tly discontinued in the event  of a 
gastro intestinal perforation. 
 
Concomitant Medications 
Supportive care, including but not limited to anti- emetic medications, may be 
administered at the discretion of the Investigator.  Erythropoietin and G- CSF may be 
administered at the discretion of the investigator, consistent with institutional 
guidelines.  
 7.  EVALUATION DURING STUDY  
• Patients must begin Cycle 1 within 14 days of signing the informed consent 
document and after the screen ing assessments. Treatment will be 
administered by qualified and trained site personnel in a hospital, clinic, or other out-patient setting appropriate for chemotherapeutic infusions. All assessments should be performed within 72 hours of each specified ti me 
parameter, with the exception of Cycle 1 in which assessments must be conducted within 24 hours (except those noted), or if medical or scheduling conditions require a delay. Request of 20 unstained tumor slides of 5 to 10 microns thick  will be sent at enrollment.  
 
Day 1 of each cycle (except where noted)  
• Inclusion/exclusion review (Cycle 1 only)  
• Directed physical exam  
• Vital Signs  
• Measurement of weight (kg) and BSA calculation prior to dosing.  
• ECOG Performance Status (see Appendix  1)  
• Hematology: CBC w ith differential and platelet count  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 19 
• Serum chemistries : glucose, creatinine, BUN, total bilirubin, AST, ALT, alkaline 
phosphatase albumin, LDH, total protein, and electrolytes (sodium, potassium, 
phosphorus, chloride, C02, magnesium, calcium).   In patients with known 
Gilbert’s syndrome, it is recommended to perform a direct bilirubin and indirect 
bilirubin. 
• CA 19 -9 
• Urinalysis   
• AEs using the NCI CTCAE  (http://ctep.info.nih.gov)  
• Concomitant medication notation   
Prior  to Cycles 4, 8, 12, etc.  
• In order to more precisely determine time to progression, the investigator is encouraged to obtain radiological assessments earlier if there is a strong clinical 
suspicion of disease progression, in order to either confirm or ref ute the clinical 
impression.  
• Reassessment of the extent of tumor should be made by the same imaging methods 
used to establish baseline tumor measurements.  
Table 7: Study Assessments (treatment cycle is 14 days) 
Evaluation or Procedure  Screening1 Study Tr eatment  End of 
Treatment 
Evaluation11 30-day Post -
Treatment Evaluation
12/Long 
Term Follow -up 
  On or before Day 
1 of each cycle     
Informed consent  X    
Medical History  X    
Physical Examination  X X3,4 X  
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria  X    
Height  X    
Weight  X X3,4 X  
Vital Signs (Blood Pressure ) X X3,4 X  
ECOG Performance Status  X X 3,4 X  
Hematology10 X X3,4 X  
Biochemistry10 X X3,4 X  
Urinalysis10 X X3,4 X  
Serum or urine pregnancy test (for females 
of child -bearing potential)  X    
Tumor T issue Collection  X2    
Toxicity assessment X X3.4 X X8 
Diagnostic Imaging for Tumor Assessment , 
preferably dual -energy CT7 X Every  4 cycles5 X6  X6 
Survival     X9 
 
1. Informed consent must be obtained before any evaluations are initiated.  Diagnostic 
imaging studies must be completed within 28 days prior to first day of study treatment. All other baseline evaluations , except for height  (which can be obtained at 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 20 
any time prior to enrollment) , must be completed within 7 days prior to first dose of 
study drug.  
2. When patients are enrolled, we will collect their pre -existing tissue biopsies, if 
available, for testing. The Oligo GEArray® Human Angiogenesis Microarray profiles 
the expression of 113 genes involved in modulating the biological processes of 
angiogenesis and will be investigated for correlation with outcome, include PFS. 
Archival tumor biopsy specimens will be used. This investigation will be performed at MD Anderson Core Facility.
 
3. For Cycle 1, baseline evaluations will suffice as they are per formed within 7 days 
prior to first dose of study drug (except for imaging studies which are performed within 28 days prior). 
4.  Within 72 hours prior to start of the cycle (except for Cycle 1 as noted above). 5.  Imaging should be obtained every 4 cycles  (+/- 1week).  Evaluations earlier than 
every 4 cycles are allowed if, in the investigator’s opinion, this evaluation is in the 
patient’s best interest.    
6. The end of treatment imaging does not have to be repeated if recent imaging has been completed wi thin 4 weeks.  For patients discontinued from the study for reasons other 
than progression, it is recommend to perform every 12 weeks (+/ - 5 week) after the 
End of Treatment Evaluation visit until documentation of progression or for 12 months after their f irst dose of study drug, whichever comes first, if no other anti-
cancer treatment is given.   
7. CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. MRI may be used in cases where it is felt to be 
unsafe to perform CT secondary to patient's history of dye allergy, or if the tumor is not adequately seen on CT for the purposes of this study. 
8. Treatment -related adverse events occurring during study treatment or within 30 days 
(window of 28- 35 days allowed) after the last administration of study drug(s) will be 
followed until resolution or stabilization.  If the patient is unable or unwilling to return to M. D. Anderson for this assessment, the patient will be contacted by phone for this assessment.   
9. Every 3 months (+/- 5 weeks) from Post- Treatment Evaluation.  
10. Hemat ology: complete blood count with differential . Chemistry:  glucose, creatinine, 
BUN, total bilirubin, AST, ALT, alkaline phos phatase, albumin, LDH , total protein, 
and electrolytes (sodium, potassium, phosphorus, chloride, C02, magnesium, calcium ).  Tumor m arkers (CA19 -9) as indicated.  Tumor markers are performed 
every 2 cycles .  In patients with known Gilbert’s syndrome , it is recommended to 
perform a direct bilirubin  and indirect bilirubin. 
11. Within 10 days of decision to discontinue study treatment.  12. At 28 -45 days from last dose of study medication. 
 
 
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 21 
7.1 End of treatment evaluations  
Within 10 days of decision to discontinue treatment 
• The investigator will evaluate the results of the following clinical and laboratory 
assessments to be conducted at the time the patient discontinues study treatment: 
• Physical examination with neuropathy assessment 
• ECOG Performance Status  
• Weight  
• Vital signs (blood pressure) 
• Hematology:  complete blood count with differential 
• Biochemistry:  glucose, creatinine, BUN, total bilirubin, AST, ALT, alkaline 
phosphatase albumin, LDH, total protein, and electrolytes (sodium, potassium, phosphorus, chloride, C02, magnesium, calcium).  Tumor markers (CA19 -9) as 
indicated.   In patients with known Gilbert’s syndrome, it is recommende d to 
perform a direct bilirubin  and indirect bilirubin. 
• Urinalysis  
• Concomitant medication notation  
• Toxicity (adverse events) assessment (including neurologic toxicities)  using NCT 
CTCAE Version 4.0 
• Tumor evaluations including CT scan or MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis (if recent imaging within 4 weeks, tumor evaluation does not need to be repeated) 
7.2 Follow- up (off -treatment)   
Follow-up/observation for all treatment related adverse events will be through Day 30 (Day 28 to Day 45 allowed) following the last dose of study drug or until resolution or stabilization of the toxicity or start of another treatment regimen. If it is not feasible for the patient to return to M. D. Anderson for the Day 30 toxicity assessment, the patient will be contacted by p hone for this assessment.  
 Patients with documented (radiological) disease progression at any point during the study will discontinue treatment with study drugs under this protocol. Objective evidence of progressive disease will be recorded at the time of  progression.  Patients without evidence 
of progression while on study, regardless of the number of treatment cycles received, will be followed for progression until it is documented.  If a patient is off treatment with no documented disease progression and no subsequent anti- cancer treatment is received, 
he/she should be followed e very 12 weeks (+/ - 5 week s) after the End of Treatment 
Evaluation visit with tumor evaluations until disease progression is documented or for 12 
months after their first dose of study drug, whichever comes first. 
 
7.3     Long-term followup 
All patients will be followed for survival status approximately every 3 months 30- day 
post- treatment evaluation .  Survival status may be obtained by checking the electronic  
medical record or by  telephone call.   
 
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 22 
8.  CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL FROM THE STUDY  
 
Subjects who meet the following criteria should be discontinued from study treatment:  
• Disease progression  
• Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of treatment  
• Unacceptable ad verse event(s) as determined by the treating physician  
• Patient decides to withdraw from the study  
• General or specific changes in the patient’s condition render the patient unacceptable 
for further treatment in the judgment of the investigator.   
 
9. RESPO NSE EVALUATION 
 
9.1 Measurement of effect  
Response and progression will be evaluated in this study using the new international RECIST criteria (version 1.1, 2009) proposed by the RECIST committee
33.  All patients 
who have measurable disease according to the RECIST criteria and who have their disease re -evaluated will be evaluable for response.  For the purposes of this study, 
patients should be reevaluated for response approximately every 4 cycles.  Note:  Lesions 
are either measurable or non -measurable using the criteria provided below. The term 
“evaluable” in reference to measurability will not be used because it does not provide additional meaning or accuracy . 
 
9.2 Definitions  
All sites of disease should be followed as either target or non- target lesions, as 
categorized at baseline.  All measurable lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesions per organ 
or 5 lesions in total, representative of all involved organs should be identified as target lesions, while all other lesions (either additional measurable lesions or non- measurable 
lesions) should be classified as non- target lesions. In cases where a target lesion is 
believed to be present and is faintly seen but too small t o measure, a default value of 5 
mm should be assigned. To ensure comparability, the baseline radiology/scans and subsequent radiology/scans to assess response should be performed using identical techniques (eg, scans performed immediately following bolus c ontrast administration 
should be made with a standard volume of contrast, the identical contrast agent, and preferably the same scanner). The same method, radiological or physical, should be employed and assessed by the same individual on each occasion, when possible.  
 
9.3 Measurable disease  
Measurable lesions are defined as those that can be accurately measured in at least one dimension (longest diameter to be recorded) as >10 mm with CT scan (with minimum slice thickness no greater than 5mm, or 10mm caliper measurement by clinical exam, or 20mm by chest X- ray).  All tumor measurements must be recorded in millimeters (or 
decimal fractions of centimeters).  
Pathological lymph nodes may also be considered as target or non-target lesions.  To be considered pathologically enlarged and measurable (target lesion), a lymph node must be ≥ 15 mm in short axis when assessed by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness recommended to be no greater than 5 mm). Lymph nodes with a short axis ≥ 10 mm but < 15 mm 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 23 
should be considered non-target lesions. Lymph nodes that have a short axis < 10 mm are 
considered non-pathologic and should not be recorded. The short axis measurement of any lymph node that is considered a target lesion should continue to be recorded regardless if the node progresses to below 10 mm. This may prevent the sum of lesions from being zero even if complete response criteria are met, since a normal lymph node is defined as having a short axis of < 10 mm.  In rare circumstances, when a target lymph node is believed to be present and is faintly seen but too small to measure, a default value of 5 mm should be assigned.  
 
9.4 Non- measurable disease 
All other lesions (or sites of disease), including small lesions (longest diameter <10 mm or pathological lymph nodes with ≥ 10 to <15mm short axis) as well as truly non -
measurable lesions.  Lesions considered truly non- measurable include: leptomeningeal 
disease, ascites, pleural/pericardial effusions, lymphangitis cutis/pulmonis, inflammatory breast disease, abdominal masses (not followed by CT or MRI).  For bone and cystic lesions, please refer to the RECIST criteria (version 1.1, 2009). 
 
9.5 Target lesions  
All measurable lesions up to a maximum of five lesions total (and a maximum of two lesions per organ) representative of all involved organs should be identified as target lesions and recorded and measured at baseline.  Target lesions should be selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the longest diameter) and their suitability for accurate repeated measurements (either by ima ging techniques or clinically).  A sum of the 
diameters for all target lesions (longest for non -nodal lesions, short axis for nodal lesions) 
will be calculated and reported as the baseline sum diameters (LD).  The baseline sum diameters will be used as reference by which to characterize the objective tumor response. 
 
9.6 Non-target lesions 
All other lesions (or sites of disease) should be identified as non-target lesions and should also be recorded at baseline.  Non-target lesions include measurable lesions tha t exceed 
the maximum numbers per organ or total of all involved organs as well as non-measurable lesions. It is possible to record multiple non- target lesions involving the same 
organ as a single item on the case record form (e.g. “multiple enlarged pelvic lymph nodes” or “multiple liver metastases”).   Measurements of these lesions are not required, but the presence or absence of each should be noted throughout follow-up.  
 
9.7 Guidelines for evaluation of measurable disease 
All measurements should be taken an d recorded in metric notation using a ruler or 
calipers.  All baseline evaluations should be performed as closely as possible to the beginning of treatment and never more than 4 weeks before the beginning of the treatment.  
The same method of assessment an d the same technique should be used to characterize 
each identified and reported lesion at baseline and during follow- up. Imaging -based 
evaluation is preferred to evaluation by clinical examination when both methods have been used to assess the antitumor e ffect of a treatment.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 24 
Clinical lesions .  Clinical lesions will only be considered measurable when they are 
superficial (e.g., skin nodules and palpable lymph nodes).  In the case of skin lesions, 
documentation by color photography, including a ruler to est imate the size of the lesion, 
is recommended.  Chest x-ray .  Lesions on chest x- ray are acceptable as measurable lesions when they are 
clearly defined and surrounded by aerated lung.  However, CT is preferable.  Conventional CT and Magnetic Resonance Imagi ng.  Conventional CT and MRI should 
be performed to obtain images of 5 mm or less slice thickness. Tumor markers .  Tumor markers alone cannot be used to assess response.  If markers are 
initially above the upper normal limit, they must normalize for a patient to be considered in complete clinical response.  
Cytology, Histology .  These techniques can be used to differentiate between partial 
responses (PR) and complete responses (CR) in rare cases (e.g., residual lesions in tumor types, such as germ cell tumor s, where known residual benign tumors can remain). 
The cytological confirmation of the neoplastic origin of any effusion that appears or worsens during treatment when the measurable tumor has met criteria for response or stable disease is mandatory to diff erentiate between response or stable disease (an 
effusion may be a side effect of the treatment) and progressive disease.  
 
9.8 Response criteria  
Evaluation of target lesions  
• Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all target and non -target lesions 
including normalization of elevated tumor marker level. Any pathological lymph 
nodes (whether target or non-target) must have reduction in short axis to < 10 mm. All non-target lymph nodes must be non-pathological in size (< 10 mm short axis). Complete response must be confirmed at a second tumor assessment not less than 4 weeks apart from the assessment at which CR was observed.  
 Partial Response (PR):  At least a 30% decrease in the sum of LD of target lesions taking as reference the baseline sum LD. Partial response must be confirmed at a second tumor assessment not less than 4 weeks apart from the assessment at which PR was observed. 
 Progressive Disease (PD): At least a 20% increase (and an absolute increase of at least 5 mm) in the sum of LD of measured lesions ta king as references the smallest 
sum LD recorded since the treatment started. Appearance of new lesions will also constitute PD. In exceptional circumstances, unequivocal progression of non- target 
lesions may be accepted as evidence of disease progression.  
 Stable Disease (SD): Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient increase to qualify for PD, taking as reference the smallest sum LD since the treatment started  
 Non-CR/Non -PD:  Persistence of 1 or more non-target lesions and/or maintenanc e of 
tumor marker level above the normal limits.  
    
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 25 
Evaluation of non- target lesions  
• Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all non -target lesions and 
normalization of tumor marker level  
• Incomplete  Response/ Stable Disease (SD): Persistence of one or mo re non- target 
lesion(s) and/or maintenance of tumor marker level above the normal limits  
• Progressive Disease (PD): Appearance of one or more new lesions and/or 
unequivocal progression of existing non- target lesions  
• Although a clear progression of “non- target” lesions only is exceptional, in such 
circumstances,  the opinion of the treating physician should prevail, and the 
progression status should be confirmed at a later time by the study chair. 
• Note:  If tumor markers are initially above the upper normal limit, they must 
normalize for a patient to be considered in complete clinical response. 
 
9.9 Time point evaluation 
At each protocol specified time point, a response assessment occurs. Table 9 provides a summary of this for patients who have measurabl e disease at baseline. Table 10  provides 
a summary of this for patients with non- measurable (therefore non -target) disease.  
 Table 8: Response for measurable disease 
Target 
Lesions  Non-target Lesions  New Lesions  Overall 
Response  Best Response for this 
Category als o Requires  
CR CR No CR ≥ 4 weeks Confirmation 
CR Non-CR/Non -PD No PR 
≥ 4 weeks Confirmation CR Not evaluated  No PR 
PR Non-PD or not all 
evaluated  No PR 
SD Non-PD or not all 
evaluated  No SD Documented at least once ≥ 6 
weeks from baseline  
Not All 
Evaluated  Non-PD No NE NE 
PD Any Yes or No  PD 
No prior SD, PR or CR  Any PD* Yes or No  PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
* In exceptional circumstances, unequivocal progression in non -target lesions may be accepted as disease 
progression. NE = inevaluable Note: Patien ts with a global deterioration of health status requiring 
discontinuation of treatment without objective evidence of disease progression at that time should be 
reported as “symptomatic deterioration.” Every effort should be made to document the objective progression even after discontinuation of treatment.  
 
     
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 26 
Table 9: Response for non -measurable disease 
Non-target Lesions  New Lesions  Overall Response  
CR No CR 
Non-CR/Non -PD No Non-CR/Non -PD 
Not all evaluated  No NE 
Unequivocal PD  Yes or No  PD 
Any Yes PD 
NE = inevaluable a ‘Non -CR/non -PD’ is preferred over ‘stable disease’ for non -target disease since SD is 
increasingly used as endpoint for assessment of efficacy in some trials so to assign this category when no 
lesions can be measured is not advised .  
9.10 Evaluation of best overall response 
The best overall response is the best response recorded from the start of the treatment 
until disease progression/recurrence (taking as reference for progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded since the treatment started).  The patient's best response assignment will depend on the achievement of both measurement and confirmation criteria.  
 
Table 10: Response Assignment  
Overall Response First Time 
Point  Overall Response Subsequent 
Time Point  BEST Overall Re sponse  
CR CR CR 
CR PR SD, PD, or PR  
CR SD SD provided minimum criteria 
for SD duration met, otherwise, 
PD 
CR PD SD provided minimum criteria 
for SD duration met, otherwise, 
PD 
CR NE SD provided minimum criteria 
for SD duration met, otherwise, 
NE 
PR CR PR 
PR PR PR 
PR SD SD 
PR PD SD provided minimum criteria 
for SD duration met, otherwise, 
PD 
PR NE SD provided minimum criteria 
for SD duration met, otherwise, 
NE 
NE NE NE 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 27 
NE = inevaluable.   If a CR is truly  met at first time point, then any disease seen at a subsequent time 
point, even disease meeting PR criteria relative to baseline, makes the disease PD at that point (since 
disease must have reappeared after CR).  Best response would depend on whether minimum duration for SD was met. However, somet imes ‘CR’ may be claimed when subsequent scans suggest small lesions 
were likely still present and in fact, the patient had PR, not CR at the first time point. Under these 
circumstances, the original CR should be changed to PR and the best response is PR.  
 
Patients with a global deterioration of health status requiring discontinuation of treatment without objective evidence of disease progression at that time should be classified as having “symptomatic deterioration.”  Every effort should be made to docum ent the 
objective progression, even after discontinuation of treatment. In some circumstances, it may be difficult to distinguish residual disease from normal tissue.  When the evaluation of complete response depends on this determination, it is recommended that the residual lesion be investigated (fine needle aspirate/biopsy) before confirming the complete response status. 
 
9.11 Confirmation 
To be assigned a status of PR or CR, changes in tumor measurements must be confirmed by repeat assessment at a minimum follow -up interval of 6 weeks after the criteria for 
response are first met.  In the case of SD, follow -up measurements must have met the SD 
criteria at least once after study entry at a minimum interval of 6 weeks.  
 
 
9.12 Duration of overall response 
The duration of overall response is measured from the time measurement criteria are met 
for CR or PR (whichever is first recorded) until the first date that recurrent or progressive disease is objectively documented (taking as reference for progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded since the treatment started).  
The duration of overall CR is measured from the time measurement criteria are first met for CR until the first date that recurrent disease is objectively documented.  
 
9.13 Duration of stable disease 
Stable disease is measured from the start of the treatment until the criteria for progression 
are met, taking as reference the smallest measurements recorded since the treatment started.  
 
10. STATISTICAL METHODS  
10.1 S tudy design and sample size  
This is a single arm, open label, phase II trial to assess the efficacy and toxicity of ramucirumab  in patients with pre-treated, advanced bile duct cancer. The primary 
objective is to evaluate the efficacy of the therapy. The primary endpoint is the progression- free survival (PFS).  A maximum of 60 patients will be enrolled in the study 
at an estimated accrual rate of 2 -3 patients per month. The study will monitor for futility 
and safety  so that it will stop early if based on the interim data, it is unlikely the PFS will 
be better than that estimated from historical data or the study drug is too toxic . 
  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 28 
10.2  Primary efficacy endpoint  
The primary endpoint is PFS, which is calculated as the time period from the date of 
treatment start to the date of disease progressio n or to the date of death, whichever occurs 
first, or to the last follow -up date if patients are alive without disease progression. It is 
expected that the median PFS time will be 3 months or more under this study treatment. If the trial continues to accru al of 60 patients and maintains sufficient follow -up to 
observe 35 events (PD/death) with a median PFS of 3 months, then the 95% credible interval for the median PFS would extend from 2.1 to 4.2 months.  
10.3  Futility monitoring  
For futility monitoring, we will monitor PFS using the methods of Thall et al and we will 
stop enrolling patients to the study if the median PFS is not likely to be longer than that 
from the historical data, which is around 3 months.  Specifically, the trial will be stopped if Pr (lamda(E)  >  lamda(S) | data from the trial) < 0.05, where lamda(S) is the median PFS for historical patients under conventional care with an inverse gamma distribution IG(58.25,171.75), which corresponds to a mean of 3 months and a standard deviation of 0.4 month (variance = 0.16), the corresponding 95% CI of (2.32, 3.88) months. The prior for lamda(E) is assumed to be IG(2.5625, 4.6875),  corresponding to a mean of 3 months 
and a larger standard deviation of 4 (variance=16, the corresponding 95% CI is 0.72-10.67).   Futility monitoring will start once 5 patients have been enrolled. Assuming an accrual rate of 2 per month and an additional follow-up of 6 months, the operating characteristics for the futility stopping rule under various scenarios are summarized in Table 1 1 below, with results based on 5000 simulations.  
 
Table 11: Operating characte ristics for futility monitoring    
Median PFS (M)  Prob(Stop Early)  Mean No. of Patients 
(25%, 75%)  
6 0.0058  49.5 (50, 50)   
4.5  0.0216  49.1 (50, 50)   
3  0.167 4 44.2 (50, 50)   
2 0.855   23.7 (10,37)   
1.5 0.9992  12.3 (7, 16)   
 10.4 Toxicity monitoring 
Unacceptable toxicities will also be monitored closely for the study drug using the 
method of Thall et al (1995). Denote the probability of unacceptable toxic ity by T
E,  
Unacceptable toxicity will be defined as follows, using the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v 4.0. For the purpose of toxicity monitoring, only unacceptable toxicities that occur in the first 28 days (i.e., 2 cycles) will be counted when assessing the stopping boundary. That is, a patient will be classified as not having toxicity if the patient has been treated for 28 days and no unacceptable toxicity has been observed.  
• Grade 4 neutropenia lasting ≥ 5 days or Grade 3 or 4 neutropenia with fever and/or infection 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 29 
• Grade 4 thrombocytopenia (or Grade 3 with bleeding) 
• Grade 4 anemia  
• Grade 3 or 4 non- hematological toxicity [excluding electrolyte 
abnormalities, alopecia or grade 3 nausea that is correctable with usual 
supportive medications] 
• Dosing delay greater than 14 days due to treatment- emergent AEs or 
related severe laboratory abnormalities  
• Grade 3 hypersensitivity reaction with premedication (Grade 3 hypersensitivity reaction without premedic ation is not considered a 
DLT)  
• Grade 4 hypersensitivity reaction with or without premedication  
• Drug -related fever ≤ Grade 3 will not be considered a DLT.   
We assume T
E ~ beta (0.3, 0.7).  We will stop the enrollment if at any point Pr(P E > 
0.30 | data)  >0.9. That is, we will stop the trial if, at any time during the study, we determine that there is more than 90% chance that the unacceptable toxicity rate is more than 30%. This toxicity monitoring rule will be applied after the first 5 patients have been enrolled and evaluated, and then in cohort size of 5. The corresponding stopping boundaries are to stop the trial if (number of patients with unacceptable toxicities / number of patients) ≥4/5, 6/10, 8/15, 9/20, 11/25, 13/30, 15/35, 16/40, 18/45.  The operating characteristics (OCs) are listed in Table 12. 
 
                 Table 12: OCs for unaccep table toxicity monitoring 
True Prob(unacceptable 
tox)  Pr(stop)  mean # Pts (25%, 50%, 75%)  
0.1  0.0006  49.97 (50, 50, 50)  
0.2  0.0225  49.21 (50, 50, 50)  
0.3  0.2215  43.59 (50 , 50, 50)  
0.4  0.6869  30.12 (15, 25 , 50) 
0.5  0.9597  17.77 ( 10, 15 , 20) 
 Multc Lean V2.1 and OneArmTTE Version 4.1.1 were used for the trial design.  
10.5 Futility monitoring in CTC website  
The Department of Biostatistics will provide and maintain a website (“Clinical Trial 
Conduct”:  https://biostatistics.mdanderson.org/ClinicalTrialConduct/
) for futility 
monitoring for this study. The Clinical Trial Conduct website resides on a secure server, and access is gained through usernames and passwords provided to personnel responsible for enrolling patients and updating patient data.  The website is accessed through a browser using secure socket layer (SSL) technology. Personnel responsible for enrolling patients on trials, which includes the principal investigator(s), research nurse(s), and data coordinator(s), will be trained by members of the Department of Biostatistics in the use 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 30 
of the trial website; the importance of timely updating of follow -up times and recording 
of events will be emphasized in training. 
 
10.6 Analysis method 
Data analysis will be performed using SAS or S-plus, as appropriate. The median PFS 
time will be estimated by Bayesian posterior estimates, along with the 95% credible interval.  Toxicity will be reported by type, frequency and severit y. Highest toxicity 
grades per patient per course will be tabulated for adverse events and laboratory measurements.  
 Demographic and baseline laboratory results will be summarized using descriptive statistics, including means with standard deviations, or medians with ranges, histograms and box-plot. Fisher’s exact test and Wilcoxon rank test will be used in the data analyses of categorical and continuous variables, respectively. Progression-free survival and overall survival functions will be estimated usin g the Kaplan -Meier method. The two -
sided log- rank test will be used to assess the differences of time to events between 
groups, and Cox proportional hazards model will also be fitted to evaluate the association between time -to-event outcomes and tumor gene expressions. The correlation between 
pre- and post- therapy CT imaging results will be assessed through Spearman correlation 
and Wilcoxon signed rank test will be used to assess whether the change in CT imaging between pre- and post- therapy is statistically significant. In addition, logistic regression 
analyses will be performed to assess the association between CT imaging results or CA19 -9 response (defined as >50% decrease from baseline) and tumor response.  
 11. DATA AND PROTOCOL MANAGEMENT  
Designated r esearch personnel must enter the information required by the protocol onto 
electronic Case Report Forms (CRFs). The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center’s Clinical Oncology Research (CORE) system, and the University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center’s Protocol Data Management System 
(PDMS) CRF system 
will be used for this study.  PDMS is a clinical research information management system. The PDMS CRF is an electronic document designed to record all the protocol-required information to be reported on each trial subject.  
PDMS provides data entry templates as defined in the protocol. Laboratory results are automatically transferred from MD Anderson Cancer Center Laboratory Medicine’s server to PDMS each morning. Users must have clearance through the MD Anderson 
Cancer Center Information Services Security Department in order to access PDMS. 
PDM S login is password protected.   The Investigator is responsible for verifying and 
providing source documentation for all adverse events and assigning attribution for each 
event for all subjects enrolled on the trial.   
12. CORRELATIVE STUDIES  
All patients who sign consent for this study will provide consent for the collection of 
previously collected paraffin embedded tissue.  Up to 20 unstained slides of 5 to 10 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 31 
microns thick will be requested from the outside institution or prepared from the patient’s 
tumor block, if applicable.  Any residual tumor tissue above what is specified here will be returned to the sending institution.  Collected paraffin embedded tissue will be handled by GI Medical Oncology research personnel.  Only the PI and her  authorized research 
staff will have access to the identifiable information from this study.  All the samples extracted from the paraffin tissue used in this study will be code d and identifiers (name, 
medical record number) will not be present on any material that is undergoing analysis.  Patient information and relevant data will be stored on password –protected institution computers behind the institution firewall.  At the closure of this study all unused material will be either returned to the sending institution or destroyed. 
 
When patients are enrolled, we will collect their pre -existing tissue biopsies, if available, 
for testing . The Oligo GEArray® Human Angiogenesis Microa rray profiles the 
expression of 113 genes involved in modulating the biological processes of angiogenesis and will be investigated for correlation with outcome, include PFS. Archival tumor biopsy specimens will be used. This investigation will be performed at MD Anderson Core Facility.  Recent data suggest that gene expression profiling may be predictive for 
response to anti- angiogenic agents
34. In addition, baseline VEGF -A in plasma was 
suggested as a possible predictive biomarker in a trial of bevacizumab in gastric cancer.  Similarly, focal amplification of VEGFA in hepatocellular carcinoma predicted sensitivity to sorafenib both in animal models and in humans
35-37. 
 
Contrast enhanced dual -energy CT’s that are triphasic or liver protocol will be utilized as 
standard of care imaging. This will consist of an arterial phase and  a portal venous phase 
which will be performed on the 64- slice dual -energy CT scanner. All patients will be 
scanned in the cranio- caudal direction from the dome of the liver to the iliac crest during 
inspiratory breath -hold.  Iodinated contrast medium will be intravenously administered via 
an automated dual-syringe power injector according to a body weight. The timing for the arterial phase scan will be determined by care bolus technique. AP scanning will start after the attenuation coefficient of abdominal aortic blood reached 100 HU. All images 
will be post processed to obtain the iodine and water images.  Additional analysis will be done on the AW work station. This will allow for iodine content quantification pre- and post- therapy as well as calculation o f atomic numbers and Z-values of the tumor in these 
patients
38,39.  These quantifications will then be correlated wi th RECIST response 
measurements . 
 
13. SAFETY REPORTING OF  ADVERSE EVENTS  
13.1 Adverse Event Reporting and Definitions  
An adverse event is the appearance or worsening of any undesirable sign, symptom, 
or medical condition occurring after starting the study  drug even  if the event is not 
considered to be related to study drug. Medical conditions/diseases present before starting study drug are only considered adverse events if they worsen after starting study drug. Abnormal laboratory values or test results co nstitute adverse events 
only if they induce clinical signs or symptoms, are considered clinically significant, or require therapy.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 32 
 
Information about all adverse events, whether volunteered by the subject, discovered by investigator questioning, or detected through physical examination, laboratory test or other means, will be collected and recorded and followed as appropriate.  Adverse events will be collected from the signing of the informed 
consent until 30 days after the last dose of study drug, or any t ime after that if the PI 
determines the event is related to the study drug.  
 The occurrence of adverse events should be sought by non-directive questioning of the patient at each visit during the study. Adverse events also may be detected when volunteered by the patient during or between visits or through physical examination, laboratory test, or other assessments. As far as possible, each adverse event should be evaluated to determine: 
• The severity grade (mild, moderate, severe or grade 1 -5) 
• Its relationsh ip to the study drug(s) (suspected/not suspected) 
• Its duration (start and end dates or if continuing at final exam) 
• Action taken (no action taken; study drug dosage adjusted/temporarily interrupted; study drug permanently discontinued due to this adverse e vent; 
concomitant medication taken; non-drug therapy given; hospitalization/prolonged hospitalization) 
• Whether it constitutes a serious adverse event (SAE)  
All adverse events should be treated appropriately. Such treatment may include changes in study drug treatment including possible interruption or discontinuation, starting or stopping concomitant treatments, changes in the frequency or nature of assessments, hospitalization, or any other medically required intervention. Once an adverse event is detected,  it should be followed until its resolution, and assessment 
should be made at each visit (or more frequently, if necessary) of any changes in severity, the suspected relationship to the study drug, the interventions required to treat it, and the outcome. Information about common side effects already known about drug can be found in the Inv estigators’ Brochure  or will be communicated between IB updates in the 
form of Investigator Notifications. This information will be included in the patient informed consent and should be discussed with the patient during the study as needed.  
13.2 A dverse event attribution  
• Attribution  of the AE: 
- Definite – The AE is clearly related  to the study treatment.  
- Probable – The AE is likely related to the study treatment.  
- Possible – The AE may be related  to the study treatment.  
- Unlikely – The AE is doubtfully related to the study treatment.  
- Unrelated – The AE is clearly NOT related  to the study treatment.  
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 33 
Adverse events for this protocol will be recorded using the Recommended 
Adverse Event Recording Guidelines for phase II protocols.   
 
Recommended Adverse Event Recording Guidelines  
Attribution  Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  Grade 4  Grade 5  
Unrelated    Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
Unlikely    Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
Possible  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
Probable Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
Definitive  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
 
The Investigator is responsible for verifying and providing source documentation for all adverse events and  assigning attribution for each event 
for all subjects enrolled on the trial.  
 
13.3 S erious adverse event (SAE) reporting  
A serious adverse event is one that at any dose (including overdose): 
• Results in death  
• Is life -threatening1 
• Requires inpatient hospit alization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization 
• Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity2 
• Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect 
• Is an important medical event3 
1“Life -threatening” means that the subject was at immediate risk of death at the time of 
the serious adverse event; it does not refer to a serious adverse event that hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe.  
2“Persistent or significant disability or incapacity” means that there is a substantial 
disruption of a person’s ability to carry out normal life functions. 
3Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited 
reporting is appropriate in situations where none of the outcomes listed above occurred.  Important medical events that may not be immediately life -threatening or result in death 
or hospitalization but may jeopardize the patient or may require intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the definition above should also usually be considered serious.  Examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 34 
A new diagnosis of cancer during the course of a treatment should be considered as 
medically important.   
 
Toxicity will be scored using CTCAE Version  4.0 for toxicity and adverse event 
reporting .  A copy of the CTCAE Version 4.0 can be downloaded from the C TEP 
homepage ( http://ctep.info.nih.gov).  All appropriate treatment areas should have access 
to a copy of the CTCAE Version 4 .0.  All adverse clinical experiences, whether observed 
by the investigator or reported by the patient, must be recorded, with details about the 
duration and intensity of each episode, the action taken with respect to the test drug, and the patient’s outcome.  The investigator must evaluate each adverse experience for its relationship to the te st drug and for its seriousness. 
Pregnancies  
Pregnancies occurring while the subject (or female partner of a male subject) is on study 
or within 30 days  after the subject’s last dose of ramucirumab  are considered expedited 
reportable events.  If t he subject is on ramucirumab , it is to be discontinued immediately.   
If the outcome of the pregnancy meets the criteria for immediate classification as a SAE (i.e., spontaneous abortion [any congenital anomaly detected in an aborted fetus is to be documented], stillbirth, neonatal death, or congenital anomaly), the Investigator should follow the procedures for Expedited Reporting of SAEs to Lilly . 
Any suspected fetal exposure to ramucirumab  must be reported to Lilly  within 24 hours 
of being made aware of the event.   The patient should be referred to an 
obstetrician/gynecologist experienced in reproductive toxicity for further evaluation and counseling. 
All neonatal deaths that occur within 30 days of birth should be reported, without regard 
to causality, as SAEs.  I n addition, any infant death after 30 days that the Investigator 
suspects is related to the in utero exposure to ramucirumab  should also be reported. 
Lilly  Drug Safety Contact Information: 
Eli Lilly  
Global Product Safety Fax Number: (866) 644-1697 or (317) 453-3402 
Investigator Reporting Responsibilities 
The conduct of the study will comply with all FDA safety reporting requirements.   
All adverse experience reports must include the patient number, age, sex, weight, severity 
of reaction (mild, moderate, severe), relationship to drug (probably related, unknown relationship, definitely not related), date and time of administration of test medications and all concomitant medications, and medical treatment provided.   The investigator is responsible for evaluati ng all adverse events to determine whether criteria for “serious” 
and as defined above are present.  The investigator is responsible for reporting adverse events to Lilly  as described below.  
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 35 
 
 
 
Expedited reporting by investigator to Lilly  
Serious adverse events (SAE) are defined above.  The investigator must inform Lilly  in 
writing using a Lilly  SAE form of any SAE within 24 hours of being aware of the event.  
The written report must be completed and supplied to Lilly  by facsimile within 24 hours.  
The initial report must be as complete as possible, including an assessment of the causal 
relationship between the event and the investigational product.  Information not available at the time of the initial report (e.g., an end date for the adverse event or laboratory values received after the report) must be documented on a follow-up report.  A final report to document resolution of the SAE is required.  The Lilly  tracking number ( I4T-US-I004) 
and the institutional protocol number should be included on SAE repor ts (or on the fax 
cover letter) sent to Lilly .  A copy of the fax transmission confirmation of the SAE report 
to Lilly  should be attached to the SAE and retained with the patient records. Participating 
study sites must report SAEs to Lilly  as described and  within 24 hours of awareness.  
Participating sites should also report SAEs to MD Anderson Cancer Center, the primary 
study site.  
 
Report of Adverse Events to the Institutional Review Board 
The principal Investigator is required to notify his/her Instituti onal Review Board (IRB) 
of a serious adverse event according to institutional policy.   
Investigator Reporting to the FDA 
Serious  adverse events (SAEs) that are unlisted/unexpected, and at least possibly 
associated to the drug, and that have not previously been reported in the Investigators 
brochure, or reference safety information document should be reported promptly to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) by telephone or by fax.  Fatal or life threatening SAEs that meet the criteria for reporting to the  FDA must be reported to the FDA within 
7 calendar days after awareness of the event.  All other SAEs that meet the criteria for reporting to the FDA must be reported to the FDA within 15 calendar days after awareness of the event.  A clear description of the suspected reaction should be provided 
along with an assessment as to whether the event is drug or disease related.    
Adverse event updates/IND safety reports  
Lilly  shall notify the Investigator via an IND Safety Report of the following information: 
• Any AE associated with the use of drug in this study or in other studies that is 
both serious and unexpected. 
• Any finding from tests in laboratory animals that suggests a significant risk for human subjects including reports of mutagenicity, teratogenicity, or carcinogenicity.  
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 36 
The Investigator shall notify his/her IRB/EC promptly of these new serious and 
unexpected AE(s) or significant risks to subjects. The Investigator must keep copies of all AE information, including correspondence with Lilly  and the IRB/EC, on file. 
 
 
 
14.  REFERENCES  
 1. Valle J, Wasan H, Palmer DH, et al: Cisplatin plus gemcitabine 
versus gemcitabine for biliary tract cancer. N Engl J Med 362:1273-81, 2010 
 2. Rogers JE, Law L, Nguyen VD, et al: Second- line systemic 
treatment for advanced cholangiocarcinoma. J Gastrointest Oncol 5:408 -13, 
2014 
 3. El-Khoueiry AB, Rankin C, Siegel AB, et al: S0941: a phase 2 
SWOG study of sorafenib and erlotinib in patients with advanced gallbladder carcinoma or cholangiocarcinoma. Br J Cancer 110:882-7, 2014 
 4. Lubner SJ, Mahoney MR, Kolesar JL, et al: Report of a 
multicenter phase II trial testing a combination of biweekly bevacizumab and daily erlotinib in patients with unresectable biliary cancer: a phase II 
Consortium study. J Clin Oncol 28:3491-7, 2010 
 5. Zhu AX, Meyerhardt JA, Blaszkowsky LS, et al: Efficacy and 
safety of gemcitabine, oxaliplatin, and bevacizumab in advanced biliary- tract 
cancers and correlation of changes in 18- fluorodeoxyglucose PET with clinical 
outcome: a phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 11:48-54, 2010 
 6. Fontanella C, Ongaro E, Bolzonello S, et al: Clinical advances in 
the development of novel VEGFR2 inhibitors. Ann Transl Med 2:123, 2014 
 7. Zhu AX, Hezel AF: Development of molecular ly targeted 
therapies in biliary tract cancers: reassessing the challenges and opportunities. 
Hepatology 53:695-704, 2011 
 8. Lazcano-Ponce EC, Miquel JF, Munoz N, et al: Epidemiology and 
molecular pathology of gallbladder cancer. CA Cancer J Clin 51:349-64, 2001 
 9. Augustine MM, Fong Y: Epidemiology and risk factors of biliary 
tract and primary liver tumors. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 23:171 -88, 2014 
 10. Jemal A, Murray T, Samuels A, et al: Cancer statistics, 2003. CA 
Cancer J Clin 53:5- 26, 2003 
 11. Shaib Y, El -Serag HB: The epidemiology of cholangiocarcinoma. 
Semin Liver Dis 24:115-25, 2004  12. Shaib YH, Davila JA, McGlynn K, et al: Rising incidence of 
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma in the United States: a true increase? J Hepatol 40:472-7, 2004 
 13. Valle JW, Wasan H, Johnson P, et al: Gemcitabine alone or in 
combination with cisplatin in patients with advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinomas or other biliary tract tumours: a multicentre randomised 
phase II study - The UK ABC -01 Study. Br J Cancer 101:621-7, 2009 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 37 
 14. Lamarca A, Hubner RA, David Ryder W, et al: Second- line 
chemotherapy in advanced biliary cancer: a systematic review. Ann Oncol 
25:2328-38, 2014 
 15. Fornaro L, Cereda S, Aprile G, et al: Multivariate prognostic 
factors analysis for second -line chemotherapy in advanced biliary tract cancer. 
Br J Cancer 110:2165-9, 2014  16. Alberts SR, Al -Khatib H, Mahoney MR, et al: Gemcitabine, 5-
fluorouracil, and leucovorin in advanced biliary tract and gallbladder carcinoma: a North Central Cancer Treatmen t Group phase II trial. Cancer 
103:111-8, 2005 
 17. Choi CW, Choi IK, Seo JH, et al: Effects of 5- fluorouracil and 
leucovorin in the treatment of pancreatic -biliary tract adenocarcinomas. Am J 
Clin Oncol 23:425-8, 2000 
 18. Lee J, Park SH, Chang HM, et al: Gemcitabine and oxaliplatin 
with or without erlotinib in advanced biliary -tract cancer: a multicentre, open-
label, randomised, phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol 13:181-8, 2012  19. Pino MS, Milella M, Gelibter A, et al: Capecitabine and celecoxib 
as second -line treatment of advanced pancreatic and biliary tract cancers. 
Oncology 76:254-61, 2009 
 20. Sohal DP, Mykulowycz K, Uehara T, et al: A phase II trial of 
gemcitabine, irinotecan and panitumumab in advanced cholangiocarcinoma. 
Ann Oncol 24:3061- 5, 2013 
 21. Giatromanolaki A, Koukourakis MI, Simopoulos C, et al: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in operable gallbladder 
carcinomas. Eur J Surg Oncol 29:879-83, 2003 
 22. Quan ZW, Wu K, Wang J, et al: Association of p53, p16, and 
vascular endothe lial growth factor protein expressions with the prognosis and 
metastasis of gallbladder cancer. J Am Coll Surg 193:380-3, 2001 
 23. Yoshikawa D, Ojima H, Iwasaki M, et al: Clinicopathological and 
prognostic significance of EGFR, VEGF, and HER2 expression in cholangiocarcinoma. Br J Cancer 98:418- 25, 2008 
 24. Mancino A, Mancino MG, Glaser SS, et al: Estrogens stimulate the proliferation of human cholangiocarcinoma by inducing the expression 
and secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor. Dig Liver Dis 41:156-63, 
2009  25. Fava G, Demorrow S, Gaudio E, et al: Endothelin inhibits 
cholangiocarcinoma growth by a decrease in the vascular endothelial growth 
factor expression. Liver Int 29:1031-42, 2009 
 26. Valle J, et al. : ABC-03: A randomized phase II trial of cediranib 
(AZD2171) or placebo in combination with cisplatin/gemcitabine (CisGem) 
chemotherapy for patients (pts) with advanced biliary tract cancer (ABC). J 
Clin Oncol 32:suppl; abstr 4002, 2014 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 38 
 27. Bengala C, Bertolini F, Malavasi N, et al: Sorafen ib in patients 
with advanced biliary tract carcinoma: a phase II trial. Br J Cancer 102:68-72, 
2010 
 28. Lee JK, Capanu M, O'Reilly EM, et al: A phase II study of 
gemcitabine and cisplatin plus sorafenib in patients with advanced biliary 
adenocarcinomas. Br J Cancer 109:915-9, 2013 
 29. Yi JH, Thongprasert S, Lee J, et al: A phase II study of sunitinib 
as a second -line treatment in advanced biliary tract carcinoma: a multicentre, 
multinational study. Eur J Cancer 48:196-201, 2012  30. Spratlin JL, Cohen RB,  Eadens M, et al: Phase I pharmacologic 
and biologic study of ramucirumab (IMC -1121B), a fully human 
immunoglobulin G1 monoclonal antibody targeting the vascular endothelial 
growth factor receptor -2. J Clin Oncol 28:780-7, 2010 
 31. Fuchs CS, Tomasek J, Yo ng CJ, et al: Ramucirumab monotherapy 
for previously treated advanced gastric or gastro- oesophageal junction 
adenocarcinoma (REGARD): an international, randomised, multicentre, placebo -controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 383:31-9, 2014 
 32. Wilke H, Muro K, Van Cutsem E, et al: Ramucirumab plus 
paclitaxel versus placebo plus paclitaxel in patients with previously treated 
advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma (RAINBOW): 
a double -blind, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 15:1224-35, 2014 
 33. Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, et al: New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1). 
Eur J Cancer 45:228-47, 2009 
 34. Brauer MJ, Zhuang G, Schmidt M, et al: Identification and 
analysis of in vivo VEGF downstream markers link VEGF pathway activity with efficacy of anti-VEGF therapies. Clin Cancer Res 19:3681-92, 2013  35. Chiang DY, Villanueva A, Hoshida Y, et al: Focal gains of VEGFA 
and molecular classification of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 68:6779-
88, 2008 
 36. Horwitz E, Stein I, Andreozzi M, et al: Human and mouse 
VEGFA -amplified hepatocellular carcinomas are highly sensitive to sorafenib 
treatment. Cancer Discov 4:730-43, 2014  37. Van Cutsem E, de Haas S, Kang YK, et al: Bevacizu mab in 
combination with chemotherapy as first-line therapy in advanced gastric cancer: a biomarker evaluation from the AVAGAST randomized phase III trial. J Clin Oncol 30:2119-27, 2012 
 38. Dai X, Schlemmer HP, Schmidt B, et al: Quantitative therapy 
response assessment by volumetric iodine -uptake measurement: initial 
experience in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma treated with 
sorafenib. Eur J Radiol 82:327-34, 2013 
 39. Uhrig M, Sedlmair M, Schlemmer HP, et al: Monitoring targeted 
therapy using dual -energy CT: semi- automatic RECIST plus supplementary 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 39 
functional information by quantifying iodine uptake of melanoma metastases. 
Cancer Imaging 13:306-13, 2013 
 
  
            
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 40 
Appendix 1  – Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status  
 
ECOG PERFORMANCE STATUS*  
Grade  ECOG  
0 Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction  
1 Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out 
work of a light or sedentary nature, e.g., light house wor k, office work  
2 Amb ulatory and capable of all self -care but unable to carry out any work 
activities. Up and about more than 50% of waking hours  
3 Capable of only limited self -care, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of 
waking hours  
 
                       
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2015-0393  
 August 29, 2018  
Page 41 
Appendix 2  Ramucirumab  – Additional Information 
SEE ATTACHED PACKAGE INSERT AND INVESTIGATOR’S BROCHURE  
 
       
  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 