Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
Subclinical Cardiovascular Disease in Psoriatic Disease
Principal Investigator
Jeffrey S. Berger, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC
Associate Professor of Medicine (Cardiology  and Hematology)
The Center for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease
New York  University  School of Medicine
530 First Avenue, Skirball 9R
New York, NY 10016
Tel. 212-263-4004
Fax. 212-263-3988 
e-mail: Jeffrey.berger@nyumc.org
Study Investigators
Michael Garshick, MD
Post-doctoral research  Fellow
The Center for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease
New York  University  School of Medicine
530 First Avenue, Skirball 9R
New York, NY 10016
Tel. 212-263-4004
Fax. 212-263-3988
e-mail: Michael.garshick@nyumc.org
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
1.Synopsis
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) remains the leading  cause  of death in the US.  Five modifiable risk 
factors: smoking,  hyperlipidemia,  diabetes, hypertension and obesity,  account for 50% of CVD 
mortality between  the ages of 45 – 79.1  These traditional cardiac risk factors dictate  who  to treat 
with primary prevention measures but do not take into account patient-specific disease states such 
as psoriatic  disease including psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, which predispose to chronic  
inflammation.  Patients with psoriatic disease  have an increased risk of atherosclerotic heart disease 
and myocardial infarctions compared to matched  controls.2  Studies are needed on how the chronic 
inflammation seen in psoriatic disease translates  into the increased atherosclerotic and thrombotic 
risk and how treatment  reduces this CVD risk.
2. Background  and significance
Psoriatic disease which includes psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis are chronic inflammatory disease 
states which have been shown to increase the risk of cardiovascular mortality.3  Psoriasis has a 
prevalence of 2 to 3 percent, with a bimodal distribution affecting most  those 30 – 39 and again  
between 50 – 69 years of age.4  Meta-analysis  on the association of CVD with  psoriasis have  yielded 
an overall relative risk (RR) of 1.5 for ischemic  heart disease.5  Young adults are at even higher 
relative risk (RR) higher risk, with a RR for myocardial infarction  of 3.1 compared to age-matched 
controls.6  Confounding this relationship is the increased  prevalence of metabolic syndrome,  
obesity, HTN and hyperlipidemia within the psoriatic  population.5  Despite this, epidemiologic 
studies have noted the increased risk of CVD  remains after adjustment  for these  traditional  CVD risk 
factors.6  
The mechanism(s) between psoriatic disease  and CVD  are still being  characterized.7  The systemic  
inflammation is linked to the production of numerous inflammatory cytokines such as interferon – γ, 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL-17 and IL-22 with an overall activation of the innate immune  system  
response.8  Through systemic inflammation,  the initial  stages of atherosclerosis develop with 
upregulation of vascular endothelial adhesion molecules  and leukocyte translocation, platelet 
activation and increased vessel wall permeability  to lipoproteins and inflammatory mediators.9  
There have  been studies linking the earliest  phases of atherosclerosis,  endothelial dysfunction and 
psoriasis.  Psoriatic  patients have impaired flow-mediated dilation,  increased arterial stiffness and 
increased carotid  intima-media thickness.10  Biochemically, a variety of extracellular microparticles, 
involved in both endothelial cell and platelet activation  are elevated in those with moderate  to 
severe psoriasis.11  Platelet activation  in particular through measurement of platelet-derived 
microparticles and soluble P-selectin are increased in psoriasis and linked to psoriasis  severity.12       
 
While there have been  studies evaluating the effects of psoriatic specific treatment on endothelial 
dysfunction, there is a lack of evidence  on the use of medications  typically  used for the primary 
prevention of CVD within  the psoriatic  population.10  The goals of the proposed study are three fold:  
As a first step  to assess  endothelial  dysfunction, we will assess vascular function in psoriasis patients  
through non-invasive ultrasound imaging and through a novel technique:  direct analysis of 
endothelial cells with  minimally invasive endothelial vein  harvesting.13  As a second  goal, we will 
assess thrombotic risk through platelet activation and platelet – endothelial interaction.  Finally,  as a 
third goal,  we will assess  in patients with moderate  to severe psoriatic disease changes to the 
endothelial function and platelet activation  over time with the use of 81mg  of aspirin and/or 40mg  
of atorvastatin.  
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
  
3. Specific Aims  
3.1 To evaluate  the association between moderate  to severe psoriatic disease  and measures  of 
vascular function.
3.2 To evaluate  the association between moderate  to severe psoriatic disease  and measures  of 
thrombotic risk.
3.3 To understand how traditional medications used in CVD prevention such as aspirin  and statins  
affect vascular function  and thrombotic risk in those  with moderate to severe psoriatic disease.
    
4.Research Design
4.1 Recruitment
We will recruit patients  across the spectrum of psoriatic disease (includes psoriasis  and psoriatic arthritis 
and age and sex matched  health controls).  
4.2 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria for Psoriatic Patients
Inclusion Criteria
1.Group  1:  Subjects  with a history of moderate to severe psoriatic disease 
2.Age ≥ 18 & < 90
3.Able and willing to provide written  informed consent  for the study
Exclusion Criteria
1.Unable to speak Spanish or English
2.Active smoking (within the past year)
3.Autoimmune, rheumatologic or inflammatory disease which are not psoriasis or psoriatic 
arthritis
4.Known active cancer receiving treatment
5.Pregnancy
6.Anemia (hemoglobin  < 9 mg/dl) or thrombocytopenia (Platelet count <75), or thrombocytosis 
(Platelet count >600)
7.A history of severe bleeding or bleeding disorders
8.Current medication use which interact with either  aspirin or atorvastatin
9.Chronic kidney  disease (CrCl < 30ml/min) 
10.Congestive  heart failure
11.Currently taking aspirin or a statin.
12.NSAID use within the past 48 hours
4.3 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria for Healthy Controls
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
Inclusion Criteria
Group 2:  Healthy subjects  without known psoriatic disease or cardiovascular disease
1.Age ≥ 18 & < 90
2.Able and willing to provide written  informed consent  for the study
Exclusion Criteria
2.Unable to speak Spanish or English
3.Active smoking (within the past year)
4.Autoimmune, rheumatologic or inflammatory disease which are not psoriasis or psoriatic 
arthritis
5.Known active cancer receiving treatment
6.Pregnancy
7.Anemia (hemoglobin  < 9 mg/dl) or thrombocytopenia (Platelet count <75), or thrombocytosis 
(Platelet count >600)
8.A history of severe bleeding or bleeding disorders
9.Current medication use which interact with either  aspirin or atorvastatin
10.Chronic kidney  disease (CrCl < 30ml/min) 
11.Congestive  heart failure
12.Currently taking aspirin or a statin.
13.NSAID use within the past 48 hours
Recruitment goals are listed  in the schedule of assessments  below.   Both female and males  will be 
recruited.  Patients  will be recruited from the outpatient general medicine, 
musculoskeletal/rheumatology and dermatology  clinics  at the NYU  Faculty  Group Practice (FGP) clinics 
including the Psoriasis,  psoriatic arthritis ambulatory  clinic, psoriasis and dermatology ambulatory care 
center and Bellevue Hospital  Adult Clinics.  We will also recruit from the Hospital for Joint  Disease 
Psoriatic arthritis  clinic  which is staffed by NYU faculty.  Patients fulfilling inclusion and exclusion criteria 
will be identified by their health care  professional, who will obtain verbal consent for contact by a 
member of the research  staff.  Study brochures will also be left at the front desk of these practices  in the 
even that subjects  would  like more information from study staff.   Patients will be approached after  their 
visit with the health care  provider in the clinic setting. Subjects and healthy  controls  will also be 
recruited from posted fliers across the medical center.  Additionally, subjects who have previously 
enrolled in any study  (10-00607, S12-03123, S14-00531,  s14-01418) by the co - PI (Jeffrey  Berger) and 
who checked off the box that they may be contacted by a member of the study staff for potential 
enrollment will be included.  
Additional recruitment will be done  through posted fliers and approved brochures at private 
dermatology offices  with dermatology office  staff  permission.  We will also recruit through social media 
postings including Craigslist, Facebook, psoriatic support groups and national  psoriatic society patient 
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
advocacy groups as well the NYU approved research match  The advertisement for these postings  will 
contain the same content  as noted on the IRB approved  flyer.   This social  media  advertisement  will also 
includes the health-union psoriasis advocacy website.  
Working with  MCIT and DataCore we will be using Epic’s Reporting Workbench tool to identify potential 
subjects that have psoriasis and present to the dermatology FGP,  arthritis or phototherapy  clinics.  We 
will screen these subjects and then if they meet study inclusion criteria and has agreed to be contacted 
for potential studies then they will be contacted.  Contact will be initiated using Epic and the patient 
portal, MyChart, via Epic’s Research Recruitment functionality.  The  information used to send the 
MyChart message will be the same  as that used for other study advertisements.
Only subjects  that have  the capacity  to consent  will be asked to consent.  
Vulnerable Population
We will not be enrolling any vulnerable populations.
4.4  Informed consent
If a subject  wishes to participate,  a member of the research team will review the informed consent  
documents, answer any questions, and obtain  written consent for participation in the study and obtain 
written consent for future analysis, contact, and sample  storage.  Subjects will be given  a “Subject 
history form”  to fill out asking for a complete medical history. They  will also be given an appointment  
reminder sheet to bring with their consent form.   They will bring the subject history form to their first 
baseline assessment appointment.   Participants  will consent to complete the baseline assessments (see 
table 1).  Participants  may  opt to decline  participation  in any baseline assessment they feel 
uncomfortable with or time constraints do not allow.  Follow-up assessments will be completed in those 
who agree to aspirin or atorvastatin usage  for the longitudinal  part of the analysis.  Participation in 
follow-up assessment is not required for participation  in the baseline assessment.  The  consent  process 
will take  place  in private offices at the NYU  FGP,  CTSI, ambulatory care center, Seligman Center  for 
Advanced Therapeutics and Bellevue adult clinics.  Subjects will be given the opportunity to be 
contacted for future studies that they may qualify  for as well.  A member of the research  team  will 
conduct the baseline interview with the subject and review the clinical history, demographic  information 
and medication use with  the individual.   All information  including the consent will be kept under double  
lock and key at the PI’s office in NYU Skirball 9th floor.
4.5 Methods
4.5.1 Schedule of assessments
At least one baseline assessment is required  for all study participants where both a blood draw of 60ccs 
(for the use of platelet  function  testing,  biospecimen collection), non-invasive vascular function imaging 
testing and endothelial vein harvesting will occur (table 1).  A subject can choose not to participate in 
any baseline testing they feel uncomfortable with but must participate in one baseline assessment  to be 
included in the study.
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
4.5.2 Longitudinal component (Group 1 only)
After baseline assessment, those  with moderate to severe psoriatic disease will be offered by the study 
physician randomly the opportunity for longitudinal follow up and to take either aspirin and/or 
atorvastatin.   For 2 weeks +/- 4 days, 1/4th  of the subjects enrolled will be offered 81mg of aspirin,  1/4th  
of the subjects  enrolled will be offered  atorvastatin 40mg, ¼ will be offered both aspirin  and 
atorvastatin and 1/4th will be offered nothing.  Participants will be given the opportunity to only 
participate in the baseline assessment and opt out of the opportunity to take aspirin and/or atorvastatin  
and longitudinal component.   
Both aspirin and atorvastatin  are routinely  used and approved in medical practice for the primary 
prevention of coronary artery disease.  These medications are frequently used  in the psoriatic 
population based  on national guidelines when  a calculated cardiac risk score  is elevated  (considered at 
moderate to high risk of cardiovascular events).  These medications will be obtained  from the Tisch 
outpatient pharmacy.  They will be stored and dispensed with CTSI oversight.  A  drug accountability and 
storage log will be kept  as per NYU research  protocol.
A follow up assessment will be planed (table  1) at 2 weeks +/- 4 days  and will include  repeat blood draw  
(60 ccs, for the use of platelet function testing, biospecimen collection) and repeated  endothelial vein 
harvesting.  The end of the study is considered when the subject completes the follow up assessment.   
All study drugs  will be stopped at this time.  If the subject wishes to continue  the study drugs they will 
be referred  to their primary  medical provider  for further management.  
A subject will be able to opt out of any part of the follow up assessment they desire.    If a subject agrees 
to be started on aspirin and/or atorvastatin for the longitudinal part of the analysis  and therapy for 
psoriasis is planned by the referring provider, we will attempt to perform the longitudinal follow up 
prior to their starting  medication.  Participation in this study will not impact planned treatment of the 
subjects by their  primary  provider.     
All subjects may be asked to provide additional information about  their  medical history,  update  any 
interim history and provide  additional samples as noted above. Health information  will be monitored 
overtime by review of the medical chart. Additional questions may be asked by phone or during routine 
clinical follow-up, as appropriate.   
Table 1.
Patient Group BaselineLongitudinal Analysis
Follow-up 
1 
n = 40Moderate to severe psoriatic 
disease1) Blood
2) Endothelial  vein 
harvesting
3) Vascular function 
imagingOffered: 
1) Aspirin
2) Atorvastatin1) Blood
2) Endothelial  vein 
harvesting
3) Additional   
medical history 
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
obtained
2
n = 10Healthy Controls1) Blood
2) Endothelial  vein 
sampling
3) Vascular function 
imaging1) Additional  
medical history 
obtained
4.5.3 Vascular  function assessment  
Vascular function may be assessed  either  using brachial artery flow  mediated  dilatation (FMD) or  pulse 
wave velocity (PWV), both non-invasive ultrasound  measures of vascular function.  FMD  and PWV will 
be measured  using a duplex ultrasound imaging  system (2D, grayscale B-mode imaging,  pulsed Doppler 
and color  flow Doppler) with a 11 MHz  linear array  probe (Sonosite Inc., Bothell WA).  Collection  of the 
ultrasound vascular function  data will occur in the Clinical Research  Center  of the NYU  Clinical  and 
Translational Science Institute (CTSI),  under the direction of Dr. Stuart Katz, who  is on this proposal.  
Before each study, participants  will provide answers  to a brief series of questions  to determine  eligibility 
for the FMD/PWV  measurements and to determine which arm to use. Participants will rest supine for at 
least 20 minutes before measurements are made.  We will attempt to use the right  arm for imaging  
except in a few uncommon circumstances among patients eligible for this study  (recent injury with or 
without casting  on the right arm, right mastectomy with  lymph node removal, or any other condition 
that results in immobility, pain, and/or swelling in the right arm or hand).   The  participants will be 
positioned to maximize their  comfort and to facilitate  image acquisition by the sonographer.  A standard 
3-lead electrocardiogram will be placed on the torso (right upper torso, left upper torso, and left lower 
torso) as per protocol. Resting supine blood pressure will be measured in the left arm and recorded.  
Mean blood flow velocity  (MBFV, cm/sec) will be determined by calculation of the area  under the hand-
traced curve of the spectral display. Brachial artery diameter and MBFV will be measured at rest, and 
after transient arterial  occlusion induced  by inflation of a forearm  blood pressure cuff to suprasystolic 
pressure for 5 minutes.  MBFV will be measured  for 15 seconds immediately upon release  of the 
occluding cuff; the first 5 beats after release will be averaged.  Occlusion of brachial  artery blood flow 
for 5 minutes with suprasystolic pressures may  result in mild  hand numbness and discomfort that 
resolves quickly with decompression of the blood pressure cuff without any known  clinical sequelae.   
Brachial artery diameter  will be measured over a 1 cm vessel length at end-diastole 60-75 seconds 
following release  of the occluding cuff;  3 diameter measurements will be averaged. FMD will be 
calculated as the % change  in brachial artery diameter after cuff release  compared with the resting  
diameter. Internal and external landmarks  will be used to make repeated  measurements  at the same 
vessel site. In our laboratory, mean FMD  in normal adult subjects mean age 43 years is 5.89% (95% CI 
4.53%, 7.23%). Intraobserver coefficient of variance for FMD measurements of the same vessel is 1-2%.  
Within-subjects coefficient of variance  ranges from 5-10%  for same day measurements  (reliability  
coefficient for repeated  measures 72%) and 15-30% for day-to-day measurements (reliability coefficient 
for repeated  measures 46%).  Carotid-to-femoral  arterial pulse wave velocity as well as central arterial 
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
pressure (Sphygmacor), a surrogate measure of vascular stiffness associated with  long-term risk of 
cardiovascular event will also be recorded.  
4.5.4 Endothelial cell harvesting
There will be a maximum of two time  points for endothelial cell harvesting and biospecimen 
collection.  Endothelial harvesting will take place either in the CTSI or in the NYU  Seligman  Center for 
Advanced Therapeutics.  Both of these  centers  have access to nursing support  and ancillary support staff 
including trained  phlebotomists.   All subjects  will have  their blood drawn and endothelial harvesting 
after informed consent and completion of the screening interview.  If willing to the subjects  will be 
preferably fasting > 4 hours and water intake is allowed.  They will be in a reclined position  with feet 
elevated.  An angiocatheter ≤ 21 gauge will be inserted into a peripheral vein on the upper extremity 
using aseptic technique. A 0.021in. diameter  J-shaped wire (Daig, Minnetonka, MN) or a 0.018in.  
diameter J-shaped wire (Arrow, Reading, PA) will be then advanced into the angiocatheter, to a distance  
of 4cm beyond the end of the angiocatheter.  Angiocatheters and J shaped wire  described  above  are 
routinely used  for intravenous fluids and medication administration in this hospital.  Venous endothelial 
cells will be scraped from the intimas of superficial forearm veins by repeated (3 times) insertion and 
removal of the wire. The distal portion of the wire will be transferred  to a 50ml conical tube containing 
dissociation buffer (0.5% bovine serum albumin,  2 mM EDTA, and 100 microg/ml heparin in PBS,  pH 7.4) 
and maintained at 4°C until study.  Half of retrieved endothelial cells will be used for RNA extraction and 
a half for immunofluorescence.
The angiocatheter used will be a ≤ 21 gauge (typically  20 gauge) INSYTE  autoguard  IV catheter  which  is 
routinely used  for clinical care, IV hydration and administration of medications.   In this case  we will using 
this angiocathter off label as a method to safety access the peripheral vein.   This poses  a non-significant  
risk for the device  according  to 21 CFR 812.3 (m) because:  1)  There is NO implantation of the device.   
2) This device will not be used to sustain human life and does not pose  a serious risk to health or safety 
of the subject.   3) This device will not be used to diagnose, cure, mitigate or treat  a disease.   4)  This 
angiocatheter device is routinely used across  the country in clinics and hospitals and does not pose a 
serious risk to health, safety or welfare of the subject. 
The J – wire used  will be either a  0.021in.  diameter J-shaped wire (Daig, Minnetonka, MN) or a 0.018in.  
diameter J-shaped wire (Arrow, Reading, PA).  This device will be used off label as a means of accessing 
and collected endothelial cells.  In  clinical  practice  these  devices are typically  used in hospital settings as 
a guidewire for accessing human  veins  and threading  other catheters into the vein.   These wires  
therefore routinely come into contact  of vein  walls during  clinical care.  HOWEVER, our use is to harvest 
endothelial cells that come into contact  with  these wires.  Therefore, this is considered  off label.  This 
poses a non-significant risk for the device according to 21 CFR 812.3 (m) because:  1)  There is NO 
implantation of the device.   2) This device will not be used to sustain human life and does  not pose  a 
serious risk to health or safety of the subject.   3) This device will not be used  to diagnose, cure, mitigate 
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
or treat a disease.   4)  This j-wire device  is routinely used across the country in clinics  and hospitals and 
does not pose a serious risk to health, safety or welfare of the subject.  
   
 
4.5.5 Biospecimen collection
Study blood  will be collected by trained staff in the outpatient  clinics, Seligman Center  for Advanced 
Therapetucis or in the CTSI.   This will occur immediately after  endothelial vein harvesting using the same 
brachial IV site if the subject  has agreed to endothelial vein harvesting.  If the subject declined  
endothelial vein harvesting but agrees to a blood draw, then standard techniques of blood drawing will 
be used  as follows.  After cleansing of the venipuncture site with  an alcohol  wipe  and removal of excess 
alcohol with  sterile gauze,  a tourniquet will be applied to the patient’s bicep region.  A 20G butterfly 
needle or less will be inserted into the antecubital  vein,  the tourniquet will be removed, and free-
flowing blood  will be collected with minimal trauma and stasis.  The needle will be removed when blood 
collection is complete and sufficient pressure  will be applied using sterile gauze at the puncture  site until 
cessation of bleeding.  A sterile  band-aid will be applied to cover the venipuncture site.  .  
For each patient, no more than  60 ml (≈4 tablespoons and 1/8 of a standard blood donation) of blood 
will be collected at the baseline visit in red (no anticoagulant) top, lavender (EDTA anticoagulant)  top, 
green (heparin) and blue (sodium citrate  anticoagulant) top tubes).  We believe this amount of blood  is 
negligible and presents  minimal  risk for the patient.  Approximately 30 cc of blood will be used  for the 
different measurements of platelet function, lipid levels, coagulation, inflammation, and approximately 
30 cc of blood  will be used for isolation of RNA, microRNA and storage  of DNA at -80C.  . The samples will 
be stored in the PI’s lab at the NYU Science building  7th floor without any identifying information other 
than a code number.  These samples will be barcoded system and lab vantage and stored in a freezer 
with back-up power supply.   
4.5.6 Longitudinal Follow  Up Data Collection
Participants enrolled in the longitudinal part of this study will be offered the option  to participate in 
follow-up biospecimen collection.  This  follow-up will allow us to assess  how aspirin and/or  atorvastatin  
affect platelet  and endothelial function and inflammation.  This  follow-up  component  will consist  of 
additional blood samples of ≈ 30ml  (2 tablespoons or less) that will be collected  for different 
measurements of platelet  function, lipid levels, coagulation, inflammation, and approximately 30 ccs of 
blood will be used for isolation  of RNA, microRNA and storage of DNA at -80C.  The samples will be 
stored in the PI’s lab at the NYU Science building 7th floorwithout any identifying information other than 
a code number.   Repeat endothelial vein harvesting will also be performed as described  above.  
Overall, code  numbers  used for collection  of samples will not be based on any information that could be 
used to identify the subject  (for example, social security  number, initials or birth date).  The master  list 
linking names to code numbers will be kept in a locked file cabinet, separate  from all research 
information.  
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
If participating in the optional follow-up collection, the total amount of blood  withdrawn (baseline plus 
follow up) will be no more  than 120 ml (approximately 7 tablespoons and 1/4 for a standard  blood 
donation).  This amount of blood  collection is within established safety guidelines of research  blood 
collection in adults.  Blood collection at baseline and at the follow up time points will allow us to 
examine how the treatment of aspirin  and atorvastatin modify 1) endothelial vein function in psoriatic 
disease, 2) changes to platelet  activity and 3) alterations in coagulation  and inflammation in those  with  
psoriatic disease. 
For all cases and controls, we will call 1 week after each procedure to assess  how patients are feeling 
after endothelial vein  harvesting.   Adverse events will be managed as mentioned below.
4.5.7 Genetic Profiling
The blood and endothelial specimens will be analyzed upon completion of the study  for RNA, microRNA, 
and DNA profiling.  We will perform detailed molecular profile study,  describing  genetic  arrays of 
patterns of platelet and endothelial  vein analysis associated with atherosclerotic heart  disease and 
psoriasis.  We  will be looking at specific transcripts in various cell types  and endothelial cells  associated 
with cardiovascular diseases.  Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) will be isolated for platelet purification and 
subsequent genetic  analysis  will be performed.  The samples will be stored in dedicated freezer space in 
the Marc and Ruti Bell Program for Vascular Biology (the NYU Science building 7th floor) for the PI 
without any identifying information other  than a unique code number.   The  code number  will not be 
based on any information that could be used to identify the subject (for example, social security 
number, initials, birth date,  etc.).  The  master list linking names to code numbers will be kept in a locked 
file cabinet,  separate  from all research information.  Genetic information will not be disclosed to 
anyone, including the participants  and their  physicians. Samples shall  be destroyed at the end of the 
testing process.    
4.6 Future  Sample Storage
All patients  will be offered an option to have  their blood stored for future processing.  If patient does 
not agree  to store his/her  blood for future tests not related  to this study, then his/her blood will be 
destroyed after all planned laboratory  tests  have been  performed.   
Blood samples  for future  analysis will be assigned a unique code  number  and stored in the dedicated 
freezer storage by the PI without any identifying  information other than a code number. The unique  
code number will not be based on any information that could be used to identify  the subject (for 
example, social security number, initials, or birth date).  The master list linking names  to code  numbers  
will be kept  in a locked file cabinet, separate from all research information placed under double  lock and 
key at PI’s office. All confidential data will be stored with a unique code  as an identifier  and will be 
protected by a double electronic lock.  All physical data will be kept under double  physical lock.  Access  
to the data  will be given  to the study personnel only.  
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
Samples will be stored for no more than  10 years.  The specimens for future analysis  may be analyzed 
upon completion of the study for RNA, microRNA,  and DNA as described  above.  Genetic information will 
not be disclosed to anyone, including the participants.  Samples could also be used  for testing other 
potential biomarkers in patient  plasma and/or  serum related to psoriatic  disease and CVD that may 
occur with exception of those which  are already part of the protocol.  Results of the future  research  will 
not be shared with the subjects or their  study doctor, and will not become part of the medical records. 
In the future,  other institutions or future collaborators at or outside of NYU Medical Center may want to 
study a portion  of these  samples,  too. If that happens,  samples would be sent to other places so other  
people interested  in studying these diseases and conditions could do that. The samples  sent  to other 
researchers will be de-identified without  PHI. Samples will be stored for no more than 10 years following  
completion of the study. At the end of the 10-year  period, all samples will be destroyed.
Subjects can request  for withdrawal of samples  at any time by contacting  PI Dr. Berger in writing.   His 
mailing address is Faculty Practice Tower 9 R, 530 First Ave NEW YORK 10016.   Withdrawing 
Authorization only affects uses and sharing  of information after  written request has been received, and 
subject may not withdraw his/her Authorization for uses  or disclosures that have  previously been made 
or must continue  to complete analyses or report data from the research. 
5.RISKS
The potential  risks of phlebotomy are pain, bruising, fainting, or small  infection at puncture site.   The 
procedure to perform endothelial vein  harvesting is identically to the placement  of an IV and routine 
phlebotomy blood draw.  These risks  are pain, bruising, fainting or small  infection at the puncture  site.  
Sterile gloves and sterile  wires are used  to harvest the endothelial cells.  The  wires  are advanced < 5 
inches.  Our lab is partnering with  a lab experienced  with this technique  and has published  extensively 
on the technique for many years14.  In their experience patients complain only on the routine discomfort  
of the IV insertion.   There is a theoretical risk of vein  thrombosis.  In our collaborators experience, in 
over 10 years of sampling, not one thrombosis  has occurred.   To minimize this risk, we will encourage 
arm mobilization post procedure.  We will be using our collaborators protocols and their  consent  
language to ensure adequate patient knowledge  on the risks of the procedure and we will train 
extensively prior to carrying  out this low risk minimally invasive procedure to harvest endothelial veins.  
There lab has also agreed to help mentor and guide us to help with the appropriate and safe 
procurement of endothelial cells when  performing this testing on our initial subject cohort.  
Regarding non-invasive imaging of vascular function,  there are no known risks associated with  taking  
ultrasound pictures.  The cuff on the forearm  and the “pins and needles” sensation may be 
uncomfortable for participants. At their request, the cuff will be deflated and any discomfort should 
disappear within a few seconds. There are no known risks to the arterial tonometry measurements.   
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
Treatment risks:
Aspirin and atorvastatin  are standard medications used for the primary prevention of CVD.  
Nevertheless, there are risks associated with being on aspirin for 2 weeks.  Use of aspirin has known  side 
effects, including stomach  irritation, ulcers, heartburn, easy bruising,  and minor or major bleeding. Thus, 
we are using the lowest clinically effective dose (81mg) and for a very short period of time. 
There is also a risk of being on 40mg of atorvastatin.  There  are known side effects to short term therapy  
which includes  hepatotoxicity,  myositis,  muscle soreness,  stomach irritation and interaction with other 
medications (such  as antifungals) and foods  (such  as grapefruit).   We are using a statin (40mg of 
atorvastatin) which has been widely studied  with a low rate of interactions, hepatotoxicity and incidence 
of myositis. 
Genetic risks:
Genetic testing can generate  information about a subjects’ personal health risks  and can cause or 
increase anxiety, damage  family relationships, and/or compromise insurability, employability and can 
even lead  to discrimination.   In general, results from studies  that use data collected  as part of this 
research will be preliminary, and the clinical implications of any findings may not be understood  for 
years. Therefore, individual study results will not be shared with participants or their physicians.  
Potential loss of confidentiality: Confidentiality  will be preserved to the fullest extent by the research 
team but absolute confidentiality can’t be guaranteed.  All data will be stored with a unique code  that 
does not identify  the participant.  Furthermore,  data will be saved using  a double  electronic lock.  All 
physical data  will also be kept under double  physical  lock.  Access to the data  will be given to the study 
personnel only thereby greatly reducing the possibility  of psychological or social risks  that could arise 
from knowledge of this genetic information, such as risk for employability or insurability or the risk of 
discrimination.
6. BENEFITS
The proposed study will examine the relationships between  psoriatic disease,  endothelial and vascular 
function and markers of thrombotic and CVD  risk.  Further, we will examine  how  treatment with aspirin 
and/or statin will improve  markers of inflammation and vascular function in those  with psoriatic disease.  
The long-term goal is to develop a better  understanding of the role endothelial function and thrombotic 
risk in those  with psoriatic disease.  Furthermore we hope to understand the use of accepted  primary  
prevention CVD medications  in those  that show an elevated risk of CVD through chronic inflammation.  
This will lead  to improved personalized medicine.  There may be no direct benefit  to enrolled  subjects.
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
7. COST
There is no cost to the study participants.   There is also no direct benefit expected from the participation  
in this study.   This study may provide valuable  information to medical/cardiovascular physician  
scientist’s with minimal risk to study subjects.  It  is hoped that knowledge gained will be of benefit  to 
others in the future. 
8. Reimbursement:
Both control subjects and psoriasis subjects may be reimbursed up to 100 dollars.
9.  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
This is a pilot study designed to investigate a novel  technique of endothelial vein sampling, vascular 
function, and assessment of thrombotic risk in a population that is under studied.  
In the first publication of this endothelial vein harvesting technique comparing subjects with and 
without severe decompensated heart failure, an n = 5 per group showed  differences  in markers of 
endothelial dysfunction.15     There is data on imaging  techniques to assess  endothelial dysfunction in 
psoriatic disease.  For  non-invasive  vascular imaging  techniques, previous studies have shown upwards 
of a 35% difference  in measurements of endothelial dysfunction between those  with  psoriasis and 
healthy controls.16  
Specific Power Analysis:
Based on the above  study  evaluating endothelial dysfunction in psoriatic patients,  we have a power  > 
80% with  an alpha level of 0.05 to detect a 35%  difference using  non-invasive  vascular imaging  in those 
with psoriatic disease compared to healthy controls with a goal n = 40 for the psoriatic group and n = 10 
for the control  group  (G*Power 3.1.9.2).  We do not have comparable data on the use of endothelial 
harvesting techniques to compare psoriatic disease to healthy controls.  In previous studies using  
endothelial harvesting to study heart failure, staining for NF-kB (non-specific marker of inflammation 
and endothelial dysfunction) yielded a 16% difference between groups, a narrow standard deviation 
with an effect  size d of 1.2.  Extrapolating this measurement with an n = 40 for psoriatic disease and n = 
10 for controls  gives us > 90%  power to detect baseline endothelial  function differences between groups 
with an alpha  level of 0.05 (G*Power 3.1.9.2).  For the longitudinal component assessing endothelial 
function with endothelial vein harvesting and staining for NF-kB, n = 10 per group and pre and post  
aspirin/atorvastatin and assuming an effect size d of 0.817, we would  have  a 74% power with an alpha 
level of 0.05 to detect a difference between groups (G*Power 3.1.9.2).   We believe given the pilot  
nature of this study, the sample sizes are adequate to detect both cross sectional and longitudinal  
trends which would then  allow for further study  proposals.    
 
10. DATA ANALYSIS
All eligible subjects will be assigned a unique identification number  upon enrollment  in the study.   Initial 
study data will be recorded on a printed form, which will be later converted to electronic database  
(Redcap).  All potential  identifiers will be kept separately  in a safe location by the PI in a locked file 
cabinet in a locked  room.  After verification of entered data  at completion of the study  all potential 
identifiers will be stripped  from  the database.
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
a.Aim 1
To evaluate the association  between  moderate  to severe  psoriatic disease  and measures  of vascular 
function.  Brachial  artery reactivity will be modeled as a continuous variable  in all analyses.  Multiple 
linear regression will be used to estimate the difference  in brachial artery reactivity  between those  with  
psoriasis and age and sex matched controls.  Conventional adjustment  for age and sex will be entered  
first into the model. Additional multivariable adjustment for other relevant  covariates  (e.g., body mass  
index, hypertension, renal  function, LDL cholesterol) will then be performed.
A similar analysis plan will be undertaken for central pulse pressure (CPP) and pulse wave velocity (PWV) 
which will be modeled  as continuous variables  in all analyses.  Multiple linear regression will be used to 
estimate the difference in CPP and PWV between those  with psoriasis and age and sex matched  
controls.  Conventional  adjustment for age and sex will be entered first into the model. Additional 
multivariable adjustment for other  relevant  covariates (e.g.,  body  mass index, hypertension, renal 
function, and LDL cholesterol) will then  be performed.
 
 For endothelial vein analysis quantitative Immunofluorescence will be performed. The human  
endothelial cells will be identified by staining with  polyclonal  rabbit antihuman VE Cadherin antibodies  
(Abcam), followed by secondary biotin-conjugated donkey antirabbit antibodies (Jackson 
ImmunoResearch Laboratories) preconjugated with Streptavidin oregon green (Molecular Probes). 
Nuclear NFkB (fluorescence intensity) and expression of MCP-1,  ICAM-1,  VCAM-1, iNOS, COX-2, eNOS,  P-
eNOS will be assed.   Negative  control slides will be generated by using  preimmune mouse IgG (Sigma  
Chemical) as primary antibodies. Immunofluorescence  analysis will be performed in a blinded  fashion by 
numerically coding each  slide. Staining will be visualized  with ultraviolet light under a fluorescent 
microscope (Nikon  ECLIPSE E600, Melville, NY) using a COHU charge coupled device  camera  (Danville, 
CA). Image processing will be performed by using ImageJ  and expressed  as fluorescence area in µm2. 
Slides will be systematically read left to right  and top to bottom. Only  cells with both cellular and nuclear 
integrity will be analyzed.  Cellular and nuclear integrity will be assessed morphologically. Intact cells  will 
be defined as those  with  continuous, unbroken cell membrane delineated by VE Cadherine  staining,  as 
analyzed by phase  contrast  microscopy.  Intact  nuclei will be defined as well-circumscribed  oval bodies as 
delineated by DAPI staining. 
Additionally, real-time quantitative RT-PCR will be performed. One microgram of total  RNA  will be 
reverse-transcribed to cDNA with Superscript II reverse transcriptase and poly  dT priming  according to 
the manufacturer's instruction (Life Technologies). Real-time quantitative PCRs will be performed with a 
LightCycler thermal cycler (Idaho Technology, Salt Lake City, UT) as previously described.40 We will assess  
mRNA  expression of MCP-1, ICAM-1, VCAM-1, iNOS, COX-2, eNOS (fold change over healthy controls).  
Untargeted RNA-sequencing  will also be performed  for untargeted analysis to identify novel markers of 
psoriatic disease and activity. 
b.Aim 2
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
We will evaluate the association  between  moderate to severe psoriatic disease and measures of 
thrombotic risk.  As in Aim1, linear and nonlinear regression models will be employed to investigate the 
difference in platelet activity  between  those with and without  psoriasis.   This is gauged by monocyte 
platelet activity  (MPA) and assessing monocyte – platelet interaction after adjusting for other covariates 
and applying model selection procedures.  We will collect data  including  maximal aggregation (%), slope 
of the aggregation curve,  and elapsed time  between addition of agonist and onset  of aggregation (lag 
phase). Regression models will unveil how these characteristics are influenced by those exposed  to 
psoriatic disease, adjusting for other covariates.
c.Aim 3
We will then  investigate how traditional medications used  in CVD prevention  such as aspirin and statins 
affect vascular function  and thrombotic risk in those  with moderate to severe psoriatic disease. We will 
assess baseline endothelial vein transcriptome  data, genetic expression for routine  markers of 
endothelial activation such as VCAM-1, ICAM-1, NF-kB  and platelet reactivity data.  Using paired t- tests, 
we will assess the changes to platelet reactivity  and endothelial  function  with the use of aspirin,  aspirin  
plus atorvastatin or atorvastatin therapy.  
11. Safety and Adverse  Events
11.1 Definitions
Unanticipated Problems Involving  Risk to Subjects  or Others
Any incident, experience,  or outcome that meets all of the following  criteria: 
Unexpected in nature,  severity, or frequency  (i.e. not described in study-related documents such 
as the IRB-approved  protocol or consent form, the investigators brochure,  etc)
Related  or possibly related  to participation  in the research (i.e. possibly related means there is a 
reasonable possibility  that the incident experience, or outcome may have been caused by the 
procedures involved in the research)
Suggests  that the research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm (including physical, 
psychological, economic,  or social harm).
Adverse Event
An adverse event (AE) is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that develops or worsens in severity  
during the course of the study.  Intercurrent  illnesses or injuries will be regarded as adverse  events.  
Abnormal results of diagnostic procedures  are considered to be adverse events if the abnormality:
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
results in study withdrawal
is associated  with a serious  adverse event
is associated  with clinical signs or symptoms
leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic  tests
is considered by the investigator to be of clinical  significance
Serious Adverse  Event
Adverse events are classified as serious or non-serious.  A serious adverse event  is any AE that is: 
fatal
life-threatening
requires or prolongs hospital stay
results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity
a congenital anomaly or birth defect
an important medical event
Important medical  events are those that may not be immediately  life threatening,  but are clearly of 
major clinical  significance.   They may jeopardize the subject, and may  require intervention to prevent  
one of the other serious outcomes noted above.  For example,  drug overdose  or abuse, a seizure that 
did not result  in in-patient hospitalization, or intensive treatment of bronchospasm in an emergency 
department would typically be considered serious. 
All adverse events that do not meet any of the criteria for serious will be regarded as non-serious 
adverse events. 
Adverse Event Reporting Period
The study period during which adverse events will be reported is the period from the initiation of any 
study procedures to the end of the study treatment follow-up.  For this study, the study  treatment 
follow-up is defined as 5 days following  the last administration of study treatment.  
Preexisting Condition
A preexisting  condition  is one that is present at the start of the study.  A preexisting  condition  will be 
recorded as an adverse event if the frequency, intensity, or the character of the condition worsens 
during the study period.
General Physical Examination  Findings
At screening, any clinically  significant  abnormality  will be recorded as a preexisting condition.  At the end 
of the study,  any new  clinically significant findings/abnormalities that meet the definition of an adverse 
event will be recorded and documented as an adverse event. 
Post-study Adverse Event
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
All unresolved adverse  events will be followed by the investigator until the events are resolved, the 
subject is lost to follow-up, or the adverse  event  is otherwise explained.  At the last scheduled  visit, the 
investigator will instruct each subject  to report any subsequent event(s)  that the subject, or the 
subject’s personal physician, believes  might reasonably be related to participation in this study.  The 
investigator will notify the IRB of any death or adverse event occurring at any time after a subject has 
discontinued or terminated study participation that may  reasonably be related to this study.  
Abnormal Laboratory Values
A clinical laboratory abnormality will be documented as an adverse event if any one of the following 
conditions is met: 
The laboratory abnormality is not otherwise refuted by a repeat test to confirm  the abnormality
The abnormality  suggests a disease and/or  organ toxicity
The abnormality  is of a degree that requires  active management; e.g. change of dose,  
discontinuation of the drug, more frequent follow-up  assessments, further diagnostic 
investigation, etc.
Hospitalization, Prolonged  Hospitalization or Surgery
Any adverse event that results in hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization will be documented and 
reported as a serious adverse event  unless specifically instructed otherwise in this protocol.  Any  
condition responsible for surgery should  be documented as an adverse event if the condition meets the 
criteria for and adverse event. 
Neither the condition, hospitalization, prolonged hospitalization,  nor surgery are reported as an adverse 
event in the following  circumstances:
Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization  for diagnostic or elective surgical procedures  for a 
preexisting condition.   Surgery  will not be reported as an outcome of an adverse event if the 
purpose of the surgery was elective or diagnostic and the outcome was uneventful.
Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization  required to allow efficacy measurement for the 
study.
Hospitalization or prolonged hospitalization  for therapy of the target disease of the study, unless  
it is a worsening or increase in frequency of hospital admissions as judged by the clinical 
investigator.
11.2 Recording of Adverse  Events
At each contact  with the subject, the investigator  will seek information on adverse events by specific 
questioning and, as appropriate, by examination.   Information on all adverse events will be recorded 
immediately in the source  document, and also in the appropriate adverse event module of the case  
report form  (CRF).  All clearly related signs,  symptoms,  and abnormal  diagnostic procedures results 
should recorded  in the source document, though should  be grouped under one diagnosis.
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
All adverse events occurring during the study period will be recorded.  The clinical course  of each event 
should be followed until resolution,  stabilization,  or until it has been determined that the study 
treatment or participation  is not the cause.  Serious adverse events that are still ongoing  at the end of 
the study  period must be followed  up to determine  the final outcome.  Any serious adverse event  that 
occurs after the study  period  and is considered to be possibly related to the study  treatment or study 
participation should be recorded and reported  immediately.
11.3 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated Problems
Investigators and the protocol sponsor will conform to the adverse event reporting timelines, formats  
and requirements of the various entities to which  they are responsible,  but at a minimum those  events 
that must be reported are those  that are:
related  to study participation,
unexpected, and 
serious or involve risks to subjects or others 
(see definitions,  section 8.1).  
For Narrative Reports of Safety Events
If the report is supplied as a narrative, the minimum  necessary information to be provided at the time  of 
the initial  report includes:
Study identifier
Study Center
Subject number
A description of the event
Date of onsetCurrent status
Whether study treatment was discontinued
The reason why the event is classified as serious
Investigator  assessment of the association 
between the event  and study  treatment
11.3.1 Investigator reporting: notifying the study  sponsor
The following  describes events  that must  be reported to the study sponsor in an expedited  fashion.
Initial Report:  within 24 hours:
The following  events  must be reported to the study sponsor by telephone within 24 hours of awareness 
of the event: 
Unanticipated  problems  related to study participation, 
Serious adverse events,  regardless  of whether they are unexpected. 
  
Follow-up report:  within 48 hours:
As a follow-up to the initial report, within the following  48 hours of awareness of the event,  the 
investigator will provide  further information, as applicable, on the unanticipated  device event or the 
unanticipated problem  in the form of a written  narrative.   This should include  a copy  of the completed 
Unanticipated Problem  form, and any other diagnostic information that will assist the understanding  of 
the event.   Significant new  information on ongoing  unanticipated adverse device effects shall be 
provided promptly to the study sponsor.
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
Other Reportable events:
Deviations from the study protocol
Deviations from the protocol must receive  the investigator’s IRB approval before  they  are 
initiated. Any protocol deviations initiated without  Sponsor and the investigator’s  IRB approval  
that may affect the scientific soundness of the study, or affect the rights, safety, or welfare of 
study subjects, must be reported to the Sponsor  and to the investigator’s IRB as soon  as a 
possible, but no later than 5 working  days  of the protocol deviation.
Withdrawal  of IRB approval
An investigator shall report to the sponsor a withdrawal of approval by the investigator’s  
reviewing IRB as soon as a possible, but no later than  5 working days of the IRB notification  of 
withdrawal of approval.
11.3.2  Investigator reporting: notifying the IRB
Federal regulations require timely  reporting  by investigators to their local IRB of unanticipated problems 
posing risks  to subjects  or others.  The following  describes the NYULMC IRB reporting requirements, 
though Investigators  at participating sites are responsible  for meeting the specific requirements of their 
IRB of record. 
Report Promptly, but no later  than  5 working days:
Researchers are required  to submit reports of the following problems promptly but no later than 5 
working days  from the time the investigator becomes aware  of the event:
Unanticipated problems including adverse events  that are unexpected and related
–Unexpected : An event is “unexpected” when  its specificity and severity are not accurately 
reflected in the protocol-related  documents, such as the IRB-approved  research protocol,  any 
applicable investigator  brochure, and the current IRB-approved informed consent document  
and other relevant sources  of information, such as product labeling and package inserts.  
–Related to the research procedures : An event is related to the research  procedures if in the 
opinion of the principal investigator or sponsor, the event was more likely than  not to be caused 
by the research procedures. 
–Harmful: either caused harm to subjects  or others, or placed them at increased risk
Other Reportable events:
The following  events  also require prompt reporting  to the IRB, though no later than  5 working days:
Complaint of a research subject when  the complaint indicates unexpected risks  or the complaint 
cannot be resolved  by the research team.
Protocol deviations or violations (includes intentional  and accidental/unintentional  deviations  
from the IRB approved protocol)  for any of the following situations: 
–one or more participants were placed at increased risk of harm 
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
–the event  has the potential to occur again
–the deviation  was necessary to protect a subject from immediate harm
Breach  of confidentiality
Incarceration of a participant when the research was not previously approved under Subpart C 
and the investigator believes  it is in the best interest of the subject to remain on the study.
New  Information  indicating a change to the risks or potential benefits of the research, in terms 
of severity or frequency. (e.g.  analysis  indicates  lower-than-expected response  rate or a more 
severe or frequent  side effect;  Other  research finds arm of study has no therapeutic  value;  FDA 
labeling change or withdrawal from market)
Reporting Process
The reportable events noted above will be reported  to the IRB using  the form:  “Reportable Event Form” 
or as a written  report  of the event (including a description of the event with information regarding its 
fulfillment of the above criteria,  follow-up/resolution  and need for revision to consent form and/or 
other study documentation).
Copies of each report  and documentation  of IRB notification and receipt will be kept in the Clinical 
Investigator’s study file.
11.4  Stopping Rules 
In this study, if we encounter any serious adverse advents or > 5 adverse events in general we will 
interrupt the study and monitor for etiology and reasons behind the study.  These events will be 
reported to the IRB as noted above.
11.5  Data and Safety Monitoring Plan
It is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator to oversee the data and safety  monitoring  plan.   The 
PI as well as co-investigator Michael  Garshick  will be conducting the data  safety monitoring  review.  We 
will review  all endothelial sampling  procedures  for any adverse events after each one is performed.    
Important reviewable events include excess  pain, significant bruising, or vagal  responses in addition to 
those listed  above in the adverse  events section.  
All serious adverse events will immediately be reported to the IRB along with  a decision  and plan on how  
to prevent these events in the future as detailed above in the reporting of adverse events section.  A 
routine summary report  will be sent to the IRB every three months to ensure adequate safety.
Safety will be monitored throughout the longitudinal phase of the study.  For the control subjects, 1 
week after endothelial vein sampling,  a follow  up phone call will be performed.  For the longitudinal 
phase of the study with  psoriatic subjects, subjects will get a phone call 1 week after  the initial  
endothelial vein sampling, a follow up visit will occur  at week 2 in the longitudinal cohort, not just for 
endothelial vein sampling  but also to ensure safety and tolerability when  on the aspirin  and/or statin.  
Finally, a phone call will be performed at study week 3, 1 week after  the second endothelial vein 
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
sampling procedure was performed.  On  the consent  form, all participants will have access  to several 
phone numbers with the ability to leave  a message  to talk to study members including the PI, Dr. Jeff 
Berger’s office, and co-investigator  Michael  Garshick’s  telephone  number.  Subjects will be counseled on 
the potential complications  of aspirin and/or  statin therapy as detailed  above  in the consent form and 
that for medical questions  or problems  they deem as emergencies including  severe bleeding  they  should 
phone their own physician  or report to the nearest emergency room .
12.  Data Handling  and Record  Keeping
12.1 Confidentiality
This study  is for research  purposes only.  Individual result will not be given back to study  participant.   
This will include information from final  results of the study,  interim results of the study  and incidental 
findings.  Confidentiality will be preserved to the fullest extent by the research team.  All data  will be 
stored with  a unique code that does not identify  the subject.  Initial study  data  will be recorded on a 
printed form,  which  will be later converted to an IRB approved electronic database, REDCap.  Only study  
personnel will have  access  to this database.  Furthermore,  data will be saved using  a double electronic 
lock.  All physical data will also be kept  under  double physical lock.  
12.2 Confidentiality  and HIPAA
Information about  study  subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the requirements 
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).   We are providing a consent 
form informing the subject of the following: 
What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study
oName, date of birth, MRN
Who will have access to that information and why
oOnly IRB approved  study investigators.  Statisticians will have access  to de-identified 
datasets.
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by regulation, 
retains the ability  to use all information collected  prior to the revocation  of subject authorization.  For 
subjects that have revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, attempts  will be made to obtain 
permission to collect at least vital  status  (i.e. that the subject is alive) at the end of their scheduled study  
period.
Source Documents
Source documents will be stored for a minimum  of 2 years after  study completion.  Source data is all 
information, original records of clinical  findings, observations, or other activities  in a clinical trial 
necessary for the reconstruction  and evaluation of the trial.   Source  data  are contained in source 
documents.  Examples of these original documents, and data records include:  hospital records, clinical 
and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy 
dispensing records, recorded data  from automated  instruments, copies or transcriptions certified after 
verification as being accurate and complete, microfiches, photographic negatives,  microfilm or magnetic  
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
media, x-rays,  subject files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at medico-
technical departments  involved in the clinical trial.
Case Report Forms
The study case report  form (CRF) will be the primary data collection instrument for the study.  All data 
requested on the CRF will be recorded.   All missing  data  will be explained.  If a space on the CRF is left 
blank because the procedure was not done or the question was not asked, “N/D” will be recorded.  If 
the item  is not applicable  to the individual case, “N/A” will be noted.  All entries will be printed  legibly in 
black ink.  If  any entry error has been  made,  to correct such an error, a single straight line will be drawn 
through the incorrect entry and enter the correct data  above it.  All such changes will be initialed and 
dated.  ERRORS WILL NOT  BE ERASED OR WHITED OUT.  For clarification of illegible  or uncertain entries, 
clarification above  the item will be printed then initial and dated.
Signature and Delegation Responsibility Log
A signature  and delegation of responsibility log will be kept.   This log will list all of the study personal as 
well as their  individual responsibilities, study – related tasks, and a description of these activities.  This 
log will also hold a record of the signatures and initials  of various research  staff.   This log will be kept in 
the regulatory binder.     
Records Retention
We will retain case report forms and source documents for 2 years after study completion.    After that,  
primary study  documents  will be discarded and stored in electronic form.
Bibliography
1. Patel  SA, Winkel M, Ali MK, Narayan KM and Mehta NK. Cardiovascular mortality  associated 
with 5 leading risk factors: national and state preventable fractions estimated from survey data. Ann 
Intern Med. 2015;163:245-53.
2. Prodanovich  S, Kirsner RS, Kravetz JD, Ma F, Martinez  L and Federman  DG. Association of 
psoriasis with  coronary artery,  cerebrovascular, and peripheral vascular diseases and mortality. Arch 
Dermatol. 2009;145:700-3.
3. Boehncke WH and Boehncke S. Cardiovascular mortality  in psoriasis  and psoriatic  arthritis:  
epidemiology, pathomechanisms, therapeutic  implications, and perspectives. Curr Rheumatol Rep.  
2012;14:343-8.
4. Parisi R, Symmons DP, Griffiths  CE, Ashcroft DM,  Identification, Management of P and 
Associated ComorbidiTy project t. Global  epidemiology of psoriasis: a systematic review of incidence and 
prevalence. The Journal of investigative dermatology . 2013;133:377-85.
5. Miller IM, Ellervik C, Yazdanyar S and Jemec GB. Meta-analysis of psoriasis, cardiovascular 
disease, and associated risk factors. J Am Acad Dermatol.  2013;69:1014-24.
6. Gelfand JM, Neimann AL, Shin  DB, Wang X, Margolis DJ and Troxel  AB. Risk of myocardial 
infarction in patients with psoriasis.  Jama . 2006;296:1735-41.
7. Eder L and Gladman DD. Atherosclerosis in psoriatic  disease: latest evidence and clinical 
implications. Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis. 2015;7:187-95.
8. Davidovici BB, Sattar N, Prinz J, Puig L, Emery P, Barker JN, van de Kerkhof P, Stahle M, Nestle 
FO, Girolomoni G and Krueger JG. Psoriasis and systemic inflammatory diseases:  potential mechanistic 
Protocol version March  22nd 2018 V10 s17-00692  
links between skin disease and co-morbid conditions. The Journal  of investigative dermatology. 
2010;130:1785-96.
9. Szmitko PE, Wang CH, Weisel RD, de Almeida JR, Anderson TJ and Verma S. New markers of 
inflammation and endothelial cell activation: Part I. Circulation. 2003;108:1917-23.
10. Brezinski  EA, Follansbee MR, Armstrong  EJ and Armstrong  AW.  Endothelial dysfunction and the 
effects of TNF inhibitors on the endothelium in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: a systematic review. 
Current pharmaceutical design.  2014;20:513-28.
11. Takeshita  J, Mohler ER, Krishnamoorthy P, Moore J, Rogers WT, Zhang L, Gelfand  JM and Mehta 
NN. Endothelial cell-, platelet-,  and monocyte/macrophage-derived microparticles are elevated  in 
psoriasis beyond cardiometabolic  risk factors.  Journal  of the American Heart Association.  
2014;3:e000507.
12. Tamagawa-Mineoka R, Katoh N and Kishimoto S. Platelet activation in patients  with  psoriasis:  
increased plasma  levels  of platelet-derived  microparticles  and soluble  P-selectin. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2010;62:621-6.
13. Onat D, Jelic S, Schmidt AM, Pile-Spellman J, Homma  S, Padeletti M, Jin Z, Le Jemtel TH, 
Colombo PC and Feng L. Vascular endothelial sampling  and analysis  of gene transcripts: a new 
quantitative approach to monitor vascular inflammation. J Appl  Physiol (1985) . 2007;103:1873-8.
14. Emin  M, Wang G, Castagna F, Rodriguez-Lopez J, Wahab R, Wang J, Adams  T, Wei Y and Jelic S. 
Increased internalization of complement inhibitor  CD59  may contribute to endothelial inflammation in 
obstructive sleep apnea. Science translational  medicine. 2016;8:320ra1.
15. Colombo PC, Ashton AW, Celaj S, Talreja  A, Banchs JE, Dubois NB, Marinaccio M, Malla S, 
Lachmann J, Ware JA and Le Jemtel TH. Biopsy coupled to quantitative  immunofluorescence: a new 
method to study the human  vascular endothelium. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2002;92:1331-8.
16. Balci DD, Balci A, Karazincir S, Ucar  E, Iyigun  U, Yalcin F, Seyfeli E, Inandi T and Egilmez E. 
Increased carotid artery  intima-media thickness and impaired endothelial function  in psoriasis. J Eur 
Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2009;23:1-6.
17. van der Meij E, Koning GG, Vriens PW, Peeters MF, Meijer CA, Kortekaas KE, Dalman RL, van 
Bockel JH, Hanemaaijer R, Kooistra T, Kleemann  R and Lindeman JH. A clinical evaluation of statin 
pleiotropy: statins selectively and dose-dependently reduce vascular inflammation. PloS one. 
2013;8:e53882.