1 
 Title: Proposal for Retrospective Review of Ketamine Assisted Psychotherapy Program on Mental  
Health at Field Trip Health Centres in North America  
 
Author(s):  Ryan Yermus MD, Field Trip Health ; Chris Lo  PhD, University of Toronto   
Date:  Oct 14 , 2022  
Version : 1.4 
Funding:  Field Trip Health  
 
Introduction  
Psychedelics are again  at the forefront of psychiatric research as the search intensifies for more 
effective interventions to address emotional disturbances  beyond conventional treatment  
(Carhart -Harris et al., 2017). Several  psychedelics have been identified as having breakthr ough 
potential when administered in combination with psychotherapy , includ ing ketamine -assisted 
psychotherapy (KAP) (Ezquerra -Romano et al., 2018; Greenway et al., 2020; Luoma et al., 2020; 
Reiff et al., 2020). Overall t he clinical trials evidence for psychedelic -assisted therapies is  early 
(Wheeler et al., 2020) and m ultiple  randomised controlled trials (RCTs) are underway around 
the world (see clinicaltrials.gov).  
 
Although RCTs  can best answer questions of safety and efficacy, there remains an urgent need 
to clarify the real -world effectiveness of psychedelic -assisted therapies . Field Trip Health 
administers KAP for adult clients coping with mental health. KAP consists of 4 -6 guided 
ketamine sessions with psychotherapy -only visits after dose 1 and 2 and then after every 2 
subsequent doses.  
This proposal is for a retrospective intervention -only effectiveness trial based on review of Field 
Trip Health patient outcomes  across its North American centres . Its objectives are:  1. to 
characterise baseline patient characteristics; 2. to identify treatment variation; 3. to determine 
the trajectory of mental health outcomes; and 4. to estimate effect sizes associated with 
treatment. We hypothesized sustained reductions in depressio n, anxiety, and post traumatic 
stress over time.   
 
Method  
Sample and Procedure  
Patients treated at Field Trip Health are initially assessed by a psychiatrist or a psychiatric nurse 
practitioner to determine appropriateness for treatment. Eligibility criteria are as follows . 
 
• Inclusion Criteria:  
o Written informed consent  
o Over the age o f 18 
o Should be psychologically and medically cleared by a psychiatrist, family 
physician, or treatment team  
o Diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), Bipolar Depression, 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD), and Eating 
2 
 Disorder by a licensed healthcare practitioner (including Field Trip Consultants)  
o A significant history of trauma and/or formal diagnosis of PTSD as per the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5 (DSM 5)  
o Individuals who have received Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) or other 
neuromodulatory treatments like Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS)  
o Individuals reporting suicidal ideation may be included, as suicidal ideation is a 
symptom of a Major Depressive Episode (MDE)  
 
• Exclusion Criteria:  
o Individuals who are unable to consent to the treatment  
o Pregnant women and nursing mothers  
▪ Note that Post Partum Depression (PPD) can be considered on a case -by-
case basis in consultation with the National Medical Director.  
o There is a relative (not absolute) contraindication for individuals with a Body 
Mass Index (BMI) of above 35. These clients must be given thorough 
consideration by the medical team.  
o Any individual who has met DSM 5 criteria for a Substance Use Di sorder in the 
past 3 months.  
▪ Note that patients with alcohol, opioid, benzodiazepine, cocaine, and 
amphetamine use disorders need to go through detox (for 
alcohol/benzodiazepines) and be sober for 4 weeks.  
▪ Note that mild active alcohol, cocaine, and cannab is use can be 
considered on a case -by-case basis at the comfort level of the treatment 
team if the client has demonstrated abstaining or significant reduction of 
use prior to starting treatment.  
o Daily use of moderate to high doses of benzodiazepines  
o Indivi duals who are experiencing psychotic symptoms as part of an MDE (mood 
congruent/ mood incongruent)  
o Psychosis: Schizophrenia, Schizoaffective disorder, Bipolar 1 with psychotic 
features during mania  
o Active Mania: Bipolar 1 (chronic non -disruptive hypomania is an exception at the 
discretion of the consultant)  
o Borderline Personality Disorder  
o Uncontrolled medical disorders  
o Physical conditions with negative interaction with ketamine (e.g., metabolic 
blood disorder)  
o Individuals with symptomatic acute brain injury  within 90 days of serious injury  
o Individuals diagnosed with moderate to severe sleep apnea  
o Individuals who are unable to identify a person or service to assure their safe 
transport to home post treatment  
3 
  
As a part of the intake process  of the program , patients provide written informed consent and 
complete questionnaires  via a Health Insurance P ortability and Accountability Act ( HIPAA) and 
Personal Health Information Protection Act ( PHIPA ) compliant Electronic Medical Records 
(EMR) system .  
 
Questions include information on  demographic s, past medical history as well as standardized 
mental health questionnaires. Patients are also encouraged to complete these scales at several 
additional points  during the treatment program and then at 1, 3, and 6 months after program 
completion. Data  will be reviewed  from patients who were treated with KAP across 11 Field 
Trip Health locations across North America from  March  2020 to June 2022 .  
 
These l ocations includ e:  
1) Toronto, ON , Canada  
2) Vancouver, BC , Canada  
3) Fredericton, NB , Canada  
4) New York City, NY , USA  
5) Atlanta, GA , USA  
6) Chicago, IL , USA 
7) Houston, TX , USA  
8) Seattle, WA, USA  
9) Santa Monica, CA, USA  
10) San Diego, CA, USA  
11) Washington , DC, USA  
 
Data Handling  
The full clinical dataset is managed by a data administrator who will collate the assessments 
and de -identify the data so that no personal  identifying  information remains. This de -identified 
dataset will then be analysed by research team members. Full clin ical data is held on encrypted 
servers with password protection  and accessible only to internal clinical staff. Only research 
team members will be allowed access to the de -identified research dataset which will also be 
kept on password protected servers an d computers.  
 
Should  a data breach or leak should occur, our data mitigation plan is to contact Veritas Internal 
Review Board (IRB)  to inform them of the breach, assess the extent of the breach , and 
determine what steps can be taken to address the situati on. We will also plan to inform 
affected clients of the event and the actions being taken.  
 
Measures of Interest  
a) Demographic variables, including  age and gender.  
b) Medical variables, including main diagnosis  and length of illness.  
c) Treatment -related variables, including number and timing of ketamine  sessions, number 
and timing of psychotherapeutic sessions , and site.  
d) Primary c linical outcomes  were:  
4 
 i. Change in depression at 3 months relative to baseline assessed by 9-item Patient 
Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9) (Kroenke et al., 2001) ;  
ii. Change in anxiety at 3 months relative to baseline assessed by 7-item 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder measure (GAD -7) (Spitzer et al., 2006) ;  
iii. Change in post traumatic stress at 3 months relative to baseline by 6 -item Post 
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Checklist (PCL -6) (Lang & Stein ., 20 05). 
e) Secondary clinical outcomes were:  
i. Change in depression at 1 month relative to baseline  assessed by  PHQ -9;  
ii. Change in anxiety at 1 month relative to baseline assessed by GAD -7; 
iii. Change in post traumatic stress at 1 month relative to baseline assessed by PCL-6; 
iv. Change in depression at 6 months relative to baseline assessed by PHQ -9;  
v. Change in anxiety at 6 months relative to baseline assessed by GAD -7; 
vi. Change in post traumatic stress at 6 month s relative to baseline assessed by PCL -6. 
 
Statistical Analysis  
Descriptive statistics will characteri ze the sample. This will include an analysis of variations in 
treatment delivery and the extent of missing values across measurement occasions. Analysis of 
treatment effects is by intention to treat. The main analysis will be mixed linear model s to plot 
the normative patient trajector ies or growth curve s for each outcome , producing estimates of 
mean changes at each endpoint (i.e. 1, 3, and 6 months) relative to baseline  (Bell et al., 2013). 
Cohen's d will be our standardised measure of effect size. By conven tion, values of d = 0.2, 0.5, 
and 0.8 correspond to small, medium, and large effects.  
Secondary analyses will include evaluating case reductions (identified by validated cut -off 
values relevant to each measure) and proportions of patients reporting minima l clinically 
important differences (MCIDs) at each endpoint relative to baseline. Additional analyses may 
include a sensitivity analysis involv ing multiple imputation of missing values to examine the 
stability of estimates. Demographic, medical, and treatm ent-related variables may be tested as 
predictive factors.  
 
Impact  
Field Trip  Health 's large -scale dataset may provide real -world benchmarks concerning the 
sustained benefits of ketamine -assisted psychotherapy. Given the scale of interest by 
policymakers,  clinicians, researchers, and patients, these findings may be suitable for 
publication in a high impact journal, offering scientific validation of Field Trip  Health 's 
therapeutic product.  
 
References  
Bell, B. A., Ene , M., Smiley, W., & Schoeneberger, J. A. (2013). A multilevel model primer using 
SAS PROC MIXED. In SAS Global Forum (Vol. 433, pp. 1 -19). Columbia, SC, USA: University of 
South Carolina.  
 
5 
 Carhart -Harris, R. L., & Goodwin, G. M. (2017). The therapeutic pot ential of psychedelic drugs: 
Past, present, and future. Neuropsychopharmacology, 42(11), 2105 -2113.  
 
Greenway, K. T., Garel, N., Jerome, L., & Feduccia, A. A. (2020). Integrating psychotherapy and 
psychopharmacology: Psychedelic -assisted psychotherapy and other combined treatments. 
Expert Review of Clinical Pharmacology, 13(6), 655 -670.  
 
Ezquerra -Romano, I. I., Lawn, W., Krupitsky, E., & Morgan, C. J. A. (2018). Ketamine for the 
treatment of addiction: Evidence and potential mechanisms. Neuropharmacology, 1 42, 72 -82. 
 
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J. B. (2001). The PHQ‐9: Validity of a brief depression 
severity measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 16(9), 606 -613.  
 
Lang, A. J., & Stein, M. B. (2005). An abbreviated PTSD checklist for use as a screening 
instrument in primary care. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43(5), 585 -594.  
 
Luoma, J. B., Chwyl, C., Bathje, G. J., Davis, A. K., & Lancelotta, R. (2020). A meta -analysis of 
placebo -controlled trials of psychedelic -assisted therapy. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 52(4), 
289-299.  
 
Reiff, C. M., Richman, E. E., Nemeroff, C. B., Carpenter, L. L., Widge, A. S., Rodriguez, C. I., ... & 
Work Group on Biomarkers and Novel Tr eatments, a Division of the American Psychiatric 
Association Council of Research. (2020). Psychedelics and psychedelic -assisted psychotherapy. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 177(5), 391 -410.  
 
Spitzer, R. L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J. B., & Löwe, B. (2006) . A brief measure for assessing 
generalized anxiety disorder: The GAD -7. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166(10), 1092 -1097.  
 
Wheeler, S. W., & Dyer, N. L. (2020). A systematic review of psychedelic -assisted psychotherapy 
for mental health: An evaluation of  the current wave of research and suggestions for the future. 
Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice, 7(3), 279.  
 