CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
Stud
y Title:  A Phase 1b/2 Study to Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability and 
Pharmacokinetics of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine (IMGN853) in Combination with Bevacizumab, Carboplatin, Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin, Pembrolizumab, or Bevacizumab  + Carboplatin, in Adults with Folate Receptor 
Alpha Positive Advanced Epithelial Ovarian Cancer, Primary 
Peritoneal Cancer, or Fallopian Tube Cancer  
Study Number IMGN853-0402 
Study Phase: 1b/2
Product Name:  Mirvetuximab soravtansine (IMGN853) 
Indication: Folate Receptor Alpha Positive Advanced Epithelial Ovarian Cancer, Primary Peritoneal Cancer, or Fallopian Tube Cancer 
Investigators: Multicenter  
Sponsor: ImmunoGen, Inc.  
830 Winter Street  
Waltham, MA 02451 USA  
Sponsor Contact: 
Phone:E-mail:
Original Protocol Date:  11 Aug 2015 
Amendment No. and Date: Amendment 1: 23 Sep 2015 
Amendment 1A: 11 Feb 2016 Amendment 1B: 13 May 2016 Amendment 2: 21 Jun 2016 Amendment 3: 26 Jun 2017 Amendment 4: 14 Nov 2017 Amendment 5: 21 Sep 2018 
Conf
idential Statement  
This document is the proprietary and confidential property of ImmunoGen, Inc.  NCT #[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]

mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
2 SPONSOR SIGNATURE PAGE  
         
830 Winter Street  
Waltham, MA 02451  
United States of America  
Tel:  
FAX:  
 

mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
3 INVESTIGATOR’S AGREEMENT  
I have received and read the Investigator Brochure for mirvetuximab soravtansine (IMGN853). 
I have read the ImmunoGen Protocol IMGN853-0402 and agree to conduct the study as outlined and in conformance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and applicable regulatory requirements. I agree to maintain the confidentiality of all information received or developed in connection 
with this protocol. 
    Printed Name, Institution, and Address of Investigator   Signature of Investigator   Date  
    
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
4 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
Abbreviation or 
Specialist Term  Explanation  
ADA  Anti-drug antibody 
ADC  Antibody drug conjugate 
ADCC  Antibody-dependent cell- mediated cytotoxicity  
AE Adverse event  
AESI  Adverse events of special interest  
AIBW  Adjusted ideal body weight 
ALT  Alanine aminotransferase  
ANC  Absolute neutrophil count 
aPTT  Activated partial thromboplastin time  
ASCO  American Society of Clinical Oncology  
AST  Aspartate aminotransferase 
AUC  Area under the time-concentration curve 
BUN Blood urea nitrogen 
CAP  College of American Pathologists 
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations 
CIOMS  Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences 
CL Clearance  
CLIA  Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments 
Cmax Maximum plasma concentration  
CNS  Central nervous system  
CR Complete response/remission  
CRC  Cohort Review Committee  
CRF  Case report form  
CRO  Clinical Research Organization  
CT Computed Tomography 
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 
DLT  Dose limiting toxicity  
DM4  N2’-[4-[(3-carboxypropyl)dithio]-4-methyl-1-oxo-2-sulfopentyl]- N2’-
deacetylmaytansine  
DM4 -Me Methylated -N2’-[4-[(3-carboxypropyl)dithio]-4-methyl-1-oxo-2-
sulfopentyl]- N2’-deacetylmaytansine 
DOR  Duration of response 
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
5 Abbreviation or 
Specialist Term  Explanation  
ECHO Echocardiogram 
ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group 
eCRF  Electronic case report form  
EOC  Epithelial ovarian cancer  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration 
FIH First in human  
FRα Folate receptor α  
GCIG  Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup  
GCP  Good clinical practice  
GI Gastrointestinal 
HFS Hand -foot syndrome 
HGSOC  High -grade serous ovarian carcinoma 
IBW  Ideal body weight  
IC50 50% inhibitory concentration 
ICF Informed consent form 
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
IEC Independent ethics committee 
Ig Immunoglobulin 
IHC Immunohistochemistry  
IMGN  ImmunoGen 
IMGN853 Mirvetuximab soravtansine 
INR International normalized ratio  
irAE  Immune -related adverse event  
IRB Institutional review board  
irRECIST  Immune-related Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 
IV Intravenous  
LDH  Lactic acid dehydrogenase 
mAb  Monoclonal antibody 
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MRI  Magnetic resonance imaging  
mRNA Messenger ribonucleic acid  
MTD  Maximum tolerated dose 
MUGA  Multigated acquisition  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
6 Abbreviation or 
Specialist Term  Explanation  
NCI National Cancer Institute  
NSCLC  Non-small cell lung cancer  
ORR  Objective response rate  
PD Progressive disease  
PD-1 Programmed death receptor -1 
PD-L1 Programmed cell death ligand 1  
PD-L2 Programmed cell death ligand 2 
PET Positron emission tomography 
PFS Progression- free survival  
PFT Pulmonary function tests 
PgP P-glycoprotein 
PK Pharmacokinetics  
PO Per orem (by mouth)  
PR Partial response/remission  
PRES  Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome 
PS Performance status  
PT Prothrombin time  
PTT partial thromboplastin time  
Q2W  Every 2 weeks 
Q3W  Every 3 weeks 
RBC  Red blood cell (count) 
RP2D Recommended Phase 2 dose 
RECIST  Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors  
SAE  Serious adverse event  
SD Stable disease  
SLD  Sum of the longest diameters  
SUSAR  Suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction 
t½ Half-life 
T1DM  Type 1 diabetes mellitus  
T3 Triiodothyronine 
T4 Thyroxine 
TEAE Treatment -emergent adverse event  
tmax Time that maximum plasma concentration occurs  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
7 Abbreviation or 
Specialist Term  Explanation  
TSH  Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
ULN  Upper limit of the normal range 
UPC  Urine protein creatinine ratio  
US United States  
Vss Volume of distribution at steady state  
WBC  White blood cell (count)  
WCBP  Woman of childbearing potential 
WHO -DD World Health Organization – Drug Dictionary 
WNL  Within normal limits  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
8 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
Title of Study:  A Phase 1b/2 Study to Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability and Pharmacokinetics of 
Mirvetuximab soravtansine (IMGN853) in Combination with Bevacizumab, Carboplatin, Pegylated 
Liposomal Doxorubicin, Pembrolizumab, or Bevacizumab + Carboplatin in Adults with Folate Receptor Alpha Po sitive Advanced Epithelial Ovarian Cancer, Primary Peritoneal Cancer, or Fallopian Tube 
Cancer  
Study center(s): approximately 16 in the United States (US), Spain, Belgium, and Canada  
Study period (months): approximately 48 months 
(including treatment and 30 -Day Follow -up visit)  
First patient enrolled: December 2015  Phase of development: 1b/2  
Purpose/rationale: Mirvetuximab soravtansine, also known as IMGN853, is a targeted antibody -drug 
conjugate (ADC) that binds with high affinity to folate receptor alpha (FRα), a glycophosphatidylinositol-
linked protein that shows limited normal tissue expression and high expression in several solid tumors 
(Kelemen 2006), most notably serous epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) ( Miotti 1987 , O’Shannessy  
2013). Mirvetuximab soravtansine consists of a humanized anti -FRα m onoclonal antibody (mAb) 
attached via a cleavable disulfide containing linker to the cytotoxic maytansinoid DM4. Once released within the target cell, DM4 acts as an anti- mitotic agent that inhibits tubulin polymerization and 
microtubule assembly, resulting in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.  
In vitro studies have demonstrated that mirvetuximab soravtansine binds cell surface FRα with high apparent affinity (≤  0.1 nM) and shows potent (50% inhibitory concentration ≤  1 nM) and selective 
cytotoxicity against  tumor cells expressing FRα. Mirvetuximab soravtansine demonstrates significant 
activity against FRα -positive xenografts, with partial and complete remissions observed in ovarian 
models ( Ab 2015). The in vitro and in vivo pharmacologic properties of mirvetuximab soravtansine, 
along with the high expression of FRα in EOC, provided the rationale for exploring mirvetuximab soravtansine in a clinical setting.  
In the first- in-human (FIH) Phase 1 study (Study IMGN853- 0401) of single- agent mirvetuximab 
soravtansine, objective responses were observed in patients with heavily pretreated FRα -positive EOC 
(≥ 25% of cells with ≥  2+ staining intensity by immunohistochemistry [IHC]) and endometrial cancer. As 
of February 2018, mirvetuximab soravtansine had a 27%  objective response rate (ORR) (95% CI, 
18.5%, 37.1%) and median progression- free survival (PFS) of 4.2 months (95%  CI, 3.7, 5.4  months) in 
the 96  patients with platinum- resist ant EOC in the patient expansion cohort in Study 0401. The ORR 
was 47% (95% CI, 30.4%, 64.5%) and the median PFS was 6.7 months (95% CI, 4.1, 8.3 months) in 
the subset of 36 patients with FRα -positive (medium/high expression [≥  50% of cells with ≥  2+ 
inten sity]) platinum -resistant EOC with one to three prior regimens treated as part of a 96-patient 
expansion cohort in Study 0401 (clinical study report  Table 16). Similarly, results of a pooled analysis of 
113 patients showed an ORR of 30% (95% CI, 21.8%, 39.4%), a median PFS of 4.3 months (95% CI, 
3.9, 5.4), and a duration of response of 19.3 weeks (95% CI, 18, 34 weeks ). Treatment -related adverse 
events (AEs) occurring in >  20% of patients in this cohort included diarrhea, blurred vision, fatigue, 
nausea, and increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and were mostly low grade. Blurred vision was likely related to the development of corneal keratopathy, transient microcysts that form in the 
corneal epithelium, causing temporary symptoms.  
Bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin are currently in use for the treatment of 
EOC. Doublet combinations of mirvetuximab soravtansine with bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin have all demonstrated additive activity in nonclinical models.  
Pembrolizumab, an anti -programmed death receptor -1 (PD -1) mAb, is approved for the treatment of 
melanoma, non –small- cell lung cancer, head and neck squamous cell cancer, classical Hodgkin 
lymphoma, urothelial carcinoma, microsatellite instability high solid tumors, and gastric/gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma and has shown preliminary anti -tumor activity as a 
single agent in EOC ( Varga  2015).  
The mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab and mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin dose escalation cohorts in this study have been completed, with dose levels explored to the highest 
allowable per this protocol. The safety and tolerability data show that each of the doublets was 
generally well tolerated; no new safety signals were observed at the highest dose levels explored. The 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
9 safety profile is consistent with the reference safety profile information for each drug and in line with 
expectations for a population of previously treated ovarian cancer patients.  
Furthermore, initial signs of anti -tumor activity were seen both doublet combinations explored in this 
study. The ORR and the median PFS observed in the mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab 
combination across all dose levels and FRα expression levels (n = 14) were 29% (95% CI, 8, 58) and 
9.5 months (95%  CI, 3.5, 15.2), respectively ( O’Malley  2017) . The observed anti -tumor activity in a 
heavily pre- treated (median of 6 prior lines of therapy [range, 2- 8]), platinum- resistant population 
compares favorably with what has been demonstrated in less heavily pre- treated, platinum- resistant 
ovarian cancer patients following treatment with bevacizumab + standard chemotherapy ( Pujade-
Lauraine  2014). The ORR and median PFS observed in the mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin 
combination across all dose levels and FRα expression levels (n = 17) were 65% (95% CI, 38, 86) and 
12.1 months (95% CI, 9.0, 15.0) ( O’Malley 2017). The observed anti- tumor activity in a pre- treated 
(median 3 prior regimens  [range 1- 5]), plat inum -sensitive (72%  with a PFS 6 -12 months) population 
compared favorably with what has been demonstrated in standard platinum- based doublets in a 
recurrent platinum- sensitive setting ( Aghajanian 2012, Coleman 2017, and Gladieff  2012).  
Bevacizumab, in combination with carboplatin- based doublets, has been approved for frontline 
treatment of patients with EOC in the European Union since 2011; more recently (December  2016) the 
use of bevacizumab + carboplatin– based doublet regimens have been approved in the US for the 
treatment of patients with recurrent, platinum- sensitive EOC. These approvals have supported an 
increased and broader use of triplet therapy for platinum- sensitive EOC. Therefore, given the 
preliminary safety and initial anti -tumor activity of mirvetuximab soravtansine both with bevacizumab 
and with carboplatin, and the increased use of bevacizumab and carboplatin in triplet therapy, this study will explore the safety and anti- tumor activity of the triplet therapy mirvetuximab soravtansine + 
bevacizumab + carboplatin in patients with recurrent platinum- sensitive EOC. Because of the 
successful full dose experiences with each of the combination partners as doublets with mirvetuximab soravtansine, the triplet therapy will initially explore a combination using full doses of all 3 agents. The 
dose will be explored in a stepwise manner, with a pause to review safety data after the first six and 
then 12 patients have completed their first cycle of treatment.  
The study is designed to establish the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and determine the 
recommended Phase 2 dose (RP2D) of mirvetuximab soravtansine when administered in combination with either bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or pembrolizumab. The study will also investigate activity signals and safety and tolerability of a triplet dose regimen of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine + bevacizumab + carboplatin. All study treatments will be administered intravenously (IV) 
to adult patients with FR α-positive ovarian cancer, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube cancer. 
The safety, tolerability, immunogenicity of mirvetuximab soravtansine, and preliminary anti -tumor 
activity of mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, pembrolizumab, or bevacizumab + carboplatin will be characterized. The pharmacokinetics (PK) and immunogenicity of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be characterized along 
with bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin concentrations. Pembrolizumab 
concentrations may be evaluated, if warranted, because of a safety signal.  
Primary Objectives  
Dose Escalation (Regimens A Through D)  
• Evaluate the safety and tolerability of mirvetuximab soravtansine when given in 
combination with bevacizumab, carboplatin, or pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or 
pembrolizumab (Regimens A, B, C and D, respectively) in patients with EOC, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube cancer  
Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E (Triplet) 
• Assess preliminary response- based anti -tumor activity of mirvetuximab soravtansine when 
administered in combination with bevacizumab (Regimen A) or pembrolizumab 
(Regimen D) and in combination with bevacizumab and carboplatin (Regimen E) in 
patients with EOC, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube cancer  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
10 Primary Endpoints  
Dose Escalation (Regimens A Through D)  
• Treatment -emergent AEs, laboratory test results, physical examination, electrocardiograms 
(ECGs), and vital signs  
Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E (Triplet) 
• Objective response rate, defined as percentage of patients with confirmed response 
(complete response/remission [CR] + partial response/remission [PR]) as assessed by 
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) Version 1.1  
Secondary Objectives  
• Evaluate the safety and tolerability of mirvetuximab soravtansine when administered in combination with bevacizumab or pembrolizumab (Dose Expansion, Regimens A and D, respectively) and in combination with bevacizumab and carboplatin (Regimen E [Triplet]) in 
patients with EOC, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube cancer  
• Assess preliminary response- based anti -tumor activity of the combination Regimens (Dose 
Escala tion, Regimens A through D)  
• Assess PFS  
• Measure duration of response (DOR): the time from first objective response (CR/PR) to the 
time of progressive disease (PD) among those who have achieved a PR or CR  
• Assess Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup (GCIG) CA125 response rate of the combination Regimens  
• Characterize PK of mirvetuximab soravtansine when used in combination Regimens  
• Evaluate bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin concentrations when administered in combination with mirvetuximab soravtansine  
• Characterize immunogenicity of mirvetuximab soravtansine  
Secondary Endpoints  
• Treatment -emergent AEs, changes in laboratory test results, physical examination, ECGs, 
and vital signs (Dose Expansion [Regimens A and D] and Regimen E [Triplet]).  
• Objective response rate, defined as percentage of patients with confirmed response (CR + 
PR) as assessed by RECIST Version 1.1 (Dose Escalation, Regimens A through D)  
• Progression- free survival, defined as time from first dose to PD or death, whichever oc curs 
first 
• Duration of response, defined as the time from first objective response (CR/PR) to the time 
of PD among those who have achieved a PR or CR  
• Number of patients with GCIG CA125 criteria clinical responses  
• Mirvetuximab soravtansine PK parameters for intact ADC, total antibody, DM4, and S -
methyl DM4 include, but are not limited to, Cycle 1 and Cycle 3 maximum plasma concentration (C
max), area under the time- concentration curve (AUC), terminal half -life (t ½), 
clearance (CL), volume of distribution at  steady state (V ss), and time that C max occurs  (tmax) 
• Concentration data of bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin will be measured  before and after bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin infusions (Cycle 1 through Cycle 6)  
• Immunogenicity: presence of anti- drug antibodies to mirvetuximab soravtansine   
Exploratory Objectives  
• Assess any association between FRα expression levels and clinical response  
• Identify or evaluate potential biomarkers in blood and tumor ti ssue that might predict 
response to each of the four combinations  
• Evaluate pembrolizumab concentrations if warranted by a safety signal (Regimen D only)  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
11 • Assess anti -tumor activity of the combination with pembrolizumab per immune- related 
RECIST ( irRECIST) (Regimen D only)  
Exploratory Endpoints  
• Correlation of FRα expression, by IHC (protein), quantitative reverse transcriptase -
polymerase chain reaction (mRNA), or other quantitative methods, to clinical endpoints  
• Measure biomarkers in blood and tumor tissue including, but not limited to, mutational and 
genomic alterations of tumor samples; expression and activation of oncogenic genes and pathways in tumor samples; expression and polymorphism of drug transporters such as 
multidrug- resistance prote in-1 (p-glycoprotein); the genotype of FcγR; expression and of 
immune- related genes and gene signatures (Regimen D only), and infiltration of tumor -
related immune cells (Regimen D only)  
• Concentration data for pembrolizumab if warranted by a safety signal (Regimen D only)  
• Evaluate efficacy endpoints per irRECIST (Regimen D only)  
– Progression- free survival, ORR, and DOR per irRECIST are defined as specified for the 
respective endpoints using RECIST Version 1.1 above, except that a confirmation 
assessment of PD (at least 4 weeks after the initial PD assessment) is required for 
subjects who remain on treatment after documented PD per RECIST Version 1.1. Subjects who discontinue treatment after documented PD assessment per RECIST Version 1.1 will be counted as having PD on the date of the documented PD assessment.  
Note: Unless specifically warranted by relevance to safety or efficacy endpoints, the exploratory 
endpoints will not be reported in the clinical study report.  
Number of patients (planned): It is estim ated that approximately 311 to 355 patients will be enrolled 
into the study.  
Dose Escalation Phase:  
• Regimen A (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab): approximately 16 patients ; 
additional patients will be recruited to ensure that 10 patients are treated at the MTD  
• Regimen B (mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin): approximately 22 patients; 
additional patients will be recruited to ensure that 10 patients are treated at the MTD  
• Regimen C (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pegylated liposomal doxorubicin ): 
approximately 22 patients; additional patients, up to 10 patients, will be recruited and treated at 
the MTD  
• Regimen D (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab): approximately 16 pat ients; 
additional patients will be recruited to ensure that 10 patients are treated at the MTD  
Dose Expansion Phase:  
Regimen A: mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab  
Patients enrolled in this phase may be assigned to one of three Dose Expansion Cohorts according to previous exposure to bevacizumab as follows:  
1. Dose Expansion Cohort 1: bevacizumab naïve; will enroll approximately 20 patients  
2. Dose Expansion Cohort 2: bevacizumab pretreated; may enroll approximately 35 patients  
3. Dose Expansion Cohort 3:  patients with at least one but no more than three prior systemic 
treatment regimens, where prior regimens may have included bevacizumab;  may enroll 
approximately 60 patients  
Regimen D: mirvetuximab soravtansine +pembrolizumab  
The Dose Expansion phase will enroll sufficient patients to ensure that 35 patients are FRα ≥  50% of 
tumor staining at ≥  2 + intensity  
Regimen E (Triplet): mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab + carboplatin  
This cohort will enroll approximately 50 patients to ensure that 40 patients  will be treated at the MTD.  
The estimated study duration is approximately 48 months for patient accrual, dosing, treatment and 
follow -up. 
Study Design Overview and Schema: This is an open label, Phase 1 /2b, non -randomized 
combination study of mirvetuximab soravtansine with bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
12 doxorubicin, pembrolizumab, or bevacizumab + carboplatin in adult patients with FRα -positive 
advanced EOC, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube cancer.  
The treatment regimens and planned dose levels for the dose escalation phase of the study are 
outlined below and in Table  1, Table  2, Table 3 , and Table 4 .  
Intermediate or lower dose levels of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, bevacizumab, or carboplatin may 
be explored if dose- limiting toxicities (DLTs) can be attributed to their mechanism of action. Higher 
doses of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (up to 50 mg/m2) and carboplatin (AUC6) also may be 
considered. The maximum allowable doses of each study drug are as follows: mirvetuximab soravtansine 6.0 mg/kg adjusted ideal body weight (AIBW) every 3 weeks (Q3W), mirvetuximab 
soravtansine 6.0 mg/kg every 4 weeks (Q4W), bevacizumab 15 mg/kg Q3W, carboplatin AUC6 Q3W, 
pegylated liposomal doxorubicin 50 mg/m
2 Q4W, and pembrolizumab 200 mg Q3W.  
If a patient is eligible for more than one Regimen, the investigator will assign the patient to a Regimen on the basis of the patient’s medical history, prior treatment, and/or patient preference.  
Regimen A: mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab administered on Day 1 of each 21- day cycle  
Regimen B:  mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin administered on Day 1 of each 21- day cycle  
Regimen C: mirvetuximab soravtansine + pegylated liposomal doxorubicin administered on Day 1 of 
each 28- day cycle  
Regimen D:  mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab administered on Day 1 of each 21- day 
cycle  
A triplet cohort will be opened because enrollment and safety from Regimens A and B have been 
established, and Regimen A (Dose Expansion Cohorts) enrollment is currently ongoing. The planned 
doses for patients receiving the triplet dose (Regimen E) are derived from all available data in Regimens A and B and shown in Table  5 below.  
Regimen E : mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab + carboplatin administered on Day 1 of each 
21-day cycle  
Table  1: Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen A  
Dose Level  Regimen A  
Mirvetuximab Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)b Bevacizumabc 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)  
-1 4 15 
1 5 15 
2 6 15 
a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW. Maximum allowable dose is 6 mg/kg AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 3 weeks. 
c Maximum allowable dose of bevacizumab is 15 mg/kg.  
Table  2: Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen B  
Dose Level  Regimen B  
Mirvetuximab Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)b Carboplatinc 
(AUC, D1q3W)  
-1 4 AUC4  
1 5 AUC4  
2 5 AUC5  
3 6 AUC5  
a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW. Maximum allowable dose is 6 mg/kg AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 3 weeks.  
c Maximum allowable dose of carboplatin is AUC6, subject  to Cohort Review Committee review.  
 
  
 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
13  
Table  3: Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen C  
Dose Level  Regimen C  
Mirvetuximab Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q4W)b  Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicinc 
(mg/m2, D1q4W)  
-1 4 30 
1 5 30 
2 5 40 
3 6 40 
a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW. Maximum allowable dose is 6 mg/kg AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 4 weeks.  
c The approved dose of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin for ovarian cancer is 50 mg/m2; however, a decrease 
in the incidence of hand-foot syndrome was observed at a dose of 40 mg/m2 without significant loss in 
efficacy. Maximum allowable dose is 50 mg/m2, subject to Cohort Review Committee review.  
Table  4: Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen D  
Dose Level  Regimen D  
Mirvetuximab Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)b Pembrolizumabc 
(mg, D1q3W)  
-1 4 200 
1 5 200  
2 6 200 
a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW. Maximum allowable dose is 6 mg/kg AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 3 weeks.  
c Maximum allowable dose of pembrolizumab is 200 mg.  
Table  5: Planned Dose Levels (Triplet Cohort) for Regimen E  
Dose Level  Regimen E  
Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)b Bevacizumab  
(mg/kg, D1q3W)  Carboplatinc 
(AUC, D1q3W)  
-2 5 15 AUC 4  
-1d 6 15 AUC 4  
-1e 5 15 AUC 5  
1 6 15 AUC 5  
a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 3 weeks.  
c Carboplatin dose may be reduced to AUC4 if safety data from the first six or 12 patients suggest that the 
triplet dose is not being tolerated.  
d Dose reduction of carboplatin due to carboplatin-associated toxicity.  
e Dose reduction of mirvetuximab soravtansine due to mirvetuximab soravtansine –associated toxicity. 
The starting dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be 5 mg/kg, with the dose calculated using AIBW, 
which is one dose level lower than the RP2D (6 mg/kg using AIBW) defined in the FIH Study  IMGN853-
0401. All mirvetuximab soravtansine doses will be calculated according to AIBW. Regimens A through D, inclusive, will be evaluated in parallel and independently.  
This Phase 1b study comprises a Dose Escalation phase followed by an MTD Expansion phase to further characterize the safety profile and confirm the MTD as the RP2D. A triplet Regimen (Regimen E: mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab + carboplatin) will be opened to evaluate the 
safety and tolerability and to assess any early signs of activity in patients dosed with the combination Regimen.  
The Dose Escalation phase will follow a standard 3 + 3 cohort design. No intra- patient dose- escalation 
will be allowed. The MTD will be determined from the assessment of DLTs during the first treatment cycle ( Table 6
). The primary aim of the Dose Escalation phase is to evaluate the safety and tolerability 
of the four dosing Regimens, and to identify the MTD and characterize the PK of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine, bevacizumab,  carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin. The PK profile of 
pembrolizumab may be characterized if warranted because of a safety signal.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
14 Table  6: DLT Definitions  
Toxicity  DLT Definition Criteriaa 
Dose delays  Failure to meet re -treatment criteria within the specified time frame  
Hematology  • CTCAE Grade 4 neutropenia ≥  7 days  
• CTCAE ≥ Grade 3 febrile neutropenia, defined as ANC < 1,000/mm3 with 
a single temperature reading of > 38.3°C or sustained temperature of 
≥ 38°C for > 1 ho ur 
• CTCAE Grade 3 thrombocytopenia, associated with clinically significant bleeding that requires transfusion therapy  
• CTCAE Grade 4 thrombocytopenia  
Non- hematologic and 
other DLTs  • CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 nausea or vomiting despite the use of optimal 
anti-emetic treatments  
• CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 diarrhea despite the use of optimal anti -
diarrheal treatments  
• CTCAE Grade 2 diarrhea lasting > 14 days (Regimen D only)  
• CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 ocular AEs  
• CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 pneumonitis  
• Other non- hematologic toxicities of CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 except for 
the following:  
– AEs related to underlying disease.  
– CTCAE Grade 3 fatigue.  
– Isolated, asymptomatic Grade 3 abnormalities in biochemistry laboratory values that last for ≤  7 days. This includes electrolyte 
abnormalities that respond to medical intervention.  
a An AE meeting criteria is considered a DLT if the event occurred during the first cycle.  
For any dose- limiting hepatic toxicity, evaluations should be performed to determine the underlying etiology and 
rule out drug-induced liver inju ry (Hy’s Law).  
ANC = absolute neutrophil count, CTCAE = Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events.  
To better characterize safety, 10 patients may receive mirvetuximab soravtansine and the assigned 
combination agent at the MTD established for Regimens A, B, C, and D.  
The Dose Expansion phase of the trial, which is planned for mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination 
with bevacizumab (Regimen A) and for mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with pembrolizumab 
(Regimen D), will open after the Cohort Review Committee (CRC) reviews safety data from Dose 
Escalation and agrees the dose is safe to proceed to Expansion. Dose Expansion will commence enrollment pending Sponsor decision. In  addition, the CRC will assess safety of the triplet after six and 
then 12 patients have completed Cycle 1 at each dose levels evaluated.  
 Regimen A (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab)  
Patients in the dose expansion phase may be assigned according to prior exposure to bevacizumab 
and disease diagnosis into three dose expansion cohorts as follows:  
1. Dose Expansion Cohort 1: bevacizumab naïve; will enroll approximately 20 patients  
2. Dose Expansion Cohort 2: bevacizumab pretreated; may enroll 35 patients  
3. Dose Expansion Cohort 3: with one to three prior  systemic therapies, and one prior therapy 
could hav e been bevacizumab; may enroll 60 patients  
Regimen D (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab): 
The Dose Expansion phase will enroll sufficient patients such that 35 patients are FRα ≥  50% of tumor 
staining at ≥  2+ intensity in the Dose Expansion phase.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
15 The aims of the Dose Expansion phase are to further evaluate the safety, tolerability, and anti -tumor 
activity of mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with bevacizumab or pembrolizumab.  
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events ( CTCAE) 
Version 4.03 will be used to grade AEs.  
Regimen E (triplet dose: mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab + carboplatin) 
This cohort may enroll up to approximately 50 patients, as exploration of alterative doses is required to 
enroll approximately 40 planned patients to be dosed at the maximum dose level determined to be 
safe.  
The aims of this cohort are to evaluate safety and tolerability of the combination and to assess for early 
signs of activity. The starting doses used in this  cohort will be derived from all evaluable data from 
Regimens A and B. The MTD will be determined from the assessment of DLTs during the first 
treatment cycle ( Table  6). 
Initially, six patients will be dosed at the target triplet dose ( Table 5 ). If there are <  2 Cycle 1 DLTs 
(total), another six patients will be dosed. If there are <  4 Cycle 1 DLTs (total) in all 12 patients, the 
remaining 28 patients will be enrolled for a total of approximately 40 planned patients.  
If either ≥  2 DLTs or ≥  4 DLTs are observed in the first six or 12 patients, respectively, either the 
mirvetuximab soravtansine dose or the carboplatin dose will be reduced. The reduced triplet doses will 
always be explored in the same step- wise manner as detailed above. A total of 12 patients (6 + 6 
patients) will be assessed at a dose before the remaining 28 patients being enrolled. The decision of 
whether to reduce the mirvetuximab soravtansine dose or the carboplatin dose will be made according 
to the DLTs observed, and the new dose levels will be explored as follows:  
a. For DLTs that cannot solely be attributable to mirvetuximab soravtansine, the carboplatin dose will be reduced.  
b. For DLTs that are solely attributable to mirvetuximab soravtansine, the mirvetuximab soravtansine dose will be reduced.  
If after the doses of carboplatin (a) or mirvetuximab s oravtansine (b) are reduced, ≥  2 DLTs or 
≥ 4 DLTs are observed in the first six or 12 patients, respectively, the dose of the other agent 
(mirvetuximab soravtansine [for a] or carboplatin [for b]) will also be reduced. The triplet dose with the reduced mir vetuximab soravtansine and carboplatin doses will then be evaluated.  
   
 
 
 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
16 Study Design Schema  
 
a Enrolled 46 patients to ensure 35 patients with tumors expressing FRα at ≥ 50% of tumor staining at intensity 
≥ 2+ and 11 patients with a FRα 25%-49% of tumor staining at intensity ≥  2+. 
b Enroll approximately 50 patients to evaluate 40 patients at the MTD.  
Study Eligibility Criteria:  
Inclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria for All Patients (Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion, Regimen -Specific)  
1. Pathologically documented advanced EOC (including primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian 
tube cancer).  
2. Female and ≥  18 years of age at the time of the first screening visit.  
3. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0 or 1.  
4. Measurable disease:  
a. Dose Escal ation: Patients may have measurable or non- measurable disease.  
b. Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E (Triplet): Patients must have at least one lesion that meets the definition of measurable disease according to RECIST Version  1.1. 
5. Willing to provide an archival tumor tissue block or slides, or a new biopsy if archival tumor 
tissue  is unavailable.  
a. Regimen D only: Patients must be willing to undergo two tumor biopsy collections using a 
non-significant  risk procedure (see Section  2.1.1). The first biopsy will be taken before the 
first dose of study treatment and the second, taken on Cycle 2 Day 8 (± 3 days).   
6. Confirmation of FRα positivity by IHC. If the archival tumor tissue does not meet FRα criteria, a new tumor biopsy may be submitted and used to meet this criterion. FRα expression levels 
must meet the following criteria:  
a. Dose Escalation (Regimens A through D): ≥  25% of tumor staining at ≥  2+ intensity  
b. Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E (Triplet): ≥  50% of tumor staining at 
≥ 2+ intensity  
7. Time from prior therapy:  
a. Systemic anti -neoplastic therapy: five half -lives or 4 weeks, whichever is shorter.  
Hormonal therapy is not considered anti- neoplastic therapy.  
b. Radiotherapy: wide -field radiotherapy (eg, >  30% of marrow -bearing bones) completed at 
least 4 weeks, or focal radiation completed at least 2 weeks, before starting study 
treatment.  
8. Recovered or stabilized to NCI CTCAE ≤  Grade 2 from all therapy -related toxicities (Regimens 
A through C and Regimen E).  

mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
17 9. Resolution of toxic effect(s) of the most recent prior chemotherapy to Grade 1 or less (except 
alopecia). If patient received major surgery or radiation therapy of >  30 Gy, they must have 
recovered from the toxicity and/or complications from the intervention (Regimen D only).  
10. Platinum  sensitivity:  
a. Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion: Regimens A (Cohorts 1 and 2) and D and Dose 
Escalation Regimen C: Patients must have disease that is resistant to platinum therapy. Platinum -resistant disease is defined as disease that responded to primary platinum 
therapy and then progressed within 6 months (182 days) after the date of the last dose of platinum therapy, or disease that progressed during or within 6 months (182 days) after 
the date of the last dose of the subsequent platinum therapy.  
b. Dose Escalation, Regimen B: Patients must have platinum- sensitive disease. Platinum-
sensitive disease is disease that responded to the last platinum therapy received before study entry and did not progress within 6 months (182 days) after the date of the last dose of platinum therapy.  
c. Regimen E (Triplet): Patients must have platinum- sensitive disease. Platinum- sensitive 
disease is disease that responded to the last platinum therapy received before study entry 
and did not progress within 6 months (182 days) after the date of the last dose of platinum therapy. The requirements to demonstrate platinum sensitivity (responsiveness and time 
to progression) apply to each of the patient’s prior platinum- containing regimens.  
d. Dose Expansion: Regimen A, Cohort 3: Patients may have either platinum- resistant 
disease or platinum- sensitive disease, where a non- platinum doublet is an appropriate  
next line of therapy.  
11. Number of prior therapies (where adjuvant ± neoadjuvant will be considered one regimen and maintenance therapy will be considered to be part of the preceding regimen; hormonal therapy 
counts as a separate line of therapy unless given as maintenance):  
a. Dose Escalation (Regimens A through D): There is no upper limit to the number of prior 
treatment regimens r eceived.  
b. Dose Expansion Regimen A, Cohort 1: Patients must have received ≤  two prior systemic 
treatment regimens.  
c. Dose Expansion Regimen A, Cohort 2: Patients must have received at least  one but not 
more than five prior systemic treatment regimens. At least one of the prior systemic 
treatment regimens must have included bevacizumab.  
d. Dose Expansion Regimen A, Cohort 3: Patients must have received at least one but no more than three prior systemic treatment regimens, where prior regimens may have included bev acizumab.  
e. Dose Expansion Regimen D: Patients must have received at least two but not more than four prior systemic treatment regimens.  
f. Regimen E (Triplet): Patients must have received at least one but not more than two prior 
systemic treatment regimens; prior systemic treatment regimens may have included 
vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitors (including bevacizumab) and must have included at least one platinum- based chemotherapy.  
12. Prior  folate receptor –targeting investigational agents treatment:  
a. Dose Escalation (Regimens A through C): Prior treatment with folate receptor –targeting 
investigational agents, including mirvetuximab soravtansine (provided it was not discontinued because of AEs), is allowed.  
b. Dose Escalation (Regimen D), Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D), and Regimen E (Triplet): Patients who have received prior mirvetuximab soravtansine are excluded.  
13. Major surgery (not including placement of vascular access device or tumor punch/scrape biopsies) must be completed 4 weeks before Day 1. Patients must have recovered or stabilized 
from the side effects before study treatment.  
14. Adequate hematologic, kidney, and liver function as defined by the following parameters:  
a. Absolute neutrophil count ≥  1.5 × 10
9/L (1,500/μL).  
b. Platelet count ≥  100 × 109/L (100,000/μL); must not be transfused within previous 10 days.  
c. Hemoglobin ≥  9.0 g/dL.  
d. Serum creatinine ≤  1.5 times the upper limit of the normal range (ULN) or 24- hour 
creatinine clearance of ≥  60 mL/minute.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
18 e. AST ≤  2.5 times the ULN; alanine aminotransfer ase ≤  2.5 times the ULN.  
f. Serum bilirubin ≤  1.5 times the ULN (patients with documented diagnosis of Gilbert 
syndrome are eligible if total bilirubin is <  3.0 times the ULN).  
g. International normalized ratio or prothrombin time (PT) ≤  1.5 times the ULN unless patient 
is receiving anticoagulant therapy, as long as PT or partial thromboplastin time (PTT) is 
within therapeutic range of intended use of anticoagulants.  
h. Activated partial thromboplastin time ≤  1.5 times the ULN unless patient is receiving 
antic oagulant therapy, as long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range of intended use of 
anticoagulants.  
i. Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion (Regimen D): thyroid- stimulating hormone within 
normal limits (WNL). If TSH is not WNL, the patient is eligible if total triiodothyronine (T3) or free T3 and free thyroxine (T4) are WNL.  
15. Willing and able to sign the informed consent form and to adhere to the study visit schedule and other protocol requirements.  
16. Woman of childbearing potential (WCBP), defined as a sexually  mature woman who has not 
undergone surgical sterilization or who has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 12 consecutive months (ie, who has had menses any time in the preceding 12 consecutive 
months) must agree to use effective contraceptive methods. Acceptable single methods include intrauterine device, vasectomy of a female patient’s male partner, and contraceptive rod implanted into the skin. Abstinence (relative to heterosexual activity) can be used as the 
sole method of contraception if it is consistently employed as the patient’s preferred and usual 
lifestyle and if considered acceptable by local regulatory agencies and independent ethics committees/institutional review boards. Periodic abstinence (eg, calendar, ovulation, sympto-thermal, post -ovulation methods) and withdrawal are not acceptable methods of contraception. 
Acceptable combination methods (requiring use of two of the following) are acceptable: diaphragm with spermicide (cannot be used in conjunction with cervical cap/spermicide) ; 
cervical cap with spermicide (nulliparous women only); contraceptive sponge (nulliparous women only); male condom or female condom (cannot be used together); hormonal contraceptive such as oral contraceptive pill, estrogen/progestin pill, or progestin- only pill; 
contraceptive skin patch; vaginal contraceptive ring; or subcutaneous contraceptive injection. Acceptable methods of contraception must be used while on study treatment and for at least 12 weeks after the last dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine, fo r at least 6 months after the last 
dose of bevacizumab, carboplatin, or pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, and for at least 4 months after the last dose of pembrolizumab.  
17. WCBP must have a negative pregnancy test within 3 days before the first dose of study treatment.  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Male patients.  
2. Primary platinum -refractory disease. Platinum refractory is defined as disease that has not 
responded to a primary platinum- based regimen or progressed within 30 days after primary 
platinum- based therapy.  
3. Clear -cell, mucinous histology, mixed histology with mucinous component, sarcoma, 
sarcomatous component, or low -grade ovarian cancer.  
4. Active or chronic corneal disorders, including but not limited to the following: Sjogren syndrome, Fuchs corneal dystrophy (requiring treatment), history of corneal transplantation, active herpetic keratitis, monocular vision, and/or other active ocular conditions requiring ongoing treatment/monitoring, such as wet age- related macular degeneration requiring 
intravitreal injections,  active diabetic retinopathy with macular edema, and/or presence of 
papilledema.  
5. > Grade 1 peripheral neuropathy.  
6. Serious concurrent illness or clinically relevant active infection (testing not required), including but not limited to the following:  
a. Known active hepatitis B or C  
b. Known HIV infection  
c. Varicella -zoster virus (shingles)  
d. Cytomegalovirus infection  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
19 e. Any other known concurrent infectious disease requiring IV antibiotics within 2  weeks 
before study enrollment  
7. Clinically significant cardiac disease including any one of the following:  
a. Recent myocardial infarction (≤  6 months before Day 1)  
b. Unstable angina pectoris  
c. Uncontrolled congestive heart failure (New York Heart Association > Class II)  
d. Uncontrolled hypertension (≥  CTCAE Version 4.03 Grade 3) 
e. History of hypertensive crisis or hypertensive encephalopathy  
f. Uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmias  
g. Clinically significant vascular disease (eg, aortic aneurysm or dissecting aneurysm)  
h. Severe aortic stenosis  
i. Clinically significant peripheral vascular diseas e 
j. ≥ Grade 3 cardiac toxicity following prior chemotherapy  
k. Heart rate– corrected QT interval >  470 msec on the screening ECG  
8. History of multiple sclerosis or other demyelinating disease and/or Eaton- Lambert syndrome 
(para- neoplastic syndrome).  
9. History of hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke within the last 6 months.  
10. History of cirrhotic liver disease.  
11. History of non- infectious interstitial lung disease, including non- infectious pneumonitis that 
required steroids or current pneumonitis.  
12. Prior hypersensitivity to monoclonal antibodies and/or severe hypersensitivity (≥  Grade 3) to 
pembrolizumab and/or any of its excipients.  
13. Women who are pregnant or lactating or expecting to conceive children within the projected 
duration of the trial, starting with the screening visit through 6 months after the last dose of study treatment (Regimens A, B, and C only).  
14. Carcinomatous meningitis, untreated central nervous system (CNS) disease, or symptomatic 
CNS metastasis. Patients with previously treated CNS metastasis (excluding car cinomatous 
meningitis) may participate if their disease is stable (without evidence of progression by 
imaging, using identical imaging modality at each assessment, for at least 4 weeks before the first dose of study treatment), have no evidence of new or emerging CNS metastasis, and are not using steroids for at least 7 days before the first dose of study treatment.  
15. History or evidence of thrombotic or hemorrhagic disorders within 6 months before the first 
dose of study treatment.  
16. Required used of folate- containing supplements (eg, folate deficiency).  
17. Known additional malignancy that is progressing or required active treatment within 3  years 
before the first dose of study treatment, excluding adjuvant hormonal therapy for breast cancer 
that was completed. Other exceptions include basal cell carcinoma of the skin, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin that has undergone potentially curative therapy, and other in situ 
cancers.  
Additional Exclusion Criteria for Regimen A and Regimen E  
18. History of bowel obstruction (including sub- occlusive disease) related to underlying disease 
within 6 months before the start of study treatment.  
19. History of abdominal fistula, gastrointestinal perforation, or intra- abdominal abscess, or 
evidence of rectosigmoid involvement  by pelvic examination, bowel involvement on computed 
tomography scan, or clinical symptoms of bowel obstruction.  
20. Prior radiotherapy to the pelvis or abdomen (Dose Escalation phase only).  
21. Surgery (including open biopsy) within 4 weeks before starting study therapy (within 24 hours 
for minor surgical procedures) or anticipated need for major surgery during study treatment.  
22. Non- healing wound, ulcer, or bone fracture.  
23. Hemoptysis ≥  0.5 teaspoon of red blood within 4 weeks before first study treatment.  
24. History  of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome.  
25. Clinically significant proteinuria: urine- protein (UPC) ratio ≥  1.0 or urine dipstick result ≥  2+; 
patients with UPC ratio ≥  1.0 or ≥  2+ proteinuria should undergo 24- hour urine collection and 
must show res ult ≤ 1 gram of protein in 24- hour period.  
26. History of pulmonary embolization.  
27. History of Grade 4 thromboembolic events.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
20 Additional Exclusion Criteria for Regimen C  
28. Prior treatment with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin and/or doxorubicin.  
29. Left ventricular ejection fraction defined by multigated acquisition scan/echocardiogram that is 
below the institutional lower limit of normal.  
Additional Exclusion Criteria for Regimen D  
30. Received a live vaccine within 30 days before study enrollment. Seasonal flu vaccines that do 
not contain live virus are permitted.  
31. Diagnosis of immunodeficiency or is receiving systemic steroid therapy or any other form of immunosuppressive therapy within 7 days before the first dose of study treatment. The use of 
physiologic doses of corticosteroids may be approved after consultation with the Sponsor.  
32. Active autoimmune disease that has required systemic treatment in the past 2 years (ie, with 
use of disease- modifying agents, corticosteroids, or immunosuppressive drugs). Replacement 
therapy (eg, thyroxine, insulin, or physiologic corticosteroid replacement therapy for adrenal or 
pituitary insufficiency) is not considered a form of systemic treatment.  
33. Prior anti -cancer mAb within 4 weeks before study Day 1 or has not recovered (ie, ≤  Grade 1 at 
baseline) from AEs due to agents administered more than 4 weeks earlier.  
34. Received transfusion of blood products (including platelets or red blood cells) or administration of colony -stimulating factors (including granulocyte colony -stimulating factor, granulocyte-
macrophage colony -stimulating factor, or recombinant erythropoietin) within 4  weeks before 
study Day 1.  
35. Known psychiatric or substance abuse disorders that would interfere with cooperation with the requirements of the trial.  
36. Pregnant or breastfeeding or expecting to conceive children within the projected duration of the trial, starting with the screening visit through 120 days after the last dose of study treatment.  
37. Severe hypersensitivity (≥  Grade 3) to pembrolizumab and/or any of its excipients.  
Prospective approval of protocol deviations to recruitment and enrollment criteria, also known as 
protocol waivers or exemptions, is not permitted.  
Investigational product, dosage, and mode of administration: Mirvetuximab soravtansine–
containing combination regimens will be investigated:  
Regimen A (mirvetuximab soravtansine +  bevacizumab): Mirvetuximab soravtansine will be 
given IV on Day 1 of a 21- day cycle (Q3W); bevacizumab will be administered IV after completion of 
the mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion.  
Regimen B (mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin): Mirvetuximab soravtansine will be given 
IV on Day 1; carboplatin will be administered IV after completion of the mirvetuximab soravtansine 
infusion; cycles will repeat every 21 days (Q3W).  
Regimen C  (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pegylated liposomal doxorubicin): Mirvetuximab 
soravtansine will be given IV on Day 1; pegylated liposomal doxorubicin will be administered IV after 
completion of the mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion; cycles will repeat every 28 days (Q4W).  
Regimen D (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab): Mirvetuximab soravtansine will be given IV on Day 1; pembrolizumab will be administered IV after completion of the mirvetuximab 
soravtansine infusion; cycles will repeat every 21 days (Q3W).  
 
  Regimen E (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab + carboplatin): Mirvetuximab 
soravtansine will be given IV on Day 1 of a 21- day cycle (Q3W). Bevacizumab will be administered 
IV after completion of the mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion on Day  1 of a 21- day cycle (Q3W). 
Carboplatin will be administered IV after completion of the bevacizumab infusion; cycles will repeat every 21 days (Q3W).  
For all dosing regimens, the dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be calculated using AIBW.  
Duration of treatment: The period of observation extends from the time the patient receives the first 
dose of study treatment until the final follow -up study visit. Patients will continue to receive study 
treatment until they develop PD per RECIST Version 1.1, unacceptable toxicity, or withdraw consent, 
whichever comes first, or until the Sponsor terminates the study. Pembrolizumab (Regimen D) will be 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
21 continued for up to 2 years. Patients who discontinue study drug for reasons other than PD will be 
followed  until PD, start of new anti -cancer therapy, or death, whichever occurs first.  
Statistical methods:  All statistical analyses will be performed using the most recently released SAS 
statistical software, unless otherwise noted. Patient disposition, patient demographics, and baseline 
characteristics will be tabulated. Pharmacokinetic parameters and plasma concentrations will also be 
presented (if available).  
No formal interim analysis is planned for this study. However, a review of safety data and available preliminary PK data will be conducted by the CRC upon completion of each Dose Escalation Cohort .  
A statistical analysis plan will fully describe the planned analyses for this study.  
Sample size:  Ascending doses of mirvetuximab soravtansine and combination therapy will be 
evaluated to identify the MTD for each of the four doublet combination regimens. The actual number of patients accrued during the Dose Escalation phase will be determined largely by the findings observed during the course of their treatment. Regimen A (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab) and Regimen D (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab) are expected to enroll 16 patients, whereas Regimen B (mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin) and Regimen C (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pegylated liposomal doxorubicin) are expected to enroll 22 patients. Additional patients will be recruited 
into each regimen to ensure that 10 patients are treated at the MTD. Overall, the Dose Escalation 
phase of the study is expected to enroll approximately  76 to 120 patients.  
Following MTD determination, there will be a Dose Expansion phase for Regimens A and D.  
Regimen A (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab):  
Patients enrolled in the Dose Expansion phase will be assigned to three Dose Expansion Cohor ts 
according to prior exposure to bevacizumab as follows: 1) Dose Expansion Cohort 1: bevacizumab naïve; 2) Dose Expansion Cohort 2: bevacizumab pretreated; and 3) Dose Expansion Cohort 3: with one to three prior therapies including one prior therapy with bevacizumab (per Protocol Amendment 5).  
For the bevacizumab- naïve Cohort (Cohort 1), assuming a response rate of 55%, there is a 94.2% 
probability of detecting at least 8 responders if 20 patients are recruited. The response rate assumption is based on an ORR of 53% observed with the standard of care therapy of paclitaxel in combination 
with bevacizumab in patients with platinum- resistant EOC.  
For the bevacizumab- pretreated Cohort (Cohort 2), assuming a response rate of 50%, there is a 91.2% 
probability of detecting at least 14 responders if 35 patients are recruited.  
For the bevacizumab expansion Cohort  (Cohort 3), assuming a response rate of 50%, there is a 95.4% 
probability of detecting at least 24 responders if 60 patients are recruited. In addition, the 90% confidence interval for true ORR is given in the table below if the observed number of responders is 
20 to 40 of 60 patients.  
 
 
Respons es Observed, 60 Patients  90% Exact Confidence Interval for True ORR  
20/60 (33%)  (23%, 45%)  
21/60 (35%)  (25%, 46%)  
22/60 (37%)  (26%, 48%)  
23/60 (38%)  (28%, 50%)  
24/60 (40%)  (29%, 51%)  
25/60 (42%)  (31%, 53%)  
26/60 (43%)  (32%, 55%)  
27/60 (45%)  (34%, 56%)  
28/60 (47%)  (36%, 58%)  
29/60 (48%)  (37%, 60%)  
30/60 (50%)  (39%, 61%)  
31/60 (52%)  (40%, 63%)  
32/60 (53%)  (42%, 64%)  
33/60 (55%)  (44%, 66%)  
34/60 (57%)  (45%, 68%)  
35/60 (58%)  (47%, 69%)  
36/60 (60%)  (49%, 71%)  
37/60 (62%)  (50%, 72%)  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
22 38/60 (63%)  (52%, 74%)  
39/60 (65%)  (54%, 75%)  
40/60 (67%)  (55%, 77%)  
Regimen D (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab): 
In the Dose Expansion phase for Regimen D, a total of 35 patients will be enrolled at FRα > 50% of 
tumor staining at intensity ≥  2+ and 11 patients with a FRα 25% to 49% of tumor staining at intensity 
≥ 2+. Assuming a response rate of 50%, there is a 91.2%  probability of detecting at least 14 
responders if 35 patients are recruited. In addition, the 90% confidence interval for true ORR is given in 
the table below if the observed number of responders is 12 to 18 of 35 patients.  
Responses Observed, 35 Patient s 90% Exact Confidence Interval for True ORR  
12/35 (34%)  (21%, 50%)  
13/35 (37%)  (24%, 52%)  
14/35 (40%)  (26%, 55%)  
15/35 (43%)  (29%, 58%)  
16/35 (46%)  (31%, 61%)  
17/35 (49%)  (34%, 64%)  
18/35 (51%)  (36%, 66%)  
Regimen E (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab + carboplatin):  
In Regimen E (Triplet), approximately 50 patients will be enrolled to ensure that 40 patients will be treated at the MTD. Assuming a response rate of 60%, there is a 92.6% probability of detecting at least 20 responders if 40 patients are recruited. In addition, the 90% confidence interval for true ORR is 
given in the table below if the observed number of responders is 20 to 26 of 40 patients . 
Responses Observed, 40 Patients  90% Exact Confidence Interval for Tr ue ORR  
20/40 (50%)  (36%, 64%)  
21/40 (52.5%)  (38%, 66%)  
22/40 (55%)  (41%, 69%)  
23/40 (57.5%)  (43%, 71%)  
24/40 (60%)  (46%, 73%)  
25/40 (62.5%)  (48%, 75%)  
26/40 (65%)  (51%, 77%)  
Overall, the Dose Expansion phase is expected to enroll up to 211 patients. Assuming that 
approximately 90% of enrolled patients in the Dose Expansion phase will be evaluable, the study is 
expected to accrue approximately 311 to 355 patients.  
 
 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
23 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
SPONSOR SIGNATURE PAGE  ....................................................................................................2  
INVESTIGATOR’S AGREEMENT  ...............................................................................................3  
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  ..........................................................................................................4  
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  ................................................................................................................8  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  ...............................................................................................................23  
LIST OF TABLES  .........................................................................................................................30  
LIST OF FIGURES  .......................................................................................................................32  
1. INTRODUCTION  ......................................................................................................33  
1.1. Target Background .....................................................................................................33  
1.2. Mirvetuximab Soravtansine (IMGN853) ...................................................................33  
1.3. Epithelial Ovarian Cancer  ...........................................................................................34  
1.4. Current Therapies  .......................................................................................................35  
1.4.1.  Bevacizumab  ...............................................................................................................35  
1.4.2.  Carboplatin .................................................................................................................35  
1.4.3.  Topotecan  ...................................................................................................................36  
1.4.4.  Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin .............................................................................36  
1.5. Investigational Therapies  ............................................................................................37  
1.5.1.  Pembrolizumab  ...........................................................................................................37  
1.6. Nonclinical Studies of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine ...................................................37  
1.6.1.  Pharmacology .............................................................................................................37  
1.6.2.  Pharmacokinetics  ........................................................................................................38  
1.6.3.  Toxicology ..................................................................................................................38  
1.7. Clinical Studies of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine .........................................................39  
1.7.1.  First-in-Human Phase 1 Study: Study IMGN853-0401 .............................................39  
1.8. Rationale for the Starting Dose ...................................................................................39  
1.8.1.  Mirvetuximab Soravtansine ........................................................................................39  
1.8.2.  Pembrolizumab  ...........................................................................................................40  
1.9. Safety Rationale for the Triplet Combination  ............................................................41  
1.10.  Rationale for the Study Plan .......................................................................................41  
1.10.1.  Rationale for FRα Expression Levels  .........................................................................43  
2. TRIAL OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  ...............................................................44  
2.1. Primary Objectives  .....................................................................................................44  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
24 2.1.1.  Dose Escalation (Regimens A Through D) ................................................................44  
2.1.2.  Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E (Triplet) ................................44  
2.2. Primary Endpoints ......................................................................................................44  
2.2.1.  Dose Escalation (Regimens A Through D) ................................................................44  
2.2.2.  Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E (Triplet) ................................44  
2.3. Secondary Objectives  .................................................................................................44  
2.4. Secondary Endpoints ..................................................................................................45  
2.5. Exploratory Objectives ...............................................................................................45  
2.6. Exploratory Endpoints ................................................................................................46  
3. STUDY POPULATION  .............................................................................................46  
3.1. Inclusion Criteria  ........................................................................................................46  
3.1.1.  Inclusion Criteria for All Patients (Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion, 
Regimen -Specific)  ......................................................................................................46  
3.1.2.  Exclusion Criteria  .......................................................................................................49  
3.1.2.1.  Additional Exclusion Criteria for Regimen A and Regimen E ..................................51  
3.1.2.2.  Additional Exclusion Criteria for Regimen C ............................................................51  
3.1.2.3.  Additional Exclusion Criteria for Regimen D ............................................................51  
4. INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  .....................................................................................52  
4.1. Study Design ...............................................................................................................52  
4.1.1.  Overview and Schema  ................................................................................................52  
4.1.2.  Cohort Review Committee  .........................................................................................54  
4.1.3.  Dose Escalation Guidelines  ........................................................................................54  
4.1.3.1.  Dose Levels and Regimens .........................................................................................54  
4.1.3.2.  Dose Escalation Rules (3  + 3 Design) ........................................................................56  
4.1.4.  Definition of Dose- Limiting Toxicity  ........................................................................57  
4.1.5.  Dose Expansion Phase ................................................................................................58  
5. STUDY TREATMENT  ..............................................................................................60  
5.1. Description of Study Treatment ..................................................................................60  
5.2. Mirvetuximab Soravtansine Packaging ......................................................................60  
5.3. Storage, Handling, and Accountability .......................................................................60  
5.4. Study Treatment Compliance .....................................................................................61  
5.5. Assignment of Patient Number ...................................................................................61  
5.5.1.  Enrolled Patient Definition  .........................................................................................61  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
25 5.5.2.  Patient Assignment to Dosing Regimens ...................................................................62  
5.6. Blinding ......................................................................................................................62  
5.7. Study Treatment Administration  ................................................................................62  
5.7.1.  Study Treatment Overview and Schedule ..................................................................62  
5.8. Study Drug Preparation and Administration ..............................................................62  
5.8.1.  Premedication for Study Treatment ............................................................................62  
5.8.2.  Prophylactic Use of Corticosteroid Eye Drops ...........................................................62  
5.8.3.  Lubricating Artificial Tears  ........................................................................................63  
5.8.4.  Preparation and Administration of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine ................................63  
5.8.4.1.  Calculation for Adjusted Ideal Body Weight .............................................................63  
5.8.4.2.  Preparation of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine ................................................................63  
5.8.4.3.  Administration of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine ..........................................................63  
5.8.5.  Preparation and Administration of Bevacizumab .......................................................64  
5.8.6.  Preparation and Administration of Carboplatin ..........................................................64  
5.8.7.  Preparation and Administration of Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin .....................64  
5.8.8.  Preparation and Administration of Pembrolizumab ...................................................64  
5.9. Monitoring and Management of Adverse Events .......................................................65  
5.9.1.  Potential Infusion- Related Reactions  .........................................................................65  
5.9.2.  Monitoring and Management of Treatment- Emergent Ocular Disorders  ..................66  
5.9.2.1.  Monitoring of Potential Ocular Disorders ..................................................................66  
5.9.2.2.  Management Guidelines for Ocular Disorders ...........................................................67  
5.9.3.  Monitoring of Non-infectious Pneumonitis After Administration of Study 
Treatment  ....................................................................................................................69  
5.9.4.  Monitoring and Management of Diarrhea After Administration of Study Treatment  ....................................................................................................................70
 
5.9.4.1.  Mirvetuximab Soravtansine–Associated Diarrhea  .....................................................70  
5.9.4.2.  Pembrolizumab -Associated Diarrhea and/or Colitis  ..................................................71  
5.9.4.3.  Diarrhea Associated With Mirvetuximab Soravtansine and Pembrolizumab ............71  
5.9.5.  Monitoring and Management of Nausea and Vomiting After Administration of Study Treatment .....................................................................................................71
 
5.9.6.  Monitoring of Bevacizumab- Associated Posterior Reversible 
Encephalopathy Syndrome .........................................................................................72  
5.9.7.  Monitoring and Management of Bevacizumab-Associated Hypertension .................72  
5.9.8.  Monitoring and Management of Bevacizumab-Associated Proteinuria .....................72  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
26 5.9.9.  Monitoring and Ma nagement of Bevacizumab -Associated Bleeding  ........................73  
5.9.10.  Monitoring and Management of Bevacizumab- Associated Gastrointestinal 
Fistula/Perforation  ......................................................................................................73  
5.9.11.  Monitoring and Management of Peripheral Neuropathy ............................................73  
5.9.12.  Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab-Associated Type 1 
Diabetes Mellitus  ........................................................................................................75  
5.9.13.  Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab-Associated Hypophysitis ..............75  
5.9.14.  Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab- Associated 
Hyperthyroidism or Hypothyroidism .........................................................................75  
5.9.15.  Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab- Associated Hepatic 
Adverse Events  ...........................................................................................................76  
5.9.16.  Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab- Associated Renal Failure or 
Nephritis  .....................................................................................................................76  
5.10.  Treatment Guidelines  ..................................................................................................76  
5.10.1.  Re-treatment Criteria  ..................................................................................................76  
5.10.2.  Follow-up for Dose-Limiting Toxicities and Adverse Events Leading to Discontinuation ...........................................................................................................77
 
5.10.3.  Criteria for Re -initiation of Study Treatment After Occurrence of a Dose-
Limiting Toxicity  ........................................................................................................78  
5.10.4.  Dose Modification Guidelines ....................................................................................78  
5.10.4.1.  Mirvetuximab Soravtansine Dose Reduction After a Dose- Limiting Toxicity  ..........78  
5.10.4.2.  Bevacizumab Dose Modification Guidelines .............................................................78  
5.10.4.3.  Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Dose Modification Guidelines for Non-hematologic Adverse Events ..............................................................................79
 
5.10.4.4.  Carboplatin Dose Modification Guidelines ................................................................80  
5.10.4.5.  Dose Modification and Toxicity Management for Immune- Related Adverse 
Events Associated With Pembrolizumab  ....................................................................80  
5.10.4.6.  Dose Modification and Toxicity Management of Infusion Reactions Related to Pembrolizumab  .......................................................................................................85
 
5.10.4.7.  Hierarchy of Dose Reductions/Discontinuations ........................................................88  
5.10.5.  Discontinuation of Study Treatment Due to Adverse Events .....................................90  
5.10.6.  Additional Discontinuation Guidelines ......................................................................91  
5.10.6.1.  Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Discontinuation ...................................................91  
5.10.6.2.  Bevacizumab Discontinuation ....................................................................................91  
5.10.6.3.  Carboplatin Discontinuation .......................................................................................91  
5.10.6.4.  Pembrolizumab Discontinuation ................................................................................91  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
27 5.11.  Removal of the Patient From the Study or From Study Drug Administration  ...........93  
5.11.1.  Replacement of Patients Who Are Withdrawn Before the End of Cycle 1  ................94  
5.12.  Period of Observation .................................................................................................94  
5.13.  Concomitant Medications and Procedures .................................................................94  
5.13.1.  Antiemetic and Antidiarrheal Medications  .................................................................94  
5.13.2.  Folate -Containing Vitamins........................................................................................94  
5.13.3.  Antineoplastic Therapy ...............................................................................................94  
5.13.4.  Hematopoietic Growth Factors  ...................................................................................95  
5.13.5.  Medications Metabolized Through Cytochrome P450 3A .........................................95  
5.13.6.  Vaccinations (Regimen D Only)  ................................................................................95  
5.13.7.  Systemic Steroids (Regimen D Only).........................................................................95  
5.13.8.  Other Concomitant Medications .................................................................................95  
5.14.  Overdose and Medication Error ..................................................................................96  
5.14.1.  Overdose .....................................................................................................................96  
5.14.2.  Medication Error .........................................................................................................96  
6. PHARMACOKINETIC AND IMMUNOGENEICITY ASSESSMENTS  ................96  
6.1. Pharmacokinetic Assessments  ....................................................................................96  
6.1.1.  Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 3 -Week Cycle Schedule Regimen A 
(Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Bevacizumab)  ...........................................................97  
6.1.2.  Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 3 -Week Cycle Schedule Regimen B 
(Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Carboplatin) ..............................................................98  
6.1.3.  Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 4 -Week Cycle Regimen C (Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine + Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin) ...................................................99  
6.1.4.  Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 3 -Week Cycle Schedule Reg imen D 
(Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Pembrolizumab)........................................................99  
6.1.5.  Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 3 -Week Cycle Schedule Regimen E 
(Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Bevacizumab + Carboplatin)  ..................................100  
6.2. Immunogenicity Assessments of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine .................................101  
7. TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH STUDIES  ..........................................................101  
7.1. Correlation Between FRα Expression and Mirvetuximab Soravtansine Anti -
tumor Activity  ...........................................................................................................101  
7.1.1.  Evaluation of FRα Expression in Tumor Tissue During Dose Escalation and 
Dose Expansion ........................................................................................................102  
7.2. Exploratory Biomarker Studies ................................................................................102  
7.2.1.  Potential Markers of Drug Response ........................................................................103  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
28 7.2.2.  Potential Markers of Drug Resistance  ......................................................................103  
7.2.3.  Potential Mechanism of Synergy Between Mirvetuximab Soravtansine and 
Pembrolizumab  .........................................................................................................103  
8. STUDY PROCEDURES  ..........................................................................................104  
8.1. Informed Consent .....................................................................................................104  
8.2. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria ..............................................................................104  
8.3. Confirmation of Disease Diagnosis ..........................................................................104  
8.4. Demographic/Medical History  .................................................................................104  
8.5. Physical Examination, Weight, and Height ..............................................................104  
8.6. Vital Signs  ................................................................................................................104  
8.7. Electrocardiogram  .....................................................................................................105  
8.8. Pulse Oximetry  .........................................................................................................105  
8.9. Pulmonary Function Tests ........................................................................................105  
8.10.  Laboratory Assessments ...........................................................................................105  
8.10.1.  Clinical Laboratory Panels .......................................................................................106  
8.11.  Pregnancy Screen  ......................................................................................................106  
8.12.  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status ......................................106  
8.13.  Radiologic Imaging ..................................................................................................106  
8.14.  Echocardiogram/Multigated Acquisition Scan .........................................................107  
8.15.  Tumor Response Assessment ...................................................................................107  
8.15.1.  RECIST and CA125 .................................................................................................107  
8.15.2.  Immune- Related RECIST (Regimen D Only)  ..........................................................107  
8.16.  Eligibility Based on FRα Expression ........................................................................108  
8.17.  Biopsy of Tumor (Regimen D Only) ........................................................................108  
9. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  ...................................................................................108  
9.1. Recording Adverse Events .......................................................................................108  
9.1.1.  Definition of Adverse Events ...................................................................................109  
9.1.1.1.  Adverse Event  ...........................................................................................................109  
9.1.1.2.  Serious Adverse Event ..............................................................................................109  
9.1.1.3.  Adverse Events of Special Interest  ...........................................................................110  
9.1.1.4.  Mirvetuximab Soravtansine ......................................................................................110  
9.1.1.5.  Pembrolizumab  .........................................................................................................110  
9.1.2.  Classification of Adverse Events ..............................................................................111  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
29 9.2. Reporting of Adverse Events ....................................................................................112  
9.2.1.  Reporting of Serious Adverse Events and/or Adverse Events of Special 
Interest  ......................................................................................................................112  
9.2.2.  Reporting of Disease Progression .............................................................................113  
9.2.3.  Reporting a Pregnancy ..............................................................................................113  
10. STUDY ACTIVITIES  ..............................................................................................114  
10.1.  Screening Visit  ..........................................................................................................114  
10.1.1.  Standard of Care Assessments  ..................................................................................114  
10.2.  End of Treatment Visit .............................................................................................114  
10.3.  Follow- up Assessments  ............................................................................................115  
10.3.1.  Safety Follow-up ......................................................................................................115  
10.3.2.  Response Follow-up .................................................................................................115  
11. STATISTICAL METHODS  .....................................................................................115  
11.1.  Sample Size ..............................................................................................................115  
11.2.  Pharmacokinetic Analyses  ........................................................................................117  
11.3.  Immunogenicity Assessment ....................................................................................118  
11.4.  Safety Analyses  ........................................................................................................118  
11.5.  Anti-tumor Activity  ..................................................................................................118  
12. QUALITY CONTROL AND ASSURANCE  ..........................................................119  
13. ADMINISTRATIVE CONSIDERATIONS, STUDY MONITORING, AND DATA MANAGEMENT  .........................................................................................119
 
13.1.  Investigators and Study Administrative Structure ....................................................119  
13.2.  Institutional Review Board or Independent Ethics Committee Approval ................119  
13.3.  Ethical Conduct of the Study ....................................................................................120  
13.4.  Patient Information and Consent ..............................................................................120  
13.5.  Patient Confidentiality  ..............................................................................................121  
13.6.  Study Monitoring ......................................................................................................121  
13.7.  Case Report Forms and Study Reports .....................................................................121  
13.8.  Critical Documents  ...................................................................................................121  
13.9.  Protocol Violations/Deviations  .................................................................................122  
13.10.  End of Study .............................................................................................................123  
13.11.  Study Termination ....................................................................................................123  
13.11.1.  Study Termination ....................................................................................................123  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
30 13.11.2.  Site Termination  .......................................................................................................123  
13.12.  Access to Source Documentation  .............................................................................123  
13.13.  Data Generation and Analysis  ..................................................................................123  
13.14.  Retention of Data ......................................................................................................124  
13.15.  Financial Disclosure  .................................................................................................124  
13.16.  Publication and Disclosure Policy ............................................................................124  
14. LIST OF REFERENCES  ..........................................................................................125  
APPE NDIX A.  SCHEDULE OF CLINICAL ASSESSMENTS – REGIMENS A, B, 
AND E  ......................................................................................................................130  
APPENDIX B.  SCHEDULE OF CLINICAL ASSESSMENTS – REGIMEN C  ....................133  
APPENDIX C.  SCHEDULE OF CLINICAL ASSESSMENTS – REGIMEN D  ....................136  
APPENDIX D.  BLOOD SAMPLE COLLECTION FOR PHARMACOKINETICS, 
IMMUNOGENICITY, AND BIOMARKER ASSESSMENTS – 
REGIMENS A, B, C, D, AND E  ..............................................................................139  
APPENDIX E.  PEMBROLIZUMAB BACKGROUND  ..........................................................140  
APPENDIX F.  EASTERN COOPERATIVE ONCOLOGY GROUP (ECOG) 
PERFORMANCE STATUS SCALE  .......................................................................142  
APPENDIX G.  RESP ONSE DEFINITION (RECIST VERSION 1.1)  ....................................142  
APPENDIX H.  GYNECOLOGIC CANCER INTERGROUP CRITERIA FOR 
EVALUATION OF CA125  ......................................................................................147  
APPENDIX I. RESPONSE DEFINITION (IMMUNE -RELATED RECIST) 
(REGIMEN D ONLY)  .............................................................................................148  
APPENDIX J.  CALVERT FORMULA FOR CARBOPLATIN DOSING  ..............................150  
APPENDIX K.  BODY SURFACE AREA CALCULATION ..................................................150  
APPENDIX L.  ADJUSTED IDEAL BODY WEIGHT CALCULATION  ..............................151  
APPENDIX M.  COMMON TERMINOLOGY CRITERIA FOR ADVERSE EVENTS 
VERSION 4.03 GRADING FOR SELECTED ADVERSE EVENTS  ....................152  
APPENDIX N.  EXAMPLES OF SENSITIVE IN VIVO CYTOCHROME P450 
SUBSTRATES A ND CYTOCHROME P450 SUBSTRATES WITH 
NARROW THERAPEUTIC RANGE (28  JULY 2011)  ..........................................153  
APPENDIX O.  SCHEMA FOR ADMINISTRATION OF STUDY- REQUIRED EYE 
DROPS  .....................................................................................................................153  
 
LIST OF TABLES  
Table 1:  Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen A (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Bevacizumab)  ....................................................................................54
 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
31 Table 2:  Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen B (Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine + Carboplatin) .......................................................................................55  
Table 3:  Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen C (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin) ...................................................55
 
Table 4:  Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen D (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Pembrolizumab) .................................................................................55
 
Table 5:  Dose -Limiting Toxicity Definitions  ...........................................................................58  
Table 6:  Planned Doses for Regimen E ....................................................................................60  
Table 7:  Management Guidelines for Potential Infusion -Related Reactions  ............................66  
Table 8:  Schedule for Ophthalmic Assessments  .......................................................................67  
Table 9:  Management of Ocular Disorders  ...............................................................................68  
Table 10:  Management of Non-infectious Pneumonitis .............................................................69  
Table 11:  Management of Nausea and Vomiting .......................................................................71  
Table 12:  Management  of Hyperten sion After Bevacizumab Administration  ............................72  
Table 13:  Management of Bevacizumab -Associated Proteinuria  ...............................................72  
Table 14:  Management Guidelines for Peripheral Neuropathy  ..................................................74  
Table 15:  Mirvetuximab Soravtansine Dose Modification Guidelines ......................................78  
Table 16:  Bevacizumab Dose Modification Guidelines .............................................................79  
Table 17:  Dose Modification Guidelines for Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin for Non-hematologic Adverse Events ..............................................................................79
 
Table 18:  Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Dose Reduction for Hematologic Adverse Events .........................................................................................................................79
 
Table 19:  Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Dose Modification Guidelines for Hand and Foot Syndrome and Mucositis .............................................................................80
 
Table 20:  Dose Modification Guidelines for Carboplatin ..........................................................80  
Table 21:  Dose Modification and Toxicity Management Guidelines for Immune-Related Adverse Events Associated With Pembrolizumab  ........................................82
 
Table 22:  Pembrolizumab Infusion Reaction Dose Modification and Treatment Guidelines ...................................................................................................................86
 
Table 23:  Agent to be Dose Reduced/Discontinued First on the Basis of Reported Compound- Specific Treatment -Related Adverse Events  ...........................................89
 
Table 24:  Adverse Events Requiring Permanent Discontinuation of Bevacizumab ..................91  
Table 25:  Adverse Events Requiring Discontinuation of Pembrolizumab .................................93  
Table 26:  Vital Sign Measurements  ..........................................................................................105  
Table 27:  Clinical Laboratory Tests  .........................................................................................106  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
32 Table 28:  Adverse Event Severity  ............................................................................................111  
Table 29:  Adverse Event Casual Relationship to Study Drug ..................................................112  
 
LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure 1: Study Design Schema .....................................................................................................53  
 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
33 1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. Target Background 
Folate receptor alpha (FRα) (gene symbol FOLR1 ) is a glycophosphatidylinositol-linked protein 
that shows limited normal tissue expression and high expression in several solid tumors 
(Kelemen  2006 ), most notably serous epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) ( Miotti 1987, 
O’Shannessy 2013). FRα binds and internalizes folate, which is an essential co- factor for one -
carbon transfer reactions that are required for DNA and RNA synthesis, cell growth, and proliferation. Marked upregulation of FRα occurs during neonatal development and in cancer, 
suggesting that the receptor functions primarily under conditions of high folate demand. In contrast, normal adult tissues generally lack FRα expression and employ alternative transporters such as folate receptor β, reduced folate carrier, and proton-coupled folate transporter for folate uptake ( Weitman  1992, Mantovani  1994, Elnakat  2004).  
Several additional studies have further validated FRα as a target in serous o varian cancer. First, 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction studies show ubiquitous FRα messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in serous ovarian cancer ( Hoskins  2001, Hough 2001), and high levels of FRα mRNA 
correlate with poor response to chemotherapy and decreased disease- free survival (Chen  2012). 
Second, both Kalli et al and Crane et al have demonstrated that recurrent tumors retain FRα expression comparably to primary tumors as shown by serial biopsy sampling and immunohistochemistry (IHC) ( Kalli 2008, Crane 2012). Third, studies with FRα -specific 
imaging agents have demonstrated real -time FRα expression at primary and metastatic tumor 
sites ( Fisher  2008, Garcia 2013, Garin -Chesa 1993, and van Dam  2011 ). Finally, a truncated 
form of FRα has been detected in ascites and blood of ovarian cancer patients ( Basal  2009, 
Mantovani  1994),  further confirming expression in this disease and suggesting that the receptor 
may serve as a circulating biomarker. Collectively, these data suggest that FRα is a promising target in solid tumors, particularly EOC.  
1.2. Mirvetuximab Soravtansine (IMGN853) 
Because of its tumor -specific expression and capacity to internalize small and large molecule 
ligands, FRα has emerged as a promising target for antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) therapy. ADCs combine the specificity of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to tumor antigens with the extraordinary cytotoxicity of maytansine derivatives, which are potent anti-microtubule agents that ta rget proliferating cells. Mirvetuximab soravtansine, also known as IMGN853, is a targeted 
ADC that binds with high affinity to FRα, a glycophosphatidylinositol -linked protein that shows 
limited normal tissue expression and high expression in several solid tumors ( Kelemen  2006 ), 
most notably serous EOC ( Miotti 1987, O’Shannessy 2013). This ADC consists of a humanized 
anti-FRα mAb attached via a cleavable disulfide containing linker to the cytotoxic maytansinoid 
DM4. Maytansinoids are anti- mitotic agents that inhibit tubulin polymerization and microtubule 
assembly, resulting in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. The antibody component of mirvetuximab soravtansine is composed of two immunoglobulin (Ig) G1 heavy chains of 447 amino acids and two kappa light chains of 218 amino acids and has a molecular weight of 145,676 Da (non-glycosylated form). Each antibody molecule is conjugated to an average of three to four molecules of DM4. 
In vitro studies have de monstrated that mirvetuximab soravtansine binds cell surface FRα with 
high apparent affinity (≤  0.1 nM) and shows potent (50% inhibitory concentration [IC
50] ≤ 1 nM) 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
34 and selective cytotoxicity against tumor cells expressing FRα. Cytotoxic effects of mirvet uximab 
soravtansine in vitro correlate with the level of cell -surface expression of FRα. Mirvetuximab 
soravtansine demonstrates significant activity against FRα -positive tumor xenografts, with 
partial and complete remissions observed in ovarian models ( Ab 2015). The in vitro and in vivo 
pharmacologic properties of mirvetuximab soravtansine, along with the high expression of FRα 
in EOC, provided the rationale for explor ing mirvetuximab soravtansine in a clinical setting.  
1.3. Epithelial Ovarian Cancer  
This study will enroll patients with FRα -positive EOC. 
Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most lethal of gynecologic cancers worldwide. There are an estimated  22,240 new cases of ovarian cancer and 14,070 deaths expected in 2018 in the United 
States (US) ( National Cancer Institute - SEER  2018), and in the European Union and North 
America, 89,113 new cases of ovarian cancer with 59,754 deaths are estimated (GLOBOCAN 2012). Because of the lack of effective screening tools and the non- specific nature 
of the presenting symptoms, more than 70% of patients with EOC are diagnosed with recurrent disease (Stage 3C and Stage 4) ( Timmermans  2017). Late- stage EOC is rarely curable despite 
intensive adjuvant or neo-adjuvant chemotherapy and optimal surgical resection. Heintz  et al 
reported the 5-year survival for patients with Stage 3C and Stage 4 disease as 32.5% and 18.6% respectively. Similarly, Timmermans  et al reported that patients with recurrent disease have an 
expected 5 -year survival rate of 24%. In patients who have developed platinum- resistant disease, 
the median overall survival is < 12 months ( Naumann  2011).  
Key signs and symptoms of EOC at presentation include persistent bloating, pelvic or abdominal pain, urinary symptoms (urgency or frequency), decreased appetite, and feeling full quickly. Other symptoms can include fatigue, indigestion, constipation, back pain, pain with intercourse, and menstrual irregularities. Many of these symptoms are frequently seen in women who do not have EOC, making symptom- based diag nosis difficult.  
Risk factors associated with development of EOC include age (approximately 50% of women with EOC are > 63 years of age), weight (body mass index ≥ 30), germline BRCA1  and BRCA2  
mutations (in about 15% of ovarian cancer [ Risch  2001]), and reproductive history (eg, increased 
risk with fertility treatment and decreased risk with birth control pills [American  Cancer  Society  2016]).  
Ovarian tumors are derived from one of three common cell types: epithelial cells (accounting for 90% of all cases [ Rosen  2009]), germ cells, or stromal cells. Recent studies indicate that ovarian, 
peritoneal, and fallopian tube cancers are not distinct entities, but represent a spectrum of diagnoses that originate in the mullerian tissue. Primary fallopian tube carcinoma and peritoneal cancers are now included in the ovarian cancer staging classification ( Cobb 2015, Grant  2010, 
Naumann  2011, O’Shannessy  2013) and are considered to be part of EOC with the same 
treatment and outcomes.  
Epithelial ovarian cancer is staged according to the I nternational Federation of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics staging system. At Stage I, the tumor is confined to either one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes, the ovary capsule may be ruptured, and there could be tumor on the ovarian surface; malignant cells may  be found in the ascites or peritoneal washings. At Stage II, the 
tumor involves one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes with pelvic extension (below the pelvic brim) or primary peritoneal cancer. At Stage III, the tumor may involve one or both ovaries, or 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
35 fallopian tubes, or primary peritoneal cancer with either cytologically or histologically confirmed 
metastasis to the peritoneum outside the pelvis and/or metastasis to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Stage IV consists of distant metastasis, excluding per itoneal metastases ( Prat 2015).  
Epithelial ovarian cancer is also classified by histology and grade. Serous ovarian carcinomas, which account for 75% of EOC tum ors, are graded as either low -grade serous ovarian carcinoma 
(approximately 3% of all serous EOC) or high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) (approximately 97% of all serous EOC [ Bergstrom  2017]). Other histologic subtypes (eg, 
endometrioid) are graded 1  through 3, high differentiation through low differentiation, 
respectively ( ASCO 2017). HGSOCs are associated with the poorest outcomes. Despite a typical 
rapid response to frontline platinum- based therapy, HGSOC is associated with rapid relapse and 
development of platinum resistance ( Alkema  2016 ).  
1.4. Current Therapies  
Current management of advanced-stage EOC typically involves surgical de-bulking either before or after platinum-based chemotherapy (commonly carboplatin and paclitaxel). However, most patients will experience recurrence of disease ( Garcia 2013). Patients who relapse > 6 months 
after platinum- based treatments are considered platinum sensitive and typically will be re -treated 
with a platinum-based combination regimen, with or without maintenance therapy. Patients who relapse ≤  6 months after treatment are considered platinum -resistant. Almost all platinum-
sensitive patients will eventually develop resistance, at which point they are considered to have acquired secondary platinum- resistant disease. Patients with platinum- resistant disease may be 
treated with a var iety of agents, including topotecan, bevacizumab, and pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin alone or in combination with weekly paclitaxel.  
1.4.1. Bevacizumab  
Bevacizumab is a humanized mAb that binds to vascular endothelial growth factor A and has 
antiangiogenic act ivity. Bevacizumab is approved for use in combination with chemotherapy 
both in the EOC frontline setting ( Burger  2011, Perren  2012) and in the platinum- resistant 
setting with up to 2 prior treatments ( Pujade-Lauraine  2014). In two frontline trials (GOG218 
and ICON7) in EOC, the addition of bevacizumab to carboplatin and paclitaxel, followed by maintenance therapy with bevacizumab, was shown to significantly prolong progression- free 
survival (PFS) compared with carboplatin and paclitaxel (GOG218: 14.1 vs 10.3 months; ICON7: 19.0 vs 17.3 months) ( Burger  2011, Perren  2012). In patients with platinum- sensitive 
disease at first relapse, the addition of bevacizumab to carboplatin and gemcitabine demonstrated a PFS adv antage of 4 months. The AURELIA trial demonstrated a 3.3-month improvement in 
PFS for patients who received bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy, followed by maintenance with bevacizumab, compared with those who received chemotherapy alone (Pujade- Lauraine 2014).  
1.4.2. Carboplatin 
Carboplatin is often used in relapsed ovarian cancer that remains potentially platinum sensitive, based on a platinum- free interv al of > 6 months, and may be used as a single agent or in 
combination ( Aghajanian  2012, Raja 2012). Conventional frontline chemotherapy for EOC 
consists of paclitaxel and carboplatin administered every 3 weeks (Q3W) for six cycles. Although the outcomes are comparable, carboplatin in combination with docetaxel or pegylated 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
36 liposomal doxorubicin has a better tolerability profile than that of carboplatin in combination 
with paclitaxel. For instance, carboplatin and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin have been associated with a lower frequency of alopecia, neuropathies, hypersensitivity reactions, and arthralgia compared with the carboplatin and paclitaxel combination. Carboplatin in combination with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin has been evaluated in platinum- sensitive or partially 
sensitive patients with gynecological malignancies. Patients with platinum- sensitive EOC treated 
with this regimen had a lower frequency of alopecia, neuropathies, hypersensitivity reactions, and arthralgia compared with those treated with carboplatin in combination with paclitaxel. Carbo platin given at either AUC6 or AUC5 and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin administered at 
either 40  mg/m
2 or 50 mg/m2 every 28 days resulted in objective response rates (ORRs) of 60% 
to 70%, PFS of 9.2 to 11.2 months, and median overall survival of 23 months in platinum-sensitive or partially sensitive patients ( Ferrero  2004, Vorobiof  2004).  
1.4.3. Topotecan 
Topotecan inhibits topoisomerase 1, leading to both single- and double-stranded DNA breaks that eventually promote apoptosis. Topotecan (administered once daily for the first 5 days of 21-day cycles) was approved for treatment of EOC after failure of initial or subsequent chemotherapy. This approval was based on a Phase 3 trial that showed it to be at least as effective as paclitaxel, with a response rate of 21% versus 13%, and median PFS of 23 weeks versus 14 weeks, respectively ( ten Bokkel Huinink 1997). Unfortunately, topotecan treatment led 
to severe bone marrow suppression, with 80% Grade 4 neutropenia, 25% Grade 4 thrombocytopenia, and 41% Grade 3 or 4 anemia ( ten Bokkel Huinink 1997).  
As such toxicities are often dose limiting, multiple clinical trials have studied alternative dosing schedules to improve the tolerability of topotecan treatment ( Armstrong  2004, Hoskins  1998). 
For example, one Phase 2 trial tested the effect of the standard dosing of topotecan (1.5 mg/m
2 
daily for the first 5 days of 21-day cycles) compared with an alternative dosing regimen (1.75 mg/m
2 once weekly for 4 weeks, repeated every 6 weeks) in patients with recurrent EOC. The 
alternative dosing regimen led to a lower response rate (9.6% compared with 22.6% in the standard dosing arm) but also decreased myelotoxicity (52% of patients had Grade 3 or 4 granulocytopenia in comparison with 94% in the standard dosing arm) ( Hoskins  1998). A 
subsequent Phase 2 trial tested the effect of yet another dosing schedule (1.5 mg/m
2 daily for the 
first 3 days of 21- day cycles) ( Markman  2000). Compared with historical controls, this 
alternative dosing regimen seemed to decrease the toxicity of topotecan. In a meta- analysis of 
various clinical trials, it was concluded that modification of the topotecan dose, and potentially the dosing schedule, can indeed reduce hematologic toxicity without decreasing the efficacy of the drug ( Armstrong  2004).  
1.4.4. Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin 
Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin is approved as monotherapy for relapsed ovarian cancer (Pisano  2013) and has also been combined with carboplatin in the frontline setti ng with similar 
activity ( Gladieff  2012 ). Studies with single-agent pegylated liposomal doxorubicin in patients 
with platinum- resistant ovarian cancer have yielded ORRs of approximately 10% to 20%. 
Palmar -plantar erythrodysesthesia (hand-foot syndrome [HFS]) and mucositis were the most 
commonly reported toxicities and the most common cause of dose reduction and treatment discontinuation ( Pisano  2013). Decreased rates of HFS and stomatitis/mucositis and comparable 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
37 response rates and outcomes have been observed when pegylated liposomal doxorubicin is 
administere d at a dose of 40 mg/m2 every 28 days compared with the approved dose of 50 mg/m2 
given on a similar schedule ( Pisano  2013). Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin a dministered in 
combination with various agents has demonstrated increased activity compared with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin alone. Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin in combination with oxaliplatin has been associated with an ORR of 60% to 70%, whereas ORRs of 30% to 40% have been observed in patients treated with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin in combination with gemcitabine, topotecan, paclitaxel, vinorelbine, or ifosfamide ( Pisano  2013). The tolerability 
profile of these combinations was good, except for pegylated liposomal doxorubicin/topotecan, which was associated with unacceptable levels of hematologic toxicity.  
1.5. Investigational Therapies  
1.5.1. Pembrolizuma b  
Pembrolizumab is a potent humanized IgG4 mAb with high specificity of binding to the programmed cell death 1 (PD- 1) receptor, thus inhibiting its interaction with programmed cell 
death ligand 1 (PD- L1) and programmed cell death ligand 2 (PD-L2). Based on nonclinical in 
vitro data, pembrolizumab has high affinity and potent receptor blocking activity for PD-1. Pembrolizumab has an acceptable nonclinical safety profile and is in clinical development as an intravenous (IV) immunotherapy for advanced malignancies. Pembrolizumab is indicated for the treatment of patients across several indications. For more details on specific indications, refer to the Appendix E . 
Refer to Appendix E  and the approved labeling for detailed background information on 
pembrolizumab. 
1.6. Nonclinical Studies of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine  
1.6.1. Pharmacology 
Results of nonclinical pharmacology studies demonstrate the following that support single- agent 
and combination studies: 
• FRα has limited normal tissue expression and marked expre ssion in epithelial tumors, 
particularly serous and EOCs and serous endometrial cancers, as assessed by IHC 
(Investigator Brochure ). 
• In vitro studies demonstrated that mirvetuximab soravtansine binds cell surface FRα with apparent high affinity (≤  0.1 nM) and shows potent (IC
50 ≤ 1 nM) and selective 
cytotoxicity against cells expressing FRα. Mirvetuximab soravtansine –mediated 
cytotoxicity involves binding, internalization, and degradation of mirvetuximab soravtansine 3, which releases DM4. DM4 and a second catabolite, S- methyl-DM4, 
then inhibit tubulin polymerization and microtubule assembly, causing cell death. The lipophilic molecules S-methyl DM4 and DM4 can also diffuse to neighboring cells and induce bystander killing.  
• In vitro cytotoxicity studies suggest that cells sensitive to mirvetuximab soravtansine 
express higher levels of FRα and release 10- to 100-fold more cytotoxic maytansinoid than cells resistant to mirvetuximab soravtansine.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
38 • Mirvetuximab soravtansine retains the inherent activities of its antibody moiety, 
M9346A, including binding affinity (apparent affinity ≤  0.1 nM) and selectivity for 
FRα, capacity for uptake, internalization and degradation by FRα -positive target cells, 
and ability to induce antibody-dependent cell- mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) in vitro .  
• Mirvetuximab soravtansine demonstrates significant activity against FRα -positive 
xenografts. Partial and/or complete regressions in xenograft models of EOC were seen at doses of mirvetuximab soravt ansine well below its maximum tolerated dose 
(MTD).  
• Mirvetuximab soravtansine shows significant in vivo efficacy against ovarian (IGROV- 1, OVCAR -3, and OV-90 models) and non–small- cell lung carcinoma 
(NSCLC) (NCI-H2110 model) tumor xenografts.  
• Combinatio n mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab is more efficacious than 
either agent administered as a monotherapy in ovarian (OV90 and IGROV-1) tumor xenografts and in an ovarian cancer patient–derived xenograft model (ST088). In the patient -derived xenograft model, the mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab 
combination is more efficacious than combination therapy consisting of paclitaxel + bevacizumab.  
• Combination mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin is more efficacious than either agent administered as a monotherapy in the OV90 ovarian tumor xenograft model. 
Combination mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin is more efficacious than carboplatin + paclitaxel in the model.  
• Combination mirvetuximab soravtansine + pegylated liposomal doxorubicin is more efficacious than either agent administered as a monotherapy in the ST088 ovarian cancer patient –derived xenograft model. 
Pharmacology studies are further detailed in the mirvetuximab soravtansine Investigator Brochure . 
1.6.2. Pharmacokinetics  
Nonclinical studies with mirvetuximab soravtansine cross-reactive (monkey) and non–cross -
reactive (mouse) species were conducted to define pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters and to determine the stability of the linker and impact of conjugation on antibody clearance. An additional PK study with free DM4 was conducted in monkeys. Pharmacokinetic studies demonstrated the stability of mirvetuximab soravtansine in circulation, showed clearance via a distribution phase lasting about 24 hours followed by a slower terminal elimination phase after IV administration, and suggested linear PK. These studies are further detailed in the mirvetuximab soravtansine Investigator Brochure .  
1.6.3. Toxicology 
Mirvetuximab soravtansine was evaluated for toxicity after a single IV injection in cross- reactive 
(monkey) and non– cross -reactive (mouse) species. Results of these studies supported the 
first-in-human (FIH) trial exploring the safety and tolerability of mirvetuximab soravtansine 
when administered Q3W to patients with advanced solid tumors. Potential risks suggested by these studies and by clinical experience with other maytansinoid ADCs include hematologic 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
39 abnormalities, electrolyte alterations, injection site reactions, infusion reactions, 
immunogenicity, hepatic abnormalities, and peripheral neuropathy. Toxicology studies are further detailed in the mirvetuximab soravtansine Investigator Brochure . 
1.7. Clinical Studies of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine  
1.7.1. First -in-Human Phase 1 Study: Study IMGN853 -0401 
The FIH Phase 1 study evaluated the safety, PK, and pharmacodynamics of single- agent 
mirvetuximab soravtansine in patients with EOC and other FR α-positive tumors. Mirvetuximab 
soravtansine was administered using two dosing schedules: Q3W (A) and on Days 1, 8, and 15 of a 28- day cycle (B). Pharmacokinetic data and treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs) 
reported by patients enrolled in the dose escalation cohorts are listed in the Investigator Brochure .  
The recommended Phase 2 dose (R2PD) for single- agent mirvetuximab 
soravtansine administered Q3W was determined t o be 6 mg/kg adjusted ideal body weight 
(AIBW). As of February 2018, mirvetuximab soravtansine had a 27% ORR (95% CI, 18.5%, 37.1%) and median PFS of 4.2 months (95% CI, 3.7, 5.4 months) in the 96 patients with platinum-resistant EOC in the patient expansion cohort in Study 0401.  
The ORR was 47% (95% CI, 30.4%, 64.5%) and the median PFS was 6.7 months (95% CI, 4.1, 
8.3 months) in the subset of 36 patients with FRα -positive (medium/high expression [≥  50% of 
cells with ≥  2+ intensity]) platinum- resistant EOC  with one to three prior regimens treated as 
part of a 96-patient Expansion Cohort in Study 0401 (clinical study report Table 16). Similarly, results of a pooled analysis of 113 patients showed an ORR of 30% (95% CI, 21.8%, 39.4%), a median PFS of 4.3 months (95% CI, 3.9, 5.4), and a median duration of response of 19.3 weeks (95% CI, 18, 34 weeks ).
 
Treatment -related  adverse events (AEs) occurring in > 20% of patients in this cohort included 
diarrhea, blurred vision, fatigue, nausea, and increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and were mostly low grade. Blurred vision was likely related to the development of corneal keratopathy, transient microcysts that form in the corneal epithelium, causing temporary symptoms.
 
1.8. Rationale for the Starting Dose  
1.8.1. Mirvetuxi mab Soravtansine  
The starting dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine in this Phase 1b/2 study will be 5 mg/kg, with the dose calculated using AIBW, which is one dose level lower than the RP2D (6 mg/kg using AIBW) defined in the FIH Study 0401. The expected exposure of patients treated at this dose level is within the range of exposure observed in patients with objective responses. Analysis of safety, tolerability, PK, and preliminary anti- tumor activity data will help guide future 
development of mirvetuximab soravtansine.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
40 1.8.2. Pembrolizumab  
The dose of pembrolizumab planned for this trial is 200 mg Q3W. The dose recently approved in 
the United States and several other countries for treatment of patients with melanoma is 2 mg/kg Q3W. Information on the rationale for s electing 200  mg Q3W is summarized below. 
KEYNOTE -001 is an open-label Phase 1 study conducted to evaluate the safety, tolerability, PK 
and pharmacodynamics, and anti-tumor activity of pembrolizumab when administered as monotherapy. The dose escalation portion of this trial evaluated three dose levels, 1 mg/kg, 3 mg/kg, and 10 mg/kg, administered every 2 weeks (Q2W), and dose expansion cohorts evaluated 2 mg/kg administered Q3W and 10 mg/kg Q3W in patients with advanced solid tumors. All dose levels were well tolerated, and no dose- limiting toxicities (DLTs) were 
observed. This FIH study of pembrolizumab showed evidence of target engagement and objective evidence of tumor size reduction at all dose levels. No MTD has been identified. In addition, two randomized cohort evaluations of patients with melanoma receiving pembrolizumab at a dose of 2 mg/kg versus 10 mg/kg Q3W have been completed, and one randomized cohort evaluating 10 mg/kg Q3W versus 10 mg/kg Q2W has been completed. The clinical efficacy and safety data demonstrate a lack of important differences in efficacy or safety profile across doses.  
An integrated body of evidence suggests that 200 mg Q3W is expected to provide similar 
response as 2 mg/kg Q3W, 10 mg/kg Q3W, and 10 mg/kg Q2W. A flat pembrolizumab exposure-response relationship for efficacy and safety has been found in subjects with melanoma in the range of doses between 2 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg. Exposures for 200 mg Q3W are expected to lie within this range and will be close to those obtained with 2 mg/kg Q3W.  
A population PK model, which characterized the influence of body weight and other patient 
covariates on exposure, was developed. The PK profile of pembrolizumab was consistent with that of other humanized mAbs, which typically have a low clearance and a limited volume of distributio n. The distribution of exposures from the 200 mg fixed dose are predicted to 
considerably overlap those obtained with the 2 mg/kg dose and, importantly, will maintain individual patient exposures within the exposure range established in melanoma as associa ted 
with maximal clinical response. Pharmacokinetic properties of pembrolizumab, and specifically the weight dependency in clearance and volume of distribution, are consistent with no meaningful advantage of weight-based dosing versus fixed dosing.  
In tra nslating to other tumor indications, similarly flat exposure-response relationships for 
efficacy and safety as observed in patients with melanoma can be expected, as the anti -tumor 
effect of pembrolizumab is driven through immune system activation rather than through a direct 
interaction with tumor cells, rendering it independent of the specific tumor type. In addition, available PK results in subjects with melanoma, NSCLC, and other tumor types support a lack of meaningful difference in PK exposures obtained at tested doses among tumor types. Thus, the 200 mg Q3W fixed-dose regimen is considered an appropriate fixed dose for other tumor indications.  
A fixed -dose regimen will simplify the dosing regimen to be more convenient for physicians and 
to reduce potential for dosing errors. A fixed-dosing scheme will also reduce complexity in the 
logistical chain at treatment facilities and reduce waste. The existing data suggest that 200 mg Q3W is the appropriate dose for pembrolizumab. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
41 1.9. Safety Rationale for the Trip let Combination  
Preliminary safety data from the mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab and the 
mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin combinations exhibit TEAEs consistent with the nature and severity of the most common preferred terms listed in the respective referenc e safety 
information for each drug. The doublet combinations were generally well tolerated, and no new safety signals were observed at the highest dose levels explored per protocol.  
As of July 2017, TEAEs occurring in > 20% of patients in the mirvetuximab  soravtansine + 
bevacizumab combination (n = 41) included nausea, fatigue, blurred vision, diarrhea, peripheral 
neuropathy, headache, hypertension, vomiting, constipation, myalgia, abdominal pain, and decreased appetite; the TEAEs were typically ≤  Grade 2.  One patient, who was dosed at the 
highest dose level, reported two Grade 2 DLTs (neutropenia and thrombocytopenia). 
Treatment -emergent AEs occurring in > 20% of patients in the mirvetuximab soravtansine + 
carboplatin combination (n = 18) included nausea, thrombocytopenia, diarrhea, vision blurred, 
neutropenia, fatigue, hypokalemia, vomiting, hypomagnesaemia, neuropathy peripheral, decreased appetite, headache, dyspnea, anemia, constipation, myalgia, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) increased, AST increased, pneumonitis, and pyrexia. The TEAEs were typically ≤  Grade 
2. One DLT (vasculitis, Grade 3) was recorded in one patient in the highest dose level cohort (6 mg/kg mirvetuximab soravtansine + AUC 5 carboplatin). Of the 10 patients dosed at the 
highest dose l evel, six  patients required at least one dose delay of carboplatin for a 
myelosuppression event, and four patients required a dose reduction of carboplatin from AUC5 to AUC4 within the first six cycles of treatment because of a TEAE. Two of the four TEAEs that led to a dose reduction of carboplatin were myelosuppressive (Grade 2 thrombocytopenia and neutropenia). 
1.10. Rationale for the Study Plan 
This is an open-label, Phase 1b/2, non-randomized combination study of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine in adult patients with advanced EOC, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube cancer. Bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin were selected as combination agents on the basis of nonclinical studies showing that the activity of these agents was additi ve with mirvetuximab soravtansine ( Section  1.6.1). Pembrolizumab, an anti–PD -1 
monoclonal antibody (mAb), is approved for the treatment of melanoma, NSCLC, head and neck squamous cell cancer, classical Hodgkin lymphoma, urothelial carcinoma, microsatellite instability high solid tumors, and gastric/gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma and has shown preliminary anti-tumor activity as a single agent in EOC ( Varga  2015).  
This study is designed to establish the MTD and determine the RP2D of mirvetuximab soravtansine when administered in combination with bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin or pembrolizumab; and to evaluate the triplet combination of mirvetuximab soravtansine at the RP2D with bevacizumab + carboplatin. All study treatments will be administered IV. The safety, tolerability, immunog enicity to mirvetuximab soravtansine, 
and preliminary anti-tumor activity of mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, pembrolizumab, or bevacizumab + carboplatin will be characterized. The PK of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be characterized along with bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin concentrations. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
42 Concentrations of pembrolizumab may be characterized if warranted because of a safety signal. 
Five dosing Regimens will be evaluated in this study:  
Regimen A: mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab administered on Day 1 of each 21-day cycle  
Regimen B: mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin administered on Day 1 of each 21-day cycle  
Regimen C: mirvetuximab soravtansine + pegylated liposomal doxorubicin administered on Day 1 of each 28- day cycle  
Regimen D: mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab administered on Day 1 of each 21-day cycle  
Regimen E: mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab + carboplatin administered on Day 1 of each 21 -day cycle  
Doublet Dosing (Escalation and Expansion) 
The patient population for the Dose Escalation phase (Regimens A through D) and the triplet 
dose (Regimen E) will include patients with EOC, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube cancer.  
In the Dose Escalation phase, patients will be enrolled in groups of three to six until the MTD is defined for each Regimen. To further evaluate the safety of each Regimen (Regimens A through D), up to 10 patients will be treated at the MTD. Dose Expansion is planned for Regimen A and Regimen D to further evaluate the mirvetuximab soravtansine and bevacizumab combination and mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab combination, respectively, in patients with platinum-resistant, advanced EOC.  
Triplet Dosing  
Triplet dosing (Regimen E) will evaluate the mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab + 
carboplatin combination in patients with platinum-sensitive, advanced EOC. Regimen E may enroll approximately 50 patients, as exploration of alternative doses is required to enroll approximately 40 patients to be dosed at the maximum dose level determined to be safe. 
The aims of triplet dosing (Regimen E) are to evaluate safety and tolerability of the combination 
and to assess for early signs of activity. The starting doses used in triplet dosing (Regimen E) will be derived from all evaluable data from Regimens A and B. The MTD will be determined from the assessment of DLTs during the first treatment cycle. Patients will be enrolled in a stepwise manner: Ini tially, six patients will be dosed at the target triplet dose. If that dose is 
considered tolerable, a further six patients will be dosed, followed by the remaining 28 patients.  
Should the initial six or 12 patients not tolerate the starting dose, either the mirvetuximab 
soravtansine dose or the carboplatin dose will be reduced. The reduced triplet doses will always be explored in the same stepwise manner as detailed above. A total of 12 patients (6 + 6 patients) will be assessed at a dose before the remai ning 28 patients are enrolled. The decision of whether 
to reduce the mirvetuximab soravtansine dose or the carboplatin dose will be made according to the DLTs.  
Regimen A Cohorts 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
43 Regimen A initially included bevacizumab -naïve patients (Cohort 1) and bevaci zumab 
pre-treated patients (Cohort 2) in the recurrent EOC, platinum-resistant population. On the basis 
of the preliminary results from Regimen A Cohorts 1 and 2 ( O’Malley  2018), a third Cohort 
(Cohort 3) will be added to further evaluate the mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab 
combination in a defined subset of patients with ovarian cancer. Approximately 60 patients will be enrolled. The purpose of Cohort 3 is to further explore and confirm the safety and efficacy of the mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab combination in the recurrent EOC patient population, including primary peritoneal and fallopian tube cancers. Cohort 3 will include patients with  one to three prior therapies who may be either platinum resistant or platinum 
sensitive if, in the opinion of the Investigator, a platinum-free doublet is an appropriate next line of therapy. Patients with platinum-sensitive EOC often, but not always, rec eive a platinum -based 
therapy. Platinum-free regimens are used when patients have had unmanageable toxicity with platinum-containing chemotherapy, when the maximum lifetime cisplatin dose has been reached, when an allergic reaction to carboplatin is of concern, and/or per patient preference. Patients in Regimen A Cohort 3 may or may not have received prior therapy with bevacizumab because the MITO B16/MaNGO study has demonstrated benefit of bevacizumab re- treatment in patients 
with ovarian cancer.  
1.10.1. Rationale for FRα Expression Levels  
Nonclinical data demonstrate that mirvetuximab soravtansine anti- tumor activity correlates with 
FRα expression: The higher the FRα expression, the greater the anti -tumor activity observed in 
nonclinical models ( Investigator Brochure ). Consistent with these nonclinical data, preliminary 
analysis of single- agent data across low, medium, and high FRα expression subsets, in the FIH 
mirvetuximab soravtansine study, confirmed that the most significant benefit (PFS and ORR) was seen in t he medium and high subsets. This has led to restriction of eligibility to the medium 
and high subsets of FRα  expression in the Forward I single- agent registration -enabling study for 
mirvetuximab soravtansine. 
The initial hypothesis for Study IMGN853- 0402 w as that while low FRα expression (≥  25% to 
< 50% cells with at least 2+ staining by IHC) may not be sufficient for maximal anti-tumor 
activity with mirvetuximab soravtansine monotherapy, it might be sufficient for anti-tumor activity when mirvetuximab soravtansine is combined with other anti- cancer agents. This 
hypothesis was based on additive/synergistic anti-tumor activity seen when mirvetuximab soravtansine is combined with other anti- cancer agents ( Investigator Brochure ). Data emerging 
from all four com binations (Regimens A through D) in the Dose Escalation phase of Study 
IMGN853-0402 reveal that, as has been observed with mirvetuximab soravtansine monotherapy, the higher the FRα expression, the greater the anti -tumor activity in terms of depth of response 
and duration of tumor shrinkage. While the numbers are small, the consistency of data across all combination Regimens in Dose Escalation does not support the initial hypothesis. Therefore, the Sponsor revised the eligibility criterion in the Dose Expansion phase of Study IMGN853-0402 (patients enrolled under Protocol Amendment 4 or later) to include patients with medium or high FRα expression (at least 50% of cells with at least 2+ staining by IHC), who are most likely to benefit from mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with bevacizumab, pembrolizumab, or bevacizumab in combination with carboplatin ( Section  3.1).  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
44 2. TRIAL OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
All objectives apply to all dosing Regimens and all Cohorts within a Regimen unless otherwise 
noted. 
2.1. Primary Objectives  
2.1.1. Dose Escalation (Regimens A Through D) 
• Evaluate the safety and tolerability of mirvetuximab soravtansine when given in 
combination with bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or pembrolizumab (Regimens A, B, C, and D, respectively) in patients with EOC, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube cancer 
2.1.2. Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E ( Triplet)  
• Assess preliminary response- based anti -tumor activity of mirvetuximab soravtansine 
when administered in combination with bevacizumab (Regimen A) or pembrolizumab (Regimen D) and in combination with bevacizumab and carboplatin (Regimen E) in patien ts with EOC, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube 
cancer  
2.2. Primary Endpoints  
2.2.1. Dose Escalation (Regimens A Through D) 
• Treatment -emergent AEs, laboratory test results, physical examination, 
electrocardiograms (ECGs), and vital signs  
2.2.2. Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E (Triplet)  
• Objective response rate, defined as percentage of patients with confirmed response (complete response/remission [CR] + partial response/remission [PR]) as assessed by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) Version 1.1 ( Appendix G )  
2.3. Secondary Objectives  
• Evaluate the safety and tolerability of mirvetuximab soravtansine when administered 
in combination with bevacizumab or pembrolizumab (Dose Expansion, Regimens A 
and D, respectively) and in combination with bevacizumab and carboplatin (Regimen  E [Triplet]) in patients with EOC, primary peritoneal cancer, or fallopian 
tube cancer  
• Assess preliminary respo nse-based anti -tumor activity of the combination Regimens 
(Dose Escalation, Regimens A through D) 
• Assess PFS  
• Measure duration of response (DOR): the time from first objective response (CR/PR) to the time of progressive disease (PD) among those who have achieved a PR or CR  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
45 • Assess Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup (GCIG) CA125 response rate of the 
combination Regimens 
• Characterize PK of mirvetuximab soravtansine when used in combination Regimens  
• Evaluate bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubi cin 
concentrations when administered in combination with mirvetuximab soravtansine  
• Characterize immunogenicity of mirvetuximab soravtansine  
2.4. Secondary Endpoints  
• Treatment -emergent AEs, changes in laboratory test results, physical examination, 
ECGs, and vital signs (Dose Expansion [Regimens A and D] and Regimen E [Triplet])  
• Objective response rate, defined as percentage of patients with confirmed response (CR + PR) as assessed by RECIST Version 1.1 (Dose Escalation, Regimens A through D) ( Appendix G ) 
• Progression-free survival, defined as the time from first dose to PD or death, whichever occurs first  
• Duration of response, defined as the time from first objective response (CR/PR) to the time of PD among those who have achieved a PR or CR  
• Number of patients with GCIG CA125 criteria clinical re sponses ( Appendix H ) 
• Mirvetuximab soravtansine PK parameters for intact ADC, total antibody, DM4, and 
S-methyl DM4 include, but are not limited to, C ycle 1 and Cycle 3 maximum plasma 
concentration (C
max), area under the time-concentration curve (AUC), terminal half-
life (t ½), clearance (CL), volume of distribution at steady state (V ss), and time that 
Cmax occurs (t max) 
• Concentration data of bevacizumab , carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin will be measured before and after bevacizumab, carboplatin, and 
pegylated liposomal doxorubicin infusions (Cycle 1 through Cycle 6) 
• Immunogenicity: presence of anti-drug antibodies (ADA) to mirvetuximab soravtansine   
2.5. Exploratory Objectives  
• Assess any association between FRα expression levels and clinical response  
• Identify or evaluate potential biomarkers in blood and tumor tissue that might predict response to each of the four combinations  
• Evaluate pembrolizumab concentrations if warranted by a safety signal (Regimen D only) 
• Assess anti -tumor activity of the combination with pembrolizumab per 
immune -related RECIST (irRECIST) (Regimen D only) 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
46 2.6. Exploratory Endpoints  
• Correlation of FRα expression, by IHC (protein), quantitative reverse transcriptase -
polymerase chain reaction (mRNA), or other quantitative methods, to c linical 
endpoints 
• Measure biomarkers in blood and tumor tissue including, but not limited to, 
mutational and genomic alterations of tumor samples; expression and activation of oncogenic genes and pathways in tumor samples; expression and polymorphism of drug transporters such as multidrug resistance protein- 1 (p-glycoprotein [PgP]); the 
genotype of FcγR; expression and of immune -related genes and gene signatures 
(Regimen D only), and infiltration of tumor- related immune cells (Regimen D only)  
• Concentration data for pembrolizumab if warranted by a safety signal (Regimen D only)  
• Evaluate efficacy endpoints per irRECIST ( Appendix I ) (Regimen D only)  
− Progression-free survival, ORR, and DOR per irRECIST are defined as specified for the respective endpoints using RECIST Version 1.1 above, except that a confirmation assessment of PD (at least 4 weeks after the initial PD assessment) is  
required for subjects who remain on treatment after documented PD per RECIST Version 1.1. Subjects who discontinue treatment after documented PD assessment per RECIST Version 1.1 will be counted as having PD on the date of the documented PD assessment.  
Note: Unless specifically warranted by relevance to safety or efficacy endpoints, the exploratory endpoints will not be reported in the clinical study report. 
3. STUDY POPULATION 
3.1. Inclusion Criteria  
3.1.1. Inclusion Criteria for All Patients (Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion, 
Regimen -Specific)  
1. Pathologically documented advanced EOC (including primary peritoneal cancer and fallopian tube cancer).  
2. Female and ≥  18 years of age at the time of the first screening visit. 
3. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS) 0 or 1.  
4. Measurable disease:  
a. Dose Escalation: Patients may have measurable or non -measurable disease.  
b. Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E (Triplet): Patients must have at least one lesion that meets the definition of measurable d isease according to RECIST 
Version 1.1. 
5. Willing to provide an archival tumor tissue block or slides, or a new biopsy if archival tumor tissue is unavailable.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
47 a. Regimen D only: Patients must be willing to undergo two tumor biopsy collections 
using a non-signi ficant risk procedure (see Section  2.1.1). The first biopsy will be 
taken before the first dose of study treatment and the second, taken on Cycle 2 Day 8 (± 3 days).  
6. Confirmation of FRα positivity by IHC. If the archival tumor tissue does not meet FRα criteria, a new tumor biopsy may be submitted and used to meet this criterion. FRα expression levels must meet the following criteria:  
a. Dose Escalation (Regimens A through D): ≥  25% of tumor staining at ≥  2+ intensity  
b. Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D) and Regimen E (Triplet): ≥  50% of tumor 
staining at ≥  2+ intensity  
7. Time from prior therapy: 
a. Systemic anti- neoplastic therapy: five half -lives or 4 weeks, whichever is shorter. 
Hormonal therapy is not considered anti-neoplastic therapy. 
b. Radiotherapy: wide -field radiotherapy (eg, > 30% of marrow -bearing bones) 
completed at least 4 weeks, or focal radiation completed at least 2 weeks, before 
starting study treatment. 
8. Recovered or stabilized to National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) ≤  Grade 2 from all therapy -related toxicities 
(Regimens A through C and Regimen E). 
9. Resolution of toxic effect(s) of the most recent prior chemotherapy to Grade 1 or less (except alopecia). If patient received major surgery or radiation therapy of > 30 Gy, they must have recovered from the toxicity and/or complications from the intervention (Regimen D only). 
10. Platinum sensitivity:  
a. Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion: Regimens A (Cohorts 1 and 2) and D and Dose Escalation Regimen C: Patients must have disease that is resistant to platinum therapy. Platinum- resistant disease is defined as disease that responded to primary 
platinum therapy and then progressed within 6 months (182 days) after the date of the last dose of platinum therapy, or disease that progressed during or within 6 months (182 days) after the date of the last dose of the subsequent platinum therapy. 
b. Dose Es calation, Regimen B: Patients must have platinum- sensitive disease. 
Platinum-sensitive disease is disease that responded to the last platinum therapy received before study entry and did not progress within 6 months (182 days) after the date of the last dose of platinum therapy. 
c. Regimen E (Triplet): Patients must have platinum- sensitive disease. Platinum-
sensitive disease is disease that responded to the last platinum therapy received before study entry and did not progress within 6 months (182 days) after t he date of the last 
dose of platinum therapy. The requirements to demonstrate platinum sensitivity (responsiveness and time to progression) apply to each of the patient’s prior platinum-containing regimens.  
d. Dose Expansion: Regimen A, Cohort 3: Patients may have either platinum- resistant 
disease or platinum- sensitive disease, where a non -platinum doublet is an appropriate 
next line of therapy. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
48 11. Number of prior therapies (where adjuvant ± neoadjuvant will be considered one regimen 
and maintenance therapy will  be considered to be part of the preceding regimen; 
hormonal therapy counts as a separate line of therapy unless given as maintenance): 
a. Dose Escalation (Regimens A through D): There is no upper limit to the number of 
prior treatment regimens received.  
b. Dose  Expansion Regimen A, Cohort 1: Patients must have received ≤  two prior 
systemic treatment regimens.  
c. Dose Expansion Regimen A, Cohort 2: Patients must have received at least one but not more than five prior systemic treatment regimens. At least one of the prior systemic treatment regimens must have included bevacizumab.  
d. Dose Expansion Regimen A, Cohort 3: Patients must have received at least one but no more than three prior systemic treatment regimens, where prior regimens may have included bevacizumab. 
e. Dose Expansion Regimen D: Patients must have received at least two but not more 
than four prior systemic treatment regimens. 
f. Regimen E (Triplet): Patients must have received at least one but not more than two prior systemic treatment regimens; prior systemic treatment regimens may have 
included vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitors (including bevacizumab) and must have included at least one platinum- based chemotherapy.  
12. Prior folate receptor –targeting investigational agents treatment: 
a. Dose Escalation (R egimens A through C): Prior treatment with folate receptor –
targeting investigational agents, including mirvetuximab soravtansine (provided it was not discontinued because of AEs), is allowed.  
b. Dose Escalation (Regimen D), Dose Expansion (Regimens A and D), and Regimen E (Triplet): Patients who have received prior mirvetuximab soravtansine are excluded.  
13. Major surgery (not including placement of vascular access device or tumor punch/scrape biopsies) must be completed 4 weeks before Day 1. Patients must have recovered or stabilized from the side effects before study treatment.  
14. Adequate hematologic, kidney, and liver function as defined by the following parameters: 
a. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥  1.5 × 10
9/L (1,500/μL). 
b. Platelet count ≥  100 × 109/L (100,000/μ L); must not be transfused within previous 
10 days. 
c. Hemoglobin ≥  9.0 g/dL. 
d. Serum creatinine ≤  1.5 times the upper limit of the normal range (ULN) or 24-hour 
creatinine clearance of ≥  60 mL/minute.  
e. AST ≤  2.5 times the ULN; ALT ≤  2.5 times the ULN. 
f. Serum bilirubin ≤  1.5 times the ULN (patients with documented diagnosis of Gilbert 
syndrome are eligible if total bilirubin is <  3.0 times the ULN). 
g. International normalized ratio (INR) or prothrombin time (PT) ≤  1.5 times the ULN 
unless patient is receivi ng anticoagulant therapy, as long as PT or partial 
thromboplastin time (PTT) is within therapeutic range of intended use of 
anticoagulants. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
49 h. Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) ≤  1.5 times the ULN unless patient is 
receiving anticoagulant therapy, as long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range of 
intended use of anticoagulants. 
i. Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion (Regimen D): thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) within normal limits (WNL). If TSH is not WNL, the patient is eligible if total triiodothyronine (T3) or free T3 and free thyroxine (T4) are WNL.  
15. Willing and able to sign the informed consent form (ICF) and to adhere to the study visit schedule and other protocol requirements. 
16. Woman  of childbearing potential (WCBP), defined as a sexually mature woman who has 
not undergone surgical sterilization or who has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 12 consecutive months (ie, who has had menses any time in the preceding 12 consecutive months) must agree to use effective contraceptive methods. Acceptable single methods include intrauterine device, vasectomy of a female patient’s male partner, and contraceptive rod implanted into the skin. Abstinence (relative to heterosexual activity) can be used as the sole method of contraception if it is consistently employed as the patient’s preferred and usual lifestyle and if considered acceptable by local regulatory agencies and independent ethics committees (IECs)/institutional review boards (IRBs). Periodic abstinence (eg, calendar, ovulation, sympto- thermal, post-ovulation methods) 
and withdrawal are not acceptable methods of contraception. Acceptable combination methods (requiring use of two of the following) are acceptable: diaphragm with spermicide (cannot be used in conjunction with cervical cap/spe rmicide); cervical cap 
with spermicide (nulliparous women only); contraceptive sponge (nulliparous women only); male condom or female condom (cannot be used together); hormonal contraceptive such as oral contraceptive pill, estrogen/progestin pill, or progestin -only pill; 
contraceptive skin patch; vaginal contraceptive ring; or subcutaneous contraceptive injection. Acceptable methods of contraception must be used while on study treatment and for at least 12 weeks after the last dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine ; for at least 
6 months after the last dose of bevacizumab, carboplatin, or pegylated liposomal doxorubicin; and for at least 4 months after the last dose of pembrolizumab. 
17. WCBP must have a negative pregnancy test within 3 days before the first dose of study treatment.  
3.1.2. Exclusion Criteria   
1. Male patients.  
2. Primary platinum- refractory disease. Platinum refractory is defined as disease that has not 
responded to a primary platinum-based regimen or progressed within 30 days after primary p latinum-based therapy. 
3. Clear -cell, mucinous histology, mixed histology with mucinous component, sarcoma, 
sarcomatous component, or low- grade ovarian cancer.  
4. Active or chronic corneal disorders, including but not limited to the following: Sjogren syndrome, Fuchs corneal dystrophy (requiring treatment), history of corneal transplantation, active herpetic keratitis, monocular vision, and/or other active ocular conditions requiring ongoing treatment/monitoring, such as wet age- related macular 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
50 degeneration requi ring intravitreal injections, active diabetic retinopathy with macular 
edema, and/or presence of papilledema.  
5. > Grade 1 peripheral neuropathy.  
6. Serious concurrent illness or clinically relevant active infection (testing not required), 
including but not limited to the following: 
a. Known active hepatitis B or C  
b. Known HIV infection  
c. Varicella -zoster virus (shingles)  
d. Cytomegalovirus infection  
e. Any other known concurrent infectious disease requiring IV antibiotics within 
2 weeks before study enrollment 
7. Clinically  significant cardiac disease including any one of the following: 
a. Recent myocardial infarction (≤  6 months before Day 1) 
b. Unstable angina pectoris 
c. Uncontrolled congestive heart failure (New York Heart Association > Class II)  
d. Uncontrolled hypertension (≥  CTC AE Version 4.03 Grade 3) 
e. History of hypertensive crisis or hypertensive encephalopathy 
f. Uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmias 
g. Clinically significant vascular disease (eg, aortic aneurysm or dissecting aneurysm) 
h. Severe aortic stenosis  
i. Clinically significant peripheral vascular disease  
j. ≥ Grade 3 cardiac toxicity following prior chemotherapy 
k. Heart rate–corrected QT interval > 470 msec on the screening ECG 
8. History of multiple sclerosis or other demyelinating disease and/or Eaton- Lambert 
syndrome (para-neoplastic syndrome).  
9. History of hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke within the last 6 months.  
10. History of cirrhotic liver disease.  
11. History of non-infectious interstitial lung disease, including non-infectious pneumonitis that required steroids or current pneumonitis.  
12. Prior hypersensitivity to monoclonal antibodies and/or severe hypersensitivity (≥  Grade 
3) to pembrolizumab and/or any of its excipients. 
13. Women who are pregnant or lactating or expecting to conceive children within the projected duration of the trial, starting with the screening visit through 6 months after the last dose of study treatment (Regimens A, B, and C only). 
14. Carcinomatous meningitis, untreated central nervous system (CNS) disease, or symptomatic CNS metastasis. Patients with previously  treated CNS metastasis (excluding 
carcinomatous meningitis) may participate if their disease is stable (without evidence of progression by imaging, using identical imaging modality at each assessment, for at least 4 weeks before the first dose of study tr eatment), have no evidence of new or emerging 
CNS metastasis, and are not using steroids for at least 7 days before the first dose of study treatment.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
51 15. History or evidence of thrombotic or hemorrhagic disorders within 6 months before the 
first dose of study treatment. 
16. Required used of folate-containing supplements (eg, folate deficiency). 
17. Known additional malignancy that is progressing or required active treatment within 3 years before the first dose of study treatment, excluding adjuvant hormonal thera py for 
breast cancer that was completed. Other exceptions include basal cell carcinoma of the skin, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin that has undergone potentially curative therapy, and other in situ cancers.  
3.1.2.1. Additional Exclusion Criteria for Regimen A  and Regimen E 
18. History of bowel obstruction (including sub-occlusive disease) related to underlying disease within 6 months before the start of study treatment. 
19. History of abdominal fistula, gastrointestinal (GI) perforation, or intra-abdominal abscess, or  evidence of rectosigmoid involvement by pelvic examination, bowel 
involvement on computed tomography (CT) scan, or clinical symptoms of bowel obstruction.
  
20. Prior radiotherapy to the pelvis or abdomen (Dose Escalation phase only). 
21. Surgery (including open biopsy) within 4 weeks before starting study therapy (within 24 hours for minor surgical procedures) or anticipated need for major surgery during study treatment.  
22. Non-healing wound, ulcer, or bone fracture.  
23. Hemoptysis ≥  0.5 teaspoon of red blood within 4 weeks before first study treatment. 
24. History of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). 
25. Clinically significant proteinuria: urine -protein (UPC) ratio ≥  1.0 or urine dipstick result 
≥ 2+; patients with UPC ratio ≥  1.0 or ≥  2+ proteinuria should undergo 24-hour urine 
collection and must show result ≤  1 gram of protein in 24-hour period. 
26. History of pulmonary embolization. 
27. History of Grade 4 thromboembolic events. 
3.1.2.2. Additional Exclusion Criteria for Regimen C  
28. Prior treatment with pegylated liposomal do xorubicin and/or doxorubicin. 
29. Left ventricular ejection fraction defined by multigated acquisition (MUGA) scan/echocardiogram (ECHO) that is below the institutional lower limit of normal.  
3.1.2.3. Additional Exclusion Criteria for Regimen D  
30. Received a live vaccine within 30 days before study enrollment. Seasonal flu vaccines that do not contain live virus are permitted. 
31. Diagnosis of immunodeficiency or is receiving systemic steroid therapy or any other form of immunosuppressive therapy within 7 days before the first dose of study 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
52 treatment. The use of physiologic doses of corticosteroids may be approved after 
consultation with the Sponsor. 
32. Active autoimmune disease that has required systemic treatment in the past 2 years (ie, with use of disease-modifying agents, corticosteroids, or immunosuppressive drugs). 
Replacement therapy (eg, thyroxine, insulin, or physiologic corticosteroid replacement therapy for adrenal or pituitary insufficiency) is not considered a form of systemic treatment.  
33. Prior anti -cancer mAb within 4 weeks before study Day 1 or has not recovered 
(ie, ≤ Grade 1 at baseline) from AEs due to agents administered more than 4 weeks 
earlier.  
34. Received transfusion of blood products (including platelets or red blood cells) or administration of colony- stimulating factors (including granulocyte colony- stimulating 
factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, or recombinant erythropoietin) within 4 weeks before study Day 1. 
35. Known psychiatric or substance abuse disorders that would interfere with cooperation with the requirements of the trial.  
36. Pregnant or breastfeeding or expecting to conceive children within the projected duration of the trial, starting with the screening visit through 120 days after the last dose of study treatment.  
37. Severe hyper sensitivity (≥  Grade 3) to pembrolizumab and/or any of its excipients. 
Prospective approval of protocol deviations to recruitment and enrollment criteria, also known as protocol waivers or exemptions, is not permitted. 
4. INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 
4.1. Study Design  
4.1.1. Overview and Schema  
This is an open-label, Phase 1b/2, non-randomized combination study of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine with bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, pembrolizumab, 
or bevacizumab + carboplatin in adult patients with FR α-positive advanced EOC, primary 
peritoneal cancer, or fallopian tube cancer.  
This Phase 1b/2 study comprises a Dose Escalation phase followed by an MTD Expansion phase 
to further characterize the safety profile and confirm the MTD as the RP2D. A triplet Regimen (Regimen E: mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab + carboplatin) will be opened to evaluate the safety and tolerability and to assess any early signs of activity in patients dosed with the combination Regimen ( Figure 1 ).  
The Dose Escalation phase will follow a standard 3 + 3 cohort design. The MTD will be determined from the assessment of DLTs during the first treatment cycle ( Table 5). A Dose 
Expansion phase is planned for Regimen A (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab) and Regimen D ( mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab) and will open pending Sponsor 
decision; patients enrolled in the Dose Expansion phase will receive study treatment at the MTD or RP2D determined during Dose Escalation ( Figure  1). For Regimen A, patients in the Dose 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
53 Expansion phase may be enrolled according to prior exposure to bevacizumab into three Dose 
Expansion Cohorts as follows: 1) Dose Expansion Cohort 1: bevacizumab naïve; 2) Dose Expansion Cohort 2: bevacizumab pretreated; and 3) Dose Expansion Cohort 3: one to three prior treatments, one of which could have been bevacizumab ( Figure  1).  
Regimen E (triplet dose) will be opened because enrollment and safety from Regimens A and B have been established, and Regimen A (Dose Expansion Cohorts) enrollment is currently ongoing. The planned doses for patients receiving the triplet dose (Regimen E) were derived from  all available data in Regimens A and B. Regimen E may enroll approximately 50 patients, 
as exploration of alternative doses is required to enroll approximately 40 patients, with a plan to be dosed at the maximum dose level determined to be safe.  
Safety and tolerability will be assessed on an ongoing basis, and patients will be enrolled initially in a stepwise manner.  
The period of observation extends from the time the patient receives the first dose of study treatment (mirvetuximab soravtansine a nd/or combination agent) until the final follow-up study 
visit. Patients will continue to receive mirvetuximab soravtansine and/or the combination agent until PD, unacceptable toxicity, or withdrawal of consent, whichever comes first, or until the Sponsor terminates the study. Patients who experience PD, as defined by RECIST, while on study may remain on study, provided there is evidence of clinical benefit and no unacceptable toxicity, as agreed upon by the Investigator and the Medical Monitor. Pembrolizum ab 
(Regimen  D) will be continued for up to 2 years. Patients who discontinue study treatment for 
reasons other than PD will be followed until PD, start of new anti- cancer therapy, or death, 
whichever occurs first.  
Figure  1: Study Design Schema  
 
a Enrolled 46 patients to ensure 35 patients with tumors expressing FRα at ≥ 50% of tumor staining at intensity ≥  2+ 
and 11 patients with a FRα 25%-49% of tumor staining at intensity ≥  2+. 
b Enroll approximately 50 patients  to evaluate 40 patients at the MTD.  

mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
54 4.1.2. Cohort Review Committee  
The Cohort Review Committee (CRC) comprises the ImmunoGen Medical Monitor and 
Investigators from participating sites. Once the last patient planned for safety evaluation in a given Regimen has completed a cycle of study treatment, a CRC meeting will be con vened to 
review all safety data and decide whether to continue or halt Dose Escalation, further expand individual dose levels to gain additional safety data, or explore lower or intermediate dose levels. In addition to meetings to review safety data at the end of each dose level, the CRC will convene to review safety data for ongoing patients and patients in follow-up, per the cohort management plan. 
4.1.3. Dose Escalation Guidelines  
4.1.3.1. Dose Levels and Regimens  
The primary aim of the Dose Escalation phase for each Regimen is to evaluate the safety and 
tolerability of mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or pembrolizumab; to identify the MTD and RP2D; and to characterize the PK profile of mirvetuximab soravtansine, bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin. The PK profile of pembrolizumab may be characterized if warranted because of a safety signal. Patients will be enrolled with 3 to 6 patients until the MTD for each of the four Regimens (A through D) is defined. If a patient is eligible for more than one 
combination Regimen, the Investigator will assign the patient to the most appropriate combination Regimen, taking into consideration the patient’s disease history, treatment history, and/or preferences. Approximately 16 (Regimen A), 22 (Regimen B), 22 (Regimen C), and 16 (Regimen D) patients will be enrolled in each Regimen, plus an additional 10 patients in each arm to define the MTD.  
The starting dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be 5 mg/kg, with the dose calculated using AIBW. All mirvetuximab soravtansine doses will be calculated according to AIBW. The four Regimens (A through D) will be evaluated in parallel and independently.  
The treatment Regimens and planned dose levels for the Dose Escalation phase of the study are 
outlined below and in Table  1, Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4. Enrollment in  Regimen A will 
open at the planned dose levels summarized in Table  1.  
Intermediate or lower dose levels of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, bevacizumab, or carboplatin may be explored if DLTs can be attributed to their mechanism of action. Higher doses of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (up to 50 mg/m
2) and carboplatin (AUC6) also may be 
considered. 
Table  1: Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen A (Mirvetuximab  Soravtansine 
+ Bevacizumab)  
Dose Level  Regimen A  
Mirvetuximab Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)b Bevacizumabc 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)  
-1 4 15 
1 5 15 
2 6 15 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
55 a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW. Maximum allowable dose is 6 mg/kg AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 3 weeks.  
c Maximum allowable dose of bevacizumab is 15 mg/kg.  
Table  2: Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen B (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine 
+ Carboplatin)  
Dose Level  Regimen B  
Mirvetuximab Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)b Carboplatinc 
(AUC, D1q3W)  
-1 4 AUC4  
1 5 AUC4  
2 5 AUC5  
3 6 AUC5  
a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW. Maximum allowable dose is 6 mg/kg AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 3 weeks.  
c Maximum allowable dose of carboplatin is AUC6, subject to CRC review.  
Table  3: Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen C (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin)  
Dose Level  Regimen C  
Mirvetuximab Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q4W)b Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicinc 
(mg/m2, D1q4W)  
-1 4 30 
1 5 30 
2 5 40 
3 6 40 
a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW. Maximum allowable dose is 6 mg/kg AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 4 weeks.  
c The approved dose of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin for ovarian cancer is 50 mg/m2; however, a decrease in the 
incidence of HFS was observed at a dose of 40 mg/m2 without significant loss in efficacy. Maximum allowable dose is 
50 mg/m2, subject to CRC review.  
Table  4: Planned Dose Levels (Dose Escalation) for Regimen D (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Pembrolizumab)  
Dose Level  Regimen D  
Mirvetuximab Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)b Pembrolizumabc 
(mg, D1q3W) 
-1 4 200 
1 5 200 
2 6 200 
a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW. Maximum allowable dose is 6 mg/kg AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 3 weeks. 
c Maximum allowable dose of pembrolizumab is 200 mg.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
56 4.1.3.2. Dose Escalation Rules (3 + 3 Design) 
For all patients, Do se Escalation decisions will be made in accordance with a standard 3  + 3 
design. To ensure that those patients consented to a specific Regimen receive study drug in this 
multi-center study, Regimens may be expanded to include additional patients if such pa tients can 
be treated ≤  14 days after the third (or sixth) patient was first dosed with mirvetuximab 
soravtansine. In this situation, the decision to dose escalate (or declare the MTD/RP2D) may be made after the third evaluable (or sixth evaluable) patient  has completed Cycle 1. Intra- patient 
dose escalation will not be permitted.  
• If none of the three or four patients experience a DLT, then dose escalation to the next dose level will occur (See Section  4.1.3 for dose levels).  
• If one of the initial three or four patients experiences a DLT, the group will be expanded to up to six patients. If no further DLT occurs, dose escalation to the next dose level may proceed.  
• If at least two of two to six patients or more than 33% of patients in any given group experience a DLT, the maximum administered dose is reached, and no further dose escalation will occur. Enrollment into a Regimen at a lower dose level will be considered. 
• Each dose level will be evaluated in a similar fashion.  
A patient will be deemed non -evaluable for dose escalation decisions and will not be counted 
toward the total number of evaluable patients in a given dose level if the patient di d not receive a 
full course of study treatment (ie, all planned doses of mirvetuximab soravtansine and 
combination drug for first cycle) and  did not experience a DLT; or discontinued from the study 
before completing necessary safety evaluations through the end of the first cycle of treatment 
and did not experience a DLT . Non- evaluable patients will be replaced except when accrual to 
the dose level has stopped because of the occurrence of at least two DLTs.  
The MTD is defined as the highest dose at which one or fewer among six patients or ≤  33% 
experiences a DLT.  
If the maximum planned dose is reached and further dose exploration of pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin or carboplatin beyond the planned maximum dose of 40 mg/m2 and AUC5, 
respectively, is required  to define the MTD, then the CRC will determine the dose escalation 
increments after review of available clinical and PK data. The maximum allowable doses of each study drug are as follows: mirvetuximab soravtansine 6.0 mg/kg AIBW every 3 weeks, mirvetuximab soravtansine 6.0 mg/kg every 4 weeks, bevacizumab 15 mg/kg every 3 weeks, carboplatin AUC6 every 3 weeks, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin 50 mg/m
2 every 4 weeks, 
and pembrolizumab 200 mg every 3 weeks. 
If there is evidence of late-occurring or cumulative DLT(s), an ad hoc CRC may be scheduled 
with participating Investigators to discuss dose level or MTD reduction. If agreed, the Investigators and Sponsor may increase the number of patients treated at a given dose level, or enroll additional patients at the previously completed dose level if doing so is necessary to better define the safety of any of the combination Regimens. Additionally, upon review of the safety data from the current Cohort, the Sponsor, together with the Investigators, may decide to evaluate intermediate dose levels.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
57 To better characterize safety, 10 patients may be enrolled and treated at the putative MTD. After 
the CRC reviews the safety data from the Dose Escalation phase and agrees that the dose is safe to proceed, and the Sponsor approves, the Dose Expansion phase of the trial will commence. Dose Expansion is planned for Regimen A and Regimen D; on the basis of emergent data, the CRC may decide to expand Regimens B and/or C to collect additional safety information. If expanded, Regimens B and C will each enroll a maximum of 20 patients, who will be treated at the MTD established for the corresponding Regimen. 
4.1.4. Definition of Dose -Limiting Toxicity  
Dose -limiting toxicity will be defined as a TEAE or abnormal laboratory value related to  
mirvetuximab soravtansine and/or the combination drug (ie, assessed as unrelated to disease, 
intercurrent illness, or concomitant medications), including those TEAEs and abnormal laboratory values that result in a failure to meet the criteria for re -treatment ( Section  5.10.1). 
Dose -limiting toxicities will be considered related to the study treatment unless there is clear 
evidence of an alternative explanation and this attribution is agreed to by the CRC.  
Only DLTs that occur during the first cycle will be considered for decisions regarding dose 
escalation. Clinically significant toxicities or TEAEs that meet the definition of dose limiting but occur  after Cycle 1 (dose-modifying events) may be considered when determining the MTD.  
If a patient experiences a DLT or an AE that qualifies as a DLT at any point during study 
treatment as outlined in Table 5, the study treatment must be stopped, and the toxicity(ies) in 
question must be followed until resolution or stabilization. If treatment is to be resumed, then re-treatment criteria must be met ( Section 5.10.3), and administration of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine and/or the combination agent must be resumed at a lower dose per dose the modification guidelines ( Section  5.10.4).  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
58 Table  5: Dose- Limiting Toxicity Definitions  
Toxicity  DLT Definition Criteriaa 
Dose delays  Failure to meet re -treatment criteria within the specified time frame 
(Section  5.10.1 ) 
Hematology  • CTCAE Grade 4 neutropenia ≥  7 days  
• CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 febrile neutropenia, defined as ANC <  1,000/mm3 
with a single temperature reading of > 38.3°C or sustained 
temperature of ≥  38°C for > 1 hour  
• CTCAE Grade 3 thrombocytopenia, associated with clinically 
significant bleeding that requires transfusion therapy  
• CTCAE Grade 4 thrombocytopenia  
Non-hematologic and 
other DLTs  • CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 nausea or vomiting despite the use of optimal 
anti-emetic treatments  
• CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 diarrhea despite the use of optimal anti -diarrheal 
treatments  
• CTCAE Grade 2 diarrhea lasting > 14 days (Regimen D only)  
• CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 ocular AEs  
• CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 pneumonitis  
• Other non- hematologic toxicities of CTCAE ≥  Grade 3 except for the 
following:  
– AEs related to underlying disease.  
– CTCAE Grade 3 fatigue.  
– Isolated, asymptomatic Grade 3 abnormalities in biochemistry 
laboratory values that last for ≤  7 days. This includes electrolyte 
abnormalities that respond to medical intervention.  
a An AE meeting criteria is considered a DLT if the event occurred during the first cycle.  
For any dose- limiting hepatic toxicity, evaluations should be performed to determine the underlying etiology and rule 
out drug-induced liver injury (Hy’s Law).  
4.1.5. Dose Expansion Phase 
Once the CRC determines the MTD, the CRC will determine the dose and schedule to be 
administered in the Dose Expansion phase. The Dose Expansion phase will begin enrollment pending Sponsor decision. The primary aims of the Dose Expansion phase are to further evaluate safety and tolerability and to assess preliminary anti-tumor activity of mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with bevacizumab or mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with pembrolizumab. Data obtained in the Dose Expansion phase will help define the RP2D.  
Regimen A (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Bevacizumab) Patients enrolled in the Dose Expansion phase may be assigned to one of three Dose Expansion 
Cohorts according to previous exposure to bevacizumab as follows:  
1. Dose Expansion Cohort 1: bevacizumab naïve; will enroll approximately 20 patients 
2. Dose Expansion Cohort 2: bevacizumab pretreated; may enroll approximately 35 patients 
3. Dose Expansion Cohort 3: 
patients with at least one but no more than three prior systemic 
treatment regimens, where prior regimens may have included bevacizumab;  may enroll 
approximately 60 patients 
Regimen D (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Pembrolizumab) 
The Dose Expansion phase will enroll sufficient patients to ensure that 35 patients are FRα 
≥ 50% of tumor staining at ≥  2+ intensity. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
59 Dose Expansion is planned for Regimens A and D, pending Sponsor decision; however, on the 
basis of emerging safety and preliminary anti-tumor activity data, the CRC may make the decision to expand Regimens B and/or C to collect additional safety information. If expanded, Regimens B and C will each enroll a maximum of 20 patients, who will be treated at the MTD established for the corresponding Regimen. 
Safety will be evaluated continuously, separately, and in aggregate in the Dose Expansion 
Cohorts. If at any time ≥  33% of at least three patients treated in the Dose Expansion Cohort 
experience a Cycle 1 DLT, further enrollment to that Cohort will stop, and the CRC will be convened. The CRC will review all available safety data and PK data to determine how further dosing should proceed. If it is decided that a new dose should be investigated, enrollment to the Cohort will begin anew. 
Regimen E (Triplet Dose: Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Bevacizumab + Carboplatin) Following evaluation of the safety, tolerability, and activity data from patients receiving 
Regimens A (Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion) and B (Dose Escalation) in this study, Regimen E (Triplet) will be opened. The planned doses for patients receiving the triplet dose are derived from all available data from Regimens A and B. Regimen E may  enroll approximately 
50 patients, as exploration of alternative doses is required to enroll approximately 40 planned patients to be dosed at the maximum dose level determined to be safe. 
The MTD will be determined from the assessment of DLTs during the fi rst treatment cycle 
(Table 5).  
Initially six patients will be dosed at the target triplet dose ( Table 5 ). If there are < 2 Cycle 1 
DLTs (total), another six patients will be dosed. If there are < 4 Cycle 1 DLTs (total) in all 
12 patients, the remaining 28 patients will be enrolled for a total of approximately 40 planned patients.  
If either ≥  2 DLTs or ≥  4 DLTs are observed in the first six or 12 patients, respectively, either the 
mirvetuximab soravtansine dose or the carboplatin dose will be reduced. The reduced triplet doses will always be explored in the same stepwise manner as detailed above. A total of 12 patients (6  + 6 patients) will be assessed at a dose before the remaining 28 patients are 
enrolled. The decision of whether to reduce the mirvetuximab soravtansine dose or the carboplatin dose will be made according to the DLTs observed, and the new doses will be explored as follows: 
a. For DLTs that cannot solely be attributable to mirvetuximab soravtansine, the carboplatin dose will be reduced.  
b. For DLTs that are solely attributable to mirvetuximab so ravtansine, the mirvetuximab 
soravtansine dose will be reduced.  
If after the doses of carboplatin (a) or mirvetuximab soravtansine (b) are reduced, ≥  2 DLTs or 
≥ 4 DLTs are observed in the first six or 12 patients, respectively, the dose of the other agent 
(mirvetuximab soravtansine [for a] or carboplatin [for b]) will also be reduced. The triplet dose with the reduced mirvetuximab soravtansine and carboplatin doses will then be evaluated. The doses to be used in Regimen E are shown in Table 6. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
60 Table  6: Planned Doses for Regimen E  
Dose Level  Regimen E  
Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansinea 
(mg/kg, D1q3W)b Bevacizumab  
(mg/kg, D1q3W)  Carboplatinc 
(AUC, D1q3W)  
-2 5 15 AUC4  
-1d 6 15 AUC4  
-1e 5 15 AUC5  
1 6 15 AUC5  
a Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose calculated using AIBW.  
b Day 1, every 3 weeks.  
c Carboplatin dose may be reduced to AUC4 if safety data from the first six or 12 patients suggest that the triplet 
dose is not being tolerated.  
d Dose reduction of carboplatin due to carboplatin-associated toxicity.  
e Dose reduction of mirvetuximab soravtansine due to mirvetuximab soravtansine –associated toxicity.  
5. STUDY TREATMENT  
5.1. Description of Study Treatment  
The investigational study drug, mirvetuximab soravtansine, will be provided by ImmunoGen, 
Inc., at a protein concentration of 5.0 mg/mL in an aqueous pH 5.0 buffered solution.  
Bevacizumab is supplied as a commercially available formulation. Please refer to the 
bevacizumab prescribing information.  
Carboplatin is supplied as a commercially available formulation. Please refer to the carboplatin 
prescribing information.  
Pegy lated liposomal doxorubicin is supplied as a commercially available formulation. Please 
refer to the pegylated liposomal doxorubicin prescribing information.  Pembrolizumab is supplied as a clinical image of the commercially available formulation by 
Merck,  and supplied by ImmunoGen. Please refer to the Pharmacy Manual.  
5.2. Mirvetuximab Soravtansine Packaging 
Mirvetuximab soravtansine will be provided in a 20 mL Type I glass vial. The container closure for the Type I glass vials will consist of a 20- mm, ethylen e tetrafluoroethylene–coated serum 
stopper (FluroTec
®) on the top and product contact surface, with a 20-mm aluminum TruEdge® 
seal with blue Flip -Off® top. Refer to the Pharmacy Manual for more information. 
5.3. Storage, Handling, and Accountability 
Specific details regarding storage and handling can be found in the Pharmacy Manual. 
Please refer to the bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, and 
pembrolizumab prescribing information regarding the proper storage and handling of these compounds. 
Accountability and shipping documents for all drugs supplied by the Sponsor must be 
maintained by the Investigator or designee (eg, the study pharmacist). The Investigator or designee must maintain an accurate record of the receipt and dispensing of mirvetuximab soravtansine study drugs in a drug accountability log or equivalent. Only participants enrolled in 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
61 the study may receive study treatment, and only authorized site staff may supply or administer 
treatment. These records must always be available for inspection, and a copy will be supplied to ImmunoGen on request. Information recorded on these accountability and shipping documents will include quantities received, dates and amount dispensed, the recorder’s initials, patient number and initials to whom administered, lot number of drug administered, and drug lost, damaged, or destroyed.  
Upon completion of the study, all study drug dispatched to a site must be accounted for and 
unused supplies returned to ImmunoGen or destroyed according to the site’s standard operating procedures. The original drug reconciliation records shall be maintained at the site and a copy collected and sent to ImmunoGen once a representative of the company has confirmed the drug accountability. The pharmacy shall maintain accurate records of all study drugs that have been received, stored, dispensed, destroyed, and used. The electronic case report form (eCRF) shall also record details of mirvetuximab soravtansine study drug administration, such as date and time of administration.  
Drug accountability will be monitored regularly. 
5.4. Study Treatment Compliance  
Mirvetuximab soravtansine and combination drugs supplied for the study (if any) may not be 
used for any purpose other than the study or administered other than as described in this protocol.  
Mirvetuximab soravtansine from two different drug lots cannot be mixed in a single dose 
administration.  
Under no circumstances is the Inves tigator allowed to release study drug supplies to any 
physician not named in the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Form 1572 or to administer these supplies to a patient not enrolled in this study. If investigational supplies are to be dispensed from any facility other than that supervised directly by the Investigator (ie, hospital pharmacy, satellite pharmacy), it is the responsibility of the Investigator to ensure that all study drug is maintained in the manner described. 
5.5. Assignment of Patient Number  
Patient numbers are assigned by the site after patients sign the ICF to participate.  
The Investigator will certify that the patient satisfies all eligibility criteria at screening and 
continues to satisfy all inclusion and exclusion criteria on Cycle 1 Day 1 before dosing.  
5.5.1. Enrolled Patient Definition  
Patients who have signed an IRB/IEC-approved ICF and who have received at least one dose of 
mirvetuximab soravtansine will be considered enrolled. Patients who are issued a patient number but who do not successfully complete the screening process and who do not receive a dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine and/or combination drug will be considered screen failures. Patient numbers for patients who fail screening will not be re-issued. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
62 5.5.2. Patient Assignment to Dosin g Regimens  
Patients will be assigned to Regimen A, B, C, D, or E on the basis of eligibility criteria and slot 
availability as determined by the Sponsor. If a patient is eligible for more than one combination Regimen, the Investigator will assign the patie nt to the most appropriate combination Regimen, 
taking into consideration the patient’s disease history, treatment history, and/or preferences.  
5.6. Blinding  
Not applicable; this is an open-label study. 5.7. Study Treatment Administration 
5.7.1. Study Treatment Overview and Schedule  
Mirvetuximab soravtansine is an experimental anti-cancer drug, and as with other potentially 
toxic compounds, caution should be exercised when handling this compound. It is recommended that gloves and protective garments be worn during preparation. Similar precautions should be taken when handling bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, and pembrolizumab. Refer to the Pharmacy Manual, Investigator Brochures, and package inserts for more information. 
For logistical re asons such as holidays, delays in the scheduled study treatment of up to 3 days 
will be permitted in Cycles 1 and 2. Additionally, shifts in the start of a new cycle by - 1 or 
+3 days will be permitted in Cycles ≥  3. 
5.8. Study Drug Preparation and Administratio n 
5.8.1. Premedication for Study Treatment  
All patients must receive 325 to 650 mg of acetaminophen/paracetamol (per orem [by mouth] 
[PO] or IV), 10 mg IV dexamethasone, and 25 to 50 mg diphenhydramine (PO or IV) (equivalent drugs of similar drug classes are also  acceptable) approximately 30 minutes before each infusion 
of mirvetuximab soravtansine. If individual patients require more intensive treatment to prevent infusion-related reactions, investigators may modify the regimen accordingly. Patients being treated  with bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or pembrolizumab in 
the absence of mirvetuximab soravtansine may receive premedication at the discretion of the Investigator or according to institutional guidelines. Patients treated with pembrolizumab in the absence of mirvetuximab soravtansine will not receive premedication with steroids. 
5.8.2. Prophylactic Use of Corticosteroid Eye Drops  
Patients receiving mirvetuximab soravtansine will be required to use corticosteroid eye drops as 
prescribed b y the treating physician unless the risk outweighs the benefit per the 
ophthalmologist/physician. Patients will be instructed to self -administer 1% prednisolone (Pred 
Forte
® or generic equivalent) six times daily on Days 1 through 4 and four times daily on Days 5 
through 8 of each cycle during the study (see Appendix O ). For individual patients who cannot 
tolerate the preservative contained in 1% pred nisolone, other corticosteroid eye drops may be 
substituted (eg, difluprednate 0.05%; Durezol®) and administered on Days 1 through 8 of each 
cycle at a frequency prescribed by the ophthalmologist. Patients should be advised to wait at 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
63 least 15 minutes afte r corticosteroid eye drop administration before instilling preservative- free, 
lubricating eye drops.  
5.8.3. Lubricating Artificial Tears  
Patients receiving mirvetuximab soravtansine will be required to use preservative- free, 
lubricating artificial tears on a daily basis (as directed by the product label or the treating 
physician). Patients should be advised to wait at least 15 minutes after corticosteroid eye drop administration before instilling lubricating eye drops.  
5.8.4. Preparation and Administration of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine  
5.8.4.1. Calculation for Adjusted Ideal Body Weight  
The AIBW will be used to calculate the dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine in this study 
(Appendix L ). 
The total dose of drug will be calculated on the basis of each patient’s AIBW using the following formula:  
Adjusted Ideal Body Weight (AIBW)  
IBW
a + 0.4 (Actual Weight − IBWa), 
where:  
Ideal Body Weight (IBW) 
IBWa (Male) = 0.9Ha – 88, and 
IBWa (Female) = 0.9Ha – 92. 
a H = height in cm; W  = weight in kg.  
The weight used for calculation should be obtained before study drug administration on Cycle 1 Day 1 (± 14 days) and thereafter should be modified only for significant (≥  10%) changes in 
body weight (not influenced by weight gain or loss attributed to fluid retention).  
5.8.4.2. Preparation of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine  
The desired amount of mirvetuximab soravtansine should be withdrawn from the vial(s) and 
diluted using 5% dextrose to a final concentration as outlined in the Pharmacy Manual. Note:  
mirvetuximab soravtansine is incompatible with saline (0.9% sodium chlorid e); therefore, 
dilutions must be made using 5% dextrose. Infusion bags must be labeled with the protocol number, patient number, storage temperature, dose, and volume of mirvetuximab soravtansine filtered into the bag, or according to institutional protocol. Once the solution is prepared, the infusion bag must not be left in direct sunlight, and the infusion must be completed within 8 hours after preparation.  
Study drug from two different drug lots cannot be mixed in a single dose administration. 
5.8.4.3. Administra tion of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine  
The starting dose level of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be 5 mg/kg using AIBW for all combinations. Mirvetuximab soravtansine  should be administered first , followed by the 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
64 assigned combination drug (bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or 
pembrolizumab) for Regimens A, B, C, and D; for Regimen E, mirvetuximab soravtansine  
should be administered first , followed by bevacizumab and then carboplatin. Mirvetuximab 
soravtansine will be administered as an IV infusion after preparation as outlined in the Pharmacy 
Manual. Details for required and compatible infusion materials are included in the Pharmacy Manual. For patients who have not been administered mirvetuximab soravtansine as a prior anti-cancer therapy, mirvetuximab soravtansine should be administered at a rate of 1 mg/min; after 30 minutes, the rate can be increased to 3 mg/min if well tolerated. If well tolerated after 30 minutes at 3 mg/min, the mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion rate may be increased to 5 mg/min. Subsequent infusions may be delivered at the tolerated rate. For patients who have been administered mirvetuximab soravtansine as a prior anti- cancer therapy, mirvetuximab 
soravtansine should be administered at the tolerated rate of prior mirvetuximab soravtansine infusions. Therefore, the overall length of infusion will vary depending on dose and patient tolerability. After infusion, the IV line should be flushed with 5% dextrose as needed to ensure delivery of the full dose.  
Patients will be carefully observed during each infusion and vital signs taken as outlined in the 
Schedule of Clinical Assessments ( Appendix A , Appendix B , and  Appendix C ). Patients will 
remain in the clinic under observation for 4 hours after completing the first infusion of mirvetuximab soravtansine, and for at least 1 hour after each subsequent infusion.  
5.8.5. Preparation and Administration of Bevacizumab 
Bevacizumab will be prepared per label and administered per protocol. Total body weight at 
Cycle 1 Day 1 (± 14 days) is to be used to calculate the required dose. No dose modifications are foreseen unless the patient’s body weight changes by ± 10% from baseline. 
5.8.6. Preparation and Administra tion of Carboplatin 
Carboplatin will be prepared per label and administered per protocol. Carboplatin dosing will be 
calculated using the Calvert formula ( Appendix J ). The maximum carboplatin dose should not 
exceed AUC (mg × min/mL) × 150 mL/min ( Griggs  2012).  
If the patient has a history of allergic reaction when administered carboplatin or other platinum agents or experiences an allergic reaction to carboplatin while on study, carboplatin must be administered per institutional protocol for carboplatin desensitization. Dosing information will be entered o n the dosing eCRF. 
5.8.7. Preparation and Administration of Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin 
Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin will be prepared per label and administered per protocol. Body weight at Cycle 1 Day 1 (± 14 days) is to be used to calculate the body surf ace area 
(Appendix K ), which will be used to determine the required pegylated liposomal doxorubicin 
dose. No dose modifications are foreseen unless the patient’s body weight changes by ± 10% from baseline.  
5.8.8. Preparation and Administration of Pembrolizumab 
Pembrolizumab  will be  administered at a dose of 200 mg using a 30-minute IV infusion. Sites 
should make every effort to target infusion timing to be as close to 30 minutes as possible. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
65 However, given the variability of infusion pumps from site to site, a window between -5 minutes 
and +10 minutes is permitted (ie, infusion time is 30 minutes − 5 minutes or +  10 minutes). 
The Pharmacy Manual contains specific instructions for preparing the pembrolizumab infusion and administering the infusion solution. 
5.9. Monitoring and Management of Adverse Events  
5.9.1. Potential Infusion -Related Reactions  
Some patients treated with IV infusions of therapeutic drugs have experienced concurrent 
infusion-related reactions (see CTCAE Version 4.03). The signs and symptoms may vary and include, for example, headache, fever, facial flushing, pruritus, myalgia, nausea, chest tightness, dyspnea, vomiting, erythema, abdominal discomfort, diaphoresis, shivers, lightheadedness, hypotension, palpitations, and somnolence. Anaphylaxis might occur at any time during an infusion. Before any infusion is started, appropriate medical personnel, medication (eg, epinephrine, inhaled beta agonists, antihistamines, and corticosteroids), and other required 
resources to treat anaphylaxis must be readily available. In general, Investigators should manage acute allergic or hypersensitivity reactions according to institutional practices. General guidelines for the management of acute infusion-related reactions and for subsequent re-treatment are provided in Table 7. Delayed infusion- related reactions may occur; therefore, 
patients should be advised to seek immediate medical treatment if symptoms newly develop and/or recur after disch arge from clinic.  
Patients who experience an infusion- related reaction during or immediately after mirvetuximab 
soravtansine administration should have blood drawn to determine drug concentration and antibodies to mirvetuximab soravtansine (ADA), if feasible. The sample should be obtained within 3 hours after the onset of the reaction and again 1 week later. These patients should undergo all scheduled anti-tumor activity and safety evaluations. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
66 Table  7: Management Guidelines for Potential Infusion- Related Reactions  
Infusion Reaction 
CTCAE Version 4.03 
Severity Grade  Management  
Grade 1: mild, transient 
reaction  • Maintain infusion rate unless progression of symptoms to ≥  Grade  2; if 
symptoms worsen, refer to guidelines below.  
• Promethazine (or equivalent) 150 mg PO per day prn for nausea.  
• Diphenhydramine (or equivalent) 25- 50 mg PO or IV prn.  
• Methylprednisolone 125 mg (or equivalent) IV prn.  
Grade 2: moderate  • Interrupt infusion and disconnect infusion tubing from subject.  
• Promethazine (or equivalent) 150 mg PO per day prn for nausea.  
• Diphenhydramine (or equivalent) 25- 50 mg PO or IV prn.  
• Acetaminophen (or equivalent) 650 mg PO prn.  
• Methylprednisolone 125 mg (or equivalent) IV prn.  
• After recovery from symptoms, resume the infusion at 50% of the 
previous rate, and if no further symptoms appear, gradually increase 
rate until infusion is completed.  
• For subsequent dosing in future cycles, patients should be 
premedicated with dexamethasone (or equivalent) 8 mg PO BID the 
day before drug administration, and acetaminophen (or equivalent) 650 mg PO and diphenhydramine (or equivalent) 25- 50 mg PO 30 -60 
minutes before dosing.  
Grade 3: severe, 
prolonged reaction not 
rapidly responsive to 
symptomatic medication and/or brief interruption 
of infusion; recurrence of symptoms following initial improvement; 
hospitalization indicated 
for clinical sequelae  
OR 
Grade 4: life- threatening 
consequences, urgent 
intervention indicated  • Immediately stop infusion and disconnect infusion tubing from subject.  
• Administer diphenhydramine (25- 50 mg) IV (or equivalent).  
• Administer IV steroids (methylprednisolone (or equivalent) up to 0.5 mg/kg every 6 hours) to treat ongoing reaction and prevent 
recurrence.  
• Administer bronchodilators (nebulized albuterol/salbutamol, 2.5-5 mg in 
3 mL of saline or equivalent) as medically indicated.  
• Administer normal saline as medically indicated.  
• Administer epinephrine (0.2 -0.5 mL of a 1:1000 dilution (0.2- 0.5 mg) SQ 
or IM) as medically indicated. Epinephrine should be used only if all other treatment methods fail to manage the infusion- related reaction.  
• Advise patient to seek emergency treatment and notify 
investigator/clinic if the infusion -related symptoms recur after discharge 
from clinic.  
• Report as an SAE (see Section 9.1.1.2 ). 
• Permanently discontinue study medication treatment.  
BID = twice daily, IM = intramuscular, prn = as needed, SAE = serious adverse event, SQ = subcutaneous.  
5.9.2. Monitoring and Management of Treatment -Emergent Ocular Disorders  
5.9.2.1. Monitoring of Potential Ocular Disorders 
Changes in visual acuity resulting from corneal epithelium disorders have been reported in other 
studies of DM4-containing immunoconjugates that use the SPDB linker ( Younes  2012). B ecause 
of the observation of ocular disorders in patients treated with mirve tuximab soravtansine Q3W at 
dose levels > 3.3 mg/kg, ocular function will be carefully monitored. Complete ophthalmologic exams and ocular symptom assessments will be performed in all patients at baseline and post- treatment as described in Table 8. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
67 Table  8: Schedule for Ophthalmic Assessments  
Assessment  Screening  Day 1  
(All 
Cycles)  Before Day 1 
Dose  
(Every Other 
Cycle)a 30 Day Safety 
Follow -up Visit 
or 
End of 
Treatment Visit  
Ophthalmologic history: Patients will 
be asked about ocular symptoms 
such as history of dry eye and 
contact lens use.  X    
Complete Examb: 
- Visual acuity  
- Indirect fundoscopy  
- Slit lamp examination under dilatation  
- Intraocular pressure measurement  
- Corneal photographyc Xd  Patients who 
report treatment -
emergent 
changes in vision  X 
Schirmer teste X  X  
Ocular symptom assessment 
(blurred vision, ocular discomfort, 
etc) X X  X 
a Within 1 week before the Day 1 dose of every other cycle; required for patients who have experienced signs or 
symptoms of ocu lar toxicity and for those with blurred vision but normal eye exams.  
b Performed by a board-certified ophthalmologist.  
c When feasible, to document corneal abnormalities such as the presence of microcysts or keratitis (not required at 
baseline).  
d Within 14 days before Cycle 1 Day 1.  
e For patients experiencing ocular symptoms, the Schirmer test will be repeated at the first ophthalmology exam and 
in subsequent ophthalmologic exams if clinically indicated.  
If a patient develops > CTCAE Grade 1 ocular symptoms ( Appendix M ), treatment with 
mirvetuximab soravtansine will be interrupted. Treatment should not be interrupted solely for 
Grade 2 ocular signs (eg, Grade 2 keratopathy) unless they are also associated with Grade 2 ocular symptoms. The patient will be referred to an ophthalmologist for a complete examination including visual acuity, slit lamp examination under dilatation, intraocular pressure assessment, and indirect fundoscopy. When feasible, corneal photographs should be obtained to document corneal abnormalities such as presence of microcysts or keratitis. Therapy may resume if ocular symptoms improve to Grade 1 or baseline within one cycle. After the development of ocular AEs, a complete ocular examination will be required at every other cycle going forward (or more frequently if clinically indicated) and at either the end of treatment or at the 30 -day follow-up 
visit.  
5.9.2.2. Management Guidelines for Ocul ar Disorders 
To prevent dry eye, which may predispose a patient to corneal irritation, patients will be required to use preservative-free, lubricating artificial tears on a daily basis (as directed by the product label or the treating physician) for the duration of the ir mirvetuximab soravtansine treatment. 
Patients should also be firmly advised to avoid using contact lenses while on study. Baby shampoo and a soft cloth should be used to clean the eyes, and a warm compress at bedtime may 
be used to decrease any possible inflammation on the eyelid’s surface. The use of UVA/UVB 
sunglasses is recommended when outside in full daylight during the course of the study. The use 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
68 of punctal plugs to increase lubrication of the eyes is also recommended. If patients report signs 
or symptoms of ocular disorders including, but not limited to, blurred vision or eye irritation, the management and dose modification guidelines outlined in Table 9 should be followed.  
Patients who have experienced study drug–related changes in vision, such as blurred vision, will 
have a complete ophthalmic examination performed before the start of every other cycle and at the end of treatment visit or the  30-day follow -up visit after the end of treatment, even if the 
results of the patient’s ocular exam are normal. Management of treatment -emergent ocular 
disorders with inflammatory characteristics should include corticosteroid eye drops and/or other measur es as indicated by an ophthalmologist. 
Table  9: Management of Ocular Disorders  
Severity Grade 
(CTCAE Version 
4.03 Grade)a Management  Guidelines for Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine Dose 
Modifications  
Grade 1  • Complete eye ex am as outlined in 
Table  8. 
• Monitor for worsening symptoms.  • Continue mirvetuximab 
soravtansine dosing.  
Grade 2 symptoms  • Complete eye exam as outlined in 
Table  8. Repeat complete exam as 
clinically indicated.   
• Patients should have weekly 
symptomatic ocular assessments until 
the symptoms resolve to Grade 1 or 
baseline ( Section 5.10.1) or are deemed 
irreversible by the Investigator.  
• Resume therapy when ocular symptoms 
improve to Grade 1 or baseline.  • Hold mirvetuximab 
soravtansine dosing.  
• Patients with ocular disorders 
lasting fewer than 14 days 
may be allowed to resume therapy at the same dose 
level.  
• Patients with ocular disorders 
who experience dosing delays > 14 days may 
resume treatment at a reduced dose level (see 
Table  15).  
Grade 3  • Complete eye exam as outlined in 
Table  8. Repeat complete exam as 
clinically indicated.  
• Patients should have weekly symptomatic ocular assessments until 
the symptoms resolve to Grade 1 or 
baseline ( Section 5.10.1) or are deemed 
irreversible by the Investigator.  
• Resume therapy when ocular symptoms 
improve to Grade 1 or baseline.  • Hold mirvetuximab 
soravtansine dosing.  
• Patients may be allowed to resume therapy at a lower dose than the one they were 
receiving when their 
symptoms began (see Table  15). 
Grade 4  • Complete eye exam as outlined in 
Table  8. Repeat complete exam as 
clinically indicated.  
• Patients should have weekly 
symptomatic ocular assessments until 
the symptoms resolve to Grade 1 or 
baseline ( Section 5.10.1 ) or are deemed 
irreversible by the investigator.  • Permanently discontinue 
mirvetuximab soravtansine 
dosing.  
a Appendix  M includes CTCAE Version 4.03 grade definitions for select ocular disorders.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
69 5.9.3. Monitoring of Non- infectious Pneumonitis After Administration of Study 
Treatment  
Non-infectious pneumonitis has been observed after administration of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine and may result in fatigue, shortness of breath, cough, or respiratory distress. 
Drug -induced pneumonitis may be immediately life -threatening. If a patient presents with signs 
or symptoms consistent with pneumonitis and/or a clinically meaningful change in pulse oximetry value, the patient should be immediately evaluated. Patients are advised to notify their treating physician immediately if they  experience new or worsening shortness of breath, cough, 
or respiratory distress.  
For patients diagnosed with pneumonitis without an infectious etiology, the management and treatment guidelines outlined in Table 10 should be followed. 
Table  10: Management of Non- infectious Pneumonitis  
Severity Grade 
(CTCAE Version 
4.03 Grade)  Medical Management of Pneumonitis  Guidel ines for Dose 
Modifications  
Grade 1  • Radiologic assessments (CT scan and/or chest 
x-ray) should be performed as clinically 
indicated.  
• Monitor for pulmonary symptoms.  • Continue dosing after 
discussion with the 
Sponsor.  
Grade 2  • Radiologic assessments (CT scan and/or chest 
x-ray) should be performed as clinically 
indicated.  
• Patient must be evaluated by a pulmonary 
specialist.  
• Treatment with corticosteroids may be indicated as recommended by a pulmonary specialist 
and/or institutional guideli nes (Regimens A, B, 
C, and E only).  
• Treat with systemic corticosteroids. When 
symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, steroid 
taper should be started and continued over no fewer than 4 weeks (Regimen D only).  • Hold dosing of 
mirvetuximab soravtansine until 
symptoms resolve to 
Grade 1 or better.  
• Hold dosing of 
pembrolizumab until 
symptoms resolve to Grade 1 or better (Regimen D only).  
• Mirvetuximab 
soravtansine may be 
resumed at same dose level after discussion with the Sponsor.  
• Pembrolizumab may be 
resumed at same dose 
level after discussion with the Sponsor.  
• Discontinue 
mirvetuximab 
soravtansine and pembrolizumab if 
recurrent Grade 2 
pneumonitis occurs 
upon re -challenging.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
70 Table  10: Management of Non- infectious Pneumonitis (Continued) 
Severity Grade 
(CTCAE Version 
4.03 Grade)  Medical Management of Pneumonitis  Guidelines for Dose 
Modifications  
Grade 3  • Radiologic assessments (CT scan and/or chest 
x-ray) should be performed as clinically 
indicated.  
• Patient must be evaluated by a pulmonary 
specialist.  
• Treatment with corticosteroids until resolution of symptoms may be indicated as recommended 
by a pulmonary specialist and/or institutional guidelines (Regimens A, B, C, and E only).  
• Immediately treat with IV steroids. Administer 
additional anti -inflammatory measures as 
needed (Regimen D only).  
• Add prophylactic antibiotics for opportunistic infections in the case of prolonged steroid 
administration (Regimen D only).  
• Bronchoscopy with lavage and/or biopsy should be performed when clinically feasible.  
• The pneumonitis event must be followed until 
resolution.  • Permanently discontinue 
mirvetuximab soravtansine.  
• Permanently discontinue 
pembrolizumab 
(Regimen D only).  
Grad e 4 • Radiologic assessments (CT scan and/or chest 
x-ray) should be performed as clinically 
indicated.  
• Patient must be evaluated by a pulmonary 
specialist.  
• Treatment with corticosteroids until resolution of 
symptoms may be indicated as recommended 
by a pulmonary specialist and/or institutional 
guidelines (Regimens A, B, and E only).  
• Immediately treat with IV steroids. Administer additional anti -inflammatory measures as 
needed (Regimen D only).  
• Add prophylactic antibiotics for opportunistic infections in the case of prolonged steroid 
administration (Regimen D only).  
• Bronchoscopy with lavage and/or biopsy should 
be performed when clinically feasible.  
• The pneumonitis event must be followed until 
resolution.  • Permanently discontinue 
mirvetuximab soravtansine dosing. 
• Permanently discontinue 
pembrolizumab 
(Regimen D only).  
a Appendix  M includes CTCAE Version 4.03 grade definitions for pneumonitis.  
5.9.4. Monitoring and Management of Diarrhea After Administration of Study 
Treatment  
5.9.4.1. Mirvetuximab Soravtansine–Associated Diarrhea  
Mild to moderate diarrhea has been frequently reported in patients treated with mirvetuximab 
soravtansine . Patients should be advised to contact their treating physician at the first sign of 
diarrhea. Patients may then be treated according to standard institutional practice. One 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
71 suggested regimen is  2 mg loperamide at the first sign of loose stool, with repeat dosing every 
2 hours until symptoms resolve ( Wadler  1998).  
5.9.4.2. Pembrolizumab -Associated Diarrhea and/or Colitis  
Patients should be carefully monitored for signs and symptoms of enterocolitis (such as diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, blood or mucus in stool, with or without fever) and of bowel perforation (such as peritoneal signs and ileus).  
All patients who experience diarrhea/colitis should be advised to drink liber al quantities of clear 
fluids. If sufficient oral fluid intake is not feasible, fluid and electrolytes should be substituted 
via IV infusion. For Grade 2 or higher diarrhea, consider GI consultation and endoscopy to confirm or rule out colitis.  
• For Grade 2  diarrhea/colitis, administer oral corticosteroids.  
• For Grade 3 or 4 diarrhea/colitis, treat with IV steroids followed by high-dose oral steroids.  
When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, steroid taper should be started and continued over no fewer than 4 weeks. 
Refer to Table 21 for dose modifications and discontinuation of pembrolizumab. 
5.9.4.3. Diarrhea Associated With Mirvetuximab Soravtansine and Pembroliz umab  
Management guidelines for pembrolizumab-associated diarrhea should be followed 
(Section  5.9.4.2).  
5.9.5. Monitoring and Management of Nausea and Vomiting After Administration of Study Treatment  
Nausea and vomiting have been reported in patients treated with mirvetuximab soravtansine and with carboplatin. Patients should be advised to contact their treating physician at the first sign of vomiting or worsening nausea. Patients should be treated according to the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) Clinical Practice Guidelines for the use of anti-emetics 
(Basch  2011) outlined in Table 11. 
Table  11: Management of Nausea and Vomiting  
Severity Grade  
(CTCAE Version 
4.03 Grade)  Management  
Grade 1  • No additional therapy is required.  
Grade 2  • Administer a 5 -HT3 receptor antagonist on Day 1 (eg,  palonosetron, 
granisetron, or ondansetron) in combination with dexamethasone on Days 1- 3 
or treat per institutional guidelines. Aprepitant may be added to the 
combination.  
Grades 3 and 4  • Administer a neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist (eg, aprepitant on Days 1 -3 or 
fosaprepitant on Day 1) in combination with a 5- HT3 receptor antagonist on 
Day 1 only, and dexamethasone on Days  1-3 or 1- 4, or treat per institutional 
guidelines.  
5-HT3 = 5 -hydroxytryptamine type 3.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
72 5.9.6. Monitoring of Bevacizumab- Associated Posterior Reversible Encephalopathy 
Syndrome  
There have been rare reports of patients treated with bevacizumab who develop signs and 
symptoms consistent with the neurological disorder PRES. Signs and symptoms of PRES 
include seizures, headache, confusion, and visual disturbance or cortical blindness, with or without associated hypertension. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain will confirm the diagnosis of PRES. Bevacizumab treatment should be discontinued in patients who develop signs and/or symptoms consistent with PRES, and the specific symptoms should be appropriately treated.  
5.9.7. Monitoring and Management of Bevacizumab- Associated Hypertension  
Patients receiving bevacizumab must be closely monit ored for the development of new or 
worsen ing hype rtension. Blood pressure measurements should be performed  after the patient has 
been  in a resting position for ≥ 5 minut es. If the initi al blood pressure reading is ≥ 140 mm Hg 
systo lic and/or ≥ 90 mm Hg di astolic, the r esult should be v erified with a repeat meas urement. I f 
bevacizumab tre atment-related hypertension develops, it sh ould be manag ed as described in 
Table 12. 
Table  12: M anagement  of Hyperten sion After Bevacizumab Administration  
Severity Grade  
(CTCAE Version 
4.03 Grade)  Hypertension Pattern  Bevacizumab Dose Modifications  
Grade 1 Asymptomatic, transient (< 24 h) BP 
increase by > 20 mm Hg (di astolic)  or to 
> 150/100  mm Hg if previously withi n 
normal limits. Continue bevacizumab . 
Grade 2 Recurrent or persistent (> 24 h) or 
symptomatic increa se by > 20 mm H g 
(diastolic)  or to > 150/100  mm Hg i f 
previously within normal limits. Withhold bevacizumab. Start anti-
hypertensiv e therapy. O nce BP is 
< 150/100  mm H g, patie nts may continue 
bevacizumab therapy. 
Grade 3 Requires more than one anti- hypertensive 
drug or more i ntens ive therapy than 
previously. Hold bevacizumab  for persistent or 
symptom atic hypertension and discontinue 
permanently i f hypertension is no t 
controlled according t o Investigator 
judgmen t. 
Grade 4 Life-threatening consequences (eg, 
hypertensive crisis). Permanently discontinue bevacizumab.  
BP = blood pressure.  
5.9.8. Monitoring and Management of Bevacizumab- Associated Proteinuria  
Proteinuria will be assessed within 48 hours before each bevacizumab treatment by urine dipstick analysis method, UPC, 24-hour urine collection, or according to local institutional guidelines. Proteinuria should be managed according to Table 13.  
Table  13: Management of Bevacizumab -Associated Proteinuria  
CTCAE Grade  Bevacizumab Dose Modifications  
< 3 No bevacizumab  dose modifications  
3 Hold bevacizumab.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
73 Nephrotic syndrome (CTCAE 
Grade 4)  Permanently discontinue bevacizumab.  
5.9.9. Monitoring and Management of Bevacizumab- Associated Bleeding  
Patients receiving bevacizumab should be monitored for signs and symptoms of CNS bleeding. 
Signs and symptoms include sudden and severe headache, headache associated with a recent blow to the head, mild and long- lasting headache, headache accompanied by neck stiffness, 
confusion, drowsiness, vomiting (more than two episodes in 24 hours), seizures, and coma. Bevacizumab should be discontinued for intracranial bleeding of any grade. If Grade 3 or Grade 4 bleeding of any kind occurs in a patient receiving bevacizumab during the study treatment period, bevacizumab should be permanently discontinued. If hemorrhagic complications occur in a patient on full-dose anticoagulation therapy, bevacizumab should be permanently discontinued, and the patient should be treated per institutional guidelines. Standard procedures such as antagonization with protamine or vitamin K, infusion of vitamin K dependent factors, or insertion of a vena cava filter should be considered, depending on the severity of the bleeding, the presence of thrombotic events, and the organ affected. 
5.9.10. Monitoring and Management of Bevacizumab-Associated Gastrointestinal 
Fistula/Perforation 
Patients receiving bevacizumab should be continually monitored for signs or symptoms of GI fistula/bowel perforation. Perforations have been shown to occur at a higher frequency in patients who have received pelvic radiation therapy. Signs and symptoms of bowel perforation include fever, nausea, vomiting, hematemesis, chills, and severe stomach pain. Signs and symptoms of GI fistula include abdominal pain, painful bowel obstruction, fever, and elevated white blood cell counts. Other symptoms include diarrhea, rectal bleeding, sepsis, dehydration, poor absorption of nutrients, and weight loss. Patients are advised to notify their treating physician immediately if they experience any of the signs or symptoms described above. If a 
positive diagnosis of GI fistula or perforation is made, bevacizumab should be immediately discontinued, and the patient should be treated per institutional guidelines. 
5.9.11. Monitoring and Management of Peripheral Neuropathy  
Peripheral sensory neuropathy is a common AE observed in patients receiving bevacizumab in 
combination with paclitaxel or oxaliplatin. When mirvetuximab soravtansine is administered as a single agent, peripheral neuropathy is a common AE ( mirvetuximab s oravtansine 
Investigator Brochure ). Patients should be monitored for signs and symptoms of peripheral 
neuropathy.  
If a patient is diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy, the management guidelines in Table 14 
should be followed. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
74 Table  14: Management Guidelines for Peripheral Neuropathy  
Severity Grade 
(CTCAE Version 
4.03 Grade)  Management  Guidelines for Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine Dose Modifications  
Grade 1  • Monitor signs and symptoms.  • Continue mirvetuximab soravtansine 
dosing.  
• Continue bevacizumab, carboplatin, or 
pegylated liposomal doxorubicin dosing.  
Grade 2  • Monitor patient until 
resolution to Grade 1 or 
baseline.  
• Treat patient per institutional 
guidelines.  • Hold mirvetuximab soravtansine dosing 
until resolution to Grade 1 or baseline.  
• Patients with peripheral neuropathy 
lasting ≤ 14 days will resume 
mirvetuximab soravtansine therapy at the same dose level.  
• Patients with peripheral neuropathy who 
experience dosing delays > 14 days will 
resume mirvetuximab soravtansine treatment at a reduced dose level except 
if in Regimen B and second occurrence. If second occurrence and Regimen B, mirvetuximab soravtansine will resume at the same dose level.  
• Continue bevacizumab or pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin dosing.  
• Continue carboplatin dosing if first occurrence.  
• Hold dosing of carboplatin until resolution 
to Grade 1 if second occurrence. Once 
resolved to Grade 1, carboplatin will 
resume at a reduced dose level.  
Table 14: Management Guidelines for Peripheral Neuropathy (Continued)  
Severity Grade 
(CTCAE Version 
4.03 Grade)  Management  Guidelines for Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine Dose Modifications  
Grade 3  • Monitor patient until 
resolution to Grade 1 or 
baseline.  
• Treat patient per institutional 
guidelines . • Hold mirvetuximab soravtansine dosing 
until resolution to Grade 1 or baseline.  
• Patients will resume mirvetuximab 
soravtansine at a lower dose level except  
if in Regimen B and second occurrence. If second occurrence and Regimen B, mirvetuximab soravtansine will resume at the same dose level.  
• Continue bevacizumab or pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin dosing.  
• Hold dosing of carboplatin until resolution to Grade 1 if second occurrence. Once 
resolved to Grade 1, carboplatin will 
resume at a reduced dose level.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
75 Severity Grade 
(CTCAE Version 
4.03 Grade)  Management  Guidelines for Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine Dose Modifications  
Grade 4  • Monitor patient until 
resolution to Grade 1 or 
baseline.  
• Treat patient per institutional 
guidelines.  • Permanently discontinue mirvetuximab 
soravtansine dosing.  
• Permanently discontinue bevacizumab dosing.  
• Permanently discontinue carboplatin 
dosing.  
• Permanently discontinue pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin dosing.  
5.9.12. Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab -Associated Type 1 Diabetes  
Mellitus  
For Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) or Grade 3 to 4 hyperglycemia: 
• Insulin replacement therapy is recommended for T1DM and for Grade 3 to 4 
hyperglycemia associated with metabolic acidosis or ketonuria.  
• Evaluate patients with serum glucose and a metabolic panel, urine ketones, glycosylated hemoglobin, and C-peptide.  
Refer to Table 21 for dose modifications and discontinuation of pembrolizumab. 
5.9.13. Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab -Associated Hypophysitis 
• For Grade 2 events, treat with corticosteroids. When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or 
less, steroid taper should be started and continued over no fewer than 4 weeks. Replacement of appropriate hormones may be required as the steroid dose is tapered. 
• For Grade 3 to 4 events, treat with an initial dose of IV corticosteroids followed by 
oral corticosteroids. When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, steroid taper should 
be started and continued over no fewer than 4 weeks. Replacement of appropriate hormones may be required as the steroid dose is tapered. 
Refer to Table 21 for dose modifications and discontinuation of pembrolizumab. 
5.9.14. Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab -Associated Hyperthyroidism or 
Hypothyroidism 
Thyroid disorders can occur at any time during treatment. Monitor patients for changes in 
thyroid function (at the start of treatment, periodically during treatment, and as indicated based on clinical evaluation) and for clinical signs and symptoms of thyroid disorders. 
• Grade 2 hyperthyroidism events (and Grade 2-4 hypothyroidism): 
− In hyperthyroidism, non- selective beta -blockers (eg, propranolol) are suggested as 
initial therapy.  
− In hypothyroidism, thyroid hormone replacement therapy, with levothyroxine or 
liothyronine, is indicated per standard of care. 
• Grade 3 -4 hyperthyroidism: 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
76 − Treat with an initial dose of IV corticosteroids followed by oral corticosteroids. 
When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, steroid taper should be started and continued over no fewer than 4 weeks. Replacement of appropriate hormones may be required as the steroid dose is tapered.  
Refer to Table 21 for dose modifications and discontinuation of pembrolizumab. 
5.9.15. Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab -Associated Hepatic Adverse 
Events  
• For Grade 2 events, monitor liver function tests more frequently until returned to 
baseline values (consider weekly).  
− Treat with IV or oral corticosteroids.  
• For Grade 3 to 4 events, treat with IV corticosteroids for 24 to 48 hours.  
• When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, a steroid taper should be started and continued over no fewer than 4 weeks. 
Refer Table 21 for dose modifications and discontinuation of pembrolizumab. 
5.9.16. Monitoring and Management of Pembrolizumab -Associated Renal Failure or 
Nephritis  
• For Grade 2 events, treat with corticosteroids. 
• For Grade 3 to 4 events, treat with systemic corticosteroids. 
• When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, steroid taper should be started and 
continued over no fewer than 4 weeks.  
Refer Table 21 for dose modifications and discontinuation of pembrolizumab. 
5.10. Treatment Guidelines  
5.10.1. Re-treatment Criteria  
In the absence of a DLT, for a patient to begin a new cycle or continue a cycle of therapy, the 
following criteria must be met.  
• ANC must be ≥  1.5 × 10
9/L (1,500/ µL) (Cycle 1 Day 1 only). 
• ANC must be ≥  1.0 × 109/L (1,000/ µL). 
• Platelet count must be ≥  75 × 109/L (75,000/ µL). 
• All non- hematologic toxicities for which a causal association to study treatment 
cannot be ruled out must be ≤  Grade 2 (except alopecia) or returned to baseline; the 
exceptions to this rule are: 
− Treatment -emergent ocular disorders, which must have recovered to ≤  Grade 1 or 
baseline.  
− Treatment -emergent pneumonitis, which must have recovered to ≤  Grade 1 within 
one c ycle. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
77 − Treatment -emergent hypertension must have recovered to blood pressure of 
< 150/100 mm Hg (Regimen A and Regimen E only). 
− Treatment -emergent proteinuria must have recovered to ≤  Grade 1 (Regimen A 
and Regimen E only). 
− Treatment -emergent HFS must have recovered to ≤  Grade 1 (Regimen C).  
− Treatment -emergent mucositis must have recovered to ≤  Grade 1 (Regimen C).  
− Treatment -emergent, pembrolizumab- associated diarrhea/colitis must have 
recovered to ≤  Grade 1 (Regimen D).  
− Treatment -emergent, pembrolizumab- associated increased AST, ALT, and/or 
total bilirubin must have recovered to ≤  Grade 1 (Regimen D).  
− Treatment -emer gent, pembrolizumab-associated hypophysitis must have 
recovered to ≤  Grade 1 (Regimen D).  
− Treatment -emergent, pembrolizumab- associated renal failure/nephritis must have 
recovered to ≤  Grade 1 (Regimen D).  
− Treatment -emergent, pembrolizumab- associated infusi on reaction must have 
recovered to ≤  Grade 1 (Regimen D).  
If the patient does not meet these criteria, dosing with the two agents in the combination 
Regimen will be delayed, and the patient should be re-evaluated within 48 to 72 hours. Dosing with both age nts may resume if these criteria have been met. If the AE can be attributed to one of 
the agents in the combination Regimen, that agent will be held or discontinued per the dose modification guidelines described in Section 5.10.4; however, treatment with the second agent may resume provided all the other criteria are met. However, if the next cycle is delayed by greater than 14 days because of insufficient recovery from a treatment -related toxicity, this will 
be viewed as a DLT ( Section 4.1.4). If the next cycle is delayed longer than one cycle because of 
treatment -related toxicity, the patient should be removed from study treatment. In such cases, 
continuation of study treatment may be considered for those patients who have experienced clinical benefit if agreed upon between the Sponsor and the Investigator.  
The use of granulocyte growth factors in accordance with ASCO guidelines may be implemented 
at the discretion of the treating physician after Cycle 1.  
5.10.2. Follow-up for Dose-Limiting Toxicities and Adverse Events Leading to Discontinuation 
Patients who experience a non -laboratory DLT must be evaluated weekly, at a minimum, until 
resolution to ≤  Grade 1 or baseline and then at least monthly until return to baseline or 
stabilization of the event, whichever comes first. For abnormal laboratory values that qualify a s a 
DLT, patients will be followed twice weekly until values return to < Grade 1 or baseline, 
whichever comes first.  
Patients who discontinue study treatment for an AE or an abnormal laboratory value must be followed per standard of care at least once a week for 4 weeks, and subsequently at 4- week 
intervals until resolution or stabilization of the AE or laboratory abnormality, whichever occurs first.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
78 5.10.3. Criteria for Re- initiation of Study Treatment After Occurrence of a Dose-
Limiting Toxicity  
Study treatment will be stopped if a patient experiences a DLT at any time during the study. It 
may resume, with applicable dose adjustments ( Section 5.10.4.1), if the following criteria are met:  
• ANC must be ≥  1.0 × 109/L (1,000/ µL). 
• Platelet count must be ≥  75 × 109/L (75,000/ µL). 
• All clinically significant non -hematologic toxicities for which a causal association to 
study treatment cannot be ruled out must be ≤  Grade 1 (except alopecia) or returned 
to baseline.  
If the patient does not meet these criteria, dosing will be delayed, and the patient should be re-evaluated within 48 to 72 hours. Dosing may resume if these criteria have been met. However, 
if the next cy cle is delayed by greater than 14 days because of insufficient recovery from a 
treatment -related toxicity, this may be viewed as a DLT ( Section 4.1.4). If the next cycle is 
delayed longer than one cycle because of treatment -related toxicity, the patient should be 
removed from study treatment. In such cases, continuation of study treatment may be considered for those patients who have experienced clinical benefit if agreed upon by the Sponsor and the Investigator. 
5.10.4. Dose Modification Guidelines  
5.10.4.1. Mirvetuximab Soravtansine Dose Reduction After a Dose- Limiting Toxicity  
Mirvetuximab soravtansine dose may be reduced at the discretion of the Investigator after 
discussion with the Sponsor. Patients who develop DLTs or AEs requiring an interruption of mirvetuximab soravtansine may resume treatment at a reduced dose level as shown in Table 15, provided the criteria outlined in Section  5.10.1 are met.  
Table  15: Mirvetuximab Soravtansine Dose Modification Guidelines  
Regimen  If the Patient Was Receiving Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine at:  Dose Should Be Reduced to: 
A, B, C, D, 
or E 6.0 mg/kg  5.0 mg/kg  
5.0 mg/kg  4.0 mg/kg  
Reduction of the mirvetuximab soravtansine dose below 4.0 mg/kg will not be permitted. Dose reductions to 
intermediate dose levels may be allowed on the basis of emerging data with the approval of the Sponsor.  
5.10.4.2. Bevacizumab Dose Modification Guidelines  
5.10.4.2.1. Grade 3 or Grade 4 Adverse Events  
Bevacizumab should be temporarily withheld for Grade 4 febrile neutropenia and/or Grade 4 
thrombocytopenia (regardless of the causal relationship to treatment) because these conditions are predisposing factors for bleeding. If a patient experiences a Grade 3 venous thromboembolism, bevacizumab must be withheld for 3 weeks. Bevacizumab may be resumed during the period of therapeutic-dose anticoagulant therapy. In general, Grade 3 or Grade 4 bevacizumab -related eve nts should be managed as outlined in Table 16. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
79 Table  16: Bevacizumab Dose Modification Guidelines  
First occurrence of Grade 3 or 4 AE  Hold bevacizumab until toxicity has improved to ≤  Grade 1.  
Second occurrence of Grade 3 or 4 AE  Permanently discontinue bevacizumab treatment.  
5.10.4.3. Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Dose Modification Guidelines for 
Non-hematologic Adverse Events  
5.10.4.3.1. General Guidelines  
If patients receiving pegylated liposomal doxorubicin experience non- hematologic, treatment-
related AEs, their pegylated liposomal doxorubicin dose should be reduced as indicated in Table 17. Patients who require dose reductions below 20 mg/m
2 should discontinue pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin treatment. 
Table  17: Dose Modification Guidelines for Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin for Non -
hematologic Adverse Events  
If the Patient Was Receiving Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin at:  Dose Should Be Reduced 
to: 
40.0 mg/m2 35.0 mg/m2 
35.0 mg/m2 30.0 mg/m2 
30.0 mg/m2 20.0 mg/m2 
Reduction of the pegylated liposomal doxorubicin dose below 20.0 mg/m2 will not be permitted.  
5.10.4.3.2. Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Dose Reductions for Hematologic Adverse Events  
Patients receiving pegylated liposomal doxorubicin are at risk of bone marrow suppression. Leukopenia is usually transient; hematologic AEs may require dose delays or reductions as indicated in Table 18. 
Table  18: Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Dose Reduction for Hematologic Adverse 
Events  
Severity Grade  
(CTCAE Version 4.03 Grade)  Dose Modification  
Grade 1  No action required.  
Grade 2 and Grade 3  Hold pegylated liposomal doxorubicin until ANC and platelet levels 
return to normal or improve to Grade 1. Resume dosing without 
dose reduction.  
Grade 4  Hold pegylated liposomal doxorubicin until ANC and pl atelet levels 
return to normal or improve to Grade 1. Resume dosing at a 25% 
dose reduction or at full dose with cytokine support.  
5.10.4.3.3. Dose Reductions for Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Hand-Foot Syndrome 
and/or Mucositis  
Hand -foot syndrome is a disease cha racterized by palmar -plantar skin eruptions with swelling, 
pain, erythema, and for some patients, desquamation of the skin of the hands and feet. Hand-foot syndrome has been observed in patients receiving pegylated liposomal doxorubicin at doses of 50 mg/m
2 and, with less frequency, in those receiving pegylated liposomal doxorubicin at 
30 mg/m2. If patients present with symptoms/signs consistent with HFS, the dose of pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin should be modified as indicated in Table 19. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
80 Table  19: Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Dose Modification Guidelines for Hand and Foot 
Syndrome and Mucositis  
Severity Grade  
(CTCAE Version 4.03 
Grade)  HFS  
Symptoms  Mucositis  
Symptoms  Dose Reduction/Discontinuation  
Grade 1  Mild erythema, swelling, or 
desquamation not interfering with daily activities  Painless 
ulcers, erythema, or mild soreness  Continue pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin, unless previous Grade 3 or 4 HFS.   
In case of previous Grade 3 or 4 
HSF,  delay up to 2 weeks and 
decrease dose by 25%.  
Grade 2  Erythema, desquamation, 
or swelling interfering with, 
but not precluding, normal physical activities; sm all 
blisters or ulcerations less 
than 2 cm in diameter  Painful 
erythema, 
edema, or ulcers, but can eat Hold pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin until resolved to Grade 1 or baseline.  If no resolution after 
2 weeks, pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin should be 
discontinued. If no prior Grade 3- 4 
HFS, resume at the dose before 
the event. If previous HFS Grade 3-4 toxicity, decrease dose by 
25%.  
Grade 3  Blistering, ulceration, or 
swelling interfering with walking or normal daily activities; cannot wear 
regular clothing  Painful 
erythema, edema, or ulcers; cannot 
eat Hold pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin until resolved to Grade 
1 or baseline. Decrease dose by 25%. . If no resolution after 
2 weeks , pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin should be discontinued. Grade 4 Diffuse or local process 
causing infectious complications, a bed ridden 
state, or hospitalization  Requires 
parenteral or enteral support  
5.10.4.4. Carboplatin Dose Modification Guidelines 
Severe myelosuppression, GI effects (vomiting and nausea), and peripheral neuropathy 
(paresthesia) have been frequently observed in patients treated with carboplatin.  
Refer to  Table 5 and Table 20 for specific guidelines regarding carboplatin dose reductions. 
Table  20: Dose Modification Guidelines for Carboplatin  
If the Patient Was Receiving Carboplatin at:  Dose Should Be Reduced to:  
AUC5  AUC4  
AUC4  Discontinue  
5.10.4.5. Dose Modification and Toxicity Management for Immune- Related Adverse Events 
Associated With Pembrolizumab  
Adverse events associated with pembrolizumab exposure may represent an immunologic 
etiology. These immune- related AEs (irAEs) may occur shortly after the first dose or several 
months after the last dose of pembrolizumab treatment and may affect more than one body system simultaneously. Therefore, early recognition and initiation of treatment is critical to reduce complications. Based on existing clinical study data, most irAEs were reversible and could be managed with interruptions of pembrolizumab, administration of corticosteroids, and/or other supportive care. For suspected irAEs, ensure adequate evaluation to confirm etiology or 
mirvetuximab soravtansine   Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
81 exclude other causes. Additional procedures or tests such as bronchoscopy, endoscopy, or skin 
biopsy may be included as part of the evaluation. On the basis of the severity of irAEs, withhold or permanently discontinue pembrolizumab and administer corticosteroids. Dose modification and toxicity management guidelines for irAEs associated with pembrolizumab are provided in Table 21. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
82 Table  21: Dose Modification and Toxicity Management Guidelines for Immune -Related Adverse Events Associated With 
Pembrolizumab  
General Instructions  
Corticosteroid taper should be initiated upon AE improving to Grade 1 or less and continue to taper over at least 4 weeks. 
For situations where pembrolizumab has been withheld, pembrolizumab can be resumed after AE has been reduced to Grade 1 or 0 
and corticosteroid has been tapered. Pembrolizumab should be permanently discontinued if AE does not resolve within 12 weeks of last dose or corticosteroids cannot be reduced to ≤  10 mg prednisone or equivalent per day within 12 weeks.  
For severe and life-threatening irAEs, IV corticosteroid should be initiated first, followed by oral steroid. Other immunosuppressive treatment should be initiated if irAEs cannot be controlled by corticosteroids.  
Immune -Related AEs  Toxicity Grade or 
Conditions (CTCAE 
Version 4.0)  Action Taken 
With 
Pembrolizumab  irAE Management With 
Corticosteroid and/or 
Other Therapies  Monitor and Follow -up 
Pneumonitis  Grade 2  Withhold  Administer corticosteroids 
(initial dose of 1 -2 mg/kg 
prednisone or 
equivalent), followed by taper.  Monitor participants for signs and symptoms 
of pneumonitis.  
Evaluate participants with suspected pneumonitis with radiologic imaging, and initiate corticosteroid treatment.  
Add prophylactic antibiotics for opportunistic 
infections.  Grade 3 or 4, or 
recurrent Grade 2  Permanently 
discontinue  
Diarrhea/colitis  Grade 2 or 3  Withhold  Administer corticosteroids 
(initial dose of 1 -2 mg/kg 
prednisone or equivalent), followed by taper.  Monitor participants for signs and symptoms 
of enterocolitis (ie, diarrhea, abdominal pain, or blood or mucus in stool, with or without fever) and bowel perforation (ie, peritoneal signs and ileus).  
Participants with ≥ Grade 2 diarrhea 
suspecting colitis should consider GI 
consultation and performing endoscopy to rule out colitis.  
Participants with  diarrhea/colitis should be 
advised to drink liberal quantities of clear 
fluids. If sufficient oral fluid intake is not 
feasible, fluid and electrolytes should be 
substituted via IV infusion.  Grade 4  Permanently 
discontinue  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
83 Table 21:  Dose Modification and Toxicity Management Guidelines for Immune -Related Adverse Events Associated With 
Pembrolizumab (Continued) 
Immune -Related AEs  Toxicity Grade or 
Conditions (CTCAE 
Version 4.0)  Action Taken 
With 
Pembrolizumab  irAE Management With 
Corticoster oid and/or 
Other Therapies  Monitor and Follow -up 
AST/ALT elevation or 
increased bilirubin  Grade 2  Withhold  Administer corticosteroids 
(initial dose of 0.5- 1 
mg/kg prednisone or 
equivalent), followed by 
taper.  Monitor with liver function tests (consider 
weekly or more frequently until liver enzyme value returns to baseline or is stable).  
Grade 3 or 4  Permanently 
discontinue  Administer corticosteroids 
(initial dose of 1 -2 mg/kg 
prednisone or equivalent), followed by 
taper.  
T1DM or 
hyperglycemia  New onset T1DM or 
Grade 3 or 4 hyperglycemia associated with evidence of β -cell 
failure  Withhold  Initiate insulin 
replacement therapy for participants with T1DM.  
Administer anti -
hyperglycemic in 
participants with 
hyperglycemia.  Monitor participants for hyperglycemia or 
other signs and symptoms of diabetes.  
Hypophysitis  Grade 2  Withhold  Administer corticosteroids 
and initiate hormonal 
replacements as clinically 
indicated.  Monitor for signs and symptoms of 
hypophysitis (including hypopituitarism and adrenal insufficiency).  Grade 3 or 4  Withhold or 
permanently 
discontinue  
Hyperthyroidism  Grade 2  Continue  Treat with non -selective 
beta- blockers (eg, 
propranolol) or thionamides as 
appropriate.  Monitor for signs and symptoms of thyroid 
disorders.  Grade 3 or 4  Withhold or 
permanently discontinue  
Hypothyroidism  Grade 2 -4 Continue  Initiate thyroid 
replacement hormones (eg, levothyroxine or liothyronine) per standard 
of care.  Monitor for signs and symptoms of thyroid 
disorders.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
84 Table 21:  Dose Modification and Toxicity Management Guidelines for Immune -Related Adverse Events Associated With 
Pembrolizumab (Continued) 
Immune -Related AEs  Toxicity Grade or 
Conditions (CTCAE 
Version 4.0)  Action Taken 
With 
Pembrolizumab  irAE Management With 
Corticosteroid and/or 
Other Therapies  Monitor and Follow -up 
Nephritis and renal 
dysfunction  Grade 2  Withhold  Administer corticosteroids 
(prednisone 1- 2 mg/kg or 
equivalent) followed by 
taper.  Monitor changes in renal function.  
Grade 3 or 4  Permanently 
discontinue  
Myocarditis  Grade 1 or 2  Withhold  On the basis of on 
severity of AE, administer 
corticosteroids.  Ensure adequate evaluation to confirm 
etiology and/or exclude other causes.  Grade 3 or 4  Permanently 
discontinue  
All other immune -
related AEs  Intolerable/persistent 
Grade 2  Withhold  On the basis of type and 
severity of AE, administer 
corticosteroids.  Ensure adequate evaluation to confirm 
etiology and/or exclude other causes.  
Grade 3  Withhold or 
discontinue on the basis of the 
type of event. 
Events that 
require discontinuation include, but are 
not limited to, 
Guillain -Barre 
syndrome, 
encephalitis.  
Grade 4 or recurrent 
Grade 3  Permanently 
discontinue  
Withhold or permanently discontinue pembrolizumab is at the discretion of the investigator or treating physician.  
Note: For participants with Grade 3 or 4 immune-related endocrinopathy where withholding pembrolizumab is required, pembrolizumab may be resumed when AE 
resolves to ≤ Grade 2 and is controlled with hormonal replacement therapy or metabolic control is achieved (in case of T1DM).  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
85 5.10.4.6. Dose Modification and Toxicity Management of Infusion Reactions Related to 
Pembrolizumab  
Pembrolizumab may cause severe or life -threatening infusion reactions including severe 
hypersensitivity or anaphylaxis. Signs and symptoms usually develop during or shortly after drug infusion and generally resolve completely within 24 hours after completion of infusion. Dose modification and toxicity management guidelines for pembrolizumab-associated infusion reactions are provided in Table 22. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
86 Table  22: Pembrolizumab Infusion Reaction Dose Modification and Treatment Guidelines  
NCI CTCAE Grade  Treatment  Premedication at Subsequent Dosing  
Grade 1  
Mild reaction; infusion 
interruption not indicated; 
intervention not indicated  Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the 
participant is deemed medically stable in the opinion of the investigator.  None  
Grade 2  
Requires therapy or infusion interruption but responds promptly to symptomatic treatment (eg, antihistamines, 
NSAIDs, narcotics, IV 
fluids); prophylactic medications indicated for ≤ 24 h.  Stop Infusion.  
Additional appropriate medical therapy may include but is not limited to:  
• IV fluids  
• Antihistamines  
• NSAIDs  
• Acetaminophen  
• Narcotics  
Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the participant is deemed medically stable in the opinion of the investigator.  
If symptoms resolve within 1 hour of stopping drug infusion, the infusion may be restarted at 50% of the original infusion rate (eg, from 100 mL/h to 50 mL/h). Otherwise, dosing will be held until symptoms resolve, and the participant should be premedicated for the next scheduled dose.  
Participants who develop Grade 2 toxicity despite adequate premedication should be permanently discontinued from further study drug treatment.  Participant may be premedicated 1.5  h 
(± 30 min) before infusion of 
pembrolizumab with:  
• Diphenhydramine 50 mg PO (or 
equivalent dose of antihistamine)  
• Acetaminophen 500- 1000 mg PO 
(or equivalent dose of analgesic ) 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
87 Table  22: Pembrolizumab Infusion Reaction Dose Modification and Treatment Guidelines (Continued) 
NCI CTCAE Grade  Treatment  Premedication at Subsequent Dosing  
Grades 3 and 4  
Grade 3:  
Prolonged (ie, not rapidly 
responsive to 
symptomatic medication and/or brief interruption of infusion); recurrence of symptoms following initial improvement; 
hospitalization indicated 
for other clinical sequelae (eg, renal impairment, pulmonary infiltrates)  
Grade 4:  
Life-threatening; pressor 
or ventilator support indicated  Stop Infusion.  
Additional appropriate medical therapy may include but is not limited to:  
• Epinephrine**  
• IV fluids  
• Antihistamines  
• NSAIDs  
• Acetaminophen  
• Narcotics  
• Oxygen 
• Pressors  
• Corticosteroids  
Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the 
participant is deemed medically stable in the opinion of the investigator.  
Hospitalization may be indicated.  
**In cases of anaphylaxis, epinephrine should be used immediately.  
Participant is permanently discontinued from further study drug 
treatment.  No subsequent dosing  
Appropriate resuscitation equipment should be available at the bedside and a physician readily available during the period of  drug administration. For further 
information, please refer to the CTCAE Version 4.0 at http://ctep.cancer.gov . 
NSAID = non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drug.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
88 5.10.4.7. Hierarchy of Dose Reductions/Discontinuations  
Patients experiencing AEs that can be clearly attributed to mirvetuximab soravtansine or to any 
of the combination drugs will have the corresponding agent reduced first ( Table 23). In case of 
an AE recurrence, the other drug in the combination Regimen will then be dose reduced. If the relationship of an AE to a particular drug cannot be clearly determined, the order in which the drugs are to be reduced will require approval from the Sponsor. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
89 Table  23: Agent to be Dose Reduced/Discontinued First on the Basis of Reported 
Compound -Specific Treatment -Related Adverse Events 
Adverse Event  Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine  Combination Agent  
Bevacizumab  Carboplatin  Pegylated 
Liposomal 
Doxorubicin  Pembrolizumab  
Ocular 
symptoms  ●     
GI events 
(vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, 
and constipation)  ●     
Peripheral 
neuropathy 
events  ●     
Noninfectious 
pneumonitis  ●    ● 
Anemiaa ●  ●   
Metabolic 
disorders  ●     
Infusion -related 
reactions  See Section  5.9.1 . 
CNS 
hemorrhage   ●    
Hemorrhage   ●    
Hypertension   ●    
Proteinuria   ●    
PRES   ●    
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
90 Table  23: Agent to be Dose Reduced/Discontinued First on the Basis of Reported 
Compound -Specific Treatment -Related Adverse Events (Continued) 
Adverse Event  Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine  Combination 
Agent  AE Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine  Combination 
Agent  
GI perforation or fistula   ●    
Non-GI fistula   ●    
Tracheoesophageal fistula   ●    
Thromboembolism   ●    
HFS    ●  
Stomatitis     ●  
Neutropenia    ● ●  
Thrombocytopenia    ● ●  
Colitis      ● 
T1DM      ● 
Hypophysitis      ● 
Hyperthyroidism/ 
hypothyroidism      ● 
Renal failure or nephritis      ● 
AST, ALT, or increased 
bilirubin      ● 
a If patients are receiving mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with carboplatin, then carboplatin should be 
reduced first.  
If the relationship of the AE to a particular drug cannot be clearly determined, the order in which the drugs are to be 
reduced will require approval from the Sponsor.  
5.10.5. Discontinuation of Study Treatment Due to Adverse Events  
Each drug in the combination Regimen may be discontinued independently on the basis of 
tolerance and drug-specific toxicities. If a doublet combination agent is discontinued in Regimen  A (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab), Regimen B (mirvetuximab 
soravtansine + carboplatin), Regimen C (mirvetuximab soravt ansine + pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin), or Regimen D (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab), the patient may continue participation in the study on mirvetuximab soravtansine as monotherapy. If a patient receiving Regimen A discontinues mirvetuximab soravtansine, the patient may continue participation in the study on bevacizumab as monotherapy until a reason for discontinuation arises (toxicity or tumor progression). If a patient receiving Regimen D discontinues mirvetuximab soravtansine, the patient may continue participation in the study on pembrolizumab as monotherapy until either the patient has received 35 treatments (approximately 2 years) or a reason for discontinuation arises (toxicity or tumor progression). If one or two of the components of the triplet dose (Regimen E) is/are discontinued, the patient may continue participation in the study with a doublet/single-agent therapy. For patients receiving either Regimen B or Regimen C, if mirvetuximab soravtansine is discontinued, the patient must be discontinued from the study. If patients receiving Regimen E discontinue all drug treatment because of toxicity, they will continue to be followed until progression. 
For all drugs, study treatment should not be resumed in the case of the following 
treatment -related events.  
• ≥ Grade 3 cardiac event.  
• Other non-hematologic events of Grade 4 severity. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
91 • Failure to meet re -treatment criteria within one cycle due to insufficient recovery 
from a treatment-related toxicity. In such cases, continuation of study trea tment may 
be considered for those patients who have experienced clinical benefit if agreed upon 
by the Sponsor and the Investigator. 
5.10.6. Additional Discontinuation Guidelines  
5.10.6.1. Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin Discontinuation 
Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin should be discontinued if the patient’s left ventricular ejection fraction drops below normal or by at least 15% from the baseline value. 
5.10.6.2. Bevacizumab Discontinuation  
Bevacizumab should be permanently discontinued in patients experiencing the AE s listed in 
Table 24. 
Table  24: Adverse Events Requiring Permanent Discontinuation of Bevacizumab  
Severity Grade  
(CTCAE Version 4.03 Grade)  Adverse Event  
Any grade  PRES   
Grade 3 or 4  Hemorrhage or bleeding  
Grade 4  Venous thromboembolism  
Any grade  Arterial thromboembolism  
Any grade  CNS bleeding  
Grade 4  Proteinuria  
Grade 3 or 4  Left ventricular dysfunction  
Grade 3 or 4  Congestive heart failure  
Any grade  GI perforation and fistula  
Any grade  Tracheo -esophageal fistula  
Grade 4  Non-GI fistula  
Any grade  Hypersensitivity and/or allergic reactions to bevacizumab  
5.10.6.3. Carboplatin Discontinuation  
Carboplatin may be discontinued after six or more cycles at the discretion of the investigator 
on the basis of the benefit -risk profile for the patient. If carboplatin is discontinued, 
mirvetuximab soravtansine may be continued as a single agent for patients receiving 
Regimen  B and in combination with bevacizumab for patients receiving Regimen E, if the 
patient continues to meet treatment criteria and has at least stable disease per RECIST Version  1.1.  
5.10.6.4. Pembrolizumab Discontinuation  
5.10.6.4.1. Disconti nuation of Study Therapy After 2 Years 
Pembrolizumab will be discontinued after 35 treatments (approximately 2 years of treatment). Retreatment with pembrolizumab in combination with mirvetuximab soravtansine or as monotherapy may be considered if the pati ent has a CR and meets criteria in Section  5.10.6.4.2 
and Section  5.10.6.4.3. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
92 5.10.6.4.2. Discontinuation of Study Therapy After Complete Response  
Discontinuation of treatment may be considered for patients who have attained a confirmed CR 
who have been treated for at least 24 weeks with mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab and had at least 2 cycles of mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab beyond the date when the initial CR was declared. Patients will follow the schedule of assessments in Appendix C . Patients who then experience r adiologic PD may be eligible for up to 1 year of 
additional treatment with pembrolizumab in combination with mirvetuximab soravtansine or as monotherapy at the discretion of the Investigator if:  
• No cancer treatment was administered since the last dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab. 
• The patient meets the safety parameters listed in the inclusion/exclusion criteria (Section 3).  
• The study is still open. 
Patients will resume pembrolizumab in combination with mirvetuximab soravtansine or as monotherapy at the same dose and schedule at the time of initial discontinuation. Additional details are provided in Section  5.10.6.4.3. Response or progression during this re- treatment, 
termed the Second Course Phase ( Section  5.10.6.4.3), will not count toward ORR or PFS for the 
primary endpoint in this trial.  
5.10.6.4.3. Second Course Phase  
Patients on Regimen D (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab) who stop mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab with CR per Section  5.10.6.4.1 may be eligible for up to 1 year 
of additional treatment with pembrolizumab in combination with mirvetuximab soravtansine or as monotherapy if they progress after stopping study treatment. This Second Course Phase of this study is available only if the study remains open and the patient meets the following conditions: 
• Stopped initial treatment with mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab after attaining an investigator-determined confirmed CR according to RECIST Version 1.1. 
− Was treated for at least 24  weeks with mirvetuximab soravtansine and 
pembrolizumab before discontinuing therapy. 
− Received at least two treatments with mirvetuximab soravtansine and 
pembrolizumab beyond the date when the initial CR was declared. 
AND  
• Experienced Investigator-determined confirmed radiologic PD after stopping their initial treatment with mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab.  
• Did not receive any anti- cancer treatment since the last dose of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine and pembrolizumab. 
• Has a per formance status of 0 or 1 on the ECOG PS. 
• Demonstrates adequate organ function as detailed in the inclusion criteria (Section  3.1).  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
93 • If WCBP, defined as a sexually mature woman who has not undergone surgical 
sterilization or who has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 12 consecutive months (ie, who has had menses any time in the preceding 12 consecutive months): 
has a negative serum or urine pregnancy test  within 72 hours before receiving 
retreatment with study medication.  
• If WCBP: agrees to use effective contraceptive methods (examples include oral, parenteral, or implantable hormonal contraceptive, intra- uterine device, or 
vasectomy) while on study treat ment and for at least 12 weeks after the last dose of 
mirvetuximab soravtansine and for at least 4 months after the last dose of pembrolizumab. 
• Does not have a history or current evidence of any condition, therapy, or laboratory abnormality that a) might interfere with the patient’s participation for the full duration of the study, or b) makes it not in the best interest of the patient to participate, in the opinion of the treating Investigator. 
Patients who restart treatment will be retreated at the same d ose frequency as when they last 
received pembrolizumab and mirvetuximab soravtansine. Treatment will be administered for up to 1 additional year. Patients will follow the Schedule of Clinical Assessments in Appendix C .  
5.10.6.4.4. Discontinuation Due to Adverse Event  
Pembrolizumab must be permanently discontinued in patients experiencing the AEs listed in Table 25. 
Table  25: Adverse Events Requiring Discontinuation of Pembrolizumab  
Severity Grade  
(CTCAE Version 4.03 Grade)  Adverse Event  
Grade 4  Hyperthyroidism  
Grade 3 or 4  Myocarditis  
Grade 3 or 4  Pneumonitis  
Grade 3 or 4  Infusion reaction  
Grade 3 or 4  Renal failure/nephritis  
Grade 4  Pembrolizumab -related adverse event  
5.11. Removal of the Patient From the Study or From Study Drug Administration 
The patient or legal guardian acting on behalf of the patient is free to withdraw consent and discontinue participation in the study at any time without prejudice to further treatment. For this protocol, patients withdrawn for reasons other than toxicity during Cycle 1 may be replaced. 
Patients will be removed from study treatment when their disease worsens and there is no 
clinical benefit. Additionally, a patient’s participation in the study may be discontinued at any time at the discretion of the Investigator. The following may be justifiable reasons for the Investigator to remove a patient from the study: 
• The patient suffers an intolerable AE.  
• Non-compliance, including failure to appear at one or more study visits. 
• The patient was erroneously included in the study. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
94 • The study is terminated by the Sponsor. 
If a patient or the patient’s legal guardian(s), acting on behalf of the patient, discontinues 
participation in the study, or the patient is discontinued by the Investigator, the reason for discontinuation must be captured in the eCRF. Any AEs experienced up to the point of discontinuation must be documented on the AE eCRF. All serious adverse events (SAEs), and those AEs assessed by the Investigator as at least possibly related to study drug, should continue to be followed until they resolve or stabilize, whichever comes first. 
5.11.1. Replacement of Patients Who Are Withdrawn Before the End of Cycle 1  
Only patients who sign the ICF and receive at least one dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine will 
be considered enrolled. If an enrolled patient is discontinued from study treatment for reasons other than safety (eg, withdrawal of consent, non-compliance, death due to PD) before the end of Cycle 1, the patient will be replaced (ie, an additional patient will be added to the Dose Escalation dose level or Dose Expansion Cohort or triplet dose [Regimen E]). Patients who do not complete Cycle 1 because of an AE will not be replaced. Patients who are replaced will not be considered in making dose escalation decisions or safety decisions for dose expansion but, if possible, will be followed for safety and other assessments according to the protocol. 
5.12. Period of Observation 
The period of safety observation for this study extends from the time of informed consent until 
the final evaluation during the study, including the 30-day follow-up safety visit and 120 days after the last dose of pembrolizumab (Regimen D only). Short- term follow -up for patients who 
discontinue study therapy without documented PD will continue every 3 months until the patient’s disease worsens, until the patient begins subsequent anti- cancer treatment, or until the 
patient dies, whichever occurs first. 
5.13. Concomitant Medications and Procedures  
All concomitant medications and supportive therapy taken within 4 weeks before Cycle 1 Day 1 
and through 30 days after last study treatment must be recorded on the appropriate eCRF. The identity of all medications, dosage, and route of administration, frequency, duration of administration, and indication for use will be recorded in the appropriate sections of the eCRF. 
5.13.1. Antiemetic and Antidiarrheal Medications  
Antiemetic  (eg, 5-HT
3 [5-hydroxytryptamine type 3] serotonin receptor antagonists such as 
palonosetron, granisetron, or ondansetron) and antidiarrheal (eg, loperamide) medications may 
be used at the discretion of the treating physician. 
5.13.2. Folate-Containing Vitamins 
Folate -contai ning vitamins are not to be taken during the course of the study. 
5.13.3. Antineoplastic Therapy  
Other chemotherapy, investigational agents other than pembrolizumab (Regimen D only), 
immunotherapy, or biologic therapy will not be permitted  during the study. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
95 Pallia tive radiotherapy during study treatment should be discussed with the Sponsor before 
implementation. If the Investigator and Sponsor agree it is in the best interest of the patient, 
palliative radiotherapy may be performed; however, the patient will be censored in the PFS analysis from the time radiotherapy was performed if treatment was performed on a target or non-target lesion.  
5.13.4. Hematopoietic Growth Factors  
Patients receiving recombinant erythropoietin or darbepoetin- α before the study start may 
continue to receive pre -treatment doses.  
The use of erythropoietic and granulocyte growth factors in accordance with ASCO guidelines may be implemented at the discretion of the treating physician after Cycle 1.  
5.13.5. Medications Metabolized Through Cytochrome P450 3A 
In vitro metabolism studies demonstrated that DM4 is predominantly metabolized by thiol s-
methyltransferase to form S-methyl DM4, which is further metabolized into sulfoxide-methyl-DM4. As S-methyl DM4 has been shown to be primarily metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A, its exposure could potentially be increased in the presence of strong CYP3A inhibitors. Drinking more than one serving (250 mL) of grapefruit juice per day should be avoided. 
Available in vitro metabolism data suggest that DM4 has a potential to inhibit CYP3A activity in 
vivo. The risk of a significant in vivo drug-drug interaction caused by DM4 inhibition of CYP3A is not currently known; therefore, treatment of patients with concomitant medications that are sensitive substrates of CYP3A or are CYP3A substrates with a narrow therapeutic index (Appendix N ) should be carefully monitored. 
5.13.6. Vaccinations (Regimen D Only) 
Live vaccines within 30 days before the first dose of pembrolizumab and while participating in the study are not allowed. Examples of live vaccines include, but are not limited to, the following: measles, mumps, rubella, chicken pox, yellow fever, rabies, BCG, and typhoid (ora l) 
vaccine. Seasonal influenza vaccines for injection are generally killed virus vaccines and are allowed. However, intranasal influenza vaccines (eg, FluMist
®) are live attenuated vaccines and 
are not allowed.  
5.13.7. Systemic Steroids (Regimen D Only)  
Systemic g lucocorticoids for any purpose other than to modulate symptoms from an event of 
clinical interest of suspected immunologic etiology or premedication before administration of study drugs are not allowed. The use of physiologic doses of corticosteroids may be approved after consultation with the Sponsor. Inhaled steroids are allowed for management of asthma. Topical steroids including corticosteroid eye drops as outlined in Section  5.8.2 are allowed.  
5.13.8. Other Concomitant Medications  
Medications for the treatment of AEs or cancer symptoms (eg, packed red blood cells and pain medications) are allowed. Prophylactic use of steroids and/or antihistamines will be considered if needed to alleviate mild to moderate infusion- related reactions.  Additionally, medications (not 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
96 addressed above) used to treat underlying medical conditions at study entry, including anti-
emetics and anti -diarrheals, will be allowed to continue.  
5.14. Overdose and Medication Error 
5.14.1. Overdose  
Mirvetuximab soravtansine: There is no known treatment/antidote available. Supportive measures should be instituted if an instance arises in which a patient suffers an overdose of any study drug. In the event of overdose, the patient should be observed closely for signs of toxicity. 
Bevaci zumab, carboplatin, or pegylated liposomal doxorubicin: Please see the package inserts 
for treatment of overdose. Supportive measures should be instituted if an instance arises in which 
a patient suffers an overdose of any study drug. 
Pembrolizumab: For th is trial, an overdose will be defined as ≥  1,000 mg (5 times the dose) 
of pembrolizumab. No specific information is available on the treatment of overdose of 
pembrolizumab.  
Overdose involving any of the study drugs, with or without associated AE/SAE, is to be recorded 
on the AE page of the eCRF and on an SAE form to ensure collection of the incident details, treatment, and any associated AEs. All instances of overdose must be reported to the sponsor as described for SAEs ( Section  9.2.1).  
5.14.2. Medication Error  
The Sponsor must be notified immediately in the event of error in prescribing, dispensing, administering, and/or use of mirvetuximab soravtansine or any study drug. The event must be reported on the eCRF. If an error resulted in an SAE, an SAE Report Form must be submitted within 24 hours after the event (see Section  9.2).  
6. PHARMACOKINETIC AND IMMUNOGENEICITY ASSESSMENTS  
6.1. Pharmacokinetic Assessments  
Pharmacokinetic blood sample collection details are provided in Appendix D  for each Regimen. 
Blood samples from patients will be analyzed to characterize the PK of mirvetuximab soravtansine when administered in 3- or 4 -week cycles. This includes the analysis of intact 
conjugate, total antibody, DM4, and S-methyl DM4. Pharmacokinetic parameters include, but are not limited to, Cycle 1 and Cycle 3 C
max, AUC, t ½, CL, V ss, and t max.  
Pre-infusion and post-infusion samples will be analyzed for pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, 
carboplatin, or bevacizumab concentrations. Samples may be analyzed to evaluate the concentration of pembrolizumab if warranted by a safety signal.  
NOTE:  Any patient who experiences a ≥  Grade 2 infusion-related reaction during administration 
of mirvetuximab soravtansine will have blood drawn within 3 hours after the onset of the 
reaction and 1 week later for determination of drug concentration, antibodies to mirvetuximab soravtansine, and factors that may be related to the development of hypersensitivity reactions (see Secti on 5.9.1).  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
97 Pharmacokinetic samples may also be obtained as feasible at any time during the treatment 
period for assessment of treatment -related SAEs  if deemed appropriate by the Investigator and 
Sponsor. 
When pre -dose samples are collected, they are to be taken before the start of the first 
infusion.  
6.1.1. Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 3 -Week Cycle Schedule Regimen A 
(Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Bevacizumab)  
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine 
Blood samples for PK measurements of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be taken at the 
following time points:  
Cycles 1 and 3  
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes), and 6 hours after the completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (+ 20 minutes) 
• Day 2 – 24 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 3 – 48 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 8 – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety assessments are 
collected  
• Day 15 – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety assessments are 
collected  
Cycles 2, 4, 5, and 6 
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes) 
• End of treatment  – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety 
assessments are collected  
• 30-day follow- up – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety 
assessments are collected  
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Bevacizumab  
Blood samples for PK measurements of bevacizumab will be taken at the following time points: 
Cycles 1 through 6  
• Day 1  – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of bevacizumab 
(+ 10 minutes) 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
98 6.1.2. Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 3 -Week Cycle Schedule Regimen B 
(Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Carboplatin) 
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine 
Blood samples for PK measurements of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be taken at the 
following time points:  
Cycles 1 and 3  
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes) and 6 hours after the completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (+ 20 minutes) 
• Day 2 – 24 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 3 – 48 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 8 – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety assessments are 
collected  
• Day 15 – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety assessments are collected  
Cycles 2, 4, 5, and 6 
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of inf usion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes) 
• End of treatment  – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety 
assessments are collected  
• 30-day follow- up – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety 
assessments are collected  
Blood Sa mples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Carboplatin  
Blood samples for PK measurements of carboplatin will be taken at the following time points: 
Cycles 1 and 3  
• Day 1  - pre-dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of carboplatin 
(+ 10 minutes) and 6 hours after the completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine 
infusion (+ 20 minutes)  
• Day 2  – 24 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
Cycles 2, 4, 5, and 6 
• Day 1  – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of carboplatin 
(+ 10 minutes) 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
99 6.1.3. Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 4 -Week Cycle Regimen C (Mirvetuximab 
Soravtansine + Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin) 
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine  
Blood samples for PK measurements of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be taken at the 
following time points:  
Cycles 1 and 3  
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes) and 6 hours after the completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (+ 20 minutes) 
• Day 2 – 24 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 3 – 48 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 8 – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety assessments are 
collected  
• Day 15 a single blood sample, which is collected when safety assessments are 
collected  
• Day 22 – a single blood sample , which is collected when safety assessments are 
collected  
Cycles 2, 4, 5, and 6 
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes)  
• End of treatment  – a single blood sample, which is collected whe n safety 
assessments are collected  
• 30-day follow- up – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety 
assessments are collected  
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Pegylated Liposomal Doxorubicin  
Blood samples for PK measurements of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin will be taken at the following time points:  
Cycles 1 through 6  
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin (+ 10 minutes) 
6.1.4. Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 3 -Week Cycle Schedule Regimen D 
(Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Pembrolizumab) 
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine 
Blood samples for PK measurements of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be taken at the following time points:  
Cycles 1 and  3 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
100 • Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes) and 6 hours after the completion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine infusion (+ 20 minutes) 
• Day 2 – 24 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 3 – 48 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 8 – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety assessments are 
collected  
• Day 15 – a single blood sample, which is collected when s afety assessments are 
collected  
Cycles 2, 4, 5, and 6 
• Day 1  – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes) 
• End of treatment  – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety 
assessments are collected  
• 30-day follow- up – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety 
assessments are collected  
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Pembrolizumab  
Blood samples for PK measurements of pembrolizumab will be taken at the following time 
points: 
Cycles 1 through 6  
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of pembrolizumab 
(+ 10 minutes) 
6.1.5. Pharmacokinetic Assessments for 3 -Week Cycle Schedule Regimen E 
(Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Bevacizumab + Carboplatin) 
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine 
Blood samples for PK measurements of mirvetuximab soravtansine will be taken at the 
following time points:  
Cycles 1 and 3 
• Day 1  – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes) and 6 hours after the completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (+ 20 minutes) 
• Day 2  – 24 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 3  – 48 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
• Day 8  – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety assessments are 
collected  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
101 • Day 15 – a single blood sample, which is collected w hen safety assessments are 
collected  
Cycles 2, 4, 5, and 6 
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine (+ 10 minutes) 
• End of treatment  – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety 
assessments ar e collected  
• 30-day follow- up – a single blood sample, which is collected when safety 
assessments are collected  
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Bevacizumab  
Blood samples for PK measurements of bevacizumab will be taken at the following time points: 
Cycles 1 through 6  
• Day 1  – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of bevacizumab 
(+ 10 minutes) 
Blood Samples for Pharmacokinetic Measurements of Carboplatin  
Blood samples for PK measurements of carboplatin will be taken at the following time points: Cycles 1 and 3  
• Day 1  - pre-dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of carboplatin 
(+ 10 minutes). 
• Day 2 – 24 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours) 
Cycles 2, 4, 5, and 6 
• Day 1 – pre -dose and immediately after the completion of infusion of carboplatin 
(+ 10 minutes) 
6.2. Immunogenicity Assessments of Mirvetuximab Soravtansine  
Mirvetuximab soravtansine immunogenicity will be assessed in plasma samples collected for PK 
evaluation; no additional blood draw is necessary. The following time points will be analyzed for ADA: before dosing (pre-dose) on Day 1 of Cycles 1, 2, 4, and 5; at the end of treatment and 30-day follow-up visits.  
7. TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH STUDIES  
Several biomarkers, inclu ding FRα, will be evaluated as potential biomarkers of clinical response 
to the different mirvetuximab soravtansine combination Regimens. These will help guide further 
clinical development of mirvetuximab soravtansine. 
7.1. Correlation Between FRα Expression and Mirvetuximab Soravtansine Anti-
tumor Activity  
FRα expression varies with tumor histology, as reported in the literature and demonstrated in 
ImmunoGen nonclinical studies ( Section 1.1 and Investigator Brochure ). On the basis of the 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
102 hypothesis that tumors expressing higher levels of FRα are more likely to be susceptible to 
anti-tumor activity of mirvetuximab soravtansine, a threshold for F Rα expression was 
determined for enrollment in this study. This was done on the basis of molecular epidemiology data generated in a number of patient samples representative of different tumor types, as well as clinical anti- tumor activity data from the FIH  Study 0401. 
7.1.1. Evaluation of FRα Expression in Tumor Tissue During Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion 
FRα expression in tumors will be analyzed by IHC. All patients who are evaluated for this study must submit archived tumor tissue samples (either formalin -fixed, paraffin embedded blocks, or 
slides sectioned from such blocks), or new biopsy samples if archival samples are not available, for analysis of FRα expression by IHC before enrollment.  
For patients in Regimen D, the pre-dose biopsy, taken either during screening or on Cycle 1 
Day 1 (ie, a biopsy taken before the first dose of the study drug and before the first dose of 
combination drug) and the biopsy taken on Cycle 2 Day 8 (±  3) will also be submitted for FRα 
expression by IHC for biomarker research studies. 
If the biopsy procedure is considered to be of significant risk, the biopsy will not be taken. 
Significant risk procedures include (but are not limited to) biopsies of the brain, lung/mediastinum, or pancreas, and endoscopic procedures extending beyond the esophagus, stomach, or bowel.  
Only patients with the required FRα expression levels by IHC (either ≥  25% or ≥  50% [Protocol 
Amendment 4] of tumor staining at ≥  2+ intensity) will be eligible to enroll in the study. If a 
patient wishes to enroll a nd does not have archival tumor tissue available for analysis, the patient 
must undergo a biopsy to obtain tumor tissue for FRα expression assessment. In this case, this 
biopsy will also serve as the pre-dose biopsy for the biomarker research study. If a biopsy procedure to obtain tumor tissue for a patient’s eligibility assessment is considered to be of significant risk, the patient cannot be enrolled in the study. 
The tumor samples will be analyzed for FRα expression in the Companion Diagnostics Pharma 
Services College of American Pathologists (CAP)- accredited and Clinical Laboratory 
Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-certified laboratory and Pathology Services at Ventana Medical Systems, Inc. Samples from patients on Regimens A (Cohorts 1 and 2), B, and C will 
have their FR α levels assessed using the FOLR1 -RPA assay. Samples from patients on 
Regimens  A (Cohort 3), D, and E will have their FR α levels assessed using the FOLR1 -IUO 
assay.  
Immunohistochemistry data will be used to further define associations between FRα expression 
and clinical response.  
7.2. Exploratory Biomarker Studies 
Studies in tumor tissue and blood will be performed to explore potential markers of sensitivity 
and resistance to the mirvetuximab soravtansine combination Regimens. The sections below describe specific activities that are planned, but additional biomarkers/biological pathways may 
be investigated. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
103 7.2.1. Potential Markers of Drug Response 
Cancer is a disease driven by molecular -level changes, which include mutations, DNA 
rearrangements, and copy number changes, and changes in the expression of proteins involved in 
key oncogenic pathways. Many of these changes determine or influence the aggressiveness of the disease, its response to therapy, and the development of resistance to treatment. To evalua te 
how these molecular changes are associated with response to the drug combinations, we will characterize the somatic mutations, gene rearrangements/fusions, and the gene expression profile of archival and biopsy tumor samples using a fit-for-purpose technology such as next- generation 
sequencing of tumor RNA and DNA. Mirvetuximab soravtansine, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin target dividing cells; therefore, markers of cell proliferation including, but not limited to, Ki67 will be assessed  in tumor samples from all patients. Potential associations 
between cell proliferation and clinical response will be examined.  
Mirvetuximab soravtansine retains the ADCC activity of the parental M9346A antibody. FcγR is the principal leukocyte receptor tha t mediates ADCC, and FcγR polymorphisms modulate 
leukocyte ADCC activity. Potential associations between FcγR genotype and clinical response will be examined ( Appendix D ). 
7.2.2. Potential Markers of Drug Resistance  
Drug efflux transporters and PgP in particular play an important role in cancer cell resistance to cytotoxic agents, including microtubule-targeting agents. Therefore, PgP expression levels and polymorphisms will be assessed as a marker of drug resistance in tumor tissues for all patients. Potential associations between PgP levels and clinical response will be examined.  
7.2.3. Potential Mechanism of Synergy Between Mirvetuximab Soravtansine and Pembrolizu mab  
In several different tumor types, including melanoma, NSCLC, gastric cancer, and others, biomarkers have been identified that show positive correlation with response to PD-1/PD- L1 
inhibitors. These biomarkers include elevated expression of PD-L1, increased number of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, and expression of immune- related gene signatures. To assess the 
potential of these biomarkers for predicting response to the combination of mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab, IHC will be carried out for PD -L1 and markers for infiltrating 
lymphocytes such as CD3, CD4 and CD8, and expression of immune- related gene signatures 
will be assessed using next-generation sequencing of RNA. 
Recent nonclinical studies demonstrated that ADC with maytansinoid payload can enhance 
lymphocyte infiltration into tumor tissue, which partially contributed to the anti- tumor activity of 
ADC. Furthermore, a synergistic effect between ADC and multiple immune-checkpoint inhibitors was observed in vivo. Consistent with that, biopsies from patients with HER2 -positive 
breast cancer before and after Kadcyla treatment demonstrated that treatment with Kadcyla resulted in an increased number of tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes ( Muller  2015). To evaluate 
the effect of mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab treatment on immune cells, pre- and post-treatment biopsies will be stained for lymphocyte markers by IHC. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
104 8. STUDY PROCEDURES  
8.1. Informed Consent  
Each patient or legally authorized representative must provide written informed consent before 
any study-required procedures are conducted, unless those procedures are performed as part of the patient’s standard care.  
8.2. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
The inclusion and exclusion criteria will be assessed during screening. All screening evaluations 
must be completed and reviewed to confirm that potential patients meet all eligibility criteria. The Investigator will mainta in a screening log to record details of all participants screened and to 
confirm eligibility or record reasons for screening failure, as applicable. Procedures conducted as part of the patient’s routine clinical management and obtained before signing an IC F may be 
used for screening or baseline purposes, provided the procedure met the protocol- specified 
criteria and was performed within the time frame defined in the Schedule of Clinical Assessments in Appendix A , Appendix B , and  Appendix C . A patient is considered enrolled 
when administered the first dose of drug. 
8.3. Confirmation of Disease Diagnosis 
At screening, disease diagnosis and current disease status will be confirmed from information in 
the source record.  
8.4. Demographic/Medical History  
The age, race, and sex of the patient are to be recorded during screening. 
During the screening period, a complete medical history will be compiled for each patient. The 
history will include the background and progress of the patient’s primary malignancy and a description of all prior therapies for the primary malignancy. 
8.5. Physical Examination, Weight, and Height 
Physical examination, height (screening only), and weight must be performed as indicated in the 
Schedule of Clinical Assessments ( Appendix A , Appendix B , and Appendix C ).  
8.6. Vital Signs  
Vital signs will be measured at screening, before dosing on Day 1 of every cycle, and as indicated in Table 26 and Appendix A , Appendix B , and Appendix C . 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
105 Table  26: Vital Sign Measurements  
 Scree
n-ing Day 1 of 
All 
Cycles 
(Pre-
dose)a Every 30 
Minutes 
During 
Mirvetuxima
b 
Soravtansine 
Infusionb,c Immediately 
After 
Completion 
of 
Mirvetuxima
b 
Soravtansin
e Infusiond 4 Hours 
After End of 
Mirvetuxima
b 
Soravtansine 
Infusionc At 
Same 
Time 
as ECG 
Assess
-
mentse End of 
Treatmen
t and 
Follow -
up Visits  
Blood 
pressure  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Pulse  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Respiratory 
rate ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Temperatu
re ● ● ● ● ●  ● 
a Within 10 minutes before the start of infusion of mirvetuximab soravtansine.  
b ± 10 minutes.  
c Cycle 1 only.  If the patient’s infusion was well tolerated, the 4- hour post –mirvetuximab soravtansine 
infusion assessment will not be required in Cycles ≥ 2.  
d Within 10 minutes after completion of infusion of mirvetuximab soravtansine.  
e Measured pre- dose and within 10 minutes after completion of each set of triplicate ECG readings (pre-
dose, end of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion) to coincide with Cmax PK draw (+ 1 hour window), end 
of combination drug infusion to coincide with Cmax PK draw (+ 1 hour window), and 24 hours post -
infusion (± 2 hours); see also Section  8.7. Cycles 1 and 3 only.  
8.7. Electrocardiogram  
A standard, single 12-lead ECG will be performed within 14 days before Cycle 1 Day 1 to 
determine study eligibility.  
Triplicate ECGs will be performed at 2 - to 5- minute intervals. A single ECG will also be 
performed at the end of treatment visit and as cl inically indicated ( Appendix A , Appendix B , and 
Appendix C ). 
Vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rate) will be measured within 10 minutes of 
completion of each set  of tripl icate ECG readings.  
8.8. Pulse Oximetry  
Pulse oximetry will be performed at screening, before dosing on Day 1 of every cycle, and as indicated in Appendix A , Appendix B , and Appendix C . 
8.9. Pulmonary Function Tests  
Pulmonary function tests will be performed at screening and in the event of pulmonary symptoms as clinically indicated ( Appendix A , Appendix B , and  Appendix C ). 
8.10. Laboratory Assessments 
Patients should be in a seated or supine position during blood collection. Screening labs and any required repeat testing will be performed as outlined in the Schedule of Clinical Assessments (Appendix A , Appendix B , and  Appendix C ) and as clinically indicated.  
Note that before each administration of mirvetuximab soravtansine, laboratory results must be reviewed to evaluate potential toxicity.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
106 8.10.1. Clinical Laboratory Panels 
A list of clinical laboratory tests is presented in Table  27. 
Table  27: Clinical Laboratory Tests  
Hematology  Serum Chemistry  Coagulation Tests  Urinalysisa 
• Hematocrit  
• Hemoglobin  
• WBC (with 5 -part 
differential)  
• RBC  
• Platelet count  • Albumin  
• Alkaline phosphatase  
• ALT 
• AST 
• BUN  
• Calcium  
• Carbon dioxide  
• Chloride  
• Creatinine  
• Glucose  
• LDH 
• Magnesium  
• Phosphorus  
• Potassium  
• Sodium 
• Total bilirubin  
• Thyroid panel (Regimen  D 
only)b • PT 
• aPTT  
• INR • pH 
• Ketones  
• Protein  
• Glucose  
• Occult blood  
• Leukocyte  
• esterase  
• Nitrite  
(Microscopic 
examination of 
sediment will be performed only if results of urinalysis dipstick are positive.)  
a For patients receiving bevacizumab, results from urinalysis should be available before dosing because of the 
increased risk of proteinuria. The test can be performed up to 48 hours before dosing. If the test result is +2, 
bevacizumab should be held until a 24- hour urine test is performed.  
b Thyroid panel should include T3 or free T3, free T4, and TSH; performed every 6 weeks.  
BUN, blood urea nitrogen; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; LDH, lactic acid dehydrogenase; RBC, red blood cell count; WBC, white blood cell count.  
8.11. Pregnancy Screen  
All female patients of childbearing potential will complete a serum beta -human chorionic 
gonadotropin or urine pregnancy test (not more than 3 days before the first dose of mirvetuximab 
soravtansine); this test must be negative for the patient to be enrolled and to receive the study drug. 
If a female patient becomes pregnant or suspects pregnancy while participating in this study, the 
Investigator and Sponsor must be informed immediately, and the patient will be withdrawn from study treatment.  
8.12. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group PS ( Appendix E ) will be assessed during screening and at 
other times specified in the Schedule of Clinical Asses sments ( Appendix A , Appendix B , and  
Appendix C ). An assessment is not necessary on Day 1 of Cycle 1 if the screening assessment 
was obtained within 3 days before Day 1. 
8.13. Radiologic Imaging  
Radiologic tumor evaluation by CT scan or MRI of chest, abdomen, and pelvis will be 
performed within 28 days before the first dose and at other time points specified in the Clinical 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
107 Schedule of Assessments ( Appendix A , Appendix B , and  Appendix C ). The same radiologic 
assessment used at screening must be used at all subsequent radiologic evaluations.  
8.14. Echocardiogram/Multigated Acquisition Scan  
Echocardiograms or MUGA scans will be performed only in patients receiving pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin (Regimen C, Appendix B ). Echocardiograms or MUGA scans will be 
performed at screening and every four cycles of treatment or as medically indicated. The same test should be performed throughout the trial. If the patient’s left ventricular ejection fraction drops below normal or by at least 15% from the baseline value, treatment with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin should be stopped. 
8.15. Tumor Response Assessment  
8.15.1. RECIST and CA125  
Tumor response for patients with measurable lesions should be assessed using RECIST 
Version  1.1 ( Eisenhauer  2009, Appendix G ). Patients with ovarian cancer will have CA125 
measured every cycle and at approximately the same time that they undergo radiologic assessment. Patients will have a baseline tumor assessment done within 28 days before Cycle 1 Day 1 and CA125 measured 14 days before Cycle 1 Day 1. Patients with measurable lesions should be assessed using CT scan or MRI approximately every second cycle, from the date of the first dose. For Regimens A, D, and E, this will continue through Week 24, and then scans will be performed every 3 months for up to 1 year from randomization, and then either every 6 months or per standard of care on the basis of symptoms until the 30-day follow-up visit. For Regimen  C, the scan frequency will change 1 year after randomization to every 16 weeks or as 
clinically indicated. Although progression may be determined by the Investigator on the basis of clinical deterioration, every effort should be made to document progression using radiologic methods. The basis for determination of progression per clinical deterioration should be documented.  
Patients experiencing CA125 response must have a confirmatory test performed as detailed in 
the Clinical Schedule of Assessments ( Appendix A , Appendix B , and  Appendix C ). In the case 
of stable disease (SD), follow -up measurements must have met the SD criteria at least once after 
study entry at a minimum interval of 6 weeks. 
The si te is expected to maintain a copy of digital data for the retention period applicable to the 
protocol, Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and federal, international, and/or state legal and medical 
requirements.  
Note: It is very important that the same method o f radiologic assessment be used 
throughout the study and that the same lesions are followed.  
8.15.2. Immune -Related RECIST (Regimen D Only)  
RECIST Version 1.1 will be adapted to account for the unique tumor response characteristics 
seen with treatment with pembro lizumab. Immunotherapeutic agents such as pembrolizumab 
may produce anti-tumor effects by potentiating endogenous cancer-specific immune responses. The response patterns seen with such an approach may extend beyond the typical time course of responses seen  with cytotoxic agents, and can manifest a clinical response after an initial 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
108 increase in tumor burden or even the appearance of new lesions. Standard RECIST may not 
provide an accurate response assessment of immunotherapeutic agents such as pembrolizumab. Therefore, RECIST  Version 1.1 will be used with the adaptions outlined in Appendix I . These 
assessments will be performed on the scans performed for  the RECIST assessment (see 
Section  8.15.1).  
Note: It is very important that the same method of radiologic assessment be used throughout the study and that the same lesions are followed.  
8.16. Eligibility Based on FRα Expression  
Instructions regarding processing and shipment of biopsy samples and archiva l tissues are 
detailed in the Laboratory Manual. Tumor samples will be analyzed for FRα expression in the Companion Diagnostics Pharma Services CAP- accredited and CLIA -certified laboratory and 
Pathology Services at Ventana Medical Systems, Inc. Samples fro m patients on Regimens A 
(Cohorts 1 and 2), B, and C will have their FR α levels assessed using the FOLR1- RPA assay. 
Samples from patients on Regimens A (Cohort 3), D, and E will have their FR α levels assessed 
using the FOLR1- IUO assay.  
All patients must ha ve documented expression of FRα by IHC (≥  25% or ≥  50% [Protocol 
Amendment 4] of tumor staining at ≥  2+ intensity) before enrollment. Immunohistochemistry 
may be performed on archival tissue to determine eligibility. If archival tissue is not available, then a new tumor biopsy must be obtained. De-identified pathology reports should be included 
with sample shipment to ImmunoGen or designee. In Study 0401, the FIH monotherapy study, most patients (98%) had available archival tissue.  
8.17. Biopsy of Tumor (Regimen D Only)  
A biopsy of tumor tissue will be performed on two occasions: The first biopsy will be performed 
before the first dose of any study treatment, and the second biopsy will be performed on Cycle 2 Day 8 (±  3) (Section  7.1.1). Instructions regarding processing and shipment of the biopsy sample 
are detailed in the Laboratory Manual. 
9. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
9.1. Recording Adverse Events  
Adverse events, including those attributed to study procedures, will be documented on the AE 
eCRF and monitored continuously throughout the study from the time of informed consent until 30 days after the patient’s last study treatment.  
However, those AEs that meet seriousness criteria (ie, SAEs) will be followed up by ImmunoGen Pharmacovigilance until resolution, stabilization, or return to baseline. Beyond this defined reporting period, any unsolicited SAE assessed as related to the study drug by the Investigator and reported to ImmunoGen will be collected and processed. Additional information obtained after database lock will reside solely in the safety database.  
The frequency of AE monitoring increases for patients who experience a DLT, and for patients who discontinue study treatment because of a study-related AE, the reporting time period may be extended. These patients must be followed at least once a week for 4 weeks, and subsequently at 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
109 4-week intervals until resolution, stabilization, or chronic state of the AE or lab oratory 
abnormality, whichever comes first ( Section  5.10.2).  
To ensure the safety of the patient, the Investigator should take appropriate measures to follow 
and provide updates for all AEs until clinical recovery is complete, laboratory values return to normal, the patient stabilizes, or death occurs. This may mean that observations continue beyond the last planned visit per protocol and that additional investigations may be requested by the Sponsor. 
9.1.1. Definition of Adverse Events  
9.1.1.1. Adverse Event  
An AE is any noxious, pathologic, or unintended change in anatomical, physiologic, or 
metabolic function as indicated by physical signs, symptoms, or laboratory changes occurring in any phase of a clinical study, whether or not considered study drug related. This includes an exacerbation of a pre-existing condition. Adverse events include: 
• Worsening (change in nature, severity, or frequency) of conditions present at the onset of the study 
• Drug -drug interactions 
• Events related to or possibly related to concomitant medications 
• Clinically significant abnormalities in physical examination, vital signs, and weight 
Adverse events may be discovered through observation or examination of the patient, questioning of the patient, complaint by the patient, or by abnormal clinical laboratory values. 
In addition, AEs may include laboratory values that become significantly out of range. Such 
abnormal laboratory values or test results constitute AEs if they induce clinical signs or 
symptoms, are considered clinically significant (eg, causes study discontinuation or constitutes in and of itself an SAE), or require therapy (eg, any hematologic abnormality  that r equires 
transfusion or growth factor treatment), and should be recorded on the AE eCRF under the signs, symptoms, or diagnosis associated with them. In the event of an out-of-range laboratory value, the laboratory test should be repeated until it returns to normal or baseline or can be explained and the patient’s safety is not at risk.  
9.1.1.2. Serious Adverse Event  
An SAE is any AE occurring at any dose that results in any of the following outcomes: 
• Death  
• Is life -threatening 
• Requires inpatient hospitalization  
• Requires prolongation of existing hospitalization 
• A persistent or significant disability or incapacity or substantial disruption of the 
ability to conduct normal life functions 
• A congenital anomaly or birth defect 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
110 • Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered an SAE when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, and blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization.  
Note that hospitalization is defined as an admission to treat a clinical AE. The following events would not be considered hospitalizations for SAE-reporting purposes: 23-hour hold for observation, admission to a hospice facility or nursing home, respite care, outpatient surgery, social ad mission (eg, a homeless patient), or admission not associated with a precipitating 
clinical AE (eg, elective or pre-planned surgery or in-patient administration of subsequent chemotherapy).  
9.1.1.3. Adverse Events of Special Interest  
An adverse event of special int erest (AESI) (serious or non -serious) is one of scientific and 
medical concern specific to the Sponsor’s product for which ongoing monitoring and rapid communication by the Investigator to the Sponsor is appropriate.  
All AESIs should be promptly reported per Section  9.2.1. 
9.1.1.4. Mirvetuximab Soravtansine  
Mirvetuximab soravtansine has one AESI, which is pneumonitis. Radiologic findings suggestive of pneumonitis include new onset of any of the following: 
• Pulmonary consolidation 
• Pulmonary infiltrate  
• Reticular infiltrate  
• Nodular infiltrate  
• Reticulo -nodular infiltrate 
• Ground- glass pulmonary infiltrate  
• Increased interstitial markings  
• Interstitial infiltrate  
• Honeycomb appearance  
9.1.1.5. Pembrolizumab  
Pembrolizumab has two AESIs: 
• An overdose of pembrolizumab, as defined in Section  5.14.  
• An elevated AST or ALT lab value that is ≥ 3 times the ULN and an elevated total 
bilirubin lab value that is ≥ 2 times the ULN and, at the same time, an alkaline 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
111 phosphatase lab value that is less than 2 times the ULN, as determined by way of 
protocol-specified laboratory testing or unscheduled laboratory testing.* 
*Note that these criteria are based upon available regulatory guidance documents. The purpose of the criteria is to specify a th reshold of abnormal hepatic tests that may require additional 
evaluation for an underlying etiology. The trial site guidance for assessment and follow-up of these criteria can be found in the Study Manual (or equivalent). 
9.1.2. Classification of Adverse Events 
All AEs will be evaluated according to the NCI CTCAE Version 4.03 (effective 14 June 2010) 
Appendix M . If the AE is not listed in the NCI CTCAE, it s hould be graded on the basis of the 
description given in Table 28. 
Table  28: Adverse Event Severity  
Severity  Definition  
Grade 1 (mild)  No limitation of usual activities  
Grade 2 (moderate)  Some limitation of usual activities  
Grade 3 (severe)  Inability to carry out usual activities  
Grade 4 (life- threatening)  Immediate risk of death  
Grade 5 (fatal)  Resulting in death  
Relationship of an AE or SAE to study drug(s) is to be determined by the Investigator on the basis of the definitions listed in Table 29. Relationship should be attributed not only to the combination Regimen, but also to each drug within the combination Regimen. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
112 Table  29: Adverse Event Casual Relationship to Study Drug  
Relationship to Study 
Drug(s ) Definition  
Not related  No relationship between the event, including laboratory test 
abnormality, and the administration of study drug. There is no temporal relationship, and there is unambiguous evidence supporting another cause.  
Unlikely related A clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, with a temporal 
relationship to study drug administration that makes a causal relationship improbable, and in which other drugs, chemicals, or underlying disease provide plausible explanations.  
Possibly related  A clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, with a reasonable time sequence to administration of study drug, but which could also be explained by concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals. Information on study drug withdrawal may be lacking or unclear.  
Probably related  A clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, with a reasonable 
time sequence to administration of study drug, unlikely to be attributed to concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals, and which follows a clinically reasonable response on withdrawal (de- challenge). 
Re-challenge information is not required to fulfill this definition. The 
association of the clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, must also have some biologic plausibility, at least  on theoretical 
grounds.  
Definitely related  A clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, occurring in a plausible time relationship to study drug administration, and which cannot be explained by concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals. The response to withdrawal of the study drug (de- challenge) should be 
clinically plausible.  
9.2. Reporting of Adverse Events  
9.2.1. Reporting of Serious Adverse Events and/or Adverse Events of Special Interest  
Any SAE or AESI, regardless of relationship to study medications, that occurs in a patient from 
the time of informed consent until 30 days after the last study treatment of mirvetuximab soravtansine, bevacizumab, carboplatin, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin and 90 days after last treatment of pembrolizumab or 30 days following cessation of pembrolizumab if the patient initiates new anticancer therapy, whichever is earlier , must be recorded by the clinical site on an 
SAE Report Form. The event must also be recorded on the patient’s AE eCRF, including the Investigator’s assessment of the relationship of the event to the study treatment (mirvetuximab 
soravtansine and bevacizumab, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, carboplatin, or pembrolizumab). The Investigator will promptly supply all information requested by the Sponsor (or Contract Research Organization [CRO]) regarding the event.  
The Investigator must submit the SAE Report Form to ImmunoGen Pharmacovigilance (or 
designee). This form must be completed and submitted within 24 hours after the Investigator learns  of the event, using the contact information printed on the SAE Report Form and contained 
within the SAE Report Form Completion Guidelines. Follow-up information must be submitted using a new SAE Report Form. 
When reporting SAEs, the following additional points should be noted:  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
113 • The underlying diagnosis or syndrome should be reported as the primary SAE term, 
rather than the signs or symptoms (signs and symptoms may be described in the narrative).  
• An event term of “Death” should not be used, but rather should be recorded as an outcome of a specific SAE term. Initially, the event term of “death NOS” (not otherwise specified) can be used until the actual cause of death is known. If an autopsy was performed, the autopsy report should be provided. 
When repor ting AESIs, the following additional points should be noted: 
• As described in Section  9.1.1.3, serious or non-serious events, any symptom, or sign 
potentially suggestive of an AESI must be promptly reported on an SAE Report Form. Please refer to the SAE Completion Guidelines and SAE R eport Form for 
additional information. 
It is the responsibility of the Sponsor to ensure that each Investigator receives a copy of any suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction (SUSAR) report (Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences  [CIOMS]/MedWatch report) regarding the study drug(s) and 
as submitted to the appropriate national regulatory agencies.  
The Investigator (or Sponsor or designee) must promptly report all SUSARs to the IRB/IEC for 
review in accordance with national regulat ions. The IRB/IEC notification of the SUSAR may be 
a submission of a copy of the CIOMS/MedWatch report or other format accepted by the IRB/IEC. A copy of the CIOMS/MedWatch report and notification to the IRB/IEC should be retained in the site’s Investigator Site File.  
In addition to the CIOMS/MedWatch reports, the Sponsor will notify (through annual update to 
the Investigator Brochure) the Investigators and IRBs/IECs of all deaths that occur during the study, irrespective of relationship to study drug(s). 
9.2.2. Reporting of Disease Progression 
Disease progression and/or progression of the disease under study is an anticipated occurrence in 
oncology drug development and is part of the efficacy objectives of this study. It is not an AE per se and should not be used as an AE term.  
However, any medical event or condition that is untoward in the context of PD and/or for the specific patient’s disease course should be reported as an AE and assessed accordingly by the Investigator.  
Progression of disease with a fatal o utcome does not need to be reported as an AE term. 
However, the applicable protocol eCRF page(s) pertaining to death must be completed immediately  to record the PD/death.  
9.2.3. Reporting a Pregnancy  
Pregnancy and lactation are exclusion criteria for this study. A WCBP, defined as a sexually mature woman who has not undergone surgical sterilization or who has not been naturally post-menopausal for at least 12 consecutive months (ie, who has had menses any time in the preceding 12 consecutive months) must agree to use effective contraceptive methods while on study treatment and for the following time periods: 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
114 • At least 12 weeks after the last dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine 
• At least 6 months after the last dose of bevacizumab, carboplatin, or pegylated 
liposomal doxorubicin 
• At least 4 months after the last dose of pembrolizumab  
The Sponsor must be notified immediately in the event of a pregnancy occurring during the course of the study and through the following time periods: 
• 30 days after a patient’s last dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine, bevacizumab, 
carboplatin, or pegylated liposomal doxorubicin 
• 120 days after cessation of pembrolizumab or 30 days after cessation of treatment if 
the subject initiates new anticancer therapy, whichever is earlier  
Pregnancy is not an AE unto itself and therefore should not be reported as an AE. 
All pregnancies will be recorded on a Pregnancy Report Form and submitted according to the 
contact information on the form and the form completion guidelines.  
Pregnancies, with the permission of the mother, will be followed to completion or termination 
using the designated sections of the Pregnancy Report Form.  
Any SAE occurring during the pregnancy, to the mother or fetus, requires that a SAE Report 
Form also be submitted. 
10. STUDY ACTIVITIES  
All study visits and assessments that must be performed during the study and follow- up are 
included in Appendix A , Appendix B , and  Appendix C . 
10.1. Screening Visit  
The Investigator is responsible for keeping a record of all patients screened for entry into the 
study and subsequently excluded. The reason(s) for exclusion must also be recorded. The screening procedures must be performed within 28 days before Day 1, unless otherwise specified.  
10.1.1. Stan dard of Care Assessments  
In some cases, clinical assessments performed before obtaining informed consent may be used to qualify the patient for the study. These include radiologic tumor assessment, physical examinations, hematology, serum chemistry results, coagulation studies, urinalysis, or other assessments that may be considered part of the normal standard of care. In these cases, repeat assessments may not be necessary before enrollment, unless individual parameters require further study or confirmation and are clinically appropriate.  
10.2. End of Treatment Visit  
Patients may voluntarily withdraw from the study treatment at any time for any reason, and without prejudice to further treatment. In addition, patients may be withdrawn by the Investigator if the Investigator does not feel that the patient is deriving clinical benefit or because the patient 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
115 is experiencing unacceptable toxicity. The reasons for which a patient may be prematurely 
discontinued are listed in Section  5.10.5.  
Patients who withdraw or are removed from the study treatment will have an end of treatment visit within 7 days after the decision to discontinue study treatment. Additionally, these patients will undergo a 30- day follow -up safety visit. The eCRF will capture reasons for withdrawal.  
10.3. Follow- up Assessments  
10.3.1. Safety Follow- up 
A safety follow-up visit will occur 30 days (+ 14 days) after the last treatment.  
All SAEs, and those AEs assessed by the Investigator as at least possibly related to study drug, 
should continue to be followed until they resolve or stabilize, whichever comes first. Reporting of SAEs is detailed in Section  9.2.1. 
10.3.2. Response Follow- up 
Patients who have discontinued study treatment for reasons other than PD will be followed per RECIST Version 1.1 ( Appendix G ) every 12 weeks (± 3 weeks) until documentation of PD or 
until the patient starts subsequent anti- cancer therapy, whichever comes first.  
11. STATISTICAL METHODS  
All statistical analyses will be performed using the most recent release of SAS statistical software, unless otherwise noted. For categorical variables, the number (n) and percentage of each category within a parameter will be presented. For continuous variables, the sample size (n), mean , median, standard deviation, and the minimum and maximum values will be presented. 
Missing data will not be imputed unless otherwise stated. There will be a detailed description of patient disposition, patient demographics, and baseline characteristics. 
No formal interim analysis is planned for this study. However, a review of safety data and 
available preliminary PK data will be conducted by the CRC after the MTD or an RP2D for each combination Regimen has been determined. Results from this data review could enable dose selection for additional studies with mirvetuximab soravtansine, before the completion of this study. 
A statistical analysis plan will fully describe the planned analyses for this trial and will be 
finalized before database lock. All analys es will be performed for any patient who receives study 
drug. All analyses for anti- tumor activity will use Cycle 1 Day 1 as the start time.  
11.1. Sample Size 
Ascending doses of mirvetuximab soravtansine and bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, or pembrolizumab are to be evaluated to identify the MTD for each of the four doublet combination Regimens. The actual number of patients accrued during the Dose Escalation phase will be determined largely by the findings observed during the course of their treatment. Regimen A (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab) is expected to enroll 16 patients, whereas Regimen B (mirvetuximab soravtansine + carboplatin) and Regimen C (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pegylated liposomal doxorubicin) are expected to enroll 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
116 22 patients. Regimen D (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab) is expected to enroll 
16 patients. For all four Regimens, up to 10 additional patients will be treated at the MTD.  
Overall, the Dose Escalation phase of the study is expected to enroll approximately 76 to 
120 patients.  
Following MTD determination, there will be a Dose Expansion phase for Regimen A (mirvetuximab soravtansine + bevacizumab) and Regimen D (mirvetuximab soravtansine + pembrolizumab).  
Regimen A (Mirvetuximab Soravtansin e + Bevacizumab)  
Patients enrolled in the Dose Expansion phase will be allocated to three Dose Expansion Cohorts according to prior exposure to bevacizumab as follows: 1) Dose Expansion Cohort 1: bevacizumab naïve; 2) Dose expansion Cohort 2: bevacizumab pre -treated; and 3) Dose 
Expansion Cohort 3: with one to three prior therapies including one prior therapy with bevacizumab (per Protocol Amendment 5).  
For the bevacizumab -naïve Cohort (Cohort 1), assuming a response rate of 55%, there is a 94.2% 
probability of detecting at least 8 responders if 20 patients are recruited. The response rate 
assumption is based on an ORR of 53% observed with the standard of care therapy of paclitaxel in combination with bevacizumab in patients with platinum- resistant EOC 
(Bevacizumab  [package insert]  2014).  
For the bevacizumab -pretreated Cohort (Cohort 2), assuming a response rate of 50%, there is a 
91.2% probability of detecting at least 14 responders if 35 patients are recruited.  
For the bevacizumab expansion (Cohort 3), assuming a response rate of 50%, there is a 95.4% 
probability of detecting at least 24 responders if 60 patients are recruited. In addition, the 90% confidence interval for true ORR is given in the table below if the observed number of responders is 20 to 40 of 60 patients.  
Responses Observed, 60 Patients  90% Exact Confidence Interval for True ORR  
20/60 (33%)  (23%, 45%)  
21/60 (35%)  (25%, 46%)  
22/60 (37%)  (26%, 48%)  
23/60 (38%)  (28%, 50%)  
24/60 (40%)  (29%, 51%)  
25/60 (42%)  (31%, 53%)  
26/60 (43%)  (32%, 55%)  
27/60 (45%)  (34%, 56%)  
28/60 (47%)  (36%, 58%)  
29/60 (48%)  (37%, 60%)  
30/60 (50%)  (39%, 61%)  
31/60 (52%)  (40%, 63%)  
32/60 (53%)  (42%, 64%)  
33/60 (55%)  (44%, 66%)  
34/60 (57%)  (45%, 68%)  
35/60 (58%)  (47%, 69%)  
36/60 (60%)  (49%, 71%)  
37/60 (62%)  (50%, 72%)  
38/60 (63%)  (52%, 74%)  
39/60 (65%)  (54%, 75%)  
40/60 (67%)  (55%, 77%)  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
117 Regimen D (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Pembrolizumab)  
In the Dose Expansion phase for Regimen D, a total of 35 patients will be enrolled at FRα > 50% 
of tumor staining at intensity ≥  2+ and 11 patients with a FRα 25% to 49% of tumor staining at 
intensity ≥  2+. Assuming a response rate of 50%, there is a 91.2% probability of detecting at 
least 14 responders if 35 patients are recruited. In addition, the 90% confidence interval for true 
ORR is given in the table below if the observed number of responders is 12 to 18 of 35 patients. 
Responses Obser ved, 35 Patients  90% Exact Confidence Interval for True ORR  
12/35 (34%)  (21%, 50%)  
13/35 (37%)  (24%, 52%)  
14/35 (40%)  (26%, 55%)  
15/35 (43%)  (29%, 58%)  
16/35 (46%)  (31%, 61%)  
17/35 (49%)  (34%, 64%)  
18/35 (51%)  (36%, 66%)  
Regimen E (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine + Bevacizumab + Carboplatin) 
In Regimen E (Triplet), approximately 50 patients will be enrolled to ensure that 40 patients will 
be treated at the MTD. Assuming a response rate of 60%, there is a 92.6% probability of detecting at least 20 responders if 40 patients are recruited. In addition, the 90% confidence interval for true ORR is given in the table below if the observed number of responders is 20 to 26 of 40 patients.  
Responses Observed, 40 Patients  90% Exact Confidence Interval for True ORR  
20/40 (50%)  (36%, 64%)  
21/40 (52.5%)  (38%, 66%)  
22/40 (55%)  (41%, 69%)  
23/40 (57.5%)  (43%, 71%)  
24/40 (60%)  (46%, 73%)  
25/40 (62.5%)  (48%, 75%)  
26/40 (65%)  (51%, 77%)  
Overall, the Dose Expansion phase is expected to enroll up to 211 patients. Assuming that approximately 90% of enrolled patients in the Dose Expansion phase will be evaluable, the study is expected to accrue approximately 311 to 355 patients.  
Safety will be evaluated continuously, separately, and in aggregate in the expansion Regimens. If 
at any time ≥  33% of patients treated in an expansion Regimen experience a Cycle 1 DLT, 
further enrollment to that Cohort will stop, and the CRC will be convened. The CRC will review all available safety and PK data to determine how further dosing should proceed. If the CRC determines that the dose should be revised during the expansion phase for a given expansion Cohort, that Cohort will enroll additional patients at the revised dose to fulfill the enrollment goal.  
11.2. Pharmacokinetic Analyses  
Pharmacokinetic parameters, if feasible, will be derived from plasma concentrations of mirvetuximab soravtansine total antibody, DM4, and S-methyl DM4 using the actual sampling times an d non- compartmental methods. Plasma concentration data and PK parameters will be 
summarized by cohort, cycle, and dose level as appropriate.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
118 Plasma or serum concentrations for pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, bevacizumab, carboplatin, 
and pembrolizumab will summarized by cohort, cycle, and dose level as appropriate.  
Individual and mean (standard deviation) plasma concentration- time profiles will be presented 
graphically by cohort, cycle, and dose level as appropriate. 
11.3. Immunogenicity Assessment  
The percentage of patients who screen positive for ADA, the percentage of patients who are 
confirmed positive, and antibody titer data will be summarized by cohort and time point using descriptive statistics. The  potential impact of immunogenicity against mirv etuximab soravtansine 
on PK, safety, and anti- tumor activity will be explored.  
11.4. Safety Analyses 
Adverse events, concomitant medications, and results from physical examinations will be listed.  
Adverse events will also be coded with the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities 
(MedDRA; Version 18.0 or later) and summarized by System Organ Class and Preferred Term. 
Concomitant medications will be coded using the World Health Organization Drug Dictionary 
(WHO -DD; 01 June 2012 or later version). A dictionary listing of all unique concomitant 
medications used in the study will be provided. 
All hematology, blood chemistry, vital signs, and ECG results will be listed by patient for each 
assessment, and descriptive statistics will be tabulated for select criteria. Changes from baseline 
in hematology, blood chemistry, vital signs, ECHO/MUGA scan (Regimen C), and ECG results 
will be summarized by treatment. Shifts in hematology and blood chemistry from baseline values will be summarized. Plasma also will be evaluated for the presence of humoral responses against the M9346A antibody component or against the DM4 component (ADA).  
11.5. Anti -tumor Activity  
Objective Response Rate 
The best objective response will be determined by the Investigator for each patient as either CR, 
PR, SD, or relapsed disease/PD using RECIST Version 1.1, CA125, and irRECIST Version 1.1 (Regimen D) evaluations (see Appendix G , Appendix H , and  Appendix I ). Confirmed objective 
responses for patients in the Dose Escalation phase will be summarized by dose assigned and the dose at which the response occurred. For the Dose Expansion phase, responses will be reported overall and separately for each expansion Cohort. Response rate will be c alculated as the number 
of CRs or PRs divided by the number of response-evaluable patients. To meet the definition of response evaluable, patients must have undergone radiologic assessment at baseline, received at least one dose of combination treatment, and must have had at least one post-dose tumor assessment.  
Duration of Response 
Duration of response, defined as the time from initial response until PD, will be estimated for all 
patients who achieve a confirmed objective response (PR or CR) using the Kaplan -Meier 
method. Results will be summarized by dose cohort assigned and dose at which the response occurred.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
119 Progression -Free Survival  
Progression-free survival, defined as the time from initiation of study drug until PD or death, 
whichever occurs firs t, will be estimated using the Kaplan -Meier method. The median PFS and 
PFS rate at 6 months will be presented. Results will be summarized by dose cohort. 
For DOR and PFS calculations, patients not achieving the endpoint will be censored at the time 
of the last endpoint assessment. Median response times and associated 95% confidence intervals will be presented.  
12. QUALITY CONTROL AND ASSURANCE  
Clinical sites will be monitored by ImmunoGen or its designee to ensure the accuracy of data 
against source documents. Data will be captured using validated electronic systems. Adverse events will be coded using MedDRA Version 18.0 or later. Concomitant medications will be coded using the WHO-DD 01 June 2012 or later version. Training will occur at an Investigator meeting  or at the site initiation visit or both, and instruction manuals (eg, laboratory manuals and 
pharmacy manuals) will be provided to aid consistency in data collection and reporting across sites.  
All required data will be entered into the clinical and/or sa fety database in accordance with Code 
of Federal Regulations (CFR) 21 Part 11 and International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) E6. The database will include an audit trail to document all data processing and activity on each data field by each user. Users will be given restricted access according to their role in the study through a password-protected environment. All missing data will be explained. 
Data entered in the system must be verifiable against source documents and will be reviewed 
manually for validity and completeness against the source documents by a clinical monitor from ImmunoGen or its designee. If necessary, the study site will be contacted for corrections or clarifications.  
13. ADMINISTRATIVE CONSIDERATIONS, STUDY MONITORING, AND DATA MANAGEME NT 
13.1. Investigators and Study Administrative Structure  
Before initiation of the study, the Investigators must provide the Sponsor with a completed Form  FDA 1572. Study medications may be administered only under the supervision of the 
Investigators listed on this form. Curricula vitae must be provided for the Investigators and sub-Investigators listed on Form FDA 1572. 
The Investigator should ensure that all persons assisting with the study are qualified and trained 
before performing de legated study- related duties. The Investigator must maintain a list of site 
personnel to whom he or she has delegated significant study- related duties.  
13.2. Institutional Review Board or Independent Ethics Committee Approval  
Before initiation of the study, the Investigator must provide the Sponsor with a copy of the written IRB/IEC approval of the protocol, the study ICF, and the screening ICF (the latter ICF is applicable for sites requesting permission to pre- screen for FRα positivity before performing any 
additional study -related tests). This approval must refer to the ICF(s) and to the study title, study 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
120 number, and version and date of issue of the study protocol, as given by the Sponsor on the title 
page of the protocol. 
Status reports must be submitted to the IRB/IEC at least once per year or per institutional 
guidelines. The IRB/IEC must be notified of study completion, and a final report must be provided to the IRB/IEC. A copy of these reports will be sent to the study clinical monitor or designee. The Investigators must maintain an accurate and complete record of all submissions made to the IRB/IEC, including a list of all reports and documents submitted. Adverse events that are subject to expedited reporting to the US FDA or other regulatory agencies (SUS ARs) 
must be submitted promptly to the IRB/IEC.  
13.3. Ethical Conduct of the Study  
The procedures set out in this study protocol pertaining to the conduct, evaluation, and documentation of this study are designed to ensure that the Sponsor and Investigators abide by the Declaration of Helsinki; GCP as described in 21 CFR Parts 50, 56, and 312; and ICH GCP guidelines.  
13.4. Patient Information and Consent 
Before enrolling in the clinical study, the patient or the patient’s legally authorized 
representative(s) must sign  an IRB/IEC -approved ICF to participate, after the nature, scope, and 
possible consequences of the clinical study have been explained in a form understandable to him or her. An IRB/IEC-approved ICF that includes information about the study will be prepared and given to the patient or the patient’s legally authorized representative(s). This document will contain all FDA, ICH, and IRB/IEC-required elements. The ICF must be in a language understandable to the patient or the patient’s legally authorized representative(s) and must specify who informed the patient or the patient’s legally authorized representative. 
After the patient has been given ample time to read and ask questions regarding the informed 
consent document and has been informed that participation is voluntary, the patient or the patient’s legally authorized representative(s) must give consent in writing. If the patient or the patient’s legally authorized representative(s) is unable to read, oral presentation and explanation of the written ICF and information to be supplied must take place in the presence of an impartial witness. Consent must be confirmed at the time of consent orally and by the personally dated signature of the patient or by the patient’s legally authorized representative(s). The witness and the person conducting the informed consent discussions must also sign and personally date the informed consent document. It should also be recorded and dated in the source document that consent was given. 
A copy of the signed and dated consent document(s) must be given to the patient or the patient’s 
legally authorized representative(s). The original signed and dated consent document will be retained by the Investigator. Patient confidentiality will be maintained as outlined in Section 13.5. 
The Investigator will not undertake any measures specifically required solely for the clinical  
study until valid consent has been obtained. A model of the full study ICF will be provided to the sites separately from this protocol.  A screening ICF may be used to confirm a patient’s consent to analyze archived or new tumor 
samples for FRα expression. If the IHC screening assay is positive for FRα, the patient will be 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
121 provided the full study consent, and only after signing the full study ICF will additional study-
specific screening tests be performed. A model of the screening ICF will be provided to the sites separately from this protocol. 
Participants must be  re-consented to the most current version of the ICF(s) per IRB/IEC 
guidelines during their participation in the study. 
13.5. Patient Confidentiality  
Protected health information (eg, patient name) will not be collected and provided to the Sponsor 
and/or CRO. If protected health information appears on any documents, it must be redacted before a copy of the document is supplied to the Sponsor and/or CRO. Study findings stored on a computer will be stored in accordance with local data protection laws. Patien t blood and tissue 
samples sent to outside laboratories and/or CROs (eg, IHC laboratory) are identified only by study patient number to ensure maintenance of confidentiality. The patient consent form will state that publications resulting from this study w ill not refer to patient names or include any 
other information that might disclose the identity of the patient. Patients will be told that representatives of the Sponsor, a designated CRO, the IRB/IEC, monitors, auditors, or regulatory authorities may inspect their medical records to verify the information collected, and that all personal information made available for monitoring, audit, or inspection will be handled in strictest confidence and in accordance with local data protection laws. The Investigato r will 
maintain a personal patient identification list (patient numbers with the corresponding patient names) to enable records to be identified. 
13.6. Study Monitoring  
Monitoring procedures that comply with current GCP guidelines will be followed. On- site 
review of the case report forms (CRFs) for completeness and clarity, cross-checking with source 
documents, and clarification of administrative matters will be performed.  
The study will be monitored by the Sponsor or its designee. On- site monitoring will be 
performed by a representative of the Sponsor (Clinical Study Monitor) who will review the CRFs 
and source documents. The site monitor will ensure that the investigation is conducted according to protocol design and regulatory requirements by frequent site visits and communications (email, letter, telephone, and facsimile).  
13.7. Case Report Forms and Study Reports  
Case report forms (paper or electronic) are provided for each patient. All forms must be filled out by authorized study personnel. All corrections to the original CRF entry must indicate the reason for change. The Investigator is required to sign/e- sign the CRF after all data have been captured 
for each patient. If corrections are made after review and signature by the Investigator, the Investigator must be made aware of the changes, and his or her awareness documented by re -
signing the CRF. 
13.8. Critical Documents  
Before ImmunoGen initiates the study (ie, obtains informed consent from the first patient), it is 
the Investigator’s responsibility to ensure that the following documents are available to ImmunoGen or designee: 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
122 • Curricula vitae of Investigator and sub-Investigator(s) (current, dated, and signed or 
supported by an official regulatory document) 
• Signed and dated agreement of the final protocol 
• Signed and dat ed agreement of any amendment(s), if applicable  
• Approval/favorable opinion from the IRB/IEC clearly identifying the document and 
document revision reviewed, including, but not limited to, the protocol, any protocol 
amendments, Investigator Brochure, Patient Information Form/ICF,  and any other 
written information to be provided regarding patient recruitment procedures 
• Copy of IRB/IEC-approved Patient Information Form/ICF/any other written information/advertisement 
• List of IRB/IEC committee members/constitution or equivalent compliance statement 
• Study and financial agreement(s) 
• Completed Form FDA 1572 
• Completed Financial Disclosure Form  
Additional documents such as laboratory reference ranges and certifications will be collected during the study. Ongoing regulatory approvals and notifications as required must also be available; these are the responsibility of ImmunoGen. 
13.9. Protocol Violations/Deviations 
The Investigator will conduct the study in compliance with the protocol. The protocol will not be 
initiated until the IRB/IEC and the appropriate regulatory authorities have given approval/ favorable opinion. Modifications to the protocol will not be made without agreement of the Sponsor. Changes to the protocol will require written IRB/IEC approval/favorable opinion before implementation, except when the modification is needed to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to patients. If applicable regulatory authorities permit, the IRB/IEC may provide expedited review and approval/favorable opinion for minor change(s) in ongoing studies that have the approval/favorable opinion of the IRB/IEC. The Sponsor will submit all protocol modifications to the regulatory authorities in accordance with the governing regulations. 
A record of patients screened but not entered into the study is also to be maintained.  When immediate deviation from the protocol is required to eliminate an immediate hazard to 
patients, the Investigator will contact the Sponsor or its designee, if circumstances permit, to discuss the planned course of action. Any departures from the protocol must be fully documented as a protocol deviation. Protocol deviations will need to be reviewed by the Medical Monitor and may be required to be submitted to the IRB/IEC per institutional guidelines.  
Protocol modifications will be initiated only by the Sponsor and must be approved by the IRB/IEC and submitted to the US FDA or other applicable international regulatory authority before initiation.  
Prospective protocol waivers or exemptions are not permitted. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
123 13.10. End of Study  
The end of the study will occur when either all patients have discontinued, all patients have been 
followed to progression, or 2 years after the last patient has been enrolled into the study, whichever occurs first.  
All patients who are actively enro lled in the study when the study ends will be given the 
opportunity to continue on study treatment until progression, either under this protocol or via a suitable rollover protocol. 
13.11. Study Termination  
13.11.1. Study Termination  
If the Sponsor, an Investigator, or Study Clinical Monitor discovers conditions arising during the 
study that indicate that the clinical investigation should be halted because of an unacceptable patient risk, the study must be terminated after appropriate consultation between ImmunoGen and the Investigators. In addition, a decision on the part of ImmunoGen to suspend or discontinue development of the test material may be made at any time.  
Within 15 days after premature closure, ImmunoGen must notify the competent authorities and 
IECs of any member state where the study is being conducted, providing the reasons for premature study closure. 
13.11.2. Site Termination  
A specific site may be terminated separate from the general study for conditions including, but 
not limited to, the following: 
• The discovery of an unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to the patients enrolled at the site  
• Failure of the Investigator to enter patients at an acceptable rate  
• Insufficient adherence by the Investigator to protocol requir ements  
• Insufficient, incomplete, and/or unevaluable data 
13.12. Access to Source Documentation  
Regulatory authorities, the IEC/IRB, or the Sponsor may request access to all source documents, CRFs, and other study documentation for on-site audit or inspection. Dir ect access to these 
documents must be guaranteed by the Investigator, who must provide support at all times for these activities. Monitoring and auditing procedures that comply with current GCP guidelines will be followed. On- site review of the CRFs for co mpleteness and clarity, cross-checking with 
source documents, and clarification of administrative matters will be performed. 
13.13. Data Generation and Analysis 
The clinical database will be developed and maintained by a CRO or an electronic data capture 
technology provider as designated by ImmunoGen. ImmunoGen or its designee will be responsible for performing study data management activities and analyses. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
124 13.14. Retention of Data  
Essential documents should be retained until the following requirements are met: 
• A minimum of 2 years has elapsed following the last approval of a marketing 
application and there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications. 
Or 
• At least 2 years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development 
of the investigational product. 
Or  
• The record retention policies and guidelines for countries in which the study is being 
conducted are followed (whichever is longer). 
It is the responsibility of the Sponsor to inform the Investigator or institution of when these documents no longer need to be retained. 
13.15. Financial Disclosure  
All investigators (eg, Investigator and sub- Investigators) will disclose any financial interests in 
the Sponsor as described in 21 CFR Part 54 before beginning this study and for 12 months after 
the study has completed. The appropriate form will be provided to the Investigator by the Sponsor, and the form will be signed and dated by the Investigator before the start of the study.  
All financial details relating to the Investigator’s participation in this stud y are provided in the 
separate contract between the institution and ImmunoGen. 
13.16. Publication and Disclosure Policy  
The information obtained during the conduct of this clinical study is confidential, and disclosure 
to third parties other than those noted below is prohibited. All information concerning the product and any matter concerning the operation of the Sponsor, such as clinical indications for the drug, its formula, methods of manufacture, and other scientific data relating to it, that have been provided by the Sponsor and are unpublished are confidential and must remain the sole property of the Sponsor. The Investigator will agree to use the information only for the  purposes 
of carrying out this study and for no other purpose unless prior written permission from the Sponsor is obtained. 
Information obtained during the conduct of this study will be used by ImmunoGen in connection 
with the development of the study drug. The study Investigator is obliged to provide ImmunoGen with complete test results and all data developed in this study. The Sponsor has full ownership of the original CRFs completed as part of the study. This information may be disclosed to other physicians who are conducting similar studies and to health authorities as deemed necessary by the Sponsor. Patient- specific inform ation may be provided to other 
appropriate medical personnel related to the care of that patient only with patient’s prior consent.  
The Investigator and any other clinical personnel associated with this study will not publish the 
results of the study, in whole or in part, at any time, unless they have consulted with ImmunoGen, provided ImmunoGen a copy of the draft document intended for publication, and obtained ImmunoGen’s written consent for such publication. All information obtained during the 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
125 conduct of this study will be regarded as confidential. ImmunoGen will use the information for 
registration purposes and for the general development of the drug. 
14. LIST OF REFERENCES  
Ab O, Whiteman KR, Bartle LM, et al. IMGN853, a folate receptor- α (FRα) -targeting an tibody-
drug conjugate, exhibits potent targeted antitumor activity against FRα -expressing tumors. Mol 
Cancer Ther . 2015;14(7):1605-1613. 
Aghajanian  C, Blank SV, Goff BA, et al. OCEANS: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled phase II trial of chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab in patients with platinum-
sensitive recurrent epithelial ovarian, primary peritoneal or Fallopian tube cancer. J Clin Oncol . 
2012;30(17):2039-2045.  
Alkema NG, Wisman GB, van der Zee AG, van Vugt MA, de Jong S. Studying platinum 
sensitivity and resistance in high-grade serous ovarian cancer: Different models for different questions. Drug Resist Update . 2016;24:55-69.  
What Are the Risk Factors for Ovarian Cancer? American  Cancer  Society  website.  
https://www.cancer.org/cancer/ovarian -cancer/causes -risks -prevention/risk-factors.html. 
Updated  04 February 2016. Accessed  08 May 2018. 
Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Peritonea l Cancer - Stages and Grades. American Society of 
Clinical Oncology (ASCO) website . https://www.cancer.net/cancer -types/ovarian -fallopian -tube-
and-peritoneal- cancer/stages -and-grades . Published October 2017. Accessed 08 May 2018. 
Armstrong DK. Topotecan dosing guidelines in ovarian cancer: reduction and management of hematologic toxicity. Oncologist . 2004;9(1):33-42. 
Basal E, Eghbali-Fatourechi GZ, Kalli KR, et al. Functional folate receptor alpha is elevated in the blood of ovarian cancer patients. PLoS One . 2009;4(7): e6292. 
Basch E, Prestrud AA, Hesketh PJ, et al. Antiemetics: American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update. J Clin Oncol . 2011;29(31):4189-4198. 
Bergstrom J, Shih I-M, Fader AN. Chapter 10 - Updates on Rare Epitheli al Ovarian Carcinoma. 
In: Birrer MJ and Ceppi L (Eds). Translational Advances in Gynecologic Cancers. London, United Kingdom: Academic Press, an Imprint of Elsevier: 2017:181-195.  
Bevacizumab  [package insert]. South San Francisco, CA: Genentech, Inc.; 2014. 
Burger R, Brady M, Bookman M, et al. Incorporation of bevacizumab in the primary treatment 
of ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med . 2011;365: 2473-2483. 
Cancer Stat Facts: Ovarian Cancer. National Cancer Institute - SEER website. https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/ovary.html. Accessed 08 May 2018. 
Chemnitz JM, Parry RV, Nichols KE, June CH, Riley JL. SHP-1 and SHP- 2 associate with 
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif of programmed death 1 upon primary human T cell 
stimula tion, but only receptor ligation prevents T cell activation. J Immunol . 2004;173(2):945-
954. 
Chen YL, Chang MC, Huang CY, et al. Serous ovarian carcinoma patients with high alpha- folate 
receptor had reducing survival and cytotoxic chemo-response. Mol Oncol . 2012;6(3):360-369.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
126 Cobb LP, Gaillard S, Wang Y, Shih I-M, Secord AA. Adenocarcinoma of Mullerian origin: 
review of pathogenesis, molecular biology, and emerging treatment paradigms. Gynecol Oncol Res Pract. 2015;2:1. doi:10.1186/s40661-015-0008- z. 
Colem an RL, Brady MF, Herzog TJ, et al. Bevacizumab and paclitaxel–carboplatin 
chemotherapy and secondary cytoreduction in recurrent, platinum- sensitive ovarian cancer (NRG 
Oncology/Gynecologic Oncology Group study GOG-0213): a multicentre, open- label, 
randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(6):779-791. 
Crane LMA, Arts JG, van Oosten M, et al. The effect of chemotherapy on expression of folate 
receptor -alpha in ovarian cancer. Cell Oncol (Dordr) . 2012;35(1):9-18. 
Disis, Mary L. Immune regulation of canc er. J Clin Oncol . 2010;28(29):4531-4538. 
Dudley ME, Wunderlich JE, Yang JC, et al. Adoptive cell transfer therapy following non-myeloablative but lymphodepleting chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with refractory metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol . 2005;23(10):2346-2357. 
Eisenhauer E, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, et al. New response criteria in solid tumors: Revised RECIST Guideline (version 1.1). Eur J Cancer . 2009;45(2):228-247. 
Elnakat H, Ratnam M. Distribution, functionality and gene regulation of fol ate receptor 
isoforms: implications for targeted therapy. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2004;56(8):1067-1084. 
Ferrero JM, Wever B, Lepille D, et al. Carboplatin (PA) and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin 
(CA:PACA regimen) in patients with advanced ovarian cancer in late relapse (>6 months) (AOCLR): results of a GINECO phase II trial.  J Clin Oncol . 2004;22(14 suppl):5022. 
Fisher RE, Siegel BA, Edell SL, et al. Exploratory study of 99mTc-EC20 imaging for identifying patients with folate -receptor positive solid tumors. J Nucl Med . 2008;49(6):899-906.  
Francisco LM, Sage PT, Sharpe AH. The PD -1 pathway in tolerance and autoimmunity. 
Immunol Rev . 2010;236:219-242. 
Garcia A, Singh H. Bevacizumab and ovarian cancer. Ther Adv Med Oncol . 2013;5(2):133-141. 
Garin -Chesa P, Campbell I, Saigo PE, Lewis JL Jr, Old LJ, Rettig WJ. Trophoblast and ovarian 
cancer antigen LK26, sensitivity and specificity in immunopathology and molecular identification as a folate binding protein. Am J Path . 1993;142(2):557-567. 
Gladieff L, Ferrero A, De Rauglaudre G, et al. Carboplatin and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin versus carboplatin and paclitaxel in platinum- sensitive ovarian cancer patients: results from a 
subset analysis of the CALYPSO phase 3 trial. Ann Oncol . 2012;23(5):1185-1189. 
GLOBOCAN 2012: Europe, Northern America (2012) Estimated Cancer Incidence and 
Mortality, All Ages: Female [database online]. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer.  http://gco.iarc.fr/today/fact- sheets -cancers . Accessed 02 August 2018.  
Grant DJ, Moorman PG, Akushevich L, Palmieri RT, Bentley RC, Schildkraut JM. Primary 
peritoneal and ovarian cancers: an epidemiological comparative analysis. Cancer Causes Control . 2010;21(7):991-998. 
Greenwald  RJ, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH. The B7 family revisited. Ann Rev Immunol . 
2005;23:515-548. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
127 Griggs J, Mangu P, Anderson H, et al. Appropriate chemotherapy dosing for obese adult patients 
with cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline.  J Clin Oncol . 
2012;30(13):1553-1561. 
Heintz AP, Odicino F, Maisonneuve P, et al. Carcinoma of the ovary. FIGO 26th Annual Report 
on the Results of Treatment in Gynecological Cancer. Int J Gynaecol Obstet . 2006;95(1 
suppl):S161-S192. 
Hoskins P, Eisenhauer E, Beare S, et al. Randomized phase II study of two schedules of 
topotecan in previously treated patients with ovarian cancer: a National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group study. J Clin Oncol . 1998;16(6):2233-2237. 
Hoskins PJ, Swenerton KD, Pike JA, et al. Paclitaxel and carboplatin, alone or with irradiation, in advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer: a phase II study.  J Clin Oncol . 2001;19(20):4048-
4053. 
Hough CD, Cho KR, Zonderman AB, Schwartz DR, Morin PJ. Coordinately up- regulated  genes 
in ovarian cancer. Cancer Res . 2001;61(10):3869-3876. 
Hunder NN, Wallen H, Cao J, et al. Treatment of metastatic melanoma with autologous CD4+ T 
cells against NY -ESO -1. N Engl J Med . 2008;358(25):2698-2703. 
Kalli KR, Oberg AL, Keeney GL, et al. Fola te receptor alpha as a tumor target in epithelial 
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol . 2008;108(3):619-629. 
Kelemen LE. The role of folate receptor α in cancer development, progression and treatment: cause, consequence or innocent bystander? Int J Cancer . 2006;119(2):243-250. 
Markman M, Kennedy A, Webster K, Peterson G, Kulp B, Belinson J. Phase 2 trial of liposomal doxorubicin (40 mg/m2) in platinum/paclitaxel- refractory ovarian and fallopian tube cancers and 
primary carcinoma of the peritoneum. Gynecol Oncol . 2000;78(3 pt 1):369-372. 
Mantovani LT, Miotti S, Menard S, et al. Folate binding protein distribution in normal tissues and biological fluids from ovarian carcinoma patients as detected by the monoclonal antibodies MOv18 and MOv19. Int J Cancer . 1994;30A(3):363-369. 
Miotti S, Canevari S, Menard S, et al. Characterization of human ovarian carcinoma- associated 
antigens defined by novel monoclonal antibodies with tumor- restricted specificity. Int J Cancer . 
1987;39(3):297-303. 
Muggia FM, Hainsworth JD, Jeffers S, et al. Phase II study of liposomal doxorubicin in 
refractory ovarian cancer: antitumor activity and toxicity modification by liposomal encapsulation. J Clin Oncol . 1997;15(3): 987-993. 
Muller P, Kreuzaler M, Khan T, et al. Trastuzumab emtansine (T -DM1) r enders HER2+ breast 
cancer highly susceptible to CTLA-4/PD-1 blockade. Sci Transl Med. 2015;7(315):315ra188. 
Naumann WR, Coleman RL. Management strategies for recurrent platinum- resistant ovarian 
cancer. Drugs . 2011;71(11):1397-1412.  
Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al. Toxicity and response criteria of the Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol . 1982;5(6):649-655. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
128 Okazaki T, Maeda A, Nishimura H, Kurosaki T, Honjo T. PD- 1 immunoreceptor inhibits B cell 
receptor -mediated signaling by recruiting src homology 2-domain-containing tyrosine 
phosphatase 2 to phosphotyrosine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2001;98(24):13866-13871. 
O’Malley DM, Moore KN, Vergote I, et al. Safety findings from FORWARD II: A Phase 1b 
study evaluating the folate receptor alph a (FRα) -targeting antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) 
mirvetuximab soravtansine (IMGN853) in combination with bevacizumab, carboplatin, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD), or pembrolizumab in patients (pts) with ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol . 2017;35(15 suppl):5553. 
O’Malley  DM, Martin  LP, Gilbert L, et al. Mirvetuximab soravtansine, a folate receptor alpha 
(FRα) -targeting antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), in combination with bevacizumab in patients 
(pts) with platinum- resistant ovarian cancer: Maturing safety and activity profile from the 
FORWARD II phase 1b study. J Clin Oncol . 2018;36(15 suppl):5549. 
O’Shannessy DJ, Jackson SM, Twine NC, et al. Gene expression analyses support fallopian tube epithelium as the cell of origin of epithelial ovarian  cancer. Int J Mol Sci . 2013;14(7):13687-
13703. 
Parry RV, Chemnitz JM, Frauwirth KA, et al. CTLA-4 and PD-1 receptors inhibit T- cell 
activation by distinct mechanisms. Mol Cell Biol. 2005;25(21):9543-9553. Perren T, Swart A, Pfisterer J, et al. A phase 3 trial of bevacizumab in ovarian cancer. N Engl J 
Med. 2012;365(26): 2484-2496. 
Pisano C, Cecere SC, Di Napoli M, et al. Clinical trials with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin in the treatment of ovarian cancer. J Drug Deliv. 2013;2013:898146. 
Prat J, FIGO Com mittee on Gynecologic Oncology. FIGO’s staging classification for cancer of 
the ovary, fallopian tube, and peritoneum: abridged republication. J Gynecol Oncol . 
2015;26(2):87-89. Pujade- Lauraine E, Hilpert F, Weber B, et al. Bevacizumab combined with chemotherapy for 
platinum- resistant recurrent ovarian cancer: The AURELIA open -label randomized phase III 
trial. J Clin Oncol . 2014;32(13):1302-1308. 
Raja FA, Chopra N, Ledermann JA. Optimal first- line treatment in ovarian cancer. Ann Oncol . 
2012;23(10 suppl):x118-x127. Riley JL. PD-1 signaling in primary T cells. Immunol Rev . 2009;229(1):114-125. 
Risch HA,  McLaughlin JR, Cole DE,  et al.  Prevalence and penetrance of germline BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 mutations in a population series of 649 women with ovarian cancer. Am J Hum Genet . 
2001;68(3):700-710. Rosen DG, Yang, G, Liu Guangzhi L, et al. Ovarian cancer: pathology, biology, and disease 
models. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) . 2009;14:2089-2102. 
Rustin  GJS, Quinn M, Thigpen T, et al. Re: New guidelines to evaluate the Response to 
Treatment in Solid Tumors (Ovarian Cancer). J Natl Cancer Inst . 2004;96(6):487-488. 
Sheppard KA, Fitz LJ, Lee JM, et al. PD-1 inhibits T-cell receptor induced phosphorylation of the ZAP70/CD3 signalosome and downstream signaling to PKC. FEBS Lett . 2004;574(1-3):37-
41. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
129 ten Bokkel Huinink W, Gore M, Carmichael J, et al. Topotecan versus paclitaxel for the 
treatment of recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol . 1997;15(6):2183-2193.  
Timmermans M, Sonke GS, Van de Vijver KK, van der Aa MA, Kruitwagen RFPM. No improvement in long-term survival for epithelial ovarian cancer patients: A population- based 
study between 1989 and 2014 in the Netherlands. Eur J Cancer . 2018;88:31-37.  
van Dam GM, Themelis G, Crane LM, et al. Intraoperative tumor- specific fluorescence imaging 
in ovarian cancer by folate receptor -α targeting: first in -human results. Nat Med . 
2011;17(10):1315-1319. 
Varga A, Piha- Paul SA, Ott PA, et al. Antitumor activity and safety of pembrolizumab in 
patients (pts) with PD -L1 positive advanced ovarian cancer: Interim results from a phase Ib 
study. J Clin Oncol . 2015;33(15 suppl):5510. 
Vorobiof DA, Rapoport BL, Slabber CF, et al. Phase 2 study of combination therapy with 
liposomal doxorubicin and carboplatin in patients with relapsed, platinum sensitive ovarian cancer.  J Clin Oncol . 2004;22(14 suppl):5091. 
Wadler S, Benson A, Engelking C, et al. Recommended guidelines for the treatment of chemotherapy -induced diarrhea. J Clin Oncol . 1998;16(9):3169-3178. 
Weitman SD, Lark RH, Coney LR et al. Distribution of the folate receptor GP38 in normal and malignant cell lines and tissues. Cancer Res . 1992;52(12):3396-3401. 
Younes A, Kim S, Romaguera J, et al. Phase I multidose- escalation study of the anti-CD19 
maytansinoid immunoconjugate SAR3419 administered by intravenous infusion every 3 weeks to patients with relapsed/refractory B -cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol . 2012;30(22):2776-2782. 
Zhang X, Schwartz JC, Guo X, et al. Structural and functional analysis of the costimulatory receptor programmed death -1. Immunity . 2004;20(3):337-347. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
130 APPENDIX A.  SCHEDULE OF CLINICAL  ASSESSMENTS – REGIMENS A, B, AND E  
Activity Screen -
ing Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Cycles 
≥ 4 End of 
Treatment  30-Day 
Follow -up 
(+ 14 
Days)  Day 
1 Day 
2 Day
s 8 
& 15  Day 
1 Days 
8 & 
15 Days 15-
21 Day 
1 Day 
2 Days 
8 & 15  Day 1  
Informed consent  ●a             
Demography  ●a             
Medical history  ●a             
Confirm disease diagnosis/ 
current stage and prognostic 
index evaluation  ●a             
Record baseline signs and 
symptoms  ● ●            
Review and document 
IC/EC  ●             
Confirm patient continues to 
satisfy IC/EC   ●            
Confirm patient meets 
re-treatment  criteria      ●   ●   ●   
Height  ●a             
Physical examinationb ●c ●  ● ● ●  ●   ● ● ● 
Weight  ●c ●   ●   ●   ● ● ● 
Vital signsd ●c ● ●  ●   ● ●  ● ● ● 
Pulmonary function testse ●c             
Pulse oximetry  ● ●r ● ● ●r ●  ●r ● ● ●r ● ● 
ECOG PS  ●  ●o   ●   ●   ● ● ● 
Hematology and chemistry f ●c ●  ● ● ●  ●  ● ● ● ● 
Coagulation (PT/INR/aPTT)f  ●c ●   ●   ●   ●  ● 
Urinalysisg, f  ●c ●   ●   ●   ●  ● 
Pregnancy test (urine or 
serum)h ● ●   ●   ●   ●  ● 
Ophthalmic examinationsi ●c Every other cycle (from point at which toxicity first reported)  ● ● 
Schirmer testi ● For patients who experience treatment -emergent eye disorders, the Schirmer test will 
be repeated at the first on- study ophthalmic examination and subsequently if clinically 
indicated.    
Ocular symptom 
assessmenti ● ●   ●   ●   ● ● ● 
Radiologic tumor 
assessments  ●a Every 6 weeks ± 1 week)j ●k ●k 
CA125  ●c Every 3 weeks (± 1 week)j ●k ●k 
12-Lead ECGl ●c ● ●     ● ●   ● ●m 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
131 Activity Screen -
ing Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Cycles 
≥ 4 End of 
Treatment  30-Day 
Follow -up 
(+ 14 
Days)  Day 
1 Day 
2 Day
s 8 
& 15  Day 
1 Days 
8 & 
15 Days 15-
21 Day 
1 Day 
2 Days 
8 & 15  Day 1  
Mirvetuximab soravtansine 
administration   ●   ●   ●   ●   
Bevacizumab or carboplatin 
or bevacizumab and 
carboplatin administration    ●   ●   ●   ●   
AE and SAE assessments  ●n ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Record concomitant 
medications  ●a ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Lubricating artificial tears 
administrationp  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●   
Corticosteroid eye drop 
administrationq  ● ● ● ● ●  ● ● ● ●   
a Within 28 days before the start of Cycle 1 Day 1.  
b Directed physical examination is acceptable while on study treatment. A complete physical examination, including assessment of general appearance, skin, 
head (eyes, ears, nose, and throat), neck, lungs, heart, abdomen, back, lymph nodes, extremities, and neurological system, wi ll be completed at screening and 
end of treatment.  
c Screening labs (hematology, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis) and ECG may be performed within 14 days before the first dose  before the start of Cycle 1 Day 1. 
Repeat testing on Cycle 1 Day 1 is not required if tests were obtained up to 4 days before dosing and are within acceptable ranges.  
d Vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and temperature) will be measured as outlined in the full protocol ( Section 8.6). 
e Pulmonary function tests should include spirometry, diffusion capacity, and lung volumes. Pulmonary function tests will be performed at screening and in the 
event of pulmonary symptoms as clinically indicated.  
f Day 1 laboratory assessments may be performed up to 4 days before study agent administration. Laboratory results must be reviewed before each scheduled 
administration of mirvetuximab soravtansine and/or bevacizumab or carboplatin. In the event of severe toxicity, laboratory tests must be repeated as necessary 
until the toxicity resolves or stabilizes.  
g For patients receiving bevacizumab, results from urinalysis should be available before dosing because of the increased risk of proteinuria. The test can be 
performed up to 48 hours before dosing. If the test result is +2, bevacizumab should be held until a 24-hour urine test is performed.   
h For WCBP, a urine or serum pregnancy test will be performed at screening, before dosing on Day 1 of every cycle (it can be performed up to 3 days before Day 
1), and at the 30-day follow -up visit. Additional testing may be performed in accordance with institutional requirements or local regulation.  
i Baseline ophthalmic exams will be performed by a board- certified ophthalmologist  and will include the following: visual acuity, indirect fundoscopy, slit lamp 
examination under dilatation, intraocular pressure measurement, and corneal photography (when feasible to document corneal abnormalities). A Schirmer test will be performed at baseline for all patients, and for patients who experience ocular symptoms, it will be repeated at the first on-study ophthalmic examination and subsequently if clinically indicated. Ophthalmic exam may be performed within 14 days before Cycle 1 Day 1. Ocul ar symptom assessment will be 
performed before the start of each cycle by the treating physician or other qualified individual. If the subject reports ocular symptoms, mirvetuximab soravtansine  
will be stopped, and the subject will be referred to an ophthalmologist for a complete examination (detailed in full protocol). Patients who experience ocular toxicity will have a complete ophthalmologic exam performed every other cycle, including patients with blurred vision but normal eye exams. All patients will have a complete ophthalmologic exam performed at the end of treatment visit or 30-day follow -up visit.  
j Radiologic tumor assessment by CT scan or MRI is to be performed every 6 weeks (± 1 week) through Week 24 and then every 3 months (± 1 month) for up to 1 year after randomization, and then either every 6 months (± 1 month) or per standard of care based on symptoms, until the 30-day follow -up visit for Regimens 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
132 A, B, and E. CA125 will be measured every 3 weeks and at approximately the same time as the radiologic assessment. Patients experiencing CA125 response 
must have a confirmatory test performed at least 28 days after initial response is documented.  
k If a patient discontinues before documentation of PD, a tumor assessment is to be performed at the end of treatment visit or 30-day follow -up visit, if not 
performed within the previous 6 weeks. Tumor assessments will be performed every 12 weeks until progression is documented or the patient begins a new treatment regimen. Patients who have discontinued study treatment for reasons other than PD will be followed per RECIST Version 1.1 every 12 weeks (± 3 weeks) until documentation of PD, start of subsequent anti -cancer therapy, or for up to 1 year after Cycle 1 Day 1, whichever comes first.  
l Single ECG will be performed at screening, end of treatment, and as clinically indicated. On -study ECGs will be performed in triplicate at each of the following 4 
time points in Cycles 1 and 3: pre-dose (baseline), within 1 hour before first dose of  mirvetuximab soravtansine ; post-dose, end of mirvetuximab soravtansine 
infusion to coincide with C max and PK blood draw (within 1 hour after this blood draw); post -dose, immediately after the end of infusion of the last drug in the 
Regimen to coincide with C max and PK blood draw (within 1 hour after this blood draw); 24 ± 2 hours after infusion of mirvetu ximab soravtansine to coincide with 
PK blood draw ( Section 8.7). 
m As clinically indicated.  
n All AEs and SAEs from the time of informed consent are rec orded.  
o ECOG assessment is not necessary on Cycle 1 Day 1 if screening assessment was performed within 3 days before Day 1.  
p Lubricating eye drops are administered every day of the cycle. Patients should be advised to wait at least 15 minutes after c orticost eroid eye drop administration 
before instilling lubricating eye drops ( Section  5.8.3 ). 
q Corticosteroid eye drops will be administered on Days 1 through 8 of each cycle ( Section  5.8.2 ). 
r Performed before dosing.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
133 APPENDIX B.  SCHEDULE OF CLINICAL  ASSESSMENTS – REGIMEN C  
Activity Screenin
g Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Cycles 
≥ 4 End of 
Treat -
ment  30-Day 
Follow -
up 
(+ 14 
Days)  Day 
1 Da
y 2 Day
s 8 
& 15  Day 
22 Day 
1 Day
s 8 
& 15  Day 22  Day 
1 Da
y 2 Days 
8 & 
15 Day 
22 Day 1  
Informed consent  ●a               
Demography  ●a               
Medical history  ●a               
Confirm disease 
diagnosis/current stage and prognostic index 
evaluation  ●a               
Record baseline signs 
and symptoms  ● ●              
Review and document 
IC/EC  ●               
Confirm patient 
continues to satisfy 
IC/EC   ●              
Confirm patient meets 
re-treatment  criteria       ●   ●    ●   
Height  ●a               
Physical examinationb ●c ●  ●  ● ●  ●    ● ● ● 
Weight  ●c ●    ●   ●    ● ● ● 
Vital signsd ●c ● ●   ●   ● ●   ● ● ● 
Pulmonary function 
testse ●c               
Pulse oximetry  ● ●p ● ●  ●p ●  ●p ● ●  ●p ● ● 
ECOG PS  ●c ●o    ●   ●    ● ● ● 
Hematology and 
chemistryf  ●c ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Coagulation (PT/INR/ 
aPTT)f  ●c ●    ●   ●    ●  ● 
Urinalysis f ●c ●    ●   ●    ●  ● 
Pregnancy test (urine or 
serum)g ● ●    ●   ●    ●  ● 
ECHO/MUGAh ●            Every four 
cycles or 
as ●  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
134 Activity Screenin
g Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Cycles 
≥ 4 End of 
Treat -
ment  30-Day 
Follow -
up 
(+ 14 
Days)  Day 
1 Da
y 2 Day
s 8 
& 15  Day 
22 Day 
1 Day
s 8 
& 15  Day 22  Day 
1 Da
y 2 Days 
8 & 
15 Day 
22 Day 1  
clinically 
indicated  
Ophthalmic 
examinationsi ● Every other cycle (from point at which toxicity first reported)i ● ● 
Schirmer testi ● For patients who experience treatment -emergent eye disorders, the Schirmer test will be 
repeated at the first on -study ophthalmic examination and subsequently if clinically indicated.    
Ocular symptom 
assessmenti ● ●    ●   ●    ● ● ● 
Radiologic tumor 
assessments  ●a Every 8 weeks (± 1 week)j ●k ●k 
CA125  ●c Every 4 weeks (± 1 week)j ●k ●k 
12-Lead ECGl ●c ● ●      ● ●    ● ●m 
Mirvetuximab 
soravtansine 
administration    ●    ●   ●    ●   
Pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin 
administration   ●    ●   ●    ●   
AE and SAE 
assessments  ●n ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Record concomitant 
medications  ●a ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Lubricating artificial 
tears administrationq  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●   
Corticosteroid eye drop 
administrationr  ● ● ●  ● ●  ● ● ●  ●   
a Within 28 days before the start of Cycle 1 Day 1.  
b Directed physical examination is acceptable while on study treatment. A complete physical examination, including assessment of general appearance, skin, 
head (eyes, ears, nose, and throat), neck, lungs, heart, abdomen, back, lymph nodes, extremities, and neurological system, will be completed at screening and 
end of treatment.  
c Screening labs (hematology, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis), CA125, and ECG may be performed within 14 days before the fi rst dose  before the start of Cycle 
1 Day 1. Repeat testing on Cycle 1 Day 1 is not required if tests were obtained up to 4 days before dosing and are within acceptable ranges.  
d Vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and temperature) will be measured as outlined in the full protocol  Section 8.6. 
e Pulmonary function tests should include spirometry, diffusion capacity, and lung volumes. Pulmonary function tests will be performed at screening and in the event of pulmonary symptoms as clinically indicated.  
f Day 1 laboratory assessments may be performed up to 4 days before study agent administration. Laboratory results must be reviewed before each scheduled 
administrati on of mirvetuximab soravtansine and/or pegylated liposomal doxorubicin. In the event of severe toxicity, laboratory tests must be repeated as 
necessary until the toxicity resolves or stabilizes.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
135 g For WCBP, a urine or serum pregnancy test will be performed at screening, before dosing on Day 1 of every cycle (it can be performed up to 3 days before Day 
1), and at the 30-day follow -up visit. Additional testing may be performed in accordance with institutional requirements or local regulation.  
h The same assessment technique should be used throughout the study. If the patient’s left ventricular ejection fraction drops below normal or by at least 15% 
from the baseline value, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin should be stopped. To be performed at screening, every four  cycles or as clinically indicated, and at 
the end of treatment visit.  
i Baseline ophthalmic exams will be performed by a board- certified ophthalmologist and will include the following: visual acuity, indirect fundoscopy, slit lamp 
examination under dilatation, intraocular pressure measurement, and corneal photography (when feasible to document corneal abnormalities). A Schirmer t est 
will be performed at baseline for all patients, and for patients who experience ocular symptoms, it will be repeated at the f irst on -study ophthalmic examination 
and subsequently if clinically indicated. Ophthalmic exam may be performed within 14 days before Cycle 1 Day 1. Ocular sympto m assessment will be 
performed before the start of each cycle by the treating physician or other  qualified individual. If the subject reports ocular symptoms, mirvetuximab soravtansine  
will be stopped, and the subject will be referred to an ophthalmologist for a complete examination (detailed in full protocol). Patients who experience ocular toxicity will have a complete ophthalmologic exam performed every other cycle, including patients with blurred vision but normal eye exams. All patients will have 
a complete ophthalmologic exam performed at the end of treatment visit or 30-day follow -up visit.  
j Radiologic tumor assessment by CT scan or MRI is to be performed every 8 weeks (±  1 week) for Regimen C up until 1 year after randomization, and thereafter 
every 16 weeks (±  4 weeks) or as clinically indicated. CA125 will be measured every 4 weeks and at approximately the same time as radiologic assessment. 
Patients experiencing CA125 response must have a confirmatory test performed at least 28 days after initial response is docum ented.  
k If a patient discontinues before documentation of PD, a tumor assessment is to be performed at the end of treatment visit or 30-day follow -up visit, if not 
performed within the previous 6 weeks. Tumor assessments will be performed every 12 weeks until progression is documented or the patient begins a new 
treatment regimen. Patients who have discontinued study treatment for reasons other than PD will be followed per RECIST Version 1.1 every 12 weeks 
(± 3 weeks) until documentation of PD, start of subsequent anti -cancer therapy, or for up to 1 year after Cycle 1 Day 1, whichever co mes first.  
l Single ECG will be performed at screening, end of treatment, and as clinically indicated. On -study ECGs will be performed in triplicate at each of the following 4 
time points in Cycles 1 and 3: pre-dose (baseline), within 1 hour before first dos e of mirvetuximab soravtansine ; post -dose, end of mirvetuximab soravtansine 
infusion to coincide with C max and PK blood draw (within 1 hour after this blood draw); post -dose, immediately after the end of infusion of the last drug in the 
Regimen to coincide  with C max and PK blood draw (within 1 hour after this blood draw); 24 ± 2 hours after infusion of mirvetuximab soravtansine to coincide with 
PK blood draw ( Section 8.7). 
m As clinically indicated.  
n All AEs and SAEs from the time of informed consent are recorded.  
o ECOG assessment is not necessary on Cycle 1 Day 1 if screening assessment was performed within 3 days before Day 1.  
p Performed before dosing.  
q Lubricating eye drops are administered every day of the cycle. Patients should be advised to wait at least 15 minutes after corticosteroid eye drop administration 
before instilling lubricating eye drops ( Section 5.8.3 ). 
r Corticosteroid eye drops will be administered on Days 1 through 8 of each cycle ( Section 5.8.2 ). 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
136 APPENDIX C.  SCHEDULE OF CLINICAL  ASSESSMENTS – REGIMEN D  
Activity Screen -
ing Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Cycles 
≥ 4 End of 
Treatment  30-Day 
Follow -up 
(+ 14 
Days)  Day 
1 Day 
2 Day
s 8 
& 15  Day 
1 Days 
8 & 
15 Days 15-
21 Day 
1 Day 
2 Days 
8 & 15  Day 1  
Informed consent  ●a             
Demography  ●a             
Medical history  ●a             
Confirm disease 
diagnosis/current stage and 
prognostic index evaluation  ●a             
Record baseline signs and 
symptoms  ● ●            
Review and document 
IC/EC  ●             
Confirm patient continues to 
satisfy IC/EC   ●            
Confirm patient meets 
re-treatment  criteria      ●   ●   ●   
Biopsy of tumor   ●b    ●b        
Height  ●a             
Physical examinationc ●d ●  ● ● ●  ●   ● ● ● 
Weight  ●d ●   ●   ●   ● ● ● 
Vital signse ●d ● ●  ●   ● ●  ● ● ● 
Pulmonary function testsf ●d             
Pulse oximetry  ● ●s ● ● ●s ●  ●s ● ● ●s ● ● 
ECOG PS  ●d ●g   ●   ●   ● ● ● 
Hematology and chemistry h ●d ●  ● ● ●  ●  ● ● ● ● 
Thyroid paneli ●d ●      ●   ● ● ● 
Coagulation (PT/INR/aPTT)h  ●d ●   ●   ●   ●  ● 
Urinalysish ●d ●   ●   ●   ●  ● 
Pregnancy test (urine or 
serum)j ● ●   ●   ●   ●  ● 
Ophthalmic examinationsk ●d Every other cycle (from point at which toxicity first reported)k ● ● 
Schirmer testk ● For patients who experience treatment -emergent eye disorders, the Schirmer test will 
be repeated at the first on- study ophthalmic examination and subsequently if clinically 
indicated.    
Ocular symptom 
assessmentk ● ●   ●   ●   ● ● ● 
Radiologic tumor 
assessments  ●a Every 6 weeks (± 1 week)l ●m ●m 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
137 Activity Screen -
ing Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Cycles 
≥ 4 End of 
Treatment  30-Day 
Follow -up 
(+ 14 
Days)  Day 
1 Day 
2 Day
s 8 
& 15  Day 
1 Days 
8 & 
15 Days 15-
21 Day 
1 Day 
2 Days 
8 & 15  Day 1  
CA125  ●d Every 3 weeks (± 1 week)l ●m ●m 
12-Lead ECGn ●d ● ●     ● ●   ● ●o 
Mirvetuximab soravtansine 
administration   ●   ●   ●   ●   
Pembrolizumab 
administration    ●   ●   ●   ●   
AE and SAE assessments  ●p ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Record concomitant 
medications  ●a ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Lubricating artificial tears 
administrationq  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●   
Corticosteroid eye drop 
administrationr  ● ● ● ● ●  ● ● ● ●   
a Within 28 days before the start of Cycle 1 Day 1.  
b A minimum of two new tumor tissue samples is required during this study (a baseline sample and Cycle 2 Day 8 sample). Before screening, all patients must 
submit a tumor tissue sample (pre-screening sample) for analysis of FRα. The prescreening sample may either be archived tumor tissue samples (formalin-
fixed, paraffin embedded blocks, or slides sectioned from such blocks), or if archival samples are not available, new biopsy samples must be provided. If a new biopsy sample is required for a baseline sample, it will be taken before the first dose of study drug; if a new biopsy sample was provided for FRα pre- screening, 
it can be used as the baseline sample. A second tumor tissue sample will be taken on Cycle 2 Day 8 (± 3 days). Once the FR α status of a patie nt has been 
established, new biopsies should be taken only if, in the opinion of the Investigator, there is no concern of significant risk to the patient ( Section 7.1.1 ). 
c Directed physical examination is acceptable while on study treatment. A complete physical examination, including assessment of general appearance, ski n, 
head (eyes, ears, nose, and throat), neck, lungs, heart, abdomen, back, lymph nodes, extremities, and neurological system, will be completed at screening and end of treatment.  
d Screening labs (hematology, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis), CA125, and ECG may be performed within 14 days before the first dose before the start of Cycle 1 Day 1. Repeat testing on Cycle 1 Day 1 is not required if tests were obtained up to 4 days before dosing and are within acceptable ranges.  
e Vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and temperature) will be measured as outlined in the full protocol ( Section 8.6). 
f Pulmonary function tests should include spirometry, diffusion capacity, and lung volumes. Pulmonary function tests will be perf ormed at screening and in the 
event of pulmonary symptoms as clinically indicated.  
g ECOG assessment is not necessary on Cycle 1 Day 1 if screening assessment was performed within 3 days before Day 1.  
h Day 1 laboratory assessments may be performed up to 4 days before study agent administration. Laboratory results must be reviewed before each scheduled administration of mirvetuximab soravtansine and pembrolizumab. In the event of severe toxicity, laboratory tests must be repeated as necessary until the toxicity  
resolves or stabilizes.  
i The thyroid panel includes T3 or free T3, free T4, and TSH.  Testing will be performed every 6 weeks during the study.  
j For WCBP, a urine or serum pregnancy test will be performed at screening, before dosing on Day 1 of every cycle (it can be performed up to 3 days before Day 1), and at the 30-day follow -up visit. Additional testing may be performed in accordance with institutional requirements or local regulation.  
k Baseline ophthalmic exams will be performed by a board- certified ophthalmologist and will include the following: visual acuity, indirect fundoscopy, slit lamp 
examination under dilatation, intraocular pressure measurement, and corneal photography (when feasible to document corneal abnormalities). A Schirmer test will be performed at baseline for all patients, and for patients who experience ocular symptoms, it will be repeated at the first on-study ophthalmic examination 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
138 and subsequently if clinically indicated. Ophthalmic exam may be performed within 14 days before Cycle 1 Day 1. Ocular symptom assessment will be 
performed before the start of each cycle by the treating physician or other qualified individual. If the subject reports ocular symptoms, mirvetuximab soravtansine  
will be stopped, and the subject will be referred to an ophthalmologist for a complete examination (detailed in full protocol). Patients who experience ocular 
toxicity will have a complete ophthalmologic exam performed every other cycle, including patients with blurred vision but nor mal eye exams. All patients will have 
a complete ophthalmologic exam performed at the end of treatment visit or 30-day follow -up visit.  
l Radiologic tumor assessment by CT scan or MRI is to be performed every 6 weeks (± 1 week) through Week 24 and then every 3 months (± 1 month) f or up to 
1 year after randomization, and then either every 6 months ((± 1 month) or per standard of care based upon symptoms, until the 30 -day follow -up visit. CA125 
will be measured every 3 weeks and at approximately the same time as radiologic assessment. Patients experiencing CA125 response must have a 
confirmatory test performed at least 28 days after initial response is documented.  
m If a patient discontinues before documentation of PD, a tumor assessment is to be performed at the end of treatment visit or 30-day follow -up visit, if not 
performed within the previous 6 weeks. Tumor assessments will be performed every 12 weeks until progression is documented or the patient begins a new treatment regimen. Patients who have discontinued study treatment for reasons other than PD will be followed per RECIST Version 1.1 every 12 weeks 
(± 3 weeks) until documentation of PD, start of subsequent anti -cancer therapy, or for up to 1 year after Cycle 1 Day 1, whichever comes first.  
n Single ECG will be performed at screening, end of treatment, and as clinically indicated. On -study ECGs will be performed in triplicate at each of the following 4 
time points in Cycles 1 and 3: pre-dose (baseline), within 1 hour before first dose of mirvetuximab soravtansine ; post -dose, end of mirvetuximab soravtansine 
infusion to coincide with C max and PK blood draw (within 1 hour after this blood draw); post -dose, immediately after the end of infusion of the last drug in the 
Regimen to coincide with C max and PK blood draw (within 1 hour after this blood draw); 24 ± 2 hours after infusion of mirvetuximab soravtansine to coincide with 
PK blood draw  (Section 8.7). 
o As clinically indicated.  
p All AEs and SAEs from the time of informed consent are recorded.  
q Lubricating eye drops are administered every day of the cycle. Patients should be advised to wait at least 15 minutes after corticosteroid eye drop admin istration 
before instilling lubricating eye drops (Section  5.8.3 ). 
r Corticosteroid eye drops will be administered on Days 1 through 8 of each cycle ( Section  5.8.2 ). 
s Performed before dosing.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
139 APPENDIX D.  BLOOD SAMPLE COLLECTION FOR PHARMACOKINETICS, IMMUNOGENICITY, AND 
BIOMARKER ASSESSMENTS – REGIMENS A, B, C, D, AND E  
Regimen  Cycles 1 and 3  Cycles 2, 4, 5, and 6  End of Treatment and  
30-Day Follow -up 
A B C D E A B C D E A B C D E 
Day 1, pre -dosea ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●      
Day 1, end of mirvetuximab soravtansine 
infusionb ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●      
Day 1, after combination infusionc ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●      
Day 1, 6 hoursd ● ● ● ● ●           
Day 2, 24 hourse ● ● ● ● ●           
Day 3, 48 hoursf ● ● ● ● ●           
Day 8g ● ● ● ● ●           
Day 15g ● ● ● ● ●           
Day 22g   ●             
Study visitg           ● ● ● ● ● 
a Predose samples to be collected before the start of the first infusion, and to also include a sample for the FcγR biomarker assessment. All patients will be 
genotyped for FcγR alleles via peripheral blood mononuclear cell analysis at Cycle 1 Day 1.  
b Immediately after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (+ 10 minutes).  
c Cohorts A, B, C, and D: sample collected immediately after completion of bevacizumab/carboplatin/pegylated liposomal doxorubicin/pembrolizumab infusion (+ 
10 minutes). Cohort E: samples to be collected immediately after completion of bevacizumab infusion (+ 10 minutes) and immedi ately after completion of 
carboplatin infusion (+ 10 minutes).  
d 6 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (+ 20 minutes).  
e 24 hours af ter completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours).  
f 48 hours after completion of mirvetuximab soravtansine infusion (± 2 hours).  
g A single sample collected when safety assessments are performed.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
140 APPENDIX E.  PEMBROLIZUMAB BACKGROUND  
Pharmaceutical and Therapeutic Background  
The importance of intact immune surveillance function in controlling outgrowth of neoplastic 
transformations has been known for decades ( Disis  2010). Accumulating evidence shows a 
correlation between tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes in cancer tissue and favorable prognosis in 
various malignancies. In particular, the presence of CD8+ T cells and the ratio of CD8+ effector T cells/FoxP3+ regulatory T cells correlates wit h improved prognosis and long- term survival in 
solid malignancies, such as ovarian, colorectal, and pancreatic cancer; hepatocellular carcinoma; malignant melanoma; and renal cell carcinoma. Tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes can be expanded 
ex vivo and reinfused, inducing durable objective tumor responses in cancers such as melanoma (Dudley 2005, Hunder  2008).  
The PD -1 receptor-ligand interaction is a major pathway hijacked by tumors to suppress immune 
control. The normal function of PD- 1, expressed on the cell surface of activated T cells under 
healthy conditions, is to down-modulate unwanted or excessive immune responses, including autoimmune reactions. PD-1 (encoded by the gene Pdcd1) is an Ig superfamily member related to CD28 (cluster of differentiation 28) and CTLA -4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte- associated protein 
4) that has been shown to negatively regulate antigen receptor signaling upon engagement of its ligands (PD-L1 and/or PD- L2) (Greenwald  2005, Okazaki  2001 ). 
The structure of murine PD-1 has been resolved ( Zhang 2004). PD -1 and its family members are 
type I transmembrane glycoproteins containing an Ig- variable–type domain responsible for 
ligand binding and a cytoplasmic tail responsible for the binding of signaling molecules. The cytoplasmic tail of PD -1 contains 2 tyrosine-based signaling motifs, an immunoreceptor 
tyrosine-based inhibition motif, and an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif. Following T-cell stimulation, PD -1 recruits the tyrosine phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2 to the 
immunoreceptor tyrosine- based switch motif within its cytoplasmic tail, leading to the 
dephosphorylation of effector molecules such as CD3 zeta, protein kinase C- theta, and zeta-
chain –associated protein kinase,  which are involved in the CD3 T- cell signaling cascade 
(Okazaki  2001, Chemnitz  2004, Sheppard 2004, and Riley  2009). The mechanism by which PD-
1 down-modulates T- cell respon ses is similar to, but distinct from, that of CTLA -4 because both 
molecules regulate an overlapping set of signaling proteins ( Parry  2005, Francisco  2010). As a 
consequence, the PD-1/PD- L1 pathway is an attractive target for  therapeutic intervention in 
EOC .  
Nonclinical and Clinical Trials  
Therapeutic studies in mouse models have shown that administration of antibodies blocking PD-1/PD-L1 interaction enhances infiltration of tumor- specific CD8+ T cells and ultimately 
leads to  tumor rejection, either as a monotherapy or in combination with other treatment 
modalities. Anti-mouse PD-1 or anti-mouse PD-L1 antibodies have demonstrated antitumor responses in models of squamous cell carcinoma, pancreatic carcinoma, melanoma, acute myeloid leukemia, and colorectal carcinoma. In such studies, tumor infiltration by CD8+ T cells 
and increased interferon γ, granzyme B, and perforin expression were observed, indicating that the mechanism underlying the anti- tumor activity of PD -1 checkpoint inhibition involved local 
infiltration and activation of effector T -cell function in vivo. Experiments have confirmed the in 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
141 vivo efficacy of anti- mouse PD -1 antibody as a monotherapy, and in combination with 
chemotherapy, in syngeneic mouse tumor models. 
Justification for Dose  
The planned dose of pembrolizumab for this study is 200 mg Q3W. Based on the totality of data 
generated in the Keytruda development program, 200 mg Q3W is the appropriate dose of pembrolizumab for adults across all indications and regardless of tumor type. As outlined below, this dose is justified by: 
• Clinical data from 8 randomized studies demonstrating flat dose– and exposure-efficacy relationships from 2 mg/kg Q3W to 10 mg/kg Q2W 
• Clinical data showing meaningful improvement in be nefit-risk, including overall 
survival at 200 mg Q3W across multiple indications 
• Pharmacology data showing full target saturation in both systemic circulation (inferred from PK data) and tumor (inferred from physiologically based PK analysis) at 200 mg Q3W 
Among the 8 randomized dose-comparison studies, a total of 2,262 participants were enrolled with melanoma and NSCLC, covering different disease settings (treatment naïve, previously treated, PD -L1 enriched, and all comers) and different treatment settings (monotherapy and in 
combination with chemotherapy). Five studies compared 2 mg/kg Q3W with 10 mg/kg Q2W (KN001 Cohort B2, KN001 Cohort D, KN002, KN010, and KN021), and 3 studies compared 10 mg/kg Q3W with 10 mg/kg Q2W (KN001 Cohort B3, KN001 Cohort F2, and KN006). All of these studies demonstrated flat dose– and exposure-response relationships across the doses studied, representing an approximate 5- to  7.5-fold difference in exposure. The 2 mg/kg (or 
200 mg fixed dose) Q3W regimen provided similar responses to the highest doses studied. Subsequently, flat dose exposure-response relationships were also observed in other tumor types including head and neck cancer, bladder cancer, gastric cancer, and classical Hodgkin lymphoma, confirming 200 mg Q3W as the appropriate dose, independent of the tumor type. These findings are consistent with the mechanism of action of pembrolizumab, which acts by interaction with immune cells, and not via direct binding to cancer cells. 
Additionally, pharmacology data clearly show target saturation at 200 mg Q3W. First, PK data in 
KN001 evaluating target-mediated drug disposition conclusively demonstrated saturation of PD-1 in systemic circulation at doses much lower than 200 mg Q3W. Second, a physiologically 
based PK analysis was conducted to predict tumor PD-1 saturation over a wide range of tumor 
penetration and PD-1 expression. This evaluation concluded that pembrolizumab at 200 mg Q3W achieves full PD -1 saturation in both blood and tumor. 
Finally, population PK analysis of pembrolizumab, which characterized the influence of body weight and other participant covariates on exposure, has shown that fixed dosing provides similar control of PK variability as weight-based dosing, with considerable overlap in the distribution of exposures from the 200 mg Q3W fixed dose and 2 mg/kg Q3W dose. Supported by these PK characteristics, and given that fixed dosing has advantages of reduced dosing complexity and reduced potential for dosing errors, the 200 mg Q3W fixed dose was selected for evaluation across all pembrolizumab protocols. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
142 APPENDIX F.  EASTERN COOPERATIVE ONCOLOGY GROUP (ECOG) 
PERFORMANCE STATUS SCALE  
Sources: Muggia  1997 and Oken  1982. 
Grade  Scale  
0 Fully active, able to carry out all pre -disease performance without restriction 
(Karnofsky 90 -100) 
1 Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work 
of a light or sedentary nature, eg, light housework, office work (Karnofsky 70 -80) 
2 Ambulatory and capable of all self -care but unable to carry out work activities; up and 
about more than 50% of waking hours (Karnofsky 50 -60) 
3 Capable of only limited self -care, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking 
hours (Karnofsky 30 -40) 
4 Completely disabled; cannot carry on any self -care; totally confined to bed or chair. 
(Karnofsky 10 -20) 
APPENDIX G.  RESPONSE DEFINITION (RECIST VERSION 1.1) 
Source: Eisenhauer  2009 . 
DEFINITIONS  
Baseline:  Baseline is defined as the most recent assessment performed before the first dose of 
study treatment. Baseline assessments must be performed within the period defined in the protocol eligibility criteria.  
Measurable Lesions:  Except for lymph nodes (described below), measurable lesions are defined 
as those that can be accurately measured in at least on e dimension (longest diameter to be 
recorded) as ≥  10 mm with CT scan (if CT scans have slice thickness greater than 5 mm, the 
minimum size of a measurable lesion is twice the slice thickness).  
• To be considered pathologically enlarged and measurable, a lymph node must be ≥ 15 mm in short axis when assessed by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness 
recommended to be no greater than 5 mm). At baseline and in follow-up, only the short axis will be measured and recorded. 
• Magnetic resonance imaging may be substituted for contrast -enhanced CT for lesions 
at some anatomical sites, but not for lesions in the lungs. The minimum size for measurability is the same as for CT scan (10 mm) as long as the scans are performed with slice thickness of 5 mm and no gap. If MRI is pe rformed with thicker slices, the 
size of a measurable lesion at baseline should be twice the slice thickness. If there are inter-slice gaps, this also needs to be considered in determining the size of measurable 
lesions at baseline.  
Non-measurable Lesions:  All other lesions (or sites of disease), including small lesions (longest 
diameter < 10 mm or pathological lymph nodes with ≥  10 to < 15 mm short axis), are considered 
non-measurable.  
• Lymph nodes that have a short axis < 10 mm are considered non-pathological and are 
not to be recorded or followed.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
143 • Bone lesions, leptomeningeal disease, ascites, pleural/pericardial effusions, 
lymphangitis cutis/pulmonitis, inflammatory breast disease, and abdominal masses (not followed by CT scan or MRI) are considered non- measurable.  
Target Lesions:  All measurable lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesions per organ and 5 lesions in 
total, representative of all involved organs, are to be identified as target lesions and measured and recorded at baseline.  
• Target lesions are to b e selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the longest 
diameter) to represent all involved organs, and to be those that lend themselves to reproducible repeated measurements.  
• On occasion, the largest lesion may not lend itself to reproducible mea surement; in 
this case, the next -largest lesion that can be measured reproducibly should be 
selected.  
• Target lesions will be measured at each assessment (longest axis for non -nodal 
lesions, shortest axis for measurable malignant nodal lesions). 
Non-target Lesions:  All other lesions (or sites of disease) including all non- measurable lesions 
(including pathological lymph nodes with ≥  10 to < 15 mm short axis) and all measurable lesions 
beyond the 5 target lesions are to be identified as non- target lesions and  recorded at baseline.  
• Measurements of these lesions are not required, but the presence, absence, and unequivocal progression of each is to be recorded throughout follow-up.  
• Lymph nodes that have a short axis < 10 mm are considered non-pathological and a re 
not to be recorded or followed. 
Special Considerations  
Clinical Examination of Lesions: Superficial or visible lesions that cannot be assessed by CT scan or MRI will be considered for response assessment only if these lesions are biopsy-proven metastatic lesions and ≥  10 mm in diameter. These lesions will be considered non- measurable, 
and thus non- target, for response assessment.  
Cystic Lesions:  Cystic lesions thought to represent cystic metastases can be considered 
measurable lesi ons if they meet the definition of measurability described above. However, if 
non-cystic lesions are present in the same patient, these are preferred for selection as target 
lesions.  
Bone Lesions:  Bone scan, positron emission tomography (PET) scan, and pl ain films are not 
considered adequate imaging techniques to measure bone lesions. However, these techniques can 
be used to confirm the presence or disappearance of bone lesions. 
• Lytic bone lesions or mixed lytic- blastic lesions, with identifiable soft tiss ue 
components, that can be evaluated by cross-sectional imaging techniques such as CT scan or MRI be considered measurable lesions if the soft tissue component meets the definition of measurability described above. 
• Blastic bone lesions are non -measurable.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
144 Lesions With Prior Local Treatment: Lesions situated in a previously irradiated area, or in an 
area subjected to other loco -regional therapy, are usually not considered measurable; however, if 
they meet the following criteria, they may be considered for study: 
• There has been prior documented progression in the lesion by at least 2 sequential CT scans or MRIs performed after the completion of radiation. 
OR 
• There is histopathological evidence of progression. 
Additionally, if such lesions meet the criteria for  measurability, they may be considered target 
lesions. 
Imaging Methods 
The same method of assessment and the same technique used to characterize each identified and reported lesion at baseline should be used during each follow-up assessment. Imaging- based 
evaluation is preferred to evaluation by clinical examination unless the lesion(s) being followed cannot be imaged but are assessable by clinical exam (referring to biopsy-proven visible lesions(s) at the vaginal apex).  
Chest X -ray: Lesions that are identified on chest x -ray must be confirmed and followed by CT 
scan. If there is/are pre -existing chest lesion(s) before the baseline tumor assessment, a chest 
x-ray is not necessary to assess those lesions. The pre- existing chest lesion(s) must be assessed at 
baseline and followed by CT scans. Conventional CT Scan or MRI:  This guideline has defined measurability of lesions on CT scan 
on the basis of the assumption that CT scan slice thickness is 5 mm or less. If CT scans have 
slice thickness greater than 5 mm, the minimum size for a measurable lesion is twice the slice thickness. Magnetic resonance imaging is also acceptable in certain situations (eg, for body scan), except for lungs.  
CA125:  Tumor marker CA125 alone cannot be used to assess response or determine 
progression; however, it will be followed. CA125 measurements should be scheduled to approximately coincide with radiologic assessment (every 6 weeks ± 1 week). Patients whose CA125 is above the ULN at baseline will need to have their values normalize to ≤ the ULN, in addition to complete disappearance of measurable or evaluable disease, to be considered in CR.  
Other methods of assessment (eg, PET-CT, ultrasound, and fluorodeoxyglucose PET) should not be used for response assessment in this study. 
Time Po int Assessments 
Patients will have tumor measurements performed within 28 days before baseline and every 6 weeks thereafter (±  1 week).  
At baseline, tumors and lymph nodes are classified and documented as target or non- target per 
the definitions provided above. It is possible to record multiple non-target lesions involving the same organ as a single item (eg, multiple liver metastases).  
At all post- baseline evaluations, the baseline classification (target or non -target) is to be 
maintained, and lesions are to be documented and described in a consistent fashion over time (eg, recorded in the same order on source documents and CRFs). 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
145 For target lesions, measurements should be taken and recorded in metric notation. All tumor 
measurements must be recorded in mi llimeters.  
At each assessment, a sum of the diameters (longest for non -nodal lesions, short axis for nodal 
lesions) for all target lesions will be calculated and reported. The baseline sum of the longest diameters (SLD) will be used as reference to further  characterize any objective tumor regression 
in the measurable dimension of the disease. The lowest SLD (nadir) since, and including, the baseline value will be used as reference for evaluating progression. 
After baseline, the actual size of the target les ion should be documented, if possible, even if the 
lesions become very small. If in the opinion of the radiologist, the lesion has likely disappeared, 
0 mm should be recorded. If the lesion is present but too small to measure, an indicator of “too small to  measure” will be provided on the CRF (a default value of 5 mm will be imputed during 
analysis).  
Non-target lesions are to be assessed qualitatively (present, resolved, or unequivocal 
progression) and new lesions, if any, are to be documented separately. At each evaluation, a time point response is to be determined for target lesions, non- target 
lesions, new lesions, and overall. 
Time Point Response Criteria  
Target Lesion Time Point Response (TPR)  
Complete response 
(CR)  Disappearance of all target lesions. All pathological lymph nodes (whether target 
or non -target) must have reduction in short axis to < 10 mm.  
Partial response 
(PR) At least 30% decrease in the SLD of target lesions, taking as reference the 
baseline SLD.  
Progressive 
disease (PD)  At least a 20% increase in the SLD of target lesions, taking as reference the 
smallest (nadir) SLD since and including baseline. In addition to the relative 
increase of 20%, the SLD must also demonstrate an absolute increase of at 
least 5 mm.  
Stable disease 
(SD) Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient increase to qualify for 
PD. 
Not applicable (NA)  No target lesions identified at baseline.  
Unable to evaluate 
(UE) One or more target lesions are not imaged, and the remainder of the SLD 
compared with the nadir SLD does not meet the criteria for PD.  
If the target lesion for a patient meets the criteria for both PR and PD at a given time point, the target 
lesion response is PD.  
If the nadir SLD is 0 (ie, the patient had a prior target lesion CR), the re- appearance of any prior target 
lesions to any degree constitutes PD.  
Non-target Lesion TPR  
Complete response 
(CR)  Disappearance of all non -target lesions and normalization of tumor marker level 
if tumor marker at baseline is above the ULN. All lymph nodes must be non-
pathological in size (< 10 mm short axis).  
Non-CR/non -PD Persistence of one or more non-target lesion(s) and/or maintenance of CA125 
above the normal limits if CA125 at baseline is above the ULN.  
Progressive 
disease (PD)  Unequivocal progression of non -target lesions. Unequivocal progression should 
not normally trump target lesion status.  It must be representative of overall 
disease status change, not a single lesion increase.  
Not applicable (NA)  No non -target lesions identified at baseline.  
Unable to evaluate 
(UE) One or more non -target lesions are not imaged, and the remaining non-target 
lesions do not meet the criteria for PD.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
146 If the target lesion for a patient meets the criteria for both PR and PD at a given time point, the target 
lesion response is PD.  
If the nadir SLD is 0 (ie, the patient had a prior target lesion CR), the re-appearance of any prior target 
lesions to any degree constitutes PD.  
New Lesion TPR  
Yes Lesion present at follow -up visit either for the very first time or re -appearing (ie, 
lesion was present at baseline, disappeared at a follow -up visit, and re -appeared 
later).  
No No new lesions present at follow -up. 
Unable to evaluate 
(UE) Patient not assessed or incompletely assessed for new lesion.  
Determining Overall Time Point Response 
Target Lesion TPR  Non-target TPR  New Lesions TPR  Overall TPR  
CR CR or NA  No CR* 
CR Non-CR/non -PD No PR* 
CR UE No PR* 
PR Non-PD or NA or UE  No PR* 
SD Non-PD or NA or UE  No SD 
UE Non-PD No UE 
PD Any No or Yes or UE  PD 
Any PD No or Yes or UE  PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
NA CR No CR* 
NA Non-CR/non -PD No Non-CR/non -PD 
Non-PD Non-PD UE UE 
* Patients with an overall response of CR or PR must have a repeat tumor assessment performed no fewer than 
4 weeks after the criteria for response are first met.  
Any = CR, PR, SD, PD, NA, or UE.  
The overall response at a given time point does not depend on the overall response assigned at any prior time 
point.  
Confirmation: The main goal of confirmation of objective response is to avoid overestimating 
the observed response rate. For patients with an overall response of PR or CR at a given time point, changes in tumor measurements must be confirmed by repeat assessments that should be performed no fewer than 4 weeks after the criteria for response are first met. However, the presence or absence of confirmation is not considered when assigning a time point response. 
Best Overall Response: Best overall response, incorporating confirmation requirements, will be 
derived during statistical analysis from the series of time point responses and need not be 
considered when assigning response at any time point. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
147 APPENDIX H.  GYNECOLOGIC CANCER INTERGROUP CRITERIA FOR 
EVALUATION OF CA125  
Source: Rustin  2004. 
On the basis of the available data and extensive discussions among the cooperative groups within the GCIG, it is recommended that the following definition of response be used in ovarian cancer studies so that response can be measured by either RECIST or CA125 criteria. If the response is evaluable by both criteria, then the date of response will be the date of the earlier of the two events.  
Definition of Response  
Greater than or equal to 50% reduction in CA125 levels from baseline: 
• The response must be confirmed and maintained for at least 28 days. 
• The pre- treatment sample must be ≥  2.0 times the ULN and within 2 weeks before 
starting treatment.  
• The date of response corresponds to the date when the CA125 level is first reduced by 50%.  
To calculate CA125 responses accurately, t he following rules apply:  
1. Intervening samples and the 30-day confirmatory sample must be less than or equal to (within an assay variability of 10%) the previous sample. 
2. Variations within the normal range of CA125 levels will not interfere with the respons e 
definition.  
Timing of CA125 Assessments 
The GCIG recommends that CA125 measurements be taken at specific time intervals:  
• The first sample is  collected within 2 weeks before treatment is started.  
• Later samples are collected at intervals of 2 to 4 weeks d uring treatment and at 
intervals of every 2 or 3 months during follow-up.  
• For each patient, the same assay method must be used, and the assay must be tested in 
a quality -control scheme. Patients are not evaluable by CA125 if they have received 
mouse antibodies or if there has been medical and/or surgical interference with their peritoneum or pleura during the previous 28 days.  
This CA125 response definition has been produced to evaluate relapse therapy. If assessing therapy that includes two treatment mod alities for relapse (eg, surgery and chemotherapy), any 
CA125 response results from both treatments. CA125 cannot distinguish between the effects of each treatment. To calculate response rates in protocols, an intent -to-treat analysis should be 
used that i ncludes all patients with an initial CA125 level of at least twice the ULN as eligible 
and evaluable. In addition to calculating response rates in protocols, it is advisable to record those patients who have both a CA125 response and whose CA125 level fall s to within the 
normal range. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
148 APPENDIX I.  RESPONSE DEFINITION (IMMUNE -RELATED RECIST) 
(REGIMEN D ONLY)  
RECIST Version 1.1 will be adapted to account for the unique tumor response characteristics 
seen with treatment with pembrolizumab. Immunotherapeutic agents such as pembrolizumab may produce anti-tumor effects by potentiating endogenous cancer-specific immune responses. The response patterns seen with such an approach may extend beyond the typical time course of responses seen with cytotoxic agents and can manifest a clinical response after an initial increase in tumor burden or even the appearance of new lesions. Standard RECIST may not provide an accurate response assessment of immunotherapeutic agents such as pembrolizumab; therefore, RECIST Version 1.1 will be used with the following adaptations: 
If radiologic imaging indicates PD, tumor assessment should be repeated ≥  4 weeks later to 
confirm PD, with the option of continuing treatment as described below while awaiting 
radiologic confirmation of progression.  
If repeat imaging shows < 20% tumor burden compared with nadir, stable or improved previous 
new lesion (if identified as cause for initial PD), and stable/improved non- target disease (if 
identified as cause for initial PD), treatment may be continued/resumed.  If repeat imaging confirms PD due to any of the scenarios list below, patients will be 
discontinued from study therapy (exception noted in Section  5.10.6.4.3).  
In determining whether the tumor burden has increased or decreased, the site study team should consider all target lesions and non- target lesions.  
Scenarios where PD is confirmed at repeat imaging:  
• Tumor burden remains ≥  20% and at least 5 mm absolute increase compared with 
nadir. 
• Non-target disease resulting in initial PD is worse (qualitative).  
• New lesion resulting in initial PD is worse (qualitative).  
• Additional new lesion(s) since last evaluation. 
In patients who have initial evidence of radiologic PD, it is at the discretion of the treating physician whether to continue a patient on study treatment until repeat imaging is obtained. This clinical judgment decision should be based on the patient’s overall clinical condition, including performance status, clinical symptoms, and laboratory data. Patients may receive pembrolizumab treatment while waiting for confirmation of PD if they are clinically stable as defined by the following criteria:  
• Absence of signs and symptoms indicating PD 
• No decline in ECOG PD 
• Absence of rapid progression of disease 
• Absence of progressive tumor at critical anatomical sites (eg, cord compression) requiring urgent alternative medical intervention 
When feasible, patients should not be discontinued until progression is confirmed. This allowance to continue treatment despite initial radiologic progression takes into account the 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
149 observation that some patients can have a transient tumor flare in the first few months after the 
start of immunotherapy, but with subsequent disease response. Patients who are deemed clinically unstable are not required to have repeat imaging for confirmation of PD.  
Immune -Related RECIST Assessment of Disease  
Immune-related RECIST is RECIST Version 1.1 adapted as described below to account for the 
unique tumor response seen with immunotherapeutic drugs. Immune- related RECIST will be 
used by the site Investigator/local radiology review to assess tumor response and progression and make treatment decisions. These data will be collected in the clinical database.  
Imaging and Treatment After First Radiologic Evidence of Progressive Disease  
 Clinically Stable  Clinically Unstable  
Imaging  Treatment  Imaging  Treatment  
First 
radiologic 
evidence of 
PD by RECIST Version 1.1  Repeat 
imaging at > 4 
weeks at site 
to confirm PD.  May continue 
study treatment at 
the local site 
Investigator’s discretion while awaiting confirmatory tumor 
imaging by site by 
irRECIST  Repeat imaging 
at > 4 weeks to confirm PD per 
physician discretion only.  Discontinue treatment.  
Repeat tumor 
imaging confirms PD by irRECIST at the local 
site No additional 
imaging required  Discontinue 
treatment (exception is possible upon consultation with 
Sponsor).  No additional 
imaging required  NA 
Repeat tumor 
imaging shows SD, PR, or CR by irRECIST by the local site  Continue 
regularly scheduled imaging assessments.  Continue study 
treatment at the local site Investigator’s discretion.  Continue 
regularly scheduled imaging assessments.  May restart study treatment if 
condi tion has improved 
and/or is clinically stable per Investigator’s discretion. Next tumor image should occur according to the every 3 
weeks (XX   ± 7 days) imaging 
schedule for the first year and 
every Y weeks (XX ± 7 days) 
after the first year.  
• In determining whether the tumor burden has increased or decreased, local study site 
investigators should consider all target lesions and non- target lesions (please refer to 
the irRECIST Tip Sheet). Patients who are deemed clinically unstable are not required to have repeat tumor imaging for confirmation.  
• For a clinically stable  patient with first radiologic evidence of PD by RECIST 
Version 1.1 (ie, unconfirmed progression of disease ), it is at the discretion of the 
site investigator to continue treating the patient with the assigned treatment per protocol until PD is confirmed at least 28 days after the date of the scan first suggesting PD. If radiologic progression is confirmed by subsequent scan, the patient will be discontinued from study treatment. If radiologic progression is not confirmed by irRECIST per the site, the patient may continue on treatment and follow the 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
150 regular imaging schedule intervals until progression is confirmed at a later time point 
by the site.  
− NOTE : If a patient has confirmed radiologic progression (ie, 2 scans at least 
4 weeks apart demonstrating PD) per irRECIST, but the patient is achieving a 
clinically meaningful benefit, and there is no further increase i n the tumor burden 
at the confirmatory tumor imaging, an exception to continue treatment may be considered following consultation with the Sponsor. In this case, if treatment is 
continued, tumor imaging should continue to be performed following the interva ls 
outlined in Appendix C . 
• Any patient deemed clinically unstable  should be discontinued from study treatment 
at first radiologic evidence of PD and is not required to have repeat imaging for PD confirmation. 
• In patients who discontinue study therapy without documented PD, every effort should be made to continue monitoring their disease status by tumor imaging using the same imaging schedule used while on treatment (every Y weeks (XX days ± 7 days), until (1) the start of new anti-cancer treatment, (2) PD, (3) death, or (4) the end of the study, whichever occurs first. 
The irRECIST data will be collected in the clinical database.  
APPENDIX J.  CALVERT FORMULA FOR CARBOPLATIN DOSING  
The formula for calculating carboplatin dosage is based upon the patient’s glomerular filtration rate (GFR; in mL/min) and carboplatin injection target area  AUC (in mg/mL*min).  
Calvert formula for carboplatin dosing: 
Total Dose (mg) = (Target AUC) × (GFR + 25).  
Note: With the Calvert formula, the total dose of carboplatin is calculated in mg, not mg/m².  
Calculations may be based on a patient’s actual body weight subject to appropriate consideration of other comorbid conditions; however, GFR should be capped at 125 mL/min for carboplatin dosing. For more information regarding carboplatin dosing, please refer to  https://www.nccn.org/professionals/OrderTemplates/PDF/appendix_B.pdf 
APPENDIX K.  BODY SURFACE AREA CALCULATION 
To prepare the correct pegylated liposomal doxorubicin doses for administration to each patient, 
the body surface area must be calculated using the following formula or equivalent:
 
Body Surface Area (m2) = ([Height {cm} × Weight {kg}] / 3600)½  
The value calculated will be used to determine the quantity of chemotherapeutic drug to be placed in the infusion bag. The weight used for calculation of body surface area should be obtained before first treatment and thereafter should be modified only for significant (≥  10%) 
changes in body weight not influenced by weight gain or loss attributed to fluid retention (exceptions may be made for institutional policies).  
 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
151 APPENDIX L.  ADJUSTED IDEAL BODY WEIGHT CALCULATION 
Adjusted Ideal Body Weight (AIBW) 
IBWa + 0.4 (Actual Weight − IBWa), 
where:  
Ideal Body Weight (IBW) 
IBWa (Male) = 0.9Ha – 88, and 
IBWa (Female) = 0.9Ha – 92. 
a H = height in cm; W = weight in kg.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
152 APPENDIX M.  COMMON TERMINOLOGY CRITERIA FOR ADVERSE EVENTS VERSION 4.03 GRADING FOR 
SELECTED ADVERSE EVENTS  
Source: CTCAE Version 4.03, National Cancer Institute, 14 June 2010; NIH Publication No 09-5410. 
Adverse Event  Grade  
1 2 3 4 5 
Pneumonitis  Asymptomatic; clinical or 
diagnostic observations 
only; intervention not indicated  Symptomatic; medical 
intervention indicated; limiting instrumental ADL  Severe symptoms; limiting 
self-care ADL; oxygen 
indicated  Life-threatening 
respiratory compromise  Death  
Blurred vision  Intervention not indicated  Symptomatic; limiting 
instrumental ADL  Limiting self -care ADL   - 
Dry eye  Asymptomatic; clinical or 
diagnostic observations only; mild symptoms 
relieved by lubricants  Symptomatic; multiple 
agents indicated; limiting instrumental ADL  Decrease in visual acuity 
(< 20/40); limiting self -
care ADL   - 
Keratitis   Symptomatic; medical 
intervention indicated (eg,  
topical agents); limiting 
instrumental ADL  Decline in vision (worse 
than 20/40 but better than 20/200); limiting self -care 
ADL Perforation or blindness 
(20/200 or worse) in the affected eye  - 
Eye disorders – 
other, specify  Asymptomatic or mild 
symptoms; clinical or diagnostic observations only; intervention not indicated  Moderate; minimal, local, 
or noninvasive intervention indicated; limiting age -appropriate 
instrumental ADL  Severe or medically 
significant but not immediately sight -
threatening;  
hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization indicated; 
disabling; limiting self -
care ADL  Sight -threatening 
consequences; urgent 
intervention indicated; blindness (20/200 or worse) in the affected eye  - 
ADL = activities of daily living.  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
153 APPENDIX N.  EXAMPLES OF SENSITIVE IN VIVO CYTOCHROME P450 SUBSTRATES AND CYTOCHROME 
P450 SUBSTRATES WITH NARROW THERAPEUTIC RANGE (28  JULY 2011) 
CYP Enzyme  Sensitive Substrates  Substrates With Narrow Therapeutic Range  
CYP3A  Alfentanil, aprepitant, budesonide, buspirone, conivaptan, darifenacin, 
darunavir, dasatinib, dronedarone, eletriptan, eplerenone, everolimus, 
felodipine, indinavir, fluticasone, lopinavir, lovastatin, lurasidone, maraviroc, midazolam, nisoldipine, quetiapine, saquinavir, sildena fil, 
simvastatin, sirolimus, tolvaptan, tipranavir, triazolam, vardenafil  Alfentanil, astemizole, cisapride, cyclosporine, 
dihydroergotamine, ergotamine, fentanyl, pimozide, quinidine, sirolimus, tacrolimus, terfenadine  
Source: FDA drug development resour ces. 
http://www.fda.gov/drugs/developmentapprovalprocess/developmentresources/druginteractionslabeling/ucm093664.htm#classSub. Acc essed 09 June 2016.  
APPENDIX O.  SCHEMA FOR ADMINISTRATION OF STUDY- REQUIRED EYE DROPS  
 
* Lubricating drops are continued if dose is held and/or cycle is delayed.  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21Steroid Eye drops – 
6 times daily
Lubricating eye 
drops at least 15 
minutes after steroid 
eye drops – daily as 
directedSteroid Eye drops – 
4 times daily
Lubricating eye 
drops at least 15 
minutes after steroid 
eye drops – daily as 
directedLubricating eye drops  – daily as directed
Cycle Days
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
154 APPENDIX P.  HISTORY OF AMENDMENTS  
Amendment 1 Summary of Key Changes  
The primary reasons for amending the protocol were to revise the table for management of 
potential infusion- related reactions , to clarify drugs for premedication before mirvetuximab 
soravtansine infusion, and to add a section for reporting a pregnancy occurring during the study. 
Amendment 1A Summary of Key Changes 
The primary reasons for amending the protocol were to revise inclusion criteria for WCBP , to 
clarify  the maximum dose of each drug administered for each regimen and dosing schedule, and 
to add monitoring and management guidelines for peripheral neuropathy.  
The following key changes were made to Amendment  1: 
1. Barrier contraceptive with spermicide and partner’s latex condom were removed from the 
list of acceptable highly effective contraceptive methods . The length of time for the use 
of contraceptives after the last study dose of bevacizumab, carboplatin, or pegylated liposomal doxorubicin was changed to 6 months. 
2. The maximum allowable dose of each drug is as follows: mirvetuximab soravtansine 6.0 mg/kg AIBW every 3 weeks, mirvetuximab soravtansine 6.0 mg/kg every 4 weeks, bevacizumab 15 mg/kg every 3 weeks, bevacizumab 10 mg/kg every 2 weeks, carboplatin AUC6 every 3 weeks, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin 50 mg/m
2 every 
4 weeks.  
3. Monitoring and management guidelines for peripheral neuropathy were added to Section  5.9. 
Amendment 1B Summary of Key Changes 
The primary reasons for amending the protocol w ere to correct discrepancies between sections of 
the protocol and the Schedules of Clinical Assessments  in the appendices and to clarify study 
assessments.  
The following key changes were made in Amendment 1B:  
1. The PK  and immunogenicity section ( Section  6) was updated to provide additional clarity 
on the time  points for PK and immunogenicity sample collection.  
2. The vital signs and ECG sections (Section  8.6 and Section  8.7) were updated to provide 
additional clarity on time  points. 
3. Study activities ( Section  10) were updated. Most  of the section was removed because this 
information is included in the Schedules of Clinical Assessments  in the a ppendices . 
Inform ation regarding screening, end of treatment, and follow- up visits remains in the 
section.  
4. The Schedules of Clinical Assessments  and pharmacokinetics ( Appendix A, Appendix B, 
Appendix C, and Appendix D ) were updated to correct discrepancies with the protocol 
text.   
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
155 Amendment 2 Summary of Key Changes 
The primary reasons for amending the protocol were to add Regimen D, to revise the time period 
for reporting AEs , and to clarify PK time points .  
The following key changes were made to Amendment 1A:  
1. Regimen D was added to the protocol. This regimen is mirvetuximab soravtansine in combination with pembrolizumab. The entire protocol was updated to include this regimen . There is a D ose Escalation part and a Do se Expansion for Regimen D.  
2. The time period for reporting AEs and SAEs was updated. In this amendment, AEs and SAEs regardless of causality are recorded and reported from the time of informed consent until at least 30 days after the last dose of study medi cation.  
3. The PK section (Section  6.1) was updated to clarify the timing of PK sample collection 
for each drug administered. The blood collection schedule was updated to separate each drug.  
4. Adverse events of special interest were added.  
5. Overdose information for pembrolizumab was added. 
6. The concomitant medications section was updated to include medications metabolized by CYP3A, vaccines (Regimen D only), and systemic steroids (Regimen D only). 
7. Typographical errors were corrected.  
Amendment 3 Summar y of Key Changes 
The primary reasons for amending the protocol were to add prophylactic corticosteroid eye drops, to modify the inclusion criteria for prior therapies, and to clarify management guidelines for ocular AEs. 
1. The premedication section (Section  5.8.1) was updated to include prophylactic 
corticosteroid eye drops. A schema for the administration schedule for eye drops was added (Appendix O). Additionally, information about lubricating eye drops was moved from the concomitant medication section (Section  5.13) to the premedication section 
(Section  5.8.1).  
2. Inclusion criteria to define the therapies considered to be prior therapies were  modified. 
3. Inclusion criteria for prior therapies for Regimen A D ose Expansion were changed. 
4. Exclusion criterion 12 for all patients was revised to specify that patients with a history of non-infectious pneumonitis that required steroids or who  have current pneumonitis will 
be excluded. 
5. Exclusion criterion 14 was updated to add that patients with severe hypersensitivity (≥ Grade 3) to pembrolizumab and/or any of its excipients will be excluded. 
6. The ocular management guidelines were updated for clarification.  
7. Discontinuation criter ion for carboplatin to allow for discontinuation of carboplatin after 
6 cycles at the discretion of the I nvestigator was added. 
8. Dose modification guidelines for bevacizumab  were  updated. 
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
156 9. The AE  section was updated to provide further clarification. 
10. The section for patient informed consent was updated for clarification. 
11. Typographical errors were corrected.  
Amendment 4 Summary of Key Changes 
The primary reason for this amendment was to add a cohort of patients with EOC, primary 
peritoneal cancer,  or fallopian tube cancer  who will receive a triplet dosing regimen of 
mirvetu ximab soravtansine + carbo platin  + bevacizumab . The amendment also enabled early 
closure, due to slow enrollment, of the bevacizumab -naïve cohort (Cohort 1) and removal of 
Regimen A Expansion Cohort 3 (endometrial cancer).  
1. The protocol was updated for the new triplet cohort: The study title was updated to reflect the new scope of the study; a rationale for the triplet cohort was added t o Section  1.10; 
the study objectives and endpoints were updated (Section 2); the number of patients, study design, and study schema were adjusted and new eligibility criteria added (Section  3 and  Section  4); PK sample collections were added (Section  6); and the 
statistical analysis  was updated (Section 11). 
2. The number of patients to be recruited into Expansion Cohort 1 was adjusted from 35 bevacizumab -naïve patients to approximately 20 bevacizumab -naïve patients 
(Section  4.1.5), and the statistical analysis  was updated (Section  11). 
3. Clarified the procedures for tumor sample collections including the timing of the collection , and a window for the Cycle 2 Day 8 sample was added (Section 7.1.1 and 
Section  8.17).  
4. Removed the Endometrial Expansion Cohort 3. This change was made throughout the protocol. 
5. The patient FRα status for patients enrolled into the Expansion C ohorts was increased 
from FRα ≥  25% to FRα ≥  50% of t umor staining at ≥  2 + intensity . This change was 
primarily made in the inclusion c riteria (Section  3.1.2).  
6. Reduced the scan frequency for patients receiving Regimen A and Regimen B, after they have been receiving study drug for 24 weeks, from every 6 weeks to every 12 weeks, and then reduced the frequency further to every 3 months for patients who remain on study for more than one year from  randomization. 
7. Provided greater clarity around the definition of platinum sensitive  in the inclusion 
criteria for Regimens B and E (Section 3.1.1.2).  
8. Updated the background information on pembrolizumab (Section 1.5.1 and Appendix E ).  
9. Updated the dose modification guidelines for pembrolizumab (Section 5.10.4.5).  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
157 Amendment 5 Summary of Key Changes 
The primary reason for this amendment was to add an additional cohort (Cohort 3) to 
Regimen  A, which will include patients with one to three prior therapies who may be either 
platinum resistant or platinum sensitive , and who may or may not have received prior therapy 
with bevacizumab . Further, the amendment includes the change of the investigational product 
name from IMGN853 to the International Non- proprietary Name of mirvetuximab soravtansine. 
The amendment also removed the alternative dosage schedule for Regimen A because it  was not 
enrolled. 
1. The protocol was updated to reflect a new C ohort (Cohort 3) in  Regimen A based on 
clinical experience with Regimen A Co horts 1 and 2. This includes the study title (Phase 
1b/2), rationale for the new Cohort ( Section 1.10), Study Objectives and Endpoints 
(Section 2 ), Study Population/Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria ( Section 3 ), Study 
Overview and Schema (including diagram) ( Section 4.1.1), and Sample Size 
(Section  11.1).  
2. The alternative dosing schedule for Regimen A was removed because this schedule did not enroll. T ext was removed from  (Section 4.1.3.1), and Table 2 and Appendix C  were 
deleted . 
3. The AIBW justification was removed for calculating the mirvetuximab soravtansine dose 
because the use of AIBW is now established and no longer needs justification (Section  5.8.4.1, Appendix L , and Appendix K ). 
4. The m irvetuximab soravtansine administration section was amended to include a special 
note to ensure that  mirvetuximab soravtansine is  administered first when used in 
combination with other study treatments ( Section 5.8.4.3).  
5. Monitoring of Ocular disorders was updated for safety inform ation guidelines and 
clarification around study visits ( Section 5.9.2.1 and Table 8 ). 
6. Monitoring of Non -infectious Pneumonitis was updated for safety information guidelines 
(Section 5.9.3 and Table 11 ). 
7. Re-treatment criteria w ere updated to reflect specifications for Regimen E 
(Section  5.10.1).  
8. Pregnancy testing after study discontinuation after a CR was updated (Section  5.10.6.4.2).  
9. Myocarditis was added as an AE  that would cause discontinuation from pembrolizumab 
(Section  5.10.6.4.4 and  Table 25).  
10. Guidelines on reporting an overdose from any study treatment were  updated 
(Section  5.1.4.1).  
11. The methodology used to assess the tumor FRα expression levels was defined and updated ( Section 7.1.1).  
12. The Potential Markers of Drug Resistance section was updated to align with objectives and endpoints and to improve overall clarity ( Section 7.2.1).  
mirvetuximab soravtansine  Amendment 5  
Clinical Study Protocol IMGN853- 0402  
 
Confidential and Proprietary  
ImmunoGen , Inc.  
158 13. Eligibility base d on FRα expression was updated to provide clear guidance on the 
methods used, and Regimen A Cohort 3 was added to this section ( Section 8.16).  
14. The safety sections were updated for consistency with program and ImmunoGen 
standards ( Section 9.1, Section 9.1.1.1, Section 9.1.1.2, Table 29 , Section 9.1.1.3, 
Section  9.2.1, and  Section 9.2.4).  
15. The sample size section was updated for the new cohort and to provide better clarity 
around patient numbers in Regimens D and E ( Section 11.1). 
16. The PK  section was updated to include a description of the analysis of the PK samples, 
including the substances to be analyzed and indication of the parameters to be calculated from the analysis ( Section 11.2).  
17. The i mmunogenicity analysis section  was updated to improve cla rity around the 
calculation of ADA -positive results ( Section 11.3).  
18. The p atient confidentiality section was updated to provide details on protected health 
information and Investigator responsibilities ( Section 13.5).  
19. The s tudy procedures  section and the Schedule of Clinical Assessment t ables were 
aligned and streamlined for internal consistency. Associated footnotes were amended and updated ( Section 8 , Appendix A , Appendix B , and Appendix C ). 