 
IRB Number: Pro00039603  
Date Approved 11/1/2016    Version 9/3/2015 
 
 1 
Medical University of South Carolina 
CONSENT TO BE IN A RESEARCH STUDY  
 
CONSENT TO BE IN A RESEARCH STUDY  
“The Effects of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and Transcranial Direct Current 
Stimulation (tDCS) on Fibromyalgia Patients” 
 
A. PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND  
You are being asked to volunteer for a research study. This research is sponsored by the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC). 
The purpose of this study is to determine whether a new medical technology, cal led 
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS), can help reduce chronic pain due to fibromyalgia when applied in combination with cognitive behavioral therapy (“talk 
therapy”). tDCS is a minimally -invasive technique (i.e., it does not  involve any surgi cal 
procedures, additional medication or sedation, or needles) that uses a very small amount of electricity to temporarily stimulate specific brain areas in awake people. The electrical current passes through the skin, scalp, hair , and skull and can tempor arily increase or 
decrease activity in areas of the brain that are thought to be involved with pain reduction. Some preliminary studies suggest that tDCS may be effective in reducing fibromyalgia and 
altering pain perception in both healthy adults and in patients with various types of pain 
conditions. However, tDCS is not approved by the FDA as a treatment for pain conditions.  
 You are being asked to participate in this study because you are between the ages of 21 -85 
and may meet criteria for these conditions. The investigator in charge of this study is Jeffrey J. Borckardt, Ph.D. This study will involve approximately 72 volunteers with chronic 
pain due to fibromyalgia and will be conducted in Charleston, SC.  
 
B. PROCEDURES  
If you agree to be in this study, the following will happen:  
1. You will complete several self- report screening measures designed to assess your 
pain history, level of depression and anxiety.  
Additionally, you will be interviewed by one of the research team members about 
your medical history  including history of seizures, implanted medical devices, skin 
conditions and history of brain injuries.  
 
2. You will be permitted to continue your current pain treatments (including 
medications), but will be asked not to change the treatment regimen during  your 
enrollment in the study.  
 
IRB Number: Pro00039603  
Date Approved 11/1/2016    Version 9/3/2015 
 
 2 
3. If you are a woman who is able to become pregnant, the study team will perform a 
urine pregnancy test. If the pregnancy test is positive you will not be eligible to 
participate in the study.  
4. You will be randomized to one of t wo groups; neither the researcher nor you will 
make the choice of which group you are assigned. The two groups are A and B. If you are randomized to Group A, you will meet with a clinician for 6 sessions of cognitive 
behavioral therapy for pain and you will receive real tDCS. If you are randomized to Group B, you will meet with a clinician for 6 sessions of cognitive behavioral therapy 
for pain and you will receive sham tDCS (this is not real stimulation).  
5. You will be given a paper diary to record you r daily pain, mood, sleep and activity 
levels. You will also be scheduled to undergo Quantitative Sensory Testing (QST) , 
which will take place in the Brain Stimulation Laboratory in the Institute of 
Psychiatry at MUSC. QST evaluates your response to pain by using a heat stimulator 
on your arm and a blunt tip needle that will be pressed into various skin a reas that 
are thought to be uniquely sensitive in patients with fibromyalgia.  
6. During the treatment phase, you will receive 6, 60 minute therapy sessions of CBT for pain. These treatment sessions will take place in the Behavioral Medicine Clinic 
located on the 1
st floor of the Institute of Psychiatry at 67 President St. Charleston, 
SC. During each of these CBT therapy sessions, you will undergo approximately 30 
minutes of either real or sham tDCS over the left DLPFC. You will also be asked to fill 
out questionnaires about your mood, sleep, activity levels, and quality of life at each 
session. 
7. When conducting a tDCS session, the investigators may pre- treat your skin  with a 
small amount of mild pain- reducing cream. Small sponges will be soaked in a sterile 
solution of 0.9% sodium chloride insulated by a latex casing.    The sponges will be placed over the area of your scalp corresponding to your group. 
The sponges will be held in place by a Velcro headband. After stimulation, the 
investigators may apply a vitamin- E/Aloe cream to the skin to reduce problems 
associated with skin drying.  
 
8. You may experience 30 minutes of mild, constant stimulation through the sponges. Som e people experience a mild tingling or itching under the sponges during the 
stimulation. Some people feel tired, some feel nothing at all.  
 
9. After a 2 -week baseline phase, you will undergo QST and then start the manualized 
CBT intervention with simultaneous  tDCS (real or sham; randomized and masked). 
 
IRB Number: Pro00039603  
Date Approved 11/1/2016    Version 9/3/2015 
 
 3 
You will undergo 1 session per week for ~ 6 weeks. After the last session, you will 
undergo another QST session. You will continue to complete the electronic pain 
diaries throughout the treatment as well as a 4 -week follow -up phase. At 1, 3 and 6 
months, you will return to the lab to complete follow -up questionnaires.  
 
C. DURATION  
Your participation in the study will involve 12 appointments (baseline visit, 6 therapy 
sessions, 2 QST sessions, 3 follow- up appointm ents). The baseline assessment may last up 
to three hours. The therapy sessions are 1 hour each. The follow up sessions will last approximately one to two hours. The QST sessions will last approximately 45 minutes each.  
 
Project staff will contact you to schedule appointments and provide reminders for those 
appointments. We will ask for your phone number, email , and mailing address to contact 
you. Any contact associated with the study will simply remind you of the time and date of 
an appointment and will not include information indicating that this study is related to 
psychiatric or pain research.   
 
D. RISKS/DISCOMFORTS  
 
Potential Risks of tDCS:  
tDCS has been found to be safe in humans with mild side- effects such as tingling sensations 
under the sponge electrodes (experienced by 70% of tDCS patients), moderate fatigue (35%), and light itching sensations under the sponges (30%).  
After tDCS, the incidence of side- effects is lower, but include headache (12%), nausea (3%) 
and insomnia (<1%). There is no evidence to date suggesting that tDCS causes seizures.  
This technique is currently being used as a method to reduce seizure frequency in epileptic patients. However, there is at least a theoretical possibility that tDCS could induce a seizure 
in some patients, thus if you have epilepsy or are taking medications known to lower 
seizure threshold, you will not be eligible for participation in this study.   
 
Some mild skin irritation can occur after tDCS treatment. If tDCS is delivered at 20 minutes 
per day, every da y for 4 or more days in a row, mild skin burns have been reported. 
However, these problems have only been seen when the electrode sponges are soaked in certain types of liquid, none of which will be used in this study. Further, these problems 
have only been seen when the skin is not treated with moisturizer creams after stimulation. 
The investigators will apply a vitamin- E/Aloe cream to your skin after each stimulation 
session. Lastly, these rare instances of burns reported in the research literature have all been reported to heal without scarring within 1 to 3 weeks following the end of tDCS 
 
IRB Number: Pro00039603  
Date Approved 11/1/2016    Version 9/3/2015 
 
 4 
treatment. Because we are using liquids that have not been associated with skin irritation, 
and because we will be applying a moisturizing cream after each treatment, we believe that 
the risk of mild burns is very minimal. Further, if the investigators detect any evidence that 
you are developing a skin irritation in response to the treatment, the treatment will be 
discontinued.  
 
tDCS is thought to be safe, with no potential for brain damage, despite extensive use in 
humans and other animals. There have been no reports of long -term changes in cognitive 
function (memory, attention, etc) in tDCS studies. However, tDCS is an experimental procedure and may have unknown side effects. The researchers will let you know if they 
learn anything that might make you change your mind about participating in the study.  
 
Potential for allergic reaction:  
Some people report allergic contact dermatitis as a result of exposure to creams such as Benzocaine and Vitamin- E lotion. Dermatitis is described as inflammation of the skin and 
may present as an itchy rash. The rash may be treated with corticosteroid creams (such as hydrocortisone), antihistamines, or wet compresses. If contact dermatitis develops, the 
investigator will immediately remove any cream from your skin and apply a wet compress.  
 
Risks regarding Confidentiality:  
All study records will be placed in a locked, secure, limited access location. Your 
participation in the study and the information you provide will be treated as confidential. 
In order to protect your confidentiality, the information we collect will contain your code 
number and not your name. Codes linking numbers and names will be kept in a locked 
secure location and will not be accessible to anyone outside the research team. There is a 
risk of a loss of confidentiality of your personal information as a result of participation in 
this study. 
 
You should know that if you threaten to harm yourself or others, or give information about 
child or elder abuse, this information will be reported to appropriate clinical staff and other 
persons outside the research program as necessary to protect you and others.  
 Even without your consent, suspected or known abuse or neglect of a child , disabled or 
elder abuse, or threatened violence to self or others may be reported to appropriate authorities.   
 
Randomization Risk:  
As there is a 50/50 chance of you receiving either the real or sham stimulation, there is the 
risk of being assigned to th e sham group , which may not receive a benefit.  
 
 
IRB Number: Pro00039603  
Date Approved 11/1/2016    Version 9/3/2015 
 
 5 
E. BENEFITS  
You may (or may not) experience a reduction in pain as a result of participating in this trial. 
It is hoped that the information gained from the study will help in the treatment of future 
patients  with chronic pain conditions.  
 
F. COSTS  
There are no costs to you for your participation. You will not be required to pay for medical 
care or services.  
 
G. COMPENSATION  
Compensation will be in the form of cash. You will receive $40 for the baseline visit;  $20 for 
each therapy session; $75 for each follow -up visit; and $25 for each QST procedure. For 
each daily diary, you will receive $1. Thus, the total amount subjects may receive for 
participation in this study is $ 519.  
Payments that you receive from MUSC for participating in a research study are considered taxable income per IRS regulations.  Payment types may include, but are not limited to: 
checks, cash, gift certificates/cards, personal property, and other items of value.   If the total 
amount of payment you receive from MUSC reaches or exceeds $600.00 in a calendar year, 
you will be issued a Form 1099.  
H. ALTERNATIVES  
tDCS is not approved by the FDA as a treatment for pain. This treatment study is being conducted to determine the effectiveness of tDCS for pain. If you choose not to participate 
in this study, you could receive other treatments for your conditions. We will be happy to 
provide referrals for other treatment clinics and health care providers in the community if 
you would like. You have the option of not participating in this trial if you choose.  
 
I. NEW INFORMATION  
If there are significant new findings during the course of this study, you will be notified.  
 
IRB Number: Pro00039603  
Date Approved 11/1/2016    Version 9/3/2015 
 
 6 
J. RELEASE OF MEDICAL RECORDS TO ANYONE OTHER THAN THE 
INVESTIGATORS 
If for any reason you would like your medical records released to anyone other than the 
study investigators, you will be asked to sign a release of information form. You will also 
sign a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) authorization to use or 
disclose your protected health information for research purposes.  
 
K. STUDENT PARTICIPATION  
Your participation or discontinuance will not constitute an element of your academic 
performance nor will it be part of your academic record at this Institution.  
L. EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION  
Your participation or discontinuance will not constitute any element of your job performance or evaluation nor will it be part of your personnel record at this Institution.  
 
N. CLINICAL TRIALS.GOV : 
A description of this clinical trial  will be available on http://www.clinicaltrials.gov , as 
required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At 
most, the Web site will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site any time.  
 
M. OTHER INFORMATION  
Results of this research will be used for the purposes described in this study. This information may be published, but you will not be identified. Information that is obtained 
concerning this researc h that can be identified with you will remain confidential to the 
extent possible within State and Federal law. The investigators associated with this study, the sponsor, and the MUSC Institutional Review Board for Human Research will have 
access to identifying information. All records in South Carolina are subject to subpoena by a 
court of law.  
In the event that you are injured as a result of participation in this study, you should immediately go to the emergency room of the Medical University Hospital, or  in case of an 
emergency go to the nearest hospital, and tell the physician on call that you are in a research study. They will call your study doctor who will make arrangements for your 
treatment. If the study sponsor does not pay for your treatment, the Medical University 
Hospital and the physicians who render treatment to you will bill your insurance 
company.  If your insurance company denies coverage or insurance is not available, you will 
be responsible for payment for all services rendered to you.  
Your  participation in this study is voluntary. You may refuse to take part in or stop taking 
part in this study at any time. You should call the investigator in charge of this study if you 
 
IRB Number: Pro00039603  
Date Approved 11/1/2016    Version 9/3/2015 
 
 7 
decide to do this.  
Your decision not to take part in the study will not affect your current or future medical 
care or any benefits to which you are entitled.  
The investigators and/or the sponsor may stop your participation in this study at any time 
if they decide it is in your best interest. They may also do this if you do not follow the 
investigator’s instructions.  
Volunteers Statement  
I have been given a chance to ask questions about this research study. These questions 
have been answered to my satisfaction. If I have any more questions about my participation 
in this study  or study related injury, I may contact Jeffrey J. Borckardt, Ph.D. I may contact 
the Medical University of SC Hospital Medical Director (843) 792 -9537 concerning medical 
treatment.  
If I have any questions, problem, or concerns, desire further information or wish to offer 
input, I may contact the Medical University of SC Institutional Review Board for Human 
Research IRB Manager or the Office of Research Integrity Director at (843) 792 -4148.   This 
includes any questions about my rights as a research subject in this study.  
I agree to participate in this study. I have been offered a copy of this form for my own 
records.  
If you wish to participate, you should sign below . 
______________________________  _____________     _________________________________     ____________ 
Signature of Participant   Date         Signature of Person Obtaining     Date 
Consent   
                                      
 