NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-1  
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
Protocol: ICH02 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Minimally Invasive Surgery plus rt -PA for Intracerebral Hemorrhage Evacuation Phase III  
(MISTIE III)  
 
 
July 25, 2018 
 
Prepared for:  
 
BIOS Coordinating Center 
Johns Hopkins University 
 
Prepared by: 
 
MISTIE III Data Coordinating Center 
Johns Hopkins University 
Bloomberg School of Public Health 
Department of Biostatistics  
615 N. Wolfe Street 
Baltimore, MD 21205 
 
 
 
Approved by:  Signature  Date 
 
 Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
Trial PI Daniel Hanley  7/25/18 
 
 
Richard Thompson, PhD  
Statistical PI  Richard Thompson  7/25/18 
  
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-2 Chapter 22.0:  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
Table of Contents 
1.0. Statistical Analysis Plan and Statistical Reports  ......................................................................................... 5 
2.0. Objectives of the Study  ............................................................................................................................... 5  
2.1. Efficacy  
2.2. Efficacy Measures Summary  
2.3. Safety  
2.3.1. Safety Measures Summary  
2.3.2. Safety Monitoring and Recruitment Suspension Rules  
3.0. Study Design  ............................................................................................................................................... 8  
4.0. Sample Size Determination for the Primary Efficacy Analysis .................................................................... 8  
5.0. Definition of Study Samples  ........................................................................................................................ 9  
5.1. Target Population 
5.2. Intent -to-Treat (ITT) Sample 
5.3. Safety Analysis Sample 
5.4. As -Treated Sample for MIS+ rt-PA 
5.4.1. As -Treated Sample for Any Form of S urgery  
5.5. Demographic and Clini cally Specific Subgroups  
5.6. Definition of Treatment Failures  
6.0. Randomization  .......................................................................................................................................... 10 
7.0. Blinding  ..................................................................................................................................................... 10 
8.0. Multiplicity  .................................................................................................................................................. 11 
9.0. Missing Data  ............................................................................................................................................. 11 
10.0. Baseline Characteristics .......................................................................................................................... 11 
10.1. Demographics 11 
10.2. Medical History  
11.0. Efficacy Analyses  .................................................................................................................................... 11 
11.1. Primary Efficacy Analysis: Dichotomized, adjudicated mRS 0- 3 vs. 4 -6 at 365 days  
11.1.1. Models  
11.1.2. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Ordinal, adjudicated mRS (0- 6) at 365 days  
11.1.3. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Longitudinal Analysis  
11.1.4. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Severity Subg roup Analysis  
11.1.5. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Subgroup Analysis  
11.1.6. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Random Effects ( Site Differences) Analyses  
12.0. Interim Efficacy  Analyses  ........................................................................................................................ 16 
13.0. Secondary Efficacy Outcomes Analyses  ................................................................................................ 16 
13.1. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 1: Dichotomized eGOS UGR -US vs. LS -Death at 365 days  
13.2. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 2: All Cause Mortality Longitudinally from Ictus to 365 Days  
13.2.1. Subordinate, Secondary Efficacy Analysis 2: Predictors of Mortality Analysis  
13.3. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 3: Relation Between Clot Removal as an AUC Estimat ing Time -Weighted 
Clot Volume from Ictus to EOT as AUC Clot Exposure and Functional Outcome (Proportion 0- 3 mRS)   
13.4. Secondary Analysis 4: Patient Disposition  
13.4.a. Secondary Efficacy A nalysis 4a: Home Days Over 365 D ays’ Time  From Ictus 
13.4.b. Secondary Efficacy Analys is 4b: Patient Location at 365 D ays Post I ctus 
13.5.  
Secondary Analysis 5: 180- Day Efficacy  
13.5.a. Secondary Analysis 5a: Dichotomized, adjudicated, cross -sectional mRS 0- 3 vs. 4 -6  
13.5.b. Dichotomized, adjudicated eGOS UGR -US vs. LS -Death  
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-3 13.5.1. A dditional, Secondary Efficacy Analysis 5: Ordinal, Adjudicated mRS (0- 6)  
13.5.2. Additional, Secondary Efficacy Analysis 5: Ordinal, eGOS UGR -US vs. LS -Death  
13.5.3. Additional, Secondary Efficacy Analysis 5: Subordinate Analyses 2-5  
13.6. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 6: Type and Intensity of ICU Management  
13.7. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 7: EQ -VAS and EQ -5D 
14.0. Safety Analyses  ...................................................................................................................................... 19 
14.1. Mortality and Safety Events at 30 Days Post Randomization  
14.2. Total SAEs at 30 Day s 
14.3. Summary of Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
14.4. Proposed Interval Safety Monitoring  
15.0. Tertiary (Exploratory/Sensitivity) Analyses  ............................................................................................. 21 
15.1. Functional Status at 180 and 365 days post ictus  
15.2. Quality of Life at 180 and 365 days post ictus  
15.3. Cost-Benefit Model  
16.0. References  .............................................................................................................................................. 22 
 
 
  
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-4 List of Abbreviations:  
AE Adverse event  
AIC Akaike Information Criterion  
AUC  Area under the curve  
BCa Accelerated bootstrap  
BP Blood pressure  
CCC  Clinical Coordinating Center  
CES-D Center for Epidemiological Studies - Depression  
CI Confidence interval  
CLEAR III  Clot Lysis: Evaluating Accelerated Resolution of Intraventricular Hemorrhage Phase 3 
CT Computed tomography  
DCC  Data Coordinating Center  
DSMB  Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
EDA Exploratory data analyses  
EDC  Electronic data capture  
eGOS  Extended Glasgow Outcome Scale  
EOT End of treatment  
EQ-5D EuroQol five dimension  
EQ-VAS EuroQol Visual Analogue Scale  
EVD Extraventricular drainage  
GCS  Glasgow Coma Scale  
GEE  Generalized estimating equations  
GOS  Glasgow Outcome Scale  
ICH Intracerebral hemorrhage  
ICP Intracranial pressure  
ICU Intensive care unit  
ITT Intent -to-treat 
IVH Intraventricular hemorrhage  
LGR Lower good recovery (eGOS)  
LM Lower moderate disability (eGOS)  
LS Lower severe disability (eGOS)  
LTF Loss to follow -up 
MD Moderate disability (eGOS)  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MIS Minimally invasive surgery  
MISTIE III  Minimally Invasive Surgery plus rt -PA for Intracerebral Hemorrhage Evacuation Phase 3 
MMSE  Mini-Mental State Examination  
mRS  Modified Rankin Scale  
NIH National Institutes of Health  
NIHSS  National Institutes of Health Scale  
PBSI  Preference Based Stroke Index  
QIC Independence model criterion  
QOL  Quality of life  
ROC  Receiver Operating Characteristic  
rt-PA Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator  
SAE Serious adverse event  
SIS Stroke Impact Scale  
UGR  Upper good recovery (eGOS)  
UK United Kingdom  
US Upper severe disability (eGOS)  
VS Vegetative state (eGOS)  
  
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-5 1.0. Statistical Analysis Plan and Statistical Reports  
 
This chapter provides the details of statistical considerations, analyses , and reports planned for the 
MISTIE  III Trial, including proposed regression models , sample size estimates , power considerations, 
interim analyses, and analysis of adverse events. The proposed analyses will be conducted on the whole patient sample and on  subsets of patients defined by gender, race, and ethnicity  as well as patient -
specific clinical factors/categories  and treatment categories. In addition, this chapter  discusses statistical  
issues relevant to these analyses (e.g., sample data to be used, missing data, adjustments for  multiplicity, 
etc.). 
 Initially, the Data Coordinating Center ( DCC) will examine data quality, create secondary variables, and 
perform exploratory data analyses (EDA). All variables will be evaluated to detect gaps, patterns, and inconsistencies in the data. These analyses will emphasize examination of the nature and extent of 
variability for all variables. Visual techniques to explore continuous variables will include stem -and-leaf 
plots, box plots, and quantile- quantile plots. Outliers will additionally be examined for data entry errors. 
Summary statistics for continuous variables will include the number of patients, median, mean, standard deviation, and range, while statistics for categorical variables will include the frequency and percentage 
of patients in each category.  
 Statistical analyses will be performed on data that have been quality -assured through DCC protocols and 
monitoring reviews, and that have been exported by the DCC directly from the MISTIE III database. The 
following analysis procedures may be applied to blinded (no treatment arm designation, for study 
investigators and staff), partially unblinded (treatment designation only as  “A” and “B ,” for DSMB and at 
interim analyses), and unblinded (full treatment designation, for final analyses) data, by DCC staff having the appropriate role permissions.  
 
The MIST IE III Executive Committee receives the open DSMB reports.  
 
2.0. Objectives of the Study  
 2.1. Efficacy  
 
The primary aim of this multicenter, international, randomized, open- label , phase 3 trial is to determine 
the efficacy of intra -clot catheter placement  and aspiration of hematoma contents, followed by gentle clot 
irrigation with low dose recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt -PA), referred to as Minimally  
Invasive  Surgery plus rt -PA (MIS+rt -PA). The primary hypothesis of this trial is that the MIS+ rt-PA 
approach to intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) management will result in more patients  having overall better 
functional outcome at 365 days, as defined by the proportion of subjects with dichotomized, adjudicated  
modified Rankin Scale (mRS)  score 0-3 vs. 4-6, when compared to the mRS scores for patients managed 
with standard aggressive medical treatment. Although the mRS includes a category for death, and hence the primary analysis incorporates mortality outcomes, in-hospital  and 30 -day mortality will als o be 
examined as safety outcomes for the trial.  Furthermore , 365-day mortality will be evaluated separately 
as a secondary efficacy outcome. An intent -to-treat (ITT) paradigm for the analyses will be incorporated. 
The MISTIE III trial will enroll a total o f 500 eligible patients, 250 randomized each treatment arm (MIS+rt -
PA or medical management). The power  to detect (88%) is for an estimated effect size of 13% across all 
clot locations with this sample size (500) . 
 
Additional analyses of efficacy outcomes will evaluate the therapeutic benefit of MIS+rt -PA relevant to 
medical management in improving subjects’ function and quality of life  at 365 days post symptom onset 
as measured by extended Glasgow Outcome Scale ( eGOS ), days in various locations such as  home 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-6 during the 365- day period, patient disposition at 180 and 365 days including proportion of days in long -
term care facilities, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale ( NIHSS ), Barthel score, days in hospital, 
days in intensive care unit (ICU), Stroke Impact Scale (SIS), Preference -Based Stroke Index (PBSI), 
EuroQol -5 Dimension ( EQ-5D), Mini -Mental State Examination (MMSE), Personal Health Utility 
Interview , and Center for Epidemiological Studies – Depression (CES -D). 
 
2.2. Efficacy Measures Summary : All Analyses Adjusted Similarly to the Primary Analysis 
 
• Primary Efficacy Analysis:  Dichotomized , adjudicated, cross- sectional  mRS 0 -3 vs. 4 -6 at 
365 days  post-ictus, adjusting for baseline (pre -randomization) variables used in covariate 
adaptive randomization as well as the clinically established severity variables IVH size and 
ICH location (lobar or deep) .  
 
• Additional , Exploratory  Analyses of mRS at 365 days:  
a. Dichotomized, adjudicated, cross -sectional mRS 0- 3 vs. 4- 6 at 365 days post ictus, 
adjusting for baseline (pre -randomization) variables used in covariate adaptive 
randomizati on as well as additional baseline variables  determined to be associated with 
the outcome . 
b. Ordinal, adjudicated mRS (0- 6) at 365 days . 
c. mRS 0 -3 vs. 4 -6 at 365 days based on a full longitudinal analysis  of the mRS data at 90, 
180, and 270 days.  
d. Severity subg roup analyses (including,  but not limited to, IVH size, location of ICH, 
presentation co-morbidities  such as diabetes, CVD , and white matter disease, etc.) 
e. Cross -sectional of mRS 0- 3 vs. 4 -6 for demographic subgroups of patients, including for 
race and gender.  (For d and e, see section 5.5 .) 
f. Analysis of cross -sectional mRS 0 -3 vs. 4 -6 at 36 5 days that models random effects for 
hospital sites.  
 
• Secondary Analyses of other outcomes    
 
1. Dichotomized eGOS UGR -US v s. LS-Death at 365 days . 
• Subordinate: Ordinal eGOS UGR, LGR, MD, LM,  US vs. LS , VS, Death at 365 
days .  
2. All-cause mortality longitudinally from  ictus to 365 days.  
• Subordinate: Predictors of m ortality . 
3. Relationship between clot removal as  an AUC  clot-assessment that estimates the time -
weighted clot volume from ictus to end of treatment (EOT; i .e., 24 hours after last dose)  
as AUC clot exposure and functional outcome (proportion 0 -3 mRS) . 
4. Patient disposition:  
a. Home days over 365 days’ time  from ictus . 
b. Patient location at 365 days post  ictus (i.e., good vs . bad location. See Tertiary 2g for 
definition. ) 
5. 180-day efficacy: 
a. Dichotomized, adjudi cated, cross- sectional  mRS 0-3 vs. 4 -6.  
• Subordinate (1): Ordinal, adjudicated mRS (0 -6). 
b. Dichotomized, adjudicated eGOS  UGR, LGR, MD , LM, US vs. LS , VS, Death. 
• Subordinate (2): Ordinal, eGOS UGR, LGR, MD , LM, US vs. LS , VS, Death. 
• Subordinate analyses 2- 5 as defined under the Primary  but for eGOS. 
6. Type and intensity of ICU management:  
a. ICU days  
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-7 b. ICU management (ICP, Ventilation, BP support, osmotherapies)  
c. H ospital days  
7.  EQ-VAS and EQ -5D 
 
• Tertiary (exploratory/sensitivity ): 
 
1. Functional status  at 180 and 365 days post -stroke :  
a. GOS  
b. Barthel Index  
c. NIHSS  
d. MMSE   
2. Quality of life  at 180 and 365 days post -stroke:  
a. SIS 
b. PBSI  
c. Personal Health Utility Assessment Interview 
d. CES-D 
e. EQ dimensions individually assessed  
f. Home days (180 only)  
g. Patient location including proportion of days in home, rehabilitation, acute care, long-
term care facilities . These wil l be evaluated  by individual location type and 
dichotomized as good vs bad outcome defined as home and rehabilitation vs acute 
care, long- term care and death.  
h. Proportion of subjects in vegetative condition  
3. Cost -bene fit model  
 
In addition to the primary , secondary , and tertiary (exploratory)  measures, there are a number of related 
and intermediate surrogate outcomes of interest, including time to treatment, surgical task descriptors, 
clot locations, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS),  Graeb Scale, clot lysis rate and final clot size reduction.  
 
2.3. Safety 
 
The safety of MIS+rt -PA relative to medical management is assessed by comparing the proportion of 
subjects between the two groups with treatment- related SAEs within the 30-day time frame: mortality, 
rebleeding, infection, and first -week (designated as operative mortality for the surgical group)  mortality.  
Additionally , the number and proportion of all SAEs across the entire time frame in the respective 
randomized groups  will be evaluated starting with the follow -up time frames of 180 and 365.   
 Interim safety analyses will be prepared for the external Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) on a 
pre-arranged schedule (such as semi -annual or after  enrollment of a fixed number of subjects) to evaluate 
efficacy and safety. Safety  measures include: monitoring the incidence of symptomatic and asymptomatic  
intracranial bleeding events (i.e., hemorrhage extension, new hemorrhage, catheter -tract hemorrhage) 
through daily computed tomography (CT) scans for the first four days  after randomization and then 
repeated one day (approximately 24 hours) after ICH  catheter removal,  and monitoring the incidence of 
confirmed and suspected infection and in-hospital mortality.  
 2.3.1. Safety Measures Summary  
 
• Mortality and safety events at 30 days post -randomization:  
a. First-week (operative) mortality  
b. All-cause mortality  
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-8 c. Symptomatic bleeding rate  
d. Infection rate   
e. Total SAEs at 30 days  
f. Summary of AEs and SAEs  by M edDRA code and grouped by organ system 
 
2.3.2. Safety Monitoring and Recruitment Suspension Rules   
 
Safety events above pre- specified thresholds will trigger a “suspend recruitment and review” by  the 
DSMB to  investigate the presumed cause and impact of these events. Such events are initially  reviewed 
by DCC staff to determine if an event  threshold has been reached at which time the study investigators 
and the DSMB will be notified. The thresholds triggering such a review are: 30- day mortality >60%, a 
MIS+rt -PA–related symptomatic bleeding rate >25% (during active treatment or during the 72 hours aft er 
treatment  will be monitored), first -week operative death rate >10%, and a procedure -related  infection rate 
>15% (over the initial 30 days). If any of these SAEs are attributable to the intervention (catheter insertion 
or manipulation, or rt -PA injection), the study will be suspended for a complete safety review.  
 Interim analyses for efficacy  will occur after 375 subjects are enrolled  and 180 days outcomes are 
available. These analyses will be based on O'Brien -Fleming stopping boundaries for eff icacy and more 
aggressive (i.e., more likely to stop if there is no early signal of benefit) stopping boundaries for efficacy 
and safety analyses will be every six months  or at other intervals as determined by the external DSMB.  
 3.0. Study Design 
 
This study is a phase 3, 1:1 randomized, open- label, multicenter evaluation of MIS and ICH lysis with rt -
PA versus medical care. The study (n=500) will evaluate the efficacy and safety of MIS plus 1 mg of rt -
PA administered every eight hours for up to nine doses as compared to subjects treated with conventional 
medical management.  
 
4.0. Sample Size Determination for the Primary Efficacy Analysis  
 
The MISTIE phase 2 results, for all available data ( non-randomized trial-standardized “pilot” and 
randomized partici pants), demonstrated an estimate d absolute increase in the probability of achieving an 
mRS 0 -3 of 13.0% [95% CI: (0.4%  to 26.4%)] comparing MIS+rt -PA treatment versus medical 
management 180 days post -stroke.
1 For the intention- to-treat (ITT) analysis, w hen only randomized 
patients are considered ( n=96), the estimate for the unadjusted treatment effect is 1 0.9% [95% CI: ( -8.8% 
to 29.4%)], and 16.2 % [95% CI: ( 0.3%  to 32.3%)] after adjusting for baseline clinical characteristics. This 
range  of es timates  provides a strong motivation for conducting MISTIE III to confirm these clinically 
beneficial findings. The analogous unadjusted and adjusted effect sizes based on non -lobar ICH patients 
are very similar to these effect sizes.  The second stage of MISTIE II provided evidence of increa sing 
frequency  of mRS scores in the 0- 2 categories between 180 and 365 days with an unadjusted proportion 
of mRS 0- 3 increasing to 14%. The sample size was selected based on 180- day outcomes in MISTIE II .  
 
It was decided to change the primary outcome to be based on 365- day outcomes because of the lack 
of a plateau in good functional outcome at 180 days.  
 
  
 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-9 5.0. Definition of Study Samples  
 
5.1. Target Population  
 
The target population to which the MISTIE intervention or conventional medical management may be 
applied are patients with site-determined ICH ≥30 mL and not requiring extraventricular drainage (EVD) 
for the management of acute obstructive hydrocephalus.  
 
5.2. Intent -to-Treat (ITT) Sample 
 
As the primary analysis, all efficacy and safety outcome measures are analyzed under the ITT. Under this principle, each eligible subject is analyzed according to the treatment group to which they were 
assigned at the time of randomization.  A total of 500 eligible subjects will be randomized. Exposure to 
the MISTIE procedure will be considered evidence of intention to treat.  
 
5.3. Safety Analysis Sample  
 All randomized subjects are included in the safety analysis sample. Further safety analyses may be 
determined by clinical events and subgroups of the surgical task.  
 
5.4. As-Treated Sample  for MIS+rt -PA 
 The potential for cross -overs to the MIS +rt-PA treatment  in this study is minimal;  none occurred in our 
prior experience. However, in the case of cross -overs, a per -protocol sample will be constructed and 
examined in which treatment -as-received is  analyzed.  
 Given that amount of clot resolution is a potentially treatment -related post -randomization variable, this 
covariate will be examined as an important potential  mediator of final outcomes as part of a per -protocol 
analysis.  This treatment performance  variable will be explored at the protocol thresholds of 15 mL, and 
10 mL  and the observed level of 5 mL. Other thresholds may be explored as determined by inspection of 
the data and clinical find ings.  Surgical performance will be evaluated by chosen trajectory, s urgical 
experience level and compliance with Surgical Center recommendations , and by actual task perform ance 
versus planned performance.  
  
5.4.1. As-Treated Sample for Any Form of Surgery 
 
Given the lack of guidelines to indicate whether any form of surgery is beneficial , different combinations 
of surgical versus  medical therapy will be explored, starting with all subjects receiving any surgical 
procedure versus  all subjects receiving only medical therapy. Impor tant groups that represent actual 
practices and the timing of such practices occurring will be explored. Given that clot resolution is a 
potentially treatment -related post -randomization variable, this covariate will be examined as an important 
potential  mediator of final outcomes as part of the as -treated analysis.   
 
Given the absence of clinical trial demonstration of benefit of craniotomy , we will assess the benefit of 
craniotomy or not by comparing all subjects receiving craniotomy versus those rec eiving only MIS +rt-PA 
and those rec eiving only medical therapy. Craniotomies will be divided into subgroups by time performed  
(in equal size groups and by day and half day) . Finally,  we will consider all craniotomies as salvage and 
assign them to death, then determine the frequency at which they are “life saving .” 
 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-10 5.5. Demographic and Clini cally Specific Subgroups 
 
All the primary , secondary , and safety  analyses will be performed by gender, race , and ethnicity to 
determine if the treatment effect or safety differs by these demographics. Patient -specific clinical or 
“severity” factors/categories and treatment categories will be explored. Planned explorations include 
age, GCS (or NIHSS), ICH location, time to treatment, and initial ICH size.  
 
Subgroups utilized for  adaptive cut points  are: age <56, age 56 through  67, and age ≥67; GCS 3–8, 9–
12 and 13–15; initial ICH size (0–<25; 25–<35; 35–<45; 45–<55; 55–<65; and ≥65). We will examine 
the following s ubgroups : stability ICH size <50 and ≥50; lobar v s. deep; stability IVH size; time to 
surgery at < 24 hours , 24-48 hours , and >48 hours  from ictus ; GCS 3 –8, 9– 12 and 13–15 ; and age < 65 
and ≥65.  
 
Additional analysis of groupings of these clinical factors will be dictated by group size and balance 
between groups. We will also explore time as a continuum and at other clinically meaningful cut points.  
We will treat age, ICH size, and IV H size  as a continuum and collapse them  to other meaningful 
subgroups, as described above.  NIHSS and GCS will also be treated as a continuum of s cores. Based 
on post hoc analysis of the STICH trials , we will evaluate GCS 9 –12 versus  all other score levels.  
 
5.6. Definition of Treatment Failures  
 
Treatment failures are defined as: rt-PA administrations discontinued due to clinically significant 
rebleeding  (prolonged GCS motor deterioration >2 motor points) , the Investigator’s judgment  to not 
treat, and f ailure to achi eve the target volume of 15 mL or less.  
 
6.0. Randomization 
 
Randomization will occur after completed screening for vascular malformation and central validation of 
inclusion  and exclusion criteria. Subjects will be randomized to MIS+rt -PA or medical  management using 
a covariate- adaptive design similar to that  used for the CLEAR III trial.2 The goal of this randomization 
scheme is to obtain an improved balance across study arms in the number of subjects with certain pre-
randomization variables that are most strongly predictive of the functional outcomes (mRS) at 180 and 
365 days post -stroke. These variables include pre-randomization clot volume, age, and baseline severity 
of impairment as measured by GCS.   Under this scenario, a randomization scheme will be used which 
increases a newly enrolled subject’s probability of being  assigned to the study arm that improves the 
overall balance in these  important prognostic factors. Briefly, prior to randomization for each  incoming 
patient, the imbalance between treatment arms will be determined using the accumulating available data 
on clot volume, age  and GCS. The patient will then be randomized with high probability (e.g. , “weighted 
coin toss ”) to the treatment arm that lowers the imbalance. Patients at any given site will not be 
considered for covariate- adaptive randomization until the site has enrolled four or six  (blinded; sites are 
randomized to four or six to maintain blinding ) patients into each treatment arm by within- site block 
randomization. This randomization scheme will be implemented using software included in the MISTIE III EDC (electronic data capture) system similar to what has been successfully implemented in the CLEAR 
III trial.  
 7.0. Blinding  
 
The examiner performing the  30-, 180
 -, and 365 -day follow -up assessments will video record the mRS 
interview assessments and upload the video to the Outcome CCC at the Western Infirmary in Glasgow , 
UK, where trained reviewers will classify the interview objectively  without knowledge of the examiner’s 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-11 score, patient name, or the treatment  details including therapy intensity  levels . 
 
8.0. Multiplicity  
 
The primary analysis of efficacy is tested at the two-sided alpha level of 0.05.  In addition, secondary 
analyses will consider the alpha=0.05 two- sided type I error.  Secondary analyses  will be examined in 
the order specified and will not be corrected for multiplicity of testing.  
 
Secondaries 2-7 are defined. The  other analyses without specific hypotheses are considered 
exploratory. We will present descriptive statistics and C Is. 
 For safety outcomes, we do not account for multiplicity  as this study was not powered to observe 
safety . Thus,  a cautionary approach is justified.  
 
9.0. Missing Data 
 Based on previous MISTIE and CLEAR studies performed in this group of stroke patients, the CCC will 
make substantial efforts to ensure complete collection of data for all patients, and to accrue minimal 
loss to follow -up (LTF) to optimize evaluation of the primary outcome of 365-day adjudicated mRS post -
stroke. The CLEAR III trial  experienced an overall  LTF rate of 2%. Since we expect missingness will be 
more prevalent for the 365- day mRS (the primary efficacy end point) than at early time points, we will 
use the targeted maximum likelihood estimator  (TMLE )
3 to adjust for censoring,  as specified in the 
description of the model for the primary efficacy model given in Section 11.1 below . The effects of 
incompleteness/noncompliance will be quantified through sensitivity analyses, the gold standard in the 
field.4 
 10.0. Baseline Characteristics  
 10.1. Demographics  
Summary statistics will be presented for age (years), gender (male or female), race and ethnicity, 
presentation center, pertinent medical history including illicit drug use, primary diagnosis ( ICH vs. ICH 
with IVH), hypertension history, diabetes, anticoagulation, tobacco and cocaine use, and antiplatelet 
drug use.  
 
10.2. Medical History  
 Summary statistics will also be presented for medical history, as well as presentation variables:  
temperature, pulse, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, p resenting NIHSS, GCS, ICP, 
ICH volume, IVH volume, extent of white matter disease (van Sweiten index) , and location of bleed.  
 
11.0. Efficacy Analyses  
 
11.1.  Primary Efficacy Analysis: Dichotomized, Adjudicated mRS 0- 3 vs. 4-6 at 365 Days Post 
Ictus 
 
This primary analysis will produce an estimate and 95% confidence interval for the average treatment 
effect comparing assignment to MIS+rt -PA treatment (MISTIE) versus control  (standard of care, i.e., 
medical management), using the ITT principle. Specifically, we will estimate the difference between the  
probability of an adjudicated mRS score of 3 or less at 365 days post-stroke comparing assignment to 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-12 treatment versus control; this difference is called the average treatment effect. Below is a description o f 
the procedure for computing estimators of the average treatment effect . We also will test the null 
hypothesis of zero treatment effect  at level 0.05.  
 
To estimate the average treatment effect, we will use the targeted maximum likelihood estimator (TMLE) of van der Laan and Gruber.
3 This estimator adjust s for baseline ( i.e., pre-randomization) 
variables  in order to improve precision. The baseline variables, denoted by the vector B, include the 
three variables used in the covariate- adaptive randomization as given in Section 6.0 (i.e., pre-
randomization clot volume, age, and baseline severity of impairment as measured by GCS ) as well as 
the following additional variables: IVH volume and location of ICH (indicator of lobar vs. deep). All baseline variables are treated as categorical and included as main terms in the models below.  
 The TMLE estimator also involves adjustment with the goal of reducing bias due to informative 
censoring, that is, participant dropout that may be correlated with the primary outcome. The TMLE  
adjusts for missing outcomes through a combination of inverse probability of censoring weights and 
outcome prediction models . Specifically, the weights and prediction models use the afor ementioned 
baseline variables, study arm, and the following post -randomization variables: mRS scores measured 
at 30, 180, 365 days from ictus, denoted M
30, M 180, M 365 respectively . The motivation is that if mRS 
score at a given visit is correlated with the mRS score at the next visit and also with dropout, then 
adjusting for observed differences in the mRS history of those who drop out versus those who stay on 
study may reduce bias (under the assumption that censoring is missing at random). As we describe below, this adjustment is implemented by fitting models for dropout and models for the primary outcome 
based on mRS measured at the previous visit, study arm, and baseline variables.   
 
Let A denote the study arm, where A=1 for the MISTIE treatment arm and A=0 for the standard of care 
(medical management) arm. Let C
30, C180, C365 denote the indicator of being uncensored at the 30 -, 
180-, 365- day visits, respectively. E.g., C 180=1 means the participant attended the 180- day visit and had 
his or her  mRS M 180 recorded.  
 The TMLE involves first constructing inverse probability of censoring weights W
30, W 180, W 365, defined 
as follows:  
 W
30=1/[Pr(C 30=1 | B, A) P(A | B)]  
W180= W 30/Pr(C 180=1 | C 30=1, B, A, M 30)  
W365= W 180/Pr(C 365=1 | C 180=1, B, A, M 180) 
 where the probabilities are estimated by fitting logistic regression models. Specifically, we fit logistic regression models for the probability of censoring at each visit given mRS at the previous visit, study 
arm, and baseline variables, among those who attended the previous visit. Each model includes main 
terms and an intercept, e.g., the model  
 
Pr(C
365=1 | C 180=1, B, A, M 180) = logit-1(β0+β1B+β2A+β3M180) 
 
for the probability of remaining uncensored at 365 days given 180- day mRS, study arm, and baseline 
variables, is fit among those uncensored at 180 days (C 180=1). 
 
We also fit a logistic regression model for the probability of A=1 given baseline variables B, used in W 30. 
When the mRS score at an interim visit (30, 180 days) is included as a covariate in a regression model, 
it is coded as a categorical variable. We also truncate each weight at 20 (i.e., for weights above 20 we 
replace them by 20). Below, there is no connection between the coefficients in different models —we 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-13 use β to denote generic coefficients in each model, for simplicity.  
 
The TMLE involves a sequence of weighted regression model fits using the inverse probability of 
censoring weights constructed above. First, the weighted logistic regression model:  
Pr(M 365 ≤ 3 | C 365=1, B, A, M 180) = logit-1(β0+β1B+β2A+β3M180)     (1) 
using weights W 365 is fit using all participants who are uncensored at 365 days (C 365=1). 
Next, for each participant who is uncensored at 180 days (the previous visit), this model fit is used to 
generate the predicted probability, denoted by S 180, of Y=1 given their 180 -day mRS M 180, study arm A, 
and baseline variables B.  
 The above two- step process (model fitting then generating predictions) is iterated by replacing 
(M
365 ≤ 3) by S 180 in (1) and regressing on previous visit mRS, study arm, and baseline variables.  
 
Specifically, fit E(S 180 | C180=1, B, A, M 30) = logit-1(β0+β1B+β2A+β3M30) with weights W 180 (2) 
using all participants who are uncensored at 180 days (C 180=1). 
and use the model fit to generate the predicted mean S 30 of S 180 for each participant with C 30=1;  
next, fit E(S 30 | C30=1,B, A) = logit-1(β0+β1B+β2A)       (3) 
with weights W 30 using all participants who are uncensored at 30 days (C 30=1). 
 
Lastly, the probability of Y=1 under assignment to study arm A=1 (MISTIE treatment) is estimated by generating for every participant (in both arms) a prediction by substituting their vector of baseline 
variables B and setting A=1 in the model fit (3). Similarly, the probability of Y=1 under assignment to 
study arm A=0 (medical management) is estimated by generating for each participant (in both arms) a 
prediction by substituting their vector of baseline variables B and setting A=0 in the m odel fit (3).  
The primary analysis estimator of the average treatment effect as a risk differe nce is defined as the 
difference between the former and the latter.  
 
The 95% confidence interval will be computed by the non -parametric bootstrap (resampling participants 
with replacement and recomputing the above estimator), and using the bias corrected and accelerated (BCa) method.
5 The null hypothesis of zero average treatment effect will be rejected if this confidence 
interval excludes  0. This completes the description of the primary efficacy analysis, except for how 
missing baseline variables and intermittent (non- monotone) missingness are handled, as described 
next.  
 Missing baseline variables are imputed using the median for continuous -valued variables and mode  for 
categorical variables. This and the following paragraph are done before any of the steps above.  
 We next describe how intermittent  (non- monotone)  missing data are handled, such as when a 
participant misses the 30 -day visit only. We consider each interim visit at v=30 and 180, in turn. First, 
for visit v=30 days, we fit a multinomial logistic regression for M
30 given A, B among those with C 30=1; 
for those with C 30=0, we  then set their M 30 to be the value with highest predicted probability from th e 
model fit. Next, for visit v=180 days, we fit a multinomial logistic regression for M 180 given A, B, C 30,  
among those with C 180=1; for those with C 180=0, we set their M 180 to be the value with highest predicted 
probability from the model fit. We do not apply this process to the final outcome at 365 days. All models 
include intercept s and main terms for the variables listed. Next, we modify model (1) to include the 
additional main term C30C180 and its interaction with A . Similarly, in model (2)  we include the additional 
main term C 30 and its interaction with A . The idea is that each model (1) -(2) now contains an indicator 
of whether the mRS score on the right side was directl y measured or was predicted by the above 
process based on previous mRS measurements, study arm, and baseline variables.  
 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-14 We will conduct sensitivity analyses to evaluate the impact (beyond what is explained by variables  used 
in the analysis above) of informative censoring  on our estimators , following recommendations from the 
U.S. National Research Council Panel on Handling Missing Data in Clinical Trials.6 
 
11.2 Additional (Non-Primary) Efficacy Analyses  
 
Models as detailed in equations (1) to ( 3) above a n analogous approach will be used to assess 365- day 
differences with other corrections  described next. Estimates from these models will account for design 
aspects such as potential within- site clustering that might otherwise lead to biased estimates in the 
standard errors associated with the regression coefficients. Additionally, we will control for clinically 
important variables, including  pre-randomization ICH volume, IVH volume (or presence, depending on 
the variability in IVH volumes), baseline stroke severity, age, co -morbidity (diagnosis of diabetes or 
history of cardiovascular disease) , and extent o f white matter disease.   
 
11.2.1. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Ordinal, Adjudicated mRS (0 -6) at 365 Days 
 
When we consider analysis of the ordinal mRS, we will estimate a proportional odds model of the form:  
 
𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝛾𝛾𝑘𝑘
1−𝛾𝛾𝑘𝑘=𝛼𝛼𝑘𝑘+𝛽𝛽𝛽𝛽+𝜃𝜃𝜃𝜃𝜃𝜃𝜃𝜃  (6) 
 where α
k = Prob(mRS < k), k=0, 1,...,5.  
 
This proportional odds model is very similar to the models described under 11.1. above, with the 
difference being that a treatment effect leads to an increase in the likelihood of a patient being in any subsequently lower mRS category. The probabilities, α
k, are cumulative probabilities which incorporate 
all outcomes below any given level. The set of intercepts, αk k=0,1,…,5, define the initial probabilities of 
these cumulative levels, covariates are again included through β and X, and the treatment difference θ 
now describes the log- odds of moving from any cumulatively higher (worse) category, into any 
cumulatively lower (better) category. For instance, here θ describes both how the MIS+rt -PA changes 
the probability of ICH patients away from a potential mRS category of  “Dead ” (6) to  “No Symptoms 
through Severe Disability ” (0-5), as well  as how the MIS+rt -PA changes patient probabilities away from  
“Severe Disability or Dead” (5,6) to  “No Symptoms through Moderate Disability ” (0-4) and so forth. This 
model is potentially more efficient than a simple dichotomous approach since it uses the available 
information across the scale of the measure. To examine the proportional odds assumption, we will additionally examine generalized ordered logit models that replace β and θ with β
k and θk, allowing non-
parallel effects between successive cumulative categories. In the event that the proportional odds assumption is rejected, we will present results from the generalized ordered logit models.  
 For the ordinal outcome, the average treatment effect is defined as the average of the cumulative log -
odds:  
 
𝛽𝛽=1
𝐾𝐾−1∑𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑃𝑃(𝑌𝑌1≤𝑖𝑖)
𝑃𝑃(𝑌𝑌1>𝑖𝑖)�
𝑃𝑃(𝑌𝑌0≤𝑖𝑖)
𝑃𝑃(𝑌𝑌0>𝑖𝑖)�𝐾𝐾−1
𝑖𝑖=1     (7) 
 
where Y r is the mRS score at 365 days  and r=1 for MIS +rt-PA and 0 for medical management.  
 
Survival models will be constructed to examine the mortality for the MIS+rt -PA and medically  managed 
groups. Standard Cox proportional hazard models will initially be examined. These models are commonly written as:  
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-15  
     (8) 
 
where λ0(t) is a non- parametric baseline hazard function, γ is a vector of regression coefficients related 
to the X covariates , and φ is the parameter for the treatment effect of MIS+rt -PA on the hazard of death 
(mortality). This model may be extended by including time- dependent covariates and non- proportional 
hazards as deemed necessary through diagnostic checks. Observed mortality will also be compared 
with predicted mortality based on clinical presentation, overall , and by treatment group. Predicted 
mortality will be estimated. We will develop a severity model t hat predicts mortality based on the Tuhrim 
model.2,7,8  
 
11.2.2. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Longitudinal Analysis  
 Longitudinal analysis will examine the secondary outcomes that are longitudinally collected at baseline 
and the follow -up time points (e.g., at 30, 90, 180, 270 , and 365 days post -stroke). These data will have 
within -patient correlations from one time point to the next, making it necessary to use appropriate 
analytical methods that properly estimate the coefficients and their associated standard errors in the 
analysis models. Since the overall goal of the trial is to compare subjects receiving the MIS+rt -PA 
intervention with subjects receiving medical standard of care, a marginal model estimated using a 
generalized estimating equations (GEE) technique is appropriate. The GEE technique requires 
specification of the standard “ mean ” model, as well as specification of a working “ association” model. 
One strength of GEE is that the fixed- effect parameters in the mean model ( i.e., the intervention effect) 
are consistent regardless of whether the association model is specified correctly under mild regularity conditions. The fixed- effects will include treatment arm (coded as 1 for MIS+rt -PA and 0 for medical 
management), follow -up time represented with four indicator variables for 90, 180, 270 , and 365 days 
post ictus), and their interactions. The interaction terms will test (at 0.05 level of statistical significance) 
whether the longitudinal change in the outcome is statistically different between study arms. Additional variables will include ICH volume, baseline GCS, age, IVH, and comorbidities, such as history of 
diabetes  or cardiovascular disease. Models will be compared using quasi -likelihood under the 
independence model criterion (QIC) for GEE.   11.2.3. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Severity Subgroup Analysis 
 
Regression of the treatment by subject severity. In subsequent analyses , the model in equation (1) will 
be modified to include multiple  baseline severity variables, such as NIHSS , IVH, ext ent of white matter 
disease, co -morbi dity, etc. The models will be compared using Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) to 
assess the best combination of predictors. The discriminatory ability of the models will be compared 
using the cross- validated area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve.
 
 
11.2.4. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Subgroup Analysis  
 
Summary statistics will be presented for the analysis sets and subgroups of gender, race, and ethnicity. 
In addition,  summary statistics wil l be examined for the subgroups of the patients who completed the 
study and by patients who discontinued the study early from the data available for these patients. The reasons for early discontinuation, including bleeding, loss to follow -up, and withdrawal of care, will be 
tabulated and recorded to help improve future recruitment and retention.  
 In addition, since data from the MISTIE phase 2 trial neither supports nor negates any significant 
difference in treatment efficacy by gender, race, or ethnicity, the analyses detailed in equations (1) to (4) above will be performed separately for males and females, by race (e.g. , Caucasian, African ) exp( ) ( ) (0 TRTX t t hi ⋅ + = φ γ λ
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-16 American, Asian, Native American, Pacific Islanders, etc.) , and by ethnicity (e.g. , Hispanic, non-
Hispanic) , where adequate data are available to determine if the treatment effect varies by these 
demographic categories, which would indicate the presence of effect modification by treatment. These 
sub-analyses are required by the NIH Policy and Guidelines on The Inclusion of Women and Minorities 
as Subjects in Clinical Research, amended October 2001. Note that the trial is not powered to see 
treatment effect modifications by these demographic categories.  
 
11.2.5. Additional Efficacy Analysis: Random Effects (Site Differences) Analyse s  
 
We will conduct analyses based on mixed models that assume random effects and their variance-covariance matrix structure, including models without random intercepts, and possibly random slopes, 
for hospital sites. 
 
 12.0. Interim Efficacy Analyses  
 
At the discretion of the DSMB , a formal interim efficacy analysis will occur after 375 subjects reach 180 
days of follow -up. These analyses will be based on approximate O'Brien -Fleming stopping boundaries 
for efficacy (defined below) .  
 In the MISTIE III design, subjects will be randomized to MIS+rt -PA versus medical management using 
a covariate- adaptive design described  previously . The trial will initially enroll ICH patients until either a 
maximum of 500  eligible  patients is accrued or the trial is stopped early for efficacy or futility using 
group sequential boundaries described below.  
 Analyses will be conducted after 375 and 500 patients, respectively, have 180- day post -stroke 
measurements. Efficacy stopping boundaries will be based on the error -spending (also called alpha -
spending) approach using the power family with exponent rho=3, which approximates the O’Brien-Fleming boundaries. The (one-sided) alpha allocated to the analysis (called the interim analysis) at 375 
participants is defined to be alpha
1 = 0.025(375/500)3 = 0.0105. All remaining alpha, i.e., (0.025 -alpha 1) 
is spent at the analysis with 500 participants (called the final analysis).  
 
13.0. Secondary Efficacy Outcomes Analyses  
 
13.1. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 1: Dichot omized eGOS UGR-US vs. LS -Death at 365 days 
 
Analyses will follow the methods as described in equations 1, 2, and 3 above (11.2. 1–11.2.5). 
Subordinate analyses will be adjusted for other clinically meaningful variables, in addition to the ones 
used in the covariate -adaptive randomization.   
 
13.1.1. Additional , Subordinate Efficacy Analysis 1: 365 -Day Ordinal eGOS  
 
Clot removal with MIS+rt -PA produces improvements in functional outcome assessed by alternative 
outcome measures such as the extended Glasgow Outcomes Scale (eGOS). Analyses: Ordinal, linear, 
logistic , and polytomous data models to examine other level s of the eGOS as part of Secondary  
Efficacy Analysis 1 will be similar to those presented above.  
 
 
 
 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-17 13.2. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 2 : All-Cause Mortality Longitudinally from Ictus to 365 Days 
 
Mortality at 365 days post ictus for MIS+rt -PA–treated subjects will be improved as compared to that of 
medical managed subjects. Comparison of t reatment groups will be examined using logistic regression 
analysis . 
 Mortality by group will be graphically displayed with Kaplan- Meier curves , and the stati stical association 
between treatment assignment and mortality will be assessed with the log- rank test. Multivariable Cox 
regression models will then be created to assess for treatment differences in the hazards of survival 
after adjusting for potential group imbalances in the covariates listed above. Finally, we will account for the effect of the decision to withdraw patient care on treatment differences in mortality.  
 As a secondary assessment, time to death within the one- year follow -up period will be compared 
between the MIS+rt -PA and medically  managed groups adjusting for appropriate baseline covariates. 
Provided the model assumptions are met, a proportional hazards regression model may be used for the analysis as described above.  
 13.2.1. Subordinate , Secondary Efficacy Analysis 2: Predictors of Mortality Analysis  
 
Additionally, survival models will be constructed to examine the mortality, morbidity , and ICU 
distributions for the MIS+rt -PA and medical management groups. Standard Cox proportional hazard 
models will initially be examined. These models are commonly written as:  
 
 
where 
λ0(t) is a non- parametric baseline hazard function, γ is again a vector of regression coefficients 
related to the X covariates , and φ is the parameter for the treatment effect of EVD  plus rt-PA on the 
hazard of death (mortality). This model may be extended by including time- dependent covariates and 
non-proportional hazards as deemed necessary through diagnostic checks. Observed mortality will also 
be compared with predicted mortality based on clinical presentation, overall , and by treatment group. 
Predicted mortality will be estimated. We will develop a severity model for predict ing mortality based on 
the Tuhrim model.2,7,8  
 13.3. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 3 : Relationship Between Clot Removal as an AUC that 
Estimates the Time -Weighted Clot Volume from Ictus to EOT as AUC Clot Exposure and 
Functional Outcome (Proportion 0 -3 mRS) 
 
EOT clot volume and/or percent EOT ICH reduction are related to mRS functional outc ome regardless 
of treatment. Based on the experience of the CLEAR  III trial, time -weighted average clot volumes will 
also be considered as a potential predictor of mRS outcome. The null hypothesis is that ICH clot 
reduction t ime course ( time weighted c lot volume, EOT clot volume, and/or percent EOT clot reduction) 
has no effect on functional outcome regardless of treatment.  
 In addition, since a “ plateau” or “floor” effect of clot resolution over time is likely, subsequent models to 
statistically test for these fixed effects will consider clot resolution in non -linear terms, such as linear or 
restricted cubic splines and other non -linear functions. Placement of knots for the splines will be based 
on the visual inspection of the average ICH trajectory over time. In addition, when using restricted cubic 
splines, we will consider placing the knots at equally spaced percentiles  of the “follow -up time” 
variable’s marginal distribution as recommended by Harrell .
9 Alternative methods that quantify the time-
weighted clot volume will also be considered in this model.7 

NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-18  
From the final, most parsimonious model, the empirical Bayes estimates of the random slopes will be 
computed to  be used in the next phase. The second- phase analysis will be based on multivariable 
logistic regression models that include the estimated clot resolution trajectories over time, the covariates listed in equation (1) above, and the dichotomized mRS at 365 days post -stroke as the 
outcome.  
 
13.4. Secondary Analysis 4: Patient Disposition  
 
13.4.a. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 4a: Home Days Over 365 Days’ Time from Ictus  
 
Multivariable linear regression models will be built on this continuous outcome of time to home.  
 
13.4.b. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 4b: Patient Location at 365 Days Post Ictus 
 
Multivariable logistic regression models wil l be built on the dic hotomized outcome of home plus 
rehabilitation locations  versus other locations for patients 365 days post -ictus.  Because variations in the 
more severe levels of mRS (4,5) and eGOS (US, LS, VS)  do not fully account for disposition, it will be 
assessed by adjusting for all covariates.  Where discrepant  conclusions about severe disability might be 
drawn from mRS, eGO S, or final location, all three descriptors will be presented for the severe levels . 
 
13.5. Secondary Analysis 5: 180-Day Efficacy  
 13.5.a. Secondary Analysis 5a: Dichotomized, Adjudicated, Cross- Sectional  mRS 0-3 vs. 4-6 
 
Analysis methods described in section 11.1 for the Primary Efficacy Analysis will be repeated using day 180 data.  
 
13.5.b. Dichotomized, adjudicated eGOS UGR-US vs. LS -Death 
 
Analysis methods described in section 13 .1 for t he Secondary Efficacy Analysis 1 will be repeated 
using day 180 data.  
 
13.5.1. Additional , Secondary Efficacy Analysis 5: Ordinal, Adjudicated mRS (0- 6) 
 
Analysis methods described in section 11.1.1. for the Subordinate Analysis (1) for the Primary Efficacy 
Analysis will be repeated using day 180 data. 
 
13.5.2. Additional , Secondary Efficacy Analysis 5: Ordinal, eGOS UGR-US vs. LS -Death 
 
Analysis methods described in section 13.1.1. for the Subordinate Analysis for Secondary Efficacy Analysis 1 will be repeated using day 180 data. 
 
13.5.3. Additional, Secondary Efficacy Analysis 5: Subordinate Analyses 2- 5 as Defined under 
the Primary Efficacy Analysis  
 
Analysis methods described in sections 11.2– 11.5 for the Primary Efficacy Analysis will be repeated 
using day 180 data.  
 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-19 13.6. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 6 : Type and Intensity of ICU Management  
 
MIS+rt-PA treatment of ICH leads to decreased intensity of hospital care compared to medical 
management . This includes fewer hospital days, ICU days, decreased use or duration of venti latory 
management, decreased intensity of ICP management, decreased BP support, decreased 
osmotherapy, shorter periods of CSF drainage, lower utilization of ventriculoperitoneal shunts, and 
fewer general critical care complications. Analyses: Linear, log- linear, and logistic data models will be 
similar to those presented above.  
 
13.7. Secondary Efficacy Analysis 7: EQ -VAS and EQ -5D 
 
Clot removal with MIS+rt -PA leads to improved health- related QOL and will be assessed by subject and 
surrogate QoL domains through the EQ -VAS and EQ -5D. 
 
14.0. Safety Analyses 
 
14.1. Mortality and Safety Events at 30 Days Post Randomization  
 
The primary safety measures for this study are symptomatic intracranial bleeding, infection, and 30 -day 
mortality. The safety thresholds for these measures have been set as: 30- day mortality >60%, a 
MIS+rt -PA–related symptomatic bleeding rate >25% (occurring during active treatment or during the 72 
hours after treatment will be monitored), first -week operative death rate >10%, and a procedure- related 
infection rate >15% (over the initial 30 days).  Bleeding will be further characterized as during the 
exposure to dosing of alteplase and the subsequent 72 hours. Comparisons to medical subjects in the 
same time frame will b e made. Total SAEs at 30 and 180 days , as well as summary of AEs and SAEs 
by M edDRA code and grouped by organ system , will be compared by treatment groups.  
 
Statistical Hypothesis: Early use of MIS+rt -PA for 3 days for the treatment of ICH is as safe as 
medically  managed ICH, measured by rates of procedure- related mortality, rebleeding, and infection 
within 30 days post -randomization. The null hypothesis is: Early use of MIS+rt -PA is worse than 
medical management for a specific safety measure. 
 
Analysis: The number of SAEs will be tabulated by SAE type post -stroke for the total population as 
well as by treatment group, with particular emphasis placed on group differences at 30 days post -
randomization. Any treatment group differences in SAEs enumerated for interim analyses will remain 
blinded to investigators associated with this study. Unmasked results (e.g. , group A versus  B, where 
the labels  “A” and “B” are randomly assigned to the surgical and medically  managed groups) will be 
made available only during the closed sessions of DSMB meetings.  
 
Methods of non -inferiority will be used to statistically determine if the proportions of a particular type of 
SAE, where there are adequate data for a particular type,  are not substantially different  among both 
treatment groups in order to test the hypothesis that MIS+rt -PA is as safe as standard medical 
management. Non- inferiority testing deems the rates of any SAE event in the MIS+rt -PA group to not 
be substantially greater than the SAE event rate in the standard medical management group as long as the group difference in this rate is statistically within some pre -specified tolerance. For this trial, the 
tolerance value will be defined as 10% for the primary adverse events of 30- day mortality, rebleeding, 
and infect ion, and 5% for first -week operative mortality. Thus, the rates of adverse events seen in the 
MIS group can be higher than those in the medically  managed group, and yet still be considered not 
substantially different as long as the upper one -sided 95% CIs on rate differences are ≤10% or ≤5%, 
depending on the safety measure.  
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-20  
Since data from the MISTIE phase 2 trial neither supports nor negates any significant difference in SAE 
event rates by gender, race, or ethnicity, the non -inferiority analyses described above will be performed 
separately for subpopulations within each of these demographics  where there are adequate data 
available.  
 14.2. Total SAEs at 30 Days  
 
Mortality attributed to MIS+rt -PA treatment plus disease- associated adverse events are similar  to the 
morbidity and mortality attributed to medical management in the first 30 days. Analyses: For initial 
evaluations, differences between the MIS+rt -PA intervention and medical management groups will be 
examined using a logistic regression model.  
 
14.3. Summary of Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events by MedDRA Code and Grouped 
by Organ System  
 All AEs and SAEs are summarized by type and by treatment group in terms of frequency of the event, 
number of subjects having the event, timing relative to randomization, severity (mild, moderate, 
severe), and relatedness to the study treatment (definitely, probably, possibly, definitely not). At the end 
of the study, the cumulative incidences of these events will be compared between the two treatment 
groups using Fisher’s exact test. Statistically significant differences between the treatment arms will be 
assessed after adjustments for multiplicity  in the case of individual SAE/ AE diagnoses and MedDRA 
codes . Additionally, generalized linear mixed models for binary data will be used to examine AE and 
SAE probabilities between treatment groups while accounting for potential confounders and site-
clustering effects. 
 
14.4. Proposed Interval Safety Monitoring  
 
The DCC will generate periodic DSMB reports . (We assum e the total number of subjects enrolled per 
six months in a single treatment group will be approximately 30; thus, eight semi -annual looks at the 
data will be suggested to the DSMB. As usual, though, periods for reporting will be discussed and 
finalized at  the initial DSMB meeting .) Each report will provide cumulative summary statistics on 
enrollment; subject status in the study (e.g., number completed at 3- month, 6-month, 9- month, and 12-
month assessments); baseline characteristics; protocol violations;  safety data, including AEs and SAEs 
by AE code, severity, and relatedness to the study  medication; outcomes data (if coinciding with an 
interim analysis —also to be discussed and finalized at the initial DSMB meeting); and data 
management/quality information (e.g., timeliness and completeness of data entry by the clinical  sites 
via the MISTIE III electronic data capture (EDC) system; number of queries generated and resolved). 
Two reports will be generated : an open report with combined data from both treatment groups, and a 
closed report for the DSMB voting committee members with data provided by blinded treatment group 
(noted as A and B). The outline of these proposed DSMB reports will be included in the Manual of 
Operations and Procedures prepared by the CCC. In an interval as yet to be determined (monthly , 
quarterly , or semi -annually ), the CCC will also generate a Safety  Monitoring Report to be distributed to 
the DSMB. This report contains only enrollment,  subject study status, safety, and data quality 
information. The trial’s Executive Committee will also receive the Safety Monitoring Reports. The DSMB 
will have discretion to recommend stopping the trial early if safety concerns become substantial . Safety 
stopping rules for each of the primary safety outcomes will be developed and used to help the DSMB make its safety assessments .  
 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-21 15.0. Tertiary ( Exploratory /Sensitivity)  Analyses 
 
15.1. Functional Status  at 180 and 365 Days Post Ictus 
 
Clot removal with MIS+rt -PA treatment produces improvements in functional outcome will be  assessed 
by alternative outcome measures such as :  
 15.1.a. Glasgow Outcome Scale  
15.1.b. Barthel Index  
15.1.c. NIHSS  
15.1.d. MMSE  
 Analysis methods will include l inear, logistic , and polytomous data models similar to those pr esented 
above.  
 
15.2. Quality of Life at 180 and 365 Days Post Ictus  
 
Clot removal with MIS+rt -PA leads to improved health- related QoL and will be assessed by subject and 
surrogate QoL domains through the:  
 
15.2.a. Stroke Impact Scale 15.2. b. PBSI  
15.2. c. Personal Heal th Utility Assessment Interview 
15.2. d. CES -D 
15.2.e. EQ dimensions individually assessed 15.2.f. Home days  
15.2.g. Patient location including proportion of days in acute care, home, rehabilitation,  long- term care 
facilities , and in vegetative condition.   
 
Analyses methods will include linear, logistic , and polytomous data models similar to those presented 
above.  
 
15.3 Cost-Benefit Model  
 
Cost-benefit analyses will be performed using data on median hospital stay, patient disposition 
categories  (such as home, long -term ambulatory and nursing care, death), time to return home, and 
cost of procedures and hospital stay. These analyses will be performed with respect to both 180- and 
365-day periods post -stroke. For cost -benefit analyses, the cost of ICU and the rest of the hospital stay, 
including the cost of MIS+rt -PA, will be considered. Cost data will be obtained from the literature. The 
overall amount for both treatments will be assessed, and the difference in dollars will be calculated.     
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
NIH/NINDS    
Johns Hopkins University    PI: Daniel F. Hanley, MD  
   
MISTIE III 
Minimally Invasive Surgery Plus rt -PA for ICH Evacuation Phase 3 
 
  Page 22-22 16.0. References 
 
1. Hanley DF, Thompson RE, Muschelli J, et al. Safety and efficacy of minimally invasive surgery 
plus alteplase in intracerebral haemorrhage evacuation (MISTIE): a randomised, controlled, 
open- label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Neurol 2016;15(12):1228 -1237. 
2. Hanley DF, Lane K, McBee N, et al. Thrombolytic removal of intraventricular haemorrhage in 
treatment of severe stroke: results of the randomised, multicentre, multiregion, placebo-
controlled CLEAR III trial. The Lancet 2017;389:603- 11. 
3. van der Laan MJ, Gruber S. Targeted minimum loss based estimation of causal effects of multiple time point interventions. Int J Biostat 2012;8(1):1370.  
4. Permutt T. Sensitivity analysis for missing data in regulatory submissions. Statistics in medi cine 
2016;35:2876 -9. 
5. Diciccio TJ, Efron B, Hall P, et al. Bootstrap confidence intervals . Statistical Science  
1996;11(3):189 -228. 
6. National Research Council Panel on Handling Missing Data in Clinical Trials. The prevention 
and treatment of missing data in clinical trials . Washington , DC: National Academies Press 
(US); 2010.  
7. Tuhrim S. Intracerebral hemorrhage—improving outcome by reducing volume? N Engl J Med 
2008;358(20):2174– 6. 
8. Tuhrim S, Horowitz DR, Sacher M, Godbold JH. Volume of ventricular blood is an important 
determinant of outcome in supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care Med 1999;27:617 -
621. 
9. Harrell F. Regression modeling strategies: with applications to linear models, logistic regression, 
and survival analysis. New York: Springer ; 2001.  
 