Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 1 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
Study Protocol  
Exploratory evaluation of the potential for  
long-term retention of G adolinium  in the bones  
of patients who have received  
Gadolinium based Contrast  Agents  
according to their medical history . 
 
A multicentr e, retrospective and prospectively 
interventional , exploratory phase  IV study  
EudraCT No .: 2012 -001439 -30 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001  
 
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
 
 
Ecron Acunova GmbH  
Hahnstrasse 70  
D-60528 Frankfurt/Main  
Germany  
Confidentiality Statement  
The information in this d ocument is confidential and proprietary to Ecron Acunova GmbH (EAG).  It is 
understood that the information will not be disclosed to any person or institution other than investiga -
tors or consultants for review, their staff, applicable Ethics Committee(s)/I nstitutional Review Board(s), 
regulatory authorities and study  patient s without express authorisation by EAG . 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 2 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
Title Exploratory evaluation of the potential for long -term retention 
of Gadolinium ( Gd) in the bones of patients who have 
received Gadolinium  based  Contrast Agents  (GdCAs)  
according to their medical history . 
Study no.  ALS-Gd64/001  
EudraCT no.  2012 -001439 -30 
Clinical phase  Post Authori sation  Study / Phase IV  
Active ingredients of  
product s under evalua tion Gadobutrol, Gadodia mide, Gadopentetic acid, Gadoteric 
acid, Gadoversetamide, and Gadoxetic acid  
Study objective(s)  Primary objective  
To prospectively explore the potential for long -term retention 
of Gd in bone s in patients  who have received a single dose 
of GdCA or m ultiple doses of the same GdCA, with 
moderate or severe renal impairment or stable  normal  renal 
function ( estimated glomerular filtration rate  > 60 
ml/min/1.73 m2) at the time of GdCA injection.  
Secondary objectives  
 To evaluate  skin samples for concentration  of Gd 
 To evaluate bone and skin samples for 
concentrations of calcium, phosphorus, s odium, iron, 
zinc and potassium  
 To evaluate skin samples for any 
dermatopathological changes that may be associated 
with Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis ( NSF) 
 To describe potential co -factors for NSF, 
susceptibility fac tors and drug treatments with 
potenti al impact on bone metabolism  
Methods  Gd concentration in bone ( trabecular and cortical ) and skin 
tissue will be analysed by inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry (ICP -MS). Other analytes (calcium, 
phosphorus, sodium, iron, zinc and potassium) will be 
analysed also by ICP -MS or alternatively (if this method is 
not satisfactory during method set -up) by induc tively coupled 
plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP -AES).  
Histopathology of skin samples will be evaluated by routine 
light microscopy method s, including immunostaining for 
CD34, factor XIIIa and CD68.   
Design  Multicent re, retrospective and prospectively interventional , 
exploratory.  
Previous treatment  
(test group only)  Single doses : 0.025  mmol per kg body weight  for Gadoxetic 
acid and 0.1  mmo l per kg body weight  for all other GdCA s. 
Multiple doses : each dose (volume) administered at each 
time point of dosing.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 3 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
Population  Study population consists of patients undergoing an 
orthopaedic procedure , provided that the required amount of 
trans -operat ory collection of bone and skin as defined per -
protocol is feasible . All inclusion criteria and no exclusion 
criteria should be  met (please refer to section s 5.1.3 , 4.1 and 
4.2). Patients must have received GdCA at least 1 month 
prior to surgery (test grou p). Additionally, a group of patients 
undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery who have not 
received GdCA  will be enrolled  (control group) .  
Number of patients  At least 99 evaluable patients  will be included.  
Number of centres  At least 35 centres in Am erica , Europe  and Asia . 
Statistics  
 Sample Size:   
There are six groups for active GdCA ingredients 
Gadobutrol, Gadodiamide, Gadopentetic acid, Gadoteric 
acid, Gadoversetamide, and Gadoxetic acid.  
In each group, three categories of renal function (stable  
normal renal function (eGFR > 60 ml/min/1.73 m2), impaired 
renal function (eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73 m2 (severe) and ≥30 
to <=60 ml/min/1.73 m2 (moderate)) and two subgroups of 
dosing of GdCA (single  / multiple) are to be evaluated.  
 
Per active GdCA ingredien t the recruitment targets are 
defined as follows  
 5 patients for stable normal renal function (eGFR > 
60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and single dose  
 at least 3 patients and up to 5 patients for stable 
normal renal function and multiple dose s  
 5 patients for impaired r enal function (eGFR <=60 
ml/min/1.73 m2) and single dose  
 up to 5 patients for impaired renal function (eGFR 
<=60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and multiple  dose s. For 
Gadobutrol and Gadoteric acid, at least 3 patients 
are required. For Gadodiamide , Gadopentetic  acid, 
Gadoversetamide, and Gadoxetic acid, there is no 
requirement to reach a specific number of patients to 
achieve study completion.  
 
The total number of patients enrolled in these groups will be 
at least 84.  
The number of subgroups in the GdCA -naïve population is 3  
according to renal function category (i.e. severe or moderate 
impairment, and stable normal  renal function) . Five patients 
will be enrolled per each sub -group. Therefore, the total 
number of GdCA -naïve patients enrolled will be at least 15 .  
Consequently, a minimum of 99 patients in total shall be 
included in the study.  
 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 4 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
Statistical analysis  Primary and secondary variables will be analysed 
descriptively. No formal hypothesis testing is planned. All 
statistical tables will compare all GdCA groups pooled as 
well as each GdCA group separately versus the control 
group. They will be further stratified according to renal 
function category ( 3 groups), single  / multiple doses of all 
patients (2 groups), and the combination of “renal function ” 
and “ single  / multiple doses”. The elapsed time from dosing 
of GdCA until surgery will be classif ied and used for 
stratification. Safety data will be tabula ted. No further 
subgroup analyse s are planned . 
 
Interim analysis  
 An interim analysis will be carried ou t on all patients enrolled 
in the single dose subgroups for Gadobutrol, Gadoteric acid, 
Gadodiamide, and G adopentetic acid once at least three 
patients have been recruited to the single -dose  subgroups 
for the 4 agents . 
The descriptive  analysis encompasses  the evaluation of Gd 
concentration in trabecular and cortical bone (primary 
analysis) and the Gd concentration in skin (secondary 
analysis) within in the subgroups defined for evaluation 
above.  
Planned time schedule  First patient first visit (FPFV):  March 2013 
Last patient last visit (LPLV) :  October 2017 . 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 5 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
RESPONSIBILITIES  
Co-ordinating Investigator:  Professor Christoph Lohmann, MD  
(applicable in multicentre studies)  Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg A. ö. R.  
 Orthopädie - Operatives Zentrum  
 Leipzigerst r. 44 
 39120 Magdeburg , Germany  
 Tel.: +49 (0) 391 67 -14000  
 Fax: +49 (0) 391 -67 14006  
 e-Mail: christoph.lohmann@med.ovgu.  
Sponsor's Responsible  
Representative:  Anders Malm  
 Managing Director Ecron Acunova GmbH  
 Ecron Acunova  GmbH  
 Hahnstrasse 70  
 60528 F rankfurt, Germany  
 Tel.: +49 (0) 69 -66 80 30 -0 
 Fax: +49 (0) 69 -66 80 30 -29 
  e-Mail: anders.malm @ecronacunova.com  
Program Manager:  Julia Flugel , MSc   
 Senior Project Manager  
 Ecron Acunova GmbH  
 Hahnstrasse 70  
 60528 Frankfurt, Germany  
 Tel.: +49 ( 0) 69 66 80 30 -0 
 Fax.:  +49 ( 0) 69 66 80 30 -29 
 e-Mail: julia.flugel @ecronacunova.com  
Biometrician:  Ernst Blümner, MSc Math , MD 
 Director Biometrics  
 Ecron  Acunova GmbH  
 Hahnstrasse 70  
 60528 Frankfurt , Ger many  
 Tel.: +49 (0 ) 69 66 80 30 -0 
 Fax.:  +49 (0 ) 69 66 80 30 -29 
 e-Mail: ernst.bluemner @ecronacunova.com  
Medical Advisor &  
Safety Lead :  Luis Mendoza Burgos , MD  
 Head of  Pharmaco vigilance and  
 Medical Services  
 Ecron Acunova GmbH  
 Hahnstrasse 70  
 60528 Fra nkfurt, Germany  
 Tel.: +49 (0) 69 66 80 30 -0 
 Fax.:  +49 (0) 69 66 80 30 -29 
 e-Mail: luis.mendozaburgos @ecronacunova.com  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 6 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
Coordinator of Central  
Histopathology Laboratory:  Shawn Cowper , MD  
 Associate Professor of Dermatology and of 
 Pathology  
 Yale Dermatopa thology  
 15 York Street, LMP 5031  
 New Haven, CT 06520, USA 
 Tel.: +1 (203) 785 -3524  
 Fax.:  +1 (203) 737 -4307  
 e-Mail: shawn.cowper@yale.edu  
Coordinator of Central  
Bioanalytical Laboratory:  Ayaaz Hussain Khan , PhD 
 Senior Vice President -  BA/BE  
 Manipal AcuNova  
 Mobius Towers, SJR i -Park, EPIP, Whitefield  
 Bangalore, 560 066 , India  
 Tel.: +91 (080) 6691 5725  
 Fax.:  +91 (080) 6691 5719  
 e-Mail: ayaaz.khan@ecronacunova.com  
A complete list of all participating centres , investigators (including names, titles, addresses 
and telephone numbers) , and all required signa ture documents, will be filed in the trial 
master file (TMF).  
 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 7 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
SERIOUS ADVERSE EVEN T REPORTING  
All Serious Adverse Events ( SAEs ) must be reported immediately (within one working day) 
to: 
Pharmacovigilance Team  
Ecron  Acunova  
Hahnstrasse 70  
D-60528 Frankfurt/M.  
Tel.: +49 (01520) 166 80 36  
Fax.:  +49 (69) 66 80 3 0-57 
e-Mail: pharmacovigilance@ecronacunova.com  
SAE reporting will be covered on a 24 hours / 7 days basis . 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 8 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
SIGNATURES  
The signatories are obliged to comply in all respects with  
- this clinical study  protocol  
- the standards of Good Clinical Practice  (GCP)  as defined in the "Note for Good Clinical 
Practice" (CPMP/ICH 135/95) and related guidelines  
- the "Declaration of Helsinki" current valid version according to applicable national regula -
tory and legal requirements  
- all applicable regulatory requirements including national drug and data protection law s 
 
 
Co-ordinating  
Investigator   
Magdeburg    
 Place / date   Prof. Christoph Lohmann, MD  
 
Responsible 
Representative  
(Sponsor)  . 
 
Frankfurt a. M    
 Place  / date   Anders Malm  
 
 
 
Program Manager   
 
 
Frankfurt a. M.    
 Place / date   Julia Flugel , MSc  
 
 
 
Biometrician  . 
 
Frankfurt a.  M   
 Place / date   Ernst Blümner, MSc Math, MD  
 
 
Medical Advisor & 
Safety Lead   
 
Frankfurt a.  M.   
 Place / date   Luis Me ndoza Burgos , MD  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 9 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
DECLARATION OF THE PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR   
I have read this study protocol and agree that it contains all the information required to con -
duct the study. I agree to conduct the study as set forth in this protocol. In particular, I agree 
to adhere to the moral, ethical and scientific principles governing clinical research as set forth 
in the current , valid  versions of the "Declaration of Helsinki" , all applicable national regulatory 
and legal requirements , and the guidelines for Good Clini cal Practice.  
 
Name  Affiliation / Address  Dated Signature  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 10 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
A B B R E V I AT I O N S  
AE Adverse Event  
C Celsius  
CHMP  Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use  
CKD -EPI Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration  
CPMP  Comm ittee for Proprietary Medicinal Products  
CRA  Clinical Research Associate  
CRF Case Report Form  
CRO  Contract  Research Organisation  
CV Coefficient of Variation  
DCF Data Clarification Form  
EAG Ecron Acunova GmbH (CRO)  
eCRF  electronic Case Report Form  
eGFR  estimated Glomerular Filtration Rate  
EMA  European Medicines Agency  
ESRD  End Stage Renal Disease  
FAS Full Analysis Population  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  
FPFV  First Patient First Visit  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
Gd Gadolinium  
GdCA  Gadolinium based Contrast  Agent  
GFR  Glomerular Filtration Rate  
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation  
ICP-AES Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy  
ICP-MS Inductively coupled plasma  mass spectrometry  
IEC Independent Ethics Committee  
IF Investigator File  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
i.v. Intravenous  
IWRS  Interactive Web Response System  
LPLV  Last Patient Last Visit  
LLOQ  Lower Limit of Quantification  
MAH  Marketing Authorisation Holder  
MDRD  Modification of Diet in Renal Disease  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 11 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for R egulatory Activities  
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
N Number of non -missing observations  
NSF Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis  
PP Per Protocol  
PT Preferred Term  
RDC  Remote Data Capture  
SADR  Serious Adverse Drug Reaction  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
SAP Statistica l Analysis Plan  
SAS Statistical Analysis Software  
SmPC  Summary of Product Characteristics  
SOC  System Organ Class  
SOP  Standard Operating Procedure  
TMF Trial Master File  
V Visit 
WHO -DD World Health Organization – Drug Dictionary  
 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 12 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1 Introduction  15 
1.1 Background  15 
1.2 Risk-benefit assessment  16 
2 Study Objectives and Purpose  18 
3 Overall study design and p lan description  18 
3.1 Discussion of study design  23 
4 Selection of study population  24 
4.1 Patient inclusion criteria  24 
4.2 Patient ex clusion criteria  25 
4.3 Patient withdrawal criteria  26 
5 Study treatments. Products and Interventions  27 
5.1 Products administered  27 
5.1.1 Products administered prior to enrolment  27 
5.1.1.1  Products under evaluation  27 
5.1.1.2  Dosage of products under evaluation  27 
5.1.1.3  Dosing frequency  27 
5.1.1.4  Route of administration  28 
5.1.2  Products administered after enrolment  28 
5.1.3  Prospective study interventions  28 
5.2 Method of assig ning patients to treatment groups  29 
5.3 Selection of dose and timing for each patient  29 
5.4 Supply, packaging and labelling  29 
5.5 Blinding and randomisation  29 
5.6 Prior and concomitant therapy  30 
5.6.1  Prohibited previous treatments  30 
5.6.2  Admissible concomitant treatments  30 
5.6.3  Prohibited co ncomitant treatments  30 
5.7 Treatment compliance  30 
5.8 Management of drug overdose  30 
6 Variables and methods  30 
6.1 Evaluation  30 
6.1.1  Primary evaluation variable(s)  30 
6.1.2  Secondary evaluation variable(s)  30 
6.1.3  Evaluation methods – Bioanalytics  31 
6.1.3.1  Sample collection and handling:  31 
6.1.3.2  Method description  31 
6.1.3.3  Validation protocol  32 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 13 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
6.1.4  Evaluation methods – Histopathology  32 
6.1.4.1  Sample collection and handling:  32 
6.1.4.2  Method description  32 
6.1.4.3  Reporting of results  32 
6.1.5  GFR estimate  32 
6.2 Safety  33 
6.2.1  Vital signs  33 
6.2.2  Laboratory variables  33 
6.2.3  Additional safety assessments  33 
6.2.4  Adverse events  33 
6.2.4.1  Definition of adverse events  33 
6.2.4.2  Assessment of adverse events  34 
6.2.4.3  Follow -up of adverse events  35 
6.2.4.4  Documentation and reporting of adverse events  35 
7 Study conduct  36 
7.1 Flow -chart  36 
7.2 Evaluations and procedures by visits  37 
7.2.1  Screening Visit (Visit 0)  37 
7.2.2  Baseline examination (Visit 1)  37 
7.2.3  Scheduled orthopaedic surgical procedure (Visit 2)  38 
7.2.4  Follow -up visit 1 (Visit 3)  38 
7.2.5  Follow -up visit 2 (Visit 4)  38 
7.2.6  2nd surgery baseline examination (Visit 5) – if applicable  39 
7.2.7  2nd orthopaedic surgical procedure (Visit 6) – if applicable  39 
7.2.8  Follow -up visit 3 (Visit 7) – if applicable  39 
7.2.9  Follow -up visit 4 (Visit 8) – if applicable  40 
7.3 Duration of the study  40 
7.3.1  Planned durati on for the individual patient  40 
7.3.2  Premature termination  40 
8 Statistics  41 
8.1 Statistical and analytical plans  41 
8.1.1  Analysis p opulations  41 
8.1.2  Primary and secondary analyses  41 
8.1.3  Analysis of safety data  43 
8.1.4  Missing data  43 
8.1.5  Multicentre study  43 
8.1.6  Subgroup analyses  43 
8.1.7  Patient data listings  43 
8.1.8  Deviations from the planned statistical analysis  43 
8.1.9  Interim analys is 43 
8.1.10  Software used for statistical analysis  44 
8.1.11  Determination of sample size  44 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 14 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
8.2 Data management  45 
9 Data handling and  data quality assurance  45 
9.1 Documentation  45 
9.1.1  Patient identification list  45 
9.1.2  Source data and patient records  45 
9.1.3  Case  report forms  45 
9.2 Direct access to source data/documents  45 
9.3 Monitoring  46 
9.4 Quality assurance  46 
10 Ethical, legal and administ rative aspects  46 
10.1  General considerations  46 
10.2  Approval procedures  47 
10.3  Protocol amendments  47 
10.4  Informed consent  47 
10.5  Confidentiality  47 
10.6  Liability and insurance  48 
10.7  Publication and use of study findings  48 
10.8  Archiving of study records  48 
11 List of references  49 
12 Appendices  51 
 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 15 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
1 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Background  
Rationale  for the Study  
This study was requested by the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use  (CHMP) 
of the European Medicines Agency (EMA). The potential for long -term retention of Gd in hu -
man bone and skin after administration of GdCAs and co-factors that may increase the risk 
of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis ( NSF) warrant further study. The an alysis of bone and skin 
samples from patients undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery was recommended  
initially  and has been widened to  other suitable orthopaedic surgeries . 
Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis  
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis was first reported in 2000 by Cowper et al . (1), who noted that 
since 1997, 15 dialysis patients presented with a disease that closely resembled sclero myx-
oedema, yet had significant enough clinical and histopathological differences to warrant its 
designation as a new clinicopathological entity. A possible association between the admin -
istration of G dCAs to patients with severe kidney impairment and NSF was first reported by 
Grobner in 2006 (2;3). NSF has been diagnosed in particular in patients with severe renal im -
pairment  (estimated glomerular filtration rate  (eGFR)  < 30 mL/  min/1.73 m²). Patients with 
acute renal insufficiency due to hepato -renal syndrome and perioperative liver 
transplantation patients  were also implicated  (for review see  (4;5)). 
Signs and symptoms of NSF may include progressive thickening and induration of the skin, 
contractures around the joints impairing mobility, swelling, redness, pruritus, and a burning 
sensation  (4;6). On a microscopic level increase d skin cellularity with fibroblast -like cell s and 
collagen deposition w ere demonstrated  (4;7;8) . Systemic involvement of organs , including  
the lung s and heart may also progress rapidly, ultimately resulting in death  in approximately 
5% of patients  (4;5). 
Risk  Factors in the Development of NSF  
Although the precise pathogenesis of NSF remains unknown, its causes are likely to be mul -
tifactorial. Risk factors include the type and dosage of GdCAs administered (9), repeated 
dosing , high cumulative dose (10), and degree  of renal impairment (e. g. stage 4 or 5 chronic 
renal failure) at the time of contrast administration (9;11)  (for review see (12)). 
NSF patients frequently have numerous co -morbidit ies and many co -factors may contribute 
to development of NSF. Among the se, coagulation abnormalities , history of deep vein throm -
bosis  (13), systemic and pre-existing inflammation  (due to  major surgery, infection, vascular 
events, etc.) (11), erythropoietin administration  (10;14) , hypothyroi dism (13), and disorders of 
iron metabolism  (15) have been evaluat ed. Additionally , high serum c alcium levels (10) and 
high serum phosphate  levels (10;16) , renal dialysis equipme nt, unidentified microorganisms 
or pathogens, and unidentified “triggers” within the body  have been reported as contributing 
factors . 
Deposition of Gd in Skin and B one  
Abraham et al . (17) reported in 2008 that Gd was detected in skin lesions of 20 patients with 
NSF, whereas Gd was undetectable in a NSF -negative patient. Skin biopsies were obtained 
from 16 days to 1991 days after Gd contrast administration .  
Gibby et al . (18) directly measured Gd in samples taken from surgical bone specimens 
removed from patients undergoing hip arthroplasty between 3 and 8 d ays after GdCA 
administration. White et al . (19) confirmed that Gd deposition reached measurable levels in 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 16 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
bone within days following administration  of GdCAs. Weinmann  et al . (20) analysed 
specimens of cranial bone obtained 1 to 21 days after GdCA administration and observed 
0.1 to 0.8 µg Gd/g dry weight in specimens versus less than 0.1 µg Gd/g dry weight in 
untreated control specimens.  Darrah et al . (21) reported measurable retention of Gd in the 
femoral heads of patients who had received  GdCA up to 8 years prior to  bone sampling.  
Clinical and Toxicological Significance of Gd in Bone  
A clinical study aimed at the assessment of Gd retained in healthy bone after GdCA expo -
sure may give data on the quantification of the retained Gd. However, similarly as in the case 
of the Gibby (18), White (19) and Darrah (21) studies, such a study will neither  be able to 
give information on the form of Gd , nor will it yield any information about potential future re -
lease, and its kinetics. No information will be obtained on a potential link between Gd storage 
and the development of NSF.  
There are no data as yet, showing whether there is any clinical significance  / toxicity of po -
tential release of Gd from bones. Such release would probably occur  over years and in small 
amounts per time unit (e.g. per year), paralleling the slow processes of bone deminer -
alisation (e.g. osteoporosis, or, potentially, of renal osteodystrophy). However, this result 
does not provide  information on the clinical and toxicological s ignificance of the retained Gd. 
There also are no data regarding what threshold (if any) of gadolinium released from bone 
tissue might be necessary to trigger NSF in patients.  
While the precise pathogenesis of NSF has not been definitively determined, none of th e cur -
rent hypotheses are premised on any direct link between the long -term retention of Gd in 
bone tissue translating into an increased risk of NSF in patients who subsequently develop 
severe renal impairment. Indeed, if retained Gd in bone were  a long-term risk factor or more 
direct trigger for NSF, then new cases of NSF would be expected among the many patients 
with renal impair ment  who received GdCAs and did not initially develop NSF . On the con -
trary, the very low incidence of NSF since 2007  (22) suggests that contributing factors other 
than retention of Gd in bone  are important. The virtual disappearance of new onset cases of 
NSF in recent years is hypothesi sed to be a result of the label changes and risk management 
activities of MAHs.  
Therefore, this study shall assess the potential of long -term retention of Gd in  patients with 
varying degrees of renal function, who have received single or multiple doses of GdCAs for 
diagnostic imaging purposes. Various linear and macrocyclic chelates of GdCAs will be 
studied, and the concentration of Gd in bone will be compared wi th respective concentrations 
of Gd in skin tissue and correlated with histopathological changes of the skin.  
 
1.2 Risk -benefit assessment  
This study may contribute further insight into the long -term retention of Gd in human tissues.  
In this study, the administ ration of GdCA to study patients must have occurred at least one 
month prior to a planned surgery, and all study evaluations will be performed retrospectively 
with regard to GdCA administration. Therefore, the administration of GdCAs does not 
constitute a study -related risk.  
The surgical intervention from which bone specimens will be obtained ( i.e. an orthopaedic 
procedure provided that the required amount of trans -operatory collection of bone and skin 
as defined per -protocol is feasible  and all inclusion c riteria and no exclusion criteria are met ) 
will take place for reasons unrelated to the conduct of the study. Two specimens will be 
taken from surgically removed bone, and such harvesting does not constitute any additional 
risk to the patient. The skin bio psy is a study initiated intervention and may carry minor risks, 
including infection, persistent bleeding, or scar formation at the biopsy site.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 17 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
Overall, the risk -benefit assessment for the study is considered positive, based on the new 
data to be gained i n relation to the non -significant added risk to patients.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 18 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
2 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSE  
Primary objective:  
To prospectively explore the potential for long -term retention of Gd in bone s in patients who 
have received a single dose of GdCA or multiple doses o f the same GdCA, with moderate or 
severe renal impairment or stable  normal  renal function (eGFR > 60 ml/min/1.73 m2) at the 
time of GdCA injection.   
 
Secondary objectives : 
 To evaluate skin samples f or concentration of Gadolinium  
 To evaluate bone and skin samples for concentrations of calcium, phosphorus, s o-
dium, iron, zinc and potassium  
 To evaluate skin samples for any dermatopatholo gical changes that may be associ -
ated with NSF 
 To describe potential co -factors for NSF, susceptibility factors and drug tre atments 
with potential impact on bone metabolism  
3 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN DESCRIPTION  
This is a multicentr e, retrospective , prospectively interventional  and exploratory , post authori -
sation study which will be conduct ed globally evaluating  the potenti al for long -term retention 
of Gd in bones of patients who received single or multiple doses  of GdCA s. The study is 
retrospective with respect to GdCA administration  (no GdCA will be administered to patients 
during the study by the investigator),  prospectiv e with respect to bone sample collection 
(taken from surgically removed bone) and both, prospective and interventional regarding skin 
sample collection.  Skin sampling is required for both dermatopathological assessment and 
quantification of Gd.  
Patients aged at least 18 years  (or older if required by local regulations)  who are scheduled 
for an orthopaedic surgery procedure (provided that the required amount of trans -operatory 
collection of bone and skin as defined in section 5.1.3 is feasible  and all inclus ion and no 
exclusion criteria are met ) and agree to provide bone and skin sample s at the time of the 
procedure will be  included in the study after they sign a written informed consent  form. In this 
study , a minimum  of 99 evaluable patients  will be enrolled , from which at least 84 patients 
have received GdCA (test group)  and 15 patients have never received GdCA (control group) 
prior the orthopaedic surgery procedure . 
The product s assessed are GdCAs which include  one of the active ing redients Gadobutrol, 
Gado diamide, Gadopentetic acid, Gadoteric aci d, Gadoversetamide or Gadoxetic  acid. 
Figure 1 and Table 1 describe enrolment targets per GdCA and the stratification of patients 
that will be prospectively controlled (see 5.5).  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 19 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 
 
Figure 1 : Target number of patien ts per GdCA  
For the test group, GdCA  products must have been administered intravenously at least  one 
month prior to the orthopaedic surgery procedure . Only patients for whom information 
regarding the active ingredient of the specific GdCA, the name of the product, the  date(s) of 
administration and the dose (s) of the administered GdCA are available will be enrolled . 
Patients who received GdCAs containing any other active ingredient will not be enrolled . 
Furthermore, documentation of  stable renal function prior to  administration of the GdCA is 
required, and renal function must have been assessed  at least once within approximately 
3 months  prior to  GdCA injection . 
In the group of patients who have received GdCA  (test group) , at least 13 patients will be 
include d per GdCA  active ingredient group  for Gadodiamide, Gadopentetic acid, 
Gadoversetamide, and Gadoxetic acid and at least 16 patients will be included per GdCA 
active ingredient group for Gadobutrol and Gadoteric acid  with the following  distribution:  

Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 20 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
Table  1: Target number of patients per GdCA and renal function status  
GdCA  Impaired renal function (at 
least moderate impairment, 
eGFR ≤ 60 ml/min)  Stable n ormal  
renal function  
Single  
dose  Multiple dose  Single dose  Multiple dose  
Gadobutrol  5 3 to 5*  5 3 to 5** 
Gadoteric acid  5 3 to 5*  5 3 to 5** 
Gadodiamide  5 0 to 5*  5 3 to 5** 
Gadopentetic acid  5 0 to 5*  5 3 to 5** 
Gadoversetamide  5 0 to 5*  5 3 to 5** 
Gadoxetic acid  5 0 to 5*  5 3 to 5** 
* Patie nts should be recruited to the Gadodiamide, G adopentetic acid, Gadoversetamide , 
and Gadoxetic  acid subgroups throughout the stu dy duration up to a maximum of 5, but 
there is no minimum requirement to reach a specific number of patients in this subgroup to 
achieve study completion. At least 3 patients and a maximum of 5 patients are required for 
Gadobutrol and G adoteric acid. If th e target of 3 patients is reached, but the study has not 
yet completed, then recruitment to this subgroup should be continued during the remaining 
study time.  
** At least 3 patients are required for this subgroup. If the target of 3 patients is reached, 
but the study has not yet completed, then recruitment to this subgroup should be continued 
during the remaining study time, stopping when until 5 patients have been recruited to this 
subgroup, or when all other subgroups have reached their minimum target for  recruitment, 
whichever comes first.  
Table 1 shows patient enrolment targets (see chapter 8  for statistical evaluation) . 
Figure 2 shows the enrolment  by renal functional status and GdCA dosing : 
a) 5 patients with stable impaired renal  function (at least moder ate impairment, eGFR ≤ 
60 ml/min/1.73 m2) who have received a single GdCA , 
b) Up to 5 patients with stable impaired renal function (at least moderate impairment, 
eGFR ≤ 60 ml/min/1.73 m2) who have received multiple doses of the same GdCA :  
 Gadodiamide, Gadope ntetic acid, Gadoversetamide, and Gadoxetic acid  
subgroups : no target number. Patients should be recruited to this subgroup 
throughout the study duration, but there is no requirement to reach a specific 
number of patients in this subgroup to achieve study completion.   
 Gadobutrol and Gadoteric acid  subgroups : at least 3 patients. If the target of 3 
patients is reached, but the study has not yet completed, then recruitment to this 
subgroup should be continued during the remaining study time . 
c) 5 patients with s table normal renal function (eGFR > 60 ml/min /1.73 m2) who have 
received a single GdCA dose , 
d) Up to 5 patients (target at least 3) with stable normal renal function (eGFR > 60 
ml/min /1.73 m2) who have received multiple doses of the same GdCA . If the target of 
3 patients is reached, but the study has not yet completed, then recruitment to this 
subgroup should be continued during the remaining study time, stopping when 5 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 21 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
patients have been recruited to this subgroup, or when all other subgroups have 
reached th eir minimum target for recruitment, whichever comes first.  
 
* Depending on the GdCA subgroup  
Figure 2: Stratification  of patients  for recruitment purposes  by renal functional status and 
GdCA  dosing   
Out of 15 patients in the control group, 5 patients shall be included in each of the following 
3 categories  (Figure 3):  
e) patients with stable severe renal impairment  (eGFR < 30 ml/min /1.73 m2) 
f) patients with stable moderate renal impairment  (eGFR within the range 30 to 
60 ml/min /1.73 m2) 
g) patients with stable norm al renal function  (eGFR > 60 ml/min /1.73 m2) 

Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 22 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 
Figure 3:  Stratification  of control group patients by renal function  
The course of the study is depicted  in Figure 4 , showing the sequential relation ship of GdCA 
administration  prior to patient enrolment and the collection of bone and skin tissue samples 
during the orthopaedic surgery procedure  (e.g. hip or knee replacement surgery) .  
End of study for the individual patient is follow-up visit 2 (visit 4)1 taking place , approximately 
within 10-14 days after the orthopaedic surgery procedure  (e.g. hip or knee replacement 
surgery)  at the time of potential stitch removal under normal healing conditions2. A detailed 
schedule of study procedures and assessments is  presented  in section  7.1 (Flow Chart).   
                                                
1 Note:  If the patient is scheduled for a second orthopaedic surgery procedure  (e.g. hip or knee replacement surgery ), end of 
study is the follow -up visit 4 (visit 8).  
2 Note:  Any other wound closure technique used according to the local clinical practice is acceptable.  

Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 23 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 
 
Figure 4: Course of the study  
The overall study period is expected to be approximately 4 ½ years from FPFV to end of 
study . This period includes the scheduled bone and skin sample collection  in conjunction 
with a medically indicated orthopaedic surgery procedure . If the patient is scheduled for a 
second orthopaedic surgery procedure (e.g. hip or knee replacement surgery ) to be 
performed within the study period , the patient can continue to particip ate in the study , 
provided that the required amount of trans -operatory collection of bone and skin as defined 
per-protocol is feasible  during the second procedure . A second bone and skin sample  shall 
be collected  during the second scheduled orthopaedic pro cedure . The overall study period 
will not be extended in order to obtain the second bone and skin sample collection.   
Based on medical experience, it is ass umed that approximately 10% of enrolled patients will 
undergo a second hip or knee replacement surge ry of e.g. the contra lateral joint. During 
both surgeries (if applicable), portions of the femoral or tibial bones will be removed in the 
course of the respective procedure. From these ex -vivo remains, two samples (trabecular 
and cortical bone) will be ha rvested for analysis in the central bioanalytical laboratory. In 
addition, a skin sample will be collected from the edge of the surgical incision during each 
joint replacement procedure . 
Handling and analysis of trabecular and cortical bone and skin sample s will be performed 
under blinded conditions at central site s. The dermatopathological examinations will be done 
at the Yale Dermatopathology, New Haven, USA , the bioanalytical examinations 
(quantification of Gd and oth er analytes from skin and bone sample s) will be conducted  by 
the Bioanalytical Laboratory of Manipal  Acunova, Bangalore, India.  
 
3.1 Discussion of study design  
The current study design is explorative in nature and will deliver descriptive data on the po -
tential for long -term retention  of gadolini um in human bone. Restricting the study population 
to patients with stable normal  renal function is unlikely to provide further insight into the 
mechanism of Gd retention and the potential development of NSF. Therefore, s ubgroups 
with different degree s of renal decrement are included.  
A limitation of the study is the retrospective nature of data associated with  the single or multi -
ple administr ation  of the GdCA s. It is anticipated that some of the specified analytical clinical 
and laboratory parameters will not be available within  the patient records.  However, it would 
be impossible to prospectively assess potential Gd retention in patients with moderate and 

Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 24 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
severe decrement in renal function , because the administration of GdCAs to such patients is 
now limit ed due to regulation . 
The current study , therefore , will enrol  patients who received  a specified GdCA at least 1 
month prior to an orthopaedic surgery procedure  and will prospectively collect  bone and skin 
samples for analysis.  Conducting the study in patients who plan to undergo a medically 
indicated  orthopaedic surgery procedure  provides an accessible model  for collecting  samples 
without adding a significant interventional load onto the patients . The collection of bone and 
skin biops ies are required to correlate  Gd content in bone and skin with potential 
histopathological finding s associated with NSF . 
GdCA-naïve patients will be included as controls for any background concentration of Gd in 
bone, e.g. from the environment. For example, Gd has been found in  skin biopsies of NSF 
patients who were considered to be “gadolinium -free” (23), as well as in bone samples from 
patients  with no previous exposure to GdCA (21) 
In summary , the study design is adequately selected to contribute to the understanding of 
long-term Gd  retention in patients who receive GdCAs. The study design  was developed 
through scientific discussion s with the EMA/ CHMP.  
4 SELECTION OF STUDY PO PULATION  
In this study  a minimum of 99 evaluable patients  (see 8.1.1 ) will be recruited, according to 
the distribution per Assessed GdCA/Renal function status  depicted in table 1 . 
The patients will be recr uited in at least 35 centres  in America , Europe and Asia . Each 
patient must meet all inclusion criteria and not present any exclusion criteria.  
4.1 Patient  inclusion criteria  
Each patient  must fulfil the following criteria to be eligible for the study:  
1. Patient  must be at least 18 years of age  (or older  if required by local regulations)  
2. Patient schedu led for an orthopaedic surgical procedure provided that the required 
amount of trans -operatory collection of bone and skin as defined per -protocol in 
section 5.1.3 is feasible  and all inclusion and no exclusion criteria are met .  
3. Patient is scheduled to have sufficient bone removed during  the orthopaedic surgical 
procedure and sufficient non-scarred skin tissue from the edge of the surgical incision  
or amputated part  to permit sample collection , in the investigator’s medical opinion  
4. Patient agree d to have bone and skin sample s collected at the time of the surgical 
procedure(s)  
5. Patient ’s surgical procedure and subsequent remission will not be altered by study -
specific skin biopsies, in the  investigator’s medical opinion  
6. Patient  is fully informed about the study and ha s signed the informed consent  form 
Patients having received GdCA  
7. Patient belong s to one of the following subgroups with respect to the number of 
GdCA doses  received and the status of their renal function : 
a) patient (total to enrol = 5) has stable impaired renal function  (at least moderate 
impairment, eGFR ≤ 60 ml/min/1.7 3 m2) and ha s received one GdCA injection  at 
the standard dose (0.025  mmol per kg body weight  for Gadoxetic acid  and 
0.1 mmol per kg body weight  for all other agents)  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 25 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 or 
b) Up to 5 patients  with stable imp aired renal function  (at least moderate 
impairment, eGFR ≤ 60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and ha s received more than one 
injection of the same GdCA .  
 Gadodiamide, Gadopentetic acid, Gadoversetamide, and Gadoxetic acid  
groups : no target number. Patients should be recru ited to this subgroup 
throughout the study duration, but there is no requirement to reach a specific 
number of patients in this subgroup to achieve study completion.  
 Gadobutrol and Gadoteric acid  groups : at least 3 patients. If the target of 3 
patients is reached, but the study has not yet completed, then recruitment to 
this group should be continued during the remaining study time . 
or  
c) patient (total to enrol = 5) has stable normal renal function  (eGFR > 60 ml/min 
/1.73 m2) and ha s received one GdCA inject ion at the standard dose 
(0.025  mmol per kg body weight  for Gadoxetic acid  and 0.1  mmol per kg body 
weight  for all other agents)  
 or 
d) patient (total to enrol = 3 to 5) with stable normal renal function  (eGFR > 60 
ml/min/1.73 m2) who have received more than one injection  of the same GdCA . 
If the target of 3 patients is reached, but the study has not yet been completed, 
then recruitment to this subgroup should be continued during the remaining study 
time, stopping when 5 patients have been recruited to this su bgroup, or when all 
other subgroups have reached their minimum target for recruitment, whichever 
comes first.  
8. A m inimum of 1 month have elapsed between GdCA dose and the scheduled 
orthopaedic surgical procedure .  
9. Patient GdCA history , including dose(s), da te(s), and product(s)  administered is com -
plete and accurate . 
GdCA naïve patients ( control g roup)  
10. Patient ha s never received GdCA before the scheduled orthopaedic surgical 
procedure.  
11. Patient belong s to one of the following renal function  categorie s:  
e) patient (total to enrol = 5) has stable severe renal impairment (eGFR < 30 ml/ 
min/1.73 m2); 
f) patient (total to enrol = 5) has stable moderate renal impairment (eGFR wi thin the 
range 30 to 60 ml/min/1.73 m2); 
g) patient (total to enrol = 5) has stable normal renal function (eGFR > 60 ml/min 
/1.73 m2). 
4.2 Patient  exclusion criteria  
No patient may enter the study if any of the following exclusion criteria are fulfilled:  
1. Patient has received different GdCAs . 
2. Patient ha s received intra -articular GdCA  or per any other non -i.v. route . 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 26 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
3. Patient  has received or i s scheduled to receive GdCA within 1 month prior to the date 
of the scheduled orthopaedic surgical and study sample co llection procedures . 
4. Patient has received any investigational product or ha s participated in any other  clini-
cal trial within 30 days prior to enrolling  in this study.  
5. Patient  suspected of, or diagnosed with, tumour  of the sk eletal system (i.e.  tumour , 
metastatic bone, and bone marrow disease in the region from where the skin and 
bone will be harvested ). 
Note: Patients shall not be excluded for other bone diseases  with the exception of those with 
bone cancer as specified in exclusion criterion 5. 
6. Patient ha s diagnosed or suspected  NSF at time of enrolment . 
Note: Patients shall not be excluded for diagnos is of NSF subsequent to  enrolment . 
7. Patient present s with scar ring in the region(s) of the scheduled surgical procedure(s)  
or of the skin sampling location , to the extent  that collection of an unscarred skin 
sample is not feasible . 
8. Patient ha s a close affiliat ion with the investigational site; e.g., a relative of the investi -
gator, dependent person (e.g., employee or student of the investigational site) . 
4.3 Patient  withdrawal criteria  
An enrolled  patient must be withdrawn  from the study immediately if any of the following  oc-
curs: 
 During screening:  if the enrolment group for which the patient qualifies, has already 
been closed.  
 Patient requires a prohibited concomitant medication, including the administration of a 
GdCA after enrolment . 
 Patient w ithdraw s consent . 
 An illness occurs during the study period that  is likely to  influence the assessment of 
the study in the investigator’s medical opinion  (i.e. patient is suspected of, or 
diagnosed with, tumour of the skeletal system (e.g . in knee  / hip bone, metastatic 
bone  and bone marrow disease in knee  / hip or other location where the orthopaedic  
surgery is to be performed )). 
Furthermore, an enrolled  patient may be withdrawn  prematurely from the study, at the inves -
tigator ’s discretion, under the following circumstances:  
 One of the inclusion criteria listed in section  4.1 does not apply . 
 One of the exclusion criteria listed in section  4.2 applies . 
 Patient does not cooperat e adequately to permit study procedures and assessments . 
 Any adverse event (AE) after which a continu ation in the study would constitute an 
unaccep tably high risk for the patient . 
 Investigator  determines it is in the best interest of the patient to withdraw from the 
study . 
The Sponsor should be informed of any decision  to withdraw  an individual patient.  If 
possible, a complete final examination according to the visit schedule  should be carried out 
and documented on the corresponding pages of the electronic case report form (eCRF)  for 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 27 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
those  patients prematurely discontinuing the study . Although patients may  withdraw from the 
study at any time without giving any reasons and without prejudice to future treatment, efforts 
should be made to document the reason for withdrawal in each case . 
Instructions for patient follow -up in case of withdrawal due to an AE are described in  sec-
tion  6.2.4.3.  
 
Withdrawal criterion for patients undergoing multiple GdCA doses:  
 If a patient undergoes a second orthopaedic surgical procedure that would qualify for 
the collection of bone and skin as described elsewhere in the protocol  section 5.1.3 
(e.g. hip or knee surgery ) during the study period , and the patient receiv es any 
additional dose  of a GdCA between the first and the second surgical procedure , the 
patient must be withdrawn from the study. No additional bone and skin samples  shall 
be collected during the second su rgery for the study. However, the data  and tissue 
samples obtained  in connection with the first surgery , prior to administration of 
disqualifying GdCAs, will be used for the statistical evaluation.  
5 STUDY  TREATMENTS . PRODUCTS AND INTERVENTIONS  
5.1 Products  administered  
5.1.1  Products administered prior to enrolment  
5.1.1.1  Products under evaluation  
Patients in the test groups (a  to d) must have received only one of the following GdCAs, at 
least 1 month prior to scheduled orthopaedic  surgery on study:   
1. Gadobutrol (Gadovist®, Gadavist® & Gad ograf®); 
2. Gadodiamide (Omniscan®); 
3. Gadopentetic acid ( Magn evist®); 
4. Gadoteric acid (Dotarem® & Magnescope®); 
5. Gadoversetamide (Optimark®); 
6. Gadoxetic acid  (Primovist®, Eovist® & EOB -Primovist®) 
Patients in the control groups e), f) and g) must be treatment -naïve regarding any GdCA.  
5.1.1.2  Dosage of products  under evaluation  
 0.1 mmol per kg body weight for the products  1–5: GdCAs with the active ingredients  
Gadobutrol , Gadodiamide , Gadopentetic acid, Gadoteric acid , and Gadoversetamide ; 
subgroups a) and c). 
 0.025  mmol per kg body weight for the product  6: GdCAs with the active ingredient 
Gadoxetic acid ; subgroups a) and c). 
 Actual dos es injected for all multiple doses subgroups  for all products 1 –6; subgroups 
b) and d). 
5.1.1.3  Dosing frequency  
 Single GdCA dose  (one injection)  at least 1 month prior to the scheduled orthopaedic 
surgical procedure ; products 1 –6: subgroups a) and c). 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 28 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 Multiple doses (more than one injection) of the same GdCA, regardless of frequency. 
Last GdCA d ose at least 1 month prior to the scheduled orthopaedic surgical 
procedure ; products 1 –6: subgroups b) and d). 
5.1.1.4  Route of administration  
 Intravenous only  
5.1.2  Products administered after enrolment  
None   
Note: No GdCA will be administered to the patient s during th e study  by the investigators.  
5.1.3  Prospective study  interventions  
Patients must be  scheduled for orthopaedic surgery ( e.g. hip or knee replacement surgery, 
limb amputations and shoulder replacement ) before enrolment in the study. This surgical 
intervention  for the patient’s underlying condition  will be completed  during the study ; 
however , the surgical procedure itself  is not a study -driven intervention.  
The scheduled  skin biopsy is the only interventional  procedure to be performed  to patients 
participating in  this study  (i.e. the only procedure performed for study purposes and not part 
of the otherwise necessary care of the patients).  This biopsy will be performed during the 
scheduled orthopaedic surgical procedure . Bone  sample s will be collected from a surgica lly 
removed bone specimen and therefore not considered being a study -related intervention . If a 
patient  is scheduled for a second orthopaedic surgical procedure  that would qualify for the 
collection of bone and skin as described in this section  (e.g. hip o r knee surgery ), additional 
bone and skin samples will be collected.  
Bone tissue sampling:  
Bone tissue will be collected from bone removed during the scheduled orthopaedic surgical 
procedure . A portion of the removed bone (e.g.  the heads of femoral or tib ial bone, 
whichever is removed during surgery ), will be further processed ex -vivo. At surgical site, two 
aliquots will be taken, each with a minimum weight of 15  g. Further bone sample handling will 
be done in the bioanalytical central laboratory to harves t two samples from each aliquot, one 
consisting of trabecular and the other of cortical bone. Bone samples will precisely be 
weighed and analysed in the central bioanalytical laboratory (for the concentration of Gd, Ca, 
P, Na, Zn, K and Fe).  
Skin tissue sampling:   
Skin samples will be collected from the incisional site made for the schedule d orthopaedic 
surgical procedure  or amputated part  if applicable . A parallel linear sample of tissue will be 
cut from one edge of the incision wound to the other. It shou ld be 2  mm thick, and as long as 
the incision (typically at least 10  cm of length, according to surgical practice). Depth should 
be the depth of the skin to the fascia (4  mm is a conservative estimate; the linear incision will 
be no longer or deeper than i t would have been without removing a sample). Since thickness 
and depth of skin tissue slices are kept constant, the maximum amount of skin tissue 
collected is defined by the length of the surgical incision. The wound is closed in accordance 
to the sites’ clinical practice.  
From the linear sample, two aliquots of 5  mm length each are required for later histopatho -
logical analysis and will be evaluated in the central histopathology laboratory by an experi -
enced and independent (blinded) dermatopathologist i n order to identify any skin changes 
associated with NSF.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 29 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
The remaining linear sample will be divided into two aliquots for later bioanalytical analysis 
(yielding approximately 320  mg of fresh tissue per aliquot). The aliquots will be weighted and 
analysed  in the central bioanalytical laboratory for the concentration of Gd, Ca, P, Na, Zn, K 
and Fe.  
5.2 Method of assigning patients to treatment groups  
No randomis ation of patients to treatments applies. However, ad-hoc stratification of patients 
to the enrolment groups will be  managed  centrally (see 5.5). 
5.3 Selection of dose and timing for each patient  
This protocol  focuse s on the exploration of long-term Gd -retention  in patients exposed to 
GdCAs . There is no upper limi t for the time -interval between  GdCA administration and sam -
ple collection during the scheduled orthopaedic surgical procedure , based on  prior evidence 
that Gd may be detect able in bone 8 years after injection of GdCA (21). In this protocol, the  
time i nterval between the last dose of GdCA and surgery  must be at least 1 month . The 
enrolment of patients with a wide range of times between GdCA injection and time of tissue 
sample collection during sur gery may support the evaluation of long -term Gd -retention.  
The study  will evaluate for the subgroups with a history of single GdCA dose administration 
only patients who received  the approved standard dose for each of the GdCAs . For the 
products with the ac tive ingredients Gadobutrol, Gadodiamide, Gadopentetic acid, Gadoteric 
acid, and Gadoversetamide this is 0.1 mmol per kg body weight . For Gadoxetic acid , a single 
dose  is 0.025  mmol per kg body weight.   
Patients in the respective multiple doses subgroups w ill have received either repeated doses 
or a single or multiple higher than the approved standard dose, and thus higher cumulative 
concentrations of the same GdCA.  Any higher dose than 120% of the standard dose of 
GdCA will be analysed as part of the multi ple doses subgroup.  In both dose subgroups,  the 
individual and total combined doses administered will be documented and evaluat ed. 
5.4 Supply, packaging and labelling  
Since qualifying  GdCA was administered prior to patient  enrolment , no supply of any study 
medication is required  in the present study.  Therefore, neither storage, shipment, packaging, 
nor labelling are applicable.  
5.5 Blinding and randomisation  
There will be no randomi sation. The analysis of bone and skin tissue samples will be done in 
a blinded manne r. 
Patients will be registered centrally via an interactive web response system (IWRS). This 
system will be connected with the eCRF and will be accessible 24  hours /7 days a week . 
Each patient will be assigned to a stratified enrolment group defined by the GdCA ingredient 
administered (or control), renal function  category  (moderate impairment, severe impairment  
or stable normal renal function eGFR > 60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and dosing number  
(single  / multiple).  Confirmation  of patient enrolment  will be  provided t o the enrolling  centre 
and shall be re tained by the investigator .  
Once a stratification group is complete , no further enrolment  into that group will be allowed. 
All participating centres  will be notified upon the completion of each enrolment  group.  
The d ata of all patients  on study  will be de-identified  by allocati on of a patient number to 
each patient  enrolled . No identifying information will be contained in the study eCRF . Patient 
numbers will be issued sequential ly to each centre  upon patient enrolment . 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 30 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
5.6 Prior and concomitant therapy  
Concomitant therapies and medications administered during the study  period are to be doc-
umented. The recording should be limited to diseases, medications that are relevant to the 
setting, e.g. osteoporosis, hormone therapy,  etc. (see 7.2.2 ). This also includes a ll medical 
and non-medicinal treatment and hormonal contraception. The f ollowing details are to  be 
recorded in the source documentation : disease indication , date of diagnos is, name of each 
medicine (including active ingredient(s)) or specification of measures, dosage, route of ad -
ministration and the dates of the start and end of treatment.  
The investigator should advise each  patient to undergo other medical treatment only a fter 
having consulted the investigator - except for emergencies.  
5.6.1  Prohibited previous treatments  
 GdCA within  1 month prior to the date of the scheduled orthopaedic surgical 
procedure . 
 Intra-articular administrated GdCAs  or per any other non -i.v. route . 
 Comb ination of different GdCAs . 
5.6.2  Admissible concomitant treatments  
 Medically indicated, non-GdCA treatments  
5.6.3  Prohibited concomitant treatments  
 GdCA re -administration  prior to completion of all surgeries and tissue collection 
procedures on study  
5.7 Treatment complia nce 
Only patients who have received one of the qualifying GdCAs and for whom a full history of 
GdCA administration and dosage is available, are considered for enrolment into one of the 
respective test groups of this study.  In this regard treatment complian ce reflects the adher -
ence to the protocol inclusion criteria and  not to be assessed separately . 
5.8 Management of drug overdose  
Not applicable  
6 VARIABLES AND METHODS  
6.1 Evaluation  
6.1.1  Primary evaluation  variable (s) 
 Concentration of t otal Gd in trabecular bone (determ ined by ICP -MS). 
 Concentration of t otal Gd in cortical bone  (determined by ICP -MS). 
6.1.2  Secondary evaluation  variable(s)  
 Concentration of t otal Gd in skin tissue samples  (determined by ICP -MS), collected at 
the time of the scheduled orthopaedic surgical proced ure, from a biopsy from the 
edge of the surgical wound  or the amputated part . 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 31 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 Concentrations of calcium, phosphorus, sodium, iron, zinc and potassium in bone 
(both trabecular and cortical ) and skin tissue samples (determined by ICP -MS or al -
ternatively ICP -AES if the feasibility evaluation of ICP -MS does not show reliable re -
sults) . 
 Histopathological evaluation of skin samples with regard to the possibility of findings 
associated with NSF (determined by an experienced dermatopathologist ). 
 Description of pot ential co -factors for NSF, susceptibility factors and drug treatments 
with potential impact on bone metabolism . 
Please note: Sample handling, analysis and dosage will be performed under blinded conditions at the 
central sites.  
6.1.3  Evaluation  methods  – Bioanaly tics 
6.1.3.1  Sample collection and handling:  
Sample collection for the bioanalytical quantification of Gd and the other analytes will be pre -
pared with a sample collection kit . Precise description of the collection pro cedures, including 
sample  harvesting , sample s ize, transfer of specimens into collection tubes, and sample 
storage until transport to the central bioanalytical lab oratory will be provided . The Sponsor 
will take care of s ecure transportation of the samples under adequate transport conditions . 
The trans port conditions will be adjusted according to  the test results obtained  by the 
bioanalytical central lab during method set -up. All bone and skin tissue samples will be 
identified by a numbering system that does not reveal  any information on the patient ’s 
identity or  history  to the blinded investigators in the central bioanalytical laboratory  (Manipal  
Acunova, Bangalore, India ). 
 Sample collection: Samples of t rabecular and cortical bone must  be harvested from 
bone removed during the scheduled orthopaedic sur gical procedure , according to the 
type of surgery performed on the individual patient . Skin will be collected during 
surgery  by a biopsy of the edge  of the surgical  incision  or the amputated part . If the 
patient is scheduled for a second orthopaedic surgic al procedure  within the study 
period , additional bone and skin samples will be harvested.  
 Tissue samples  will be kept frozen  at at least -20 °C during storage at sites and 
during the  transport  to the central bioanalytical lab oratory . The w eight of the samp les 
will be measured in the central bioanalytical laboratory.  
 Bone and skin s ample  processing and analysis will be performed under blinded 
conditions at the central bioanalytical laboratory . 
 Central laboratory s ample storage: tissue sample s are kept  frozen  at at least –20oC 
until analysis.  
 A detailed manual of sampling handling procedures and transport logistics will be pr o-
vided . 
6.1.3.2  Method description  
A ICP -MS bio analytical method (based on (19;24;25) ) will be dev eloped and validated 
according to EMA and FDA requirements (26;27)  for the quantification of Gd and other speci -
fied analytes , including  calcium, phosphorus, sodium, iron, zinc and potassium in tissue  
samples .  The validated methods  will be employed for the s tudy sample analysis . In case 
that the reliable analysis of all planned analytes  is not possible with the ICP -MS (based on 
the method setup results), alternative  methods for  analysis of some of the parameters will be 
done with an ICP -AES technique  (18;28) . 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 32 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
6.1.3.3  Validation protocol  
The bio analytical method to quantif y Gd, Ca , P, Na, Zn, K and Fe in skin and bone tissue will 
be developed and validated according to current regulatory requirements  and guidelines 
(26;27) .  
6.1.4  Evaluation  methods – Histopathology  
Sample collection for the histopathological analysis will be p erformed using  a sample collec -
tion kit. Precise description of the collection pro cedures, including sample harvesting, 
transfer of specimens into collection t ubes, and sample storage until transport to the central 
bioanalytical laboratory will be provided.  The Sponsor will take care of s ecure sample trans -
portation under adequate transport  conditions . The skin tissue samples will be identified by a 
numbering sy stem that does not reveal an y information on the patient’s identity or history to 
the blinded investigators in the central histopathology laboratory  Yale Dermatopathology, 
New Haven, USA . 
6.1.4.1  Sample collection and handling:  
 Sample collection: Skin will be coll ected during the orthopaedic surgical procedure by 
a biopsy from the edge of the surgical incision  or the amputated part . If the patient is 
scheduled for a second orthopaedic surgical procedure  within the study period , an 
additional skin sample will be har vested.  
 Skin specimens will be fixed and preserved in formaldehyde solution for later paraffin 
embedding and histopathological examination at the central histopatholog y labora -
tory. Samples will shipped under ambient  condition s to the central histopatholog y la-
boratory. There the paraffin embedding will be completed, further stabili sing the sam -
ples until analysis.  
 A detailed manual of sampling handling procedures and transport logistics will be pr o-
vided . 
6.1.4.2  Method description  
The histopathological analysis w ill be completed  by an experienced dermatopathologist in 
the central laboratory at the Yale Dermatopathology, New Haven, USA . Methods will include  
routine light microscopy evaluation of skin biopsy samples (stained e.g. for mucin and elastic 
fibres) and immunostaining for CD34 -positive “circulating” fibrocytes  (4;25;29) . Electron  
microscopy for ultra -structural analysis and in situ localisation of Gd will not be performed  
(29). 
6.1.4.3  Reporting of results  
The results of the individual histopathology parameters , including a dermatopathological ex -
pert statement, will be reported to the respective study centres  and to EA , allowing assess -
ment of potential AEs, medical review a nd further data handling.  The results of the individual 
histopathology parameters will be transferred to EA data management electronically, consid -
ered for descriptive statistics and included in the data listing of the study  report . However, the 
study centres will not enter the results into the patient specific eCRF.  
6.1.5  GFR estimat e 
Various methods have been previously established f or the estima te of GFR . Most commonly, 
the Cockgroft /Gault method , the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD)  or the 
Chronic  Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD -EPI) method s are used (30). In 
the pre sent study , any of the clinically accepted, serum creatinine -based methods of GFR 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 33 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
estima tion will be accepted as indicator of renal function. In c ase eGFR was not computed 
prior to GdCA administration, eGFR will be estimated by the investigator at enrolment based 
on se rum creatinine, age, sex, bio metric and/ or other laboratory data required for the 
applic ation of one of the above -mentioned eGFR for mulas.  
6.2 Safety  
6.2.1  Vital signs  
No vital signs will be measured  for this study.  
6.2.2  Laboratory variables  
No routine clinical laboratory tests will be performed in this study.  
6.2.3  Additional safety assessments  
It will be left to the investigator ’s discretion whether safety assessments in addition to the 
documentation of AEs as outlined below  (6.2.4 ) are required . Unless useful for specific pur -
poses (e.g. individual serious adverse events), the data gained from these additional safety 
assessm ents will not be part of the study’s data base. However, if the investigator considers 
the finding to be clinically significant and of importance regarding safety assessment (e.g. 
severe bleeding following surgery), it must be documented in the eCRF as an adverse event.  
6.2.4  Adverse events  
After signature of the informed consent form  the investigator will ask the patient to report any 
significant clinical abnormality and will monitor the patient’s medical records.  Any AE occur -
ring from the date the  patient enrols in the study u ntil follow -up visit 2 (visit 4) taking place 
approximately within 10 -14 days post -surgery (at the time of potential stitch removal3 under 
normal healing conditions) after the scheduled orthopaedic surgical procedure , must be 
documented by  the investigator in the  eCRF . Complications related to the operation wound 
and its healing will be followed -up as an adverse event until consolidation . In case the patient 
is scheduled for a second orthopaedic surgical procedure that would qualify for the  collection 
of bone and skin as described in this protocol  in section 5.1.3 , AE monitoring will be  handled 
like the AE monitoring of the first surgery . 
AEs of interest are: NSF -like events after enrolment, wound related problems, and Serious 
Adverse Drug R eactions (SADRs).  
All AEs, including intercurrent illnesses, must be documented in detail , including the date and 
time of occurrence , the date of event resolution  and the outcome  (6.2.4.2 ). The related treat-
ments of the event will be documented in the  eCRF  as well as  event  intensity, potential 
causal relationship to any of the categories  specified below  (6.2.4.2 ) and seriousness of the 
AE (6.2.4.2 ). 
6.2.4.1  Definition of adverse  events  
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical investiga -
tion subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a 
causal relationship with this treatment. An AE can , therefore , be any unfavourable and unin -
tended sign (including abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associ -
ated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not related to the me -
dicinal (investigational) product.  
                                                
3 Note:  Any other wound closure technique used according to the local practice is acceptable.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 34 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
6.2.4.2  Assessment o f adverse events  
Each AE will be assessed by the investigator regarding potential causal relationship with one 
or more of the following categories : 
 (1) related to the orthopaedic surgery (bone resection  included ). 
 (2) related to the skin biops y. 
 (3) relate d to GdCA exposure  in the past  (e.g. NSF signs  after enrolment) . 
 (4) related to other health conditions of the patient . 
The investigator must assess each AE as either unrelated  or causally related  to any of the 
categories (1) – (4). Related means possibly,  probably or certainly related.  
Each AE will be characteri sed by the investigator according to intensity of the event and 
whether any of the seriousness criteria apply. The definitions are given below:  
Intensity  
Regardless of the classification of an AE as  serious or non -serious (see below), its intensity 
must be assessed according to medical criteria alone  (taking into account the patient’s limita -
tions in routine activities due to the surgical indication before or status after joint replace -
ment)  using th e following categories:  
Mild:  does not interfere with routine activities  of the patient in the review or opinion 
of the investigator  
Moderate:  interferes with routine activities  of the patient in the review or opinion of the in -
vestigator  
Severe:  impossibl e to perform routine activities  of the patient in the review or opinion of 
the investigator  
It should be noted that a severe AE does not necessarily have to be serious in nature and 
that a serious adverse event need not be severe.  
Seriousness  
A serious adv erse event (SAE) is an AE that , at any dose ,: 
 results in death ;  
 is life -threatening ; 
 requires in -patient hospitalisation or prolongation of existing hospitalisation  unless it 
lasts less than 12 hours, or hospitalisation is pre -planned (e.g. standard of ca re or for 
respite care) ; 
 results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity ; 
 is a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
or 
 is an important medical event that does not have to be immediately life -threatening or 
result in death or hospitalisation, but w hich may jeopardise the patient or may require 
medical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.  
NSF-like events will be considered medical ly important events, and thus are serious AEs.  
All SAEs must be reported by the investigator immediat ely (within one working day) to 
the pharmacovigilance team of EA ( page 4). Unreported SAEs (e.g. not noticed by the 
investigator) must be reported by the Clinical Research Associate (CRA) directly to the 
pharmacovigilance team of EA. A study -specific SAE r eporting form is to be used.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 29 April 2016  
Page 35 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
All AEs that do not fall into any of the above categories are defined as non -serious.  
Expectedness  
Expectedness for potential AEs in response to GdCA exposure in the past (e.g. NSF signs 
after enrolment) , category 3 of the list  above: The Summary of Product Characteristics 
(SmPC) of the respective GdCA as applicable locally and at the time of the event is consid -
ered as reference document of expectedness.  
Expectedness for potential AEs related to the interventional part of the s tudy (skin biopsy), 
category 2 of the list above, or in a broader sense to the participation in the study: Medical 
judgement will be applied by the investigator. If the event is considered related to the skin bi -
opsy - or in a broader sense to the particip ation in the study  - and it is reasonably expected 
according to the medical knowledge, then it will be considered expected for the study.  
Outcome  
The outcome of the AE is to be documented as follows:  
 Recovered . 
 Recovered with sequelae . 
 Not recovered yet . 
 Fatal . 
 Unknown . 
6.2.4.3  Follow -up of adverse events  
Regardless of the duration of the study , each AE must be followed up until it resolves, the 
cause is documented,  or an adequate final assessment can be given.  If follow -up is not per-
formed or possible , justifica tion must be given by the investigator.   
6.2.4.4  Documentation and reporting of adverse events  
Any AE occurring while a patient is in the study (from informed consent until follow -up visit 2 
(visit 4)4 taking place approximately within 10 -14 days post-surgery (at the time of potential 
stitch removal under normal healing conditions5) after the surgical intervention must be 
documented and reported by the investigator.  Complications related to the surgical  wound 
and its healing will be followed -up as an adverse event until consolidation. Each  AE must be 
documented in  the eCRF  according to  the requirements set forth  in section  6.2.4.2 . 
 
                                                
4 Note: If the patient is scheduled for  a second  orthopaedic surgery procedure  that would qualify for the collection of bone and 
skin as described in the protocol , end of study is the follow -up visit 4 (visit 8).  
5 Note: Any other wound closure technique used according to the local clinical pra ctice is acceptable.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001  
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 36 of 51  
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
7 STUDY CONDUCT  
7.1 Flow -chart  
Table 1: Schedule of Procedures and Assessments  
 Visit 0  
Screening 
Visit  Visit 1 (V1)  
Baseline  
(within 3 days 
prior to surgery)  Visit 2 (V2)  
1st surgery   
(day 0)  Visit 3 (V3)  
Follow -up 1 
(3-5 days af -
ter surgery)  Visit 4 (V4)  
Follow -up 2 
(approximately within  
10-14 days after sur -
gery)  If applicable: Patients receiving  a 2nd surgery only  
Visit 5 (V5)*  
Baseline  
(within 3 days 
prior to surgery)  Visit 6 (V6)*  
2nd Surgery  
(within study 
timeframe ) Visit 7 (V7)*  
Follow -up 3 
(3-5 days after 
surgery)  Visit 8 (V8)*  
Follow -up 4 
(approximately 
within  10-14 days 
after surgery)  
Patient informat ion and signa -
ture on Medical Data Release 
Form  X         
Patient information, written in -
formed consent   X        
Written informed re -consent, if 
applicable       X    
Demographic data  X         
Diagnosis and medical history   X    X    
Inclusion and exclusion criteria  X X    X    
Renal status (retrospective with 
regard to GdCA administrations)  X         
GdCA history / verification of 
GdCA history  X X X   X X   
Connection to IWRS for stratified 
enrolment   X        
Concomitant diseases and ther -
apies X X X X X X X X X 
Study -specific parameters:           
 Bone sample collection    X    X   
 Skin sample collection    X    X   
Visual check of wound/scar     X X   X X 
Adverse events   X X X X X X X X 
* Additional visit for patients scheduled for second   orthopaedic surgical procedure  within study timeframe  In case no second surgery is planned at comp letion of visit 2, the study  ends with the end of the follow -up 
visit 2 (V4)  
 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 37 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
7.2 Evaluations and procedures by visits  
7.2.1  Screening Visit (Visit 0)  
The investiga tor will use the inclusion and exclusion criteria (section  4.1 and 4.2) to deter -
mine the eligibility of each candidate patient for enrolment in the study. Patients who are eli -
gible and willing to participate in the study will receive appropriate information and sign a 
Medical Data Release Form allowing the screening of out -clinic patient files prior to enrol -
ment.  
At the screening examination the following will be carried out and/or documented:  
 date and time of visit ; 
 check of inclusion and exclusion criteria ; 
 demographic data (height, weight, age, sex) ; 
 diagnosis of qualifying study indication ( specify duration, severity as requested) ; 
 retrospectiv e renal status (eGFR value(s) at time point  of firs t and (if applicable) subse -
quent GdCA administration, including date(s) of sampling ); 
 GdCA history, i.e. prior GdCA administration (brand name of product(s), date(s) of 
admin istration, dosing, and route of administration and patient’s body weight determi ned 
within 4 weeks prior to  GdCA administration ); 
Patients meeting the study entry criteria will complete the baseline visit of the study.  
Note:  The screening visit 0 can be combined with the baseline examination (Visit 1) if feasible for the site  / patie nt 
and if in accordance with local regulations  
7.2.2  Baseline examination (Visit 1) 
At the baseline examination the patient will sign the Informed Consent Form when it has 
been validated that the patient is suitable for study participation  and ample time has bee n 
ensured for the subject to decide. Afterwards,  the fo llowing will be carried out and/or  docu -
mented:  
 date and time of visit ; 
 verification of inclusion and exclusion criteria (if baseline visit is performed separately 
from screening visit 0) ; 
 GdCA history : verification that no GdCA has been given between the visits (not applica -
ble if Visit  0 and Visit  1 are combined) ; 
 connection to IWRS (via eCRF system) for stratified enrolment ; 
Note: In cases where the applicable stratified enrolment group is completed,  the patient must be withdrawn 
from the study .  
 relevant medical history and concomitant disease(s) (including date of diagnoses), 
concom itant therapies (brand name, dose, route, frequency, start and stop dates) ; 
 other relevant medical history and past th erapies since first GdCA administration(s), 
where possible, including:  
- vascular, thrombotic and/or pro -inflammatory events ; 
- serum concentrations of calcium, phosphorus, sodium, iron, potassium and zinc ; 
- any event which may have led to iron mobilization, in cluding concomitant iron drug ; 
- cumulative dose of erythropoietin ; 
- T4 and TSH ; 
- Drug treatments with potential impact on bone metabolism, including long -term 
chronic drug treatments (i.e. biphosphonates, estrogens, calcitonin, calcitriol, 
fluoride salts, vit amin D, corticosteroids) ; 
 AEs (from informed consent on) ; 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 38 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 a physical examination of the skin for any clinical signs of NSF according to clinical rou -
tine (4). 
In addition to the general documentation of concomitant diseases, bone -related diseases in 
the medical history should especially be focussed on  (e.g. osteoporosis, fractures, 
menopausal effects on bone, etc.) with the exception of suspected or diagnosed tumour of 
the skeletal system , metastatic bone and bone marrow disease (which are exclusionary) . 
7.2.3  Schedul ed orthopaedic surgical procedure  (Visit 2)  
On the day of surgery the following will be carried out and/or documented:  
 date and time of visit ; 
 check for withdrawal criteria ; 
 GdCA history: verification that no GdCA has been given between the visits ; 
 relevan t changes in concomitant disease(s) (including date of diagnoses), relevant 
changes in concomitant therapies (brand name, dose, route, frequency, start and stop 
date)*; 
 AEs; 
 bone sample collection ; 
 skin sample collection;  
 schedule next appointment or study  visit date . 
7.2.4  Follow -up visit 1 (Visit 3)  
This visit should be performed in connection with a routine wound inspection (about 3 -5 days 
after surgery). The following will be carried out and/or documented:  
 date and time of visit ; 
 relevant changes in concomita nt disease(s) (including date of diagnoses), relevant 
changes in concomitant therapies (brand name, dose, route, frequency, start and stop 
date)* ; 
 inspection  of the surgery wound in order to assess if the wound healing process can be 
assessed as normal (an y finding needs to be documented as AE); 
 AEs; 
 schedule next appointment or study visit date . 
7.2.5  Follow -up visit 2 (Visit 4)  
This visit should be performed approximately within 10 -14 days (at the time of potential stitch 
removal under normal healing conditions6) but not later than 18 days  post-surgery . 
The following will be carried out and/or documented:  
 date and time of visit ; 
 relevant changes in concomitant disease(s) (including date of diagnoses), relevant 
changes in concomitant therapies (brand name, dose, route, frequency, start and stop 
date)*; 
 inspection  of the surgery wound in order to assess if the wound healing process can be 
assessed as normal (any finding needs to be documented as AE); 
 AEs; 
                                                
*AE related changes or bone -disease related changes should be considered as relevant  
6 Note:  Any other wound closure technique used according to the local practice is acceptable.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 39 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 end of study documentation or in case that a second orthopae dic surgical procedure  is 
planned sur gery date and appointment for the 2nd baseline visit.  
7.2.6  2nd surgery baseline examination (Visit 5) – if applicable  
For patients scheduled to receive a 2nd orthopaedic surgical procedure  (that would qualify for 
the collec tion of bone and skin as described in this protocol ) within the study period, the 
following will be carried out and/or documented:  
 date and time of visit ; 
 re-consent: the patient should be asked to confirm with actual date and signature that 
the provided w ritten informed consent is still valid ; 
(Note: If the patient does not agree to re -consent, the patient must be withdrawn from the study .) 
 verification of inclusion and exclusion criteria ; 
 GdCA history: verification that no GdCA has been given between the visits ; 
 relevant changes in concomitant disease(s) (including date of diagnoses), relevant 
changes in concomitant therapies (brand name, dose, route, frequency, start and stop 
date) * ; 
 AEs; 
 a physical check of skin for any clinical  signs of NSF according t o clinical routine (4). 
In addition to the general documentation of concomitant diseases, bone -related diseases 
other than the study indication shall e special ly be focus sed on.   
7.2.7  2nd orthopaedic surgical procedure (Visit 6) – if applicable   
On the day of the seco nd surgery the following will be carried out and/or documented:  
 date and time of visit ; 
 check for withdrawal criteria ; 
 GdCA history: verification that no GdCA has been given between the visits ; 
 relevant changes in concomitant disease(s) (including date of diagnoses), relevant 
changes in concomitant therapies (brand name, dose, route, frequency, start and stop 
date)* ; 
 AEs; 
 bone sample collection ; 
 skin sample collection;  
 schedule next appointment or study visit date . 
7.2.8  Follow -up visit 3 (Visit 7) – if applicabl e 
This visit should be performed in connection with a routine wound inspection (about 3 -5 days 
post-surgery ). The following will be carried out and/or documented:  
 date and time of visit ; 
 relevant changes in concomitant disease(s) (including date of diagnos es), relevant 
changes in concomitant therapies (brand name, dose, route, frequency, start and stop 
date)*; 
 check of the surgery wound in order to assess if the wound healing process can be as -
sessed as normal (any finding needs to be documented as AEs); 
 AEs; 
 schedule next appointment or study visit date . 
                                                
* AE related changes or bone -disease related changes sho uld be considered as relevant  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 40 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
7.2.9  Follow -up visit 4 (Visit 8) – if applicable  
This visit should be performed approximately within 10 -14 days (at the time of potential stitch 
removal under normal healing conditions7) but not later than 18 days post-surgery.  
The following will be carried out and/or documented:  
 date and time of visit ; 
 relevant changes in concomitant disease(s) (including date of diagnoses), relevant 
changes in concomitant therapies (brand name, dose, route, frequency, start and  stop 
date)*; 
 inspection  of the surgery site in order to assess if the wound healing process can be as -
sessed as normal (any finding needs to be documented as AE); 
 AEs; 
 end of study documentation.  
7.3 Duration of the study  
The study is scheduled to start in March 2013 and will be completed  with the LPLV in 
October 2017. Enrolment will be competitive over all study centres and per stratified 
enrolment group. As soon as a stratified enrolment  group is completed, centres will be 
informed that the respective group is closed, and enrolment shall continue for the remaining 
open enrolment g roups.  
7.3.1  Planned duration for the individual patient  
For each participating patient, the study lasts until the second follow -up visit (visit 4) is com -
pleted. If a patient is scheduled  for a second orthopaedic surgical procedure  (to be 
performed within the overall study period), the duration of participation will be extended for 
that patient until com pletion of the last follow -up visit (visit 8).  
7.3.2  Premature termination  
Study  
At any time , the study as a whole may be terminated prematurely by the Sponsor, at the 
Sponsor’s discretion, if important reasons call for this step . 
Centre  
At any time, an individual centre participati ng in the study may be excluded , at the Sponsor’s 
discretion, for  the following reasons:  
 The centre fails to comply with the requirements of the protocol.  
 The centre fails to comply with GCP standards.  
 No patients are enrolled  by the centre within a reasonable period after initiation of the 
centre.  
In addition, each cen tre shall have the right to discontinue (reasonable written notice ex -
pected) participation if the study can no l onger be carried out for organis ational or other rea -
sons.  
Patient  
Individual patients shall be withdrawn from the study according to the crite ria specified in 
section  4.3, including termination due to suspected breach . 
                                                
7 Note:  Any other wound closure technique used according to the local practice is acceptable.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 41 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
8 STATISTICS  
8.1 Statistical and analytical plans  
8.1.1  Analysis populations  
All patients who have undergone the planned orthopaedic surgical procedure will be in cluded 
in the safety analysis (safety population).  
The primary  analysis will be performed on the full analysis population (FAS) and the per 
protocol (PP) population (see definitions below).  
Definition of analysis populations  
Population  Description  
Screeni ng population  All patients who entered the study  
Safety population  All patients who have undergone the 
planned orthopaedic surgical procedure   
Full analysis population (FAS)  All patients in the safety population for whom 
Gd measurements from the bone are  availa -
ble 
Per protocol (PP) population  All patients in the full analysis population 
who meet the defined requirements of GdCA 
treatment history, all inclusion and exclusion 
criteria, and whose tissue samples yield data 
for Gd in bone (trabecular as well  as cortical) 
and skin.  
The evaluability of patients /samples shall be 
assessed by a blinded data review prior to 
final unblinding and analysis.  
The primary analysis will be conducted on the p er protocol population.  
The f ull analysis population will be us ed for sensitivity analyses, as the FAS could potentially  
encompass patients not fulfilling the requirements for addressing study objectives.  
8.1.2  Primary and secondary  analyses  
Statistical methods:  
Study data will be analysed descriptively. No formal hypothes is testing is planned.  
All parameters will be analysed for the per protocol population using descriptive statistics 
including confidence intervals whenever appropriate. Details will be defined in a statistical 
analysis plan (SAP), which will be signed prio r to unblinding of the samples.  
Descriptive statistical methods will be used to summarise the results of the study. The 
following descriptive statistics will be calculated for continuously distributed data and for 
ordered categorical data (ordinal data)  if applicable:  
 N (number of non -missing measurements)  
 Arithmetic mean  
 Standard deviation  
 Coefficient of variation (CV),  
 Geometric mean  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 42 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 Geometric standard deviation (re -transformed standard deviation of the logarithms)  
 Corresponding CV  
 Minimum  
 Median  
 Maximu m 
For ordered categorical data and nominal data, absolute and relative frequencies (in %) will 
be calculated.  
Group or stratification variables due to the study design are:  
 GdCA test group or control  
 Renal function category (moderate impairment, severe imp airment or stable normal 
renal function eGFR > 60 ml/min/1.73  m2, Figure 3)  
 Single (one injection of standard dose) or multiple (more than one injection or one 
injection with higher than standard) doses of GdCA administered  
 
The elapsed time from dosing of  GdCA until surgery will be classified and will also be used 
for stratification.  
Statistical tables will compare all GdCA groups pooled as well as each GdCA group sepa -
rately versus the control group. They will be further stratified according to renal function cate-
gory ( 3 groups), single  / multiple doses of all patients (2 groups), and the combination of “re -
nal function  with “single  / multiple doses”.  
The primary analysis encompasses the evaluation of Gd concentration in trabecular and cor -
tical bone. Th e secondary analysis deals with Gd concentration in skin as well as the 
parameters specified below.  
Descriptive analyses include  
 Gd concentration in bone (trabecular and cortical) and skin will be expressed as nmol 
Gd / g bone or skin . 
 Gd concentration in bone (trabecular and cortical) and skin as a function of time 
elapsed between GdCA injection and surgery. Additional stratification classifications 
of time after dosing of Gd will be specified in the SAP . 
 Analyses will be performed separately for trabecula r bone, cortical bone, and skin . 
 Time elapsed between GdCA injection and surgery, cu mulative GdCA dose, number 
of doses and time intervals of dosing . 
 eGFR . 
 Potential co -factors for NSF and susceptibility factors, based on the following data 
and in the limi t of their availability in medical history of the patients : 
o eGFR ; 
o cumulative dose of GdCA , 
o co-existing vascular, thrombotic and/or pro -inflammatory events ; 
o serum concentrations of calcium, phosphorus, sodium, iron, potassium and zinc ; 
o any event which may h ave led to iron mobilization, including concomitant iron 
drug; 
o cumulative dose of erythropoietin ; 
o T4 and TSH . 
 Concomitant drug treatments with potential impact on bone metabolism: 
biphosphonates, estrogens, calcitonin, calcitriol, fluoride salts, vitamin D , 
corticosteroids . 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 43 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 Concentration of Ca, P, Na, Zn, K and Fe in skin and in tissue of both trabecular and 
cortical bone, determined by ICP -MS (or ICP -AES if the feasibility evaluation of ICP -
MS does not show reliable results) . 
 Histopathological evaluation o f skin samples (taken at time of surgery / surgeries) 
with regard to the possibility of findings associated with NSF by an experienced 
dermatopathologist under blinded conditions at a central site . 
8.1.3  Analysis of safety data  
The AEs will be encoded using the MedDRA thesaurus in the most recent version available 
at study start. This version will be used throughout the entire study without subsequent up -
date. Frequency tables for the preferred terms (PTs) will be compiled, based on patients ex -
periencing an AE a nd based on the number of AEs. These frequency tables will also be 
stratified by system organ class (SOC).  
Concomitant diseases and medical history will also be encoded using MedDRA. These data 
will be presented applying  frequency tables.  
Previous and conc omitant medication will be encoded using the WHO -DD dictionary. Fre -
quency tables will be compiled based on medication coding.  
8.1.4  Missing data  
Missing values will not be replaced.  
8.1.5  Multicentre study  
This study will be performed as a multinational multicentre s tudy. Due to the small sample 
size of each stratification group, results will not be further stratified by country or centre . 
8.1.6  Subgroup analyses  
Due to the small number of patients in each stratification subgroup , special subgroup 
analyses are not planned.  
The patients who have undergone two surgeries on study will be analysed as a subgroup , at 
least for Gd concentration in bone and skin. Descriptive statistics will be calculated for the 
difference of Gd concentration in bone (trabecular and cortical) and i n skin at the time of first 
and the time of second surgery. Stratification of the results will depend on the number of pa -
tients in this subgroup (8.1.2).  
8.1.7  Patient data listings  
All recorded data will be presented in patient data listings.  
8.1.8  Deviations from t he planned statistical analysis  
Any deviations from the planned statistical analysis shall be defined in the statistical analysis 
plan prior to unblinding the sample results. They shall also be described and justified in the 
final study report. If a deviat ion has an impact on the primary analysis, the Sponsor may elect 
to document such deviation in a protocol amendment.  
8.1.9  Interim analysis  
An interim analysis will be carried out on all patients enrolled in  the single dose subgroups for 
Gadobutrol, Gadoteric ac id, Gadodiamide and G adopentetic acid once at least three patients 
have been recruited to all the single dose exposure subgroups for the 4 agents.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 44 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
The interim analysis will be based on the PP population to determine the Gd concentration in 
bone (trabecula r and cortical) and skin (expressed as nmol Gd / g). Gd concentrations will be 
descriptively evaluated (as defined in section 8.1.2) by:  
 Renal function status: Stable normal renal function (eGFR > 60 ml/min/1.73 m2), 
impaired renal function (eGFR <30 ml/mi n/1.73 m2 (severe) and ≥30 to <=60 
ml/min/1.73 m2 (moderate)) versus control  
 GdCA: Each of the 4 GdCAs (Gadobutrol, Gadoteric acid, Gadodiamide, and 
Gadopentetic acid) versus control  
No statistical tests are to be calculated.  
All data used in this interim analysis will be listed. All listings will include patient identifier, 
GdCA type, renal function, and will be sorted by GdCA type, renal function, and patient 
identifier.  
Study Investigational sites and analytical laboratories will be blinded to the Interi m Analysis 
results. Details on the interim analysis evaluation will be described in the Statistical Analysis 
Plan (SAP).  
8.1.10  Software used for statistical analysis  
The SAS software version  9.2 or higher will be used for the statistical analysis and for the re -
porting of this study.  
8.1.11  Determination of sample size  
There are no prior expectations or assumptions relative to the measured concentrations of 
Gd in the bone (primary objective) and in skin (secondary objective). Due to the exploratory 
nature of the study, the sample size was not determined based on formal statistical consider -
ation, but rather on the feasibility of conducting the study as a whole. The study is intended 
to be analysed descriptively. No formal hypothesis testing is planned.  
There are six gro ups for active GdCA ingredients (Gadobutrol, Gadodiamide, Gadopentetic 
acid, Gadoteric acid, Gadoversetamide, and Gadoxetic acid ).  
In each group, three categories of renal function (stable (normal) renal function (eGFR > 60 
ml/min/1.73 m2) versus impaired  renal function (eGFR <30  ml/min/1.73 m2 (severe) and ≥30 
to <=60 ml/min/1.73 m2 (moderate)) and two subgroups of dosing of GdCA (single  / multiple) 
are to be evaluated.  
 
Per active GdCA ingredient the recruitment targets are defined as follows  
 5 patients for stable normal  renal function (eGFR > 60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and single 
dose  
 at least 3 patients and up to 5 patients for stable normal  renal function and multiple  
dose s  
 5 patients for impaired renal function ( eGFR < =60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and single dose  
 up to 5 pat ients for impaired renal function ( eGFR < =60 ml/min/1.73 m2) and multiple  
dose s. For Gadobutrol and Gadoteric acid , at least 3 patients  are required. For 
Gadodiamide, Gadopentetic acid, Gadoversetamide, and Gadoxetic acid, there is no 
requirement to reach a specific number of patients t o achieve study completion.  
 
The total number of patients enrolled in th ese groups  will be at least 84.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 45 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
The number of subgroups in the GdCA -naïve population is 3  according to renal function 
category  (i.e. severe or moderate impairment, and stable normal  renal function ). Five 
patients will be enrolled per each sub -group . Therefore, t he total number of GdCA -naïve 
patients enrolled will be at least  15.  
Consequently, a minimum of 99 patients in total shall be included in the study.  
 
8.2 Data management  
The data management will be performed using Oracle Clinical version  4.5.3 or later. Details 
will be defined in the data management manual, which will be signed by the Sponsor  prior to 
start of the data entry.  
9 DATA HANDLING AND DAT A QUALITY ASSURANCE  
9.1 Documentation  
9.1.1  Patient identification list  
All patients who have given informed consent to study participation – regardless if the patient 
has received any product under evaluation  or not – shall be entered on the patient  identifica -
tion list by the assigned study staff , giving full name, initials, date of birth and patient number. 
The patient identification list will be kept in the Investigator's File (IF).  
9.1.2  Sour ce data and patient records  
All data entered into the eCRF shall have corresponding source documentation available at 
the site.  
9.1.3  Case report forms  
This study will use an eCRF for data capture . The Oracle Clinical Remote Data Capture 
(RDC) System version 4.5 .3 or later will be applied . An eCRF completion manual  for the use 
of the RDC system will be provided prior to study start.  
The system used shall be validated and is compliant with Food and Drug Association (FDA) 
Title 21 CFR part 11 and the requirements o f ICH GCP.  
For each patient, the investigator must enter all requested data and findings as they occur 
during the study in the eCRF. The eCRFs should be made available at all times for monitor -
ing visits (even for visits arranged at short notice). The inv estigator must keep the eCRFs in 
good order and up to date so that they always reflect the latest observations on the patients 
enrolled in the study.  
Any discrepancies in the eCRF data detected by the study personnel are to be resolved via 
data clarificati on forms (DCFs).  
9.2 Direct access to source data/documents  
Monitoring the study progress requires c hecking the eCRFs for completeness and clarity as 
well as their cross -checking with source documents . The CRAs are entitled to compare 
eCRF entries to source da ta and to inform the investigator about any errors and omissions. 
The investigator will provide direct access to source data/documents for the Sponsor’s des -
ignated representatives (CRAs and auditors) as well as IRB/IRC members and regulatory in -
spections.  
Regulatory authorities and/or the Sponsor's Clinical Quality Assurance Group may also carry 
out such source data checks and/or on -site audit inspections. They will be carried out giving 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 46 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
due consideration to data protection and medical confidentiality. The  investigator is to give 
the Sponsor whatever support is necessary.  
9.3 Monitoring  
Monitoring will be conducted by Sponsor CRAs  in accordance with the stipulations of 
chapter  5.18 of the ICH  GCP Guideline.  
During the course of the study, a CRA will visit each centre to review protocol compliance, 
compare eCRFs to corresponding patient medical records, and ensure that the study is being 
conducted according to pertinent regulatory requirements and the protocol. eCRF entries will 
be verified against source documen tation in accordance with the applicable Standard Oper -
ating Procedures (SOPs) of the Sponsor . CRAs  will maintain and protect the confidentiality of 
personal data of patients.  
Data monitoring will include 100% source data verification  of every patient ’s do cumentation . 
For patients who are withdrawn from the study prior to surgery, only the written informed 
consent form shall be verified.  
The CRA will determine whether all AEs and SAEs have been appropriately reported.  
The Sponsor reserves the right to order  special examinations of laboratory samples in case 
of doubt concerning the validity of individual patient data or the accuracy of data generation 
at an investigational centre.  
9.4 Quality assurance  
Pre-study site visits will be performed by representatives of  the Sponsor in order to assure 
the eligibility of the study centre s to implement  the protocol, with specific focus on staff quali -
fication and/or technical equipment requirements.  
Furthermore it is planned that a member of the Sponsor’s quality assurance unit will perform 
on-site audits (approximately one audit per active country). The auditor(s) will usually be 
accompanied by a CRA. The investigator will be informed about the outcome of any audit of 
their respective centre.  
In addition, inspections by hea lth authority representatives - including foreign authorities - 
and IEC(s) / IRB(s) are possible at any time. The investigator should immediately notify the 
Sponsor of any such inspection announcement.  
As other planned quality measures:  
 A protocol audit  
 A TMF audit at the end of the study  
 An audit of the final study report.  
will be performed . 
10 ETHICAL , LEGAL AND ADMINISTRA TIVE ASPECTS  
10.1 General considerations  
The procedures regarding the conduct, evaluation, and documentation of this study as de -
scribed in thi s protocol are designed to ensure that the study is conducted according to GCP 
guidelines and under the guiding principles detailed in the Declaration of Helsinki. The study 
will also be carried out in accordance with FDA Title 21 CFR part 11 and in accord ance with 
applicable local laws and regulations.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 47 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
Each investigators of this study shall ensure that this clinical investigation is conducted in ac -
cordance with the signed investigator agreement, the study protocol, and all applicable reg -
ulations. The inv estigator is responsible ensuring  that the rights, safety, and welfare of the 
study patients are protected at all times.  
10.2 Approval procedures  
Before the start of the study, the study protocol and/or other relevant documents will be ap -
proved by the appropr iate ethics committee.  
The relevant authorities, in accordance with local legal requirements will be notified/asked for 
approval of the intended study.  
10.3 Protocol amendments  
After initiation of the study, any change in this protocol will require a formal ame ndment. The 
amendment must be signed by all of the signatories to the original protocol. Once the study 
has started, amendments will be made only in exceptional cases.  
All protocol amendments will be submitted to ethics committee(s) and  the regulator y auth ori-
ties, as required by national law.  
Changes to the protocol may only be implemented after all appropriate requirements listed 
above (ethics, regulatory approval of all responsible personnel) have been fulfilled.  
10.4 Informed consent  
Before any patient can b e enrolled or admitted into the study, their informed consent will be 
obtained according to the national regulatory and legal requirements. To this end, the inves -
tigator or an authorised designee will explain the nature, purpose, significance and scope of  
the study, including its potential risks, to the patient. In addition to this oral information, the 
patient will receive for his/her own records a written patient information sheet summarising 
the relevant information. Sufficient time will be allowed to d iscuss any questions raised by the 
patient. Only after this information has been provided can informed consent for participation 
be given. The consent form must be personally signed and dated by the patient giving con -
sent, and it must be retained by the i nvestigator as part of the study records. A copy of the 
signed informed consent form will be given to the patient.  
The investigator will not undertake any investigation required for the clinical study until in -
formed consent has been obtained. The terms of  the consent and the date when it was ob -
tained should also be entered in the eCRF.  
After releasing an amendment to the protocol, the contents of which might influence the pa -
tient's decision for participation, the patient information sheet and the inform ed consent form 
must be amended accordingly. They must be submitted to the relevant ethics committee and 
the relevant authority as requested by local law. Depending on the nature of the amendment 
it might be necessary that patients already enrolled must co nfirm their informed consent on 
the basis of the new information by reviewing and signing the amended informed consent 
form.  
10.5 Confidentiality  
All local legal requirements regarding protection of personal patient data will be adhered to.  
The anonymity of stu dy patients will be maintained. Throughout documentation and evalua -
tion, the patients will be identified on eCRFs and other documents by an identification (pa -
tient) number. Documents which identify the patient (e.g. the signed informed consent) must 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 48 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
be m aintained in confidence by the investigator. The patients will be informed that all study 
findings will be stored on computer and handled in the strictest confidence.  
Any results derived from the study and documents will also be regarded as confidential. T he in -
vestigators and members of their research teams will be not be allowed to disclose such in -
formation without prior written approval from the Sponsor.  
10.6 Liability and insurance  
Where required by the laws and regulations of the country in which the study  is performed, in -
surance of patients against health impairment occurring as a result of participation in the study 
will be obtained in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. All relevant documenta -
tion regarding such insurance will be filed in the TMF and/or IF, as appropriate.  
The General Insurance Conditions will be kept in the investigator's file and shall be made 
available for patients at any time that the centre is open.  
10.7 Publication and use of study findings  
By signing the study protoco l, the investigator agrees with the use of results of the study for 
the purposes of national and international registration, publication and information for 
medical and pharmaceutical professionals. If necessary, the authorities will be notified of the 
investigator's name, address, qualifications and extent of involvement.  
An integrated study report covering clinical and biometrical aspects will be prepared by the 
Sponsor.  
All relevant aspects regarding publication will be part of the contract between the Sponsor 
and the investigator/institution.  
10.8 Archiving of study records  
Essential documents as listed in ICH  GCP, chapter  8, will be retained for at least 15  years 
after study end. The documents may be retained for a longer period if required by other ap -
plicable regulatory requirements or by a separate agreement between the Sponsor and the 
investigator.  
Patient medical records will be archived according to local regulations and in accordance 
with the maximum period of time permitted by the hospital, institutio n, or private practice.  
The investigator’s file  is not to be destroyed without the Sponsor’s approval. The investiga -
tor’s contract will contain all regulations relevant for the study centre. The Sponsor will inform 
the investigator when the prescribed pe riod for archiving study documents has elapsed and 
the investigator no longer needs to retain the records relating to the study.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 49 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
11 LIST OF REFERENCES  
 (1)  Cowper SE, Robin HS, Steinberg SM, Su LD, Gupta S, LeBoit PE. 
Scleromyxoedema -like cutaneous diseases in renal -dialysis patients. Lancet 2000 
September 16;356(9234):1000 -1. 
 (2)  Grobner T. Gadolinium --a specific trigger for the development of nephrogenic 
fibrosing dermopathy and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis? Nephrol Dial Transplan t 
2006 April;21(4):1104 -8. 
 (3)  Grobner T. ERRATUM. Gadolinium - a specific trigger for the development of 
nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis? Reply. Nephrol 
Dial Transplant 2006;21:1745.  
 (4)  Cowper SE, Rabach M, Girardi M. Clinical and histological findings in nephrogenic 
systemic fibrosis. Eur J Radiol 2008 May;66(2):191 -9. 
 (5)  Grobner T, Prischl FC. Gadolinium and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. Kidney Int 
2007 August;72(3):260 -4. 
 (6)  Girardi M, Kay J, Elston DM, LeB oit PE, Abu -Alfa A, Cowper SE. Nephrogenic 
systemic fibrosis: clinicopathological definition and workup recommendations. J Am 
Acad Dermatol 2011 December;65(6):1095 -106. 
 (7)  Cowper SE, Su LD, Bhawan J, Robin HS, LeBoit PE. Nephrogenic fibrosing 
dermopath y. Am J Dermatopathol 2001 October;23(5):383 -93. 
 (8)  Nazarian RM, Mandal RV, Kagan A, Kay J, Duncan LM. Quantitative assessment of 
dermal cellularity in nephrogenic systemic fibrosis: a diagnostic aid. J Am Acad 
Dermatol 2011 April;64(4):741 -7. 
 (9)  Cowper SE. Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis: a review and exploration of the role of 
gadolinium. Adv Dermatol 2007;23:131 -54.:131 -54. 
 (10)  Marckmann P, Skov L, Rossen K, Heaf JG, Thomsen HS. Case -control study of 
gadodiamide -related nephrogenic systemic fibros is. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2007 
November;22(11):3174 -8. 
 (11)  Sadowski EA, Bennett LK, Chan MR, Wentland AL, Garrett AL, Garrett RW et al. 
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis: risk factors and incidence estimation. Radiology 2007 
April;243(1):148 -57. 
 (12)  Prince MR, Zhang HL, Roditi GH, Leiner T, Kucharczyk W. Risk factors for NSF: a 
literature review. J Magn Reson Imaging 2009 December;30(6):1298 -308. 
 (13)  Kallen AJ, Jhung MA, Cheng S, Hess T, Turabelidze G, Abramova L et al. 
Gadolinium -containing magnetic  resonance imaging contrast and nephrogenic 
systemic fibrosis: a case -control study. Am J Kidney Dis 2008 June;51(6):966 -75. 
 (14)  Swaminathan S, Ahmed I, McCarthy JT, Albright RC, Pittelkow MR, Caplice NM et al. 
Nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy and high -dose erythropoietin therapy. Ann Intern 
Med 2006 August 1;145(3):234 -5. 
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 50 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 (15)  Swaminathan S, Horn TD, Pellowski D, Abul -Ezz S, Bornhorst JA, Viswamitra S et al. 
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, gadolinium, and iron mobilization. N Engl J Med 2007 
August 16; 357(7):720 -2. 
 (16)  Prince MR, Zhang H, Morris M, MacGregor JL, Grossman ME, Silberzweig J et al. 
Incidence of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis at two large medical centers. Radiology 
2008 September;248(3):807 -16. 
 (17)  Abraham JL, Thakral C, Skov L, Rossen  K, Marckmann P. Dermal inorganic 
gadolinium concentrations: evidence for in vivo transmetallation and long -term 
persistence in nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. Br J Dermatol 2008 
February;158(2):273 -80. 
 (18)  Gibby WA, Gibby KA, Gibby WA. Comparison of Gd DTPA -BMA (Omniscan) versus 
Gd HP -DO3A (ProHance) retention in human bone tissue by inductively coupled 
plasma atomic emission spectroscopy. Invest Radiol 2004 March;39(3):138 -42. 
 (19)  White GW, Gibby WA, Tweedle MF. Comparison of Gd(DTPA -BMA) (Omniscan) 
versus Gd(HP -DO3A) (ProHance) relative to gadolinium retention in human bone 
tissue by inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy. Invest Radiol 2006 
March;41(3):272 -8. 
 (20)  Weinmann HJ, Press WR, Gries H. Tolerance of extracellular contrast agents for  
magnetic resonance imaging. Invest Radiol 1990 September;25 Suppl 1:S49 -
50.:S49 -S50. 
 (21)  Darrah TH, Prutsman -Pfeiffer JJ, Poreda RJ, Ellen CM, Hauschka PV, Hannigan RE. 
Incorporation of excess gadolinium into human bone from medical contrast agents. 
Metallomics 2009 November;1(6):479 -88. 
 (22)  Becker S, Walter S, Witzke O, Wilde B, Hillen U, Napieralski D et al. The German 
registry for nephrogenic systemic fibrosis: findings from 23 patients. Clin Nephrol 
2010 June;73(6):426 -30. 
 (23)  Deng A, Martin DB, Spillane A, Chwalek J, St Surin -Lord S, Brooks S et al. 
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis with a spectrum of clinical and histopathological 
presentation: a disorder of aberrant dermal remodeling. J Cutan Pathol 2010 
February;37(2):204 -10. 
 (24)  High WA, Ayers RA, Chandler J, Zito G, Cowper SE. Gadolinium is detectable within 
the tissue of patients with nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. J Am Acad Dermatol 2007 
January;56(1):21 -6. 
 (25)  Thakral C, Abraham JL. Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis: hi stology and gadolinium 
detection. Radiol Clin North Am 2009 September;47(5):841 -vii. 
 (26)  EMA: European Medicines Agency.Committee of Medicinal Products for Human Use 
(CHMP). Guideline on Bioanalytical Method Evaluation.  2012 Feb.  
 (27)  FDA: US Depart ment of Health and Human Services.Food and Drug Administration.  
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. Guidance for Industry: Bioanalytical 
method validation.  2001 May.  
Study  No.: ALS-Gd64/001   
Long -Term Retention of Gadolinium in Bone  
Version 4.0 Final, 2 9 April 2016  
Page 51 of 51  
 
 
This document is proprietary to the Sponsor (EAG) and for  restricted circulation and access only.   
 (28)  Zaksas NP, Sultangazieva TT, Gerasimov VA. Determination of trace elements i n 
bone by two -jet plasma atomic emission spectrometry. Anal Bioanal Chem 2008 
May;391(2):687 -93. 
 (29)  Schroeder JA, Weingart C, Coras B, Hausser I, Reinhold S, Mack M et al. 
Ultrastructural evidence of dermal gadolinium deposits in a patient with nephrog enic 
systemic fibrosis and end -stage renal disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008 
July;3(4):968 -75. 
 (30)  Levey AS, Stevens LA. Estimating GFR Using the CKD Epidemiology Collaboration 
(CKD -EPI) Creatinine Equation: More Accurate GFR Estimates, Lower CKD 
Prevalence Estimates, and Better Risk Predictions. Am J Kidney Dis 2010 
April;55(4):622 -7. 
 
 
12 APPENDICES  
None . 