Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Technology -Based Sedentary Reduction Intervention in Patients with Type 
2 Diabetes: A Pilot Study  
 
Principal Investigator:  
Shelagh Mulvaney, PhD  
Associate Professor  
School of Nursing, Vanderbilt  University 
425 Godchaux Hall  
21st Avenue South Nashville, TN  37240  
Phone:  615-322-1198  
Email: shelagh.mulvaney @vanderbilt.edu  
 
Co-Investigators:  
 
Chorong Park, PhD, RN  
Assistant Professor  
School of Nursing, Vanderbilt University  
 
Mulubrhan Mogos, PhD, MSc  
Assistant Professor  
School of Nursing, Vanderbilt University  
 
James Muchira, PhD  
Assistant Professor  
School of Nursing, Vanderbilt University  
 
Jason Jean, DNP  
Lecturer of School of Nursing Vanderbilt University 
Nurse Practitioner of Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
  
 
 
 
Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific  Aims  
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
5.0 Study  Procedures  
6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk 
to Participants or  Others  
7.0 Study  Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
8.0 Statistical  Considerations  
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality  Issues  
10.0  Follow-up and Record  Retention  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 1.0 Background  
Sedentary behavior (SB) is a strong modifiable risk factor for developing type 2 
diabetes (T2D) and cardiovascular disease, even after controlling for daily 
physical activity.1-3 During sedentary behavior, there is no muscle contraction of the 
legs, which causes decreasing insulin sensitivity, glucose uptake, vascular dysfunction, 
and promotes low -grade inflammatory cascades.4 Despite the important role of 
sedentary behavior in managing T2D, people with T2D remain highly sedentary. They 
spend on average 11 -15 hours per day sitting,5,6 which comprises 65 -75% of waking 
time.5,7,8 Moderate -to-vigorous levels of physical activity or exercise can attenuate 
cardiometabolic risk, but do es not eliminate the increased risk associated with high 
sedentary time.1,9 Considering T2D patients’ low cardiorespiratory fitness and low activity 
levels,10,11 they may be at greater risk than others for the negative cardiometabolic 
consequences of seden tary behavior.12 Therefore, there is a pressing need to  
develop novel strategies to reduce SB and improve daily activity in patients with  
T2D. Targeting SB, which occupies most of a T2D patient’s waking time, can be  
a new target behavior for secondary prev ention in this  population.  
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific  Aims  
 
Frequent standing/walking can reduce the total SB time and change prolonged patterns 
to interrupted patterns. Since leg muscles do not contract during SB, sedentary breaks 
such as standing/walkin g (requiring muscle contractions) may change physiological 
pathways and improve cardiometabolic outcomes. A recent meta -analysis found that 
while controlling for total sedentary time and MVPA time, short sedentary breaks (2 -5 
minutes of standing/walking fo r every 20 -60 minutes of sitting) were beneficially 
associated with cardiometabolic markers; adding one break decreases 0.05 unit of BMI,  
0.2 cm of WC, 0.002 mg/dl of hsCRP, and 1.8 mmHG of systolic blood pressure 
(BP).13,14 Many intervention studies have also shown that breaking prolonged sedentary 
time with short periods of light PA or standing improves glucose (2 -17%) and insulin 
(15%).13,15 Moreover, emerging evidence shows that reducing SB time with frequent 
breaks is safe16-18 in other chronic health conditions and applicable to T2D 
patients.  
SB breaks can be achieved through self -monitoring and prompts from a wearable 
device. In addition, the use of a smart water bottle may be a promising strategy to 
naturally break sedentary time due to the impact of  increased water intake on kitchen 
and restroom breaks. A smart water bottle can sync with an activity tracker, which could 
synergistically motivate the T2D patients to reduce SB. This new technique is a 
potentially  low-cost and sustainable  strategy  to deliver SB  reduction  interventions.  
Because there is no SB reduction program specifically focusing on sedentary breaks in 
T2D patients, we propose to develop and conduct a pilot study to test a wearable 
technology ‐based SB reduction intervention in T2D patient   The 8-week intervention 
includes: 1) one instructional and goal setting session; 2) the use of a wearable devi ce 
(Fitbit) that provides stand/walk prompts and self -monitoring; 3) a smart water bottle 
(HidrateSpark) that syncs with the Fitbit, and 4) weekly tailored text messages for 
behavior reinforcement and weekly goal monitoring.  Since text message s and wearab le 
device -based intervention requires a complex and multiple iterative process to 
customize research participants’ needs and refine the contents and frequency of the text 
messages . To find the most suitable frequency and contents of text messages, we  will 
use an iterative design process. Outcomes will be measured at baseline and post -
intervention. Specifically, we aim to: Aim 1 : Determine the feasibility and acceptability of 
the SB reduction intervention in T2D patients by evaluating reach, retention, satisfaction, 
and compliance with the  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 intervention.  
Aim 2 : Evaluate the preliminary efficacy of the SB reduction intervention on changes in 
total SB time and numbers of prolonged SB bouts.  
Aim 3 (Exploratory Aim) : Explore preliminary effects of the SB reduction intervention 
on light physical activity (total standing and stepping times), cardiometabolic markers 
(24-hour glycemic control, BMI, waist circumference, blood pressure ) and patient -
centered outcome s (confidence in reducing SB, habit strength for SB, and quality of 
life). 
 
3. Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
Inclusion criteria:  1) ages 18 and above, 2) diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, 3) self - 
reported HbA1C<13, 4) self -report of sitting ≥ 8hr/day, 5) abi lity to stand and walk, 6)  
ownership of a smartphone.  
Exclusion criteria:  1) currently using an activity tracker; 2) currently participating in exercise 
or other research programs; 3) use of insulin; 4) non -English speak ing; 5) patients who are 
classified as unstable (e.g., heart failure, uncontrolled arrhythmia) or have kidney disease 
that limits daily water intake, or any other conditions contradictory to standing or 
walking 19,20; and 6) random blood glucose > 300, and 7) currently pregnant.  
 
4.0 Enrollment  
Recruitment  
We will use five recruitment strategies:  
 
1) Self-referrals  
Recruitment flyers and brochures will be posted in Primary care clinics at 
Vanderbilt for self -referrals. The flyer and brochure are attached to this 
application. If the subject is interested, they will call the number on the 
recruitment flyers. During the phone call, the trained research staff will answer 
any questions from the potential participants and ask about their eligibility. An y 
of the data regarding their eligibility will not be recorded or stored. If subjects 
are interested in participating and meet all the eligibility criteria, an in -person 
baseline visit will be scheduled. The detailed procedure regarding pre - 
screening pros pective participants is described below  
 
2) Research Notification Distribution  List 
Email distribution list allows researchers to email IRB -approved participant 
recruitment announcements to the Vanderbilt community. Members of the 
distribution list have the o ption to subscribe/unsubscribe with each email. The 
potential participants will click the pre -screening consent. The detailed procedure 
regarding pre -screening prospective participants is described below  
 
3) ResearchMatch.  
ResearchMatch is a national electron ic, web -based recruitment tool that was 
created through the Clinical and Translational Science Awards Consortium in 
2009 and is maintained at Vanderbilt University as an IRB -approved data 
repository (see IRB #090207). The detailed procedure regarding pre -screening 
prospective participants is described below.  
 
After advertisement, there will be two approaches to identify eligible 
participants. For online recruitment (using Email distribution list and 
ResearchMatch) placed via email, there will be a link dire cting the potential 
participants to the prescreening e -consent via REDCap. They will have an  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 option to download the e -consent for prescreening activities. After they sign on 
the prescreening e -consent, they will answer several questions about t heir 
eligibility (e.g. sitting hours > 8 hours a day). These pre -screening data will be 
saved into REDCap. Once they meet all the inclusion criteria, the trained 
research staff will call them to confirm their eligibility and schedule an in - 
person baseline  visit. 
 
4) Reporting  Workbench  
Reporting Workbench Reports are available/viewable in eStar . These reports are 
developed using real -time data and can be customized to meet study -specific 
inclusion/exclusion criteria that are computable in the EHR. The reports often 
include additional variables to facilitate study team outreach, such as Research OK 
to Contact status, MHAV account status, contact information, next upcoming 
appointment in a specific clinic. While the report displays certain variables/data, it 
provides easy access to a patient's record for additional screening and 
confirmation of eli gibility. Research team members with appropriate eStar access 
can view/run the reports as frequently as  needed.  
 
We plan to use the results from our custom Reporting Workbench report to 
facilitate outreach in the following way: To send My Health at Vanderb ilt (MHAV) 
recruitment requests, as detailed below in recruiting strategy 5. KSP do not have 
an existing provider relationship with the patients being approached about study 
participation. Results will be restricted to those marked as ‘OK to Contact’. We w ill 
not be reaching out to employees or persons of interest.  
 
5) My Health at Vanderbilt (MHAV) Recruitment  Requests  
Participants will be recruited through My Health at Vanderbilt. My Health at 
Vanderbilt (MHAV) is VUMC's patient portal where the patient may sign up and 
participate in managing his/her health care. MHAV can also be used for sending 
recruitment requests to a predefined cohort of patients who meet certain study - 
specific inclusion/exclusion criteria, have an activated MHAV account and are 
marked as OK to Contact in eStar. The recruitment requests are sent by a central 
VICTR team on behalf of the study team. The notification preferences for the 
recruitment requests can be managed by the patients in MHAV. The system 
default is an email notification like clinical notifications (see attached MHAV 
Recruitment Request messaging). If the patient has turned off notifications, the 
study will just be listed on their research studies page in MHAV.  
 
Once the Recruitment Requests are sent, the patients' enrollm ent status is 
automatically updated to (IT Use Only) Identified - RWB Recruitment Message or 
Auto DL. If the patient clicks ‘ No Thank You’ , the patient's enrollment status in 
eStar is automatically updated to (IT Use Only) Not Interested - Pt. answered in 
MHAV . The study team does not get a notification in Epic In Basket or in REDCap.  
 
If the patient clicks ‘ I'm Interested ’, the designated KSP (with eStar access) 
receive an In Basket message in eStar indicating the patient is interested  
 
The patient's enrollment status is automatically updated to (IT Use Only) 
Interested - Pt. answered in MHAV . The REDCap Participant Updater Module 
looks for the patient's MRN in the study specific database. If a matching MRN is 
not found, the Participant U pdater Module creates a record in the study -specific 
database with the following information from eStar:  
(1) Patient's  MRN  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 (2) Patient's enrollment status - (IT Use Only) Interested - Pt. answered in 
MHAV  
(3) Study ID  (IRB#)  
 
REDCap CDIS is then triggered to pull in the patient email address from eStar if 
available for all patients who click I’m Interested. This will trigger an email from 
REDCap to the patient which contains a link to the IRB approved pre -screening 
and eConsent  surveys on REDCap.  
 
If the patient responds to the email from REDCap or completes a pre -screening survey or 
eConsent, the study team will update the patient's enrollment status accordingly in eStar 
or REDCap. Once the patient's enrollment status has been updated in the study specific 
record in REDCap, the Participant Updater Module will automatically update the 
enrollment status in eStar. The study team will contact the interested patient by telephone 
call or email to confirm their eligibility and schedule  an in -person baseline visit  
 
 
5.0 Study Procedures  
 
 
This iterative design process requires multiple  cohorts  until reach ing the general 
agreement in terms of participants’ satisfaction and feedback  on the intervention . 
Below is the steps  to iterative process of developing Sit Less Program.  
As of today (May 15, 2023), we are currently undergoing  the first phase, testing Sit 
Less V1  and will collect participants’ feedback in June 2023. We also  collected user’s 
feedback from a sibling study “  Reducing sedentary time in patients with 
cardiovascular disease: A pilot randomized controlled trial (Sit Less Study)”  IRB # 
220416 . This sibling study has the same intervention components and is now  
undergoing qualitativ e analysis based on int ervention group participants’ feedback. 
35 
 
 
Below  is a detailed study process over time for all of cohort participants.  
 
5.1. Baseline visit 1: Initial contact, screening, and  consent  
Interested respondents will be screened by a trained research staff over the phone or in - 

Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 person, depending on the recruitment methods. For this research, no aspect of the 
participant’s diabetes treatment regimen will be modified.  
 
Those who are eligible for the stud y will be invited to the in -person visit. The first visit 
(i.e. Baseline visit 1) will be conducted at VUSN (Vanderbilt School of Nursing)’s lab at 
Wesley building.  
 
At the Baseline visit 1, the trained research staff will ask the individual what their mos t 
recent blood glucose level was. If their reported glucose levels are between 80 -300, they 
will complete the informed consent with assistance from the trained research staff.  
Those who are consented will participate in 1) completing survey questionnaires  
(30minutes), 2) biometric assessments 3) brief instruction regarding the wear of 
activPAL and continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) devices (30  minutes), and 4) start to 
wear two devices for 7 days. The activPAL3 device (PAL Technologies Ltd., Scotland, 
UK) will be worn on the thigh and a CGM (Abbott FreeStyle Libre) will be attached to the 
upper arm. The research staff will provide 1) a copy of the informed con sent form; 2) 
instructions with photos and 5 waterproof dressings (Tegaderm) for attaching the 
activPAL on the thigh; 3) information about the CGM; and 4) daily sleep diary and wear 
log for 7 days. Participants will receive $25 for baseline visit 1.  
 
1. Quest ionnaires  
Participants will be given an iPad to answer questions about their demographics, 
socioeconomic characteristics, and a series of questionnaires detailed below. All 
responses will be recorded in REDCap.  
a) Demographics : demographics and socio -economic status will be self -reported 
by the  patients.  
b) Health behavior : Questions about their tobacco use, alcohol intake,  physical  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 activity (measured using the 16 -item Global physical activity questionnaire21), 
sedentary behavior (measur ed using 11 -item Weekly sitting inventory22), and diet 
(measured using the 16 -item Rapid Eating and Activity Assessment for 
Participants Short Version (REAP -S)23, sleep quality (measured using the 10 - 
item Pittsburgh sleep quality index24) will be answered  with the assistance of the 
study team member.  
c) Confidence in reducing SB and increasing PA : Confidence in reducing SB 
and increasing  physical  activity  will be measured  using  12 items  from the Self- 
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 Efficacy Questionnaire for Physical Activity and Sedentary Behavior (Cronbach’s alpha = 
0.79). 25 
d) Habit strength for SB : Habit strength for SB will be assessed by using a 
validated measure, Self -Report Habit Index (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.91). 26 This 7 - 
item index was adapted to sedentary breaks (standing/walking) to assess the 
degree to which sedentary breaks become  habitual.  
e) Quality of life : Quality of life will be measured by using the 12 -item Short Form 
Health Survey (SF -12). The SF -12 is well -validated i n T2D patients27 and 
provides physical and mental health  scores.28 
f) Medical history and current medication : Medical history and current 
medication will be self -reported by the  patients.  
g) Depressive symptoms : Depressive symptoms will be measured by using 
Patients Health Questionnaire 9  (PHQ -9)29. 
h) Diabetes  self-management : Self-efficacy  of diabetes  self-management  will be 
measured by the Perceived Diabetes Self -Management  Scale30. 
 
2. Biometric assessments  
Participants will undergo a basic physical examination  (e.g., height, weight, blood 
pressure, hip circumference, waist circumference) . 
a) Anthropometrics: Height, weight, and waist and hip circumferences will be 
measured using a validated stadiometer, digital scale, and flexible tape measure, 
respectively. All measurements will be recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm and 0.1 
kg. 
b) Blood pressure: Blood pressure will be measured using an automated and 
validated BP monitor. In a private room, participants will be seated comfortably for 5 
minutes  with feet flat on the ground prior to measurements. 32 The device will take 
three readings at 2 -minute intervals and the mean of three BP readings will be 
recorded. 32 
c) Random  glucose via finger prick : The trained research staff will conduct a 
finger prick and one drop of blood will be obtained on a glucometer. The 
glucometer will be used to test their random  glucose.  Participants will NOT be 
required to fast overnight prior to the study visit.  If the random glucose >300,  the 
PI will be immediately informed and the participant will be withdraw n per the 
protocol (see section 7).  
 
3. ActivPAL  
The activPAL  is a non -invasive method of monitoring activity and rest cycles through 
an inclinometer. The device will be worn on the anterior upper thigh of the dominant 
leg and kept in place by an adhesive pad (Tegaderm). If the participants have hair on 
the upper th igh, shaving an area of the thigh will be considered; we will provide a 
disposable shaving razor and foam as well as a private room with a sink. The 
participant will apply the device by themselves in a private room. The participants will 
wear the activPAL 24hours over a 7 -day period. There is no need to charge the 
device. The activPAL monitor has been validated against direct observation and is 
the most sensitive device to detect sitting -to-standing transitions.31At a follow -up visit 
(Baseline visit 2), the activPAL data will be downloaded to the secured PI’s computer 
and summary reports will be reviewed by the study team member and the 
participants.  
 
4. Continuous Glucose Monitor  (CGM)  
The device (FreeStyle Libre Pro ™; Abbott Diabetes Care, Witney, Oxon, UK) will be 
worn on the back of the upper arm to measure their 24 -hours glucose levels for 7 
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 days. The CGM has one sensor applicator, one sensor, and one reader. Skin will be 
prepared using an alcohol wipe and the sen sor applicator will be placed over the 
application  site. The research  staff will press  firmly,  hold for a few seconds,  and gently 
pull the sensor applicator away from the site. A sensor applicator has an introducer 
needle which will be retracted after appl ication. Only a thin, flexible filament will 
remain under the skin and the sensor is held in place by an adhesive. The sensor 
applicator serves as a container for disposal. The water -proof sensor, worn on the 
upper arm, is factory calibrated. The reader is  retained by the PI and data are not 
visible to participants during sensor wear. The sensor automatically captures and 
stores glucose data every 15 min (96 glucose  readings/day).  
 
5. Sleep diary and wear  log 
The participants will be asked to complete a daily sleep diary each morning while they 
are wearing the monitor, which takes about 2 minutes. The participant will also 
complete a daily wear log each evening. The information about sleep onset and offset 
and wear time will be used to validate the activPAL wea ring protocol.  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
  
Once they complete the 7 days of activPAL  and CGM monitoring, they will be scheduled 
for the in -person visit (Baseline visit 2) and will return the devices and log to the study 
team at the visit.  
 
5.2. Baseline visit  2 
5.2.1.  Device removal  
The in -person baseline visit  2 will take place at the VUSN Clinic in the Wesley building. 
Participants will return the activPAL and the continuous glucose monitoring devices at 
Baseline visit 2. The trained research staff will assist the participa nt in removing the two 
devices as needed, and then download the data from the activPAL  and CGM devices.  
Baseline visit 2  will last approximately 1 hour and 30 minutes. Participants will receive 
$25 for baseline visit 2.  
1.  ActivPAL data  download  
The 7 days of activPAL data wi ll be downloaded and stored in the secured PI’s 
computer. The variables of interest from the activPAL data are listed below:  
a) Sedentary behavior : SB will be objectively measured as time spent sedentary 
(sitting or lying, minutes/day) and number of prolonged  sedentary bouts (>30 
minutes and >60 minutes) using the activPAL3. ActivPAL data will be 
downloaded and processed using activPAL  software.  
b) Physical activity : Time spent standing and walking (stepping), number of sitting - 
to-standing transitions, and daily  step counts will be measured using the 
activPAL.  
 
2. Continuous glucose monitoring data  download  
The 7 days of CGM data will be downloaded via Libreview  and stored in the PI’s 
computer. The variables of interest from the CGM data are listed below:  
a) The 24 -hour glucose control: the 24 -hour glucose control will be evaluated by 
mean  24-hour glucose  levels  and numbers  of events  and time in hypoglycaemia 
(glucose < 3.9 mmol/l), euglycaemia (glucose 3.9 –7.8 mmol/l), hyperglycaemia 
(glucose > 7.8 mmol/l) and above target  (glucose > 9 mmol/l).  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
  
 
5.3. Intervention  
The 8-week intervention will consist of four components. All study subjects will be 
assigned to intervention group. After the intervention, the study subjects  will keep 
their Fitbit and the HidrateSpark smart water bottle.  
 
5.3.1.  Instructional/goal setting  session  
The study team member will provide an orientation at the baseline visit 2. The study 
team member will review the activPAL data and identify targetable prolonged SB bouts. 
The study team member and the participant will set two goals: 1) a SB reduction goal  will 
be set as reducing daily sedentary time gradually until they reach the goal of ≥ 120 
minutes SB reduction; and 2) a sedentary break goal  will be set as 3 minutes of 
standing/walking every 1 hour and then increasing its duration to 5 minutes and its 
frequency to every 30 minutes. These goals were feasible in stroke patients and T2D 
patients.16,33 The participant will enter the goal into the Fitbit for self -monitoring and fill 
out the first worksheet in the Ten Top Tips (TTT). The TTT is a booklet develo ped from 
the Habit Formation Theory and includes 10 tips to add SB breaks into their daily 
routine.34 The ten tips are modified to eight in our study. See Appendix for the TTT and 
worksheet. This goal session will last 1 hour.  
 
5.3.2.  Fitbit  
We will provide Fitbi t (Inspire 3) that can alert participants with a vibration when they 
have been sitting for 60 minutes. Participants can select the days and the time ranges to 
receive the move alerts. Patients will be encouraged to review their daily summary 
before they go  to bed.  
 
The Fitbit is not intended to be used as a medical device. All participants will have the 
ability to monitor physical activity, sleep, and heart rate with the Fitbit. All data from the 
Fitbit will be continuously, streamed to the secured Fitbit s ervers. The study team 
member will assist participants in downloading the app and creating an account and will 
instruct them on how to use the device, with the official Fitbit user manual. When we 
create Fitbit accounts for research subjects, we do not use  their real name or email 
address and default their account settings to the most privacy -protective option 
available.  
 
Fitbit accounts require a unique email address for each user. To ensure participants’ 
anonymity and privacy when creating Fitbit accounts , we will (1) set up anonymous 
Gmail accounts and (2) set up deidentified Fitbit accounts for the purpose of the study. 
This individualized email address will then be linked to a Fitbit account in which  personal 
identifiers  should  not be used.  Importantly,  research  staff and participants  will be advised 
that the email  and Fitbit  accounts  should  be used  strictly  for the study’s  purpose.  
Moreover, account information will be stored in protected PI’s computer within encrypted 
documents. Once the intervention is concluded, Fitbit data will not be collected. Also, 
Fitbit and Fitbit app will be reset for the participant to keep using the Fitbit after study 
completion.  
 
5.3.3.  Smart Water  Bottle  
We will provide a HidrateSpark water bottle,  and the study team member will assist 
participants in downloading the app and creating an account. The study team member  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 will instruct participants on how to use the bottle, with the official user manual. The 
device alerts participants with a color change and message on the Fitbit to keep them 
hydrated. The device provides the daily water intake summary in the Fitbit app. We will 
advise participants to drink 4.5 – 6 bottles (500ml/bottle) of water per day based on 
current recommendations by the  U.S. National Academies of Medicine.35 
The HidrateSpark accounts require a unique email address for each user and the same 
email which is used to Fitbit account will be used to the HidrateSpark app. The same 
rules will be applied to the HidrateSpark accou nt, and the account information will be 
stored in protected PI’s computer within encrypted documents.  
Once the intervention is concluded, HidrateSpark data will not be collected. Also, 
HidrateSpark bottle and the app will be reset for the participant to ke ep using the bottle.  
 
5.3.4.  Weekly Text  Message  
Text messages will be provided to support and enhance the habit formation process. 
Text messaging has shown effectiveness in many exercise studies.36-38 There are three 
default  text messages which will be sent and depending on study subject’s preference, 
they will receive the text message up to one text message per day (a maximum of 10 
text message a week). The first default text message will be sent on Thursday  to 
provide feedback on their progress for the week. The second default text messages will 
be sent on Saturday morning to encourage them to sync their Fitbit to the Fitbit  app. The 
third text messages will be sent on Monday morning  to provide a weekly Fitbit summary 
and set next week’s goal on reducing sedentary time. This Monday message will be 
structured by 1) positive reinforcement, 2) a weekly summary of sedentary time, steps 
counts and a suggestion for extra sitting breaks (data retrieved from Fitbit), 3) one tip 
from the TTT booklet, and 3) setting of next week’s  goal.  
Participants will text back with a new goal. Examples of text messages are included in 
the appendix. Depending on the subject’s preference, th ey will receive additional text 
messages which include positive reinforcement and encouragement. In addition to 
the weekly text messages, they will receive two monthly progress  check up  messages 
at the end of week 4 and week 8. These monthly text messages include their monthly 
sitting hours followed by restatement of overall goal. They will also get an introductory 
video explaining Fitbit app navigation and filling out the weekly goal sh eet. 
 
Below is the process of developing and providing text messages.  
 
1. Creation of weekly text message template: Dr. Mulvaney (Co -I), an expert in 
effective health communication, and the PI co -created the weekly message 
template with Dr.  Mulvaney.  
2. Fitbit data transfer: We will transfer the Fitbit data from the participants’ Fitbit 
accounts to REDCap by developing our own data collection interface using 
Fitbit’s Web Application Programming Interface (API). This platform provides 
secure data acquisiti on and management tools that facilitate remote data 
collection from Fitbit without the need for study participants to return the devices 
to researchers for data  extraction.  
3. Integration of Fitbit data into the text message template. The collected Fitbit dat a 
in the Redcap  will be integrated  into our weekly  text message  template.  
4. Send text messages by using Twilio and Redcap. The customized text message 
will be sent using the Twilio plug -in for REDCap. Twilio module enables our study 
to make and receive SMS text messages, both to and from study participants. A 
REDCap and Twilio acc ount are linked together. When a user indicates that an 
SMS (text) or a call should be sent to a cell phone, REDCap requests that action 
through Twilio. When a user responds, Twilio relays that information back to 
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 REDCap. The data is stored in the REDCap d atabase. Twilio does not store any 
data, nor does it keep a log of its  actions.  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 5. Ask next week’s goals via text message. This study uses survey function via 
SMS conversation to set a next week’s sedentary hour and step counts goal. 
When particip ants take an SMS survey, questions are asked one at a time as an 
SMS text message conversation/thread. We will ask three questions (three SMS 
text messages). Participants may respond with any kind of alpha -numeric text for 
SMS survey. Only REDCap administr ators are allowed to enable the Twilio 
option to initiate a survey as an SMS conversation. All messages and Fitbit data 
will be managed in  REDCap.  
 
 
5.4. Post -intervention  visit 
After 8 weeks, all participants will be invited to an in -person visit (post -intervention visit). 
During the visit, all the above parameters will be re -measured by the same trained 
research staff. The visit will take app roximately 1 hour including completion of a series of 
questionnaires (which may be completed by the participants beforehand) and biometric 
assessments. All participants will wear the activPAL3 and the CGM for 7 days to 
examine their post -intervention activ ity and glycemic control. They will return the devices 
via pre -paid mail. All participants will receive $50 for the post intervention visit, and an 
additional  $50 for mailing  back  the devices  to the study  team.  
Therefore, total compensation would be $150 for each participant . Also, all participants 
will be informed of their 24-hour glucose results, and activity patterns retrieved from the 
ActivPAL device. A subsample of participants from the intervention  group will be invited 
to pa rticipate in a separate qualitative exit interview . The one -on-one exit interview will 
be conducted by the trained study team member during the visit. The interview will last 
30 minutes,  and each participant will be compensated with $30 for completing thi s 
interview.  
 
1. Questionnaires  
Participants will answer the same questions about their demographics, 
socioeconomic characteristics, medical history and current medication, health 
behaviors, and patient -centered outcomes (e.g., fear of movement, confidence in  
reducing SB and increasing PA, habit strength for SB, quality of life, and depressive 
symptoms). Participants will have a choice to complete these questionnaires during 
the post -intervention visit in person or to receive paper copies of the questionnaires  
by mail. Printed copies will be identified by the participant’s REDCap record ID 
number; there will be no additional identifying information on the printed 
questionnaires. If a participant chooses to receive the questionnaires by mail, he or 
she will be a sked to complete them using a blue or black ink pen no sooner than 2 
days prior to their scheduled post -intervention visit and will bring the completed 
surveys to their post -intervention visit. After the post -intervention visit is completed, 
the study team  will enter their responses manually into REDCap and upload a 
scanned PDF version of the paper questionnaires to their REDCap record. Paper 
copies of the surveys will be kept in a locked cabinet in the study team’s office at the 
Vanderbilt School of Nursin g. In addition, participants will answer questions (Table  
2) about feasibility and acceptability of the intervention. Level of satisfaction with the 
intervention will be assessed by using 23 items from the questionnaire developed by 
Lyons, Swartz, Lewis, M artinez and Jennings 39 and Burner, Zhang, Terp, Bench, 
Lee, Lam, Torres, Menchine and Arora 40. We will also use the 10 -item of System 
Usability Scale55 to assess usability. The scale is considered as “industry standard”  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 and provides a global measure of satisfaction 56. 
 
Table 2. Feasibility and Acceptability Assessment  
Variables  Measures  
Reach  (participants enrolled/participants screened and eligible) × 100  
Retention  (participants  completing post -intervention assessment/participants 
enrolled) × 100  
Satisfaction  23 items from Lyons and Burner’s questionnaires, System usability 
scale, Exit interviews (n=20)  
Compliance  Number of days the Fitbit device was worn by week 
Number of days the Fitbit app was logged in by week  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
  
Number of text messages replied about the next week’s goal  
 
2. Biometric  assessment  
Participants will undergo the same physical examination (e.g., height, weight, blood 
pressure, hip circumference, wais t circumference) . The same protocol and 
instruments will be used.  
3. activPAL data download  
The 7 days of activPAL  data will be downloaded and stored in the PI’s computer.  
4. Exit interview  
A one -on-one interview will be conducted by the trained study team member during 
the post -intervention visit. The exit interview will be structured to capture feedback on 
the acceptab ility and satisfaction of the intervention, barriers and facilitators to SB 
reduction, and perceived health impacts of SB reduction. A semi -structured interview 
guide is attached in the appendix. The exit interview will be audio recorded by using 
a secure iPad and transcribed verbatim. The transcripts will be saved on the secure 
computer. The interview will take approximately 30  minutes.  
1. To generate initial speech -to-text transcription of the mp4 audio file of the 
exit interview, trained study team members will utilize the transcription tool 
on a Microsoft Teams meeting. Alternatively, the Microsoft Word for 
OneDrive transcription tool will be used for recorded audio files. The mp4 
file will be uploaded from the iPad to the Microsoft OneDrive Word 
applicatio n to begin transcription. These transcription methods have been 
approved and recommended by the VUMC Center for Technology Transfer 
and Commercialization. The transcript will be saved on the secured online 
VUSN server and only the study team will have acce ss to the transcripts 
and audio recording files. De -identified audio files will be coded with four - 
digit numbers (ex. 0001) at the time of entry into the research study so that 
no direct identifiers appear on any samples or questionnaires. Audio files 
will be stored on a secure computer at Vanderbilt School of Nursing and 
password -protected, only accessible by the PI and/or her staff. No 
identifiable information will be stored on any mobile devices (laptops, USB 
keys, CDs, DVDs, etc.). The voice recording files that are saved under 
VUSN server will be permanently disposed 5 years after the study has 
been  completed.  
 
Table 3. Overview of Study Visits  
 Screening  Baseline  Baseline  Intervention  Post- Exit 
 assessment 1  assessment  (Week 1 to  intervention  interview  
  2 Week 8) assessment 
(after Week 8) (after 
Week 8) 
Related 
personnel  Research 
staff Research staff  Research 
staff Research 
staff or PI  Study staff 
member  Research 
staff 
Delivery 
methods  Phone or 
in-person  In-person  In-person  In-person for  
only initial 
session  In-person  In-person  
Activity  Screening  Consenting,  Biometric  Initial goal  Support for  Structured  
 eligibility  Support for  assessment,  setting  completing  one-on-one 
  completing  activPAL and  session,  questionnaires,  interview  
  questionnaires,  CGM data  Activity  Biometric   
  distributing  download  tracker  assessment,   
  activPAL device   distribution,  Distributing   
  and CGM   weekly text 
message  activPAL and 
CGM   
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
  
Length of 
time 
needed  10 
minutes  1hour  40minutes  Initial 
session:  
1hour 
Weekly text 
message: 5 - 
  10minutes   1hour  30minutes  
 
 
 
6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or  Others  
 
Consent  
For the pre -screening activity, potential participants recruited from the email distribution 
list or ResearchMatch will sign an e -consent in REDCap. Participants will be given 
information about what questions we will ask. There are no benefits or side effe cts 
related to this prescreening activity. Once they meet all the eligibility criteria, they will be 
invited for the in -person baseline visit. At the visit, participants are given as much time 
as they would like to consider participation from the initial i nvitation to participate until 
they sign the “main” consent form. Participants are encouraged to ask as many 
questions as possible and reminded that participation is completely voluntary and will 
not affect their medical rights. They are also told that the y have the option to 
discontinue participation at any time for any  reason.  
 
Finger Prick Blood Test  
Risks associated with the finger prick include: temporary discomfort from the needle 
prick, bruising, and  rarely (<1%) infection. These risks will be minimized by using a 
sterile technique and applying sustained pressure to the site.  
 
ActivPAL  
The activPAL  activity tracker is a safe, non -invasive method to capture information about 
activity cycles. Participation in this study requires that participants wear an activPAL 
tracker taped (using Tegaderm adhesive dressing) to the front of the right thigh during 
waking hours for a minimum of 7 consecutive days (baseline and follow -up). The 
Tegaderm adhesive dressing used to apply the activPAL devices are hypoallergenic and 
consist of a dual layer hydrogel that does not pull at the skin or hair. There are few risks 
associated with wearing the activPAL device and include slight discomfort, such as light 
pressure from the activPAL or irritation from the waterproof dressing.  
 
Continuous Glucose Monitor  
The FreeStyle Libre Pro Flash Glucose Monitoring System is an FDA -approved, 
professional continuous glucose monitoring device indicated for detecting trends and 
tracking patterns in persons (age 18 and older) with diabetes. After application of the 
sensor, only a thin, flexible filament will remain under the skin and the s ensor is held in 
place by an adhesive. The following are possible adverse effects of inserting a sensor 
and wearing the adhesive patch: local erythema (redness), local infection, inflammation, 
pain or discomfort, bleeding at the glucose sensor insertion si te, bruising, itching, 
scarring or skin discoloration, and adhesive irritation. There is a remote risk of sensor or 
needle fracture during insertion, wear or removal, with fragments retained under the 
skin. 
 
Fitbit  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 Participants will wear an additional wris t-worn activity tracker for 8 weeks during waking  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 hours. There are few risks associated with wearing the device and include slight 
discomfort, such as light pressure from the wristband or irritation from wearing a damp 
band after showering o r swimming. There is a possible risk of confidentiality loss. To 
reduce the risk, we will create an anonymous email account for the Fitbit app. All 
identifiable data will be kept on password -protected computer systems in a locked office.  
 
Smart Water bottle  
Participants will use the smart water bottle to increase the frequency of standing and 
moving by frequently going to the restroom and kitchen for refills. There is no risk 
associated with using the smart water bottle. To reduce the possible risk of 
confidentiality loss, we will create an anonymous email account for the HidraSpark app. 
All identifiable data will be kept on password -protected computer systems in a locked  
office.  
 
8-Week Sedentary Behavior  Intervention  
Participants will gradually decrease their sedentary behavior and replace the sedentary 
behavior with a short period of light intensity physical activity such as 2 to 3 minutes of 
standing or walking over 8 weeks. The risk of falling or injury is the sa me as would be 
associated with day -to-day activity. Study staff members will instruct participants to 
make sure there are no hazards within the walking path and surrounding area.  
 
Suicidal ideation or severe distress  
Research has confirmed that simply aski ng a participant about whether they have 
thoughts of suicide is not a likely trigger of such an event41. It is usually only when the 
person reports ideation as well as an intent, plan, and/or means to commit suicide that 
risk for immediate suicide is consi dered to be more acute.  
 
If a participant reports severe distress or suicidal ideation during the survey 
administration (Baseline visit 2 or Post -intervention visit), the research staff will 
immediately notify the PI. The PI will provide the participant wi th help to get treatment. 
This may include:  
• working with the participant to contact his/her  doctor,  
• contact  a trusted  family  member,  or a therapist  to discuss his/her  thoughts,  
• or work with the participant on a plan that may include getting him/her to a 
hospital for  safety.  
 
 
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
Taking part in this study is voluntary, and the participant has the right to refuse to take 
part in the study. The participant can withdraw from the study at any period and should 
notify the PI or a study staff member. The decision to withdraw will not affect the 
participant’s ability to get healthcare at the institution, or their enrollment in any health 
plans or benefits. The investigator may decide to discontinue a participant’s participation 
without permission because she may decide that staying in the study will be harmful for 
the participant, or the sponsor may stop the study. A participant's decision to withdraw 
from this study will not be retroactive. For example, if a participant provides  consent and 
completes the baseline visit but then decides to withdraw from the study at the post - 
intervention visit, the data collected from the baseline visit, which was collected in good 
faith, will not be destroyed.  
 
Criteria for Discontinuation of In dividual Participants  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 Subjects can decide to discontinue entirely from the study at any time for any reason. 
Subjects can also be discontinued from the study or discontinued from the study treatment 
due to Investigator decision as detailed belo w. 
1. Withdrawal of  consent.  
2. At the Investigator’s discretion in certain situations such as lack of compliance  or 
serious adverse event.  
3. One DKA event or one episode of hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar nonketotic  syndrome 
(HHNS)  
4. Dangerous hypoglycemia (glucose <54 mg/dl after three treatments or unable to  function 
due to low blood glucose during study  visits)  
5. Continuous hyperglycemia (random blood glucose >300mg/dl two times in a row during 
study visits)  
 
Protocol for hypoglycemia  
During any study visits, if the study participant develops any of the symptoms below, the 
study team member will check glucose levels immediately. The symptoms are  
• Weakness and  tiredness  
• Sweating  
• Fast breathing  
• Shakiness, nervousness, and or  anxiety  
• Nausea  
• Confusion and problems  communicating  
• Light -headedness,  dizziness  
 
If the glucose level is below 70mg/dl, one of the following options will be administered.  
1. 2 oz (60ml)  juice 
2. 15mg of glucose  tables  
 
After 15 minutes, the study team member will re -check glucose level. If the glucose level is 
still below 70mg/dl, the treatment will be repeated up to 2 times.  
 
If the participant’s glucose level is still below 70mg/dl after three treatments, the study 
team member will notify the PI and a sk participants to call healthcare provider. If the 
participant’s glucose level is still below 54mg/dl or the participant is unable to function 
because of mental or physical changes due to low blood glucose, call 911 immediately 
and notify the PI.  
 
Protoco l for hyperglycemia  
During first visit, the finger prick random glucose level of potential participants is 300 mg/dl 
or higher two times in a row, the RA will notify PI immediately. The potential participants 
will be informed of their glucose levels and asked to contact their healthcare provider 
immediately. The PI will withdraw the study participa nt to prevent severe hyperglycemic 
events and/or DKA.  
 
Adverse events (AEs) will be reported according to IRB policies. Any adverse event 
requiring reporting will be reported no later than 10 working days to the IRB using the 
IRB form “Report of Unanticipa ted Problem Involving Risk to Participants or Others” (IRB 
Form #1105). Reporting will depend on adverse event severity:  
Grading of Severity  
0: No AE or within normal limits. 
1: Mild AE. 
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 2: Moderate  AE. 
3: Severe AE resulting in inpatient hospitalization, or a persistent or 
significant  disability/incapacity.  
4: Life-threatening or disabling AE. 
5: Fatal  AE. 
 
8.0 Statistical  Considerations  
 
Sample Size Calculation  
Because this is a novel intervention, we cannot use an exact effect size from the literature . As 
of today (May 22), we have recruited 16 participants; 3 have  withdraw n, 5 randomized into 
intervention group, 8 assigned to control group. For the remaining iterative process,  each 
cohort will have 10 participants. It will give us enough  power to be saturated in terms of 
qualitative findings.  Assuming a 15% attrition rate, we plan to enroll 24 more  participants , for a 
total of 40 participants.  
  
Analysis Strategies  
Aim 1: Feasibility and acceptability outcomes will be reported as percentages or 
averages. For the exit interview, we will collaborate with the Vanderbilt Qualitative 
Research Core in developing a semi -structured interview guide and thematic analysis. 
To enhance credibility, we will follow the consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative 
research (COREQ) guidelines.44 
Aims 2 & 3: Descriptive analyses are planned to characterize the study sample on all 
measures including baseline demographics and covariates. For this pilot study, 
exploratory linear mixed modeling will be used to provide descriptive statistics relative to 
treatment effects, both within - and between -groups effects on the primary and secondary 
outcomes over time. We will also estimate effect sizes for those outcomes.  
 
Exit Interview  
We will develop a semi -structured interview guide and thematic analysis. The exit 
interview will be audio recorde d, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed using a thematic 
approach to guide refinements to future SB reduction interventions as well as identify 
barriers and facilitators to SB reduction. To enhance credibility, we will ensure 
methodological triangulation (au dio recording, surveys, and field notes), audit trail and 
peer-debriefing process.45 
 
 
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality  Issues  
 
All Personal Health Information (PHI) and Personal Identifying Information (PII) will be 
kept confidential, unless release is required by law. Release of PHI/PII information will 
only be allowed if it is legally required by law. The PI and staff have been trained in 
confidentiality and HIPAA requirements and will conduct the study using Good Clinical 
Practice guidelines.  
 
Upon study enrollment, participants will be assigned a unique study ID number and 
anonymous email account that will be used to label all research data including Fitbit 
data, CGM data, questionnaires, activPAL data, and interview recording files. The study 
ID and the anonymous email will serve as the only identifier used on all study -related 
documents. Informed consent will occur at the time  of recruitment once verification of  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 eligibility has been completed. The participant identifiers will be stored in the Master List, 
which will include full name and contact information (e.g., phone number, email address) 
and will be used for administrative purposes only.  
The Master List will be maintained by study staff and stored in a file separate from the 
coded study dataset on a password -protected computer. Only individuals directly 
involved with the study (e.g., PI or her staff) will have  access to this file.  
 
This individualized email address will then be linked to a Fitbit account in which personal 
identifiers should not be used. Importantly, research staff and participants will be advised 
that the email and Fitbit accounts should be use d strictly for the study’s purpose.  
Moreover, account information will be stored in protected PI’s computer within encrypted 
documents.  
 
All of the Fitbit data will be extracted from the Fitbit account to Redcap by using the Fitbit 
web API developed by VU School of Nursing IT team. Fitbit data will be stored on a 
secure computer at University School of Nursing server and password -protected, only 
accessible by the PI and/or the IT team. The Fitbit data will be uploaded into REDCap.  
To send weekly text messag es from REDCap, we will utilize the third -party service 
Twilio.com which means that all voice calls and SMS messages will be routed through  
Twilio's servers. However, REDCap goes to great lengths to ensure that voice call records 
and SMS tr anscriptions do not stay in Twilio's logs but are removed shortly after being 
completed. This is done for security and privacy concerns (e.g., HIPAA), in which our 
survey participants' phone numbers and their survey responses do not get permanently 
logged on Twilio's servers but instead remain securely and separately in REDCap. Twilio 
uses two -factor authentication to access the application administratively. The integrated 
module can only be turned on by a REDCap Administrator. Twilio configuration is manag ed 
by a REDCap administrator. The integration requires ‘inspectors’ be turned off at the Twilio 
level to ensure no logging data is retained.  
However, this method is limited to have two -way interaction , which means that Twilio and 
REDCap system do not allow  research  participants  to text back to the study team. To facilitate 
two-way communications, we will have a wireless cell phone and answer any questions if the 
participants  have any.  
All hard copy documents (e.g., sleep diary or wear log) will be stored in a locked filing 
cabinet and office. All electronic records, including th e Master List and voice recordings, 
will be stored on a secure computer at Vanderbilt University School of Nursing and 
password -protected, only accessible by the PI and/or her staff. No identifiable 
information will be stored on any mobile devices (laptops , USB keys, CDs, DVDs, etc.). 
Research files will be kept for a period of 7 years after the study has been completed.  
Data entry will be completed in REDCap by the PI and/or her staff and will be imported 
to SPSS file format for analysis. Only de-identified data will be used for analysis.  
 
10.0 Follow -up and Record  Retention  
 
Raw hard copy research data will be kept in locked file cabinets in a locked office. All 
electronic records, including the Master List and voice recordings, will be stored on a 
secure internal Vanderbilt University School of Nursing server and password -protected, 
only accessible by the PI and/or her staff. After a period of seven years from the end 
date of the study, all identifying information, including signed consent form s and the 
Master List, will be destroyed. Anonymous raw data and electronic data will be 
maintained indefinitely.  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 References  
1. Bellettiere J, LaMonte MJ, Evenson KR, Rillamas -Sun E, Kerr J, Lee I -M, Di C, 
Rosenberg DE, Stefanick ML, Buchner DM. S edentary Behavior and 
Cardiovascular Disease in Older Women. Circulation . 2019;139:1036 -1046. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.035312  
2. Young DR, Hivert M -F, Alhassan S, Camhi SM, Ferguson JF, Katzmarzyk PT, 
Lewis CE, Owen N, Perry CK, Siddique J. Sedentary b ehavior and cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality: a science advisory from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation . 2016;134:e262 -e279.  
3. Rezende LFMd , Rodrigues Lopes M, Rey -López JP, Matsudo VKR, Luiz OdC. 
Sedentary behavior and health outcomes: an overview of systematic reviews. PloS 
one. 2014;9:e105620.  
4. Bergouignan A, Latouche C, Heywood S, Grace MS, Reddy -Luthmoodoo M, 
Natoli  AK, Owen N, Dunstan DW, Kingwell BA. Frequent interruptions of 
sedentary time modulates contraction -and insulin -stimulated glucose uptake 
pathways in muscle: ancillary analysis from randomized clinical trials. Scientific 
reports . 2016;6:1 -13. 
5. Hamer M, Hac kett RA, Bostock S, Lazzarino AI, Carvalho LA, Steptoe A. 
Objectively assessed physical activity, adiposity, and inflammatory markers in 
people with type 2 diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Research and Care . 
2014;2:e000030.  
6. Cichosz SL, Fleischer J, Hoeyem P, La ugesen E, Poulsen P, Christiansen J, 
Ejskjær N, Hansen T. Objective measurements of activity patterns in peoplewith 
newly diagnosed Type 2 diabetes demonstrate a sedentary lifestyle. Diabetic 
medicine . 2013;30:1063 -1066.  
7. Loprinzi PD. Accelerometer -determin ed sedentary and physical activity estimates 
among older adults with diabetes: considerations by demographic and 
comorbidity characteristics. Journal of aging and physical activity . 2014;22:432 - 
440. 
8. Van der Berg JD, Stehouwer CDA, Bosma H, van der Velde J HPM, Willems 
PJB, Savelberg HHCM, Schram MT, Sep SJS, van der Kallen CJH, Henry R. 
Associations of total amount and patterns of sedentary behaviour with type 2 
diabetes and the metabolic syndrome: The Maastricht Study. Diabetologia . 
2016;59:709 -718. 
9. Ekelun d U, Steene -Johannessen J, Brown WJ, Fagerland MW, Owen N, Powell 
KE, Bauman A, Lee IM. Does physical activity attenuate, or even eliminate, the 
detrimental association of sitting time with mortality? A harmonised meta - 
analysis of data from more than 1 mi llion men and women. Lancet . 
2016;388:1302 -1310.  
10. Boulé NG, Kenny GP, Haddad E, Wells GA, Sigal RJ. Meta -analysis of theeffect 
of structured exercise training on cardiorespiratory fitness in Type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. Diabetologia . 2003;46:1071 -1081. doi:  10.1007/s00125 -003-1160 -2 
11. Kennerly A -M, Kirk A. Physical activity and sedentary behaviour of adults with 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review. Practical Diabetes . 2018;35:86 -89g. doi:  
https://doi.org/10.10 02/pdi.2169  
12. Bouchard C, Blair SN, Katzmarzyk PT. Less Sitting, More Physical Activity, or 
Higher Fitness? Mayo Clin Proc . 2015;90:1533 -1540.  
13. Chastin  SFM, Egerton T, Leask C, Stamatakis E. Meta -analysis of  the 
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 relationship between breaks in sedentary behavior and cardiometabolic health.  
Obesity . 2015;23:1800 -1810. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/oby.21180  
14. Dempsey PC, Larsen RN, Dunstan DW, Owen N, Kingwell BA. Sitting Less and 
Moving More: Implications for Hypertension. Hypertension . 2018;72:1037 -1046. 
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTEN SIONAHA.118.11190  
15. Dunstan DW, Kingwell BA, Larsen R, Healy GN, Cerin E, Hamilton MT, Shaw 
JE, Bertovic DA, Zimmet PZ, Salmon J. Breaking up prolonged sitting reduces 
postprandial glucose and insulin responses. Diabetes care . 2012;35:976 -983. 
16. Ezeugwu VE, M anns PJ. The Feasibility and Longitudinal Effects of a Home - 
Based Sedentary Behavior Change Intervention After Stroke. Archives of Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation . 2018;99:2540 -2547. doi:  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2018.06.014  
17. Henson J, Davies MJ, Bodicoat DH, Edwardson CL, Gill JMR, Stensel DJ, 
Tolfrey K, Dunstan DW, Khunti K, Yates T. Breaking Up Prolonged Sitting With 
Standing or Walking Attenuates the Postprandial Metabolic Response  in 
Postmenopausal Women: A Randomized Acute Study. Diabetes Care . 
2016;39:130. doi:  10.2337/dc15 -1240  
18. Lynch BM, Nguyen NH, Moore MM, Reeves MM, Rosenberg DE, Boyle T, 
Vallance JK, Milton S, Friedenreich CM, English DR. A randomized controlled 
trial of a wearable technology -based intervention for increasing moderate to 
vigorous physical activity and reducing sedentary behavior in breast cancer 
survivors: The ACTIVATE Trial. Cancer . 2019;125:2846 -2855. doi:  
https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.32143  
19. Freene N, van Berlo S, McManus M, Mair T, Davey R. A Behavioral Change 
Smartphone App and Program (ToDo -CR) to Decrease Sedentary Behavior in 
Cardiac Rehabilitation Participants: Prospective Feasibility Cohort Study. JMIR 
Form Res . 2020;4:e17359.  
20. Patterson K, Davey R, Keegan R, Niyonsenga T, Mohanty I, van Berlo S,  Freene  
N. A smartphone app for sedentary behaviour change in cardiac rehabilitation and 
the effect on hospital admissions: the ToDo -CR randomised controlled trial study 
protocol. BMJ Open . 2020;10:e040479 -e040479. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen -2020 - 
040479  
21. Bull FC, Maslin  TS, Armstrong T. Global physical activity questionnaire 
(GPAQ):  nine country reliability  and validity  study.  Journal  of physical  activity  & 
health . 2009;6.  
22. Salmon J, Owen N, Crawford D, Bauman A, Sallis JF. Physical activity and 
sedentary behavior: a popu lation -based study of barriers, enjoyment, and 
preference. Health Psychol . 2003;22:178 -188. doi:  10.1037//0278 -6133.22.2.178  
23. Segal -Isaacson CJ, Wylie -Rosett J, Gans KM. Validation of a Short Dietary 
Assessment Questionnaire: The Rapid Eating and Activity A ssessment for 
Participants  Short  Version  (REAP -S). The Diabetes  Educator . 2004;30:774 -781. 
doi: 10.1177/014572170403000512  
24. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The  Pittsburgh 
Sleep Quality Index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. 
Psychiatry Res . 1989;28:193 -213. doi:  10.1016/0165 -1781(89)90047 -4 
25. Adams MM. On our feet: Feasibility trial of an intervention to reduce sedentary 
behavior and increase  physical activity. In: Ann Arbor: The University of North 
Carolina at Greensboro; 2012:332.  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 26. Verplanken B, Orbell S. Reflections on past behavior: a self‐report index of  habit 
strength 1. Journal of applied social psychology . 2003;33:1313 -1330.  
27. Glasziou P, Alexander J, Beller E, Clarke P. Which health -related quality of life 
score? A comparison of alternative utility measures in patients with Type 2 
diabetes in the ADVANCE trial. Health and quality of life outcomes . 2007;5:1 -11. 
28. Ware Jr JE, Kosinski M, Keller SD. A 12 -Item Short -Form Health Survey: 
construction of scales and preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Medical 
care. 1996:220 -233. 
29. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression 
severity measure. Journal of general internal medicine . 2001;16:606 -613. 
30. Wallston KA, Rothman RL, Cherrington A. Psychometric properties of the 
perceived diabetes self -management scale (PDSMS). Journal of behavioral 
medicine . 2007;30:395 -401. 
31. Mitchell T, Born er K, Finch J, Kerr J, Carlson JA. Using Activity Monitors to 
Measure Sit -to-Stand Transitions in Overweight/Obese Youth. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc . 2017;49:1592 -1598. doi:  10.1249/MSS.0000000000001266  
32. Frese EM, Fick A, Sadowsky HS. Blood pressure measurement g uidelines for 
physical therapists. Cardiopulm Phys Ther J . 2011;22:5 -12. 
33. Wadden TA, West DS, Neiberg RH, Wing RR, Ryan DH, Johnson KC, Foreyt JP, 
Hill JO, Trence DL, Vitolins  MZ. One‐year weight losses in the Look AHEAD 
study: factors associated with success. Obesity . 2009;17:713 -722. 
34. White I, Smith L, Aggio D, Shankar S, Begum S, Matei R, Fox KR, Hamer M, 
Iliffe S, Jefferis BJ, et al. On Your Feet to Earn Your Seat: pilot RCT  of a theory - 
based sedentary behaviour reduction intervention for older adults. Pilot and 
Feasibility Studies . 2017;3:23. doi:  10.1186/s40814 -017-0139 -6 
35. Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium,  
Chloride, and Sulfate . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press;  2005.  
36. Agboola S, Jethwani K, Lopez L, Searl M, O’Keefe S, Kvedar J. Text to move: a 
randomized controlled trial of a text -messaging program to improve physical 
activity behaviors in pati ents with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Journal of medical 
Internet research . 2016;18:e6439.  
37. Pellegrini CA, Hoffman SA, Daly ER, Murillo M, Iakovlev G, Spring B. 
Acceptability of smartphone technology to interrupt sedentary time in adults  with 
diabetes. Transl ational Behavioral Medicine . 2015;5:307 -314. doi: 
10.1007/s13142 -015-0314 -3 
38. Block G, Azar KMJ, Romanelli RJ, Block TJ, Hopkins D, Carpenter HA, Block 
CH. Diabetes prevention and weight loss with a fully automated behavioral 
intervention by email, Web, and mobile phone: A randomized controlled trial 
among persons with prediabetes. Journal of Medical Internet Research . 
2015;17:e240. doi:  10.2196/jmir.4897  
39. Lyons EJ, Swartz MC, Lewis ZH, Martinez E, Jennings K. Feasibility and 
Acceptability of a Wearable Techno logy Physical Activity Intervention  With 
Telephone Counseling for Mid -Aged and Older Adults: A Randomized 
Controlled Pilot Trial. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth . 2017;5:e28. doi: 
10.2196/mhealth.6967  
Vanderbilt Diabetes and Research Training Center, P&F DK020593  
Revision Date:  August 1st, 2024  
 40. Burner E, Zhang M, Terp S, Bench KF, Lee J, Lam CN, To rres JR, Menchine M, 
Arora S. Feasibility and Acceptability of a Text Message –Based Intervention to 
Reduce Overuse of Alcohol in Emergency Department Patients: Controlled Proof - 
of-Concept Trial. JMIR mHealth and uHealth . 2020;8:e17557.  
41. Gould MS, Marrocco FA, Kleinman M, Thomas JG, Mostkoff K, Cote J,  Davies  
M. Evaluating iatrogenic risk of youth suicide screening programs: a randomized 
controlled trial. Jama . 2005;293:1635 -1643.  
42. Compernolle S, DeSmet A, Poppe L, Crombez G, De Bourdeaudhuij  I, Cardon G, 
van der Ploeg HP, Van Dyck D. Effectiveness of interventions using self - 
monitoring to reduce sedentary behavior in adults: a systematic review and meta - 
analysis. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity . 
2019;16:6 3. doi:  10.1186/s12966 -019-0824 -3 
43. Rosenberg DE, Anderson ML, Renz A, Matson TE, Lee AK, Greenwood - 
Hickman MA, Arterburn  DE, Gardiner PA, Kerr J, McClure JB. Reducing Sitting 
Time in Obese Older Adults: The I -STAND Randomized Controlled Trial. J 
Aging Phys Act . 2020;4:1 -11. 
44. Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative 
research (COREQ): a 32 -item checklist for interviews and focus groups. 
International journal for quality in health care . 2007;19:349 -357. 
45. Creswell JW, Clark VLP. Designing and conducting mixed methods  research . 
Sage publications;  2017.  