  
Effects of Unloader Bracing in Clinical Outcome and Articular Cartilage 
Physiology Following Microfracture of Isolated Chondral Defects  
Study Protocol  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
December 13, 2011  
 
  
Effects of Unloader Bracing on Clinical Outcome and Articular 
Cartilage Regeneration  following Microfracture of isolated 
Chondral Defects  
Background  
The management of articular cartilage defects continues to be one of the most challenging 
clinical problems for orthopaedic surgeons. Articular cartilage is a highly organized tissue 
with complex biomechanical properties and substantial durability. However, it has a poor 
intrinsic capacity for healing, and defects resulting from trauma can result in con siderable 
functional impairment  and lead to subsequent joint degeneration and osteoarthritis . 1  
Bone marrow stimulation through ‘ microfracture’ is the most frequently used technique for 
treating small symptomatic defects of the articular cartilage in the knee. I t is a technically  
straightforward procedure, and the costs are low compared with those of other treatment 
modalities. Microfracture involves perforation of the subchondral plate in order to recruit 
mesenchymal stem cells from the bone marrow space into th e lesion2. The formation of a 
stable blood clot that  maximally fills the chondral defect is important, and it has been 
correlated with the success of bone marrow stimulation procedures1. 
Two aspects of post-operative rehabilitation are thought to be critical to the success of 
microfracture. First, pro tected weight -bearing for 8 weeks post -operatively protect the clot 
from shear forces, which may disrupt the clot and prevent healing.3,4 Second , continuous 
passive motion is believe d to encourage  stem cell differentiation along a chondral pathway.4,5 
During  rehabilitation following microfracture,  an u nloading valgus brace may further 
enhance clot stability by protecting it from disruptive shear forces during motion. Unloader 
braces apply  an external, valgus force by creating a three -point bending moment along the 
knee, which decreases  the force on the medial compartment.  
The aim of this pilot study is to determine whether the use of post -operative  unloading brace 
will improve outcomes of  the microfracture procedure for treatment of isolated cartilage 
lesions . 
  
Study Design  (Pilot Study)  
Recruitment  
A pilot study will be carried out at two centers. 20 patients will be enrolled  at each center  and 
be randomized to 2 groups. Patients will be identified from preoperative clinical and 
radiographic evaluation as potential candidates for the study, however a s eligibility will 
depend on arthroscopic assessment of the cartilage lesion at the time of surgery final 
enrollment will occur immediately post operatively.  
Inclusion criteria include a discrete, contained chondral defect less than 2cm2 in size located 
on the medial  or lateral  femoral condyle, age between 1 8-40 years, and overall neutral lower 
limb mechanical alignment  (<5 degrees varus or valgus) .  Exclusion criteria include previous 
chondral procedures, osteoarthri tis (Kellegren -Lawrence Grade ≥ 2), or significant 
concomitant knee pathology such as a meniscal tear requir ing treatment or a ligamentous 
instability .  Patients who have previously undergone  ACL reconstruction or meniscal repair 
will still be eligible for inclusion in the study.   
Initia l post-operative protocol  
All patients will participate in physical therapy two times per week , use a continuous passive 
motion  device for eight weeks and will have no ROM restrictions. Following enrollment, 10 
patients will be randomized into one of two g roups  at each center . Group 1 will be fitted with 
the Ossur Unloader One brace. Group 2 w ill be treated without a brace. At Center 1 (USA), 
patients will be initially kept non -weight bearing for a period of 8 weeks prior to applying an 
unloader brace. At C entre 2 (Japan), patients will wear an off -loading brace  and commence 
weight bearing immediately post -operatively. Non-bracing group will be NWB for 8 weeks 
at both centers.  
 
 
 
  
Outcome Measures  
Radiographic outcome  will be assessed using baseline, 6  month, and one and two year MRI 
scans  which  will assess the quality of the cartilage repair. T1 Rho and T2 mapping will be 
used to assess regenerate cartilage composition compared to surrounding normal cartilage,  
surface integrity , average cartilage thick ness and the percentage  to which the defect is filled. 
MRI  mapping protocols investigate cartilage health by looking at glycosaminoglycan (GAG) 
concentration. Higher concentrations of GAG generally indicate healthier cartilage. 
Moreover, correlations have been found between T2 values and cartilage hydration, collagen 
fiber orientation, and loss of type 2 collagen , suggesting some degree of specificity for 
targeting the spatial collagen architecture of the matrix.6 
Clinical outcome  will be assessed at MRI follow -up time points using: The Knee injury 
and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS)  questionnaire is a standard clinical tool used to 
evaluate short -term and long -term symptoms and function in subjects with knee injury and 
osteoarthritis. It is broken up into five subcategories: Knee symptoms, knee pain, Function in 
daily living (ADL), F unction in Sport and Recreation (Sport/Rec), and knee -related Quality 
of Life (QOL). The KOOS is a validated, reliable and responsive self -administered 
instrument that can be used for short -term and long -term follow -up of osteoarthritis and will 
given to o ur patients to evaluate the effect of the unloading braces. The KOOS incorporates 
the commonly used WOMAC survey.  
Tegner activity level scale will be used to establish standardized activity levels pre and post 
treatment.  VR-12 quality of Life questionnaire  will be used to establish changes in quality of 
life. Lysholm  score will be used to reflect symptoms with activities of daily living. VAS 
(Visual Analog Scale)  will be used to determine the level of patient pain at each visit.  
 
 
 
 
  
Schedule of Appointments  
Visit  1 (T=0)  
Visit 1 will be the baseline visit  and will take place at the first post operative visit .  
Participants will undergo the informed consent process.  Once signed, participants will 
answer standardized questionnaires (see above), get fitted for the brace  (if in bracing group) , 
and undergo baseline MRI scans and x -rays to evaluate alignment.  Wearing of the brace will 
commence at the time of weight bearing, which will occur immediately post -operatively in 
Centre 2 (Japan) and 8 weeks post operati vely at Centre 1 (USA).  
Brace fitting  
Each participant will be fitted by a licensed orthotist for the Unloader brace.  
 
Imaging  
Each participant will undergo a pre-study series of X -rays that are standard for osteoarthritis 
examination.  This series consists of a front -view (AP) X -ray of the knees, a sideways 
(lateral) view, and a one with the knee flexed at 45° (Ros enberg).  There will also be a long 
standing X -ray (36") that w ill film the lower extremities. These films will measure any mal-
alignment  present.  
A MRI scan during the first visit will examine cartilage physiology.  The scans will take 
place at the Stanford Medical Outpatient Center or Stanford Medical Lucas Imaging Center  
with a 3T scanner.  Subjects will undergo 2D-T2 mapping , 3D-T2 mapp ing, and 3D -T1rho 
mapping .  The se scans take approximately 12, 10, and 6  minutes , respectively .  The total 
time for the first visit will last approximately 2 hours . 
Brace wear and documentation  
All patients will be provided with a hard copy bracing diary f or the 6 -month study duration. 
Patients will be instructed to document the number of hours for which they wear the brace 
each day. Diaries will be collected at Visit 2 and d aily and weekly averages will be 
calculated for all patients.  
  
Each Unloader brace w ill be equipped with an iButton temperature sensor  that acquires 
temperature readings every 20 minutes to objectively document brace wear. The temperature 
threshold to determine brace wear is set at 25C. The iButton captures and stores these 
measurements f or 1 month afte r which it must be reprogrammed; a ll participants will 
therefore undergo five iButton swaps. These visits will be managed by the orthotist who 
performs the initial brace fitting. The fin al iButton will be obtained at V isit 2.  iButton  data 
files will be post -processed by Duane Romo and daily and weekly averages calculated for 
each participant.  These values will be compared with the bracing diaries completed by each 
patient.  
Visit 2 (T=6  Months)  
Visit two will consist of quantitative  MRI scans conducted at the Stanford Medical 
Outpatient Center or the  Stanford Lucas Imaging Center .  The patient will also complete the 
same standardized questionnaires as in the first visit.   
Visit 3 (T= 12  months)  
The patient will return  for another quant itative MRI  scan and to answer the standardized 
questionnaires.  
Visit 4 (T= 24  months)  
The patient will come back again for a final  MRI  mapping scan and to answer the 
standardized questionnaires.  
Benefits  
All s ubjects requiring bracing will receive a fitted Unloader One off the shelf brace as 
compensation for their participation in the study.  
Budget  
Standard treatment costs, which the study sponsor will NOT be responsible for, include:  
1. office visits  
  
2. standard x -ray series  
3. off-loader bracing (insurance reimbursement  portion )  
Sponsor study costs (per study site) : 
Year 1:  
1. Any p atient cost s for Unloader brace NOT covered by insurance (unkn own) 
2. Biologic MRI scanning and T2 mapping analysis of 20 patients                                                 
@ 4 scanning sessions  @$600/scan            
3.  MRI analysis (post doc radiologist @ 50% effort)=                 
4. Study coordinator             
           
Year 2:  (MRI analysis and study coordinator only)  
 
 
References  
 
1 Bedi A, Feeley BT, Williams RJ. Management of Articular Cartilage Defects of the Knee. The 
Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery  2010; 92: 994 –1009.  
2 Knutsen G, Engebretsen L, Ludvigsen TC, et al.  Autologous chondrocyte implantation compared 
with microfracture in the knee. A randomized trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am  2004; 86 -A: 455 –64. 
3 Safran MR, Seiber K. The evidence for surgical repair of articular cartilage in the knee. J Am 
Acad Orthop Surg  2010 ; 18: 259 –66. 
4 Hurst JM, Steadman JR, O'Brien L, Rodkey WG, Briggs KK. Rehabilitation following 
microfracture for chondral injury in the knee. Clin Sports Med  2010; 29: 257 –65–viii. 
5 Rodrigo JJ, Steadman JR, Silliman JF, Fulstone HA. Rodrigo: Improvement  of full -thickness 
chondral defect... - Google Scholar. Am J Knee Surg, 1994.  
6 Oneto JMM, Ellermann J, LaPrade RF. Longitudinal evaluation of cartilage repair tissue after 
microfracture using T2 -mapping: a case report with arthroscopic and MRI correlation . Knee Surg 
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc  2010; 18: 1545 –50. 
 
 
