 
   
 
  
PCORI -1306- 02918 Evaluation of Parent -Based Interventions to Support Children after 
Traumatic Injury  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
5/07/2018 
 
  
 
IRB ID #:  201111728  
 
To:  Marizen Ramirez  
 
From :  IRB-01  DHHS Registration # IRB00000099,  
Univ of Iowa,  DHHS Federalwide Assurance # FWA00003007  
 
Re: Evaluation of Parent Based Interventions to Support Children After Traumatic Injury  
 
Protocol Number:    
Protocol Version :    
Protocol Date:     
Amendment Number/Date(s):   
 
 
Approval Date:  05/07/18  
 
 
Next IRB Approval  
Due Before:  05/07/19  
 
Type of Application:  Type of Application Review :  Approved for Populations : 
  
 New Project    Full Board:   Children  
 Continuing Review  Meeting Date:   Prisoners  
 Modification    Expedited   Pregnant Women,  Fetuses, Neonates  
     
     Exempt         
 
Source of Support:  Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Insitute  
 
Investigational New Drug/Biologic Name:  
Investigational New Drug/Biologic Number :  
Name of Sponsor who holds IND:  
 
Investigational Device Name:   
Investigational Device Number :  
Sponsor who holds IDE:    
 
 
This approval has been electronically signed by IRB Chair:  
Brian Bishop, CIP, MA  
05/07/18 1605
IRB ID#: 201111728   05/07/18   Page 2 of 3  
 
 IRB Approval:  IRB approval indicates that this project meets the regulatory requirements for the protection 
of human subjects.  IRB approval does not absolve the principal investigator from complying with other 
institutional, collegiate, or departmental policies or pr ocedures.  
 Agency Notification:  If this is a New Project or Continuing Review application and the project  is funded  by 
an external government or non- profit agency , the original HHS 310 form, “Protection of Human Subjects 
Assurance Identification /IRB Certi fication/Declaration of Exemption,” has been forwarded to the UI Division of 
Sponsored Programs, 100 Gilmore Hall, for appropriate action.  You will receive a signed copy from Sponsored Programs.  
 Recruitment/Consent:  Your IRB application  has been approved for recruitment of subjects not to exceed 
the number indicated on your application form.  If you are using written informed consent, the IRB -approved 
and stamped Informed Consent Document(s)  are attached.  Please make copies from the attached  "masters" 
for subjects to sign when agreeing to participate.  The original signed Informed Consent Document should be 
placed in your research files.  A copy of the Informed Consent Document should be given to the subject.  (A 
copy of the signed  Informed Consent Document should be given to the subject if your Consent contains a 
HIPAA authorization section.)  If hospital/clinic patients are being enrolled, a copy of the IRB approved 
Record of Consent form should be placed in the subject’s electronic medical record . 
 Continuing Review:  Federal regulations require that the IRB re- approve research projects at intervals  
appropriate to the degree of risk, but no less than once per year.  This process is called “continuing review.”  
Continuing review for non- exemp t research is required to occur as long as the research remains active for 
long-term follow -up of research subjects, even when the research is permanently closed to enrollment of new 
subjects and all subjects have completed all research- related interventions and to occur when the remaining 
research activities are limited to collection of private identifiable information. Your project “expires” at 12:01 AM on the date indicated on the preceding page (“Next IRB Approval Due on or Before”).  You must obtain 
your next IRB approval
 of this project on or before that expiration date.  You are responsible for submitting a 
Continuing Review application in sufficient time for approval before the expiration date, however the HSO will 
send a reminder notice a pproximatel y 60 and 30 days prior to the expiration date.  
 
Modifications:  Any change in  this research project or materials must be submitted on a Modification 
application to the IRB for prior review and approval , except when a change is necessary to eliminate appare nt 
immediate hazards to subjects.  The investigator is required to promptly notify the IRB of any changes made 
without IRB approval to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to subjects using the Modification/Update Form. Modifications requiring the prior review and approval of the IRB  include but are not limited to:  changing 
the protocol or study procedures, changing investigators or funding sources, changing the Informed Consent Document, increasing the anticipated total number of subjects from what was originally approved, or adding 
any new materials (e.g., letters to subjects, ads , questionnaires).  
 
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks:  You must promptly report to the IRB any serious and/or 
unexpected adverse experience, as defined in the UI Investigator’s Guide, and any other unanticipated 
problems involving risks to subjects or others.  The Reportable Events Form (REF) should be used for 
reporting to the IRB.  
 Audits/Record -Keeping:  Your research records may be audited at any time during or after the 
implementation of your project.  Federal and University policies require that all research records be 
maintained for a period of three (3) years following the close of the research project.  For research that involves drugs or devices seeking FDA approval, the research records must be kept for a period of three 
years after the FDA has taken final action on the marketing application.  
 Additional Information:  Complete information regarding research involving human subjects at The 
University of Iowa is available in the “Investigator’s Guide to Human Subjects Research.”  Research 
investigators are expected to comply with these policies and procedures, and to be familiar with the 
University’s Federalwide Assurance, the Belmont Report, 45CFR46, and other applicable regulations prior to 
conducting the research.  These documents and IRB application and related forms are available on the 
Human Subjects Office website or are available by calling 335- 6564.  
IRB ID#: 201111728   05/07/18   Page 3 of 3  
 
  
 
PI: Marizen Ramirez
IRB ID #: 201111728
Project Details
I. Project Introduction
I.1 Project to be reviewed by:
IRB-01
I.2 Project Title:
Evaluation of Parent Based Interventions to Support Children Af ter Traumatic Injury
I.3 Short Title (optional):Psychological First Aid for Injured Kids
I.4 Provide a short summary of the purpose and procedures  of the study proposed in this IRB application.
DO NOT include information on studie s not proposed in this application.
Use LAY terminology only. This must be easily unde rstandable by IRB community members and nonscientists.
DO NOT cut and paste technical abstracts from funding applic ations that may not be unde rstood by a general audience.
Phase 1We propose to conduct eight focus groups: two composed of appro ximately 6-10 parents each at Un iversity of Iowa Children's Hospital
and two composed of approximately  6-10 parents at Blank Childre n's Hospital. We will also cond uct two of approximately 6-10
pediatric health care providers each from the University of Iow a Children's Hospital and two of a pproximately 6-10 pediatric h ealth care
providers each from Blank Children 's Hospital. The purpose of t he parent focus groups is to establish the parent's willingness to
participate in a study to reduce the psychological effects of i njury on their children, and a  parent's accepta bility of the LP C for Injured
Kids materials. The purpose of the pediatric health care provid er focus groups is to understand the types of trauma experience d by
children, the psychosocial consequences encountered by traumati zed children and the types of services perceived as available,
accessible, and acceptable to fam ilies particularly from rural Iowa. In addition, providers will be asked to prov ide feedback on the LPC
for Injured Kids materials. If a health care provider is unable  to participate in the focus group but wishes to be interviewed  individually,
the purpose and the questions ask ed during the in terview will b e identical to those of the focus group. Each focus group/inter view is
expected to last between 60 and 90 minutes.
Phase 2
Children between 10-17 years of age presenting to the UIHC and Blank Children's Hospital with a n unintentional injury requirin g
admission will be the sample popu lation. Blank Children's Hospital has submitted a separate IRB for their participation in the  study. A
child will be included if they ar e 10-17 years old with an unin tentional injury. Cons enting children and t heir parents will be  asked to
complete a series of four questi onnaires: before hospital disch arge, at 6 weeks post discharge , 3-months and 6-months post dis charge.
The parent-child dyads will be r andomized (1:1) to receive trai ning in Link for Injured Kids or  to receive Trauma Education (p arent
booklet, "So, you've been in an Accident"). The survey complete d in the hospital will be a paper survey or online via iPads, a nd
follow-up surveys can be completed on paper or online.
I.5 Specify your research question(s), study aims or hypotheses (do not indicate "see protocol")
Phase 1Assess the feasibility of LPC for Injured Kids t hrough qualitat ive research with paren ts of previously inj ured children and so cial workers
and pediatric trauma providers f rom the UI Children's Hospital and Blank Children's Hospital. The focus group findings will also help
inform and refine intervent ion materials and delivery.
Phase 2Through a randomized trial, deter mine the range of potential ps ychosocial and behavioral health indicators possibly impacted b y Link
for Injured Kids. Th is will identify the types of outcomes whic h could include PTSD, depression , nonspecific distr
 ess, quality  of life,
absenteeism, school performance, cop ing skills, communication s kills, and access to mental health.
I.6 Background and significance and/or Pre liminary studies related to this project.
(do not indicate "see protocol")According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, th e number one cause of death and morbidity among children ages 1 -19 is
unintentional injury. Each year, approximately 12,000 children die from unintentional injury cau ses (1). Of all injury causes,  motor
vehicle crash leads to the most number of deaths to children in  U.S. as passengers, teen drivers and pedestrians. Almost 400,0 00 injured
teen drivers and occupants were s een in emergency departments i n the US in 2005 (2). In the U.S., falls lead to the highest nu mber of
childhood injury emergen cy department visits followed by injuri es due to being struck by or against an object (1). Fire or bur ns are also
an important cause of injury as the second leading cause of injury death to children between 1 and 19 (1).
Unintentional injuries, particular ly severe injuries that impac t daily functioning, can have longlasting psychological effects . Prevalence
of posttraumatic stre ss symptoms is estimat ed at 29% during the first month pos t-trauma and 13% between 3-6 months post-trauma . (3)HawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
1 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Within 12 months of being hosp italized because of injury, 19-32 % of adolescents developed PTSD. (4) A variety of injury experi ences
can lead to PTSD sympto ms including traffic crashes, burns, fal ls and animal attacks. (5) Adoles cents involved in a mass burn incident
had significantly more mental pro blems than community controls one year after the incident (6), and, 12% of schoolchildren exp osed to
an industrial fire met the crite ria for PTSD. (7) Approximately  30% of pediatric pedestrian inj ury cases have acute stress disorder or
PTSD. (8-10) Many cases of psychol ogical trauma are missed in hospital settings and sent home. T his proposed project will empo wer
families with skills t o identify trauma-in duced mental health d istress and resources for referr al to advanced mental health ca re.
Our innovative project addresses the need for evidence-based pr actices to improve the acute car e of children post-injury. Psyc hological
First Aid (PFA), analogous to physical first aid (11), “uses in terpersonal skills provided by individuals to respond to psycho logical
consequences of [trauma] in thei r own lives, as well as in the lives of their family, friends, and neighbors (p. 4–5)” (11). I nformed by
previous res earch on pos ttraumatic risk and  resilience, PFA pro vides information, education, comfort and support through human
contact in order to accelerate r ecovery and promotion of mental  health (12, 13).
In 2006, psychologists developed a child-focused version of PFA  in school and community settings called “Listen, Protect, Conn ect
(LPC)-Model and Teach.” LPC outlines steps for administering PF A to children after any type of crises, either a large-scale di saster or
local emergency. The effectivene ss of PFA has not been scientif ically evaluated. We propose to create an adapted version of LP C for
families. LPC has the potential to be a national tool that possibly improves coping, access to mental health care, and acute P TSD
symptoms for children impacted by both individual and community  emergencies (see Approach  for description of LPC).
Preliminary Studies
Dr. Ramirez (PI) has over ten y ears of experience conducting pe diatric injury, viol ence and disaster preparedness research, in cluding
studies of school-related inju ries to childr en with disabilitie s (14-16); high school sports injuries (17); and emergency prep aredness
among staff, students and parents (18-20). Recently, Dr. Ramire z began studies focused on the psychological trauma in school s ettings.
Studies of Psychological First Aids. In July 2008, Dr. Ramirez conducted studies of Listen Conn ect Protect (LPC) in the school  setting, a
precursor to the work proposed her e. In the first study, 200 ra ndomly selected flood-affected children were inv ited to partici pate, but
only 8 enrolled into the study. In the second study, students s een at or referred to school nur ses’ offices potentially impact ed by various
types of trauma (e.g., unintentional injury, violence, the floo ds) were enrolled. In total, 20 students were treated with LPC and
followed-up.
The L PC intervention had high f ide
lity and acceptance among cli ents and nurse providers. Speci fically, 90% of sessions followe d the
Listen Steps, 85% the Protect Steps, and 75% the Connect Steps.  Feedback from subjects and nurse providers was also extremely
positive, with 80% of children reporting f eeling comfortable sp eaking with the school nurse, an d 60% of students indicating that the
LPC sessions were helpful in dealing with recent life events. O ne student with elevated scores o f distress on the K6 screening  tool
(PTSD screener included in the LPC repertoire) was immediately referred to advanced mental hea lth care. Human subject protecti on
approval for LPC has a lready been obtained, and protocols were developed and tested. The new project will adapt materials from  this
school-based study and apply the  intervention to families of injured children seen at the UIHC.
Flood-induced stress among college students. In August 2008, Dr . Ramirez conducted a university -wide survey to measure disaste r
health impacts of the Great Flood of Iowa among University of I owa students. Of the 10,500 su mmer enrolled students, 1,404
responded. Eight percent of students had symptoms consistent wi th PTSD. The most commonly reported symptom was feeling
emotionally upset (12%). Another 7% reported frequent trouble s leeping and 6% reported frequent trouble concentrating. About 7 % of
students reported increased drug and/or alcohol use following t he floods.
“So you’ve been in an accident,” the second early intervention strategy to be tested in the pro posed study, takes into account  the
challenges of hectic hospital settings and busy families. Given  time and other constraints, edu cational materials may be a sim ple,
cost-effective early interventi on option when nothing else is a vailable. Dr. Kenardy (Co-I of th is research project) tested hi s materials at
two children’s hospitals in Queensland. In the in tervention hos pital, pediatric trauma patients (11-17 years old) and their pa rents received
booklets within 72 hours of admission, while control patients a nd parents at the other hospital received no materials. Over th e follow-up
period, children in the intervention hospital had significantly  lower levels of stress. Their parents also showed promising ou tcomes such
as fewer intrusive post-traumati c stress symptoms than control group parents. In their implemen tation evaluation of the materi als, 97%
of parents and 83% of children in the intervention arm reported reading them, and of those, 72% of parents perceived the bookl ets as
having a positive effect on them  and 57% thought the materials benefitted their children (18,19).
I.7 Literature cited / references (if attaching a grant or protocol enter N/A).
1. Borse N, Gilchrist J, Dellinger A, Rudd R, Ballesteros M, Sl eet D. CDC Childhood Injury Repor t: Patterns of Unintentional I njuries
among 0 -19 Year Olds in the United States, 2000-2006. Atlanta:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center fo r Injury
Prevention and Control; 2008.2. CoI, Violence and Poison Prev ention: American Academy of Ped iatrics. Policy statement-Pe destrian safety. Pediatrics
2009;124(2):802-12.
3. Olofsson E, Bunketorp O, Andersson AL. Children and adolesce nts injured in traff ic--associ ated psychological 
 consequences: a
literature review. Acta P aediatr 2009;98(1):17-22.
4. Zatzick DF, Jurkovich GJ, Fan MY , Grossman D, Russo J, Katon  W, et al. Association between po sttraumatic stress and depress ive
symptoms and functional outcomes in adolescents followed up lon gitudinally after injury hospitalization. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
2008;162(7):642-8.
5. Daviss W, Racusin R, Fleischer A, Mooney D, Ford J, McHugo G . Acute stress disorder symptom atology during hospitalization f or
pediatric injury. J Am Acad Child  Adolesc Psychiatry 2000;39(5) :569-75.
6. Dorn T, Yzermans JC, Spreeuwenberg PM, Schilder A, van der Z ee J. A cohort study of the long- term impact of a fire disaster  on the
physical and mental health of ad olescents. J Trauma Stress 2008 ;21(2):239-42.
7. March JS, Amaya-Jackson L, Terry R, Costanzo P. Posttraumati c symptomatology in children and adolescents after an industrial fire.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1997;36(8):1080-8.8. de Vries AP, Kassam-Adams N, Cnaan A, Sherman-Slate E, Galla gher PR, Winston FK. Looking beyond the physical injury:
posttraumatic stress disorder in children and parents after ped iatric traffic injury. Ped iatrics 1999;104(6):1293-9.
9. Stallard P, Salter E, Velleman R. Posttraumatic stress disor der following road traffic accide nts - a second prospective stu dy. Eur ChildHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
2 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Adolesc Psychiatry 2004;13(3):172-8.
10. Winston FK, Kassam-Adams N,  Vivarelli-O'Neill C, Ford J, Ne wman E, Baxt C, et al. Acute stress disorder symptoms in childr en
and their parents after pediatric traffic injury. Pediatrics 20 02;109(6):e90.
11. Institute of Medici ne. Preparing for the Psychological Cons equences of Terrorism: A Public Health Strategy. Washington, DC :
National Academies Press; 2003.12. Everly GS, Jr., Flynn BW. Principles and practical procedur es for acute psychological first a id training for personnel wit hout mental
health experience. Int J Emerg Ment Health 2006;8(2):93-100.
13. Berger R, Pat-Horenczyk R, G elkopf M. School-based interven tion for prevention and treatment  of elementary-students' terro r-
related distress in Israel: a qu asi-randomized controlled trial. J Trauma Stress 2007;20(4):541-51.
14. Ramirez M, Yang J, Bourque L, Javien J, Kashani S, Limbos MA, et al. Sports injuries to h igh school athletes with disabili ties.
Pediatrics 2009;123(2):690-6.
15. Ramirez M, Peek-Asa C, Kra us JF. Disability a nd risk of sch ool related injury. Inj Prev 2004;10(1):21-6.
16. Limbos MA, Ramirez M, Park LS, Peek-Asa C, Kraus JF. Injuri es to the head among children en rolled in special education. Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med 2004;158(11):1057-61.17. Ramirez M, Schaffer KB, Shen H, Kashani S, Kraus JF. Injuri es to high school football athletes in California. Am J Sports Med
2006;34(7):1147-58.
18. Kenardy J, Cobham V , Nixon R D, McDermott B, March S. Protoc ol for a randomised controlled trial of risk screening and earl y
intervention comparin g child- and family-f ocused cognitive-beha vioural therapy for PTSD in children following accidental injur y. BMC
Psychiatry 2010;10:92.19. Kenardy J, Thompson K, Le Bro cque R, Olsson K. Information- provision interventio n for children and their parents following
pediatric accidental injury. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2008; 17(5):316-25.
II. Research Team
II.1 Principal Investigator
Name E-mail College
Marizen Ramirez marizen-ramirez@ui owa.edu College of Public Healt h
II.2 Team MembersUI Team Members
Name E-mail College ContactKey
PrsnUI
COIVAMC
COIConsent Process
InvolvementDeactivated
Marizen Ramirez, PHDmarizen-
ramirez@uiowa.eduCollege ofPublic HealthYes Yes No Yes No
Mallory Bolenbaugh, BS
mallory-ermler@uiowa.eduGraduateCollegeNo No No Yes No
Cassidy Branch, BS, MA
cassidy-branch@uiowa.edu VP Research Yes No No Yes No
Collin Calvert, MPH collin-calvert@uiowa.eduCollege of
Public HealthNo No No No No
Gretchen Cress, BSN, RN gretchen-cress@uiowa.eduCarver College
of MedicineNo No No Yes No
Jonathan Davis, MSjonathan-
a-davis@uiowa.eduCollege ofPublic HealthNo Yes No No No
Patricia Espe Pfeifer, PHDpatricia-
espepfeifer@uiowa.eduCarver College
of MedicineNo Yes No Yes No
Javier Flores, BS javier-flores@uiowa.eduGraduate
CollegeNo No No No No
Kelly Guinn, BA kelly-guinn@uiowa.eduGraduateCollegeNo No No Yes No
Charles Jennissen, MDcharles-
jennissen@uiowa.eduCarver Collegeof MedicineNo Yes No No No
Corinne Peek-Asa, PHDcorinne-
peek-asa@uiowa.eduCollege of
Public HealthNo Yes No No No
Graeme Pitcher, MD graeme-pitcher@uiowa.eduCarver College
of MedicineNo Yes No No No
Lisa Roth, BS lisa-m-roth@uiowa.eduCollege ofPublic HealthYes Yes No Yes No
Ruthann Schrock, BSNruthann-
schrock@uiowa.eduUniversity
HospitalsNo No No Yes No
Karen Smith, RD, MS karen-l-smith@uiowa.eduCollege of
Public HealthNo No No No No
Kristel Wetjen, RN kristel-wetjen@uiowa.eduUniversityHospitalsNo Yes No Yes NoHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
3 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Name E-mail College ContactKey
PrsnUI
COIVAMC
COIConsent Process
InvolvementDeactivated
Tammy Wilgenbusch, PHDtammy-
wilgenbusch@uiowa.eduCarver College
of MedicineNo Yes No Yes No
Non-UI Team Members
Name Institution Locatio n FWA Role DHHS ContactKey
PrsnUI
COIVA M C
COIConsent
Process
InvolvementEmail
Bridget ChoUniversity
of Kansas-
LawrenceLawrence,KS00003310Bridget is a
clinical
psychologypracticum
student
workingwith study
Co-I Dr.
BrianaWoods-
Jaeger. In
her roleBridget is
involved
with bothclinical
work and
researchwith Dr.
Woods-
Jaeger andwill beworking
under her
supervisionon this
study.Yes No No No Yes
bridget.cho@ku.edu
Sun Young HwangChildren'sMercy
HospitalKansasCity, MO00002496Sun YoungHwang willbe an intern
that will be
responsiblefor
consenting
participantsand
delivering
theintervention
and
collectingdata per
protocol.Yes No No No Yes
shwang@cmh.edu
Teresa MaagChildren's
MercyHospitalKansas
City, MO00002496Teresa will
serve as aclinical
research
coordinatorand serveas the site
coordinator
for CMH.Yes No No No Yes
tamaag@cmh.edu
Kimberly RandellChildren'sMercy
HospitalKansas
City, MO00002496Dr. Randellis an
emergency
roomphysician
who will
provideclinical
oversightYes No No No Yes
krandell@cmh.eduHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
4 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Name Institution Locatio n FWA Role DHHS ContactKey
PrsnUI
COIVA M C
COIConsent
Process
InvolvementEmail
for the
projectteam at
Children's
MercyHospital
Chris SextonChildren's
Mercy
HospitalKansasCity, MO00002496Dr. Chris
Sexton is a
researchassociate
and will
assist inexecuting
the study
protocols.Yes No No No Yes
csexton@cmh.edu
Emily SiedlikChildren's
Mercy
HospitalKansasCity, MO00002496Emily willbe a
research
assistantand adhere
to study
protocols.She will be
delivering
interventionand
conducting
datacollectionYes No No No Yes
easiedlik@cmh.edu
Lauren SlagelChildren's
Mercy
HospitalKansasCity, MO0002496Lauren is aresearch
assistant
who willassist in
engagement
activitiesand
collecting
stakeholderfeedback.Yes No No No Yes
leslagel@cmh.edu
Shallyn WardChildren's
Mercy
HospitalKansasCity, MO00002496Shallyn is a
research
assistant atChildren’s
Mercy
Hospital.She will be
assisting
withparticipant
follow-up,
boostercalls, and
survey data
entry. Shewill alsoassist with
PCORI
stakeholderengagement
activities
and mayprovide
back-up for
screening,recruitment,
andYes No No No Yes
slward@cmh.eduHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
5 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Name Institution Locatio n FWA Role DHHS ContactKey
PrsnUI
COIVA M C
COIConsent
Process
InvolvementEmail
intervention
for eligibleparticipants
at CMH.
Chalott WilliamsChildren's
MercyHospitalKansas
City, MO00002496Charlott
will be aresearch
assistant
and adhereto all
protocols.
She will bedelivering
the
interventionand
conducting
datacollection.Yes No No No Yes
cwilliams@cmh.edu
Briana Woods-JaegerChildren'sMercy
HospitalKansas
City, MO00002496Briana
Woods-
Jaeger willwork
remotely as
a researchteam
member to
assist infidelitytesting of
audio
recordings.Yes No No No Yes
bwoodsjaeger@cmh.edu
II.3 The Principal Investigator of this study is:
Faculty
II.6 Identify the key personnel. The system will automatically designate the PI and all faculty members on the project as “key perso nnel.” For
information about other team members who should be designated as “key personnel” please click on the help information.
Name Is Key Personnel
Marizen Ramirez, PHD Yes
Mallory Bolenbaugh, BS NoCassidy Branch, BS, MA NoCollin Calvert, MPH No
Gretchen Cress, BSN, RN NoJonathan Davis, MS Yes
Patricia Espe Pfeifer, PHD YesJavier Flores, BS No
Kelly Guinn, BA No
Charles Jennissen, MD YesCorinne Peek-Asa, PHD YesGraeme Pitcher, MD Yes
Lisa Roth, BS Yes
Ruthann Schrock, BSN NoKaren Smith, RD, MS No
Kristel Wetjen, RN Yes
Tammy Wilgenbusch, PHD YesBridget Cho No
Sun Young Hwang No
Teresa Maag No
Kimberly Randell No
Chris Sexton No
Emily Siedlik NoHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
6 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Name Is Key Personnel
Lauren Slagel No
Shallyn Ward No
Chalott Williams No
Briana Woods-Jaeger No
II.5 Select research team memb er who is the primary cont act for study participants.
Cassidy Branch
III. Funding/Other Support
III.1 Funding Sources
Type Source Grant TitleName of PI
on GrantStatusStatus
Description
* Private Foundation/AssociationPatient-Centered
Outcomes ResearchInsituteEvaluation of Parent_Based Intervention
to Support Children af ter Traumatic InjuryMarizenRamirezAwarded
* new source name
III.2 Which office will process the agreement for this projectSponsored Programs - Federal /State/Local Agency Funded
III.3 Does any member of the research team have a financial conf lict of interest related to this project according to the 
Conflict of Interest in
Research  policy? If yes, please indicate which members below.
Name Has Conflict of Interest
Marizen Ramirez, PHD No
Mallory Bolenbaugh, BS No
Cassidy Branch, BS, MA No
Collin Calvert, MPH No
Gretchen Cress, BSN, RN No
Jonathan Davis, MS No
Patricia Espe Pfeifer, PHD No
Javier Flores, BS No
Kelly Guinn, BA No
Charles Jennissen, MD No
Corinne Peek-Asa, PHD No
Graeme Pitcher, MD No
Lisa Roth, BS No
Ruthann Schrock, BSN No
Karen Smith, RD, MS No
Kristel Wetjen, RN No
Tammy Wilgenbusch, PHD No
Bridget Cho No
Sun Young Hwang No
Teresa Maag No
Kimberly Randell No
Chris Sexton No
Emily Siedlik No
Lauren Slagel No
Shallyn Ward No
Chalott Williams No
Briana Woods-Jaeger No
III.5 What is the current status of this funding source?
Source Status Other Status Description
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Insitute Awarded
IV . Project TypeHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
7 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
IV .1 Do you want the IRB to give this project
Regular (expedited or full board) review
IV.2 Enter the date you will be ready to begin sc reening subjects/collecting data for this project.
10/17/2011
IV.3 Are you requesting a waiver of informed consent/authorization  (subjects will not be given any or al or written information about the
study)?
No
V . Other Committee Review
V. 1 Does this project involve any substance in gested, injected, or applied to the body?
Do not answer yes, if the involvement includes a device, wire, or instrument
No
V. 2 Are any contrast agents used for any purpose in this study?No
V. 9 Will any subject be asked to undergo a diagnostic radiation procedure (including radiographic, nuclear medicine, DEXA)?
No
V. 14 Will any subject be asked to undergo a radi ation therapy procedure (including external  beam therapy, brachytherapy, or nuclear medicine
therapy)?No
V. 20 Does this project involve the deliberate transfer of recombinant or synthetic nucleic acid molecules, or DNA or RNA derived fro m
recombinant or synthetic nucleic acid molecules,  into one or more human research participant?
No
V. 21 Will any portion of this project be conducted in the CRU, or does it use any CRU resources?Yes
V. 22 Will this project use any resource/patients of the HCCC?
No
V. 25 . a Will the study involve 
any of the following activity at UI Health Care, even if subjects or their insurance will not be billed for the item or
service, and regardless of the study funding source (i ncluding studies with depa rtmental or no funding)?
Procedures, tests, examin ations, hospitalizations, us e of Pathology services, use of clinic facilities or clinical equipment, o r any
patient care services, including services co nducted in the Clinical Research Unit; or
Physician services or services provided by non-physicians who are credentialed to bill (ARNPs, Physician Assistants, etc.)
No
V.26 The study involves nursing, nursing resources or evaluates nursing practices.Yes
VI. Subjects
VI.1 How many adult subjects do you expect to  consent or enroll for this project?
300
VI.2 What is the age of the youngest adult subject?18.0
VI.3 What is the age of the oldest adult subject?
75.0
VI.4 What is the percentage of adult male subjects?
50
VI.5 What is the percentage of  adult female subjects?
50HawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
8 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
VI.6 How many minor subjects do you expect to consent or enroll for this project?
300
VI.7 What is the age of the youngest minor subject?
10.0
VI.8 What is the age of the oldest minor subject?
17.2
VI.9 What is the percentage of minor male subjects?
50
VI.10 What is the percentage of minor female subjects?50
VI.11 Will any of the minors enrolled be in foster care or Wards of the court?
No
VI.13 Describe EACH of your subject populations
Include description of any control group(s)
Specify the Inclusion/Exclusion criteria for EACH group
Studies under IRB-03 enrolling non veterans as part of the subject  population must present a compelling argument to the IRB for
the inclusion of non-Veterans (e.g., insuff icient number of Veterans; survey of VA employees; study of active duty military; study
involving Veterans’ family members), and the research is relevant to the care of Veterans or active duty military personnel.
Phase 1University of Iowa Children's Hospital- UI Children's (Complete )
Parent population: Parent's of children ages 10-17 years of age  who are treated for a unintenti onal traumatic injury in the la st 12 months at UI
Children's Hospital. Parents of children with intentional injuries will be excluded from the foc us groups. Only one parent of a potential parent
dyad (mother or father) will be i ncluded in the focus group.
Provider population: Emergency M edicine and Trauma physicians, nurses, pediatric psych iatrists and psychologists, social worke rs, and parent
advocates serving the pediatric  unintentional traumatic injury population.
Blank Children's Hospital- Complete
Qualitative formative research w ill be conducted at Blank Children's Hospital to solidify them es and confirm that the research  protocol can be
effectively itengrated into both settings. Two provider focus g roups will be held at Bla nk Children's Hospital
Parent population: Parents of children 10-17 years of age who a re treated for a unintentional traumatic injury in the last 12 months at Blank
Children's Hospital. Parents of children with intentional injuries will be excluded from the foc us groups. Only one parent of a potential parent
dyad (mother or father) will be i ncluded in the focus group. Two parent focus groups will be h eld in the Des Moines area.
Provider population: Emergency M edicine and Trauma physicians, nurses, pediatric psych iatrists and psychologists, social worke rs,child life
specialist and parent advocates s erving the pediatric unintenti onal traumatic injury population.
Phase 2Children with new unintentional i njuries (not a complication fr om previous injury) will be recr uited to participate in the ran domized trial. All
children will be between the age s of 10-17.2 (17 years, 3 month s) years of age. All children ad mitted for injury will be ident ified, and direct
questioning later will screen out  those who had intentional inj uries. Children with unintentional injuries will be administere d the COAT which
is a measure of orientation to s elf, place and memory, and those that pass the COAT will be recruited into the study. One pare nt of the child
will be recruited for participation. Inclu sion and exclusion cr iteria are the same for both ra ndomization groups. Exclusions i nclude non-English
speaking, diagnosis of intellectua l deficit or psychosis, suici de attempt in the last year, and residential treatment placemen t in the last year.
VI.14 Provide an estimate of the total number of subjects that would be eligible for inclusion in each of your study populations (inc lude your
control population if applicable)
Phase 1University of Iowa Children's Hospital-UI C hildren's(complete)
Parent population- UI Children's:  Approximately 140 pediatric p atients between the age of 10 an d 18 are treated by UI Children 's Hospital
each year, ther ef
ore, approximately 140 parents will be eligibl e for participation in the focus group.
Provider population- UI Children' s: Approximately 10-15 UI Chil dren's Hospital providers serve the injured pediatric populatio n. All
providers will be eligible for the  focus group or a personal in terview.
Blank Children's Hospital- CompleteParent Population-Approximately 100 pediatric patients between the age of 10 and 18 are treated by Blank Children's Hospital e ach year,
therefore, approxima tely 100 paren ts will be eligib le for parti cipation in the focus group.HawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
9 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Provider population- Approximate ly 10-15 Blank C hildren's Hospi tal providers serve the injured pediatric population. All provi ders will be
eligible for the focus group  or a personal interview.
Phase 2
Approximately 480 pediatric pa tients between the age of 10 and 17 are admitted by UI Children's and Blank Children's Hospital each year,
therefore, for a 2.5 year study period, approximately 1200 parent-child dyads will be eligible to participate in the study.
Children's Mercy Hospital in Kansas City admits 540 children wh o were age 10-17 on an annual ba sis. As they joi n year 3 of the study this
will be the number of p arent-child dyads e ligible to participat e in the study from that site.
VI.15 Describe how you will have access to each of your study popula tions in sufficient number to meet your recruitment goals.
Phase 1
University of Iowa Child ren's Hospital(completed)
Parent population: Using the Iow a Trauma Database, Ms. Wetjen, UIHC Pediatric Nurse Trauma Coordinator, will identify parents whose
children previously received an unintentional injury and were treated at the UIHC in the past 12 months.
Provider population: Given Ms We tjen's leadership role in the U IHC Trauma team, she will facil itate the invitation and recruit ment of pediatric
unintentional injury health care providers.
Blank Children's Hospital- Completed
Parent population: Using the Iow a Trauma Database, Ms. Wetjen, UIHC Pediatric Nurse Trauma Coor dinator will work with Blank Ch ildren's
Hospital Pediatric Trauma Coordina tor to identify parents whose  children previously received an unintentional injury and were treated at the
Blank Children's Hospital in the past 12 months.
Provider population: Given Ms We tjen's leadership role in the UIHC Trauma team, she will work w ith Blank Children's Hospital Pediatric
Trauma Nurse to identify pediatri c unintentional injury health care providers.
Phase 2The UIHC and Children's Mercy Ho spital team will review patient  admission records morning and afternoon/evening to identify el igible
patients (injury admissions between 10-17 years of age). The UI HC team will determine if the child meets inclusion criteria by  reviewing
information collected from EPIC . The Children's Mercy Hospitial  team will determine if the child  meets inclusion criteria by r eviewing
information collected from Ce rner medical record system.
VI.16 Do you 
plan to recruit/enroll non-English speaking people?
No
VI.18 Do you propose to enroll any of the following in this study as subjects?
Employee of the PI or employee of a research team member
Individual supervised by PI or supe rvised by member of research team
Individual subordinate to the PI or subord inate to any member of the research team
Student or trainee under the direction of the PI or under the direction of a member of the research team
Yes
VI.19 Provide justification for why these subjects must be included in the study.Phase 1There is very limited pediatric psychiatric and psychological s taff within the UIHC staff, therefore a staff member of Dr. Wilgenbusch's
clinic will be asked to particip ate in the health  care provider  focus group.
Phase 2
These groups will not be enrolled.
VI.20 Will subjects provide any information about their relatives?
Yes
VI.21 Describe in detail how this information w ill be obtained. NOTE: The collection of id entified data about fam ily members makes th e
family member a subject in the study. This would require a cons ent process with the family memb er or a request for waiver of
consent to collect these data. See the Research Guide for more information.
Phase 1
Parents will be asked to describe the circumstan ces and resulting injuries their children received.
Phase 2Parents will be asked to complete  a questionnaire that gathers information about their child/a dolescent's (the subjects in thi s study with
the injury) symptoms  of traumatic stress and quality of life. P arents will also complete a participant informa tion form asking  forHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
10 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
information about the child/adolescent's age, injury, and gener al family information.
VI.22 List the data to be collected about subject relatives including the names of any surveys, questionna ires etc. to be used. Attac h data
collection tools under the Relative/Proxy Data Collection Instruments category.
Phase 1None of the child's identifying informatio n will be recorded or  the circumstances a round their injury.
Phase 2Foa PTSD - Parent Version
Strengths and Difficulties - Parent Version
Quality of life - Parent Version
VI.23 Will anyone (other than the subject) provide you with information about the subject (e.g. proxy interviews)?
Yes
VI.24 Describe in detail how this information will be obtained.
Phase 1 : No
Phase 2
Parents will be asked to complete  a questionnaire that gathers information about their child/a dolescent's (the subjects in thi s study with
the injury) symptoms  of traumatic stress and quality of life. P arents will also complete a participant informa tion form asking  for
information about the child/adolescent's age, injury, and gener al family information.
VI.25 List the data to be collected from proxy individuals including the names of any surveys, questionna ires etc. to be used. Attach  data
collection tools under the Relative/Proxy Data Collection Instruments category.Phase 2Foa PTSD - Parent Version
Strengths and Difficulties - Parent Version
Quality of life - Parent VersionParticipant In formation Form
VI.26 Is this project 
about pregnant women?
No
VI.27 Will this project involve fetuses?No
VI.28 Does this project involve adult subjects who may be incompet ent or have limited decision-makin g capacity on initial enrollment into the
study?No
VI.32 Does this project involve subjects whose capacity to  consent may change over the course of the study?
No
VI.37 Does this project involve 
prisoners as subjects ?
No
VII.A. Project Description (A)
VII.A.1 Where will project procedures take place (check all that apply)?
UIHC - UI Children's Hospital
Other UI campus site - Westlawn
U.S. off-campus - Blank Children' s Hospital, Children's Mercy H ospital and Clinics
VII.A.2 Is this project also being conducted by other researchers at their own sites (e.g. a multi-site collaborative project)?
Yes
VII.A.3 What is the UI site’s role(s) for this project (check all that apply)?
Clinical/participating site
Coordinating Center
Statistical/Data Management Center
VII.A.4 Provide specific and detailed information describing how the UI investigator will coordinate all aspects of the study, such as:
Name, location, and IRB of record for each site,
Verification of IRB approval and continuing review for all sitesHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
11 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Managing variation in requirements from the IRBs  or institutional policies of the different sites.
Outline all activities that will occur at each participating site
The University of Io wa researchers will pa rticipate in all aspe cts of data collection, management, and analysis. Because of it 's
larger size and higher number of pediatric trauma admissions, t he University of Iowa is anticip ated to collect roughly two thi rds of
the data proposed. The UI resear chers will act as the coordinat ing center for the multi-site c ollaboration, and will provide
information and interim reports  to Blank Children's Hospital an d Children's Mercy Hospital as o utlined below. The UI researche rs
will also ensure adherence to I RB protocol, and communicate pro gress with the funding agency.
VII.A.5 Describe in detail the procedures that will be used to identif y and report unanticipated problem s from participating sites to t he
lead institution.
The University of Iowa research ers convene with Blank Children' s Hospital researchers in month ly meetings where progress and
problems can be discussed. The team members at Children's Mercy  Hospital will be given meeting updates via phone or email. If
an unanticipated problem requires urgent attention, Blank Child ren's Hospital and Children's Mercy Hospital will contact the
University of Iowa PI, project m anager, and(or) site coordinato r via phone or email to report the problem.
VII.A.6 Describe in detail the procedures that will be used to iden tify and report unanticipated pr oblems from the lead institution to
participating sites.The University of Iowa research ers convene with Blank Children' s Hospital and Children's Mercy Hospital researchers in monthly
meetings where progress and probl ems can be discussed. If the u nanticipated problem requires ur gent attention, the University of
Iowa team will contact the Blank Ch ildren's Hospital study coor dinator, and the Children's Merc y Hospital study coordinator, v ia
phone or email to r eport the problem.
VII.A.7 Describe in detail the procedures that will be used to comm unicate protocol modifications from the lead institution to the
participating sites.The University of Iowa research ers convene with Blank Children' s Hospital and Children's Mercy Hospital researchers in monthly
meetings, where any protocol modifications can be discussed. If immediate change is required, the University of Iowa team will
contact the study coordinator at  Blank Children's Hospital and the study coordinator at Childre n's Mercy Hospital to communicate
the modifications. These modifi cations will then need to be ref lected in an IRB modifi cation at each institution.
VII.A.8 Describe in detail the procedures that will be used to communica te interim results from the lead institution to the participati ng
sites.Interim results will be reporte d at monthly meetings, and any u pdates sent to the funding agency will be forwarded to Blank
Children's Hospital and Ch ildren's Mercy Hospital.
VII.A.9 Describe in detail the procedures that will be used to co mmunicate other new information which may impact a subject's
willingness to participate, or continue participating from the lead institution to the participating sites.
The University of Iowa research ers convene with Blank Children' s Hospital and Children's Mercy Hospital researchers in monthly
meetings, where such information could be discussed.  
 If immedia te attention is required, the University of Iowa team will cont act
the study coordinator at Blank Children's Hospital and the study coordinator at Children's Merc y Hospital to communicate the n ew
information.
VII.A.10 What are collaborating site  roles for this project?
Clinical/participating site - Blank Children's Hospital, Childr en's Hospital and Clinics of M innesota, and Children's Mercy
Hospital-Kansas City, 3 sites
VII.B. Project Description (B)
VII.B.1 Does this project involve any of th e following (Check all that apply):
Registry  – The collection and maintenan ce of data (not including biolog ic samples) in which: (1) the i ndividuals in the registry have
a common or related condition(s), and/or (2) the individuals in  the registry are interested in being contacted for future stud ies by
investigators other than those l isted in Section II of this pro ject.( UI Guide )
Repository  – The collection, storage, and distribution of human biologic samples and/or data materials for research purposes.
Repository activities involve three  components: (i) the collect ion of data and/or specimens suc h as blood, tissue, saliva, etc .; (ii) the
storage of data or specimens, a nd data management function; and  (iii) the sharing of data/speci mens with recipient investigato rs other
than the original investigators. (paraphrased from OHRP)
Expanded Access  – A process regulated by the Foo d and Drug Administration (FDA ) that allows manufacturers to provide
investigational new drugs to pa tients with serious diseases or conditions who cannot participate in a clinical trial. Examples of
expanded access include non-protocol access to experimental tre atments, including protocol exception, single-patient IND, trea tment
IND, compassionate use, emergency use, continued access to inve stigational drug, and parallel track ( ClinicalTrials.gov  & FDA ).
Clinical (or Treatment) trial  – A prospective biomedical or be havioral research study of new  treatments, new drug or combinations
of drugs, new devices, or new approaches to surgery or radiatio n therapy. (NIH and ClinicalTrials.gov  & FDA)
Physiology intervention/study  – A pharmacologic or measurement  study aimed at understanding basic mechanisms of disease
and/or of normal human physiology, often without any therapeuti c intent (though a clinical trial  could include such components , often
labeled as “translational” or “b asic science” aims.) Measuremen ts in such studies could include , but are not limited to, a blood draw,
EKG, EEG, MRI, auditory or sensory testing, checking vital sign s, DEXA scans, eye tracking, specimen collection, exercise, fas ting,
HawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
12 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
VII.B.1.b Provide the NCT  (National ClinicalTrials .gov Identifier) number
VII.B.2 Does this project involve a drug washout  (asking subject to stop taking an y drugs s/he is currently taking)?
No
VII.B.11 Is there a separate, written protocol that will be submitted in addition to this IRB New Project form? (Note: a grant applicati on is not
considered to be a protocol)
No
VII.B.18 Does this project involve testing the safe ty and/or efficacy of a medical device?
No
VII.C. Project Description (C)
VII.C.1 Does this project involve any research on genes or genetic testing/research ?
No
VII.D. Project Description (D)
VII.D.1 Check all materials/methods that will be used in recruiting subject s (you will need to attach copies of all materials at the en d of the
application):
E-mail -
Letter -
Use of any information available to the researchers or their co lleagues because this person is a patient OR use of any informa tion
considered to be Protected Health Information (PHI) OR review o f patient/clinic records - Phas e 1 Name, address and telephone contact
information for parent's of children identified in the UIHCTrau ma system as having an uninten tional injury. Phase 2 Name, addr ess and
telephone contact information fo r parents of children identifie d in the UIHCTrauma system as having an unintentional injury.
Other - Phase 1 - Blank Childre n's Hospital will use Name, addr ess and telephone contact inform ation for parents of children i dentified
in the Blank Children's Trauma s ystem as having an unintentiona l injury. Blank Children's Hospi tal staff will do mailing of in troductory
letter so no PHI will be shared with UI research staff.
VII.D.2 List the individual data elemen ts you will need to access/use from the patient or clinic records to identify potential subjects  for
recruitment
Phase 1-Injured child's age to ensure the child is between 10 and 17 y ears of age
-Type of injury to de termine intention
-Parent names-Parent address to send inform ational sheet and consent letter
-Parent phone numbers to follow-up after study information shee t
Phase 2-Injured child's age to ensure the child is between 10 and 17.2  years of age
-Admission to UIHC and Children' s Mercy Hospital Pediatric Unit for injury. Later, direct questioning will be used to determin e whether
the injury was intenti onal, and thus if th e child is eligible.
-Parent and child names
VII.D.3 Describe why you could not practicably recruit subjects w ithout access to and use of th e information described above
Phase 1Unintentional injuries among children ages 10-17 are not rare but severe injury requiring a vis it to an Emergency Department a nd
Trauma activation are difficult to identify. Use of the Iowa Tr auma database allows the researchers to identify this high risk  population.
Phase 2
Unintentional injuries among children ages 10-17 are not rare but severe requiring a visit to a n Emergency Department, Trauma
activation and hospita l admission. These are difficult to ident ify. Use of medical record data allows the researchers to ident ify this high
risk population.special diets, etc.
Behavioral intervention/study  – May be used to refer to studies of individual or group behav ior. This option does not include drugs,
biologics, or devices but could include psychotherapy, lifestyl e counseling, behavior modification, etc.
Diagnostic trial  – Protocol designed to evaluate one or more interventions aime d at identifying a disease or health condition
(ClinicalTrials.gov  & FDA)
Non-clinical  – any college/department th at would regularly submit to IRB-02
Other
HawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
13 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
VII.D.4 Describe why you could not practicably obta in authorization from potential subjects to review their patient or clinic records f or
recruitment purposes.
It would not be practicable to contact subjects to ask if you c an review the medical record to see if they are eligible becaus e you won't
know who to contact until you do review the medical record.
VII.D.5 Describe plans to protect the identifiers from improper use or disclosure
All identifying infor mation will be kept in  password-protected computer files that are only av ailable to the research team.
VII.D.6 Describe plans to destroy identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent with conduct of the research
Phase 1Following the completion of the f ocus groups or interview ident ifying information will be destroyed.
Phase 2Following completion of the rando mized trial and data analysis the identifying information will be destroyed.
VII.D.7 Does the research team agree that the requ ested information will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as
required by law, for authorized oversight of the study, or for other research for which the use or disclosure of the requested
information would be permitted by the HIPAA Privacy Rule
Yes
VII.D.8 Will a member of the research team discuss the study with th e subject in person prior to th e subject agreeing to participate?
Yes
VII.D.9 Describe the physical location where the consent process will take place:Phase 1
Among the parent foc us group, verbal consent will take place on the phone. The parental focus  group will take place at the Coral Ridge
Community Center. Parental focu s groups for the Blank Children' s Hospital site will take place at the Blank Park Zoo.
If a parent is unable to attend a focus group a t elephone inter view option will be provided. The parent will again give consen t over the
phone.
The consent process with provide rs will take place via a letter  with elements of consent inclu ded. The research team will disc uss the
elements of the study with each p rovider upon arrival to the fo cus group. The provider focus group will take place at Blank Ch ildren's
Hospital.
Phase 2
This discussion will likely take p lace in the child's hospital room. If it is a shared room, we will work with Kristel Wetjen-  Trauma
Coordinator at UI Children's to use another private room on the  same floor. Children's Mercy Hospital staff will identify priv ate space
for the discussion.
VII.D.10 Will a member of the research team discuss the study with the subject by phone prior to the subject agreeing to participate?
Yes
VII.D.11 Describe:Phase 1UI Children's Hospital-A research team member will contact potential parent focus group partic ipant by phone to explain the pu rpose of
the focus group/telephone interview after the parent has receiv ed the introductory letter and th e letter with consent elements . Each
potential provider participant will receive an email with eleme nts of consent.
Blank Children's Hospital- After  the parent has received the in troductory letter and has emailed or called the UI research sta ff to ex pr
 ess
interest in participating in the  study, a research team member will then send out the letter w ith consent elements. Research s taff will then
contact potential parent focus g roup participant by phone to ex plain the purpose of the focus gr oup/telephone interview and an swer any
questions. Each potential provide r participant will receive a l etter with elements of consent.
Phase 2
No, the discussion will be done in person.
VII.D.12 Who will be involved in the consent process  (including review of consent docu ment, answering subjects' questions)?
Name Consent Process Involvement
Marizen Ramirez, PHD Yes
Mallory Bolenbaugh, BS Yes
Cassidy Branch, BS, MA Yes
Collin Calvert, MPH No
Gretchen Cress, BSN, RN Yes
Jonathan Davis, MS No
Patricia Espe Pfeifer, PHD Yes
Javier Flores, BS NoHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
14 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Name Consent Process Involvement
Kelly Guinn, BA Yes
Charles Jennissen, MD NoCorinne Peek-Asa, PHD NoGraeme Pitcher, MD NoLisa Roth, BS YesRuthann Schrock, BSN YesKaren Smith, RD, MS NoKristel Wetjen, RN YesTammy Wilgenbusch, PHD YesBridget Cho YesSun Young Hwang YesTeresa Maag YesKimberly Randell YesChris Sexton YesEmily Siedlik YesLauren Slagel YesShallyn Ward YesChalott Williams YesBriana Woods-Jaeger Yes
VII.D.15 Check all materials that will be used to obtain/document informed consent:
Letter or Information sheet con taining elements of consent
Consent Document
Assent Document
VII.D.16 Are you requesting a waiver of documentation  of consent (either no subject signature or no written document)?
Yes
VII.D.17 Choose one of the following to indicate why you are requesting that the IRB waive the requirement to obtain a subject signature as
documentation of consent:
A.  The research prese nts no more than minimal risk (minimal risk means the probability a nd magnitude of harm or discomfort
anticipated in the research are not greater in and of themselve s than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the  performance
of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests)
     AND
The study involves no procedures for which consent is normally required ouside of a research context. (This type of waiver is often
permitted for a minimal risk mail-out survey th at includes a cover letter with all elem ents of consent, and returning the surve y indicates
consent. You cannot request this waiver if the study also involves the use of any protected health information (PHI).)
VII.D.18 Explain why this meets the chosen criteria in A. or B. above:
Phase 1
As defined in the risk  section, this study will involve minimal  risk to the parents including psychological/emotional response  to
discussing the injury to their child. The child will not be inv olved in the study in any way. T he study involves minimal risks for the
providers as they will be discu ssing content of the program and  how the program will fit into the clinic s etting. Providers wi ll not be
asked to report any personal information.
Phase 2
The waiver will not be applied to Phase 2
VII.D.19 Before the subject gives consent to participate are there any sc reening questions that you need to directly ask the potential s ubject to
determine eligibility for the study?Yes
VII.D.20 List any screening questions you will directly ask the potential subject to determine eligibility.
To verify that a child's injury is unintentional, we will speak  with the child's nurse or Kriste l Wetjen, the nurse on our res earch team, as
she is usually in contact with a ll pediatric patients. Children's Mercy Hospital research staff  will work with n ursing staff f or verification
of unintentional injury. The modified version of the COAT, a me asure of orientation and awaren ess, will be given to all eligib le children
to ensure the child has the capacity to assent.
1. What is your name?
2. How old are you? What is your birthday?
3. Where do you live?
4. What is your father’s name?HawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
15 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
What is your mother’s name
5. What school do you go to?
What grade are you in?6. Where are you now?7. Is it daytime or night-time?
7. What is the month?
8. What is the year?
A child will be required to score  55 (of a potential score of 6 5) to be eligible for the study.
We would speak with th e nurse or review medi cal records to dete rmine if the parent of the patient is not English speaking; if patient is
diagnosed with intellectual deficit or psychosis; if patient has previously attempted suicide; o r if patient had been in resid ential
treatment.
VII.D.21 Will you keep a screening log or other record that would include information on  people who do not enroll in the study?
Yes
VII.D.22 Describe the information being collected an d the purpose for keeping this information.
For children who screen ineligible, we will record their score,  age and mechanism of injury so that we can describe the differ ences
in children who did and did not participate in the study.
VII.D.23 Will this information be shared with anyone outside the UI research team members?
No
VII.D.25
After the subject agrees to participate (sig ns consent), are there any sc reening procedures, tests, or studies that need to be done to
determine if the subject is elig ible to continue participating?
No
VII.D.27 Discuss how much time a potential subject will have to agree to consider participation and whethe r or not they will be able to discuss the
study with family/friends befo re deciding on participation.
Phase 1Potential focus group members will have approximately a week be tween receipt of the letter/email with elements of consent to c onsider
participation. In ad dition, they will be allowed time during th e phone conversation with research staff to consider participat ion.
Phase 2
The parent-child dyad will be giv en approximately 15 minutes to  consider participation and be a llowed to discuss their participation with each
other.
VII.D.28 How long after the subject agrees to participate do study procedures begin?
Phase 1Focus groups and tele phone interviews will occur approximately 1-2 weeks after the letter with elements of consent for parents  and 1-2 weeks
after email with elements of con sents for providers. Provider k ey informant interviews will al so follow this same timeline.
Phase 2
The study procedures will begin as soon as consent is received.
VII.D.29 Provide a description of the enrollment and consent process for adult subjects
Describe each study population separately including control population
Include when recruitment and consent materials are used
Use 3rd person active voice “The Principal Investigator will identify subjects. For example, the principal investigator will id entify
potential subjects, the study coordinator will discuss the study w ith subjects over the telephone and schedule the first study visit,
etc...”
Describe the steps that will be taken by the research team to mi nimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence during th e
consent process
Phase 1
UI Children's Hopsital-Ms. Wetj en will identify potential paren t focus group members through the  Iowa State Trauma Registry (a s previously
described). Ms. Frederick will p repare and mail the introductor y letter to potential focus group  members. Within a week of mai ling the
introductory letter, Ms. Frederick will mail the letter with elements of consent to potential pa rent participants. One week af ter mailing the
consent letter, Drs. Harland, R amirez or Ms. Fredrick will atte mpt to contact the potential subjects to discuss the study over  the phone. The
researchers will strictly adhere  to phone scripts when contacti ng potential subjects over the phone to reduce the possibility of coercion. If the
initial phone contact is not suc cessful, the research team will  try to contact the potential subject two additional times with in a week of the
initial phone call. If phone cont acts are unsuccessful than the  team will contact potential su bjects by e-mail with a maximum of two e-mails.
All letters contain in formation allowing p otential subjects to opt out of the study by calling  or e-mailing Dr. Harland or Ms.  Frederick. Dr.
Harland, Dr. Ramirez, or Ms. Fredrick will complete the consent  process over the phone with the  parents. If a parent agrees to participate in a
focus group a letter confirming the date, time and location of the focus group will be mailed to the parent. The letter will i nclude materials toHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
16 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
be discussed during the focus group and a map. The materials ma y also be delivered by email. If a parent agrees to participate  in an interview,
the materials will be mailed or s ent by e-mail per the participants request.
For the provider focu s groups, Ms. Wetjen will e-mail the provi ders about their potential participation in the study focus group. The e-mail
content will be the introductory letter with the elements of co nsent. Providers interested in p articipating will be asked to RSVP through a
doodle calendar link or they may contact Dr. Harland either by phone or email to enroll in the focus group or discuss any ques tions they may
have about the group. If a healthcare provider is unable to par ticipate in a schedule focus group  but wishes to provide a key informant
interview the interview will be c ompleted by Dr. Harland or Dr. Ramirez.
Blank Children's Hospital-
For parent focus groups- Pediatr ic Trauma Coordinator at Blank Children's Hospital will identify potential parent focus group members
through the Iowa State Trauma Reg istry (as previ ously described ). Pediatric Trauma Coordinator will provide a cover letter fro m Blank
Children's Hospital expressing t heir willingness to forward inf ormation about the study and no ting the attached recruitment ma terials from UI
Researchers. Staff from Blank Children's Hospital will mail the  introductory letters out so no PHI infor mation will be provided to UI .
Interested participants will be a ble to contact UI research sta ff via the study email provided or by calling Ms. Roth at the n umber listed in the
letter. Once they have positively responded via email or phone about their interest in the stud y, UI research staff will mail the letter with
elements of consent to potential parent participants. Potential  participants will be contacted one week after mailing the cons ent letter, UI
reserach staff will attempt to contact the potential subjects to discuss the study over the phone. The researchers will strict ly adhere to phone
scripts when contacting potential subjects over the phone to re duce the possibility of coercion . If the initial phone contact is not successful, the
research team will try to contact the potential subject two add itional times within a week of the initial phone call. All lett ers contain
information allowing potential su bjects to opt out of the study  by calling Ms. Roth or emailing the study email address. UI re search staff will
complete the consent process ov er the phone with the parents. I f a parent agrees to participate in a focus group a letter conf irming the date,
time and location of the focus group will be mailed to the pare nt. The letter will include materials to be discussed during th e focus group and a
map. The materials may also be d elivered by email. If a parent agrees to participate in an inte rview, the materials will be ma iled or sent by
e-mail per the participants request.
For the provider focus groups, Pediatric Trauma Coordinator will provide a cover letter from Bla nk Children's Ho spital expressing their
willingness to forward information about the stud y and noting t he attached recruitment material s from UI Researchers. Material s will be
distributed to all providers at Blank Children's Hospital who i nteract with traumatically injur ed children. The materials will  include the
introductory letter with the ele ments of consent. Providers int erested in participating will be asked to RSVP through email to  the study email or
to Lisa Roth, Project Manager to enroll in the foc us group or d iscuss any questions they may have about the group. If providers do not respond
after first correspondence they  will not be recont acted. Provid ers may also indicate by email or phone if they do not wish to participate in this
study. If a healthcare provider is unable to participate in a s chedule focus group but wishes to  provide a key informant inter view the interview
will be completed by Dr. Ramirez.
Phase 2
A study team member will be texte d or notified if a child is admitted to the UIHC/Children's Mercy Hospital with trauma. The t ext/notification
will not contain identifying information, just information like  "A patient is added to the datab ase." The research team will r eview the child's
medical record to determine if he/she meets eligibility criteri a, and consult the child's care te am to determine if the injury  was truly
unintentional. On a daily basis , the research team will review each child's medical record to determine wh en the child is likely to be
discharged. On the day of dischar ge or any convenient time reco mmended by the provider, a mem ber of the resear ch team will pre sent to the
child's room to determine if the child has an appropriate level  of consciousness to complete th e consent process (a COAT orien tation score of
at least 55), and if appropriate recruit the dyad. The team mem ber will discuss the study and complete the consent process wit h the dyad
in-person. If timing is inconvenient due to a conflicting event , such as a medical procedure, t he team member will give the PC ORI infographic
to the parent. This half-sheet  contains brief information about  the study and contact information for the study team. The team  member will
only give this half-sheet to fam ilies they have approached in p erson, and they will return at a more convenient time to continue the recruitment
process. To minimize the possib ility of coercion during the con sent process, the res earch team will follow the consent documen t closely and
stress to the dyad that the ch ild's health care will not be aff ected by participat ion in the study.
For research subjects that were assented as children but turned 18 prior to the end of their in volvement in the study, the research team will mail
a re-consent instruction letter along with a new consent docume nt to the subject. The consent document will be different than the consent
document signed by the parent at initial  recruitment. The  docum ents will  be mailed to research s ubjects via U.S. mail and prov ided a postage
paid envelope in which to return the signed consent document to  the research team.
VII.D.30 Describe how you will obtain the consent of the parents or  legal guardians for child/minor subjects in this study
Describe each study population separately including control population
Include when recruitment and consent materials are used
Use FIRST person, and provide detail as to order of events
Describe the steps that will be taken by the research team to mi nimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence during th e
consent process
The ICTS flexible nursing staff will alert the research team if  a child presents to the UIHC as  an admission for trauma. Child ren's Mercy
Hospital research staff will be a lerted by Emergency Room staff  if a child present for admission of a trauma. The research tea m will review the
child's medical recor d to determine if he/she meet eligibility criteria, and consult the child's care team to verify that the injury was indeed
unintentional. On a daily basis , the research team will review each child's medical record to determine wh en the child is likely to be
discharged. On the day of discharge, a member of the research t eam will present to the child's room to determine if the child has an appropriate
level of consciousness to complete the consent process, and if appropriate recruit the dyad. I f timing is inconvenient due to a conflicting event,
such as a medical procedure, the  team member will give the PCORI infographic to the parent. This half-sheet contains brief inf ormation about
the study and contact information for the study team. The team member will only give this half- sheet to families they have app roached inHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
17 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
person, and they will return at a more convenient time to conti nue the recruitment process. The child-parent dyad will be recruited
simultaneously theref ore the parent or legal guardian will be a vailable at the time of the child's assent. The team member wil l discuss the study
and complete the consent process  with the dyad in-person. To mi nimize the possibility of coercion during the consent process, the research
team will follow the consent docum ent closely and stress to the  dyad that the child's health care will not be affected by part icipation in the
study.
For research subjects that were assented as children but turned 18 prior to the end of their in volvement in the study, the research team will mail
a re-consent instruction letter along with a new consent docume nt to the subject. The consent document will be different than the consent
document signed by the parent at initial recruitment. The docum ents will be mailed to research s ubjects via U.S. mail and prov ided a postage
paid envelope in which to return the signed consent document to  the research team.
VII.D.31 What are the plans for the assent process for children/minors in th is study? (You may choose more than one procedure if you hav e
different child populations in your study)
Children/minors will sign an assent or consent document -
VII.D.36 Provide a detailed description and rationale for each of the procedures chosen above and describe the child/minor populations t o which
they apply in your study.
Phase 2
All children 10-17.2 years of a ge will be asked to sign an asse nt document. We chose to use the assent document for all partic ipants aged
10-17.2 years because the language is simple and easy to unders tand, especially since the childr en are undergoing medical proc edures in the
hospital.
It was discovered on 7/15/2016 that some children who signed th e assent document turned 18 at some point during the 9-month fo llow-up
period of the study. For research subjects that were assented a s children but turned 18 prior to the end of their involvement in the study, the
research team will mail a re-consent instruction letter along w ith a new consent document to the  subject. The consent document  will be
different than the consent document signed by the parent at ini tial recruitment. The  documents will be mailed to research subj ects via U.S. mail
and provided a postage paid envelope in which to return the sig ned consent document to the research team.
VII.D.37 Does the study include any form of deception (e.g., providing partic ipants with false information, misleading information, or w ithholding
information about certain study procedures)?
Examples:
Procedure includes a cover story that provides a plausible but inaccurate account of the purposes of the research.
Participants will be provided with fals e information regarding the particular behaviors of interest in the research.
Procedures include a confederate pretending  to be another participant in the study.
Participants will be told that the research  includes completion of a particular task, wh en in fact, that task will not be admin istered.
Study is designed to introduce a new procedure (or task) that participants are not initially told about.
If yes, a waiver of informed consent mu st be requested under question IV.3.
No
VII.E. Project Description (E)
VII.E.1 Will subjects be randomized?
Yes
VII.E.1.a Will any subjects be blinded to which study arm they have been assigned?
No
VII.E.2 Describe randomization scheme/assignment including ratio such as 1:1, 2:1 etc.
Phase 1: No randomizationPhase 2
The parent-child dyad will be r andomized at a 1:1 ratio by a program developed in Microsoft Access or Excel.
VII.E.3 Will any questionnaires, surveys, or written assessments be used to obtain data directly from subjects in this study?
Yes
VII.E.4 List all questionnaires, surveys, written asse ssments and ATTACH each one to the app lication. (NOTE: You are NOT prohibited
from attaching copyrighted ma terials to this application)
Phase 1Two focus group questionnaires ha ve been develope d: a questionn aire for parents of injured ch ildren and a questionnaire for st aff who
serve these injured children. The  questions for the parent inte rview will be equivalent to the parent focus group questions. T he questions
for provider key informant inter views will equivalent to those of the provider focus group. At each focus group, one study sta ff member
will ask the questions and a seco nd person will take notes on the answers from the participants . In the telephone interview, n otes will be
taken by the research staff memb er completing the telephone int erview
Phase 2HawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
18 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
The parent and child will be ask ed to answer 4 questionnaires e ach over the course of the stud y: one during hospitalization, o ne at
6-weeks, one at 3-months and one at 6-months post hospitalizati on. The 6-week, 3-mont h and 6-month questionnaires will be the same
questionnaire.
Both parent and child  will complete the baseline questionnaire and follow-up questio nnaire three times.
The parent and the child ques tionnaires will contain the following validated questionnaires: St rengths and Difficulties Questi onnaire; the
Pediatric Quality of Life Invent ory; CESD; Foa PTSD; Multidimen sional scale of perceived social support; open family communication;
and how I cope under pressure.The questionnaires listed are co ntained within the attached documents. Please see the following  for where they can be found in  both
parent and child surveys. Parent Baseline Survey #11 is Foa PTS D (#8 in follow-up surveys) #13 is Multidimensional scale of pe rceived
social support (#2 in follow-up) #14 is CES-D (#3 in follow-up)  #16 is How I cope under pressure (#5 in follow-up) #17 is Open  family
communication (#7 in follow-up) #21 is Q uality of Life (#9 in f ollow-up) #22 is Strengths and  Difficulties (#10 in follow-up) Child
Baseline Survey #6 is the Pediatr ic Quality of Life Inventory ( #9 in follow-up surveys ) #7 is Strengths an d Difficulties (#10 in
follow-up) #9 is Foa PTSD (#3 in follow-up) #10 is CES-D (#4 in  follow-up) #11 is How I cope under pressure (#5 in follow-up) #12 is
Multidimensional scale of perceived social support (#7 in follo w-up) #13 is Open family communication (#8 in follow-up)
VII.E.5 Does this project involve creating any audiotapes, videotapes, or photographs?
Yes
VII.E.6 Provide a detailed description in sequential order of the stud y procedures following the consent process - DO NOT cut and paste  from the
Consent Document.
Describe study populations separa tely if they will be participating in different procedures - include CONTROL population if app licable.
DESCRIBE:
What subjects will be asked to do/what happens in the study (in sequential order)
The time period over which procedures will occur
The time commitment for the subject for individual visits/procedures
Long-term followup and how it occurs
Phase 1
Participants will be asked to co me to a 60-90 minute focus grou p session at the University of Io wa and Blank Children's Hospit al. During each
focus group, participan ts will be asked questions about their o pinions, recommendatio ns and additions to the LPC for Injured K ids materials,
and the applicability of the progr am in a rural Iowa population . Each focus group will be audio r ecorded to ensure all recomme ndations,
additions or corrections are docum ented. This audio recording w ill be done with a hand held audi o recorder. Audio transcripts of each focus
group will be downloaded into a p assword protected computer. Th e expected time to complete the telephone interview is 20-30 mi nutes and
will answer the questions a sked of the focus group.
If a health care provider is unable to attend the focus group b ut interested in participating in a key informant interview, Dr . Ramirez will
complete the interview. The key informat interview questions wi ll be equivalent to those of the provider focus group. These in terviews will
also be audio recorded, transcribed and downloaded into a passw ord protected computer.
The time commitment w ill be 60-90 minutes. There will be no follow-up visits.
Participants are free to not respond to any questions they pref er not to answer.
Phase 2
All subjects: Following consent, the research  team will collect contact information (address, phone number, e-mail addresses) from the
parent-child dyad. The parent-ch ild dyad will then complete their baseline questionnaires. Eac h questionnaire will take approx imately 10
minutes to complete. The questionn aire will measure depressive symptoms, symptoms of post trau matic stress disorder, social su pport,
strengths and weakness, quality o f life and family communicatio n. The contact information and baseline questionnaires will be collected with
an iPad or by paper form, and en tered into electronic databases  upon return to the research tea m space in Westlawn at the UIHC  site and the
Clinical Trials Coordinators off ice in the Division of Developm ental and Behavioral Sciences at Children's Mercy Hospital and filed in locked
filling cabinets. Identifying dat a will be kept separate from q uestionnaire data.
Link is our new program of psych ological first aid adapted from  LPC. After our early formative phase 1 work, we had made some
modifications to LPC that were no t in agreement with the origin al developers. In order to translate LPC to a program that was acceptable and
appropriate for our population , and also after consultation wit h UI Legal Counsel, we decided to create Link. Therefore, we wo uld not run into
copyright issues. Link has elemen ts similar to that described i n the LPC program that we created  - including screening for str ess and
motivational interviewi ng skills. The large difference in Link is that the three orig inal LPC steps - Listen Protect and Connect are not
referenced. 
However, both progra ms are based on psychological f irst aid.
Link Intervention: Intervention parents will get a 20-45 minute  training on the Link for Injured Kids Program during their chi ld's
hospitalization. The training will involve viewing a Link train ing program on an iPad and a brief training in motivational int erviewing. All
Link training sessions will be audio recorded to ensure fidelit y among the research team. Two w eeks after hospital discharge, a packet will beHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
19 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
mailed to the family's home address containing the Link pocket card, trifold, and instructional DVD. At 6-weeks post-discharge , the instructor
will conduct a telep hone booster se ssion with the parent traine d in Link.
Trauma Education Intervention: P arents will be given the bookle t "So Your Child Has Been in an Accident... An Information Book let for
Parents." This booklet will be se nt again to the family's addre ss 2-weeks after their hospital re lease. At 6-weeks post-discharge, the
interventionist will conduct a brief telephone survey to assess the parent's perceptions regarding the Trauma Education progra m.
All subjects: The dyads will be a sked to complete  follow-up que stionnaires at 6 weeks, 3-months,  6-months post hospitalization . The
questionnaire will measure depre ssive symptoms, symptoms of pos t traumatic stress di sorder, social support, family communicati on, strengths
and difficulties and quality of life and asks about any mental health or community res ources they may have used since the last  questionnaire.
The research team will e-mail a li nk for the parent and the chi ld to complete their surveys as well as mail a hard copy version of the
questionnaire with a cover letter explaining that the survey ca n be completed on paper or onlin e and a postage paid envelope. If completed
online, the questionnaires will be done electronically using RE DCap, a U of I supported online su rvey system. A telephone call  will be placed
to the dyad the day the hard copy questionnaire is mailed infor ming the dyad of the mailing; th e dyad will also have the optio n of completing
the survey over the phone  at the time of the call.
For subjects that were consented as children, but turned 18 pri or to the end of their involvement in the study: after obtainin g re-consent when
the subject turns 18, these subjects will complete follow up qu estionnaires at the same interv als described for all subjects.
If an online or mailed questionn aire is not returned within 7 d ays the research team will attemp t to contact the dyad by phone  12 times (for
each follow-up period) to remind them to complete the questionn aire or to make arrangements for the questionnair e to be comple ted at an
already scheduled follow-up appoin tment at the hospital. For 6- week questionnaire, they will be c ontacted 12 times up to 6 wee ks following
their eligibility to complete that questionnaire. For 3-month q uestionnaire, they will be contacted 12 times up to 3 months fo llowing their
eligibility to complete that que stionnaire. For 6-month questio nnaire they will be contacted 12 times up to 6 months following  their eligibility
to complete that questionnaire. After a month of no response fo r any survey timepoint, we will resend the package or online link. If a dyad
does not complete the 6-week que stionnaire, they will still be asked to complete the 3-month and 6-month questionnaires.
The research team will complete the medical record abstraction within 12 months of receiving th e medical record consent. The d ata collected
from the medical record includes measures of injury severity, t he type of injury the child susta ined, external cause of injury , length of stay,
diagnostic  procedures, Glasgow C oma Scal
e measures, comorbidities, and initial vital signs and all discharge codes.
VII.E.7 Will you attempt to recontact subj ects who are lost to follow-up?
No - those lost to followu p will not be recontacted
VII.E.9 Will subjects be provided any compensati on for participating in this study?
Yes
VII.E.10 Cash
No
VII.E.11 Gift CardNo
VII.E.12 Check
Yes
VII.E.13 Who will be providing the research compensation check to the subject?
Accounting Services directly  via the e-V oucher system
VII.E.16 Other
Yes
VII.E.17 Describe:
Phase 1: A light meal will be pro vided to all focus groups. For  the parent focus groups, on-site child care will also be provided.
Phase 2: None
VII.E.18 If you plan to compensate subjects using cash, checks or cash equivalent does your unit have a 
Cash Handling
Procedure  in place that has been approved by Accounting Services?
Yes
VII.E.19 Describe the compensation plan including
Compensation amount and type per visit
Total compensation
Pro-rating for early withdrawal from study
Phase 1
Since the focus groups will take place at common meal times (lu nch for provider s and dinner for parents), a light meal will be  provided
before the focus group. Parent  focus group participants will re ceive a $20 gift card to compensate them for their time upon co mpletion ofHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
20 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
the focus group. In addition, for the parent focus groups, on-s ite child care will be provided.  Parents will also be compensat ed for
mileage to travel to a nd from the focus group in the form of a gift card. The rate of $0.55/m ile will be paid and the gift car d will be
rounded up to the nearest $5 increment. Parent interviews will receive the $20 compensation for completio n of the interview.
Providers participatin g in a key informant interview will not b e compensated.
Phase 2
Trauma Education group: Both the  parent and th e child will receive $25 for completion of each questionnaire for a total of $100/subject
or $200/family.
Link Intervention group : Both the parent and the child will rec eive $25 for completion of each questionnaire for a total of $1 00/subject
or $200/family.For both the Trauma Education and Link Intervention group, both  the parent and child will recei ve a $25 check for each completed
questionnaire delivered via the e-voucher system.
VIII. Risks
VIII.1 What are the risks to subjects including
- emotional or psychological
- financial
- legal or social- physical?
Phase 1
This study involves minimal risk. Responding to focus groups qu estions may incur some emotional or psychological risks to pare nts whose
children suffered a traumatic inj ury. Providers may also have t his response when talking about  a particularly severe traumatic  injury of a child
they treated.
Phase 2
This study involves minimal risk. Responding to questionnaire i tems may incur some emotional or psychological risks to a paren ts or child.
Data abstracted from the medical record will be data related to  the unintentional injury admission.
VIII.2 What have you done to minimize the risks?
If applicable to this study ALSO include:
How you (members of your research  team at Iowa) will monitor the safety of individual subjects.
Include a description of the availability of  medical or psychological resources that subjects might require as a consequence of
participating in this research and how referral will occur if necessary (e.g. availability  of emergency medical care,
psychological counseling, etc.)
Phase 1
Staff who are experienced in c onducting focus gr oups will be used in this project. If a focus g roup participant become visibly  upset during the
session, they will be referred to  Dr. Tammy Wilgenbusch, Pediatric Psychology, UI C hildren's Hospital.
In the parent focus group, participation in the focus group may  risk a loss of confidentiality  although parents will only be a sked to use their
first name or a pseudo name during group introductions.
In the provider focus group, pr oviders will be asked to remove their UIHC/ Blank Children's Hospital badges to reduce the risk  of loss of
confidentiality. Only the research team will receive the RSVP's  through the doodle link or email to ensure confidentiality.
Phase 2
All parent-child dyads  recruited at UIHC will be provided conta ct information for Dr. Patti Espe -Pfeiffer and the UIHC pediatr ic psychiatry
clinic should either experience an emotional/psychological issu e requiring further attention. All parent-child dyads recruited  at Children's
Mercy Hospital will be provided with contact information for a general social work hersupport should with either experience anemotional/psychological issues  requiring fur ther attention.
Medical record abstraction data will be recorded by study subje ct identification number to reduce the likelihood of breach of confidentiality.
As mandatory reporters, the discovery of child abuse by a research team member will result in an immediate report to the Unive rsity of Iowa
Police and local police, consiste nt with Iowa Code 262.9(37).
VIII.3 Does this study have a plan to have an in dividual or committee review combined data from all subjects on a periodic basis (such  as
summary or aggregate safety and/or efficacy data)?No
IX. Benefits
IX.1 What are the direct benefits to the subject (d o not include compensation or hypothesized results)?
Participants may not benefit  from being in this study.HawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
21 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
IX.2 What are the potential benefits to society in terms of knowledge to be gained as a result of this project?
Phase 1
Parents of children with a traum atic unintentional injury, the children themselves, an d health care provide rs of these injured  children may
potentially benefit from the development of this new program to  reduce psychological trauma follo wing an unintentional injury.
Phase 2Parents of children with a traum atic unintentional injury and t he children themselves may pot entially benefit fr om these progr ams to reduce
psychological trauma following an unintentional injury.
X. Privacy & Confidentiality
X.1 What are you doing to protect the privacy  interests of the subjects?
Phase 1
Information from the focus group s will be recorded in an anonym ous fashion. Telephone intervie ws will not be recorded. The res earch team
will only ask questions that will help them to answer the study  questions. During t he provider focus gr oups, providers will be  asked to remove
their UI/ Blank Children's Hosp ital identification badge before  entering the session.
Phase 2
All dyads will be assigned a random identification number. The questionnaire, and medical recor d data and the personal identif iers will be kept
in seperate databases and be mad e available only to research st aff. Data abstracted from the medical record will only be relat ed to the
unintentional injury hospital adm ission and recorded on forms t hat document only the stu dy identification number.
X.2 Are you collecting the Social Security Number of any subjects for any purpose?
No
X.4 How will information/data be collected and stor ed for this study (check all that apply):
Paper/hard copy records (hard copy surveys, questionnaires, cas e report forms, pictures, etc.)  - Phase 1 Hand written notes from the
sessions will be placed in a locked filling cabinet. The notes will not contain identifying info rmation. Focus group participants will be
recorded as Participant A, B, etc. Transcriptions of key Inform ant interviews will be not contain  identifying inf ormation. Pha se 2 The
baseline questionnaire and medica l record abstrac tion form may be hard copies. The pa rticipants will be asked to place their c ompleted
questionnaire in a manilla envel ope only identified by their st udy ID number. These envelopes w ill be collected by the researc h team and
transported from the U IHC/Children's Mercy Hospital to the stud y offices in Westlawn or the Clin ical Trail Coordinators office  in the
Division of Development and Beha vioral Sciences at Children's M ercy Hospital The hard copies will be stored in a locked filling cabinet
in Westlawn (UIHC) or Clinical Tri als Coordinator Office in the  Division of Development and Beh avioral Sciences (CMH).If follo w-up
questionnaires are completed in h ard copy, the hard copy will o nly contain the study identification number and be returned in first class
postage paid envelopes.
Electronic records (com puter files, electronic databases, etc.)  - Phase 1 All audio files, and electronic documents containing  the
transcription of the audio files, will be saved on the College of Public Health servers and will be password protected. Follow ing the
focus groups, the audio record ers will be placed in locked fili ng cabinets. Once transcription has been completed and verified , the audio
files will be deleted from the a udio recorders. Phase 2 The que stionnaires will be completed u sing REDCap, an electronic onlin e survey
system supported by the U of I. A subject's study ID will be li nked to the data and no identifying information will be in the follow-up
surveys. Two electronic ACCESS da tabases will be created for tr acking research subjects and fo r entering the baseline question naire.
Audio recordings from external sites will be sent to the Univer sity of Iowa research team via uploading the audio files to a group
SharePoint site. On the SharePoint site, each external site wil l have a site-specific audio f ile folder that is only accessibl e to their staff
and the UI research team for the purpose of downloading files t o the CPH secure servers. All audio recordings and electronic f iles will
be stored on secure servers and only be accessible by password protected computers by the research team. Non-UI team members w ill
be issued a HawkID in order to access the data files stored in REDCap.
Name - Tim Shie
Title - Director of Information Technology, College of Public H ealth
University Job Classification - IT Director
X.5 Do the confidentiality protections indicate d above allow only members of the rese arch team to access the data/specimens?
No
X.6 Describe
Because the funding agency require s engagement activities of pr ojects, we will identify partners  to be consultants to the rese arch team.
Consultants may include previous study participants. These cons ultants may provide services by providing: feedback/suggestions  about
their experience with study processes, ideas about disseminatio n, testimonials, or collaboratin g on presentations. They will n ot be
engaged in any research activities, and will not have access to  any coded or id entifiable data.
X.7 Does your study meet the NIH criteria for a Certificate of Confidentiality  or will you be applying for Certificate of Confidentiality?
No
XI. Data Analysis
XI.1 Describe the analysis methods you will use, includ ing, if applicable, the variables you will analyzeHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
22 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM
Phase 1
The focus group data and key informant interviews will be analy zed using content analysis and id entification of themes. Focus group and
interview data will also be used to incorporate ch anges into th e LPC for Injured Kids program.
Phase 2If we achieve randomization, we will compare the differences in  distributions between intervention and control groups using si mple chi-square
tests for categorical outcomes (l ow, medium, high levels of coi ng; being symptomatic for PTSD, Depression, etc.) and t-tests o r Wilcoxon
rank-sum tests for continuous variables depending on their norm ality (e.g. scores for PTSD, depression, social support).
If we do not achieve randomization (i.e. distribution of demogr aphics are not balanced across in tervention and control arms), we will also
adjust for confounding using Ge neralized Linear Models and appr opriate link functions ( logit for binary outcomes, linear for c ontinuous
outcomes).
XI.2 Provide the rationale or power analysis to support the number of subjects proposed to complete this study.
Phase 1The research team needs each final focus group to contain at le ast 6 parents or providers to ge t an adequate response to the f ocus group
questions. The focus group will ha ve potentially unpredictable schedule, either due to children in the home (parents) or heavy work load
(providers) therefore we are recruiting 10 members  per focus gr oup to ensure we have at least 6 attending each focus group.
Phase 2
We conducted sample size based on testing a moderate effect siz e of 0.5 standard deviation comparing Trauma Education vs Link.  With an
alpha of 0.05, a sample size of 134 parent-child dyads in each of the arms (n=268) has 100% power  to examine comparisons. We w ill
oversample by 12% for a total n = 300.
XII. Future Research
XII.1 Do you wish to keep any information about subjects involved with this research project so that members of the current research team may
contact them in the future for your own research projects?No
XII.2 Do you wish to keep any information about subject s involved with this research project so that 
other researchers  may contact them for
future research?No
XII.4 Does this project involve storing any data, tissues or specimens for future research?
NoHawkIRB https://hawkirb.research.u iowa.edu/hawkirb/summary/proje cts.page?mo...
23 of 23 5/29/2018 1:38 PM