Page 1 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019STUDY TITLE:
Improving emotional well-being and quality of life in older adults experiencing 
dementia-related  fear.
Short study title: Memory  and Fear Study
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
Name: James  W. Griffith, PhD
Department: Medical  Social Sciences
VERSION DATE:
17 February 2021IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 2 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019Check any applicable  boxes in the table below – you  will be asked  for 
further detail on these topics later in the protocol form:
Indicate Vulnerable 
Population(s) to be Enrolled☐ Children (you must complete  Appendix  A in addition 
to this protocol document if you plan to  enroll children)
☐ Cognitively Impaired  Adults  
☐ Pregnant Women  (IF the research  activities  will affect     
the pregnancy  or the fetus)
☐ Prisoners  (or other detained/paroled individuals) 
International Research  
(check this box if you will 
collect data from individuals located  outside 
the United  States)☐
Research  involving external  
collaborators (some research  activities  will be 
carried  out by individuals 
not employed  by 
Northwestern  or NU 
affiliates)☒
Research  has U.S. Federal  
government funding via 
direct award  or a sub-
award  (e.g., NIH, NSF, other  
federal  agencies  or 
departments)☐
1.0 Purpose  and rationale  of the study:
Many older adults worry about developing dementia.  Evidence suggests  that 
dementia  has become the most feared  health condition among people over the age of 
50, surpassing heart disease, cancer and stroke [1]. Evidence also suggests  that 
dementia-related  fears  negatively affect health and well-being through  vicious 
cognitive-behavioral cycles  [2-4].  Individuals who  worry about developing dementia  
often  fixate on what they perceive to be symptoms  of the condition, such as every time 
they forget a name.  This excessive self-monitoring is fatiguing and can actually increase 
cognitive failures, which  compounds the initial fear.  Over time, these experiences  of 
anxiety and failure can undermine motivation and engagement in healthy activities, 
which  leads to social withdrawal and other  negative consequences such as accelerated  
cognitive decline [5].IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 3 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019Interventions  that disrupt these vicious cognitive-behavioral cycles  could afford 
immediate improvements  in dementia-related  fears  and mental  health, as well  as long-
term benefits (e.g.  curtailing cognitive decline [6]). Crucially, mindfulness-based 
interventions  have been  shown to improve health and well-being outcomes  in other 
conditions, such as chronic pain and fatigue, by improving individuals’ ability to 
acknowledge negative thoughts and feelings without fixating on them  [7-9].  However, 
few studies have investigated  the use of mindfulness-based interventions  in the context 
of dementia-related  fear.  In addition, extant interventions  are often  modified from pre-
existing psychological interventions  (e.g.  mindfulness-based cognitive therapy).  These 
approaches therefore require a high level  of support and specialist training to  
administer. In addition, they lack relevance for older adults experiencing sub-clinical 
levels  of dementia-related  anxiety, who  may  be at risk for dementia.  To address these  
limitations, we will use newly  developed  web-based technology to deliver  a low-
intensity intervention  to help older people manage dementia-related  fears  in daily life.
We will develop  a web-based mindfulness plus activation intervention  tailored to 
mitigate dementia-related  fears  and improve well-being in a sample of older adults 
experiencing heightened  dementia-related  fear.  This three-week  program will focus on 
(1) mindfulness-based exercises  to identify and monitor dementia-related  fears  and (2) 
behavioral-based ex ercises  to overcome  maladaptive fear avoidance (FA-mindfulness). 
An active  control  group  will receive a typical  meditation intervention.  Therefore,  this 
project will (1) determine  the impact of the  FA-mindfulness on dementia-related  fear 
and maladaptive avoidance, (2) maximize convenience  by developing a web-based 
intervention  program and (3) investigate  a low-cost approach to  promote health-related 
outcomes  in older adults.
We will conduct a randomized control  study to determine  the impact of a 
tailored, web-based mindfulness program  to reduce anxiety and increase quality of life 
in older adults experiencing dementia-related  fears, relative to a conventional 
meditation program.  A group  of older adults experiencing elevated  dementia-related  
fears  will randomly receive either the FA-mindfulness program or a mindfulness 
meditation-only control  condition. Outcome  measures  will be administered at five time 
points (pre-, baseline, interim-, and post-intervention as well  as at 3-month  follow up). 
We predict  greater reductions in dementia-related  fear and avoidance (e.g., avoiding 
cognitively demanding situations) in the FA-mindfulness group  relative  to the 
comparison group  (Hypothesis 1). This outcome will be measured  using the fear-
avoidance of memory decline (FAM)  questionnaire [2], developed  by us. We also predict  
greater improvements  in mental  health (i.e. anxiety, depression) and psycho-social 
functioning (i.e. quality of life, social functioning, fatigue) in the FA-mindfulness group  
relative to the comparison group  (Hypothesis 2). This outcome will be measured  using 
the World  Health Organization Well-Being Index  (WHO-5) [10],the PROMIS-29  scale [10] 
and the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-15) [11].  We also predict that fear will lead to a 
reduction  in cognitive fatigue, and thus, improved  cognitive  performance in the FA-IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 4 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019mindfulness relative to the comparison conditions (Hypothesis 3). Cognitive 
performance will be measured  using the Montreal  Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), which  
can be administer remotely if needed  [13].  A final objective will be to identify 
mechanisms through  which  FA-mindfulness program facilitated improvements  in 
psycho-social functioning. Our theoretical  framework suggests  that maladaptive 
avoidance behaviors, relating to fears  of dementia, restrict  meaningful engagement in 
beneficial activities, which  negatively impacts  daily functioning. Therefore, we predict 
that treatment-related  changes  in fear-avoidance tendencies  will predict improvements  
in psycho-social functioning overtime (Hypothesis 4)
2.0 Enrollment Criteria (who can be in your  study and who would not 
be eligible  to participate  in your  study):
Inclusion criteria
1. 55 years  of age or older
2. Elevated  dementia-related  fear as measured  by the FAM scale (score of 61 or higher)
3.Able and willing to provide informed consent
4.Able to read/write in English
5.Willingness to be randomized to  intervention  group
6.Willingness to complete three weeks  of self-guided intervention,  questionnaires and 
cognitive tests
7. Access  to internet for completion of questionnaires and intervention  materials
8. Current United  States  resident 
Exclusion criteria
1.Diagnosis of mild cognitive  impairment (MCI), Alzheimer’s  Disease or dementia  by a 
health care provider
2. Impaired  cognitive or neurologic function as determined  by the MoCA blind (score of <18 
out of 22) [12, 13, 14]
3.Unstable medical  condition (hospitalization in the last 6 weeks  or repeated  ER visits)
4. Severe depression (GDS-15 cut-off score  of 12  or higher)  [15]
5. Current treatment for anxiety or depression 
6. Current participation in another psychotherapy
7. Current use of psychiatric medication
8. Current substance use disorder9.Inadequate vision or hearing to interact with  study materials
3.0 Sample  Size:
We will recruit two groups with  40 participants in each  (N = 80).  The randomization will 
be stratified by age  (female vs. male). These group  sizes are powered  to observe a 
significant interaction  between  time (within-person) and treatment (between-group)  IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 5 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019using a mixed  model. Assuming a medium-sized (d = .4), group  sizes of 21 are powered  
at 80% to observe a significant group-by-time interaction  (alpha = .05, calculated using 
G*Power).  These group  sizes are relatively consistent with  guidance in the literature  
[24], suggesting that groups of 27 are powered  at 80% to observe a significant group-by-
time interaction.
4.0 Recruitment and Screening  Methods:
Recruitment Methods:
We plan to recruit no more than 80 participants for this study. Potential  participants will 
also be recruited  through  community-based outreach  methods, digital and print 
advertising (e.g., flyers,  web  postings, such as Google Ads), and registries  (e.g., Research  
Match).  Additionally, the PI of this study, James  W. Griffith, has a list of participants 
from previous research  studies who  have agreed  to be contacted  for future research  
conducted  by this PI. Those who  have participated in previous research  studies in 
Griffith Lab, will receive  either an email  or phone call, depending on their contact  
preferences, describing the study. If a participant is interested, they will be directed  to 
the online screening survey in REDCap to assess initial eligibility before a longer 
screening phone call.
Research  Match  is a secure online, national recruitment tool that is maintained by 
Vanderbilt University.  ResearchMatch.org  allows researchers  to conduct feasibility or 
recruit potential study participants. Participants who  are interested  and released  their 
contact information to the study team  will be contacted  via email  to complete an online 
pre-screener to determine eligibility.
Screening Methods:
Screening for this study will be two-fold. First, participants will complete an online 
screener consent form and then, if they agree, an online screener  will be administered 
via REDCap to collect  demographic information and assess top-line inclusion/exclusion 
criteria.  
The online screener will consist of the following:
1. General  contact  information form
2.Demographic information form (Age, gender, ethnicity,  relationship status, 
employment status, years  of education, income, family history of dementia  and 
contact information).
3.Questions to  confirm adequate hearing/vision required  to complete the 
intervention  materials. 
4.Basic questions about internet accessibility 
5. Current treatment  for anxiety and depression, including psychotherapy and 
medications.IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 6 of 18 HRP-583 / v101020196. Current diagnosis of substance use disorder
7.Unstable medical  condition
8.Diagnosis of MCI, Alzheimer’s  Disease, or Dementia
9.Fear and Avoidance in Memory  Loss (FAM)
10.GDS-15
If participants are deemed  eligible by the online screener, they  will move on to the 
second part of the screening  process. They will be called by a research  coordinator for a 
more detailed screening to assess and verify  their eligibility to enroll. At this phone call, 
the research  coordinator will first obtain consent from the potential participant and 
remind  them that after consenting they  will need  to complete additional screening 
questionnaires prior to  enrolling in the study. After consenting, the coordinator will 
assess the participant’s cognitive impairment using the  Montreal  Cognitive Assessment 
(MoCA) Blind, which  allows the research  coordinator to assess cognitive impairment 
remotely.  Participants that score less than 18 points (out of a possible 22)  on the MoCA 
Blind will be deemed  ineligible for the study [12, 13, 14]. 
After completing both online and phone screening  procedures, if the  individual is 
eligible and still interested  in participating, the coordinator will confirm their 
participation, randomize the participant, and begin  sending them the weekly  modules. 
5.0 Research Locations:
Northwestern  University
This study will be delivered  remotely  for participants who  live in the Chicago area.  We 
plan to use Northwestern  University’s  iteration  of REDCap to  screen,  e-consent, and 
store data for all participants in the study. The intervention  will be delivered  through  a 
REDCap site that will be created  to look like the intervention  material  packet.  Research  
team members  at NU will e-Consent all participants into the study as well  as collect all 
screening data over the phone, including cognitive  screening of participants using the 
MoCA Blind and administering the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-15).. Study 
participants will be able to contact NU research  team members  via phone or email  for 
any questions or concerns  throughout the duration of their  participation in the study.
6.0 Multi-site  Research (research that involves external collaborating  
institutions and individuals): 
Northwestern  University is the lead study site for this research  project and will be the 
only site recruiting participants. NU will create  all protocols and modifications related  to 
the study and notify research  team  members  outside of NU. NU will be responsible for 
ensuring that all procedures  are followed in accordance with  the protocols that are 
approved by NU IRB.  
Northwestern  UniversityIRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 7 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019Northwestern  University is the primary grantee  for this study. NU IRB will review  all 
research  procedures  for this study. All  participants in the study will reside in the United  
States.  Research  team  members  at Northwestern  University will obtain informed 
consent from all participants who  enroll in the study. Research  coordinators at NU will 
also conduct cognitive screening over  the phone with  participants as described  in 
Section  4 above. Study participants can correspond with  NU research  team  members  by 
phone and email  for any study-related  questions or concerns  throughout their 
participation in the study. Research  team  members  at NU will be responsible for 
ensuring all sites  follow protocol procedures.  The sites  hold biweekly  project meetings  
that will continue throughout the duration of the study to ensure all protocol 
procedures  are being followed correctly.  Any deviations from the protocol will be 
reported  to the NU IRB. NU personnel will also monitor data sharing to ensure only 
deidentified data is shared with  collaborating institutions. 
Trinity College Dublin, Maastrict University and University of Cambridge
Research  team members  located  at Trinity College Dublin, Maastrict University and 
University of Cambridge will assist with  development of intervention  materials  and 
consult on data collection and analysis. All data provided to research  team  members  at 
these sites  will be deidentified prior to  sharing. Data will be shared by downloading 
deidentified spreadsheets from the REDCap database and then  emailing the data via 
secure emails.
Data analysis may  occur  at other institutions, including Trinity College Dublin, Maastrict 
University, and University  of Cambridge. These data will be deidentified prior to 
analysis.
7.0 International Research (where data collection will occur  outside  the 
United States  and U.S. territories, including  online  activities)
All data collection will occur in the United  States.
8.0 Procedures Involved:
This study is a two-group  experimental  design. The two study groups are (1) 
Experimental group  that will participate in mindfulness, de-centering exercises  plus 
behavioral activation activities  and (2)  Control group  that will participate in mindfulness, 
de-centering exercises  only. 
The study consists of five total  time-points. The baseline visit will occur 2 weeks  prior to 
the start  of the intervention.  Participants fill out questionnaires two weeks  prior to 
starting the intervention  as well  as weekly after completing the intervention  activities.  
At the two-week  pre-baseline visit, a  research  c oordinator will screen  participants for IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 8 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019eligibility, as described  in “Recruitment and Screening Methods” section  above. If 
eligible, they will complete the study questionnaires as described  in Table 1 below.
A total  of 80  participants will be randomized into the study. Participants will be 
randomized to one of two groups: (1) mindfulness and de-centering or (2) mindfulness 
and de-centering with  behavioral activation. The randomization will be stratified by age 
(female vs. male). Randomization will occur on a 1:1 ratio  and within strata  (female vs. 
male). Participants will be randomized to  one of the two interventions  based on a 
predetermined  list within each  strata  created  using the blockrand package of R.  
Randomization will occur  by blocks, with  varying block sizes, in accord  with  
recommended  methods  for RCTs. The randomization key will be linked to a unique 
study ID number,  as well  as to  an intervention  (mindfulness and decentering  vs. 
mindfulness and decentering + behavioral activation).Participants will be aware that 
there are different arms  they can be assigned to  and will know which  randomization 
group  they are assigned.
The intervention  will consist of three weeks’ worth  of sessions of mindfulness and de-
centering exercises  (and behavioral activation exercises  for the experimental  group). 
Each week of the intervention, participants will be  a sked  to complete mindfulness 
activities  4 days of the week.  These activities  will take about 10-30 minutes  to complete 
each  day that an activity is assigned. Each week  of the intervention  will focus on 
psychoeducation and mindfulness lessons.  Week 1 will consist of psychoeducation on 
memory loss, dementia, fear of dementia,  and general  health anxiety. Participants will 
also complete a beginner’s mindfulness technique towards  the end of the week.  Week 2 
will consist of psychoeducation about mindfulness and meditation. Participants will 
learn  about and practice mindfulness techniques throughout the week.  They will also 
complete written  activities.  During week 3, participants in the control  group  will 
continue practicing and using mindfulness techniques taught in week  2 of the 
intervention.  The experimental  group  will learn  about behavioral activation strategies  
and practice activities  related  to behavioral activation throughout the week.  After 
completing each  week’s  activities, participants will complete a short set of 
questionnaires. We expect that modules for the control  and experimental  groups to 
take about the same amount of time to complete.  We estimate about 10-30 minutes  
each  day that an activity is assigned because similar amount of audio files and activities  
are provided to  each  group. 
All modules of the mindfulness  i ntervention  will be completed  within REDCap forms  
designed based on the intervention  materials  developed  with  this protocol. The 
modules will consist of audio files, exercises  (e.g., multiple choice questions, writing 
activities, meditation exercises, etc.), and summarization of concepts  learned  in each  
module. Each week of the intervention, participants will be emailed  with  that week’s  
links to the assigned intervention  modules. The links will be sent in the beginning of the 
week to the participant’s specified email  address. For each  of the 3 weeks  of the 
intervention, the participant will complete four modules that will each  take  between  10-IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 9 of 18 HRP-583 / v1010201930 minutes  to complete.  Participants also have the option to review the modules that 
they have already completed.  The links will remain  active for the duration of their 
participation in the study and for up to 3 years  after the study is complete.  No data is 
collected  directly from the individual within the modules. The modules are educational 
in nature and include activities  to help participants practice what they have learned  in 
each  module. While the REDCap modules will include fields for participants to  reflect on 
questions and their own  thoughts, those responses will not be used as outcome data. 
Due to the nature of REDCap forms, research  personnel will be able to view  the 
information that participants have input into the forms  but it will not be used for data 
analysis. 
After completion of the follow-up visit, all participants will receive a handout that 
describes  resources  and lifestyle behaviors/activities they can do to help reduce their 
risk of developing dementia.  
In addition to  the intervention  components, participants will be asked  to fill out 
questionnaires at all time-points. Questionnaires administered during intervention  
weeks  will be completed  after the participant completes  the intervention  materials  for 
that week.  The Patient Expectation Scale is the only questionnaire that will be 
completed  before the intervention  during an intervention  week.  
After follow-up assessments (4 weeks  after completion of the intervention), participants 
will be emailed  a REDCap form that asks a series  of open-ended questions about their 
experiences  with  the intervention.  The purpose of these questions is to give participants 
the opportunity to share their experience with  the intervention  and their initial 
impressions on if the intervention  seemed  beneficial for them.  These questions will 
cover the following topics: 
1. Overall  experience, including beneficial and difficult aspects, difficulty of 
completing the activities, and feedback on the length  of each  section.
2.Personal reactions  to overall  change in anxiety about  memory loss
3.Plans to  continue using mindfulness techniques learned  in the intervention
4. Any recommendations  or comments  the participant has.
When  participants are emailed  the qualitative questionnaire described  above, they will 
receive an email  debriefing them about the study and who  to contact  if they have any 
follow-up questions. Participants will complete  the following questionnaires throughout the course of the 
study:
Name Description of instrument
Fear and Avoidance of 
Memory loss (FAM)  scaleTo assess fear of memory  loss. This scale is 24-items.IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 10 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019Fear of Alzheimer’s  Disease 
Scale (FADS)To assess fear of Alzheimer’s  disease. This scale is 30-
items.
Memory Failure Scale (MFS) This measures  memory failures that people tend  to
experience in everyday  life. This scale is 12-items.
MoCA Blind The Montreal  Cognitive Assessment was developed  to 
identify cognitive impairment in individuals. The MoCA 
BLIND  is comprised  of the same tasks  as the MoCA 
FULL, except  the visual items  have been  removed, 
which  allows the assessment to  be performed  
remotely over the phone.
PROMIS-29 To assess quality of life, social functioning, fatigue, 
anxiety, and depression. 
World  Health Organization 
Well-Being Index  (WHO-5)To assess overall  well-being. This scale is 5-items.
Geriatric Depression Scale 
(GDS-15)To assess severity of depression. This scale is 15-items.
Patient Global Impression of 
Change (PGIC)To assess participant’s impression of change in their 
fear and anxiety since the start of the intervention.  
This scale is 1-item.
Patient Expectations Scale Single item to measure participant expectations for 
treatment.
Coronavirus Anxiety  Scale 
(CAS)The coronavirus anxiety scale (CAS) is a self-report 
mental  health screener of dysfunctional anxiety 
associated with  the coronavirus crisis. This scale is 5-
items.
The table below indicates at which  time-points these questionnaires will be 
administered:
Table  1. Summary of Study  Procedures
Intervention
(3 sessions)2-Weeks 
Pre-
Intervention 1 (baseline) 2 3Post-  
Intervention (1 week 
after  session  3)Follow-Up
(4 weeks after  
post-
intervention)
Online screen ●
Demographics ●
FAM ● ● ●● ● ●
FADS ● ●
MFS ● ● ●IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 11 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019At the end of each  set of questionnaires, we will ask the participants a few questions 
about their experience  with  that week’s  intervention  activities.  These questions will 
include:
1.On a 0 to 10 scale, how unhelp or helpful were the techniques this week?  With  0 
being not at all helpful and 10 being very helpful.” (0-10 scale)
2. “Is  there anything else you would like to tell me about the past 7 days, if so, 
please make a note here:”  (open ended  text box)
As a benefit to participant, we plan to allow all participants who  have consented  and 
enrolled in the study to access  the website and activities  provided during the 
intervention  so they  can continue to use them, if they would like.  No new data will be 
collected  from participants if they  choose to  revisit the website/materials. Participants 
may choose to answer the exercise  questions within the REDCap but that data will not 
be used as outcome data. The REDCap website built for this research  study will remain  
active for up to 3 years  after study completion. Participants will also have the option to  
download pdf copies of the website or download the mp3 recordings  of all audio files to 
sav
e to their  personal devices  to use in the future.  We will also include a zip file of all 
pdf versions of the intervention  materials  that we will email  to participants, upon their 
request.  After  the study is completed, we will also post that zip file of the intervention  
materials  to our research  website (https://sites.northwestern.edu/griffithlab/) where 
participants can go to download the materials, if they choose.  
9.0 Research with Vulnerable  Populations (if children are the ONLY 
vulnerable  population  you plan to enroll,  do NOT  complete  this 
section -- instead fill out Appendix  A)
N/A
10.0 Incomplete  Disclosure  or Deception:
N/A PROMIS-29 ● ● ●
WHO-5 ● ● ●
MoCA BLIND ●
GDS-15 ●
Patient Expectation 
Scale ● (before 
administering 
intervention)
PGIC ●
CAS ● ● ●
Qualitative 
questionnaire●IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 12 of 18 HRP-583 / v1010201911.0 Consent Process: 
The consent process  for this study will be two-fold. First, the participant will complete 
an online screening  consent form to collect sensitive screening information. Then, if 
they are eligible, they  will be contacted  by a study coordinator to obtain full informed 
consent and complete screening and enrollment in the study. 
The online screener consent will be administered via a Redcap  form and will explain key 
information about the screening  process. After  potential participants review the online 
screener consent, they will have the option to “agree”  or “disagree” to complete the 
online screening  procedures.  If a participant agrees  and are deemed  eligible by the 
online screener,  a research  coordinator will contact  them by phone to complete the 
consent process. If a participant is deemed  ineligible, based on their responses to the 
online screener,  we will include an optional question at the end to ask if we can use the 
information they provided on the online screener to recruit them  for future research  
studies. 
If participants agree and are eligible from the online screener, they  will then  be 
contacted  by a research  team member for additional screening and consenting. The 
consent process  for this study will take place over the phone between  participants and 
research  team members.  The informed consent process  is expected  to take around 20 
minutes  to complete.  This study is conducted  entirely remotely  and presents  only 
minimal risk to  the participant so therefore we are requesting a waiver of signed 
consent for this study. Instead, we plan to  use a verbal  consent process. Research  team 
members  will call participants to confirm study eligibility criteria  and, if they are eligible, 
will obtain verbal  consent from the participant. First, research  team members  will 
thoroughly explain the informed consent form to the participant, allowing them to ask 
any questions throughout the explanation with  additional time  after  explanation of the 
study for additional questions. The participants will be free to take  as much  time  as they 
need  to decide whether or not to  participate and/or to consult with  friends/family 
about their decision to participate. Once all of the  participant’s questions have been  
answered, the research  team member  will ask a short series  of questions to determine 
consent comprehension. If the participant answers  all consent comprehension 
questions correctly, the research  team member will verbally ask them if they  wish to  
consent to the study. If  they say “yes”, the research  team member  w ill mark that on the 
e-Consent form housed in REDCap. The research  team member who  obtained consent 
will then  print their name, sign their name, and date the form.  The person who  obtained 
informed consent will then  email  a copy of the  verbal  informed consent form to the 
participant for their  records.
12.0 Waiver of  Participant Signature  on Consent Form:IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 13 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019This study is requesting a waiver of participant signature on the consent form because 
the study will be conducted  remotely using phone and web-based sessions. In place of a 
participant signature on the consent form, we intend to use a verbal  consent process  for 
this study. The verbal  consent process  takes  the burden off of the participants as they 
do not have to navigate to the consent form on a separate device as they remain  on the 
phone with  a study coordinator. Additionally, older populations often  are limited  in their 
technology literacy and find it difficult to  sign using an electronic  form.  A study team 
member will follow a similar process  to the standard informed consent process  in order 
to obtain verbal  consent. As described  above, the study coordinator will thoroughly 
explain the form, allow adequate time for participant’s questions, and, if requested, 
send a copy of the form to  the participant so they  can consult with  friends/family about 
their decision to participate. This study will also ask a few consent comprehension 
questions prior to obtaining verbal  consent to  ensure that the participant understood 
the consent form information that was  explained to them.  In place of a signature line, 
the study c oordinator will verbally ask the participant if they consent to  the study. 
13.0 Waivers and Alterations  of Consent Information:
N/A
14.0 Financial Compensation:
Participants will be compensated  up to  a maximum of $80 for their participation 
in this study. Participants will be compensated  based on the visits they complete.  
Compensation will occur  at the end  of the study. Participants will be sent e-gift 
cards  for the total  amount of their compensation within 2-4 weeks  of study 
completion. If a participant withdraws  or drops out, the participant will be paid 
for all completed  time-points prior to their withdrawal/drop out based on the 
table below.
Time-point Compensation amount
Baseline $10
Week 1 $10
Week 2 $10
Week 3 $10
Week 4 $10
Follow-up $30
15.0 Audio/Video Recording/Photography
N/AIRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 14 of 18 HRP-583 / v1010201916.0 Potential  Benefits of this Research: 
This study will not promise any direct  benefits as a result of this research.  Participants 
may experience a decrease  in their fear or anxiety related  to dementia  after practicing 
the intervention  techniques. 
17.0 Potential  Risks to Participants:
The main potential risk of this study is a breach  of confidentiality. To combat this risk, 
we will store all identifiable information in a REDCap database that is only accessible by 
members  of the study team.  The study will also use questionnaires and mindfulness-
based interventions  to see if that type of intervention  helps reduce anxiety or fear about 
dementia  in older adults. These study procedures  do not have significant risks  beyond 
some discomfort in answer health-related questionnaires and participating in 
mindfulness-based activities.  The intervention  materials  will be provided online so the 
participant will be able to access  them privately  and stop use at any time  that they feel 
uncomfortable. 
18.0 Provisions to Protect Participant Privacy and Data Confidentiality:
This study will be conducted  entirely  remotely.  Participants will interact  with  a research  
team member by phone twice over the course of the study. Once at the beginning of 
the study to complete screening  procedures  and the informed consent process  and once 
at th
e end  for a debriefing interview.  During these phone calls, the research  team will 
advise the participant to  try to have a private  space to answer questions and discuss the  
study procedures.  The research  team member will also conduct these  phone calls from 
a private space to  ensure participant confidentiality. All  data collection will take place in 
a secure  REDCap database hosted on Northwestern  University’s  iteration  of REDCap. 
Participants will be assigned a study ID# once they are enrolled in the study. Only 
research  team members  interacting with  participants will have access  to their 
identifiable information. All participant data will be deidentified prior to analysis.
Special procedures  for ensuring patient confidentiality will be implemented.  Data 
transmission and the distributed data systems  will have multiple layers  of security.  All  
study  data  will  be  entered  by research  team members  into  the electronic  data entry  
system, hosted on Northwestern  University’s  interation of REDCap. This database will be 
accessed  using password protected  computers, will require research  team members  to 
log in to Northwestern’s  VPN using a username and password. All data containing PHI 
will be stored  in the secure  REDCap database. Within the database, each  study subject 
will be assigned a unique identification  number.  Only t his number will be used to 
identify subjects in any individual tabulation. The PHI that is collected  will represent  the IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 15 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019minimum necessary  to successfully execute  the study. Deidentified data from the study 
may be stored  on the Northwestern  shared drive, which  is regularly backed  up. 
Only group-level  data will be included in publications and presentations. If  individual 
participated data are to be published, no identifying information will be included.  
Access   to computerized   data  will  be  restricted   to  study  personnel.  Password  
authorization  will  be  enforced.  Previous  use of this security  system and a secured  
server indicates that this technique is very successful in assuring the  protection  of 
confidential information. The  data  will  be  stored   on  a  secure  server  with   restricted   
access.  All  study  personnel  who  have  access   to  patient  data  will  be  educated   
regarding  the  need   to  protect  confidentiality  and  the  procedures  to be followed to  
ensure such protection.  After the study is completed, the archived  data will be stored  on 
the secure, password protected  Northwestern  shared drive.  
19.0 Data Monitoring  Plan  to Ensure  the Safety of Participants:
This study will ask questions about depression and anxiety, for which  good treatments  
do exist. In this study population, these mental  health issues will be directly  tied  to 
anxiety/fear about dementia/cognitive slips. Therefore, we will provide a handout to 
every participant at the end of th e study that gives  helpful lifestyle behaviors and 
resources  to help prevent cognitive decline. Giving this information to  all participants 
ensures  that no person will be missed, and also reduces  any feelings of stigma  that 
might arise if the person felt singled out based on their responses. While this study does 
not ask any explicit questions about suicidality or self-harm, if the participant was  to 
mention  an immediate threat to themselves  or others, the research  team members  will 
be trained  to assess suicidality. In the case that a participant mentions a significant 
threat of suicidality or self-harm, the PI of the  study, James  W. Griffith, is a licensed 
psychologist and he will be informed of any concern  for follow-up. Any immediate  
suicidal intent will be treated  as a life threatening  emergency.  We will involve 
emergency services  from 911 if needed  and request a crisis intervention  manager for 
the situation. Participants will be notified that if they mention  a significant threat of 
suicidality or self-harm, that emergency services  will be contacted  on their behalf.
20.0 Long-term  Data and Specimen Storage  and Sharing: 
After study completion, participant data will be archived  in the REDCap database and 
deidentified data will be archived  on the secure  Northwestern  shared drive.  Any data 
that is shared outside of the research  team will be deidentified. 
21.0 Qualifications of Research Team to  Conduct the Research:
James W. Griffith, PhD.  (Contact PI). Associate Professor, Department of Medical Social 
Sciences, Northwestern University. IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 16 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019The team will be led  by Dr. Griffith, a clinical psychologist and researcher with  expertise 
in behavioral interventions  and advanced data-analytic techniques used for clinical 
trials, including growth  curve models and mixed  modelling. Dr. Griffith has over 70 
publications in a variety of clinical areas  including anxiety, depression and cognitive 
difficulties. He has contributed  to the design, execution, and data analyses of clinical 
trials and large  observational studies with  aggressive recruitment goals. He is also a 
licensed clinical psychologist with  extensive  experience in cognitive-behavior therapy.
Francesca R. Farina,  PhD. (Multiple PI). Post-doctoral Research Scientist, Department of 
Psychology, Trinity College Dublin and Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Ireland.
Dr. Farina is an established researcher with  expertise  in aging, cognitive  decline and 
dementia.  She has successfully led a number of Irish  Research  Council funded-projects 
specifically focused on emotional well-being and quality of life in older adults at-risk for 
dementia.  She possesses advanced training in study design, recruitment of vulnerable 
populations and statistics (e.g., predictive  modelling). Dr. Farina will co-lead the project  
along with  Dr. Griffith and Dr. Bennett.  Dr. Farina will be actively involved at each  stage 
of project.  
Marc Bennett, PhD. (Multiple PI). Investigator Scientist, Medical Research Council- 
Cognition and Brain  Sciences Unit, U niversity of Cambridge, UK. 
Dr. Bennett’s  research  is on the development, prevention  and treatment of anxiety 
during sensitive neuro-developmental periods, e.g., neuro-developmental delay, 
adolescence and later life. Dr.  Bennett  is also a post-doctoral researcher for the  
Wellcome Trust funded MYRIAD  Project investigating the role of mindfulness-based 
training as a prevention  strategy in adolescent anxiety and depression. Dr. Bennett is 
currently commissioned by the Wellcome Trust to author an Insight Analysis on 
Psychological Decentering as a core  component of psychological treatments  for anxiety 
and depression. Dr.  Bennett will therefore  assist in developing the FA-mindfulness 
based intervention  and establishing the app-based delivery system.  
Dr. Griffith, Dr.  Farina and Dr. Bennett currently collaborate on a research  line 
investigating the impact of fear-avoidance on health-related outcomes  in older adults 
[2], so they are well  placed to executive this project.  Dr. Griffith is also currently  
supported by the National Institute  on Aging to determine the impact of health literacy 
on dementia  screening; this pilot project  will allow him to expand this work into the 
domain of treatment to enhance the overall  well-being of older adults
ReferencesIRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 17 of 18 HRP-583 / v101020191. Saga, Dementia more feared than Cancer new Saga Survey reveals. 2016.
2. Farina, F.R., et al., Fear of memory decline predicts lower quality of life and 
increased memory failures in older adults: Preliminary findings from a novel fear-
avoidance of memory decline scale.  2020.
3. Kim, S., et al., Dementia Stigma Reduction (DESeRvE): Study  protocol for a 
randomized controlled trial of an online intervention program to reduce dementia-
related public stigma.  Contemporary clinical trials communications, 2019. 14: p. 
100351-100351.
4. Werner, P., et al., Family stigma and caregiver burden in Alzheimer's disease.  
Gerontologist, 2012. 52(1): p. 89-97.
5. McWhirter, L., et al., Functional cognitive disorders: a systematic review.  The 
Lancet Psychiatry, 2019.
6. Stern, Y., Cognitive reserve in ageing and Alzheimer's disease.  The Lancet 
Neurology, 2012. 11(11): p. 1006-1012.
7. Nijs, J., et al., Thinking beyond muscles and joints: therapists' and patients' 
attitudes and beliefs regarding chronic musculoskeletal pain are key to applying 
effective treatment.  Manual therapy, 2013. 18(2): p. 96-102.
8. Velthuis, M.J., et al., Fear of movement in cancer survivors: validation of the 
Modified Tampa Scale of Kinesiophobia—Fatigue.  Psycho‐ Oncology, 2012. 21(7): 
p. 762-770.
9. Zale, E.L., et al., The relation between pain-related fear and disability: a meta-
analysis.  The Journal of Pain, 2013. 14 (10): p. 1019-1030.
10. Hays, R.D., et al., PROMIS®-29  v2. 0 profile physical and mental health summary 
scores.  Quality of life Research, 2018. 27(7): p. 1885-1891.
11. Sheikh, J.I. and J.A. Yesavage, Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS): recent 
evidence and development of a shorter version.  Clinical Gerontologist: The Journal 
of Aging and Mental Health, 1986.
12. Wittich, W., Phillips., N., Nasreddine, Z. S., and Chertkow, H. (2010). Sensitivity 
and Specificity of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Modified for Individuals Who 
are Visually Impaired. Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness. June 2010: p. 
360-368.
13.  Effendi-Tenang, I., Tan, M.P., Khaliddin, N., Jamaluddin Ahmad, M., Amir, N. N., 
Kamaruzzaman, S.B., and Ramli, N. (2020). Vision impairment and cognitive 
function among urban-dwelling malaysians aged 55 and over from the Malaysian 
Elders Longitundinal Research (MELoR) Study. Archives of Gerontology and 
Geriatrics, 90 (104165). ISSN  0167-4943, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.archger.2020.104165.
14. Marie-Ève Gervais, Mélanie Couture, Stéphanie Le Blanc, Sophie Blanchet, 
Marie-Ève Gagné & Marie-Christine Ouellet (2017) Evaluation of Cognitive 
Functioning in the  Context of Rehabilitation for Visual Impairment in Older Adults: IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021
Page 18 of 18 HRP-583 / v10102019A Case Series, Physical & Occupational Therapy In Geriatrics, 35:3-4, 132-
155, DOI: 10.1080/02703181.2017.1339758
15. Greenberg, S.A. (2012). The Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). Try This: Best 
Practices in Nursing Care to  Older Adults. 4 (2012). IRB #: STU00214078 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 3/1/2021