Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 1 
  
Protocol  
Evaluation of Methods for Implementation of a Comfort Care Order Set – Beacon II  
Principal Investigator: Kath ryn L.  Burgio, PhD  
6/20/ 2017 
Background  
It is well documented that patients at life’s end have unrelieved physical suffering  with significant emotional, 
spiritual, and social distress. Too  many patients die an undignified death with many uncontrolled symptoms . 
Emotional, social and spiritual needs of the p atient and the family often are not addressed  adequately . Studies 
report most patients have up to 10 different symptoms during the last week of life, many severe and 
unrelieved. Consistently, family accounts of the dying process and bereavement period  point to unrelieved 
symptoms and exacerbating  ineffective disease -modifying treatments as source s of distress .  
Hospice is a holistic approach to end -of-life care focus ing on management of pain and non -pain symptoms , 
while addressing other forms of distress su ch as psycho -social stressors and existential angst. At its best, 
hospice care supports growth and healing , achiev ing a sense of completion that includes bereavement and 
grief support  both before and after death. In this way hospice programs may help individuals have a “Good 
Death.”  One of the particular skills that the hospice programs have developed is excellence in care in the last 
days  and hours of life. This is the specialty care  of the actively dying. Patients referred to hospice often benefit 
from improved symptom management and practical assistance in the home, which may improve both quality  
and quantity of life. The hospice model is accepted as a model of excellence for care a t life’s end.  
Despite the benefits of hospice care, research has shown most people do not receive such care when they die.  
For the foreseeable future, i t appears that the majority of patients will die in a hospital or nursing home , where 
they will not re ceive care designed specifically to address suffering and support family members.  Statistics 
from the National Hospice & Palliative Care Organization indicate that e ven among hospice patients, only 52% 
die at home, 22% die in a nursing facility  and 10% in a hospital. Given these numbers, there is clearly a need 
to address the processes of care for the actively dying patient in the inpatient setting.   
Integrating  hospice care into traditional medical practices can be challenging  because the general approach es 
to care differ. In acute care setting s, where the focus is on “cure,” attention to symptom management often is 
downplayed , because it is assumed that symptoms will abate if the disease is “managed” or “cured.” In this 
environment, transition away from disease -modifying treatments to symptom control can seem counter -
intuitive. Successful symptom management techniques and suppo rtive care systems that are not technically 
sophisticated are not always available for inpatients . The subspecialty palliative care workforce is not sufficient 
to reach all patients dying in hospital settings , and acute care practitioners can fail to recog nize shifts in patient 
illness trajectory indicating the need for palliative care consultation.  The overarching goal of this program of 
research is to implement the best practices of traditionally home -based hospice care in the inpatient setting. 
This inte rvention could have significant impact in transferring the best practices of hospice care into 
institutional settings where most end -of-life care actually takes place.  
In the past, other acute care palliative care interventions have not achieved their goals. The SUPPORT study  
sought to improve care for seriously -ill hospitalized patients  using specially trained nurses to increase doctor -
patient communication regarding ca re preferences. This carefully designed study of 9,105 adults in five 
teaching hospitals failed to improve care at end of life.  Investigators i n another study used a multi -modality 
intervention to improve quality of end-of-life care in 12 intensive care un its. Despite a robust intervention that 
included clinician champions, clinician education, academic detailing, quality -of-care feedback and system 
support, they were unable to identify improvements in quality -of-care outcomes based on family satisfaction.  
Early Work and Development of the Comfort Care Education Intervention  
Dr. Amos Bailey has many years of experience in the field of palliative care, most of which has focused on 
inpatient settings. In 1998, he founded the Balm of Gilead, a palliative care unit within an acute care public 
hospital. The goal was to replicate th e best practices of home hospice care in the acute care hospital. In 2001, 
he established the Birmingham VA MC Safe Harbor Palliative Care Program , a comprehensive initiative that 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 2 
 includes active case finding, inpatient and outpatient consultation, staff ed ucation, and physician/nurse case 
management of inpatients and home hospice patients referred to community programs. Recent feedback from 
the PROMISE family surveys indicate the BVAMC is above national norms on several scores, including overall 
ratings of “excellent.”  
It was in these settings that Dr. Bailey developed the Comfort Care Order Set (CCOS) based on home hospice  
best practices for care in the last days or hours of life and modified for use in the acute inpatient care setting. 
Subsequently , it has been refined, condensed to a pocket card, and translated into a CPRS software patch. As 
a set of modifiable standing orders , it functions as a decision support tool.  With funding from The Project on 
Death in America (PDIA) Faculty Scholars Program  (2002 -2003), Dr Bailey  developed and evaluated a 
Palliative Medicine Training Program . He also  developed and published a n instructional  manual , The Palliative 
Response ,  a comprehensive guide to end -of-life care . Based on adult learning theory , the manual  includes 44 
individual 5 -minute education sessions.  The book has been used to train internal medicine residents and guide 
daily didactic teaching sessions for palliative care, oncology, and geriatric fellows . This text will be used with 
other educational materials to train providers in the proposed project .  
Pilot Study: Intervention to Improve End-of-Life Care in the Birmingham VA Medical Center 
To formally assess the impact of the Safe Harbor Palliative Care Program within the Birmingham VAMC, a pilot 
study was conducted using  educational materials and pocket cards to assist physicians in the identification of  
dying patients , and the Comfort Care Order Set (CCOS) to implement a plan of care.  Data on 13 symptoms 
and processes of care were collected for the 6 months prior to initiation of the Program in 2001 and compared 
to data from the first 6 months of 2003. Between the two years, p roviders increased documentation for 10 of 
the13 end -of-life symptoms (p < .05) and i ncreased care plans for 9 of 13 symptoms (p < .05). Number of 
documented end -of-life symptoms increased from 1.7±2.1 to 4.4±2.7 (p < .001) and documented care plans 
increased from 0.4±0.9 to 2.7±2.3 (p < .001). Opioid medication orders increased dramatical ly from 56% to 
84% (p < .001) and DNR orders increased from 62% to 89% (p < .001). There was a significant decline in 
deaths in the ICU from 47.4% to 25% (p = .002). Hospice care offerings increased significantly from 21% to 
35% (p < .03); In addition, ove rall costs of caring for patients at end of life decreased.  In secondary analyses , 
there was a significant increase in orders for morphine as a preferred opioid from 47.4% to 81.7% ( p < .001)  
and administration of an opioid in the last 72 hours of life inc reased from 13.9% to 71.3%( p<.0001 . 
Based on the pilot data from the Birmingham VAMC, the team concluded that the Comfort Care Education 
Intervention was a promising, feasible approach to inpatient end -of-life care. With the teaching methods and 
materials  developed, including the published training manual, six laminated pocket cards, PowerPoint slide 
presentations, and the CCOS  (built and integrated  into CPRS), the team sought Merit Review funding to test 
the effectiveness of the education intervention for improving the quality of end -of-life care in other VAMCs.  
Multi -site Implementation  Trial: "Intervention to Improve Care at Life's End in VA Medic al Centers" (BEACON)  
(funded by VA HSR&D ; PI: Burgio; Co -PI: Bailey ) (in press, Journal of General Internal Medicine )  
“Best Practices for End -of-life Care and Comfort Care Order Sets for Our Nation's Veterans ” (BEACON) is a recently  
completed real-world implementation trial  designed to evaluate the Comfort Care Education Intervention in six 
VAMCs in the Southeastern US. The Comfort Care Education Intervention consisted of two weeks of  in-person staff 
training plus supporting written materials (pocket card s and book), creation of a CCOS in each site’s CPRS system, 
and follow -up consultation. Staff training targeted hundreds of VAMC staff members in teaching basic palliative care, 
identification of the dying veteran, and application of the CCOS modified as n eeded for individual patients. Several 
processes of care were identified as quality endpoints for end -of-life care (last 7 days) and abstracted from the 
electronic medical records of veterans who died before or after intervention in the participating VAMCs . 
Primary endpoints were proportion of patients with an order for opioid pain medication at time of death, do -not-
resuscitate order, location of death, nasogastric tube, intravenous line infusing, and physical restraints. Due to 
the possibility that secular trends could  bias or confound intervention estimates, records were abstracted 
across the entire 6 -year study period for all hospitals (n=6,066) . Generalized estimating equations were 
conducted adjusting for longitudinal trends over the 6 years of t he study.   
Each of the intervention components was delivered to all sites. Sign -in sheets documented that training was 
attended by at least 1,621 staff, including 131 physicians, residents, and medical students, 66 physician 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 3 
 assistants and nurse practition ers, 943 nurses, 135 nursing assistants and students, 53 social workers, 24 
chaplains, 100 pharmacy staff, 5 mental health staff, 24 respiratory therapists, 15 dietary staff, 54 other allied 
health professionals, 44 administrative staff, and 27 other staff . There were no significant differences in patient  
characteristics between the pre -and post -intervention groups. Changes were in the expected direction for all 17 
of the process of care endpoints. Longitudinal (secular) trends were significant only for the  proportions of 
patients dying with a do -not-resuscitate (DNR) order, family present, or an order for death rattle medication. 
For all other variables, no longitudinal trends achieved statistical significance. After adjusting for these 
longitudinal trends,  the intervention effects remained significant for the proportion of patients dying with an 
active opioid order, with an antipsychotic order, and with an order for death rattle medication (Figure 1). The 
longitudinal analysis also indicated significant int ervention effects for presence of advance directives, 
nasogastric tube, benzodiazepine order, and sublingual administration.  
Conclusion: T his broadly targeted 
intervention to change practice 
patterns for end -of-life care led to 
modest but statistically significant 
changes in several processes of care . 
These changes become highly relevant 
when considering the potential i mpact on 
the 21, 500 veterans  who die each year in 
VA facilities . 
A secondary analysis of baseline data 
(2005 only , n=1,068 ) described  pain 
management practices for imminently 
dying patients and found that 64.2% had 
an active order for an opioid at the time  of 
death.  Of these, 69.8% of patients had 
received the medication at some time 
within the last 7 days of life, 61.2% within 
the last 48 hours, and 47.0% within the 
last 24 hours. These  findings indicate a 
need for improving availability of opioids for en d-of-life care in the inpatient setting , especially within 
the last 24 hours .   
Formative Evaluation of the BEACON Intervention   
After completing the BEACON trial, we conducted a formative evaluation  (supplementary study funded by 
HSR&D) to understand the processes by which best practices were adopted and to inform the design of the 
proposed Enhanced Intervention Approach. We completed semi -structured telephone interviews with key 
informants from each site in the trial (n=14) and queried t hem about the roles played by key personnel, as well 
as perceived barriers, facilitators, needs, and suggestions for future implementation. Qualitative analysis was 
led by the team medical sociologist  (Dr. Williams) .  
In characterizing the optimal instruct ional modality, informants’ accounts of the favorable aspects of the 
BEACON training focused on the flexible presentation strategies, standardized instructional tools, and 
interactive teaching methods. Informants detailed how small group instruction, in pa rticular, facilitated active 
learning, encouraging participants to engage with the instructional process, to discern what palliative care is all 
about, and to explore the “whys” and “hows” for doing palliative care. Teaching in small groups facilitated 
interactive learning, allowing participants to connect to the learning process by relating their personal stories of 
illness, death, and dying, and stimulating others to share their stories as well. Small interactive settings and 
efficient use of time also he ightened interest in the training sessions. In typifying the characteristics of the ideal 
trainer,  informants expressed the importance of the presenter’s particular experience in the field, his ability to 
relate to and communicate with trainees, and his co ntent area expertise.  
Figure 1 : Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for process of 
care endpoints adjusting for six-year longitudinal trends , N=6,066  

Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 4 
 Reflecting on challenges and barriers, respondents mentioned the difficulties involved in making staff available 
for training (including the burden of competing training and other duties), getting buy -in from individuals, 
administration, and physician lead ership, staff shortages, and staff turn -over. A major theme across sites was 
how interest in the intervention faded in the post -intervention period, after the team left the facility, and the 
corresponding need for refresher training and regular formal and informal training opportunities. As 
suggestions, they specifically mentioned using a train -the-trainer model and "getting key physicians talking 
about Palliative Care," so their residents would learn about it as part of  their regular rotations. In one 
respondent's words:  
"Well I think you really need to work closely with somebody within the facility who has the credibility of the 
staff, who has experience with quality end -of-life care who can do the training within that  facility. I mean, it’s 
always nice to have that external expert come in, but once they’re gone, the immediacy or the importance of 
it tends to fade. Whereas if you’ve got somebody there who can continue to keep it moving forward, that’s 
going to be really  important. ...I think that people who are dealing with the clinical issues are the ones who 
need to be doing the training and the constant cheerleading oversight monitoring of the program."  
These findings support the design of the proposed Enhanced Implem entation Approach, particularly the face -
to-face, interactive learning model and the enduring role of the Champion embedded within each facility.   
Dissemination Activities  
In the final stage of the BEACON project, all materials were refined and a Comfort C are Education Intervention 
Packet was created for training providers and a “train the trainer” model for disseminating best practices. The Packet , 
including all of the written materials, presentations, policy and procedures, and family brochure is posted o n the 
VA Sharepoint and Dr. Bailey has used it to train Palliative Care Consult Teams in VISN 11.  In addition, the CCOS  
for CPRS has been disseminated to over 15 other VAMCs  with encouragement from the Comprehensive End -
of-life Care Initiative  (CELC) and support from the CELC VA Implementation Center.   
Rationale for the Proposed Implementation Study  
With the completion of the BEACON study, we conclude that it is possible to change provider behavior across a 
number of endpoints that reasonably can be expect ed to improve end -of-life care for veterans. However, 
investigators encountered challenges conducting this trial that revealed barriers to the adoption of best practices, 
including the difficulty of doing intensive training at another site, as well as some  factors that appear to promote 
uptake, such as positioning on -site clinical champions to lead the efforts to change practice on an ongoing basis. 
In the BEACON trial, Dr. Bailey, the physician leader and developer of the intervention, personally travelled to each 
site and spent two weeks providing intensive staff training. While this approach allowed us to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the Comfor t Care Education Intervention, it was difficult to accomplish and cannot be replicated on a 
broad scale by Dr. Bailey himself. This poses significant challenges to the feasibility of national implementation.  
Further, while the changes  were statistically s ignificant across several important variables, they were modest in 
magnitude, particularly in comparison to changes observed during the pilot study at the BVAMC. This suggests a 
potential implementation effect and underscores the need to reassess and refin e the intervention delivery strategy.  
Although the Education Intervention Packet is fully developed and available to all VA providers, the best strategy for 
delivering the education to providers and facilitating adoption of best practices (CCOS) is not ye t known.  
A goal of the BEACON study was to train as many staff as possible that might have contact with actively  dying 
patients. However, in achieving this goal, it is possible that the depth and breadth of knowledge necessary to achieve 
long-term culture  and practice change , as well as sustainable patient outcomes was not reached. Because hundreds 
of staff were exposed to some training, no one individual or group of individuals received intensive training, which 
may have diffused the efficacy of the inter vention. Further, although intensive in nature, the intervention occurred 
over a short period of time. This did not provide the continuity over time needed to accomplish large changes in 
practice and to address staff turn -over. As such, findings from the B EACON study suggest the need for a train -the-
champion  model as an alternate approach to ensuring th at each VA facility has an in -house subject matter expert 
capable of training others and providing continuity and longer -term availability. A train -the-champion  model, 
through which  training could be ongoing at each site, would allow for a more sustained delivery of training and 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 5 
 the potential for regular  refreshers  and updates . We propose to test this train -the-champion  model in the next 
phase of this res earch program (BEACON 2).  
As a result of the 2003 VA mandate, every VAMC now has a formal Palliative Care Consult Team (PCCT) to 
promote and oversee Palliative Care programs in local facilities. These PCCTs  include  a physician, nurse , social 
worker, mental  health provider , and pastoral care provider. These teams have received core training with the 
EPEC for Veterans and ELNEC for Veterans, which allows these individuals to easily understand the concept 
and need for the comfort care clinical interventions an d quickly adopt them in their care setting to improve their 
delivery of palliative care. Compared to what was previously available within VA, PCCT members represent a 
more highly trained group of providers who can serve as clinical champions  
We reason that PCCTs are now well  established and that team members are trained at least in the basics of 
palliative care principles. We propose to capitalize on this existing infrastructure and utilize these leaders as change 
agents for delivering the Comfort Care Education Intervention using two implementation strategies. Training existing 
teams of palliative care providers creates the potential for in -house change agents to be present for a longer period 
of time. This potentially could increase the uptake of comfo rt care interventions as opposed to the presence of an 
expert for only two weeks. Activating and empowering a PCCT, rather than an individual champion , has the potential 
for greater impact. In their formal roles, members of the PCCTs already are leaders, recognized and charged with 
improving palliative care and presumably motivated to implement what they have learned and to pass this training 
onto others in an ongoing way. By training and supporting PCCTs to provide state -of-the-art, evidence -based care 
we propose to optimize adoption and utilization of best practices in a sustainable and reproducible manner.   
The purpose of the proposed project is to evaluate two methods of delivering this Comfort Care Education 
Intervention utilizing the established infra structure of Palliative Care Consult Teams (PCCT): a Basic 
Implementation Approach using a teleconference to review educational materials and activate PCCTs to 
educate other providers, and an Enhanced Implementation Approach utilizing in -person, train -the-champion  
workshops to prepare PCCT members to be clinical champions and trainers at their home sites.  
With these findings, we will be able to determine the better method of delivery for the Comfort Care Education 
Intervention and modify the training program, the education materials, and any other aspect of the 
implementation strategy to ensure a successful  future dissemination.  
Conceptual Framework  
The proposed study is guided by constructs from the PRECEDE (Predisposing, Reinforcing, and Enabling 
Constructs in Ecosystem Diagnosis and Evaluation) framework . This framework , which has its origins in health 
promotion planning and has been applied more recently in the field of implementation science, provides a 
comprehensive structure for diagnosing needs , as well as developing , and implementing , and evaluating  
interventions targeted to meet those needs. In the  current context, the framework guides  a multi -modal 
approach to changing practice patterns for end -of-life care including: 1) predisposing  providers to make the 
desired changes in practice through intensive case -based and experiential training and by utilizing in -house 
“change agents”; 2) enabling providers to change by providing them with a computerized clinical  decision  
support tool , as we ll as a packet of written educational materials; and 3) reinforcing  the changes in practice 
through a regular audit and performance feedback mechanism. This framework  also provides a structure for 
evaluating the process, impact , and outcome of the interven tions.  
Significance  
The total number of veterans predicted to die next year, both inside and outside of the VA, is greater than 
600,000 , comprising  more than 25% of all individuals who die in the United States. Within VA facilities, nearly  
21,500 veterans die each year. The VA has long recognized that veterans at the end -of-life have unique need s for 
a healthcare system that can respond to the need for pain and symptom management, as well as psychosocial 
support . However many patients still  have poorly controlled symptoms and multiple unmet needs.  
VA has embarked on a robust program to improve capacity for hospice and palliative care services in all VA facilities. 
This program includes training initiatives, and the creation of over 50 new i npatient hospice -palliative care units. 
Further, Palliative Care Consult Teams (PCCT) are mandated by VHA at all VA facilities. Dr. Amos Bailey was 
a member of the Hospice and Palliative Care Field Advisor Group for VA Central Office that drafted this 2003 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 6 
 directive. In the last three years the Comprehensive End -of-Life Care (CELC) Initiative has supported the 
PCCTs and other staff in the VAMC by the development of "Education in Palliative and End -of-life Care" 
(EPEC ) for Veterans, "End -of-Life Nursing Education Consortium" (ELNEC)  for Veterans , and Hospice and 
Palliative Nurses Association ( HPNA ) nursing assist ants training. The PCCT s and other staff have received 
mandatory training with these new curricula to improve proficiency, and they  are primed to  use the CCOS.  
The proposed project will build on this infrastructure by providing the PCCTs  at participating  facilities with 
training, education materials , tools,  and technical support to help accomplish their mission . Further, it will 
provide valuable information on the effectiveness of two implementation strategies for delivering this Comfort 
Care Education I ntervention , developed in the BEACON project,  and teach ing PCCT members to train other 
providers  and serve as clinical champ ions. The long -term goal of this program of research is to improve the quality 
of end -of-life care for patients dying in VA Medical Centers. Findings will be used to refine the Comfort Care 
Education Intervention and implementation approach  in preparation for nationwide dissemination of best 
practices for end -of-life care within the VA Healthcare System, and potentially within  health care systems 
throughout the nation provid ing the bulk of health care services to veterans.  
Research Design and Methods  
Overview  
This study will be a group (cluster) randomized trial in which 50 PCCTs will be assigned to receive the Comfort 
Care Education Intervention via a Basic or Enhanced Implementation Approach. Data on processes of end -of-
life care, before and after  implementation of the Education Intervention, will be derived from the records of 
veterans who have died in the 50 VAMC hospitals. Following intervention, semi -structured  telephone 
interviews will be conducted with PCCT members to explore  the implementation process at each site, including 
barriers, facilitators and suggestions for improving the implementation process. Questionnaires will be used to 
evaluate the perceptions of PCCT members and providers who receive training from the PCCT regarding 
training and its impact on their attitudes, skills, practice , and perceived efficacy to care for patients . 
Recruitment  
PCCT teams at 50 VA Medical Centers will be recruited to participate in the trial. To avoid ceiling effects, 
recruitment will be preferential, target ing teams at  sites with the lowe r scores on the PROMISE family after -
death survey, which measures several parameters of family satisfaction with care received by the veteran. To 
avoid enrolling sites that might be especially resistant to change, teams at VAMCs with scores in the lowest 
10th percentile will not be recruited . To compensate for potential dropout, 50 sites will be recruited to  ensure 
the participation of 48 VA Medi cal Centers.  The study will be announced on the twice monthly calls held with 
the Palliative Care Coordinators for each VISN. Emails will also be used to announce the study  and invite 
participation . (See letter of support from Scott Shreve, DO, National Di rector of Hospice & Palliative Care ) 
Currently, the Comprehensive End -of-Life Care  (CELC ) palliative care programs have a high profile among 
VISN and VAMC leadership. All VISNs and VAMCs are receiving quarterly PROMISE reports , which document  
deficiencies in quality of care , and identifying areas that  need improve ment  and is expected to increase  
facilities ' motivation  to participate in the study. Each PCCT  can decide individually  if they w ish to participate 
in the study . If there is not a prescribing provider from the PCCT ( enabling use of  the CCOS) who wishes to 
participate, that site will not be included in the trial.  
Once the PCCT members are identified as participants , their personally identifiable, i.e., name, telephone, 
email, will be maintained on VA secure networks. If paper copies exist, they will be maintained within locked 
office of the GRECC.  
Power  
Power calculations were based on data on the primary endpoint fr om the BEACON study, change in proportion 
of patients with an active opioid order at time of death. Sample sizes of 2400 patients  in the Basic 
Implementation Approach and 2400 patients  in the Enhanced Implementation Approach , which will be obtained 
by rand omizing 24 PCCTs from VA Medical Centers with 100 patients  on average to each group, will achieve 
86% power to detect a difference between the group proportions of 0. 05, where the proportion of patients  post-
intervention with an active order for opioid at death in the Basic group is 0.65 and the proportion in the 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 7 
 Enhanced group is 0.70 . The significance level was 0.05 and an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) is 
assumed to be 0.005, similar to the ICC observed in the original BEACON Trial. Calculation s were performed 
using PASS 11.0.  
Randomization  
To avoid baseline differences between groups of sites in quality and processes of end -of-life care, PCCT sites 
will be stratified on high vs. low baseline scores on the PROMISE Bereaved Family  Survey . PROMISE scores 
should reflect the general quality of care provided. Within this stratum,  teams  will be randomized to the Basic 
or Enhanced Approach to implementing the Intervention.  
In most group -randomized clinical trials, all groups or clusters are re cruited and randomized at baseline. 
However, we will not be able to recruit and randomize all PCCTs  prior to initiation of intervention. For this 
reason , training of the PCCTs  will be conducted in separate waves. When five PCCTs  have been recruited and 
randomized to a group, training will be initiated with th ose five teams  as a group. This will produce twelve  
waves of 6 teams  (six waves for each implementation approach) to complete the study. While wave #1 is 
receiving intervention , 10 more teams  will be recruited in preparation for  wave #2. These waves of recruitment , 
randomization , and training  will continue until 25 teams  have been assigned to each group.  
The BEACON Comfort Care Education Intervention - a Multi -modal Approach  
The Education Intervention is targeted to providers. There has been considerable debate about the effects of 
continuing medical education (CME) on provider behavior in the practice setting. CME courses have been 
found to be effective for increasing provide r knowledge; but knowledge has often not generalized into their 
practice patterns. Didactic  presentations and distributing printed information only have little or no beneficial 
effect in changing physician practice . It has been suggested that the ineffecti veness of CME accounts for the 
discrepancy between evidence and practice or, at lease , contributes to this gap. Understanding what CME 
tools and techniques are most effective in disseminating and retaining medical knowledge is critical to 
improving CME and  diminishing the gap between evidence and practice.  
Several health services research (HSR) areas focus on improv ing patient quality of care by changing provider 
behavior. For instance, academic detailing, audit and feedback, benchmarking , continuing medical education 
(CME), and computerized reminder systems are  all methodologies used to change provider behavior. The 
literature is consistent in reporting that interactive techniques are the most effective at changing physician care 
and pati ent outcomes. Clinical  practice guidelines and opinion leaders are less effective. However, there is 
mixed evidence that these  interventions alone  can change and sustain behavior. The literature is clear that 
there does not appear to be a “magic bullet” in  changing provider behavior , but that multi -modal interventions 
may be more effective compared to a single intervention methodology.  
The proposed study will use a multi -modal approach to changing practice patterns for end -of-life care. This will 
be accomplished in part by offering an intervention that includes three core adult learning and development 
concepts: 1) training will be timely, relevant, insightful, practical and useful; 2) it will employ experiential 
learning and action learning strategie s, methods and practices; and, 3) the central focus will be on participants’ 
interaction and collaboration.  Specifically, using the PRECEDE phases of the  conceptual framework, 1) 
providers will be predisposed to make the desired changes in practice through  intensive case -based and 
experiential training and by utilizing in -house “change agents”; 2) providers will be enabled to change by 
providing them with a computerized clinical support tool , as well as a packet of written educational materials; 
and, 3) the  changes in provider practice will be reinforced through structured consultation with trainers.   
The two groups will receive the same  Pre-Implementation Preparation and the same Education Intervention 
Packet Materials. They will differ on the implementatio n approach used to deliver the education intervention.  
Table 1 
Components of Comfort Care Education Intervention/Implementation  
Teleconference  Train -the-Champion  
A. Pre-Implementation Preparation  A. Pre-Implementation Preparation  
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 8 
 Communicate with administrative leaders  Communicate with administrative leaders  
Communicate with PCCT members  Communicate with PCCT members  
Communicate with IRM representative  Communicate with IRM representative  
Technical assistance to build Comfort 
Care Order Set in CPRS  Technical assistance to build Comfort Care Order 
Set in CPRS  
B. Education Intervention Package Materials  B. Education Intervention Package Materials  
Case Identification  Case Identification  
Comfort Care Interventions  Comfort Care Interventions  
Comfort Care Order Set  Comfort Care Order Set  
Pocket cards  Pocket cards  
Sample policies and procedures  Sample policies and procedures  
PowerPoint slide s for training other providers  PowerPoint slide s for training other providers  
Sign-in sheets to document  training other 
providers  Sign-in sheets for training other providers  
C. Implementation Strategy  C. Implementation Strategy  
Activate Comfort Care Order Set  Activate Comfort Care Order Set  
Teleconference  Train -the-Champion  Program  
Orientation and review of Education Packet 
Materials (80 minutes)  In-person workshop at BVAMC (2 days)  
 Interactive t eaching on comfort care interventions  
 Case -based coaching to build care plans using 
CCOS  
 Hands -on experiences with using the CCOS  
 Teaching to become trainers and change agents 
(with manual)  
 Review of baseline facility -specific PROMISE data 
(feedback)  
Charge to train providers at home facility  Charge to train providers at home facility  
Team available for consultation as needed by 
PCCT members  Bi-weekly conference calls to provide consultation 
for 4 months  
A. Pre-Implementation Preparation  
Identify Lead Champion . (point  of contact) It is critical that all sites have a lead champion, a physician or 
nurse practitioner who will lead the efforts to promote ongoing palliative care education and use of the CCOS . 
The quality of the lead champion may vary, but is expected to be fairly uniform in the proposed study due to 
the standard training they receive in the PCCT role.  
CCOS preparation : Each PCCT team will be provided with the assistance of an experienced Computer  
Applications Coordinator (CAC; see Letter of Support from Dr. Cleveland ) and a clinical provider (Dr. Bailey, Dr. 
Perna , or Dr. Kvale ) at the Birmingham VAMC, all of whom will work remotely with the local PCCT and CAC to 
construct a CCOS tailored and integrated into that VAMC's CPRS  using existing and new orders . To assist the 
local team to build the CCOS, materials are provided in the Education Packet that incl ude a description of the 
components and screen shots of the sample CCOS in the CPRS system. In addition, the BVAMC CAC has 
written an instructional manual to assist the CACs at other VAMCs to construct  their order set.  
The CCOS will be tested by the investigators and refined to ensure that it functions as planned and has fidelity to the 
best practices. I t can be tested remotely in Birmingham and errors or sections that do not work as planned can 
be repaired  easily . This is an iterative process unique to each VA, because it is built using orders that already 
exist within the local system and the programming varies across VAMCs.  Based on experience with other sites, 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 9 
 this process can be completed in 30 hours, divided over an 8- week period.  The CCOS will not be activated until the 
training for that site is launched.  The BVAMC CAC  has built a “Reminder Report” to identify patients for whom the 
CCOS was used. This programming will allow investigators to track use of the electronic CCOS by site.  
B. Education Intervention Package Materials   
Dr. Bailey has developed a Training Manual for PCCTs to use to deliver Comfort Care Interventions in the 
inpatient setting, specifically in their local VAMCs. The Palliative Response  includes didactic information on 
how to identify and care for patients who are dying in the hospital setting, the CCOS, pocket cards, and other 
tools an d training materials needed to train staff at their own hospital.  
Case Identification . PCCT members at the sites will receive a pocket card designed to aid them in the 
identification of patients who are near the end of life  and for whom use of the comfort  care order set is 
appropriate.  This tool has been adopted by VISN 7 as a screening tool for case finding.  
Comfort Care Clinical Interventions . PCCT members will receive materials describing a number of Comfort 
Care interventions appropriate for patients at the end of life. These interventions are derived from the best 
practices for care in the last days or hours of life as practiced in the home hospice setting and have been 
modified for use in the acute inpatient care setting. The Comfort Care interventio ns are based on the American 
Board of Medical Specialty guidelines and core principles for clinical policy and professional practice in end -of-
life care, subsequently endorsed by the National Quality Forum Consensus standards for Palliative Care and 
End-of-life Care . There is a growing body of evidence for each of the Comfort Care interventions. Evidence of 
safety and efficacy can be found in The 2004 Cochrane Library .  
CPRS Comfort Care Order Set (CCOS) . These order sets can be customized for individual patients, and 
all or some of the orders can be selected as appropriate and integrated into existing care plans. The orders are 
designed to compliment and be used with disease -modifying therapies. There is no requirement to discontinue 
any other therapies or treatments if the CCOS is activated. The CCOS has also been condensed into a pocket 
card for easy reference  and distributed to staff at each of the 48 sites .  
Policy and Procedure Changes : One of the bar riers for the BEACON study was the need to add certain 
medications or routes to the pharmacy formulary. This required working with the P&T Committee and Nursing 
Committees  to change policies and procedures , particularly those related to morphine concentrat e, 
scopolamine patches for secretions, and use of subcutaneous lines and medications  to provide pain pumps or 
small doses of medications . To facilitate such changes in the proposed study, samples o f appropriate policies 
and procedures are provided in the E ducation Intervention Packet   
C. Implementation Strategies  
All PCCT s in both arms of the study will be exposed to the ir assigned implementation strategy for 4 months. 
Trainees in both arms will receive training in teaching and charged  to train as many appropriate providers as 
possible over the next 4 months. PCCTs will be given sign -in sheets to use when they offer group or one -on-
one training . Sign-in sheets will include the name, email address, and VA unit/department where they work.  
They will be asked to return their sign -in sheets by fax or secure email (PKI) at least monthly and will be 
prompted when they are due. These sign -in sheets will be used later to identify providers for emailing 
questionnaires  regarding their training expe riences (Aim #4).  During the 4 months of implementation, the 
training team will be available  for telephone consultation to answer  questions about patient cases or the 
training process at the site.  In addition to offering training to other providers in the 4-month implementation 
window, PCCTs will be expected to develop a plan to sustain training opportunities, so that new employees 
can be exposed to the basic principles of Palliative Care and the CCOS. This is vital for residents who rotate 
through the VA o n a monthly basis.  
Teleconference Teaching . An 80 -minute teleconference will be scheduled to provide an orientation for PCCTs . 
A trainer from the BVAMC will review the Education Packet Materials and the basic functions of the CCOS. The 
session will be guided by a standard PowerPoint slide set for training providers . The session will include the 
importance of training other providers, the concept of culture change, and teaching "when to refer."  Although the  goal 
will be for PCCTs to complete training of existing staff within the 4-month implementation window, training is 
expected to  continue beyond four months . We will contac t the sites monthly to collect training records.  
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 10 
 In-Person Train -the-Champion Workshop . Two PCCT members from each site will be identified to attend the in -
person training. Ideally this will be a physician and nurse practitioner with prescribing privileges, so that both will have 
access to the CCOS and be able to train others. With each wave including five sites, each workshop will train 10 
PCCT members. This group will travel to BVAMC to attend a 2 -day, in -person, centralized train-the-champion 
workshop with Dr. Bailey and the training team. The training team at the Birmingham VAMC will provi de a 
standardized curriculum for each group of trainees. Training will include review of education materials; case -
based coaching to build care plans using CCOS; hands -on experiences with using the CCOS; coaching to 
become champions ( trainers and change ag ents); review of baseline facility -specific PROMISE data 
(feedback); a charge to train providers at home facility; and expectations for training at the home facility . 
Review of Education Materials  
Trainers will review the hospice and palliative care education materials , with content derived from EPEC for 
Veterans, ELNEC for Veterans and The Palliative Response , particularly  modules dealing with the introduction 
to palliative care, anorexia, dyspnea, delirium, pain and pain control, ethical issues, sha ring bad news, and 
goals of care. All of the above will then be incorporated in to sessions on  "Care in the Last Hours of Life. " 
Training  will be interactive and involve question and answer sessions.  
Case -Based Coaching and Hands -on Experiences with Using the CCOS  
Early in the first day, trainees will receive a hands -on experience with their own CCOS . Three standardized 
patient scenarios have been developed that replicate typical scenarios, such as patient s dying with 1) advanced 
cancer, 2) CHF/COPD , and 3) Dementia/ stroke . The teams will discuss each case and be coached to use their 
personalized CCOS to build a care plan for the actively -dying patient described in the scenario. This will provide the 
team with hands -on experience, as well as comfort and fami liarity with the CCOS  built for their home facility . Small 
group discussion will be conducted to review experiences with the CCOS and compare care plans. In the 
afternoon there will be second session using a standardized patient scenario followed by feedba ck from 
trainers  regarding most effective care plans. On the second day of  training, the third standardized patient 
scenario will be used to develop a final care plan. There will be a certification checklist to ensure that all 
participants demonstrate competency with use of their CCOS.  
Coaching to Become Champions ( Trainers  and Change Age nts)  
PCCT members will be coached in the use of the Education Packet materials to train other staff in identify ing dying 
patients and implementing  the orders in the CCOS. Using a training manual, PCCT members will review teaching 
concepts , techniques , and materials for training other providers at their VAMC. A brief training session will be 
demonstrated using a  short 20 -minute, PowerPoint presentation appropriate for in -service training for the 
majority of nursing and ancillary staff in their hospital . The participants will practice presenting the materials 
and will receive feedback from the faculty and fellow participants. PCCT members will be asked to 
demonstrate their skill as a trainer using either the module for training others physicians, or thos e with 
prescribing authority or the in -service module for the general staff. On the second day of training, a certification 
checklist will be use d to ensure all participants demonstrate competency.  We will also introduce the PCCT s to 
academic detailing, a small group training technique modeled after the successful change agent techniques of 
the pharmaceutical sales force. Extensive research on the effectiveness of these techniques suggests this kind 
of education intervention is more likely to change provide r behaviors than traditional CME -type presentations. 
The importance of culture change will be emphasized , as will the need for all hospital staff caring for and 
interacting with patients and families to have a basic understanding of CCOS orders. The  PCCT members  will 
discuss how this may differ from previous approaches to care and the important role they will play.  
 
Charge and E xpectations for Training at the Home Facility  
The PCCT teams will be charged to train all providers at their home facility  who may have contact with patients 
who are dying. The goal will be for them to complete training of existing staff within the 4-month implementation 
window, but is expected to continue beyond four months whether or not this accomplished.  
Follow -up Consultation  
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 11 
 During the 4-month implementation , the team at the Birmingham VAMC will be available to assist teams with specific 
problems at their request . In addition, the training team will conduct bi -weekly conference calls for the most recently 
trained PCCT members to discuss the team's local implementation and to brain storm about solutions.  Calls will 
include a very brief didactic to review a n aspect of palliative care (either requested by the PCCT or identified by 
the tra ining team) Then PCCT members will have time to review cases, ask questions, and receive advise from 
the training team and other PCCT members. Dr. Bailey and team have experience conducting similar calls 
nationally for the VA Implementation Center , includi ng sessions for VISN champions and palliative care 
program managers , and the activity has been perceived as very helpful.   
Measurement  
Aim #1: Process -of-Care Endpoints  
The primary aim of the study is to compare the effectiveness of the Basic and Enhanced Implementation 
Approach es for improving processes of end -of-life care . Data on end -of-life care will be abstracted from the 
CPRS records of veterans who have died [in settings other than the emergency department] in the 48 VAMCs 
9 months before and after t he intervention period. As detailed in the power calculation, the study requires an 
average of 100 deaths  per site. It is likely that some hospitals will have many more than the required 100 
deaths  during the sampling period, in which case, a random sample  will be chosen, not to exceed 150. The 
limit is above 100 because it is likely some hospitals will have less than 100 patient s die during the sampling 
period. Allowing  some hospitals to be above 100 will enable us to satisfy the requirement of 100 on average.  
Methods of Data Collection and Management . Lists of veterans (names and real SSNs) who have died in 
the 48 participating VAMCs 9 months before and after the intervention period  will be obtained via direct contact 
with the facilities.  Information w ill be sent to assigned study personnel  via encrypted email  and stored  on the 
secure shared drive  (\\v07\bir\BIRResearch \REAP1 \1548) . Real SSNs will be necessary in order to access the 
health records. We will request remote “Special User” access via VistaWeb and/or CAPRI to the health records 
of deceased veterans at each facility , as well as access to local CPRS if needed.  Health records will be 
reviewed and abstracted  to capture  data related to care at the end of life. Abstracted d ata will be entered onto 
paper abstraction forms  and locked in a secure filing cabinet maintained in the investigator’s locked office in 
the GRECC ( 8th floor of BVAMC ). Abstracted d ata will also be stored electronically using VA REDCAP. VA 
REDCAP is a web appl ication that facilitates the collection and entry of research data . Electronic data will then 
be imported into  VINCI ( VA Informatics and  Computing Infrastructure) , a secure, central analytic platform for 
performing research and supporting clinical operations activities.  Future analysis will be conducted within 
VINCI.  Applications will be accessed using encrypted VA devices.  
Similar technology and chart abstraction procedures were  used successfully in the BEACON project. 
Demographic variables, variab les regarding hospital stay and variables related to processes of care will be 
captured by the chart review. The chart abstraction tool developed and used for data collection in the BEACON 
study  will be used for this study . We will ensure data validity by checking for inter -rater agreement on 10% of 
the charts abstracted.  Additional demographic and clinical data will be pulled from national VA  datasets and 
merged with the data from chart abstractions. These variables will include: age (DOB), race, gender, m arital 
status, living status, service connection, zip code, religion, income category (1 -8), and diagnoses (all ICD -9 
codes) .  
Endpoints . The primary endpoint  will be presence of an active order for opioid medication at the time of 
death. Opioids are important medicines for the management of pain and dyspnea at life’s end. These 
medicines should be routinely available for treatment of symptom exacerbations. Num erous studies have 
documented that patients dying in the acute care setting are likely to have poorly controlled pain as reported by 
their families. Secondary e ndpoints  will be other processes of care that represent the development of a 
comprehensive  care plan for actively dying patients , includ ing orders for and administration of appropriate 
medications, as well as orders that implement goals of care, palliative care consultation, orders to facilitate 
environmental changes that enhance patient safety and comfort, and psycho -social -spiritual support for patient 
and family.  
Orders for and administration of appropriate medications . In addition to the primary endpoint, we will abstract 
orders for and administration of antipsychotic  medications for delirium or nausea and vomiting, 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 12 
 benzodiazepines for anxiety and treatment or prevention of seizures, and medication to control excessive 
secretions (death rattle). While orders are necessary, they are not sufficient. If patients are in pa in or have 
dyspnea, then the nursing services would need to administer the medication. There are numerous barriers to 
opioid administration, which this education intervention is designed to overcome by encouraging clinicians to 
write orders for opioids and   schedule dosing as "offer and patient may refuse" or "nurse will assess for 
symptoms with option to hold," as opposed to PRN. This approach prompts the nursing staff to frequent ly 
assess for pain and dyspnea and guides them in offering small but effectiv e doses frequently if necessary. The 
educational intervention is designed to relieve opioid phobia and excessive anxiety associated with the 
unfounded fear that small doses will cause death in dying patients. Also , it is important that the orders are 
flexible, so that if the patient is not able to swallow a tablet, sublingual or parental medication is available. 
Finally the subcutaneous route is promoted since starting and maintaining an IV is difficult for many patients at 
end-of-life. The subcutaneous rou te offers an easy to place, less painful and effective route for parenteral 
opioid  administration , insuring that lack of IV assess is not a barrier to pain control   
Communication about goals of care . Indicators of communication regarding goals of care include having a 
DNR order in place at the time of death  (documenting goals of care discussion) , timing of DNR order,  and having 
an Advance Directive . In studies about Advance Directive use , it has been n oted that the provider often is 
unaware of the patient’s preferences for end -of-life care, including resuscitation efforts. Often the DNR order is 
written very late in the course of the illness, despite the fact that the prognosis may have been clear from the 
time of admission. Patients and families who have discussions about resuscitation earlier in the course of the 
illness have more time to adjust to the illness, to prepare for declines in patient status, and to make decisions 
in a less stressful environ ment.  
Palliative care consultation . The Palliative Care Consult is a marker of the recognition of the severity of the 
veteran’s illness with attendant risk for distressing symptoms and potential risk for dying. The CCOS may be 
used by the non -palliative c are providers, but they often need assistance to customize the treatment plan for 
optimal symptom control and family support. Over time, as staff improve their skill of identifying the actively 
dying and increasingly understand the importance of symptom co ntrol and support to families, the rate of 
Palliative Care Consults can increase and may occur earlier in the course of the illness .  
Environmental Changes . Environmental endpoints will include orders for f ans for dyspnea, nasogastric tubes, 
intravenous li nes infusing, and restraints , and location of death ( intensive care unit versus palliative care unit 
versus other ). It is often appropriate to reduce the use of nasogastric  tubes and infusing IV or other medical 
instrumentation that is no longer associated with benefit, but often associated with physi cal discomfort from the 
devices . Environmental changes should encourage family presence when available and appropriate. 
Regard ing location  of death , patients at the end of life are frequently in the ICU setting for at least some portion 
of their hospitalization. The ICU setting is associated with isolation from family and other support and the use 
of aggressive and invasive treat ments that, at the end of life, may not be associated with clinical benefit, and 
have a high risk for iatrogenic harm. Many veterans are admitted to the ICU setting when this may not be 
consistent with goals of care before ultimately being transitioning to  a comfort care approach.   
Psycho -social -spiritual support . Indicators of psycho -social -spiritual support for patient and family will include 
pastoral care visits  and family presence at or near the time of death .  
In addition to the chart abstractions, the “Reminder Report” programming  embedded in the CCOS  will identify 
patients for whom the CCOS was used and will allow investigators to track use of the electronic CCOS by site.  
Aim # 2: Telephone Interviews with PCCT  members  
Telephone interviews will be conducted to qualitatively explore and formatively evaluate PCCT member 
experiences with and perceptions of the Basic and Enhanced Implementation Approaches . To ensure that 
multiple perspectives are included, w e will invite all members of the PCCT  from each site  to participate in an 
interview .  For sites in the enhanced Implementation group, it will be essential to include the two members of 
the team who attended the in -person, train -the-champion workshop, because they will be able to provide 
feedback on the workshop program . For sites in the Basic Implementation group, it will be important to include 
at a minimum, the lead physician and nurse, to provide feedback on the teleconference teaching session.  
Approximatel y 12-18 weeks following the end of the 4-month implementation window, i nterviews will be 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 13 
 conducted by an interviewer trained in qualitative inquiry and not involved in the training. It is anticipated that 
interviews will not exceed an hour in length. Interview sessions will be tape -recorded and transcribed for 
coding and analysis. We will use semi -structured telephone interviews to guide the inquiry and achieve breadth 
in the evaluation. The Center for Advanced Palliative Care (CAPC) guidelines will be foll owed in designing the 
telephone interview instrument and conceptualizing the interview process. Separate guides will be developed 
for PCCT members who are prescribers, and those who are non -prescribers. The development of the interview 
guides will be shaped by consensus of the research team using their expertise in palliative care, behavioral 
medicine, geriatrics, education, medical sociology, and qualitative methods. Each item in the interview guide 
will be reviewed by an interdisciplinary team of MDs, PhDs, and nurse s for relevance, clarity and readability.   
The interview guides will be used to format the interactions to insure the key research questions are 
addressed. Open -ended questions will cover experiences with and perceptions of the Basic and Enhanced 
Implementation Approaches, including:  1) perceptions of the  training , 2) the process of teaching other 
providers , 3) barriers and challenges encountered , 4) responses and solutions to obstacles , 5) how prepared 
or confident they felt to overcome these barriers , 6) facilitators observed , 7) needs and preferences regarding 
the implementation approach , and 8 ) suggestions for improving training . After each  site's interviews are 
completed and reviewed, the team will refine the interview guide to capture more fully critical concepts that 
have emerged and to incorporate them into subsequent interviews.  
Aim #3: Evaluation  of PCCT  Member Perceptions  
To quantita tively evaluate PCCT member perceptions of the training received with the Basic and Enhanced 
Implementation Approaches we will invite all PCCT members at all sites to complete a structured questionnaire 
after their training. The goal of the survey is to as sess the impact of the implementation approach and the 
Comfort Care Education Intervention on trainee attitudes, skills, perceptions , and potential impact on practice 
patterns . The content of the questionnaire  will be developed by consensus of the research team with feedback 
from experts in each area represented by the PCCT: physician, nurse, social worker, mental health provider, 
and pastoral care provider. The questionnaire  will include closed -ended and open -ended questions. The 
structure of the questions will be guided by the education/evaluation expert and the statistician.  The survey will 
include items about the usefulness of the training and its impact in terms of changing 1) their attitudes  about 
end-of-life care , 2) ability to recognize dying patients , 3) self-efficacy in ordering appropriate care plans , 4) self-
efficacy to train other providers , and 5) provider behavior/practice (including readiness to use the CCOS) . The 
results of the post -training ques tionnaire will  inform ongoing refinement of the telephone interview guide .  
Aim #4: Evaluation of Downstream Impact ( Providers Trained by PCCT ) 
The fourth aim is to assess the downstream effect of the intervention on providers at all sites who receive 
training from PCCT members, including their perceptions of the usefulness of the training and its impact on 
knowledge, attitudes, skills, self-efficacy  for ordering appr opriate care, readiness to use the CCOS , and 
practice patterns. Separate questionnaires  will be developed for prescribers (who can potentially use the 
CCOS) and for non -prescribers (who can potentially facilitate the identification of patients who are dyin g and 
assist knowledgeably in the delivery of Comfort Care interventions). Individual providers will be identified from 
the sign -in sheets used by PCCT trainers in both groups and invited via email to complete a questionnaire. 
Two reminders will be sent to  non-responders to optimize response rates. Participation will be voluntary and 
confidential. Specifically, these providers’  supervisors and co -workers will not be informed of their  participation 
(or non -participation) or their responses to the questionnai res. The sign -in sheets will also provide a count of 
providers  who received the education as a measure of reach and description of uptake by discipline.  
Data Analysis Plan  
Aim #1 : Analysis of Effectiveness for Improving Processes of Care . Analyses of chart  abstraction data will 
begin by summarizing demographic variables and process of care endpoints with descriptive statistics and 
graphs. A key aspect of the descriptive statistics, as well as the analytic methods, will be identification of 
individuals as pr e-implementation or post -implementation deaths within a hospital. Analysis of the primary 
endpoint (proportion of patients with an order for pain medication at the time of death) and secondary 
endpoints for the 48 randomized VAMCs will rely upon Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) as developed 
by Zeger and Liang. Given the nature of the binary outcomes of this grant, one might assume that chi -square 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 14 
 analyses or logistic regression could be us ed to analyze the resulting data. However, such an approach would 
be wrong. Because the probability of receiving an order for opioid naturally varies by hospitals, outcomes for 
individuals nested within a hospital are actually correlated. This correlation,  called the intra -class correlation 
coefficient (ICC), violates a key assumption of chi -square analyses and logistic regression. Any variance 
estimates derived without taking into consideration the clustering effects are typically biased downward. GEEs, 
which can be thought of as logistic regression accounting for the clusters and the ICC, correctly estimate the 
variance of treatment effect as long as 30 or more clusters are used.   
In order to test whether the Enhanced Implementation Approach leads to a hig her proportion of patients having 
desired outcomes compared to the Basic Implementation Approach, GEE analyses of the post -implementation 
data will include an explanatory variable indicating to which arm the hospital was randomized. These simple 
GEE models , to be developed separately for the primary and each secondary outcome, will produce an 
unadjusted 95% confidence interval for the odds ratio for the outcome at time of death within an Enhanced 
Approach hospital relative to a Basic Approach hospital. If t he hypothesized effect of Enhanced Approach 
leading to higher proportion s of desired endpoints is true, then these confidence intervals should completely 
exceed an odds ratio of 1. Although confounding should be minimized due to the use of randomization of  
VAMCs, multivariable GEE models will be developed to incorporate patient characteristics that have been 
identified in our previous studies to be associated with the outcomes  [(age, race, terminal illness, location of 
death) ]. The justification for multiva riable models is two -fold. First, inclusion of the covariates will adjust for any 
potential imbalance remaining after randomization . Second , inclusion of covariates should allow for greater 
precision in estimat ing treatment differences. As with the simple models, it is anticipated that these adjusted 
95% confidence intervals should completely exceed an odds ratio of 1 for the endpoints. Add David’s section  
Aim # 2: Qualitative Data Analysis and Interpretation . Analysis of the telephone interviews will be led by Dr. 
Williams , working in conjunction with Dr . Ahluwalia, and Dr. Burgio. Analysis will be conducted concurrently 
with data collection. The process will begin with each team member individually reading ini tial transcripts to 
gain an overall perspective on the data. The team will progress  to initial coding using directed qualitative 
content analysis. Unlike conventional content analysis where initial codes are derived from the data, in directed 
content analy sis, the initial coding is guided by a theoretical framework. In this analysis we will employ the 
theoretical framework of symbolic interactionism , a sociological school of thought developed by Herbert 
Blumer. It is based on the premise that human beings, in interaction with one another, create a context of 
meaning to make sense of everyday life . Symbolic interactionism is  used widely in qualitative inquiry to 
understand how human beings interpret the events in their social world, create shared understandin gs of social 
situations , and modify their assumptions and actions to fit the situation . As such, the symbolic interaction 
theoretical framework is ideally suited to shape our initial coding scheme  for exploring  informants ’ perspectives  
on, perceptions  of, and experiences with the intervention.  
The team will code initial transcripts simultaneously and meet weekly by conference call to compare codes, 
discuss discrepancies, and reach consensus. During initial coding, the team will pay close attention to 
informants' stance toward palliative care training and characterizations of the trainer -the-champion  model.  
Additionally we will focus on informants’ accounts of the dynamics of the training sessions , as well as the lens 
(personal, clin ical, institutional) through which the training is processed and assessed. Once an initial 
codebook has been developed, the team will move to focused coding, which involves identifying the most 
relevant and common elements  within the codes and applying the m to the transcripts. Codes will be 
reassessed and reconsidered throughout this process and some codes will be eliminated, edited, or added. 
The team will continue to meet regularly to discuss emerging themes and interpretations of the data , 
continually re ferring back to the data to insure consistency and relevance.  
Aims # 3 & #4: Analysis of PCCT and Provider Questionnaires . Descriptive statistics will be used to 
summarize responses for each of the questionnaire  items completed by the PCCT and the providers they 
subsequently train. GEE and mixed linear models will be used to compare categorical outcomes and 
continuous outcomes respectively between the Basic and Enhanced Implementation arms.  
Dissemination and/or I mplementation Plan  
Some of our dissemination work is already underway. For example, materials developed by the investigators 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 15 
 are posted on the VA Hospice/Palliative Care Website and the entire text of The Palliative Response  is 
available online at: http://www.uab.edu/medicine/palliativecare/training/palliative -response . It was also peer -
reviewed for the End of Life/Palliative Education Resource Center (EPERC) website ( www .eperc.mcw.edu ) 
and received its highest rating. The materials have also been included in the Growt hhouse website 
MegaSearch ( www.growthhouse.org ), an international clearinghouse for high quality educational materials 
related to hospice and palliative care. A BEACON packet of extensive materials that can be used by sites to 
start CCOS is on the VA Palliative Care SharePoint. Future dissemination will be shaped by the findings of the 
proposed study, which will determine the relative value of the Basic and Enhanced Approaches to 
implementation. Results will be used to refine the I ntervention and implementation strategies in preparation for 
nationwide dissemination of best practices for end -of-life care within the VA Healthcare System.  
Challenges and Limitations  
One potential challenge to implementation is providers ’ resistan ce to training due to the tedium of  multiple and 
recurring education  requirements. In our formative evaluation , informants  specifically mentioned using a train -
the-trainer model so the residents would learn about palliative care as part of the regular rotati ons. We plan to 
overcome resistance by using an approach based on the evidence that interactive, experiential learning 
techniques are more effective than didactic presentations.  The Enhanced Implementation Approach 
incorporates three core adult learning co ncepts , seek ing to engage participants in their training, retain their 
interest throughout, and facilitate their interact ion with their instructor and fellow trainees . Further, the 
intervention strategy seeks to support behavior change by integrating the electronic order set into the system 
of care as a decision support tool and through the enduring role of the Champion embedded within each 
facility . As an additional measure, t o avoid enrolling sites that might be especially resistant to change, VAMCs 
with scores in the lowest 10th percentile will not be recruited.  
Project Management Plan  
Timeline for Proposed Project  
Activity  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  
Recruit VAMCs to participate  
        
Site preparation (IRB, CCOS, admin)  
        
Preparation for training (telecon, in -person)  
        
Refine data collection tools                
Implementation (wave #1 - 8 sites)                 
Implementation (wave #2 - 8 sites)                 
Implementation (wave #3 - 8 sites)                 
Implementation (wave #4 - 8 sites)                 
Implementation (wave #5 - 8 sites)                 
Implementation (wave #6 – 8 sites)           
Telephone  interviews                
Qualitative analysis                
Chart abstractions  
        
Data analysis                
Preparation of manuscripts                
Refinement of Implementation Approach                
Research Team, Facilities, and Resources Required  
Our research team is led by Kathryn L. Burgio, PhD, an established clinical investigator in behavioral science 
and health services research, and F. Amos Bailey, MD, a clinician/educator and expert in palliative medicine. 
The core BEACON team has been worki ng together since 2004. We have weekly, agenda -driven meetings to 
maintain communication within the team, discuss and plan studies, presentations, and manuscripts, provide 
feedback on ongoing activities, communicate expectations, assist each other, and mai ntain progress towards 
goals. As PI, Dr. Burgio provides scientific leadership and coordinates the interdisciplinary team’s activities . Dr. 
Bailey provides vision and clinical supervision.  Beverly Williams , PhD, is a medical sociologist and expert in 
Version 6/20/17  
  
 Page 16 
 quali tative analysis, who will lead the qualitative initiatives. Patricia  Goode , MD,  is a geriatrician and expert in 
end-of-life care , who will assist with implementation . Our biostatistician David  Redden , PhD, oversees data 
management /analysis.  Marie Bakitas, DNSc, APRN is a professor of Nursing and an established palliative care 
investigator , who  will assist the team to plan and conduct PCCT training . Note: Although Dr. Bailey will be 
moving to Denver, CO, he is maintaining employment with the Birmingham VAMC and will fulfill his role on the 
study. He is in the process of obtaining approvals for teleworking, which will allow him to interact with the 
PCCTs, assist with building the CCOS at each facility, monitor ch art abstraction, and attend regular team 
meetings. He will conduct teleconferences for the Basic Approach group and return to BVAMC to lead the in -
person Train -the-Champion workshops for the Enhanced Approach group.  