										Neuroimaging	predictors	of	relapse	during	treatment	for	Opiate	dependence	NCT:	02696096	June	22,	2017																																					
C1.		Brief	Description	of	Subjects	The	study	sample	will	consist	of	72	opiate	dependent	persons,	21-50	years	old,	who	want	to	initiate	buprenorphine	treatment.		C2.		Study	Design	Participation	for	all	individuals	will	last	4	months.		Assessments	will	occur	at	baseline,	and	weeks	1,	4,	8,	and	12.		FMRI	scans	will	occur	on	the	initial	study	day	(consent	and	BL	assessment	are	also	completed	on	this	day)	or	within	a	week	of	the	initial	study	day,	and	approximately	2-3	days	later.		Buprenorphine	induction	will	begin	at	the	completion	of	the	second	scan;	follow-up	medical	visits	will	align	with	study	assessments	on	weeks	1,	4,	8	and	12.		All	participants	will	receive	16	weeks	of	buprenorphine	(the	final	4	of	these	16	weeks	will	include	a	taper).			C3.		Specific	Procedures	or	Treatments	Assessments:	Participants	will	meet	with	the	Research	Assistant	(RA)	at	the	baseline	visit,	during	the	scanning	sessions,	and	prior	to	the	medical	visit	at	weeks	1,	4,	8,	and	12	after	beginning	buprenorphine.	The	goal	of	the	follow-up	contacts	will	be	to	assess	drug	and	buprenorphine	use	using	the	TLFB,	dispense	buprenorphine,	and	biochemically	confirm	acute	abstinence	with	urine	toxicological	analysis.			During	the	baseline	(first	study	visit)	day,	participants	will	be	cabbed	to	Butler	Hospital	to	complete	informed	consent,	meet	with	the	study	physician	to	confirm	study	eligibility,	and	complete	the	baseline	assessment.		If	their	FMRI	is	the	same	day,	they	will	then	be	cabbed	to	the	FMRI	facility,	where	they	will	meet	with	a	second	research	staff	member	and	complete	the	FMRI	session.		At	the	conclusion	of	this	first	day,	they	will	be	cabbed	home.		If	their	FMRI	is	on	a	separate	day	from	the	BL	appointment,	they	will	be	cabbed	home	from	the	BL	appointment,	then	cabbed	back	and	forth	to	the	FMRI	facility	for	the	first	FMRI.		For	all	participants,	for	the	second	FMRI	day,	they	will	be	cabbed	directly	to	and	from	the	FMRI	facility.		For	the	study	visits	during	weeks	1-12,	which	all	take	place	only	at	Butler	Hospital,	they	will	be	asked	to	provide	their	own	transportation.		Assessments	will	include	the	following	measures:	general	demographic	information,	social	support	(Duke	Social	Support	Index78),	self-efficacy	(Thoughts	About	Abstinence	Scale79),	other	drug	use	(Addiction	Severity	Index	section	on	drug	use80,	self-report	by	TLFB,	and	urine	toxicology),	alcohol	use,	craving81	(Brief	Substance	Craving	Scale82),	withdrawal	symptoms	(Clinical	Opiate	Withdrawal	Scale83),	delayed	discounting	(paper	version),	and	service	utilization	(The	Treatment	Services	Review	which	quantifies	types	of	treatment	services	received	by	participants84	during	treatment,	including	the	number	of	12-step	groups	attended).		This	study	will	use	Care	New	England’s	instance	of	REDCap	for	the	collection	and	storage	of	data.	The	study	will	not	collect	or	store	any	actual	data	within	REDCap	until	the	project	has	been	moved	into	REDCap’s	production	environment.		REDCap	is	a	secure,	web-based	application	developed	by	Vanderbilt	University	for	building	and	managing	surveys	and	databases.	It	is	primarily	designed	to	support	online	or	offline	data	capture	for	research	studies,	quality	improvement,	and	operations.	REDCap	provides	easy	data	manipulation	(with	audit	trails	for	reporting,	monitoring	and	querying	patient	records),	real-time	data	entry	validation,	and	an	automated	export	mechanism	to	common	statistical	packages.		
	Care	New	England’s	instance	of	REDCap	is	hosted	within	the	Care	New	England	data	center	in	Warwick,	RI.	This	REDCap	instance	is	role-based	and	is	fully	integrated	with	CNE’s	Active	Directory	structure.	It	enjoys	24/7/365	enterprise-level	support	and	security	inherit	to	CNE’s	HIPAA-compliant	data	center.	Network	transmissions	(data	entry,	survey	submission,	and	web	browsing)	to	and	from	REDCap	are	protected	via	TLS	1.2	encryption.		REDCap’s	data	is	stored	on	encrypted	servers	within	CNE’s	data	center.			The	REDCap	Consortium	is	composed	of	thousands	of	active	institutional	partners	in	over	one	hundred	countries	who	utilize	and	support	REDCap.	REDCap	was	developed	specifically	around	HIPAA-Security	guidelines,	and	more	information	about	the	consortium	and	system	security	can	be	found	at	http://www.projectredcap.org/.		Buprenorphine:	The	participant	will	meet	with	the	study	physician	(Dr.	Stein)	at	the	first	study	visit	at	Butler	Hospital,	prior	to	buprenorphine	induction.	During	this	visit,	he	will	take	a	medical	history,	confirm	the	participant’s	eligibility	for	buprenorphine	and	explain	how	to	use	the	buprenorphine	medication.		Participants	will	be	told	at	this	first	visit	that	they	need	to	be	in	mild	to	moderate	opiate	withdrawal	when	they	complete	the	second	FMRI	scan	at	the	upcoming	study	visit	(2-3	days	later)	in	order	to	be	eligible	to	receive	their	initial	buprenorphine	dose.		At	the	conclusion	of	this	second	scan,	research	staff	at	the	FMRI	facility	will	complete	the	COWS	to	confirm	withdrawal	symptoms,	remind	the	participant	how	to	self-dose	the	buprenorphine,	and	provide	the	participant	with	enough	buprenorphine	to	last	until	the	next	study	visit	in	about	a	week.		As	their	initial	buprenorphine	dose,	the	participant	will	receive	four	milligrams	of	buprenorphine	(with	1	mg	of	naloxone)	sublingually14.	Following	this	protocol,	which	Dr.	Stein	has	used	in	multiple	prior	studies14,15,	additional	buprenorphine	will	be	taken	home	for	use	later	in	the	day,	with	the	usual	first	day	dose	of	16	milligrams	(with	4mg	naloxone),	and	16	mg	administered	daily	throughout	the	12	weeks	of	maintenance	for	standardization.	Participants	will	be	seen	and	dosed	by	Dr.	Stein	thereafter	with	only	enough	buprenorphine	provided	at	each	study	visit	to	reach	the	next	scheduled	medical	visit.	Buprenorphine	dosing	will	be	done	with	the	understanding	that	a	total	of	16	weeks	of	treatment	will	be	offered.	Thus,	at	the	week	12	visit,	a	buprenorphine	taper	will	begin,	with	a	reduction	of	half	the	week	12	dose	during	week	12-14,	and	the	remaining	taper	during	weeks	14-16.	Upon	request,	participants	will	be	provided	with	a	complete	list	of	buprenorphine	providers	in	the	area	to	continue	buprenorphine	assisted	therapy	(maintenance)	if	participants	wish	to	continue	treatment	beyond	the	study	period.	For	those	participants	continuing	buprenorphine	assisted	therapy	with	a	buprenorphine	provider	arranged	post-study,	a	stable	dose	of	buprenorphine	will	be	provided	during	weeks	12-16	in	lieu	of	taper.	If	the	participant’s	appointment	with	this	outside	buprenorphine	provider	is	after,	but	within	approximately	10	days	of,	the	4-month	study	date,	when	the	study	medication	is	completed,	the	participant	can	be	eligible	to	receive	a	“bridge	prescription”	to	maintain	continuity	of	medication	between	the	end	of	the	study	and	the	start	of	outside	care.		Urine	toxicology	will	be	performed	at	each	medical	visit.	No	participant	will	be	discharged	for	use	of	illicit	opiates.	Thus,	the	incentive	to	misrepresent	opiate	use	behavior	at	follow-up	assessments	is	relatively	low	since	use	does	not	result	in	discontinuation	of	buprenorphine	or	from	the	study,	or	loss	of	monetary	compensation	for	assessment.			FMRI:	For	FMRI	session	1,	research	staff	will	be	certain	that	participants	are	not	in	opiate	withdrawal	(scoring	<7	on	the	Clinical	Opiate	Withdrawal	Scale83).	For	FMRI	session	2,	
participants	will	be	instructed	to	stop	using	opiates	12-24	hours	prior	to	the	session	so	they	arrive	at	the	Brown	University	FMRI	facility	at	the	time	of	their	scan	in	a	state	of	mild	opiate	withdrawal,	scoring	7-12	on	the	Clinical	Opiate	Withdrawal	Scale	(COWS)83.	This	COWS	score	range	will	allow	standardization	of	withdrawal	symptoms	across	opiate	types	(e.g.,	heroin,	oxycodone).	If	they	appear	at	the	FMRI	appointment	and	are	not	in	withdrawal,	participants	will	need	to	reschedule	their	scan.	Participants	will	remain	in	withdrawal	throughout	the	FMRI	session	2	procedures,	and	after	this	FMRI	will	receive	their	first	dose	of	buprenorphine.	This	plan	is	in	keeping	with	the	fact	that	withdrawal	symptoms	are	essential	for	buprenorphine	to	be	initiated.			After	administration	of	pre-scan	measures,	participants	will	be	“trained”	to	perform	each	of	the	three	FMRI	tasks,	that	is,	made	aware	of	what	they	will	see	and	be	asked	to	do	when	in	the	FMRI	scanner.	This	training	takes	15	minutes.	Despite	training,	performance	below	chance	level	on	the	WM	task	and	invalid	responses	on	the	DD	task	are	expected	in	a	small	minority	of	participants,	making	the	data	from	these	individuals	unusable.	Resting	state	scans	are	not	based	on	performance	levels	or	subjective	responses	and	therefore	(unless	data	are	lost	to	movement)	always	analytically	adequate.	Based	on	our	experience	administering	these	paradigms	and	the	careful	participant	screening	procedures	that	we	have	developed,	we	expect	that	analytic	exclusions	based	on	head	movement	and	the	inability	of	the	participants	to	complete	any	particular	FMRI	portion	of	the	study	will	be	approximately	20%.		Participants	will	then	apply	earplugs	and	FMRI-compatible	vision	correction,	if	needed,	and	lie	on	the	MR	scanner	table.	Stimuli	will	be	back-projected	with	a	LCD	projector	onto	a	screen	that	the	participant	will	view	through	mirrors	fixed	to	the	scanner.	High-resolution	T1	scans	will	be	acquired	before	FMRI.	During	FMRI,	participants	will	respond	using	a	response	box.	The	FMRI	scan	process	will	last	approximately	60	minutes.			During	both	FMRI	sessions,	we	will	administer	three	FMRI	behavioral	challenges	and	a	resting	scan	during	the	60-minute	protocol	(see	Table	1).	Research	staff	will	be	overseen	by	co-Investigator	Dr.	Jerskey,	who	will	be	responsible	for	administering	the	paradigms	during	FMRI	data	acquisition.			
	Delay	Discounting	Paradigm.	This	paradigm	will	be	presented	to	examine	decision-making	for	smaller	immediate	rewards	versus	larger	delayed	rewards.	Thus,	this	task	will	assay	impulsive	choice	preferences	and	the	relative	activity	of	both	motivational	drive	and	inhibitory	control	prior	to	entering	buprenorphine	treatment.	Using	an	event-related	design,	participants	make	choices	between	smaller	immediate	rewards	or	larger	delayed	rewards	over	72	trials	(e.g.,	“Would	you	rather	have	$25	today	or	$35	in	29	days”).	Each	item	has	a	temporal	discounting	function	and	the	overall	array	of	responses	permits	calculation	of	an	individuals’	discounting	level.		Table	1.	FMRI	Paradigms	and	domains	challenged	Paradigm	Relapse	Risk	Domain(s)	Time	Bilateral	ROIs	Delay	Discounting	(DD)	Reward,	Impulsivity,	Restraint	16	min	MFG,	anterior	insula,	ACC,	PCC,	MedFG	Working	Memory	(WM)	WM,	WM	Cognitive	Persistence	8	min	MFG,	IPL,	SMA		Inhibitory	Control	(IC)		Inhibitory	Control	12	min		Rest	Default	Network		6	min	PCC,	MedFG						Abbreviations:	Middle	frontal	gyrus	(MFG),	anterior	insula	(AI),	anterior	cingulate	(ACC),	posterior	cingulate	(PCC),							medial	frontal	gyrus	(MedFG),	inferior	parietal	lobule	(IPL),	supplementary	motor	area	(SMA),	ventral	striatum	(VS).	
	Working	Memory	Paradigm.	The	2-Back	version	of	the	n-Back	has	been	widely	used	in	FMRI	experiments	as	a	WM	challenge	(i.e.,	a	construct	that	refers	to	the	process	of	short-term	storage	and	management	of	information).	This	task	challenges	persistence	during	a	sustained	cognitive	set	since	information	is	constantly	maintained	and	updated	over	six	45s	blocks	of	time.	During	the	2-Back	WM	challenge	a	series	of	15	consonants	are	presented	visually,	one	every	3000	ms.	Participants	make	a	yes/no	response	following	each	consonant	-	whether	it	is	the	same	as,	or	different	from,	the	consonant	presented	two	earlier.	Each	consonant	block	contains	33%	stimulus-target	consonants	pairs,	which	randomly	overlap	(e.g.,	F,	N,	B,	N,	B,	K,	B,	K,	N…).	The	0-Back	task	(a	control	task	for	the	2-Back)	will	include	nine	consonants	presented	at	the	standard	3000	ms	rate.	Subjects	respond	“yes”	when	a	predetermined	target	consonant	appears	and	“no”	for	other	consonants.	In	total,	there	will	be	two	runs	of	six	2-Back	blocks	each,	requiring	4.8	minutes	to	complete	(including	control	blocks).	Three	blocks	of	the	0-Back	and	three	blocks	of	the	rest	will	be	included	in	each	run.	Accuracy	and	reaction	time	will	be	used	as	dependent	measures	of	cognitive	performance.			Go/No-Go:	The	Go/No-Go	is	an	inhibitory	control	task.		The	version	used	in	this	study	is	similar	to	the	version	used	previously	by	Kiehl	and	colleagues	(2000),	except	that	the	Go	stimuli	are	randomly	selected	letters	other	than	“X”.		Specifically,	letters	will	be	presented	for	100	ms	each,	with	an	interstimulus	interval	of	900	ms.		A	total	of	240	letters	will	be	presented	consisting	of	80%	“Go”	stimuli	(all	letters	other	than	“X”)	and	20%	“no-go”	stimuli	(“X”).	Participants	will	be	instructed	to	press	a	button	for	each	“Go”	stimulus	in	order	to	establish	a	pre-potent	response,	and	inhibit	their	response	when	an	“X”	appears	on	the	screen.		Total	percentage	correct,	percentage	of	false	alarms	(commission	errors),	and	reaction	times	for	correct	go	stimuli	will	be	used	as	behavioral	measures	of	performance.		 