CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 2    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
    
SUPPORT/FUNDING:  Lis t any support/grants or any funding source (partial or 
full) here  
 IND #:      Exempt   
  
OTHER AGENT (S):  Thiotepa / Melphalan / Fludarabine  
                  
 
        
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 3    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 SUMMARY OF CHANGES  
 
Protocol 
Date  Section  Change  
09/14/17  Initial IRB approval 
12/19/17 Cover page Added Clinical Trials.gov NCT #; updated version date and contact 
information for study coordinator  
 Protocol Summary  Inclusion criteria revised to be consistent with Section 4.1 .2 
 11.1.2 Revised to indicate timing of follow -up tests and procedures  
 
 11.2 Footnotes added to the Study Calendar to indicate timing of tests and 
procedures  
03.22.18 Cover page Updated version date 
 Protocol Summary  Corrected typographical error  
 4.2.1 Changed Pulmonary function: DLCOcorr < 40% normal to 
Pulmonary function:  DLCOc <40% normal  
 8.2.2 Corrected typographical error  
04.13.18 Cover page Updated version date 
 8.2.3 Updated CTCAE version to 5.0 
 11.1.2 Text has been added to clarify the timing of the bone marrow 
aspiration  
 11.2 Footnotes have been revised to clarify the timing of the bone marrow 
aspiration  
10.31.18 Cover page Updated version date 
 Cover page  KGF added to other agents  
 Fig. 2 work   
 Protocol summary  Added: KGF 60mcg/kg IV on day -11, -10, and -9 and 0, +1, and +2.  
 3.4 Day -8 changed to day -11 
 6.2 Added: Keratinocyte Growth Factor (Palifermin, Kepivance, K) will 
be given at a dose of  60mcg/kg IV on day -11, - 10, and - 9 and 0, +1, 
and +2  for both haplo -identical transplants and dUCBT . 
 8.1.7 Added: 8.1.7 Palifermin  (Kepivance)  
Palifermin may cause rash, itching, redness, or discoloration of the 
skin. It may cause edema, an increase in pancreatic enzymes. It may 
cause arthralgia . It may cause tongue discoloration or tongue edema.  
 8.1.8 Renumbered from 8.1.7 
 9.1.4 Added Kepivance, Palifermin, KGF, Keratinocyte Growth Factor  
Pharmacologic information  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 4    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 Protocol 
Date  Section  Change  
 11.1.2 Added:  
T-11, -10, -9 
• Keratinocyte Growth Factor (Palifermin, Kepivance, K) will 
be given at a dose of 60mcg/kg  
T +0  
• Infusion of graft source: dUCBT or Haplo -Identical Donor  
• Keratinocyte Growth Factor (Palifermin, Kepivance, K) will 
be given at a dose of 60mcg/kg IV after the infusion of the hematopoietic stem cells 
T +1  
• Keratinocyte Growth Factor (Palifermin, Kepivance, K) will 
be given at a dose of 60mcg/kg IV T +2 
• Keratinocyte Growth Factor (Palifermin, Kepivance, K) will 
be given at a dose of 60mcg/kg IV  
 11.2 Study calendar updated to include KGF 
12.13.18 Figure 2  
Protocol summary  
6.2 Corrected dose of rabbit ATG (A) to 1 mg/kg on day - 3 and 2 
mg/kg on day -2 
 11.2 Correct study calendar to indicate Palifermin on days -11, -10, -9 
(not -8) 
2.7.2020 Through 
out document Minor grammatical & typographical corrections  
Updated protocol version date in footer 
Figures updated to correspond with text updates  
 Title page  Updated version date  
Updated study nurse  
 1.3 Added : Alternative donor transplant have acceptable clinical 
outcomes comparable to matched unrelated donors, therefore anyone without a matched related donor may be a candidate for 
this trial 
 2.1 Changed leukemia -free survival to disease -free survival  
 4.1.1 Added intermediate risk to inclusion criteria: Complete Remission 
(CR1) with poor  or intermediate -risk cytogenetics or molecular 
markers (e.g. Flt 3 mutation, 11q23, del 5, del 7, complex 
cytogenetics)  
 4.1.1 Added treatment related MDS to inclusion criteria: Myelodysplastic 
syndromes (MDS), Intermediate, High or Very High Risk by the 
revised international prognostic scoring system  (IPSS- R; See 
Appendix B) or treatment related MDS.  
 4.1.1 Added Intermediate one to inclusion criteria: Myelofibrosis (MF):  
Intermediate -1, Intermediate -2 or high risk by DIPSS -plus 
 4.1.1 Added inclusion criteria: Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 5    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 Protocol 
Date  Section  Change  
 4.1.4 Removed unrelated from inclusion criteria: Patients without a 
matched related donor  
 8.2.3 Added clarification: exempting those previously mentioned in section 
8.2.2  
 8.2.3 Added clarification: Attribution is required for the treatment as a 
whole, not individual components of the treatment.  
 8.4 Added clarification: expected adv erse events listed in Sec. 8.2.2  above 
(not collected at all).  
 11.1 Added differential to Complete Blood Count and Differential  
 11.1.2 Treatment Period  corrected from day -8 to: 
Treatment time will begin the day -11  
 11.2 Corrected study calendar to indicate testing window of 2 weeks  
Added clarifications to footer  
5/13/20 Through -out 
document  Updated protocol version date in footer  
 4.0 Added missing OR to inclusion criteria  
o Relapsed or Refractory Lymphoid Malignancies 
(including non- Hodgkin Lymphoma, Hodgkin 
Lymphoma) meeting the following criteria: 
 Disease status: Stable Disease, Partial 
Remission or Complete Remission  OR 
 Have relapsed after autologous transplant or 
who have failed to collect for an autologous transplant.  
 
7/22/20 Through -out 
document  Updated protocol version date in footer  
 Cover page Updated version date 
 7.0 Revised to specify that the fludarabine dose may be reduced for 
patients at an increased risk for neurotoxicity, including those with impaired renal function, prior high dose cytarabine, intrathecal therapy, or cranial irradiation and prior HSCT with fludarabine 
conditioning.  
1/8/2021 Through -out 
document  Updated protocol version date in footer  
 Cover page Updated version date; updated study staff 
 7.0 Revised  thiotepa dose modification to add or has comorbidities that 
may increase the risk of morbidity or mortality with conditioning 
chemotherapy,  the dosage of thiotepa may be reduced to 7.5mg/kg or  
5mg/kg  at the discreti on of the treating physician . 
 7.0 Added: If a patient develops a reaction to KGF that significantly 
impacts the care, health, and/or functionality of the patient, further 
doses may be omitted from the preparative regimen.  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 6    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 Protocol 
Date  Section  Change  
3/31/21 Through -out 
document  Updated protocol version date in footer  
 Through -out 
document  Minor corrections to spelling,  grammar , and document formatting 
 Study Schema Figure 1 : “Decision Tree on how donor sources are decided for 
patients enrolled in CASE 10Z17” revised  
 Study Schema  
Study Summary ATG for cord blood transplants removed as a treatment option for this 
protocol. We will not be utilizing ATG in cord blood transplants per 
ASTCT guidelines.  
 Table of abbrevia -
tions  Abbreviations added, table reorganized into alphabet ical order for 
ease of use  
 1.3 ATG for cord blood transplants removed as a treatment option for this 
protocol per ASTCT guidelines  
 1.3 Removed ATG dosing, added We will not be utilizing ATG in cord 
blood transplants per ASTCT guidelines.  
 3.4 Clarification: Added definition of treatment failure  
 4.1.2 Upper age limit lowered from 75 years to 65 years 
 4.2.1 Creatinine clearance changed from <30 to <50 ml/min  
AST(SGOT) & ALT(SGPT) changed from > 2X to >3X ULN  
DLCOc  changed from <40 to < 60% normal 
Ejection fraction changed from < 35% to <50% KPS<80  
 Thus, revised section is: Patients with inadequate Organ Function as defined by: 
o Creatinine clearance < 5 0ml/min  
o Bilirubin S >
  2X institutional upper limit of normal 
o AST (SGOT) > 3X institutional upper limit of normal 
o ALT (SGPT) > 3X institutional upper limit of normal 
o Pulmonary function: DLCOc < 60% normal 
o Cardiac: left ventricular ejection fraction < 50% 
o KPS < 80  
 6.1 Figure 1: “Decis ion tree for choosing of a graft” revised  
 6.2 Removed ATG dosing, ATG no longer utilized in cord blood 
transplants per ASTCT guidelines  
 8.1.6 Removed ATG risks, ATG no longer utilized in cord blood 
transplants per ASTCT guidelines  
 8.1 Sections re-numbered after deletion of section 8.1.6 
 11.1.2 Removed ATG as treatment options, ATG no longer utilized in cord 
blood transplants per ASTCT guidelines  
 Appendix A  Karnofsky Performance Status added  
 Appendix B Revised  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 7    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 Protocol 
Date  Section  Change  
6/22/21 Through -out 
document  Updated protocol version date in footer  
References re -numbered as needed  
 Cover page  Study coordinator updated  
 decision tree Updated 
 1.3 Added: 9. Cord blood selection will be based on ASTCT guidelines as 
well10. 
 4.1.3 ECOG performance status removed, Karnofsky Performance Status 
(KPS) added as protocol relies on KPS  
 4.1.5 Inclusion criteria update to match ASTCT current guidelines 
 11.2 ECOG performance status removed, Karnofsky Performance Status 
(KPS) added as protocol relies on KPS  
 Appendix A ECOG performance status removed as protocol relies on KPS 
 References  References revised  
10/26/22 4.1 Added inclusion criteria: Mixed Phenotypic Leukemia / Biphenotypic 
Leukemia  in CR  
2/21/23 Cover page  
Study Schema 
Protocol Summary  
Abbreviations 6.2 7.0 8.1.6 9.1.4 11.1 
11.2 Palifermin (Kepivance or Keratinocyte Growth Factor (KGF)) is no longer manufactured, thus is no longer available and is being removed 
from the protocol.  
 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 8    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 STUDY SCHEMA  
 Figure 1. Decision Tree on how donor sources are decided for patients enrolled in CASE 10Z17  
 
 
 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 9    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
  
Figure 2.  Preparative Regimen and Thiotepa Dosing for Double Umbilical Cord 
Transplant (dUCBT) and haplo -identical transplant (Haplo).  

CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 11    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Protocol Number/Title  CASE 10Z17 A Phase II Study of Thiotepa added to 
Fludarabine and Melphalan as the Preparative Regime for 
Alternative Donor Transplantation  
Study Phase  II  
Brief  Background/Rational e 
 
  In the United States, thiotepa has been utilized in reduced 
intensity conditioning regimens for alternative donor courses (double umbilical cord blood transplant (dUCBT) and haplo -
identical transplants).  
Our hypothesis is that thiotepa at a dose of 10mg/kg, in 
combination with melphalan (100mg/m2) and fludarabine 
(160mg/m2) as a reduced intensity conditioning regimen for 
alternative donor transplant is safe and effective in patients with hematologic malignancies  
Given that this regimen has been investigated extensively, 
and the current study proposes to confirm those previous 
observations with a small modification (melphalan dose 
reduction due to previous mucositis rates with higher doses), this will be a phase II study designed to measure disease -
free-survival.   
Primary Objective  To assess the effectiveness of Thiotepa, Fludarabine, and 
Melphalan in alternative donor transplants as measured by 
leukemia free survival.  
Secondary Objective (s) To assess the 1 - year OS, Relapse, TRM, aGVHD and 
cGVHD, rates of neutrophil and platelet engraftment.  
Sample Size  Approximately 39 males and females 1 year  to 75 years of 
age 
Disease sites/Conditions  Acute Myelogenous Leukemia (AML), Acute Lymphocytic 
Leukemia (ALL), Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML), Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), Myelofibrosis and 
Lymphoma  
Interventions  Melphalan 100 mg/m2 on day −8  
Thiotepa 10 mg/kg on day -7  Fludarabine 160 mg/m
2 in divided doses given on days −6, 
−5, −4 and −3.     
If the patient undergoes a haplo- identical transplant, post -
transplant cyclophosphamide will be added as 50 mg/kg 
given on each of days +3 and +4.  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 12    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 ABBREVIATIONS  
 
 
                      
 
                 
   AE Adverse event  
aGVHD  Acute Graft Versus Host Disease  
AML  Acute Myelogenous Leukemia  
ALL  Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia  
ASTCT  American Society for Transplantation and Cellular Therapy  
CCCC  Case Comprehensive Cancer Center  
CCF  Cleveland Clinic Foundation  
cGVHD  Chronic Graft Versus Host Disease  
CML  Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia  
CNS  Central Nervous System  
CR Complete Remission  
CRF  Case Report Form  
CTCAE  NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
DCRU  Dahm ’s Clinical Research Unit  
DFS Disease Free Survival  
DSTC  Data Safety  and Toxicity  Committee  
dUCBT  Double Umbilical Cord Blood Transplant  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
IPS Idiopathic P neumonia  Syndrome  
IPSS -R Revised International Prognostic Scoring System  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
GVHD  Graft Versus Host Disease  
GVL  Graft Versus Leukemia  
  
KPS Karnofsky Performance Statue  
LFS Leukemia  Free Survival  
MDS  Myelodysplastic Syndrome  
MMF  Mycophen olate Mofetil  
OS Overall Survival  
PRMC  Protocol Review and Monitoring Committee  
RIC Reduced Intensity Conditioning  
SAE  Severe Adverse Event  
SOC  Standard of Care  
TBI Total Body Irradiation  
TRM  Transplant Mortality Rate  
UCB  Umbilical Cord Blood  
UH University Hospitals  
VOD  Veno -occlusive Disease of the Liver  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 13    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1.0  INTRODUCTION   
1.1 Study Diseases  
1.2  Name/description of Investigational Agents 1.3  Rationale   
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  
2.1 Primary Objective   
2.2  Secondary Objective(s)  
 3.0 STUDY DESIGN 
3.1 Study design 
3.2 Number of Subjects 3.3 Replacement of Subjects  
3.4 Expected Duration of Treatment and Subject Participation   
 
4.0  SUBJECT SELECTION 
4.1 Inclusion Cri teria 
4.2  Exclusion Criteria  
4.3 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 5.0 REGISTRATION  
  6.0  TREATMENT PLAN  
6.1 Donor Selection  
6.2 Conditioning Regimen  6.3  General Concomitant Medications and Supportive Care Guidelines 
6.4 Criteria for Removal f rom Study 
6.5 Duration of Follow- Up 
 
7.0 DOSE DELAYS / DOSE MODIFICATIONS  
 
8.0 POTENTIAL RISKS , ADVERSE EVENTS, REPORTING 
REQUIREMENTS  
8.1  Potential Risks 8.2 Definitions  
8.3 Serious Adv erse Event Report Form  
8.4 Reporting Procedures for Serious Adverse Event  8.5 Serious Adverse Events and OnCore
TM    
8.6 Data Safety Toxicity Committee  
8.7 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
 
9.0 PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION  
9.1 Agent (s)  
 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 14    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 10.0 EXPLORATORY/CORRELATIVE  
n/a 
 
11.0 STUDY PARAMETERS AND CALENDAR  
11.1 Study Parameters  
11.2 Calendar  
 12.0 MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  
 13.0 RECORDS TO BE KEPT/REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  
13.1 Data Reporting 
13.2 Regulatory Considerations  
  
14.0 STATISTICAL CONS IDERATIONS  
14.1 Design and Sample Size 
14.2 Analysis Plan  
 
REFERENCES   
  
APPENDICES   
  
APPENDIX A :  
Karnofsky Performance Score  
 
APPENDIX B:  
Revised International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS- R) 
 APPENDIX C: Acute GVHD staging per Blood and Marrow Transplant Clinical Trials Network Manual of Operations (BMT MOP)  
 APPENDIX D: Acute GVHD grading per Blood and Marrow Transplant Clinical Trials Network Manual of Operations (BMT MOP)  
 APPENDIX E: Acute GVHD clinical assessment per Blood and Marrow Transp lant Clinical Trials 
Network Manual of Operations (BMT MOP)   APPENDIX  F:   
Chronic GVHD severity scoring per Blood and Marrow Transplant Clinical Trials Network Manual of Operations (BMT MOP)
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 15    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 1.0 Introduction  
 
1.1 Study Disease s  
Acute Myelogenous Leukemia (AML), Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia (ALL), Chronic 
Myelogenous Leukemia (CML), Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), Myelofibrosis and Lymphoma  
 
1.2  Name and Description of Investigational Agents   
Thiotepa / Melphalan / Fludarabine in Alternative Donor T ransplants  
 1.3 Rationale  
Reduced intensity conditioning (RIC) regimens have expanded availability of allogeneic 
transplantation and therefore cure to a greater number of patients who would not be otherwise eligible for myeloablative transplantation based on age or organ function
1. 
However, the rates of relapse with such regimens remain high and thus there have been attempts to intensify RIC with a number of chemotherapeutic or immunologic agents
2,3. 
Thiotepa, an alkylating agent with very good central nervous system penetration, has been studied in a number of phase II trials as a way to intensify RIC and achieve better outcomes for patients with hematologic malignancies
4,5.  
 Thiotepa has been shown to be safe and effective as an additional chemotherapeutic to conditioning regimens. In an European Society for Blood and Marrow Transplant (EBMT) retrospective analysis of the use of thiotepa as a part of the conditioning regimen in allogeneic transplant for AML, which included matched related donors, matched unrelated donors, and cord blood transplants, the majority of the conditioning regimens were 
myeloablative and consisted of: fludarabine, busulfan, and thiotepa; fludarabine and 
thiotepa (+/ - TBI); and cyclophosphamide and thiotepa (+/ - TBI)
6. The overall leukemia 
free survival at 3 years was 41% in patients in C R1; non- relapse mortality at 3 years was 
19%. The rates of mucositis were 47% and the rate of VOD was 4%, even with the high percentage of myeloablative conditioning within the cohort.   In the United States, thiotepa has been utilized in reduced intensity conditioning regimens for alternative donor courses (double umbilical cord blood transplant (dUCBT) and haplo-identical transplants). In a retrospective analysis of dUCBT for AML, thiotepa at 10mg/kg was added to melphalan 140mg/m
2 and fludarabine 160mg/m2 4. Forty- three of 47 patients 
engrafted (91%); and 1- year treatment related mortality was 28%. One year overall survival 
was 59%. The major toxicity was GI (nausea / vomiting / mucositis / diarrhea) and there was no veno- occlusive disease diagnosed in this cohort. In a retrospective analysis of 
haplo- identical transplants for AML, thiotepa at 10mg/kg was added to melphalan 
140mg/m2 and fludarabine 160mg/m2
5. Haplo -identical grafts were CD34+ selected.  
Although there was a high rate of graft failure (22%), many patients had donor -specific 
antibodies (3 out of 22 patients). The major toxicity was GI (nausea / vomiting / mucositis / diarrhea) and there was no veno- occlusive disease diagnosed in this cohort. The non-
relapse morta lity was 32% and there was a high rate of relapse in these high risk patients 
(44% by day 72 post-transplant).   
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 16    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 Besides utilizing chemotherapy to reduce relapse, another mechanism by which one can 
affect disease control is through the graft versus leukemia (GVL) effect. Recently Milano et al published data in support of superior GVL with cord blood grafts
7. There is not similar 
data in regards to haplo- identical transplants.  
 Our hypothesis is that thiotepa at a dose of 10mg/kg, in combination with melphalan (100mg/m
2) and fludarabine (160mg/m2) as a reduced intensity conditioning regimen for 
alternative donor transplant is safe and effective in patients with hematologic malignancies. Alternative donor transplant have acceptable clinical outcomes comparable to matched  
unrelated donors, therefore anyone without a matched related donor may be a candidate for this trial
8. We have decided to reduce the melphalan dose to limit GI toxicity associated 
with the combination of melphalan (at 140mg/m2), fludarabine (160mg/m2) and thiotepa 
(10mg/kg). We will not be utilizing ATG in cord blood transplants per ASTCT guidelines9. 
Cord blood selection will be based on ASTCT guidelines as wel l10. Haplo -identical 
transplants will undergo post-transplant cyclophosphamide for GVHD prophylaxis.  Given that this regimen has been investigated extensively, and the current study proposes to confirm those previous observat ions with a small modification ( Melphalan  dose 
reduction due to previous mucositis rates with higher doses), this will be a phase II study designed to measure disease- free-survival.   
  
2.0  Objectives  
 2.1  Primary Objective  
To assess the effectiveness of Thiotepa, Fludarabine, and Melphalan in alternative donor 
transplants as measured by disease free survival.  
 
2.2 Secondary Objective(s)  
To assess the 1 - year OS, Relapse, TRM, aGVHD and cGVHD rates and the  rates of 
neutrophil and platelet engraftment.  
 
 
3.0 Study Design 
 3.1  Study design  
This is a Phase II study of Thiotepa, Fludarabine, and Melphalan in alternative donor 
transplants.  
 Subjects will be assessed for safety and tolerability (including adverse events, serious adverse events, and clinical/laboratory assessments) using a continuous monitoring 
approach. Subjects will be followed for up to 1 year or until progression of disease, relapse , 
or death.   
3.2 Number of Subjects  
Approximately 39 subjects will be enrolled i n this trial.  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 17    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
  
 
3.3 Replacement of Subjects  
There may be replacement of subjects if a patient is enrolled but does not start treatment 
before they come off study.  
 
3.4  Expected Duration of Treatment and Subject Participation  
Treatment time will begin the day -11 before transplant and continued until the 
conditioning regimen is completed; for dUCBT this is T+0 and for haplo- identical 
transplant this is T+4.  
 
Patients will be followed for 12 months  post-transplant , unless treatment failure. Treatment 
failure is defined by disease  relapse, graft failure, or death. Patients will  continue to be 
followed for safety for up to 30 days afterwards.  Patients will be followed for toxicity for 30 days after therapy has been completed or until death, whichever occ urs first.  
 The clinical course of each event will be followed until resolution, stabilization, or until it has been determined that the study treatment or participation is not the cause.  Serious adverse events that are still ongoing at the end of the st udy period will necessitate 
follow- up to determine the final outcome. Any serious adverse event that occurs after the 
study period and is considered to be possibly related to the study treatment or study participation will be recorded and reported immediately.  
  4.0 Subject Selection  
Each of the criteria in the sections that follow must be met in order for a subject  to be 
considered eligible for this study.  Use the eligibility criteria  to confirm a subject’s 
eligibility.   
 Subject ’s Name  
_____________________________________________________________  
Medical Record #  
___________________________________________________________ 
 
Research Nurse / Study Coordinator Signature:  
____________________________________________ Date __________ 
 Treating Physician [Print] 
____________________________________________________ 
 
Treating Physician Signature:  
______________________________________________ Date  __________ 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 18    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
  
  4.1 Inclusion Criteria   
 Subject s must meet all  of the following inclusion criteria to be eligible for enrollment:  
 
  4.1.1 Patients with the following hematologic malignancies:  
o Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML): High-risk AML including: 
 Antecedent hematological disease (e.g., myelodysplasia (MDS))  
 Treat ment -related leukemia  
 Complete Remission (CR1) with poor  or intermediate -risk 
cytogenetics or molecular markers (e.g. Flt 3 mutation, 11q23, del 5, del 7, complex cytogenetics) 
 CR2 or CR3  
 Induction failure or 1
st relapse with < 10% blasts in the marrow  
o Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)  
 High -risk CR1 including: 
• Poor- risk cytogenetics (e.g., Philadelphia chromosome 
t(9;22)or 11q23 rearrangements) 
• Presence of minimal disease by flow cytometry after 2 or 
more cycles of chemotherapy  
 No CR within 4 weeks of ini tial treatment  
 Induction failure with <  1 0% blasts in the marrow  
 CR2 or CR3  
o Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), Intermediate, High or Very High Risk 
by the r evised international prognostic scoring system  (IPSS- R; See 
Appendix B) or treatment related MDS.  
o Mixed Phenotypic Leukemia / Biphenotypic Leukemia in CR  
o Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML) in second chronic phase after accelerated or blast crisis.  
o Myelofibrosis (MF):  
 Intermediate -1, Intermediate -2 or high risk by DIPSS -plus 
(Appendix D ) OR  
 Monosomal karyotype OR  
 Presence of inv(3)/i(17q) abnormalities OR  
 Other unfavorable karyotype OR leukocytes  ≥40 × 10(9) /L AND  
 Circulating blasts =< 9% 
o Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia 
o Relapsed or Refractory Lymphoid Malignancies (including non-Hodgkin Lymphoma, H odgkin Lymphoma) meeting the following criteria: 
 Disease status: Stable Disease, Partial Remission or Complete Re
mission   OR  
 Have relapsed after  autologous transplant or who have failed to 
collect for an  autologous transplant.  
 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 19    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
   4.1.2 Age > 1 years, < 65 yrs  
 
  4.1.3 KPS  Performance status  ≥80 [See Appendix A]  
 
  4.1.4 Patients without a matched related donor 
 
  4.1.5 Patient with either one or both: 
  
o A related haplo-identical donor 
o Two 4/8 HLA or better high resolution matched UCB grafts with a cell dose 
of 1.5x107 TNC/kg each  and 1x105CD34+ cells/ kg each.  
 
  4.1.6 Concurrent Therapy for Extramedullary Leukemia or CNS Lymphoma: 
Concurrent therapy or prophylaxis for testicular leukemia, CNS leukemia, and CNS 
lymphoma including standard intrathecal chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy 
will be allowed as clinically indicated. Such treatment may continue until the planned course is completed. Subjects must be in CNS remission at the time of protocol enrollment if there is a history of CNS involvement. Maintenance therapy after transplant is allowed.  
 
  4.1.7 Subjects must have the ability to understand and the willingness to sign a 
written informed consent document. 
 4.2 Exc 
lusion Criteria  
 The presence of any of the following will exclude a subject from study enrollment.  
 
  4.2.1 Patients with inadequate Organ Function as defined by: 
o Creatinine clearance < 5 0ml/min  
o Bilirubin > 2X  institutional upper limit of normal  
o AST (SGOT) > 3X institutional upper limit of normal 
o ALT (SGPT) > 3X institutional upper limit of normal 
o Pulmonary function: DLCOc < 60% normal 
o Cardiac: left ventricular ejection fraction < 50% 
o KPS < 80  
 
  4.2.2 Patients with uncontrolled inter- current illness including, but not limited to 
ongoing or active infection, symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia, or psychiatric illness/social situations that would limit compliance with study requirements. 
 
  4.2.3 Pregnant or breastfeeding women are excluded from this study because 
chemotherapy involved with RIC have the significant potential for teratogenic or abortifacient effects.  
 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 20    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
   4.2.4 Any condition that would, in the investigator's judgment, interfere with full 
participation in the study, including administration of study drug and attending 
required study visits; pose a significant risk to the subject; or interfere with interpretation of study data. 
 
  4.2.5 Known allergies, hypersensitivity, or intolerance to any of the study 
medications, excipients, or similar compounds.  
  4.2.6 Presence of donor- specific antibodies against chosen graft source.  
 
4.3 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
Men, women  and members of all races and ethnic groups are eligible for this trial.  
 
 5.0 Registration  
All subjects who have been consented are to be registered in the OnCore™ Database. F or 
those subjects who are consented, but not enrolled, the reason for exclusion must be recorded.  
 All subjects will be registered through  University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center and 
will be provided a study number by contacting the study coordinator  listed on the cover 
page.  
 
  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 21    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 6.0  Treatment Plan  
 
6.1 Donor Selection  
Figure 1: Decision tree for choosing of a graft  
 
 
 
6.2 Conditioning Regimen  
The conditioning regimen would consist of:  Melphalan 100 mg/m
2 on day −8  
Thiotepa 10 mg/kg on day -7  Fludarabine 40mg/m2/day on days - 6, -5, -4 and -3 
 If the patient undergoes a haplo- identical transplant, post -transplant cyclophosphamide 
will be added as 50 mg/kg given on each of days +3 and +4.All monitoring is done per standard of care.  
 
CTCAE v 5 .0 will be used as the criteria for evaluating infusion- related events. We will 
attribute acute toxic effects noted during and within 60 minutes of the infusion to 
administration of that cellular product.  
 
6.3 General Concomitant Medications and Supportive Ca re Guidelines  
6.3.1 Graft versus host disease prophylaxis 
1. For dUCBT:  

CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 22    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 a. Tacrolimus will be initiated on the day –5 before the transplant. Tacrolimus will 
be administered IV at 0.02 mg/kg/dose over 24 hours. Subsequently doses will be 
adjusted according to trough levels monitored at least biweekly and/or upon 
symptoms or alteration in renal function. When appropriate, the treating physician 
may transition the patient to oral tacrolimus.  The target range for serum tacrolimus 
levels will be 7 ng/mL to 15 ng/mL, or as clinically indicated. This dose of tacrolimus will continue until day +100, and then will be tapered as long as the severity of GVHD is less than grade II.  
b. Mycophenolate mofe til (MMF) will be given at 1g intravenously or orally twice 
daily from day -5 to +100, or as clinically indicated. 
2. For haplo- identical transplants:  
a. Tacrolimus will be initiated on the day + 5 after the transplant. Tacrolimus will 
be administered IV at 0.02 mg/kg/dose over 24 hours. Subsequently doses will be adjusted according to trough levels monitored at least biweekly and/or upon symptoms or altera tion in renal function. When appropriate, the treating physician 
may transition the patient to oral tacrolimus. The target range for serum tacrolimus levels will be 7 ng/mL to 15 ng/mL, or as clinically indicated. This dose of tacrolimus will continue until day +100, and then will be tapered as long as the severity of GVHD is less than grade II.  
b. Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) will be given at 1g intravenously or orally twice 
daily from day +5 to +35, or as clinically indicated. 
 6.3.2 Growth factor support: P er standard of care.  
 
6.4 Criteria for Removal from Study  
In the absence of treatment delays due to adverse events, treatment may continue until one 
of the following criteria applies:  
 • Disease progression,  
• The investigator considers it, for safety reasons, to be in the best interest of the subject.  
• Subject  decision to withdraw from treatment (partial consent) or from the study (full 
consent), • Pregnancy during the course of the study for a child- bearing participant  
• Death, or • Sponsor reserves the  right to temporarily suspend or prematurely discontinue this study. 
The date and reason for discontinuation must be documented. Every effort should be made to complete the appropriate assessments.  
 
6.5 Duration of Follow Up 
Patients will be followed as o utpatient per standard of care with their transplant physician. 
Patients will be followed for this study for 1 year following the allogeneic transplant, 
relapse, or death, whichever comes first.  
 The clinical course of each adverse event will be followed until resolution, stabilization, or 
until it has been determined that the study treatment or participation is not the cause.   
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 23    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 Maintenance therapy post hematopoietic stem cell transplant is allowed if clinically 
indicated or patient is eligible for a nother trial. 
 Serious adverse events, such as chronic infection or grade III -IV GVHD,  that are still 
ongoing at the end of the study period will necessitate follow -up to determine the final 
outcome. Any serious adverse event that occurs after the study period and is considered to be possibly related to the study treatment or study participation will be recorded and reported immediately.  
 
 7.0  Dose Delays/Dose Modifications  
If patient is over the age of 60 or has comorbidities that may increase the risk of morbidity 
or mortality with conditioning chemotherapy, the dosage of thiotepa may be reduced to 7.5mg/kg or 5mg/kg at the discretion of the treating physician.  In patients with an increased risk for neurotoxicity, including those with impaired renal function, prior high dose cytarabine, intrathecal therapy, cranial irradiation, or  prior HSCT 
with fludarabine conditioning, the fludarabine dose may be reduced to 30 mg/m
2 on days -
6, -5, -4 and -3 instead of 40mg/m2. 
 If a patient develops toxicity attributed to the chemotherapy the nurse and physician will adhere to institutional guidelines for infusion toxicity / reaction.  
  
8.0 Potential Risks, Adverse Events, Reporting Requirements  
 
8.1 Potential Risks  
8.1.1 Thiotepa  
Thiotepa may cause a lowering of the white blood cell , red blood cell, or platelet counts, 
leading to an increased risk of infection and frequent bruising or bleeding. It may cause 
damage to the GI tract causing mouth sores, nausea, vomitin g, and diarrhea. Other side 
effects may include loss of appetite, liver abnormalities, hair loss, swelling, fatigue, sleepiness, skin rash.  
 8.1.2 Melphalan Melphalan may cause a lowering of the white blood cell, red blood cell,  or platelet counts, 
leading to an increased risk of infection and frequent bruising or bleeding. It may cause damage to the GI tract causing mouth sores, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Other side effects may include loss of appetite, liver abnormalities,  hair loss, swelling, fatigue, 
sleepiness, skin rash.  
 8.1.3 Fludarabine Fludarabine may cause a lowering of the white blood cell, red blood cell, or platelet counts, 
leading to an increased risk of infection and frequent bruising or bleeding. Other side effects may include loss of appetite, liver abnormalities, hair loss, swelling, fatigue, 
sleepiness, skin rash, and lower limb weakness.  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 24    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
  
8.1.4 Mycophenolate Mofetil (MMF, Cellcept)  
MMF may cause a lowering of the white blood cell, red blood cell, or platel et counts. This 
may lead to an increase in the risk of infections or bleeding. Other side effects include headache, rash,  fever, nausea, vomiting, allergic reaction, liver abnormalities, kidney 
abnormalities, thyroid dysfunction, fatigue, and swelling.    8.1.5 Tacrolimus Tacrolimus may cause a lowering of the white blood cell, red blood cell, or platelet counts. 
This may lead to an increase in the risk of infections or bleeding. Other side effects include headache, rash,  fever,  nausea, vomiting, allergic reaction, high blood pressure, high blood 
sugar, mental status changes,  liver abnormalities, kidney abnormalities, thyroid 
dysfunction, fatigue, and swelling.    8.1.7 Risks of Transplant  
Risks of Transplant include fever, nausea and vomiting, fatigue, weakness, malaise, diarrhea, dark stools, sores in the mouth, headache, low blood counts, cough, swelling, rash, hives, allergic reaction, muscle pain, loss of appetite, painful urination, red urine, kidney damage, liver damage, se rious infection, and death. Specific risks discussed below:  
  Graft rejection: First, the UCB  or Haplo- Identical cells may not grow after they are 
infused. This problem is termed graft rejection, occurs rarely, and is reduced by giving high- dose chemotherapy. The high -dose chemotherapy is not only given to get rid of the 
cancer cells, but it will get rid of the immune system and prevent graft rejection.  
 
Graft -versus- host disease (GVHD) : GVHD is the most common complication following 
allogeneic stem cell tr ansplant. Development of GVHD can result in damage to the skin, 
intestine, liver, immune system, and occasionally bone marrow. Following an allogeneic 
stem cell transplant UCB, the risk of GVHD is roughly between 20 and 30%. Methotrexate, and/or prednisone  and/or mycophenolate mofetil, and/or cyclosporine/tacrolimus may be 
given to prevent the development of GVHD. On the other hand, there is some benefit to the development of GVHD; the T- lymphocytes present in the cells obtained from an HLA 
matched UCB may kill any remaining cancer cells , a process called the graft -versus- tumor 
(GVT) effect. GVHD and GVT can occur despite the preventative medications. GVHD can be serious enough to cause death. Most common symptoms are skin rash diarrhea, yellowing of the skin, and also dry eyes, mouth sores and changes of the finger and toe nails. GVHD may also affect the lung, tendons and joints.  Veno -occlusive disease of the liver (VOD): VOD is damage to the blood vessels of the 
liver that can be caused by the chemotherapy given before stem cell transplant. In VOD 
the flow of blood into the liver is impaired. This causes a painful enlargement of the liver, an increase in body fluid and weight, and an increase in blood bilirubin. In severe cases the liver fails, which can result in death.  
 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 25    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 Damage to the kidneys : Kidney damage may occur due to medicines used as part of the 
transplant and to prevent GVHD. K idney function will be monitored carefully during and 
after the transplant procedure.  
 
Damage to the lungs : Lung damage may occur due to the chemotherapy used prior to stem 
cell transplant or as a result of the transplant itself. Lung inflammation that occurs early after transplant, in the absence of infection, is known as idiopathic pneumonia syndrome 
or IPS . IPS occurs in le ss than 10% of patients that received allogeneic stem cell transplant. 
However, if/when it occurs, IPS can be fatal.  Prednisone will be given to reduce the inflammation should IPS occur. Other IPS treatment options may be used at the discretion of the tre ating physician. 
 Serious infections : Infections in the blood stream or other organs are more likely to occur 
because the immune system is weakened for a period of time by the stem cell transplant and the medicines used to prevent GVHD. These infections ar e sometimes fatal.  
 These side effects, alone or in combination with other problems, may be severe enough to cause death.  
 
8.2 Definitions   
 
8.2.1 Adverse Event   
An adverse event  (AE) is any unfavorable or unintended event, physical or psychological, 
associated with a research study, which causes harm or injury to a research participant as a result of the participant’s involvement in a research study. The event can include 
abnorma l laboratory findings, symptoms, or disease associated with the research study. 
The event does not necessarily have to have a causal relationship with the research, any 
risk associated with the research, the research intervention, or the research assessmen ts.  
 
Adverse events may be the result of the interventions and interactions used in the research; the collection of identifiable private information in the research; an underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the subject; and/or other circumstances unrelated to the research or any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the subject.  
 
 8.2.2   Serious Adverse Events  
A serious adverse event (SAE)  is any adverse experience occurring at any dose that results 
in any of the following outcomes:  
• Results in death.  
• Is a life-threatening  adverse experience.  The term life- threatening in the 
definition of serious refers to an adverse event in which the subject was at risk of death at the time of the event.  It does not refer to an adverse event which hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe.  
• Requires inpatient  hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization .  Any adverse event leading to hospitalization or prolongation 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 26    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 of hospitalization will be considered as Serious, UN LESS at least one of the 
following expectations is met:  
o The admission results in a hospital stay of less than 24 hours OR  
o The admission is pre -planned ( e.g., elective or scheduled surgery 
arranged prior to the start of the study) OR  
o The admission is not associated with an adverse event (e.g., social 
hospitalization for purposes of respite care.  
However it should be noted that invasive treatment during any hospitalization may fulfill the criteria of “medically important” and as such may be reportable as a serious adverse event depend ent on clinical judgment.  In addition where local 
regulatory authorities specifically require a more stringent definition, the local regulation takes precedent.  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity .  The definition of 
disability is a substantial disruption of a person’s ability to conduct normal life’s functions. 
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
• Is an important medical event.  Important medical events that may not result death, be life -threatening, o r require hospitalization may be considered a serious 
adverse experience when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to 
prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood disease or disorders, or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency 
or drug abuse . The development of a new cancer is always considered an 
important medical event.  
 
Neutropenic fever, thrombocytopenia and anemia, electrolyte disturbances, elevations of enzymes, LDH, gamma GT, alkaline phosphatase are expected side effects of stem cell 
transplantation and will not be considered regimen- related toxicity.   
 
8.2.3 Adverse Event Evaluation  
The investigator  or designee is responsible for ensuring that all reportable adverse events  
(both serious and non -serious , exempting those previously mentioned in section 8.2.2) 
observed by the clinical team  or reported by the subject which occur after the subject has 
signed the informed consent are fully recorded in the subject’s medical records. Source 
documentation must be available to support all adverse events.  
 A laboratory test abnormality considered clinically relevant (e.g., causing the subject to withdraw from the study, requiring treatment or causing apparent clinical manifestations, result in a delay or dose modification of study treatment, or judged relevant by the investigator),  should be reported as an adverse event.   
 The investigator or sub -investigator (treating physician if applicable) will provide the 
following for all adverse events (both serious and non- serious) : 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 27    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 • Event term (as per CTCAE)  
• Description of the event 
• Date of onset and resolution 
• Expectedness of the toxicity  
• Grade of toxicity  
• Attribution of relatedness to the investigational agent - (this must be assigned 
by an investigator, sub- investigator, or treating  physician)  
• Action taken as a result of the event , including but not limited to; no changes, dose 
interrupted, reduced, discontinued, etc. or action taken with regard to the event, i.e. 
no action, received conmed or other intervention, etc. 
• Outcome of even t 
 Descriptions and grading scales  found in the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE) version  5.0 will be utilized for AE  reporting.  
 GVHD grading scales and assessment forms are included in Appendices C -F. 
 
An expected adverse event  is an event previously known or anticipated to result from 
participation in the research study or any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the 
subject. The event is usually listed in the Investigator Brochure, consent form or research protocol.  
 
An unexpected adverse event is an adverse event not previously known or anticipated to 
result from the research study or any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the 
subject.  
 
Attribution  is the relationship between an adverse event or serious a dverse event and the 
study drug.  Attribution will be assigned as follows: 
 
• Definite – The AE is clearly related  to t
 he study drug. 
• Probable – The AE is likely related  to the study drug. 
• Possible – The AE may be related  to the study drug. 
• Unlikely – The AE  is doubtfully related to the study drug. 
• Unrelated – The AE is clearly NOT  related  to the study drug. 
 Protocol must specify if attribution is required for individual components of the treatment regimen or the treatment regimen as a whole.  
Attribution is required for the treatment as a whole, not individual components of the 
treatment.  
 
8.3  SAE Report Form  
SAEs will be recorded on the FDA Form 3500A (MedWatch) but should only be reported 
as instructed below.  The electronic FDA SAE reporting forms should not be used.   
 
8.4  Reporting Procedures for Serious Adverse Events  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 28    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 For this study, only grade 3 and greater (according to CTCAE 5.0) AEs will be collected 
and reported, with the exception of infusion site reactions (all grades will be collected) and the expected adv erse events listed in Sec. 8.2.2 above (not collected at all).  
 For the purposes of safety reporting, serious adverse events that occur beginning with the 
signing of the informed consent form, during treatment, or within 30 days of the last dos e 
of treatment must be reported. Adverse events, both serious and non- serious, and deaths 
that occur during  this period will be recorded in the source documents. All SAEs should 
be monitored until they are resolved or are clearly determined to be due to a subject ’s stable 
or chronic condition or intercurrent illness(es).  Related AEs will be followed until 
resolution to baseline or grade 1 or stabilization.   
8.4.1 SAE Reporting Requirements  
• All serious adverse events must be reported to the Sponsor -Investigator  within 24 
hours  of discovery or notification of the event.  
o Leland Metheny, 216- 844-0139, Leland.Metheny@uhhospitals.org  
• The Sponsor- Investigator will review the SAE and report the event to external 
collaborator(s), and IRB as applicable.  
 
Institutional Review Board Reporting Requirements: 
• Adverse events will be reported to the IRB of record according to the local IRB’s 
policies and procedures in reporting adverse events.  
 
8.5 SAEs and OnCore  
• All SAEs will be entered into OnCore.   
• A copy of the completed SAE form (FDA Form 3500A)  is also uploaded into 
Oncore. 
 
8.6  Data Safety and Toxicity Committee  
ALL SAEs occurring on this trial must be  reported to the Case Comprehensive Cancer 
Center’s Data and Safety Toxicity Committee. This submission is simultaneous with OnCore
TM.  
 The Sponsor-I nvestigator is responsible for submitting an annual report to the DSTC as per 
CCCC Data and Safety Monitor ing Plan. 
  
8.7 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP)  
This protocol will adhere to the policies of the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center Data 
and Safety Monitorin g Plan in accordance with NCI guidelines.  
 9.0 PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION  
A list of the adverse events and potential risks associated with the investigational or commercial agents administered in this study can be found in Section 8.0 .  
 9.1 Agents 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 29    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 9.1.1  Thiotepa  
 
Product description:  Thiot epa is an alkylating agent which produces cross -linking of 
DNA strands leading to inhibition of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis; thiotepa is cell -
cycle independent.  
 Solution preparation:  Thiot
 epa for Injection, USP, for single use only, is available in vials 
containing 15 mg of nonpyrogenic, sterile lyophilized powder.  Thio
tepa for injection should be reconstituted with 1.5 mL of sterile water for injection 
resulting in a drug concentration of approximately 10 mg/mL. The reconstituted solution is hypotonic and should be further diluted with sodium chloride  injection (0. 9% sodium 
chloride) before use. When reconstituted with sterile water for injection, solutions of thiotepa should be stored in a refrigerator and used within 8 hours.   Reconstituted solutions further diluted with sodium chloride injection should be used immediately. In order to eliminate haze, filter solutions through a 0.22 micron filter* prior to administration. Filtering does not alter solution potency. Reconstituted solutions should be clear. Solutions that remain opaque or precipitate after filtration should not be used.  Storage requirements:  As
  for other antineoplastic agents Thiotepa should be handled by 
trained personnel using procedures for proper handling. The use of gloves and protective glasses is recommended to avoid exposure upon accidental spillage.  
 Route of administration: intravenous infusion over 30- 60 minut
 es 
 Drug Procurement:  Thiot
 epa must be obtained from commercial sources.  
 
9.1.2 Melphalan  
Product description:  Alkyl ating agent which is a derivative of mechlorethamine  that 
inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis via formation of carbonium ions; cross -links strands of 
DNA; acts on both resting and rapidly dividing tumor cells. 
 Solution preparation:  ALK
 ERAN for Injection is supplied as a sterile, nonpyrogenic, 
freeze- dried powde r. Each single -use vial contains melphalan hydrochloride equivalent to 
50 mg melphalan and 20 mg povidone. ALKERAN for Injection is reconstituted using the sterile diluent provided. Each vial of sterile diluent contains sodium citrate 0.2 g, propylene glycol 6.0 mL, ethanol (96%) 0.52 mL, and Water for Injection to a total of 10 mL.   As f
or other antineoplastic agents Melphalan should be handled by trained personnel using 
procedures for proper handling. The use of gloves and protective glasses is recommended to avoid exposure upon accidental spillage.  Route of administration: intravenous infusion over 30- 60 minut
 es 
 Drug Procurement:  Mel
 phalan must be obtained from commercial sources.  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 30    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
  
9.1.3 Fludarabine  
Product description:  Antin eoplastic fluorinated nucleoside analog. After phosphorylation 
to fluoro- ara-ATP [adenosine triphosphate] the drug appears to incorporate into DNA and 
inhibit DNA polymerase alpha, ribonucleotide reductase and DNA primase, thus inhibiting 
DNA synthesis. The half -life of the act ivated compound is approximately 10 hours but the 
pharmacology is incompletely understood. Excretion is impaired in patients with impaired renal function.  Solution preparation:  Eac
 h vial contains 50 mg lyophilized drug, to be reconstituted with 
2 mL steri le water to a solution that is 25 mg/mL for intravenous administration. Solution 
Preparation: mix each vial with 2 mL sterile pyrogen- free water to a clear solution, which 
is 25 mg/mL for intravenous administration only. Reconstituted solution should be us ed 
within 8 hours.  As f
or other antineoplastic agents Melphalan should be handled by trained personnel using 
procedures for proper handling. The use of gloves and protective glasses is recommended to avoid exposure upon accidental spillage.  Route of admi nistr
 ation: intravenous infusion over 30- 60 minutes  
 Drug Procurement:  Fl
 udarabine must be obtained from commercial sources.  
 
 
10.0 EXPLORATORY or CORRELATIVE STUDIES  
N/A  11.0  STUDY PARAMETERS AND CALENDAR  
 
11.1 Study Parameters  
Laboratory Studies:  
• Serum Chemistries: albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, bicarbonate, BUN, 
calcium, chloride, creatinine, glucose, potassium, SGOT [AST], SGPT [ALT], sodium.  
• Complete Blood Count and Differential  
• Additional lab studies (Screening only)  
• PT, PTT.  
• Urinalysis  
• CMV IgG and IgM, EBV panel, Hep B sAg, Hep B sAb, Hep B cAb, Hep 
C Ab, HIV I/II, HSV I/II, HTLV I/II, Syphilis, Toxo IgG (and if positive IgM), VZV IgG  
 Vital signs include: blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, percent oxygen saturation and temperature  
 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 31    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 Bone marrow aspiration; flow cytometry, cytogenetics, and molecular studies as clinically 
appropriate   11.1.1 Screening Evaluation  Screening studies and evaluations will be used to determine the eligibility of each subject for s
tudy inclusion. All evaluations must be completed < 60 days prior  to administration 
of protocol therapy.   11.1.2 Trea
tment Period  
Treatment time will begin the day -11 before transplant and continued until the 
conditioning regimen is completed; for dUCBT this is T+0 and for haplo- identical 
transplant this is T+4.  
  
 
If the patient undergoes a haplo- identical transplant, post -transplant cyclophosphamide 
will be added as 50 mg/kg given on each of days +3 and +4. 
T-8 
• Melphalan 100 mg/m2 
 T-7 
• Thiotepa (T) 10 mg/kg  
 T-6 
• Fludarabine 40mg/m2 
 T -5 
• Fludarabine 40mg/m2 
 
T -4 
• Fludarabine 40mg/m2 
 T -3 
• Fludarabine 40mg/m2 
 
 
T +0  
• Infusion of graft source: dUCBT or Haplo- Identical Donor  
  
T +6 to +30 
• Continue GVHD prophylaxis per standard of care  
• Bone Marrow Aspiration may be performed following between T+6 and T+30 if 
engraftment has not been demonstrated or if loss of graft is suspected;  flow cytometry, 
cytogenetics, and molecula r studies as clinically appropriate  
 T +30 to +60 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 32    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 • Bone Marrow Aspiration may be performed following T+30 bone marrow if 
engraftment has not been demonstrated or if loss of graft is suspected; flow 
cytometry, cytogenetics, and molecular studies as clinically appropriate . If a bone 
marrow aspiration has been already performed between T+6 and T+30, this does not need to be repeated.  
 Follow up:  Outpatient, up to T+100, 6, 9, and 12 months post- tra
 nsplant  (+/- 
2weeks)  
 
Bone marrow aspiration; flow cytometry, cytogenetics, and molecular studies as 
clinically appropriate.  
 
Acute GVHD 
Acute GVHD will be graded and staged according to the BMT CTN Manual of 
Operations (BMT CTN MOP) (Appendixes C, D, and E).  
 
Chronic Graft Versus Host Disease 
Chronic GVHD is scored according to the BMT CTN MOP (Appendix F). The first day 
of cGVHD onset will be used to calculate cumulative incidence curves.  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 33    Version date:  02.21.2023 
 11.2 Calendar   
 
 
* Bone Marrow Aspiration may be performed following T+30 bone marrow if engraftment has not been demonstrated or if loss of gra ft is suspected; flow cytometry, 
cytogenetics, and molecular studies as clinically appropriate . It may be repeated as clinically appropriate   Study Days  Screening  T -11, -10, -9 T -8 T -7 T -6 T -5 T -4 T -3 T -2 T -1 T +0  T +1, 
T +2 T +6  to 
T +30  T +30 to 
T +60  T+100, 6, 9, and 
12mo f/u  
Required Assessments                 
Informed Consent  X               
Demographics  X               
Medical History  X               
Height  X               
Weight  X  X1             
Vitals (section 11.1)  X  X1 X1            
Physical exam  X   X1            
Con Med Assessment  X               
KPS X              X2 
Baseline  Symptoms Assessment  X               
Adverse Events Assessment    X X       X X X X X‡ 
CBC/diff/Platelets  X  X1 X1           X2 
Chemistries (section 11.1)  X  X1 X1           X2 
Additional Lab Studies (section 11.1)  X               
ß-HCG for women of childbearing potential3 X               
2-D ECHO or MUGA  X               
Pulmonary function testing (including 
DLCO)  X               
CT, PET, for lymphoma  X               
Cardiology consult  X               
Bone Marrow Aspiration (see section 11.1)  X             X* X2 
(T+100 only) 
Treatment                 
Melphalan    X             
Thiotepa     X            
Fludarabine      X X X X        
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 34    Version date:  02.21.2023 
 ‡ Follow -up of adverse events that are still ongoing  after the 30 day reporting peri od 
1These studies may have a window to +/ -3 days.  
2 These studies may have a window of 2 week s. 
3 ß-HCG test should be performed within 7 days before admission.  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 35    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 12.0  MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  
   
Disease Free Survival ( DFS) at 1 year is the percentage of patients alive and without 
evidence of hematologic malignancy at 1 year after transplant.  
 
Overall Survival (OS) at 1 year is the percentage of patients alive at 1 year after transplant.  
 Relapse incidence at 1 year is the percentage of patients who experience relapse of their hematologic malignancy up to 1 year after transplant.  Treatment Related Mortality (TRM) at 1 year is the percentage of patients who expi re from 
treatment related toxicity attributed to transplant up to 1 year after transplant.  
 
Acute graft versus host disease (aGVHD) 1 year cumulative incidence is the percentage of 
patie nts who experience any aGVHD up to 1 year after transplant.  
 
Chronic graft versus host disease (cGVHD) 1 -year cumulative incidence is the percentage 
of patients who experience any cGVHD up to 1 year after transplant.  Neutrophil engraftment will be calculated as the days from transplant where the absolute neutrophil count (ANC) reaches >500cells/ul x 3 days.  Platelet engraftment will be calculated as the days from transplant where the platelet count reaches 20,000 platelets /ul without the need of transfusion of platelets for 7 days. 
 
13.0 DATA REP
 ORTING / REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Adverse event lists, guidelines, and instructions for AE reporting can be found in Section 
8.0 (Adverse Events: List and Reporting Requirements). 
 
13.1 Data Reporting  
The OnCore™ Database will be utilized, as required by the Case Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, to provide data collection for both accrual entry and trial data management. 
OnCore™ is a Clinical Trials Management System housed on secure servers maintained at 
Case Western Reserve University.  OnCore™ . Access to data through OnCore™ is 
restricted by user accounts and assigned roles.  Once logged into the OnCore™ system with 
a user ID and password, OnCore™ defines roles for each user which limits access to 
appropria te data. User information and password can be obtained by contacting the 
OnCore™ Administrator at OnCore -registration@case.edu.  
 OnCore™ is designed with the capability for study setup, activation, tracking, reporting, 
data monitoring and review, and eligi bility verification.   A calendar of events and required 
forms are available in OnCore™.  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 36    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 This study will utilize electronic Case Report Form completion in the Overture database  
system, a part 11 compliant electronic data capture system .  Approved users wil l received 
access independently from the OnCoreTM system used for clinical trial management.  
 
13.2 Regulatory Considerations  
The study will be conducted in compliance with ICH guidelines and with all applicable federal (including 21 CFR parts 56 & 50), state or local laws.  
13.2.1 Written Informed consent  
Provision of written informed consent  must be obtained prior to any study- related 
procedures. The Principal Investigator will ensure that the subject is given full and 
adequate oral and written information about the nature, purpose, possible risks and benefits 
of the study as well as the subject’s financial responsibility.  Subjects must also be notified 
that they are free to discontinue from the study at any time. The subject should be given 
the opportunity to ask questions and be allowed time to consider the information provided.  
The original, signed written Informed Consent Form must be kept with the Research Chart in conformance with the institution’s standard operating procedures. A copy of the signed  
written Informed Consent Form must be given to the subject.  Additionally, documentation 
of the consenting process should be located in the research chart. 
13.2.2 Subject Data Protection  
In accordance with the Health Information Portability and Accountabil ity Act (HIPAA), a 
subject must sign an authorization to release medical information to the sponsor and/or 
allow the sponsor, a regulatory authority, or Institutional Review Board access to subject’s medical information that includes all hospital records r elevant to the study, including 
subjects’ medical history.   
 13.2.3  Retention of records  
The Principal Investigator of The Case Comprehensive Cancer Center supervises the retention of all documentation of adverse events, records of study drug receipt and dispensation, and all IRB correspondence for as long as needed to comply with local,  
national and international regulations. No records will be destroyed until the Principal Investigator confirms destruction is permitted.  
 
13.2.4  Audits and inspections  
Authorized representatives of the sponsor, a regulatory authority, an Independent Ethics Committee (IEC) or an Institutional Review Board (IRB) may visit the  site to perform 
audits or inspections, including source data verification. The purpose of an audit  or 
inspection is to systematically and independently examine all study- related activities and 
documents to determine whether these activities were conducted, and data were recorded, analysed, and accurately reported according to the protocol, Good Clinica l Practice (GCP), 
guidelines of the International Conference on Harmonization (ICH), and any applicable regulatory requirements.  For multi- center studies, participating sites must inform the 
sponsor-investigator of pending audits.  
 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 37    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 14.0  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS   
 
14.1 Design and Sample Size: The one year leukemia free survival (LFS) is the primary endpoint for the phase II study. 
One year LSF is measured is the percentage of patients alive and without evidence of hematologic malignancy at 1 year after transplant . We are particularly interested in the rate 
of LFS within one year after transplant.   The 1 -year LFS rate for this study population 
under standard care is about 40% (P
0 = 0.4). We expect the target 1 -year LFS rate of the 
investigation therapy t o be 60% (P 1 = 0.60). R. Simon’s minimax two- stage phase II 
design11 with type I error of 0.05 and power of 80% will be used on 1- year LFS. Thirty -
four patients will be enrolled on stage one. If there are 17 or less alive without relapse beyond 1 year, the trial will be stopped and the t reatment will be considered not effective 
for this patient population. If there are 18 or more alive without relapse after 1 year, 5 additional patients will be enrolled. If 20 or fewer are alive without relapse after 1 year are observed in the total 39 pa tients, then the trial will be considered to be not effective. On 
the other hand, if there are more than 20 patients alive without relapse after 1 year, then the treatment will be considered to be effective.  
 14.2 Analysis Plan  
AEs and SAEs from this phase II study will be tabulated. For time -to-event endpoints, such 
as overall survival, the Kaplan -Meier method
12 will be used to estimate survivor function. 
The cumulative incidence of acute GVHD, chronic GVHD, and the rate of neutrophil and platelet engraftment will be estimated by the method that accommodates competing risks
13. 
As part of exploratory data analysis, the predictive value of laboratory correlates on time -
to-event data will be estimated using Cox models14. 
 
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 38    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 REFERENCES  
1. Mohty M, de Lavallade H, El -Cheikh J, et al. Reduced intensity conditioning 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation for patients with acute myeloid leukemia: long term 
results of a 'donor' versus 'no donor' comparison. Leukemia. Jan 2009;23(1):194-196. 2. Sengsayadeth S, Savani BN, Blaise D, Malard F, Nagler A, Mohty M. Reduced 
intensity conditioning allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation for adult acute myeloid leukemia in complete remission - a review from the Acute Leukemia Working Party of the 
EBMT. Haematologica. Jul 2015;100(7):859-869. 
3. Mawad R, Lionberger JM, Pagel JM. Strategies to reduce relapse after allogeneic 
hematopoietic cell transplantation in acute myeloid leukemia. Current hematologic malignancy reports. Jun 2013;8(2):132-140. 
4. C iurea SO, Saliba RM, Hamerschlak N, et al. Fludarabine, melphalan, thiotepa and 
anti-thymocyte globulin conditioning for unrelated cord blood transplant. Leukemia & 
lymphoma. May 2012;53(5):901-906. 5. Ciurea SO, Saliba R, Rondon G, et al. Reduced- intensity conditioning using 
fludarabine, melphalan and thiotepa for adult patients undergoing haploidentical SCT. Bone marrow transplantation. Mar 2010;45(3):429-436. 6. Eder S, Labopin M, Finke J, et al. Safety and efficacy of thiotepa -based 
conditioning for allogeneic transplantation in AML: a survey from the ALWP of the EBMT. Bone marrow transplantation. Feb 2017;52(2):238-244. 7. Milano F, Gooley T, Wood B, et al. Cord- Blood Transplantation in Patients with 
Minimal Residual Disease. The New England journal of medicine. Sep 8 
2016;375(10):944-953. 8. Simon R. Optimal two -stage designs for phase II clinical trials. Controlled clinical 
trials. Mar 1989;10(1):1-10. 
9. Kaplan EL, Meier P. Nonparametric Estimation from Incomplete Observations. J 
Am Stat Assoc. 1958;53(282):457-481. 
10. Pepe MS, Mori M. Kaplan -Meier, Marginal or Conditional -Probability Curves in 
Summarizing Competing Risks Failure Time Data. Stat Med. Apr 30 1993;12(8):737-751. 11. Cox DR. Regression Models and Life -Tables. Journal of the Royal Statist ical 
Society Series B -Statistical Methodology. 1972;34(2):187- &. 
              
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 39    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 APPENDIX A  
 
 
 
Karnofsky DA Burchenal JH. (1949). "The Clinical Evaluation of Chemotherapeutic Agents in Cancer." In: 
MacLeod CM (Ed), Evaluation of Chemotherapeutic Agents. Columbia Univ Press. Page 196  
       

CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 41    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
 IPSS- R Prognostic Risk Categories/Scores*  
RISK CATEGORY  RISK SCORE  
Very Low  <=1.5  
Low >1.5 - 3 
Intermediate  >3 - 4.5 
High >4.5 - 6 
Very High  >6 
*Greenberg, Tuechler, Schanz et al, Revised International Prognostic Scoring System 
(IPSS-R) for Myelodysplastic Syndrome, Blood 120: 2454, 2012. 
**Schanz J et al, J Clin Oncology 2012; 30:820 
 
  
CASE xxxx10Z17    Page 45    Version date:  
02.21.2023 
  
 
 
 1. Mohty M, de Lavallade H, El -Cheikh J, et al. Reduced intensity conditioning 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation for patients with acute myeloid leukemia: long term results of a 'donor' versus 'no donor' comparison. Leukemia. 2009;23(1):194-
196. 
2. Sengsay adeth S, Savani BN, Blaise D, Malard F, Nagler A, Mohty M. Reduced 
intensity conditioning allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation for adult acute myeloid leukemia in complete remission - a review from the Acute Leukemia 
Working Party of the EBMT. Hae matologica. 2015;100(7):859-869. 
3. Mawad R, Lionberger JM, Pagel JM. Strategies to reduce relapse after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation in acute myeloid leukemia. Current hematologic malignancy reports. 2013;8(2):132-140. 
4. Ciurea SO, Salib a RM, Hamerschlak N, et al. Fludarabine, melphalan, thiotepa and 
anti-thymocyte globulin conditioning for unrelated cord blood transplant. Leukemia 
& lymphoma. 2012;53(5):901-906. 
5. Ciurea SO, Saliba R, Rondon G, et al. Reduced- intensity conditioning using 
fludarabine, melphalan and thiotepa for adult patients undergoing haploidentical SCT. Bone marrow transplantation. 2010;45(3):429-436. 
6. Eder S, Labopin M, Finke J, et al. Safety and efficacy of thiotepa -based 
conditioning for allogeneic transplantation  in AML: a survey from the ALWP of 
the EBMT. Bone marrow transplantation. 2017;52(2):238-244. 
7. Milano F, Gooley T, Wood B, et al. Cord- Blood Transplantation in Patients with 
Minimal Residual Disease. The New England journal of medicine. 
2016;375(10):944-953. 
8. Baron F, Labopin M, Ruggeri A, et al. Impact of Donor Type in Patients with AML Given Allogeneic Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation After Low -Dose TBI -Based 
Regimen. Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American 
Association for Cancer Research. 2018;24(12):2794-2803. 
9. Metheny L, Politikos I, Ballen KK, et al. Guidelines for Adult Patient Selection and Conditioning Regimens in Cord Blood Transplant Recipients with Hematologic Malignancies and Aplastic Anemia. Transplant Cell Ther. 2021;27(4):286-291. 
10. Politikos I, Davis E, Nhaissi M, et al. Guidelines for Cord Blood Unit Selection. 
Biology of blood and marrow transplantation : journal of the American Society for 
Blood and Marrow Transplantation. 2020. 
11. Simon R. Optimal two -stage designs for phase II clinical trials. Controlled clinical 
trials. 1989;10(1):1-10. 
12. Kaplan EL, Meier P. Nonparametric Estimation from Incomplete Observations. J 
Am Stat Assoc. 1958;53(282):457-481. 
13. Pepe MS, Mori M. Kaplan -Meier, Marginal or Conditional -Probability Curves in 
Summarizing Competing Risks Failure Time Data. Stat Med. 1993;12(8):737-751. 
14. Cox DR. Regression Models and Life -Tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical 
Society Series B -Statistical Methodology. 1972;34(2):187- &. 
 