LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  1 of 131)Protocol Title
Comparison of 2 application techniques  for LET (lidocaine 4%;  epinephrine  0.1%;  tetracaine 0.5%) gel used 
prior to simple laceration repair
2)HSC Review History
n/a
3)Investigators
Kelly D. Young,  MD,  MS
Joshua Siembieda, MDManpreet Singh, MD
4)Objectives*
Describe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives.  
State the hypotheses to be tested.
Primary outcome: To compare pain scores  during laceration repair with first suture  placement  using 
standardized visual analog scale (VAS) between 2 different topical local anesthetic application techniques for using LET gel. Specifically, we are looking to see if applying LET  gel 3 times, spaced 10 minutes apart (triple 
LET) provides superior  anesthesia to one 30 minute application  (single LET).  Single LET is the current 
standard method  of application.
Secondary outcomes:
1)To compare provider satisfaction  scores using a Likert scale between the triple  LET  and single LET 
application techniques.
2)To compare parental satisfaction scores  using a Likert scale between the triple LET and single LET 
application techniques.
3)To compare the  need  for additional local anesthetic infiltration between the triple LET and  single LET 
application techniques.
Hypothesis: We believe that applying LET  gel 3 times  over a 30 minute period will provide superior anesthesia 
to one 30 minute long application.
4)Background*
Describe the relevant  prior experience and gaps in current knowledge. 
Describe any relevant preliminary data. 
Provide the scientific  or scholarly background for, rationale  for, and significance  of the Human Research  
based on  the existing  literature and how will it add to existing knowledge.  
Preventing pain in the pediatric emergency department is a high  priority. Studies have shown that sub-
therapeutic anesthesia  may result in more procedural  complications, increased sensitivity to pain in  the future, 
and increased anxiety related to medical  care.1
LET gel has  been  shown  to be safe and effective when used prior  to wound  repair.2
At our institution, the current method  used to apply the LET gel is one  30 minute  application.  This it the 
standard application method. However, other  institutions anecdotally report  using  different application 
techniques with superior results, specifically,  applying the LET gel 3 times,  in 10 minute intervals over a 30 
minute period.  
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  2 of 13There are no studies comparing  these 2 application techniques. We have only anecdotal  reports that the triple 
LET application technique decreases  patient  pain and reduces the need for additional  anesthetic  infiltration. 
5)Setting of the  Human Research
Describe the sites at  which your research team  will conduct the research. If applicable, describe:
We are a county  hospital  with a Pediatric ED, level 1 trauma center that sees ~24000 patients aged <  21 years 
annually. We have Pediatric Emergency Medicine (PEM)  trained physicians, PEM fellows, pediatric and  
emergency medicine residents, family medicine residents, medical students,  and pediatric nurse practitioners 
working in  our pediatric  emergency department.  
Identify the site(s) where  your research  team will identify and recruit potential  subjects.
We will identify and recruit potential  subjects  from those presenting to the Pediatric Emergency Department.
Identify the site(s) where  your research  procedures  will be performed.
The research will be  conducted within the Harbor-UCLA Medical  Center Pediatric  Emergency  Department.
Composition and involvement of any community  advisory board.  
 N/A
7)Resources  Available to Conduct the  Human Research
Justify the feasibility of recruiting the required  number  of suitable  subjects within  the agreed recruitment  
period. For example,  how  many  potential subjects do you have access to?  What  percentage of  those 
potential subjects do you  need to recruit?
We are a county  hospital  with a Pediatric ED, level 1 trauma center that sees ~24000 patients aged <  21 years 
annually. Of these there are a  number who will present with a laceration requiring repair.
We will be studying a convenience sample of patients requiring  simple laceration repairs; enrollment will be  
centered around availability of investigators.
Sample size calculations revealed that enrolling 22 patients per group would have 90% power  to detect a 1 point 
difference in visual analog pain score  (range  0-10) between groups  with  a standard deviation of 1, using a two  
sample t test with an  alpha of 0.05. We  estimate  that the enrollment  will be  complete  within 1 year after IRB 
approval. 
Describe the time that you will devote to conducting and completing the trial within  the agreed trial 
period. 
The Principal Investigator  will devote  ~5 hours a week/month to conducting  this study. The fellows involved 
will devote ~20  hours  a week/month.
Describe the number and qualifications of your staff, their experience in conducting  research, their 
knowledge of the local study sites, culture,  and society. 
We will have 2 fellows  enrolling patients in the Pediatric ED. 
Drs. Young, Siembieda, and Singh developed  the study design and  will be involved in data collection, analysis,  
and manuscript  preparation. 
All members of the research team have  completed  CITI training. The  team includes:
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  3 of 13Kelly Young  MD, MS, FACEP, FAAP: Dr. Young is a  pediatric emergency medicine  fellowship trained 
Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, the pediatric  emergency medicine fellowship director,  and has a Master of 
Science in Epidemiology and experience in research regarding pain with  procedures.  She is a  reviewer  for eight 
journals, an associate  editor for Annals of Emergency Medicine,  has been principal investigator or co-
investigator on several  projects including as  recipient of a K23  award. She has coauthored  13 peer-reviewed 
manuscripts.
Joshua Siembieda, MD: Dr. Siembieda is a pediatric emergency  medicine fellow with  prior  research  
experience. He  completed his residency in pediatrics. He anticipates completing his fellowship in June 2017.
Manpreet Singh, MD: Dr. Singh is an ultrasound fellow in the emergency department. He completed his residency in emergency medicine. He has prior research experience and is involved in several studies in  the 
emergency department.
Describe your facilities. 
Facilities: Harbor-UCLA Medical Center  has an  18 bed pediatric emergency department that  sees about 24,000 
patients per year.
Describe the availability of medical  or psychological  resources  that subjects might need as  a result of  
an anticipated consequences of the human research. 
We do not anticipate the need for any additional medical or psychological resources for the subjects  as a result 
of our research. The patients will be consented for two  known techniques of LET gel application, both  of which 
are considered appropriate for pre-laceration repair analgesia. Treatment will not be withheld  from the subjects.
Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the trial are adequately informed  about  
the protocol, the investigational product(s), and their trial-related duties and functions.
The investigators will meet regularly to discuss the status of  the study and  their roles and  duties.
8)Prior Approvals
Describe any approvals that will be obtained prior to commencing the research. (E.g.,  school,  external site. 
funding agency, laboratory, radiation safety, or biosafety approval.)
CITI training and IRB  approval as  required by LA BioMed. No  additional  product approvals will be required.
9)Study Design
a)Recruitment Methods
Describe when, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited.  
Subjects will be  identified on a convenience sample basis when a study investigators are available.  When a 
study investigator is  available, the patient  will be  identified on ORCHID, the patient/family will  be approached 
by the treating clinicians and asked for permission for the researcher to approach and  discuss the study.
Describe the source of subjects. 
The source of potential subjects will be those presenting to  the Pediatrics ED with  a laceration  requiring  repair 
and meeting the study inclusion criteria.
Describe the methods that will be used to identify  potential subjects. 
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  4 of 13Subjects will be  identified on a convenience sample basis when a study investigators are available.  When a 
study investigator is  available, the patient  will be  identified on ORCHID, the patient/family will  be approached 
by the treating clinicians and asked for permission for the researcher to approach and  discuss the study. 
Describe the amount and timing of any payments  to subjects.
Subjects will not be  compensated for their participation in this  study. 
Describe materials that will be  used to recruit subjects. Include copies of these documents  with the 
application. For advertisements,  submit the final copy of  printed advertisements. When  advertisements 
are taped for  broadcast, provide  the final audio/video tape. You may submit the wording of the 
advertisement prior  to taping to preclude re-taping because of  inappropriate wording, provided the  
HSC reviews  the final audio/video tape. 
There will be no advertisements.
b)Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria*
Describe how you  will screen for eligibility. 
When a study investigator is available,  the patient  will be identified on ORCHID,  the patient/family will be  
approached by  the treating clinicians and asked  for permission for the researcher to approach  and discuss  the 
study. 
Describe the criteria that define  who will be included or excluded  in your final  study  sample. 
Inclusion Criteria:
Patients with simple ( < 3 cm) lacerations  who are  > 7 years old  and < 18 years old, for whom the 
physician plans  to close the laceration  using simple superficial interrupted sutures.
Exclusion Criteria:
Lacerations involving the hands, feet, genitals, tongue, mucus  membranes,  nose, ears,  or occurring  over 
joints.
Patients who are  developmentally  delayed or have a disability preventing  them  from giving a reliable  
pain score.
Patients whose primary language is  other  than English  or Spanish.
Patients for whom procedural sedation is required.
Patients receiving  intranasal or oral  midazolam  or inhaled nitrous oxide.
c)Local Number of Subjects
Indicate the total  number of subjects to be accrued locally. 
If applicable, distinguish between  the number of subjects who are expected to be enrolled  and screen, and 
the number of subjects  needed to complete the research procedures (i.e., numbers of subjects excluding 
screen failures.)
We will be recruiting subjects on a convenience sample basis. We have  calculated  the need to  recruit  22 
subjects in each arm, for  a total of 44 subjects, to have a  90% power  to detect a 1 point difference in pain score, 
with an alpha  of 0.05.
d)Study-Wide Number of Subjects*
If this is  a multicenter  study, indicate the total number of subjects to be accrued across all sites.
N/A
e)Study Timelines*
Describe:
The duration of an individual subject’s  participation in the study.
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  5 of 13The duration anticipated  to enroll all study subjects.
The estimated  date  for the investigators to complete this  study  (complete primary analyses)
The enrolled patients  will be involved in the study through the duration of the consent process, laceration  repair, 
and time needed  to obtain pain score after procedure. There will be no follow-up beyond  the ED visit.
Estimated date to complete enrollment is 1 year after IRB approval. 
Estimated date to complete data  analysis and  manuscript is  2 years after IRB approval.
f)Study Endpoints*
Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints. 
Describe any primary or  secondary safety  endpoints.
Primary endpoint: To  compare pain scores during  laceration repair with first suture  placement  using 
standardized visual analog scale (VAS) between 2 different topical local anesthetic application techniques for using LET gel. Specifically, we are looking to see if applying LET  gel 3 times, spaced 10 minutes apart (triple 
LET) provides superior  anesthesia to one 30 minute application  (single LET).
Secondary endpoints:
1)To compare provider satisfaction  scores using a Likert scale between the triple  LET  and single LET 
application techniques.
2)To compare parental satisfaction scores  using a Likert scale between the triple LET and single LET 
application techniques.
3)To compare the  need  for additional local anesthetic infiltration between the triple LET and  single LET 
application techniques.
g)Procedures Involved  in the Human Research*
Describe and explain the  study  design.  
Provide a description  of all  procedures being performed and when they are performed, including 
procedures being  performed to monitor subjects for safety or minimize  risks. Include procedures being 
performed already  for diagnostic or  treatment  purposes and differentiate between these  and the 
procedures performed  solely for the research.  
Once patients are identified and consent  is obtained,  they will be  randomized to one of two groups.  One group 
will have LET gel applied to the laceration one  time for a duration  of 30 minutes.  The other group will have 
LET gel applied 3 times, at 10 minute  intervals. Between applications, the excess gel on the surface of the skin 
will be gently wiped  off, and a  new strip of LET gel  will be  applied.  The laceration repair will proceed in a 
normal sterile fashion, using standard  irrigation  and debridement techniques. Laceration repair  will occur within 
the 15 minutes  following the 30 minute period of LET application to  the wound.  The patient will be  asked to 
rate his/her pain immediately after the first suture  is placed or attempted using  the visual analogue scale (VAS, 
range 0-10). The decision  to use any additional anesthetic  infiltration will be left  to the performing provider. 
There will be 2 nurses involved in the study. One nurse will be  the patient’s  primary  nurse  and will be 
administering the  LET gel  (so will not be blinded,  but will not be involved in data collection). The other nurse 
will be obtaining the  VAS  immediately (Appendix  3) after the first suture  is placed,  using  a pre-prepared script 
(Appendix 3) and standardized  technique. The nurse  or research assistant will also be  blinded as to the method 
of LET gel application. The provider performing the laceration repair  will be  blinded. The research assistant  
will not be blinded and  will coordinate all involved providers and nurses, will ensure  correct timing in  LET gel 
administration, and  laceration repair  timing.  
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  6 of 13The investigator will interview for  demographic data, ensure proper application of LET  gel according  to 
randomized group, observe laceration  repair, record use of additional anesthesia,  (including all data  collection 
on data form).
Describe procedures taken  to lessen  the probability or magnitude  of risks. 
Risks to the patient  are minimal given that  LET is routinely used in  the pediatric ED and has been shown to be 
efficacious. To minimize  risk, patients  and/or clinicians can withdraw from the study at any time. 
Identify which procedures are being  done as part of  the Human Research and which are being 
conducted anyway for other reasons. 
The randomization  to the timing and number  of applications of LET gel is being done specifically for this study 
as are  the VAS post  placement of first suture.  Repair of the laceration  will be  done as part of standard of care.
Describe all drugs  and devices used in the research and the purpose  of their use, and their  regulatory 
approval status. 
LET gel is compounded by our pharmacy using the  formula shown in Appendix 2.
Describe the source records that will be used to collect  data about subjects. Attach all surveys, scripts, 
and data collection  forms.  
The attached  survey forms  can be seen in Appendices.
Describe what data will be collected including long-term follow-up.
There will not be  any long-term follow up.
a)Data and Specimen Banking*
If data or specimens will  be banked  for future use, describe where  the specimens  will be stored, how 
long they will  be stored, how the  specimens will be accessed, and who will have access to the 
specimens. 
We are not banking data for future  sharing or use. 
List the  data to be stored or associated with each specimen.  
N/A
Describe the procedures to release data or specimens, including: the process  to request a release, 
approvals required  for release, who can obtain data or specimens, and the data  to be provided with 
specimens.
We are not banking data for future  sharing or use by outside researchers. 
b)Data Management *
Describe the data analysis  plan, including any statistical  procedures.
Provide a power analysis.
The study hypothesis is that there will be at least  a 1 point difference in pain score. Sample  size is calculated 
such that  the study will have a power  of 90% to detect a 1 point difference  in pain scores using a two sample t  
test with an alpha of 0.05.
Describe the steps that  will be taken  secure  the data (e.g., training, authorization  of access, password 
protection, encryption, physical controls, certificates of confidentiality, and separation  of identifiers and 
data) during storage, use, and transmission.  
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  7 of 13Original data forms and  consent forms and scales  will be kept in  a locked office. We will not  record  any 
identifiers as  defined  by HIPAA  on our data  forms and scales. We  will assign a  random  unique study 
identification number  to each subject and this number will be  used  rather than the subject’s name on the data 
forms and in our database/excel spreadsheets. We  will not maintain a link between the study ID number to  each 
individual; however will still seek individual permission  to collect and use protected health  information  using  a 
PHI authorization.   
Data will be entered into password protected  excel  files and analyzed using SAS statistical analysis software.  
Excel files  will be de-identified  using  study numbers; no patient names or identifiers will remain. Study 
numbers will be  used to enter into excel files. Only the study investigators will have  access  to the data forms 
and files. All investigators will be trained  in confidentiality, CITI training. 
Data will be kept for at  least 3 years  after  completion of the research.  This includes data collection  forms, 
consent documents,  etc.  We will ensure  that all  data  is de-identified at that  time.
j)Confidentiality
Describe the local procedures  for maintenance of confidentiality.
Where and how data or specimens  will be stored locally?
2.Original data forms and source documents will be kept in locked filing  cabinet in  a locked office in  
Building D9.  
How long the data or specimens will  be stored locally?
3.Data will be  kept until the youngest subject  turns 18 years. 
Who will have access to the data or specimens locally? 
4.Only investigators  and research  assistants involved in the conduct of this study will have access to the  
data.
Who is responsible for receipt or  transmission of the  data  or specimens  locally? 
5.The investigator and research assistants are  responsible.
How data and specimens  will be transported locally?
Data will be secured using a password protected  excel spreadsheet and accessible only  by study personnel.
k)Provisions to Monitor the  Data to Ensure the  Safety  of subjects*
This is required  when  Human Research involves more than minimal risk to  subjects.
Because LET gel is  used  routinely in clinical practice and this study looks at 2 different methods of application, 
there is no more than minimal risk to the subjects.  There is no more than minimal risk to involved  nurses and 
physicians.
l)Withdrawal of Subjects*
Describe anticipated circumstances  under which subjects will be withdrawn from the research  
without their consent. 
Describe any procedures  for orderly termination. 
Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw from the  research, including 
partial withdrawal  from  procedures  with  continued  data collection.
The subject  will be withdrawn from  the study at any time if  the subject or legal guardian(s) choose to  withdraw. 
If the subject  is withdrawn after consent and data  collection has already taken place, the data collected will be 
entered into  the intention  to treat  group, but all  further data  collection will stop. A  statement is included in the  
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  8 of 13consent form that they must tell us if they do not wish us  to use the data already collected and we will destroy it 
if we  are still able to identify it as being from their  child.
No procedures will be  done should a subject withdraw from the study after application of the gel. Subjects will  
continue to receive standard  of care.
10) Risks to Subjects*
List the  reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or inconveniences  to the subjects related the 
subjects’ participation in the research.  Include as may be useful for the HSC’s consideration, describe the  
probability, magnitude,  duration, and reversibility of the risks.  Consider physical, psychological,  social, 
legal, and economic risks.
If applicable, indicate which procedures  may have  risks to the subjects that are currently unforeseeable.  
If applicable, indicate which procedures  may have  risks to an embryo or fetus should the subject be or 
become pregnant.
It is assumed that  the systemic absorption through topical use will be minimal. For example, commercially 
available combination of lidocaine+tetracaine (Pliagris) cream has pregnancy category B even though  
tetracaine alone  is under category C due to lack of data
If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects.
The risks to the subject involved in the laceration  repair are a function  of the medical  treatment required and not 
directly related to the study. The only foreseeable risk  related to the study is a theoretical increase  in pain, 
however, providers will provide  additional anesthesia as they  see appropriate. Also,  a theoretical  increase in 
total time in  ED exists, however, based  on current practices, no significant delays in  ED stay  time are  foreseen. 
In actuality,  because investigators  will be following up with clinicians  to make sure suturing  begins  within 15 
minutes of  completing  the LET application, ED total time may actually be shorter for participants.
There are no foreseeable risks to involved providers. The nurses and providers  in the Pediatric ER will know 
about the study and  they may opt out of the study if they choose.
11) Potential Benefits to Subjects*
Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects may experience from  taking  part in the research. 
Include as may be useful for the HSC’s consideration, the probability, magnitude, and duration of  the 
potential benefits. 
Indicate if there is no direct benefit. Do not include benefits to society or others
Potential benefits  to individual subjects include possible decreased pain, lower requirement for additional 
injected local anesthesia, decreased ED length of stay (since timing of LET and laceration repair will be monitored by  investigator).
12) Provisions to Protect the Privacy  Interests of Subjects
Describe the steps that  will be taken  to protect  subjects’ privacy interests. “Privacy interest” refers to  a 
person’s desire  to place limits on whom  they interact or  whom they provide personal information. 
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  9 of 13Describe what steps you  will take to make the  subjects  feel at ease with the research situation  in terms of  the 
questions being asked and the procedures  being  performed. “At ease” does not  refer to physical discomfort, 
but the sense of intrusiveness a subject might experience in response to  questions,  examinations,  and 
procedures.
Indicate how the  research team is permitted  to access any sources  of information about the subjects.
A provider will approach and ask patient  and parent or legal guardian for permission for a researcher to 
approach patient/family.  The investigator  will discuss the study design with the family and assure that medical 
care will  not be withheld as part of this study. The  investigator will  inform  the patient  and family that they can 
withdraw from  the study at any time. The  investigator will explain to the patient and  family  that the information 
recorded on the data collection forms will not include any  direct  identifiers and  will only  be accessible to  the 
study investigators.  The patient and family  will be assured that  their involvement in this study is completely 
voluntary, and their decision to take part in the study will not  affect the care they receive.
All interactions  with the subjects and their  parent/legal guardian  will take place  in a private setting such as a 
private exam  room. 
13) Compensation for  Research-Related  Injury
If the research involves more than minimal risk to subjects,  describe  the available  compensation  in the event 
of research related injury.
There is no more than  minimal risk to subjects. There is no anticipated research related injury expected  and no 
compensation for subjects involved in the  study.
14) Economic  Burden to Subjects
Describe any costs that subjects may be  responsible for because of  participation  in the research.
There will be no economic burden  to the subjects. Subjects will be responsible for the costs of their visit to the  
Pediatric Emergency Department including  the LET gel.
15) Consent Process
Indicate whether you will you be obtaining consent,  and if so  describe:
Where will  the consent process take place  
Any waiting period  available between informing the prospective subject and obtaining  the consent.
Any process  to ensure ongoing consent.
Whether you will  be following “SOP: Informed Consent Process for Research (HRP-090).”  If not, 
describe: 
oThe role of the  individuals listed in the  application as being involved in the consent process. 
oThe time that will be devoted to the consent  discussion. 
oSteps that will be taken  to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence. 
oSteps that will be taken  to ensure the subjects’  understanding.
Consent will be obtained from the legal  guardian(s) in  the subject’s room  in the pediatric emergency 
department. Assents will be obtained  from the patient as well. 
Appropriate time will be  given to the patient  and legal guardian to  complete  the assent and  consent process. 
No process will be  required to ensure  ongoing consent since  the researcher will be  present  from  the time 
consent is  obtained  through the end of the  subject’s involvement in the study. The legal guardian(s) will be 
given written information about the  consent process and study. 
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  10 of 13The consent  process will follow the  conditions of HRP-090.
Non-English Speaking  Subjects
Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by  prospective  subjects or 
representatives. 
If subjects who  do not speak  English will  be enrolled,  describe  the process  to ensure that the oral 
and written information  provided  to those subjects will be in that language.
Spanish speaking families will be included  in the  study.  
When enrolled, a  consent form translated into Spanish will be  used and either translational services  or a trained 
observer fluent in Spanish will be used during the  data collection and the consent process.  
After IRB approval of the  English  consent, an identical Spanish consent will be prepared.
Waiver or  Alteration of the Consent Process  (consent will  not be  obtained, required information will  
not be disclosed, or the research involves  deception)
N/A
Subjects who are not  yet adults  (infants,  children, teenagers)
Describe the criteria that will be used to determine whether a prospective subject has  not attained 
the legal age for consent to treatments or procedures involved in  the Human Research  under the 
applicable law of the  jurisdiction  in which the  Human Research  will be conducted. (E.g., individuals 
under the  age of 18 years.)
oFor research conducted in the state,  review “SOP: Legally  Authorized Representatives, 
Children, and Guardians (HRP-013)” to be aware of which individuals in the state meet  the 
definition of “children.”
Parental permission will be obtained from:
oOne parent even if the other parent is alive, known,  competent, reasonably available, and shares legal 
responsibility for the  care and custody of  the child.
Permission will be obtained  from individuals other than parents if they are  the legal guardians with  
documentation supporting this and not foster parents. 
Assent will be obtained on all patients enrolled  in the study. All  patients  will be  at least 7 years old.  
Assent will be documented with the child’s signature  (in writing) on the prepared  and approved  assent  form.
Cognitively Impaired  Adults
Describe the process to determine whether an individual  is capable of consent.
N/A
Adults Unable to Consent
List the  individuals from  whom  permission  will be  obtained in order  of priority. (E.g., durable power of  
attorney for  health care, court appointed guardian for health care  decisions, spouse, and adult child.) 
N/A
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  11 of 1316) Process to Document Consent in Writing
Describe whether you will be following “SOP: Written Documentation  of Consent  (HRP-091).” If not,  
describe whether and how  consent  of the subject  will be documented in writing.
Written consent will be obtained by the parent/legal  guardian  for all  children  enrolled. Assent  will be obtained 
from all the subjects enrolled in the study. The written consent will follow “SOP: Written Documentation of Consent (HRP-091).”  Adequate provisions  will be  made to solicit the permission of the legal  guardian  of the 
child. 
17) Vulnerable Populations
If the Human Research involves  individuals who are vulnerable to coercion or undue influence, describe  
additional safeguards included  to protect  their rights  and welfare.
The population involved in this study  is a vulnerable population in that all  subjects are  children. The population 
of the pediatric emergency department  at Harbor UCLA is a  primarily economically and  educationally 
disadvantaged population.
In order  to minimize risks to this population the following safe  guards  will be  added:
-The research assistant will verbally read  the consent information  aloud while the  legal guardians 
read it to ensure that  illiteracy does not prevent  the legal guardians from  understanding the study
-The research assistant will have the legal guardians verbalize back  the study plan, what  the study is 
for, and that they are allowed to withdraw their child at any time
-Legal guardians who are not able  to consent  will not have their child  enrolled  in the study.
-The physician  providing care for  the patient will not  be involved in data collection, consent, 
enrollment.
Adults unable to consent - Excluded
Individuals who are not yet adults (infants,  children, teenagers) - Included
Pregnant women  – Included (permission will be sought from parent/legal guardian and their assent 
will be sought unless they are  an emancipated  minors  as defined by Cal. Fam. Code §7002 and 
Cal. Fam. Code  §7050(e) – pregnancy is not among conditions that emancipate  a minor)
Prisoners - Excluded
18) Drugs or  Devices
If the Human Research involves  drugs  or device, describe your plans to  store, handle, and administer  those 
drugs or  devices so that they will be used  only on subjects and be  used only by authorized  investigators.
The study involves  a medication which  is routinely  used  in the pediatric emergency department. There will not 
be any special supply or storage of the medication for this study, as it is a standard, stocked medication in  our 
department.
19) Multi-Site Human  Research*
This is  not a multi site research project.
20) Community-Based Participatory Research
Describe involvement of the community  in the design and conduct  of the research. 
Note: “Community-based  Participatory Research”  is a collaborative  approach to  research  that equitably  
involves all partners in the research  process and recognizes the unique strengths that each brings.  
Community-based Participatory Research  begins  with a research topic of  importance  to the community,  has 
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  12 of 13the aim of combining knowledge with action and achieving social change  to improve health outcomes  and 
eliminate health  disparities
Our goal is  to reduce perceived pain  in the pediatric emergency department. By comparing two different 
methods of  topical  anesthetic applications, we hope to discover a superior application method  than is currently 
used in our  ED. 
21) Sharing  of Results with Subjects
Describe whether results  (study results or individual subject results, such as  results  of investigational 
diagnostic tests, genetic tests, or incidental findings) will be shared with  subjects  or others (e.g., the 
subject’s primary care physicians)  and if so, describe how it will  be shared.
Study results  will be available to study participants and nurses  who  participate after data  analysis  and 
manuscript preparation if they express  a desire  to collect information.  If they express an interest, participants 
will be given the  contact  information of the primary  investigator so  they can email a  request  to receive a copy of 
the manuscript  after publication.
References
1.Young KD. What’s New  in Topical  Anesthesia. Clinical Pediatric Emergency Medicine 2007;8(4): 
232-239.
2.Harman  S, Zemak R, Duncan MJ, et al. Efficacy of pain control with topical lidocaine–epinephrine – 
tetracaine during laceration  repair with tissue adhesivein children: a randomized controlled trial. 
CMAJ. 2013 Sep 17;185(13):E629-34.
3.Priestley  S, Kelly AM,  Chow  L, et al. Application of topical local anesthetic at triage reduces 
treatment time for children with lacerations:  a randomized controlled trial. Ann Emerg  Med  
2003;42:34-40.
4.Ordog GJ,  Ordog  C. The efficacy of TAC (tetracaine, adrenaline,  and cocaine) with  various  wound-
application durations.  Acad Emerg  Med 1994;1:360-3.
5.Smith GA,  Strausbaugh  SD, Harbeck-Weber C, et al. Comparison of topical anesthetics with  
lidocaine infiltration  during laceration repair in children. Clin Pediatr  (Phila)  1997;36:17-23.
6.Grant SA, Hoffman RS. Use of tetracaine, epinephrine, and cocaine as a topical anesthetic  in the 
emergency department.  Ann Emerg Med  1992;21:987-97.
7.Tripp  M, Dowd DD, Eitel DR. TAC toxicity in the emergency department. Ann Emerg Med 
1991;20:106-7.
8.Eidelman  A, Weiss  JM, Enu IK,  et al. Comparative efficacy and costs of various topical  anesthetics 
for repair of  dermal lacerations: a systematic review of  randomized, controlled trials.  J Clin Anesth 
2005;17:106-16.
9.Resch  K, Schilling C,  Borchert BD, et al.  Topical anesthesia  for pediatric  lacerations:  a randomized 
trial of lidocaine-epinephrinetetracaine  solution  versus gel. Ann Emerg Med 1998;32:693-7.
10. Ferguson C, Loryman B, Body R. Best evidence topic  report.  Topical  anaesthetic  versus  
lidocaine infiltration  to allow closure of skin wounds in children.  Emerg  Med  J 2005;22:507-9.
11. Singer AJ, Stark MJ. Pretreatment of lacerations with  lidocaine,  epinephrine, and tetracaine at 
triage: a randomized  double-blind  trial. Acad  Emerg Med  2000;7:751-6.
12. White NJ, Kim MK, Brousseau  DC,  et al. The anesthetic  effectiveness  of lidocaine-adrenaline-
tetracaine gel  on finger lacerations. Pediatric Emerg  Care  2004;20:812-5.
13. Nykanen D, Kissoon N, Rieder  M, et al. Comparison of a topical mixture of lidocaine and 
prilocaine (EMLA) versus 1% lidocaine infiltration  on wound  healing. Pediatr Emerg Care 
1991;7:15-7.
14. Zempsky WT, Karasic RB. EMLA versus TAC for  topical  anesthesia  of extremity wounds in 
children. Ann Emerg Med 1997;30:163-6.
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016
LET Comparison Study
Revised: June 22, 2016
Page  13 of 1315. Singer AJ, Stark MJ. LET versus EMLA  for pretreating lacerations: a randomized trial. Acad 
Emerg Med  2001;8:223-30.
IRB NUMBER: 30846-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 06/22/2016