Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  1 MD Anderson IND Sponsor Cover Sheet  
Protocol ID  2013 -0261  
Protocol Title  A Phase I/II study of Lenalidomide and Obinutuzumab (GA101) in 
Relapsed Indolent Non -Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  
Protocol Phase  I/II 
Protocol Version  MOD003  
Version Date  11.11.2020  
Protocol PI  Loretta Nastoupil  
Department  Lymphoma/Myeloma  
IND Sponsor  MD Anderson Cancer Center  
IND #  120166  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  2  MD Ande rson Cance r Center 
Hous ton, Texas 
 
 
Study  Title 
 
A Phas e I/II study of Lenalidomid e and Ob inutuzumab (GA101) in Relaps ed 
Indolent Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  
 
Study Drug 
Obinutuzumab 
Lenalido mide 
Support  Provided  By 
Genent ech, Inc. 
 
 
Sponsor Investigator 
 
Loretta Nastoupil  MD 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Study Nu mber:  2013 -0261 
 
Protocol Versio n Date: 11.11.2020  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  3 2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma  
  
 
 
LIST OF APPEN DICES  
 
APPENDIX  A: Pr ioritizat ion List [located in MD Ander son’s Protocol 
Documen t Onlin e (PDOL ) system] 
APPENDIX  B: Prot ocol Checklist (located in MD Ander son’s PDO L system) 
APPEND IX C: Investi gator’s Broc hure – Obinu tuzumab IB v.7 (located in 
MD Ander son’s PDO L system)  
APPENDIX D: Ca lculation of C reatinine Clearance Using the Cockcroft– 
Gault Formula  
APPEND IX E: SAFE TY REPORT ING FAX COVE R SHEET  
APPE NDIX F: CURRENT NCI CO MMON TERMINOL OGY CRIT ERIA FOR  
ADVERSE EVENT S (CTCAE) 
APPENDI X G: GUIDELINE S FOR OB INUTUZUMAB PR EPAR ATION A ND 
ADM INIST RATI ON 
APPENDIX  H: Ri sks of Fetal Exposure, Pregnanc y Testing Guideline s and 
Acceptab l e Birth Control Methods  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  4 2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma  
  
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIAT IONS  AND DEFINITI ON OF TERMS  
 
 
Abbrevi ation Definition  
 
ABC activated B c ell 
 
ADCC antibody- dependent cellular cytotoxicity  
 
AE advers e event  
 
anti-HBc antibody to h epatiti s B core antigen 
aPTT activated partial throm boplastin time 
BM bone ma rrow 
 
ASCO American So ciety of Clinical Oncology 
 
AUC area under the concen tration−time curve 
 
BSA body surfac e area 
 
CDC compleme nt-depe ndent cytotoxicity  
 
CHO P cyclophospha mide, doxorubic in, vincristine , predn isone 
CLL chron ic lymphocytic leukemia 
Cmax maximum co ncentration o bserved 
CNS  centr al nervo us system 
 
CR complete res ponse or complet e remission 
 
Cru unconfir med comp lete re sponse 
 
CSR Clinical Study Report 
 
D Day 
 
DFS disease-free survival 
 
DLBC L diffus e large B-cell lympho ma 
 
DLT dose- limitin g toxicity 
 
EC Ethics  Commi ttee 
 
ECHO  echoca rdiogram 
 
ECOG  Eastern Coop erative On cology Group 
 
eCRF  electron ic Ca se Repo rt Form 
 
EDC  electron ic data capture 
 
EFS event -free sur vival 
 
F phenylal anine 
 
FACS fluorescent-activate d cell sorter 
FcγR leukocyt e rec eptor s for the Fc portion of IgG 
18F-FDG  18F-fleurodeoxygluc ose 
 
FFPE formali n-fixed paraffin- embe dded 
 
FISH fluorescence in situ hybridization 
 
GCB  germ inal cent er B cell 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  5 2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma  
  
 
 
Abbrevi ation Definition  
 
GCP  Good Clinical Pract ice 
 
GCS F granulocyte-colony stimulating factor 
 
GEP 
G  
gene expression profili ng 
GA10 1(obinut uzumab) 
 
G-FC GA10 1(obinut uzumab) in combinati on wi th fludarab ine 
and cy clopho sphamide 
HAH A human an ti-human antibodies 
 
HBcAb hepatiti s B core antibod yd 
 
HBsAg  hepatitis  B su rface a ntigen 
 
HBV hepatit s B virus 
 
HCV  hepatitis  C virus  
 
HD high dose 
 
HTLV human T- cell leukemi a virus 
 
ICH Interna tional Conference on Harmoni sation  
 
Ig immuno globulin 
 
IHC immuno histochemis try 
 
IND Investigatio nal New Drug 
 
IMC Internal Monit oring Committ ee 
 
IRR infusi on-related reaction 
 
IV intraveno us 
 
IL interleuk in 
 
IPI Internation al Prog nostic Index  
 
IVRS interactive v oice respon se system 
 
LD low dose 
 
LVEF left ventric ular ejecti on fraction 
 
LVSD left ventricul ar systol ic dysfunction 
 
MCL  mantle- cell lympho ma 
 
MUGA  multigated ac quisition scan 
 
NCI CTCA E Natio nal Cancer In stitute Common Te rminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events  
 
NHL non-Hodg kin’s lympho ma 
NONMEM Non-Linear Mi xed Effect Model 
ORR overal l response rate 
OS overal l survival  
 
PD progressive disease 
 
PICC peripherall y inserted central catheter 
 
PK pharm acokine tic 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  6 2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma  
  
 
 
Abbrevi ation Definition  
PET positron emission tomo graphy  
PFS progression- free su rvival  
PML progressive  multifocal leukoenceph alopathy  
PR partial response or pa rtial remission  
R-CHOP  rituxima b in combinati on with cyclo phosphamide,  
 doxor ubicin, vincr istine, predn isone 
SAE serious adver se event  
SD stable disease  
SDI shorter duration of infusion 
SLL small lympho cytic lymphoma 
SOC Scientific Oversight Committee  
TLS tumor  lysis sy ndrome 
ULN upper limit o f normal 
V valine  
WHO  World Health Organization 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  7 2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma  
  
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
  
 
1.1 DISEAS E BACKGROUND  
 
1.1.1  NON-HODGKIN ’S  LYMPHOMA  
 
Non-Hodg kin’s lymphoma (NHL ) is the most commo n hematolog ic ma lignancy i n 
adults. It is estimated that in 2010 there were 93,172 new cases o f NHL in Europe 
and 65,54 0 new cases of NHL in the United States (American Cancer Society 2010; 
GLOBOCA N 2010) . The ma jority of N HLs are of B- cell origin and are   
characterized by the express ion of mem brane antigen CD2 0 which is im portant in 
cell cycle initiation and different iation (Anders on et al. 1984).  
 
Indolent NHLs are a heterog eneou s group of malignant lymph omas and accoun t for 
abou t one-third of all NHLs. Follicular lympho ma is the most c ommon subty pe of  
indolen t NHL in the Wester n hemispher e and is assoc iated with fo llicle cente r B 
cells t hat typically contain the BCL2 chromosom e translocation t(14:18) , whic h  
leads to overexpr ession o f the intracel lular anti-apopto tic protein B cl-2. Al though 
follicular lymphom a is the most commo n subtype of indolen t NHL, there are also 
many histological non-follicular subtypes , includin g marg inal zone lymphom a (MZL),  
and sm all lympho cytic lymphom a (SLL) .  Early-stage indolent NHL may be 
effec tively treated with radiat ion therapy , but  advanced stages remain i ncurable. 
 
1.1.2  NATURAL HISTORY AND CURRE NT MANAGEMENT OF 
INDOLENT NON-HODGKIN 'S  LYMPHOMA  
 
The clinica l cours e of indolen t NHL is charac terize d by remission and relapse 
(Gallaghe r et al. 1986 ). The diseas e often initially re sponds t o 
immuno chemothe rapy, but most patient s eventuall y suffer multipl e relapses 
distinguished by increasing resistanc e and decreas ing durat ion of response in 
subsequent lines of therapy . Patients with advan ce-stage disease are not  
usuall y cured with conventiona l treatmen t and ultimately die from recurrent 
disease or treatment -related toxicity. 
 
a. Immunochemotherapy  in Follicular Lym phoma  
There is no st andar d treatmen t for the management of advanced follicular 
lymphoma , and data from the Nationa l LymphoCar e registr y demonstrat e that 
practice var ies widely among physician s (Friedber g et al. 2009) .  For follicular 
lymphom a patients requiring treatment , immuno chemot herapy with rituximab, a 
mono clonal antibody directed agains t CD20 , plus che motherapy has 
demonstra ted impr ovement s in response rates, pr ogression -free su rvival (PFS ), 
and over all survival compared with chemotherap y alone in fou r studies 
(Hidde mann et al. 2005; Herold et al. 2007; Marcu s et al. 2008; Salle s et al.  
2008) . Rituximab in co mbina tion with chemother apy (e.g., CHOP 
[cyclopho spham ide, doxorubi cin, vincristine, and prednisone ], CVP 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  8 2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma  
  
 
 
[cyclopho spham ide, vincristine, and prednisone], or purine analogue– based 
scheme s such as those with fludarab ine or bendamustine)  for newly diagnosed 
patient s with advance d Stage III and IV dise ase requi ring treatment is strongly 
supported by both the 2009 European Socie ty for Medi cal Oncology ( ESMO)  
Guidelines Working Group recomm enda tions (level of evidence: I; grade of 
recom mendat ion: B) and the 2010 National Comp rehensiv e Cancer Network 
(NCCN) gu ideline s (Catego ry 1 recomme ndation based on high-level eviden ce, 
with a unifor m NCCN c onsensus ) (Dreyling 2009; Zelenetz et al. 2010).  
 
b. Immunochemotherap y in Non-Follicular  Indolent  Lymphoma  
Rituximab has also de monst rated efficac y in patients with non-follicular indolent  
lymphoma , including MZL, WM, and SLL (Foran et al. 2000; Treon et al. 2001; 
Hainsworth et al. 2003) .  A Phas e II trial conducted in 3 9 patient s with MZL 
(Brow n et al. 2009 ) showed high r espons e rates (overal l respons e rate [ORR ] of 
85%; complet e respons e [CR] rate of 54%) with durable respons es (79.5 % PFS 
after 3.1 years ) followin g treatmen t with rituximab and chemothe rapy. 
 
Rituxima b is listed as an option for the treatmen t of advance d MZL in the most  
recen t ESM O and NCC N Clinical Practice Guideline s (Zelenet z et al. 2010; 
Zucca et al. 2010).  
 
c. Maintenance Therapy  after  Induction Treatment  
In addition to i mmun ochemotherapy induc tion, two randomized c linical tr ials have 
demonstrated the benef it of maintenan ce rituximab in resp onding patients with both 
previously untreated and relaps ed follicular lymphoma.  In a clinical trial of patients 
with relap sed follicular lymphoma , respo nders to ri tuximab p lus CHO P (R-CHOP) 
or CHOP under went a secon d rando mization to maintenanc e rituxima b or 
observation .  Patient s who received ma intenanc e rituxima b demonstrated a 
super ior median PFS (52 vs. 15 months ) and 3-year overall survival ( 85% vs. 77%) 
compared with patients who under went observation (van Oers et al. 2006). 
Updated re sults from this study, with a me dian follow-up of 6 year s, continue d to 
demonstrate  a signific ant improvement in PFS with rituxima b maintenanc e versus 
observation (median PFS: 3.7 years vs. 1.3 years ; p< 0.001; hazard ratio, 0.55) 
and in 5- year overal l surviva l (74% vs. 64%) after either R-CHOP or CHOP  
induction (van Oers et al. 2010).  More recently, a study of patients with previous ly 
untreated fo llicular lymphom a that respond ed to rituximab in combinat ion with C VP, 
CHOP, or FCM (fludarabi ne, cyclophospha mide, and mitoxan trone) who were later 
rando mized to obser vation or 2 y ears of maint enance rituximab (the Primary 
Rituxima b and Maintenanc e [PRIMA] trial) demonstrated an im provement in PFS  
with the additio n of maintenance ritux imab (2-year PFS of 82% for rituximab 
maintenance compared with 66% for the obse rvation group [p < 0.001;  hazard  ratio, 
0.50] ) (Salle s et al. 2011).  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  9 2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma  
  
 
 
1.2 OBINUTUZUMAB BACKGROUND  
 
1.2.1  STRUCTURE AND MECHA NISM OF ACTION OF OBINU TUZUMAB  
 
Obinut uzumab (R O5072759) is a nove l, Type II, glycoengi neered monoc lonal 
antibod y derive d by human izatio n of the parental B- Ly1 mous e antibody . (Bee rs 
et al. 2010 ; Mössner et al. 2010 , Aldujai  et al. 2011).  
 
Obinutuzumab has an elbow hinge amino acid exch ange in the Fc region o f the 
antibody that result s in a different angle of b inding to the CD20 epitope compared 
to  Type I anti-CD20 antibodies . This Type II bi nding induces more  potent direct 
cell death compare d to Type I antibodies , including rituximab . In ad dition, the Fc 
portion of obinutu zumab has been glycoengineered to r educe fucosyla tion 
resulting in hi gher affinit y for the FcγRIIIa receptor s on natural killer cells and 
monocy tes leading to enhan ced ADCC.  
 
Given the significantly greater ADCC and direct cell-death induction, it is possible 
that obinu tuzumab may have greater efficacy than rituximab, particularly in th e 
80% to 85% of patient s who are carrier s of the FcγRIIIa low-affinit y receptor 
polymorphism.  
 
1.2.2  NONCLINICAL EFFIC ACY WITH OBINUTUZ UMAB 
 
Obinut uzumab has demonstrated in vivo efficacy super ior to that of rituxima b in 
various h uman lympho ma xeno graft models.  Both antibodie s have been 
compare d in human SUDHL -4 ce lls (a di ffuse large B-cell lymphoma [DLBCL] 
model ) that were subcutaneously injected into sever e combined im munodefi cient 
beige mice.  Therapy bega n when tumor s were established and rapid ly growing. 
 
It was shown that rituximab at 10 mg/kg in hibited tumor growth more than 
rituxima b at 1 mg/kg ; however , increasing the dose to 30 mg/k g did not result in 
increased efficac y of ri tuximab. In contrast , obinutuzumab showed a dose - 
dependen t increas e in efficacy in the range of 1 −30 mg/k g and resulted in 
complet e tumo r regress ion in all animals and in lasting tumo r eradication in 9 of 
10 animal s at the highes t dose of 30 mg/kg and in 1 of 10 ani mals at a dose of 
10 mg/kg. 
 
Additiona l studies have shown that obinutu zumab treatment was able to control 
tumo r growt h when vehicle- and rituximab-treated tumors were not controlled 
(Mössne r et al. 2010).  
 
For more detailed nonclinical information on obinutuzum ab, please refer to th e 
curren t version of the obinutu zumab Investigato r’s Broc hure. 
 
 
1.2.3  CLINICAL  EXPERIENCE WITH  OBINUTUZUMAB  IN NON- 
HODGKI N’S LYMPHOMA  
 
As of December 2011, cl inical data on obinutuzumab are av ailable from four Phase 
I or II studie s (Studie s BO20999 , BO21003 , BO2100 0, and JO21900 ) and two 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
Protocol  Version:  
11.11.2020  10 2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma  
  
 
 
Phas e III studies (Studies GAO4753 g and BO21004/CLL- 11). More than 
550 patients with CD20 -positive malign ant disease have been treated with 
obinutuzumab.  
 
Results from the aggressive and indolen t NHL cohorts in o ngoing st udies ar e 
describe d below.  
 
1. Study BO2099 9 (Phas e I/II): OBI NUTUZ UMAB Monot herapy  
 
 
 
Patients  with Indolent  Non-Hodgkin's  Lym phoma  
Forty patient s with relapse d or refractor y indolen t NHL were random ized to receive 
obinutuzumab in a low- dose cohort (n = 18) or a high-dose cohor t (n = 22). The low- 
dose cohort r eceived obi nutuzumab 400 mg on Days 1 and 8 of Cycle 1 and 
400 mg on Day 1 of Cyc les 2–8 ( 21-day cycles), and the high-dose cohor t received 
obinutuzumab 1600 mg on Days 1 and 8 of Cycle 1 fo llowed b y 800 mg on Day 1 
of Cycles 2–8 (21-day cycles).  Patients had been pretreated with a median o f three 
prior regimens  (range,  1−11), and the majority (38 o f 40) had received pr ior 
rituximab treatment.  More  than half of t hese patient s (22 of 40) were considered to 
be rituximab refractor y, and 35% (14 of 40) of all patient s had previously received  
an autologou s stem -cell transplant. The best overal l respons e rate i n the follicular 
lymphoma patients was 36% in the low-dose cohor t (1/14 CR/CRu, 4/14  PR) and 
60
% in the high-dose c ohort (4/20 CR/CRu, 8/20 PR). (Salle s et al. 2011) 
 
The most commo n advers e even t of any grade was infusion-related reactio n (IRR; 
72% low-dose cohort , 73% high-dose c ohort). Fifty-five percent of patients had 
Grad e 3 or 4 adver se events ; the most commo n Grad e 3/4 adverse ev ents across 
cohort s were infections (14%) , neutropen ia (14%), and IRRs (9%), all in the high- 
dose coho rt. 
 
Patients with Aggressiv e Non-Hodgkin 's Lymp homa  
Forty pat ient s with aggress ive NHL were enrolled into the P hase II part of the 
study . Of these patients with aggressive NHL (25 with DLBCL and 15 wi th 
mantle -cell lymphom a [MCL]) , 19 were treated in the high-dose cohor t (15 with 
DLBCL and 4 with MCL) and 21 were treated in the low- dose cohor t (10 with 
DLBCL and 11 with MC L). Patients were he avily pretreate d (median of three  
prior therapies) , with 63% of patients having not responde d to or relapse d within 
6 month s after a previous rituximab-conta ining regimen (rituximab refractor y). 
The best overal l respons e rate was 24% in the low- dose cohort (DLBCL: 2 PR, 1 
CRu); MCL: 2 CR)
 and 37% in the high- dose cohor t (DLBCL : 3 CR, 2 PR; MCL: 
2 PR). (Morschhauser et al. 2011)  
 
The most commo n advers e event of any grade was IRR (81% low dose cohort,  
68% high dose cohort) .  Grade 3 or 4 adve rse event s occurring with ≥ 5% 
frequenc y were anemia (10%) , thrombocy topeni a (8%), IRR ( 8%), tumor lysis 
syndrom e (5%) and cardiac failure (5%).  Adverse event s did not incr ease in th e 
high-dose c ohort compared to the low- dose cohort . There was one Grade 5 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  10  
  
 
 
adverse event, cardiorespiratory arres t that was thought to be secondar y to 
ventricular arrhy thmia.  
 
b. Study BO2100 3 (Phas e II): Obinut uzuma b Monot herapy pl us 
Maintenance  
Study B O21003 is an ongoing, open- label, multicente r, randomi zed, Phase I/II study 
to investigate the efficacy and safety of obinut uzumab monothe rapy compared with 
that of rituxima b monot herapy in patient s with relapsed indolent NHL. In the Phase  
II portio n of the study 175 patients (149 follicular, 26 non-follicular) were randomized 
to receive 4 weekly i nfusions of obinu tuzumab (1000 mg) or rit uximab (375mg/m2). 
Patients without progr essio n continued ther apy with obinut uzumab or rituximab 
every 2 month s for 2 years . The ORR at the end of treatmen t in the follicular 
lymphom a cohor t was 45% for obinut uzumab and 33% for rituxim ab, as assessed  
by the investigators . A blinded centra l review was also performed and the ORR was 
45% for obinu tuzumab and 27% for rituximab. (Sehn et al. 2011)  
 
More IRRs were repor ted in the obinut uzumab arm (any grade: 72% vs. 49%, 
Grad e 3/4: 11% vs. 5%, for obinutuzu mab and rituximab, respect ively). Othe r AEs 
of any grade that occurre d with ≥ 5% frequenc y with obinut uzumab com pared to 
rituximab were fatigue, cough , back pain, and decreased ap petite. 
 
c. Study BO21000 (Phas e Ib): Obinut uzuma b in Combination wi th 
Chemotherapy  
Study BO21 000 is an ongoing, open-label, randomized Phas e I/II trial 
investigatin g two dose s of obinutuzumab (400 mg in all cycles and 1600 cycle 
1/800 mg s ubsequent cycles) in combination with chemotherapy given every 4 
weeks for a maximum of six cycles (obinutuz umab p lus fludarabine and 
cyclopho sphamid e [G-FC]) or a maximum of ei ght cycles ( obinut uzuma b plus 
CHO P [G-CHOP] ) in patient s with relapsed or refract ory follicu lar lymphoma.  
Patient s with a PR or CR who comp lete a minimum of f our cycles of G-FC or six 
cycles of G- CHO P have the optio n of receivin g main tenanc e therapy with 
obinutuzumab alone every 3 mo nths fo r up to 2 y ears.  All patients (2 8/28) who 
received G-CHOP and 22/28 who received G-FC compl eted treatment . Reasons 
for withdrawa l from the G-FC arm were PD (1 patient) , neutropeni a (3 patients)  
and rash and infection (1 patient each) (Radfor d et al. 2011) 
 
Overall , the rate of advers e events  was similar betwe en the high- dose and low- 
dose arms . The most commo n AE in both groups was IRRs, mostl y during   
cycle 1. The rate of IRRs was 64% of patie nts in the G-CHOP arm and 79% of 
patient s in the G-FC arm; 7% of IRR events were Grade 3 or 4 ev ents in both 
chemotherapy arms . There were fewer dose delays , dose reduc tions, and 
neutropeni a in the G-CHO P versus the G-FC cohorts.  Grad e 3/4 neutropenia 
was seen in 39% of the G-CHO P patient s and 50% of the G-FC patients. In the 
G-CHO P arm 6% of cycle s were delayed due to neutropeni a or infection and the 
dose of any CHOP componen t was reduced in 29% of pat ien ts. In the G-FC a rm, 
10% of cycle s were delayed due to neutropenia or infection with dose reduc tions 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  11  
  
 
 
in 36% of patien ts. Three deaths w ere report ed following G-FC i nduct ion 
treatm ent (progressive disease, n=1; underlying Parkinson’ s disease , n=1; and 
chroni c obstructiv e pulmonar y disease du ring maintenance , n=1) with none 
considered to be treatment -related.  
 
The overall respon se rate (ORR ) at the end of induc tion was 96% in the G-CHOP 
group (39% CR) and 93% in the G-FC gr oup (50% CR). Data from the G-CH OP 
cohor t were compared in a matched -pair analysis to the rituximab plus CHOP (R- 
CHOP ) arm from study M3902 2 (EORT C 20981 ) in a si milar patient populati on. 
Respon se ra tes to G- CHO P compare d favorably to respons e rates to R- CHOP.  
 
The protocol was amende d to include obinutuz umab at a flat dose of 1000 mg 
plus bendamustine (G- bendamu stine) or CHOP in prev iously untreated patie nts 
with follicula r lymphoma .  Again , patients with a PR or CR who comp lete a 
minimum of six cycle s of G- CHOP  or four cycle s of G- bendamus tine have the 
option of recei ving ma inten ance therapy wit h GA10 1 alone every 3 month s for up 
to 2 years . The Data and Saf ety Monitoring Board evaluated safet y of the first 20 
patients without requesting modi fications to the prot ocol. 
 
d. Study  GAO4753g  (Phase III): Obinutuzumab in Combination wi th 
Chemotherapy  
Study GAO4753 g is an ongoi ng, open-l abel, multicen ter, rando mized , Phas e III 
study to investigat e the efficac y and safet y of bendamus tine com pared with 
bendamus tine plus obinu tuzumab in patients with rituximab-refrac tory indolent 
NHL. Approxima tely 360 patients will be enrolled. The Data and Safety 
Monitor ing Board evaluated safety of the first 20 patients without reques ting 
modification s to the protoco l. Since the initial r eview of the first 20 patients in 
April 2011 , two additional Data and Safety Monitor ing Board meetings have 
convened, and they recommended that the trial continue.  
 
e. Summary of Safety and Effic acy Results 
With considerat ion of the available obinutuzuma b Phase I and II data,  
obinutuzumab has an acceptable safet y profile and there is rationale t o 
investigate whether obinutuzumab is an e ffective trea tment for patients with B- 
cell malig nancies.  
 
For more informatio n relating to safet y and efficac y in the NHL indication, 
pleas e refer to the obinut uzumab I nvestigator's Brochure. 
 
 
1.2.4  PHARMACOK INETIC AND PHAR MACODYNAMIC OBINUTUZUMAB 
DATA 
 
A population pharmacokine tic mode l has been deve loped for Studi es BO20 999 
and BO2100 3 to character ize the pha rmacokinetics of obinutuzumab and its 
variability . A two-compartmen t model, compr ising both a linear clearance 
pathway and a non-li near time- varying clea rance pathway, was fitted to the data. 
Data are available for a total of 134 patients following intravenous (IV) 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  12  
  
 
 
administration of obinutuzuma b in S tudie s BO20999 (n = 114) and BO21 003 
(n = 20). 
 
Followin g infusion of obinu tuzumab , the elimination appears to be characterized 
by a clearance that is dependen t on time; that is, starting at a typical value of  
594 mL/da y and then gradual ly decreasing to an asym ptote of 112 mL/day at 
stead y state. Tumo r burde n potentially contributes sig nificantly to the clea rance 
of obinutuz umab , espe cially at the beginning o f treatm ent when there is an 
excess of CD20 cells.  As tumo r burden decreases, the clear ance reaches an 
asymptote, which is though t to be primarily a function o f the proteol ytic metabolic 
clearance. Consequently , some patien ts with a high tumor burden appear to 
clear the drug from the plasma faster than  patient s with a low tumor burden 
because obinutuzumab binds to the CD20 -positive tumor cells and i s effectively 
removed from the plasma.  Therefore, the clea rance of the drug will vary wit h 
time since repeate d treatment s with GA 101 will reduc e the quant ity of CD20- 
positive tumor cells.  
 
Treatmen t with obinu tuzumab re sulted in extensive B-cel l depletion, with all 
patient s showin g a reductio n in cell c ount to absolute  zero at some stage of their 
treatmen t cycle .  Overall , there has been no notable increase in complement 
levels before or after infusion, but changes have been observe d in the levels of 
interleu kin-6 and interleukin-8 b 
 
1.3 LENALIDOMIDE  
 
  
Lenalido mide, a n oral agent , is a t halidomide derivative that belongs to a new 
class of agent s know n as immunomodula tory drugs (IMiDs). Lenalido mide has 
clinical activity in non-H odgkin’s lymphom a (NHL) and has been shown to 
possess several immunomodulat ory proper ties. Despi te the clinical activit y of the 
IMiDs in va rious malignant disea ses, the exac t mechanis m of t heir antitumo r 
activity rem ains elusive. In addition to its know n effec t on various cytokine s, 
lenalidom ide may affec t the immun e cellula r componen t of the tumor 
microenvironment . Potential effects include inducing lymph ocyte proliferation, 
increasin g the productio n of IL-2/INF -g by effector cells and angiog enesis 
inhibition. 
 
  
Lenalidomid e Description  
 
The chemical name is 3- (4-amino-1-oxo 1,3-dihydr o -2H-isoindol -2-yl) pi peridine- 
2,6-dione . 
 
The empi rical formula for len alidomide is C 13H13N3O3, and the gram molecular 
weigh t is 259.3. 
 
Lenalidomid e is off-wh ite to pale-ye llow solid powder . It is solubl e in organic 
solvent/wa ter mixtures, and buffered aqueou s solvents. Le nalido mide is 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  13  
  
 
 
more soluble in organic solvent s and low pH soluti ons. Solubility was 
significantl y lower in less acidic buffers , ranging from abou t 0.4 to 0.5 
mg/ml. Lenalido mide has an asym metri c carbon atom and can exist as the 
optically act ive forms S(-) and R(+), and is pr oduced as a racemic mixt ure 
with a net optical rotation of zero.  
 
Lenal idomide is available in 5 mg and 10 mg capsule s for oral 
administration. Each capsule contains lenalido mide as the active ingredient 
and the following inactive ingredients: lactos e anhydrous, microcryst alline 
cellulose, croscarmellos e sodium,  and magnesium stearate. The 5 mg 
caps ule shell contain s gelatin, titanium di oxide and black ink. The 10 m g 
capsul e shell contain s gelat in, FD&C blue #2, yellow iron oxide , titanium 
dioxid e and black ink. 
 
Pharmacokinetics and Drug Metabolism:  
Absorption:  
Lenalidomide , in healthy vo lunteers , is rapidly absorbe d following oral 
administration with maximum plasma c oncentrations occurring betw een 0.625 
and 1.5 hours post-dose . Co-administration with food does not alter the extent of 
absorption (AUC ) but does reduce the maxi mal plasm a concentration (Cmax) by 
36%. The pharmacokinetic disposition of lenalidomide is linear. Cmax and AU C 
increas e proportionat ely with incr eases in d ose. 
 
Multiple do sing at the recom mende d dose-regimen does not result in drug 
accumula tion. Pharmacokinetic samplin g in myelodysplas tic syndrome (MDS) 
patients was not perfo rmed. In multiple myeloma patien ts maximum plasma 
concentrations occur red between 0.5 and 4.0 hours post-dose both on Days 1 
and 28. AUC and Cmax values increas e proportionall y with dose following single 
and multiple doses. Expo sure (AUC ) in mult iple my eloma patien ts is 57% h igher 
than in he althy male volu nteers. 
 
Pharmacokineti c  Parameters:  
Distribution:  
In vitro (14C)-lenalidomid e binding to plasma proteins is approxima tely 30%.  
 
Metabolism  and Excretion:  
 
The metabol ic profile of le nalidom ide in human s has not been studied. In healthy 
volunteers , approxi mately two-t hirds o f lenalido mide is eliminated unchang ed 
through ur inary excre tion. The process exceeds the glomerular filtration rate and 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  14  
  
 
 
therefore is partiall y or entirely acti ve. Half-life of elimin ation is approximately 3 
hours.  
 
  
1.3.1  Lenalidomid e in NHL  
 
Lenalido mide induced gr owth arres t and apoptosis of lymphom a cell lines as well 
as enhan cing NK-cell–mediated antibod y-dependen t cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) 
of rituximab. (Wu et al 2006 ) In addition, usin g a lymphoma xenograft mouse 
mode l (Hernandez -Ilizaliturri et al 2005 ) demonstrated t hat IMiD molecules 
enhanced the antitumor activity of rituxim ab, resulting in improved s urvival of 
tumor -bearing animals.  
 
Aggre ssive NHL 
 
Wierni k et al reported preliminary results of lenalidomide m onotherapy in patients 
with relap sed o r refractory non-Hodgkin's lymphoma . Lena lidomide (25 mg/d )  
was administered on days 1 to 21 of a 28-day cycle and c ontinued for 52 we eks 
as tolera ted o r until diseas e progres sion. Patient s with various aggressive 
histologic subtypes (including diffuse large B-cell, follicular cente r cell, mantl e cell, 
and transforme d NHL) were enrolled. Forty-one of the 50 patient s were 
assessable for response. Clinical responses were obser ved in all lymphoma 
subtypes. The ORR was 34% (n = 14) includ ing five patients with CR 
unconf irmed (CRu), with a media n progres sion-free survival in pati ents achievin g 
a CRu o f more than 239 (> 191 to > 373 days) days. (Witzig et al 20 07) An 
ongoing multicenter clinical trial is furthe r investigati ng clinical efficacy of single 
agen t lenalido mide in patients with aggressive NHL.  
  
 
Kaufma n et al first reporte d the clinical efficac y of thalidom ide combined with 
rituximab i n patient s with relaps ed/ref ractor y mantle-cel l lymphom a (MCL) . The 
ORR and CR rate in t his study was 81% and 31%, respectively with a median 
progres sion-free survival o f 20.4 months . (Kaufma n et al 2004) On the basis of 
these findings , a phase I clinica l trial of lenalidomid e (5 to 25 mg) in combina tion 
with rituximab was initiated for MCL. The MTD was 20 mg/d , 21 of 28 days. The 
DLT was prolonged neutrope nia. Thirteen of 15 patients were assessab le and 
had a median of three1-4 pr ior therapies . Although t here were no r esponses in 
the 10- and 15-mg dose cohorts , five of six patien ts in the 20-mg cohort 
responded including a complete response . (Wang et al 20 07) On the basis of the 
important si ngle-agen t activity of lenalidomide and bortezomib in MCL, CALGB is 
currentl y conducting a phas e II trial of the combinati on of the two agent s in 
patients with relap sed or refracto ry MCL.  
 
Indolent  NHL  
 
Witzig et al reported a phase II study of le nalidomid e (25 mg/d for 21 of 28 da ys) 
in patient s with relap sed or refract ory indo lent NHL. 70 Amon g 27 a ssessable 
patients with a median of three (range , one to 17) pr ior thera pies, the ORR was 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  15  
  
 
 
26% (n = 7 ) including two CRs, whereas the overall clinical benefit (stable 
disease or bette r response) was observed in 59% of the patients. (Witzig 2007) A 
large, randomized, multicente r clinica l trial conducte d by the Cancer and 
Leukemia Grou p B (CAL GB) is in vestigating the clinical be nefit of lenalidomid e 
versu s lenalidomide/ri tuximab in patients wit h relap sed follicular NHL.  
 
Lena lidomide plus Ri tuximab in Indolen t Lym phoma  
 
At MD Anderson , we are current ly conducting an i nvestiga tor initiate d phas e II, 
single arm study with a combinatio n of lenalidomid e and rituxima b in patients   
with untreated indolent NHL. Patients receive lenalidom ide 20 mg/day on d ays 1- 
21 of each 28 day cycle . Rituximab is given at 375 mg /m2 on da y 1 of each cycle. 
We have reported high overal l respons e rates, with a complet e response rate of 
over 90% in patients with follicular lymphoma . Toxicity has been mild to 
modera te, with the most commo n non-hema tologic adverse even t reported as 
grade 1-2 fati gue and rash. (Fowle r N, et al 2011)  
 
  
 
1.4 STUDY  RATIO NALE 
 
 
 
We hy pothesize that the high clinical responses noted in indolen t lymphoma 
patients following len alidomide and ri tuximab is related to the comb ination’s 
ability to augmen t the immun e response, and subsequen t ADCC through 
alteration of i mmun e cell subsets in the tumo r and periphera l blood. 
Lenal idomid e has been show n to activate NK cells, T cells, or both and leads to 
expans ion of i mmun e effec tor cells in-vivo i n NHL and CLL mode ls. In 
preclinica l models , we hav e also shown the synerg istic anti-tumor  effect  of 
combinin g lenalido mide with anti-C D20 mo lecules. 
 
As noted above, obinutuzu mab is a new, humanized anti-CD20 mon oclona l 
antibody which binds to a uniqu e type II epitop e on the cell surface. 
Obinut uzum ab has dem onstrated increased affinity to the FCg RIIIa receptor , and 
may have increase d ADC C when compare d to rituximab. Preliminar y studies 
also sugges t the obinutuzu mab is effec tive in patients with relap sed/refrac tory 
indolent lymphoma . (Salle s et al 2011)  
 
Combining an anti- CD20 antibody with increas ed affinit y for the FCgRIIIa  
recepto r with a immunomodu latory agen t that increa ses ADCC is rational and 
has the potentia l to build upon the anti-lymphom a chara cteristics of both agents.  
Both agents are well tolerated, and the expected toxicity profile is mi ld. 
 
 
 
The starting dose of lenalido mide is based upon the initial dose finding study by 
Wang et al which determined the maximum to lerated dose of lenalidomide with 
rituximab was 20mg daily in relapsed NHL.  Although we do not expect  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  16  
  
 
 
significant additional toxicity with obinu tuzumab the first cohor t of patient s will be 
started at dose l evel 1 (10mg daily) of lenalidomide . (Wan g et al 2012) 
 
A unit dose of 1000 mg of GA 101 was chose n for studies of NHL after a review  
of data from comple ted Phase I studies was under taken. This unit dose of GA101 
to be used in future stud ies was based on the fo llowing findings: 
 
• No dose -limiting toxicities were observed and no maximum tolerated dose was 
reached in Phas e I (dose s from 50 mg to 2000 mg were tested). 
 
• Clinical activit y (respon ses) was observed at all dose levels tested.  
 
• PK analyses suggeste d that a decrease d variability of drug exposure related to 
tumo r burden was achieved at doses above 800 mg given on Days 1, 8 , 22 an d 
every 3 week s for nine doses. 
 
• GA10 1 was well to lerated with a preliminar y safet y profile similar to that of 
rituximab in NHL patient s (i.e., mainly Grad e 1−2 toxicities, with more frequent 
IRRs aroun d the time of the first infusion , decreasi ng with subsequent infusions).  
 
After a comprehens ive review of all safety , efficacy, and PK data obtaine d in 
Phas e I studies , a total GA10 1 dose of 1000 mg for all infusions was chosen as 
the dose to be used in future Ph ase II and Phase III studie s by the spon sor since 
it was the d ose mos t likely to b e well to lerated and efficacious in a majority of  
NHL patients regardless of t heir initial tumo r burden.  
 
In order to coordinat e the dosing of study dr ugs during the first 6 month s of 
treatm ent, GA101 will be given on 28-day cycle s for the first six cycle s in this 
study . On cycle 1 of therapy , the dose of GA10 1 will be divided over 2 days; day 
1, 100m g and Day 2, 900mg. PK modeling su ggest s that giving additional doses 
of GA 101 on Days 8 and 15 of Cycl e 1, and then every 2 month s beyon d 6 
months , will be need ed in or der to saturate target -mediate d clear ance achie ve 
and maintai n a stead y state of drug early and as long as possi ble during 
treatment. 
 
After the maximu m tolerat ed dose is fo und, patients will be enrolled in two 
cohorts . Pr ior studies in various B cell malignanci es have obser ved different 
respons e profiles in patients with SLL and ma rgina l zone lympho ma compared to 
patient s with follicular lymphom a (Fowle r et al). 
 
  
 
  
 
 
2, STUDY DESI GN 
 
2.1 SCHEDULE  OF STUDY  ASSESSMENTS  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenalidomid e in Low Grad e Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  17  
  
 
 
 
 
  
SCH EDULE  OF STUDY  ASSE SSMENTS 
        
 
 
Procedu re 8*  
Scree ning 
 
≤ 30days from 
Baseline (First 
day study drug 
admin istration)  
Cycle 1  All 
Cycles 
* All 
Cycles 
* Following 
Cycles 3, 
6, 913, 1213 
then  every 4 
month s during 
obinutu zuma b 
maintenance*15  
 
Disco ntinuatio n 
From Study 
Drug   
Follow- 
Up 
Phase  
 
Day 
 
1  
Day 
 
8  
Day 
 
15  
Day 
 
22  
Day 
 
1  
Day 
 
14  Every 36 
months  
Record prior medicatio ns, 
treatme nts X          
Record prior anti-cancer therapies X          
Medica l History X X    X     
HTLV1 , HIV and Hepatiti s B/C 
screening10 X          
Physica l examination , vital signs, 
weight X X    X   X  
ECO G perfo rmanc e status X X    X   X  
CT of the chest & abdom en / 
pelvis , neck, PET CT. 8* X       X X X 6 
Chest x-ray X        X  
Electrocardiogram (EKG)  X          
Bilateral bone marro w Bx, BM 
cytogene tics. On Follicula r 
lymphoma hi stolog y do BM and 
blood PCR for Bcl-2 rearrangeme nt. 
On SLL do ZAP70, CD38 staining 
and somatic mutation analysis on 
BM and tumor tissue. X 2       X2 X2  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenalidomid e in Low Grad e Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  18  
 Register patient into 
Revlimid REMS ® program1 X          
Prescr ibe lenalidomi de via 
Revlimid REM S® program 1 X     X     
obinu tuzumab infusion 12,14  X X X X  
X12     
Hematolog y Test: hematocrit, 
platelet  count, WBC  count 
with differential , Abso lute 
neutrophil count (ANC ) and 
absolute lymphoc yte count 
(ALC). 9, 11 X X x X X X11 X  X  
Serum chemistry: Blood  chemistries  
should include so dium,  potassium,  
chloride,  
CO2,  blood ur ea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine,  
glucose,  aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST),  alanine aminotr ansferase  (ALT), 
total bilirubin,  alkaline phosphatase,  
lactate dehyd rogenase (LDH),  calcium,  
hh  d i TSH 5 X X X X X X X  X  
Pregnancy test 3,4  
X4 X X X X 4   4  
Tumor lesions assessment X       X X X6 
Respon se assessment using 
IWG criteria        X X  
Record concomitant 
therapies/procedures x     X   X  
Obta in Follow-Up anti-cancer 
treatments         X X 6 
Obtain Follow-Up survival information           
X 6 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
X X 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
* Variati ons of +/- 3 days  of the sche dule are pe rmitte d. 
** Staging CTs and BM Bx will be do ne up to 7 days  of end of cycle  
  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenalidomid e in Low Grad e Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  19 
  
  
1. Lenali domide must  be pres cribed through and in comp liance with Celgene’s Re vlimid REMS® progr am. Prescrip tions must be filled w ithin 
7 days.  
2. Repeat BM eval uation to confirm morphol ogic and ge netic ma rkers of di sease. Zap 70 and CD38 staining will be done if tissue is availa ble. 
Repeat BM biopsy is at investigat ors discre tion to confirm complete remission (as determined by radiographic imaging) . Screening bone ma rrow 
biopsy can be obtained up to 60 days prior to s tudy entry. 
3. Pregnancy te sts for females o f childbearing poten tial. A femal e of c hildbearing po tentia l (FCBP) is a se xually matur e female wh o: 1) has not 
unde rgone a hysterectomy or bilateral o ophorect omy; or 2) has not been natur ally postmenopa usal for at least 24 consecutive months (i.e., 
has had mense s at any tim e in the preceding 24 conse cutive  months).  
4. Preg nancy tests  must occur within  10 – 14 days  and again within  24 hours  prior to prescribing lenalid omide (prescripti ons must be filled 
within 7 days). FCBP with regul ar or no mens truation must have a pregnancy test weekly for the first 28 days and then every 28 days  while  
on thera py (including breaks in therapy) , at disconti nuation of lenal idomide and at Day 28 post the last dose of lenalidomide. Fema les with 
irregular men struati on mu st have a pregnancy test weekly for the fi rst 28 days and then e very 14 days  while on therapy  (including b reaks in 
therapy), at disc ontinua tion of lenalidomi de and at Day 14 and Day 28 post the last dose of lena lidom ide (see Appen dix: Risks of Fetal 
Expos ure, Pr egna ncy Tes ting Guidelines and Accepta ble Birth Control Meth ods). 
5. Thyroid Stimulating  Horm one (TSH) will be drawn at baseli ne and prior to cycle s 4 
6. Follow -up and tumor asse ssment – Pa tients will be ev aluated every 3 months for one year, every 6 mo nths for 1 year and then yearl y with 
CT of neck, thorax,  abdomen and p elvis and other  studies as reco mmend by  the treating  physician for 1 year.  Timing of imaging studies 
will be calculated from date of last scan. Tumor assessments, as well as timeline for tumor assessments are recommendations o nly. 
Exact timing of follow -up tumor assessments are at the discretion of the treating physician. Patients will have a minimum of imaging 
studies every 6 months for the first. Imaging can be done plus/ -21 days of recommended time points.  
7. Patient e valuation and predos e labs can occur up to 3 days prior to st arting ea ch cycle . If possible, patients should be seen at least 24 
hours  prior to each cycle  
8. If a pa tient is allergi c to IV c ontrast, non-c ontras t PET/ CT images can be used f or tumor e valuation, response as sessm ent. If pa tient has a 
histor y of PET negativ e disease, re peat PET is not re quired prior to study en try. If patient has full CT at spec ified timepoint, PET is 
recomme nde d, but not required for study en try or on follow up visits. 
9. If not report ed on pa tients CBC, patient’s ANC and A LC can be calculated f rom absolute neutrophil percent and ab solute lymphocyte 
percent.  
10. In the abse nce of a history of blood trans fusion or intrav enous drug use in  the past 6 months, patient s can have hepatitis B/C andHIV 
testing up to 8 week s prior to s tudy en try. 
11. Hematolo gy testing will oc cur on day 1 and day 14 (+/- 4 days) of cycles 2-1 2. If patient di scon tinues lenalidomide, day 14 labs are not 
required in cycle #2 and be yond.  
12. Obinut uzumab is gi ven on day 1, 2, 8, 1 5, and 22 of cycle one a nd on day 1 of each subsequ ent cycle  up to 6 additio nal months during 
lenalidomide dosing.  In months 12 and beyond, obinutuz umab is g iven every 56 days. 
13. Patients  can receive up to 12 cycles of lenali domide and obinutuzumab.  Rest aging will occur every 3 cycles whi le the patient is on 
comb ination therapy, and ev ery 112 days during obinutuzumab m onother apy ( maintenance phase). 
14. Obinut uzumab will be given 100mg IV on day 1, and 900mgI V on day 2 of c ycle 1. Subseque nt cycles will re ceive 1000 mg on ea ch dose 
day a s tolerated. 
15. Cycles are 28 days  long during  the first 11 mon ths of treatment  (during  combination  and singl e agent  dosin g of 
obinutuzumab).  The remaining cycles are 56 days. If the patient  is on singl e agent  obinutuzuma b during  cycle  7‐12 , physical  
exam,  labs,  follo w up visit, ecog,  vital signs, and medical histor y will only be done  on cycles  8, 10, and 12. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
GA101 Plus Lenalidomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma  
  
 
 
2.2OBJECT IVES 
 
2.2.1  Prima ry Objectives  
 
Part 1 (phas e 1). 
 
1. To determin e the maximum toler ated dose of l enalidomide pl us 
obinutuzuma b in relapsed/refr actor y indolent lymphoma. 
 
Part 2 (phase 2). 
1. To evaluate the safet y of lenalidomide in combi nation with obinu tuzumab 
in patient s with relaps ed/refracto ry indolent lymphoma.  
 
2. To determine the over all response rate (ORR ) of the combinatio n in 
patients with relap sed/refrac tory indolen t lymphoma.  
 
2.2.2  Secon dary Ob jectives 
 
1. To determine the compl ete respons e rate, time to progression (TTP), and 
progre ssion free survival in patient s with i ndolent lymphom a following treatment 
with obinutuzumab + lenalido mide. 
 
2. To evalua te change s in immun e effec tor cells and the tumor microenviron ment 
followin g treatment with obinutuzuma b + lenalidomide. 
 
2.3 STUD Y DESIGN 
 
2.3.1  DESCRIPT ION OF THE STUDY 
 
This is a single -center, open label, phas e I/II st udy in pat ients with re fractory or 
relapsed indolen t lymphoma.  The feasibility of admi nistra ting lenalidomid e in 
combinatio n with obinutuzuma b and the MTD of the combination will be 
determine d in the phase I part of the study . When the MTD has been 
established , the efficacy of the combination will be further e valuate d in the phase 
II part of the study in two patient cohort s simultaneously. All patient s will receive 
a combinatio n of daily lenalidom ide for 21 days with IV o binutuzumab on day 1,2, 
8, 15, and 22 of cy cle one (obinutuzumab will be given 100m g IV on day 1, and 
900mgI V on day 2, subsequent do ses will be given over 1 day)and on day 1 of 
each s ubsequen t cycle up to 6 cycle s. Patients who do not progress following 6 
cycles and are deriving benef it from the combination in the opinion of the treating 
physician can re ceive up to 12 cycles o f lenalidomi de therapy. After  completing 
combinatio n lenalido mide therapy,pati ents will then enter a “main tenance phase ” 
and recei ve obinutuzumab on day 1 of each 2 mont h cycle for up to 2 years or a 
total of 30 months on treatmen t (combina tion + maintenance) , whicheve r occurs 
first. The two patient cohort s are patients with follicular lymp homa (grad e 1-3a ) 
and the patients with any indolent lymphoma including follicular,  marginal zone or 
SLL.
 A maxim um of 72 patients (18 in phas e I and 60 in phase II; the 6 patients 
treate d at the MTD in ph ase I will be included in analys is  
  
Protocol  Version:  9/27/2017 20 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  21  
  
 
 
of the first group of patient s treated in phase II) will be enrolled in this st udy on an 
intent-to-treat basis. 
 
2.3.2  Phase  I 
 
The primary objectiv e of the phase I part of the study is to determin e the 
maximum  tolerated  dose (MTD) o f lenalidomid e when given in comb ination 
with obinutuzuma b for subsequent testin g in the phas e II part of the trial. 
There are three predefined dose levels for lenalidomid e (10 mg, 15 mg, 20 
mg) with a fixed dose o f obinutuzumab (1000 mg) as outline d in Ta ble 1. 
 
 
Dose limiting to xicity (DLT ) will be assessed during the first course of each cohort 
(28 days) , and refers to a medical ly significant event which meet s one of the 
following criteria using Na tional Cancer Institute Common T erminology Criteria  
for Advers e Event s (NCI CTCAE ) versio n 4: 
 
 
• Grad e 3 or highe r non-hematologic AE which is felt to be rela ted to 
the study drug by the inves tigator with the exception of the 
followi ng: 
o Transient grade 3 or less infusion reaction that completely 
resolve s within 24 hours.  
• Grad e 4 hematologi c toxicity (Platelet count is define d as <25,000 
for the purpose s of determining DLT.  
• Grad e 3 neutropeni a with eleva ted temperatur e (defined as >/= 
101 degree s F to be c onfirmed on two occas ions).  
• Grad e 3 thrombocytopeni a with bleeding.  
• Treatment delay of greater than 2 w eeks due to treatment related 
toxicity. 
 
Prior to advancing/changing dose levels a cohort summary will be completed and 
submitted to the Clinical Research Monito r in the IND Office.  
 
2.3.3  Phase  II 
 
The objectiv e for the phas e II part is to fu rther evaluate the safety and efficacy of 
lenalidom ide when given in combination with obinutu zumab at the MTD of 
lenalidomi de determine d in phase I. The maximum number of patient s that will 
be recrui ted for the phas e II part is 60 with 30 for each of the two patient coho rts: 
the patien ts with follicu lar lymphoma (grade 1-3a) and the patient s with any 
indolent lymphoma .  The patients who are treate d at the MTD in the phas e I part 
will b e counted as the first group of patient s treated in phas e II. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  22  
  
 
  
2.3.4  Evaluation  of response  
 
Response criteria for patients enrolled onto the study will follow the guidel ines 
recommended by the199 9 International Wor kshop on Re spons e Criteria for NHL. 
(Che son et al.1999 ) All responses will be ch aracterized as either c omplete 
remissio n (CR) , unconfirmed complete remissio n (CRu) , partial remissio n (PR), 
stable disease (SD), or progres sion of dis ease (POD). Response will be 
assessed after every three cycle s of comb ination therapy . Respon se will be 
assessed every 4 month s thereafter while the patient receives obinutuzumab 
maintenanc e treatment.  
 
 
3. STUDY POPULATION 
 
3.1 INCLUS IONCRITERIA  
 
Patients must meet the follow ing criteri a for study entry:  
• A di agnosis of small lymphocy tic lymphoma , follicula r lymphom a (grades 1- 
3a), or margina l zone lymphoma.  
 
• Ev idence of progres sion or lack of respon se followin g at least 1 prior 
treatmen t for indolen t lymphoma.  
 
• Able and willing to provi de writte n informe d consent and to compl y with the 
study protocol  
 
• Ag e ≥ 18 years  
 
• Must have at least 1 node greate r than 1.5cm in short axis diameter  
 
• A dequat e hematolog ic function (unless abnormal ities are related to NH L), 
defined as f ollows:  
 
 Hemoglobi n ≥ 9.0 g/dL 
 
 Absolute neutrophil coun t ≥ 1.5 × 109/L 
 
 Platele t count ≥ 75 × 109/L 
 
 ANC < 1.5 x 109 /L or PLT coun t less than 100 x109/L if cytopeni a is due 
to extensive bone marrow involvemen t of disease as determined by the 
treating physici an. 
 
 
• For men who are not surgically ster ile, agreemen t to use a barrie r method 
of contraception for ≥ 6 month s after the last obinutuzumab dose. In addition, 
male patient s must agree to reques t that their partner s use an additional  
metho d of contraception, such as oral contracep tives, i ntrauterin e device,  
barrier method of contraception or spermicidal jelly  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  23  
  
• For wome n of reproducti ve potential who are not surgically sterile ,  agreement 
to use two adequat e methods of contrac eption , such as oral contraceptives,  
intrauterine device , or barrier method of contracep tion in conjunc tion with 
spermicida l jelly for ≥ 18 month s after the last obinut uzumab dose . 
 
• Females of childbea ring poten tial (FCBP)† must have a negat ive serum 
pregnanc y test with a sensitivity of at least 50 mIU/mL within 10 – 14 days  
prior to and again wi thin 24 hours of prescribin g lenalidomide and must either  
commi t to continued abstinenc e from heterosexual intercours e or begin TWO  
acceptable methods of birth control, one highly effective metho d and one 
additional effectiv e method AT THE SAME TIME , at least 4 week s befor e she 
starts taking lenalidom ide. FCBP must also agree to ongoing pregnancy  
testing . Men must agree to use a latex condo m during sexua l contact with a 
femal e of ch ild bearin g poten tial even if they have had a successf ul 
vasectomy.  
 
• All study participant s must be registered into the mandat ory Revlimid  
REMS ® program , and be willin g and able to compl y with the requirement s of 
Revlimid REM S® pr ogram. 
 
For patients  with bulky disease  (tumors  >5cm);  must be able to take aspirin 
(81m g or 325 mg) daily as prophy lactic anticoagulation (patients intolerant  to 
ASA may use warfa rin or low molecu lar weight heparin. 
 
• Females of reproduc tive potential must adher e to the scheduled pr egnancy 
testing as re quired in the Revlimid RE MS® program . Able to take aspirin (81 
or 325 mg) daily as prophy lactic anticoagu lation (patients intolerant to ASA 
may use warfa rin or low mo lecular weigh t hepar in). 
 
 
† A female  of childbeari ng potential  is a sexually  mature woman wh o: 1) has not unde rgone a 
hysterec tomy or bilateral oo phorect omy; or 2) has not been naturally postmenop ausal for at le ast 
24 conse cutive  months  (i.e., has had me nses at any time in the preceding 24 co nsecutive 
months).  
 
 
 
3.2 EXCLUS IONCRITERIA  
 
• Eviden ce ongoin g transformation into aggre ssive NHL.  
 
• Histor y of s evere allergic or anaphy lactic reactions to monoclo nal a ntibody 
therapy  
 
• K nown hypersen sitivity to t halidomide or lenalidomide. 
 
• Regular treatment with corticoste roids during the 4 we eks prior to the start of 
Cycle 1, unles s administere d for indication s other than NHL at a dose 
equivalent to ≤ 30 mg/da y predni sone
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  24  
  
 
 
• Histor y of pr ior malig nancy within the last 5 years , with the exception of 
curatively treated basal or squa mous cell carcin oma of the skin an d low- 
grade in situ carcino ma of the cervix 
 
• Ev idence or history of significant , uncontrolled concomit ant diseases that 
could affec t comp liance with the protocol or interpret ation of results, including 
significant cardiov ascular disea se (suc h as New York Hear t Association  
Class III or IV cardia c disease, sever e arrhythmia, myocardial infarct ion 
within the previou s 6 months , unstabl e arrhythmias , or unstable angina ) or 
pulmonary disease (including obstructive pulmonar y diseas e and histor y of 
bronchos pasm)  
 
• Know n active bacte rial, viral, fungal , mycobacterial , paras itic, or other infection 
(excludin g funga l infections of nail beds ) or any majo r episode of infection 
requirin g treatmen t with IV antibiotic s or hospitalization (relating to the 
completion of the course of antibiotics , except if for tumor f ever) within 4 w eeks 
prior to the start of Cycle 1 
 
Patients with suspected active or latent tuberculosis (latent tuberculo sis 
need s to be confir med by positive Interferon -gamm a releas e assay) 
 
• Vaccination with live va ccine s within 28 days pr ior to start of treatment  
 
• Any of the following abnorma l labor atory values (unles s any of these 
abnormalities are due to unde rlying lymphoma):  
 
Creatinin e > 1.5 times the uppe r limit of norma l (ULN) (unles s creatinine 
clearance normal) , or calculated creatinine clearanc e < 40 mL/min 
(using Cockcroft –Gault formula; see Appe ndix D) 
 
AST or A LT > 2.5 × ULN 
 
Total bilirubin > 1.5× ULN (or > 3 × ULN for patients with docum ented 
Gilber t syndro me) 
 
Any histor y of hepati tis B infection. 
 
• Positive test results for hepatitis C ( hepa titis C v irus [HCV] antibody serology 
testing)  
 
Patient s positiv e for HCV antibody are eligible only if PCR is negative for 
HCV RNA 
 
• Know n history of H IV seropositive status  
 
• Positive test results for huma n T-lymphotropi c 1 (HTL V 1) virus 
HTLV testin g  is required in patients from endemic countries (Japan, count ries in 
the Caribbean basin , South Am erica, Central America, sub-Saha ran Africa, and 
Melanesia)  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  25  
  
 
 
 
• P regnant or lactating 
 
• ECO G performanc e status greater than 2. 
 
• Participation in another clinical trial with drug intervention wi thin 21 days prior 
to start of Cycle 1 and during the study  
 
• Patients with SLL /CLL will are excl uded during the pha se I portion of the 
study  
 
3.3 IMMUNIZATION  DURING  B-CELL DEPLETION  
 
To date, no vaccina tion stud ies hav e been performed with obinutuz umab . No 
vaccina tion with live virus vaccine s shou ld be given to patients treate d with 
obinutuzumab.  
 
4. TREAT MENT PLAN  
 
4.1 Phase I 
 
Three d ose levels of len alidomide (10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg) will be evaluated with a 
fixed dose of obinutuzuma b (1000mg ) as outlined in Table 1. (obinutuzumab will 
be given in divided doses on cycle 1 ; 100mg  IV on day 1, and 900mgIV on day 2, 
subsequen t doses will be given ove r 1 day) Up to 18 patient s may participate in 
the Phas e I component of the study , depending on the level at which toxicity is 
observed. Subject s will be assigned to a dose level based on the order of study 
entry and to xicities seen in pr ior patients.  The dose escala tion pro cess is 
describe d below .  There will be n o intra-patient dose esc alation.  DLT will be 
assessed durin g the fi rst cours e of each cohort (28 days) , and refers to a 
medi cally si gnificant event which meet s criteria using National Cancer Institute  
Common T ermin ology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) version 4. (s ee 
sectio n 2.3.2) 
 
Table  1. Dose  levels  to be tested in phase I porti on 
Dose Level  Lenalido mide Dose (da ys 2- 
22 followed by 6 days of no 
therap y) Obinutuzumab  dose 
-1 5 mg  
1000m g IV 1 10 mg 
2 15 mg 
3 20 mg 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  26  
  
 
4. 2 Phase II  
 
Additional pts will be enrolled into two coho rts at the recommended dose level 
(MTD) es tablished in Phase I up to a maximum of 30 patients each in two 
independent ly enrollin g cohorts.  
 
Cohor t A: 30 patients with relap sed/refrac tory follicular lympho ma 
Cohor t B: 30 patients follicular lymphoma, margin al zon e lymphom a or SLL 
 
4. 3 Treat ment Schedule 
 
Lenalido mide capsules will be taken orally daily each day on days 2 - 22, 
followe d by 6 days of no therapy of each 28-day cycle . Obinu tuzumab will be 
given by intravenous infusio n on day 1,,2, 8, 15, and 22 of cycle one and on day 
1 of each subsequen t cycle up to 6 cycles. Patient s who do not progress 
followin g 6 cycle s and are deriving be nefit from the combination in the o pinion of  
the treating physician can rec eive furthe r cycles of com binat ion up to 12 cycles of 
lenalido mide therapy. (As long as the patient does not exhibi t progression, the 
decision of how many cycles of combina tion therapy beyon d 6 is at the 
discrestio n of the treating team  and investigator). 
 
Exten ded dosing of ob inutuzumab will be gin after combination therapy if patients 
demonstrate  at least stable disease on re spons e assessment . In the extended 
dosing schedule , obinut uzumab will be adm inistered ev ery 2 months, and in the 
absence of pr ogression, will be dosed for maximum of 30 month s (combinatio n + 
maintenance).  
 
Patient s that do not have at least a partia l remission followin g 12 cycles of 
combina tion therap y will not continue with ex tended ob inutuzum ab treatment.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  27  
  
 
 
TREAT MENT REGIMEN  
 
 
*(GA101 will be gi ven in divi ded doses on first dose in cycle 1; 100m g IV on day 
1, and 900mgIV on day 2, subsequen t doses will be given over 1 day) 
  
 
This research study protocol allows the subjec t to receive up to 21 infusion s of 
obinutuzum ab. Eve n if the treatmen t is show n to be of be nefit, additional 
infusions of obinutuz umab beyond that allowed in the protocol canno t be gi ven 
to the subjec t while they are participatin g in this study.  
 
Visit schedule and assessm ents 
Screenin g Assessment s and all on study schedule d visits and assessment s are 
outlined in Table of Study Assessm ents. All timepoint s outlined in the Schedule 
of Assessments allow variation of +/- 3 days.  
 
Due to the drug deliver y from an outside facility, clinicians should allow up to 7 2 
hours from patient assess ment/evalua tion to the start of each cycle. 
 
Pregnanc y testin g and counselin g must be performe d if a subjec t misse s her 
period or if her pregnanc y test or her menstrual bleedin g is abno rmal. Study drug 
treatment must be discontinued during t his evaluation. In addition to the required 
pregnanc y testing , the Investi gator must con firm with FCBP that she is  
continuing to use two reliabl e methods of birth control a t each visit. 
 
An unscheduled visit can occur at any time durin g the study . Source must be 
maintained for these unschedu led visits. The date for the visit and any data 
gene rated must be recor ded on the appr opriate C RF. Source document s for 
these unscheduled visits must also be maintained.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  28  
  
At treatmen t disconti nuation, subjects will un dergo off study evaluations per th e 
Sched ule of Assess ments, Sect ion 2. In addition, a safety assessment will b e 
done approxi mately 28 days post the last dose o f study drug.  
 
5. STUD YMED ICATI ON 
 
5.1 OBINUTUZUMAB 
 
Obinu tuzuma b is prov ided as a single dose, sterile liquid formulatio n in 50 mL 
pharma ceutical grade glass vials containing a nomin al 1000 mg of 
obinutuzumab. The formulate d drug pr oduc t consist s of 25 mg/m L drug 
substanc e (G3 material ) formulated in h istidine, trehalose, and polo xame r 188. 
The vials contai n 41 mL ( with 2.5% overfill). Genen tech will provide 
obinutu zumab to investigational site as an IMP. 
 
For furthe r details, see the obinut uzumab Investigato r’s Brochure. 
 
5.1.1 OBINUTUZ UMAB DOSE A ND SCHEDULE 
 
Obinutuzuma b 1000m g will be given IV on day 8, 15, and 22 of cycle one and 
on day 1 of each subsequent cycle up to 6 c ycles du ring lenal idomide d osing. 
First dose of 1000m g will be split into day 1  and 2 o f cycle 1 as outlined in 
section  
5.1.4. If the patient atta ins at least stable disease, the patien t will receive 
obinutuzuma b 1000m g IV every 2 months for a m aximum of 2 years. For 
dosing instructi ons, see section 6. 2. 
 
5.1.2  OBINUTUZUM AB   PREPARAT ION 
 
Obinu tuzuma b drug produc t intended for IV infusion is pr epared by dilution of 
the drug pr oduc t into an i nfusion bag containin g 0.9% NaCl to the final drug 
concentration of 4 mg/mL . Using a 250-mL infusio n bag conta ining 0.9% NaCl,  
withdra w and discard 40 mL of the NaCl. Withd raw 40 mL o f obinutuzumab 
from a si ngle glass vial and inject in to the infusion bag (d iscard any unu sed 
portion of obinu tuzumab left in the vial). Gentl y invert the infusion bag to mix 
the solution; do not shake.  
 
Do not use obinutuzuma b beyon d the expiration date stampe d on the carton.  
 
5.1.3  OBINUTUZUMAB PRE MEDI CATIONS 
 
5.1.3.1  Obinutuzum ab  Pre-medications  
 
Thirty to 60 minute s prior to all obinutuzu mab infusions , the followin g pre- 
medi cations will be given (unless contraind icated): 
 
• Oral acetaminophe n (e.g., 650−1000 mg) AND  
• An antihist amin e such as diphenhydram ine (50 −100 mg) 
 
• For Cycle 1, proph ylactic c orticosteroids (e.g., 100 mg IV prednisolone)  
at least one hour prior to the obi nutuzumab infusion . An equiv alent 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  30  
 dose of dexamethasone (15-20mg) or methy lprednisol one (80mg) is 
accep table but hydrocortiso ne shoul d not be used.  
 
In subsequen t cycles, steroids shoul d be given to patient s who 
experienced a severe IRR with the prior infusion of obin utuzuma b or who 
are though t to be at high risk for inf usion-related reactions , as assessed 
by the investigator. 
 
 
5.1.3.2  Tumor  Lysis Syndrome Prophy laxis  
 
Patient s who are considere d to have a high tumo r burde n and who are 
considered to be at risk for tumo r lysis by the investigator should additional ly 
recei ve tumo r lysis pr ophylaxi s prior to the i nitiation of tr eatment . These 
patient s shoul d be well hydrated startin g 1 to 2 days before the first dose of 
obinutuzum ab. In addition , all patien ts cons idered to ha ve high tumor burden 
and who are considered to be at risk for tumor lysis shou ld be treate d with 
allopurino l 300 mg/day orally or a suitable alternative treatmen t startin g 12 t o 
24 hours prior to treatment on Day 1 of Cycle 1. These patients should 
continue to receive repeated prophylax is with allopuri nol and adequate 
hydration prior to each subsequent infusion, i f deeme d appropriate by th e 
investigator  
 
5.1.4  OBINUTUZ UMAB  ADMINISTRATION  
 
First  Infusions  
• First dose of obinutuz umab will be split into two days on cycle 1. Day 
1 patient will receive 100mg , day 2 patient will receiv e 900mg. During 
cycle 1, rate on day 1  will be 25mg/hr over 4 hours (25ml/hr at 
1mg:1ml dilution).  
 
• In the absence of IRRs/ hype rsens itivity, the rate of the infusion on cycle 1 
day 2 will be escalated in in crement s of 50 mg/h r (14ml/h r) every 30 minu tes 
to a maximum rate of 400 mg/hr (100ml/hr). 
 
• The patient will receive 1000m g of ob inutu zumab for the remainder of the 
cycle 1 infusions (day 8, 15, 22) at the initial rate of 50 mg/h r (12.5 ml/hr) 
and increased by 50 m g/hr (12.5 ml/hr ) increment s at 30 mi nute interva ls, 
as tolerated , to a maximum rate of 400 mg/h r (100 ml/hr).  
 
• If a hyper sensitivit y or IRR develops, the infusion sho uld be 
tempo rarily interrup ted or slowe d down and con comit ant 
medi cation may be adminis tered i f deeme d appropriate by th e 
invest igator. 
 
• Upon the resolution of symptoms, the infusion will resume at one- 
half the previous rate (the rate being used at the time that the 
hyper sensitivity or IRR occurred) and infusion- rate escalation may 
resume at the increments and interval s described above. If patient 
does not demonstrate sign s of acute infusio n reaction 
hypotension or shortnes s of breath), the patien t can have IV 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  31  
  
discontinue d prior to 1 hour on secon d infusion and bey ond. 
 
 
 
Secon d cycle and Subsequent In fusio ns 
• If a patient’s previous ob inutuzum ab infusi on(s) in cycle 1 
 
• were well tolerated (defined by an absen ce of Grad e ≥ 2 IRRs durin g a 
final infusio n rate of ≥ 100 mg/h r (25cc/h r in standar d 4m g:1m l dilution), 
subsequent infusions beginning with cycle 2 will be administere d at an 
initial rate of 100 mg/hr (25ml/hr ) and increased by 100-mg/h r (25ml/hr) 
increment s at 30-minut e intervals , as tolerat ed, to a maximum rate of 
400 mg/h r (100ml/hr).  
 
• If a hyper sensitivit y or IRR develops, the infusion shoul d be temporar ily 
interrup ted o r slowe d down and concomitan t medi cation may be 
administered i f deemed appropria te by the investigato r. 
 
• Upon the r esolution of symptoms, the infusion will resume at one-half the 
previous rate (the rate being used at the time that the hype rsensitivity or 
infusion -relate d reactio n occurred) and infusion-rate e scalation may resume 
at the increment s and interval s described above.  
 
If the previous infusio n rate was not well tolera ted, as de fined above, instru ctions 
for the fi rst cycle in fusion rate will be used. 
 
 
Table 2 
 
Adm inistration of First and Subse quent Infusions of Obinutuzumab 
 
First Infusion (Day 1 of Cy cle 1) Subs equent Infusi ons 
 
• If a reaction de velops, stop or slow the 
infusion. Adminis ter medications an d 
supportive care in accordan ce with 
institutional gu idelin es. If reaction ha s 
resolved, re sume the infusion at a 50% 
reduction in r ate (i.e., 50% of rate being used 
at the time that the reaction occurre d).  
• If the patient experi enced an 
infusi on-related or hype rsensitivit y reacti on 
during the pri or infus ion, use full 
premedic ation including 100 mg 
predniso ne/prednisolone (or 80mg  
methy lprednisolone  equi valent) (until no 
further IR R occu rs), begin infusion at an 
initial rate 
of 50 mg/ho ur (14ml /hr) and follow 
instructions for first infusion. 
• If the patient tolerated the prior infusion 
well (defined by an absence of Grade 2 
reactions duri ng a final infusion rate of 
≥ 100 mg/ hour (25ml /hr)), begin infusi on 
at a rate of 100 mg/h our (25ml/hr).  
• If no reaction  occurs,  increase the 
infusion rate in 100-mg/hour ( 25ml/hr) 
increments every 30 minutes, to a 
maximum of 400 mg/ hour (100ml/hr ). 
If a reaction de velops, stop or slow the 
infusion. Adminis ter medications an d 
supportiv e care in acco rdance  with used at 
the time that the reaction occurred ). 
•  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  32  
  
 
 
Obinut uzumab must be administe red in a cl inical (inpa tient or outpatient) setting. 
Full emer gency resusci tation facilities shoul d be i mmed iately available and patients 
should be under close super vision of the investigator at all times. For the 
managemen t of IRRs and anaph ylaxis, see Sectio n 6.1.1. 
 
Obinut uzumab should be administere d as a slow IV in fusion throug h a dedicated 
line. IV infusion pumps shoul d be used to c ontro l the infusion rate of 
obinutuzum ab. Administratio n sets with polyvinyl chloride, polyuretha ne, or 
polyethylen e as produc t contac t surfac e and IV bags with polyolef ine, 
polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride, or polyethylen e as product contact surfac e are 
compatibl e and may be used . Do not administe r as an IV push or bolus. Do not  
use an additiona l in-line f ilter because of potentia l adsorption.  
 
After the end of the first infusion, the IV line or central venous c atheter sh ould 
remai n in place for greater than or equal to 1 hour to be able to administer IV 
drugs if neces sary. If no adve rse events occur a fter 2 hours , the IV line may be 
remove d or the central venous catheter may be de accessed . For subsequ ent 
infusions, the IV line or central venou s cathete r should re main in place for at 
least 1 hour after the end of the infusion. If no advers e event s occur after 1 hour, 
the IV line may be removed or the central venous cat heter may be de accessed. 
 
 
 
 
5.1.5  OBINUTUZ UMAB  STORAGE 
 
Obinu tuzuma b drug produc t shoul d be stored at 2 °C–8 °C and protecte d from 
light. For the diluted product , chemi cal and physical in-use st ability have been 
demonstrated at concentrat ions of 0. 2mg/ml -20mg/m L for 24 hours at 2 °C–8 °C 
and at ambien t tempe rature and ambien t room lighting .  The product should b e 
used immediately. If not used immediat ely, in-use sto rage times and cond itions 
prior to use are the respons ibility of the user and would norm ally not be longer 
than 24 hours at 2°C–8 °C.  Obinutu zumab should not be fr ozen or shaken.  Mix 
gently. All trans fer procedu res re quire strict adhe rence  to as eptic techniques. 
 
For furthe r details, see the obinut uzumab Investigato r’s Brochure. 
 
5.1.6  OBINUTUZUMAB UNUSED OR E XPIRED DR UG 
 
All unused or expire d investigatio nal drug will be destroy ed in accordan ce 
with institutional po licies . Drug acco untabilit y records will be emaile d to 
ga101 -gsur @gene.com at study  closure. 
 
 
5.2 LENALIDOMIDE  
 
Lenalidomide is availabl e in 2 .5 mg, 5 mg and 25 mg c apsule strengths for oral 
administration. Each capsule contains lenalidomide as the active ingred ient and 
the following in active ingredie nts: lactose anhydrous , microcrystallin e cellulo se, 
croscarmellos e sodiu m, and magne sium stearate . The 5 mg capsul e shell 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  33  
 contain s gelatin , titaniu m dioxide and black ink. The 10 mg capsu le shell contai ns 
gelat in, FD&C blue #2, yellow i ron oxide, titaniu m dioxid e and black ink. 
 
 
5.2.1 Lenalidomid e Dose and Sche dule 
 
Phase I: In the phas e I portio n of the study the planned dose of lenalidom ide for 
patients with follicular lymphom a and margi nal zone lymphoma (SLL patient s not 
included in phase I portion of study ) will be ba sed upon the dose esca lation table. 
(table 1)  Patient s will re ceive an oral dose daily on days 2 – 22 followed by 6 
days rest (28 day cycle). 
 
 
Table  3. Dose  levels  to be tested in phase I porti on 
Dose Level  Lenalido mide Dose (da ys 2- 
22 followed by 6 days of no 
therap y) Obinutuzumab  dose 
-1 5 mg  
1000m g IV 1 10 mg 
2 15 mg 
3 20 mg 
 
 
Phase II: Lenalido mide will be administe red orally at the maximu m tolerated 
dose (MTD) (as define d by the Phase I portion of the study ) on days 2 to 22 of a 
28 day cycl e in patients with follicu lar lymphom a and marginal zone lymphoma.  
Patients with a diagno sis of small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) will begin cycle 
#1 at a maximu m dose of 10 mg total daily on days 2 to 22 of a 28 day cyc le. 
This dose will be escalated by 5mg with each cycle up to the MTD if no toxicit y is 
encountered. (see dose modi fication for lenalidomide table). In the a bsence of 
progre ssion or toxicity, patient s will remai n on lenalidomide treatmen t for a total 
of 6-12 months/cycles. 
 
Only one
 cycle of study drug will b e supplied to the patient each cycle.  
 
If a dose of lenalidom ide is m issed, i t should be taken as soon as possibl e on th e 
same day. If it is missed for the entire day, it should not be m ade up. 
 
Patient s who take more than the prescribe d dose of le nalidom ide shoul d be 
instructe d to seek em ergenc y medical care if needed and contact study sta ff 
immediate ly. Subjects exper iencin g advers e even ts may need study treatment 
modifications . See Tables 6 and 7. 
 
Supplier 
Celgene Corporat ion will supply Revlimid® (lenalidomide) to study partic ipants at 
no charg e through the Revlimid REMS® pr ogram . All physi cians who presc ribe 
lenalidom id e for researc h subjects enrolled into this trial and all research subjects  
enrolled in to this trial must be re gistered in and m ust comply with al l requirement s of 
Celge ne’s Revlimid REMS® program.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  34  
  
 
 
 
Dosage  form  
Lenalidomide will be s upplie d as capsules for oral administra tion. The capsules 
are available in 2.5 mg, 5mg and 25mg capsu le streng ths. 
 
Packaging  
Lenalidomide will be shi pped directly to the patient. Bottle s will contain a 
sufficient numbe r of capsules for one cycle of dosing. 
 
 
 
Storage  
Lenalidomide shoul d be store d at r oom temperatu re away from direct sunlight 
and protected from excessive heat and cold. 
 
Unuse d or Expire d Drug 
All un u sed or expire d investigational drug will be destroyed in a ccordanc e with 
institutional po licies . Drug accountabilit y records will b e emaile d to ga101- 
gsur@gene.com  at study c losure.  
 
Lenalidomide  Prescribing  Information  
 
Lenalido mide (Revlim id®) will be provided to researc h subject s for the durat ion of 
their participation in this trial at no charge to t hem or their insurance providers. 
Lenalidomide will be provided in accordance with the Revlimid REMS® progra m. 
Per standard Revlimid REMS® pr ogram require ments all physician s who 
prescribe lenalidomide  for research subject s enrol led into this trial, and all 
researc h subject s enrolled into this trial, must be register ed in and must comply 
with all require ments of Celgene’s Revlimid REMS® pr ogram. Prescriptions must  
be filled within 7 days. Only enough lenalidomid e for one cyc le of therapy   
will be s upplied to the patient each  cycle. 
 
Special  Handling  Instructions 
Wome n of childbearing potential shoul d not handl e or admi nister the clinical 
dosage forms unles s they are wearin g gloves. 
 
  
6. DOSE M ODIF ICATION/TO XICITY M ANAGEM ENT 
 
A numbe r of measures will be taken to en sure the safety of patients participating 
in this study. These measures will be addressed t hrough exclusion criteria (see 
Sectio n 3.2) and routin e monitor ing as follows.  
 
Patient s enrolled in this study will be evalua ted clinic ally and with standard 
laboratory tests before and during their participation  in this study. Sa fety 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  35  
  
 
 
evaluat ions will c onsist of medi cal in terviews, recording of advers e events, 
phys ical exam inations, blood pressure, and laborator y measu rements . Subjects 
will be evaluate d for adver se ev ents (all grade s for ph ase I sectio n; for phase II 
portion of st udy: and all grades for non-hemat ologic events, grade 3 and 4 only 
for laboratory abnor malities.) , serious adverse events , and adver se ev ents 
requi ring study drug interr uption or discontinuation at e ach study visit for th e 
duratio n of their participatio n in the study.  
 
 
 
6.1 OBINUTUZUMAB 
 
The dose of obinutuzuma b generall y remains constant throughou t the trial. 
Obinu tuzuma b infusion shoul d be interrupted for sever e reactions , e.g., rapid 
tumo r lysis.  Treatmen t of infusio n-related symptom s with diphenhydram ine and 
acetaminophe n is recommended . Additional treatmen t with bron chodilators or IV 
saline may be i ndica ted.  Epinephr ine, antihistamines , and corticosteroid s should 
be available fo r immediate use in the event of a hypersensitivity re action to 
obinutuzumab (e.g., anaph ylaxis). In most cases, the infusion must be re sumed 
at no gr eater than 50% of initial rate (e.g., from 100mg /hr to 50mg/hr) when 
symp toms and laborat ory abnor malities have comple tely resolved. 
Obinutuzumab can be resu med on the following day if infusion reaction 
prevented f ull delivery on day 1. 
 
Infusion s shoul d be discontinued in the ev ent of seriou s or life-threatening 
cardiac arrhythmias. Subject s who develop clinic ally significan t arrhythmias 
should undergo cardiac moni toring during and after subsequent infusions. 
 
Carriers of hepa titis B and patients with a hi story of hepatitis B infection or 
positive ser ology should be exclude d from clinical trials excep t in situations 
wher e the potential benefit is determine d to j ustify the risk of possibl e hepati tis B 
reacti vation, which can be fatal. Patient s with positive serology should h ave viral 
DNA levels checke d and a gastrointestinal consu ltation obtained . If treate d with 
obinutuzum ab, such patien ts should be closel y monitored for clinical and 
laboratory signs of active HBV infection and for signs of hepatitis t hroughout their 
study participa tion. 
 
6.1.1  MANAGEM ENT OF INFUSION-RELATED REACTIONS AND  
ANAPHY LAXIS  
 
Medications (includ ing epinephri ne for sub cutaneou s injections, corticosteroids, 
diphenh ydramine hydr ochloride for IV in jection ) and resuscitation eq uipment 
shou ld be availabl e for immed iate use at point of infusion. Management of 
infusion -relate d symptoms for obinu tuzuma b is summari zed in Table 4. In th e 
even t of a life-threatenin g IRR (which may include pulm onary or cardiac events) or 
an IgE-mediated anaphy lactic react ion, obinutuzuma b should be di scont inued and 
no additional drug should be administered. Patien ts who experie nce any o f these 
reactions shoul d receive aggressive symptomatic tr eatmen t and will be 
discontinue d from study treatme nt. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  36  
  
 
 
Patients who experience obinutuzuma b -associated, infusion -relate d temperature 
elevations of > 38.5° C or other mi nor infusion-related symptom s may be treated 
symptomat ically with acetam inophen ( ≥ 500 mg) and/or H1- and 
H2-histamine –receptor  antagoni sts (e.g., diphenh ydramine hydrochloride, 
ranitidine).  Serious infusion-related events, mani fested by dyspn ea, hypoten sion, 
whee zing, bronchos pasm , tachycardia , reduced oxy gen saturation , or respiratory 
distress, shoul d be mana ged with additional s upportive therapies (e .g., 
supple mental oxygen, β2-agonist s, epineph rine, and/or corticoste roids) 
as clinica lly indicated according to standa rd clini cal practice. 
 
Table 4 
 
Guidelines  for Mana gement  of Infusion- Related  Symptoms  Related  to 
Obinutuzumab 
 
Infusion-Relat ed Sy mptoms  a Guid ance 
Grade 4  • Discontinue infusion immediate ly, treat symptoms 
  aggressively , and do not resum e treatment.  
Grade 3  • Hold infusio n. 
• Give supportiv e treatment. b 
• Upon s ympt om resolutio n, may resume i nfusion rate 
escalation at the investigator's discretion. c 
• If the same a dverse event recurs with the same severity, 
treatment must be pe rmanentl y discontinued.  
Grade 1 −2  • Slow or hold infusion. 
• Give supportiv e treatment. b 
• Upon s ympt om resolutio n, may resume i nfusion rate 
escalation at the investigator’s di scretio n. c 
a Refer  to National Cancer I nstitute Common Te rminology Criteria for Adverse Eve nts, Version 4.0 
for the grading of s ymptoms.  This table does not refer to manage ment of immun oglobulin 
E−mediat ed allerg ic reactions, which sho uld be manag ed as directed in Section 6.1.1.  
b Suppo rtive treatment : Patients should be t reated with a cetaminophen and an antihistamin e 
such a s diphenhydramine hydrochloride if they hav e not been received in the last 4 hours.  
Intravenous saline may be indicated. For bronchospa sm, urticaria , or dyspnea, pa tients ma y 
require a ntihistami nes, oxygen,  corticosteroids (e.g.,  100 mg of intravenous prednisolone or 
equivalent), a nd/or bronch odilators . For hypotensi on, patients may require vasopres sors.  
c Escalation of the infusion rate after re-initiat ion: Upon complet e resolutio n of sym ptoms, 
the infusion may be resumed at 50% of the r ate achieved prior to in terruption. In the absence o f 
infusion-related s ymptoms, the rate of infus ion may be e scalated in in crements of 50 mg/hr  
every 30 minu tes to a maximum rate of 400 mg/hr. 
  
 
6.1.2  MANAGEM ENT OF TUMOR LYSIS SYNDRO ME 
 
For patients  with evid ence of TLS, obinutuzumab should be disc ontinued and the 
patients treate d as c linically indicated.  Following the complete re solution of    
TLS complications,  obinutuzumab may be re-administered at the full dose during 
the nex t infusion in conj unct ion with proph ylactic therap y as in dicated (se e 
Sectio n 5.1.3.2).  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  37  
  
 
 
 
6.1.3  CARDIOT OXICITY  
 
Infusions should be di scontinued in the even t of seriou s or life-threatening 
cardiac arrhythmias. Patients who develop clinically sig nificant arrhyth mias 
shou ld underg o cardiac monitoring during and after subse quent infusio n of 
obinutuzum ab. Patients with preexisting ca rdiac condi tions, including 
arrhy thmia s and angina, who have had recurrences of these ev ents during 
obinutuzumab therap y should be monitored throughou t the infusion and 
immediat e post-infusion period.  
 
6.1.4  HEPATIT IS B VIRUS REACTI VATION 
 
Patients with a history of hepa titis B inf ection will be excl uded from study.  
 
6.1.5  DOSAGE MODIFICATION DURING MAINTENANCE THERAPY WI TH 
OBINUTUZUMAB  
 
6.1.5.1  Nonhemat ologi cToxi cities  
 
For Grade  ≥ 2 nonhematol ogic tox icities related to obinutuzumab , treatment with 
obinutuzumab will be delayed fo r a maximum of 3 week s until resolution to Grade 
≤ 1 or baseline (see Table 4). Resumption of dosing without complete resolution 
of toxicity may be considered only upon ca reful weighin g of the risks and bene fits 
to the patient by the inves tigator. It is recommended that cycles be delayed in 1 
week increments . If treatmen t is delayed for more than 3 week s, study treatment 
will be discontinued.  
 
There will be no dose reduc tions of obinutuzumab.  
 
 
6.1.5.2  Hemato logic Toxici ty 
 
Note that lymphopeni a is not considered to be a hema tologic toxicity, becaus e it is 
an expe cted outcome of therapy.  
 
For Grade  ≥ 3 hematologi c toxicities (defined as neutropenia, a nemia, or 
thrombocy topenia) , treatment with obinutu zuma b will be delayed for a 
maximum of 3 weeks until resolution to Grad e ≤ 2 (see Table 5). Resumpt ion of 
dosing without complete resolution o f toxicity may be con sidered only upon 
carefu l weighin g of the risks and benef its to the patien t by the investigator. It is 
recom mende d that cycle s be delayed in 1-w eek increments. If treatment is 
delayed for more than 3 weeks , study treatment will be discontinued. 
 
There will be no dose reduc tions of obinutuzumab.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  38  
  
Table 5 
Guidelines for Dose Delay or Modificatio n of Obinutuzumab  
during Maintenanc e Therapy  
 
Event Dose Delay or Modific ation 
Grade 2, 3, or 4 • Delay  doses of obinut uzumab for a maximum  of 3 weeks.  
nonhematologic • If improvement to Grad e ≤ 1 or baseline, administ er full dose  of 
toxicity a obinut uzumab. 
Grade 1 • No dose reduction  or delay. 
nonhematologic  
toxicity a  
Grade 3 or 4 • Delay  doses of obinut uzumab for a maximum  of 3 weeks.  
hematol ogic toxicity • Administ er myeloid  growth factors  for neutrop enia. 
 • Administ er RBCs  or plate lets as required. 
 • If improvement to Grad e ≤ 2, administ er full dose of obinutuzumab. 
Grade 1 or 2 • No dose reduction  or delay. 
hematol ogic toxicity  
RBC  = red blo od cell. 
a   For tumor lysis syndrome o r hepatiti s B virus reactivation, Section 6.1.2 or 6. 1.4, respecti vely. 
b    Dose delays  and interru ptions  will onl y occur  of toxicity is  felt to be related  to 
obinutuzuma b per the investigator or treating  physician.  
 
6.1.6  Dosage Mo dificati on During combinatio n Therapy  
For Grade  ≥ 3 nonhematologi c toxicities  felt to be related to obinutuzuma b by the investigator  
or treating  physician,  treatmen t with obinutuzumab will be delayed  until  resolutio n to Grade  ≤ 1 
or baseline.  Resumption  of dosing  withou t complete  resolutio n of to xicity may  be considered 
only upon careful weig hing of the risks  and benefits  to the patient by the investigator.  
 
For Grade  ≥ 3 hematologic  toxicities  (defined as neutropenia , anemia,  or thrombocytopenia), 
treatment  with  obinutu zuma b will be delayed  until resolutio n to Grade  ≤ 2. Resumption of 
dosin g without  complete  resolutio n of toxicity  may  be considered  only upon careful weighing  of 
the risks  and benefits  to the patient by the investigator.  
 
Note that lymphopenia  is not considered to be a hematologic  toxicity,  because it is an expec ted 
outcom e of therapy.  
 
There  will be no dose reductions  of obinutuzumab.  
 
If a toxicity,  hematologic  or non‐hematologic  is felt to be due to either  lenalidomide  or 
obinatuzumab , patients  safety  is considered  paramoun t and either  drug  can be held  at the 
investigato r or treating  physicians  discretion  until  the investigato r or treating  physicia n feel the 
causal agent  can be restarted  safely.  In cases  of medication  hold per physician,  redosin g must 
meet  all criteria for restarting  new  cycle (section  6.2.2).  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  39  
  
6.2 DOSE MOD IFICATION: LENALIDOMIDE  
 
Subject s will be ev aluated for AEs at each visit with the NCI CTC AE v4.0, se e 
below for full instruction on init iation of a new cycle of therapy and dose 
modifications  during a cycle of therapy.  
 
Table  6, 7 Lenalidomi de dose  adjustment  steps 
 
 
Table 6: LENALIDOMIDE Dose Adjustment Steps 
 
 
Starti ng Dose  
MTD mg d aily f or 21 days eve ry 28 days 
 
Dose Level –1  
MTD -5 mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
 
Dose Level –2  
MTD -10 mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
 
Dose Level –3  
MTD-15 mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
 
 
 
Table 7: LENALIDOMIDE Dose Adjustment Steps in SLL 
Starting Dose MTD or max of 10 mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
Dose level +1 Starting dose +5 mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
Dose level +2 Starting dose +10mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
Dose level +3 Starting dose +15mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
Dose level -1 Starting dose -5 mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
Dose level -2 Starting dose -10 mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
Dose level -3 Starting dose -15mg daily for 21 days every 28 days 
The minimum dose level is 15mg below MTD or 5 mg daily for 21 d ays, 
(whichever is higher).  
Patient s who cannot tolerate or require dose redu ction 
below 5mg daily le nalido mide will not receive further dose s of lenalido mide.
 I
f the patien t is attaining c linical benef it in the opinion of the treating physician , 
and has attained at least a partia l response,  obinutuzuma b dosin g will continu e 
per st udy design to a ma ximum of 21 doses. 
 
The startin g dose will be pr edefined during the ph ase I po rtion of the study ba sed 
upon coho rt (see Table 2) . In the phas e II portion of the study , the startin g dose 
will b e the maximu m tolerated dose as defined by phase I portion. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenalidomid e in Low Grad e Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version: 
10/31/2017  42  
  
 
 
 
 
6.2.1  INSTRUCTIONS FOR LENALI DOMIDE DOSE M ODIFICATIONS OR INTERRUPTION 
DURING A CYCLE . 
 
Table 8: Dose Modi fication for Lenalidomide 
NCI CTC Toxicity Grade Day 2-14 of Cyc le ≥Day 15 of Cycle  
 
 
Grade 3 neutrop enia 
associated with feve r 
(temper ature ≥ 38.5º C) 
or Grade 4 ne utrop enia • Hold (int errupt do se). 
• Follow CBC we ekly. 
• If neutro penia has r esolved to ≤ 
grade 2 rest art at next lower dos e 
level and continue the cycle unti l 
Day 21. • Omit len alidomide for 
remain der of cycle 
If neutropenia is the only 
toxicity for which a dose 
reduction is req uired. G-CS F 
may be used and the dose 
mainta ined for the next cycle at 
the invest igators di scretion. 
 
 
Thrombo cytope nia 
≥Grade 3 (platelet c ount  
< 50,000/mm³)  • Hold (int errupt do se). 
• Follow CBC we ekly. 
• If throm bocyto penia res olves to ≤ 
grade 2 rest art at next lower dos e 
level and continue the cycle unti l 
Day 21. • Omit len alidomide for 
remain der of cycle  
 
Erythem a multiform e ≥ 
Grade 3 • Disc ontinue lenalidomide study 
drug. • Disc ontinue 
lenalidomide stu dy 
drug. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenalidomid e in Low Grad e Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version: 
10/31/2017  42  
  
 
Sinus  bradycardia/ 
other cardiac 
arrhythm ia 
Grade 2 
 
 
 
≥ Grad e 3 • Hold (int errupt) dose. F ollow at  
least weekly. 
• If the toxicity resolves  to ≤ grade 1 
prior to D ay 21 restart at next lower 
dose level and continue the cycl e 
until Day 21. 
 
• Disc ontinue lenalidomide study 
drug. • Omit len alidomide for 
the remainder of the 
cycle. 
 
 
 
 
• Disc ontinue 
lenalidomide stu dy 
drug. Dose  
 
Allergic r eaction or 
hypersensitivity 
Grade 2-3 
 
 
 
 
Grade 4 • Hold (int errupt) dose. F ollow at  
least weekly. 
• If the toxicity resolves  to ≤ grade 1 
prior to D ay 21 restart at next lower 
dose level and continue the cycl e 
until Day 21. 
 
 
• Disc ontinue lenalidomide study 
drug. • Omit len alidomide for 
the remainder of the 
cycle. 
 
 
 
 
• Disc ontinue 
lenalidomide stu dy 
drug 
 
 
Venous  
thrombosis/embolism  
≥ Grade 3 • Hold (int errupt) do se and st art 
anticoagul ation; restart at 
investigator’s di scretion (m aintai n 
dose lev el). • Omit len alidomide for 
remain der of cycl e. 
Anticoagulati on 
measures a s 
described in 
Connco mitant thera py 
sectio n below. 
 
other non-hema tologic  
toxicity assessed a s 
Lena lidom ide-related ≥ 
Grade 3 • Hold (int errupt) dose. F ollow at  
least weekly. 
• If the toxicity resolves  to ≤ grade 2 
prior to D ay 21 restart at next lower 
dose level and continue the cycl e 
until Day 21. • Omit lenalidomide for  
remainder of cycle. 
• Initiate appropriate suppo rtive 
care, restar t lenalidomi de  
next cycle (decrease by one 
dose level) 
 
 
 
Hype rthyroid ism or 
hypothyroidi sm • Omit lenalidomide for rema inder of  
cycle, evaluate etiology, and initiate • Omit len alidomide for 
remainder of cycle, 
appropriate therapy. Restart 
lenalidomide nex t cycle (decreas e 
dose by one dose leve l). evaluate etiology, and 
initiate appropriat e 
therapy. Re start 
lenalidomide next 
cycle (d ecrease dos e 
by one d ose level).  
adjustments/inte rvention:  lenalidomide associa ted rash: 
 
 Grade  
1‐2 •  
 Day 2‐14  of Cycle  
Startsupportive  •  
 
Day ≥ 15 of Cycle  
Startsupportive  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenalidomid e in Low Grad e Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version: 
10/31/2017  42  
 measures  if grade 2 measures  if grade 2 
• No dose  adju stment  • No dose  adju stment  
Non‐blisterin grash  • Hold (i nterr upt) dose.  • Omit lenalidomide  for 
Grade 3 • Startsupportive  
measures.   
• remainder  of cycle. 
Startsupportive  
 • Evaluate  weekly  measures.  
 • If rash  resolves  to ≤ • Evaluate  weekly until 
  grade  1 prior  to day 21 
restart  at dose level  ‐1  
• rash  ≤ grade  1. 
Restart  next  cycle at 
  and continue to Day  dose  level  ‐1. 
  21.   
 • Restart  next cycle at   
  dose  level  ‐1.   
Grade 4* • Discontinue  • Discontinue  
  lenalidomide   lenalidomide  
 • Dermatology  • Dermatology  
  evaluation   evaluation  
 • Startsupportive  • Startsupportive  
 
Desquamating (blistering)   
• measures  
Discontinue   
• measures  
Discontinue  
rash  lenalidomide   lenalidomide  
Any Grade* • Dermatology  • Dermatology  
  
• evaluation  
Startsupportive   
• evaluation  
Startsupportive  
  measures   measures  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  43  
  
 
 
Suggest ed support ive measure s : 
 
1. Initiate daily oral antihistamines 
Examp les 
 
• Loratine 10mg PO daily 
• Ceterizin e 10mg PO daily 
• Diphenhydr amin e 25mg PO daily 
2. Short -course low-dose oral ste roids 
Example  
 
• Prednisone 10mg PO x 3 days 
• Hy drocortisone 20mg PO QAM , 10mg PO QPM x 3 days 
  
 
6.2.2  Instruction  for initiation  of a New Cycle 
 
 
A new course of treatment may begin on the schedu led Day 1 of a new cycle i f: 
 
• The ANC is ≥ 1,000/ μL; 
• The platelet count is ≥ 50,000/μL; 
• Any study drug-related allergi c reaction/hypersensitivity o r sinus bradycardia/ 
other cardiac arrhythmi a adver se even t that may have occurre d has resolve d to ≤ 
grade 1 severity;  
• Any other study drug-related adverse event that may have occurred has 
resolve d to ≤ grade 2 severity.  
 
If these conditions are not met on Day 1 of a new cycle , the subjec t will be 
evaluate d weekl y and a new cycle of the combination will not be i nitiated until the 
toxicity has resol ved as describe d above. If lenalidomide dosing was halted 
durin g the previous cycl e and was restarted with a one-level dose reduction 
without req uiring an inte rruption for the rema inder of the cycle , then that reduce d 
dose level will be initiate d on Day 1 o f the new cycle. 
 
If lenalidomide dosing was om itted for gr eater than 15 days of the previous 
cycle or if the new cycle is delayed more than 7 days due to toxicity   
note d on the sched uled Day 1, then the new cycle will be starte d with a one- 
level dose r educ tion. 
 
  
Treatmen tcompliance  
 
Subject s will be aske d to maintai n a di ary to recor d the drug admi nistration.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  44  
  
 
 
6.3 CONCOMITANT  THERAPY  
 
Anti-can cer therapies , including ch emotherapy, chem oimm unothe rapy, radia tion, 
thalidomide, or any other investigational  agent s is not permitte d while subjects 
are receivin g study drug durin g the treatment phas e of the study.  
 
 
Patients can r eceive sargramo stim (G-CSF) as treatm ent for grade 3 or greater 
neutropeni a at the treatin g physici ans di screti on. P rophylactic growth factor is 
not permitted.  
  
It is recommende d that patients who are at high risk for a initial or recur rent 
thromboe mbolic event (high risk is defined as history of a throm boembolic event 
and/or taking a c oncomitan t medica tion ass ociated with an increased risk for a 
thromboe mbolic event and/or a  know n hypercoagula ble st ate regar dless of 
thromboe mbolic history) receive prophylactic aspirin (70 – 325 mg) daily unless 
contraindicated . If aspiri n is c ontraindic ated, use of low m olecular weight heparin 
or warfarin (or equivalent Vitamin K antagonist) to keep the inte rnational 
normalize d ratio (INR) in the range of 2-3, or use of ot her anti-thrombot ic therapy 
according to ho spital guidelines , or physician preference, is acceptable. 
Howe ver, the choice of anticoagulan t for prophylaxis for VTE relies upon th e 
investigato r’s discretion and shoul d be tailored to the subject’s indivi dual 
risk/benef it profile by taking into accoun t the i ndividua l thrombotic risk (e.g ., 
histor y of venous thrombosi s), bleedin g risk, and the quality of compl iance with 
antithrombotic  treatment.  
 
  
 
6.4 DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY TREATM ENT 
 
 
 
Follow-Up 
 
Subjects who d iscontinue treatment , will be followed for a m inimum of 6 m onths. 
Patient s who die or withdra w consen t will not be followe d beyond  the date of the 
death or withdrawa l of conse nt. Patient s who start alternativ e therap y will not be 
followe d beyon d initiatio n of next line therap y excep t for surviva l. All other 
patient s that remai n on study (ie completion  of therapy,  or drug interruptio n due to 
toxicity) will be follow ed with tumo r lesion assessments, imaging , and survival per 
the schedul e of assessments, Sectio n 2.1. Subjects will u nderg o a safety 
assessm ent appro ximat ely 28 days post the last dose of st udy dr ug. In addition, 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  45  
 off study evaluati ons, such as recording subseq uent therapy, per the Schedul e of 
Assessm ents will be done. Following completion of chemothe rapy, patients will be 
evaluated every 3 month s for one year, then every 6 months for a to tal of 2 years 
following co mpletion of therap y with CT of neck, t horax, abdomen and pelvis and 
other studie s as rec ommen d by the treatin g physician.  
 
7. CRITERIA FOR SUBJECT DISCONTINUATION  
 
7.1 OB INUTUZUMAB- SPEC IFIC CRITERIA  
 
Subjects who meet the following cri teria shou ld be disc ontinued from the study:  
 
 • 
 
• Activ e HBV infectio n or hepatitis  
 
Severe or life-threatening anaph ylaxis or hy persensitivity reaction 
 
7.2   
GENERAL CRITERIA  
 • Inabilit y of subject to c ompl y with study requirements  
 • Determination by the investigator t hat it is no longer safe for the 
subjec t to continu e therapy  
 
8.   
CRITER IA FOR  STUDY  DISCONTINUATION  
Treatm ent will continue for six cycle s of combinatio n thera py and 12 cycles (2 
years) of main tenance obinutuzu mab as per study design, or until the occurrence 
of any of the following events.  
 
Treatmen t with study drug is to be discontin ued when any of  the following 
occurs: 
 
• Lack of therapeu tic effect  
 
• Adverse event (s) that, in the judgment of the Inves tigator, may cause 
severe or permanent harm or which rule out continuatio n of study drug. 
 
• Majo r violation of the study pr otocol.  
 
• Withdrawal of consent  
 
• Lost to follow up 
 
• Death  
 
• Suspecte d pregnancy  
 
 
  
9. CLIN ICAL AND LABORATORY  EVALUATIONS  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  46  
 9.1 PRETREATMENT EVALUATIONS  
 
Pleas e see schedul e of study assess ments for scree ning evaluations (section 
2.1). Screening evaluatio n will be perform ed wi thin 30 days of study entry . In 
the absence of a history of blood trans fusion or intraven ous drug use in the p ast 
6 months , patient s can have hepatiti s B/C and HIV testin g up to 8 we eks prior 
to study  entry.  
 
 
 
9.2 EVALUATIONS  DURING  TREATMENT  
 
Patient s will underg o tumo r respons e asse ssmen t includin g a CT scan of the 
neck, chest, abdo men, and pelvis, physical exam , and basic laborat ory panel 
during screening , after 3 and 6, 9 and 12 cycles of combinat ion teatment , and 
every 4 month s during main tenance phase with obinutuz umab. 
 
9.3 POST -TREATMEN T EVALUATIONS  
 
Subject s who discontinue treatment for any reason, other than completion of 
therapy, will be fo llowed for a minimum o f 6 months from last dose of drug. 
Subject s will undergo a safety  assessment approxi mately 28 days post the last 
dose o f study drug. In addition, off study evaluations , such as recording 
subsequent t herapy, per the Schedule of Assessments will be done . Following 
completion of chemotherapy, patients will be evaluated ev ery 3 month s for one 
year, every 6 mo nths for 1 year and then yearl y with CT of neck, thorax, 
abdo men and pelvis and other studie s as recommen d by the treating physi cian. 
When patien t starts alternative treatment for lymphoma, they will no lo nger be 
follo
wed pre protocol.  
 
  
10. EVALUATION OF RESPONSE  
 
 
Response criteria for patients enrolled onto the study will follow the guidel ines 
recom mende d by the1999 Internationa l Wor ksho p on Respo nse Criteria fo r NHL 
(Che son et al.1999 ) All responses will be ch aracterized as either c omplete 
remissio n (CR) , unconfirmed complete remissio n (CRu) , partial remissio n (PR), 
stable disease (SD), or progres sion of disease (POD). Response will be 
assessed after every three cycle s of therapy and at the completion of 
lenalidomi de treatment. Response will be asse ssed every 4 month s thereafter 
while the patient receive s obinutuzumab.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  47  
  
11. STATI STICAL   CONSIDERATIONS  
 
This is a single -center, open label, phas e I/II st udy in pat ients with re fractory or 
relapsed indolen t lymphoma.  The feasibility of admi nistra ting lenalidomid e in 
combination with obinutuz umab and the MTD of the c ombination will be 
determine d in the phase I part of the study . When the MTD has been 
established , the efficacy of the combination will be further e valuate d in the phase 
II part of the study in two patient cohor ts sim ultaneou sly. The two patient cohorts 
are the patients with follicular lymphom a (grad e 1-3a) and the patient s with either 
follicular lymphoma, marginal z one lymphom a, or SLL. A maximum of 72 
patients (18 in phase I and 60 in phase II (30 patients each cohort ); the patient s 
treated at the MTD in phase I will be counte d as the first group of patient s treate d 
in phase II) will b e enrolled in this st udy on an intent-to-treat basis. 
 
 
11.1 STATI STICAL /STUDY  DESIGN  
 
 
11.1.1  Phase  I 
 
The primary objectiv e of the phase I part of the study is to determin e the 
maximum  tolerated  dose (MTD) o f lenalidomid e when given in comb ination 
with obinutuzuma b for subsequent testin g in the phas e II part of the trial. 
There are three predefined dose levels for lenalidomid e (10 mg, 15 mg, 20 
mg) with a fixed dose of obinutuzumab ( 1000mg ) as outline d in Table 2. 
 
 
Dose limiting to xicity (DLT ) will be assessed during the first course of each cohort 
(28 days) , and refers to a medical ly significant event which meet s one of the 
following criteria using Na tional Cancer Institute Common T erminology Criteria  
for Advers e Event s (NCI CTCAE ) versio n 4: 
 
 
• Grad e 3 or highe r non-hematologic AE which is felt to be rela ted to 
the study drug by the inves tigator with the exception of the 
followi ng: 
• Transient grade 3 or more infusion reaction that complete ly 
resolve s within 24 hours.  
• Grad e 4 hematologi c toxicity (Platelet count is define d as <25,000 
for the purpose s of determining DLT.  
• Grad e 3 neutropeni a with eleva ted temperatur e (defined as >/= 
101 degree s F to be c onfirmed on two occas ions).  
• Grad e 3 thrombocytopeni a with bleeding.  
• Treatment delay of greater than 2 w eeks due to treatment related 
toxicity. 
 
The target rate of DLT is 30%.  The standard  ‘3+3’ design will be used . 
Applying the 3+3 design, the first cohort of 3 patients will be treated at dose 
level 1 and evaluate d at the end of 28 days.  The algorith m is as fo llows: (1) 
If 0 out  of 3 pa tients experiences DLT, the next cohor t of 3 patients will be 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  48  
 treated at the next highe r dose level. (2) If 1 out of 3 patient s develo p DLT, 
additional 3 patien ts will be treate d at the same dose level. If no more DLT 
devel ops at the dose, i.e. 1 out of a total of 6 patients develops DLT, the 
dose esca lation continues for the nex t cohort of 3 patients . (3) At any given 
dose, if greater than 1 ou t 3 patients or 1 out of 6 patients experience DLT, 
the dose level exceeds the MTD and 3 m ore patients will be treated at the 
next lower dose if there are less than 6 patients al ready treated at that 
dose. Followin g the abov e scheme, MTD is defined as the highes t dose 
leve
l in which 6 patients have been treate d with less than 2 instance s of 
DLT. Given 3 d ose levels, it is anticipated that up to 18 eligible pa tients are 
requi red for the phase I part of the study. 
Safety p arameter s and DLTs will be su mmarize d and listed by each dose level. 
Prior to advancing/changing dose levels a cohort summary will be completed and 
submitted to the Clinical Research Monito r in the IND Office.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  49  
  
 
 
 
 
11.1.2  Phase  II 
 
The primary objectiv e for the phas e II part is to furthe r evaluate the safet y and 
efficacy of lenalido mide when given in combination with obinutu zumab at the 
MTD of lenalido mide deter mined in phase I. The maximum number of patien ts 
that will be recruite d for the phas e II part is 60 (include additional 54 and the 6 
patient s treate d at the MTD in phas e I) with 30 for each of the two patient 
cohorts : the patient s with follicular lymph oma (grad e 1-3a) and the patient s with 
either follicular lymphoma, marginal zone lymphom a or SLL. The patient s who 
are treate d at the MTD in the phase I part will b e include d in phas e II (in relevant 
cohort) . The objective respons e (complet e respons e + partia l r esponse) after 6 
cycles and DLT a fter 1 cycle will be monitored simultaneousl y using the B ayesian 
approach of Thall, Simon, Estey (1995, 1996) as ext ended by T hall and Sung 
(1998).  
 
Cohort  A: Patients  with Follicular  lymphoma  
 
Histo rical data on 43 patient s (Witzig, 2009) with relap sed or refractor y indolent 
non-Hodgki n’s lymphom a treated with lenalidom ide show an objec tive response 
(OR) rate of 23% and DLT rate of unde r 30%. Indep endence was assumed 
between OR and DLT.  It is expe cted for the current trial that the two- drug 
combinatio n will i mprov e the OR rate by 20% to 43% wh ile the DLT rate is 
maintaine d at or below 30%. A sampl e size of 30 patients ensures that, if the  
trial is not termina ted early, a posterior 90% credibl e interval for OR rate will have 
width of 0.283 at most , unde r the assumption of a 43% of OR rate. We will cla im 
that the regimen is wor th of furthe r in v estigation if the lower limit of the posterior 
90% cr edible interval for OR  rate is hi gher than 0.23. The probabi lities of OR 
and DLT for the histori cal data are modele d by beta distributions ( Beta (9.89, 
33.11) and Beta (12.9, 30.1), respectively). The prior probabili ties of OR and 
DLT for the expe rimental regime n are also modeled by beta distributions ( Beta 
(0.46 , 1.54) and Beta (0.6, 1.4), respectively), which have the same means as  
the corresponding beta distributions for the historica l data. 
 
Denot ing the historical probab ilities of objec tive response rate and DLT rate by 
{p(OR,H) , p(D LT,H)}, the following decision criteria will be appl ied: 
 
1) Let E correspon d to the experime ntal treatment, stop if 
Prob{p(OR,H)  + δOR > p(OR ,E) | data} > 0.95, where δCR =0.20  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  50  
  
 
 
2) Stop if Pr ob{p(DLT,H) + δTOX < p(DLT,E )| data}>0.95, wher e δDLT =0 
 
Patient s will be monitored in c ohort s of 10 according to the following stopp ing 
bounda ries for overall respons e and toxicity. 
Number of patients 
evaluated  Recommend stopping if ≤ 
OR obser ved Recommend stopping if  
≥ DLT observed  
10 1 7 
20 4 11 
30 7 15 
 
The operat ing characteristic s are summari zed in the following tabl e (based on 
simulations from 10,00 0 trials).  
True DLT Rate  True OR Rate  Prob(stop the trial early) 
0.10  0.13  0.9047 
 0.23  0.5420  
 0.33  0.2014  
 0.43  0.0491  
 0.53  0.0082  
0.20  0.13  0.9048  
 0.23  0.5426 
 0.33  0.2025 
 0.43  0.0503 
 0.53  0.0095  
0.30  0.13  0.9069 
 0.23  0.5528  
 0.33  0.2203  
 0.43  0.0715  
 0.53  0.0316  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  51
  
  
 
 
0.40  0.13  0.9186  
 0.23  0.6087 
 0.33  0.3177 
 0.43  0.1875 
 0.53  0.1526 
0.50  0.13  0.9461 
 0.23  0.7410 
 0.33  0.5485  
 0.43  0.4623  
 0.53  0.4392  
 
   
Cohort  B: Patients with follicular lymphoma, ma rginal zone lymphoma  or small  
lymphoc ytic lymphoma.  
 
Historica l data on 44 patie nts (Fer rajoli, 2008) with relap sed or refractory chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia treated with lenalidomide show an object ive respons e (OR) 
rate abou t 30% and DLT rate of unde r 30%. Independenc e was assumed 
between OR and DLT.  It is expe cted for the current trial that the two- drug 
combinatio n will i mprov e the OR rate by 20% to 50% wh ile the DLT rate is 
maintaine d at or below 30%. A sampl e size of 30 patients ensures that, if the  
trial is not termina ted early, a posterior 90% credibl e interval for objective 
respons e rate will have wi dth of 0.287 at mo st, under the assumption of a 50% of 
objecti ve response rate. We w ill claim t hat the regimen is worth of further 
investigation if the lower limit of the posterior 90% credible interval for OR rate is 
highe r than 0.30. The probab ilities o f OR and DLT for the hi storical data are both 
modeled by beta distribution s (Beta (13.2 , 30.8) ) since the historical rates are 
same for both. The prior probabilitie s of OR and DLT for the expe rimental 
regime n are then also mode led by beta distribution s (Beta (0.6, 1.4)), which have 
the same mean as the correspondin g beta distribution for the historica l data.  
 
Denoting the historical probabilitie s of object ive respons e rate and DLT rate by 
{p(OR,H) , p(D LT,H)}, the following decision criteria will be appl ied: 
 
1) Let E correspon d to the experime ntal treatment, stop if 
Prob{p(OR,H)  + δOR > p(OR ,E) | data} > 0.95, where δCR =0.2 
2) Stop if Pr ob{p( DLT,H) + δDLT < p(DLT,E )| data}>0 .95, wher e δDLT =0 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  52  
  
 
 
  
 
Patient s will be monitored in c ohort s of 10 according to the following stopp ing 
bounda ries for overall respo nse and DLT. 
Number of patients 
evaluated  Recommend stopping if ≤ 
OR obser ved Recommend stopping if  
≥ DLT observed  
10 2 7 
20 6 11 
30 9 15 
 
The operat ing characteristic s are summari zed in the following tabl e (based on 
simulations from 10,00 0 trials).  
True DLT Rate  True OR Rate  Prob(stop the trial early) 
0.10  0.30  0.6491 
 0.40  0.3014  
 0.50  0.0889 
 0.60  0.0164 
 0.70  0.0018  
0.20  0.30  0.6496  
 0.40  0.3023 
 0.50  0.0901  
 0.60  0.0176  
 0.70  0.0031  
0.30  0.30  0.6574 
 0.40  0.3179  
 0.50  0.1104  
 0.60  0.0395  
 0.70  0.0253 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  53  
  
 
 
0.40  0.30  0.7002  
 0.40  0.4031 
 0.50  0.2216 
 0.60  0.1596 
 0.70  0.1471 
0.50  0.30  0.8016 
 0.40  0.6050 
 0.50  0.4848  
 0.60  0.4438  
 0.70  0.4355  
 
 
 
 
11.2 Anal ysis Plans  
Phase I: 
Toxicity type and sever ity by dose level will be summarize d usin g frequency 
tables. 
  
 
Phas e II: 
The analysis for phase II will include the patients who are treated at the MTD in 
phase I. 
Toxicity type and sever ity will be su mmar ized for each patie nt cohort using 
frequenc y tables.  
Summary statistics will be prov ided for continuous variables. Frequency tables 
will be used to summariz e categorica l variables . The overal l response rate for 
each patient cohor t will be calculated and the Cl oppe r Pears on conf idence 
interv al will be provided. Chi squar e test or Fisher’ s exact test will be used to 
evaluate the assoc iation between patien t prognostic factor and response. Th e 
distribu tion of time-to-even t endpoint s including overall su rvival and progression 
free survival will be estimate d using the method of K aplan and Meier. 
Comparison o f time- to-event e ndpoints by importan t subgrou ps will be m ade 
using the log-rank test. 
For the toxicity endp oint, per-treate d analysis w ill be performe d to incl ude any 
patient who receive d the treatment regardless of the eligibility nor the duration o r 
dose of the treatmen t received. For the efficac y endpoints , intend-to-treat 
analy sis will be applie d to the eligible patient s. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  54  
  
 
 
   
12. REPORTING  OF ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
12.1 ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
 
Safety  assessments wi ll consist of monitoring and reporting adverse events  (AEs)  and 
serious adverse events (SAEs)  per protocol.  This includes  all events  of death,  and any 
study  specific issue  of concern.  
  
 
12.1.1  ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
An AE is any unfavor able and un intended sign, symptom, or diseas e tempo rally 
associated with the use o f an investigat ional medi cinal produ ct (IMP) or other 
protocol-imposed intervention, regardless of attribu tion. 
 
This includes the following:AEs not previously observ ed in the subject that 
emerge duri ng the protocol-spe cified  AE re porting period,  including signs or 
symptoms associ ated with non-Hodg kin’s lymph oma that  were not present prior 
to the  AE rep orting p eriod. 
Complica tions t hat occur a s a result of protocol-mandated intervent ions (e.g., 
invasive  procedures such  as ca rdiac catheterizati ons).  
 
• If applicable, AEs that occur pr ior to a ssign ment of st udy treatm ent 
associa ted wit h medi cation washout, no treatmen t run-in, or other protocol-
mandated intervention.  
 
• P reexisting medical cond itions (other than the conditio n being studied) 
judged by the investigator to have worsened in severity or frequ ency or 
changed in cha racter during the pr otocol-specified AE r eportin g period. 
 
12.1.2  SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting Requirements for M D Anderson Sponsor Single Site 
IND Protocols  
 
An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “serious” if, in the view of either 
the investigator or the sponsor, it results in any of the following  
outcomes:  
 
• Death 
• A life -threatening adverse event  
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to 
conduct normal life functions.  
• A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
 
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life- threatening, or require 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  55  
 hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse drug experience when, based upon 
appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed i n this definition. 
Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse (21 CFR 312.32).  
 • Important medical events as defined above, may also be considered 
serious adverse events. Any important medical event can and should be reported as an SAE if deemed appropriate by the Principal Investigator or the I ND Sponsor, IND Office. 
• All events occurring during the conduct of a protocol and meeting the 
definition of a SAE must be reported to the IRB in accordance with the timeframes and procedures outlined in “The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Institutional 
Review Board Policy on Reporting Adverse Events for Drugs and Devices”.  
• Serious adverse events will be captured from the time of the first protocol -
specific intervention, until 30 days after the last dose of drug, unless the participant withdraws 
consent.  
• Serious adverse events must be followed until clinical recovery is complete 
and laboratory tests have returned to baseline, progression of the event has stabilized, or there has been acceptable resolution of the event.  
• All SAEs, expected or unexpected/ initial or follow up, must be reported to 
the IND Office within 5 working days of knowledge of the event regardless of the attribution.  
• Death or life- threatening events that are unexpected, possibly, probably or 
definitely  related to drug must be reported (initial or follow up) to the IND Office within 24 hours 
of knowledge of the event  
• Additionally, any serious adverse events that occur after the 30  day timeline 
that are related to the study treatment must be reported to the IND Office. This may include the development of a secondary malignancy.  
• The electronic SAE application (eSAE) will be utilized for safety reporting to 
the IND Office and MD Anderson IRB.  
• All events reported to the supporting company must also be reported to the 
IND Office  
 Reporting to FDA:  
• Serious adverse events will be forwarded to FDA by the IND Sponsor 
according to 21 CFR 312.32.  
 
It is the responsibility of the PI and the research team to ensure serious adverse events are 
reported according to the Code of Federal Regulations, Good Clinical Practices, the protocol 
guidelines, the sponsor’s guidelines, and Institutional Review Board policy.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
12.2 METHOD S AND TIMING FOR ASSESS ING AND  
RECORDING  SAFETY  VARIABLES  
 
The investigator is responsible for ensuring that all AEs and SAEs that are 
observ ed or reporte d durin g the st udy, are collecte d and reported to the FDA,  
appropriat e IRB(s), and Gene ntech, Inc. in acco rdance with CFR 31 2.32 (IND 
Safet y Reports).  
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  56  
 12.2.1  ADVERSE EVENT REPOR TING PERIOD  
 
The study perio d durin g which all AEs and SAEs must be reporte d begins afte r the 
first protocol intervention. and ends 30 days followi ng the last administra tion of 
study treatmen t or study dis continuation/ter mination , whichever is earlier. After this 
period, investigators should only repor t SAEs that a re attributed to prior study 
treatment.  
 
12.2.2  ASSESS MENT  OF ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
All AEs and SAEs whet her volunteered by the subject , discovered by study 
personnel during questioni ng, or detected throug h physical examination, 
laboratory test, or other mean s will be re porte d approp riately. Each reporte d AE 
or SAE w ill be descri bed by its durat ion (i.e., start and end dates), regulatory 
seriousness criteria if applicable , suspe cted relation ship to the {stud y drug} (see 
followin g guidance), and action s taken.  
 
The Inv estigator or physi cian designee is responsible for verifying and provi ding 
sourc e documentation for all advers e events and assigning the attribution fo r 
each even t for all subjects enrolled on the trial. 
 
To ensure consistency of AE and SAE causal ity/attribution  assessments , 
investigators shou ld apply the following general guidel ine: 
 
 
           Attribution - the determination of whether an adverse event is related to a medical 
treatment or procedure :  
 
• Definite - the adverse event is clearly related to the investigational agent(s).  
• Probable - the adverse event is likely related to the investigational agent(s).  
• Possible - the adverse event may be related to the investigational agent(s).  
• Unlikely - The adverse event is doubtfully related to the investigational agent(s).  
• Unrelated - The adverse event is clearly NOT related to the investigational 
agent(s).  
 
Expecte d advers e event s are those adverse events that are listed or 
characterized in the Packag e Insert or curren t Investigator Brochur e. 
 
Unexpecte d advers e event s are those not listed in the Packag e Inser t (P.I.) or 
curren t Investigator Br ochur e (I.B.) or not identified. This includes adverse e vents 
for which the specificity or severity is not consisten t with the de scriptio n in the P.I. 
or I.B. For example,  under  this definition, hepat ic necrosis would be unexpected 
if the P.I. or I.B. only referred to e levated hepati c enzymes or hepatitis.  
Protocol specific data and adverse ev ents will be entered into PDMS/CORE. 
PDMS/CORE will be used as the electron ic case repor t form for this protocol. 
 
 
 
12.3 PROCEDURES  FOR ELIC ITING, RECORD ING, AND  
REPORTING ADVERS E EVENTS 
 
12.3.1  ELICIT ING ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
A consistent methodolog y for elicitin g AEs at all subject evaluation time points 
shoul d be adopted . Example s of non-directive ques tions include:  
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  57  
 • “How have you felt since your last clinica l visit?”  
• “Have you had any new or changed heal th probl ems since  you we re last here?” 
 
12.3.2  SPECIFIC  INSTRUCT IONS  FOR RECORDING  AES 
 
Investigator s shoul d use correct medi cal terminology/ concept s whe n reporti ng 
AEs or SAEs . Avoid colloquiali sms and abbrev iations.  
 
a. Diag nosis vs. Signs and Sympto ms 
If know n at the time of reporting, a di agnosis should be repo rted rather than 
individual signs and symptom s (e.g., recor d only liver failur e or hepatiti s rather 
than jaundice, asterixis, and elevated transaminases) . However, if a constellation 
of signs and/or symptom s cannot be m edical ly character ized as a single 
diagno sis or syndrome at the time of reporting, it is acceptable to report the 
informa tion that is currently av ailable. If a diagno sis is subs equently established, 
it shoul d be reported as follow -up informa tion. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  58  
 b. Deat hs 
All deaths that occur durin g the protoc ol-specified AE r eportin g period (see 
Section 12.2.1), regardl ess of attribut ion, will be r eported to the appropriate 
parties. When recording a death , the event or condi tion that caused or 
contributed to the fatal outcome shoul d be reporte d as the single medical 
concept . If the caus e of death is unknow n and cannot be ascertained a t the time 
of reporting, repor t “Unexplained Death”. 
 
c. Preexisting Me dical Conditions  
A preexis ting medi cal conditi on is one that is present at the start of the study.  
Such condit ions should be repor ted as medi cal and surgical hi story. A preexisting 
medic al condition sh ould be re-assesse d throughout the trial and re porte d as an 
AE or SAE only if the frequency , severity, or character of the condition worsens 
durin g the study . When report ing such event s, it is im portant to conve y the 
concept that the preexis ting condi tion has c hanged by including applicable 
descriptor s (e.g., “more frequen t heada ches”).  
 
d. Hosp italizations for M edical or Surgical Proce dures 
Any AE that results in hosp italization or prolonged hospitalization should be 
document ed and reported as an SAE. If a subjec t is hospi talized to undergo a 
medi cal or surgi cal pr ocedur e as a resul t of an AE, the event responsible for the 
procedure, not the procedur e itself, shou ld be reported as the SAE. For example, 
if a subjec t is hospitalize d to underg o coronary bypas s surgery , recor d the heart 
condition that necessitated the bypass as the SAE.  
 
Hospitalizations for the follow ing reasons d o not requir e reporting:  
• Hospitalization or prolonged hospit alizat ion for diagno stic or elective 
surgi cal pr ocedure s for preexisting conditions  
• Hospitali zation or prolonged hospi talization requ ired to a llow efficacy 
measurement  for the study  or 
• Hospitalization or pr olonged hospitalizat ion for scheduled therapy o f the 
target diseas e of the study.  
 
Assessment of Severity of Adverse Events 
 
The adverse event severity grading scale for the NCI CTCAE v 4.0. 
The severity of the adverse events (AEs) will be graded according to the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE), Version 
4.0.  
 
Events n ot included in the NCI CTCAE will be scored as follows:  
• Grade 1: Mild: discomfort present with no disruption of daily activity, no 
treatment required beyond prophylaxis.  
• Grade 2: Moderate: discomfort present with some disruption of daily activity, 
require treatment.  
• Grade 3: Severe: discomfort that interrupts normal daily activity, not responding 
to first line treatment.  
• Grade 4: Life Threatening: discomfort that represents immediate risk of death  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  59  
  
The investigator (or physician designee) is  
responsible for verifying and providing source documentation for all adverse events, 
assigning the attribution  and assessing the severity of the AE, the causal relationship between any events and the clinical study procedure, activities or device.   Additionally, 
the Investigator is responsible for providing appropriate treatment for the event and for 
adequately following the event until resolution for all adverse events for subjects 
enrolled.  
 
Pregnancy 
If a femal e patient become s pregnan t while receivin g obinutuzumab o r within 18 
months after the last dose of obinut uzumab, or the partner of a male patient 
becomes pregnan t while receiving therap y or within 6 months  of completing 
therapy , a repor t shoul d be completed and expeditiousl y subm itted to the 
Genentech, Inc. Follow -up to obtain the outcome of the pregnanc y shoul d also 
occur . Abortion, whether accident al, therapeut ic, or spont aneous , shou ld always 
be classified as serious, and expeditiously reported as an SAE. Similarly, any 
congenital  anomaly/birth defec t in a child born to a female subjec t expose d to 
obinutuz umab shoul d be repor ted as an SAE.  
 
Pregnan cies occur ring while the subjec t is on lenalido mide or within 4 weeks 
after the subject’s last dose of lenalidomide are cons idered expedited reporta ble 
events . If the subjec t is on lenalidom ide, it is to be di scont inued im mediately and 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  60  
 the subjec t is to be instructed to return any unused portion of lenalidomid e to th e 
Investigator. The pregnanc y must be repor ted by the invest igator to MD ACC IRB  
and IRB OFFIC E AND to Celg ene Corporat ion Worldw ide Drug Safety 
Surveillan ce (WWDSS ) within 24 hours of the Investigator’s knowledg e of the 
pregnanc y by phone and f acsimile using the SAE Form.  
 
 
 
The Investigator will fo llow the subject until complet ion of the pregnancy, and 
must notify Celgene Corpora tion Worl dwide D rug Safety Surveillance (WW DSS) 
of the outcome as speci fied below. The Inves tigator will provide this information 
as a follow-up to the initial SAE. 
 
  
If the outcom e of the pregnanc y meets the criteria fo r imme diate classification as 
a SAE (i.e., spontane ous abortion [any congen ital anomaly detec ted in a n 
aborted fetus is to be document ed], stillbirth , neonata l death, or conge nital 
anomaly) , the Investigato r should follow the pr ocedures for r eport ing SAEs (i.e ., 
repor t the event to Celgene Corporation Worl dwide Drug Safety Surve illance 
(WWDSS ) by facsimile within 24 hours of the Inves tigator’s knowledge of th e 
event ) and repor t the even t to MDACC IRB and IRB OFFIC E. 
 
 
 
Any suspected fetal expo sure to lenalidomide must be repor ted to Ce lgene, 
MDAC C IRB AND IRB OFFIC E within 24 hours of being made awar e of the 
event . The patient shoul d be referred to an obstetri cian/gynecologist 
experi enced in reproductive toxicity for furthe r evaluat ion and couns eling.  
 
 
 
All neonata l deaths that occur within 30 days of birth shoul d be repo rted, witho ut 
regar d to c ausality, as SAEs. In addition, any infan t death after 30 days that the 
Investigator suspects is related to the in utero exposur e to lenalidomid e should 
also be reported.  
 
In the case of a live “norma l” birth, Celgene Corpora tion W orldwide Drug Safety 
Surveillance  (WWDSS), MDAC C IRB AND IRB OFFI CE shou ld be advised as 
soon as the informa tion is av ailable.  
 
Celgene: 
 
Pregnan cies 
 
Pregnancies and suspecte d pregnancie s (including a positive pregnanc y test 
regardles s of age or diseas e state) of a fema le subjec t occurr ing while the 
subject is on lenalido mide, or within 28 days of the subject ’s last dose of 
lenalido mide, are considered immediat ely reportabl e events . Lenalidomide is to 
be discontinued immediately. The pregna ncy, suspecte d pregnancy, or positive 
pregnanc y test must be r eporte d to Celgen e Drug Safety imme diately by 
facsimile or emai l using the P regnanc y Initi al Report Form. The female subj ect 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  61  
  
 
 
shoul d be re ferred to an obstetrician-gynecologi st, preferably one experienced in 
reproductive t oxicity for further ev aluat ion and coun seling. 
 
The Investigato r will fo llow the fe male sub ject until completion of the pregnancy,  
and must notify Celgene D rug Safety immediatel y about the outcom e of the 
pregnanc y (either normal or abnorma l outcome) using the Pregnancy Follow-up 
Repor t Form. If the outcom e of the pregnanc y was abno rmal (e.g., spon taneous 
or therapeuti c abortion) , the Invest igator shou ld report the abnor mal outcome as 
an AE. If the abnorma l outcome meet s any of the serious cr iteria, it must be 
reporte d as an SAE to Celgen e Drug Safety immed iately by facsimile, or other 
appropriat e method, within 24 hours o f the Investigator’s knowledge of the event 
using the SAE R eport Form.  
 
All neonata l deaths that occur within 28 days of birth shoul d be repo rted, witho ut 
regar d to causalit y, as SAEs. In addition, any infant death after 28 days that the 
Investigator suspects is rela ted to the in utero expos ure to the IP should also be 
reported to Celgene Drug Sa fety immediately b y facsim ile, or other appropriate 
method, within 24 hours of the Inves tigator’s knowledge of the event using the 
SAE Report Form.  
 
Male Subjec ts 
 
If a femal e partner of a male subjec t taking inves tigational prod uct becomes 
pregnant , the male subject taking lenalidomide shoul d notify the Investigato r, 
and the pregnant femal e partner shou ld be advised to call their h ealthcare 
provider immedia tely. 
 
 
Celgen e Drug Safety Contact Informati on: 
 
Celgene Corporation 
Global Drug Safet y and Risk Management 
Connel l Corporat e Park 
300 Connel l Dr.  Suite 6000 
Berkeley Heights , NJ 07922 
Fax: (908) 673-9115 
E-mail:  drugsafety@celgene.com  
 
Post-Study Adverse Ev ents 
The investigator shoul d expeditiously repor t any SAE occurring after a subject   
has c ompleted o r discontinue d study participatio n if attributed to prior 
obinutuzumab o r lenalido mide exposure . If the investigator should becom e aware 
of the develop ment of cancer or a c ongeni tal anomal y in a subsequently 
concei ved offsp ring of a femal e subjec t, including pregnancy occurring in the 
partner of a male study subject  who participated in the study, this should be 
reported as an SAE adequately to Genentech drug Safety during follow up 
period  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  62  
 Reconciliation  
The Spon sor agrees to conduct reconcil iation for the produc t. Genentec h and the 
Sponsor will agree to the reconciliatio n perio dicity and format , but agree at 
minimum to exchang e month ly line listings o f cases received by the other party . If 
discrepan cies are identified , the Sponsor and Genente ch will coo perate in 
resolving the discrepancies . The responsible individual s for each party shall 
handl e the matte r on a case-by-case basis until sati sfactory resolut ion. 
 
AEs of Sp ecial Interest (AES Is) 
AESIs are a subset of Events to Monitor (EtMs) of scientific and medical concern 
specific to the product, for which ongoing monitoring and rapid communication by 
the Investigator to the Sponsor is required. Such an event might require further investigation in order to characterize and understand it.  Depending on the nature 
of the event, rapid communication by the trial Sponsor to other parties (e.g., Regulatory Authorities) may also be warranted.  
           
         Adverse events of special interest for this study include the following:  
• Cases of potential drug- induced liver injury that include an elevated ALT or 
AST in combination with either an elevated bilirubin or clinical jaundice, as 
defined by Hy’s law:  
• Treatment -emergent ALT or AST >  3 × ULN in combination with total 
bilirubin > 2 × ULN 
• Treatment -emergent ALT or AST >  3 × ULN in combination with clinical 
jaundice  
• Data related to a suspected transmission of an infectious agent by the study drug (STIAMP), as defined below:  
Any organism, virus, or infectious particle (e.g., prion protein transmitting transmissible spongiform encephalopathy), pathogenic or non- pathogenic, is considered an 
infectious agent.  A transmission of an infectious agent may be suspected from clinical symptoms or laboratory findings that indicate an infection in a  patient exposed to a 
medicinal product.  This term applies only when a contamination of the study drug is suspected. 
 
 
The obinutuzuma b Event s of Specia l Interes t are: 
 
• TLS (all grades)  
 
• Second malignancy  
 
 
 
Other Special Situations Reports  
 
The following other Special Situations Reports should be collected even in the absence 
of an Adverse Event and transmitted to Genentech:  
• Data related to the Product usage during breastfeeding  
• Data related to overdose, abuse, misuse or medication error (includi ng potentially 
exposed or intercepted medication errors)  
• In addition, reasonable attempts should be made to obtain and submit the age or 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  63  
 age group of the patient, in order to be able to identify potential safety signals 
specific to a particular population  
  Product complaints  
 A Product Complaint is defined as any written or oral information received from a complainant that alleges deficiencies related to identity, quality, safety, strength, purity, reliability , durability, effectiveness, or performance of a product after it has been released 
and distributed to the commercial market or clinical trial.  
 
 
Exchange of Single Case Reports with Genentech   
The principal Investigator will be responsible for collecting all protocol -defined Adverse 
Events (AEs)/Serious Adverse Events (SAEs), pregnancy reports (including pregnancy occurring in the partner of a male study subject), other Special Situation reports, AESIs and Product Complai nts with an AE where the patient has been exposed to the Product. 
The completed MD Anderson SAE  form should be sent to the Genentech contact 
specified below. Transmission of these reports (initial and follow -up) will be either 
electronically via email or by fax and within the timelines specified below:  
 Fax: 650- 238-6067  
Email: usds_aereporting -d@gene.com  
 
All Product Complaints without  an AE  should call via:  
PC Hotline Number: (800) 334- 0290 (M -F: 5 am to 5 pm PST)  
 
Transmission of these reports (initial and follow -up) will be either electronically or by fax 
and within the timelines specified below:  
 
Serious Adverse Drug Reactions 
(SADRs)  15 calendar days of the awareness date  
Other SAEs  30 calendar days of the awareness date.  
Special Situation Reports (Pregnancy)  
 
Special Situation Reports (Other)  30 calendar days of the awareness date.  
30 calendar days of the awareness date.  
Product Complaints  15 calen dar days of the awareness date.  
AESIs  15 calendar days of the awareness date.  
   
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  61 
  
  
 
 
• Serious Adverse Drug Reactions (SADRs)  
Serious AE reports that are related to the Product or where the causality is assessed as 
unknown or not provided shall be transmitted to Genentech within fifteen (15) calendar 
days of the awareness date.  
 
• Other SAEs  
Serious AE reports that are unr elated to the Produ ct shall be transmitted to Genentech 
within thirty (30) calendar days of the awareness date.  
 
• Sp
ecial Situation Reports  
o Pregnancy reports  
While such reports are not serious AEs or Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs) per se, as defined herein, any repor ts of pregnancy (including pregnancy occurring in the partner of 
a male study subject), where the fetus may have been exposed to the Produc t, shall be 
transmitted to Genentech  within thirty (30) calendar days of the awareness date. 
Pregnancies will be foll owed -up until the outcome of the pregnancy is known, whenever 
possible, based upon due diligence taken to obtain the follow -up information.  
 
Pregnancies in Female Partners of Male Patients    
 
Male patients will be instructed through the Informed Consent Form to immediately 
inform the investigator if their partner becomes pregnant during the study or within 180 days after the last dose of study drug.   A Clinical Trial Pregnancy Reporting Form should 
be completed and submitted to Genentech within th irty (30) calendar days of the 
awareness date . 
 
o Other Special Situation Reports , as defined above, shall be transmitted 
to Genentech within thirty (30) calendar days of the awareness date.  
 
• Product Complaints  
All Product Complaints (with or without an AE) shall be forwarded to Genentech within 
fifteen (15) calendar days of the awareness date.  
 
• AESIs  
 
AESIs requiring expedited reporting (related or possibly related to Genentech product or 
where the causality is assessed as unknown or not provi ded) shall  be forwarded to 
Genentech within fifteen (15) calendar days of the awareness date. Others (non -related 
to  product) shall be sent within thirty (30) calendar days . 
 
Note: Investigators sho uld also re port even ts to their IRB as required.  
 
 
 
Case Transmission Verification of Single Case Reports  
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  61 
  
  
The Principal Investigator  (PI) agrees to conduct the Case Transmission verification to 
ensure that all single case reports have been adequately received by Genentech via 
Principal Investigator  emailing Genentech a Quarterly line- listing documenting single 
case reports sent by MD Anderson Cancer Center to Genentech in the preceding time period.  
The periodic line- listing will be exchanged within seven (7) calendar days of the end of 
the agreed time period. Confirmation of receipt should be received within the time period mutually agreed upon.  
                    
If discrepancies are identified, the Principal Investigatorand Genentech will cooperate in resolving the discrepancies. The responsible individuals for each party shall handle the matter on a case- by-case basis until satisfactory resolution.  The PI  shall receive 
reconciliation guidance documents within the ‘Activation Package’.  
 Following Case Transmission Verification, single case reports which have not been received by Genentech shall be forwarded by the PIto Genentech within five (5) calendar days from request by Genentech.  
 
At the end of the study, a final cumulative Case Transmission Verification report will be sent to Genentech.  
 
 
Follow-up Information  
Additiona l informa tion may be added to a prev iously su bmitted repor t by any of 
the followin g methods:   
• Adding to the original MD ACC Interna l SAE Repor t Form for Prom pt 
Reporting an d submittin g it as follow- up 
• Adding supplementa l summar y information and sub mitting it as follow-up 
with the original MDACC Internal SAE Report Form for Promp t Reporting 
• Summar izing new information and faxing it with a cover letter  including 
patient  identifiers  
(i.e. D.O.B. initial, patient nu mber), protocol description and number, if 
assigned, brief adve rse even t description , and notation that additional or 
follow-up in formati on is b eing submitted (The patient identifiers are 
important so that the new infor matio n is ad ded t o the correc t initial 
report)  
 
 
Occ
asionally Genentech may cont act the r eporter for additi onal informati on, 
clarification , or curre nt statu s of the patient for whom and adve rse event was 
reported. For questi ons regardin g SAE reporti ng, you may contact the 
Genentech Drug Safet y repres entativ e noted abov e or the MS L assigned to the 
study. R elevant follow-up information should be su bmitte d to Genent ech Dr ug 
Safety  as soon as it beco mes available and/or upon request. 
 
MEDWATCH 3500A REPORTING GUIDELINES  
 
The below guidelines must also be followed when completin g SAE form s different to 
MEDWATCH 3500A : 
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  61 
  
 In addition to completing  appropriate patient  demographic (Section A)  and suspect 
medic ation information (Section C & D),  the report should include the following  
information  within  the Event  Description  (Section B.5) of the MedWatch 3500A  form:  
 
• Protocol  number and title description  
• Description  of event,  severity, treatment,  and outcome  if known  
• Suppor tive laboratory  results  and diagnostics (Section B.6)  
• Investigator’s  assessment of the relationship of the adverse event  to each  
investigational product  and suspect medication  
 
Follow-Up I nformation   
• Additional informatio n may be added  to a previously  submitted  report  by any of 
the following  methods:  
• Adding to the original  MedWatch 3500A  report  (or MDACC SAE form) and  
submitting it as follow-up 
• Adding supplemental summar y information  and submitting  it as follow-up with the 
original  
MedW atch 3500A  form (or MDACC SAE form) 
• Summarizing new information and faxing it with a cover letter including patient 
identifiers (i.e. D.O.B. initial, patient number), protocol description and number, if assigned, brief adverse event description, and notation that additional or follow -up information is being submitted (The patient identifiers are import ant so 
that the new information is added to the correct initial report)  
 
 
MedW atch 3500A  (Mandatory  Reporting)  form is available at 
https://www.fda.gov/media/69876/download  
 
 
The Principal Investigator will be responsible for the expedited reporting of safety 
reports originating from the Study to the Ethics Committees and Institutional Review Boards (IRB), where applicable.  
 
MD Anderson Cancer Center  will be responsible for the distribution of safety 
information to its own investigators, where relevant, in accordance with local 
regulations.  
 
 
12.3.3  ADDITIONAL REPORTING  REQUIREMENTS FOR IND 
 
For Investigator -Sponsore d IND Studies, some additi onal reporti ng requirements 
for the FDA apply in accor danc e with the guidanc e set fo rth in 21 CFR § 600.80.   
 
Events me eting the following crit eria need to be submitted to the Food and Drug 
Administra tion (F DA) as ex pedited IND Safety Reports acco rding to the following 
guidanc e and timelines: 
 
7 Calenda r Day Telephone or Fax Report:  
The Inv estigator is requi red to notify the FDA of any fatal or life-threatening 
adverse even t that is unexpecte d and assessed by the inves tigato r to be pos sibly 
related to the use of obinut uzumab. An unexpected adverse even t is one that is 
not already descr ibed in the obinutuzumab Investigato r Brochure. Such reports 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  61 
  
 are to be telephone d or faxed to the FDA and Genentech wi thin 7 calendar days 
of first learning of the event.  
 
15 Calendar  Day Written  Report  
The Inv estigator is also requi red to notify the FDA and all participating 
investigators, in a written IND Saf ety Report , of any serious, unexpected AE that 
is considered reasonabl y or possi bly relate d to the use of obinutuz umab. An
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  62  
 unexpected adverse event is one that is not already de scribe d in the 
obinutuzumab investigator brochure.  
 
 
 
Writte n IND Safet y report s shoul d include an A nalysis of Similar Event s in 
accordance with regulation 21 CFR § 312. 32. All safe ty report s prev iously filed 
by the investigator with the IND concerning similar events should b e anal yzed 
and the significance of the new repor t in light of the previous , similar reports 
commented on. 
 
 
 
Written  IND safety  reports  with Analysis of Similar Events are to be submitted to 
the FDA, Genentech, and all participating in vestigators within 15 c alendar days 
of first learning of the event . The FDA pref ers these report s on a M edwa tch 35 00 
form, but alternati ve format s are accep table (e.g., MDAC C Internal SAE Re port 
Form for Prompt Reportin g, summary letter ). 
 
 
 
FDA fax numbe r for IND Safety Reports: 
Fax: 1 (800) FDA 0178  
 
 
All written  IND Safe ty Reports  submitt ed to the FDA must also be faxed to 
Gene ntech Drug Safety:  
Fax: (650) 225-4682 or (650) 225-4630  
         Email: usds_aereporting- d@ge ne.com  
 
And to the Site IRB: 
U.T. MD Anderson Cancer Center  
Institution al Review Board 
1400 Pressler, Unit 1437  
Houston,  TX 77030  
(713)792- 2933phone  
(713)  794-4589 fax 
 
For quest ions related to safety reporting, pleas e contact Genentech Drug  
Safety: 
Tel: (888) 835-2555 
Fax: (650) 225-4682 OR (650) 225-4630  
 
Celgene Drug Safety Contac t Informati on: 
Celgene Corporation 
Global Drug Safet y and Risk Management 
Connel l Corporat e Park 
300 Connel l Dr.  Suite 6000 
Berkeley Heigh ts, NJ 07922 
Fax: (908) 673-9115 
E-mail: drugsafety@celgene.com  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  63  
  
 
  
 
 
12.3.4  IND A NNUAL REPORTS  
 
Copie s to Genentech:  
All IND annual report s submitted to the FDA by the Sponso r shoul d be copied to 
Genentech.  
 
Copies  of such  reports  should be emailed to Genentec h at:  Genentech Drug Safety 
CTV mail box: ctvist_drugsafety@gene.com  
 
 
 
 
12.4 STUDYCLOSE -OUT  
 
Any study report submitted to the FDA by the Sponsor should be copied to 
Genent ech. This includes all IND annua l reports and the Clin ical Study Report  
(final study report) . Additionally, any literature articles tha t are a resul t of the 
study shoul d be sent to Genen tech. Copie s of such report s should be mailed to 
the assigned Clinical O perat ions cont act for the study:  
 
 
Obinutuzuma b  Protocols 
Email: ga101 -gsur@gene.com   
 
         And to Genentech Drug Safety CTV oversight mail box at: ctvist_drugsafety@gene.com  
 
 
 
 
13. MD ANDERSON  REPORTI NG REQUIREMENTS  FOR  
SERIOUS ADVERSE  EVENTS AND  DOSE LI MITING  
TOXICITI ES: 
 
 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  64  
  
 
 
 
• 
 
Expedite d Reportin g by In vestigator to Celgene  
Serious ad v erse events (SAE ) are defined ab ove. The investigator must inform 
Celgene in writing using a Ce lgene SAE form , MDACC SAE form  or 
MEDWATCH 3500A form of  any SAE within 24 hours of being awar e of the 
event . The wri tten repor t must  be comple ted and supplie d to Celgen e by 
facsimile within 24 hours/1 business day . The initial repor t must be as complet e 
as possible, including an assessm ent of the causa l relatio nship between the 
event and the  in vestigational produc t(s),. Information not av ailabl e at the time 
of the initial repor t (e.g., an end date for the advers e event or la borator y values 
received afte r the report ) must be documente d on a follow-up report. A final 
report t o documen t resoluti on of the SAE is requi red. The Celgene tracking 
number (RV- 
XX-PI-###) and  the institutional protocol numbe r should be included on SAE  
report s (or on the fax cover letter) sent to C elgene. A copy of the fax 
trans mission confirmation of the SAE re port to Celgene should be attached to 
the SAE a nd retained with the patient records.  
If this is a multicenter trial, sugges t including language indicatin g that 
participating study sites must report SAEs t o Celge ne as described and within 
24 hours of awarenes s.  Participa ting sites shoul d also re port SAEs to the 
primary study site.  
 
 
 
 
14. RETENT ION OF RECORDS  
 
U.S. FDA regulat ions (21 CFR §312.62 [c]) and the ICH Gu ideline for GCP      
(see Section 4.9 of the guideline) requi re that records and document s pertaini ng 
to the conduc t of clinical trials and the distri bution of invest igationa l drug, subject  
records, consent fo rms, laboratory test r esults, and medica tion inventory records, 
must be retained for 2 years after the last marketin g application approval in an 
ICH region or after at least 2 years have elapse d since formal discont inuatio n of 
clinical developmen t of the investigat ional product . All state and local laws for 
retentio n of records also apply. 
 
For studie s conducte d outsid e the Unite d States under a U.S. IND, the Principal 
Investiga tor must comply with the re cord retention requi rement s set forth in the 
U.S. FDA IND re gulations and the relevant national and local healt h authorities, 
whichever is longer.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  65  
  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Aapro MS, Bohlius J, Cameron DA, et al. 2010 updat e of EOR TC guidel ines fo r 
the use of granulocyte colony stimulating factor to reduc e the incidenc e of 
chem otherapy induced febrile neut ropeni a in adult patients with 
lymphop rolifera tive disorder s and solid tumours . Eur J Ca ncer 2011;47: 8−32. 
 
Alduai j W, Ivano v A, Honey church J et al. Nove l Type II anti-CD20 mono clonal 
antibody (GA101 ) evoke s homotypi c adhes ion and actin-dependent, lysoso me- 
mediate d cell death in B- cell malignancies . Blood 2011; 117 (17): 4519−29. 
 
American Cancer Socie ty. Cancer Facts & Figures 2010. Atlanta (GA):  
American Cancer Societ y 2010.  
 
Anderson K, Bates MP, Sl aughenhoupt BL, et al. Ex pressio n of human 
B cell−associa ted antigen s on leukemia s and lymphom as: a model of human B  
cell differentiation . Blood 1984;63:142 4−33. 
 
Beers SA, F rench RR, Chan HT, et al. Antigenic modulation lim its the efficac y of 
anti-CD20 antibodies : implications for antibody selec tion. Blood 
2010 ;115:5191 −201. 
 
Brow n JR, Friedbe rg JW, Feng Y, et al. A phas e 2 study of concurrent fluda rabine 
and rituximab for the treatment of marg inal zone lymp homas . Br J Haem atol 
2009 ;145:741−8. 
 
Cheson BD, Horning SJ, Co iffier B, Shipp MA, Fisher R I, et al. Repor t of an 
internationa l worsho p to standardiz e response criteria for Non-Hodgkins 
lymphomas. J Clin Oncol 1999; 17(4):1244.  
 
Crawford J, C aserta C, Roila F, et al., on behal f of the ESMO Guidelines Wor king 
Group. Hematopoietic gr owth factors: ESM O recom mendations for the 
applications. Ann Oncol 2009 ;20:iv162 -5. 
 
Davies A, Radford J, Cartron G, et al. Interim results from a Phase Ib study of the 
anti-CD20 antibody obinutuzumab (GA101 ) in combination with FC o r CHO P in 
relapsed/r efractor y follicula r lymph oma (FL). Poster V11 at the 16th Co ngress of 
the Europea n Hematology Association , London , June 2011. 
 
Dreyling M. Newl y diagnosed and relap sed follicular lymp homa: ESM O clinical 
recommendation s for diagnosis , treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 
2009 ;20(Supple ment 4):119– 20. 
 
Foran J M, Rohatiner AZ, Cunningham D , et al. Europea n Phas e II study of 
rituximab (c himeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody) for patient s with newly 
diagnosed mant le-cell lymphoma and previousl y treate d mantle-cell lymphom a, 
immuno cytoma, and small B-cell lymph ocytic lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 
2000;18:317– 24. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  66  
  
 
 
Fowle r N, Hagem eister F, Mc Laughli n P, e t al. Lenalidomide plus Rituximab is a 
highly effective and well-tolerated biologi c therapy in untreated indolen t B cell 
non-Hodg kins lymphoma . Annals of Onco logy 2011 ; 22 (Supplement 4): Abstract 
137 (11-ICML) 
 
Friedbe rg JW , Taylo r MD, Cerhan JR, et al. Follicula r lymphom a in the Unit ed 
States: first repor t of the National Lymp hoCare Study . J Clin Oncol 20 09;27:1202 −8. 
 
Gallag her CJ, Grego ry WM, Jone s AE, et al. Follicula r lymphoma: prognost ic 
factor s for respons e and survival. J Clin Oncol 1986;4: 1470−80. 
 
GLOBOCA N 2008 (IARC) . Section of cance r information [resourc e on the 
Internet] . 2010. Availabl e from:  
http://g lobocan.iarc.fr/ factsheets/ populations/factsheet.asp?uno=990.  
 
Hainsworth J, Litchy S, Barto n J, et a l. Single-ag ent rituximab as first-line and 
maintenanc e treatmen t for patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia or sm all 
lymphocyti c lymphoma: a Phase II trial of the Minnie Pear l Cance r Research 
Network . J Clin Onco l 2003;21:174 6−51. 
 
Herol d M, Haas A, Sr ock S, et al. Rituxima b added to first-line mitoxantrone, 
chlorambu cil, and prednisolon e chemot herapy followed by interferon 
maintena nce prolon gs survival i n patients with adva nced follicular lymphoma: an 
East Germa n Study Group hematology and o ncology study. J Clin O ncol 
2007;25:1986 −92. 
 
Hernandez -Ilizaliturri F, Reddy N ,Holkova B, Ottman, Czuc zman M, 
“Immunomodula tory drug CC-501 3 or CC-404 7 and ri tuximab enhance 
antitumor activity in a severe combined i mmunodeficien t mous e lymphoma 
model, ” CCR vol. 11, no. 16, pp. 5984 –5992 , 2005.  
 
Hidde mann W, Kneb a M, Dreyling M, et al. Frontline therapy with ritu ximab add ed 
to the combinatio n of cyclo phosp hamide, doxorubicin , vincristine, and predni sone 
(CHOP) significantly impro ves the outcome for patients with advan ced-stag e 
follicular lymphom a compared with therapy with CHO P alone: results of a 
prospectiv e randomized study of the Ge rman Low-Grade Lymphom a Study Group. 
Blood 2005;106:3725 −32. 
 
Marcu s R, Imrie K, Solal -Celigny P, et al. Phas e III study of R- CVP compared with 
cyclopho sphamide, vincristi ne, and predni sone alone in patient s with previously 
untreated a dvanced f ollicular l ymphoma J Clin Onco l 2008;26:457 9−6. 
 
Morschhauser F, Cartro n G, Thieble mont C et al. Encouraging activity of 
obinutuzumab (GA101 ) monot herapy i n relaps ed/refractory aggressive non- 
Hodgki n’s lymphoma: result s from a P hase II study (BO 20999) [ abstract]. Blood 
2011 ;118:abstrac t 3655.  
 
Mössne r E, Brünker B, Mose r S, et al. Increasing the efficacy of CD20 antibody 
therapy through the engineering of a new Type II anti-CD20 antibody with 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  67  
  
 
 
enhanced direct and immun e effector cell–media ted B- cell cytotoxicity. Blood 
2010 ;115:4393 −402. 
 
Persky D, Dornan D , Goldma n B, e t al. Fc gamma  receptor 3a genotype predicts 
overal l survival for follicula r lymphoma patients treated on Southwest Oncology 
Grou p Trials with combined monoclonal antibody plus chemotherapy but not 
chemothe rapy alone [ abstract] . Blood 2009 ;114:abstrac t 111. 
 
Radfor d J, Davies A, Cartron G et al. Obinutuzumab (G A101) in combination with 
FC or CHOP in patients with relapsed or refractor y follicular lymphoma:fin al 
results of the Phase I G AUDI st udy (BO21000 ) [abst ract]. Blood 
2011; 118:abstract 270.  
 
Salles G, Mo rschhause r F, Thieblem ont C et al. Efficacy and safety of 
obinutuzumab (GA101 ) monot herapy in relap sed/refractory indolent non- 
Hodg kin’s lymphoma : resul ts from a Phase I/II study (BO 20999) [ abstract]. Blood 
2011; 11
8:abstract 268.  
 
Salles G, Mounier N, de Guiber t S, et al. Rituxim ab combined with chemotherapy 
and interferon in f ollicu lar lymphoma patients: result s of the GELA- GOELAMS 
FL200 0 study . Blood 2008;112: 4824−31. 
 
Salle s G, Se ymou r J, Offne r F, et al. Ritux imab maintenanc e for 2 years in patients 
with high tumour burden follicular lym phom a respon ding to rituxima b plus 
chem otherapy (PRIMA): a Phase 3, randomi sed con trolled trial. 
Lancet 2011;377:42 −51. 
 
Sehn LH, Goy A, Offne r F et al. Randomized Phase II trial compar ing GA101 
(obinutuzu mab) with rituximab in patients with relap sed CD20 i ndolent B- cell non- 
Hodg kin lymphoma : preliminary analy sis of the GAUS S study [abst ract]. Blood 
2011 ;118:abstrac t 624 and data presente d at ASH Annua l Meeting , San Diego, CA 
2011.  
 
Smith TJ, Khatcheressian J, Lyman GH, et al. 2006 updat e of recomm endat ions for 
the use of white blood cell growth facto rs: an ev idence-based clinical practice 
guideline. J Clin Oncol 2006 ;24:3187 -205. 
 
Treon S, Agus D, Link B, e t al. CD20-direc ted antibody-m ediated immu notherapy 
induces respon ses a nd facilitates hematol ogic recover y in patients with 
Waldenstrom' s macrog lobulinemia. J  Immunother 2001;24:272 −9. 
 
van Oers MH, Klasa R, Marcu s RE, et al. Rituximab m aintenan ce impro ves clini cal 
outcome of relaps ed/resistant follicular non-Hodg kin lymphom a in patient s both 
with and withou t rituxima b during induc tion: results of a prospec tive random ized 
Phase 3 intergrou p trial. Blood 2006;108:3295 −30 1. 
 
van Oers M, Van Glabbeke M, Giur gea L, et al. Rituximab main tenan ce treatment 
of relapse d/resistant follicula r non-Hodgkin ’s lymphoma: long- term outcom e of the 
EOR TC 20 981 Phas e III rando mized intergroup study . J Clin Oncol 
2010;28:2853 −8. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  68  
  
 
 
 
Wang M, et al. Lenalido mide in combination with ri tuximab for p atients wit h 
relapsed or refractor y mantle -cell lym phoma: a phase 1/2 clinical trialLancet  
Onco l. 2012 Jul;13(7):716 -23 
 
Wiernik P ,Lossos S, Tusca no M et al., “Lenalido mide monotherapy in relapsed or 
refrac tory aggressive non-Hodg kin's lymphom a,” Journal of Clinical Oncology,   
vol. 26, no. 30, pp. 4952 –4957 , 2008 
 
Witzig TE, Wi ernik PH, Moor e T, R eeder C, Cole C, Justice G, et al. 
Lenalidomide oral monotherap y produce s durable response s in relapsed or 
refractory indolent non -Hodgkin’s lymphoma.  J Clin Oncol 2009; 27 (32):5404 - 
5409.  
 
Witzig TE, Vose JM, Luigi Zinzani P, Reeder CB, Buckstein R, P olikof f JA, 
Bouabdal lah R,Ha ioun C, Tilly H , Guo P, Pietronigro D, E rvin-Haynes AL, 
Czuczman MS. An international phase II trial of single -agent lenalidomid e for 
relapsed or refractor y aggressi ve B-c ell non- Hodg kin's lymphoma . Ann Oncol. 
2011 Jan 12 [Epub ahea d of print] 
 
Wu L, Adam s M, Carte r T, Chen R, Muller G, Stirlin g D, Schafer P, Bartlett JB.  
Lenalido mide enhan ces natural killer cell and monocyte-me diated antibody- 
dependen t cellula r cytotoxicity of rituxim ab-treated CD20 + tumo r cells. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 15;14(14):4650-7. 
 
Zhan g L, Q ian Z, Cai Z, Sun L, W ang H, Bartlett JB, etal. Synergis tic antitumor 
effect s of lenalidomid e and ritu ximab on m antle cell lymphoma in vi tro and in vi vo 
Am J Hemato l 2009;  84(9):553- 9. 
 
Zelenet z AD, Abramson JS, Advani RH, et al. NCCN clinical pr actice guid elines 
in oncology: non-Hodgki n lym phoma . J Natl Compr Canc Netw 2010;8:28 8−334 
 
Zucca E, Conconi A, Martin elli G, et al. Chlorambu cil plus rituximab produces better 
event-free survival in comparison with ch lorambucil alone in the treatmen t of MALT  
lymphoma : 5-year analy sis of the 2-arms part of the IELSG-19 random ized st udy 
[abstract] . Blood 2010;116:abstrac t 432 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  69  
  
 
 
APPENDIX  D 
Calculation of Creatinine  Clearan ce Using  the Cockcroft –Gault  
Formula  
 
 
Creatinine Cl earanc e (men ) = (140-Age) ×Lean  Body  Weight [ kilograms]  
 
Serum Creatinine (mg/ dL) × 72 
  
 
Creatinine Cl earanc e (women) = 0.85 × (140-A ge) ×Lean Body Weight  [kilograms] 
 
Serum Cr eatinine (mg/dL ) × 72 
 
 
 
Reference: 
 
Gault MH, Longeri ch LL, Harne tt JD, et al. Pre dicting glomer ular functio n from 
adjusted s erum creatinine (edito rial). Nephron 1992 ;62:249. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  70  
  
 
 
APPENDIX  E 
SAFETY  REPORTI NG FAX COVE R SHEET  
 
 
  
 
GENENTECH SUPPORTED  RESEARCH  
 
AE / SAE FAX No: (650) 225-4682 
 
Alternat e Fax No: (650) 225-5288 
 
  
 
Genentech Study Numb er  
 
Principal Invest igator  
 
Site Name  
 
Repo rter na me  
 
Repo rter Teleph one #  
 
Reporter Fax #  
 
 
Initial Report Da te  
[DD] / [MON] / [YY] 
 
Follow-up Report Date  
[DD] / [MON] / [YY] 
 
Subject Initials 
 
(Ente r a dash if pa tient has no 
middle na me)   
[ ] - [ ] - [ ] 
 
 
SAE or Safety Re portin g ques tions, contac t Genentech Safety : (888) 835-2555  
 
 
 
 
 
PLEASE PLAC E MD ANDERS ON SAE REPO RTING FORM BEHIND TH IS 
COVE R SH EET 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  71  
  
 
 
 
  
APPENDIX  F: CURRENT  NCI COMMON  TERM INOLOGY  
CRITER IA FOR  ADVERSE EVENTS (CTCAE)  
Please refer to the following web l ink: 
http://ct ep.can cer.gov/pro tocolDevelop ment/electr onic_ 
applicati ons/ctc.htm  
 
 
APPENDIX  G: GUIDELIN ES FOR OBINUTUZUMAB  
PREPARATION AND ADM INISTRATION  
 
Reconsti tuted obinutuzumab drug produc t intended for IV infusion is prepa red by 
dilutio n of the drug pr oduct into an in fusion bag conta ining 0.9% sodium chlori de, 
to the final drug conce ntratio n of 4 mg/mL . Using a 250-mL infusio n bag 
containing 0.9% sodiu m chloride, withd raw and discard 40 mL of the sodium 
chloride. Withdraw 40 mL of obinut uzumab from a single glass vial and inject 
into an in fusion bag (discard any unused portion o f obinutuzu mab left in the vi al). 
Gentl y inver t the infusion bag to mix the solution; do no t shake. 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  72  
  
 
 
Appendi x H: Risk s of Fetal Exp osur e, Pregnancy T esting 
Guidelines and Acceptab le Birth Control Methods  
 
Risks Associated with Pregnancy  
 
The use of lenalidomide in pregnant females and nursing mot hers has not been 
studie d nor has the effect of the lenalido mide on human eggs and sperm . The 
risks to a fetus are not known. However, because lenalidomid e is r elated to 
thalidom ide, and thalidomide is known to cause se vere birth defects , the 
followin g requi rement s must be observed.  
 
All study participant s must be registered into the mandat ory Revlimid REMS®  
program , and be willin g and able to comply with the requirements of Revlimid 
REMS® pr ogram. 
Females of c hildbea ring potential (FCBP )† must agree to use two reliable form s  
of contraception simul taneously or to practi ce complet e abstinence from 
heterosexua l intercourse during the follo wing time periods related to this study: 1 ) 
for at least 28 days befor e starting study drug; 2) while participating in the study; 
and 3) for at least 28 days after discon tinuation from the study. The two methods 
of reliabl e cont racep tion must include one highly effec tive metho d (i.e.  
intrauterine device (IUD) , hormonal [birth c ontro l pills, injections, or implan ts], 
tubal ligation , partner’s vasectomy ) and one additional effect ive (barr ier) method 
latex condom , diaphragm , cervical cap). FCBP must be referred to a 
qualified pr ovider of contraceptive methods if needed.  
 
Befor e startin g stud y drug:  
 
Female Subjects:  
 
• FCBP must have two negative pregnanc y tests (sensitivity of at least 50 
mIU/mL ) prior to pr escribing lenalidomide. The first pregna ncy test must  
be perfor med wi thin 10-14 days prior to prescri bing l enalidomide and the 
secon d pregnanc y test must be performe d within 24 hours prior to 
prescribin g lenalido mide (prescriptions must be filled within 7 days) . The 
subject may not receive study drug until the I nvestigato r has verified that 
the results of these preg nanc y tests are negative.  
 
 
 
 
† A femal e of childbearing poten tial is a sexually m ature w oman who: 1) has not undergone a 
hysterectomy or b ilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 
consecutive months (i.e ., has had menses at  any tim e in the preceding 24 c onsecu tive months). 
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 
2013 -0261 - Obinutu zumab Plus Lenal idomid e in Low Grade Lymphoma 
Protocol  Version:  
10/31/2017  73  
  
 
 
 
  
 
Male Subjects:  
 
• Must agree to use a latex co ndom durin g sexual contact with fema les of 
childbear ing potential w hile participating in the study and for at least 28 
days followin g discontinua tion from the study even if he has undergone a 
successfu l vasec tomy.  
 
During study participation and for 28 days following di scontinuation fr om 
the study: 
 
All Subjec ts: 
 
• If pregnancy o r a positive pregnanc y test does occur in a study subject or 
the partner of a male study s ubject during study participation, lenalido mide 
must be immed iately di scont inued.  
 
Female Subjects:  
 
• FCBP with regular or no menstrual cycle s must agree to have pregnancy 
tests  weekly  for the first 28 days  of study participation and then every 28 
days while on st udy, at study discontinuation, and at day 28 following 
discon tinuation from the st udy. If menstrua l cycle s are irregular , the 
pregnanc y testin g must occur wee kly for the first 28 days and then every 
14 days while on st udy, at study discontinuat ion, and at days 14 and 28 
followin g discontinuation from the study. 
 
• In addition to the requir ed pregnanc y testing, the Investigator must confirm 
with F CBP that she is continuing to use two reliable methods of b irth 
control at each visit. 
 
• Pregnanc y testin g and coun seling must be performe d if a subjec t misses 
her period or if her pregnancy test or her menst rual bleedin g is abn ormal. 
Study drug treatment must be discont inued during this evaluation. 
 
Male Subjects:  
 
• Must agree to use a latex co ndom durin g sexual contact with fema les of 
childbear ing potential w hile participating in the study and for at least 28 
days followin g discontinua tion from the study even if he has undergone a 
successfu l vasec tomy.  
Proprietary of MD Anderson Cancer Center 