A PROSPECTIVE  RANDOMIZ ED STUDY CO MPARING  THE TIME TO AMBULATION  (TTA) AND SAFETY OF 
USING  A CLOSURE  DEVICE  ALO NE AND IN CO NJUNCTIO N WITH A POTASSIUM  FERRATE  PAD 
(STATSEAL ADVANCED ) FOLLOWING  TRANSCATHER  AORTIC  VALVE  REPLACEMENT  (TAVR)  VIA THE 
TRANSFEMORAL  ARTERY  
Principa l  Investigator:  
David M  Tehrani ,  MD , MS 
Cardiology  Division ,  Department  of  Medicine  
University  of  Californi a Los Ang eles                           [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
                           Protocol: November 8, 2022
Table of  Contents  
I. INTRODUCTION , BACKGROUND  & RATIONALE
II.DESCRIPTION  OF STUDY  DEVICE
III.STUDY  OBJECTIVES
IV.STUDY  DESIGN  AND METHODOLOGY
V. STUDY  ACTIVITI ES AND  GUIDELINES
VI.STUDY  STATISTICAL  PLAN
VII.ADVERSE  EVENTS
VIII.DATA MANAGEMENT
IX.ETHICAL , REGULATO RY A ND ADMINISTRATIVE  REQUIREMENTS
X. RISK BENEFIT  ANALYSIS
XI.REFERENCES
APPENDICES  
I.INTRODUCTION , BACKGROUND  &  RATIONALE
Invasi ve ca rdiac ca theterization -based  procedures  are  done  via  transradial  (TRA)  or 
transfemoral  access  (TFA).  The se procedures  ar e impor tant  in  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of 
coronary  artery  disease.  T ransradial  access  (TRA)  for  invasi ve ca rdiac ca theterization 
procedures  has  gaine d significant  popularity  around  the  world  compared  wit h the  transfemoral 
acces s.  And  in  fact,  and  as ear ly as 2016 ,  the  Europea n Soci ety  of  Cardiology  guidelines  have 
given  transradial  access  its  highest  recommendation  (Class  I  A)  over  femoral  access.1 The  most 
compelling  reason  for  adopting  TRA  is  the  increased  patient  safety  that  results  from  the 
potential  elimination  of  a ccess si te bleeding  and  vascular  complications.  I n addi tion,  TRA  is 
associated  with  early  sheath  removal,  improved  patient  comfort,  faster  recovery,  and  lower 
costs  i n comparison  with  transfemoral  access.2-4  
One  of  the  largest  concer ns of  TRA  vs  TFA,  is  th e occur rence  of  radial  artery  occlusion,  whi ch is 
in par t  related  i n part  to prolonge d radial  artery  compression  time  with  suc h devices as   the 
trans -radial  air -bladder  bracelet  (TR  band  [TRB]  (Terumo,  Tokyo,  Japan).5 Given  that  safe 
reductio n in  compressions  times  may  reduce  the  risk  of  radial  artery  occlusion,  w e have  
previously  shown  that  th e adj uncti ve use   of  a  potassium  ferrate  hemostatic  patch  (PFHP, 
Statseal  Advanced  RAD,  Biolife,  Sarasota,  FL)  with a TRB  reduces  composit e ove rall 
complicatio ns and   time  t o TR B  deflation  (68 ±15  vs  138  ±  62  min,  P<0.001)  as  compared  to  use 
of  the  TRB  alone.6,7 The  PFHP  contai ns po tassium  ferrate  on  a  be d of  hydrophilic  polymer.    The 
polymer  rapidly  dehydrat es and con centrates  blood  solids,  whil e the  potassium  ferrate 
agglomerates  the  solids  &  proteins  together,  forming  a seal   to  the  wound  t o stop  bleeding. 
Bene ath  the  seal,  blood  soli ds and pr oteins con tinue to  concentrat e and   stack dow n,  promoting 
hemostasis  at  th e arteriotomy  site  without  components  of  the  PFHP  reaching  the  vessel.  
While the TRA  provides  the  ability  to  perform  a  broa d range  of  diagnostic  an d interventional 
cardiovascular  procedures ,  there  are  clear  limitations  t o its  use . Compare d with TR A, 
transfemoral  provides  an  easier  access ,  less  radiatio n time,  an d less  contrast  agent 
administered  to  the  patient.  Importantly,  there  is  still  a growing  need  for  TFA  i n the  setting  of  
advancement s of  structural  heart  procedures  (e.g.  use  of  transcatheter  aortic  valve 
replacements)  and  mechanical  circulatory  support  (e.g.  use  of  left  ventricular  assist  devices 
such  as  the  Impella ). Further,  TFA  plays  an  important  rol e on  peripheral  endovascular 
interventions  such  as an gioplasty,  stenting,  atherectomy,  and  thrombectomy . In  these 
scenarios,  TFA  cannot  b e replaced  by TRA.  Additionally,  operators  will  often  times  requir e TFA  
during  the  sam e index  or  later  procedur e in  the  setting  of  TRA  failure  due  t o a variety  of  reasons 
including  patient  discomfort  an d inability  to  deliver  procedural  equipment.  
Two of  the  most  common  standar d of  care  methods  for  TFA  hemostasis  are the  suture -mediate 
closur e devi ce  Perclose  ProGli deTM system  (Abbott  Vascular,  CA,  USA)  and  the  collagen -plug 
mediated  Angio -SealTM (St.  Jud  Medical)  devices . While  first  generation  TFA  closur e devices 
were  reported  to  increased  vascular  complicatio ns in  comparison  to  manual  compression ,8
closure  devices  overall  have  emerge d as  a  safe  and  effective  alternative  method  to  manual 
compression.  Larger  registry  studi es have   suggested  equivalen ce of  the  Perclose ™ (Abbott 
Laboratories)  arterial  closure  device  to  ma nual  compression,  whil e the  Angio -Seal™ (St.  Jude 
Medical)  device  has  shown  a decrea se in  manual  compression  time following  percutaneous 
coronary  intervention  ( PCI).9,10 More  recently,  a  separate  meta -analysis  of  randomized  trials 
showed  a strong  trend  for  a  reduction  of  major  vascular  complicatio ns wi th  the  use  of  Angio -
Seal™ following  PCI,11 whereas  Perclose ™ has  had  equivalent  vascular  complication 
compared  to  manual  compression.12 
The Ang io-Seal™ arterial  closur e devi ce  has  a  bioabsorbabl e intraluminal  anchor  and 
extraluminal  collagen  plug.  More  recent  iterations  of  the  device  now  have  a  37%  greater 
collagen  footprint  at  the  sit e of  arteriotomy.  Re-access o f  the  femoral  artery  is  not  recommended 
for  at  least  3  months  in  fear of  possibl e embolization  of  the  collagen  plug.  Th e Percl ose 
Proglide ™ utilizes a monofilament  suture,  which  facilitates  knot  delivery  and  hel ps to  retai n kno t 
tensil e strength.  Given,  the  suture  mechanism,  TFA  at  or  near  the  same  sit e is no t 
contraindicated.  When  comparing  these  two  devi ces in   PCI  patients,  a  recent  randomized  study 
showed that  whil e there is  no  significant  differenc e in  major  vascular  complicatio ns bet ween  the 
two devi ces,  time  to  hemostasis  was  shorter  (5.3  vs.  46.8  min,  P <  0.01)  and  time  to  ambulation 
was lo nger  (26 1 vs.  334  min,  P <  0.05)  with  the  Angi o-Seal  VIPTM device compare d to  the 
Perclo se Progl ideTM.13 
THE CLINICAL  NEED 
Despit e the  use  of  both  the  PercloseTM and  the  Angio -Seal™ commonly  for  TFA  closure  there 
has  been  no  clinically  establishe d time  t o ambulation  post -deployment.  Whil e time  to  ambulation 
varies  widely  based  on  operator  in both diagnostic  an d PC I  catheterizatio ns (which  require 
anticoagulation),  the PercloseTM instructions  for  use  indicate  that  a patient  m ay ambulate  2 
hours  after  their  devi ce is  deploye d if  using  a  5 -8F sheath14 and  similarly  Angio -seal™ 
recommends  ambulation  2 hou rs  after  deployment.15 Particul arly f or PercloseTM,  which coul d 
otherwise  be  considered  ideal  over  Angio -Seal™ given  its  properties  allowing  for  immediate  re-
access,  reducing  time  to  hemostasis  an d ambulation  woul d be important.13 To  this  end,  the 
utility  of  PFHP  woul d be of  particular  interest  in  those  undergoing  TFA  with  a Per closeTM.  While 
the PFHP  have  been  show n to be   safe and   decreased  time  t o hemostasis  whe n used   in 
conjunction  to  manual  compression,  it  has  not  been  studied  in  conjunction  wit h a  closure 
device.16 PFHP  i n conj unction  with  manual  pressur e is most  commonly  use d in  the 
catheterizatio n lab wh en a cont raindicatio n to a   closur e devi ce  exists  such  as se vere  arterial 
disease ,  but  may  al so im prove  time  to  hemostasis  an d ambulatio n wh en  used  i n con junction 
with a PercloseTM.  Establishing  a saf e  expedited  protocol  with  use  of  a clo sure  device  an d a 
PFHP  coul d result  in  multipl e favorabl e clinical and hospi tal outcomes:  
▪Decreased  femoral  artery  hemostasis  times
▪Decreased  incidence  of  oozing,  bleeding  or  hematoma  complications
▪Facilitate  arterial  site  management  to  the  more  specialized  catheterization  lab
staff/personnel  that  are  better  trained  to  recognize  complications
▪Decreas ing time in  the  cath  lab  trying  to  obtai n hemostasis,  therefore  increasing  case
throughput  and  number  of  cases  per  day
▪Decreasing  the  workload  to  the  staff  by  virtue  of  shortened  band  i n place  times  and
improve  procedural  throughput.
▪Facilitate  greater  patient  comfort  resulting  from  decrease  supine  time  and  faster  wound
healing
▪Facilitated  faster  discharge  time  allowing  for  mor e beds to be  availabl e during  time  of
critical  bed  shortages.
Through  our pilot  study  of  180  patients6 and  multicenter  randomized  clinical  trial  of  443  TRA 
patients7 we we re abl e  to  show  the  capabiliti es of  an  adjunct  PFHP  to  an  additional  standard  of 
care  closur e devi ce  to  achieve  many  of  those  favorabl e clinical  outcomes.  We  showed  time  to 
complete  TRB  deflation  w as 66± 14  min  with  the  PFHP  vs.  113 ±56  min  for  TRB  alon e (P<0.001) 
in the  setting  of  no  minor  rebleeding  in  the  TRB  +  PFHP  group.  Furthermore,  amon g PC I 
patients,  time  t o TR B  deflatio n (68±15  vs  138  ±  62 min,  P<0.001)  and  composite  complications 
[10.0%  vs.  24.2%,  p=0.0 4] were  reduced  with  the  PFHP.  
Thus,  the  Statseal  w as demonstrated  to  facilitate  a rapid deflatio n protocol  with  the  TRB, 
allowing  for  in an  earlier  discharge,  without  evidence  of  significantly  increase d complicatio n of 
hematomas  or  radial  artery  occlusion.  Th e  present  study  is  designed  to  evaluat e the  use  of 
Statseal  in  the  TFA  populatio n in  conjunction  with  use  of  the  PercloseTM TFA  closur e device. 
Additionally,  the  TFA  is  the  preferred  approach  for  transcatheter  aortic  val ve replacement 
(TAVR).  In  contrast  to  th e 6Fr   TFA,  TAVR  procedures  requir e large bore catheters  of  14  to  16 
Fr  in  many  circumstances.  Ther e has   been  wide spread ado ption  of  the  Perc loseTM TFA  closure 
device ,  with  many  institutions ,  including  our  ow n using  a sin gle Percl ose  closure  in order  to 
hemostasis.  The  present  study  is  designed  to  evaluat e the  use  of  Statseal  i n the  TAVR  TFA 
populatio n in  conjunction  wit h use   of  a  singl e Perc loseTM TFA  closure  device.  
II. DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  STUDY  DEVICE:
A new  compound  – potassium  ferrate,  i n combination  with  a  hydrophilic  polymer  which  is  formed 
in  to a  disc  when  compressed  - has  been  used  in  conjunction  with  hemostasis  bands  to  shorten 
compression  times.    This  product  (trade  name  StatSeal  Advanced)  is  an  FDA  approved  product 
comprised of a topical hydrophilic polymer and potassium ferrate disc,  [Photo  1] formed by 
compression  of  the  compound.   
  
 
 
Photo 1:        StatSeal  Advanced  Disc  
 
When  in  the  direct  contact  with  eve n a  small  amount  of  blood,  the  compound  forms  an  occlusive 
seal  through  simultaneo us iron -mediated  agglomeration  of  blood  solids/protei ns and rapid 
dehydratio n of  the  blood.    Seal  formatio n is  independent  of  the  clotting  cascade,  facilitating 
sealing  regardless  of  anticoagulatio n /  antiplatelet  status  of  the  patient.  Following  cessation  of 
pressure being applied to the site, the remnants of StatSeal form what resemble a ‘scab’, and 
remai ns in   place  for  24  hours,  covered  wi th a ban d-aid or  Tegaderm  patch.     
INDICATION  FOR USE 
StatSeal  Advanced  is  a  commercially  availabl e product  in  the  United  States,  and  is  indicated  for 
use  on  patients  i n wh om  the  radial  or  femoral  artery  has  been  used  t o gai n  vascular  access  for 
a car diovascular  procedure.     
DEVICE  STORAG E AND  ACCOUNTABILITY  
StatSeal  Advanced  is  provide d in a sterile,  foil  pouch  to  protect  it  from  humidity  /  moisture.    As 

with most  medical  products,  it  shoul d be  stored  in  a cool , dry,  secur e envi ronment.    StatSe al 
Advance  will  be  provided  at  no  charge  by  the  manufacturer  for  use  in  the  study.   
Damaged devices will be returned to the manufacturer (Biolife, LLC, Sarasota,FL). All unused 
devices m ay  be  retained  by the  site  for  continued  use,  if  th ey so   choose.  
  
III.  STUDY  OBJECTIVE(S)  
The primary  objecti ves o f  this  study  are  t o evaluate  the  performance  of  StatSeal  Advance d used 
in conj unction  with  the  PercloseTM (SS) as  com pared  to  the  PercloseTM without  SS  (PC) relative 
to: 
 
TAVR  Outcomes:  
1. Primary  outcome:  Time  t o He mostasis  (TTH)   
2. Secondary  outcome:  Th e incidence  of  access  hematomas  
 
Time to hemostasis  (TTH)  is  define d as  the  time  period  required  to  achiev e hem ostasis, 
beginning  at  the  tim e at which  the PercloseTM is depolyed  to  the  access  site  to  whe n no 
additional  bleeding  is  appreciated ..  
Hematom a are defined  as  being  <5  cm,  5 -10  cm,  and  >10 cm. The  physician  on  the  study  team 
will  make  the  assessment  for  the  incidence  and  si ze of   the  hematom a bas ed  on  physical  exam 
and /or  diagnostic  imagin g including  ultrasound . Hematoma  assessment  will  be  done  in  multiple 
incidences:  at  the  tim e of  Perclo se depl oyment  whil e in  the  catheterization  lab,  at  the  time  of 
admission  to  the  recovery  unit  by  the  TAVR  team,  an d at  the  time  of  admission  to  the  inpatient 
service  for  overnight  monitor ing. While in  recovery  the  patient  will  be  evaluated  by  the  staff  fo r 
15  minutes  for  on e hou r,  every  30  minutes  for  the  next  hour,  an d every  hour  for  the  subsequent 
four  hours  (for  a  total  of  6 hours   post -procedure  whil e in  the  recovery  unit). While admitted  for 
overnight  monitoring  (at  least  for  a 24  hour  period),  the  patient  will  ha ve their  site  evaluated 
every  4  hours  until  the  2 4 hours   period  has  been  reached.  
IV. STUDY  DESIGN  AND  METHODOL OGY 
STUDY  DESIGN  
This  study  is  a physician  initiated,  prospective,  observational,  two  arm,  randomized  study  to  be 
performed  at one academically  affiliated  with  hig h cat heterization  volumes .  Enrollment  with 
continu e at  each  site  on  discretio n of  the  investigators  until  at  least  50 patients  ar e enrolled  
Clinicians  will  perform  the  catheterization  in acco rdance  with  local  standar d practice ,  with no 
minimum  amount  of  anticoagulatio n required  during  the  procedure .  
 
STUDY  METHODS ; 
Patient  Selection  Criteria  Study  subjects  will  be  identifie d in  their  outpatient  appointments  during 
their  appointments  with  the  structural  heart  team  prior  to  their  TAVR  procedure.  
Inclusion  Criteria:  
• Left  heart  c atheterization  with plans  for  delivery  of  a 14-16  Fr TAVR  system   
Exclusion  Criteria:  
Candidat es for  this  study  will  be  excluded  if  any  one of  the  following  criteri a is t rue. 
• Use of a hemostasis method or device besides PercloseTM (Perclose  may not be used in situations 
of heavy calcification, presence of dissection, etc).  
• Use of an anticoagulant  other than  unfractionated heparin or bivalirudin  during the 
procedure.  
• Any use of  glycoprotein  inhibitors  or  cangrelor.   
• Use of   sheathless  guides.  
• Any  anticipated  need  for  co ntinued  anticoagulation  post -catheterization ,  including 
extende d bivalirudin  infusion.  
• Any active  treatment  wit h oral  anticoagulants  continued  during  course  of  procedure.  
• Presence  of  arterioven ous di alysis  fistul a in  the ipsilateral  leg. 
• Any  physical  deformity  or  trauma  /  injury  of  the  leg  that  would  prevent  proper  placement 
or  function  of  the  hemostasis  band.  
• Inability  of  the  patient  to  personally  consent  for the study. (no  surrogate  consent)  
• Cardiogenic  shock ,  emergent  procedures  (high  risk  myocardial  infarctions),  or  any 
clinical  instability  as asse ssed  by  the  physician  performing  the  procedure.  
Trans femoral  Catheterization  Procedure  
TFA Cardi ac Ca theterization  will  be  performed  according  to  local  practice  standards  with use o f 
a 14-16 Fr  sheath  during  a TA VR  procedure.  
Patients  will  have  their  activated  clotting  time  measured  prior  to  sheath  removal  and  at  least  5 
minutes  following  t he  initial  do se of   anticoagulant .  Additional  activate d clo tting  time 
measur ements  for  PCI  woul d be expected  as  part  of  routine  practi ce bu t  not  recorded.  
Vasodilators  (nitroglycerin,  verapamil)  will  be  administered  i n accordance  wit h local  practice.  
Timing  of  Subject  Enrollment  
A  subject  will  be  consented  into  the  study  prior  to  the  administration  of  sedatio n prior  to  the 
procedure,  and  randomized  at  the  conclusion  of  a  successful  deployment  of  the  Perclose  device 
(after  all  anticoagulation  an d ant iplatelet  medication  decisions  have  been  made),  at  which  time 
placement  of  the  assigne d device wi ll  occur .  Eligibility  for  the  study  will  be  assesse d at  this  time 
and the  subject  will  ha ve to meet  all  of  the  inclusion  criteri a and   none  of  th e excl usion  criteria . 
Randomizatio n will  be  performed  by  means  of  sealed  envelop es in   randomizatio n blocks  of  25. 
Each  envelop e will  be  labeled  by pat ient  number  containing  devi ce desi gnation.  Device 
designatio n in  the  envelopes  will  be  random  i n occurrence.    When  a  patient  is  officially  enrolled 
(after  PercloseTM deployment)  the  envelope  corresponding  to  that  patient  number  i n the  Study 
Patient  log  will  be  pulled,  opened,  and  the  assignment  revealed.  
End  of  Study  Status  /  Effect  of  Withdrawals:  
A  subject  will  have  completed  the  study  when  one  of  the  following  events  is  documented:   
1. The pat ient  is  successfu lly  enrolled,  treated  with  a  PercloseTM, and complet es al l 
required  follow  u p. 
2. A  subject  withdraws  consent  t o participate.  Patients  who  withdraw  from  th e study  will 
have their  dat a included  to  the  extent  allowabl e by law.  As  all  study  relate d procedures 
are  expected  to  be  completed  on  the  day  of  the  procedur e or  day  after,  subject 
withdrawal  is  not  considered  likely.  
 
Protoc ol: 
Informed  Consent : 
Subjects  must  have  read  the  contents  of  the  written  informed  consent  document,  had  all 
questions  regarding  the  study  adequately  answered  by study  staff,  an d sig ned and da ted  the 
document  prior  t o any   study  related  activities.   
 
 
14/16  (TAVR)  French Co ntrol  patients :    Patients  will  ha ve a PercloseTM device depl oyed at  the 
arteriotomy.  Manual  pressure  will  be  held  for  at  least  5 minutes ,  the  beginning  of  which 
will  correspond  to  time  point  zero.  Patent  hemostasis  will  be  documented  after  device 
deployment.  Any  manual  compression  needed  or  per  protocol  under  the  disgression  of 
the  operator  will  count  towards  the  time  to  hemostasis.  After  hemostasis  is  achieve d in 
the  cat h lab  the  patient  will  be  sent  to  the  post -operati ve area  and  monitored  for  f urther 
bleeding  or  hematoma  formation  as  described  previously.  
 
 
 
14/16  (TAVR)  French Statseal  Protocol : Patients  will  ha ve a PercloseTM device depl oyed at  the 
arteriotomy.  A  Statseal  Advance  (SS)  disc  will  applied  wit h 2 piece  of  gauge  over  it  and 
manual  pressure  will  be  hel d for  at  least  5  minute,  the  beginning  of  which  will 
correspond  to  tim e poi nt  zero  Patent  hemostasis  will  be  documented  after  device 
deployment.  Any  manual  compres sion  needed  or  per  protocol  under  the  disgression  of 
the  operator  will  count  towards  the  time  to  hemostasis.  After  hemostasis  is  achieve d in 
the  cat h lab, the  patient  will  be  sent  to  the  post -operative  area  and  monitored  for  further 
bleeding  or  hematoma  fo rmation   as  describe d previously.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [rest of page intentionally blank]   
STUDY  OVERVIEW  GRAPHIC  
 
 
V.  STUDY  DEFINITIONS  AND  OUTCOMES  
 
Definitions  of  Baseline  an d Procedu ral  Variables:  
Smoking:  Acti ve smokin g or  >20  pack  year  tobac co hi story.  
Diabetes:  Hgb  A1C  >6.5%  or  active  medical  treatment  for  diabetes.  
Hypercholesterolemia:  LD L >130 or  on  treatment  wit h ant ilipemic  agents.  
Hypertension:  >140/80  or  on  medical  treatment  for  hypertension.  
Diagnostic  procedure:  Involving  diagnostic  catheters  only.  
Interventional  procedure:  Involving  an  interventional  wir e and therapeutic  AC T typically  >200, 
including  for  fractional  flow  reserve  measurement  wher e a stent  is  not  placed.  
Puncture  attempts:  Number  of  forward  advances  of  the  needle  (not  punctur e site s)  needed  to 
achieve  access  
Procedure  Start  Time:  Tim e wh en  lidocaine  is  administered,  prior  to  first  puncture  attempt.  
Procedure  End  Time:  Tim e wh en  sheath  is  removed  
 
Primary  Efficacy  Outcome:  
▪ Total  Time  to  Hemostasis  (TTH),  define d as  from  the  tim e of  manual  compression  after 
PercloseTM deploye d until  no  further  bleeding ..    
 
Primary  Safety  Outcome:  
▪ Hematoma  formation :  small  ranging  from  small  <5cm  [I],  5-10cm  [II]  , or  large  >10cm . 
Hematoma  assessment  will  be done in  multiple  incidences:  at  the  time  of 
Perclose  deployment  while  in  the  catheterization  lab,  at  the  time  of  admission  to 
the recove ry unit by  the  TAVR team,  and  at  the time  of  admission  to the inpatient 
service  for overnight  monitor ing. While  in re cove ry the  patient  will  be  evaluated 
by the staff for 15  minute s for  one  hour, every 30  minute s for the next  hou r, and 
every hour for t he subseque nt  four  hou rs (for a total of 6  hours  post -procedure 
while  in  the  recove ry unit).While  admitted  for  overnight  monitoring  (at  least  fo r a 
24 hour period ), the  patient  will  have their site e valuated  every  4  hours until the 
24 hours period  has  been  reached.  
 
VI. STUDY  STATISTICAL  PLAN:  
This  is  a phy sician  initiated,  prospective,  randomized , two-arm study,  to  be  conducted  at high-
volume  academically  affiliated  centers  with  the  cath lab st aff  having  a  (minimum)  ten  case 
experience  using  StatSeal  Advanced.   The  primary  analysis  will  be  by  intention -to-treat 
methodology . 
A sample  si ze of   50  patients  is  sufficient  t o have  >90%  power  t o detect  an  average  expected 
difference  of  10  minutes  i n time  ( 5 min  vs  15 min)  to  hemostasis  (different  primary  outcomes 
compared  to  6F  study)  between  the  SS  and  Perclose  groups,  using  a  two -sided alpha of  0.05.  A 
standard  deviatio n of 10  minutes  is  assumed,  whi ch wi ll  be  the  additional  time  for  manual 
compression  if  any  site ozzing/bleeding  is  seen after  the  initial  compression .  A  different 
standard  deviation  time  w as assum ed  given  larger  bore  access  for  TAVR  TFA  acess.   
Descripti ve summary  statistics  will  be  presented  for  all  study  variables.    Continuous  variables 
will  be  displaye d as means  with standard  deviations  and  medians  with  75th and 25th percentiles .   
Categorical  variabl es wi ll  be  summarize d as frequenci es wi th  their  respective  percentages  with 
two-sided 95%  exact  confidence  intervals  of  the  percentages . Statistical  comparisons  for 
continuous variables will be performed using the Student’s t test or Mann -Whitney  U  test,  as 
appropriate.  Comparisons  for  categorical  variabl es wi ll  be  performed  using  the  Chi  square  test 
or  Fisher  exact  test,  as appropriate.  A two-sided  P  value  of 0.05  will  be  considered  statistically 
significant.  
A single multivariat e logistic  regression  will  be  reported  for  the  safety  outcome  of  hematoma 
formation.  In  order  to  create  this  model,  study  arm  and  variables  know n to pl ace  patients  at 
higher  risk  for  hematoma  formation  will  tested  i n univariat e anal ysis for  the  primary  safety 
outcome.  Tho se va riables wi th a  P<0.10  will  be  included  i n backw ards  stepwi se regression 
modeling  to  obtai n a  final  model.  Similar  t o our  prior  publishe d study,17 the  following  variables 
will  be  analyzed:  Age,  sex,  weight,  hypertensi on,  diabetes,  creatinine,  pre -procedural  INR,  pre -
procedural  platelet  level,  hepari n dose gi ven,  PCI,  last  ACT  prior  to  procedural  end,  an d last 
SBP  prior  t o procedural  end.   
 
VII. ADVERSE  EVENTS:  
Reports  of  all  adverse  events  will  be  mad e and   recorded  for  the  duration  of  the  study,  and 
categorized  as spe cific  t o those  complicatio ns as sociated  with  femoral  access,  such  as 
hematoma,  bleeding,  an d other  vascular  access  complications .    Those  complicatio ns no t  related 
to vas cular  ac cess wi ll  be stored  locally  only.  
Adver se even ts  will  be  re corded on  the  case  report  forms  (CRF) and  adjudicated  by  the  site 
Principal  Investigator  as  to  their  severity  and  whether  or  not  directly,  indirectly,  or  not  connected 
to  the  study  devices,  and  forwarded  to  the  Data  C enter  for  entry  in  to  the  database . 
 
Adver se Even t  
Any cli nically  relevant  event  that  occurs  during  th e per forma nce  of  the  stu dy that  puts  the 
subject  at  additional  risk  of  injury,  whether  foreseen  or  not,  and  requires  additional  care  beyond 
that  expected  as  a  result  of  the  study.  
Adver se De vice  Event  
An adverse   event  related  to  the  use  of  the  device.  This  includ es adve rse events  resulting  from 
insufficient  or  inadequate  instructions  for  use,  deployment,  or  operation,  or  any  malfunction  of 
the  device.  This  definitio n also in cludes any   event  resulting  from  user  error  or  from  intentional 
misuse  of  the  devi ce by   the  investigator.  
Serio us Adve rse  Event   
A  serio us ad verse  event  (SAE)  is  define d as  an  adver se event  that:   
• Led to  death,   
• Led to a serious  deterioratio n in  health  that  either,   
o Resulted  i n a life-threatening  illness  or  injury,  or   
o Resulted  i n a permanent  impairment  of  a body   structure  or  a bod y  function,  or   
o Required  in -patient  hospitalization,  or   
o Resulted  in  medical  or  surgical  intervention  t o prevent  life  threatening  illness  or 
injury  or  permanent  impairment  to  a bod y  structur e or a body   function.   
 
Note:  This  includ es devi ce def iciencies  that  might  ha ve led t o  a  serious  adverse  event  if 
(a)  suitabl e action  had  not  been  taken  or  (b)  intervention  had  not  been  made  or  (c)  if 
circumstances  ha d been   less f ortunate.   
 
VIII. DATA  MANAGEMENT  
 
Data  Collectio n Proce ss 
Data  will  be  collected  in  a n anon ymized  (coded)  fashion  using  case  report  forms  for  each 
subject.    CR Fs wi ll  be  transmitted  to  the  data  center  for  entry  in  to  the  database.    Data  may  be 
collected  by  clinical  research  personnel  assigned  to  the  study,  under  the  supervision  of  the 
investigator.     
 
Data  Confidentiality  
Subject  data  will  be  collected  i n an  anonymous  form.    Each  sit e will  kee p a  confidential,  site  – 
only  log  of  enrolled  patients  connecting  their  identity  to  a  coded  subject  identifier.    Each  subject 
will  be  entered  on  the  log  alon g with procedure  dat e and   will  be  assigned  a  patient  study 
number  comprise d of  the  sit e number  and  sequential  subject  number  enrolled.    This  coded 
number  will  be  use d in  the CR Fs.      For  example,  John  Q  Doe,  the  12th patient  enrolled  at  site 
number  2,  will  be  assigned  study  identifier  002 -012.    All  activiti es wi ll  be  performed  in 
complian ce wi th HIPPAA  and  Goo d Clinical  Practi ce st andards   
Data  Center  
CRFs  or  coded  anonymized  data  will  be  forwarde d to  the  Central  Data  Center ,  checked  for 
completeness,  and  entered  i n the  Database  as  received.    Incomplete  forms  will  be  returned  to 
the  study  site  for  completion.   Electronic  submission  of  Data  may  be  employed,  but is  not 
required.   
See the “Study Statistical Plan” for a description of the plan.  
 
IX. ETHICA L,  REGULATORY  &  ADMINISTRATIVE  REQUIREMENTS  
The devices bei ng  studie d in  this  clinical  plan ,  and  the  tests  performed  under  it,  are app roved 
for  marketing  by  the  US -FDA for  use  as  described  and have   been  in  use  for cardiac 
catheterization  procedures  at  the  participating  institutions.   FDA  approval  of  the  study  is  not 
required.   No  part  of  the  study  u ses any   device  or  test  that  is  considered  investigational.   
Investigational  Review  Boar d App rovals .   
Data  from  this  study  may  be  used  for  publication  i n the  scientific  literature,  an d therefor  IRB 
approval  is  required.    No  patient  may  be  enrolled  until  IRB  approval  is  granted,  an d an  Informed 
Consent  approve d by  the IRB  is  signed  by  the  subject.  
 
Protocol  Adheren ce and   Amendments  
Investigators  will  be  required  to  adhere  to  the  protocol  requirements.    Deviatio ns or   violatio ns of 
the  protocol  may  result  i n dismissal  from  the  study.  
 
Informed  Consent  
Each  subject  i n the  study  must  sign  the  informed  consent  agreeing  t o participation.  
 
Alternatives  to  Participation  
As a voluntary randomized study, the patient’s alternative to participation is primarily to the local 
standard  of  care,  typically  involving  the  Perclose  alon e or  Perclose  with  manual  compression , 
used per   local  protocol .  SS devices  m ay be   used  outside  of  the  study  depending  on  local 
practice  an d avai lability.  
 
Enrollment  in  other  studies  
Simultaneo us or  dual  enrollment  i n other  investigative  or  observational  protocols  that  do  not 
involve vascul ar  access,  anticoagulation,  or  antiplatelet  agents  is  expressly  permitted.    The 
interventions  i n this  trial  are  not  expected  to  significantly  impact  upon  the  outcomes  of  other 
protocols,  however,  the  sit e investigator  is  responsibl e for  ensuring  that  there  is  no  conflict  with 
dual  enrollment  from  the  standpoint  of  the  other  trial.     
 
Study  Activities  
The Investigator  is  required  to  perform  the  study  i n accor dance with  the  protocol  and  to  use 
devices  per  the ir instructions  for  use.  
Follow -Up 
There  is  no  requirement  for  the  subjects  taking  part  i n the  study  t o be  seen  or  examined  for  any 
follow  up  relative  to  the  study  following  completio n of  activities  described  herein.   
CRFs  
CRFs will  b e completed  for  each  subject.    See  Appendix  1 for  the  CRFs.  
Recor ds and   Retention  
Copies of   all  records  will  be  retaine d by  the  investigator  at  each  site  for  2  years.  
(Model)  Patient  Informed  Consent  
See  Appendix  2  
Communication  with  the  Principal  Investigator:  
All  communication  regarding  the  study  shoul d be routed  directly  to  the  Principal  Investigator.   
Copies of   all  corresponden ce regarding  the  study  shoul d be maintained  in  the  Site  Investigator 
study  file.  
Declaration  of  Helsinki  &  HIPPAA  
The Prin cipal  Investigator  will  ensure  that  this  stu dy is pe rformed  i n con formity  with  the 
Declaration  of  Helsinki ,  HIPPAA,  and all  local  an d nat ional  regulations.  
Investigator  Responsibilities  
• Adhere  to  all  of  the  required  elements  of  the  Clinical  Protocol   
• Resol ve querie s  in a  timely  manner   
• Participat e in  Investigator  meetings  and emails ,  if  scheduled  
• Comply  with  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki   
• Obtai n written  Informed  Consent  from  each  study  participant  before  any  study  specific 
procedures  are  performed   
• Complete  all  required  ca se report  forms  (CRFs)  for  each  subject   
• Comply  wit h all  applicabl e regulations  an d code s  of  approvals  from  the  sit e IRB  and 
other  Regulatory  Authorities   
• Notify  the  Principal  Investigator  of  personnel  changes  that  may  affect  the  study  protocol   
• Retai n all  records  and  study  files  as  required,  after  which  the  files m ay  be  destroyed.   
• Allow  direct  access  t o source  data/documents,  including  patient  records,  i n case of 
monitoring,  auditing  and/or  inspection  by  the  IRB  and/or  other  regulatory  authority 
bodies.  
 
X.  RISK  BENEFIT  ANALYSIS  
General  Risks  an d Presumed  Benefits : 
Applicatio n of  a hemostatic  device  in a setting  absent  an  actual  femoral  arteriotomy  presents 
negligibl e risk  to  the  subject . 
Patients  assigned  to  the  SS  group  may  enjoy  less  discomfort  from  the  s horter  length  of  time 
needed  to  lay  flat  as  compared  to  the  Perclose  being  place d by  itself ,  presuming  that  the  SS 
does reduce  the  time  to  ambulation .  
The pot ential  benefit  of  subject  participation  is  gratification  from  making  a  contribution  to  science 
helping  t o demonstrate  the  effectiveness  of  a  new  clinical  method  to  achieve  hemostasis 
following  a  femoral  artery  procedure.    This  new  method  coul d potentially  provide  a  safer ,  more 
efficient,  and  mor e effective  hemostatic  device  for  clinicians  t o use   in  treating  patients 
undergoing  the  femoral  artery  approach  for  cardiovascular  procedures.     
Risks  related  to  Perclose  Device : 
Currently  marketed  Perclose  devices  have been   associated  with  complicatio ns such   as,  but  not 
limited  to,  ski n irritation,  femoral  artery  or  branch  occlusion,  arterial  dissection,  hematoma, 
pseudoaneurysm,  failure  to  achieve  hemostasis,  an d gene ral groin  discomfort.     
Risks  Specific  to  the  Stu dy De vice: 
There  ar e no  known  risks  specific  to  the  study  device . 
Risk  Mitigation : 
Every  effort  will  be  made  to  mitigate  risks  in  this  Study.    Tho se efforts  include  requiring 
investigators  to  be  highly  experienced  operators.  
 
Clinical  monitorin g will  occur  in  real  time  to  ensur e the  accurate  collection  an d reporting  of  data, 
and ensure   that  the  Sit e is  in complian ce wi th  the  clinical  protocol  requirements  that  mitigate  risk 
such  as  patient  entry  criteria,  use  of  the  study  devi ce in   accordance  with  instructions,  and 
complian ce wi th  study  test  procedures  and  methods.   
 
XI. REFERENCES:  
1. Roffi  M,  Patron o C,  Collet;  ESC  Scientific  Document  Group  .  2015  ESC  Guidelines  for 
the  management  of  acut e cor onary  syndromes  i n pat ients  presenting  without  persistent 
ST-segment  elevation:  T ask For ce  for  the  Management  of  Acute  Coronary  Syndrom es in  
Patients  Presenting  without  Persistent  ST -Segment  Elevation  of  the  European  Society  of 
Cardiology  (ESC).  Eur  Heart  J.  2016  Jan  14;37(3):267 -315. 
2. Cooper  CJ,  El -Shiekh  RA,  Cohen  DJ,  Blaesing  L,  Burket  MW,  Basu  A,  Moor e JA.  Effect 
of  transradial  access  on  quality  of  lif e and   cost  of  cardi ac ca theterization:  A  randomized 
comparison.  Am Heart J .  1999;138:430 -436 
3. Jolly  SS,  Amlani  S,  Hamon  M,  Yusuf  S,  Mehta  SR.  Radial  versus  femoral  access  for 
coronary  angiography  or  intervention  and  the  impact  on  major  bleeding  an d isch emic 
events:  a  systematic  review  and  meta -analysis  of  randomized  trials.  Am Heart J . 
2009;157:132 -140 
4. Safley  DM,  Ami n AP ,  Hou se JA,   Baklan ov D,  Mills  R,  Giersiefen  H,  Bremer  A,  Marso 
SP.  Comparison  of  costs  between  transradial  and  transfemoral  percutaneo us cor onary . 
5. Dangoi sse V,   Guédès  A,  Chenu  P,  et  al.  Usefulness  of  a  Gentl e and Sh ort  Hemostasis 
Using  the  Transradial  Band  Devi ce af ter  Transradial  A ccess f or  Percutaneous  Coronary 
Angiograp hy and Interventio ns to  Reduce  the  Radial  Artery  Occlusion  Rat e (from  the 
Prospective  an d Ra ndomized  CRASOC  I,  II,  and  III  Studies).  Am  J  Cardiol.  2017  Aug 
1;120(3):374 -379.   
6. Seto  AH,  Rollefson  W,  Patel  MP,  et  al.  Radial  haemostasis  is  facilitated  wit h a potassium 
ferrate  haemostatic  patch:  the  Statseal  with  TR  Ban d assess ment  trial  (STAT). 
EuroIntervention.  2018  D ec 7; 14(11):e1236 -e1242.  
7. Safirstein  J,  Tehrani  DM ,  Schussler,  et  al.  Radial  hemostasis  is  facilitated  with 
potassium  ferrat e hemost atic pa tch:  STAT2  Trial.  JACC inteventions.  In press.  
8. Dangas  G,  Mehran  R,  Kokolis  S,  et  al.  Vascular  complicatio ns after  percutaneous 
coronry  intervention  following  hemostatsis  with  manual  compression  vs  arteriotomy 
closur e devi ces. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;  38:638 -641. 
9. Resnic  FS ,Blake  GJ ,Ohno -Machado  L ,  et  al.  Vascular  closure  devi ces and   the  risk  of 
vascular  complicatio ns after  percutaneous  coronary  intervention  i n pat ients  receiving 
glycoprotein  IIb/IIIa  inhibitors . Am J Cardiol  2001 ; 88: 493– 496. 
10. Applegate  RJ ,Grabarczyk  MA ,Little  WC ,  et  al.  Vascular  closure  devices  i n pat ients 
treated  with  anticoagulation  and  IIb/IIIa  receptor  inhibitors  during  percutaneous 
revascularization . J Am Coll Cardiol  2002 ; 40: 78– 83. 
11. Nikolsky  E ,Mehran  R ,Halki n A,  et  al.  Vascular  complicatio ns asso ciated  wit h arteriotomy 
closur e devi ces  in pat ients  undergoing  percutaneous  coronary  procedures;  a  meta -
analysis . J Am Coll Cardiol  2004 ; 44: 1200 – 1209 . 
12. Vaitkus PT . A  meta -analysis  of  percutaneous  vascular  closure  devices  after  diagnostic 
catheterizatio n and   percutaneo us co ronary  intervention . J Invasive 
Cardiol  2004 ; 16: 243– 246. 
13. Marti n JL,  Pratsos  A,  Magarge e E,  Mayhew  K,  Pensyl  C,  Nunn  M,  Day  F,  Shapir o T.  A 
randomized  trial  comparing  compression,  Perclos e Progl ide  an d Ang io-Seal  VIP  for 
arterial  closure  following  percutaneous  coronary  intervention:  the  CAP  trial.  Catheter 
Cardio vasc  Interv.  2008  Jan  1;71(1):1 -5. 
14. https://www.cardiovascular.abbott/us/en/perclose -proglide -closure -device -ep-
ablation.html  
15. Lai YC,  Kao  HL,  Li n YH ,  et  al.  The Ang io-Seal  arterial  closur e devi ce  for  early 
ambulatio n after  elective  percutaneous  coronary  intervention  i n patients  receiving  low -
dose enoxa parin . J Int Med Res  2008;  36:  1077 –1084.   
16. Wang  DS,  Chu  LF,  Olso n SE ,  et  al.  Comparative  evaluation  of  noninvasi ve com pression 
adjuncts  for  hemostasis  i n per cutaneous  arterial,  venous,  and  arterioveno us di alysis 
access  procedures.  J  Vasc  Interv  Radiol.  2008  Jan;19(1):72 -9. 
17. Safirstein  JG,  Tehrani,  DM,  Schussler  JM,  et  al.  Radial  Hemostasis  is  Facilitated  With  a 
Potassium  Ferrate  Hemostatic  Patch:  The  STAT2  Trial.  JACC  Cardiovasc  Interv.  2022 
Apr  25;15(8):810 -819. 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES:  
Appendix  1:  Sample  Patient  information  sheet  
Appendix  2:  CRF’s  
 