Title:   Bright Start Study Protocol 
NCT number:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document date:   September 13, 2023   
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 1 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 1. Protocol  
Protocol Title: Feasibility pilot in preparation for large pragmatic encouragement trial of Bright Light 
Therapy (BLT) for depression Abbreviated Title: BLT Pilot Participant Facing Name: Bright Start Study 
 
Principal Investigator: Greg Clarke, PhD   Version Date: 09/13/2023 
 
2. Objectives 
Primary Objective (or Aim) 
Our primary objective is to examine benefit of a deployment-ready BLT approach when delivered to 
complex real-world patients in an active health care system setting, against a background of other usual 
care. This trial will evaluate BLT effectiveness with little of the “scaffolding” typical of highly controlled 
efficacy trials. This R34 pilot will prepare for a future , fully powered effectiveness trial.  Our focus will be 
on how participants in the condition with the most assistance (Arm 3: TAU + Enhanced BLT 
Encouragement + Adherence Promotion + MI) benefit in terms of BLT initiation, continued use, and 
depression outcomes compared to those participants  enrolled in the other two arms (Control Arm 1: 
TAU control with no BLT assistance; and Minimal Assistance Arm 2: TAU + brief written BLT Educational material but no phone coaching). 
Secondary Objectives (or Aim) 
The secondary objectives are to: 
 Conduct analyses that mirror those planned for a future, fully-powered trial. Key analytic 
contrasts are (a) active Arms 2 + 3 vs. control Ar m 1; (b) each active Arm (2, 3) separately vs. 
control Arm 1; and (c) Minimal Arm 2 vs. Enhanced  Arm 3. For each contrast we will initially 
examine differences between study arms in pre-post change in proposed mediators in BLT and 
MI effects; followed by examination of differenc es in pre-post change in the primary (PHQ-9) 
and key secondary outcomes. 
 Examine candidate mediators (imp roved sleep, normalized circadian rhythm, increased physical 
activity, readiness for change) for mediating BL T and MI effects on depression. We will also 
examine moderation of BLT effects and subgroup outcome variation (e.g., receiving vs. not 
receiving TAU ADs).  
 Examine cost data and con duct economic analyses.  
 Collect pilot feasibility data that will facilitat e rapid launch of a future trial: estimated 
recruitment, retention, and adherence with BL T protocol and compensation program for light 
box purchase; and a cautious estimate (with wide  confidence intervals) of BLT effectiveness. 
 
3. Background Informat ion and Rationale 
Depressive disorder is associated with significa nt adverse impacts on mental and physical health, 
reduced attainment of life milestones including em ployment and education, and lower psychosocial 
functioning. In the United States, it affects millions of people: in 2017,  an estimated 17M adults (7.1%) 
had major depression. Effective, accessible treatment for depression is a major public health priority. 
The most common evidence-based treatments (EBTs) are pharmacotherapy such as SSRI 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 2 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 antidepressants (ADs), and psychosocial therapies such  as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). However, 
even when delivered under ideal conditions these have moderate benefit. Treatment effectiveness is further reduced in real-world patients by low levels of initiation and adherence, and/or high levels of 
discontinuation. Patient reluctance to fully engage with these EBTs is fueled by high costs, limited availability of trained providers, concer ns about side effects, and stigma. 
While promising research is underway to improve engagement/adherence to existing 
depression EBTs and to develop new treatments, othe r approaches should be considered. One of these 
is an existing EBT with a strong research pedigree but has low adoption in clinical care: bright light therapy (BLT), most often administered via a “lig ht box.” BLT was developed out of basic science 
regarding seasonal affective disorder (SAD). For ma ny years, BLT has been vi ewed as an appropriate 
treatment for SAD but not for non-SAD depression. Howe ver, recent trials and meta-analyses reveal that 
BLT yields medium to high clinical benefit for non- SAD depression as well as SAD, as both monotherapy 
or as an adjunct to ADs. BLT has several advantage s over existing pharmacotherapy or psychotherapy. 
First, at a typical light box purchas e price of $70 to $110 it is relative ly affordable, and many insurance 
plans reimburse patients for the purchase cost. Seco nd, BLT is hypothesized to work via a different 
mechanism than pharmacotherapy or psychotherapies, and evidence points to additional benefit when 
BLT augments other EBTs. Third, properly educated and motivated patients can self-administer BLT at 
home, alleviating barriers of travel burden and limited access to care—telehealth issues that have been 
highlighted during the present pandemic. Finally, contraindications are minimal (e.g., skin/eye photosensitivity), side effects are typically minor/tran sient, and antidepressant action is rapid (within 1-
2 weeks). Despite these advantages adoption/promotion  of BLT is low, even when patients are not 
engaged in other depression EBT. This represents a care gap that may be addressed in part with BLT. 
Given that BLT has established medium-large efficacy, what is the next step? A large pragmatic 
effectiveness trial is a logical progression of rese arch: to examine benefit of a deployment-ready BLT 
approach when delivered to complex real-world patients  in an active health care  system setting, against 
a background of other usual care. This trial will evalua te BLT effectiveness with little of the “scaffolding” 
typical of highly controlled efficacy trials. This  R34 pilot will prepare for a future, fully-powered 
effectiveness trial.   
4. Study Design 
This is a three-arm randomized controlled trial (RCT),  with treatment as usual (TAU; i.e., usual care) 
underlying all study arms. Following a 2-stage eligibility  screening and baseline assessment, patients will 
be randomly assigned to: 
 Arm 1: Treatment as Usual (TAU) control: A “usu al care” control group (e.g., antidepressants, 
watchful waiting, psychosocial th erapy, or no treatment, all de termined by the participant in 
consultation with their TAU providers). All TAU will  be recorded for all participants in all study 
conditions; or 
 Arm 2: TAU + Minimal BLT Encouragement: TAU plus two minimal communications (mailed 
letter, secure EHR message, email, or text) identifying BLT as a promising treatment and 
outlining steps for participants to self-initiat e. Arm 2 will not include any phone coaching or 
adherence promotion. 
 Arm 3: TAU + Enhanced BLT Encouragement + Adherence Promotion + MI: TAU plus 2-6 brief 
calls to encourage BLT use, advise on purchase of  a light box (LB) that meets all ideal technical 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 3 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 standards, assist with obtainin g compensation for LB purchase, educate for correct LB use, and 
provide motivational interviewing (MI) as needed to promote adherence. 
Outcomes will be assessed at baseline, 2, 4, and 6 months. The acute intervention period will be for 2 
months. The primary outcome will be scores on the Pa tient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), selected as 
representative of how depression is assessed in many  usual care settings, consistent with effectiveness 
research principles. 
 
5. Study Population 
a. Number of Subjects 
We will enroll 90 to 100 participants. 
 
b. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
Potentially eligible individuals will be screened  at two points in the recruitment phase: 1) 
preliminary identification of likely participants via a search of KPNW electronic health record (EHR) 
and 2) phone or online screening survey. 
 
EHR inclusion criteria: 
 Age 18-69 years, inclusive, and 
 New episode of unipolar depression within the last month, defined as: New ICD-10 diagnosis 
of SAD or unipolar depression (i.e., major depression, minor depression, depression not otherwise specified, and/or adjustment disorder with depressed mood) AND usual care administration of the PHQ-9 depression scale in  the last 30 days, with a total score of 10 or 
higher, and 
 Participant must have a kp.org MyChart account, with evidence of use in  the last 12 months.   
EHR exclusion criteria: 
 Chronic depression:  ICD-10 diagnosis of SAD or unipolar depression in the 6 months prior to 
case-identification;  
 Elevated PHQ-9 (score of 10 or higher) in the 6 months prior to case identification. 
 Active EHR diagnoses and prescriptions repres enting any of the following contraindications 
for BLT:  Conditions that might render skin or  eyes more vulnerable to phototoxicity (e.g., 
ophthalmic disorders such as cataract, macular degeneration, glaucoma, retinitis pigmentosa; disorders affecting the retina su ch as retinopathy, diabetes, herpes); or 
photosensitive skin; or if they are taking a pho tosensitizing medication or herb (e.g., St. 
John’s wort or a psoralen). 
 EHR-recorded diagnoses of bipolar disorder I or II. 
 
Screening inclusion criteria: 
 Elevated PHQ-9 (score of 10 or higher);  
 Able and willing to conduct study assessm ents and phone coaching in English; 
 Phone and internet access.  
Screening exclusion criteria: 
 Participation barriers (e.g., te rminal end-stage cancer, moving out of the region, no locator 
information); 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 4 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017  Contraindicated diagnoses or medications (see EH R exclusion criteria above) in case these 
are known to patients but are not EHR-record ed (e.g., if they were diagnosed with a 
contraindicated condition before becoming a KP member and have not yet sought care for 
it); 
 Contraindicated diagnoses or medications (see EHR exclusion criteria) newly reported that 
were not captured in the EHR; 
 Emergent bipolar, manic, mixed symptoms that  may not have been formally diagnosed yet 
(e.g., significant mood swings, excessive incr eases in energy, dramatically less need for 
sleep).  
In the event of a screen failure, or when a po tential participant is contacted but declines 
participation, minimal demographic data collected (s uch as age, sex, race, et hnicity), and reason for 
declining will be retained for review. This da ta may help inform future study design.  
 c. Vulnerable Populations 
 
Vulnerable Populations (VPs) Include/Exclude Rationale  
Pregnant women Include Pregnancy has no known vulnerabilities for BLT. 
Further, BLT may be a valuable alternative treatment 
for pregnant women who might be hesitant to take 
antidepressants. 
Children Exclude N/A 
Neonates of uncertain viability 
or nonviable neonates Exclude N/A 
Prisoners Exclude N/A 
 
 
d. Setting 
 This study will be conducted by study staff at Cent er for Health Research (C HR), among the KPNW adult 
membership. Participants will be able to conduct all study activities from home.  
 
e. Recruitment Methods 
EHR Identification of Potential Recruitment Pool.  We will run an EHR case-finding program as needed for 
the projected 16-month recruitment period to generate  an initial outreach list of potentially eligible 
individuals. After each recruitment list is generated, we will send a secure EHR message to each 
individual’s primary care provider (PCP) and mental heal th specialist (e.g., psychi atrist) if applicable. In 
this message, we will state our intent to reach out to the patient unless we hear from the provider within three business days that it would be unwarra nted (e.g., due to more acute condition for which 
other health care should be primary).   
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 5 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 Once an individual has been identified once by this EHR search program, they will be excluded from 
subsequent runs of the program to avoid multiple waves of contact.   Recruitment Mailing, Emailing, Online Screening, and Calls.  For patients not opted out by clinician(s), we 
will mail/email a recruitment packet containing the re cruitment letter, recruitment flyer, and a copy of 
the consent information sheet. Intere sted patients have the option to complete the screening survey 
online. For those who screen eligible online, stud y staff will follow up by phone to obtain verbal 
informed consent as described in Section F. Patients also have the option to opt out online.  
If the screening survey is not completed on line, study assessment staff will begin making 
recruitment calls to those who have not preemptive ly declined at least two calendar days after the 
recruitment packet is sent. If a potential participant did not receive the recruitment packet, upon 
request, we will email the recruitment packet to the individual. The consent and the recruitment flyer will also be available as downloadable PDF docume nts on the public access study recruitment website 
(no account needed). We will use IR B-approved email templates and will  follow CHR guidelines in emails 
sent to potential participants regarding this study. 
During the recruitment call, study staff will expl ain the study and answer questions. For those 
individuals who are interested, study staff will comp lete the screening survey. Individuals who pass the 
screening survey will be invited to complete the baseline survey after study staff obtains verbal 
informed consent as described in Section F.    
Recruitment Contact Methods and Frequency.  Study assessment staff will make multiple telephone 
attempts to contact potentially eligible individuals , not to exceed 3 attempted calls unless otherwise 
requested by the individual. The study may also employ recruitment text messages and emails to potential participant cell phones and email addresse s (if listed in HealthConnect member contact data), 
sending a maximum of 2 recruitment text messages and emails. Pending KPNW regional permission 
granted to use this system, we may also send secure messages via the MyChart function in 
HealthConnect, which offers a password-protected, mo re secure messaging system  than typical email or 
text.   Staffing.  All participant recruitment and assessment contacts will be conducted by CHR mental health 
interviewers, occasionally with backup from SPD st udy project management staff. All intervention 
delivery will be conducted by BAC department sta ff or other CHR staff with the previous requisite 
training and licensure.   
 
f. Consent 
 
Informed Consent Process 
Potentially eligible individuals will be sent a copy of the consent information sheet in the recruitment 
packet as described previously. For individuals who screen eligible, study staff will use the recruitment 
script to obtain verbal informed consent via phone.  Verbal consent will be documented in the study 
tracking system.  
We ensure the language in the consent and recruitment script is appropriate for an adult 
population. They will be reminded that participation is  completely voluntary and there will be no penalty 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 6 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 for opting out – refusal to participate will not influenc e their ability to receive care and they are free to 
withdraw at any time. Procedures for ensuring confidentiality and a statement of potential risks are 
included in the informed consent form.  
We take the following steps to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence: 
 Gift certificate values that are not so high that they unduly influence decisions to take part 
(see Compensation to Participants section); 
 Assessment and intervention staff will ment ion, especially during highly sensitive 
interview/questionnaire topics, that  participants have the right to not answer any questions, 
although if they refuse to answer key outcome questions we may elect to administratively withdraw them from the study;  
 Participants may withdraw from the study at any time.  
  
Waiver or Alteration of Informed Consent or Signed Informed Consent  
The Application for Waiver or Alteration of Consent or Authorization has been filled out and is included 
in the submission.  
 Waiver of Informed Consent: We are request ing a waiver of informed consent for the 
preliminary EHR case-finding program and the e ligibility screen. Participants who pass the 
screen will be asked for verbal consent and authorization for st udy participation as described 
above. 
 Waiver of Signed Informed Consent for Partic ipant Assessments: The study cannot practicably 
be conducted without a waiver of signed informed consent because we will only be contacting participants by phone, and requesting a return mailed consent form would increase burden to 
participants and study staff. The consent in formation sheet will be mailed to potential 
participants prior to the recruitment call. During  the recruitment call the elements of informed 
consent will be read and verbal cons ent will be obtained and documented. 
 Waiver of Signed Informed Consent for Provider  Surveys: We are also requesting a waiver of 
signed informed consent, as the provider survey will be administered online and we do not plan 
to obtain written consen t from participating providers. The Consent Information Sheet will be 
displayed for the provider to review on the REDCap "page" prior to the survey questions. 
Non-English-Speaking Subjects  
Not applicable. 
 
Assent of Children and Parent Permission 
 Not applicable.  
 
Adults Unable to Consent/Decisionally Impaired  
 Not applicable.  
 
g. HIPAA Authorization – if study will use or disclose Protected Health Information (PHI) 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 7 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 HIPAA authorization will be combined into the informed consent inform ation sheet and verbal 
consent will be obtained and document ed during the recrui tment phone call. 
  
Waiver or Alteration of HIPAA Privacy Rule Authorization  
Alteration of Authorization is requested to allow fo r a waiver of the signature and date requirement for 
HIPAA authorization. This research will be conducting a HIPAA privacy rule authorization procedure, but 
without signed documentation. We believe the study cannot practicably be conducted without a waiver 
of signed authorization because eligible part icipants are only being contacted by phone. 
 
A request for Waiver of Authorization is also reque sted for recruitment. During the first stage of the 
screening process, we will run an EHR case-finding program to generate an initial outreach list of 
potentially eligible individuals. This initial case finding  algorithm does not itself qualify individuals for the 
study, but merely generates a likely pool within which further screening is merited.  
This waiver allows study staff to  approach (via letter, email/the EHR patient portal, and subsequent 
phone call) likely interested and eligible individu als and offer them the study opportunity. The study 
could not complete the research without access to and use of PHI because it is not practical to recruit 
eligible individuals without pre-identifying using medi cal record information and contact information. It 
would be too costly and would un-duly burden the KP membership to receive invitations to every study. 
Only the minimum amount of PHI will be accessed to identify participants who are likely to meet the 
study eligibility criteria. 
 
6. Study Procedures  
Recruitment 
Recruitment procedures are described in the earlier Recruitment Methods section.  Randomization 
Participants will be randomized 1:1:1 to three conditio ns, stratified by gender (male vs. female + all non-
CIS gender identities), age (median split; estimated as  <46yrs vs >= 47yrs), and minority status (white 
non-Hispanic vs. all other races/ethnicities). 
 
Monitoring for Safety 
The target condition is depression, and the most likely emergent risks (and how we will monitor for 
these) are: 
 Worsening depression, evaluated at each assessment with the PHQ-9 depression measure. 
 Intentional self-harm, including suicidal thoughts and behavior. This will be evaluated at each 
assessment with the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS).  
 Emergent bipolar disorder symptoms (a possible risk of triggered symptoms from lightbox use). 
This will be assessed at each follow up assessment with th e 5-item Altman Self-Rating Mania 
Scale (ASRM). 
Any increased risk evident from any of these meas ures, or other unexpected increased in other less 
common safety issues (e.g., threats to harm others ) will be reviewed between the interviewing staff and 
Dr. Clarke, with a review of the relevant usual he alth care the individual is already receiving.  
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 8 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 We will also send EHR messages to TAU providers of  Arm 2 and 3 participants stating that they 
are being encouraged to self-administer BLT, so th at they can coordinate other depression care as 
needed, or if some new condition or situation aris es that might impact BLT; e.g., emergent bipolar 
disorder.  Depending on the level of risk revealed through the monitoring procedures above, possible risk 
amelioration actions include:  recommendation that the participant meet with their primary care 
provider and/or specialist provider(s) to seek new ca re; research staff share the risk information with 
these providers or others; and in the most extreme risk cases initiate a ‘warm handoff’ to the KPNW 
Emergency Psychiatric Service 24/7 call line for immediate, additional evaluation of risk. 
 
 Drugs and Devices 
No drugs will be used in this resear ch. Participants in study Arms 2 and 3 will be encouraged to use light 
boxes designed to treat depression. The specific de vices recommended by the study will be those that 
meet the ideal light therapy criteria, but they are a vailable to the general public to purchase “over the 
counter” (e.g., via Amazon or Best Buy) and are not considered regulated or approved devices. 
 
Source records that will be used  to collect data about subjects 
 HealthConnect Electronic Health Record (EHR) case-finding data program, identifying highly likely 
individuals who meet preliminary indicators of st udy inclusion criteria and did not meet exclusion 
criteria  
 Recruitment Script: Includes recruitment voicemail, call script, screening surv ey, and verbal consent 
script;  
 Baseline and Follow-Up Assessments: Scripts and meas ures for the randomization phone call and all 
assessments are incorporated into one do cument titled “Scripts and Measures_All 
Assessments_Randomization” (see Survey Measur es section below for a description of the 
measures);  
 Intervention Contact Form (Arm 3 only): Used by  phone coach to capture details of intervention 
contacts with participants; 
 We will obtain data from the EHR to describe TAU in all study arms for 12 months prior to 
enrollment and up to 12 months post-enrollment. 
 
Study Conditions 
Arm 1: TAU control condition.  The control condition is non-research  treatment as usual (TAU), most of 
which is delivered in the KPNW HMO. TAU also un derlies the active intervention Arms 2 and 3.  
 Arm 2: TAU + Minimal BLT promotion.  Participants will receive 2 brief communications (mailed letter, 
secure EHR message, email, and/or text) identifying BLT as a promising treatment with few side effects, and steps for participants to self-initiate. The educational and background information from the 2 
communications will also be made available as PDFs or webpages on the secure study website. If 
requested, participants will be prov ided with a copy of these materials by email. Arm 2 has no phone 
coaching, adherence promotion or MI.  Arm 3: TAU + BLT encouragement + adherence promotion. BLT promotion coaches will follow a four- 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 9 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 step approach in engaging with Arm 3 participants: (a) provide encouragement to consider using BLT; (b) 
provide guidance regarding light box purchase and co mpensation; (c) educate pa rticipants about ideal 
BLT use to obtain maximum benefit; and (d) provid e ongoing brief telephonic adherence promotion and 
motivational interviewing (MI) where warranted to maximize persistent and appropriate BLT use. The 
educational and instructional information for these 4 steps will also be made available as PDFs or 
webpages on the secure study website.  If requested, participants will be  provided with a copy of these 
materials by email.   Encouragement.  Coaches will encourage particip ants to consider BLT during the first post-randomization 
contact, in most cases by telephone. Coaches will address the reason for the call (BLT promotion) and 
advantages of BLT. They will also gauge interest in us ing BLT; for ambivalent participants they will offer a 
brief motivational interviewing (MI) exercise.   Compensation for BLT purchase.  In Arms 2 + 3 interested participants will receive written guidance on 
purchasing a light box (LB) that meets minimum study  requirements. Arm 3 coaches guide participants 
to purchase LBs and obtain compensa tion (up to $80 in Fred Meyer gift  cards) for this cost through the 
study. This compensation process is modeled to simulate the KP durable medical equipment (DME) benefit, which does not currently cover LBs.  Ar m 2 offers the same written information about LB 
purchase and compensation, but no coach assistance.   
Education.  Participants in both Arms 2 and 3 will receiv e written information about how to obtain the 
greatest BLT benefit, including recommended day/time usage, session duration, eye distance from light box, the length of time to continue using, and th e small risk of emergent mania or BD and how to 
recognize this. Written best practices for ideal BLT w ill be provided in both Arms 2 and 3 via secure EHR 
message, email, and/or USPS. PDFs of best practice s for BLT will also be available for download on our 
study website. Arm 3 participants will also review this  material with coaches in the initial phone session. 
They will also address common patient concerns an d reactions, respond to re ported barriers to usage 
and provide possible solutions, and offer suggestions for maintaining the correct use of BLT. In Arm 3 
coaches will review and emphasize the ideal BLT protocol as needed in subsequent adherence 
promotion calls.  
 
Duration of BLT.  Both Arms 2 and 3 materials will recomme nd a minimum 4-weeks of acute daily BLT 
sessions to achieve and consolidate maximum benefit. If by week 4 an acute response of at least 2 
weeks with few or no depressive symptoms has not been achieved, participants will be encouraged to 
continue with daily sessions with th e goal of maximizing a tolerable but still therapeutic level of BLT 
exposure. Beyond the written best pr actices for both Arms 2 and 3, pho ne coaches will work with Arm 3 
participants to explore possible contributing factors and possible solutions. For example, if incomplete 
BLT adherence is identified, coaches will work wi th participants to address barriers (discomfort, 
scheduling, competing demands, low motivation) to maximize adherence to the ideal protocol. Once 
depression response is obtained and sustained for at least 2 weeks, written materials (and coaches in 
Arm 3) will encourage participants to continue wi th a longer-term but less intense maintenance period 
to sustain BLT benefits, in which the duration and/or frequency of light exposures can be reduced. Written materials (and coaches in Arm 3) encourage part icipants to monitor for a return of depressive 
symptoms, and to take steps should that occur;  e.g., restart or increase frequency of BLT. 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 10 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017  
Adherence promotion (AP) + Motivational Interviewing (MI).  This Arm 3 component will focus on 
monitoring appropriate light box use and guiding particip ants back to this protocol when there is drift. 
Ideally, coaches will make an initial check-in phone  contact within 72 hours of enrollment, encourage 
purchase of light box, assist with compensation for light box purchase, and review educational material 
about the ideal use of BLT. Coaches will make additi onal AP+MI contacts by phone after 1 week of BLT 
use. For adherent participants who are using BLT co nsistent with the ideal protocol, coaches will make 
one more call in week 3 or 4 to confirm ongoing adhe rence and to assist participants with the shift to 
the maintenance phase. For participants who are only  partially or weakly adherent, coaches will make 
up to 6 additional brief contacts to assist, promote use, and help overcome barriers or low motivation to 
use BLT according to the ideal protocol. In all case s, coaches will employ standardized problem-solving 
techniques to identify the issue(s), barriers, and facili tators for ideal BLT use, an d assist participants in 
brainstorming possible solutions. Coaches will also moni tor for relapse to depression episode, with plan 
to restart BLT or increase sessi on duration/frequency as needed. 
If motivation to adhere to the BLT protocol is la cking, coaches will employ brief MI. Many of our 
behavioral health and assessment (BAC) staff have  delivered MI and adherence promotion protocols 
similar to this for previous trials. While BAC staff have prior MI experience, they will also attend MI 
workshops offered by KPNW and will then be trained by  senior staff to address MI specifically for BLT 
use. We have engaged a MI fidelity expert, Dr. Ernst to rate training cases and ongoing calls to confirm 
initial and ongoing coach MI fidelity. During start- up each coach w ill conduct several simulated BLT 
coaching calls; Dr Ernst will rate audio recordings of these simulations for MI quality/adherence. Staff 
who are rated 4 or higher on four global components of MI quality/adherence for these initial simulations will be cleared to conduct study MI with  enrolled participants. We will also conduct ongoing 
MI fidelity ratings for study Arm 3 phone coach contac ts. Dr. Ernst will conduct MI fidelity reviews of a 
random 10% selection of these Arm 3 coaching calls (b locked by coach, and by early/late session). 
Additionally, as Dr. Ernst reviews MI sessions she will also complete fidelity checklists (to be created and 
submitted in a subsequent modification) of BLT he alth education review/pra ctice and problem solving 
that coaches may deliver to promote ideal BLT se ssions (e.g., did coach review whether daily BLT 
sessions occurred? If not, were barriers identified  and possible solutions ex plored?). Dr Ernst’s MI 
fidelity and BLT education ratings will be used as process variables, but also to provide feedback to 
coaches during supervision meetings. 
Based on prior coaching experiences, ~10% of individuals randomized to Arm 3 will likely not 
engage with coaches, despite indicating a previous  willingness to do so. Coaches attempt to reach all 
Arm 3 participants, but after 3 failed outreach attempts  coaches will send a final “contact us if you wish” 
email or letter.  
 Assessments 
We will ask participants to complete baseline an d follow-up surveys using the REDCap online survey 
system; those who do not complete the online survey s after 3 prompts will be called by interviewers 
and verbally administered the same scales. Assessm ents consist of the baseline assessment; a post-
acute treatment assessment at 2 months after enro llment; and follow-up assessments at month 4 and 
month 6, for a total of 4 data points over the course  of six months. Interviewers will be blinded to study 
condition.  
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 11 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 Demographics data will be collected on all potent ial participants during the screening process and/or 
baseline assessment and will include race, ethnicity, sex assigned at birth, gender identity, relationship 
status, employment status, and education and income information.  
 
Survey Measures 
All measures will be administered at the baseline assessment and all follow-up assessments unless otherwise indicated. The surveys will include questions from the following measures, either in part or in 
their entirety: Patient Health Questionnaire–9 (PHQ-9);  Seasonal Pattern As sessment Questionnaire 
(SPAQ); Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomato logy, self-report (QIDS-SR ); Geriatric Depression 
Scale (GDS); the abbreviated  self-report Columbia Suicide Severity  Rating Scale (C-SSRS); Altman Self-
Rating Mania Scale (ASRM); Generalized Anxiety Di sorder-7 (GAD-7); Brief Medication Questionnaire 
(BMQ); Short Form 6 Dimension (SF-6D); Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI); Reduced Version of the 
Morningness-Eveningness Questionnair e (rMEQ); Split Week Self-Assessm ent of Sleep Survey (SASS-Y); 
Readiness Ruler (RR);  
 
Non-Standardized Measures to be collected include:  
Alternative depression treatments.  We will ask participants whethe r they are currently using, or 
intend to use, any “alternative” treatments for depression such as BLT (including whether light 
box purchase was new or had existing), yoga, Tai Chi, mood-enhancing diets (e.g., 
Mediterranean Diet), exercise, omega-3 fatty acids, St John’s wort, and others.   
Satisfaction and Feedback.  At the 2-month follow-up assessment, we will ask participants in 
Arms 2 and 3 about their experience as a participant in this study.  
Actigraphy 
Following the baseline and 2-month follow-up assessmen ts, participants will be mailed an actigraphy 
device to wear for 10 days or until the battery dies and then return in supplied postage-paid envelope. 
We will download/score actigraphy data for sleep and physical activity using ActiLife software, then 
reset the actigraphy device and reuse it again with additional participants.  
 
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) 
Up to 4 days per week during the 9-week acute inte rvention phase (baseline to 2-month follow-up), and 
twice weekly thereafter to 6 months, all participants will be sent text and/or email links to a brief EMA 
REDCap survey about mood and sleep in the last 24 ho urs. For participants in Arms 2 and 3, the EMA 
survey will also include brief questions about BLT adherence.  Electronic Health Record (EHR) Data Abstraction 
EHR-Derived Comorbidity Index (EHR-CI).  Medical comorbidity is a risk factor for mental health 
disorders. We will use an EHR calculated CI us ing medical diagnoses and prescription dispensing 
data.   
 
TAU health care utilization.  We will extract health care utiliz ation data from the EHR to examine 
other outcomes (e.g., antidepressant prescription  fills, ED visits). Another moderator category 
will be clinical/demographic EHR factors (e.g.,  comorbidities; age, ethnicity/race, sex; 
pharmacotherapy use). 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 12 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017  
Formative Qualitative Exit Interviews  
We will not conduct formal qualitative interviews and an alysis, but we will conduct formative qualitative 
interviews with a subset of participants who represent se veral ‘types:’ those who (a) were consistently 
adherent with study tasks such as surveys; (b) rapi dly dropped out of study tasks or withdrew from the 
study; and among participants in active intervention  Arms 2 and 3, (c) those who reported difficulties 
with BLT such as side effects, low motivation, and/ or lack of benefit; and (d) those who appeared to 
tolerate BLT well and had high adherence to the ideal protocol. We aim to conduct interviews with 3 to 
4 participants of each type, for a total of 12 to 16 qualitative interviews. These brief interviews will 
include questions about the participant’s experiences in the study, pros and cons, feedback on how to 
improve the study and the BLT protocol, ease of us e or barriers, and any unanticipated problems or 
benefits.  We will also conduct surveys with 6 to 10 representa tive healthcare providers whose patients enrolled 
in the study, asking about positive and negative impact s of BLT use, coordination with other treatments, 
and burden on providers. 
 
Formative Qualitative Interview Recruitment . Participants will be selected for qualitative interview 
recruitment based on their pattern of survey comple tion, survey responses, and/or interactions with 
study staff. These participants will be sent the “Qua litative Interview Email” and/or will be invited to 
participate in the qualitative interview during contact with study staff for other study activities. After the 
initial email outreach, study staff will make a maxi mum of two follow up contact attempts by phone, 
text, or email, unless otherwise requested by partic ipants. For participants wishing to withdraw or 
already withdrawn, any communication regard ing the qualitative interview will include 
acknowledgement of study withdrawal and emphasize th at participants are not being asked to join the 
study again. Participants who with drew their HIPAA authorization or who expressed a desire to not be 
contacted again about this study will not be cont acted/recruited for these formative qualitative 
interviews.  Several Kaiser Permanente healthcare providers whos e patients enroll in the study will be invited to 
complete a brief survey via HealthConnect. The surv ey invitation will include a link to the provider 
survey instrument in REDCap. No incent ive will be provided for this survey. 
 
The estimated date for study completion is May 2024. 
 
Participant Withdrawal 
Participation in this study is purely voluntary. Participants are free to  withdraw from this study at any 
time and will be removed from the study if requested. Participants who wish to withdraw will be offered 
the option to withdraw from intervention but continue with the follow up assessments. Subsequent contact with those who elect to continue with the follow up assessments will be for assessment 
purposes only. Participants will also be informed that  should they choose not to continue to participate 
that their Kaiser Permanente healthcare will not be jeopardized.  
Participants may be formally withdrawn from the study by the PI and study team if they (a) 
develop a condition that meets criteria for exclusion (e .g., psychosis) or (b) show evidence of functional 
deterioration that clinically indicates alternate servic es incompatible with continued participation (e.g., 
inpatient hospitalization). If a participant is withdraw n from the study, they will be provided information 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 13 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 on access to Kaiser Permanente reso urces at the appropriate level of ca re for their clinical presentation. 
Participants who are removed will be encouraged to  continue participating in the remainder of the 
follow-up assessments as is compatib le with their clinical status.  
 In the event of a potential study-initiated termination, the PI and the relevant study team members will consult. If merited, we will seek consultation with the IRB. The individual circumstances 
for termination may be variable and unique, so we are not pre-specifying the possible triggers and 
outcomes. After consultation with the IRB, the study team, and other inputs as needed (e.g., the participant's KP care team), the PI will decide fina l termination and write a corresponding justification. 
The terminated participant will be contacted to ex plain the outcomes and reasons for it. No further 
study procedures or events will be schedul ed or delivered for that participant. 
 
a. Data Analysis  
Preliminary data evaluation.  Before any analyses, we will conduct procedures to assess data quality and 
completeness and will evaluate missing data patterns . To maximize analytic team efficiency, we will 
audit data from the initiation of data collection. Careful descriptive analyses (e.g., mean, SD, range, 
skewness) will be conducted for all st udy variables of interest. We will evaluate distributions to ensure 
that they meet the assumptions of planned analyses (below), including the detection of outliers (another potential indicator of entry error).   Management of missing data . To carry out the planned ITT anal yses, we use multiple imputation 
methodology to account for missing data. These meth ods preserve the correlational structure among 
the study measures and incorporates the uncertainty inherent in replacing missing values, and as with 
other imputation procedures, they assume data ar e “missing at random” (MAR). We will create 10 
imputed datasets, repeating outcome analyses across each replicate, and will use Rubin’s rules to 
produce adjusted estimates and statistics from which inferences will be drawn. 
 
Analysis of primary outcome . For our PHQ-9 primary outcome, we will test whether there are 
differences in score trajectories across time betwee n arms with two-level hierarchical linear models 
(HLMs) in a growth curve framework. The first leve l of the model will includ e time as a predictor, 
modeling within-person variation. The second leve l will include a dummy variable for arm (e.g., 
1=TAU+BLT+AP or TAU+BLT, 0=TAU) as the predic tor variable for both the random effects of the 
intercept and slope for time. A significant coefficient for arm on the time slope would indicate that there are different trajectories across time for BLT arms versus TAU. 
We will probe any significant arm x time interact ions by graphing the simple-effects equations 
to determine whether the observed patt ern is consistent with hypotheses.  
 Moderation and mediation . In addition to primary outcome analyses we will conduct exploratory 
analyses of moderation using variables identified through previous research and clinical expertise, 
specifically indication of pharmacotherapy use (1 =yes, 0=no), age (continuous), gender (1=female, 
0=male), race and ethnicity (1=racial/ethnic minority, 0=non-Hispanic white), baseline PHQ-9 
(1=clinically elevated, 0=below clinical range), and EHR indication of mental health comorbidities such as 
eating disorders, anxiety (1=comorbidity, 0=no co morbidity). Moderation will be indicated by a 
significant time x arm x moderator interaction in HLM. 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 14 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 We will conduct exploratory analyses of the BLT mediation pathway as the extent to which the 
relation between BLT and outcomes is mediated by  changes in participants’ 1) sleep (SASS-Y and 
actigraphy, and PSQI subjective sleep quality), 2) total physical activity, and 3) circadian timing and 
chronotype. For example, to evaluate the mediating effect of PSQI sleep quality we will regress post-
acute treatment PSQI on baseline PSQI and a randomization condition indicator; and we will regress 
follow-up PHQ-9 at post-acute treatment PSQI and a randomization condition indicator. Using the 
product coefficients mediation approach, we will use the resulting regression coefficients and standard 
errors (SEs) to estimate the indirect  effect. Because SEs of the products of regression coefficients are not 
normal, we will use bias-corrected bootstrapping to es timate the SEs for the indirect effect. We will use 
a similar approach for the MI pathway to test the me diating effect of particip ants’ increased readiness 
to change on BLT adherence. 
 Analysis of secondary outcomes . Continuous measures over time will be modeled with HLM methods 
described above. Health service use can be categorized into binary (e.g., met threshold for medication possession ratio, had > 1 hospitalization) and count outc omes (e.g., N of ED visits, primary care visits). 
Binary outcomes will be modeled with multivariable logistic regression, and the coefficient of study arm 
membership (e.g, 0=TAU, 1= TAU+BLT+AP & TAU+BLT)  is the coefficient of primary interest. Count 
outcomes are modeled with either multivariable Poisson or negative binomial regression depending on which yields optional fit.  
BLT process outcomes . To examine the effects of adherence an d MI elements, we will contrast Arms 2 
vs. 3 across months 2, 4, and 6, comparing: (a) % cumulative light box purchase; (b) % cumulative 
compensation for light box purchase; and (c) mean EMA-adherence (aka, dose). We will conduct these 
analyses using methods similar to those for secondary  outcomes; however, the analysis sample will be 
restricted to Arms 2 and 3. We will describe similar metrics in the TAU condition (Arm 1). 
 
Economic analysis . The future full trial will conduct a cost -effectiveness analysis (CEA) of the BLT 
intervention relative to TAU to inform the merits and costs of implementing such a program. In this pilot 
we will conduct both the relevant da ta collection and the economic an alyses to prepare for this. Two 
major CEA cost components include 1) TAU costs rela ted underlie all study arms, and 2) costs of the BLT 
intervention, including the equipment but also phone coach staff time. This pilot study provides the 
opportunity for our research team to hone the data  collection process and measurement of these cost 
components, building on our several previous economic analyses conducted in concert with our mental 
health RCTs. While this pilot is underpowered to detect significant difference in costs between study 
conditions, we will be able to richly describe and ca tegorize TAU services unde rlying each condition. In 
addition, Dr. Dickerson will lead efforts to estimate  the total cost of the intervention by developing a 
data collection tool for phone coaches and research  staff to track time used to the deliver the 
interventions. He will also periodically meet with  those who are providing data to assess whether the 
tools are meeting their needs and if the data are trul y capturing the resource intensity needed to deliver 
the protocol. This tool will be submitted in a subsequent modification. 
 Power analysis, sample size . The R34 pilot funding cap limits us to a feasibility sample that is insufficient 
for an adequately powered test of the hypothesis. None theless, we provide an estimate of the statistical 
power obtained from this sample of a minimum of 90 participants ( up to 100 ppts if recruitment success 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 15 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 allows). Meta-analyses suggest an overall effect size  for BLT of d=0.84. We conservatively estimate the 
effect size likely to be obtained in this pilot trial as lower than report ed in meta-analyses because this is 
a real-world effectiveness population; even with Ar m 3 adherence promotion BLT adherence is likely to 
be lower than in efficacy trials, leading to lower clin ical benefit. Assuming a retained sample size of N=81 
at the final 6-month assessment, we conducted po wer analysis for the HLM of the primary outcome 
(using SAS version 9.4) to determine the minimum detectable effect size. At a two-tailed alpha level of 
0.05 and conservatively assuming an autocorrelation of 0.70, we would have 80% power to detect a 
Cohen’s d for the time by arm effect as small as 0. 39 for the contrast between active intervention arms 
(Arms 2 and 3) and TAU, and as small as 0.55 for co ntrasts between individual arms; both estimates are 
medium effects. This pilot study is not powered to  evaluate mediation, but we will conduct mediation 
analyses as if this were the full-powered R01 confirma tory trial to test feasibility of the analytic methods 
and to provide informative estimates of potential me diators. We estimate that we will have 80% power 
using a 95% bias-corrected confidence interval to iden tify effect sizes of 0.43 or larger for the pathways 
between randomization status to mediator, and medi ator to outcome (BLT adherence for MI pathway, 
and PHQ-9 for BLT pathway); and we will be able to iden tify direct and indirect effects of 0.19 or larger, 
which correspond to a small-medium effect. 
 Use of pilot results to estimate power for the future full trial.  Regardless of the between-condition effect 
size that we observe in this pilot, we will heed the cautions that have been raised about using pilot study 
results to estimate effect for full trial power/samp le calculations. We will consider between-condition 
effect size (ES) results highly te ntative given the small pilot sample and will use it only with wide 
confidence intervals when employing it to estimate power for the future full pragmatic trial. For example, if we obtain an effect size of d=0.45, we will generate a power/sample size matrix with estimated effects of 0.35, 0.40, 0. 45, 0.50—all ranging around the observed effect from this pilot, but 
trending to somewhat smaller and more conservative effects. 
 
b. Sharing of Results with Subjects 
Immediate, individual level results will not be shar ed with participants. However, approximately 6 
months after the study end we will send a brief su mmary of the results to participants via email 
and/or US post. 
 
c. Data and/or Specimen Banking 
Data collected for this research will not be used  for future unspecific re search. No specimens are 
collected in this study. 
 
7. Privacy, Confidentiality and Data Security  
Additional Information about Sensitive Data 
As described previously, mental health diagnoses an d/or records will be collect ed (e.g., prescription 
dispensing data and health care utilization). These data are necessary to identify potentially eligible 
participants in the recruitment phase and to exam ine possible moderators of effects during analysis. 
 
Describe the plan for storage of data and/or specimens. 
Data collected for all participants will be kept strictly  confidential, except as may be required in the case 
of a psychiatric or medical crisis (reporting abuse, immi nent danger to self or others). All research files 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 16 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 are kept on a secure server that uses multiple layers  of data protection, and all research personnel sign a 
confidentiality agreement and receiv e human subjects protection training. These data are only used for 
the purpose of recruitment and for contacting st udy participants during the course of the study.  
 Data from participants who do not qualify for partic ipation will be collected, including the reasons why 
participants did not qualify, and basic demographics from the EHR that are associated with the case-
finding program (e.g., age, gender, gender minority st atus, race, ethnicity). This data will be used to 
enhance recruitment efforts in planned randomized control trial proposals, by permitting us to 
understand whether our study and/or recruitment me thods may be less often acceptable to certain 
demographic groups. The data will be re tained no longer than three years. 
 
A unique study identifier will be assigned to each  study participant and us ed to code the data.  
 Paper Data:  We do not plan to utilize any hard copies of da ta. However, if it is ne cessary to collect hard 
copies (e.g., REDCap is unavailable), ha rd copies of data will be kept in a locked office at KP CHR to which 
only research staff has access. Hard copies of paper data will be stored at any location where staff are 
working remotely. Data for all participants will be ke pt strictly confidential, except as mandated by law. 
All research files are kept in locked file  cabinets or in a locked file room.  
 Collection of data from subjects electronically 
Electronic data will either be (a) stored on the study file service, which is accessible only to study staff 
who have been given access by the project manager or the principal investigator, or (b) stored in 
REDCap. Assessment and intervention data will be co llected via REDCap. An email containing a unique 
survey link will be sent to participants or data will  be directly entered into REDCap by study assessment 
staff. Within REDCap data collectio n forms, participants will be identified by a study ID only. 
 
Recordings:  Recordings of intervention contacts with particip ants will be stored on a secure file server at 
CHR, using the study ID for identification. These recordings will be used for training and quality 
assurance purposes only. A select sample of the reco rdings will be securely transferred to our research 
collaborator, Dr. Denise Ernst, via the SFT site for quality assurance purposes. Dr. Ernst will access the 
SFT website through a uniquely assigned account and down load the files to a secure location on their 
network. 
 Destruction of Identifiers:  Once the study is completed, identifiable information will be removed from 
the study tracking system and stored in the CHR secu re electronic data storag e system until such time 
that the PI no longer needs the data. At that time , the data will be professionally erased following 
standard procedures in place at that time. Identifiab le information in paper form will be stored in the 
secure off site storage area until the PI no longer needs the data at which time it will be returned to the CHR and sent to be shredded. 
 
Does this study involve the disclo sure of PHI to a collaborator? 
 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 17 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 Dr. Denise Ernst . A select sample of phone coaching call recordings will be securely transferred to our 
research collaborator, Dr. Ernst, vi a Secure File Transfer for quality assurance purposes. Dr. Ernst will 
access the SFT website through a uniquely assigned accoun t and download the files to a secure location 
on their network. While the recording files will be la beled with study ID and study staff will not solicit 
PHI, it is always possible that a participant will shar e a name or other unique identifier during a recorded 
phone coaching call.  
 National Database for Autism Research (NDAR).  This study is subject to NIH policies on data banking 
with NDAR. We will submit data on study participan ts to NDAR via the National Institute of Mental 
Health Data Archive system. Data will be de-ident ified prior to upload to the NDA. However, there 
remains the possibility of deductive disclosure of participants with unusual characteristics. 
  Data Commitments (data and specimen sharing) 
FROM KPNW 
Recipient and 
Description of Materials Identifiers* 
(note w/an X) Health Information** 
(note w/an X) HIPAA Documentation 
(see policy NWRC.PRIV.04 ) 
Dr. Denise Ernst 
Phone coaching call 
recordings labeled with 
study ID will be shared via 
SFT. Study staff will not 
solicit PHI during 
recordings, but it is 
possible that a participant 
will share a name or other 
unique identifier during a 
recording.  __Fully Identifiable 
__Limited Data Set 
X__De-Identified 
__Aggregate __Yes 
_X_No __Signed Authorization 
__Waiver of Authorization 
__Limited Data Set only (DUA       
Required) 
__De-Identified or Aggregate Data 
_X_N/A, No Health Information 
National Database for 
Autism Research (NDAR) 
We will share de-
identified participant 
data with the National 
Institute of Mental 
Health Data Archive 
(NDA) as required by the 
NOA. __Fully Identifiable 
__Limited Data Set 
_X_De-Identified 
__Aggregate __Yes 
X__No __Signed Authorization 
__Waiver of Authorization 
__Limited Data Set only (DUA       
Required) 
__De-Identified or Aggregate Data 
X__N/A, No Health Information 
 
 
8. Provisions to Monitor Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 18 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 Dr. Clarke will assume responsibility for and oversee patient safety on the overall project. Drs. Clarke 
and Dickerson will liaise with a data safety monitori ng board (DSMB), which will have overall review 
responsibility for patient safety and serve as a report ing body to the NIMH and study IRB. The DSMB will 
consist of 3 TBN members: a community mental health  advocate, a biostatistician, and another clinical 
or research mental health expert.  
The DSMB will conduct twice-yearly reviews to determine whether patient safety has been 
adequately safeguarded. The DSMB members, in cons ultation with Dr. Clarke, are empowered to take 
whatever immediate action is necessary to safegua rd the welfare of individual patients. The DSMB 
group will also examine adverse events (AEs) annually,  and serious adverse events (SAEs) as they occur 
(see reporting times below). Safety information will  be collected at each assessment timepoint as 
described previously in section 6 under “Monitoring for Safety”. 
Dr. Dickerson will generate quarterly interim re ports for the DSMB as well as summary 6-month 
reports. These interim analyses will be conducted for safety outcomes (suicidal behavior, other crises, 
study terminations, all AEs, SAEs, other events) and data quality indicators (recruitment, retention, 
instrument reliability, intervention fidelity), but no t routinely for clinical e ffectiveness or economic 
outcomes. Study conditions will be masked (e.g., Red, Green, Blue arms) in thes e safety and data quality 
reports but the DSMB can request unblinding at its di scretion should a safety or data quality concern 
arise.  
The study team will notify the IRB and the DSMB (a nd as required, the NIMH Project Officer) of any 
clinically significant new emergent issues detected in this study, even if seemingly unrelated to the 
study, BLT or procedures (e.g., new diagnosis of ca ncer). We will follow KPNW IRB reporting dates for 
DSMB notification. In many cases,  because the study does not routinely assess participants for new 
emergent issues that are not anticipated as a possible ri sk (see list of expected cl inical issues in section 6 
under “Monitoring for Safety”), these incidental diag noses/conditions will be detected either through 
spontaneous patient report or review of the electronic health record (EHR). Given that all participants 
are members of the Kaiser Permanente health or ganization, in the case of new EHR-recorded 
diagnoses/conditions this means that the usual care health providers (primary care providers, mental 
health and other specialists) will already know abou t and will be addressing these conditions/diagnoses.  
Given the enrolled population will have been pre-iden tified by virtue of EHR depression clinical 
diagnosis or elevated PHQ-9, none of the clinical events summarized previously (worsening depression, 
suicide/self-harm, new comorbidity, Bipolar Disorder) are considered ‘unexpected.’ In other words, they 
are not unusual given the high comorbidity of depression  with other mental disorders generally. Suicide, 
self-harm, anxiety, substance misuse and BD are part icularly possible given the case-selection for active 
depression disorder and/or symptomatology. In th is study, the most likely anticipated event possibly 
related to research would be the precipitation of BD  and any variant on exposure to BLT. We will make 
appropriate clinical referrals to emergency or no n-emergency services, and/or communicate with TAU 
providers as warranted – and as summarized previously. 
  
9. Risks and Benefits  
a. Risks to Subjects 
The assessments and treatments in this study pose no greater risk than standard treatment or 
therapy, or clinical interviews. These risks include: 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 19 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 1. The potential for an unintended breach of co nfidentiality. We will be in touch with 
participants by email and text message to sche dule study events or to remind them about 
surveys. Any confidential information sent through the Internet or by text message has a small risk of being read by someone other than the person it was sent to. As described in the 
data handling section above, we will store a ll information in locked  cabinets, on password 
protected servers, or within REDCap (a HIPAA-compliant, web-based application for data 
capture).  
2. The possibility of distress in association with  addressing emotional difficulties during the 
completion of surveys or study activities. Participants are free to refuse to answer any questions and will be reminded of this pr ior to addressing sensitive subjects.  
3. Engaging in bright light therapy may have risks for individuals with vulnerability to 
phototoxicity, photosensitive skin, or who are ta king a photosensitizing medication or herb. 
Our EHR case-finding program will exclude patients with active EHR diagnoses and 
prescriptions representing any of the few contra indications for BLT. We will also ask about 
these diagnoses and conditions during the scre ening survey to further exclude those with 
these potential contraindications. 
4. There is a small risk of manic activation from BL T light exposure. This risk is inherent in the 
general population and could occur whether or not individuals were enrolled in the study. 
Our EHR case-finding program will exclude patien ts with any variation of bipolar disorder 
recorded in the EHR. We will also screen for emerging symptoms of mania during the 
screening survey and follow-ups. We will inform the TAU providers of our participants that 
their patients are participating in this study, which may involve self-administration of BLT.  
If study staff suspects a participant is in danger or  unsafe, they will immediately report this to a 
licensed study team member and di scuss possible strategies for re sponding (see DSMP section for 
more details).  
Some participants may become pregnant duri ng the study. However, nothing in the study 
procedures or interventions is expected to have  any adverse impact on the mother or child.  
 
b. Potential Benefits to Subjects 
The study treatment participants may utilize as a result of partic ipating in this study may help 
improve their well-being and functioning and reduce mental health problems. Additionally, 
participants often feel good that participating in research may help other people.  
 
10. Economic Burden to Subjects  
There are no costs to participants for study assessm ents or study phone coaching activities. However, 
participants may incur the follo wing costs during participation: 
 Usual care underlies all three arms of the study, and some of that usual care may be directed at 
depression. Participants may incur costs for us ual care; e.g., co-pays; paying for treatment, 
therapies, or other interventions. However, the de livery of these usual care services will be at 
the discretion of the KP provider s, or community providers for us ual care services participants 
may receive outside of KP.  
 Participants in study arms 2 and 3 will be enco uraged, but not required, to purchase a light box 
with an estimated cost of $70 to  $200 depending on the model. All of these participants will be 
provided with written informatio n about obtaining compensation (up to $80 in Fred Meyer gift 
 
Protocol Template 
(Use with Core Data Form)  Form  
NCRSP HRP FORM KP-202, Version 1.1  
     KP NW  Implementation Date: 0 5/09/2019  
Page 20 of 20 
 
NCRSP PO 12/01/2017 cards) for this purchase through the study. In Ar m 3, a study coach will guide participants to 
obtain compensation. Participants will be resp onsible for any purchase price greater than $80. 
The study light box compensation process is modeled to simulate the KP durable medical 
equipment (DME) benefit, which does not currently cover LBs for non-SAD depression. Preliminary conversations with the DME decision group seem to indicate willingness to cover 
LBs for non-SAD depression when a published meta -analysis determines that there is sufficient 
evidence of LB benefit for non-SAD depression. While there are individual studies showing LB benefit for non-SAD depression, this evidence does not quite meet the threshold for changing the DME benefit.  
Participants will be informed of these potential co sts in the consent information form and during the 
recruitment call with our staff.  
 
11. Compensation to Participants  
Participants will be provided with Amazon gift certif icate incentives for partic ipating in each assessment 
($25 for baseline, $25 for 2-month follow up, $30 fo r 4-month follow up, $40 for 6-month follow up). 
Participants are compensated for completing each as sessment, even if the participant chooses to not 
finish all portions of the surveys. Participants wh o complete the qualitative interview will be provided 
with a $20 Amazon gift certificate. Participants w ill be notified of the compensation details in the 
consent information sheet and during the recruitment call with our staff.  
 
12. Resources Available 
Not applicable.  
13. Additional Approvals 
Not applicable.  
14. Drugs or Devices 
a. Drug Studies 
Not applicable. 
 b. Device Studies: 
Not applicable.  
 
15. Multi-Site Research  
N/A  
16. Community-Based Participatory Research  
N/A 