BWH/MGH Human Subjects Research Application Form  Filename: Detailed Protocol 
Version 4: March 2 002   Page 1 PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL  
 
Title: Activating the hypoglossal motor nucleus using existing drugs for the treatment of 
obstructive sleep apnea  
 
Principal Investigator:  Luigi Taranto -Montemurro, MD  
 
Version Date:  Decem ber 6th, 2018  
 
I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
Obstructive sleep apnea ( OSA)  is a common sleep -related breathing disorder  associated with 
serious cardiovascular and metabolic diseases and  with important  consequences on the quality of 
life. It is characterized by repetitive collapse or ‘obstruction’ of the pharyngeal airway during 
sleep  resulting in a complete closure (apnea) or narrowing  (hypopnea) of the upper airway . The 
severity of the disease is measured as the frequency of obstructive events for each hou r of sleep 
(apnea -hypopnea index, AHI). When OSA is defined as an AHI ≥5 events per hour plus 
symptoms (eg, daytime sleepiness) or A HI ≥15 events per hour  with or without  symptoms , the 
estimated prevalence is approximately 15 percent in males and 5 percent in females1. 
 
Over the last decade research has show n that a number of pathogenic fa ctors, or traits, c ontribute 
to the development of OSA2-5. These include: 1) an anatomically small, collapsible upper airway; 
2) an oversensitive respiratory control system leading to ventilatory overshoots and undershoots, i.e., instability; 3) a loss of pharyngeal muscle tone or responsiveness during sleep; and 4) a low respiratory arousal threshold, i.e., prem ature arousal to respiratory stimuli.  
 Despite our improved understandi ng of the pathoge nesis of OSA, it has not led to improved 
therapy.  Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is still the only viable treatment for most patients, and it is usually e ffective because it mechanically splints the upper airway open.  The 
problem, however, is that many patients cannot use CPAP because they find it intolerable.  This 
represents a significant health concern, as OSA is known to cause a number of adverse 
cardiovascular
6-13, neurocognitive14, and daytime functioning15 consequences, making OSA a 
major health concern.  
 
In the presence of an anatomical predisposition  to airway collapse, the sleep -related withdrawal 
of motor output  from the hypoglossal motornucleus (HMN)  to the upper airway dilator muscles 
can cause the collapse of pharyngeal structures, with ensuing episodes of reduced ventilation, 
intermittent hypoxia, hype rcapnia, and arousals from sleep16. Loss of pharyngeal dilator muscle 
activation during sleep is central to the pathogenesis of OSA17. However, attempts to 
pharmacologically reverse pharyngeal hypotonia that occurs in sleeping humans have thus far been ineffective mostly because of the lack of agents that can activate receptors specific to the 
HMN  motor and pre -motor areas .  
 Our group has made significant headway in dealing with ventilatory control sensitivity .
18, 19  
While a host of oral devices and surgeries have been developed to address the anatomi cal 
predisposition to collapse , drugs that activate the pharyngeal muscles are needed.  
 Recent investigation based on gene expression in the HMN motor and pre -motor (pre -HMN) 
areas has shown that t here is  a significant unexplored potential in terms of testing  FDA- approved 
BWH/MGH Human Subjects Research Application Form  Filename: Detailed Protocol 
Version 4: March 2 002   Page 2 drugs that can specifically  target receptors that have preferential expression on the HMN and 
pre-HMN areas . These areas are part of a neural circuit  that is critical for OSA pathogenesis 
because they modulate the upper airway muscle activity during wakefulness and sleep20. There is 
now sufficient data to support a new approach to the development of a pharmacologic treatment 
for OSA, based on genome -wide analyses of the differential expression of druggable targets in 
the circuitry controlling motor  output to the upper airway musculature .    
 
Our group recently discovered that the combination of atomoxetine (a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor) and oxybutynin (an anticholinergic) reduced OSA severity by 63% in a group of 20 
unselected patients. The p utative mechanism of action was an increase in genioglossus muscle 
responsiveness during sleep by ~3 fold. Based on animal research conducted in Richard Horner’s 
lab in Toronto, norepinephrine is the main neurochemical responsible for upper airway muscles 
hypotonia during NREM sleep while acetylcholine, through the muscarinic receptors mediate the 
REM -related atonia in the same muscles.  The analysis of the effect of the drugs taken alone 
revealed that atomoxetine was able to increase the ventilation during sleep compared to placebo 
but the patients had frequent respiratory and spontaneous arousal s from sleep,  the sleep quality 
was compromised  and the patients experienced still a high number of hypopneas . Oxybutynin 
taken alone had only a minor effect  in impr oving ventilation during sleep, however when 
administered with atomoxetine, it had the effect of consolidating sleep by i ncreasing  sleep 
efficiency, sleep duration and sleep architecture. Based on these findings, we have reasons to believe that oxybutynin could be substituted (in the combination with atomoxetine) with a non-myorelaxing hypnotic free from anticholinergic side effects such as zolpidem, trazodone or gabapentin.          
 II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 AIM 1. To determine the effect of  several  FDA- approved drug s administered alone or in 
combination on OSA severity. The drugs tested in this protocol have been selected because of their potential to increase the upper airway muscle activity during sleep by specifically stimulating the HMN and/or the pre -HMN areas i n the brainstem.  
 Specifically, we will te st this hypothesis by assessing:   
 1. The effect of lorcaserin  on OSA severity  (LTM1201L) . Lorcaserin is a  weight -loss 
drug acting specifically as an agonist of 5 -HT 2C, a receptor  expressed in the pre -HMN  area 
twice as much as  the rest of the brain . Previous data collected in  an animal model showed 
that the stimulation of the receptor 5 -HT 2C with the agonist 2,5-dimethoxy -4-
iodoaminophentamine  increased genioglossus activity during sleep 8 -fold compared to 
placebo , and  it also  reduced the upper airway collapsibility
21.  
 2. The effect of the combination of lorcaserin  and cholecalciferol  on OSA severity  
(LTM1201LD) . Cholecalciferol is an agonist of the vitamin D receptor , which is expressed 
on HMN neurons >  4 times than on other neurons in the brain. Therefore, the vitamin D 
receptor is highly specific to the HMN. There are no studies assessing the effect of v itamin D 
administration on OSA severit y but several protocols have reported an association between 
the presence of  OSA and vitamin D deficiency
22. 
 3. The effect of the combination of lorcaserin  and nabilone  on OSA severity  
(LTM1201LN) . Nabilone is a cannabinoid 1 and cannabinoid 2 (CB1/CB2) receptor agonist  
approved for the treatment of refractory nausea and vomiting associated with cancer 
BWH/MGH Human Subjects Research Application Form  Filename: Detailed Protocol 
Version 4: March 2 002   Page 3 chemotherapy.  Cannabinoid 2 receptor is expressed 6.8 times more on the HMN compared to 
the rest of the brain. In an animal model, methanandamide – a CB2 agonist – increased tonic 
and phasic genioglossus activity23 during wakefulness. Furthermore, a recent clinical trial 
suggested cannabinoids  might be helpful in the treatment o f sleep apnea, although the 
administration of CB1/2 receptor agonist alone had only a modest effect on OSA severity24.  
 
4. The effect of the combination of lorcaserin  and buspirone  on OSA severity  
(LTM1201LB) . Buspirone is used in the treatment of generalized anxiety  disorder , and it 
increases  the firing in the locus ceruleus. The locus ceruleus is  an area of brain where 
norepinephrine cell bodies are found in high concentration, and it reduces the firing of 
serotonin- containing neurons . The net result of buspirone actions is that serotonergic activity 
is suppressed while noradrenergic cell firing is enhanced. The increase in norepinephrine in 
the brain is important for the HMN area, since it acts as an agonist fo r the alpha1 -adrenergic 
receptor, which is expressed 3.7 times more on the HMN area compared to the rest of the brain. A previous pilot study suggested a possible  modest effect of buspirone administered 
alone in the treatment of sleep apnea
25. 
 
 
 
 
III.   SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
In this  pilot study we will recruit a group of 10 OSA patients.  These individuals will be 
otherwise healthy (except for well -controlled hype rtension, diabetes , or hyperlipidemia) with 
no active medical problems and on no medication that could affect  respiration or muscle 
control.  Everyone  will be 18 -70 years of age.  Both men and women will have an apnea -
hypopnea index (AHI) >10 events/hr dur ing supine NREM sleep. These individuals will be 
recruited to encompass a large range of AHI’s (from 10 to >60/hour).   
Exclusion criteria:  
• Any medical condition other than well controlled hypertension and mild diabetes .  
Patients with diabetes will be enr olled only if they are treated with one oral 
hypoglycemic drug. 
• Any medication known to influence breathing, sleep/arousal , or muscle physiology.  
• Claustrophobia . 
• Inability to sleep supine.  
• Allergy to lorcaserin , vitamin D analogues,  nabilone , or buspirone . 
• History of kidney stones , hypercalcemia, primary hyperparathyroidism, sarcoidosis, 
hypervitaminosis D, which can be exacerbated by cholecalciferol . 
• Individuals with underlying cardiac disease, such as arrhythmias.  
• Individuals taking psychiatric medications, such as an MAO- I, SSRI or SNRI , or any 
of the studied medications for medical care.  
• For women: Pregnancy.  
• Pulmonary hypertension 
• Severe OSA with a mean SaO2 lower than 88%  
 
Equal number of males and females will be recruited. We will consider all applicants regardless of sex, race, color, creed, or national origin. 
 
BWH/MGH Human Subjects Research Application Form  Filename: Detailed Protocol 
Version 4: March 2 002   Page 4 IV.   SUBJECT ENROLLMENT 
 
Men and women with OSA will be recruited in the sleep disordered clinic of BWH and BFH through advertisement  flyers . The patients who showed interest in the research wil l contact us 
after talking to their physician  in the clinic . 
 Study staff may contact th e patient in writing initially and allow the patient to make the first 
contact if they are interested. Study staff may ask a physician colleague or research nurse to initially explain the study or to re -contact the potential subject after the Investigator has 
presented the study. Study staff may offer patients the opportunit y to take home the Consent 
Form  and call back if they wish to participate. Study staff will recommend that the patient 
discuss participation with other health care providers.  Subjects from our existing database of OSA patients who previously took part to similar research studies and showed int erest in performing more  tests will also  be contacted by ou r study 
coordinator .  
 Subjects also may be recruited through social media such as Facebook , and bulletin 
advertisements. Should the subject be interested in the study, they can call the study physician or coordinator to inquire about study participation.  
  
On the phone, s ubjects will be given a thorough review of the risks, discomforts, potential 
benefits (if any) and their expected involvement  using a prepared script approved by our 
Institutional Review Board .  Subjects will be given a copy of the inform ed consent and allowed a 
minimum of 24 hours to review the information and decide  on study participation.  During this 
time, the subject will have the opportunity to discuss the research with his/her primary care 
physician or clinician. The study investiga tors will be available to answer any questions should 
any arise. Informed consent will be obtained from all subjects by a licensed physician investigator prior to commencement of any study procedures.  
 
Inclusion and exclusion criteria will be carefully as sessed prior to enrollment. Assuming subjects 
meet the inclusion criteria, they will begin the protocol by scheduling their overnight studies in the clinical/physiology laborato ry. Subjects will be informed that they may withdraw from the 
study at any point, with  no impact on their ongoing care.  
 All email sent outside of the Partners firewall containing confidential information will be encrypted using "Send Secure" as per the Partners Policy.  Subjects may opt out of encrypted email communications if they  have been advised of the risks associated with unencrypted email, 
and they indicate a preference to receive unencrypted email despite the risks.  Consent to receive unencrypted email will be documented per the Partners Policy in the subject’s record.  We will discourage subjects from communicating about medical issues by non- secure email.  
 V.   STUDY PROCEDURES   
 
Protocol  
 After a medication and screening visit, five overnight sleep studies will be performed approximately 1 week apart in an open -label randomi zed design .  This study has been designed 
to quickly generate preliminary data for future studies, targeted to the most effective 
BWH/MGH Human Subjects Research Application Form  Filename: Detailed Protocol 
Version 4: March 2 002   Page 5 combinations of drugs that will be performed in a double -blinded fashion in a higher number of 
patients.  
 
Consent and medicati on visit  
 
The study will be explained in detail and an assessment will be made by an investigator to ensure 
the study procedures can be performed and written consent will be obtained. If the subject enrolled is a premenopausal woman, we will perform a urine pregnancy test at this visit.  
 
Sleep Studies  
 For each night, the s ubjects will arrive at the sleep laboratory at approximately 6:30pm. A 
physician will perform a history and physical examination. The placebo or drug(s) will be administered 30 minutes be fore lights out. The patients will perform five sleep studies in random 
order:  
 1) placebo night  
2) lorcaserin (15mg) night  – LTM1 201L  
3) lorcaserin (15mg) +cholecalciferol (1500 IU ) night  – LTM1 201LD  
4) lorcaserin+nabilone  (1mg)  night  – LTM1 201LN  
5) lorcaserin  (15mg) + buspirone  (20mg)  night – LTM1 201LB  
  
Measurements and equipment :  
 Subjects will be instrumented with standard pol ysomnography (PSG) recording sensors. Sleep 
stage and arousals will be measured with electrodes pasted on to the scalp, face, chin , and chest 
(EEG, EOG, EKG, chin EMG).  Paste-on EMG electrodes will be placed over the anterior 
tibialis muscle to detect leg movements. Respiratory effort belts will be placed around the chest and abdomen to measure breathing movements. Oxygen saturation will be measured continuously with a puls e oximetry probe placed on the fingertip. Snoring will be detected with a 
small microphone positioned over the suprasternal notch. Body position will be recorded with a sensor taped to the thoracic belt. Each of these devices is standard for diagnostic PSG  and should 
not be uncomfortable.  
 To measure airflow, a standard CPAP  mask will be placed over the nose and held in place with 
straps. The mask allows monitoring of breathing (inspiratory flow by pneumotachograph that  can 
be integrated to  yeld tidal volu me) and  expired carbon dioxide levels (PCO
2) using a calibrated 
infrared CO 2 analyzer (Capnograph/Oximeter Monitor).  
 After all the equipment is  in place, the patient will be asked to sleep in  the supine position for at 
least one half of the night  (4 hour s). As much data will be recorded from NREM and REM sleep 
as possible over the night. Following completion of the study, all equipment will be removed, and the subject will be able to sleep  in the laboratory free from equipment for the rest of the 
night. A lternatively, if the subject feels alert enough to leave, they may do so.  
 
Data Analysis : 
 Apneas, hypopneas, arousals , and sleep stages will be scored using standard American Academy 
of Sleep Medicine guidelines
26 by a registered polysomnographic technologist (RPSGT)  blinded 
BWH/MGH Human Subjects Research Application Form  Filename: Detailed Protocol 
Version 4: March 2 002   Page 6 to the treatment allocation. Hypopneas will be defined as r eduction in flow ≥30% from baseline, 
lasting at least 10 seconds and associated with an arousal from sleep or an oxyhemoglobin 
desaturation ≥ 3%.  
 If the data collected are considered insufficient, the subject may be asked to repeat the whole study or a pa rt of it.  
 
VI.   BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 In this protocol , we want to collect pilot data to measure the possible effect size of this 
intervention. Variables of interest will be compared using a  mixed effect model with p<0.05  
considered as statistically significant.  
 
VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS   
 We believe that the risks associated with participation in this study are small since the drugs are already FDA -approved for other purposes and we are only performing standard clinical sleep 
studies . All study procedures have been conducted in our laboratory without serious incident. 
Anticipated risks and discomforts are listed below:  
 1. The equipment used for assessing sleep (paste on electrodes) is standard and poses no 
risk. The electrodes may be mildly uncomfortable and could cause some sleep interruption. Thus , subjects may feel somewhat tired the day following this study.  
 
2. Lorcaserin  side effects include : headache (15% to 17%), hypoglycemia (diabetic 
patients 29%; symptomatic 7%; sev ere: 2%), back pain (6% to 12%), upper respiratory tract 
infection (14%), nasopharyngitis (11% to 13%), h ypertension (5%), peripheral edema (5%), 
decreased heart rate (less than 50 bpm: 4% to 5%), acquired valvular heart disease (3%), 
dizziness (7% to 9%),  fatigue (7%), anxiety (4%), insomnia (4%), depression (3%), stress 
(3%), cognitive dysfunction (2%), psychiatric disturbance (2%),  exacerbation of diabetes 
mellitus (3%), nausea (8% to 9%), diarrhea (7%), constipation (6%), xerostomia (5%), 
vomiting (4%) , gastroenteritis (3%), toothache (3%), decreased appetite (2%), urinary tract 
infection (7% to 9%), Decreased hemoglobin (10%), decreased neutrophils (6%), m uscle 
spasm (5%), musculoskeletal pain (2%), cough (4% to 8%), oropharyngeal pain (4%), sinus 
congestion (3%)  
 
3. Cholecalciferol : no adverse reactions are listed in the manufacturer's labeling.  High 
levels of Vitamin D may facilitate kidney stones formation  and atherosclerosis , secondary to 
hypercalcemia.  There are no known interactions  between  cholec alciferol and lorcaserin.   
 
4. Nabilone (Cesamet)  side effects include:  drowsiness (52% to 66%), dizziness (59%), 
vertigo (52% to 59%), euphoria (11% to 38%), ataxia (13% to 14%), depression (14%), lack 
of concentration (12%), sleep disorder (11%), x erosto mia (22% to 36%), visual disturbance 
(13%), hypotension (8%), d ysphoria (9%), headache (6% to 7%), sedation (3%), 
depersonalization (2%), disorientation (2%) . There are no known interactions  between  
nabilone and  lorcaserin.  
 
5. Buspirone  side effects incl ude: Dizziness (3% to 12%), Chest pain (≥1%), Drowsiness 
(10%), headache (6%), nervousness (5%), confusion (2%), excitement (2%), numbness (2%), 
outbursts of anger (2%), abnormal dreams (≥1%), ataxia (1%) paresthesia (1%), Diaphoresis 
BWH/MGH Human Subjects Research Application Form  Filename: Detailed Protocol 
Version 4: March 2 002   Page 7 (1%), skin rash (1%),  Nausea (8%), diarrhea (2%), sore throat (≥1%) Weakness (2%), 
musculoskeletal pain (1%), tremor (1%), Blurred vision (2%), Tinnitus (≥1%), Nasal 
congestion (≥1%) . There are no known interactions  between  buspirone and lorcaserin. Both 
these agents are serot onin modulators but the development of serotonin toxicity/serotonin 
syndrome is highly unlikely because buspirone inhibits the release of serotonin in the brain 
while lorcaserin specifically s timula tes a single serotonin receptor ( 5HT 2C ).   
 
VIII.  POTENTIAL BEN EFITS  
 
Although it is unlikely that there will be any direct physical benefit to the subjects from participating in this study, we will make known to each subject, if requested, some of the information we have gathered from this testing. This study provide s a unique opportunity to gain 
insight into the specific mechanisms by which these novel drugs may improve upper airway muscle function. The results may, in the future, lead to improved strategies for the treatment of sleep apnea. However, if previously unknown abnormalities of sleep and breathing are encountered, this information will be passed onto the subject. Results can be forwarded to the primary care physician or clinician at the request of the subject.  
 
IX.   MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 As these s tudies represent physiologic investigation and not clinical studies, no formal quality 
assurance programs will be implemented.  However, the ongoing results, problems, and limitations of the study will be presented on a regular basis to the investigators in the Division of Sleep Medicine. Also, any adverse events will be promptly reported to the Human Research Committee for review.   See attached Data and Safety Monitoring Plan.  
 We will also elect an independent safety monitor (ISM) to review the study and protocol on a quarterly basis .  The designated safety monitor is Robert Thomas, MD.  Dr. Thomas is an 
Associate Professor in Medicine at Harvard Medical School and practices out of Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital in Boston.  He specializes in Sleep Medicine (Circadian Rhythm Disorders, Complex Sleep Apnea, Insomnia, Restless Leg Syndrome, Periodic Limb Movements, and Narcolepsy).  He is not directly associated with our research lab.  He has no say over the design 
or implementation of these studies and will r eview the practices in an unbiased manner.  
  
 
X.   REFERENCES  
 
1. Peppard PE, Young T, Barnet JH, Palta M, Hagen EW, Hla KM. Increased prevalence of sleep -disordered breathing in adults. Am J Epidemiol . 2013;177:1006- 1014 
2. Eckert DJ, Whi te DP, Jordan AS, Malhotra A, Wellman A. Defining phenotypic causes 
of obstructive sleep apnea. Identification of novel therapeutic targets. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine . 2013;188:996- 1004 
3. Wellman A, Eckert DJ, Jordan AS, E dwards BA, Passaglia CL, Jackson AC, Gautam S, 
Owens RL, Malhotra A, White DP. A method for measuring and modeling the physiological traits causing obstructive sleep apnea. J Appl Physiol . 2011;110:1627- 1637 
4. Wellman A, Edwards BA, Sands SA, Owens RL, Ne mati S, Butler JP, Passaglia CL, 
Jackson AC, Malhotra A, White DP. A simplified method for determining phenotypic traits in patients with obstructive sleep apnea. J Appl Physiol . 2013 
BWH/MGH Human Subjects Research Application Form  Filename: Detailed Protocol 
Version 4: March 2 002   Page 8 5. Younes M. Contributions of upper airway mechanics and control mechani sms to severity 
of obstructive apnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2003;168:645- 658 
6. Somers VK, Dyken ME, Clary MP, Abboud FM. Sympathetic neural mechanisms in 
obstructive sleep apnea. J Clin Invest . 1995;96:1897- 1904 
7. Nieto FJ, Young TB, Lind BK, Shahar  E, Samet JM, Redline S, D'Agostino RB, 
Newman AB, Lebowitz MD, Pickering TG. Association of sleep- disordered breathing, 
sleep apnea, and hypertension in a large community -based study. Sleep heart health 
study. JAMA . 2000;283:1829- 1836 
8. Brooks D, Horner RL, Kozar LF, Render -Teixeira CL, Phillipson EA. Obstructive sleep 
apnea as a cause of systemic hypertension. Evidence from a canine model. J Clin Invest . 
1997;99:106- 109 
9. Peppard PE, Young T, Palta M, Skatrud J. Prospective study of the association betw een 
sleep -disordered breathing and hypertension. N Engl J Med . 2000;342:1378- 1384 
10. Hung J, Whitford EG, Parsons RW, Hillman DR. Association of sleep apnoea with myocardial infarction in men. Lancet . 1990;336:261- 264 
11. Wessendorf TE, Teschler H, Wang Y M, Konietzko N, Thilmann AF. Sleep -disordered 
breathing among patients with first- ever stroke. J Neurol . 2000;247:41- 47 
12. Hoffstein V. Blood pressure, snoring, obesity, and nocturnal hypoxaemia. Lancet . 
1994;344:643- 645 
13. Shahar E, Whitney CW, Redline S, Lee ET, Newman AB, Nieto FJ, O'Connor GT, Boland LL, Schwartz JE, Samet JM. Sleep -disordered breathing and cardiovascular 
disease: Cross -sectional results of the sleep heart health study. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 2001;163:19- 25 
14. Redline S, Strauss ME, Adams N, Winters M, Roebuck T, Spry K, Rosenberg C, Adams K. Neuropsychological function in mild sleep- disordered breathing. Sleep . 1997;20:160-
167 
15. Findley LJ, Unverzagt ME, Suratt PM. Automobile accidents involving patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Am Rev Respir Dis . 1988;138:337- 340 
16. White DP, Younes MK. Obstructive sleep apnea. Comprehensive Physiology . 
2012;2:2541- 2594 
17. Horner RL. Respiratory physiology: Central neural control of respiratory neurons and motoneurons during sleep  In: K ryger MH RT, Dement WC, ed. Principles and practice 
of sleep medicine. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011:237- 249. 
18. Edwards BA, Sands SA, Eckert DJ, White DP, Butler JP, Owens RL, Malhotra A, Wellman A. Acetazolamide improves loop gain but not the other physi ological traits 
causing obstructive sleep apnoea. J Physiol . 2012;590:1199- 1211 
19. Wellman A, Malhotra A, Jordan AS, Stevenson KE, Gautam S, White DP. Effect of oxygen in obstructive sleep apnea: Role of loop gain. Respir Physiol Neurobiol . 
2008;162:144- 151 
20. Horner RL, Grace KP, Wellman A. A resource of potential drug targets and strategic decision -making for obstructive sleep apnoea pharmacotherapy. Respirology . 
2017;22:861- 873 
21. Ogasa T, Ray AD, Michlin CP, Farkas GA, Grant BJ, Magalang UJ. Systemic  
administration of serotonin 2a/2c agonist improves upper airway stability in zucker rats. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine . 2004;170:804- 810 
22. Neighbors CLP, Noller MW, Song SA, Zaghi S, Neighbors J, Feldman D, Kushida CA, Camacho M. Vitamin d and obstructive sleep apnea: A systematic review and meta -
analysis. Sleep Med . 2018;43:100- 108 
23. Grace KP, Hughes SW, Horner RL. Identification of a pharmacological target for genioglossus reactivation throughout sleep. Sleep . 2014;37:41- 50 
BWH/MGH Human Subjects Research Application Form  Filename: Detailed Protocol 
Version 4: March 2 002   Page 9 24. Carley DW, Prasad B, Reid KJ, Malkani R, Attarian H, Abbott SM, Vern B, Xie H, Yuan 
C, Zee PC. Pharmacotherapy of apnea by cannabimimetic enhancement, the pace clinical trial: Effects of dronabinol in obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep . 2018;41  
25. Mendelson WB, Maczaj M, Holt J. Buspirone administration to sleep apnea patients. J Clin Psychopharmacol . 1991;11:71- 72 
26. Berry RB, Budhiraja R, Gottlieb DJ, Gozal D, Ib er C, Kapur VK, Marcus CL, Mehra R, 
Parthasarathy S, Quan SF, Redline S, Strohl KP, Davidson Ward SL, Tangredi MM, American Academy of Sleep M. Rules for scoring respiratory events in sleep: Update of the 2007 aasm manual for the scoring of sleep and assoc iated events. Deliberations of the 
sleep apnea definitions task force of the american academy of sleep medicine. J Clin Sleep Med . 2012;8:597- 619 
  