1 Research  Protocol  
Title 
A new therapeutic approach for somatosensory tinnitus  
Investigators  
PI: Sarah M. Theodoroff, PhD  
Specific Aims/Purpose  
The purpose of this study is to address the immediate clinical need to improve the way 
the VA screens and evaluates tinnitus patients by piloting an approach modeled after what is done at the Cleveland Clinic. Results of this study will provide pilot data to be used in a large- scale Merit Review proposal. Long- term objectives are to adapt 
Cleveland Clinic’s int erdisciplinary approach to diagnose and treat somatosensory 
tinnitus for use in a new population: Veterans with tinnitus.  
Scientific Rationale  and Significance 
Somatosensory tinnitus is suspected when the perceptual characteristics of tinnitus (e.g., pitch, loudness, timbre) are altered following certain head or neck maneuvers, 
forceful muscle contractions, or eye or jaw movements. Prevalence estimates range from 60 to 80% of tinnitus patients being able to somatically modulate their tinnitus in some manner (Ralli et al, 2017). The Cleveland Clinic, an institution at the forefront of tinnitus care in the United States, has developed a protocol for assessing if tinnitus can be somatically modulated and, when it can, implementing an established treatment regimen that has been successful in a majority of these patients. The prevalence and 
treatment of somatosensory tinnitus has not been studied in Veterans who suffer from 
tinnitus. The proposed research is the first step in achieving our long- term goal to 
develop a clinical framework for diagnosing, assessing, and treating somatosensory tinnitus in Veterans.  
Of the m
illions of Veterans with tinnitus, many suffer negative consequences such as 
anxiety, insomnia, and concentration difficulties (Liu et al, 2015). Because the underlying mechanisms are still unclear, classification methods rely on categorizing tinnitus according to its characteristics. Many cases of somatosensory tinnitus involve concomitant pain or stiffness in the musculature of the head and neck. Other clinical 
features include tinnitus onset following head or neck trauma. Tinnitus and musculoskeletal disabilities of the head and neck are highly prevalent in Veterans (Veterans Benefits Administration, 2016); therefore, it is logical to postulate that a significant percentage of these Veterans have the clinical features suggestive of somatosensory tinnitus.  
Current 
clinical practice at the VA Portland Health Care System  (VAPORHCS)  is for 
Veterans who report tinnitus to be seen in the audiology clinic to assess their hearing ability and communication needs. VA clinicians do not routinely perform an in- depth 
tinnitus assessment and no standard guidelines exist recommending questions or screening procedures to identify tinnitus fluctuations or triggers. Going one step further [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 12/10/2020
2 
 and evaluating the influence of somatic factors on the Veteran’s tinnitus perception is 
rarely done. Veterans whose tinnitus is influenced by somatic movements suggests the possibility of an underlying head or neck musculoskeletal deficit that is being overlooked, which if treated, would help the Veteran patient to regain normal functioning.   
 In general, there is a lack of understanding as to why some tinnitus patients report benefit from one treatment over another.  One possible explanation is that some types of 
tinnitus are more responsive to select treatments. Therefore, a critical need exists to develop methodological and clinical tools capable of assessing and subtyping tinnitus so that controlled studies can be done to address this gap in our knowledge. In the absence of this knowledge, patient factors are often examined to determine the likelihood of successful treatment outcomes (Theodoroff et al, 2014). By examining patient factors of individuals who respond favorably to an intervention, including what “type” of tinnitus they have, insight is gained as to what aspects of the patient and types of tinnitus are best suited for particular treatments. The focus of this proposal is a specific tinnitus subtype known as somatosensory tinnitus.  
 When attributes of the tinnitus percept change following certain maneuvers or muscle 
contractions  and somatosensory tinnitus is suspected, it  suggests an interaction 
between the somatosensory and auditory systems (Levine, 1999; Shore et al, 2007; Ralli et al, 2017; Marks et al, 2018). Numerous studies have revealed that tinnitus can be somatically modulated in many people (see Ralli et al, 2017 for a review). Tinnitus modulations associated with the somatosensory system and somatic disorders are often 
attributed to cortical neuroplasticity initiated by subcortical changes occurring at the 
auditory brainstem level (Shore et al, 2007). The anatomical and physiological 
connections between the somatosensory and auditory pathways have been well documented (Dehmel et al, 2008; Shore et al, 2007; Shore et al, 2016; Wu et al, 2016) and are shown in Figure 1 (Cherian et al, 2013). The fact that somatic manipulations can directly influence the tinnitus perception for many patients (Shore, 2011) suggests somatosensory tinnitus is an indicator of an underlying musculoskeletal deficit of the head or neck which warrants taking a non- traditional approach to tinnitus management  
(Sanchez & Rocha, 2011). The Cleveland Clinic, an institution that is at the forefront of providing tinnitus rehabilitative services, has developed a protocol for assessing if tinnitus can be somatically modulated; when it can, the clinic provides these patients with individualized physiotherapy as part of the treatment regimen.  
 
Research Design and Methods  
General Summary of Procedures.  To accomplish the goals of Aim 1 ( address the 
prevalence of somatosensory tinnitus in Veterans  with tinnitus ), individuals who are 
enrolled for care at a V A facil ity or clinic  will be  contacted and scre ened over the phone. 
Based on the phone screening, a subset of Veterans  will be invited to attend one in-
person visit. To accomplish the goals of Aim 2 ( develop a clinical framework to 
diagnose, assess, and treat  Veterans wit h somatosensory tinnitus ), a subset of 
Veterans identified with somatosensory tinnitus  (knowledge gained at visit 1)  will be 
given the option to attend 3 in-person individualized physiotherapy  sessions from t he 
3 
 study physical therapist  using an abb reviated therapy protocol  modeled after protocols 
used at the Cleveland Clinic.   
 
Subj ect Identification/Recruitment  
We w ill use a var iety of recruitment methods including any of the following:  
NCRAR Data Repository: Veteran subjects will be recruited from a pool of participants 
who previously participated in research projects at the NCRAR  and gave their consent to 
be conta cted for futu re studies. These authorized data can be found in the NCRAR data 
repository (MIRB#2874) and the audiology and rehabilitation research data repository 
(MIRB #3750). The NCRAR data repository and audiology and rehabilitation research data 
reposi tory’s SOP in dicates that any investigator who has an approved IRB protocol and 
consent form can contribute and retrieve data from the repository.  
 Corporate Data Warehouse (CDW):  Data in the CDW are generated, in part, f rom 
Veterans’ electronic health rec ords within t he VA and  include healthcare use, diagnoses, 
and prescription drug dispensation for those receiving VA care nationally. T he CDW will be 
used to identify demographic information and diagnoses for health condit ions of interest  
relevant to accomp lish the aims  of this research  (e.g., audiologic test data, tinnitus ). CDW 
data will be accessed and linked via the VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure 
(VINCI) Data Application Request Tracker (DART). Once VA data  are linked within the 
VINCI enviro nment , they w ill be securely moved to a VA Portland Health Care System 
research server. Dr. Theodoroff has worked on other projects th at have successfully us ed 
this method for similar recruitment efforts .  
 Recruitment Letters:  Veterans who are enrolled for care at a V A facility or clinic,  and 
have tinnitus , will be mailed a recruitment letter informing them about the opportunity to 
participate in this research study .  
 Outreach and Other  Activities: Veter ans ma y learn about the possibility of study 
participati on through newspaper adv ertisement, online advertising, recruitment flyers, from 
health care professionals, or word- of-mouth. When advertising and discussing the study at 
outreach events, IRB approved  study  personnel can collect names, email addresses, and  
phone numbers of people who would like us to contact them to learn more about the study 
for screening purposes.  A full screening  will be done over the telephone to ensure as 
much as possible that ca llers wh o are invited for an assessment are s uitable candi dates. 
IRB approved staff will access Veterans’  medical record s in the computerized patient 
record system (CPRS) to determine if  they meet the study’s eligibi lity criteria. We have 
conducted this ty pe of screening for numerous clinical studies  and have r efined the 
techniques for efficiency.  
 To identify eligible candidates, study personnel will administer a phone screening to interested callers.  This phone sc reening will be conducted  from a VA or non -VA netwo rked 
telephone.  If a non- VA networked telephone  is used to c onduct the screening, additional 
precaut ions will be taken to maintain the privacy of the Veteran. These precautions include 
calling from a private and secur e location, and only leaving the contact information of study 
team member ’s VA telephone extension, should a call ba ck be required.   
4 
  
If candidates f ail to meet the selection criteria during the phone screening they  can be re-
screened  at a later  date at the discretion of staff. This will be tracked in the study tracking 
database used for recruitment  by recording their screen status (i.e. “Re- screen”) a nd will 
also include the date that the p articipant needs to be con tacted. When a candidate is re-
screened, they will be contacted via the phone and re -asked the phone screening 
questions foll owing the IRB approved script. If they meet the criteria to be invited for the in-
person screening, they will b e scheduled at that time.  
 
Aim 1: Eligibility Crit eria 
• Veteran  
• Chronic tinnitus (≥ 6 months) that  can typically be heard in a quiet room  
 
Aim 2 : Inclusion Criteria  
• Veteran  
• Chronic tinnitus (≥ 6 months) that can typically  be heard in a quiet room  and is 
experienced at least daily or weekly . 
• Positive screen for somatosensory tinnitus (i.e., tinn itus pitch or loudness that 
changes during somatic mane uvers and/or limited range of motion suggestive of 
mechanical deficits associated with a somatic component)  
 
Aim 2: Exclusion Cri teria 
• N on-Vetera n  
• Not able to attend 3 weekly physi otherapy sessions at the VAPORHCS  
• Not a good candidate for physical therapy 
• Participation  in new (i.e., < 1 month) tinnitus management or treatment  
• Current  participation in tinnitus research involving an intervention 
•  Inability to read and respond appropriately to instructions, and/or to perform all 
of the study procedures  
 
Informed Conse nt & HIPAA Authoriza tion 
The study will be reviewed with the participant  one of two ways: 1)  over the telephone 
using the IRB -approved Information Sheet , with a review  and signature of the HIPAA 
authorization during the first study visit, or 2) if the participant prefers to be consented 
in-person, the IRB-approved Informed C onsent Form  and HIPAA authorization will be 
review ed at the beginning of the screening visit. For both options, IRB-a pproved testing 
procedures will  only occur  after the appropriate consent and/or authorization have been 
obtained.  
 After the phone screening, if a participant appears to be eligible for the study, the y will 
be given the option to complete the consenting process over the telephon e rather than 
in-person as indicated above, in an effort to limit close, person- to-person contact  in 
accordance with COVID -19 precautions. In that case, a member of the research team 
will then mail the IRB- approved Information Sheet to the participant, and at a mutually 
agreed upon time, the participant will be contacted by phone to review each section of 
5 
 the form. Participan ts will be given amp le time to review the In formation Sheet  and 
decide if they would like to participate in the study. Following thi s discussion and the 
clarification of any questions, the study member will ask “Based on the information we 
have reviewed in this form, would  you like to participate in this study?” If the participant 
answers “Yes,” this affirmation will serve as their conse nt to participate in the study . 
They will be advised to keep a copy of the Information Sheet for their records. It will be 
made clear to th e participant that providin g consent  is not the same thing  as being 
enrolled in the study , which will be deter mined d uring the in- person visit.  
 
Screening/Baseline Test s  
For parti cipants who choose to be consented in- person, after the informed consent and 
HIPAA authorization f orms are reviewed and signed, they  will comple te a scree ning 
evaluation to confir m eligibility f or th e study. For participants who consented vi a the 
IRB-approved Information Sheet, they will be reminded they provided con sent over the 
phone and be asked if they want anything about the nature of the study to be reviewed 
with them  prior to starting the scree ning procedures.  The HIPAA authorization will then 
be reviewed and signed prior to any study procedures being conducted.  In some cases, 
procedures  will be rep eated on later visits. Baseline testing includes tinnitus loudn ess-
matching using an audiometer  (optional)  and a musculoskeletal  screening exam. The 
following questionnaires will also be adminis tered: Tinnitus Screener , Health History 
Questionnaire, Tinnit us History Questionnaire; Hospital  Anxiety and Depression Scale; 
and the Tinnitus Functional Index, which is the primary outcome measure. 
 
Data Analysi s (Statistical Analysis Plan)  
A Bayesian approach will be used to estimate t he prevalence of somatosensory ti nnitus 
in the VA population conditional on the phone scr eening data. The Bayesian prior 
probabilit y distrib ution ( i.e., “prior”) for this analysis is t he meta- analysis  based 
prediction derived from 4 published studies (Sanc hez et al, 2002; Abel & Levine, 20 04; 
Sanchez et al, 2007; Simmons et al, 2008). A sensit ivity analysi s will be conducted 
using a flat prior  and a prior concentrated below 40% prevalence to evaluate the effec ts 
of the prior on the Bayesian posterior probability dis tribution.  
 
We will eva luate the feasibility and tolerability of individualized p hysio therapy performed 
in ~10 Veterans with somato sensory tinn itus. We will use the pilot data from 
questionnaires (e .g., TFI) and if available, 1 kHz loudness -matching results  to document 
any reductions in tinnit us-related distress and perceived loudness  following 
individual ized physi otherapy. The change from  baseline TF I score and 1 kHz loudness -
match (in dB S ensation Level; dB SL) observed in this sample will provi de the basis for 
sample size calculations in a s ubsequent large- scale Merit Review proposal.  
 
Risks and Si de Ef fects  
Ther e are only minimal risks a ssociated with these research procedures.  The sound 
booth use d for testing is extremely quiet, and some peo ple find such quiet environments to 
be disconcerti ng/annoying.  Subjects will be told they do not ha ve to p articipate if  this is a 
problem. All of the testing  equipment is checked and calibrated accordi ng to a r equired 
schedule, so any risk of equipment mal function is minimized. For  all measurements, sound  
6 
 levels are below those known to cause hearing damage. The re is a sma ll possibility, 
however, that  certain sounds in the tests may seem loud to a subje ct and ca use them 
temporary discomfort. In addition, some  discomfort is occasiona lly associated with wear ing 
earphones during audiologic and tinnitus test ing. To m inimize these risks, subjects will be 
told they c an stop at any time and do not have to listen to any sounds they do not want 
to.  
 
Minor anxiety an d fatigue may be experienc ed when carrying out the  testing and when 
completi ng questionnaires. People coul d react  emoti onally to some of the items o n the 
questionnaires.  These items ask about how peopl e react t o tinnitus and how it affects their 
life. To m inimize this risk, individ uals will be told they d o not have t o answer any questions 
they do not want to.  
 People  with tinnitus have been known to r eport the ir tinnitus becoming louder following 
audito ry testin g. Usually these individuals report some discomfort during testing. 
Participants will be informe d of this po tential risk a nd told to report any d iscomfo rt during 
testing, which would result in t esting be ing terminated immediately.  
 The musculoskel etal scre ening exam will be performed by a trained clinic ian. It is 
possible that  the screeni ng procedures could aggravate the subject’s tinnitus, 
underly ing diz ziness, headache,  ear discomfort, or neck symptoms.  To minimize  these 
risks, subjects will be t old to let the clinician know immediately  if symptoms a ppear or 
worsen in any way  during the exam.  
 For the i ndividu alized physiotherapy, Veterans  will b e worki ng one-on-one with the 
physical therapist who will provide both  exercises and manual treatments  (i.e., 
physiotherapy) to correct any deficits that are i dentified using standard of care clini cal 
procedures.  After a treatment session, there is a minim al risk  that the subject  may 
experience an increas e in tin nitus, disco mfort associated with the cervical spine,  jaw, or 
thoracic spine. To minimize subjects experiencing discomfort, they will be ed ucated on: 
1) proper f orm of the exercises and expectations; 2) how to pr event wors ening of 
symptoms; and 3)  what to do if symptoms worsen.  
 
Participant Safeguards 
This study does not include vulnerable populations.  Additional safeguards hav e been 
establ ished to minimiz e risk of noise expos ure. 
 
Suicidality  
It is not ex pected that p otential subjects will be suic idal. In  the unlikely event that an 
individual expre sses suic idal ideation during the screening phone call or if he/she 
indicates that he/she is s uicidal at any time during the study,  a “warm transfer” 
procedure w ill be implem ented to connect the individua l with a  person at t he Suicide 
Hotline. All research  staff wi ll be informed of the warm transfer procedure and phone 
number for the N ational Crisis Hotline 1 -800-273-8255 (Veterans press “1” and non-
Veterans stay on the line).  
 
7 
 Language is included in the informed co nsent form that if participants express t houghts 
about wanting to harm themselves or others, the P rincipal Investigator or  study team 
member may call t he Nati onal Crisis Ho tline at 1- 800-273-8255 (Veterans press “1”  and 
non-Veterans stay on the line) or  walk them t o the E mergency Department  as 
appropriate . 
 
Benefi ts 
Tinnitus is the most prevalent ser vice- connected disability for Veterans and c urrently 
has no “cure.” Hearing loss is the second most prevalence s ervice- connect ed di sabili ty 
for Veter ans. Subjec ts may  or may n ot personall y benefit from participating in this study. 
However, by serving as a subject, they will contribute new information expected to benefit 
patient s in the future. Data  generated fr om th is research will he lp to asse ss the 
effectivenes s of a new therape utic appr oach to reduce tinnitus  distress  and partially , or 
completely , suppress the tinnitus perception.  
 
Subjects will benefit by learnin g about tinnitus. In some cases,  people who are bothered 
by thei r tinnitus are helped s imply by re ceivin g informati on and having their questions 
answered.  
 
Protected Health Information 
HIPAA id entifiers will include names, geographical s ubdivisions smalle r than a state, 
dates (study contact  dates), telephone numbers , email  addresses, and last four digits of  
particip ants’ social security numbers (SSNs ). This i nformation i s the minimum 
necessary t o contact potential subjects, enroll them in the study, and carry out the study 
protocol. Phone numbers, ad dress es, and emai l addre sses a re needed to ensure that 
subjects may be reached for follow -up visits and other st udy-related communication.   
 All test results from this study, including behavioral  data and responses to 
questionnaires, date(s) of s tudy session , and all contact information will be banked in 
Dr. Theodorof f’s data repository “Sensory Perception, Physiology and Outcomes Data 
Repository " (#4635). Information will be shared with repository  #4635 only after the 
participant is enrolled in the study and has given consent to bank their data f or future 
research. P articipants must agree to bank their data in repository #4635 in order to 
participate in this study; this banking of research data is mandatory.   
 
Subje ct Compensati on 
Subjec ts will receive a VA payment voucher for $30 for each visit they attend at the 
NCRAR. This am ount is con sistent with our other s tudies,  which will cover  typical travel 
costs assoc iated with attending the appointments. If subjects show  up, but are unable to  
compl ete the session (or are disqualified) , they w ill still receive the entire paym ent ($30)  
for their participation in that session. If subjects withdraw from the study prior to finishing 
all of the required sessions, they will only  be compensated for the num ber of visits they 
attended.  For subjects who qualify to receive individualized physioth erapy and attend all 
scheduled visi ts, the y will recei ve a total of $120.  
  
8 
 Privacy a nd Confidentiality  
The information gathered for this study will be kep t confidential as required by law. The 
results of participation  in this study may be used for  publication or for scientific 
purposes, but  the resul ts will n ot include any identifying inf ormation. A subject’s identity 
will not be disclosed unless they provide specif ic, separate consent or if required by law.  
All VA research records will be held in accordanc e with the VA records control 
schedule.  
 
Subject data confi dentiality will be maintain ed throughout the clinical study,  but in a 
manner that ensures the i nformation can always be tracked back to the subject  if 
necessa ry. All information generated in this s tudy must b e considered highly 
confidentia l and must not be disclosed to any persons  not directly concerned with the 
study without written pr ior permissio n from th e Sponso r. However, authorized regulatory 
officials  and Sponsor personnel will be al lowed ful l access to  the records. Only uniqu e 
subject n umbers in c ase report forms will ident ify subjects.   
 All study personnel, who have been authorized by the PI, will have access to the subject 
identification log which will be kept as an electronic vers ion and will be password 
protected; this w ill not  be copied or rem oved from the study center. A ll records with 
personal inform ation will be kept in a locked cabinet at the study center according to 
national legal requirement s or hospital requirements, whic hever perio d is lo nger.  
 
Transfer  of Data Owne rship  
No PHI data will be trans ferred away from the VAPORHCS.  
 
Data and Safety M onitoring Plan (DSMP)   
1. What safety information will be collected including ser ious adve rse events and 
unanticipated  problems involving risk. 
Adverse events and u nanticipate d problems will be recorded by the PI or s tudy team  
member and documented according to VA guid elines. 
 
2. How the safety information will be collected, e.g., case report form s, at study 
visits, by telep hone, etc.  
The data will be collected and rec orded by st udy staff. Any unexpected safety is sues 
will be col lected and reported on the appropri ate IRB forms . 
 
3. The frequency of data collection inc luding when  safety data collect ion starts.  
Information will b e collected at each visit, and as necessary betw een visit s.  
 
4. The frequency or periodicity of revie w of cumulative safety data.  
Summary reports of subjects ’ data will be generated for discussion at weekly 
meetings. Safety inf ormation will be reported to t he PI as it is colle cted.  
  
5. If there will not b e a data moni toring committee, and if applicable, w hat 
statistical tests will be used to anal yze safety data and determine if harm is 
occurring?  
9 
 Because this  is a minimum -risk stu dy, a data monitoring commit tee is not required.  
 
6. Who will oversee safety data?  
Any safe ty issues that arise will be re ported imme diate ly to the PI who reviews all data  
collected. In accordance with VA guidelines, any Seri ous Adverse Event will b e 
repor ted in writing to the IRB with in 5 business days o f awareness.  
 
7. Which condit ions would trigger an immediate suspension of the resear ch, if 
applicable.  
For this minimal ri sk study, there are no forseeable conditions or events  that would  
trigger an i mmediate suspension of the study or stopping it prematurely.  
 
Data Storage 
Any identi fiable information collected at the NCRAR will be k ept on a password 
protected computer, in a p assword protected MS Access database, and/or passwor d 
protected excel spreadsheet, which will be stored in a restricted folder on the VA server 
behind the firewall. Folder ac cess will be restricted to IRB -approved s tudy t eam 
members. Data collected durin g study vi sits and on questionnaires will be kept in 
separate MS Access databases/excel  spreadsheets. These databas es will also be 
stored on the VA server in the  restricted  study folder. These data will be coded by  
unique s tudy ID numbers. Paper files cont aining identifi able (e.g., ICF) data will be kept 
in a separate locked file cabinet w ithin a locked room.  
 
References & Liter ature Cite d   
Abel MD, Levine R A. Muscle contr actions and auditory perception in t innitus pati ents 
and nonclinical subjects, Cranio, 2004, 22(3):181- 191. 
 
Cherian K, Cherian N,  Cook C, Kaltenbach JA.  Improving tinnit us wit h mechani cal 
treatment of the cer vical spin e and jaw, J Am Acad Au diol, 2013,  24(7):544- 555. 
 Dehmel S, Cui YL, Shore SE. Cross -modal  interactions of auditory and somatic i nputs 
in the brainstem and midbrain a nd their imbalance in tinnitus and deafness, Am J 
Audiol , 2008, 17(2):S193- 209. 
 Levine RA. Somatic (craniocerv ical) tinnitu s and the dorsal cochlear nucleus 
hypothesis, Am J  Otolary ngol, 1999, 20(6):351- 362. 
 Liu YF, H u J, Streelman M, Guthrie OW. The Epw orth Sleepiness Scale in the 
asse ssment of slee p disturbance in Veterans with ti nnitus, In t J Otolaryngol , 2015, 
429469.  
 Marks KL, Martel DT, Wu C, Basura GJ,  Roberts LE, Sc hvartz -Leyzac KC, Shore SE. 
Audito ry-somatosensory bimodal stimulation desynchroni zes brain circuitry to reduce 
tinnitus in  guinea pigs and humans, Science Transl ational Medicine , 2018, 10(422) . 
 
10 
 Michiels S, Van de Heyning P, Truijen S, Hall emans A, De Her togh W . Does multi -
modal cervical physical th erapy improve tinnitus in patients wi th cervicogenic somatic 
tinnitus? Man Ther , 2016, 26:125- 131. 
 
Newman CW, Jacobs on GP, Spitzer JB. Development of the Tinnit us Handicap 
Inventory, Arch Otolary ngol Head Neck Surg , 1996, 122(2):143- 148. 
 Newma n CW, Sandr idge SA, Bea SM, Cherian K, Cherian N , Kahn KM, Kaltenbach J. 
Tinnitus : patients do not have to ‘just live with it.’,  Cleve Clin J Med, 2011, 78(5): 312-
319. 
 Ralli M, Greco A, Turchetta R, Altissi mi G, de Vincentiis M , Cianfrone G. 
Somatosensory  tinnitus: Current evidence and future perspecti ves, J Int Med Res , 
2017, 45(3):933- 947. 
 Sanchez TG, da Silva  Lima A, Brandão A L, Lorenzi  MC, Bento RF. Somati c modulation 
of tinnitus: Test reliability and r esults  after re petiti ve muscle contraction traini ngs, Ann 
Otol Rhinol Laryngol , 2007, 116(1):30-3 5. 
 Sanchez TG, Guerra GC, Lorenz i MC, Br andão AL, Bento  RF. T he influence of 
voluntary mu scle contractions upon the onset and modulation of tinnitus, Audiol 
Neurootol , 2002,  7(6):370- 375. 
 Sanchez TG, Rocha CB. Diagnos is and management of somatosensory ti nnitus: review 
article, Clinics ( Sao Paul o), 2011, 66(6) :1089- 1094.  
 Shore SE, Roberts LE, Langguth B. Maladapt ive plasticit y in tinnitus -triggers, 
mechanisms and treatment, Nat Re v Neurol , 2016, 12(3):150- 160. 
 Shore S, Zhou J, Koehler S. Neural mechanism s underlying somatic tinnitus, Prog Brain 
Res, 2007, 166:107-1 23. 
 Simmons R, Da mbra C, Lobarinas E, Stocking C , Salvi R. He ad, Neck, and Eye 
Movements That Modul ate Tinnitus , Semin Hear , 2008, 29(4):361 -370. 
 Theodorof f SM, McMillan GP,  Zaugg TL, Cheslock  M, Roberts C, Henry JA. 
Randomiz ed contr olled trial of a novel device for tinni tus sound therapy during sleep,  
Am J Audiol, 2 017, 26(4):543- 554. 
 Theodoroff S M, Schuette A, Griest S , Henry JA. Individual pat ient factors associated 
with effective tinnitus treatment, J Am Acad Audiol , 2014, 25(7): 631-643. 
 Theod oroff SM, Stevens A, McM illan G, P ettersson D, Woodward W , Folmer RL . MRI 
verification of a 10- 20 targetin g protocol u sed du ring transcranial magnetic s timulation 
sessions for tinni tus, Brain Topography , 2018, 31(4):690 -699. 
 
11 
 Veterans Benefi ts Adm inistrati on, US Department of Vet erans Affa irs. Annual benefits 
report for fi scal year 2016. https://www.benefit s.va.gov/REPORT S/abr/ ABR-
Compensation- FY16- 01262018 .pdf; Acc essed May 2, 2018.  
 
Whedon J. Reducti on of tinnitus by spinal manipulation in a patient with presumptive 
rotational v ertebral artery occlusion syndr ome: A case r eport, Altern Ther Health Med, 
2006,12(3):14- 17. 
 Wu C, Stefanescu RA, Martel DT, Shor e SE. Tin nitus: Maladaptive auditory -
somatosenso ry plasticity, Hear Res , 2016, 334:20-2 9. 
 
 