MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A (4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 1 of 36  
 
 
Immuno therapy for the treatment of br east cancer related upp er extremity 
lymphedema (BCRL) pro tocol # CQBX258X2203T  
 
PROTOCOL FACE PAGE FOR  
MSKCC THERAPEU TIC/DIAGNOSTIC PRO TOCOL 
 
Principal 
Investigator/Department: Babak Mehrara, MD Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Co-Principal 
Investigator(s)/Department: Joseph  Dayan, MD 
Kimberly Van Zee, MD 
Jacqueline Bromberg, MD, PhD Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Investigator(s)/Department: Andrea Barrio, MD 
Raghu Parsad Kataru, PhD 
Shari Goldfarb, MD Maura 
Dickler, MD Shanu  Modi, 
MD Elizabeth Comen, MD 
Neil Iyengar, MD 
Ayca Gucalp, MD 
Tiffany Traina, MD 
Sarat Chand arlapaty, MD 
Mario Leitao, MD 
Sharlynn Tuohy, PT, DPT, MBA 
Ting-Ting Kuo, PT, DPT, MBA, 
WCS, CLT 
Jaenne tte Zucker, PT, DPT 
Laryssa Buone to, PT 
Andrea Pusic, MD 
Evan Matros, MD 
Peter Cordeiro, MD 
Joseph  Disa, MD 
Colleen McCarthy, MD 
Monica Morrow, MD 
Tari King, MD 
Mary Gemignani, MD 
Virgilio Sacchini, MD 
Alexandra Heerdt, MD 
Lisa Sclafani, MD 
Hiram Cody, MD 
George Plitas, MD 
Debra Capko, MD 
Mahmoud El-Tamer, MD 
Melissa Pilewski, MD 
Elyn Riedel, MA 
Melissa Lee-Teh, RPh 
Svetlana Kleyman, MD 
Andrew Weinstein, MD 
Geoffrey Hespe 
Gabriela Garcia Nores, MD 
Jessie Yu, MD Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Surgery/GYN Service 
Neurology 
Neurology 
 
Neurology 
Neurology 
Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics 
Pharmacy 
Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Sloan Kettering Institute 
Sloan Kettering Institute 
Sloan Kettering Institute 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A (4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 2 of 36  
 
Consen ting 
Professional(s)/Department: Babak  Mehrara, MD 
Joseph  Dayan, MD 
Kimberly Van Zee, MD 
Jacquiline Bromberg, MD 
Andrea Barrio, MD 
Shari Goldfarb, MD 
Maura Dickler, MD 
Shanu  Modi, MD 
Elizabeth Comen, MD 
Neil Iyengar, MD 
Ayca Gucalp, MD 
Tiffany Traina, MD 
Sarat Chand arlapaty, MD Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Surgery/Plastic & Reconstructive Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Surgery/Breast Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Medicine/Breast Medicine Service 
Please  Note: A Conse nting Professional mu st have comp leted the mandatory Human  
Subjects Educa tion and Certification Program. 
 
 
 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center 
1275  York Avenue  
New York, New York 10065 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 3 of 36 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4)  
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHE MA .................................................................... . 4 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC AIMS ............................................................................. . 6 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE .................................................................................. . 7 
 
4.0 OVERV IEW OF STUDY DESIGN/INTERVE NTION......................................................... . 10 
 
4.1 Design.......................................................................................................................... . 10 
 
4.2 Intervention ................................................................ .................................................. . 11 
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNO STIC AGENTS ........................................................................ . 14 
 
6.0 CRITERIA FOR SUBJECT ELIGIBILITY ........................................................................ . 15 
 
6.1 Subject Inclusion Criteria.............................................................................................. . 15 
 
6.2 Subject Exclusion Criteria ............................................................................................ . 15 
 
7.0 RECRU ITMENT PLAN .................................................................................................... . 15 
 
8.0 PRETREATMENT EVALUATION ................................................................................... . 17 
 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN............................................................................. . 18 
 
10.0 EVALUATION DUR ING TREATMENT/INTERVENTION ................................................ . 19 
 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS .......................................................................................... . 21 
 
12.0 CRITERIA FOR THERAPEUTIC RESP ONSE/OUTCOME ASSESSMENT .................... . 25 
 
13.0 CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY .................................................................... . 26 
 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS ............................................................... .............................................. . 27 
 
15.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURE S28 
 
15.1 Resea rch Participant Registration ................................................................................ . 28 
 
15.2 Rando mization ............................................................................................................. . 28 
 
16.0 DATA MANAGEMENT ISSUE S ...................................................................................... . 28 
 
16.1 Quality Assurance  ........................................................................................................ . 28 
 
16.2 Data and Safety Monitoring .......................................................................................... . 28 
 
17.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS ......................................................................... . 31 
 
17.1 Privacy ......................................................................................................................... . 31 
 
17.2 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting ...................................................................... . 31 
 
18.0 INFORMED CONSEN T PROCEDURE S ......................................................................... . 32 
 
19.0 REFERENC ES ................................................................................................................ . 33 
 
20.0 APPENDICES ................................................................................................................. . 36 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 4 of 36  
  
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEMA 
 
Study Title: Immunotherapy for the treatment of breast canc er related upper extremity lymphede ma 
(BCRL) 
 
Duration: All study participants will be followed for 7 months 
 
Background:  
 
Over the past decad e, improved unde rstanding of the pathologic processes that regulate a 
variety of chronic disorders has made it poss ible to devise targeted treatment options that greatly 
reduce  the morbidity and treatment co sts of these  diseases.  The purpose  of this proposal is to 
develop a similar strategy for patients who suffer from breast canc er related lymphede ma (BCRL) 
using a monoc lonal an tibody targeting the pathological process of this disease. This proposal is a 
direct bench to beds ide translation of NIH funded  research completed in our laboratory elucidating 
the pathological mechan isms of lymphede ma.1-5 
 
Lymphede ma is a common and morbid complication of breast cancer treatment developing 
in 1 in 3 women who undergo axillary lymph node  dissection.6,7 Lymphede ma also occurs in 
approximately 4-9% of women who unde rgo sentinel lymph node  biopsy8,9 and conse rvative 
estimates suggest that 5-7 million Americans suffer from this disorder.10   In these  patients, da maged 
lymphatic circulation results in lifelong swelling and fibroadipose  tissue deposition in the affected 
extremity. These  pathological cha nges lead to impaired quality of life, functional d eficits, and 
development of severe infections necess itating hospital ad mission for intravenous  antibiotics.11 
However, desp ite the fact that lymphede ma is common and morbid, treatments for this disorder a re 
palliative and rely exclusively on compression to prevent swelling and progression of symptoms. 
Importantly, there have been few advance ments in the treatment of this disorder, and to date, there 
are no proven targeted treatment options designed to address the pathologic process  using a 
mechan istic approach. The proposed  study is designed to address these shortfalls and aims to 
translate our p reclinical findings in the laboratory elucidating the cellular and molecular mechan isms 
of lymphede ma. 
 
Using a variety of animal models, as well as tissue biopsy specimens obtained from patients 
with BCRL, we have previously shown that CD4+ cells play an important role in the pathology of this 
disease  by regulating tissue fibrosis and lymphatic dysfunction.1-5  We have shown that s imilar to 
other fibroproliferative disorders, differentiation of naive CD4+ cells to the T-Helper 2  (Th2) 
pheno type is necess ary for this pathology. More importantly, we have shown that targeted blockade 
of Th2 differentiation using monoc lonal a ntibodies (mAbs) d irected against interleukin 4 (IL4) and 
interleukin 13 (IL13) markedly decreases the pathological cha nges of lymphede ma in a mouse 
model resulting in significantly dec reased  fibrosis, decreased  adipose  deposition, and improved 
lymphatic function.3   This is important beca use IL4/IL13 blockade using mABs is currently clinically 
used  in phase  I and  phase II studies as an experimental treatment for a variety of fibroproliferative 
disorders including pulmonary fibrosis, keloids, liver fibrosis, kidney  fibrosis, asthma, eos inoph ilic 
esopha gitis, among others. These  once  a month treatments have been  well tolerated in both animal 
and human studies with no major ad verse events reported. Thus, the use mABs for the treatment of 
lymphede ma would be similar to FDA approved treatment options for other chronic disorders such 
as plaque psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis. These pharmaceutical treatments are a paradigm shift 
in the treatment of lymphede ma providing a non-compressive and targeted therapeu tic option for 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 5 of 36  
  
patients who suffer from this disease. If the current trial is successful, our plan would be to proceed 
with multicenter trials for phase  II and III clinical trials. 
 
Study Objectives: Our primary objective is to evaluate the efficacy of QBX258 in reduc ing arm 
volume excess in women with stage I-II BCRL. QBX258 is a compound  developed  by Novartis 
Corporation and is a combination of 2 antibodies that inhibit the bioactivity of IL4 and IL13. 
 
Our secondary  objectives are to analyze tolerability and pharmacokinetics of QBX258, evaluate 
the efficacy of drug therapy in decreasing fluid content and  fibrosis of the affected extremity, 
determine how this treatment cha nges quality of life measures using validated quality of life surveys, 
and to elucidate the histological cha nges in lymphede matous tissues by analyzing skin biopsies 
obtained before and after treatment. 
 
Patient Population: Women ages 18 to 70 who suffer from unilateral stage I or II BCRL as defined 
by the America Society of Lymphology (spontaneously reversible or irreversible lymphede ma in 
which the tissue  has a spongy consis tency with mild to moderate pitting and mild to moderate 
fibrosis of the skin) with a minimum volume excess of 300 mL as compared with the normal upper 
extremity. 
 
Study Design: This will be a single arm, open  label p ilot study designed to test the efficacy of 
QBX258, a combination of 2 humanized monoclonal an tibodies that inhibit the bioactivity of 
interleukin 4 and interleukin 13, for the treatment of stage I or II BCRL.  Patients who meet the 
inclusion criteria will be recruited to the study and base line lymphede ma measu rements will be 
performed by a licensed  physical therapist.  Patients will then be treated with QBX258 once  every 4 
weeks for 4 treatments followed by repeat measures performed within 21 days of the final treatment 
dose.  Washout measurements, based on the known pharmacokinetics of monoc lonal an tibody 
treatment, will be performed 16-20 weeks after the final dose  of QBX258 to analyze chan ges after 
withdrawal of treatment (treatment half life is 4 weeks, therefore 16-20 weeks after last treatment is 
sufficient for complete clearance).  During the course of treatment and  washout  periods, pa tients will 
continue their usual  routine for lymphede ma care including the use of skin care produc ts and 
compression garments according to their pre-treatment directions. However, to avoid potential 
confound ing effects, patients will avoid the use of intermittent pneu matic compression devices, 
manual lymphatic massage by a physical therapist, laser treatment, or treatment with high 
compression short stretch band ages during the study period.  It is important to note that a lthough 
these  modes  of treatment are used  commonly for lymphede ma, the standard of care for the 
treatment of this disease  is skin care and compression garments.  In fact, a recent review of the 
literature has shown that these  adjunctive treatments have no statistically significant benefit in the 
treatment of lymphed ema in the vast majority of well controlled studies when compared to standard 
therapy.12 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 6 of 36  
  
The plan and schema for the study are summarized below. 
 
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC  AIMS 
 
Primary objective: 
 
• Evaluate the efficacy of QBX258 in reduc ing arm volume excess in women with 
unilateral stage I or stage II BCRL with a minimum volume difference of 300 mL between 
the normal and  lymphede matous limb. 
 
Seconda ry objectives: 
 
• Evaluate the efficacy of QBX258 in decreasing fluid content of the affected extremity 
(bioimpedance  measurements) 
• Examine chan ges in skin elasticity/fibrosis in response  to treatment (skin tonometry). 
• Examine how this treatment changes quality of life measures using validated quality of 
life surveys (ULL-27) 
• Examine the histological changes in lymphede matous tissues  as compared with normal 
tissues  by analyzing skin biopsies obtained before and after treatment. 
• Analyze tolerability of QBX258 treatment 
• Analyze pharmacokinetics of QBX258 treatment 
 
 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND RATIONALE 
 
Targe ted monoc lonal antibody  treatments have revolutionized the treatment of a  variety of 
chron ic disorders. Over the past decade, improved unde rstanding of the pathologic processes 
that regulate a variety of disabling chronic disorders has made it poss ible to devise targeted 
treatment options that greatly reduce  the morbidity and treatment costs of these  disease s.  For 
example, patients with rheumatoid arthritis, chronic plaque psoriasis, ankylosing spond ylitis, 
inflammatory bowel disease,  and psoriatic arthritis have achieved significant treatment benefits with 
reduced  pain, improvements in disease  status, decreased  hospitalization, and reduced  need  for 
chronic steroid use.  The purpose of this proposal is to develop a similar strategy for patients who 
suffer from breast cancer related lymphede ma (BCRL) using a monoc lonal antibody  that is targeted 
to the pathological process of this disease.  
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 7 of 36  
  
Lymphedema  is a common and morbid complication of cancer  treatment.  Lymphede ma is a 
dreaded  complication of breast canc er treatment occu rring in 33-50% of patients who unde rgo 
lymph node  dissection.7 Although the number of axillary lymph node  dissections performed has 
decreased  with introduc tion of sentinel b iopsy procedures, e ven these  relatively minor injuries to the 
lymphatic system cause  lymphede ma in 4-9% of patients.8,9   As a result, it is estimated that 5-6 
million Americans suffer from lymphede ma and as many as 25-50,000 new cases  are diagnosed 
annua lly.10   The incidence  of lymphede ma is likely to increase due to increased  rates of obes ity, use 
of radiation therapy, and an aging popu lation since these  variables independen tly increase  the risk 
of this complication.13-15 In addition, improved cancer treatment will also increase  the burden of 
lymphede ma as the development of this complication and survival are directly correlated. 
 
 
Patients with lymphede ma complain of pain, heaviness,  and decreased arm function. These 
chan ges signficantly decrease  patient reported quality of life and are a significant source of anxiety 
and depression.16,17   Some patients develop frequent  and often severe infections of the affected 
extremity requiring hosp italization and antibiotic therapy.11,18    In fact, many patients cons ider their 
lymphede ma as worse than their canc er diagnosis because  the latter was finite and resolved with 
treatment while lymphedema is chronic and progressive. 
 
 
Treatment  of lymphed ema is palliative.  Despite the fact that lymphed ema is common and a 
major source of morbidity, there are no proven preventative or curative options. Surgical and 
medical treatments have been  reported, ho wever, the results of these  studies have been  variable 
and in most cases  disappointing. As a result, treatment is palliative in nature with the hope  of 
preventing disease  progression rather than achieving a cure.  Patients are required to constantly 
wear tight fitting, uncomfortable compression garments designed to prevent fluid accumulation. 
Physical therapy treatments are also performed in some cases  and a re time intensive (4-6 week 
treatment course for an hour a day and 24/7 wrapping with band ages) a nd expens ive (more than 
$10,000/year by one conservative estimate).17   These facts, together with denial of service by many 
insurance  companies for garments or therapy, leads to significant rates of non -compliance  and 
disease  progression. 
 
 
Etiology of lymphedema  remains unkn own. Development of effective treatments for lymphed ema 
has been  hampered by the fact that the etiology of this disorder remains unknown. It is unclear for 
instance, why an identical ope ration leads  to lymphede ma in some patients and not o thers. 
Similarly, it is unknown why even trivial lymphatic injury in the form of sentinel lymph node  biopsy 
can result in significant lymphede ma. Perhaps  the most perplexing aspe ct of lymphede ma is the fact 
that p rogressive arm swelling in most cases  occurs in a delayed fashion, usually 1-5 years after 
surgery.19    Thus, a lthough lymphatic injury is clearly the initiating event, the pathologic events that 
follow and lead to the development of lymphede ma in a subset of patients remain unknown. This 
gap in our knowledge serves as a significant barrier to the development of targeted, rational 
treatment methods for this disabling and common disorder. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 8 of 36  
  
Fibros is is a key regu lator of pathology in lymphedema.  Recent studies in our lab have shown 
that fibrosis is a key pathologic process  and may serve as a “second  hit” following lymphatic injury 
ultimately leading to the development of lymphede ma.1,2,4,20   This hypothesis is supp orted by the fact 
that fibrosis is a hallmark of lymphede ma clinically and progression of disease is characterized by 
depos ition of fibroadipose tissues  and replacement of collecting lymphatic vesse ls with proliferative 
smooth muscle cells with luminal ob literation.21 In addition, it is well recognized that fibrosis is a 
common cause  of end-organ failure in a number of other organ systems including liver, lung, skin, 
kidney, and heart suggesting that lymphede ma may simply represent “end-organ failure” of the 
lymphatic system due  to fibrosis.22    Fibrosis also provides a rationale for the delayed development 
of lymphede ma since the progressive abno rmal collagen depos ition necessary to cause  organ 
dysfunction takes time to accumulate. This hypothesis is also supp orted by preclinical studies in our 
lab demonstrating that interventions designed to decrease  tissue fibrosis in lymphede ma potentially 
increase  lymphatic function and decrease  the pathological consequences  of lymphatic injury in a 
variety of mouse  models.1-5,20,23 
 
 
Lymphedema  results in chron ic CD4+ cell inflamma tion.  Based  on our hypothesis that 
lymphede ma is fibrosis related end-organ failure of the lymphatic system, our lab has spent the last 
6 years studying the mechanisms that regulate fibrosis in lymphede ma. Using mouse  models and 
clinical b iopsy specimens obtained from pa tients who suffer from BCRL, we have shown that 
lymphede ma, similar to other fibroproliferative diseases,  results in chronic tissue inflammation.3  We 
have shown that the majority of inflammatory cells that are present in lymphede matous tissues  are 
CD4+ cells and that the severity of lymphede ma positively clinically correlates with the degree of 
CD4+ cell inflammation.3   In addition, we have shown that similar to other fibrotic disorders, CD4+ 
cells present in lymphedematous tissue have a mixed T-helper 1  (Th1), T-helper 2 (Th2) 
pheno type.2,5   This is important beca use previous studies have shown that Th2 cells produce 
profibrotic cytokines such as interleukin 4 (IL4), interleukin 13 (IL13), and transforming growth factor 
beta 1 (TGF-B1). These  molecules activate a diverse array of pathways that increase collagen 
synthesis, decrease  matrix turnover and remodeling thus resulting in replacement of functional 
parench yma with scar.22 
 
 
CD4+ cell inflammation and differen tiation to Th2 pheno type plays a key role in the pathology 
of lymphedema.  We have shown that depletion of CD4+ ce lls with neutralizing antibodies or loss of 
CD4+ cells in CD4 knockout mice prevents development of lymphede ma in our mouse model.5,23 
More importantly, we have shown that blockade of Th2 differentiation with neutralizing antibodies 
directed against IL4 or IL13 not on ly prevents development of lymphed ema after lymphatic injury but 
also can reverse pathological cha nges in established  lymphede ma.3   Animals treated with just 3 
doses  of antibodies demonstrated marked reversal of tissue fibrosis, had  significantly increased 
lymphatic function, and decreased  chronic inflammation.  More recen tly,  in collaboration with our 
colleagues at MD Anderson Cancer Center, we have compared tissue biopsy samples before and 6 
months after lymphatic bypass surgery (a treatment that dec reases lymphatic fluid stasis) and  have 
found  that su bjective and objective improvements with these  surgical treatments correlate with 
decreased  CD4+ ce ll inflammation, dec reased fibrosis, and  decreased  hyperkeratosis (a clinical 
hallmark of lymphede ma).24 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 9 of 36  
  
Taken together, these  preclinical and  clinical studies strongly suggest that the pathology of 
lymphede ma is related to chronic CD4+ cell inflammation, d ifferentiation to Th2 phen otype, and 
tissue  fibrosis. Therefore, the use of antifibrotic treatments represents a novel and  targeted 
treatment of this common and morbid complication of cancer  treatment. This parad igm shift in the 
treatment of lymphed ema provides numerous applications and novel treatment s trategies for a 
disease  that has previously been  primarily treated with dubious preventative measu res and palliative 
treatment options. 
 
 
Th2 responses  are involved in other fibropr oliferative disorders.  Despite differences  in 
parench yma and function, the mechanisms that regulate fibrosis in a variety of organ systems 
including the lung, liver, kidney, and skin are largely conse rved and dependent  in large part on Th2 
cytokines. The aggregate of a large number of studies has led to the proposal of the Th2 paradigm 
hypothesis by Wynn and colleagues postulating that Th2 responses, as  we have obse rved in 
lymphede ma, are a major pathologic response  in fibroproliferative disorders.22,25 These  studies 
have led to a application of Th2 blockade in phase I and  II clinical trials for the treatment o ther 
fibrotic disorders including pulmonary fibrosis, keloids, eosinoph ilic esop hagitis, and asthma among 
others.  These studies have focused on the use of monoc lonal an tibodies against IL4 or IL13 (or 
both) since the use of targeted immunotherapy h as been  highly succes sful in a variety of diseases 
including breast cancer  (herceptin), melanoma, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, among others. 
Therefore, based  on this rationale in this protocol we propose  to use a monoclonal IL4/IL13 
neutralizing antibody  for the treatment of lymphedema. 
 
 
Blockade  of Th2 responses  is onco logically safe. T cell resposes  in gene ral, and Th2 
differentiation in particular are known regulators of breast cancer tumorigenesis.26,27   Previous 
studies have shown that breast tumors are infiltrated by Th2 cells that s trongly express IL4 and IL13 
and that these  cytokines prime tumor development by directly interacting with tumor ce lls, inhibiting 
dend ritic cell response s, and  regulating expression of cancer ce ll differentiation markers.26,28,29 Other 
studies have shown that activation of IL4/IL13 signaling pathways increases breast cancer invasion 
and propens ity for lung metastasis.30   In addition, several studies have shown that blockade of IL4 
and IL13 with neutralizing antibodies (similar to the approach proposed in this application) inhibit 
tumor growth and metastasis in a variety of tumor types including breast c ancer.26,27   These findings 
have led some authors to propose  that blockade of Th2 respon ses may be a viable strategy as 
either a mainstream or alternative method for the treatment of breast and other cance rs.31 This 
conc lusion is further supported by other studies demonstrating that blockade of Th2 responses 
increases  tumor surveillance by immune cell types in a variety of tumors.32-34    Finally, in addition to 
the wealth of experimental da ta cited above supporting our hypothesis that blockade of Th2 
responses  does  not increase  the risk of breast cancer  development, growth, or metastasis, there 
has been  no evidence  of carcinogenic potential for QBX258 or its component antibodies in long-term 
repeat dose  toxicity or preclinical primate studies (performed up to 6 months in duration).   These 
facts together lead us to conclude that the use of QBX258 and resultant IL4/IL13 blockade in breast 
cancer su rvivors is onco logically safe. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 10 of 36  
  
Volume measu rements are the gold standard  method by which efficacy of treatment for BCR L 
is measured.  Previous studies have shown that arm volume measurements over short periods of 
time (as long as 1 year) remain relatively stable unless the patient experiences  an acute 
exacerbation resulting from an infection or ce llulitis.  For example, Shaw and colleagues in a study 
on the effect of weight loss on BCRL found  very little spontaneous  changes in limb volumes in 
patients relegated to the control (i.e. no weight loss) group.35   Previous studies have also shown that 
conse rvative measu res that patients use such as compression garments or self massage also do 
not spontaneous ly decrease arm volumes; rather, these  approaches are designed to prevent 
progression of disease .36   Therefore, spon taneo us decreases in arm volumes without a clinically 
signficant intervention is unusua l. 
 
Numerous studies have shown that volume measurements have high intrarater/interrater and  
test-retest reliability (intraclass correlation coefficient=0.997) of perometer measurements37,38 able to 
detect even relatively modest cha nges in arm volume with a high degree of sensitivity and spec ificity.   
Therefore, we expect that cha nges in arm volume measurements will be a sensitive primary outcome 
measu re to analyze therapeu tic interventions for BCRL.  In addition, based  on a comprehensive 
review of the literature on previous studies reporting positive outcomes in lymphede ma treatment 
using various treatment modalities (e.g. laser, pneumatic pump devices), we have found  that 
reductions in arm volumes of 20-30% after treatment are considered to be a 
clinically significant endpoint.35,39-49    Based  on this analysis, we conclude that novel treatments such 
as Th2 blockade as proposed  in this trial would be clinically relevant if they can decrease  arm 
volumes by 20-30%.  
 
 
 
4.0 OVERVIEW OF STUDY  DESIGN/INT ERVENTION  
 
4.1 Design 
 
This will be a single arm, open  label des ign pilot study, aiming to test the efficacy of QBX258, 
a combination of two fully human monoc lonal an tibodies that ne utralize the biologic activity of 
interleukin 4 and interleukin 13 (IL4/IL13), for the treatment of stage I or II breast canc er related 
upper  extremity lymphede ma (BCRL). Patients with stage I or II BCRL (n=22) who meet the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria (see below) will be recruited to the study and base line lymphede ma 
measu rements will be performed.  Based  on these measurements, women with a minimum volume 
excess of 300 mL between the normal and  lymphede matous arm and at least 6 months postop from 
axillary lymph node  dissection will be eligible for the study. We have elected to limit the study to 
patients with stage I or II lymphede ma since previous studies have shown that an tifibrotic strategies 
are most effective in early stage disease  (i.e. when end organ failure is not complete). We have 
chosen  not to include patients with latent (stage 0) lymphede ma since these patients typically have 
very little difference  in arm volumes between the lymphede matous and normal limbs thus making it 
difficult to analyze the relative effectiveness  of our treatment on  our primary outcome measure 
(volume reduction).  Similarly, we have chosen  not to include patients with end stage (stage III) 
lymphede ma since it is unlikely that the pathologic changes that have occurred in these cases 
(usua lly over the course of many years) will be reversed with the short term treatment as proposed  
in this study. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 11 of 36  
  
Once enrolled, patients will be treated once  every 4 weeks for 4 treatments with QBX258 
followed by analysis of our primary and seconda ry outcome measures within 21 days of the last 
dose  of antibody  treatment. We will also evaluate outcome measures after a 16-20 week washout 
period to analyze the effect of treatment withdrawal on recurrence  of symptoms. During the course 
of the study, patients will continue the use of standard therapy for lymphedema (compressive 
garments, ae robic exercise, weight lifting) according to their pre-treatment directions. However, to 
avoid potential confound ing effects of manual lymphatic massage or intense physical therapy, these 
interventions will not be performed in the active treatment period. 
 
4.2 Intervention 
 
In preclinical studies we have shown that blockade of Th2 cellular differentiation using IL4 or 
IL13 antibodies markedly dec reases the pathological effects of lymphede ma and improves lymphatic 
function.3,5   Therefore, the objective of this study is to determine if a similar treatment app roach is 
effective for the treatment of BCRL, the most common cause of lymphed ema in the United States 
and Western countries. Based  on our inclusion and exclusion criteria (see below) women  with 
stage I or II BCR L with a minimum  volume excess of 300  mL and at least 6 months postop from 
axillary lymph node  dissection will be recru ited for treatment with QBX258 a monoc lonal 
IL4/IL13 neutralizing antibody  for once  every 4 weeks  for 4 treatments.  Objective/subjective 
measu res of treatment as well as the pharmacokinetics and tolerability of treatment will be 
evaluated. 
 
Prima ry objective: 
 
 
 
1) Arm volume calculations. These  measurements will be performed using a perometer 
(Volumerter; Bosl Medizintechn ick, Aschen  Germany), a non-invasive infra red scanner that 
reproduc ibly measu res the diameter of the extremity at multiple points and calculates arm volumes 
using the truncated cone  formula. The perometer has  been  shown to have excellent 
intrarater/interrater and test-retest reliability (intraclass correlation coefficient=0.997) with a greater 
than 95% specificity for lymphede ma.37,38   Analysis of arm volume is considered the “gold-standard” 
for measurement of fluid and adipose  accumulation in patients with lymphede ma and is used  in most 
lymphede ma studies to evaluate response  to treatment.  Duplicate measurements will be performed 
at base line following enrollment (0-2 weeks prior to initiation of treatment).  Measu rements will be 
performed between the hours of 8AM and 5PM and will be performed by a licensed  physical 
therapist at MSKCC .   Volume excess will be calculated as compared with the normal upper 
extremity.  Duplicate arm volumes will be re-measured within 21 days after last dose of QBX258. 
Finally, washout  measurements will be performed 16-20 weeks following the last dose  of QBX258. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 12 of 36  
  
Secon dary objectives: 
 
 
1) Bioimpedance  meas uremen ts will be performed using the ImpediMed L-DexTM U400 
device.  This device is FDA app roved for measu rement of tissue dielectric constant and  calculates 
the fluid content of tissues using differential transmission of low voltage electrical current.50 
Bioimpedance  has very high sensitivity (100%)  and specificity (98%) for lymphede ma as compared 
with limb volume measu rements.51 This approach is widely used  commercially in consu mer 
electronics as a means  of calculating body  fat composition and has  no reported side effects. The 
relative fluid content of the affected extremity is calculated by comparing the ratio of the normal and 
lymphede matous limbs using single use gel pads  similar to those used  for an EKG. Bioimpedance  
measu rements have been shown to be highly sensitive for detecting changes in fluid content in 
patients with stage I and II lymphede ma.50   Bioimpedance  measurements will be performed at the 
same sessions as the volumetric analysis. 
 
2) Skin fibrosis/elasticity will be assessed  using a non-invasive device (Elastimeter; Delfin 
Techno logies).   Skin tonometry measurements are a sensitive means  of analyzing response  to 
treatment and progression of disease  in patients with lymphede ma.40,52 The ICC for test-retest and 
interrater reliability of tonometry ranges between 0.69-0.88 and tonometry is considered to have very 
high reliability.53   The Elastimeter is a battery operated device that measures the force required to 
indent  the skin at a given location. The inden tation that is measured is minor and monitored with 
built in force sensors that measure skin elasticity based  on a low level deformation force that 
enab les instantaneo us measu rements. There is no change in skin structure and the force is applied 
for less than 3 second s. Skin fibrosis/elasticity measurements will be performed at the same 
sessions as the volumetric analysis. 
 
3) Quality of life survey (ULL 27) will be administered at the same sessions as volumetric 
analysis.  The ULL27  is validated for patients with lymphede ma, is simple to complete, and  enab les 
us to track patient reported outcomes of lymphede ma.54,55 The scale is highly precise, accurate, and 
sens itive to changes in symptoms. The ULL 27 is comprised of 27 items divided into three 
dimensions: ‘physical’ (15 items), ‘psychological’ (seven items) and ‘social’ (five items). The recall 
period is short (previous 4 weeks) enabling us to compare pre and post treatment quality of life 
measures. In addition, the ULL27 has been shown to have a high degree of sensitivity for quantifying 
clinical improvements in lymphedema symptoms. The questionna ire and scoring methods are 
appe nded to this protocol. 
 
4) Histologic outcome s. Histologic analysis of tissue changes after targeted therapy is an 
important part of this proposal as  it will enab le us to perform mechan istic analysis of response  to 
Th2 blockade. We have performed this analysis previously on nearly 200 patients in collaboration 
with our co lleagues at Stanford University, MD Anderson, and  University of Chicago and have 
shown that the biopsy procedu re is safe (no adverse effects including infections or wound  healing 
complications in any of the patients), simple to perform in an outpatient setting, and  extremely well 
tolerated (i.e. no need  for pain medications). We have published  this protocol and  results from this 
analysis in 5 peer reviewed manuscripts.2,3,24,56,57  This analysis has enab led us to validate our 
preclinical models and, as proposed  in the current study, will enab le us to analyze fibrotic and 
inflammatory responses  to treatment.   Because  of the important mechan istic information that will be 
provided by the biopsies, the pre and post treatment biopsy proced ures will not be optional. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 13 of 36  
  
5 mm punch biopsies will be obtained from the affected and normal arms. The exact location of the 
biopsy  will be determined based  on physical exam and will correspond  to the location judged to have 
the most ed ema, fibrosis, and hyperkeratosis.  The hand  will not be used for biopsy sites. The 
same location on the arm will be biopsied in both normal and  affected limbs.  Histologic analysis will 
include fibrosis (collagen depos ition, scar index), inflammation (CD4+ cells, Th2 popu lations, 
macrophages), hyperkeratosis, and  mast ce lls.  Skin biopsies will be performed at base line after 
enrollment (0-2 weeks prior to initiation of treatment) and  after conclusion of treatment (within 21 
days after last dose  of QBX258)  under sterile conditions by Dr. Mehrara or Dr. Dayan in the plastic 
surgery outpatient office. We will use  the protocol that we have previously used  in our co llaborations 
with Stanford University, MD Anderson, and  University of Chicago.2,3,24,56,57  Briefly, patients will be 
treated with a dose  of antibiotics (Keflex 500mg or clindamycin 900mg PO if allergic to PCN) 1 hour 
before procedure.  A 5 mm punch  biopsy will be performed under local an esthesia from the exact 
location in the normal and lymphede matous upper extremity as previously reported. The resulting 
wound  will be closed  with a single 5-0 suture and standard wound  care instructions will be provided. 
The patient will be seen  in followup 3-21 days to assess  proper wound  healing. 
 
5) Tolerab ility of treatment. In general, treatment with QBX258 as well as its individual 
component pa rts (VAK694 and QAX576)  in both preclinical and  clinical studies have been  well 
tolerated (see section 11 Toxicology).  There have been  no serious adverse effects directly related 
to either QBX258 or its component  monoc lonal antibodies.  In addition, minor to moderate adverse 
effects have all resolved spon taneous ly without long-term sequelae.  An objective of this study will 
be to continue these observations and report SAEs or AEs if they were to develop. 
 
6) Pharmakok inetics (PK) of QBX258. A number of clinical and  primate animal studies have 
evaluated the PK of QBX258 compone nt parts (VAK694 and QAX576). In addition, the PK of 
QBX258 has been  analyzed in one clinical study as well as long term primate animal studies. 
Therefore, a seconda ry aim of this study is to analyze the PK of QBX258 treatment. 
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/D IAGNOSTIC AGENTS 
 
• QBX258 is the combination of two antibodies (VAK694 and QAX576) developed  by Novartis 
Corporation to inhibit bioactivity of IL4 and IL13. VAK694 is a fully human monoc lonal IgG1k 
antibody  (mAb) with a specificity and high affinity for IL4 (KD= 7pM). QAX576 is a fully 
human IgG1k mAB directed against IL13 (KD = 139pM).   The drug (QBX258) as well as 
drug administration equipment (e.g. pumps, tubing) and  pharmacy instructions will all be 
supp lied by Novartis. 
• QBX258 as a combined injection of QAX576 and VAK694 is administered IV and  has been 
tested in rhesus monkeys, marmoset monkeys, and humans. 
• The Investigational New Drug Application (IND) has been  submitted by Novartis Corporation 
and approved to proceed  by the FDA (IND #107 ,646).  Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center will cross reference this IND held by Novartis Corporation. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 14 of 36  
  
Dose Calculation 
 
The doses  of the combination antibody  components of QBX258 to be used in the current study are 
based  on previous/ongoing clinical trials with VAK694 (3mg/kg) and QAX576 (6mg/kg). 
 
In a clinical study of QBX258, sequential i.v. doses of VAK69 4 (3 mg/kg) and QAX576 (0, 0.3, 1, 
3 and 6 mg/kg, 1 hour after VAK694 ) were administered on a single occasion. As expected for 
IgG1 type antibodies, the mean systemic  clearances for VAK69 4 and QAX576 were low (4.1 
mL/day/kg and 3.0 mL/day/kg, respectively). The systemic clearance for VAK69 4 was not 
modified  upon  QAX576 administration, and that for QAX576 was consistent with values observed 
in studies where QAX576 was administered alone. The mean terminal phase half-life for VAK6 94 
was 23.1 days and not  significantly affected upon QAX576 administration. The mean half-life for 
QAX576 was also  as expected (22.8 days) and in the range of values previously observed when 
QAX576 was administered alone. Given in combination on one occasion, VAK694 and QAX576 
demonstrated  typical IgG1 type kinetics and very similar profiles as compare to when given alone. 
Because they also demonstrated linear PK behaviour, no pharmacokinetic interactions are 
expected as well when these two entities will be administered together on multiple occas ions. 
 
Both VAK69 4 (3mg/kg) and QAX576 (6mg/kg) in the doses chosen for the current study have been 
generally safe and well tolerated in other clinic al trials for treatment periods up to 6 months. 
For both antibodies, adverse events have been mild to moderate and have resolved spontaneously 
without sequelae. There have been  no study drug-related SAEs for VAK694 . SAEs that have been 
suspec ted to be related to QAX576 include a possible drug interaction with acetaminophen and 
an occurrence of  Ramsay-Hunt syndrome. There were no adverse event with an expected causal 
relationship  and no fatal adverse events with a suspected causal relationship. No significant 
immunogenicity has been observed. 
 
Prepara tion and pack aging 
 
QAX576:  The drug product is a white, solid lyophilisate in 10 mL colorless glass vials with 
rubbe r stopper  and aluminum flip-off cap  to  be  recons tituted  with  water  for  injection  (WFI). 
The powder for solution for infusion/injection contains QAX576 in a formulation of histidine (pH 6.0 
± 0.5), sucrose, glycine and Polysorbate 80. The formulation does  not contain a preservative as 
it is to be used for single-dose administration only. It is a solid lyophilisate powder for solution for 
infusion/injection. It is reconstituted with 1.0 mL or 3.4 mL sterile water for injection to yield a solution 
of 150 mg/mL or 50  mg/mL QAX576, respectively, and is used  for single dose  administration only. 
 
VAK694: 150 mg is a lyophilisate to be reconstituted with 1.0 mL or 3.4 mL sterile water for 
injection to yield a solution of 150 mg/mL or 50 mg/mL VAK694 , respectively. The lyophilisate is 
formulated with histidine (pH 6.0 ± 0.5), sucrose, arginine hydrochloride and polysorbate 20. The 
formulation does not contain a preservative as it is to be used for single-dose administration only. It 
is a lyophilisate to be reconstituted with 1.0 mL or 3.4 mL sterile water for injection to yield a 
solution of 150 mg/mL or 50 mg/mL VAK694 , respectively. 
 
QAX576 and VAK694 are dosed together as a single infusion. Note that VAK694 and 
QAX576 Powder for Solution for Infusion are to be reconstituted separately. The resulting 
VAK69 4 and QAX576 Concen trates for Solution for Infusion have to be diluted into the same infusion 
bag sequentially to yield ready-to-use QBX258 Solution for Infusion. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 15 of 36  
  
Recons tituted VAK694 and QAX576 Powder for Solution for Infusion should not be mixed with 
each  other before injection of the Concen trates for Solution for Infusion into the  infusion bag. 
Investigational Product QAX576 and VAK694, will be supplied by Novartis Drug Supply Management 
as patient specific open label bulk medication. 
 
6.0 CRIT ERIA FOR SUBJECT ELIGIBILITY  
 
We will use  the following inclusion and exclusion criteria to identify potential study 
cand idates. 
 
6.1 Subject Inclusion Cr iteria 
 
• Women 18-70  with unilateral stage I or II BCRL  
• Volume difference of at least 300 mL between the normal and  lymphed ematous limb 
based  on perometry evaluation 
• BMI of 18-30 
• No current evidence of breast canc er 
• At least 6  months postop from a xillary lymph node  dissection 
• Women of childbea ring potential must be  willing to use a highly effective form of 
contraception for the duration of the trial and  for 18 weeks (5 half-lives) after the last dose 
of treatment 
 
6.2 Subject Exclusion C riteria 
 
• Bilateral lymphede ma or history of bilateral axillary lymph node  dissection 
• Recent  history of cellulitis in the affected extremity (within last 3 months) 
• Recurrent breast cancer or other malignancy  
• Current (within last month) use of chemotherapy for breast or o ther malignancy 
• Currently receiving adjuvant trastuzumab (Herceptin) 
• Current (within last 3 months) use  of radiation for breast or o ther malignancy 
• Recent (within last month) or current intensive MLD and /or sh ort stretch banda ge use 
• Unstable lymphede ma (i.e. worsening symptoms/measu rements in the past 3 months) 
• Pregnant or nursing (lactating) women 
• Stage III lymphede ma 
• Patients that take acetaminophen  (paracetamol) chronically, i.e. more than 1 g/day for 
more than 3 out of 7 days, or more than 2 g/ day for more than 1 day out of 7 days 
• Use of other investigational drugs at the time of enrollment, or within 30 days or 5 half- 
lives of enrollment, whichever is longer 
• History of hypersensitivity to any of the study drugs or to drugs of similar 
chemical classes  (e.g. monoc lonal an tibodies, polyclonal gamma globulin, po lysorbates). 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 16 of 36  
  
7.0 RECRUIT MENT PLAN 
 
Potential research subjects will be identified by treating physicians in the Plastic Surgery, 
Breast Surgery, Breast Medicine, and rehab ilitation medicine services.  If the treating physician is 
also an investigator on  the protocol, then s/he will discuss  the study with the patient. Otherwise the 
patient will be referred to a study investigator for evaluation. It is estimated that more that 30% of 
women who unde rgo axillary lymph node  dissection for the treatment of breast cancer go on to 
develop lymphede ma.  Because  these procedu res are performed commonly (approximately 
150/year desp ite the widespread use of sentinel lymph node  biopsy) a large number of patients go 
on to develop lymphede ma. In addition, beca use lymphede ma is a lifelong cond ition and our 
treatments for breast ca ncer have increased  survival, a large number of breast cancer su rvivors 
suffer from lymphed ema thus providing a large pool of patients who are eligible for the trial. 
Therefore, pa tients will be identified as they present to the individual se rvices. To increase 
awareness  of the trial, the clinical trial will also be listed on clinicaltrials.gov.  Because  breast cancer 
is most commonly diagnosed  in women, we will focus  our recruitment efforts to women. 
 
 
During the initial asses sment, the patient may be asked to provide certain health information 
that is necess ary for the recruitment and  enrollment proces s.  Specifically, the diagnosis, current 
treatments, stability, and symptoms of lymphede ma will be queried. In addition, the patient will be 
asked about  the current status of their disease, history of lymphede ma related infections, h istory of 
fibroproliferative disorders (e.g. pulmonary fibrosis, cirrhosis, keloids), history of axillary surgery, and 
the current treatment p lan for their lymphede ma. The investigator/resea rch staff may also review 
portions of her medical records at MSKCC in order to further assess  eligibility. They will use  the 
information provided by the patient and /or medical record to confirm that the patient is eligible and to 
contact the patient regarding study enrollment. If the patient is ineligible for the research study, the 
resea rch staff will des troy all information collected on the patient during the initial con versation and 
medical records review, except for any  information that must be maintained for screening log 
purposes. If the woman agrees to study participation, a conse nting individual (listed below in section 
15.1) will obtain informed consent  from the patient un til a goal of 22 eligible patients are entered into 
the study in order to have 20 evaluable patients. 
 
In the majority of cases, we expect that the initial contact with prospe ctive subjects will be 
conduc ted by the treatment team or investigators/research staff working in consu ltation with the 
treatment team. The recruitment p rocess outlined in this application presents no more than minimal 
risk to the privacy of potential subjects and minimal PHI will be maintained as part of a screening 
log.  As a result, we request a (partial) limited waiver of authorization in order to (1) 
review medical records to identify potential research subjects and obtain information relevant to the 
enrollment p rocess; (2) Discuss  potential en rollment with patients; (3) handling of PHI con tained 
within those  records and provided by the potential sub jects; and (4) maintaining information in a 
screening log of patients approached  (if applicable). 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 17 of 36 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Once a suitable cand idate is identified and volume difference  of at least 300 mL between the  
 normal and  lymphede matous limbs is confirmed using perometry, the patient will be offered the 
oppo rtunity to join the study.  The discussion process will include the rationale for the study including 
the pathological processes involved, the goals of the study, the length of the study, measurements 
an analyses to be performed, the expected time commitment and number of clinic visits. 
Investigators will discuss  with the patient that the proposed  trial is a short-term treatment rather than 
a cure for lymphede ma and that we expect that the symptoms of lymphed ema will recurr once 
treatment has been  terminated. The risks of the treatment including potential adverse reactions, 
transfusion/infusion reactions, and hypersensitivity reactions will be discussed  in detail with the 
patient. In addition, we will discuss  the time commitment of the protocol a nd schedu le for followup 
visits, measurements, biopsies, and blood draws. 
 
 
 
8.0 PRETREATMENT EVALUATION 
 
The pretreatment evaluation will aim to quantify the objective and subjective chan ges of 
lymphede ma. This analysis will include: 
 
1)  Physical Examination will be performed to evaluate lymphadenopa thy, evidence  of cancer 
recurrence, and  general physical hea lth.  This will include vital signs as well as height/weight 
measu rements. 
 
2)  Urine Pregnancy  test will be administered prior to enrollment into the study and prior to each 
monthly drug treatment. Although QBX258 treatment has not e xhibited evidence  of maternal toxicity 
in multiple preclinical trials with marmoset monkeys, there was a trend towards an increased  rate of 
spon taneous  abortions in these  studies.  However, fetuses that were born to monkeys treated with 
QBX258 had normal fetal developmental pa rameters and there was no evidence  of teratogenicity. 
Therefore, pa tients capable of childbea ring recruited to the study will be required to use highly 
effective birth control measures whilst participating in the QBX258 t r ia l and for at least 18 weeks ( 
5 half-lives) after the last dose of QBX258. 
 
3)  Arm volume meas urements will be performed in duplicate at base line using a perometer (Pero- 
Systems).   Measu rements will be performed by a licensed  physical therapist at the out patient 
physical therapy office located at 53rd and Madison Avenue  between the hours of 8AM and 3PM. 
The perometer is a non-invasive infrared scanner that measu res the circumference  of the upper 
extremity at multiple points.  Volumes are then calculated using the truncated cone  formula. This 
analysis is highly reproducible and accurate avoiding the need  for traditional volume measurements 
(fluid displacement) or manual limb circumference  measurements.  Volume excess will be calculated 
as compared with the normal (i.e. co ntralateral) upper extremity. 
 
4)  Bioimpedance  meas uremen ts will be performed to compare the no rmal and lymphede matous limbs 
using the ImpediMed L-DexTM U400 device. The ImpediMed device is FDA approved and is used  to 
estimate the fluid content of tissues  based  on resistance  to transmission of electrical current. These  
measurements are simple to perform and  are highly accurate in analyzing chan ges in early stage 
lymphede ma. Bioimpedance measurements will be performed in duplicate at the same time as 
volume measu rements. 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 18 of 36 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
 
5)  Skin fibrosis will be assessed  at the same session as arm volume measurement using a tonometer  
 (Elastimeter; Delfin Techonolgies).  Duplicate measures of a point located 10 cm above and 10 cm 
below the olecranon  process on the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the limb will be recorded.  Skin 
fibrosis resulting from hyperkeratosis and fibrosis is a characteristic feature of lymphede ma. 
 
6)  Quality of life survey (ULL27 ) will be administered upon  enrollment to quan tify the subjective 
measu res of lymphede ma. These questionna ires are validated lymphede ma specific surveys and 
are simple to perform and have been  used  in previous lymphede ma trials performed at MSKCC. 
The questionna ires will be administered within 6 weeks enrollment and prior to the start of therapy. 
 
 
 
7)  Histologic analysis.  A defining feature of lymphede ma is skin fibrosis and inflammation. We have 
previously compared skin biopsy specimens from the normal and  lymphede matous limbs of patients 
to analyze inflammatory changes and, more recently, to evaluate tissue changes that occur after 
lymphede ma surgery. These  biopsies have been  performed in over 200  patients under IRB 
approved protocols by our collaborators at Stanford University, MD Anderson Medical Center, and 
The University of Chicago  and have been  well tolerated with minimum pa in, no surgical 
complications, and  most importantly no postoperative infections. 
 
The proced ure will be performed using strict sterile protocol and  a single pre-procedure dose 
of antibiotics.   A 5  mm punch  biopsy will be obtained from the volar surface of the affected and 
normal arms. The exact location of the biopsy will be determined based on physical exam and will 
correspond  to the location judged to have the most edema, fibrosis, and  hyperkeratosis.  The hand 
or wrist will not be used for biopsy sites. The same location on the arm will be biopsied in both 
normal and  affected limbs. The biopsy will then be fixed and embedded  for histological ana lysis. 
This pretreatment biopsy specimen will be compared with post-treatment biopsies to analyze 
treatment efficacy for decreasing inflammation and fibrosis using our previously published protocols. 
Skin biopsies (both normal and  lymphede matous arms) will be performed before and after treatment. 
 
Histologic analysis of biopsy specimens will be performed using our previoulsy published 
reports to analyze inflammation and tissue fibrosis.1-5,20,57 Briefly, CD4+ and  Th2 cells will be 
identified and quantified using immunoh istochemical staining according to our previously published 
protocols.3   In addition, we will ana lyze the degree of tissue fibrosis using collagen staining and 
analysis of Sirius Red Birifringence (scar index) according to our previously published  methods.  It is 
important to note that in our previous studies we have shown that the severity of lymphed ema 
clinically is positively correlated with the number of CD4+ ce lls, the number of Th2 cells, and  the 
degree of tissue fibrosis. In addition, in other c linical studies comparing pre and postoperative tissue 
biopsy samples in patients who unde rwent lymphovenous  bypass proced ures (a surgical treatment 
that a ims to bypasses  the obstructed lymphatic system to the venous  circulation) we have found that 
the severity of CD4+ ce ll inflammation and fibrosis decreased  signficantly after surgery and that this 
response  correlarted with symptomatic improvement.24 
 
 
8)  Routine Blood draw. A pretreatment complete blood count  and differential will be performed within 
one month of starting the trial to establish base line values for co mplete blood coun t, basic metabolic 
pane l, and liver enzymes. 
 
9)  Research  Blood draw. A pretreatment PK ana lysis measurement blood draw will be performed. 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 19 of 36 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4)  
  
10) Urine Analysis will be performed to rule out pre-existing urinary cond itions. 
 
 
 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  PLAN 
 
Once patients are registered for the trial, they will be treated with QBX258 (VAK694 3mg/kg 
and QAX576 6mg/kg) delivered via peripheral intravenous  injection once  every 4 weeks (+ 1 week) 
for 4 treatments.  Intravenous  access  will be limited to the non-lymphed ematous limb and will be 
performed using standa rd techn iques.  Infusions will be performed at the Breast Center (BAIC, 66th 
street) and  patients will monitored at the infusion center. The infusions will take approximately 2 
hours and patients will be monitored for 2 hou rs after the completion of infusion. As a result, we 
expect a total time of approximately 4 hours for each infusion session. Infusions will be ordered by 
medical onco logists listed on the protocol. 
 
10.0 EVALUATION D URING TREATMENT/INT ERVENTION  
 
Overview of study: 
 
 Study Phase Screening Baseline Treatment/FU Outcome Washout 
 
Weeks - -2 to 0 0 4 8 12 12-15 28(+3)-32 (+3) 
         
Inclusion/Exc. x x       
Demographics x x       
Physical Exam  x     x x 
Pregna ncy Test  x x x x x   
Evaluation of 
acute transfusion 
reaction   x x x x   
Pharmacokinetics  x x x x x x  
Height  x       
Weight  x     x x 
Temperature  x x x x x x x 
Vital signs  x x x x x x x 
ECG  x     x  
CBC  x     x  
Metabo lic panel  x     x  
Liver Enzymes  x     x  
Urine Analysis  x     x  
Arm Volumes  x     x x 
Bioimpeda nce  x     x x 
Tonometry  x     x x 
QO L 
questionna ire  x     x x 
Skin Biopsy  x     x  
Adverse event 
Check  x x x x x x x 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 20 of 36 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4)  
 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
In order to calculate the pharmacokinetics of both component antibodies of QBX258, blood 
draws will be performed from study subjects according to the following schedule: 
Initial day of dosing: Blood draw will be performed within 30 minutes after the conclusion of infusion + 
5 minutes 
Day 15 (+3 days) after 1st dose 
Days 29, 43, 57, 71, 85, 99, 113, and 141 (+ 3 days) after 1st dose;  Day 183 after 1st dose (+ 10 
days) 
Blood samples will be taken either by  direct venipunc ture or an  indwelling cannu la inserted in 
the normal (i.e. non-lymphede matous) hand  or forearm vein.  At the specified time points, 4ml of 
blood will be collected in tubes  with EDTA as an anticoagulant to obtain 4 aliquots of at least 0 .3ml 
of plasma.  All samples will be given a unique sample number and  a collection number (de-identified 
of all patient information). The actual sample collection date and time will be entered on the PK 
blood collection page. Samples will be kept up right at -70 degrees celcius on site and sent in batch 
shipments as necessa ry to AtlanBio for ana lysis (Z.I. de Brais - 1 rue Graham Bell, 44600  Saint 
Nazaire; France). The plan for PK blood collection is summarized in the diagram be low. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation of acute infusion reaction and tolerability of QAX258. 
 
The risk of anaph ylaxis or  anaphylactoid reactions is present but is minimized due to fact 
that QAX576 and VAK694 are fully human monoclonal antibodies. Anaphylactic reactions are much 
less common to human mAbs than mouse, chimeric or humanized mAbs.58 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 21 of 36 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4)  
  
Although very rare, if these reactions occur, they usually do so after the first or any 
subsequent intravenous administration of the drug. Therefore, vital signs will be assessed  after 
initiation of infusion and repea ted every hour  after infusion for a total of 2 hours . Patients will 
be closely monitored and will be evaluated by staff trained in the  management of infusion reactions 
and anaph ylaxis. 
 
As with any drug, there is a small chance  that subjects will experience an allergic reaction 
to   the  medicine,  such  as  an  allergic  skin  rash,  or  hives.   There   may   be   unknown   or 
unforeseeab le risks. We do not  anticipate that the combination of both antibodies poses a high 
risk of allergic reactions based on data with the individual components.   Nevertheless, patients will 
be contacted by telephone  within 96 hours  after administration of each dose  of QX258 and 
queried regarding allergic reactions or systemic symptoms including rash, hives, fevers, nause a, 
vomiting, malaise, head aches,  arthralgias, urticaria, and palpitations.  The telephone  contact will be 
performed by the study RSA.  This contact information (person calling and patient reports) will be 
recorded in a log created for each  patient at the onset  of the study.   The log will be kept on a 
secu re server.  Patients will be instructed to call or contact study investigators if symptoms develop 
after this period.  In addition, patients will be queried about  these  symptoms prior to initiation of 2nd, 
3rd, and 4th  infusions.  The patient specific log will be upda ted at these time points by the study 
RSA.  This plan is based on the experience with other FDA monoclonal antibody treatments (e.g. 
Remicade®) .  Patients who report symptoms or potential adverse effects will be evaluated in 
person and poss ible relationsh ip to the study will be assesse d. 
 
 
Examination of biop sy sites and wound healing 
 
Biopsy  sites in both the lymphede matous and normal limbs will be asses sed by a conse nting 
physician or licensed  practitioner 3 -21 days after the proced ure to ensure that it is healing 
appropriately and  rule out evidence  of infection. Any potential infections will be reported and treated 
with antibiotics. 
 
Pregnancy test 
 
Given the potential reproductive toxicity of Th2 blockade (see section below on toxicity), a 
urine pregnancy  test will be administered to volunteers of childbea ring age upon  enrollment and 
before each  infusion. 
 
Outcome measures of lymphedema treatment 
 
Outcome measures of lymphede ma will be assessed  as outlined above and include limb 
volume measu rements, bioimpedance,  skin fibrosis/elasticity, QOL surveys, and histologic analysis. 
Volumetric analysis, bioimpedance, skin fibrosis/elasticity, and QOL surveys will be assessed  within 
21 days of the last dose  of QBX258 and after a washout  period of 16-20 weeks.  In addition, the 
patients weight will be checked at each  time point. 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 22 of 36 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4)  
  
11.0 TOXICITI ES/SIDE EFFECTS 
 
Identifying and reporting of toxicity or complications  
 
We will utilize the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 for 
grading of all adverse events.  A copy of the CTACE V4.03 can be downloaded  from the CTEP 
home page (http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html).  All investigators and treatment areas will 
have access  to a copy of the CTCAE V4.03 
 
 
Definition of an  Adverse  event:  Any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory  finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medical treatment 
or procedure regardless of whether it is considered related to the medical treatment or procedure 
(attribution of unrelated, unlikely, possible, probable, or definite). [CTEP, NCI Guidelines: Adverse 
Event Reporting Requirements. January 2005 ;http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/adeers.html]) 
 
 
Definition of an SAE: Any adverse experience occurring during any part of protocol treatment and 
30 days after that results in any of the following outcomes: 
 
 
• Death; 
• A life-threatening adverse drug experience; 
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization; 
• A persistent or significant disability/incapacity; 
 
 
Important   medical   events   that   may  not   result   in   death,   be   life  threatening,  or   require 
hospitalization may be co nsidered an SAE, when, based upon medical judgment, they may 
jeopardize the patient and may require medical or  surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
outcomes  listed  in  the  definition.  Any  pregnancy  occurring  on  study  will  be  reported as a 
medically significant event. 
 
 
All AEs and  SAEs will be repor ted to the IRB and sponsor ing institution as ou tlined in 
section 17.2 below.   In the event of a grade III or IV SAE, the study will be halted until 
causa lity is determined. 
 
 
Patients who experience  AE or SAE will be managed by the Breast medical onco logists and plastic 
surgery attendings listed on the protocol. Any potential wound  healing issues  or complications will 
be addressed  by plastic surgery and  consu ltation with Breast Medicine as necessa ry.  In the event 
that hosp ital admission is required for management of an SAE, patients will be admitted to the 
Plastic Surgery Service with close consu ltation and management with the Breast Medical Oncology 
Service. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 23 of 36  
  
Potential toxicity related to QB X258 treatment in pr eviously conducted trials: QBX258 
has been sho wn to be well tolerated in both preclinical studies and hu man trials. In animal studies 
using Rhesus  monkeys treated with escalating doses  of QBX258 up to a dose  of 100mg/kg, there 
were  no   QBX258  treatment-related  deaths.  There  were  no  QBX258-related  clinical  signs  or 
changes in  bodyweight, food consumption, ophthalmic examinations, ECG, heart rate or blood 
pressure.  There  were  no  effects  on  clinical  pathology,  hematology,  clinical   chemistry   and 
urinalysis investigations. There were no effects either on peripheral b lood lymphocyte 
immunopheno typing parameters or on immune function (generation of a primary  and secondary T 
cell-dependent IgM and IgG antibody  response to KLH). There were no effects on organ weight 
or in macroscopic or microscopic observations, including no effects  on extended histopathology 
of lymphoid organs. 
Similarly, in the first study of QBX258 in humans, sequential intravenous  doses  of VAK694 
(3mg/kg) and  QAX256 (up to 6mg/kg) on a single occas ional were safe and well tolerated. In a 
different study of 40 subjects with bronchial as thma, QBX258 treatment was well tolerated with no 
significant imbalance  of adverse events between patients treated with QBX258 and placebo.  A 
single serious adverse effect was reported for a subject who was hosp italized following a snake bite 
and required hosp italization.  A second  patient had an increase in CPK, however this was not 
suspec ted to be associated with the drug.  Most other ad verse events (e,g. headache, e tc) were mild 
or moderate and resolved spon taneo usly. 
 
The  potential  on -target  risk  of  QBX258  is  further  mitigated  by  experience  with  other 
biological compounds that targeted the actions of IL-4 and IL-13 in humans. For example, trials 
using antibodies  to IL4Ra59  and IL-1360   have been  reported to be well tolerated without significant 
adverse events. 
 
Potential  toxicity  related  to  individual  compon ents  of  QBX258  (VAK694  and 
QAX576 ). Because  QBX258 is a combination of 2 sepa rate monoc lonal an tibodies (VAK694 and 
QAX576), the known toxicity of these individual compone nts and the combination drug are listed 
below. 
 
VAK694 has been  well tolerated when administered to human subjects in doses  ranging from a 
single infusion of 0.1mg/kg to healthy individuals to four sequential infusions of 3mg/kg given every 
4 weeks to subjects with seasonal  allergic rhinitis.  There have been  no study d rug related SAEs. 
Adverse effects have been  mild to moderate and have resolved spon taneous ly.  No significant 
immunogenicity has been obse rved. 
• Doses  as high as 100mg/kg/dose  (more than 30 times the dose administered in humans) 
administered once  weekly for 4 weeks in cynommolgus monkeys were well tolerated with 
and no treatment or dose level related effects were observed.  There were no clinical signs 
indicative of neurobeha vioral effects or quantitative electrocardiographic changes. There 
were no effects on the injection site, body weight, ophthalmology, electrocardiography, 
hematology, clinical biochemistry, immunoche mistry, urinalysis, or organ weights. There 
were no spontaneous  tumors. 
• As of July 2013,  3 VAK694 studies have been  completed with one study in healthy 
volunteers and two studies in patients with seasonal rhinitis.  A total of 61 subjects have 
received VAK694. Single doses  up to 1mg/kg in healthy volunteers,  multiple doses  up to 
1mg/kg weekly x 3 to asymptomatic patients with allergic rhinitis, and  multiple doses  of 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 24 of 36  
  
3mg/kg every 4 weeks x 4 in patients with seaso nal allergic rhinitis were safe and well 
tolerated. 
• There has been  a single SAE in patients treated with VAK694 (hosp italization for acute 
append icitis) which was not considered to be related to the study drug.  Adverse events have 
been  mild to moderate and have resolved spon taneous ly without sequela.  These  included 
once  case of nasal co ngestion, once case of pharyngolaryngeal pa in, 1 patient with a 
headache,  and 1 case of traumatic injury of the knee  joint. 
 
 
QAX576 has been  generally safe and well tolerated in doses  up to 6mg/kg every three 
weeks or 10 mg/kg every 4 weeks up to 6 months. SAEs suspe cted to be related to QAX576 include 
a poss ible drug interaction with acetaminophen  and an occurrence of Ramsay-Hunt Syndrome. 
There were no adverse events with an expected causal relationsh ip and no fatal ad verse events with 
a  suspected causal  relationsh ip. 
 
 
• Doses  as high as 100mg/kg/twice weekly for up  to 13 weeks to marmoset monkeys (>15 fold 
of doses  to humans) intravenous ly had no significant toxicological or local tolerability effects. 
There was no evidence  of immunotoxcity.  There were no drug related changes in body 
weight, food consumptions, ophthalmoscop y, electrocardiography, colorectal pathology, 
clinical che mistry or urinalysis, organ weight, or macroscopic organ changes. There was 
also no maternal toxicity however, the incidence  of prenatal loss was increased  modestly. 
• As of December 2012, 10 clinical trials with QAX576 have been  completed or terminated 
after enrolling some patients; 3 in healthy volunteers and 7 in patients. The trials consisted 
of allergic rhinitis, pulmonary fibrosis, keloid, and other Th2 related disorders.  A total of 168 
patients have participated in phase  I programs and 227 in phase 2 programs. The programs 
have included  both women and men in ages ranging from 18-80. 
• In a study of 24 healthy volunteers, There were no clinically significant changes noted on 
safety assessments including vital signs, blood chemistries, hematology, urinalysis, physical 
examinations and electrocardiogram measurements at all dose  levels. No SAEs were 
reported in this study. A t o t al o f 2 adv er s e e f f ec t s w er e r epor t ed : one subject 
experienced  a mild headache  and an upper respiratory infection which was not felt to be 
related to QAX576. In another s tudy, one  subject experienced  a severe episode  of migraine 
that was not suspected to be related to QAX576. One patient developed  mild arthralgia 
which resolved spon taneously.  No immunogenicity signal was detected and no positive 
antibodies to QAX576 were reported up to 28 days after the study drug administration. 
• In a multiple dose study in patients with pulmonary fibrosis second ary to systemic sclerosis, 
five serious adverse events were reported in 2 patients. One patient e xperienced 
hypotension with mild tachycardia, and pneumonia post bronchosc opy. Another patient 
suffered an episode of pseudo -bowel obs truction. These  SAEs were judged by the principal 
investigator as  not to be related to the study drug. 
• In a doub le blind placebo  controlled study of asthma, a patient injured his back after the 
second  dose  of study medicated and was prescribed paracetamol.  Afterwards the patient 
presen ted with some adverse events which lead to hosp italization for the treatment of 
potential pa racetamol overdose.  
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 25 of 36  
  
Potential toxicity related to Th2  blockade 
 
Infection. Published studies in mice deficient in either cytokine alone do not demonstrate 
an  increased susceptibility to parasitic diseases, reproductive abnormalities, or alterations in 
humoral response.61 Nevertheless, mice that lack both  IL-4 and IL-13 clear intestinal infection with 
helminthes more slowly than wild-type mice or  mice that lack either cytokine alone.62 Given that 
patients enrolled in our study are unlikely to suffer from pa rasitic disease s, we feel that this is a low 
risk potential toxicity. 
 
 
Reproductive toxicity. No reproductive abnormalities have been described in mice lacking 
IL-4 and IL-13.62  While the risk of embryofetal toxicity with VAK694 is presently unknown, preliminary 
data from embryo-fetal development (EFD) and combined  EFD pre-/post-natal development  
(PPND) studies with QAX576 in the marmoset do not  exclude an adverse impact of IL-13 
suppression on the pregnancy outcome.  Furthermore, data in animals and in humans su pport a role 
for Th2 cytokines, including IL-13  and IL-4, in the maintenance of pregnancy.63 No 
teratogenic effects of QAX576 have been  observed. No overt pheno typic abnormalities have been 
obse rved in mice in which both IL-4 and IL-13  have been  disrupted.62    Nevertheless, a 
teratogenic effect of  therapeutic  neutralization of both IL-4 and IL-13 cannot be excluded. For 
these reasons, we will exclude pregnant and lactating women from pa r t i c i pat i on i n t he t r i al .   I n 
addi t i on, w e w i l l c ar ef ul l y m oni t or v o l unt eer s f or pr e g nanc y bef or e and dur i ng t h e 
t r ia l.   Female subjects of child-bearing potential must use highly effective measures of 
contraception (see below) whilst participating in the QBX258 t r ia l and for at least 18 weeks ( 5 
half-lives) after the last dose QBX258. Women who are considered post-menopausal and  not of child 
bearing potential i.e. if they have had 12 months of natural (spontaneous)  amenorrhea with an 
appropriate clinical profile (e.g. age appropriate, history of vasomotor symptoms) will not be required 
to use contraception. 
 
Highly effective contraception methods  are defined as: 
 
• Total abs tinenc e: when this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject. 
[Periodic abstinence  (e.g. calenda r, ovulation, s ymptothermal, post o vulation methods) and 
withdrawal are not acce ptable methods  of contraception], or 
• Documented history of sterilization: surgical bilateral oopho rectomy (with or without 
hysterectomy) or tubal ligation at least s ix weeks before taking study treatment. 
• Documented history of male partner sterilization or 
• Use of a combination of any two of the following (a+b or a+c, or b +c): 
a. Use of oral, injected or implanted hormonal methods  of contraception (in case of use of 
oral con traception women shou ld have been  stable on the same pill for a minimum of 3 
months before taking study treatment), 
b. Placement of an intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS), 
c. Barrier methods  of contraception: Condom or Occlusive cap (diaphragm or 
cervical/vault caps)  with spermicidal foam/gel/film/cream/vaginal suppos itory. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 26 of 36  
  
Liver toxicity. In a mouse model of acetaminophen-induced liver toxicity, in which liver 
damage is associated with increased circulating IL-13, pre-treatment with a neutralizing  antibody 
to IL-13 exacerbated the extent of liver injury.64    Similar findings  were obtained in IL-13 
knockout mice that received high doses of acetaminophen. These data  suggest a possible 
hepatoprotective role for IL-13, and ingestion of acetaminophen (paracetamol) w ill  b e 
limited in this clinical study. To date, liver toxicity has not been seen in QAX576 human clinical 
trials, however, patients enrolled in this study will be advised to avoid using acetaminophen until the 
trial has completed. 
 
 
 
Potential comp lications related to biop sy 
 
Biopsy  of lymphed ematous and normal arms are an important aspe ct of this application as 
these  procedu res will enable us to determine if Th2  blockade is succes sful in reversing the 
pathologic tissue changes assoc iated with lymphede ma. In addition, these  studies are critical for 
performing mechan istic studies that may further our studies and unde rstanding of lymphede ma. We 
have performed these  procedu res in over 200 patients in collaboration with our co lleagues at 
Stanford University, MD Anderson Cancer Center, and the University of Chicago.  No adverse 
events have been  reported in these  studies and all wounds  have healed uneventfully without 
evidence  of infection, delayed healing, pain, or lymph leak.  As a result, we expect that we will have 
similar results in the current proposa l. If adverse effects (i.e. delayed healing, infection, lymph leak 
etc) are identified, then these  will be reported immediately to the principal investigators and the IRB 
and appropriate treatments including antibiotic treatment (PO or IV depe nding on severity of 
infection), debridement, and further management will be instituted as necessary. 
 
Potential toxicity or complications related to measureme nts 
 
Measu rements performed in this study (perometry, bioimpedance, tonometry) are all non- 
invasive and we do not expect to experience  any AEs.  Similarly, the patient reported outcome 
questionna ires administered in this study have been  validated and used  in hund reds of patients 
without any significant adverse events. 
 
 
 
 
12.0 CRIT ERIA FOR TH ERAPEUTIC R ESPONSE/OUTCO ME ASSES SMENT 
 
Patients will be considered evaluable if they provide both a base line and follow-up arm 
volume measu rements.   If biopsy data or time points from PK ana lysis measurement are not 
available at followup due to patient des ire to avoid additional su rgery or a missed  blood draw 
appo intment, then the remainder of the outcomes will be analyzed.  Similarly, if impeda nce, 
tonometry, or QOL data are not available, then other measu res available will be analyzed. 
Therapeu tic volume changes in the arm will be calculated using the methods published  by Anderson 
et al (2000 ).65   Briefly, the difference  in volume measu rments between the normal and 
lymphede matous arms at base line (i.e volume excess) will be compared to the volume differential 
after drug treatment and following the washout  period using the following formula: 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 27 of 36  
  
(VL-VN) B - (VL-VN) F 
 
VL = Volume of the lymphede matous arm 
VN = Volume of the normal arm 
B= Baseline 
F = Follow up 
 
 
 
13.0 CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY 
 
Patients will be removed from the study according to the following criteria: 
 
• Significant toxicity, persistent AE or SAE related or unrelated to the treatment. 
• If at any  time the patient is diagnosed  or de velops recurrent breast canc er or suspicious 
chan ges on laboratory or radiological testing sugges tive of malignanc y. 
• Subject non -compliance  with infusions, measurements/analysis at the appropriate time 
intervals. 
• Voluntary wish of the subject to withdraw from the protocol. 
• Development of cellulitis or infection of the affected extremity. 
• Significant progression of lymphede ma volume changes during treatment (greater than 30% 
increase  in limb volume as assessed  by perometry). 
• Unexpected pregnancy  or non-compliance  with the use of birth control methods 
 
The study will be halted in the event of a grade 3 or 4 SAE until investigation of causa lity with 
drug treatment is concluded. At this point if the SAE is not thought to be caused  by drug treatment, 
then the treatment plan will be reviewed with the company  and the IRB to decide if the study shou ld 
be restarted. 
 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS 
 
This is a prospe ctive, longitudinal, open  label p ilot study designed to evaluate the efficacy of 
QBX258, a monoc lonal antibody  treatment designed to block biologic activity of interleukin 4 (IL4) 
and interleukin 13 (IL13).  Our primary end point is volume changes as measured by perometry. 
Our second ary endpo ints include pharmacokinetics, bioimpeda nce measurements, skin tonometry, 
the ULL27  lymphed ema questionna ire, and  histologic studies. 
 
Sample size calculation:  Based  on a review of the literature, reductions of 20-40% in the extent of 
excess lymphede ma volume before and after various interventions such as weight loss or co ld laser 
have been  reported. 35,39-49   However, these  interventions have not gained widesp read clinical 
incorporation due to compliance  issues  (weight loss) and time intensive nature of the therapies. 
However, it is commonly accep ted that a 30% reduction to any potential therapy for lymphede ma is 
a good clinical response  and worthy of additional study. We will therefore consider an average 
decrease  of 30% in arm volume excess in the cohort as a therapeu tic response.  Previous studies 
have also shown that the minimum measurable change in volume is 60-75 cc.66   Therefore, based 
on these findings we have used  a minimum volume excess of 300 cc  between the normal and 
lymphede matous arms as an inclusion criterion measu rable. Thus, a excess volume reduction in a 
patient who has a volume excess of 300 cc prior to treatment would be equal to a 90cc reduc tion, 
which is greater than the minimal measurable change of 60-75cc (). 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 28 of 36  
  
Using data from the weight loss study sited in the Background  section in which perometer 
measu ments were used to calculate limb volumes before and after weight loss, we assume a 
base line mean excess lymphede ma volume of 802ml and  a standa rd deviation of 325 for the 
difference  in pre and post treatment excess volume. With a sample size of 20 patients, we can 
detect a  30% reduction in excess volume (236ml difference between pre and post treatment) with 
90% power and 5% type I error.  Assuming a 10% drop out rate, we will therefore plan on accruing 
22 patients to meet our study goal. 
 
 
We expect to accrue approximately two patients per month and will complete accrual within one 
year. 
 
Analysis of primary  objective:  Our primary aim is to establish the difference in the extent of 
excess lymphede ma volume before and after treatment with QBX258. The extent of excess 
lymphede ma volume is defined as the difference  between the volume of the lymphede matous arm 
and the normal arm at each time point (i.e. Prior to treatment; after treatment, and  after washou t). 
Since the volume measurement at each  time point is taken in duplicate, the average between the 
duplicate measurements will be used  to calculate the excess lymphede ma volume; see section 
12.0). The difference in the extent of lymphed ema between time points will be assessed  with paired 
two-sided t-tests comparing the post-treatment and washout  measurements with the pre-treatment 
measu rements and the post-treatment measurements with the washout measu rements.  In addition, 
we will ana lyze the effect of potential confound ing variables such as pre treatment BMI on volume 
reduc tion using analysis of covariance  (ANCOVA) with the arm volume difference  after completion of 
treatment as the outcome variable and base line volume difference  and BMI as covariates. We will 
report a two-tailed p-value and a 95% confidence  interval for the difference  between groups. Data 
will be presen ted graphically to facilitate analysis. 
 
Analysis of secondary  objectives: 
 
Tolerability will be evaluated using toxicity data and will be tabulated by severity.  ULL-27 
questionna ire responses  will be graded  and scored according to previously published methods  (see 
Append ix A).   Changes in each  symptom sca le (physical, psychological and  socia l) as well as the 
overall score will be compared pre and postn treatment using paired two-sided t-tests. The 
bioimpedance  and tonometry measurements yield continuous  variables and will be analyzed using 
paired t-tests.  Similarly, histologic analysis of the biopsy specimens will yield data on the number of 
CD4+ cells, the number of Th2 cells, and the degree of tissue fibrosis, all of which are also 
continuous  variables. These variables will be compared pre and post treatment us ing paired t-tests. 
For phamacokinetic analysis, mean volume of distribution at steady  state (Vss),mean total systemic 
clearancea nd the mean distribution half-life (t1/2α) will be calculated using published methods. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 29 of 36  
  
15.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURE S 
 
15.1 Research  Participant Registration 
Confirm eligibility as defined in the section entitled Criteria for Patient/Subject Eligibility. 
Obtain informed consent, by following procedures defined in section entitled Informed 
Consent  Procedu res. 
 
During the registration process  registering individuals will be required to complete a protocol 
spec ific Eligibility Checklist. 
 
All participants must be registered through the Protocol Participant Registration (PPR) Office 
at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. PPR is available Monday through Friday from 
8:30am – 5:30pm at 646-735-8000. Registrations must be submitted via the PPR Electronic 
Registration System (http://ppr/). The completed signature page of the written consent/RA or 
verbal sc ript/RA, a completed Eligibility Checklist and other relevant documents must be 
uploaded  via the PPR Electronic Registration System. 
 
15.2 Random ization 
 
This is an open  label trial and  rando mization will not be required. 
 
16.0 DATA MANAGEMENT ISSUES  
 
A Resea rch Study Assistant (RSA) will be assigned to the study and will be respons ible for 
project compliance, da ta collection, abstraction and entry, data reporting, regulatory monitoring, 
problem resolution and prioritization, and coordination of the activities of the protocol study team. 
The data collected for this study will be entered into a secured database  (Clinical Resea rch 
Database, CRDB ) at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer  Center.  Source documentation will be 
available to suppo rt the computerized patient record. 
 
 
We will administer the ULL27  questionna ire via either paper  forms in private areas of waiting 
rooms at the MSKCC 60th street Plastic Surgery offices, the 64th Street Breast Cancer Center, or 
the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine located at 53rd and Madison Avenues.  The QOL 
survey will be completed prior to initiation of therapy, at the conclusion of therapy, and after a 
washout  period as outlined above and will be brought to the patients by the study RSA and 
collected after completion.  The data collected in this manner will be entered into a secured 
database  (Clinical Resea rch Database, CRDB ) at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. 
Source documentation will be available to suppo rt the computerized patient record and will be 
kept in a secure locked cabinet. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 30 of 36  
  
16.1 Quality Assurance  
 
Registration reports will be generated to monitor patient accruals and completeness  of 
registration data.  Routine data quality reports will be generated to assess  missing data and 
incons istencies.  Accrual rates and extent and  accuracy of evaluations and follow-up will be 
monitored periodically throughout the study and potential problems will be brought to the 
attention of the study team for discuss ion and action. 
 
 
Rando m-Sample data quality and protocol compliance  audits will be conducted by the study 
team, at a minimum of two times per year and more frequently if indicated. 
 
 
16.2 Data and Safety Monitoring 
 
The Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM) plans at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer 
Center were approved by the National Cancer  Institute in September 2001. The plans 
address the new policies set forth by the NCI in the docu ment entitled "Policy of the 
National Cancer Institute for Data and Safety Monitoring of Clinical Trials" which can be 
found  at: http://mskweb2.mskcc.org/irb/index.htm. 
 
 
Clinical trials are monitored by a number of different mechan isms to ensue  data 
safety and quality.  Institutional p rocess es are in place for quality assurance (e.g. protocol 
monitoring, compliance  and data verification audits, therapeutic response s, and staff 
educa tion on clinical research).  In addition, there are depa rtmental procedures for quality 
control as well as two institutional c ommittees that are respons ible for monitoring the 
activities of our clinical trials programs. The committees: Data and Safety Monitoring 
Committee (DSMC) for Phase  I and  II clinical trials, and the Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB) for Phase  III clinical trials, report to the Center’s Research Counc il and 
Institutional Review Board. 
 
 
During the protocol de velopment and  review process, each protocol will be assessed  for 
it’s level of risk and degree of monitoring required. Every type of protocol (e.g., NIH 
sponso red, in-house  sponsored, indus trial spons ored, NCI coop erative group, etc.) will 
be addressed  and the monitoring procedu res will be established  at the time of protocol 
activation. 
 
 
17.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
Prior to the enrollment of each  patient, the risks, benefits and objectives of the study will be 
reviewed with the participant, including a discuss ion of the possible toxicities and side effects. 
Financ ial cos ts and burdens of the trial will be reviewed in detail including a detailed discuss ion of 
the tests/measu rements that will be performed.  The tests and measu rements will be the financial 
respons ibility of the study.  The cost of traveling to and from the center for evaluation will be the 
financ ial respons ibility of the patient.  Blood work analysis as well as analysis of EKG and  other 
monitoring tests will be provided at no cost to the patient.  Every effort will be made to keep study 
records private. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 31 of 36  
  
Neither the patient's name nor an ything else that cou ld identify the patient will be used  in any 
reports or publications that result from this study. Trained staff at Memorial Hospital and  the 
Institutional Review Board at Memorial Hospital may review medical records if necessa ry. The 
patient may terminate participation in the study at any time during the trial.  In the event that a 
toxicity or complication arises as a result of the study, the patient will be evaluated and treated at 
no cost to the patient unless it is determined that the adverse effect is not related to the study 
drug in which case treatment co sts will be billed to the patients insurance. 
 
 
17.1 Privacy 
 
 
 
MSKCC’ s Privacy Office may allow the use and disclosure of protected health information 
pursuant to a completed and signed Research Authorization form. The use and disclosure of 
protected health information will be limited to the individuals described in the Research 
Authorization form.  A Resea rch Authorization form must be completed by the Principal 
Investigator and  approved by the IRB and  Privacy Board (IRB/PB). 
 
 
 
17.2 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Repor ting 
 
Any SAE will be reported to the IRB/PB as soon as poss ible but no  later than 5 calendar 
days. The IRB/PB requires a Clinical Resea rch Database  (CRDB ) SAE report be submitted 
electronically to the SAE Office at  sae@mskcc.org. The report will con tain the following 
information: 
 
Fields popu lated from CRDB: 
 
• Subject’s name (generate the report with only initials if it will be sent ou tside of 
MSKCC)  
• Medical record number 
• Disease /histology (if applicable) 
• Protocol n umber and  title 
 
Data need ing to be entered: 
 
• The date the adverse event occurred 
• The adverse event 
• Relationsh ip of the adverse event to the treatment (drug, device, or intervention) 
• If the AE was expected 
• The severity of the AE 
• The intervention 
• Detailed text that includes  the following 
o A explanation of how the AE was hand led 
o A desc ription of the subject’s cond ition 
o Indication if the subject remains on the study 
o If an amendment will need  to be made to the protocol and /or conse nt form. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 32 of 36  
  
The PI’s signature and the date it was signed are required on the completed report. 
 
17.2.1 
 
SAEs (as defined above) will be reported to the sponso ring company  (Novartis Corp) in a 
deidentified manner within 15 business day of the event as outline the companies standard 
operating procedu res. This report will include: 
 
• Protocol n umber and  title 
• The date the adverse event occurred 
• The adverse event 
• Relationship  of the adverse event to the treatment (drug, device, or intervention) 
• If the AE was expected 
• The severity of the AE 
• The intervention 
• Detailed text that includes  the following 
o A explanation of how the AE was hand led 
o A desc ription of the subject’s cond ition 
o Indication if the subject remains on the study 
o If an amendment will need  to be made to the protocol and /or conse nt form. 
 
The SAE will also be reported to the FDA through the IND Office and that report will include the FDA 
assigned IND number a nd name. 
 
 
 
 
18.0 INFORMED CONSEN T PROCEDURE S 
 
Before protocol-specified proced ures are carried out, conse nting professionals will explain full 
details of the protocol and study procedures as well as the risks involved to participants prior 
to their inclusion in the study. Participants will also be informed that they are free to withdraw 
from the study at any time. All participants must sign an IRB/PB-approved conse nt form 
indicating their con sent to participate. This consent form meets the requirements of the Code 
of Federal Regulations and the Institutional Review Board/Privacy Board of this Center. The 
consent  form will include the following: 
 
1.  The nature and objectives, potential risks and benefits of the intended  study. 
2.  The length of study and the likely follow-up required. 
3.  Alternatives to the proposed study. (This will include available standa rd and 
investigational therapies. In addition, pa tients will be offered an option of suppo rtive 
care for therapeu tic studies.) 
4.  The name of the investigator(s) responsible for the protocol. 
5.  The right of the participant to accept or refuse study interventions/interactions and to 
withdraw from pa rticipation at any  time. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 33 of 36  
  
Before any protocol-specific proced ures can be carried out, the conse nting professional will 
fully explain the aspects of patient privacy conce rning research spec ific information.  In 
addition to signing the IRB Informed Conse nt, all patients must agree to the Resea rch 
Authorization compone nt of the informed consent  form. 
 
Each participant and consenting professional will sign the consent  form. The participant must 
receive a copy of the signed  informed consent  form. 
 
 
19.0 REFERENC ES 
 
1. Avraham T, Clavin NW, Daluvoy SV, et al. Fibrosis is a key inhibitor of lymphatic 
regeneration. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2009;124(2):438-450. 
2. Avraham T, Daluvoy S, Zampell J, et a l. Blockade of Transforming Growth Factor-{beta}1 
Accelerates Lymphatic Regeneration during Wound Repair. Am J Pathol. 2010 ;177(6):3202- 
3214.  
3. Avraham T, Zampell JC, Yan A, et al. Th2 differentiation is necessary for soft tissue fibrosis 
and lymphatic dysfunction resulting from lymphede ma. FASEB J. 2013 ;27(3):1114-1126.  
4. Clavin NW, Avraham  T, Fernandez  J, et al. TGF-beta1 is a negative regulator of lymphatic 
regeneration during wound  repair. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 ;295(5):H2113 - 
2127.  
5. Zampell JC, Yan A, Elhadad  S, Avraham T, Weitman E, Mehrara BJ. CD4(+) cells regulate 
fibrosis and lymphan giogenes is in respo nse to lymphatic fluid stasis. PLoS One. 
2012 ;7(11):e4994 0. 
6. Petrek JA, Heelan MC. Incidence  of breast carcinoma-related lymphed ema. Cancer. 
1998 ;83(12 Suppl American):2776-2781.  
7. Petrek JA, Senie RT, Peters M, Rosen  PP. Lymphedema in a cohort of breast carcinoma 
survivors 20 years after diagnosis. Cancer. 2001;92(6):1368 -1377. 
8. McLau ghlin SA, Wright MJ, Morris KT, et a l. Prevalence  of lymphede ma in women with 
breast canc er 5 years after sentinel lymph node  biopsy or axillary dissection: objective 
measu rements. J Clin Oncol. 2008 ;26(32):5213-5219.  
9. McLau ghlin SA, Wright MJ, Morris KT, et a l. Prevalence  of lymphede ma in women with 
breast canc er 5 years after sentinel lymph node  biopsy or axillary dissection: patient 
perceptions and precau tionary beha viors. J Clin Oncol. 2008 ;26(32):5220-5226.  
10. Rockson SG, Rivera KK. Estimating the popu lation burden of lymphede ma. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci. 2008 ;1131:147-154. 
11. Szuba A, Rockson SG. Lymphede ma: ana tomy, physiology and pathogenesis. Vasc Med. 
1997 ;2(4):321-326. 
12. Oremus M, Walker K, Dayes IS, Raina P. Diagnosis and treatment of secondary 
lymphede ma: Techno logy Assess ment Report. Agency  for Healthcare Resea rch and Quality. 
2010.  
13. Goffman TE, Laronga C, Wilson L, Elkins D. Lymphede ma of the arm and breast in irradiated 
breast canc er patients: risks in an era of dramatically changing axillary surgery. Breast J. 
2004 ;10(5):405-411. 
14. Hayes SC, Janda  M, Cornish B, Battistutta D, Newman B. Lymphede ma after breast canc er: 
incidence,  risk factors, and effect on  upper body  function. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(21):3536- 
3542.  
15. Soran A, D'Angelo G, Begovic M, et al. Breast cancer-related lymphed ema--what are the 
significant p redictors and how they affect the severity of lymphed ema? Breast J. 
2006 ;12(6):536-543. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 34 of 36  
  
16. Ahmed RL, Prizment A, Lazovich D, Schmitz KH, Folsom AR. Lymphed ema and quality of 
life in breast cancer su rvivors: the Iowa Women's Health Study. J Clin Oncol. 
2008 ;26(35):5689-5696.  
17. Shih YC, Xu Y, Cormier JN, et al. Incidence, treatment co sts, and  complications of 
lymphede ma after breast cancer among women of working age: a 2-year follow-up study. J 
Clin Oncol. 2009;27(12):2007 -2014.  
18. Szuba A, Rockson SG. Lymphede ma: classification, diagnosis and therapy. Vasc Med. 
1998 ;3(2):145-156. 
19. Cormier JN, Askew RL, Mungovan KS, Xing Y, Ross MI, Armer JM. Lymphede ma beyond 
breast canc er: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cance r-related seconda ry 
lymphede ma. Cancer. 2010;116(22):5138-5149.  
20. Avraham T, Yan A, Zampell JC, et al. Radiation therapy causes  loss of dermal lymphatic 
vesse ls and interferes with lymphatic function by TGF-beta1-mediated tissue fibrosis. Am J 
Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 ;299(3):C589-605. 
21. Mihara M, Hara H, Hayashi Y, et al. Pathological steps of cance r-related lymphede ma: 
histological cha nges in the collecting lymphatic vessels after lymphadenec tomy. PLoS One. 
2012 ;7(7):e4112 6. 
22. Wynn TA. Fibrotic disease and the T(H)1/T(H)2 paradigm. Nat Rev Immunol. 2004 ;4(8):583- 
594. 
23. Zampell JC, Avraham T, Yoder N, et a l. Lymphatic function is regulated by a coordinated 
expression of lymphangiogenic and anti-lymphan giogenic cytokines. Am J Physiol Cell 
Physiol. 2012 ;302(2):C392-404. 
24. Torrisi J, Joseph W, Ghanta S, et al. Lymphaticovenous  bypass decreases  pathological skin 
chan ges in upper extremity breast cancer related lymphede ma. Lymphat Res Biol. 2014 ;In 
Press. 
25. Wynn TA. Common and unique mechan isms regulate fibrosis in various fibroproliferative 
diseases.  J Clin Invest. 2007;117(3):524-529. 
26. Pedroza-Gonzalez A, Xu K, Wu TC, et al. Thymic stromal lymphopo ietin fosters human 
breast tumor growth by promoting type 2 inflammation. J Exp Med. 2011;208(3):479-490. 
27. Carvalho MI, Pires I, Prada J, Queiroga FL. A role for T-lymphoc ytes in human breast canc er 
and in canine mammary tumors. BioMed research international. 2014;2014:130894.  
28. Aspord C, Pedroza-Gonzalez A, Gallegos M, et al. Breast cancer instructs dend ritic cells to 
prime interleukin 13-secreting CD4+ T cells that facilitate tumor de velopment. J Exp Med. 
2007 ;204(5):1037-1047.  
29. Blais Y, Gingras S, Haagensen  DE, Labrie F, Simard J. Interleukin-4 and interleukin-13 
inhibit estrogen-induced  breast canc er cell proliferation and stimulate GCDFP-15 expression 
in human breast cancer cells. Molecular and cellular endoc rinology. 1996;121(1):11-18. 
30. Minn AJ, Gupta GP, Siegel PM, et al. Genes  that mediate breast canc er metastasis to lung. 
Nature. 2005 ;436(7050):518-524. 
31. Wynn TA. IL-13 effector functions. Annu Rev Immunol. 2003 ;21:425-456. 
32. Terabe M, Matsui S, Noben-Trauth N, et a l. NKT cell-mediated repression of tumor 
immunos urveillance  by IL-13 and the IL-4R-STAT6 pathway. Nat Immunol. 2000 ;1(6):515- 
520. 
33. Kobayashi M, Kobayashi H, Pollard RB, Suzuki F. A pa thogenic role of Th2 cells and their 
cytokine produc ts on the pulmonary metastasis of murine B16 melanoma. J Immunol. 
1998 ;160(12):5869-5873. 
34. Kawakami K, Kawakami M, Husain SR, Puri RK. Potent an titumor activity of IL-13 cytotoxin 
in human pancreatic tumors engineered to express IL-13 recep tor alpha2  chain in vivo. Gene 
therapy. 2003;10(13):1116-1128.  
35. Shaw C, Mortimer P, Judd PA. A randomized controlled trial of weight reduction as a 
treatment for breast can cer-related lymphede ma. Cance r. 2007 ;110(8):1868-1874.  
36. Rockson SG. Lymphed ema. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc  Med. 2006 ;8(2):129-136. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 35 of 36  
  
37. Deltombe T, Jamart J, Recloux S, et al. Reliability and limits of agreement of circumferential, 
water displacement, and optoelectronic volumetry in the measurement of upper limb 
lymphede ma. Lymphology. 2007;40(1):26-34. 
38. Stanton AW, Northfield JW, Holroyd B, Mortimer PS, Levick JR. Validation of an 
optoelectronic limb volumeter (Perometer). Lymphology. 1997;30(2):77-97. 
39. Szuba A, Achalu R, Rockson SG. Decongestive lymphatic therapy for patients with breast 
carcinoma-assoc iated lymphede ma. A randomized, prospec tive study of a role for ad junctive 
intermittent pneumatic compression. Cancer. 2002;95(11):2260-2267.  
40. Carati CJ, Anderson SN, Gannon  BJ, Piller NB. Treatment of postmastectomy lymphede ma 
with low-level laser therapy: a doub le blind, placebo-controlled trial. Cancer. 
2003 ;98(6):1114-1122.  
41. Kaviani A, Fateh M, Yousefi Nooraie R, Alinagi-zadeh  MR, Ataie-Fash tami L. Low-level laser 
therapy in management of postmastectomy lymphede ma. Lase rs in medical sc ience.  
2006 ;21(2):90-94. 
42. Shaw C, Mortimer P, Judd PA. Randomized controlled trial co mparing a low-fat diet with a 
weight-reduction diet in breast canc er-related lymphede ma. Cance r. 2007;109(10):1949 - 
1956.  
43. Kozanoglu E, Basaran S, Paydas S, Sarpel T. Efficacy of pneu matic compression and low- 
level laser therapy in the treatment of postmastectomy lymphoede ma: a randomized 
controlled trial. Clin Rehabil. 2009 ;23(2):117-124. 
44. Lau RW, Cheing GL. Managing postmastectomy lymphede ma with low-level laser therapy. 
Photomedicine and laser su rgery. 2009 ;27(5):763-769. 
45. Damstra RJ, Partsch H. Compression therapy in breast canc er-related lymphede ma: A 
rando mized, controlled comparative study of relation between volume and interface pressure 
chan ges. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49(5):1256-1263.  
46. Bialoszewski D, Wozniak W, Zarek S. Clinical efficacy of kinesiology taping in reduc ing 
edema of the lower limbs in patients treated with the ilizarov method--preliminary report. 
Ortoped ia, traumatologia, rehab ilitacja. 2009;11(1):46-54. 
47. Schmitz KH, Ahmed RL, Troxel A, et a l. Weight lifting in women with breast-cance r-related 
lymphede ma. N Engl J Med. 2009 ;361(7):664-673. 
48. Hayes SC, Reul-Hirche H, Turner J. Exercise and seconda ry lymphede ma: safety, potential 
benefits, and  research issues.  Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009 ;41(3):483-489. 
49. Brambilla L, Tourlaki A, Ferrucci S, Brambati M, Boneschi V. Treatment of classic Kapos i's 
sarcoma-assoc iated lymphede ma with elastic stockings. The Journal of dermatology. 
2006 ;33(7):451-456. 
50. Cornish B. Bioimpedan ce analysis: scientific background. Lymphat Res Biol. 2006 ;4(1):47- 
50. 
51. Cornish BH, Chapman M, Hirst C, et al. Early diagnos is of lymphede ma using multiple 
frequency  bioimpedanc e. Lymphology. 2001 ;34(1):2-11. 
52. Gerber LH. A review of measu res of lymphede ma. Cancer. 1998 ;83(12 Suppl 
American):2803 -2804. 
53. Moseley A, Piller N. Reliability of bioimpedance  spectroscopy and tonometry after breast 
conse rving cancer treatment. Lymphat Res Biol. 2008 ;6(2):85-87. 
54. Pusic AL, Cemal Y, Albornoz C, et al. Quality of life among breast cancer patients with 
lymphede ma: a systematic review of patient-reported outcome instruments and outcomes. J 
Cancer  Surviv. 2013;7(1):83-92. 
55. Viehoff PB, van Genderen FR, Wittink H. Upper limb lymphede ma 27 (ULL27): Dutch 
translation and validation of an illness-specific health-related quality of life questionna ire for 
patients with upper limb lymphede ma. Lymphology. 2008;41(3):131-138. 
56. Cuzzone DA, Weitman ES, Albano  NJ, et al. IL-6 regulates adipose  depos ition and 
homeostasis in lymphedema. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2014 ;306(10):H1426 -1434. 
MEMORIAL SLOAN-KETTERING  CANCER CENTER 
IRB PROTOCOL  
IRB#: 15-085 A(4) 
Amended: 02 -FEB-2016  
Page 36 of 36  
  
57. Zampell JC, Yan A, Avraham T,  et al. Temporal and spatial patterns of endogenous  danger 
signal e xpression after wound  healing and in response  to lymphede ma. Am J Physiol Cell 
Physiol. 2011 ;300(5):C1107 -1121.  
58. Brennan  FR, Cauvin A, Tibbitts J, Wolfreys A. Optimized nonc linical sa fety assess ment 
strategies supp orting clinical de velopment of therapeu tic monoc lonal an tibodies targeting 
inflammatory disease s. Drug development research. 2014 ;75(3):115-161. 
59. Corren J, Busse W, Meltzer EO, et a l. A randomized, controlled, phase  2 study of AMG 317, 
an IL-4Ralpha antagonist, in patients with asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2010 ;181(8):788-796. 
60. Tan RA, Corren J. Safety of omalizumab in asthma. Expert opinion on drug safety. 
2011 ;10(3):463-471. 
61. McKenzie GJ, Bancroft A, Grencis RK, McKenzie AN. A distinct role for interleukin-13 in Th2- 
cell-mediated immune responses. Curr Biol. 1998;8(6):339-342. 
62. McKenzie GJ, Fa llon PG, Emson CL, Grencis RK, McKenzie AN. Simultaneous  disruption of 
interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13 defines individual roles in T helper cell type 2-mediated 
response s. J Exp Med. 1999;189(10):1565-1572.  
63. Carlock LL, Cowan LA, Oneda  S, et al. A comparison of effects on reproduction and neona tal 
development in cynomolgus monkeys given human soluble IL-4R and  mice given murine 
soluble IL-4R. Regulatory toxicology and pharmacology : RTP. 2009;53(3):226-234. 
64. Yee SB, Bourdi M, Masson MJ, Pohl L R. Hepatoprotective role of endogenous  interleukin-13 
in a murine model of acetaminophen -induced  liver disease. Chemical research in toxicology. 
2007 ;20(5):734-744. 
65. Andersen L, Hojris I, Erlandsen  M, Andersen J. Treatment of breast-cancer-related 
lymphede ma with or without manual lymphatic drainage--a rando mized study. Acta Oncol. 
2000 ;39(3):399-405. 
66. Taylor R, Jayasinghe UW, Koelmeyer L, Ung O, Boyages J. Reliability and validity of arm 
volume measu rements for assessment of lymphedema. Phys Ther. 2006;86(2):205-214. 
 
 
 
20.0 APPENDICES 
 
• Append ix A  - QOL Survey 
• Append ix B – QOL scoring 
• Append ix C – Labo ratory Requisition Forms 