Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
While support  for involvement of family members in care has  to address suicide risk  been 
discussed  in many national trainings for VA mental health (Glynn, personal communication ), 
this work has been hampered by the lack of research on effective conjoint interventions to 
address suicide risk in adults.  To date, we  are aware of only one intervention study evaluating a 
relative -inclusive intervention to address suicide risk in adults  (Anastasia , Humphries ‐
Wadsworth, Pepper, & Pearson, 2015 ).  Though this trial has positive results, it tested a hospital 
division progr am including primarily females, so its generalizability to a primarily male 
outpatient Veteran  population is unknown.   
To fill this gap in research and clinical care, Safe Actions for Families to Encourage 
Recovery (SAFER) was developed.  
The Safe Action for Families to Encourage Recovery  (SAFER ) intervention is a family -
based SPI treatment. Specifically, SAFER aims to  help Veteran s cope more effectively , improve 
communication, limit feelings of burdensomeness while building a more robust support sy stem 
and sense of belonging, all in the service of lessening suicide risk.  Simultaneously, for families, 
SAFER targets their support of Veteran  coping, communication , and lessens feelings of  being 
burdened by the Veteran . 
The SAFER intervention was developed as a manualized, 4 -session 90 -minute dyad -
based approach that includes psychoeducation about suicide risk and focuses on building a 
Veteran  and supporting partner  safety plan  (see Table 1). Open label p ilot test ing of the 
intervention  on six Veteran  couples enabled to the research team to finalize the manual and 
session content and resulted in promising feasibility and acceptability  data on the dyad format . In 
order to test the initial efficacy of the SAFER intervention , a small randomized clinical trial was SAFER: A Brief Intervention Involving Family Members in Suicide Safety Planning10/1/2020
designed  comparing SAFER to a control condition – individual Safety Planning Intervention  (I-
SPI) that  entailed creating a safety plan individually  and is the standard of care in VA practice .  
 The specific hypotheses of this randomized control trial were:  
Study Hypotheses  
 Hypothesis 1. Veteran s participating in SAFER will experience reduced severity of 
suicidal ideation in comparison to Veteran s completing I-SPI. 
 Hypothesis 2. Veteran -supporting partner  dyads participating in SAFER will show 
improved suicide related coping  in compa rison  to I-SPI. Specifically, we predicted Veteran s 
would experience improvement in suicide -specific coping (Hypothesis 2A)  and the supporting 
partner  would demonstrate greater resource knowledge and support of Veteran ’s coping efforts 
(Hypothesis 2 B). 
 Hypothesis 3. Veteran - supporting partner  dyads participating in SAFER will show 
reductions  compared to I -SPI on interpersonal  appraisals  that are related to suicide risk . 
Specifically, we predicted Veteran s would experience reduced perceived burdensomeness  and 
thwarted belongingness (Hypothesis 3A)  while supporting partners  would experience  reduced 
caregiver burden (Hypothesis 3B).  
Methods  
Overview  
The study is designed as a randomized controlled  study comparing SAFER to  I-SPI in a 
sample of thirty -nine Veteran -supporting partner  dyads struggling with recent or past suicidal 
ideation. Outcomes were evaluated using two follow -up assessments (post -treatment and 
extended follow -up) that were . Due to the difficulty of recruiting  this specialized sample, 
participants were re -contacted for a given assessment until it was finally completed . All 
procedures and instruments were  approved by an institu tional review board.  Given the novel 
nature of the SAFER  intervention , the sample intentionally was recruited for having moderate to 
high, but not extreme immediate risk . 
Participants  
Eligible Veteran s were  at moderate risk for suicide, defined as: having endorsed recent 
passive or active suicidal ideation (within the past 3 months ) or a lifetime history of a suicide 
attempt . Additionally, Veteran s must have been  receiving care at the VA  and have  had an 
availab le, consenting, and qualifying supporting partner  to participate . Supporting partners  
needed to meet  at least three (two for nonrelatives) of five criteria  inclusion criteria  established 
by (Pollak & Perlick, 1991): 1 ) is a spouse, co -habiting significant other or parent; 2) has more 
frequent contact than any other caregiver; 3) helps to support the patient financially; 4) is 
contacted by treatment staff for emergencies; 5) has been involved in the patient’s treatment.   
Veteran s and supporting partners  were  excluded  if: 1) history of suicide attempt in the 
past 3 months ; 2) they presented with untreated or un -medicated active psychosis ; 3) they 
presented with alcohol or drug abuse or dependence within the past month ; 4) they presented 
with medical condition or life event (e.g., an upcoming move to  another state) that would 
compromise participation; 5) they recently (past 6 -months) participated  in another family -based 
psychosocial intervention trial ; 6)  had limited English proficiency ; 7) and if they were 
participating with a romantic partner and endorsed recent, “severe” intimate -partner violence. 
Participants were  screened for inclusion/exclusion with measures  described below  immediately 
after consent.  
To determine inclusion/exclusion the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ; Spitzer, 
Kroenke, & Williams, 1999) was used to screen for alcohol or drug abuse or dependence within 
the past month, defined by criteria m et on the PHQ’s modules of alcohol and drug abuse or 
dependence. For romantic couples, to determine recent, “severe” intimate -partner violence, the 
revised 20 -item Conflict Tactics Scale Short Form (CTS2S; Straus & Douglas, 2004) was used.  
The study aimed to recruit, consent, and randomize 40 Veteran s at risk for suicide and 40 
corresponding supporting partners  over a 30 -month period from a large VA medical center in a 
major metropolitan area in the North East . Recruitment sources included VA suicide prevention 
coordinators, a Veteran ’s primary clinician from the VAMC’s psychiatric inpatient unit or 
outpatient care center, or through community outreach (e.g., Vet Centers and higher education 
institutions).  
Procedure  
Assessments  
After screening and consent,  Veteran s and supporting partners  completed separate  in-
person baseline assessments which included demographic data, Veteran  and supporting partner  
assessments to assess inclusion/exclusion, and measures including the final study outcomes. Each 
Veteran -supporting partner  dyad was then randomly assigned to participate in either I-SPI or 
SAFER with a one to one ratio using a block randomization scheme.  Regardless of 
randomization, Veteran s were allowed to c ontinue with all other VA care, as needed . Outcomes 
were re -assessed immediately  post-intervention  and then again through a follow -up assessment 
at least 3 -months post -intervention.  To minimize attrition in this difficult to obtain and track 
sample , participants were i nitially  contacted at the end of their intervention and then re -contacted 
until one or both provided the post -treatment assessment (Range=0.30 -7.47 months from 
baseline; M=2.84 months) and then the follow -up was timed three months from that point or up 
until one year from enrollment (Range=3.10 -11.43 months from  partic ipants’  baseline; M=6.32 
months).  
Attrition.  Of the 78 participants in the study, 57 gave at least one wave of follow -up (30 
Veterans; 27 Supporting Partner s). Examination of demographic predictors of attrition found 
that participants who provided follow -up did not significantly different from participants who 
did not with respect to assigned condition, years of education, gender, ethnicity, race, 
employment status, nature of caregiving relationship, Veteran status of the non -Veteran partner , 
or any of the baseline levels of the outcome measures . However, age did significantly predict 
attrition ( t(76)= -2.36; p<.02), with those providing follow -up being generally older (M=51.37 
years) than those who did not (M=42.76 years).  
 Individual  Suicide -Safety Planning (Control)  
As noted above, all participants were able to continue in standard VHA care based on 
their own determined needs (psychiatry ; psychotherapy; and case management by the suicide 
prevention coordinator).  Veteran s in the contr ol group were able to update and review the ir 
safety plan with a study clinician. Veteran s created a full SPI with a study clinician if they did 
not already have one.  
SAFER Intervention  (Treatment)  
The SAFER intervention is a novel, manualized, 90 -minute dyad -based intervention that 
typically includes a joining  session , two treatment sessions, and a booster. SAFER follows 
standard skills training session format and include: 1) brief check -in with bri ef assessment of 
mood, current level of suicidality and use of safety plan; 2) homework review; 3) teaching of new 
material and skill; 4) in -class practice of the skill; and assignment of homework/outside practice 
of skill /development of safety plan. Sess ion content  includes the use of psychoeducation, 
communication skills training and revision and development of both the Veteran  and a 
complementary supporting partner  SPI. The SAFER treatment goal is to provide the tools and 
structure to support social sup port involvement in Safety Planning Intervention  for Veteran s at 
moderate risk for suicide  (Table 1 ). 
Treatment Fidelity. A fidelity scale was developed during the prior open trial plot testing to 
assess core features of SAFER’s structure, contents and treatment principles, along with general 
clinical competence (e.g., building rapport, crisis management, etc.).  This 14-17 item scale (13 
general competence items and 1 -4 session -specific items) was rated on a 4 -point Likert scale 
(where 0 = unacceptable and 3 = excellent) . were made by one trained rater. The rater was 
trained by the Principal Investigator and research staff.  It was a one-day training to review 
components of the treatment manual, instruction in group therapy principles and group 
didactics, and suicide risk assessment. Additionally, the rater read the 51 -page manual inclusive 
of session handouts and worksheets . All intervention sessions were recorded, and a 
randomization scheme was generated to have  seven  sessions randomly selected for review. 
Clinicians are required to maintain a total score of 80% or above on each session to 
demonstrate acceptable a dherence to the intervention. Clinicians whose ratings fall below this 
criterion were given additional supervision and their adherence was monitored until 
satisfactory adherence was regained.  The average percentages on the adherence scale ranged 
from 82 to  100 with the mean score being 90.7. No interventionists ever dropped below the 80% 
adherent threshold and therefore no re -training was required throughout the trial.  
Measures  
Primary Outcome Measure (Hypothesis 1)  
Veteran  suicidal ideation. Moderate s uicidality was  measured to determine eligibility 
using the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  (C-SSRS). Posner and colleagues (2011) 
found the C -SSRS to have divergent validity, predictive validity, sensitivity, specificity,  
sensitivity to change, and internal consistency in a multisite study (Posner, et al., 2011) . The C -
SSRS  was also used across time  points to record level of ideation, lifetime suicide attempts , and 
recent suicide attempts . Research staff was trained by Dr. Barbara Stanley and Dr. Ainsley 
Burke, two of the developers  of the assessment. Additionally, staff had weekly meetings in 
which the C -SSRS was discussed to ascertain consensus when scenarios warranted further 
discussion.  
Suicide -Specific Coping (Hypothesis 2)  
Veteran  suicide -related coping . Suicide -related coping was evaluated by the Suicide -
related Coping Scale (SRCS), a 17-item self -report measure assessing  one’s ability to cope with 
suicidal ideation and urges  (Stanley, Green, Ghahramanlou -Holloway, Brenner, & Brown, 2017). 
The scale demonstrated good  internal consistency (α=.8 5) at baseline ; scores were summed so 
that higher scores represent greater confidence and breadth of approaches to coping with suicidal 
thoughts and feelings.  
Partner’s  support of suicide -related coping . Supporting partner s also completed five 
items adapted  from the SRCS  that assessed their confidence in their ability to support the 
Veteran  through their suicidal urges. The five items were, “I know the nearest hospital or urgent 
care facility where my loved one can go if I cannot handle the crisis on my own,” “When my 
loved one is feeling suicidal or showing signs of suicidal thinking/behavior, there are places we 
can go to help take his/her mind off the problems,” “I have several things I can do to help my 
loved one get through a suicidal crisis,” “I am able to put aside my own fears and focus on taking 
appropriate actions when my loved one is feeling suicidal or showing signs of suicidal 
thinking/behavior,” and “Seeking help from health care professionals is a good way to keep my 
loved one safe when he/she is feeling suic idal or showing signs of suicidal thinking/behavior.” 
Items were rated on a 0 ( Strongly Disagree ) to 4 ( Strongly Agree ) and were summed so that 
higher scores  indicate d greater self -efficacy when supporting the Veteran  through suicidal crises ,  
In addition to face validity,  the scale s howed acceptable internal consistency in the sample 
(α=.78).  
Suicide -promoting appraisals  (Hypothesis 3) 
Vetera n perceptions of burdensomeness and thwarted belongingness . Perceived 
burden someness  and thwarted belongingness were  evaluated by the Interpersonal Needs 
Questionnaire (INQ -15; Van Orden, Cukrowicz, Witte, & Joiner, 2012). Scores on each subscale 
are summed so that higher scores represent a greater degree of Perceived Burdensomeness (α= 
.95) and Thwarted Belongingness (α =. 79).  
Supporting partner’s experience of caregiver burden . Caregiver burden  was evaluated 
using  the Caregiver Burden Inventory  (CBI ; Novak  & Guest, 1 989), a 24 -item scale assessing 
caregiver burden in f ive areas: time, physical, social, developmental  and emotional burden . Items 
were summed to create an overall measure of caregiver burden (α =.94) .  
Analytic Strategy  
 We examined predicted trajectories on the outcomes of interest using  slope -intercept 
trajectories based on  Hierarchical Linear Modeling (HLM; Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002).  We 
specifically created a two -level model in which repeated measurements over time were modeled 
at Level 1 (within -person change) and differences between participants/dyads were modeled at 
Level 2 (between -person change, including difference in condition).   
 Level 1  Outcome = π0 + π1 * (months since baseline ) + E 
The Level 1 equation represents a  slope -intercept model predicting each participants’ 
estimated score on an outcome baseline (π0) and then calculating linear change in that outcome  
each month across the study  (π1). Slope -intercept trajectories are ideal for the present data given 
the variable assessment windows across all participants and the ability of HLM to use all 
available information from each participant to estimate these slop es using restricted maximum 
likelihood estimation.  
 Level 2  π0 = β00 + β01*(Condition ) + β02*(Veteran  History of Attempt) +  
β03*(Relationship with Supporting Partner ) + β04*(Age) +  r0 
π1 = β10 + β11*(Condition ) + β12*(Veteran  History of Attempt) +  
β13*(Relationship with Supporting Partner ) + β14*(Age) 
The Level 2 equation models respondents ’ trajectories  based on condition (SAFER=1; I-
SPI=0). Due to limited power, we were sparing with our controls and limited them to those 
considered most relevant to Veteran risk (history of attempt; 0= No attempts; 1=Has 1+ 
attempts ), ability to collaborate with the supporting partner (nature of relationship  between 
partners; 1=Romantic; 0=All others ), and attrition (age).  The treatment effect of SAFER is 
modeled as the effect of condition  on change  in functioning over time  (β11) after controlling for 
difference s between conditions at baseline (β 01) and demographic controls (all other βs).  
As Veteran s and supporting partners  were assessed on separate outcomes that in many 
cases were assessed weeks to months apart from one another , we estimated  separate trajectories  
for each outcome without needing to account for dyadic dependence.  
Results  
Descriptives  
 Participant characteristics at baseline can be found on Table 3. Consistent with the 
Veteran population in the recruitment region, the sample wa s generally middle -aged, more likely 
to be black, somewhat more likely to be Hispanic/ Latino and somewhat more likely to be 
unemployed than the general population. The final sample of 39 Veteran -supporting partner  
dyads included a range of supports including 14 romantic partners, 13 family members of 
Veterans, and 12 close friends. Although supporting partners were not required to be Veterans, a 
third of supporting partner  (n=13) identified as Veterans themselves.  19 Veterans reported a 
history of one or more suicide attempts.  As can be seen on Table 3, participants were generally 
similar across both conditions  with respect to demographics characteristics as  well as all 
outcomes. This  highlight s the effectiveness of  random assignment in our small sample  and 
suggests the groups are roughly comparable for treatment analyses.  
Impact of Treatment Condition on Change in Outcomes over Time  
The full model examining change in C -SSRS rated severity of suicidal ideation can be 
found in Table 4. As can be seen in the top half of Table 4, Veteran  suicidal ideation did not 
significantly differ  at baseline  by condition or demographic control s. Howev er, there was a 
significant effect of treatment condition  on their trajectories over the course of the study . 
Specifically , Veterans in the active SAFER condition were predicted to see sharper  declines in 
suicide ideation than those in the control group  (B= -0.37; p=.032). In order to clarify the impact 
of treatment on trajectory over time, we then calculated the slope -intercept trajectory within each 
condition . Veteran s in the SAFER condition experienced significant  declines  in severity of 
suicidal ideation  while there was little change over time in the control condition . 
This pattern of findings  was replicated when examining the impact of treatment 
participation on coping strategies (Hypothesis 2). Specifically, a significant treatment -by-time 
interaction emerged when predicting Veteran  suicide -related coping (B=1.40; p=.028). 
Examination of simp le slopes highlights that Veteran s in SAFER reported m arginal  increases in 
suicide -related coping  (Simple Slope= 0.88; p=.080)  while Veteran s in I-SPI reported non -
signif icant declines in coping. Similarly, a treatment effect emerged for supporting partners  
support of Veteran  coping (B=0.79; p=.034). Specifically, while supporting partner s in I-SPI 
provided marginally less support over time, caregivers in SAFER maintained their efforts to 
support Veteran  coping . 
Contrary to expectations, self -reported appraisals of relational factors and self -efficacy 
were not impacted by condition for either Veteran s or supporting partner s. In fact, modeling 
trajectories across both conditions highlight  that most appraisal variables are expected to be 
stable across the length of the study . 
Impact of Controls  
 Although not part of our primary hypotheses, we examined significant effects of controls 
on the outcomes of interest. Notably, romantic partner s of Veterans  reported  substantially higher 
overall levels of caregiver burden at baseline (B=17.66; p=.01) that remained relatively stable 
over the study. Veterans with romantic partners showed corresponding increases in suicide 
ideation severity (B=0.49; p=.02; Table 2)  and decreases in suicide -related coping (B= -1.52; 
p=.04). In contrast, Veteran history of suicide attempt was associated with  only somewhat 
elevated caregiver burden on baseline (B=7.22; p=.28) that were offset  greater declines in 
caregiver burden over the study (B= -2.38; p=.03) . Taken together, this indicates that caregivers 
of Veterans with a  history of attempt showed general adaptation as the crisis subsided while 
romantic partners of Veterans experienced stable high levels of burden that were then followed 
by worsening functioning for the Veteran over time .  