 
 
 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF TAILORED  
COLLABORATIVE CARE FOR WOMEN VETERANS (CCWV) 
 
 An EMPOWER QUERI  Project  
Protocol Component A  & B 
Funding Agency: QUE 15 -272 
Principal Investigator /Study Chair : Alison B. Hamilton, PhD , MPH  
 June 22, 2020  
 
 
  
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 2 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Abstract  
Project Background: Women Veterans are the fastest growing segment of Veterans Health 
Administration (VHA) users . This dramatic growth has created challenges for V HA. Rates of 
depression, anxiety, and mental health comorbidity are disproportionately high among women 
Veterans.  Furthermore, a high rate of women Veterans’ attrition from VA care,  along with 
organizational  barriers to care, substantiate that organizational changes are needed in order to 
engage and retain women Veteran V HA users in evidence- based, patient -centered care.  
Project Objectives :  The Enhancing Mental and P hysical health o f Women through E ngagement 
and Retention (EMPOWER) QUERI  addresses VHA Blueprint for Excellence Strategy 6, by 
advancing “personalized, proactive, patient -centered” care models, and Transformational 
Strategy 7.2.g by implementation of innovative care models in women Veterans’ health care .” 
The EMPOWER QUERI Program is designed to  improve  women Veterans’ engagement and 
retention in evidence- based care  for mental health. To achieve this impact goal, we propose a 
cohesive portfolio of projects with the following aims : (1) To use an evidence- based 
implementation strategy that emphasizes local tailoring of care models, multilevel stakeholder 
engagement, and systematic evaluation of complex implementation processes in order to enrich organizational capacity for innovations in women Veterans’ VHA health care;  (2) To implement 
personalized, proactive, patient -centered innovations in VHA women’s health that are 
acceptable, feasible, satisfactory, relevant, and effective for both providers and patients, thereby encouraging women Veterans’ engagement and retention and  sustainability of the innovations; 
and, (3) To generate implementation “playbooks” for our partners that are scalable and serve as 
guidance for future implementation of a broader array of evidence- based women’s health 
programs and policy.  
Project Methods : “
 Implementation of Tailored Collaborative Care for Women Veterans” will 
evaluate implementation of  an evidence- based collaborative care model tailored to enhanc e 
provider - and system -level capabilities to address women Veterans' anxiety and depression 
treatment needs, thereby improving organizational primary care -mental health integration (PC-
MHI) effectiveness and women Veterans’ engagement and retention in PC -MHI. The study will 
use a modified stepped wedge design and will apply  the evidence- based Replicating Effective 
Programs (REP) implementation strategy.  Mixed methods implementation evaluations  will focus 
on investigating primary implementation outcomes of  adoption, acceptability, feasibility, and 
reach. Multilevel stakeholder engagement will be prioritized. Program -wide organizational -, 
provider -, and patient -level measures and tools will be utilized to enhance synergy, productivity, 
and impact. As a coherent program of women’s health implementation research and quality improvement, the proposed EMPOWER QUER I will constitute a major milestone in achieving 
BPE strategies and realizing women Veterans’ engagement and, ultimately, empowerment in 
our VHA system .
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 3 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- List of Abbreviations  
1. EMPOWER........................................... Enhancing Mental and Physical health o f Women 
through Engagement and Retention  
2. PCMHI ………………… ……………………..... ……Primary Care -Mental Health Integration  
3. PCP…………………..…………………………………………………..Primary Care Provider  
4. MH……………………. …………………………. …………………………. …… Mental Health  
5. CCWV ………………… ………………………. ……Collaborative Care for Women Veterans  
6. WATCH……… ………. ……. ………Women’s Assessment Tool for Comprehensive Health  
7. CALM ……… ………………………………Coordinated Anxiety Learning and Management  
8. PACT ………………………………………….. ……………VA’s Patient -Aligned Care Teams  
9. WH……………………………………………………………………………… Women’s Health  
10. WHS…………………………………………………………………. Women’s Health Services  
11. GLA……… …………………………………………………. ……………. .Greater Los Angeles  
12. NCP………………………. .National Center for Disease Prevention and Health Promotion  
13. BPE…………… …………………………………………….. ………. ..Blueprint for Excellence  
14. EMR……………………………………………………. …………. .Electronic Medical Record  
15. REP…………………………………………………... ………..Replicating Effective Programs  
16. TECH……… ……… ……………Tool for Evaluating Research Implementation Challenges  
17. WHRN……… ……………………………….. …………..Women’s Health Research Network  
18. PBRN……… ………………………………………………Practice -Based Research Network  
19. DART ……………………………………………………………Data Access Request Tracker  
 
 
 
  
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 4 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Contents  
Protocol Title:  ................................................................................................................................................ 5 
1.0 Study Personnel  ............................................................................................................................... 5 
2.0 Objectives  ...................................................................................................................................... 10 
3.0 Resources and Personnel  .............................................................................................................. 12 
4.0 Study Procedures  ........................................................................................................................... 17 
5.1 Study Design  ..................................................................................................................................... 17 
Risk to Subjects ................................................................................................................................... 25 
Potential Risks ..................................................................................................................................... 25 
Adequacy of Protection from Risk  ....................................................................................................... 26 
Potential Benefits of the Research to Subjects and Others  ................................................................ 27 
5.2 Recruitment Methods  ........................................................................................................................ 27 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  .......................................................................................................... 29 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ............................................................................................................... 30 
5.5 Study Evaluations  ............................................................................................................................. 31 
5.6 Data Analysis  .................................................................................................................................... 32 
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects ...................................................................................................................... 34 
5.0 Reporting  ........................................................................................................................................ 35 
6.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  ............................................................................................................. 37 
Data Security  ....................................................................................................................................... 38 
Data Collection Procedures  ................................................................................................................ 39 
Data Transportation Procedures  ......................................................................................................... 40 
Data Transmission Procedures  ........................................................................................................... 40 
7.0 Communication Plan  ...................................................................................................................... 41 
References  .................................................................................................................................................. 43 
 
  
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 5 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Protocol Title:   
IMPLEMENTATION OF TAILO RED COLLABORATIVE CAR E FOR 
WOME N VETERAN S (CCWV) 
 
NOTE : Component A  (approved 12/27/2016 ) involves Key Stakeholder VA Staff 
Participants , and  will be coordinated by the PI at  Greater Los Angeles VA Healthcare 
System.   Component B involves Patient Human Subjects  and additional  sites outside of 
Greater Los Angeles VA . 
1.0 Study Personnel  
 Principal Investigator: Alison B. Hamilton, PhD, MPH  
Greater Los Angeles VA Healthcare System  
11301 Wilshire Blvd, Bldg 206, Los Angeles, CA 90073 
310-478-3711 extension 43785 
Alison.Hamilton@va.gov  
Affiliations:    
1 VA HSRD Center for the Study of Healthcare Innovation, Implementation & Policy 
(7/8ths)  
 
Co-Principal Investigator: Ariel Lang, MPH, PhD 
Veterans Medical Research Foundation 
3350 La Jolla Village Dr. #151ª  
San Diego, CA 92161  
959-642-6297  
Ariel.lang@va.gov
 
Affiliations:   1 VA San Diego Healthcare System (8 /8ths)  
 
 
Co-Investigator: Erin Finley, PhD  
VA employee: 8/8  
VA Facility: South Texas Veterans Health Care System  
Phone: (210) 617- 5300  
VA email: Erin.Finley@va.gov   
Affiliations  
1 Veterans Evidence -based Research Dissemination and Implementation Center (VERDICT) at 
the South Texas Veterans Health Care System,  
2 Adjunct Assistant Professor with the Division of Clinical Epidemiology, Department of 
Medicine, at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio.  
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 6 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Co-Investigator: Catherine Chanfreau, PhD  
VA employee: 8/8  
Phone:  310-478-3711 x 49998 
VA email:  Catherine.Chanfreau@va.gov  
VA Facility: VA Salt Lake City Healthcare System  
Affiliations  
1 VA Salt Lake City Healthcare System , Veterans Affairs Informatics Computing Infrastructure  
 
Collaborators include: Alexis Huynh, PhD, MPH; Rachel Kimerling, PhD; Martin Lee, PhD; 
Jessica Moreau , PhD; Anne Sadler, RN, PhD; Jennifer Strauss, PhD; Shannon Wiltsey -Stirman, 
PhD 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 7 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Introduction 
BACK GROUND 
Almos t  half (48%) of wom en Veter ans have at least one ment al health (MH) conditi on,1 with 
depression as the m ost c ommon  MH cond ition among wom en Veter an VA use rs (24% in FY 14), 
followed by PTS D (14%) and anxiety (8 %). Depression and anxiety are substantia lly more 
preval ent among wom en Veter ans than men.2  Wom en Veter ans are also more likely t han men 
to have comorbid M H cond itions, and they are more likely t o have ex perienced m ilitary sex ual 
trauma (MST)3-4 and intimate partner violence  (IPV)5 Like their mal e counterpa rts, wom en 
Veterans tend  to have compl ex mental health n eeds.  However, in contrast with men, a 
signifi cant pr oportion of wom en’s symptoms, l osses, and treatment con traindicati ons may be 
related to r eproductive phases  and ex periences, gender ed trauma histori es, and gender role 
responsib ilities. 
 
Wom en Veter ans’ distinctive M H needs  challenge t he organizati on to appropriately connect  
wom en to M H providers w ho understand t heir uniq ue vul nerabilities, and to suppor t their 
navigati on of o ften fragmented M H care opti ons offered across V A primary care ( PC) and  MH 
settings. Dependi ng on the VA site, wom en m ay have access to integrated M H care in g eneral 
PC clinics, in a separate portion of a g eneral PC c linic set as ide for wom en, or in st and-alone 
wom en-only clini cs, with vari able access to wom en-only care options and same- g ender 
provi ders w hen prefe rred. MH cli nics may have no spec ial arrangem ents for wom en, or  may 
have some provi ders to w hom wom en are preferentia lly assigned. At a few sites, wom en-only 
MH clinics m ay be avail able, or if the site has a compr ehens ive wom en’s P C clinic, full-service 
spec ialty M H care may be co- l ocated.6 Such highly vari able models of M H care delivery in P C 
and MH furt her challen ge the syst em to engage wom en in servi ces in a timely m anner, a nd to 
suppor t their retention in care. 
 
Collaborative care m odels have a s trong evi dence  base f or enhanc ing pati ent engagem ent 
and ret ention in PC-based M H care for depression,7-9 and t he VA has  extended applicati on of 
collaborative care to m any o ther mild to m oderate c onditi ons, including anxiety disor ders and 
alcohol  misuse. The VA’s appro ach t o integrat ed MH involv es collaborative care with two 
components: co-l ocated M H professionals w ho are integr al co mponen ts of the PC team , and 
MH care management.10 While co-l ocati on has been achiev ed at many s ites, implementati on 
of care m anagem ent has  been limited , espec ially in wom en ’s clini cs. The VA endorses thr ee 
collaborative care m odels t hat em phas ize di fferent elem ents of care m anagement : Behavior al 
Health Lab ,11 White River Junc tion,12 and Translati ng Initiativ es in Depression into Effective 
Soluti on (TIDES).13 A recent report on Integrati ng M ental Health into VA’s Pati ent-Aligned 
Care Teams ( PACT)14 suggests tha t further work should be dir ected at underst anding t he 
advantages and disadv antages of each approach, and suggests movi ng aw ay from branded 
approaches , towar d blended m odels with l ocal tailoring. 
 
VA policy spec ifies that MH services must be provi ded in a m anner that recogniz es that gender-
specific issues can  be im portant compo nents of care.  With a ttenti on to gender-spec ific 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 8 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- conc erns, co llaborative care is a promisi ng m odel to improve PC-MH integrati on for wom en 
Veter ans. We pr opose implem entation of ta ilored “Collaborative Care f or Wom en Veter ans” 
(CCW V) that encoura ges local blending of elem ents from VA-approved m odels with a PC-
friendly evi denc e-based, c omputer- assisted cognitive behavior al treatm ent (CBT) platfo rm for 
anxiety and depression.15 
 
 
RATIONA LE 
 
The rati onale f or this proj ect is based on five f undam ental premi ses: 1) P C and M H care for 
wom en Veteran s are compl ex and diverse ( as described above) ; 2) anxiety and depression 
among wom en Veter ans can and should be treat ed in PC; 3) improvem ents are needed in 
PC-MH I for wom en in t hese  compl ex care str ucture s and setti ngs; 4) collabo rative care 
designed fo r wom en Veter ans would benefi t the VA, provi ders, and wom en Veter ans 
themselv es; and 5) blended m odels of existi ng co llaborative care m odels or co mponents , with 
some enhancem ents, are need ed in orde r to fit with l ocal WH s tructure s , needs,  and 
resources. 
 
Anxiety and depressi on among wom en Veter ans can and should be treated in the PC context. 
Since 2007,  Primary Care-Ment al Health Integrati on (PC-MHI) in VHA has  evol ved into a 
requirement a t all VHA medical centers and lar ge comm unity- based  outpati ent clinics.16  VA WH 
policy now requir es that bas ic mental health servi ces be provi ded in t he same physi cal location 
as wom en’s primary car e, whether in a gender-neutral primary care clini c, in shared separate 
space in t he gende r-neutr al clinic, or in a separate WH center . In additi on, WH c linics m ust have 
co-located M H and social work services. A ssessment and ps ychosoc ial treatment need to be 
available in wom en’s PC f or  MH disorders, including depression and pr oblem drinki ng, within t he 
parameters of PC-M HI. 
 
Improvem ents are needed in PC-MH I for wom en in VA’s compl ex WH care str uctures and 
settings . Wom en’s As sessment Tool for Compr ehens ive H ealth (WATCH) data provi ded to us 
by our WHS primar y partners i ndicat es that roughly 63% of VA healthcare se ttings (i ncluding 
medical centers and community- based out patient c linics) have avail ability of PC-MHI such that 
a wom an can “ see a PC-MHI provi der when cli nically indicat ed… whenev er this clinic is open to 
see pati ents on a timely, same- day basis.” U npubli shed intervie w da ta from sever al of ou r 
team’s q ualitative k ey informant st udies suggest that MH servi ces available in 
wom en’s P C (or in an adjacent wom en’s MH clini c) tend to be longer-ter m spec ialty M H 
servi ces (as opposed to PC-MHI asses sments and brief ther apies) as  well as wom en-only 
treatm ent gr oups, pa rticularly f or MH problems assoc iated with MST ex perience. Inform ants 
have t ended to re port g ood comm unication betw een PC and M H providers, with “warm hand-
offs” and curb-sidi ng easily occu rring in t he clinic, but without a  care managemen t componen t 
to assess and triage t he more and less severe c ases  to appropriate servi ces. 
 
True integrati on of M H support s for PC-ba sed management of mild to mo derate M H conditi ons 
may be over shado wed by co-l ocated spec ialty M H services for more seri ous conditi ons. On the 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 9 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- other han d, when wom en receive t heir PC in mix ed-gender  general PC clinics, wom en’s 
proportional minority creates challeng es to provisi on of integrat ed servi ces that can  provi de 
choice of wom en-only and same-g ender provi der services w hen desired, and may limit access 
to integrat ed MH providers ex perienced in working with t he unique trauma experiences  of 
wom en in t he military. Varyi ng care arrangements and varyi ng needs  for gender -specif ic 
choices make t he “glue” of a care m anagement pr ocess  very im portant to help wom en 
Veter ans access appropriate servi ces, while also making care managem ent more di fficult to 
implement. 
Furthermore, work from the VA Wom en’s PBRN17 indicat es that depression and PTS D are 
associated with wom en’s str ong preferen ces for designat ed women’s ment al health servi ces, 
as well as treatment within t he PC setting. Accordi ng to a r ecent nati onal surv ey of wom en 
Veter ans, a ccess  to M H care for these  conditi ons is good, bu t nearly half o f respondents 
report ed that VA MH services do not fully meet their needs.17 Our WH, MH, and P C partners 
have urg ed us to use this QUER I implementati on research oppo rtunity to improve PC- MH I for 
wom en Veter ans with depression and anxiety. 
 
Collaborative care designed f or wom en Veter ans with depressi on and anxiety w ould bene fit 
the VA, provi ders, and wom en Veter ans themselves. Numer ous similar models of co llaborative 
care have been  tested, p rimar ily for ca re of depression in primary care se ttings, both outsi de 
the VA,18-19 and in m ilitary20 and VA11, 12, 21 populati ons.  A 2006 meta- analysis fo und that 
collaborative care is more e ffective t han st andar d care in improvi ng depressi on outcom es in 
the shor t and long er terms, and  conc luded tha t future res earch needs  to address t he 
implem entati on of co llabo rative car e.7 
 
The overal l higher MH bu rden among wom en Veter ans, and great er compl exity of 
presentati ons, adds  to the challeng es of tailoring care m anagemen t to mee t wom en’s needs.  
Models based on treating one MH conditi on, such  as depression, tend to excl ude patients with 
more compl ex issues . Our recent work has found  that ov er one -quarter (27% ) of wom en 
Veter an VA users have two or more M H conditi ons. Though depressi on is t he most co mmon  
MH diagnosis among wom en Veter ans, depressi on very oft en pr esents toget her with anxiet y 
disor ders; in fact, depressi on-pl us-anxiety and depression-pl us-PTS D are ti ed  for the two most 
preval ent co- occu rring M H conditi ons among wom en Veter ans.1 Therefor e, collaborative care 
managemen t models t hat incorporate PC-friendly tr ansdiag nostic brie f treatm ent opti ons for co-
morbid pr esentati ons may be particularly suit ed to wom en Veter an populati ons. In additi on, for 
those wom en w hose MH needs  exceed w hat can  be offered in PC, strategi es to suppor t 
engagem ent in spec ialty care ( espec ially w hen wom en-only se ttings ar e not  available), as well 
as strong st epped  care and referr al management com ponents w ill be important. 
 
Because o f the need for transdiag nostic and flexible m odels to mee t wom en’s MH needs,  we 
propose to enhance existi ng VA mo dels with elem ents o f another co llabo rative care 
managemen t model, Coordinated Anxiety Learni ng and M anagem ent, or CALM. CALM is a 
flexibl e, patient prefer ence -driven m odel for multip le anxiety disor ders ( panic, genera lized 
anxiety, social anxiety, PT SD) and depr ession in PC. Evidence fo r the effectiv eness  of CALM 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 10 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- comes from a large (n = 1004) rando mized controlled effectiveness  trial, in 17 US primary care 
clinics with 71% women.15,22  Women receiving collaborative care show ed larger reductions in 
anxiety, greater improvements in mental heal th functioning, and larger reductions in days of 
restricted activity than women receiving usual car e, while men showed no differences  in these 
measures. Women receiving the com puter-assisted CBT (which used  disorder-specific 
treatment modules) a ttended more sessions of psychotherapy, completed more modules of 
therapy, expressed more commitment, and viewed psycho therapy as  more helpful than did 
men.23 Althoug h Veterans were not the focus of the CALM trial, past trials using cog nitive 
behav ioral strategies for an xiety and depression in VA PC clinics have demonstrated the value 
of the general appr oach.24 Importantly, the effectiveness  of CALM was strongly related to level 
of engagement; outcome was predicted by completing exposur es and homework and attending 
more frequently.25   CALM’s care management com ponent s closely mirror those emphasized in 
VA-approved models described abov e, including screening and initial assess ments using 
structured instruments; regular monitoring of treatment adher ence  and side effects using a 
standa rdized protocol; patient educ ation and activation; decision suppor t using a protocol to 
determine patient preference  for medication vs a brief computer-assisted CBT-based therapy 
or bot h; a stepped care protocol suppo rted by regular brief assess ments and a patient tracking 
system; and assistance  with referral to spec ialty care when appropriate. Our ability to 
incorporate elements of CALM for CCWV is strengthene d by many key factors: 1) the CCWV 
Co-PI, Dr. Lang, was involved in the original CALM trial and is an expert on the CBT platform; 
2) one of the main CALM dev elopers, Dr. Craske, has guided our study design and is a 
member of our Strategic Advisory Group; 3) CALM is currently being evaluated in a VA HSR& D 
CREA TE hybrid type III implementation study, and the research team has agr eed to share with 
us their VA-tailored version of the web-based CBT platform as  well as their implementation 
results; 4) the lead of the CALM implementation evaluation,150 Dr. Curran, is a nat ionally  
recog nized implementation scientist and will also serve on our Strategic Advisory Group; and 
5) one  of our key partners, the PC-MHI National Medical Director, Dr. Post, strongly endor ses 
our incorporation of CALM, indicating in his letter that this project will take existing PC-MHI 
programs “to a new level.” 
 
2.0 Objectives  
 
SPEC IFIC AIMS 
 
Our spec ific aims are to: 
 
1.  In four PBRN sites, blend and tailor existing primary care-based collabo rative care 
models with an ev idence -based CBT platform to provide evidence- based, pat ient-
centered collabor ative care for women Veterans (CCWV) with anxiety and/or depression; 
2.  Implement the tailored CCWV in the four PBRN sites; and  
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 11 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- 3.  Evaluate CCWV implementation using a modified stepped wedge design and 
conduct an implementation-focused evaluation to further refine CCWV to facilitate future 
spread. 
 
Achieving these aims will help achieve VA comprehens ive PC polici es for women Veterans and 
VA MH Strategic Analytics for Improvement and Learning (SAIL) performance goals of 
popul ation coverage, cont inuity of care, and experience of care. 
 
Our seconda ry aims focus on factors that empower Women Veterans to engage in and benefit 
from co llabor ative care. Specifically, we will evaluate a) effects of patient a ctivation and 
engagement with care on retention in and experiences  of CCWV, and  b) changes in MH 
symptoms, patient activation, health-related quality of life, and care experiences  as a function of 
participation in CCWV. We hypothesize that a)  more highly activated women and women with 
greater increases in activation will demonstrate better retention in care and report better care 
experiences,  and b) symptoms, patient activation and qualit y of life will improve as a function of 
CCWV participation. 
3.0 Resources and Personnel    
  
STAFF  PROJECT ROLE  STUDY ACTIVITIES  
Staff  Degree  Site Role (Level)  Description  Access 
to PHI  Obtain  
Informed 
Consent  Recruit -
ment  Conduct 
Interviews  Perform 
Data 
Analysis  
Hamilton, 
Alison  PhD, 
MPH  GLA PI Ensure that study procedures are followed to collect 
implementation evaluation data that contributes to an 
understanding of  the implementation outcomes, as well as 
patient -level data that will inform secondary aims related 
to clinical outcomes. Oversee the study team, 
administrative components, project management, human 
subjects, data collection, data quality, analysis,  
dissemi nation of findings, and preparation of the final 
report.  Y Y Y Y Y 
Huynh, Alexis  PhD, 
MPH  GLA Collaborator 
(Implem 
eval/stats ) Provide  both qualitative and quantitative data collection 
support and analysis in the implementation evaluations. 
She will also be the statistical analyst who runs the 
stepped wedge model.  She will contribute to the 
Implementation Core, particularly to cross -project 
analyses and manuscripts.  Y Y Y Y Y 
Moreau,  
Jessica  PhD GLA Implem eval  With mentorship from Dr. Hamilton, Dr. Zuchowski  will 
coordinate and lead qualitative data collection and 
analysis. She will ensure that data collection and analysis 
are conducted in a systematic and  
efficient way. In Year 5, she will participate in the cross -
QUERI analyses and in preparation of manuscr ipts, 
presentations and reports.  Y Y Y Y Y 
Canelo, 
Ismelda  MPA  
 GLA Admin support  Manage QUERI project staff and keep the team aware of 
projected timeline milestones, budgetary issues and 
compliance requirements, as well as evaluation activities 
and progress as needed. She will also coordinate the 
scientific activities of the study and provide administrative 
and regulatory support . She will also work to ensure  
the project stays on track according to the Gantt chart 
through effective project coordination, documentation and 
meeting arrangements with the PIs and the SAG.  N N N N Y 
Oberman, 
Rebecca  MSW, 
MPH  GLA Project Director  She will meet with leadership and the Implementation 
Team and liaison with the participating sites. Ms. 
Oberman will evaluate implementation progress and 
problem -solve implementation issues with the site staff 
and leadership throughout implementation. She will be 
responsible for the day -to-day central project activities, 
including oversight of research, implementation, and 
interfacing with VHA personnel. At the sites, she will be in Y Y Y Y Y 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 13 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- close communication with the care managers and the 
Research Assistants. She will complete research 
assessments as needed. She will collaborate with the PI 
and research team on data analyses, including the 
qualitative data analyses. Ms. Oberman will assist with 
reports and development of the CCWV Implementation 
Playbook. She will work to disseminate project findings 
through relevant VA workgroups. She will manage the 
CIRB and DSMB reports for this multi -site study. She will 
also prepare and collate all study related materials 
(surveys, interview guides). Ms. Oberman will devote 20 
hours per week over the course of the entire QUERI 
Program.  
Jackson, 
LaShawnta DrP
H, 
MPH  GLA Project Director  Dr. Jackson will meet with leadership and the 
Implementation Team and liaison with the participating 
sites. She will evaluate implementation progress and 
problem -solve implementation issues with the site staff 
and leadership throughout implementation. She will be 
responsible for the day -to-day central project activities, 
including oversight of research, implementation, and 
interfacing with VHA personnel. At the sites, she will be in 
close communication with the care managers and the 
Research Assistants. She will complete research 
assessments as needed. She will collaborate with the PI 
and research team on data analyses, including the 
qualitative data analyses. Dr. Jackson will assist with 
reports and development of the CV Toolkit  Implementation 
Playbook.  Y Y Y Y Y 
Brunner, 
Julian  PhD GLA Stats  Mr. Brunner will support the stepped wedge analysis.  Y Y Y Y Y 
Than, Claire  MPH, 
CPhil  GLA Stats  Ms. Than will support the stepped wedge analysis.  Y Y Y Y Y 
Chrystal, 
Joya  MSW  GLA Implem. Eval  Ms. Chrystal will conduct  qualitative data collection and 
analysis , and participate in the cross -QUERI analyses and 
in preparation of manuscripts, presentations and reports.  Y Y Y Y Y 
Schweizer, 
Catherine 
Amanda  PhD GLA Implem. Eval  Dr. Schweizer will p rovide both qualitative and quantitative 
data collection support and analysis in the implementation 
evaluations.  Y Y Y Y Y 
Dyer, Karen  PhD GLA Research 
Assoc.  Dr. Dyer will conduct qualitative data collection and 
analysis , and participate in the cross -QUERI analyses and 
in preparation of manuscripts, presentations and reports.  Y Y Y Y Y 
 
  
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 14 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- SITE: Palo Alto  
STAFF  PROJECT ROLE  STUDY ACTIVITIES  
Staff  Degree  Site Role (Level)  Description  Access 
to PHI  Obtain  
Informed 
Consent  Recruit -
ment  Conduct 
Interviews  Perform 
Data 
Analysis  
Kimerling, 
Rachel  PhD Palo 
Alto Co-I Given her expertise in measurement of women’s 
preferences for care as well as other key measures 
related to patient engagement (e.g., patient activation), 
support the Implementation Core. In Year 1 she will 
contribute to the consolidation of the cross -Program 
measures, ensuring that members of the team are trained in the measures and that they are integrated appropriately for use in the projects. As the first sites launch, she will 
monitor the data collection activities, ensuring quality and 
consistency and she will conduct preliminary analyses to ascertain the integrity of the data. She will continue to 
provide measurement support, and then in Year 5 will 
contribute sub stantially to cross -Program analyses and 
dissemination of findings.  N N N N Y 
Wiltsey -
Stirman, 
Shannon PhD Palo 
Alto Co-I With her strong background and training in implementation 
science, Dr. Wiltsey -Stirman will support the 
implementation evaluation efforts in the CCWV 
implementation research project. Because her focus is on 
implementation of evidence- based treatments, she will 
provide the team with unique expertise regarding 
implementation challenges and solutions, and will 
participate in the use of the TECH. In addition, she will 
provide consistent support to the Implementation Core, 
lending her expertise in sustainability  of evidence based 
care models to the team.  N N N N Y 
Carney, 
Diane MA Palo 
Alto PBRN  liaison  Ms. Carney’s responsibilities on this project will be 
consultative in nature. She  will serve as the PBRN liaison 
on the Implementation Core. Considering that all projects 
will occur in PBRN sites, it is imperative that we have  a 
liaison who can provide contacts, information, and 
connections as well as support for the overall emphasis  on 
multilevel stakeholder engagement.  N N N N N 
 
  
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 15 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- SITE: San Diego  
STAFF  PROJECT ROLE  STUDY ACTIVITIES  
Staff  Degree  Site Role (Level)  Description  Access 
to PHI  Obtain  
Informed 
Consent  Recruit -
ment  Conduct 
Interviews  Perform 
Data 
Analysis  
Lang, Ariel  PhD, 
MPH  SD Co-PI Co-PI of the CCWV project an d will be responsible for 
overseeing implementation at the San Diego PBRN site, 
as well as contributing to the broader scientific effort, in 
particular, overseeing implementation of the collaborative care protocol, with expertise in the CALM CBT platform. 
She will provide supervision and training as needed to 
clinical staff who provide the CBT.  Y Y Y Y Y 
Jeanne 
Maglione MD SD Co-I Psychiatrist  with experience in PCMHI , she will be  the San 
Diego site liaison and  responsible for facilitating research 
and implementation at the San Diego PBRN site, as well 
as contributing to the broader scientific effort, in particular, 
overseeing implementation of the collaborative care 
protocol . 
 Y Y Y Y Y 
TBN  SD Research 
Assistant  Carry out activities including recruitment, screening, 
consent, survey and qualitative interviews  Y Y Y Y N 
TBN  SD Site 
Coordinator  Manage Local Site CIRB submissions and local site R&D 
submissions.  Assist in research activities as needed including recruitment, screening, consent, survey and 
qualitative interviews.  Y Y Y Y N 
 
SITE: San Antonio  
Erin Finley  PhD, 
MPH  San 
Antonio  Implem core  Oversee the implementation evaluations.  Leading role in 
development, drafting, and dissemination of the 
Implementation Playbook.  Y N N Y Y 
 
SITE: Salt Lake City  
Catherine 
Chanfreau,  PhD,  Salt 
Lake 
City Implem core  Dr. Chanfreau  will lead the data extraction from CDW, will 
be part of the implementation evaluation team, and will oversee the data extraction and measures construction for 
the impact, access, and other measures for 
implementation monitoring and feedback to the sites, as 
well the overall trial.  Y N N Y Y 
 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 16 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Co-Investigators involved in design and interpretation and dissemination,  accessing only de -identified data, include:  Anne 
Sadler, RN, PhD  (Iowa City VA)  and Jennifer Strauss, PhD  (Durham VA).  
4.0 Study Procedures  
 
This study is part of a larger EMPOWER QUERI project focusing on innovation in care for women 
Veterans at VA. Project stakeholders include staff and leadership as subjects and/or key informants. Products include development of an innovative approach for addressing implementation of a care 
model  that address es anxiety and depression for woman Veterans.  
 
5.1 Study Design 
EMPOWER Q UER I Concept ual Framewo rk. This Q UER I Program foc uses  on strengt hening W H 
organizati onal capac ity for innovati on in patient-c enter ed care, usi ng an Implem entati on Core and 
three projects as a co llective platform for examini ng how particular characteristics of care m odels 
contribute t o provi ders’ ab ility to ut ilize t he models and to pati ents’ engagem ent and  retention in t he 
models.  As depict ed in our  concept ual framework (Fig . 2), the Implementati on Core fo rms the 
back bone of our program , and re lies on an evi dence- based implem entation strategy, R eplicati ng 
Effective Pr ograms (REP) , and emph asizes multileve l stakeholder engagem ent and  complexity 
theory. T he Core wil l exami ne org anizati onal capac ity for innovati on in t he context of l ocal WH car e 
arrangem ents, which w e know to be quite diver se, as  well as implem entati on cons tructs such as 
climat e and l eadership , and novel cons tructs such as organizati onal readiness  for pati ent engagement 
and implem entati on citiz enship. K nowledge of organiza tional capac ity wil l inform implem entati on of 
innovative care m odels t hat address anxiety and depression. Implem entation outcomes w ill con tribute 
to devel opment of Implementati on Playbooks—b rief, user-friend ly summations of implem entati on 
targets , processes, outcome s, and r ecommendations for scale- up and spr ead.26 Together, these 
activiti es will contri bute to our ultimate g oal of enriching VHA’s org anizati onal capac ity to enga ge and 
retain wom en Veter ans in pati ent-center ed, proactive, per sona lized evi dence-b ased care. 
 
 
 

Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 18 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ ---  
EMPOWER Q UER I Implementati on Strategy : Replicating Effective Pr ograms ( REP) . We w ill use  
REP13 across all projects to maxi mize the implementati on sci ence  knowledge that w ill be generat ed by 
a common appr oach. Grounded in t heori es of Diffusi on of In novati on and S ocial Learning , REP was 
selected because o f its strong evi dence base  and applicati on in VHA health servi ces research.27 It 
also provi des a phas ed framework for implem entation, with different discr ete implem entati on 
strategi es being employ ed in di fferen t phases.  REP’ s dem onstrat ed effectiv eness  in promoting uptake 
of evi dence- based pr actices allows us to focus on  its applicati on in varied  settings and care models. 
Use acr oss all projects w ill allow f or further testing and expans ion of the framewo rk, particularly 
through our emphas is on multilevel s takehol der e ngagem ent and incorporation of comple xity theory.   
The REP framewor k consists o f four phases (Fi g. 3): pre-conditions, p re-implementati on, 
implementation, and maintenance/ evolution. Careful attention  is paid to interv ention pac kaging during 
pre- conditi ons and pre- implem entati on; training, techni cal ass istance, and fi delity assessment durin g 
implem entati on; and recus tomizi ng duri ng maint enanc e/evoluti on. 
 
During each phas e, local context is param ount, with varyi ng deploym ent of the interv ention dependi ng 
on local prioriti es, needs, and  resources. One of our implem entati on science g oals will be  to track t he 
relative im portance of each  discrete s trategy in each  phase at each  site and across sites, as well as in 
each proj ect and across projects , to inform user-friendly, implem entati on practice “play books” for our 
partners. 
 
Enhanc ing REP with Mult ilevel Stak eholder Engagement and Complexity T heory. REP was origi nally 
designed to guide dissemi nation of evi dence -based practi ces in comm unity-based org anizati ons. 
Kilbour ne and co lleagues27 note th at “it was not des igned to address mult ilevel barriers to 
implem entati on,” so t hey enhanced REP with f acilitation, us ing implem entation ex perts as exter nal 
facilitators to provi de guid ance fo r overcomi ng implementati on barrier s. Interestingly, outcom es were 
favor able for enhanced REP for their primary implem entati on outcome of uptake (i.e., complet ed 
contacts with Veter ans with seri ous mental illness who had been l ost to car e),  but not  for incr eased 

Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 19 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- utilization of servi ces by patients w ho had dr opped out of care.28 This prompt ed us to cons ider 
alternate RE P enhancements that are 1) more f ocused on pa rticipator y action29 within compl ex 
adaptive systems30 in VHA WH clini cal se ttings,31 and 2) potentia lly more e ffective i n increasing 
patient e ngagement. Accordingly, we dr aw on complexity t heory and mult ilevel stakeholder 
engagem ent (Fig. 3). Complexity t heory postulates that outcom es in compl ex adaptive systems are 
nonlinear and unpredictable; i t is a highly relati onal theory, exami ning how multiple agents  involv ed in 
implem entati on interact in compl ex ways and “make sens e” of implem entati on in di fferen t ways.32 This 
emphasis on i ncorporating multiple per spec tives and differing prioriti es is cons istent with our VHA WH 
roadm ap to deliveri ng gender-sens itive compre hens ive care for wom en Veter ans,33 which suggests 
that mult ilevel stakehol der engagem ent is key to improvi ng wom en Veter ans’ health car e. 
 
We w ill operati onalize complexity t heory through use of t he Tool for Evaluati ng R esearch 
Implementati on Challeng es (TECH),34 which w as designed to systematica lly assess im pacts of 
implem entati on challenges and guide pot ential so lutions. Simpson  and colleagues r ecomm end this 
tool under three pre-cond itions: 1 ) “implementati on adaptati ons are ex pected due to t he emergent 
nature of compl ex resea rch se ttings; ” 2) the resea rch envir onment ne eds to encourage “ spon taneous  
emerg ent so lutions” and creativity; and 3) all resea rch tea m mem bers must be em power ed to 
participate. Our app roach, where al l stakeholders are integr al to achieving the im pact goal, suppo rts 
these pre-c onditi ons. 
 
TECH, which has been used successfully in VHA and community studies, is codified into a series 
of interactive steps:  identifying challenges (e.g., through observing day-to-day dynamics, 
listening to complaints, asking questions, etc.), interpreting the challenges in weekly meetings, 
generating and testing solution strategies, and, if necessary, addressing regulatory issues. 
Solution strategies are developed through open dialogue among the team members as well as others who might have perspectives on potential solutions. Although applicable to many different types of research, TECH is especially useful for research in complex adaptive systems as a tool for addressing unexpected challenges in systematic and collaborative ways.  
 
Multilevel Stak eholder Engagem ent in the EMPOWER Q UER I. Ou r QUER I capita lizes on our 
seasoned team of implementati on sci entists, health servi ces researcher s, and cl inicians, suppo rted by 
a ste llar Strategic Advisory Group. Fu rthermore, we have t he disti nct advantage of being buttr essed 
by the VHA HSR&D Wom en’s H ealth R esea rch Network (WH RN), which is compri sed of the 
Wom en’s H ealth R esea rch Consort ium and  the Wom en’s H ealth Practi ce-Based R esea rch Network 
(PBRN ; §3.3.1) , and a re search a im on mult ilevel stakeholder engagement. O ur en tire team is 
associat ed with t he WHR N (with EMPOWE R QUERI P I Ham ilton also being o ne of t he WHR N PIs). In 
fact, this Q U
ERI was devel oped with cons istent input from the PBRN Site Leads  (some of w hom are 
on our team: Bean-May berry (P I), Mattock s, Sadler), and the projects wil l all be conduc ted at PBRN 
sites (Fray ne LoS) . Moreover, our QUER I proposal has  been str engthened from its inc eption by 
invaluable i nput of wom en Veter ans themselves. S pecifically, a newly  formi ng Wom en Veter an 
Patient Advisory C ounc il has  agreed to serve as an implementati on pa rtner fo r this Q UER I Progra m 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 20 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- (Gottke LoS); Dr . Ham ilton wil l serve as an advisor to the Counc il and w ill use  principles of pati ent 
engagement in re search33 to gui de co llaborati on and involvem ent of the C ounc il. 
 
EMPOWER Q UER I Met hods  
 
Setting: Wom en’s H ealth Practice-B ased R esear ch Network ( PBRN ). The PBRN provides a resear ch 
infrastructure for inv estigators seeking to incr ease  inclusion of wom en in VHA research or conduct 
multi-sit e wom en’s fo cused r esea rch in VHA. Compri sed of 37 VAMCs t hat see one-third of wom en 
Veter an VHA use rs, the PBRN he lps investigator s overcome t he challenges of multi-site st udies 
through engagement o f Site Leads with established  worki ng relati onshi ps with l ocal c linicians and 
facility leadershi p. Site Leads  have receiv ed implem entati on traini ng, and have devel oped across-site 
relati onshi ps through regul ar nati onal calls and techn ical support org anized by the PB R N 
Coordi nating C enter in Palo Alto (Fray ne LoS) . 
 
Modified St epped  Wedge  Study Design for Implementati on Trials. We will use st epped  wedge 
designs, which rely on sequenti al roll-out to participating sit es over time, while us ing ot her s ites as 
controls until they begin implem entati on. Consistent with our subs tantial prior experience us ing these 
designs in VH A and arm ed with compl exity theory’s r ecogniti on of nonlinea rity of implem entati on, we 
will use  modified stepped wedges (rather than r andomiz ed) given their suit ability for st udying 
implem entati on. This design ac knowl edges that sites are heterog eneous, f ace multiple cons traints , 
and, as a result , are ready  to adop t interv entions at di fferent rate s.  The m odified design exp licitly 
cons iders the timing o f implem entati on spr ead a nd addresses the statisti cal issues  introduced by lack 
of randomizati on in implem entati on starts and pr ocesses. We w ill analytically com pensate f or the 
design by collecting pati ent-, provider-, and site-lev el data t hat may be assoc iated with timing of t he 
adopti on of each  interv ention. 
 
We w ill include thr ee levels i n our  hierarchi cal stepped wedge m odels: (1) patient,( 2) time of 
intervention (i.e., when a provider starts using the intervention), and (3) site. Outcomes of interest  are 
measured for all  patients at each site within the given intervention time period. We will include four 
PBRN sites in each of our two implementation trials  
 Data co llection w ill occur in each o f the REP  phas es (e.g., pre-c onditi ons for 6 months, pre-
implem entati on for 6 m onths, implem entati on for 15 m onths, and maint enanc e/evoluti on for 4 months). 
Similar to previ ous modified st epped w edge st udies, implem entati on initiat es with PCPs. Figure 4 
depicts Site A initiating a t Quarter 3, Site B at Quarter 4, a nd so on, with thr ee PCPs at each s ite, each 
quarter, for a tot al of 81 PCPs. The PCPs “turn on ” (i.e., use  the template in t he CV project; refer to 
the
 care m anager in the CCW V project) as they switch from p re-implementati on to implem entati on. 
 Modifi ed st epped w edge designs make e fficient use of al l data ava ilable for within-site and betw een-
site com parisons .  For the within-site compari son, s ites act as  their own controls in an eval uation that 
compares sites pre- ver sus post-implem entation . The compari son exami nes sites as they cross-ov er 
from control to interv ention states . The betw een-site com parison eval uates the interv ention period for 
a site v s. all other interv ention and con trol periods for all sit es. By having these  two ty pes of 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 21 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- comparison, the design improv es on t he validity of t he eval uation of t he interv ention, by accou nting for 
histori cal time tr ends  that may occur outsi de of the interv ention and f or site context ual characteristics 
that m ay affect site perfo rman ce. 
 
We wil l use  a modifi ed st epped w edge design to eval uate t he implem entation in four V A Wom en’s 
PBRN sites (Fray ne LoS) . In the contex t of the modified st epped w edge design, the interv ention is 
“turned on” w hen a PCP at a site mak es her/his first refe rral to the CCWV care m anag er (see below). 
 
In Year 1, we wil l begin the REP pre-conditi ons phase in one VA Wom en’s PBRN sites. We w ill 
conti nue through t he phases  over the course o f four y ears, with a 15-month implem entati on phase in 
order to ensu re adequate time to eval uate implementati on and sufficient numbers of Wom en Veterans 
being ex posed to CCWV. Three  additi onal PBRN sites will be “stepped in” during Year 2at appropriate 
intervals over time . Accordi ng to t he REP framework and complexity t heory, al l sites will be 
encourag ed to adapt  and tailor set -up and delivery of CALM accordi ng to their local resour ces and 
care configurati ons.  
 
REP Implementati on Phases  
 
Pre-conditi ons (Aim 1): The  need f or CCWV has been established and the review of effective 
interv entions has been conduct ed (see above) . To ensure tha t the care m odel fits local settings and 
stakeholder prioriti es, the PI and Co-Inv estigator Dr. Oi shi will visit t he sites and meet with t he local 
team to discuss l ocal structures, car e models and processes, e ducati onal needs, as  well as elements 
of the prop osed CCWV and tailoring options that we have concept ualized (T able 3) . Using t he TECH , 
the local team wil l discuss opti ons for CCW V implem entati on and antici pated barriers to 
implem entati on. Also duri ng this phase, interviews and surveys wil l be conduc ted with al l cons enting 
key stak eholders, with t he excepti on of pati ents who wil l be interview ed and survey ed in t he 
implementati on phase ( see below).
Table 3. Elements of Co llabora tive Care f or Wom en Veter ans ( CCWV) 
 
Care management 
Functions CCWV Element Local Tailoring Options 
Initial MH 
assessm ent of pat ients 
referred by PCP Care manager  conducts baseline MH 
assessm ents, medication his tory, and ot her relev ant 
inform ation collection Site designates a local MH care manager  (RN or 
social worker) who c onduc ts some or all care 
managem ent functi ons; si tes choose from VA-
approved assessment pack ages  
Women with positive 
assessm ents offered 
treatment choice Treatment choices for anxiety, depression, and PTSD  
are medications, primary care- based CA LM CBT , or both Site chooses integrated MH providers 
accordi ng to local ava ilability (psychol ogist; 
social worker) f or traini ng in CALM CBT 
 
Care management 
Functions CCWV Element Local Tailoring Options 
Women with severity 
or complexit y requiri ng 
specialt y treatment 
assisted to acc ess 
specialt y resources Care manager  inquires about preferences for 
gender-s pecific ser vices and pro vider gender; facilitates 
connection to most c ongruent loca lly available s pecialty 
services, and mak es a war m handoff if possibl e; care 
manager  follows up w ith pat ient to check on any mi ssed  
appointments or group sessions Referral can be made to co-located or 
distant specialty ser vices as avail able at the si te; care 
manager  is familiar with loca lly available gen der-
specific gr oups  and provi ders most ex perienced i n 
treating wo men; same gender provi der options 
identified ahead of time 
Systematic 
monitoring of symptoms 
and t reatment emer gent 
problems Care manager  uses structured MH a ssessments 
for depression, anxiety disor ders, and alco hol p roblems as 
well as sympt om and si de effects check lists to monitor 
treatment respons e; follow s up to assure m edication and/or 
CBT se ssion comp liance Sites choose from VA-approved follow-up 
assessm ent options; site c an choose to involve pe er 
support f or telephone check- in with patient and in-
person chaper oning and esc orting to various services 
Patient education 
and activati on If the patient has chosen medication, care 
manager  provi des basic patient educ ation and activ ation 
releva nt to the p rimary di agnosis; i f CBT is chosen the 
care m anager  facilitates c onnecti on to an i ntegr ated 
provider trained i n CALM Site decides which materials from available 
care m anagem ent programs care m anager w ill offer; if 
in the scope of practice of the locally c hosen care 
manger  (e.g., MSW) the care m anager  may be train ed 
to provide CALM C BT 
Decision support Care manager  uses a stepped care protocol 
under  supervision of a local psychi atrist to determi ne when 
decisions to in crease or change t reatment options are 
needed and to collec t inform ation to assist t he primary care 
provider in maki ng adjustm ents Decision support templates may be locally 
selected fro m VA-approved options; sites choose a 
supervising psychi atrist who ma y be co-loc ated or 
based in s pecialty m ental heal th depending on local 
circumstances 
Site 1: Because  this proj ect’s Co-P I (Dr. Lang) is based at the San Diego PBRN site, we have alr eady  
laid t he ground work for implementati on at this sit e, in co llaborati on with t he PBRN Site Lead, Dr . 
Meredith Barnes , who is the WH M edical Di rector. VA San Diego is an inter esting and compl ex site at 
which to implem ent CCWV , because P C is deliver ed in two l ocati ons (La Jolla and Missi on Va lley) 
that serve both m en and wom en, with 41 designat ed WH provi ders acr oss the healt hcare system. 
These two l ocati ons differ in their PC-MHI team s, with one having a clini cal ps ychologist, a nurse case 
manager , and a part- time (1/ 8) ps ychia trist; and t he othe r having two psych ologists, a nurse case 
manager, a part-time (6/8) psychia trist, and psy chology trainee tim e (approx. 40 hours/w eek). Unless 
the PCP is prescribing hi m/herself , most PC pa tients with M H ne eds are referred to the Anxiety 
Disor ders Clinic or the M ood Clinic, unless the diagn osis is PT SD, in which case wom en are refe rred 
to the wom en’s trauma cli nic. These clini cs all have waiti ng lists. MH providers at the two P C sites 
have expr essed to t he co-P I that CCWV w ould be an impo rtant and needed additi on to t he servi ces 
currently provided, es pecially in t hat, fo r those w ho need a hig her level of care, it can provi de a 
“bridg e” to that care and m ay even circumv ent the need f or such care if desir ed outcom es are 
achiev ed through CCWV. This site has a str ong peer suppo rt spe cialist program , led by the Local 
Recovery C oordi nator who has expr essed her supp ort for this st udy and w ill actively “market ” the 
availability of female peer suppor t spec ialists to t he WH PCPs and pati ents. Of note, acr oss the two 
PC clinics fro m Oct 2014  – Apr 201 5, there have been 688 unique encoun ters in primary care by 
wom en with an xiety or depression.  This substantiat es that we wil l have sufficien t numbers o f wom en 
at this site to ensure t hat at least 130  will be referr ed to t he CCWV care m anager (see power analysis 
section) and w ill complete t he baseline m easures. 
 
Pre-implementati on (Aim 1 cont.): A t each  site, a local CCWV champi on wil l be identifi ed by the Site 
Lead when s/ he signs onto t he project. The CCWV package wil l be further devel oped and l ocally 
tailored, with attenti on to traini ng and techni cal a ssistance  needed at each  site. Once pr epared , the 
package w ill be piloted locally to ensure that it works as int ended  with l ocal s ystems and processe s. In 
order to use t he CALM CBT platform , we are co llabo rating with Dr . Curran (see LoS) w ho will provide 
us with a V A versi on of the platfor m when it is r eady  (their C REATE study). Using t he TECH , any 
challeng es with p ilot implementati on wil l be di scussed  and addres sed by the team. Wh en the team 
determi nes that c hallenges  have been suffici ently addr essed, orientati on meetings w ill be held with 
the br oader clini c, where t he CCWV package w ill be distr ibuted, discussed , and marketed. 
 
Implementati on (Aim 2): The implementati on phase wil l begin a t one PBRN sites and will last a tot al of 
15 mont hs to ensure adequate time for pati ent E xposure to t he care mo del as  well as implem entation 
evaluation and rea ch. CCWV w ill spread to three additi onal PBRN sites in the following years . PBRN 
representativ es will be trained in CA LM.  Field notes will be taken during t he traini ng and mi nutes w ill 
be kep t of all conference  calls and meeti ngs. Notes will be analyz ed usi ng ATL AS.ti and  will be 
interpret ed in conj uncti on with ot her eval uation data as desc ribed below. During regul ar 
implem entati on meetings , TECH will be used to assess and address implem entati on challenges.  
 
Procedures : Once traini ng is complete and sites are r eady  for implementati on, wom en Veter ans with 
poss ible depr ession and/or anxiety disor ders w ill be referred by their PCP (or other referri ng provi der) 
to the locally identifi ed CCWV care m anager , who will a lso conduct  local c ase fi nding activities to 
identify wom en Veteran s who m ay benefit from care m anagement. T he care m anager w ill then 
complete a clini cal e valuation to i dentify the disorder o f primary clini cal focus (P anic Disor der with or 
without Agoraphobi a, Social Anxiety Disor der, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Posttr aumatic S tress 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 24 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Disor der, depr ession). CCWV is an innovative care m odel that is proactiv e, patient-center ed and 
personalized to each  wom an that has an appoin tment with t he care m anager. S pecifically, the care 
manager assists t he patient in deciding which ty pe of treatment she  wants t o pur sue ( CBT, 
medication, or both). During or shortly a fter the initi al meeting with t he care m anager , each wom an will 
be asked by the R A if she is willing to participate in our research proj ect, meaning t hat she wil l be 
asked to complete a bri ef written battery of m easures (§3.3.3. 3) and a short qualitative interview at 
baseline (after the first or second visit with the care manager)  and a t six-months post- base line.  
Women who enroll after the baseline window  will not be eligible for baseline survey measures ; 
however they can participate in interviews . Participants  who enroll  in research after the baseline 
period, and any women who are otherwise unable or unwilling to compl ete the written surveys, will be 
invited to consent to participate in other components of the research (i.e., qualitative interviews, , data 
obtained from medical record) .     
 
For wom en who choose  CBT, the CALM-trained provi der will then meet with t he patient w eekly to 
review t he CALM CBT modules. The progr am includes  five g eneral modules (introduction, 
psychoeducati on, se lf- monitorin g, breathing retraini ng and rel apse  prev ention), and thr ee othe r 
modules that are customiz ed to each anxiety disor der (cognitive res tructurin g, in vivo exposure and 
intero ceptive ex posure) , which are ta ilored to each anxiety disor der. Depression m odules are also 
available. The CALM CBT platfor m is a computer- assisted delivery sys tem. The provi d er sits with t he 
patient in front of the com puter and dir ects the individual to revi ew the appropriate material , clarifyi ng 
and i ndividually ta iloring. The program c ontai ns educ ational materi al as  well as skills traini ng and 
exposure exercises . The entire progr am is typically complet ed within eight 60-mi nutes sessi ons.  
 
Maint enance and Evoluti on: The last phase in this framework a llows us to take t he feedback and 
make modificati ons to our implem entation process to e nhance CCWV adopti on, fidelity to t he REP 
framework, and dissemi nation to future sit es. Sharing t hese  details with stak eholders using T ECH 
informs t he current implem entati on process and sustainability f or the futur e. The four REP phases 
allow us to ac count  for each s tep of the gui ded implem entati on strategy. Fi nally, t he inter change 
betw een t hese phases and t he implem entati on process com ponen ts provi de an in- depth 
underst anding o f whether CCWV implem entati on requir es further ada ptation and customizati on pri or 
to broader  VA dissemi nation. Duri ng this phas e, the research tea m will collaborate with t he local 
implem entati on teams to devel op points f or the CCW V Implementati on Playbook. 
 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 25 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Risk to Subjects  
This study involves both Veteran ( 520 total across sites) and VA Staff participants (60 total across 
sites).  
Veteran Involvement and Characteristics  
This 4- site project aims to inform the VA regarding implementation of collaborative care for women 
Veterans (CCWV).  The study is primarily focused on implementation outc omes such as adoption, 
acceptability, feasibility, satisfaction, and reach, as well as patient engagement and retention; patient 
clinical outcomes (symptoms, etc.) though examined, are secondary. After IRB approval, at each 
participating site, we will enroll approximately 130 women Veterans who are referred by their primary 
care provider (PCP) or another referring provider to the CCWV care manager. Any woman referred to 
the care manager (and therefore initially screening positive for anxiety , depression, an d/or PTSD ) is 
eligible to participate. We will stop consenting enrollees once we have reached up to 80 women who 
have had an encounter with the care manager  and who consent participate in the research, in order to 
complete data collection with 65 women at each site.  Our goal is to have 260 women total (across the 4 sites) engaged in care management  over the course of the study.  Participation in CCWV consists of 
completion of  the surveys, interviews, and access to relevant medical record data.   
Routine Clinical  Care versus Research .   Meeting with the care manager and participating in 
Coordinated Anxiety Learning and Management (CALM) , being followed by the care manager for 
medication adherence, psychiatric treatment and medication, or other ment al health treatments are 
routine clinical care  available to any woman Veteran seen at a participating primary care or women’s 
health clinic .  Consenting to research involves completing the research surveys, research  interviews , 
and granting permission to access selected medical record data as part of an evaluation of the 
implementation outcomes and secondary clinical outcomes described above.   Participants who enroll in 
research after the baseline period, and any women who are otherwise unable or unwilling to complete 
the written surveys, will be invited to consent to participate in other components of the research (i.e., 
qualitative interviews, data obtained from medical record).   Patients do not have to consent to participating in research in order to rec eive routine clinical care with the care manager.  
Provider / VA Staff Involvement and Characteristics  
We will recruit approximately 15 VA staff members per site. Staff members from each site will comprise 
primary care providers, care managers, MH provider s, social workers, and administrators (e.g., Primary 
Care Chief, MH Chief). Given the diversity of VA staff, this sample will include women, men, and 
members of minority and ethnic groups.  This array of providers and staff will allow varied perspective 
on the CCWV care delivery process at each site.  
Potential Risks  
Risks are minimal.  
For patients, s tudy assessments will include potentially sensitive questions and information about 
mental and/or physical health symptoms, thus there is risk for embarrassment and negative effects on 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 26 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- patient subjects if sensitive information was improperly disclosed and used in a discriminatory fashion 
against the individual.  It is also possible that patients may become upset or triggered when asked about 
mental health concerns and exposures, or that suicidal thoughts may be revealed during questionnaire 
completion or dur ing interviews.  Additionally, individuals’ social security numbers will be collected in 
order to obtain data from VA databases and to collect data from patient medical records.   If disclosed, 
this information could cause negative financial or legal consequences.  Recruitment may also involve the risk of coercion if the Veteran perceives that refusal might threaten care or benefits.    
For staff participants , because these studies ask questions about organizational issues at the clinic 
where they are employe d, there is risk for embarrassment and negative effects on subjects if sensitive 
information was improperly disclosed and used in a discriminatory fashion against the individual.   
However, given the safeguards against improper disclosure and steps we are taking to ensure 
protection of sensitive information as detailed below, the likelihood of any disclosure is minimal.  
Adequacy of Protection from Risk  
Procedures to safeguard against adverse events.  All data collection protocols will include procedures 
whereby research staff members report problems with the data collection, concerns about risk to 
subjects or others, or unusual occurrences during the collection. These allow project leaders an 
opportunity to quickly review and respond to any possible concerns  or adverse effects.   
Informed consent. Research participants are advised of the voluntary nature of participation and 
research subjects are informed of their right to withdraw from the project at any time. Each participant 
receives a verbal and written description of the study. The Principal Investigator and delegated 
research team members are available at all points of the study to answer questions and to explain 
assessment procedures, uses to which the data will be put, and confidentiality of data.  
Mandatory reporting safeguards . Procedures to prevent violation of confidentiality are limited by the 
mandatory nature of legal reporting requirements. Subjects are informed in the consent document and 
verbal consent process that their responses to the survey s and interviews are confidential, except:  
“1) If we need to protect you or others from harm. An example of this is if you want to hurt yourself or others. In that case, we will give information about you to others that is needed to protect you or others from harm.  
2) If you tell us about the abuse of a child or of an elderly person, or if you tell us about being abused 
yourself. In that case, we must report this to a supervisor, who may report it to the authorities.”  
 
Data safeguards. Before analysis of the data, all identifying information will be removed from the data. 
No information that could identify study subjects will be published or presented. Data will be reported 
only in the aggregate. Identifiable data will be stored separately from coded data sets. Access to identifiable study data will be restricted to research teams on a need- to-know basis.  
 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 27 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- The CALM CBT program  that will be used by care managers who work with patients choosing this 
option will be accessed from a secure website behind the VA firewall.  No  mental health information 
recorded in the program  during CALM CBT sessions, including mental health assessments, will be 
accessed for research purposes . We will document  which modules were used for each participating 
patient as a way of tracking the most useful and effective content for this population.  
  
Discomfort with assessment, intervention procedures o r disclosure safeguards. During the course of  
participation in the study, a subject could feel uncomfortable answering the survey or interview 
questions.  All interviewers will be trained in the assessments and with sensitivity to the issues to be 
discusse d.  All subjects are informed that they may c hoose to skip any questions that they find 
uncomfortable or withdraw from the study at any time.  
For patients who consent to be surveyed, the 30- 45 minute  surveys are handed to the participant  by the 
RA, and will be completed in a private room in the VA c linic setting at each site.   The RA will check for 
completeness as well as suicidality items before participant leaves.   Qualitative i nterviews will be 
conducted in person in a private room  or by phone.    
Staff interviews will be conducted over the phone or in person in a pri vate room.    
Response procedures for adverse events are described in Section 6 Reporting (below).  
 
Staff training safeguards . As required, all research staff will be credentialed by their VA Healthcare 
System’s research service, and will successfully complete all required trainings. Clinical staff provide  
routine clinical  care.  Research staff will meet with their local study s upervisor (the Site Lead or the 
Project Director) on a regular  basis for supervision, ongoing monitoring of interactions with subjects, 
and problem solving. Research and clinical staff are trained to identify events that would fall under mandatory reporting guidelines, such as harm to self or others. The PI will be available at all times by 
cell phone. When the PI is not available, the PI will delegate this responsibility to another qualified, 
credentialed staff member.  
 
Potential Benefits of the Research to Subjects and Others  
Although individual subjects do not benefit directly, there are potential benefits to human subjects from 
participation. Participants may be able to impact the development and future dissemination of the care 
models for women with a nxiety and/or depression at their own or other VA sites. They may also be able 
to provide feedback on care in the clinic where they receive services or are employed, which may affect 
their treatment or working environment in the future if this model is widely adopted.   
 
5.2 Recruitment Methods  
This study involves both Veteran Patients  (n=260; 65/site) and  VA Staff  participants ( n=60; ~15/site ). 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 28 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Patients .  Patient subjects will be recruited after making contact with the CCWV care manager via 
referral from their provider  or other staff . The care manager will introduce the research study, and if the 
person wishes to find out more about the study and possibly participate, the care manager will  
introduce the Veteran to the RA (if available), ask the Veteran to complete the Research Candidate 
contact form , add research staff as an additional signer on their CPRS note to automatically notify 
research staff of interested individual s, or contact the RA through ano ther secure HIPAA -compliant 
route such as phone call or encrypted email to relay the Veteran’s referral information.  . The RA will 
check in with the care manager frequently to learn when women Veterans have been referred, as well 
as respond to notifications from the CPRS system , phone calls, and encrypted emails . Using a visit -
based sampling method, patients are eligible during their first or second  visit with the care manager 
during the 15 -month implementation period. The patient will be informed about the details of research 
participation and asked if they would like to participate in the project .  If they agree,  the written or verbal 
(if by phone) informed consent process will be conducted.   Patients that are past the enrollment window 
(i.e., 1st or 2nd visit with care manager), or otherwise unable or unwilling to participate in surveys are still 
eligible to complete qualitative interviews.   
For patients who enroll after the baseline window and will only be invited to consent to participate in 
other components of the research (i.e., qualitative interviews, data obtained from medical record) by 
phone, after receiving information about interested Veterans from the care manager, the RA will mail the interested Veteran a written information sheet about the study that contains all the elements for 
informed consent  and HIPAA, including information about audio recording .. The RA will wait one week 
before calling the Veteran to check if they have received it. If they have received it, the RA will discuss 
the details of research participation with the Veteran and if the Veteran would like to participate, the RA 
will review the written information sheet  and conduct a  verbal consent process that includes reviewing 
all the elements of consent and the HIPAA, and ver bal consent will be recorded at the time of interview 
for these patients. 
 
 
Staff.  A total of 60 to 80  VA Staff participants will be recruited from 4 sites. Staff partic ipants  will be 
recruited from women’s health clinics that are using a WH PACT model of  care.  To obtain the staff 
sample, we will work with each site’s PBRN Site Lead and/or Site Representative to develop a list of 
eligible individuals (and their contact information), who meet the staff categories we would like to 
include. The study PI and/ or the Site Lead will present the study to local staff and administrators  via 
email and/or phone call .  Staff members will be emailed an invitation to participate  in an initial interview, 
which will be collected at the time of the initial interview. This e mail will also inform the participant that 
their participation includes three semi -structured interviews, either in person or over the phone, that will 
take 30 minutes each, the initial interview in the next few weeks, the second interview 10 -12 months 
later and the final interview about a year later (the expected duration of their participation will be a total 
of 3 years) .  The recruitment process will include informing potential staff participants  about the study, 
who is conducting it, why the individual was selected for recruitment, and how the information gathered 
will be used. Potential staff participants  will be informed that their participation is entirely voluntary and 
their decision about participation will not affect their employment, merit, or promotion.  After explaining 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 29 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- the study, if the staff member is interested, the GLA  research staff will schedule an appointment , or 
local staff may help schedule in- person interviews with visiting GLA research staff . We will also inform 
the participant that in 10 -12 months, unless they ask us not to, we will contact them again regarding 
participating in a similar follow -up interview to document events across time.  
  
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  
 
Patients.  For patients who enroll during the baseline period and complete the written surveys, w e will 
obtain a signed HIPAA authorization to access patient  medical records.  The informed consent process 
will include informing potential subjects about the study, who is conducting it, why the individual was 
selected for recruitment, that their participation in the research will be entered in their medical record, 
how the information gathered will be used, and about the patient participant  payments.  Payments 
include $2 0 voucher  for each of two surveys and, $10 voucher for each of the interviews at baseline 
and six months post -baseline.  
Patients who enroll after the baseline window will only be invited to consent to participate in other 
components of the researc h (i.e., qualitative interviews, data obtained from medical record) . We will 
request a waiver of HIPAA in entirety from this subset of patients and a waiver of documentation of 
consent  from this subset of patients , as these components may be conducted by phone. A fter receiving 
information about interested Veterans from the care manager, the RA will mail the interested Veteran a 
written information sheet about the study that contains all the elements for informed consent  and 
HIPAA, including information about audio recording. The RA will wait one week before calling the 
Veteran to check if they have received it. If they have received it, the RA will discuss the details of research participation with the Veteran and i f the Veteran would like to participate, the RA will review 
the written information sheet and conduct a verbal consent process that includes reviewing all the 
elements of consent and the HIPAA, and verbal consent will be recorded at the time of interview f or 
these patients.  
 
Potential subjects will be informed that their participation in the research is entirely voluntary, and that if 
they choose not to participate, there will be no effect on the care they receive.  Methods for how subjects’ identity and c ollected data will be protected will be discussed. Patients will be asked if they 
understand the nature of their participation, and will be asked to describe their understanding of 
participation.  
Staff.  A request for waiver of documentation of consent wil l be requested as affirmative response to 
the email invitation will constitute informed consent  and verbal consent will be recorded at the time of 
interview .  After a response has been received, enrolled staff members will be scheduled for an 
interview  with a member of the research team.   
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 30 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ ---  
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Staff  
Inclusion Criteria:  VA staff affiliated with women’s health care. Given the diversity of VA staff , we expect 
this will include women, men, and members of minority and ethnic groups . 
 
Exclusion criteria: Non -VA staff.  
 
Patients  
Inclusion Criteria:  female VA patients who are referred to the care manager for further mental health 
assessment and/or care . 
 
Exclusion criteria: Non -VA patients; less than 18 years of age; anyone who is unable to provide 
consent.  
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 31 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- 5.5 Study Evaluations 
 
Qualitative Data Co llection:  
 
Staff Interviews:  To understand  clinic organization, provider and staff roles, existing care 
arrangements for women Veterans,  and perceived acceptability and feasibility of the CCWV program 
from key participants (VA staff, including WH primary care providers, nurses, clinical staff and health 
coaches); we intend to recruit approximately 15 staff per site who will be asked to c omplete a brief 
interview. Participation will consist of three 30- minut e qualitative interviews (pre- , mid -, and post -
implementation) conducted in-person or over the phone by a research staff member. We will evaluate 
the pre -implementation interviews (approximately five months into the pre- conditions phase ); 
perceptions of interim implementation processes and outcomes (approximately six months into the implementation phase) and summative perceptions of implementation and potential for spread (last two 
months of the maintenance/evolution phase). The mid -impleme ntation assessment will evaluate the 
progress and implementation barriers and facilitators to CCWV  implementation and be used to 
continue to tailor the implementation.  Final interviews will re- evaluate baseline domains, and will 
follow -up on CCWV  implemen tation and sustainability.  
 
 
Ethnogr aphic field notes will be  taken by research tea m mem bers through out implem entati on to captur e 
aspec ts of t he context o f implem entati on and otherwise unmeasur ed aspe cts of usual ca re. The two 
anthr opologists on the QUER I Progra m (Ham ilton and Moreau) w ill provide training on writing field 
notes. Also, minut es will be recor ded f or all project meetings (i ncluding trainings) and confer ence calls. 
In additi on, subs tantive ema ils and other co mmunicati ons regardi ng implementati on will be archiv ed 
and analy zed. 
 
 
Quantitative Data Co llection: The measures will be comp iled into a wri tten q uestionnaire fo r patients .  
Participants wil l be asked to complete brief questionnair es during or near t he same time as the 
qualitative interviews.    
 
Information from and about Veterans:  
Sources of patient data for this project include (1) Data obtained from medical records including 
utilization of MH and CCWV services, psychiatric medications, MH diagnoses, relevant patient history 
(i.e., MST), and symptom measures completed with care manager and obtained from medical record; (2) information provided by patient participants via surveys  (baseline and six months)  and interviews  
(baseline and six months; and  (3) CALM modules acc essed and/or completed.  (  
After consent, all enrolled participants in each project who enroll during the baseline window will complete a 30 -45 minute survey, delivered in- person by a research assistant  (RA) at baseline and six -
months post -baseline. The surveys  focus on patient activation, health -related quality of life, satisfaction 
with treatment, and project specific measures. In addition, a subset of approximately 45 women Veterans in each study will also be as ked to com plete an additional 30- minute qualitative interview with 
a research staff member at baseline and six months post- baseline.  The participant will be asked to 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 32 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- complete a hard copy, which the RA will  send via fax to a monitored fax machine at GLA to enter into 
the database.  Participants who enroll in research after the baseline period, and any women who are 
otherwise unable or unwilling to complete the written surveys, will be invited to consent to participate in 
other components of the research (i.e., qualitative interviews, , data obtained from medical record), which may be conducted primarily by phone.  
Patient semi -structured interviews will be coded only with a study ID, digitally audio- recorded, and 
uploaded to a secure VA server behind the VA firewall. If recording c onsent is denied, the researchers 
will take hand written notes, which will be securely transported and stored as described below until they 
are transcribed into an electronic format. When desired by the patient or the interviewer, or to accommodate the cognitive needs of the subject, the survey or interview can be performed at two or 
more sessions. At the end of the implementation period we will obtain utilization history through the 
Data Access Request Tracker (DART) system, conducting chart review in the VA Informatics and 
Computing Infrastructure (VINCI) environment.   
 
5.6 Data Analysis  
 
Qualitativ e Analysis: All semi-str uctured interviews wil l be digita lly recorded on an VA -approved audio 
device.   The interview content will be transcribed in order to assure that interviewer notes have 
accurately and fully captured interview content.   Approved staff from the VA Salt Lake City (VASLC) 
will transcribe the CCWV  audio files. The VASLC has a Professional Transcription Service available 
to VA sites and monitored by their own IRB. The CCWV ] audio recordings to be transcribed by 
VASLC staff will be labeled by the subject's unique alphanumeric code and saved behind the VA Firewall in CCWV’s  secure shared project folder on GLA VA share drive. The VASLC transcripti on 
staff will be given access to a sub- folder within CCWV’s  secure project folder. Approved study staff 
will place a copy of the audio files in this folder for an approved VASLC transcriptionist to access for the purposes of transcription. The VASLC transcriptionist will transcribe each interview verbatim and 
save the completed transcript in the sub- folder using the same alphanumeric code. No data (audio 
files, in process transcripts, or completed transcripts) will leave the GLA VA secure research server. 
As completed transcripts become available, approved study staff will move these files from the 
transcription sub- folder into another sub- folder that is only accessible to study staff, where they will 
be stored and accessed for qualitative analyses.  
 
 
Trans c ripts w ill be review ed, edit ed for accur acy, and su mmariz ed by members of t he research team. 
Consistent with our team’s approach ac ross multiple projects , matrix analysis met hods35 will be used 
for rapid turn-ar ound of the results36 to share with our Strategic Advisory Group. In-depth analysis of 
the qualitative data wil l be conduc ted using ATL AS.ti, a qualitative data analysis software progra m that 
allows fo r fluid interacti on of data acr oss types and sources. Initia lly, a t op-lev el code book  will be 
devel oped f or the baseli ne int erviews  based on the se mi-structur ed interview gui de.37   Using a 
cons tant compari son a nalytic approach, this co debook  will be elaborated upon based on emergen t 
them es, and it will be adjusted as each rou nd of interviews is review ed. Interviews wil l be co mpared 
within each clini c, across clinics, and ov er time. A dditional sour ces of qualitative data ( i.e. meetin g 
minutes , field notes, and archiv al information) w ill also be included in t he data set and will be coded  
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 33 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- separatel y  and  in relati on to the interview data. These multiple approaches  and gr oupings are easily 
facilitat ed within t he software program , which has the capac ity to group data in multiple ways and 
which a llows t he qualitativ e researchers maxim um flexib ility in negotiating a compl ex narrative 
dataset. Of note, the EMPOWE R QUER I qualitative team has been working togethe r for over five 
years; all desc ribed analytic pr ocedures are well- established and all mem bers o f the team have 
expertise with q ualitative data  analysis and di ssemination of results.  
 
In the pre- conditi ons transcripts, we wil l identify clinic organization, provider and staff roles, existing 
care arrangements for women Veterans,  and perceiv ed acceptability and feasibility of the CCWV 
program . We w ill synthesize this info rmati on with patient survey data to cr eate baseline su mmari es of 
care as usual, and to ta ilor our marke ting and implem entati on strategi es for use at the sites.  In mid-
implementati on interview data, we wil l identify factor s fac ilitating and im peding implem entati on of the 
care m odel, and strengths and w eaknesses  of the model as implem ented. We w ill assess  the ext ent to 
which com ponen ts of the model are being implement ed, and whi ch co mponents are e ffic ient and easy  
to incorporate into routi ne care. We w ill explore w hether particul ar co mponen ts appe ar to be of limited 
value in improvi ng care and exami ne clinic and provi der characteristi cs assoc iated with varyi ng levels 
of care m odel implem entati on and effectiveness.  In post-implementati on interview data, we wil l take a 
summative approach to characterizi ng overal l experiences  of and perspec tives on implem entation, 
with a pa rticular focus  on recomm endati ons for scale up and spread.55 
 
For provi de rs, we will track chang es in percepti ons about the ut ility and im pact of CCWV on clinical 
practice from p re-conditi ons to maint enanc e. We w ill also be inter ested in t he ex periences  of the care 
managers and othe r stakehol ders with regard to working specifica lly with wom en, eliciting their 
prefer ences, providi ng the CBT, and coordi nating with M H providers. For pati ents, we will co mpare 
and contrast data from those  who selected di fferent treatment options.  In or der to eval uate t he pati ent 
impact of CCWV , we will assess chang es in pati ent percepti ons of their M H symptoms , self-effic ac y, 
activati on, health- related quality of life and functioning.  We will  also collect information on 
demographics,  trauma history, health care, mental health care,  and experiences of care. 
 
 
Quantitative A nalysis: We wil l use  the m odified stepped w edge design to eval uate t he implem entation 
across t he provi ders at four site s. CCWV w ill be defined as “turni ng on” when a provi der refers a 
patient to the CCWV care m anager. We wil l model the effect of CCW V implementati on on referr al 
rates, while contr olling fo r organizati onal level, provi der level and patient level co variat es. 
 
In addition to project key personnel,  the overall E MPOWER Q UER I Implementati on Core will be 
involved in data analysis.  The Implementation Core i s directed by Dr. Ham ilton (EMPOWER Q UER I 
PI), an experienced and highly trai ned implementati on sci entist. She will be support ed by a seasoned 
team of Co- Inv estigators , many of w hom also have implementati on research ex perience.  Drs. 
Hamilton and Moreau will lead the qualitative analysis . The implementati on core per sonnel are 
support ed by sever al internationally r ecogniz ed implem entati on sci entists on the Scientific Advisory 
Group, i ncluding Dr s. Curran, Mittman, and Ya no. 
 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 34 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Impact-f ocused eval uation: Secondary aims f or the  project focus on factors that em power Wom en 
Veter ans to engage in a nd benefit from c are. We wil l use  genera lized linear mixed m odels (GLM) to 
evaluate a) cross-sectional relati onshi ps of patient a ctivati on, health-relat ed quality of life, and care 
experie nces  at enro llment, with provi der and site characteristics , adjusting for pati ent soc ial and 
demogr aphic char acteristi cs; and b) prospective changes in patient activati on, health-relat ed quality of 
life, and care ex periences  from en rollment to 6-m onth follow- up, adjusting for pati ent, provider, a nd 
site char acteristics. We w ill also cons truct multi-lev e l mediati on and moderati on m odels to explore 
whether engagem ent-relat ed factors such as patient ac tivation, strength o f treatment prefer ences, o r 
the comm unicati on subs cale of t he CAHP S are as sociated with great er ben efit from or satisfacti on 
with care. 
 
Power Analysis: O ur goal with t he power analysis w as to ascertain the number of pr oviders who would 
need to “turn on” the intervention (i.e., the number of referrals to the CCWV care manager), as well as 
the minimum number of patients that would need to be exposed to the care model. Consistent with 
our modified stepped wedge design, the power analysis presented here is for a 3- level hierarchical 
linear model where patients are clustered within PCPs within sites. In the final analysis structure, patients are the Level 1 units, the timing of PCP template use/referrals represent  Level 2 units, and 
sites are the Level 3 units. The number of patients who completed the care model sessions out of all 
patients referred). The outcome is binary (referred/retained vs. not), and measured at the patient level 
(Level 1). Treatment effect is  measured at Level 2, i.e., timing of when the PCPs turn on. Parameters 
required for calculating power are: alpha (α) = 0.05, sample size of patients clustered within referring PCPs (n) = at least 260 (based on prior work), the number of sites (K) = 4, the Plausible for Retention 
among those with low utilization (PI) = 5% to 85%, and Effect Size Variability (ESV) = medium or 0.05. Based on the resulting power curve, we need at least 8.78 (rounded to 9) referring PCPs per site to achieve power at 0.80. Our power analyses assume that the treatment effect is linear over time, i.e. patients that are retained longer have proportionally better outcomes. While selected details of the resulting dose response curve may vary, sensitivity analyses demonstrate a reasonable 
approximation enabling detection of treatment effects.  
 
In addition to project key personnel,  the overall E MPOWER Q UER I Implementati on Core will be 
involved in data analysis.  The Implementation Core i s directed by Dr. Ham ilton (EMPOWER Q UER I PI), 
an experienced and highly trai ned implementati on scientist . She will be support ed by a seasoned  team 
of Co- Inv estigators , many of w hom also have implementati on resea rch ex perience.  
 
 
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects 
The PI may terminate a participant in the study at any time if the study participant does not meet 
enrollment criteria or does not comply with study requirements, e.g., keeping scheduled appointments with the interview team.   
 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 35 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Participants may withdraw at  any time with no consequences.   
 
Information obtained up to the time of participant withdrawal or termination may be used in the data 
analysis.  
5.0 Reporting  
 
 
Although we do not expect our project to elicit distress among participants, i t is possible that some  
patient  participants will experience distress at the recall of certain experiences. Interviewers will be 
trained to respond to indications of distress by redirecting the participant to another area of the 
interview guide. Should the part icipant continue to indicate distress, the interviewer will ask the 
participant if she/he needs to speak to a mental health professional; local contact information of such 
professionals will be available to all interviewers and will be utilized if necessar y.  
 
Under any adverse circumstance, the Coordinating PI  will notify local PIs of any actions taken in 
response to the indication of distress, and regarding any unanticipated serious adverse events. In 
addition, the IRB will be notified according to guidel ines if there is an adverse event.  
 
The site PI and, in her absence, the Co- Principal Investigator will differentiate serious from non- serious 
adverse events. Upon discovery, all research -related deaths will be immediately and verbally reported 
to the CIRB and the Principal Investigator  followed by written notification within 5 working days after 
being made aware of the death.   All local serious unanticipated (unexpected) adverse events that are 
related to the research will be reported t o the Central IRB within 5 working days. Unanticipated 
problems that represent a risk to participants and/or others will be reported to the CIRB and the 
coordinating center within 5 working days.   Protocol deviations that substantively affect subjects’ rights 
or safety, or potentially compromise facility human research protection will also be reported to the Central IRB within 5 working days. An annual report summarizing all adverse events and unanticipated 
problems/protocol deviations that did not require immediate reporting will be prepared and reported to 
the Central IRB at the time of continuing review.  
 
Response procedures for adverse events  
 
Discomfort with disclosure . Research staff  who collect survey and interview data will be trained on how 
to respond to embarrassment or discomfort in an appropriate and compassionate manner. Participants  
will be encouraged to contact the care manager, site PI or other research staff in the event of a 
potential adverse reaction that occurs as a consequence of their pa rticipation in the survey or interview. 
They will receive specific written (in the form of a study description and contact information) and verbal instructions during the study consent procedures about how to do so, if needed. 
 
Mandatory reporting. One adv ersity a participant  may encounter is the possibility that staff must report 
to authorities instances of physical abuse or neglect  of a child, dependent or elderly person;  or threat of 
physical harm to the subject or others. To anticipate these concerns , the study has established 
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 36 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- procedures and guidelines to respond to risk disclosures and crisis situations. Staff will be trained to 
recognize risks or crises that require immediate reporting response.    
We expect that discussion of some of the mental health issues during the course of the research 
assessments may possibly result in some emotional or psychological stress.  If that does occur, the RA 
or interviewer will stop the research process, check on the patient, and inform the patient that she will 
call the PI or designated local clinical staff contact (e.g., care manager) for assistance.  
Each of the possible adverse events is described below, including background, criteria for emergency action, and non -emergency action.   
1) Suicidal ideation or intent ion to harm self  
If a subject endorses  thoughts of self -harm  when responding to assessments or makes a spontaneous 
disclosure to the research assistant or interviewer at any time , research staff will follow the procedures 
below:  
a. Emergency: in the rare instance that an individual is in imminent danger and needs emergency 
medical or mental health services, research staff will adhere to their medical center’s policies and 
procedures for managing and reporting such events including, if appropriate dialing 911 or the local 
police.   
b. Non- emergency: If a subject spontaneously reports that they are thinking of killing themselves or 
taking their life, for example:  
1. “I’m thinking about suicide/killing myself”  
2. “I feel like I want to kill myself”  
3. “I wish I were dead”  
4. “I wish my life were over”  
5. “I can’t go on” or “I feel I can’t go on”  
The research staff person will say, “You seem to be having a difficult time. If you think this is an 
emergency, we can call 911. If you think you need help with this problem, you can talk to your VA 
clinician or go to the VA emergency room.”  The research staff person will contact the designated VA 
clinician.  The clinician will follow standard clinical care guidelines, assessing a level of suicidality and 
establi shing a safety plan as needed  
The research staff person will call either the PI or their delegate within one hour of this incident. They 
will determine what further action is needed.  
2) Intent to harm others  
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 37 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Research staff will not be probing for this information and it is not part of any of the research tasks. 
Sometimes threats may be voiced spontaneously. If this is a vague statement about intent to harm others and it is not an easily identifiable person, and does not communicate clear intent, capable 
means or immediate intent to do  so, the research staff person will redirect the subject to the task at 
hand. However, if the subject makes a specific threat to a reasonably identifiable person, then the 
research staff person will remind the subject about the limits of confidentiality, and follow these 
procedures:  
a. Emergency: In the rare instance that an individual is in imminent danger and needs emergency 
medical or mental health services, the research staff will adhere to their medical center’s policies and procedures for managing and reporting such events including, if appropriate dialing 911 or the local 
police.  
b. Non- emergency: If a subject reports intent to commit harm to others that is a non- emergency in 
nature but that still communicates a reasonably identifiable person, clear  intent, capable means or an 
immediate intent to do so, the research staff person will contact the PI within one hour and will 
complete an incident report the same day. In addition, the research staff person will talk to the subject to express concern and encourage him/her to tell someone. They will determine what further action is 
needed.  
3) Child or dependent abuse/neglect  
Research staff will not be probing for this information and it is not part of any of the research tasks. However, if a subject discusses that a child, dependent or elder is being sexually, physically, or verbally 
abused or there is evidence of neglect (e.g., young child left alone for hours), then we will follow these 
procedures:  
a. Emergency: In the rare instance that a child or dependent is in imminent danger, the research staff 
will adhere to their medical center’s policies and procedures for managing and reporting such events 
including, if appropriate dialing 911 or the local police.  
b. Non- emergency: If there is a report or incident of child or elder abuse that is non -emergency in 
nature, the research staff person will consult with the PI or delegate by phone within one hour of the incident and will complete a written incident report the same day.  
Consulting with the VA Research Service, and VA legal representatives as needed, we will review what is known about each situation and will assess the legal and ethical characteristics of each situation. If it 
is determined that the study has a legal or ethical obligation to report the incident, we will do so.  
Reporting procedures of the VA Research Service will be followed for each incident.   
 
6.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 38 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Assurance of Patient Safety  
The local site research staff will be in regular communication with the research team at the main site 
and are responsible for monitoring patient safety at the participating sites.  The Project Director will 
monitor research operations of the project and oversee patient safety.  All research staff will be 
experienced in working with women V eteran patients and will be closely supervised by the study local 
site PI.  Since a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) is required for multi -site studies, we plan to 
utilize the central HSR&D DSMB for further oversight.  The DSMB provides an ongoing evaluation of 
the study’s progress including patient accrual and retention, monitoring of adverse events, and the 
adequacy and efficiency of the analysis plan to discern outcomes that might require study modifications, or result in early cessation of the study due its benefits or harms.  In terms of patient 
safety, the DSMB will evaluate all adverse and serious adverse events, by control and intervention site, including all hospitalizations and deaths.  
Data Security  
VA Research staff use VA computers to collect and analyze study data; either desktop or laptop computers with the VA image installed and managed by the local Information Resource Management 
department.   All laptops are encrypted with VA -approved FIPS 140 -2 certified encryption software to 
ensure that if laptops are ever lost or stolen, no data could be removed.   Laptop computers are never 
removed from VA grounds without supervisory approval and a VA Property Pass approved by the VA 
research service.   Thumb drives are never used as long- term storage of data with identifiers.   If a 
thumb drive is needed to transfer data from one computer to another, only a VA -approved thumb drive 
with the proper encryption software would be used after obtaining authorization from the local ISO.  
VA staff practice regular and secure data backup procedures.   Computer users “lock” their workstations 
when not actively in use, and office doors are closed and locked when staff members are not present.  Hard copies of sensitive data are stored separately from identifiers in locked filing cabinet in a locked 
office.  All research staff have access to a secure VA server managed by the HSR&D CSHIIP.   This 
server is behind the VA firewall and provides individual storage space for each project, and for each 
member of the study teams.   VA staff regularly backup data stored on computers to this server to 
protect those data in the case of an original data failure. This server is backed up incrementally on a 
daily basis with full backup occurring monthly.   Backups go to a tape library and the tapes are rotated 
on a quarterly basis and stored in the safe located in the ISO’s office at the Sepulveda campus.  
This server also provides a means to transfer data between local and non -local research staff.   Project 
folders can be created where any approved individual on the VA intranet can gain access through their approved VA login to a project server folder.   This allows secure data transfers over short and long 
distances with the smallest risk of accidental data disclosure.   Only staff that are li sted on delegated 
authorities for the project through the CIRB, are credentialed by Research, have completed all required data security training, and are approved by the CSHIIP will be given access to the research project 
folders on the research server.   Staff may only access this folder by using their VA login on a VA 
computer behind the VA firewall. Access to these files is immediately revoked for staff members who 
leave the project.  
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 39 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- Data Collection Procedures 
Staff data includes a masterlist, consents, and audio and transcription from interviews.  Patient data 
includes a masterlist, consents, surveys, audio and transcription from interviews, CALM web- tool data, 
and data extracted from medical records.    
A series of identification (ID) numbers will be generated for all patient and staff participants . A 4 digit 
study ID code will be generated for each participant and project staff will maintain a link file that contains the following for each participant: ID code, gender, name, site, and wave number. This is how 
the 4 digit study ID codes will be generated for each participant: 1st digit=wave #, 2nd digit=site #, Last 
2 digits= random # for unique respondent code.   For staff , the linking file will contain : ID number, 
gender and name.  This link file will be stored on a secure VA server behind the VA firewall.  All 
information linking subject identifiers to their data will be destroyed in accordance with the VA Records Control Schedule and guidance from the Central IRB.    
Data from all participants will be collected in a private office at each site or private room by phone by a 
trained member of the project team.  Project staff will maintain a link file that contains for each subject or participant: (a) for patients: ID number, subject name, last four of the social security number; (b)  for 
staff: ID number and name. This link file will be stored on a secure VA server behind the VA firewall.   
Consents are also collected in paper form and list patient subject's name and social security number 
(no SSNs are collected from staff participants).  The paper consents will be stored in a locked file 
cabinet within a secured room at the local site.  A limited number of authorized project staff have 
access to these consent forms.  The study master list has the subject ID number, SSN, full name and 
contact information. This master list is only accessible to the PI, co- PI, and limited project staff.  The 
master list  is stored on a VA desktop or encrypted laptop and a backup copy is stored on a VA server 
behind the VA firewall.  
 
Social security numbers are not collected from staff  participants; we are only collecting their VA contact 
information.  
 
Patient survey responses will be coded with the study ID and recorded directly into a survey program running on a VA computer and stored in a project -specific folder on the CSHIIP secure server.  
The VA CALM web- tool stores information entered by the patient during CALM C BT sessions (e.g., 
behavioral goals) and also tracks scores on mental health assessments such as the PHQ -9 that may 
be completed during sessions for follow -up over the course of participation.   The VA version of CALM 
was developed for the on- going CREATE CALM project (PI, Dr. Michael Cucciare, Little Rock VA) and 
have been made  available to the CCWV project on a secure VA server in Little Rock for use by care 
managers during CALM CBT sessions with patients.     
 
Patient information collected in the CALM web -tool is considered part of routine clinical care, and will be 
stored on a single- secure VA server at North Little Rock VA . 
 
Audio and Transcription from Interviews.  All staff participants  and a subset of patient participants  
will also complete a semi -structured interview with a research staff member. With the participants’ 
permission, the interviews will be recorded on VA- approved devices and uploaded to the project -
Version 4 ( 06/22/2020) VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 40 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- specific folders.  Data on patient participants  extracted from VA data systems, will also be stored in 
project folders. Paper data collected will be entered and verified, and securely stored in a locked 
cabinet in a locked office at the local HSR&D site.   
Any paper data collected from participants will have only the subject’s ID number and no identifying 
information.  No data will be collected outside the VA.  Paper data containing PHI is never left out on 
unattended desks.  
Data Transportation Procedures  
If paper data and audio recording devices need to be transported between sites they  will be securely 
carried in VA locked bags. Once on site, they will be secured in a locked file cabinet in a secure room.  
Data Transmission Procedures 
Paper surveys from local sites may be faxed to GLA.  Local staff will coordinate with GLA staff to 
arrange a time when the fax machine can be monitored by GLA project staff to secure the data.  The qualitative interviews will generate digital voice files, which are considered identifiable. To minimize risk, during recorded interviews subjects will only be identified using their project ID number, and subjects are instructed not to state any names or other identifying information in their interviews.  These audio 
files will be uploaded from recorders to the secure server The transcription company will be informed 
not to transcribe any identifying information accidentally disclosed in interviews. Any identifying information found in voice files from the qualit ative interviews is accidental and rare; no identifying 
information will be found in transcripts. The study team downloads the transcription files to the project -
specific folders on the VA server behind the VA firewall. Once they have been downloaded and v erified, 
the transcription company destroys the copies on their own server.  
 
Access, Storage and Handling of Secondary Data  
In addition to surveys and interviews, other outcome data will be extracted from national VA data 
systems, and patient medical record charts.  Data from VA electronic data systems will initially include 
patients’ social security numbers (SSN) along with any other identifiers, since these are used to assure that the data matches the project participants.  We will merge the extracted data with our existing research data. Once the data have been checked to ensure the merge has been successful, within the shortest possible time period, the SSNs will be removed from the analytic data file and stored in a link 
file kept in a separate, high security folder on secure VA server.   Each subject will already have been 
assigned a project ID number that does not contain any identifiers. The subject’s ID number will replace the SSN in the files.   All information linking subject identifiers to their data will be destroyed in 
accordance with the VA Records Control Schedule and guidance from the CIRB.  
VA records data will be obtained from CPRS, DSS or CDW.  In order to obtain data, the project team will work with a list of SSNs of patients consented and enrolled in the study. Project or VA -certified 
database analysts will be given this list of SSNs and will then run a query to extract the needed data, either working in the VINCI platform or downloading the data to a temporary folder on the CSHIIP 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 41 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- secure server.  Extracted data will be placed into our secure folder on the local CSHIIP server and 
coded for analysis. This data will always remain behind the VA firewall.   
All the above data are stored and backed up on a secure VA server.  Computer users “lock ” their 
workstations when not actively in use and office doors are locked when staff members are not present.  
Hard copies of sensitive data are stored in a separate locked filing cabinet in a locked office.   
Special consideration and precautions will be taken with regard to sharing information provided by individual employees with supervisors and co -workers.   While general information derived from 
employee interviews related to relevant clinical practices, resources, quality improvement activities, and 
barriers/facilitators will be shared with other site participants in aggregate or synthesized form, detailed 
information that would allow identification of individual employee responses will not be shared with supervisors of the employees or their co -workers .   
 
 
 
7.0 Communication Plan 
 
The CCWV team is comprised of a PI (Hamilton) with strong implementation science and mixed 
methods ex pertise, a Co-PI (Lang) with an exceptional bac kground in CALM, CBT, and trial resea rch, 
and several Co- Investigators who are subject matter experts in both women Veterans’ MH and  
implementation science. Of note, one  of our Co-Investigators, Dr. Strauss, is also the National 
Women’s Mental Health Program Manag er, thus providing our pr oject with a direct and cons istent link 
to one of our key partners (WMHS; McCutcheon LoS ). Drs. McCutcheon (WMHS) and Post (PC-MHI) 
are highly suppor tive of our approach to further developing collabor ative care for women Veterans. Dr. 
Post, in particular, has  guided our team in our concep tualization of blending models and incorporating 
elements of CALM. Reflecting their strong commitment to the proposed work and important policy -
relevant information to be gained, these partners have worked closely with us to develop this study 
and will remain active partners throughout the course of this work. They ar e eager for the CCWV 
Implementation Playbook to guide future PC-MHI efforts. 
 The project headquarters will be at the VISN 22 HSR&D CSHIIP offices in Los Angeles.  Alison Hamilton, PhD, MPH, is a medical anthropologist at the Greater Los Angeles VA, and Associate 
Research Anthropologist at UCLA.  She will provide leadership of this study as the coordinating PI and 
will be responsible for all aspects of this project.   
 
The Coordinating Principal Investigator will be responsible for informing local sites of protocol changes, 
reporting compliance issues related to CIRB and VA research service requirements, for reporting 
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 42 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- progress of research at least annually, and for reporting any injuries or other unanticipated problems 
involving participants or others.   
 
Local Site leads are responsible for obtaining local approvals, complying with l ocal policies, including 
notifying local facility directors of research engagement.   
 
Each local site lead will ensure that the study is being conducted according to the IRB -approved 
protocol.  Issues will be discussed with the Corresponding PI.  
 Each loc al site will hold its own regular  meeting.  Site leads will be responsible for tracking local events, 
complying with local reporting requirements, and reporting all events to the Coordinating PI.   
 
On a regular  basis, Dr. Hamilton will meet with Local Site leads.  On a monthly basis,  calls will be held 
with all leads to ensure cross -level synergies and consistency in qualitative approaches to data 
collection and analysis.  Enrollment, data collection, and administrative issues will also be discussed.  
Issues may include IRB,  protocol changes, informed consent, and HIPAA.   
 Any events that may impact the conduct of the study or the safety of participants will be reported by local staff to the Coordinating PI within 1 business day.  This includes any SAEs, Unanticipated Problems, concerns about protocol deviations, and any interim results that may impact the conduct of 
the study.  
 
Although we do not anticipate any SAEs/UAPs if any safety issues (SAEs or UAPs) arise, they will be 
reported to the Coordinating PI within 1 business day.  The PI will follow CIRB reporting guidelines and collect relevant information.  Data c ollection occurs at one point in time; therefore, it is unlikely we will 
become aware of any SAEs.  If we become aware of any SAEs, we will collect the information by 
phone.   Issues or interim results that may impact the conduct of the study will be report ed by the 
Coordinating PI to Local Site PIs on weekly calls.  
 
Sites will be informed when the study is over  and they are no longer engaged in research.    The 
coordinating PI will report to CIRB.  Local Site PIs are responsible for reporting to local authorities.   
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 43 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- References  
 
1. Hamilton A, NC M, Oishi S, et al. Mental health needs and diagnoses among women V eterans 
receiving Veterans Health Administration health care. VA Women's Health Services Research 
Conference on Enhancing Partnerships for Research and Care for Women; 2014.  
2. Maguen S, Ren L, Bosch JO, Marmar CR, Seal KH. Gender differences in mental health diagnoses 
among Iraq and Afghanistan veterans enrolled in veterans affairs health care. Am J Public Health. 
2010;100(12):2450 -2456.  
3. Kimerling R, Gima K, Smith MW, Street A, Frayne S. The Veterans Health Administration and military sexual trauma. A m J Public Health. 2007;97(12):2160- 2166.  
4. Valdez C, Kimerling R, Hyun JK, Mark HF, Saweikis M, Pavao J. Veterans Health Administration  mental health treatment settings of patients who report military sexual trauma. J Trauma Dissociation. 
2011;12(3):232 -243.  
5. Dichter ME, Cerulli C, Bossarte RM. Intimate partner violence victimization among women veterans 
and associated heart health risks. Womens Health Issues. 2011;21(4 Suppl):S190- 194.  
6. Oishi SM, Rose DE, Washington DL, MacGregor C, Bean- Mayberry  B, Yano EM. National variations 
in VA mental health care for women veterans. Womens Health Issues. 2011;21(4 Suppl):S130 -137.  
7. Gilbody S, Bower P, Fletcher J, Richards D, Sutton AJ. Collaborative care for depression: a 
cumulative meta- analysis and revi ew of longer -term outcomes. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(21):2314-
2321.  
8.  Adli M, Bauer M, Rush AJ. Algorithms and collaborative- care systems for depression: are they 
effective and why? A systematic review. Biol Psychiatry. 2006;59(11):1029 -1038.  
9. Thota AB, Sipe TA, Byard GJ, et al. Collaborative care to improve the management of depressive 
disorders: a community guide systematic review and meta- analysis. Am J Prev Med. 2012;42(5):525-
538.  
10. VHA Handbook. 1160.01.(2008). Uniform mental health services  in VA Medical Centers and Clinics. 
Washington, DC: Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration.  
11. Tew J, Klaus J, Oslin DW. The Behavioral Health Laboratory: building a stronger foundation for the 
patient -centered medical home. Fam S yst Health. 2010;28(2):130- 145.  
12. Pomerantz AS, Shiner B, Watts BV, et al. The White River model of colocated collaborative care: A 
platform for mental and behavioral health care in the medical home. Fam S yst Health. 2010;28(2):114-
129. 
13. Chaney EF, R ubenstein LV, Liu CF, et al. Implementing collaborative care for depression treatment 
in primary care: a cluster randomized evaluation of a quality improvement practice redesign. Implement 
Sci. 2011;6:121.  
14. Integrating Mental Health Into PACT (IMHIP). Report on Integrating Mental Health Into PACT in the 
VA.  VA Health Services Research & Development, VA Office of Patient Care Services;2013.  
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 44 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- 15. Roy -Byrne P, Craske MG, Sullivan G, et al. Delivery of evidence- based treatment for multiple 
anxiety disorder s in primary care: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2010;303(19):1921 -1928.  
16. Management of Post -Traumatic Stress Working Group. VA/DoD clinical practice guideline for 
management of post -traumatic stress. Version. 2010;2:149 -150.  
17. Kimerling R, P avao J, Greene L, et al. Access to mental health care among women Veterans: is VA 
meeting women's needs? Med Care. 2015;53(4 Suppl 1):S97- S104.  
18. Wells KB, Sherbourne C, Schoenbaum M, et al. Impact of disseminating quality improvement 
programs for depre ssion in managed primary care: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2000;283(2):212 -220.  
19. Unutzer J, Katon W, Callahan CM, et al. Collaborative care management of late -life depression in 
the primary care setting: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288(22):2836 -2845.  
20. Engel CC, Oxman T, Yamamoto C, et al. RESPECT- Mil: feasibility of a systems -level collaborative 
care approach to depression and post -traumatic stress disorder in military primary care. Mil Med. 
2008;173(10):935 -940.  
21. Post EP,  Metzger M, Dumas P, Lehmann L. Integrating mental health into primary care within the 
Veterans Health Administration. Fam Syst Health. 2010;28(2):83- 90.  
22. Craske MG, Stein MB, Sullivan G, et al. Disorder -specific impact of coordinated anxiety learning 
and management treatment for anxiety disorders in primary care. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011;68(4):378-
388.  
23. Grubbs KM, Cheney AM, Fortney JC, et al. The role of gender in moderating treatment outcome in 
collaborative care for anxiety. Psychiatric services (Washington, D.C.). 2015;66(3):265 -271.  
24. Lang AJ, Norman GJ, Casmar PV. A randomized trial of a brief mental health intervention for 
primary care patients. J C onsult Clin Psychol. 2006;74(6):1173 -1179.  
25. Glenn D, Golinelli D, Rose RD, et al. Who gets the most out of cognitive behavioral therapy for 
anxiety disorders? The role of treatment dose and patient engagement. J Consult Clin Psychol. 
2013;81(4):639 -649.  
26. Sharp A, Nguyen H, Hahn E, et al. The Just Do It Playbook for Implementation Sc ience. HMO 
Research Network Conference; April 1- 3, 2014, 2014; Phoenix, Arizona.  
27. Kilbourne AM, Abraham KM, Goodrich DE, et al. Cluster randomized adaptive implementation trial 
comparing a stand ard versus enhanced implementation intervention to improve uptake of an effective 
re-engagement program for patients with serious mental illness. Implement Sci. 2013;8:136.  
28. Kilbourne AM, Almirall D, Goodrich DE, et al. Enhancing outreach for persons with serious mental 
illness: 12 -month results from a cluster randomized trial of an adaptive implementation strategy. 
Implement Sci. 2014;9:163.  
29. Leykum LK, Pugh JA, Lanham HJ, Harmon J, McDaniel RR, Jr. Implementation research design: 
integrating participatory action research into randomized controlled trials . Implement Sci. 2009;4:69.  
Version 4 (06/22/2020)  VA Central IRB Protocol Template  Page 45 of 45 
 
 
 1;lip)_ --- 30. Jordon M, Lanham HJ, Anderson RA, McDaniel RR, Jr. Implications of complex adaptive systems 
theory for interpreting research about health care organizations. J Eval Clin Pract. 2010;16(1):228- 231.  
31. Yano EM, Haskell S, H ayes P. Delivery of gender -sensitive comprehensive primary care to women 
veterans: implications for VA Patient Aligned Care Teams. J Gen Intern Med. 2014;29 Suppl 2:S703 -
707.  
32. McDaniel RR, Jr., Lanham HJ, Anderson RA. Implications of complex adaptive s ystems theory for 
the design of research on health care organizations. Health Care Manage Rev. 2009;34(2):191 -199.  
33. deKleijn M, Lagro- Janssen AL, Canelo I, Yano EM. Creating a roadmap for delivering gender -
sensitive comprehensive care for women Veteran s: results of a national expert panel. Med Care. 
2015;53(4 Suppl 1):S156 -164.  
34. Simpson KM, Porter K, McConnell ES, et al. Tool for evaluating research implementation challenges: a sense- making protocol for addressing implementation challenges in complex research 
settings. Implement Sci. 2013;8:2.  
35. Averill JB. Matrix analysis as a complementary analytic strategy in qualitative inquiry. Qual Health 
Res. 2002;12(6):855 -866.  
36. Hamilton A. Qualitative methods in rapid turn- around health services research. Spotlight on 
Women’s Health. VA HSR&D National Cyberseminar Series December 11, 2013 2013.  
37. Glaser BG, Strauss AL. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. 
Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company; 1967.  
 
 