 
  
MD Anderson IND Sponsor Cover Sheet  
 
Protocol ID  2017 -0097  
Protocol Title  A Study to Test Drug A and Drug B with cancer 
patients  
Protocol Phase  II 
Protocol 
Version  09 
Version Date  01/30/20  
 
Protocol PI  Ahmed Kaseb  
Department  GI Medical Oncology  
 
IND Sponsor  MD Anderson Cancer Center  
IND #  135,932  
 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     1 Clinical Protocol    BMS CA209- 956 
  An Open -Label Preoperative Pilot Study Evaluating Nivolumab (Anti -PD-1 Antibody) Alone 
Versus Nivolumab Plus Ipilimumab (Anti- CTLA -4 Antibody) in P atients with R esectable HCC   
  Principal Investigator:   Ahmed Kaseb, MD  
 Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology  
 U.T. M. D. Anderson Cancer Center  
 1515 Holcombe Blvd 
 Houston, TX 77030 
Collaborators :  
                                                Surgical Oncology  
 Jean-Nicolas Vauthey, MD  
                                                Yun Chun, MD  
                                                Thomas Aloia, MD  
                                                Ching- Weie Tzeng  
 
 Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology  
 James Yao, MD  
 Kanwal Raghav, MBBS  
  
 Melanoma  
 Adi Diab, MD  
 
 Pathology 
 Asif Rashid, MD  
  
 Division of Cancer Medicine  
 Marc Uemura, MD, MBA   
 
 Department of Statistics  
 Lianchun Xiao, MS  
         
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     2     
TABLE OF CONTENTS  Page  
1.0  Research Hypothesis  4 
2.0 Objectives  4 
3.0  Disease Background  4-18 
4.0 Study Population  18-23 
5.0  Treatment Plan  23-26 
6.0  Study Medications  26-32 
7.0  Dosing Modifications  32 
8.0  Discontinuation of Therapy 33-36 
9.0 Concomitant Therapy  37 
10.0 Study Assessments and Procedures  37-57 
11.0  Adverse Event Reporting 58-64 
12.0  Statistic al Methodology  60-64 
13.0  Administrative Section  65-66 
14.0 References  67-71 
Appendix I: Adverse Events I -O Algorithms  72-78 
Appendix II: Study Design Version Comparison  79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     3 Table 1. LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
 
Abbreviation  Term  
ANC  Absolute Neutrophil Count  
BID Twice a Day  
BMS  Bristol -Myers Squibb Company  
CAT ( or CT scan)  Computed Axial Tomography  
CBC  Complete Blood Count  
CR Complete Response  
CRF  Case Report Form  
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria Adverse Events  
CTLA -4 Cytotoxic T -Lymphocyte Antigen 4  
DLT  Dose Limiting Toxicity  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
ECOG PS  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status  
HCV  Hepatitis C virus  
HBV  Hepatitis B virus  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IB Investigator Brochure  
HCC  Hepatocellular Carcinoma  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
irRC  Immune related Response Criteria  
MRI  Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
NAFLD  Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease  
PD Progressive Disease  
PD-1 Programmed Death Receptor -1 
PFS Progression Free Survival  
PO By Mouth  
PR Partial Response  
QD Once Daily  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event  
SD Stable Disease  
TTP Time to Tumor Progression  
UNOS  United Network for Organ Sharing  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     4 1.0  RESEARCH HYPOTHESIS  
Anti-PD1 antibody (nivolumab) alone or in combination with anti -CTLA -4 antibody 
(ipilimumab) can be safely administered and may induce augmented immunological and clinical 
responses in patients with resectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).  
2.0 OBJECTIVE S 
Primary Objective:  
1. To evaluate the safety and tolerability of therapy with nivolumab alone or nivolumab + 
ipilimumab in resectable HCC in the context of presurgical therapy.  
 
Note: As of January 8, 2020, 30 patients have been enrolled and 27 patients have been 
randomized. The PI decided to stop enrollment since the study has reached its primary endpoint of safety.  
 
Secondary Objectives:  
1. To assess the efficacy of presurgical nivolumab alone or nivolumab + ipilimumab therapy 
in HCC by estimating the objective response rate (ORR) and time to progression (TTP) per RECIST 1.1 progression- free survival (PFS).  
 Exploratory Objectives:  
 1. To assess the  immunological/biomarker  changes  in tumor tissues and peripheral blood in 
response to nivolumab alone or nivolumab + ipilimumab in HCC therapy (pre - vs post-
treatment), and explore any potential association between these biomarker measures and antitumor response  and immune -related respon se criteria (iRC) assessed by MD Anderson 
Department of Diagnostic Imaging.  
 
3.0 DISEASE BACKGROUND  
3.1 Hepatocellular Carcinoma  
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly lethal malignancy of worldwide significance 
and has become increasingly important in  the United States. Overall, it is the most common 
Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     5 primary liver cancer, the sixth most common cancer, and the third most common cause of cancer-
related deaths worldwide [1]. Various risk factors ar e responsible for the majority  of HCC cases.  
these include liver cirrhosis  (multiple etiologies), hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, hepatitis C 
virus (HCV) infection, alcohol abuse, and non- alcoholic fatty liver disease  [2]. Notably, although 
treatment for HCV has dramatically improved over the past several years, HCC incidence in the 
United States is rising especially among patients chronically infected with HCV. This is likely due 
to the long latency period between initial HCV infection and HCC incidence [3, 4].  
Treatment options for HCC depend on the cancer stage at initial presentation  and degree 
of synthetic liver dysfunction. Although a number of different staging systems have been used to provide accurate prognostic assessment  (i.e. AJCC, Okuda, GRETCH, CLIP, etc.) , all have 
limitations. The Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer staging system provides an easy reference 
algorithm that links HCC stage and evidence- based treatment recomm endations (Fig. 1) [5 -7].  
 
3.2  Standard Therapy for Hepatocellular Carcinoma  
 Surgical Resection and Liver Transplantation  
Figure 1:  BCLC staging system and therapeutic strategy. Llovet, J. M. et al. (2016) Hepatocellular carcinoma 
Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers doi:10.1038/nrdp.2016.18  

Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     6 The only potentially curative treatment modalities for HCC include surgical resection 
(partial hepatectomy) and liver transplantation. Unfortunately, the actual number of patients who 
qualify for these modalities is small (approximately 10 -30%) because most patients present with 
locally advanced or metastatic disease, or have significant liver dysfunction that precludes curative 
options. Surgical resection is typically consid ered for patients w ith a solitary tumor of any size 
who have adequate liver remnant and no evidence of major vascular invasion or portal 
hypertension [8]. Recent evidence has shown that partial hepatectomy procedures in carefully 
selected patients can be done with low operative morbidity and mortality [9, 10] . However, despite 
these favorable surgical outcomes, in those patients who are fortunate to undergo surgical 
resection, tumor recurrence is common. In fact, the 5- year tumor recurrence rate following surgical 
resection have been reported to be as high as 70%  [11-13].  
 Although there is no FDA -approved medication for use in the adjuvant setting after surgical 
resection, the recently reported phase III STORM trial evaluated the efficacy and safety of sorafenib, an antiangiogenic agent approved for use in advanced HCC  [14]. In this study, 1,114 
HCC patients with a complete radiological response after surgical resection or local ablative 
therapy were given sorafenib 400 mg or placebo twice a day for a maximum of 4 years. Treatment related adverse events were high in both study groups and there  was no difference seen between 
the two groups in regard to recurrence- free survival  (RFS), time to recurrence (TTR) or overall 
survival (OS) . At this time, there remains no evidence to support a particular adjuvant therapy in 
HCC.  Of note, our pilot study is important as it will generate for the first time PFS data in HCC 
with combination nivolumab plus ipilimumab.  
 Liver transplantation is the other potentially curative treatment option for HCC p atients 
that removes both the underlying HCC tumors and ba ckground cirrhosis. In 1996, Mazzaferro and 
colleagues  proposed the Milan criteria (single lesion ≤  5 cm or 2 -3 lesions each ≤  3 cm, no 
macrovascular invasion, no extrahepatic disease) for patients with small, unresectable HCC in the setting of cirrhosis [15] . For patients meeting this criterion who underwent orthotropic liver 
transplantation, the OS and RFS rates at 4 years were 85% and 92%, respectively. Subsequent 
studies have confirmed the results reported i n this initial Mazzaferro study. B ecause of this, the 
United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) has adopted the Milan criteria for determining candidates for liver transplantation with HCC. Moreover, in 2001, Yao and colleagues proposed 
expanded criteria  (UCSF Criteria) for HCC liver transplantation (single lesion ≤  6.5 cm or 2 -3 
lesions, each ≤  4.5 cm + sum of lesions ≤  8 cm, no macrovascular invasion, no extrahepatic 
disease) t hat demonstrated 1-  and 5- year survival rates of 90% and 75%,  respectively [16]. Because 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     7 UNOS specifies that patients undergoing evaluation for liver transplantation are not eligible for 
partial hepatectomy, liver transplantation is usually reserved for those patients with early -stage 
HCC and moderate to severe cirrhosis (i.e., Child’s Pugh B or C). On the other hand, partial hepatectomy is considered for those patients with mild cirrhosis (i.e., Child’s Pugh A) having an 
HCC tumor amenable to resection as deemed by the performing surgeon.  
 Local -regional therapies for HCC  
 Conceptually, local -regional therapies are designed to induce local tumor necrosis and are 
indicated for those patients with primarily liver -only disease but who are not resection or 
transplantation candidates . Even though there is no absolute HCC size -cut off for use of the se 
treatment modalities, there are a number of contraindications to use. These include poor synthetic liver function (i.e. Child Pugh C), elevated bilirubin > 2.5, significant ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, recent variceal bleeding, and main portal vein thrombosis. Local -regional 
therapies  are generally divided into two categories: ablation and arterially directed therapies.  
 Ablative modalities include thermal ablation (radiofrequency ablation or microwave 
ablation), cryoablation, or chemical ablation ( percutaneous ethanol infusion or acetic acid 
injection).  Ablative procedures may be curative in treating tumors ≤  3 cm and have shown 
increased overall survival in tumors 3 -  5 cm in largest diameter  [17-19] . Radiofrequency ablation 
(RFA), which we consider the most commonly used method of the ablative options, involves the 
local application of radiofrequency thermal energy to small  HCC lesions. In fact, some centers 
even consider  RFA the treatment of choice for small tumors (<2 cm) in an appropriate location. 
This is based on studies demonstrating similar outcomes for these tumors when compared to 
surgical resection with less cost and procedure -related complications [20] .  
 Arterial directed therapies involve selective catheter -based infusion of particular 
substances into the hepatic artery . These therapies are possible because the liver has a dual blood 
supply; the portal vein supplies blood to normal liver parenchyma whereas the hepatic artery supplies blood to HCC lesions. Such modalities are particularly attractive because all tumors, 
irrespective of location, can be treated with an arterial approach provided the blood supply to the tumor can be manipulated without causing undo harm to surrounding, normal tissue. In general, arterial based treatments are used for larger tumors not amenable to resection, transplantation or 
an ablative approach.  Currently available arterial directed therapies include transarterial bland 
embolization, transarterial chemoembolization, transarterial ra dioembolization and yttrium -90 
microspheres.  
 External -beam Radiation  Therapy (EBRT)  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     8  Because HCC is a radiosensitive tumor, EBRT can be employed in patients with 
unresectable or inoperable HCC to deliver high doses of radiation to the underlying HCC tumors 
while sparing the normal liver parenchyma. Like arterial based approaches, EBRT can be used to 
treat all tumor regardless of location . Specific  EBRT  modalities include intensity -modulat ed 
radiation therapy (IMRT), stereotactic  body radiation therapy (SBRT), and proton beam therapy 
(PBT). Notably, SBRT is usually considered in patients with liver -only disease who have failed 
ablative or arterial -based approaches, and for those with partial vein thrombosis [21] .  
  
Sorafenib for advanced HCC  
 Sorafenib is an orally bioavailable agent originally developed as a Raf kinase inhibitor. 
Further studies revealed that sorafenib was also a potent inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFR -1, -2, and - 3), as well as platelet derived growth factor receptor 
(PDGFR), KIT and FLT3. Currently, sorafenib is the only FDA -approved therapy for advanced or 
unresectable HCC . This approval was based on the phase III SHARP study, which evaluated 602 
patients with advanced HCC who had not received previous systemic therapy who received either 
sorafenib (400 mg BID) or placebo [22] . Media n overall survival was 10.7 months in the sorafenib 
group compared to 7.9 months in the placebo group; there was also a benefit in time to 
symptomatic progression (5.5 months for sorafenib vs. 2.8 months for placebo). Additionally, in 
the phase III Asia -Pacific study , 226 patients with advanced HCC were randomized to receive 
either sorafenib (400 mg BID) or placebo [23] . This study, which included a large number of HBV 
infected patients, also demonstrated improved OS (6.5 months vs. 4.2 months) and TT P (2.8 
months for 1.4 months) for the sorafenib group.   
 Of note, there currently is no second line therapy approved for advanced HCC.  
Regorafenib for advanced HCC  
 Regorafenib is an orally bioavailable agent that inhibits multiple membrane -bound and 
intracellular kinases involved in cell growth (RET, VEGFR -1, VEGFR -2, VEGFR -3, KIT, 
PDGFR -alpha, PDGFR -beta, FGFR1, FGFR2, TIE2, DDR2, Trk2A, Eph2A, RAF -1, BRAF, 
SAPK2, PTK5 and ABI). Although regorafenib is not ye t approved for advanced HCC, the 
recently reported phase III RESORCE Trial evaluated 573 patients with intermediate or advanced 
stage HCC who had been previously treated with sorafenib (data unpublished) . Patient s were 
randomized 2:1 to receive either rego rafenib 160 mg daily or placebo for 1- 3 of each four -week 
cycle. This trial, which has not been formally published, demonstrated improvements in both 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     9 median OS (10.6 months vs. 7.8 months) and PFS (3.1 months vs. 1.5 months) for the regorafenib 
group.  
Other systemic therapies  for advanced HCC  
 Multiple chemotherapy regimens and targeted agents have been tested in advanced HCC 
with modest benefit; however, no single regimen has shown superiority to any other. Most 
randomized trials have demonstrated median OS benefits of < 12 months.  Monotherapy a gents 
that have been tested in HCC include doxorubicin, epirubicin, mitoxantrone, 5- fluorouracil (5-
FU), capecitabine, gemcitabine, irinotecan, thalidomide, cisplatin, bevacizumab (VEGF inhibitor) 
and ramicirumab (V EGF inhibitor). In addition, a number of combination chemotherapy regimens 
have also been tested with limited clinical efficacy. These include FOLFOX (infusional 5-
fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin), cisplatin doublets, gemcitabine doublets and PIAF (c isplatin, 
interferon alpha, doxorubicin, and infusional 5- FU). Notably, our group recently performed a 
clinical trial which tested the efficacy of modified PIAF in patients without cirrhosis or hepatitis 
who had initially unresectable HCC  [24]. Our results demonstr ated an ORR=36% and a rate of 
conversion to curative surgery = 33%.  
3.3 Anti -PD1 (Nivolumab)  
3.3.1 Mechanism of Action  
Immune activation is tightly regulated by co- stimulatory (e.g. CD28 and ICOS) and co-
inhibitory (e.g. CTLA -4 and PD -1) receptors expressed on T cells. Agonistic antibodies against 
co-stimulatory T cell receptors and blocking antibodies against co- inhibitory T cell surface 
receptors have both been shown to potentiate T cell activation for tumor cell killing.  
PD-1 (programme d death receptor -1) is mainly expressed by activated CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells, as well as APCs. It has two ligands, PD -L1 and PD -L2, with distinct expression profiles [25] . 
PD-L1 is expressed not only on APCs, but also on non- hematopoietic cells, including tumor cells. 
Expression of PD -L2 is larg ely restricted to APCs including macrophages and myeloid dendritic 
cells, as well as mast cells.  The role of PD -1 as a negative regulator of T cells was best 
demonstrated by the finding that PD -1 deficient mice developed significant autoimmunity with 
high titers of autoantibodies [26, 27] . Subsequently, blocking antibodies against PD -1 were shown 
to activate immune responses that resulted in reduction of tumor metastasis and tumor growth in a 
number of experimental tumor models [28, 29] . Consistent with the immune inhibitory role of PD -
1/PD -L1/2 signaling, forced expression of PD -L1 in murine tumor cell lines allowed increased 
tumor growth in vivo, wh ich was otherwise kept in check by T cells. The inciting effect of PD -L1 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     10 on tumor growth was reversed by blocking anti -PD-L1 antibodies [30] . Patients with high tumor 
and/or lymphocyte PD -L1 levels are 4.5 times more likely to die from their cancer than those with 
low levels of PD -L1 expression.  
Notably, the PD -1 pathw ay regulates  T cell response s in chronic inflammatory liver 
conditions ( HBV, HCV, autoimmune hepatitis , and NAFLD ) that are responsible for the large 
majority of HCC. Interestingly, in a previous study examining the PD -1 expression profiles, it was 
shown that patients with chronic inflammatory hepatitis have significantly increased numbers of 
PD-1 expressi ng lymphocytes [31] . Subsequent reports have confirmed that  there is up -regulation 
of PD -1 in patients infected with HBV or HCV [32, 33] .  
Nivolumab (BMS -936558) is a fully human, IgG4 (kappa) isotype, monoclonal antibody 
that bi nds PD -1. Blockade of the PD -1 pathway by nivolumab was studied using the mixed 
lymphocyte reaction (MLR). PD -1 blockade resulted in a reproducible enhancement of both 
proliferation and IFN -γ release in the MLR. The effect of nivolumab on antigen- specific recall 
response was investigated using a CMV -restimulation assay with human peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and was evaluated by ELISA. These data indicated that nivolumab, versus an isotype -matched control antibody, augmented IFN -γ secretion f rom CMV -specific 
memory T cells in a dose -dependent manner. PD -1 blockade by nivolumab is therefore considered 
a promising immunotherapeutic strategy.  
3.3.2 Nivolumab in Hepatocellular Carcinoma  
 El-Khoueiry AB , et al. presented results from the interim analysis of the phase 1/2 
nivolumab trial (CA209- 040) in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma  at the 2015 
annual ASCO meeting [34]. In the  presentation, the  dose escalation  study demonstrated safety and 
tolerability of nivolumab at 0.1 mg/kg to 10 mg/kg in patients with HCC due to HCV, HBV or who were uninfected with viral hepatitis. The only grade 4 adverse event was elevated lipase (1 patient) while grade 3 elevations in liver enzymes were se en in 9 patients (AST = 5, ALT = 9). 3 
mg/kg was selected for the dose expansion in the uninfected and HCV cohorts; the dose escalation 
for the HBV cohort was ongoing. In 42 patients evaluable to response, the ORR by RECIST 1.1 
criteria was 19%  (8) with 2 patients achieving a complete response. The preliminary overall 
survival at 12 months was 62% (95% CI 42- 76%). Moreover, Sangro B, et al . recently presented 
interim results of 214 patients in the expansion CheckMate -040 study who received Nivolumab 3 
mg/kg every 2 weeks [35]. This report demonstrated a preliminary ORR = 16%.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     11  Because of these results, a phase III study comparing nivolumab to sorafenib for patients 
with advanced HCC has been launched in the frontline setting with an estimated enrollment of 726 
patients and primary completion date of July 2017 ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
3.3.3 Summary of Results from Nivolumab Program  
For a complete review of clinical information, please refer to the nivolumab Investigator 
Brochure.  
3.3.3.1  Summary of Safety  
In clinical trial CA209001 (n = 39), patients received a single dose of nivolumab with 
possible retreatment at 3 months. The most frequent adverse events (AEs) were fatigue (56%), 
nausea (44%), proteinuria (38%), constipation (33%), b ack pain (33%), dry mouth (28%), 
vomiting (28%), rash (26%) and dyspnea (26%). There was no clear correlation between the 
incidence or severity of AEs and the nivolumab dose levels (0.3, 1, 3, or 10 mg/kg IV single dose, 
with possible retreatment at 3 months). Among 39 (100%) patients who had at least one AE, 32 (82%) had Grade 3 or 4 AEs. Three treatment -related severe adverse events (SAEs) were reported: 
hypothyroidism (Grade 2), colitis (Grade 3), and anemia (Grade 2). Among 12 deaths, none were 
consider ed drug- related.  
In CA209003 (n = 306), as of the database lock date of 18- March -2013, nivolumab- related 
AEs of any grade occurred in 75.2% of patients [36] . The most fre quent drug- related AEs 
occurring in ≥ 5% of patients included fatigue (28.1%), rash (14.7%), diarrhea (13.4%), pruritus 
(10.5%), nausea (9%), decreased appetite (9%), and fever (6%). The majority of AEs were low 
grade, with Grade 3/4 drug- related AEs obser ved in 14% of patients. The most common Grade 
3/4 drug- related AEs occurring in ≥ 1% of patients were fatigue (2%), pneumonitis (1%), diarrhea 
(1%), AST/ALT increase (0.3% each) Drug -related SAEs occurred in 17% of patients. Grade 3/4 
drug- related SAEs occurring in ≥ 1% of patients were: pneumonitis (1.3%), and diarrhea (1%). 
The spectrum, frequency, and severity of nivolumab- related AEs were generally similar across 
dose levels and histological subtypes. Other drug- related AEs included vitiligo, hepatitis,  
hypophysitis, and thyroiditis.  
Hepatic or gastrointestinal events were managed with treatment interruption and 
administration of corticosteroids, and were generally completely reversible. Endocrine events were managed with hormone replacement therapy. Se veral patients in these categories successfully 
reinitiated treatment with nivolumab. Drug -related pneumonitis occurred in 3% of patients; Grade 
≥ 3 pneumonitis developed in 3 patients (1%). No clear relationship was identified between the 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     12 occurrence of pn eumonitis and tumor type, dose level, or the number of doses received. Low -grade 
pneumonitis was generally reversible with treatment discontinuation and corticosteroid 
administration. In three patients, infliximab and/or mycophenolate were utilized for additional 
immunosuppression, with unclear effectiveness. There were three (1%) drug- related deaths due to 
pneumonitis. In two of these cases, the patients did not receive the early and aggressive 
intervention (including systemic corticosteroid therapy) that is likely key in the management of 
this toxicity, while in the third case, other anti- cancer agents (erlotinib and vinorelbine) may have 
contributed to the fatal event. 
Additional details on the safety profile of nivolumab, including results from other cli nical 
studies, are also available in the Investigator Brochure.  
3.3.3.2  Summary of Clinical Activity  
In CA209001 and CA209003, the clinical activity of nivolumab was demonstrated in a 
variety of tumor types, including melanoma, RCC, non- small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and 
colorectal cancer (CRC). Clinical activity was noted across a range of doses (0.1 mg/kg, 0.3 mg/kg, 1 mg/kg, 3 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg) and across dosing schedules (every 2 weeks dosing for CA209003, single administration with possibility of retreatment at 3 months in CA209001). 
In CA209001, all treated patients (n = 39) were evaluable for tumor response [37] . Partial 
response (PR) was reported in 3 patients and stable disease (SD) was reported in 10 patients. Patients with PRs included 1 patient with CRC treated at 3 mg/kg and 1 patient each with 
melanoma and RCC, both treated at 10 mg/kg. Tumor responses were maintained in these patients 
as of their last radiological tumor assessments at 26, 3, and 18 months, respectively as of the 
clinical data cut -off date. The patient with RCC had received multiple prior therapies, including 
sunitinib and sorafenib. In 2 of the 10 patients with SD, stable disease was maintained for more 
than 6 months. 
In CA209003, as of the  database lock date of  18-March -2013, a total of 306 patients with 
melanoma, RCC, and NSCLC were evaluated for clinical activity [36] . A response of either CR 
or PR, as determined by the investigator based on modified RECIST 1.0, has been reported at all 
dose levels. No responses (CR or PR) have been reported in patients with colorectal carcinoma or 
castrate -resistant prostate cancer.  
3.3.3.3  Clinical Pharmacology Summar y 
Single dose pharmacokinetics (PK) of nivolumab was evaluated in patients with multiple 
tumor types in CA209001 whereas multiple dose PK is being evaluated in patients in CA209003. 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     13 In addition, a preliminary population pharmacokinetic (PPK) model has been developed with data 
from ~350 patients from CA209001, CA209002, and CA209003. 
Single dose PK of nivolumab was evaluated in 39 patients with multiple tumor types in 
study MD1106- 01 in the dose range of 0.3 to 10 mg/kg. The median Tmax across single doses 
ranged from 1.6 to 3 hours with individual values ranging from 0.9 to 7 hours. The PK of 
nivolumab is linear in the range of 0.3 to 10 mg/kg with dose - proportional increase in Cmax and 
AUC (INF) with low to moderate inter -subject variability observed at ea ch dose level (i.e., CV 
ranging from 7 to 45%). Geometric mean clearance (CL) after a single intravenous (IV) dose 
ranged from 0.13 to 0.19 mL/h/kg, while mean volume of distribution (Vz) varied between 83 to 
113 mL/kg across doses. The mean terminal T -HAL F of nivolumab is 17 to 25 days, which is 
consistent with half -life of endogenous IgG4, indicating that the elimination mechanism of 
nivolumab may be similar to IgG4. Both elimination and distribution of nivolumab appear to be 
independent of dose in the dose range studied. Additional details are provided in investigator 
brochure.  
A preliminary PPK model was developed by nonlinear mixed effect modeling using data 
from 350 patients from CA209001, CA209002, and CA209003. The body weight normalized 
dosing produces approximately constant trough concentrations over a wide range of body weights, 
and hence is appropriate for future clinical trials of nivolumab. 
3.4 Ipilimumab (Yervoy): Background  
Ipilimumab (anti- CTLA -4) is a fully humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody to cytotoxic 
T-cell lymphoma -4 (CTLA -4). Ipilimumab is an approved therapy for metastatic melanoma and 
has demonstrated improved overall survival as monotherapy (as compared to peptide vaccine 
gp100) and in combination with dacarbazine (as compared to dac arbazine alone) [38, 39] . It has 
been studied in combination with multiple standard- of-care therapies including chemotherapy for 
squamous and non- squamous NSCLC and radiotherapy for hormone resistant prostate cancer [40] .  
Ipilimumab toxicity profile includes side effects associated with an immune mechanism of 
action (immune -related adverse events, irAEs). At 3 mg/kg given every 3 weeks as monotherapy 
[38], the following AEs were observed in at least 10% of subjects: fatigue (42%), diarrhea (33%), 
nausea (35%), decreased appetite (27%), vomiting (24%), pruritus (24%), constipation (21%), rash (19%), cough (16%), abdominal pain (15%), headache (15%) and pyre xia (12%). Additional irAEs 
occurring in < 10% of subjects but with clinical relevance included: colitis (8%); endocrinopathies 
(8%) including hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism, hypophysitis, adrenal insufficiency, increased 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     14 serum thyrotropin and decreased c orticotropin; hepatotoxicity (4%) including hepatitis and 
elevations in AST/ALT; and vitiligo (2%). Other reported irAEs include nephritis, pneumonitis, 
meningitis, pericarditis, uveitis, iritis and hemolytic anemia. Overall irAEs occurred in 
approximately 60% of subjects, of which 13% were Grade 3- 4, and 0.8% were Grade 5 [38, 40] .  
Seven death s were associated with an irAE -  GI perforation (4), colitis (1), liver failure (1), and 
Guillain -Barré Syndrome (1). In addition, 1 subject in the ipilimumab plus gp100 group of 
MDX010 -20 clinical trial had a Grade 4 skin irAE (Stevens Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal 
necrolysis/Lyell’s syndrome), but died due to a treatment -related acute respiratory distress 
syndrome. The irAEs are related to T -cell activation and can be serious or life threatening. Specific 
management guidelines were addressed by Weber et al [41] . 
3.4.1  Ipilimumab in Hepatocellular Carcinoma  
 There are currently no published data testing ipilimumab in HCC. However, Checkmate 
040, which is currently enrolling, is testing the combination of nivolumab plus ipilimumab in patients with advanced HCC.  
 Interestingly, anti -CLTA -4 therapy ( tremelimumab)  was previously teste d in a pilot study 
to evaluate the safety, preliminary antitumor/antiviral effect of tremelimumab in patients with HCC and chronic HCV [42] . In the 21 patients enrolled in this study, 20 were evaluable for toxicity 
and 17 for tumor response. Tremelimumab had an acceptable safety profile with only 1 patient  
developing grade 3 toxicity (encephalopathy); the partial response rate was 17.6% and disease control rate was 76.4%.  
3.4.2  Nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab in melanoma  
Since anti -PD1 and anti -CTLA -4 use distinct mechanisms for immune activation from anti-
CTLA -4 and anti -PD1 as well as supportive preclinical data, a phase I study was conducted on 
nivolumab and ipilimumab combination therapy in patients with advanced melanoma  [43]. In this 
trial, patients were treated with intravenous doses of nivolumab and ipilimumab in patients every 3 weeks for 4 doses, followed by nivolumab al one every 3 weeks for 4 doses (concurrent regimen). 
The combined treatment was subsequently administered every 12 weeks for up to 8 doses. In a sequenced regimen, patients previously treated with ipilimumab received nivolumab every 2 weeks for up to 48 dos es.  
A total of 53 patients received concurrent therapy with nivolumab and ipilimumab, and 33 
received sequenced treatment. The ORR  (according to modified WHO criteria) for all patients in 
the concurrent -regimen group was 40%. Evidence of clinical activity (conventional, unconfirmed, 
or immune -related response or stable disease for ≥24 weeks) was observed in 65% of patients. At 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     15 the maximum doses that were associated with an acceptable level of adverse events (nivolumab at 
a dose of 1 mg per kilogram of body weight and ipilimumab at a dose of 3 mg per kilogram), 53% 
of patients had an objective response, all with tumor reduction of 80% or more  
Grade 3 or 4 adverse events related to therapy occurred in 53% of patients in the 
concurrent -regimen group but were qualitatively similar to previous experience with monotherapy 
and were generally reversible. Among patients in the sequenced- regimen group, 18% had grade 3 
or 4 adverse events related to therapy and the objective -response rate was 20%.  
A follow -up phase 3 s tudy examined 945 previously untreated patients with advanced 
melanoma [44]. Patients were randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive one of three regimens: 
nivolumab 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks plus placebo; nivolumab 1 mg/kg every 3 weeks plus ipilimumab 3 mg/kg every 3 weeks for 4 doses followed by nivolumab 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks; or ipilimumab 3mg/kg every 3 weeks for 4 doses plus placebo. The investigator -assessed ORR for 
the 3 treatment regimens were 43.7% (95% CI, 38.1 to 49.3) in the nivolumab alone gr oup, 57.6% 
(95% CI, 52.0 to 63.0) in the combination nivolumab plus ipilimumab group, and 19% (95% CI, 14.9 to 23.8) in the ipilimumab alone group. The median progression- free survival was 6.9 months 
(95% CI, 4.3 to 9.5), 11.5 months (95% CI, 8.9 to 16.7), and 2.9 months (95% CI, 2.8 to 3.4), 
respectively. In addition, grade 3- 4 treatment -related adverse events occurred in 16.3% in the 
nivolumab group, 55% in the nivolumab- ipilimumab group, and 27.3% in the ipilimumab group, 
with diarrhea and fatigue being the most common adverse events.  
 
Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     16  
 
3.4.3  Nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab in other malignancies  
 Recently, interim data from phase 1 studies in NSCLC and MSI -high colorectal cancer 
testing combination nivolumab and ipilimumab were presented. In particular, CheckMate 012 in 
first-line advanced NSCLC tested nivolumab and ipilimumab in the following combinations: 
nivolumab 1mg/kg plus ipilimumab 1 mg/kg every 3 weeks  x 4 cycles then nivolumab 3 mg/kg 
every 2 weeks ; nivolumab 1 mg/kg every 2 weeks plus ipilimumab 1 mg/kg given every 6 weeks; 
nivolumab 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks and ipilimumab 1 mg/kg every 12 weeks; and nivolumab 3 
mg/kg every 2 weeks and ipilimumab 1 mg/kg every 6 weeks [45]. Of notable interest, the nivo 3 
Q2W + ipi 1 Q12 (n=38) and nivo 3 Q2W + ipi Q6W (n=39) showed improved toxicity profiles , 
Figure 1 . Clinical Activity in Patients Who Received the Concurrent Regimen  
of Nivolumab and Ipilimumab. Panel A shows changes from baseline in the  
tumor burden. Panel B  shows a representative waterfall plot of the maximum  
percentage change in target lesions, as compared with baseline measurements.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     17 and grade 3 -4 treatment- related adverse events were 37% and 33%, respectively. In addition, the 
confirmed ORR for these two groups were 47% (95% CI, 31 to 64) and 39% (95% CI, 23 to 55), 
respectively.  
Based upon these data, it is important to determine whether combination therapy with 
nivolumab and ipilimumab can offer similar clinical benefit to patients with resectable or 
unresectable HCC, a disease in which there is no standard preoperative therapy.  
3.4.5 Study Rationale  
As mentioned, surgical resection or liver transplantation are the only potentially curative 
treatment modalities for localized HCC  in select patients . Local-regional therapies (ie: ablation , 
arterial -based therapies, or EBRT) can pal liate and sometimes downstage non- resectable lesions, 
but are not typically curative procedures. Sorafenib is the only FDA -approved systemic therapy 
for advanced HCC. Therefore, patients with unresectable HCC have  poor survival and there is a 
high recurrence rate (~50% or more) for those receiving potentially curative therapy. Novel 
treatment approaches taking advantage of the higher response rates seen in early- phase  HCC 
studies and long- term survival of immunothe rapies clearly need to be studied in order to improve 
the treatment of HCC.  As a basis for future research in H CC, immunological pathways in response 
to monotherapy versus combinational therapy need to be evaluated in the context of clinical outcome in or der to identify predictive and prognostic biomarkers as well as other potential 
therapeutic targets.  
Anti-PD-1 antibody, nivolumab, has recently been shown in a phase  1-2 clinical trial on 42  
patients with advanced or unresectable HCC to result in 19% ORR ; many of these responses were 
durable with a response duration of 1- 8+ months in patients achieving a PR [ 34]. Subsequent 
analysis of 214 patients on this study confirmed a 16% ORR. Of note, these response rates compare favorably to those  seen for sorafenib  where the ORR = 2%  (without any observable CRs).  Anti-
CTLA -4 antibody, i pilimumab , has not been test ed in HCC. However, an alternative anti -CLTA -
4 blocking agent, tremelimumab, has been reported to have a partial response rate of 17% in 
patients with HCC and chronic HCV [42] .  
Based on strong preclinical data supporting the hypothesis that PD -1 and CTLA -4 are both 
non-redundant pathways that negatively regulate effector T cells, multiple recent clinical studies 
in other cancer types suggest that combination nivolumab and ipilimumab may induce even greater 
anti-tumor responses than either agent alone. While this combination has yet to be tested in HCC, 
considering the immunosuppressive environment especially characteristic of hepatitis -related 
HCC, combination therapy may lead to enhanced responses.   
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     18  Lastly, multiple recent studies have demonstrated that checkpoint inhibitors can be safely 
administered in the preoperative setting. For example, two preoperative trials have evaluated anti -
CTLA -4 antibody therapy prior to curative surgery both in early st age breast cancer [46]  and 
bladder cancer [47] . In addition, anti -PD-1 antibody therapy is current being tested in the 
preoperative setting in renal cell carcinoma at MD Anderson.  
  Based  upon the above functional mechanisms and clinical activities of nivolumab and 
ipilimumab, we propose to use nivolumab alone, or nivolumab + ipilimumab in the presurgical 
setting for a number of reasons. First, it will offer patients with resectable HCC th e promising 
clinical benefits of nivolumab and ipilimumab . This may result in improved recurrence rates for 
those patients receiving curative surgery. Second, it will allow us to further evaluate potentially 
synergistic or additive activities on HCC  between nivolumab + ipilimumab . Third, this proposed 
trial will allow us to evaluate the immunological pathways  in HCC tissues after treatment with 
nivolumab alone, or with nivolumab + ipilimumab, to interrogate potential predictive/prognostic 
biomarkers of clinical response.  
We hypothesize that therapy with nivolumab alone, or combination therapy with 
nivolumab + ipilimumab will have acceptable safety profile and may lead to measurable 
immunological changes, with identification of novel biomarkers that can be used for correlation 
of clinical outcomes in patients with  resectable HCC .  
4.0 Study Population  
For entry into the study, the following criteria MUST be met within 4 weeks (+/ - 7 days) 
prior to 1st dose of therapy on this trial.  Any exceptions from the protocol -specific selection 
criteria must be approved by principle investigator. A PI override will be submitted to the 
UTMDACC IND Office before obtaining UTMDACC IRB approval for enrolling a patient on an active protocol who has a minor deviation from the  stated eligibility criteria which will not affect 
the analysis or interpretation of the study. 
4.1  Inclusion Criteria  
Signed written informed consent  
1. Patients must give written informed consent prior to initiation of therapy, in keeping with 
the policies  of the institution. Patients with a history of major psychiatric illness must be 
judged able to fully understand the investigational na ture of the study and the risks 
associated with the therapy.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     19 Target population  
2. Patients with histologically confirmed H CC (Documentation of original biopsy for 
diagnosis is acceptable if tumor tissue is unavailable) or clinical diagnosis by AASLD 
criteria in cirrhotic subjects is required (presence of arterial hypervascularity with venous 
washout). For subjects without cir rhosis, histological confirmation is mandatory. The 
determination of resectability  status  will ultimately lie in the clinical judgment of the 
surgical oncologist and medical oncologist involved in the care of the patient.  
3. Patient must have measurable dise ase defined as a lesion that can be accurately measured 
in at least one dimension (longest diameter to be recorded) and measures ≥ 15 mm with 
conventional techniques or ≥ 10 mm with more sensitive techniques such as MRI or spiral 
CT scan.  
4. Patient can have had prior treatment for HCC  including prior surgery, radiation therapy, 
local -regional therapy (abalation or arterial directed therapies), and systemic therapy 
including sorafenib or chemotherapy (but not anti -PD-1 or anti -CTLA -4 therapy)  
5. ECOG performance status ≤ 1. 
6. Within 14 days of the first dose of study drug, patients must have adequate organ and 
marrow function as defined below:  
• Absolute neutrophil count ≥ 1,500/μL  
• Platelets ≥100,000/μL  
• Hgb > 9.0 g/dL (may be transfused or receive epoetin alfa [e.g., Epogen®] to maintain 
or exceed this level)  
• Total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 mg/dl  
• Serum creatinine ≤ 1.5 times the upper limit of normal or estimated CrCL >40mL/min.  
• AST (SGOT) and/or ALT (SGPT) ≤ 5 X institutional upper limit of normal  
Age and Sex  
7. Men and women ≥ 18 years of age  
8. Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) must have a negative serum or urine 
pregnancy test (minimum sensitivity 25 IU/L or equivalent units of HCG) within 24 hours 
prior to the start of study drug. 
9. Women must not be breastfeeding  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     20 10. WOCBP must agree to follow instructions for method(s) of contraception from the time of 
enrollment for the duration of treatment with study drug (s) plus 5 half -lives of study drug 
(s) plus 30 days (duration of ovulatory cycle) for a total of 5 months  post treatment 
completion. 
11. Men who are sexually active with WOCBP must agree to follow instructions for method(s) 
of contraception for the duration of treatment with study drug (s) plus 5 half -lives of study 
drug (s) plus 90 days ( duration of sperm turnover) for a total of 7 months  post-treatment 
completion. 
12. Azoospermic males and WOCB P who are continuously not heterosexually active are 
exempt from contraceptive requirements. However , WOCBP must still undergo pregnancy 
testing as described in these sections.  
Investigators shall counsel WOCBP and male subjects who are sexually active wit h 
WOCBP on the importance of pregnancy prevention and the implications of an unexpected pregnancy Investigators shall advise WOCBP and male subjects who are sexually active with 
WOCBP on the use of highly effective methods of contraception. Highly effective methods of contraception have a failure rate of < 1% per year when used consistently and correctly. 
At a minimum, subjects must agree to the use of two methods of contraception, with one 
method being highly effective and the other method being either highly effective or less effective as listed below: 
HIGHLY EFFECTIVE METHODS OF CONTRACEPTION 
• Male condoms with spermicide  
• Hormonal methods of contraception including combined oral contraceptive pills, vaginal ring, 
injectables, implants, and intrauterine dev ices (IUDs) such as Mirena by WOCBP subject or 
male subject’s WOCBP partner.  
• Nonhormonal IUDs, such as ParaGard  
• Tubal ligation  
• Vasectomy  
• Complete Abstinence*  
*Complete abstinence is defined as complete avoidance of heterosexual intercourse and is an 
acceptable form of contraception for all study drugs. Abstinence is only acceptable when this is in 
line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject. Peri odic abstinence (eg, calendar, 
ovulation, symptothermal, profession of abstinence for entry into a clinical trial, post -ovulation 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     21 methods) and withdrawal are not acceptable methods of contraception. Subjects who choose 
complete abstinence are not required to use a second method of contraception, but female subjects 
must continue to have pregnancy tests. Acceptable alternate methods of highly effective 
contraception must be discussed in the event that the subject chooses to forego complete abstinence.  
LESS EFFECTIVE METHODS OF CONTRACEPTION  
• Diaphragm with spermicide  
• Cervical cap with spermicide  
• Vaginal sponge  
• Male Condom without spermicide*  
• Progestin only pills by WOCBP subject or male subject’s WOCBP partner  
• Female Condom*  
*A male and female condom must not be used together  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Any of the following criteria will disqualify the patient from participation: 
Target Disease Exceptions  
1. Any other malignancy from which the patient has been disease -free for less than 2 years, 
except for non- mela noma skin cancer, or in situ carcinoma of any site.  
Medical History and Concurrent Disease  
2. Patients who have organ allografts.  
3. Patients who have had a major surgical procedure, open biopsy, or significant traumatic 
injury with poorly healed wound within 6 weeks prior to first dose of study drug; or 
anticipation of need for major surgical procedure during the course of the study (other than 
defined by protocol ); fine needle aspirations or core biopsies within 7 days prior to first 
dose of study drug. NOTE: Patient s will be allowed to start cycle 1 day 1 therapy after 24 
hours from pre -treatment biopsy. 
4. Autoimmune disea se: Patients with a history of inflammatory bowel disease (including 
crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis) are excluded from this st udy as are patients with a 
history of autoimmune disease (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, systemic progre ssive sclerosis 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     22 [scleroderma], systemic lupus e rythematosus , autoimmune vasculitis [e.g., wegener’s 
granulomatosis]).  
5. Known history of testing positive for  human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or known 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).  
6. Any underlying medical condition, which in the opinion of the Investigator, will make the 
administration of study drug hazardous or obscure the interpretation of adver se events, 
such as a condition associated with frequent diarrhea.  
7. Patients who have had a history of acute diverticulitis, abdominal fistula, gastrointestinal 
perforation, intra -abdominal abscess, GI obstruction, abdominal carcinomatosis which are 
known ri sks factors for bowel perforation, should be excluded from the study. 
8. Patients who have a primary brain tumor (excluding meningiomas and other benign lesions), any brain metastases, leptomeningeal disease, seizure disorders not controlled with standard medical therapy, or history of stroke within the past year.  
9. History of serious systemic disease, including myocardial infarction or unstable angina within the last 12 months, history of hypertensive crisis or hypertensive encephalopathy, uncontrolled hyper tension (blood pressure of >140/90 mmHg) at the time of enrollment, 
New York Heart Association (NYHA) Grade II or greater congestive heart failure, unstable 
symptomatic arrhythmia requiring medication (patients with chronic atrial arrhythmia, i.e., 
atrial fibrillation or paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia are eligible),  significant 
vascular disease or symptomatic peripheral vascular disease.  
10. Patients who have history of other diseases, metabolic dysfunction, physical examination 
finding, or clinical l aboratory finding giving reasonable suspicion of a disease or condition 
that contraindicates the use of an investigational drug or that might affect the interpretation 
of the results of the study or render the subject at high risk from treatment complicati ons. 
11. Patients who are on high dose steroid (e.g. > 10 mg prednisone daily or equivalent) or other 
more potent immune suppression medications  (e.g. infliximab)  
12. Patients who have had influenza , hepatitis, or other vaccines within a month prior to 
initiation  of study drugs.  
13. Patients who have clinical history of coagulopathy, bleeding diathesis or thrombosis within the past year.  
14. Patients who have serious, non- healing wound, ulcer, or bone fracture.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     23 15. Pregnancy (positive pregnancy test) or lactation.  
16. Patients with prior orthotropic liver transplantation.  
17. Patients with cirrhosis and severe synthetic liver dysfunction (Child Pugh B -C).  
Prohibited Therapies and/or Medications  
18. Patients must not have received prior anticancer therapy with anti -CLTA -4 or anti -PD1 
for HCC . Patients receiving any concomitant systemic therapy for HCC are excluded.  
19. Patients must not be scheduled to receive another experimental drug while on this study.  
20. Patients who require ongoing anticoagulation will be excluded. Only aspirin will be 
permitted. Pre and post -surgical prophylactic anti -coagulation treatment is permitted.  
21. Patients must not require total parenteral nutrition with lipids.  
Other Exclu sion Criteria  
22. Any patients who cannot be compliant with the appointments required in this protocol must not be enrolled in this study.  
5.0  TREATMENT PLAN  
5.1  Registration  
This is  a randomized  preoperative pilot study evaluating nivolumab alone or in 
combination with ipilimumab in patients with resectable  HCC . Patients will be registered by the 
responsible study nurse or research coordinator.  
5.2 Data Collection  
Data will be collected and stored in an approved database as required.  
5.3  Study Design and Duration  
This is a pilot, randomized, open- label study of preoperative nivolumab alone (Arm A) or 
nivolumab plus ipilimumab (Arm B) in patients with resectable H CC. A total of 30 patients will 
be enrolled  as follows:  Arm A (15 patients) and Arm B ( 15 patients ). Patients will be 
randomized into either Arm A or B. 
Note: As of January 8, 2020, 30 patients have been enrolled and 27 patients have been 
randomized. The PI decided to stop enrollment since the study has reached its primary endpoint of safety.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     24  
During screening, patients will be evaluated by a surgeon to determine if they are good 
candidates for  conservative hepatic resection or liver resection with curative intent. All patients 
will also be required to provide a pre -treatment biopsy with docume nted tumor involvement by 
pathologist review.  
Originally, this study included a third arm (Arm C) in which 15 unresectable patients were 
to receive nivolumab 240 mg IV every 2 weeks for 3 doses plus ipilimumab 1 mg/kg IV on day 1 
of therapy (3 doses of nivolumab, 1 dose of ipilimumab; 6 weeks) followed by post -treatment 
biopsy. The study objective in Arm C was to estimate the conversion rate to surgery for potentially 
resectable patients. However, the study has been amended in June 2019 to remove exclude this 
objective and enrollment of Arm C (Appendix II).    
Patients in Arm A (resectable cohort)  will receive nivolumab at 240 mg IV every 2 weeks 
for 3 doses followed by liver imaging and hepatic resection on day 1 of week 7, followed (after 4 
weeks from surgery) by nivolumab 480 mg IV every  4 weeks in the adjuvant setting until disease 
progression or for 2 years , whichever is sooner. Patients in Arm B (resectable cohort)  will receive 
nivolumab 240 mg IV every 2 weeks for 3 doses plus  ipilimumab 1 mg/kg IV on day 1 of therapy 
(3 doses of nivolumab, 1 dose of ipilimumab) followed by hepatic resection followed (after 4 
weeks from surgery) by nivolumab  480 mg IV every  4 weeks plus ipilimumab 1 mg/kg IV every 
6 weeks to 4 doses in the adj uvant setting. Adjuvant therapy will start after 4 weeks from surgery 
with nivolumab 480 mg IV every 4 weeks (Both Arms A and B) plus ipilimumab 1 mg/kg IV 
every 6 weeks (in Arm B only) for up to 4 doses in the adjuvant setting until disease recurrence or for total of 2 years from first cycle, whichever is sooner. For Arm B, ipilimumab will be 
administered before nivolumab since the toxicities for ipilimumab are already well- known. Since 
the doses of nivolumab and ipilimumab either as monotherapy or combination are within 
maximum tolerated doses as previously defined, no dose increases or reductions will be allowed. 
Patients will return at week 6  for a pre -surgical evaluation. A small portion of patients with 
rapid diseas e progression (We anticipate 1 -3 of a total of 30 patients  in Arms A and B ) may not 
have hepatic resection per discretion of the treating surgical and medical oncologists. These 
patients will be off protocol and treated with other standard or investigational agents. They will be asked to return for an optional biopsy that will be scheduled in place of their surgery. For patients who had significant progression of disease pre -operat ively but are still eligible for  hepatic resection 
or transplantation, they will be treated with other investigational agents vs. observation post -
operatively  as there is  no standard adjuvant therapy in surgically resected HCC.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     25 After finishing the last tre atment, hepatic resection or biopsy will occur on day 1 of week 
7 (+/- 7 days). We will obtain surveillance scans (MRI of abd omen and pelvis with/without 
contrast, and CT chest with/without contrast of chest) 8 weeks after surgery. Patients who show 
signif icant progression of disease post -operatively will be taken off study and an optional biopsy 
will be taken at that time for immunological analysis.  
Patients who complete the study or discontinue study treatment should be scheduled for an 
end of treatment visit (EOT) as soon as possible. All patients who complete the study or 
discontinue treatment will have a safety follow -up visit 30 (+/ - 14 days) after the last dose of study 
drug or surgery, whichever comes last. Please refer to Figure 2 below for the study design.  
Patients will receive baseline staging studies with CT or MRI and be assessed for treatment 
response by scans : MRI or CT of abd omen and pelvis with/without contrast, and CT chest 
with/without contrast of chest (according to RE CIST 1.1 and irRC ) at week 6  (+/- 7 days). E ach 
patient will have post -surgical  (day 1 of week 11 +/- 7 days) , staging studies as above . 
Subsequently, restaging will be carried out every 12 weeks unless, in the investigators’ opinion, follow -up intervals need to be shorter. Studies to confirm a complete response or document 
progressive disease will be performed as needed. Patients will be allowed to continue study therapy after initial investigator -assessed RECIST 1.1 /irRC -defined progression if they are de emed by the 
investigator to be deriving clinical benefit and tolerating study drug(s), as described in Section 8.3.  
Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     26        
 
         
 
6.0 STUDY MEDICATIONS  
6.1 Nivolumab (Anti -PD1, nivolumab) 
The vials are not subject specific although there will be specific vial assignments by subject distributed by the Pharmacy in order to track drug usage and re-supply.  
6.1.1 Dose Calculation of nivolumab 
Nivolumab will be dosed at the the currently FDA -approved dose of 240 mg/dose every 
two weeks  or 480 mg/dose every 4 weeks. The flat dose was recently deemed similar to the 3mg/kg 
dosing that was previously used. Dose adjustment is not allowed. 
Figure 2 . Study Design of preoperative nivolumab alone or in combination with 
ipilimumab. There are 2 arms to this study: A) Nivolumab monotherapy in resectable HCC; 
B) Combination nivolumab plus ipilimumab in resectable HCC.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     27 6.1.2 Preparation and Dispensing of Ni volumab  
The product storage manager should ensure that the study drug is stored in accordance with 
the environmental conditions (temperature, light, and humidity) as determined by the Investigator 
Brochure. If concerns regarding the quality or appearance of the study drug arise, do not dispense 
the study drug and contact the sponsor immediately.  
Investigational product documentation must be maintained that includes all processes 
required to ensure drug is accurately administered. This includes documentation of drug storage, administration and, as applicable, storage temperatures, reconstitution, and use of required processes (e.g. required diluents, administration sets). 
Nivolumab vials must be stored at a temperature of 2°C to 8°C and should be protected 
from light. If stored in a glass front refrigerator, vials should be stored in the carton. Recommended safety measures for preparation and handling of nivolumab include laboratory coats and gloves.  
For details on prepared drug storage and use tim e of nivolumab under room 
temperature/light and refrigeration, please refer to the Investigator Brochure section for 
“Recommended Storage and Use Conditions”.  Care must be taken to assure sterility of the 
prepared solution as the product does not contain any anti -microbial preservative or bacteriostatic 
agent. No incompatibilities between nivolumab and polyolefin bags have been observed.  
Nivolum ab is to be administered as a 30  +/- 15-minute  IV infusion, using a volumetric 
pump with a 0.2/0.22 micron in- line filter at the protocol- specified dose. The drug can be diluted 
with 0.9% normal saline or D5W for delivery but the total drug concentration of the solution cannot 
be below 0.35 mg/ml. It is not to be administered as an IV push or bolus injection. At the end of the infusion, flush the line with a sufficient quantity of normal saline.  
6.1.3 Administration of nivolumab  
Patients in all t wo arms (a total of 30  will receive preoperative treatment with nivolumab 
as a 30 +/ - 15-minute IV infusion on Day 1 of a t reatment cycle every 2 weeks for arms A  and B. 
Post-surgery adjuvant maintenance nivolumab will be given at  480 mg IV every 4 weeks until 
disease progression or intolerability. There will be no nivolumab dose escalations or reductions allowed. Patients in each arm may be dosed no less than 12 days from the previous dose.  All post -
surgical patients may be dosed no less than 12 days from the previous dose. If a subject cannot receive a following dose of the cycle within the designated time frame, it will be omitted and the 
next dose received will be considered Day 1 of the next cycle.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     28 Nivolumab should be administered under the supervision of a physician experienced in the 
use of IV agents. Nivolumab is administered as an IV infusion only. 
Calculate Total Infusion Volume  as follows:  
(Total nivolumab dose in mg ÷ 10 mg/mL) + dilution volume = total infusion volume in mL  
Calculate Total Drug Concentration  as follows:  
Total nivolumab dose in mg ÷ Total infusion volume nivolumab dose in ml = total infusion volume 
in mg/mL.  
Total concentration cannot be below 0.35 mg/mL. 
Calculate Rate of Infusion  as follows:  
Total infusion volume in mL ÷ 30 minutes = rate of infusion in mL/min.  
Example:  
Flat dosing of 240 mg of nivolumab used. 
The total infusion volume would be 24 mL (240 mg ÷ 10 mg/mL = 24 mL) if no dilution volume 
is added. The total drug concentration would be 10 mg/mL (240 mg ÷ 24 mL = 10 mg/mL).  
The rate of infusion would be 0.80 mL/min in 30 minutes (24 mL ÷ 30 minutes = 0.80 mL/min).  
6.1.4  Patient Monitor ing During Infusion  
Patient vital signs should be monitored prior to dosing, about 15 minutes after initiation of 
the infusion (then every 15- 20 minutes as indicated), at 30 and 60 minutes after completion of the 
infusion, or longer if indicated, until the  vital signs normalize or return to baseline. For subsequent 
infusions, vital signs should be collected prior to dosing, every 30 minutes during dosing, and 1-hour post dosing. All vital sign time points  will be afforded a 10- minute  window.  
6.1.5  Treatmen t of nivolumab Related Infusion Reactions  
Since nivolumab contains only human immunoglobulin protein sequences, it is unlikely to 
be immunogenic and induce infusion or hypersensitivity reactions. However, if such a reaction were to occur, it might manifest with fever, chills, rigors, headache, rash, pruritus, arthralgias, 
hypo-  or hypertension, bronchospasm, or other symptoms. All Grade 3 or 4 infusion reactions 
should be reported within 24 hours to the BMS and reported as an SAE if criteria are met. Infusi on 
reactions should be graded according to NCI CTCAE (version 4.0) guidelines. 
Treatment recommendations for nivolumab related infusion reactions are provided below 
and may be modified based on MD Anderson treatment standards and guidelines, as appropriate : 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     29 • For Grade 1 symptoms  (Mild reaction; infusion interruption not indicated; intervention 
not indicated):  
o Remain at bedside and monitor subject until recovery from symptoms. The 
following prophylactic pre -medications are recommended for future infusions: 
diphenhydramine 50 mg (or equivalent) and/or acetaminophen 325 to 1000 mg at least 30 minutes before additional nivolumab administrations.  
• For Grade 2 symptoms  (Moderate reaction requires therapy or infusion interruption but 
responds promptly to symptomatic treatment [e.g. antihistamines, non -steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, narcotics, corticosteroids, bronchodilators, IV fluids]; prophylactic medications indicated for ≤ 24 hours):  
o Stop the nivolumab infusion, begin an IV infusion of normal sal ine, and treat the 
subject with diphenhydramine 50 mg IV (or equivalent) and/or acetaminophen 325 to 1000 mg; remain at bedside and monitor subject until resolution of symptoms. Corticosteroid or bronchodilator therapy may also be administered as appropria te. 
If the infusion is interrupted, then restart the infusion at 50% of the original infusion rate when symptoms resolve; if no further complications ensue after 30 minutes, the rate may be increased to 100% of the original infusion rate. Monitor subject closely. If symptoms recur,  then no further nivolumab will be administered at that 
visit. Administer diphenhydramine 50 mg IV, and remain at bedside and monitor the subject until resolution of symptoms. The amount of study drug infused must 
be recorded on the case report form (CRF). The following prophylactic 
premedications are recommended for future infusions: diphenhydramine 50 mg (or 
equivalent) and/or acetaminophen 325 to 1000 mg should be administered at least 
30 minutes before additional nivolumab administrations. If necessary, corticosteroids (recommended dose: up to 25 mg of IV hydrocortisone or equivalent) may be used.  
• For Grade 3 or Grade 4 symptoms  [Severe reaction, Grade 3: prolonged (i.e. not rapidly 
responsive to symptomatic medication and/or brief interruption of infusi on); recurrence of 
symptoms following initial improvement; hospitalization indicated for other clinical sequelae (e.g. renal impairment, pulmonary infiltrates), Grade 4: life -threatening; pressor 
or ventilatory support indicated]:  
o Immediately discontinue i nfusion of nivolumab. Begin an IV infusion of normal 
saline, and treat the subject as follows: Recommend bronchodilators, epinephrine 0.2 to 1 mg of a 1:1,000 solution for subcutaneous administration or 0.1 to 0.25 mg 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     30 of a 1:10,000 solution injected slowly for IV administration, and/or 
diphenhydramine 50 mg IV with methylprednisolone 100 mg IV (or equivalent), as 
needed. Subject should be monitored until the investigator is comfortable that the 
symptoms will not recur. Nivolumab will be permanently discontinued. Institutional guidelines will be followed for the treatment of anaphylaxis. Remain 
at bedside and monitor subject until recovery from symptoms. In the case of late -
occurring hypersensitivity symptoms (e.g. appearance of a localized or generalized 
pruritus within 1 week after treatment), symptomatic treatment may be given (e.g. 
oral antihistamine or corticosteroids).  
6.2  Ipilimumab (BMS -734016)  
Ipilimumab is a human immunoglobulin G (IgG1) κ anti -CTLA -4 monoclonal antibody 
(mAb). It is supplied in cle ar, colorless solution at a concentration of 5 mg/ml in 40ml vial.  
Ipilimumab (BMS -734016) Injection (5 mg/ml), must be stored refrigerated (2 -  8°C) with 
protection from light. In preparation of infusion, ipilimumab may be stored in IV infusion bags 
(PVC , non- PVC/non- DEHP) or glass infusion containers at room temperature or refrigerated (2°C 
- 8°C) for up to 24 hours. Drug must be completely delivered to the subject within 24 hours of 
preparation. This includes any time in transit plus the total time for the infusion. 
6.3.1 Dose Calculation of Ipilimumab  
Total dose should be calculated as in the following example:  
Subject’s actual body weight in kg x 1 mg = total dose in mg Therefore, a subject weighing 70 kg who is to receive a dose of 1  mg/kg would be administered 
70 mg of ipilimumab (70 kg x 1 mg/kg = 70 mg). Dose adjustment is not allowed. 6.3.2 Administration of Ipilimumab  
Each patient in Arm B is to receive ipilimumab at 1 mg/kg dose IV every 6 weeks of 
treatment  for up to 4 dses after surgery. Ipilimumab will be administered as a 90 +/- 15-minute IV 
infusion, using a volumetric pump with a 0.2 to 1.2 micron in- line filter at the protocol- specified 
dose. The drug can be diluted with 0.9% normal saline or 5% Dextrose Injection to concentrations 
between 1 mg/mL and 4 mg/mL. It is not to be administered as an IV push or bolus injection. Care 
must be taken to assure sterility of the prepared solutions, since the drug product does not contain 
any antimicrobial preservatives or bacteriostatic agents.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     31 Please refer to the ipilimumab Investigator Brochure for further details regarding 
preparation/administration. 
6.3.3 Patient monitoring during Ipilimumab infusion  
Patient vital signs should be monitored prior to dosing, about 15 minutes after initiation of 
the in fusion (then every 15- 20 minutes as indicated), at 30 and 60 minutes after completion of the 
infusion, or longer if indicated, until the vital signs normalize or return to baseline. For subsequent 
infusions, vital signs should be collected prior to dosing, every 30 minutes during dosing, and 1-
hour post dosing. All vital sign time points will be afforded a 10- minute window. 
6.3.4 Treatment of Ipilimumab infusion Reactions  
Since ipilimumab contains only human protein sequences, it is less likely that any all ergic 
reaction will be seen in patients. However, it is possible that infusion of ipilimumab will induce a cytokine release syndrome that could be evidenced by fever, chills, rigors, rash, pruritus, hypo-  or 
hypertension, bronchospasm or other symptoms. No prophylactic pre -medication will be given 
unless indicated by previous experience in an individual patient.  
Reactions should be treated based upon the following recommendations:  
For mild symptoms (e.g., localized cutaneous reactions such as mild pruritus, flushing, rash):  
• Decrease the rate of infusion until recovery from symptoms, remain at bedside and monitor 
patient; 
• Complete the ipilimumab infusion at the initial planned rate;  
• Diphenhydramine 50 mg IV will be given prior to subsequent doses for patient who 
experience infusion reactions of ≥ grade 1.  
• Premedication with diphenhydramine may otherwise be given at the discretion of the 
Investigator for subsequent doses of ipilimumab.  
 
For moderate symptoms (any symptom not listed above [mild symptoms] or below [severe 
symptoms] such as generalized pruritus, flushing, rash, dyspnea, hypotension with systolic BP 
>80 mmHg):  
• Interrupt ipilimumab; 
• Administer diphenhydramine 50 mg IV;  
• Monitor patient closely until resolution of symptoms;  
• Corticosteroids may abrogate any beneficial immunologic effect, but may be administered 
at the discretion of the treating physician;  
• Resume ipilimumab infusion after recovery of symptoms;  
• At the discretio n of the treating physician, ipilimumab infusion may be resumed at one half 
the initial infusion rate, then increased incrementally to the initial infusion rate.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     32 • If symptoms develop after resumption of the infusion, the infusion should be discontinued and no additional ipilimumab should be administered that day;  
• The next dose of ipilimumab will be administered at its next scheduled time and may be given with pre -medication (diphenhydramine and acetaminophen) and careful monitoring, 
followin g the same treatment guidelines outlined above;  
• At the discretion of the treating physician additional oral or IV antihistamine may be administered prior to dosing with ipilimumab.  
 
For severe symptoms (e.g., any reaction such as bronchospasm, generalized urticaria, systolic 
blood pressure < 80 mm Hg, or angioedema):  
• Immediately discontinue infusion of ipilimumab, and disconnect infusion tubing from the subject;  
• Consider bronchodilators, epinephrine 1 mg IV or subcutaneously, and/or diphenhydramine 50 mg IV, with Solu- Medrol 100 mg IV, as needed.  
• Patients should be monitored until the Investigator is comfortable that the symptoms will not recur;  
• No further ipilimumab will be administered; 
 In case of late- occurring hypersensitivity symptoms (e.g., appearance within one week after 
treatment of a localized or generalized pruritus), symptomatic treatment may be given (e.g., oral antihistamine, or corticosteroids).  
 
7.0 DOSE MODIFICATIONS  
Based upon toxicity profiles on past clinical trial s (e.g. nivolumab plus ipilimumab i n 
melanoma [43, 44] ), the doses of nivolumab and ipilimumab proposed in this protocol are within 
the maximum tolerated doses. Therefore, dose reductions or modifications of  nivolumab and/or  
ipilimumab will not be allowed.  
For detailed management of toxicities related to nivol umab or ipilimumab, please refer to 
Appendix 1 (AE I-O Algorithms) . If a patient experiences a grade 3 or greater drug -related adverse 
event after a dose of nivolumab or ipilimumab, and did not respond to steroid treatment within 2 
weeks (i.e. improve from  G4 to <  G3; or from G3 to <  G2), then the next dose will not be 
administered and the patient will proceed to surgery after the adverse event has resolved or been ameliorated sufficiently so that the patient can proceed safely to surgery.  If a patient experiences a grade 3 or greater non- drug related adverse event after a dose of nivolumab or ipilimumab then 
the patient may receive additional doses of nivolumab or ipilimumab, at the discretion of the PI, if 
the grade 3 or greater event has resolved or has been reduced sufficiently as assessed by the treating 
PI prior to administration of the additional doses of nivolumab or ipilimumab. 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     33 8.0 DISCONTINUATION OF THERAPY  
Patients MUST be discontinued from study therapy AND withdrawn from the study for 
the follow ing reasons:  
• Withdrawal of informed consent (subject’s decision to withdraw for any reason)  
• Any clinical adverse event, laboratory abnormality or inter -current illness which, in the 
opinion of the Investigator, indicates that continued treatment with study therapy is not in 
the best interest of the subject  
• Termination of the study by MD Anderson Cancer Center  
• Imprisonment or the compulsory detention for treatment of either a psychiatric or physical 
(e.g., infectious disease) illness. 
 
8.1 Discontinuation Cr iteria of Nivolumab and Ipilimumab  
Nivolumab and Ipilimumab administration should be discontinued for the following:  
• Any Grade ≥ 2 drug- related uveitis, eye pain, or blurred vision that does not respond to 
topical therapy and does not improve to Grade 1 severity within the re -treatment period 
OR requires systemic treatment 
• Any Grade 3 non- skin, drug- related adverse event lasting > 7 days, with the following 
exceptions for laboratory abnormalities, drug- related bronchospasm, hypersensitivity 
reactions, and  infusion reactions:  
− Grade 3 drug- related laboratory abnormalities do not require treatment 
discontinuation except:  
 Grade 3 drug -related thrombocytopenia > 7 days or associated with bleeding 
requires discontinuation.  
 Any drug- related liver function test (L FT) abnormality that meets the following 
criteria require discontinuation: 
• AST or ALT > 5 -10x ULN for > 2 weeks  
• AST or ALT > 10x ULN  
• Total bilirubin > 5x ULN  
• Concurrent AST or ALT > 3x ULN and total bilirubin > 2x ULN  
− Grade 3 drug -related bronchospasm, hypersensitivity reaction, or infusion reaction of 
any duration requires discontinuation 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     34 • Any Grade 4 drug- related adverse event or laboratory abnormality, except for the following 
events which do not require discontinuation:  
− Grade 4 neutropenia ≤ 7 da ys 
− Grade 4 lymphopenia or leukopenia  
− Isolated Grade 4 electrolyte imbalances/abnormalities that are not associated with 
clinical sequelae and are corrected with supplementation/appropriate management 
within 72 hours of their onset.  
• Any Grade 4 drug- related adverse event or laboratory abnormality, except for the following 
events which do not require discontinuation:  
− Grade 4 amylase or lipase abnormalities that are not associated with symptoms or 
clinical manifestations of pancreatitis. It is reco mmended to consult with the PI for 
Grade 4 amylase or lipase abnormalities.  
• Any dosing interruption lasting > 6 weeks with the following exceptions:  
− Dosing interruptions to allow for prolonged steroid tapers to manage drug- related 
adverse events are allowed. Prior to re -initiating treatment in a subject with a dosing 
interruption lasting > 6 weeks, the principle investigator must be consulted. Tumor assessments should continue as per protocol even if dosing is interrupted. 
− Dosing interruptions > 6 weeks tha t occur for non- drug- related reasons may be 
allowed if approved by the principle investigator. Prior to re -initiating treatment in a 
subject with a dosing interruption lasting > 6 weeks, the UTMDACC IND Office 
must be notified.  Tumor assessments should continue as per protocol even if dosing is interrupted. 
• Any adverse event, laboratory abnormality, or inter -current illness which, in the judgment 
of the Investigator, presents a substantial clinical risk to the subject with continued nivolumab dosing.  
• Any G rade 3 drug -related laboratory abnormality, with the following exceptions for 
asymptomatic amylase or lipase, AST, ALT, or total bilirubin: Grade 3 amylase or lipase abnormalities that are not associated with symptoms or clinical manifestations of 
pancreat itis do not require a dose delay. It is recommended to consult with the PI for Grade 
3 amylase or lipase abnormalities.  
• Any Grade 3 colitis, neurologic toxicity, symptomatic pancreatitis, or pneumonitis.  
• Any Grade ≥3 Stevens -Johnson Syndrome of Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis(TEN).  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     35 8.2 Continued Treatment beyond Progression of Disease  
Accumulating evidence indicates a minority of patients treated with immunotherapy may 
derive clinical benefit from continued treatment despite initial evidence of progressive dis ease 
[48]. For this reason, patients receiving nivolumab +/ - [ipilimumab] will be permitted to continue 
study therapy beyond initial investigator -assessed REC IST 1.1- defined progression as long as they 
meet the 2 criteria listed below.  
• Investigator -assessed clinical benefit, and  
• Subject is tolerating study drug 
The assessment of clinical benefit should take into account whether the subject is clinically 
deteri orating and unlikely to receive further benefit from continued treatment. All decisions to 
continue treatment beyond initial progression post -surgery must be discussed with the MDACC 
IND Office and documented in the study records.  
Patients should discontin ue study therapy upon evidence of further progression, defined as an 
additional 10% or greater increase in tumor burden from time of initial progression (including all 
target lesions and new measurable lesions).  
New lesions are considered measurable at the  time of initial progression if the longest diameter 
is at least 10 mm (except for pathological lymph nodes, which must have a short axis of at least 15 mm). Any new lesion considered non- measurable at the time of initial progression may become 
measurable and therefore included in the tumor burden measurement if the longest diameter 
increases to at least 10 mm (except for pathological lymph nodes, which must have an increase in 
short axis to at least 15 mm).  
For statistical analyses that include the investigator -assessed progression date, patients who 
continue treatment beyond initial investigator -assessed, RECIST 1.1- defined progression will be 
considered to have investigator -assessed progressive disease at the time of the initial progression 
event.  
8.3  Destruction of Study Drug  
Nivolumab and ipilimumab are to be destroyed onsite. It is the Investigator’s responsibility 
to ensure that arrangements have been made for disposal and that procedures for proper disposal have been established according to applicable regulations, guidelines, and i nstitutional procedures. 
Appropriate records of the disposal must be maintained.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     36 8.4  Return of Study Drug  
If study drug will not be destroyed upon completion or termination of the study, all unused 
and/or partially used study drug that was supplied by BMS  must be returned to BMS. The return 
of study drug will be arranged by BMS. It is the investigator’s responsibility to arrange for disposal 
of all empty containers, provided that procedures for proper disposal have been established 
according to applicable federal, state, local, and institutional guidelines and procedures, and 
provided that appropriate records of disposal are kept. 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     37 9.0 CONCOMITANT  THERAPY 
Concurrent medicat ions related to co -morbidity (e.g. hypertension, diabetes, etc.) and pre -medications prescribed by the protocol for infusion reactions 
will be recorded in the database.  Hydration, supportive medications, and routine surgical drugs will not be recorded in the database.  The patient will provide a 
list of medications taken within 4 weeks prior to screening, and will provide a new list during each clinic visit (see sectio n 10.0). The name, dose, date of start, 
date of stop (if use for short term), indication of the medication will be listed.  
The patient should not start a new prescription medication or over -the-counter medication before consulting with the study investigator, except in the 
case of a medical emergency. No other cancer/investigational therapies should be started during the curre nt study without consulting with the study investigator.  
10.0 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES  
Table 1: Study Assessments and Procedures  for Arm A  
Trial Period:  Screening 
Phase  Treatment Cycles . 3 cycles  (2-Week Cycles)  planned before surgery   then 
after surgery  (4-Week Cycles) , patients may receive up to 2 years of 
therapy depending on response and every restaging scans every 12 weeks  End of 
Treatment  
 Post-treatment  
Title:  Screening     Surgery     Discontinue  Safety 
Follow -
upl Follow -
Up Visits Survival  
Follow -
Upa 
Treatment Cycle/ Day:  0 C1D1  
 C2D1  C3D1  C4D1  C5D1  C6D1  C7+D1  At time of 
discon  30 days 
post  last 
dose Every 
9 weeks 
post-
discon  Every 12 
weeks  
Scheduling Window (Days)b -28 to -1 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±7 ±7 
Administrative Procedures              
Informed consent X            
Informed consent for future 
biomedical research (optional) X             
Inclusion/exclusion criteria  X            
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     38 Trial Period:  Screening 
Phase  Treatment Cycles . 3 cycles  (2-Week Cycles)  planned before surgery   then 
after surgery  (4-Week Cycles) , patients may receive up to 2 years of 
therapy depending on response and every restaging scans every 12 weeks  End of 
Treatment  
 Post-treatment  
Title:  Screening     Surgery     Discontinue  Safety 
Follow -
upl Follow -
Up Visits Survival  
Follow -
Upa 
Treatment Cycle/ Day:  0 C1D1  
 C2D1  C3D1  C4D1  C5D1  C6D1  C7+D1  At time of 
discon  30 days 
post  last 
dose Every 
9 weeks 
post-
discon  Every 12 
weeks  
Scheduling Window (Days)b -28 to -1 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±7 ±7 
Demographics and medical 
history  X            
Prior and concomitant 
medication review X X X X X X X X X X   
Post-study anticancer therapy 
status           X X X 
Survival status             X 
Clinical 
Procedures/Assessments              
Review adverse events X X X X X X X X X X X  
Full physical examination  X        X X   
Directed physical examination c  X X X X X X X     
Child -Pugh score  X            
Height, weight, and vital signs 
(T, P, RR, BP)c X X X X X X  X X X    
12-Lead electrocardiogram  X            
Upper endoscopyp  X            
ECOG performance status  Xe X X X X X X X X    
Nivolumab administration  Xb X X  Xb X X     
LOCAL Laboratory 
Assessments              
Pregnancy testd X X    X    X   
PT/INR and PTT Xe X X X X X X X X X   
CBC with differentialf Xe X X X X X X X X X   
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     39 Trial Period:  Screening 
Phase  Treatment Cycles . 3 cycles  (2-Week Cycles)  planned before surgery   then 
after surgery  (4-Week Cycles) , patients may receive up to 2 years of 
therapy depending on response and every restaging scans every 12 weeks  End of 
Treatment  
 Post-treatment  
Title:  Screening     Surgery     Discontinue  Safety 
Follow -
upl Follow -
Up Visits Survival  
Follow -
Upa 
Treatment Cycle/ Day:  0 C1D1  
 C2D1  C3D1  C4D1  C5D1  C6D1  C7+D1  At time of 
discon  30 days 
post  last 
dose Every 
9 weeks 
post-
discon  Every 12 
weeks  
Scheduling Window (Days)b -28 to -1 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±7 ±7 
Chemistry panelf Xe X X X X X X X X X   
Urinalysisg Xe  X X X X  Xq  X    
T3, FT4, TSH , ACTH, and total 
cortisolg Xe X X X X  Xq 
  X X   
AFPp Xe X   X  Xq 
  X X   
C -Reactive protein, amylase, 
lipase   X   X  Xq 
  X    
Serum IGF  Xq X   X  Xq  X    
Hepatitis C antibody (HCV Ab, 
anti-HCV)  X            
Anti-HBc (Total and IgM), anti -
HBs, HBsAg  X            
If Ant i-HCV (Hepatitis C 
antibody) positive:              
• HCV genotype  X            
• HCV viral loadn X X   X  Xq  X    
If (1) HBsAg positive or (2) 
anti-HBc positive, anti -HBs 
negative, and HBsAg negative:              
• Anti-HDV X            
• Anti-HBe  and HBeAg  X            
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     40 Trial Period:  Screening 
Phase  Treatment Cycles . 3 cycles  (2-Week Cycles)  planned before surgery   then 
after surgery  (4-Week Cycles) , patients may receive up to 2 years of 
therapy depending on response and every restaging scans every 12 weeks  End of 
Treatment  
 Post-treatment  
Title:  Screening     Surgery     Discontinue  Safety 
Follow -
upl Follow -
Up Visits Survival  
Follow -
Upa 
Treatment Cycle/ Day:  0 C1D1  
 C2D1  C3D1  C4D1  C5D1  C6D1  C7+D1  At time of 
discon  30 days 
post  last 
dose Every 
9 weeks 
post-
discon  Every 12 
weeks  
Scheduling Window (Days)b -28 to -1 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±7 ±7 
• HBV viral loadn X    X  Xq  X 
    
• Anti-HBc (total), anti -HBs, 
and HBe Ag  X            
CENTRAL Laboratory 
Assessments              
Blood for genetic analysis  X           
Whole blood for biomarker 
studies (serum and plasma)h  X X X X  Xq  X    
Whole blood for correlative 
studies (RNA and DNA)h  X X X X  Xq  X    
Tumor tissue collectionj X    X        
Efficacy Measurements              
Tumor imagingk Xi, n    X  Xq  X    
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     41 AFP = alpha fetoprotein; aPTT = activated partial thromboplastin time; Anti -HBc (total) = Total hepatitis B core antibody; Anti -HDV = hepatitis D virus antibody (previously 
known as ‘delta’); anti -HBs = hepatitis B surface antibody; BP = blood pressure; CB C = complete blood count; Discon = discontinuation; ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology 
Group; FT4 = free thyroxine; HBeAb or anti -HBe = hepatitis B e antibody; HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; HBV = hepatitis B virus; HBcAg = hepatitis B core antigen; HBsAb  = 
hepatitis B surface antibody; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HCV = hepatitis C virus; HCV Ab = hepatitis C antibody; IN R = international normalized ratio; P  = pulse; 
Q12W = every 12 weeks; RR = respiratory rate; T = temperature; PT = prothrombin t ime; T3 = triiodothyronine; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone, ACTH = 
adrenocorticotropic hormone .  
a. In subjects that experience site-assessed PD or start a new anti -cancer therapy, contact should be made (example; by telephone) q12W to assess for survival  status.  
b. Cycle 1 treatment must be given within 3 days of allocation.  The window for each visit is ±3 days until the end of treatment  and ±7 days during follow -up. Nivolumab 
is given every 4 weeks after surgery.  
c. Height will be measured at Visit 1 only.   
d. For women of reproductive potential, a urine or serum pregnancy test should be performed within 24 hours prior to C1D1, C 5D1 and 30 days post treatment.  May use 
screening pregnancy test if performed within 24  hours of first dose.  A serum test can be done if urine is not appropriate.  Additionally, if urine test is positive or is not 
evaluable, a serum test is required.  Sub jects must be excluded/discontinued in the event of a positive test results.  Pregnancy tests (serum and/or urine tests) shou ld be 
repeated if required by local guidelines.  
e. ECOG Performance Status and laboratory tests for screening and determining eligibil ity are to be performed within 28 days prior to the first dose of trial treatment.   
f. CBC with differential and chemistry to be performed every 2 weeks before surgery. After surgery, CBC with differential and ch emistry are performed on every 
nivolumab admini stration day.  
g. Urinalysis and thyroid/hormonal function tests will be performed at every cycle before surgery, at time of surgery (C4D1), at  C6D1 and at every restaging thereafter 
(q12 weeks).  
h. Blood will be collected prior to dose one (C1D1), Cycle 2 and 3 (before the 2nd and 3rd dose of Nivolumab) , at time of surgery (C4D1), at 8  weeks after surgery 
(C6D1), at every restaging thereafter (q12 weeks), and finally at treatment discontinuation  (confirmed progression or end of therapy).    
i. Screening tumor imaging will be performed within 28 days prior to allocation for confirmation of baseline measurable disease per RECIST 1.1 as required prior to 
subject allocation, then at time of surgery. Aft er surgery, imaging will be repeated and therapy starts at C7D1, then surveillance imaging will be repeated q12W (72±7 
days).  
j. Biopsies will be required pre -treatment and at time of surgery.   
k. The first on -study imaging time point will be performed at 6  weeks around time of surgery (42±7 days) calculated from the date of allocation and then 8  weeks after 
surgery, and will continue to be performed q12W.  
l. SAEs will be followed through 100  days following cessation of treatment, or 100 days following cessation of treatment if the subject initiates new anticancer therapy, 
whichever is earlier.  
m. HBV/HCV viral loads (for subjects who have known history of chronic infection) will be measured during screening, then at C1D 1, at time of surgery (C4D1), at 8  
weeks after s urgery (C6 D1), at every restaging thereafter (q12 weeks), and at time of discontinuation.  
n. The following imaging studies are required at screening, at time of surgery, at 8  weeks after surgery, then at every restaging thereafter (q12 weeks):  CT chest with  or 
without contrast; MRI of abdomen and pelvis with or without contrast unless patient has contraindication for MRI or severely claustrophobic.     
o. Every time imaging is done for re -staging (q12 weeks).  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     42 Trial Period:  Screening 
Phase  Treatment Cycles . 3 cycles  (2-Week Cycles)  planned before surgery   then 
after surgery  (4-Week Cycles) , patients may receive up to 2 years of 
therapy depending on response and every restaging scans every 12 weeks  End of 
Treatment  
 Post-treatment  
Title:  Screening     Surgery     Discontinue  Safety 
Follow -
upl Follow -
Up Visits Survival  
Follow -
Upa 
Treatment Cycle/ Day:  0 C1D1  
 C2D1  C3D1  C4D1  C5D1  C6D1  C7+D1  At time of 
discon  30 days 
post  last 
dose Every 
9 weeks 
post-
discon  Every 12 
weeks  
Scheduling Window (Days)b -28 to -1 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±7 ±7 
p. Unless performed within 6 months of enrollment day.  
q. Starting with Cycle 6 , assessments are to be done q12 weeks.  
Table 1: Study Assessments and Procedures f or Arm B  
Trial Period:  Screening 
Phase  Treatment Cycles . 3 cycles  (2-Week Cycles)  planned before 
surgery   then after surgery  (4-Week Cycles) , patients may 
receive up to 2 years of therapy depending on response and 
every restaging scans every 12 weeks  End of 
Treatment  
 Post-treatment  
Title:  Screening     Surgery     Discontinu
e Safety 
Follow -
upm Follow -Up 
Visits Survival  
Follow -Upa 
Treatment Cycle/Day  0 C1D1  
 C2D1  C3D1  C4D1  C5D1 C6D1 C7+D1 At time of 
discon  30 days 
post  last 
dose Every 
9 weeks post -
discon  Every 12 
weeks  
Scheduling Window (Days)b -28 to -1 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±7 ±7 ±7 
Administrative Procedures              
Informed consent X            
Informed consent for future biomedical 
research (optional) X             
Inclusion/exclusion criteria  X            
Demographics and medical history  X            
Prior and concomitant medication review X X X X X X X  X X X   
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     43 Post-study anticancer therapy status           X X X 
Survival status             X 
Clinical Procedures/Assessments              
Review adverse events X X X X X X X  X X X X  
Full physical examination  X        X X   
Directed physical examinationc  X X X X X X  X     
Child -Pugh score  X            
Height, weight, and vital signs (T, P, RR, 
BP)c X X X X X X X  X X    
12-Lead electrocardiogram  X            
Upper endoscopy  X            
ECOG performance status  Xe X X X X X X  X X    
Nivolumab administration  Xb X X  Xb X X     
Ipilimumab administration   Xb     Xr       
LOCAL Laboratory Assessments              
Pregnancy testd X X    X    X   
PT/INR and PTT Xe X X X X X X  X X X   
CBC with differentialf Xe X X X X X X  X X X   
Chemistry panelf Xe X X X X X X X X X   
Urinalysisg Xe  X X X X  Xq  X    
T3, FT4, TSH , ACTH, and total 
cortisolg Xe X X X X  Xq  X X   
AFPo Xe X   X  Xq  X X   
C -Reactive protein, amylase, lipase   X   X  Xq  X    
Serum IGF  Xq X   X  Xq  X    
Hepatitis C antibody (HCV Ab, anti -
HCV)  X            
Anti-HBc (Total and IgM), anti-HBs, 
HBsAg  X            
If Anti -HCV (Hepatitis C antibody) 
positive:              
• HCV genotype  X            
• HCV viral loadn X X   X  Xq  X    
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     44 \ 
AFP = alpha fetoprotein; aPTT = activated partial thromboplastin time; Anti -HBc (total) = Total hepatitis B core antibody; Anti -HDV = hepatitis D virus antibody (previously known 
as ‘delta’); anti -HBs = hepatitis  B surface antibody; BP = blood pressure; CBC = complete blood count; Discon = discontinuation; ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Onc ology Group; FT4 
= free thyroxine; HBeAb or anti -HBe = hepatitis B e antibody; HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; HBV = hepatitis B vi rus; HBcAg = hepatitis B core antigen; HBsAb = hepatitis B 
surface antibody; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HCV = hepatitis C virus; HCV Ab = hepatitis C antibody; INR = internat ional normalized ratio; P  = pulse; Q12W = every 12 
weeks; RR = respirato ry rate; T = temperature; PT = prothrombin time; T3 = triiodothyronine; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone, ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone .  
a. In subjects that experience site-assessed PD or start a new anti -cancer therapy, contact should be made (exampl e; by telephone) q12W to assess for survival status.  
b. Cycle 1 treatment must be given within 3 days of allocation.  The window for each visit is ±3 days until the end of treatment  and ±7 days during follow -up. Nivolumab is 
given every 4 weeks after surgery.   
c. Height will be measured at Visit 1 only.  Timepoints of directed physical examination will follow nivolumab and ipilimumab administration day.  
d. For women of reproductive potential, a urine or serum pregnancy test should be performed within 24 hours prior to C1D1, C 5D1 and 30 days post treatment.  May use 
screening pregnancy test if performed within 24  hours of first dose.  A serum test can be done  if urine is not appropriate.  Additionally, if urine test is positive or is not 
evaluable, a serum test is required.  Subjects must be excluded/discontinued in the event of a positive test results.  Pregna ncy tests (serum and/or urine tests) should be 
repeated if required by local guidelines.  
e. ECOG Performance Status and laboratory tests for screening and determining eligibility are to be performed within 28 days pri or to the first dose of trial treatment.   
f. CBC with differential and chemistry to be performed every 2 weeks before surgery. After surgery, CBC with differential and chemistry are performed on every nivolumab 
and ipilimumab’s administration day.  If (1) HBsAg positive or (2) anti -HBc 
positive, anti-HBs negative, and HBsAg 
negative:              
• Anti-HDV  X            
• Anti-HBe  and HBeAg  X            
• HBV viral loadm X    X  Xq  X    
• Anti-HBc (total), anti -HBs, and HBe 
Ag X            
CENTRAL Laboratory Assessments              
Blood for genetic analysis  X           
Whole blood for biomarker studies 
(serum and plasma)h  X X X X  Xq  X    
Whole blood for correlative studies 
(RNA and DNA)h  X X X X  Xq  X    
Tumor tissue collectionj X    X        
Efficacy Measurements              
Tumor imagingk Xi,n    X  Xq  X    
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     45 g. Urinalysis and thyroid/hormonal function tests will be performed at every cycle before surgery, at time  of surgery (C4D1), at C6 D1 and at every restaging thereafter (q12 
weeks).  
h. Blood will be collected prior to dose one (C1D1), Cycle 2 and 3 (before the 2nd and 3rd dose of Nivolumab) , at time of surgery (C4D1), at 8  weeks after surgery (C 6D1), at 
every rest aging thereafter (q12 weeks), and finally at treatment discontinuation  (confirmed progression or end of therapy).    
i. Screening tumor imaging will be performed within 28 days prior to allocation for confirmation of baseline measurable disease per RECIST 1.1  as required prior to subject 
allocation, then at time of surgery. After surgery, imaging will be repeated and therapy starts at C7D1, then surveillance im aging will be repeated q12W (72±7 days).  
j. Biopsies will be required pre -treatment and at time of surgery.   
k. The first on -study imaging time point will be performed at 8  weeks around time of surgery (42±7 days) calculated from the date of allocation and then 8  weeks after surgery, 
and will continue to be performed q12W.  
l. SAEs will be followed through 100  days following cessation of treatment, or 100 days following cessation of treatment if the subject initiates new anticancer therapy, 
whichever is earlier.  
m. HBV/HCV viral loads (for subjects who have known history of chronic infection) will be measured duri ng screening, then at C1D1, at time of surgery (C4D1), at 8  weeks 
after surgery (C 6D1), at every restaging thereafter (q12 weeks), and at time of discontinuation.  
n. The following imaging studies are required at screening, at time of surgery, at 8  weeks after surgery, then at every restaging thereafter (q12 weeks):  CT chest with or 
without contrast; MRI of abdomen and pelvis with or without contrast unless patient has contraindication for MRI or severely claustrophobic.     
o. Every time imaging is done for re -staging (q12 weeks).  
p. Unless performed within 6 months of enrollment day.  
q. Starting with Cycle 6 , assessments are to be done q12 weeks.  
r. Ipilimumab 1 mg/kg IV is administered in the adjuvant setting, starting with Cycle 5 , every 6 weeks to 4 doses maximum.  
 
 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     46 10.1 Procedures by Visit  
The Time and E vents Schedule above (Table 1 - attached ) summarizes the frequency and timing 
of various measurements. The evaluations and procedures for patients enrolled in this study at 
specific time points are further described in the following sections. 
10.1.1 Screening/Pre- study (Day - 28 to Day - 1) 
The following procedures will be completed for each patient prior to inclusion in the study. All 
screening diagnostic imaging studies MUST be performed within 28 days of the first treatment.  
• Confirmation of the eligibility of patients (see Section 4 for detailed Inclusion/Exclusion 
criteria)  
• Histologic diagnosis of HCC  
• Demographics  
• Medical history relevant to the patient’s cancer  
• Vital sign measurements including weight, height, temperature , pulse, oxygen saturation by 
pulse oximetry, and resting systolic and diastolic blood pressure  
• Complete physical examination  
• ECOG Performance Status  
• Clinical laboratory tests  
• Hematology: CBC  
• Serum Chemistry Panel  
• T3 (free), T4 (free) & TSH  
• ACTH and Tota l Cortisol  
• Amylase and Lipase  
• Hepatitis B and C screening tests  
• AFP (alpha fetoprotein)   
• Serum IGF  
• Blood samples for Immune Testing 
• Urinalysis: Gross examination including specific gravity, protein, glucose, and blood; 
microscopic examination including WBC /HPF, RBC/HPF and any additional findings. 
• A pregnancy test will be done for women of childbearing potential every 4 weeks  during 
enrollment, beginning 24 prior to starting therapy, and prior to post -operative nivolumab 
treatment as explained in Section 4. 1. 
• Chest radiography  
• Diagnostic imaging, including CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis or MRI abdomen/pelvis.   
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     47 • EKG  
• Current medications  
• Baseline signs and symptoms  
• Tumor tissue Collection -  
• Diagnostic/confirmatory biopsy 
10.1.2 Pre-surgical Phase  
Patients who complete the screening evaluations and are confirmed to be eligible for the study will 
begin treatment on this study.  
Eligible patients in Arm A will receive nivolumab at 240 mg IV every 2 weeks for 3 doses (6 
weeks) followed by hepatic resection.   
Eligible patients in  Arm B will receive nivolumab 240 mg IV every 2 weeks for 3 doses plus 
ipilimumab 1 mg/kg IV on day 1 of therapy (3 doses of nivolumab, 1 dose of ipilimumab; 6 weeks) 
followed by hepatic resection.  
The following procedures will be performed within +/ - 3 days of each scheduled visit or as 
indicated in Section 10. 
• Vital sign measurements including weight, temperature, pulse, oxygen saturation by pulse 
oximetry, and resting systolic and diastolic blood pressure.  
• Vital sign measurements of pulse, oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry, and systoli c and 
diastolic blood pressure will be collected every 30 minutes for the duration of nivolumab +/-  
ipilimumab  infusion, 1 hour following the completion of the infusion, and routinely unless 
otherwise indicated.  
• Physical examination  
• ECOG Performance Stat us   
• Blood samples for Immune Tests  
• Hematology: (see Section 10, PT and PTT will be done at baseline and prior to surgery or future procedures)  
• Serum chemistry (see Section 10)  
• Amylase & Lipase  
• AFP 
• T3 (free), T4 (free) & TSH (see Section 10)  
• A pregnanc y test will be done for women of childbearing potential on the day of starting 
therapy as explained in Section 4.1. 
• Concomitant medications (see Section 9)  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     48 • Adverse event assessment  
• Each patient will be restaged with CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis or M RI abdomen/pelvis 
at baseline, prior to surgery, 8 weeks post -surgery follow up, and during future follow up visits 
(every 12 weeks) as indicated in Section 10, unless, in the investigators’ opinion, follow -up 
intervals need to be shorter. Studies to confi rm a complete response or document progressive 
disease will be performed as needed.Unscheduled visits are permitted to evaluate adverse events and possible disease progression.  
10.1.3 Pre-surgical Visit  
During the Pre -Surgical Evaluation, the patient will have labs and imaging performed and be 
assessed by the physician and surgeon to determine if they are still good candidates for surgery. 
For the pre -surgical visit, patients will return to the clinic at week 6  (+/- 7 days). The following 
assessments will be conducted during this visit:  
• Vital Signs Measurement  
• Physical examination  
• ECOG Performance Status   
• Blood samples for Immune Tests  
• Hematology, PT and PTT  
• Serum chemistry (see Section 10)  
• Amylase and Lipase  
• AFP 
• T3 (free), T4 (free) & TSH (see Section 10)  
• ACTH and Total Cortisol  
• Concomitant medications (see Section 9)  
• Adverse event assessment  
• Each patient will be restaged with CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis or MRI abdomen/pelvis 
at baseline, prior to surgery, 8 weeks post -surgery follow up, and during future follow up visits 
(every 12 weeks) as indicated in Section 10, unless, in the investigators’ opinion, follow -up 
intervals need to be shorter. Studies to confirm a complete response or document progressive disease will be performed as need ed.  
10.1.4 Surgery Visit  
During the Surgical Visit the patient will have a hepatic resection or biopsy performed by the 
surgeon and tissue will be collected. For the surgical visit, patients will return to the clinic at week 
7 (+/ - 7 days). The following assessments will be conducted during this visit:  
• Surgery or biopsy  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     49 • Tumor tissue collection for immune tests  
• Additional safety lab tests at the surgeon’s discretion 
• Tumor tissue collection for immunological testing (at surgery).   
• As an optional procedure, tissue will also be collected during procedures performed while 
patients are enrolled in this study. No new procedures will be required. This tissue will also be banked for future research related to immunological response.  
10.1.5 Post-surgical Follow -Up (4 Weeks Post Surgery) & Post -Op Nivolumab or 
Nivolumab/Ipilimumab Maintenance  
The Post -Surgical Follow Up begins for all patients after surgery. Patients will return to the clinic 
for a follow -up visit 4 weeks postsurgery. The following assessments will be conducted during 
this visit:  
• Vital Signs Measurement  
• Physical examination  
• ECOG Performance Status   
• Blood samples for Immune Tests  
• Hematology  
• Serum chemistry (see Section 10)  
• Amylase and Lipase  
• AFP 
• T3 (free), T4 (free) & TSH (see Section 10)  
• Concomitant medications (see Section 9)  
• Adverse event assessment  
• Each patient will be restaged with CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis or MRI abdomen/pelvis 
at baseline, prior to surgery, 8 weeks post -surgery follow up, and during future follow up visits 
(every 12 weeks) as indicated in Section 10, unless, in the investigators’ opinion, follow -up 
intervals need to be shorter.   Studies to confirm a complete response or document progressive 
disease will be performed as needed.  
 
Patients will be followed fo r clinical responses, anti -cancer medications and delayed 
autoimmune toxicity and TTP . If a possible delayed Immune -related adverse event (IRAE) is 
suspected, the patient will be requested to return to the Investigator’s clinic or office for a physical 
examination and blood work, and other relevant laboratory assessments. All patients will  be 
followed for immune -related adverse events for at least 30 days after finishing therapy.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     50 10.1.6 End of Treatment Visit  
Patients who complete the study or discontinue study treatment should be scheduled for an 
EOT visit as soon as possible, at which ti me all of the assessments listed for the EOT visit will be 
performed. At the time of study early withdrawal, the reason for early withdrawal and any new or 
continuing AEs should be documented. If study drug administration is discontinued, the reason for discontinuation will be recorded.  
10.1.7 Safety Follow -up Visit  
All patients who discontinue study treatment will have a safety follow -up visit for safety 
evaluations 30 days (+/- 14 days) after the last dose of study drug or surgery, whichever comes 
last. I f study drug administration is discontinued, the reason for discontinuation will be recorded.  
10.2 Details of Procedures  
10.2.1 Study Materials  
BMS will provide nivolumab and ipilimumab. 
10.2.2 Safety Assessments 
Adverse events will be assessed at each pat ient visit, documented in the medical record, 
and entered into CRFs. Patients who report visual changes on therapy will be referred to 
Ophthalmology for evaluation of potential inflammatory or immune -related adverse events 
(uveitis, optic neuritis, etc.) I n addition, any occurrence of a SAE from the time of the first protocol 
specific intervention forward, until 100 days after the last dose of study drug, will be reported. 
Refer to safety reporting Section 10.3.  
Safety will be evaluated for all treated pat ients using the NCI CTCAE version 4.0 
(http://ctep.cancer.gov). Safety assessments will be based on medical review of AE reports and the 
results of vital sign measurements, physical examinations and clinical laboratory tests.  
10.3 Criteria for Evaluation  
10.3.1 Safety Evaluation  
Refer to Common Terminology Criteria Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 
(http://ctep.cancer.gov
) 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     51 10.3.1.1 Medical History, Physical Exam, Physical Measurements  
Physical examination will be perf ormed at the time points outlined in Section 10.0. If the 
screening physical is conducted within 24 hours of dosing on Cycle 1 Day 1, then a single 
examination may count as both the screening and pre -dose evaluation. Pertinent medical history 
(physician di scretion) will be recorded.  
10.3.1.2 Vital Signs  
Blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry and 
temperature will be obtained as outlined in Section 10.0. Orthostatic (supine and standing) blood 
pressure and heart rate are to be measured for any subject who experience lightheadedness, dizziness, syncope or any similar complaints. 
10.3.1.3 ECOG Status  
ECOG performance status will be evaluated continuously and documented at Screening 
and at each visit as outlined in S ection 10.0. 
10.3.1.4 Assessment of Baseline Symptoms  
Baseline signs and symptoms present within 2 weeks of starting therapy, whether or not 
related to current disease will be documented. Assessment of these baseline signs and symptoms 
will be done at each  treatment and Follow -Up Visit (see Section 10.1). Any worsening by > 1 
Grade change from baseline is to be documented as an adverse event.  
10.3.1.5 Adverse Event Monitoring  
An adverse event is the appearance or worsening of any undesirable sign, symptom, or 
medical condition occurring after starting the study drug even if the event is not considered to be related to study drug. Medical conditions/diseases present before starting study drug are only 
considered adverse events if they worsen after starting st udy drug. Abnormal laboratory values or 
test results constitute adverse events only if they induce clinical signs or symptoms, are considered 
clinically significant, or require therapy.  
Adverse events will be evaluated according to the NCI CTCAE Version 4.0 on a 
continuous basis starting from when the patient takes the first dose of nivolumab or ipilimumab  to 
follow up visits. Events, such as abnormal laboratory values, considered by the principal investigator to be not clinically significant (related to the study or study drug) will not be 
documented. The investigator (or physician designee) is responsible for verifying and 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     52 providing source documentation for all adverse events and assigning the attribution for all 
adverse events for subjects enrolled.  If abnormal lab values, which were not pre -existing or 
which worsened after the first dose of study drug, me et Common Terminology Criteria (CTC) for 
reporting as adverse events (AE), they will be documented in the AE source document and captured in the CORe/PDMS Database. For the lab results that do not meet the CTC for reporting 
as an AE, they will be considere d not clinically significant (NCS). No additional documentation 
will be required to neither specify NCS lab results nor require physician investigator signature.  
 
Adverse events will be treated appropriately. Such treatment m ay involve changes in 
nivolumab or ipilimumab  therapy including possible interruption or discontinuation, starting or 
stopping concomitant treatments, changes in the frequency or nature of assessments, 
hospitalization, or any other medically required intervention. Refer to Sections 6.1- 3 for treatments 
of nivolumab or ipilimumab  infusion reaction and toxicities. 
Once an adverse event is detected, it should be followed until its resolution, and assessment 
should be made at each visit of any changes in severity, the suspected relationship to nivolumab  
or ipilimumab, the interventions required to treat it, and the outcome. Reporting of adverse events 
will be done according to NCI CTCAE version 4.0. The following items will be recorded at least:  
• Event description  
• Date of onset of AE  
• CTCAE gra de/severity (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)  
• Relationship to treatment with nivolumab or ipilimumab (unrelated, unlikely, possible, 
probable, highly probable/definite)  
• Action taken (none, temporarily discontinued agent, drug treatment given/specify, permanently discontinue d agent, non- drug treatment given/specify, hospitalization)  
• Date of AE stop  
• Outcome (recovered without sequelae, recovered with sequelae, ongoing, worsened, death)  
• Serious AE (yes, no)  
• Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) must be collected from the time of the first protocol specific intervention until 100 days after the last dose of study drug. 
 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     53 Potential Drug Induced Liver Injury (DILI)  
Wherever possible, timely confirmation of initial liver -related l aboratory abnormalities should 
occur prior to the reporting of a potential DILI event. All occurrences of potential DILIs, meeting 
the defined criteria, must be reported as SAEs.  
Potential drug induced liver injury is defined as:  
1) AT (ALT or AST) elevation  > 3 times upper limit of normal (ULN)  
AND  
2) Total bilirubin > 2 times ULN, without initial findings of cholestasis (elevated serum alkaline 
phosphatase),  
AND  
3) No other immediately apparent possible causes of AT elevation and hyperbilirubinemia, 
including, but not limited to, viral hepatitis, pre -existing chronic or acute liver disease, or the 
administration of other drug(s) known to be hepatotoxic. 
 
Recommended Adverse Event Recording Guidelines  
 
Attribution  Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  Grade 4  Grade 5  
Unrelated  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  
Phase II   
 Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  
Unlikely  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  
Phase II   Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  
Possible  Phase I  
Phase II   Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  
Probable  Phase I  
Phase II  
 Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  
Definitive  Phase I  
Phase II  
  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II  
Phase III  Phase I  
Phase II   
Phase III  
   
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     54 10.3.2 Laboratory Test Assessments  
Any abnormal laboratory test result considered clinically significant by the Investigator 
must be recorded.  
10.3.2.1 Serum Chemistry  
Serum chemistry tests include: LDH, glucose, total protein, albumin, BUN or urea, 
creatinine, ALT, AST, serum alkaline phosphatase, direct and total bilirubin, sodium, potassium, 
chloride, HCO3, calcium, magnesium, and uric acid. Serum Chemistry is to be obtained as outlined 
in Section 10.0. Three (3) ml of blood will be drawn for serum chemistry, exclusive of TSH. In addition, TSH, free T3, free T4, ACTH and total cortisol will also  be obtained as described in 
Section 10.0 to monitor endocrine side effects of nivolumab or ipilimumab . Lastly, AFP for tumor 
marker assessment will also be monitored.  
10.3.2.2 Hematology  
CBC with differential are to be obtained as outlined in Section 5.1.  Complete Blood Count 
(CBC) with differential includes hemoglobin, hematocrit, white blood cells, platelets, neutrophils, 
lymphocytes, eosinophils and monocytes. PT and PTT will be drawn at baseline and prior to surgery or future procedures. A dditional draws must be incorporated to monitor recovery from any 
hematologic laboratory AE. Two and a half (2.5) ml blood will be drawn for hematology. 
10.3.2.3 Tumor Tissue  
Available tumor tissue, obtained at pre- treatment and the  time of surgical resect ion or 
biopsy (if unresectable)  will be collected for immune monitoring studies as described below 
(Section 10.3.3).  
10.3.3 Immune Tests  
The Immunotherapy Platform will perform immune monitoring, including but not limited 
to evaluation of CD4 and CD8 T cel ls in peripheral blood and available tumor samples as 
previously published [52 -59]. All samples will be collected and analyzed as per a separate IRB -
approved lab protocol.  
All blood collection will be compliant with institutional safety standards and will not 
exceed the maximum blood draw per venipuncture policy. 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     55 10.3.4 Evaluation of Clinical Responses  
10.3.4.1 Efficacy Assessments  
Progression- free survival (PFS) and objective response rate (ORR), each based on RECIST 
1.1 criteria, are two of the primary ef ficacy assessments of this study. See Sections 12.2.2.1 and 
12.2.2.4 for the definitions of ORR and PFS, respectively.  
10.3.4.2 Criteria for Progression and Responses  
Evaluation of response will follow the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 
(RECI ST) Guidelines. All tumor measurements must be recorded in centimeters.  
• Target Lesions:  
All measurable lesions up to a maximum of five lesions per organ and 10 lesions in total, 
representative of all involved organs, should be identified as target lesions and recorded and 
measured at baseline. Target lesions should be selected on the basis of their size (those with the longest diameter) and their suitability for accurate repeated measurements (either by imaging techniques or clinically). A sum of the longes t diameter for all target lesions will be calculated and 
reported as the baseline sum longest diameter. The baseline sum of longest diameters will be used as the reference by which the objective tumor response is characterized.  
• Non-target Lesions:  
All oth er lesions (or sites of disease) should be identified as non- target lesions and should 
also be recorded at baseline. Measurements of these lesions are not required, but the presence or 
absence of each should be noted throughout follow -up. 
• Evaluation of Tar get Lesions:  
− Complete Response : The disappearance of all target lesions.  
− Partial Response: At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the longest diameter of target 
lesions, taking as reference the baseline sum longest diameter.  
− Progressive Disease : At least a 20% increase in the sum of the longest diameter of 
target lesions, taking as reference the smallest sum longest diameter recorded since 
the treatment started or the appearance of one or more new lesions.  
− Stable Disease: Insufficient shrinkage to qualify for partial response, or insufficient 
increase to qualify for progressive disease, taking as reference the smallest sum longest diameter since the treatment started.  
• Evaluation of Non- target Lesions:  
− Complete Response : The disappearance of all non -target lesions.  
Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     56 − Incomplete Response/Stable Disease: The persistence of one or more non- target 
lesion(s) 
− Progressive Disease: The appearance of one or more new lesions and/or unequivocal 
progression of existing non- target lesions.  
• Evaluation of Best Overall R esponse: (see Table 4)  
The best overall response is the best response recorded from the start of treatment until 
disease progression/recurrence (taking as reference for progressive disease the smallest 
measurements recorded since the treatment started).  
Table 4. Evaluation of Best Overall Response 
10.3.4.3 Immune related Response Criteria (irRC)  
Table 5. irRC outcome measures [ 64] 

Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     57 New, measurable lesions  Incorporated into tumor burden  
New, non - measurable lesions  Do not define progression (but precludes 
irCR)  
Non-index lesions  Contribute to defining irCR (complete 
disappearance is required  
Complete response (CR)  Disappearance of all lesions in two 
consecutive observations not less than 4 
weeks apart  
Partial response (PR)  ≥50% decrease in tumor burden compared 
with baseline in two observations at least 4 
weeks apart  
Stable disease (SD)  50% decrease in tumor burden compared 
with baseline cannot be established nor 
25% increase compared with nadir  
Progression of disease (PD)  ≥25% increase in tumor burden compared 
with nadir (at any single time point) in two consecutive observations at least 4 weeks 
apart  
 
Note: According to the irRC, disease progression of non- index lesions or appearance of new non-
measurable lesions will not classify the subject as PD, and therefore the subject may stay in the 
study if it is the in the subject’s best interest. A confirmato ry tumor assessment may be performed 
no less than 4 weeks after the first indication of progression to provide additional data for the 
investigator to decide if the subject should stay in the trial or be discontinued due to clinical 
progression based on th e investigator’s decision.  
10.3.4.4 Time - to- Event Assessment of Response  
Time to Response : From the start of study drug to the first observation of a response (the first of 
two confirmatory measurements).  
Duration of Response : From the first observation  of a response (the first of the two confirmatory 
statements) to the first observation of progressive disease, or to death due to any cause, or early 
discontinuation of treatment due to progressive disease.  
Time to Progression: From the start of study drug to the first evidence of progression. 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     58 11.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
11.1 Serious Adverse Event Reporting (SAE) for M. D. Anderson -sponsored IND 
Protocols  
An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “serious” if, in the view of either the 
investigator or the sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes:  
• Death  
• A life -threatening adverse drug experience – any adverse experience that places the patient, 
in the view of the initial reporter, at immediate risk of death from the adverse experience 
as it occurred. It does not include an adverse experience that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.  
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization 
• A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions.  
• A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require hospitalization 
may be considered a serious adverse drug experience when, based upon appropriate medical 
judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical 
events include allergic b ronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at 
home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse (21 CFR 312.32). 
• Important medical events as def ined above, may also be considered serious adverse events. 
Any important medical event can and should be reported as an SAE if deemed appropriate 
by the Principal Investigator or the IND  Sponsor, IND Office.  
• All events occurring during the conduct of a protocol and meeting the definition of a SAE must be reported to the IRB in accordance with the timeframes and procedures outlined in “The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Institutional Review Board Policy for Investigators on Reporting Una nticipated Adverse Events for Drugs and 
Devices”.  Unless stated otherwise in the protocol, all SAEs, expected or unexpected, must be reported to the IND Office, regardless of attribution (within 5 working days of knowledge of the event).  
• All life -threaten ing or fatal events, that are unexpected, and related  to the study drug, 
must have a written report submitted within 24 hours  (next working day) of knowledge of 
the event to the Safety Project Manager in the IND Office.   
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     59 • Unless otherwise noted, the electronic SAE application (eSAE) will be utilized for safety reporting to the IND Office and MDACC IRB.  
• Serious adverse events wi ll be captured from the time of the first protocol -specific 
intervention, until 100 days after the last dose of study drug, unless the participant 
withdraws consent. Serious adverse events must be followed until clinical recovery is complete and laboratory  tests have returned to baseline, progression of the event has 
stabilized, or there has been acceptable resolution of the event.  
• Additionally, any serious adverse events that occur after the 100 day time period that are 
related to the study treatment must be reported to the IND Office. This may include the development of a secondary malignancy.  
11.2 Reporting to FDA  
• Serious adverse events will be forwarded to FDA by the IND Sponsor (Safety Project Manager IND Office) according to 21 CFR 312.32. 
 It is the r esponsibility of the PI and the research team to ensure serious adverse events are 
reported according to the Code of Federal Regulations, Good Clinical Practices, the protocol guidelines, the sponsor’s guidelines, and Institutional Review Board policy.  
11.3 Investigator Communication with Supporting Companies  
• Adverse events classified as "serious" require expeditious handling and reporting to BMS 
to comply with regulatory requirements.  
• All SAEs whether related or unre lated to nivolumab or ipilimumab must b e immediately 
reported to BMS (by the investigator or designee) within 24 hours of becoming aware of 
the event, using the M. D. Anderson SAE forms.  If only limited information is initially available, follow -up reports are required.  The original SAE form must be kept on file at 
the study site. 
All SAEs should be faxed (or emailed) to BMS at:  
Global Pharmacovigilance & Epidemiology  
Bristol -Myers Squibb Company  
Fax Number:  609- 818-3804 
Email: Worldwide.safety@bms.com
 
 
• For studies conducted under an Investigator IND, any event that is both serious and 
unexpected must be reported to the FDA as soon as possible and, in no event, later than 7 days (deat h or life -threatening event) or 15 days (all other SAEs) after the investigator’s or 
institution’s initial receipt of the information.  The investigator will provide BMS with a simultaneous copy of all adverse events filed with the FDA.  SAEs will be repor ted on the 
MDACC SAE Form.  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     60 • AE Reporting Period: For nivolumab and ipilimumab, all AEs must be collected which 
occur after the first dose through within 100 days of discontinuation of dosing or 
completion of the patient’s participation in the study if the last scheduled visit occurs at a later time.  In addition, the Investigator should notify BMS of any SAE that may occur after this time period which they believe to be certainly, probably, or possibly related to nivolumab and/or ipilimumab . 
• Worldwide.Safety@bms .com aepbusinessprocess@bms.com  
 
Notes:  
• Cancer/Overdose: An overdose is defined as the accidental or intentional ingestion of any 
dose of a product that is considered both excessive and medically important. For reporting 
purposes, any form of overdose, regardless of adverse outcome, will be cons idered as an 
important medical event and reported immediately to BMS.  
• Hospitalizations (exceptions) :  Criteria for hospitalizations not reported as SAEs include 
admissions for:  
− Planned as per protocol medical/surgical procedure  
− Routine health assessment r equiring admission for baseline/trending of health status 
documentation (e.g., routine colonoscopy)  
− Medical/surgical admission for purpose other than remedying ill health state (planned prior to entry into study trial; appropriate documentation required)  
− Admission encountered for other life circumstance that carries no bearing on health status and requires no medical/surgical intervention (e.g. lack of housing, economic inadequacy, care- giver respite, family circumstances, administrative)  
11.4 Pregnancy  
Patients must agree to use adequate contraception (barrier method of birth control) prior to study 
entry, and for up to 23 weeks after the last study drug dose (for female study participants) or up to 
31 weeks after the last study drug dose (for male study participants). The treating physician, principle investigator and BMS should be notified immediately, should a patient or patient’s sexual 
partner become pregnant or suspect she is pregnant while participating in this study.  
12.0 STATISTICAL METHODOLOGY  
12.1 Preliminaries and Objectives  
This is a randomized, pilot trial of nivolumab (Arm A) or nivolumab + ipilimumab  (Arm B) as 
pre-operative treatment for patients with  hepatocellular  carcinoma who are eligible for surgical 
resection. Each patient in both Ar ms A  and B will be given nivolumab at 240 mg every 2 weeks 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     61 for a total of 6 weeks. Patients in Arm B will additionally be treated concurrently with ipilimumab 
at 1mg/kg every 6 weeks. No dose increases or reductions  will be allowed for nivolumab or  
ipilimumab. Surgical resection or post -treatment biopsy  will occur within  4 weeks after finishing 
the last cycle of therapy. T he rationale is that nivolumab and ipilimumab activate the immune 
system via distinct mechanisms and therefore, the combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab  may 
result in synergistic activation of the immune system against hepatocellular carcinoma. The primary objective is to assess the safety and tolerability of nivolumab +/ - ipilimumab .  Secondary 
objectives include e stimating the ORR and TTP of the 2 differ ent arms .  Exploratory objectives 
include evaluating the  pre- and post -treatment immunological changes in tumor tissues and 
peripheral blood.  
As of January 8, 2020, 30 patients have been enrolled and 27 patients have been random ized. 
The PI decided to stop enrollment since the study has reached its primary endpoint of safety.  
 12.2 Endpoints  
12.2.1 Primary Endpoint: Safety  
Safety will be recorded through the incidence of adverse events, serious adverse events and 
specific labor atory abnormalities (worst grade) in each treatment arm. Toxicities will be graded 
using the NCI CTCAE version 4.0. For trial monitoring and decisions about future trials, extreme 
toxicities (TOX) will be defined as any grade 3 or higher adverse event that  is possibly, probably, 
or definitely related to any therapy received on this protocol and occur within the first 6 weeks of therapy with one exception. Any grade 3 or higher adverse event that is potentially treatable with 
steroids will only count as an e xtreme toxicity if it does not improve to grade 1 or better within 2 
weeks. Additionally, a delay of greater than 3 months from the expected surgery date will count 
as a TOX.  
Success will be predefined as having at least 13 of 15 subjects receiving their a ssigned 
therapy without grade 3 or higher adverse events necessitating a delay in the pre -established 
surgical resection date (a clinically driven end -point defined by the multidisciplinary MD 
Anderson hepatocellular cancer team).   
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     62 12.2.2 Secondary Endpoints  
12.2.2.1. Objective Response Rate  (ORR)  
Objective response rate (ORR) is defined as the number of subjects with a best response of CR or 
PR after 12 weeks of therapy by RECIST 1.1 criteria divided by the number of randomized subjects 
as described in Section 10.3.4.2  
12.2.2.2.  Time to progression ( TTP)  
TTP is defined as the time from the start of study drug  to the first documented tumor progression 
or recurrence of tumor as determined by the investigator using RECIST 1.1 or iRC criter ia. Patients 
who are alive and free of known progression at the time of analysis will be censored on the date 
of last tumor assessment.  
12.2.2.3 PFS 
PFS is defined as the time from the start of treatment to date of PD or recurrence or date of death 
whichever occurs  first if patients have a event, or to the last follow -up date if patients are alive 
without PD.  
12.2.3 Exploratory Endpoints   
Tissue and blood immune monitoring will be conducted through the Immunotherapy Platform 
based on samples collected  at the following time points: 1) Pre -treatment; 2) time of surgical 
resection or biopsy (if unresectable); and 3) at time of discontinuation (peripheral blood 
collection).   
12.3 Sample Size 
Up to 30 patients will be enrolled, for 15 patients each in arm. This sample size is based on having 
sufficient patients to assess toxicities in each arm while providing preliminary estimates of 
secondary endpoints for future trials.   
12.4  Randomization 
Patients in the resectable cohorts will be randomized in a 1:1 f ashion through the Clinical Trial 
Conduct website ( https://biostatistics.mdanderson.org/ClinicalTrialConduct ), which is housed on 
a secure server at MDACC and maintained by the MDACC  Department of Biostatistics. Access 
to the website will be gained through usernames and passwords provided by the MDACC 
Department of Biostatistics to personnel responsible for enrolling patients. Training on the use of 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     63 the Clinical Trial Conduct website to enroll patients on the study will be provided by the study 
biostatistician for study personnel.  
12.5 Safety Monitoring 
All patients who receive at least one dose of nivolumab or nivolumab plus ipilimumab will be considered evaluable for toxicity.  
Safety assessments will include a comprehensive evaluation of AEs and/or toxicity based on:  
• Results of monitoring vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and body 
temperature)  
• Results of clinical chemistry, hematology/coagulation, complement testing, thyroid 
function testing, and urine analysis tests  
• ECG results   
• Changes in physical examination  
• Need for concomitant medications  
• ISRs  
• ECOG performance status  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     64 12.6 Data Analyses   
This is a t wo arm, open- label pilot study evaluating nivolumab alone or in combination with 
ipilimumab in the preoperative or prebiopsy setting.  Since no effective treatments are available in 
this setting, a response rate of 15% (within 95% CI) is consi dered acceptable – i.e., the signal for 
launching further, larger studies with nivolumab or nivolumab + ipilimumab in this patient 
population is ≥ 1 response in the current study (each arm).  If no response is observed, the treatment 
with nivolumab alone or in combination with ipilimumab will be considered ineffective. A total 
of 15 patients will be enrolled in each arm and treated to rule out a response rate of 15% or less with 90% power when at least one response is observed.  In other words, with 15 pati ents treated, 
the probability of observing at least one response is more than 90% if the response rate is at least  
15%.  Descriptive statistics including with 90% confidence interval will be computed. Observed response profile, clinical benefit rate at 6 m onths and TTP  along with relevant confidence intervals 
will be used to guide future development decisions. 
Total evaluable patients  Number of responders  Response rate  Lower 90% CI*  Upper 90% CI*  
15 0 0% <1%  18% 
15 1 7% <1%  27% 
15 2 13% 2% 36% 
15 3 20% 6% 44% 
15 4 27% 10% 51% 
15 5 33% 14% 58% 
15 6 40% 19% 64% 
15 7 47% 24% 70% 
15 8 53% 30% 76% 
15 9 60% 36% 81% 
15 10 67% 43% 86% 
15 >10**  >67%  >43%  >86%  
* Exact confidence interval computed by the method of Clopper and Pearson (Biometrika 26:404-
413, 1934)  
The Kaplan -Meier method will be used to estimate probability of PFS for each treatment arm.  
 Our exploratory objectives are to characterize the immune response for both treatment arms and 
its correlation to treatment response.   Immune responses, such as infiltration of CD8+/CD4+ T 
cells and dendritic cells, and cytokine levels in blood, will be compared between pre -treatment and 
post-treatment via paired t -test and Wilcoxon signed rank test. The overall treatment response rate 
will be summarized descriptively by dose with the n, percentage, and 95% CIs. Comparison of the response rates between two treatment arms will be made via Fisher’s exact test  Association 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     65 between the binary overall treatment response and immune responses w ill be assessed by two -
sample t -test and Wilcoxon rank sum test. 
 
The Investigator is responsible for completing a Safety/Efficacy Summary Report, and submitting 
it to the IND Office Medical Affairs and Safety Group, for review and approval.  This should be 
submitted after the first 5 evaluable patients per arm, complete 14  weeks of study treatment, and 
every 5 evaluable patients per arm, thereafter. On every summary submission, toxicity will be assessed at week 6, and response at week 14 of study treatment . 
A copy of the cohort summary should be placed in the Investigator’s Regulatory Binder under “sponsor correspondence”. 
13.0 ADMINISTRATIVE SECTION  
13.1 Compliance with the Protocol and Protocol Revisions  
The study must be conducted as described in the final approved protocol.  Documentation 
of approval signed by the chairperson or designee of the IRB(s) must be sent to BMS protocol 
managers  by the PI/research team .  All revisions (protocol amendments, administrative letters, and 
changes to the informed consent) must be submitted to BMS protocol managers.  The Investigator 
should not implement any deviation or change to the protocol without prior review and documented approval/favorable opinion from the IRB of an Amendment, except where necessary 
to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) to study patients. 
13.2 Informed Consent  
The Investigator must ensure that patients or their legally acceptable representatives are 
clearly and fully informed about the purpose, potential risks, and other critical issues regardi ng 
clinical trials in which they volunteer to participate.  Preparation of the consent form is the 
responsibility of the Investigator and must include all elements required by CFR 21 Part 50.25 and the local IRB.  The consent form must be sent to BMS for r eview prior to IRB approval. 
13.3 Records and Reports  
An Investigator is required to prepare and maintain adequate and accurate case histories 
designed to record all observations and other data pertinent to the investigation (e.g. case report form) on each  individual treated with nivolumab +/ - [ipilimumab]. The investigator is required to 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     66 retain, in a confidential manner, the data pertinent to the study. CORe/PDMS will be used as the 
electronic case report form for this study. All protocol specific data, including adverse events, will 
be entered into  CORe/PDMS . This study will be monitored for compliance by the IND Office.  
13.4 Institutional Review Board (IRB)  
Before study initiation, the Investigator must have written and dated approval/favorable 
opinion fr om the IRB for the protocol, consent form, subject recruitment materials/process (e.g., 
advertisements), and any other written information to be provided to study subjects. The 
Investigator should also provide the IRB with a copy of the Investigator Brochure or product labeling information to be provided to patients.  
The Investigator should provide the IRB with reports, updates and other information (e.g., 
Amendments, Administrative Letters) according to regulatory requirements or Institution procedures. A  detailed list of required regulatory documents also to be submitted to BMS will be 
sent upon final approval of the protocol.  
13.5 Record Retention  
The Investigator must retain nivolumab and nivolumab plus ipilimumab disposition 
records, source documents, and case histories designed to record all observations and other data pertinent to the investigation (e.g. case report form) for the maximum period required by applicable regulations and guidelines, or Institution procedures. If the Investigator withdraws from the study 
(e.g. relocation, retirement), the records shall be transferred to a mutually agreed upon designee 
(e.g. another Investigator, IRB). Documentation of such transfer must be provided to BMS.  
 
   
 
 
         
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     67                References:  
 1. http://www.who.int/whosis
. WHOMDWSIS.  
2. El-Serag HB: Hepatocellular carcinoma . N Engl J Med 2011, 365(12):1118- 1127. 
3. Ryder SD, Irving WL, Jones DA, Neal KR, Underwood JC, Trent Hepatitis CSG: Progression of hepatic fibrosis in patients with hepatitis C: a prospective repeat liver biopsy study . Gut 2004, 53(3):451- 455. 
4. Alter MJ: The epidemiology of acute and chronic he patitis C . Clin Liver Dis 1997, 
1(3):559- 568, vi -vii. 
5. European Association for Study of L, European Organisation for R, Treatment of C: EASL -EORTC clinical practice guidelines: management of hepatocellular 
carcinoma . Eur J Cancer 2012, 48(5):599- 641. 
6. Llovet JM, Zucman- Rossi J, Pikarsky E, Sangro B, Schwartz M, Sherman M, Gores G: 
Hepatocellular carcinoma . Nat Rev Dis Primers 2016, 2:16018. 
7. Llovet JM, Bru C, Bruix J: Prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma: the BCLC staging classification . Semin Liver  Dis 1999, 19(3):329- 338. 
8. Truty MJ, Vauthey JN: Surgical resection of high -risk hepatocellular carcinoma: 
patient selection, preoperative considerations, and operative technique. Ann Surg Oncol 2010, 17(5):1219- 1225. 
9. Pawlik TM, Poon RT, Abdalla EK, Z orzi D, Ikai I, Curley SA, Nagorney DM, Belghiti J, 
Ng IO, Yamaoka Y  et al: Critical appraisal of the clinical and pathologic predictors 
of survival after resection of large hepatocellular carcinoma . Arch Surg 2005, 
140(5):450- 457; discussion 457- 458. 
10. Chok KS, Ng KK, Poon RT, Lo CM, Fan ST: Impact of postoperative complications on long- term outcome of curative resection for hepatocellular carcinoma . Br J Surg 
2009, 96(1):81 -87. 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     68 11. Portolani N, Coniglio A, Ghidoni S, Giovanelli M, Benetti A, Tiberio GA, Giulini SM: Early and late recurrence after liver resection for hepatocellular carcinoma: prognostic and therapeutic implications . Ann Surg 2006, 243(2):229- 235. 
12. Bruix J, Sherman M, Practice Guidelines Committee AAftSoLD: Management of hepatocellular carcinoma . Hepatology 2005, 42(5):1208- 1236.  
13. Tabrizian P, Jibara G, Shrager B, Schwartz M, Roayaie S: Recurrence of hepatocellular cancer after resection: patterns, treatments, and  prognosis . Ann Surg 2015, 
261(5):947- 955. 
14. Bruix J, Takayama T, Mazzaferro V, Chau GY, Yang J, Kudo M, Cai J, Poon RT, Han KH, Tak WY et al : Adjuvant sorafenib for hepatocellular carcinoma after resection 
or ablation (STORM): a phase 3, randomised, dou ble-blind, placebo -controlled 
trial. Lancet Oncol 2015, 16(13):1344- 1354.  
15. Mazzaferro V, Regalia E, Doci R, Andreola S, Pulvirenti A, Bozzetti F, Montalto F, Ammatuna M, Morabito A, Gennari L: Liver transplantation for the treatment of small hepatocellu lar carcinomas in patients with cirrhosis . N Engl J Med 1996, 
334(11):693- 699. 
16. Yao FY, Ferrell L, Bass NM, Watson JJ, Bacchetti P, Venook A, Ascher NL, Roberts JP: Liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: expansion of the tumor size limits d oes not adversely impact survival . Hepatology 2001, 33(6):1394- 1403. 
17. Peng ZW, Zhang YJ, Liang HH, Lin XJ, Guo RP, Chen MS: Recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma treated with sequential transcatheter arterial chemoembolization and RF ablation versus RF abl ation alone: a prospective randomized trial . Radiology 2012, 
262(2):689- 700. 
18. Feng K, Yan J, Li X, Xia F, Ma K, Wang S, Bie P, Dong J: A randomized controlled trial of radiofrequency ablation and surgical resection in the treatment of small 
hepatocellul ar carcinoma . J Hepatol 2012, 57(4):794- 802. 
19. Chen MS, Li JQ, Zheng Y, Guo RP, Liang HH, Zhang YQ, Lin XJ, Lau WY: A prospective randomized trial comparing percutaneous local ablative therapy and partial hepatectomy for small hepatocellular carcinoma. A nn Surg 2006, 243(3):321-
328. 
20. Livraghi T, Meloni F, Di Stasi M, Rolle E, Solbiati L, Tinelli C, Rossi S: Sustained 
complete response and complications rates after radiofrequency ablation of very 
early hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: Is resection still the treatment of 
choice?  Hepatology 2008, 47(1):82 -89. 
21. Hoffe SE, Finkelstein SE, Russell MS, Shridhar R: Nonsurgical options for hepatocellular carcinoma: evolving role of external beam radiotherapy . Cancer 
Control 2010, 17(2):100- 110. 
22. Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, Hilgard P, Gane E, Blanc JF, de Oliveira AC, Santoro A, Raoul JL, Forner A  et al : Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma . N Engl 
J Med 2008, 359(4):378 -390. 
23. Cheng AL, Kang YK, Chen Z, Tsao CJ, Qin S, Kim JS , Luo R, Feng J, Ye S, Yang TS  et 
al: Efficacy and safety of sorafenib in patients in the Asia -Pacific region with 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     69 advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a phase III randomised, double -blind, placebo -
controlled trial . Lancet Oncol 2009, 10(1):25 -34. 
24. Kaseb AO, Shindoh J, Patt YZ, Roses RE, Zimmitti G, Lozano RD, Hassan MM, Hassabo HM, Curley SA, Aloia TA  et al : Modified cisplatin/interferon alpha -
2b/doxorubicin/5- fluorouracil (PIAF) chemotherapy in patients with no hepatitis or 
cirrhosis is associated with i mproved response rate, resectability, and survival of 
initially unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma . Cancer 2013, 119(18):3334- 3342. 
25. Keir ME, Butte MJ, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH: PD -1 and its ligands in tolerance and 
immunity . Annu Rev Immunol 2008, 26:6 77-704. 
26. Nishimura H, Nose M, Hiai H, Minato N, Honjo T: Development of lupus -like 
autoimmune diseases by disruption of the PD -1 gene encoding an ITIM motif -
carrying immunoreceptor. Immunity 1999, 11(2):141- 151. 
27. Nishimura H, Okazaki T, Tanaka Y, Nakatani K, Hara M, Matsumori A, Sasayama S, Mizoguchi A, Hiai H, Minato N  et al : Autoimmune dilated cardiomyopathy in PD -1 
receptor- deficient mice. Science 2001, 291 (5502):319- 322. 
28. Iwai Y, Terawaki S, Honjo T: PD -1 blockade inhibits hematogenous spread of poorly 
immunogenic tumor cells by enhanced recruitment of effector T cells . Int Immunol 
2005, 17(2):133- 144. 
29. Nomi T, Sho M, Akahori T, Hamada K, Kubo A, Kanehiro H, Nakamura S, Enomoto K, Yagita H, Azuma M  et al : Clinical significance and therapeutic potential of the 
programmed death -1 ligand/programmed death -1 pathway in human pancreatic 
cancer. Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research 2007, 13 (7):2151- 2157.  
30. Iwai Y, Ishida  M, Tanaka Y, Okazaki T, Honjo T, Minato N: Involvement of PD -L1 on 
tumor cells in the escape from host immune system and tumor immunotherapy by 
PD-L1 blockade . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America 2002, 99(19):12293- 12297. 
31. Kassel R, Cruise MW, Iezzoni JC, Taylor NA, Pruett TL, Hahn YS: Chronically inflamed livers up -regulate expression of inhibitory B7 family members . Hepatology 
2009, 50(5):1625- 1637.  
32. Xu P, Chen YJ, Chen H, Zhu XY, Song HF, Cao LJ, Wang XF : The expression of 
programmed death -1 in circulating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells during hepatitis B virus 
infection progression and its correlation with clinical baseline characteristics . Gut 
Liver 2014, 8(2):186- 195. 
33. Barathan M, Gopal K, Mohamed R, Ellegar d R, Saeidi A, Vadivelu J, Ansari AW, 
Rothan HA, Ravishankar Ram M, Zandi K  et al : Chronic hepatitis C virus infection 
triggers spontaneous differential expression of biosignatures associated with T cell exhaustion and apoptosis signaling in peripheral blo od mononucleocytes . Apoptosis 
2015, 20(4):466- 480. 
34. El-Khoueiry AB MI, Crocenzi TS, et al. Phase I/II safety and antitumor activity of 
nivolumab in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC): CA209- 040. J 
Clin Oncol. 2015 (suppl; abstr LBA101). .  
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     70 35. Sangro B MI, Yau T, et al. Safety and antitumor activity of nivolumab in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: interim analysis of dose- escalation cohorts from the 
phase 1/2 CheckMate 040 study. Presented at: 10th Annual International L iver Cancer 
Association Conference; September 9 -11, 2016; Vancouver, Canada. Abstract O -019. .  
36. Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN, Smith DC, McDermott DF, Powderly JD, Carvajal RD, Sosman JA, Atkins MB  et al : Safety, activity, and immune correlates 
of anti -PD-1 antibody in cancer . N Engl J Med 2012, 366(26):2443- 2454. 
37. Brahmer JR, Drake CG, Wollner I, Powderly JD, Picus J, Sharfman WH, Stankevich E, Pons A, Salay TM, McMiller TL  et al : Phase I study of single -agent anti -programmed 
death -1 (MDX -1106) in refractory solid tumors: safety, clinical activity, 
pharmacodynamics, and immunologic correlates . J Clin Oncol 2010, 28(19):3167-
3175. 
38. Hodi FS, O'Day SJ, McDermott DF, Weber RW, Sosman JA, Haanen JB, Gonzalez R, Robert C, Schadendorf D, Hassel JC  et al : Improved survival with ipilimumab in 
patients with metastatic melanoma . N Engl J Med 2010, 363(8):711- 723. 
39. Robert C, Thomas L, Bondarenko I, O'Day S, M DJ, Garbe C, Lebbe C, Baurain JF, Testori A, Grob JJ  et al : Ipilimumab plus dacarbazine for previously untreated 
metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med 2011, 364(26):2517- 2526. 
40. Ipilimumab IB. 2012 Aug- 31. v15. 
41. Weber JS, Kahler KC, Hauschild A: Management of immune -related adverse events 
and kinetics of r esponse with ipilimumab . J Clin Oncol 2012, 30(21):2691- 2697. 
42. Sangro B, Gomez -Martin C, de la Mata M, Inarrairaegui M, Garralda E, Barrera P, 
Riezu -Boj JI, Larrea E, Alfaro C, Sarobe P  et al : A clinical trial of CTLA -4 blockade 
with tremelimumab in pat ients with hepatocellular carcinoma and chronic hepatitis 
C. J Hepatol 2013, 59(1):81- 88. 
43. Wolchok JD, Kluger H, Callahan MK, Postow MA, Rizvi NA, Lesokhin AM, Segal NH, Ariyan CE, Gordon RA, Reed K  et al : Nivolumab plus ipilimumab in advanced 
melanoma . N Engl J Med 2013, 369(2):122- 133. 
44. Larkin J, Chiarion- Sileni V, Gonzalez R, Grob JJ, Cowey CL, Lao CD, Schadendorf D, 
Dummer R, Smylie M, Rutkowski P  et al : Combined Nivolumab and Ipilimumab or 
Monotherapy in Untreated Melanoma . N Engl J Med 2015, 373(1):23 -34. 
45. Hellmann MD GS, Goldman JW, et al: CheckMate 012: Safety and efficacy of first -line 
nivolumab and ipilimumab in advanced NSCLC. 2016 ASCO Annual Meeting. Abstract 3001. Presented June 4, 2016. 
46. Diab A MHApsopP -o, single -dose Ipil imumab (Ipi) and/or cryoablation (Cryo) in women 
(pts) with early -stage/resectable breast cancer (ESBC). ASCO Annual Meeting. 2014, 
Abs #1098, Chicago, IL.  
47. Carthon BC, Wolchok JD, Yuan J, Kamat A, Ng Tang DS, Sun J, Ku G, Troncoso P, Logothetis CJ, All ison JP  et al : Preoperative CTLA -4 blockade: tolerability and 
immune monitoring in the setting of a presurgical clinical trial. Clin Cancer Res 2010, 16(10):2861- 2871.  
48. Wolchok J, Hoos A, O'Day S, Weber J, Hamid O, Lebbé C, Maio M, Binder M, 
Bohnsack O, Nichol G  et al : Guidelines for the evaluation of immune therapy activity 
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     71 in solid tumors: immune -related response criteria . Clinical cancer research : an 
official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research 2009, 15 (23):7412-
7419. 
49. Liakou C I, Kamat A, Tang DN, Chen H, Sun J, Troncoso P, Logothetis C, Sharma P: 
CTLA -4 blockade increases IFNg -producing CD4+ICOShi cells to shift the ratio of 
effector to regulatory T cells in cancer patients.  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 
105(39):14987- 14992.  
50. Tang DN, Shen Y, Sun J, Wen S, Wolchok JD, Yuan J, Allison JP, Sharma P: Increased Frequency of ICOS+ CD4 T Cells as a Pharmacodynamic Biomarker for Anti -
CTLA -4 Therapy Cancer Immunol Res 2013, 1 (4):229–234. 
51. Chen H, Fu T, Suh W, Tsavachidou D, Wen S, Gao J, Ng D, He Q, Sun J, Sharma P: CD4 T Cells Require ICOS -Mediated PI3K Signaling to Increase T -Bet Expression 
in the Setting of Anti -CTLA -4 Therapy . Cancer Immunol Res 2014, 2(2):1 -10. 
   
Protocol 2017- 0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     72 52. Liakou, C. I. et al. CTLA -4 blockade increases IFNg -producing CD4+ICOShi cells to shift 
the ratio of effector to regulatory T cells in cancer patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105, 14987-14992 (2008).   
53. Carthon, B. C. et al. Preoperative CTLA -4 bloc kade: tolerability and immune monitoring in 
the setting of a presurgical clinical trial. Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research 16, 2861 -2871 (2010).  
54. Tang, D. N. et al. Increased Frequency of ICOS + CD4 T Cells as a Pharmacodynamic 
Biomarker for Anti -CTLA -4 Therapy. Cancer Immunol Res 1, 229–234 (2013).  
55. Chen, H. et al. CD4 T Cells Require ICOS -Mediated PI3K Signaling to Increase T -Bet 
Expression in the Setting of Anti -CTLA -4 Therapy. Cancer Imm unol Res 2, 1- 10 (2014).  
56. Eng, C. Circulating DNA biomarkers: a primer for metastatic colorectal cancer. Lancet Oncol 16, 878 -  879 (2015)  
57. Subudhi, S. K. et al. Clonal expansion of CD8 T cells in the systemic circulation precedes development of ipil imumab -induced toxicities. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113, 11919- 1192 (2016)  
58. Wargo, J. A. et al. Analysis of Immune Signatures in Longitudinal Tumor Samples Yields Insight into Biomarkers of Response and Mechanisms of Resistance to Immune Checkpoint Blocka de. Cancer Discov 6, 827- 837 (2016)  
59 . Gao, J. et al. Loss of IFN -γ Pathway Genes in Tumor Cells as a Mechanism of Resistance to 
Anti-CTLA -4 Therapy. Cell 167, 397- 404 (2016)  
  
Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     73 Appendix I: AE I -O Algorithms 
 
 
 

Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     74  
  

Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     75  
 

Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     76  
 

Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     77  
 

Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     78  
 

Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     79  
       
 
  
 
     
 

Protocol 2017-0097 
   January 30, 2020  
 
 
     80 Appendix II: Study Design Version Comparison  
       Protocol Version 1 -8        Protocol Version 9  
 
 
  
