  Confidential 
THESE DOCUMENTS ARE THE PROPERTY OF BOSTON SCIENTIFIC CORPORATION AND SHALL NOT BE REPRODUCED, 
DISTRIBUTED, DISCLOSED OR USED FOR MANUFACTURE OR SALE OF APPARATUS WITHOUT THE EXPRESS WRITTEN 
CONSENT OF BOSTON SCIENTIFIC CORPORATION.    
     
Blue Box  Study  
Study to Characterize the Effects of Programmin g Spinal Cord Stimulation (SCS) in 
Patients Undergoing a B oston Scientific (BSC) SCS Temporary Trial  
 
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION PLAN  
 
 
 
Sponsored By  
Boston Scientific Corporation  
Neuromodulation 
25155 Rye Canyon Loop 
Valencia, CA 91355 
United States of America  
 
 
 
 
This protocol contains confidential information  for use by the Investigators and their 
designated representatives participating in this clinical investigation. The protocol should be 
held confidential and maintained in a secure location. 
Do not copy or distribute without written permission from Boston Scientific Corporation. 
 
 
   
  
Released Blue Box Clinical Study Protocol
Boston Scientific Confidential. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Page 1 of 48

Confidential 
Page 2 of 48 
Contact Information 
Role Contact 
Clinical Contact Kristen Lechleiter, M.S. 
Principal Clinical Research Scientist 
Boston Scientific Corporation 
Neuromodulation 
25155 Rye Canyon Loop 
Valencia, CA 91355 
United States of America 
Kristen.lechleiter@bsci.com 
1-602-300-8267
Coordinating Not applicable
Principal 
Investi2:ators 
Released Blue Box Clinical Study Protocol 
Boston Scientific Confidential. Unauthorized use is prohibited. 

 Confidential  Form/Template 90702637 Rev/Ver AL  
Blue Box  Protocol, 91153461  Rev/Ver C 
Page 9 of 48 
 4. Introduction  
4.1. Chronic Pain 
Chronic pain is a significant world- wide complaint and consumes considerable healthcare 
resources and heavily impacts quality of social and working life for many.  A 2001 European 
investigation showed that 30% of patients treated in primary care facilities were treated by a 
physician for a pain complaint, and 37% of those patients (11% of total) suffered from chronic pain ( Hasselstrom, Liu -Palmgren, & Rasjo -Wraak, 2002).  More recently an epidemiological 
study conducted in Scotland found the prevalence of chronic pain to be 48%, 8% of which is of neuropathic origin.  The authors concluded that chronic pain is more prevalent than what previous studies have suggested (Torrance, Smith, Bennett, & Lee, 2006).  In a separate European study 
done in 2006, 19% of adults surveyed reported suffering from chronic pain ( Breivik, Collett, 
Ventafridda, Cohen, & Gallacher, 2006).   In the 2010 report of the health and status of the nation, Health, the U.S. Center for Disease Control and Prevention reports that over 28% of adults suffer from non- fleeting low -back pain.  
In patients with low -back pain, approximately half of the patients reported limitation in at least 
one basic action from the following list:  movement difficulty, emotional difficulty, sensory difficulty, cognitive difficulty, self- care limitation, social limitation, or work limitation (National 
Center for Health Statistics, 2011).  Chronic pain can lead to a number of co-morbidities, including reduced health- related quality of 
life, reduced ability to engage in activities of daily living, increased disability, increased emotional depression, and weight gain due to the adoption of a sedentary lifestyle. 
4.2. Spinal  Cord Stimulation  
Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) is a treatment option for chronic pain that has generally been 
reserved for patients who have failed multiple, and sometimes all, conservative chronic pain therapies.  With SCS, an implanted pulse generator (IPG) delivers electrical current to a lead(s) implanted in the epidural space at spinal level(s) where access can be obtained neural structures that are implicated in the chronic pain circuits.   Electrically stimulating these nerves creates a comfortable tingling sensation, known as paresthesia, that can be directed to the painful location to mask the sensation of pain (Kumar et al ., 2006).  
SCS is effective for neuropathic pain associated with a variety of conditions, including failed back surgery syndrome (FBSS), which is the most common condition associated with chronic pain (Carter et al., 2004, Taylor et al ., 2004).  For best pain relief, the paresthesia must be programmed 
to overlap the regions of pain (North et al., 1990). To achieve overlap, the el ectrode contacts are 
programmed based on the patient’s feedback to various combinations of stimulation parameters such as polarities, pulse rate, amplitude, and pulse width.   
Two randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been conducted on the use of SCS to treat patients 
with FBSS. Each study demonstrated the superiority of SCS compared with the alternative 
Released Blue Box Clinical Study Protocol
Boston Scientific Confidential. Unauthorized use is prohibited. Page 9 of 48
