 
 1 -Title:  Effects of Electrotherapy on Pain, Anxiety, Mobility, and Proprioception in Young 
Adults with Mild Neck Pain: A Randomized Controlled Trial  
 
-Authors:  Pablo Mleziva  PT, PhD(c). Department of Physical Therapy, Assistant Professor, 
Loma Linda University, California, USA. Eric Glenn Johnson  PT, DSc. Department of 
Physical Therapy, Professor, Loma Linda University, California, USA. Everett Lohman III  PT, 
DSc. Department of Physical Therapy, Professor, Loma Linda University, California, USA.. 
Madeha Jaber  Department of Physical Therapy, Professor, Loma Linda University, California, 
USA. Lillian Mleziva  Department of Physical Therapy, San Gorgonio Memorial Hospital, 600 
N Highland Springs Ave, Banning, California 92220, USA. Noha Salim Daher  Department of 
Public Health, School of Allied Health Professions, Professor, Loma Linda University, 
California, USA  
 
-Institutional Review Board  (IRB# 5220149) approved 4/29/2022 at Loma Linda University at 
University. Registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (Identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
 
-Financial disclosure and Conflict of Interest:  I affirm that I have no financial affiliation or 
involvement with any commercial organization that has a direct financial interest in any matter 
included in this clinical trial.  
 
-Corresponding author:  Pablo Mleziva Address: 24951 North Circle Drive, Nichol Hall, Loma 
Linda, California, 92354 Email: pmleziva@llu.edu  
 
-Funding:  None  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2  
 
 
 
1. PROTOCOL INFORMATION   
Title: Effects of electrotherapy on cervical spine proprioception, pain, anxiety, and 
disability in adults with subclinical neck or upper quadrant pain.  
Funding Source : School of Allied Health Professions (SAHP)  
Phase of Study : N/A  
Version Date of Protocol : N/A  
 
2. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR’S INFORMATION  
PI Name:  Eric Glenn Johnson, DSc, PT, MS -HPEd, NCS  
Title:  Professor, SAHP, Physical Therapy Department  
Name & Address of Research Institution:  Loma Linda University, School of Allied 
Health Professions, Nichol Hall Room #A -712, Loma Linda, CA 92350  
Ext # 47471 FAX # (909) 558 -0459  
Email Address : ejohnson@llu.edu  
 
3. STUDY PERSONNEL  
Name: Eric Johnson. Email: ejohnson@llu.edu  
Name: Pablo Mleziva. Emai l: pmleziva@llu.edu  
Name: Everett Lohman. Email: elohman@llu.edu  
Name: Lillian Mleziva . Email: LMleziva @llu.edu  
Name: Noha Daher . Email: ndaher @llu.edu  
Name: Madeha Jaber. Email: mmjaber@students.llu.edu  
 
4. STUDY INFORMATION  
Location(s) of Research Activity:  SAHP  Neuroscience Research Laboratory - Room 
Nichol Hall A-712, 24951 North Circle Drive , Loma Linda, CA 92354 . 
Expected Start/Stop Dates  of Research:  July 1, 202 2-June 30, 2023 .  
Special Time Sensitivities:  N/A 
Type of Research:  Experimental  
 
5. INCLUSION / EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Inclusion criteria : Subjects  will be adults between 20 -40 years of age currently 
enrolled as students at Loma Linda Un iversity. There will be three groups. T he 
 
 3 normal group will include twenty subjects with no neck and/or quadrant pain. The 
control group will include twenty subjects with neck and/or upper quadrant chronic 
subclinical pain and the intervention group will i nclude twenty subjects with neck 
and/or upper quadrant chronic subclinical pain.    
Exclusion criteria : Individuals currently receiving clinical pain treatment, pain 
medications within six hours of data collection, acute pain (control and intervention 
group s), individuals with electrotherapy contraindications , and unwilling to receive 
daily SMS text message home program reminder . Exclusion criteria will be 
determined by self -report using a questionnaire.   
 
6. SUBJECT RECRUITMENT & SCREENI NG 
This study will have  a sample  size of 60 adults (males and females) between 20  to 40 
years of age.  This sample size will provide us with enough power to detect the needed 
effect size. The estimated attrition rate is 15  percent . The participants  will be 
recruited from  the student population at Loma Linda University via flyers, posters, 
hand -outs, mass emails, and word of mouth. The phone script will be used when 
potential subjects contact us after seeing the flyer.  
 
7. INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS  
The informed c onsent will be  conducte d by Pablo Mleziva  in the SAHP Neuroscience 
Research Laboratory wit h a single potential subject at a time. Participants will have 
the opportunity to ask questions before decid ing to participate. Those participants 
who me et inclusion criteria will be identi fied by a code on all documents other than 
their signature on the i nformed consent.  Twenty participants  with no pain  will be  in 
the normal group . Forty  participants  with chronic subclinical neck or upper quadrant 
pain will be randomi zed (random  number  table will be used ) into two groups: twenty 
subjects in the control gro up, and twenty subjects in the intervention group. All 
participants’ records  will be store d in a locked cabinet, in a locked office and stored 
on a secure drive . 
 
8. STUDY DESIGN  
a. Background or  rationale for this study.  
As defined by the International Association for the S tudy of Pain (IASP) pain is 
“an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with, or  resembling that 
associated with, actual or potential tissue damage.” ( IASP, 2021 ) and one of the most 
 
 4 common reasons people seek medical care is chronic pain. A pproximately 50 million 
adults in United Stated have chronic pain affecting daily lives1 postin g public health 
problems in costs of pharmacological management.2,3 The financial  cost to care for 
people with chronic pain is more costly than diabetes, cardiov ascular and cancer 
combined.4,5 
Chronic pain is persistent or recurrent pain that last longer t han 3 months in one 
or more locations in the body even beyond the perio d of the e xpected healing 
phase.6,7 Chronic pain can be affected by biological, psychologi cal, and social factors 
that are accompanied by anxiety, depression, frustration, deconditionin g, functional 
disability, financial problems and opioid use problems.8,9 As peopl e experience pain, 
that experience and manifestation of pain is unique to each i ndividual and includes 
physical and psychological factors7 making the managing pain and chronic  pain can a 
difficult thing to achieve.1  
Facing an opioid epidemic, th e Centers of Disease Control and Prevention  (CDC)  
reports  that studies of 2 weeks to 6 mon ths in duration that utilized effective non -
pharmacological treatments for chronic pain  were ef fective.10 Among the 
recommendations from the CDC for non -opioid and no n-pharmaco logical treatments 
for pain, physical therapy is included.10,11 As physical ther apists we find imperative to 
reinforce the use of  non-pharmacologic options for  pain relief in peop le that are 
tackling the difficult task of managing their pain to c ontinue wi th their normal lives.  
As mentioned previously, one of the most common reasons people seek medical 
care is chronic pain;1 however, subclinical pain (mild, low irritability) g enerally does 
not prompt people to seek medical treatment.12,13,14 Subc linical pa in can be measured  
by the visual analog scale (VAS)  score of ≤3.4/10.15 In addition, non -pharmacological 
treatments in physical therapy for chronic subclinical pain have not b een studied 
extensively.  Pain can lead to anxiety (which is often treated with p harmacological 
interventions) and avoidan ce of movement.8,9 Pain and local inflammation in the 
cervical spine or upper quadrant, coupled with avoidance of movement, can lead t o 
reduced cervical spine proprioception. Pain and anxiety are often treated with 
pharmacological interventions.  
We are int erested in learning more about people living with “subclinical” pain. 
According to Grant et al and Browne et al.16,17 people with neck  pain but are not yet 
receiving any treatment as having minor musculoskeletal or “subclinical” pain. 
 
 5 Subclinical pain may increase anxiety18,19 and affect movement and can  lead 
to anxiety, disability , and impaired neck proprioception.12,14,20,21 
People may  as what those non -pharmacologic options that physical therapy can 
offer for pain  management, especially for untreated sub clinical pain? In the field of 
physical therapy biophysical agents are agents that apply forms of energy to 
“modulate or decrease pain ” along with the reduction of “risk factors and 
complications; enhance health, we llness, or fitness; enhance or maintain p hysical 
performance; or prevent or remediate impairments in body functions and structures, 
activity limitations, or participation rest rictions.”22 Within the group of biophysical 
agents is the application and use of  electrical currents, more specifically  
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).22 
TENS is the delivery of electrical current through intact skin to stimulate 
peripheral nerves.23 TENS delivers electrical currents through the skin with the 
objective to stimulate peripheral nerves to p revent the transmission of nociceptive 
information to the brain and by this process achieve pain relief.24,25,26,27 One of the 
most ac cepted theories for the modulation of pain with the use of TENS is the “gate 
control theory of pain” by Melzack and Wall p ublished in 1965.28,29 which explains 
pain relief by electrical stimulation.28 The authors proposed that by using electrical 
currents to stimulate low -threshold A -beta axons, it will reduce pain by pre -venting 
the transmission of nociceptive information in  the spinal cord and brainstem.23 This 
theory also proposed that the substantia gelatinosa (SG) in the dorsal horn of the spine 
acts a s a gate control system before afferents influence T cells.28 T cells then activa te 
the system responsible for response an d perception.28 Large -diameter afferent nerve 
fibers (facilitates SG) and small -diameter afferent nerve fibers (inhibits SG) influence  
T cells.30 TENS gives the clinician the option to select the depolarization of a fferents 
nerves through the adjustment of  parameters of electrical current deliver with 
electrodes through the skin.30 Depolarizing large -diameter (A -beta) sensory afferent 
nerves via sensory TENS can help gate or block noxious input.30,31,32  TENS has bee n 
used for treating subclinical pain base d on studies that have found superiority of 
TENS over placebo for chronic musculoskeletal pain.33 Most importantly for our 
study, TENS  is non-prescriptive battery -powered device that uses self -adhering 
electrodes on  the surface of the skin to deliver elect rical current. TENS is often self -
administered, affordable and safe when compared to medications.23 
 
 6 Despite electrical stimulation for  pain modulation has been used for many years, 
there is an “efficacy -impasse” for  clinical utilization of TENS, despite fi fty years of 
published research.34 There is an urgent need for randomized controlled trials to 
investigate TENS effectiveness.34 Based  on this need the purpose of this study is to 
investigate the effects of electrot herapy for improving cervical spine propr ioception, 
reduce pain, anxiety , and disability in adults with subclinical neck or upper quadrant 
pain.  
b. Objectives.  
1) To measure the  immediate and short -term effects of TENS on subclinical neck or 
upper quadrant p ain with the VAS, anxiety with the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory for 
Adults ™, disability with neck disability index (NDI), disability and cervical spine 
proprioception Noraxon  3D Inertial Motion Capture System in subjects 20 -40 years 
of age.  
2) To measure pain, anxiety, disability , and cervical s pine proprioception in subjects 
with and without neck or upper quadrant pain.  
3) To compare compliance of TENS home usage in groups wi th and without short 
message system (SMS), text message, reminders.  
c. Procedures in volved (Research Interventions)  
There wil l be thr ee groups as follows: twenty subjects with no pain in the normal 
group; forty subjects with chronic subclinical neck or upper quad rant pain will be 
randomized into two groups: twenty subjects in the control group, and twenty 
subjects in the interve ntion gr oup. The intervention group will be further randomized 
into two groups: ten subjects will receive instructions for home use of  TEN S with 
daily SMS text message reminders and ten subjects will receive instruc tions for home 
use of TENS without SMS te xt messa ge reminders. We will aim for an equal 
distribution of males and females in each group.  
 
First ses sion (Day  1): Before startin g the procedures, participants complaining of pain 
that are greater than 4/10 in the VAS will be excluded from the study a s this will be 
greater of what we consider to be subclinical pain based on literature review and if 
the pa in has b een present less tha n three months. In addition, if participants with pain 
less than 4/10 pain receiv ing clinical pain treatment, have taken p ain medication 
 
 7 within six hours of first session, have acute pain or contraindications for electrical 
stimulation would be excluded fr om the study.  Following completion of the signing 
procedures, all participants w ill be given brief explanations before ad ministration of 
the questionnaires.  
First, participants in the normal group (20 subjects) will first be in structed  to 
complete the VAS  for pain, a subjective measure of pain intensity consisting of a 10 
centimeter ( cm) line with anchor statements on the le ft (no pain) and extreme pain on 
the right. Pain scores will be determined by measuring the distance in cm  from “n o 
pain” to the parti cipant’s anchor point.  In this group the score must be “no pain” or 0 
cm.Particip ants randomly assigned to the control g roup (20 subjects) will first be 
instructed to complete the VAS for pain  with a score less than 4/10 requir ed. 
Participants randomly assigned to the intervention group (10 subjects) that will 
receive daily SMS  text me ssage  reminders  for compliance during intervention  will 
first be instructed to complete the VAS for pain  with a score less than 4/10 required.  
Participant s randomly assign ed to the intervention group (10 subjects) that will not 
receive daily SMS text messa ge reminders  for compliance during in tervention will 
first be instructed to complete the VAS for pain  with a score less than 4/10 required.  
Next, all part icipants in all g roups will complete 2 self-report questionnaires 
beginning with  the STAI -form Y which is a definitive clinical m easure of state and 
trait anxiety in adults. Form Y has 20 items for assessing trait anxiety and 20 for state  
anxiety . All items are r ated on a 4 -point scale (e.g., from “Almost Never” to “Almost 
Always”). Higher score s indicate greater anxiety.  
Next, all participants in all groups will complete the NDI questionnaire which 
consist of 10 sections  (pain intensity, personal  care, lifting, w ork, headaches, 
concentration, sleeping, driving, reading and recreation ) with quest ions that are 
measure in a 6 -point sca le from 0 (no disability) to 5 ( full disability ). The numeric 
responses will be added with a score varying fr om 0 -50 where 0 is consid ered “no 
activity limitation” and 50 is considered “complete disability.”  Furthermor e, 0-4 (no 
disability), 5 -14 (mild dis ability), 15 -24 (moderate disability), 25 -34 (severe 
disability) and greater than 35 (complete disability).  
Next, all participants in all groups will be familiarized with the  Noraxon 
myoMotionTM system instrument that utilizes inertial measurement units (I MUs) to 
 
 8 measure angles of motion in joints which will measure c ervical spine proprioception 
utilizing the joi nt posit ion error (JPE) t est. 
Participants in the normal group will not receive any interventions  in the lab or at 
home and will not receive  educa tion on the use of TENS equipment.  
Participants in the control  group will not receive any interventions  in the lab or at 
home and will  not receive  education on the use of TENS equipment.  
Participants in the intervention  group  with daily SMS text mes sage reminders  will 
be provided with a TENS  unit by the investigators  for home  use for a total  of 29 days  
and instru cted by a license  physical therapist f or its use and safety. In addition, you 
will be provided with a daily lo g sheet to track its use while receiving SMS text 
message reminders fo r compliance . Then , the participants in th is intervention  group 
will receive a  30-minute  high-frequency sensory TENS  treatment in lab  on the pain 
site in the neck and upper quadrant are a. After the 30 -minute high-frequency sensory  
TENS treatment, the participants in t he intervention group will again complete the 
VAS, STAI, and NDI. Also, cervical spine propri oception  will be measured wit h 
Noraxon myoMotionTM system instrument  utilizing th e JPE test .  
Participants in the interventio n group  without daily SMS text message  reminders  
will be  provided with a TENS unit by the investiga tors for home use  for a total  of 29 
days and instructed by a license physical ther apist for its use and safety. I n addition, 
you will be provided with a dail y log sheet to tr ack its use without  receiving SMS text 
message reminders fo r compliance.  Then, the participants in th is intervention  group 
will receive a  30-minute  high-frequency s ensory TENS  treatment in lab  on the pain 
site in the neck and upper quadran t area. After the  30-minute high-frequency sensory 
TENS treatment, the participants in the intervention group will again complete the 
VAS, STAI, and NDI. Also, cervical spine propri oception  will be measured with 
Noraxon myoMotionTM system instrument  utiliz ing the JPE test .  
 
Session 2 (1st follow up)  (Day 8) : Participants  will return on  day eight . Parti cipants in 
the normal group  will be asked to complete  again complete the VAS, STAI, and NDI. 
Also, cervical s pine propriocep tion will be measured with Noraxon myoMo tionTM 
system instrument utilizing the JPE test.  Partic ipants  will not re ceive any 
intervent ions in the lab .  
Participants in the control group will be asked to complete again complete the 
VAS, STAI, and N DI. Also, cervical spine proprioception will be mea sured with 
 
 9 Noraxon myoMotionTM system instrum ent utilizing the JPE test. Pa rticipants will 
not receive any interventions in the lab.  
Participants  in the intervention group with daily SMS text message remin ders will 
be asked to complete again complete the V AS, STAI, and NDI. Also, cervical spine 
proprioception will be measured wit h Noraxon myoMoti onTM  system instrum ent 
utilizing the JPE t est. Participants will not receive any interventions in the lab.  
Partic ipants  in the intervention group without daily SMS text message reminders  
will be asked to complete again complete the VAS, ST AI, and NDI. Also , cervical 
spine proprioception will be me asured with Noraxon myoMotionTM system 
instrum ent utilizing the JPE tes t. Particip ants will not receive any interventions in the 
lab. 
 
Phone/Email follow up :  Participants in the normal , control a nd intervention ( with no 
SMS text message reminders) groups  will be contacted by e -mail and SMS text 
message during the seventh day  period  at least  one before retu rning for session two 
on the eight  day and at least three times before returning for the  last session on day 
thirty . 
Participants in the interventi on group (with SMS text reminders for compliance) 
will be contacted via SMS t ext message  daily for compliance  with high-frequency 
sensory TENS during the seven -day period before session two and dur ing the twenty -
one-day period before last session.  We will send a text message to the personal 
phone . Investigators will be available th rough phone , text message or ema il to answer 
any questions  participants  may have.  
 
Last session  (Day 30) : Participants  will return on d ay thirty. Participants in the  
normal group  will be asked to complete  again complete the VAS, STAI, and NDI. 
Also, cervi cal spine proprioception will be measured wit h Noraxon myoMotionTM 
system instrument utilizing the JPE test.  Partic ipants will not re ceive any 
interventions  in the lab  and will be  given a  $50 gift card.  
Participants in the control  group will be asked to co mplete again complete the 
VAS, STAI, and NDI.  Also, cervical spine proprioception will be measured with 
Noraxon myoMotio nTM system instru ment utilizing the JPE test. Participants will 
not receive any interventions in the lab  and will be given a  $50 gift ca rd. 
 
 10 Partici pants  in the intervention group wi th daily SMS text message reminders  will 
be asked to complete again complet e the VAS, STAI, and NDI. Also, cervical spine 
propriocepti on will be measured with Noraxon myoMotionTM system instrum ent 
utilizing the JPE test.  They will return the TENS unit and the daily log sheet  to the 
investigators . Participants will not receive any  interventions in  the lab. and will be 
given a  $50 gift car d. 
Participants  in the intervention group without daily SMS text message remi nders 
will be asked to complete again complet e the VAS, STAI, and NDI. Also, cervical 
spine proprioception will be measu red with Noraxon myoM otionTM system 
instrum ent utilizing th e JPE test.  They will return the TENS unit and the daily log 
sheet  to the inv estigators .  Participants will not receive an y interventions in the lab.  
and will be given a  $50 gift card.  
d. Alternative procedures, if any, t hat are not included in the study but might be 
advantageous to the subject.  
n/a 
e. Concise review  of literature that supports th e rationale , objectives, and 
methodology of the proposed study.  
As defined by the IASP pain is “an unpleasant sensory and emotion al experience 
associated with, or resembling that associated with, actual or p otential tissue 
damag e.” (IASP, 2021)  and one of the most c ommon reasons people seek medical 
care is chronic pain. Approximately 50 million adults i n United Stated have chronic 
pain affecting daily lives1 posting public health problems in costs of pharmaco logical 
managemen t.2,3 The financial cost to car e for peopl e with chronic pain is more costly 
than diabetes, cardiovascular and cancer combined.4,5 
Chronic pain is persistent or recurrent pain that last longer than 3 months in one 
or more locations in the body even beyond the period of the ex pected healing 
phase.6,7 Chronic pain can be affected by biological, psychological and social factors 
that are accompanied by anxiety, depres sion, frustration, deconditioning, functional 
disability, financial problems a nd opioid use pro blem s.8,9 As people experience pain, 
that experience and manifestation of pain is unique to each individual and includes 
physical a nd psychological factors7 maki ng the managing pain and chronic pain can a 
difficult thing to achieve.1  
 
 11 Facing an opioid epid emic , the C DC report s that studies of 2 we eks to 6 months 
in duration that utilized effective non -pharmacological treatments for ch ronic pain  
were effective .10 Among the recommendations from the CDC for non -opioid and non -
pharmacological t reatments for pai n, physical therapy is included .10,11 As physical 
therapists we find imperative to reinforce the use of  non-pharmacologic options 
for pain relief in people that are tackling the difficult task of managing their pain to 
continue with their normal lives.  
As mentioned previousl y, one of the most com mon reasons people seek medical 
care is chronic pain;1 however, subclinical pain (mild, l ow irritability) generally doe s 
not prompt people to seek medical treatment12,13,14 Subclinical pain can be measured  
by the VAS score of ≤3.4/10.15 In addition, non -pharmacological treatments in 
physical therapy for chronic subclinical pain have not been studied extensively.  Pain 
can lea d to anxiety8,9 (which is often treated with pharmacological interventions) and 
avoidance of m ovement. Pain and local inflammation in the cervical spine or upper 
quadrant, coupled with avoidance of movement, can lead to reduced cervical spine 
proprioceptio n. Pain and anxiety are often treated with pharmacological interventions.  
We are interested in  learning more about people living with “subclinical” pain. 
According to Grant et al and Browne et al.16,17 people with neck pain but are not yet 
receiving any tr eatment as having minor musculoskeletal or “subclinical” pain. 
Subclinical pain may increase a nxiety18,19 and affect movement and also  can lead 
to anxiety, disability and impaired neck proprioception12,14,20,21 
People may as what those non -pharmacologic op tions that physical therapy can 
offer for pain management, especially for untreated subclinica l pain? In the field of 
physical therapy  biophysical agents are agents that apply forms of energy to 
“modulate or decrease pain” along with the reduction of “risk  factors and 
complications; enhance health, wellness, or fitness; enhance or maintain physical  
performance; or prevent or remediate im pairments in body functions and structures, 
activity limitations, or participation restrictions.”22 Within the group of bi ophysical 
agents is the application and use of electrical currents, more specifically  TENS.22 
TENS is the delivery of electrical curr ent through intact skin to stimulate 
peripheral nerves.23 TENS delivers electrical currents through the skin with the 
objective to stimulate peripheral nerves to prevent the transmission of nociceptive 
information to  the brain and by this process achieve p ain relief.24,25,26,27 One of the 
 
 12 most accepted theories for the modulation of pain with the use of TENS is the “gate 
control theory of pain” by Melzack and Wall published in 1965.28,29 which explains 
pain relief by electrical stimulation.28 The authors pr oposed that by using electrical 
currents to stimulate low -threshold A -beta axons, it will reduce pain by pre -venting 
the transmission of nociceptive information in the spinal cord and brainstem.23 This 
theory also pr oposed that the SG in the dorsal horn of  the spine acts as a gate control 
system before afferents influence T cells.28 T cells then activate the system 
responsibl e for response and perception.28 Large -diameter afferent nerve fibers 
(facilitates SG) and sma ll-diameter afferent nerve fibers (inhib its SG) influence T 
cells.30 TENS gives the clinician the option to select the depolarization of afferents 
nerves through the adjustment of parameters of electrical current deliver with 
electrodes through the skin.30 Depolarizing large -diameter (A -beta) se nsory afferent 
nerves via sensory TENS can help gate or block noxious input.30,31,32   TENS has been 
used for treating sub clinical pain based on studies that have found superiority of 
TENS over placebo for chronic mu sculoskeletal pain.33 Most importantly f or our 
study, TENS is non -prescriptive battery -powered device that uses self -adhering 
electrodes on the surface of the ski n to deliver electrical current. TENS is often self -
administered, affordable and safe when com pared to medications.23 
Despite electric al stimulation for pain modulation has been used for many years, 
there is an “efficacy -impasse” for clinical utilization o f TENS, despite fifty years of 
published research.34 There is an urgent need for randomized co ntrolled trials to 
investigate TENS effe ctiveness.34 Based on this need the purpose of this study is to 
investigate the effects of electrotherapy for improving ce rvical spine proprioception, 
reduce pain, anxiety , and disability in adults with subclinical n eck or upper quadrant 
pain.  
f. If an Invest igational Device (ID) is involved, provide the following information: 
(1) name of device, (2) manufacturer, (3) status wit h Food and Drug 
Administration and ID#, (4) review of animal studies and previous human 
studie s, (5) reported adverse effects.  
n/a 
 
9. DATA COLLECTION  
The study will be conducted in th e Neuroscience Research Laboratory in the SAHP - 
Room NH A -712, Loma Linda,  California . Informed consent will be obtained prior to 
 
 13 the beginning of the study by the grad uate student investigator and other IRB 
approved researchers.  Participants will be recruited if they are adults (males and 
females) aged 20-40 years old with  no pain for the normal group and with neck or 
upper quadrant pain no greater than 4/10 in the VAS for longer than three months, not 
receiv ing clinical pain treatment, have not taken pain medication within six hours of 
first session, have acute pain or contrain dications for TENS.  
Study participants will be assessed on visits one, tw o and three (visit th ree will be at 
the end of the thirty -day period ).  
During participant’s visit one , two and three  the following clinical assessments will 
be provided:  
- The VAS f or pain, a subjective measure of pain intensity  
- The STAI -form Y is a definitive clinical mea sure of state and trait anxiety in adult s. 
- The NDI questionnaire that measures neck disability.  
- JPE test  which will measure cervical spine proprioception  through the Noraxon 
myoMotionTM system instrument . 
 
10. LABELING & STORAGE OF DATA & SPECIMENS  
Hard co pies will be stored in a locked file cab inet in a locked room in the clinic and 
computer data will be stored on an encrypted computer in a locked room in the clin ic.  
 
11. DATA ANALYSIS  
All data will be analyzed using SPSS version 2 8.0. For quantitative data, we will use  
the statistical test ANOVA a nd for descriptive statistics we will use means and 
standard deviations.  Also, an expert statistician will be consulted to  accurately 
analyze and interpret the results. The alpha level will be set at 0.05.  
 
12. RISK AND INJURY  
Participating in this study will involve the following risks:  this study may involve 
breach of your confidentiality, risk of falls, risk of fatigue during  study procedures 
and discomfort with the application of pain reducing electrical stimulation . This study 
may involve breach of your c onfidentiality : your information will be kept in a locked 
cabinet , in a locked office  and store on a secure drive . Risk of falls: all reasonable 
attempts will be made to p revent you from falling including superv ision, as someone 
will stand closely beside y ou to provide you with physical assistance as needed , the 
floor in the neuro science research laboratory is not slippery. Risk of fatigue during 
 
 14 study procedures: you wil l be offered rest breaks regularly if th e investi gators notice 
signs of fatigue on you.  You will be instructed on the use and application of pain 
reducing electr ical stimulation device.   
 
13. BENEFIT (S) 
We expect that participants will experience improvements  in cervical spine range of 
motion and p ropriocept ion, decreased anxiety and neck disabi lity, and all components 
of improving wholeness and health as participants  carry out functional activities.  The 
expected benefits of this study include the improve of q uality of life and functional 
mobility i n people w ith neck chronic pain. In addition, th e study may provide 
evidence of the efficacious use of electrical stimulat ion as a non -pharmacological 
option for the management of chronic pain. This study is expected  to provide through 
electrical stimulati on an acce ssible, affordable, self -administered and non -
pharmacological option for the management of chronic pain without the need to go to 
a clinic for the application of electrical stimulation.  
 
14. COMPENSATION  
Partic ipants will receive a $50 gift card at t he co mplet ion of the study.  
 
15. CONFIDENTIALITY  
Efforts will be made to keep participants’ personal information confidential,  but we 
cannot guarantee absolute confidentiality. We will use a pseudonym throughout the 
study for all recorded data so participant’s  actual na me will not be used. Participants 
will not be identified by name in any publications describing the results of t his study. 
Data in hard copy will be kept in a locked file cabinet , in a locked office  and 
electronic data will be  store d on a secure  drive  and password protected.  
 
16. LITERATURE REVIEW  
As defined by the IASP pain i s “an unpleasant sensory and emotional expe rience 
associated with, or resembling that associated with, actual or potential tissue 
damage. ” (IASP, 2021) and one of the most commo n reasons p eople seek medical 
care is chronic pain. Approximately 50 million ad ults in United Stated have chronic 
pain aff ecting daily lives1 posting public health problems in costs of pharmacological 
management.2,3 The financial cost to care for people wi th chronic pain is more costly 
than diabetes, cardiovascular and cancer combine d.4,5 
 
 15 Chronic pain is persistent or recurre nt pain that last longer than 3 months in one 
or more locations in the body even beyond the pe riod of the expected healing 
phase.6,7 Chronic pain  can be affected by biological, psychological and social factors 
that are accompanied by anxiety, depression, f rustration, deconditioning, functional 
disability, financial problems and opioid use problems.8,9 As people experience pain, 
that expe rience and manifestation of pain is unique to each individual and includes 
phys ical and psychological factors7 making the managing pain and chronic pain can a 
difficult thing to achieve.1  
Facing an opioid epidemic, the CDC reports that  studies of 2 weeks to 6 months  
in duration that utilized effective non -pharmacological treatments for chronic pain  
were effective .10 Among th e recommendations from the CDC for non -opioid and non -
pharmacological treatments for pain, phy sical therapy is included.10,11 As physi cal 
therapi sts we find imperative to reinforce the use of  non-pharmacologic opt ions 
for pain relief in people that are tac kling the difficult task of managing their pain to 
continue with their normal lives.  
As menti oned previously, one of the most common reasons peo ple seek medical 
care is chronic pain;1 however, subclinical pain (m ild, low irritability) generally does 
not p rompt people to seek medical treatment.12,13,14 Subclinical pain can be measured  
by the VAS  score of ≤3.4/10.15 In addition, non -pharmacological treatments in 
physical therapy for chronic subclinical pain have not  been studied extensively.  Pain 
can lead to anxiety8,9 (which is often treated with pharmacological interventions) and 
avoidance of move ment. Pain and local inflammation in the cervical s pine or upper 
quadrant, coupled with avoidance of movement, can lead  to reduced cervical spine 
proprioception. Pain and anxiety are often treated with pharmacological interventions.  
We are interested in le arning more about people living with “subclinical” pain. 
According to Grant et al and Browne et al.16,17 people with ne ck pain but are not yet 
receiving any treatment as having minor musculoskeletal or “subclinical” pain. 
Subclinical pain may increase anxi ety18,19 and affect movement and also can  lead 
to anxiety, disability and impaired neck proprioception.12,14,20,21 
Peop le may as what those non -pharmacologic options that physical therapy can 
offer for pain management, especially for untreated subclinical pain? In the field of 
physical therapy biophysical agents are agents that apply forms of energy to 
“modulate or decreas e pain” along with the reduction of “risk factors and 
 
 16 complications; enhance health, wellness, or fitness; enhance or maintain physical 
performance; or prevent or remediate impairments in body functions and structures, 
activity limitations, or participatio n restrictions.”22 Within the group of biophysical 
agents is the application and use of electrical currents, more specifically  TENS.22 
TENS is the delivery of electrical current through i ntact skin to stimulate 
peripheral nerves.23 TENS delivers electrica l currents through the skin with the 
objective to stimulate peripheral nerves to prevent the transmission of nociceptive 
information to t he brain and by this process achieve pain relief.24,25,26,27 One of the 
most accepted theories for the modulation of pa in with the use of TENS is the “gate 
control theory of pain” by Melzack and Wall published in 1965.28,29 which explains 
pain relief by el ectrical stimulation.28 The authors proposed that b y using electrical 
currents to stimulate low -threshold A -beta axons,  it will reduce pain by pre -venting 
the transmission of nociceptive information in the spinal cord and brainstem.23 This 
theory also prop osed that the SG in the dorsal horn of the spine ac ts as a gate control 
system before afferents influence T cells.28 T cells then activate the system 
responsible for response and perception.28 Large -diameter afferent nerve fibers 
(facilitates SG) and small -diameter afferent nerve fibers (inhibits SG) influ ence T 
cells.30 TENS gives the clinician the option to select the de polarization of afferents 
nerves through the adjustment of parameters of electrical current deliver with 
electrodes through the skin.30 Depolarizing large -diameter (A -beta) sensory afferen t 
nerves via sensory TENS can help gate or block noxious input.30,31 ,32 TENS  has been 
used for treating subclinical pain based on studies that have found superiority of 
TENS over placebo for chronic muscul oskeletal pain.33 Most importantly for our 
study, T ENS is non -prescriptive battery -powered device that uses self -adheri ng 
electrodes on the surface of the skin to deliver electrical current. TENS is often self -
administered, affordable and safe when compare d to medications.23 
Despite electrical stimulation for pain modulation has been used for many years, 
there is an “effic acy-impasse” for clinical utilization of TENS, despite fifty years of 
published research.34 There is an urgent need for randomized contro lled trials to 
investigate TENS effectiveness.34 Based on this need the purpose of this study is to 
investigate the eff ects of electrotherapy for improving cervical spine proprioception, 
reduce pain, anxiety , and disability in adults with subclinical neck or upper quadrant 
pain.  
 
 17  
 REFERENCES  
 
1. Centers for D isease Control and Prevention Website. 
https://www.cdc.gov/learnmore feelbetter/programs/chronic -pain.htm. Accessed 
April 8, 2022.  
2. Cheatle MD. Assessing suicide risk in patients with chronic pain and depres sion. J 
Fam Pract.  2014;63(6 Suppl):S6 -S11.  
3. Rasu R S, Vouthy K, Crowl AN, et al. Cost of pain medication to treat adult  
patients with nonmalignant chronic pain in the United States. J Manag Care 
Pharm . 2014;20(9):921 -928. 
4. U.S. Institute of Medicine Committ ee on Advancing Pain Research, Care, and 
Education:  Relieving pain in America: a blueprint for transforming prevention,  
care, education, and research, Washington, DC, 2011, National Academies Press.  
5. Gaskin DJ, Richard P. The economic costs of pain in the U nited States. J Pain  
2012; 13(8)715–24. 
6. Treede RD, R ief W, Barke A, et al. Chronic pain as a symptom or a disease: the 
IASP Classification of Chronic Pain for the International Classification of Diseases 
(ICD -11). Pain . 2019;160(1):19 -27. 
7. Bellew JW, Michlov itz SL, Nolan TP. Michlovitz's Modalities for Thera peutic 
Intervention . 7th ed. Pages 356. Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis  Company; 2022.  
8. Apfelbaum JL, Chen C, Mehta SS, et al. Postoperative pain experience: results 
from a national survey suggest postoperati ve pain continues to be undermanaged. 
Anesth Analg . 2003; 97(2):534–540. 
9. George SZ, Greenspan AI: Nonpharmacological man agement of pain: convergence 
in priorities fuels the drive for more evidence. Phys Ther.  2018;98(5):287 –289.  
10. Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Cho u R. CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for 
Chro nic Pain — United States, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep . 2016;65(No. RR -
1):1–49. 
11. Choose PT Website. https://www.choosept.com/why -physical -therapy/safe -pain-
management . Accessed  April 8, 2022.  
12. Kelley MJ, Shaffer MA , Kuhn JE, et al. Shoulder pain and mobility defici ts: 
adhesive capsulitis. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2013;43(5):A1 –31. 
 
 18 13. Haavik H, Murphy B. Subclinical neck pain and the effects of cervical 
manipulation on elbow joint position sense. J Manipulative Physio l Ther . 
2011;34(2):88 –97.  
14. Lee H, Nicholson LL, Ada ms RD, Bae SS. Proprioception and rotation range 
sensitization assoc iated with subclinical neck pain. Spine . 2005;30(3):E60 –7. 
15. Boonstra AM, Schiphorst Preuper HR, Balk GA, Stewart RE. Cut -off points for 
mild, moderate, and severe pain on the visual analogu e scale for pain in patients 
with chronic musculoskeletal pain. Pain . 2014;155(12):2545 –2550. 
16. Grant R, Forrester C, Hides J. Screen based keyboard operation: the adverse 
effects on the neural system. Aust J Physiother . 1995;41(2):99 –107.  
17. Browne CD, Nolan BM, Faithfull DK. Occupational repetition strain injuries. 
Guideline s for diagnosis and management. Med J Aust . 1984;140(6):329 –332.  
18. Rhudy JL, Meagher MW. Fear and anxiety: divergent effects on human pain  
thresholds. Pain . 2000;84(1):65 –75.  
19. Metzger S, Po liakov B, Lautenbacher S. Differential effects of experimentally 
induced anxiety and fear on pain: the role of anxiety sensitivity. J Pain Res . 
2019 ;12:1791 –1801.  
20. Lucchetti G, Oliveira AB, Mercante JP, Pe res MF. Anxiety and fear -avoidance in 
musculoskelet al pain. Curr Pain Headache Rep . 2012;16(5):399 –406. 
21. Paulus I, Bruma gne S. Altered interpretation of neck proprioceptive signals in 
persons with subclinical recurrent neck pain. J Rehabil Med . 2008;40(6):4 26–432. 
22. American Physical Therapy Association Websi te. 
https://guide.apta.org/interventions/categories -interventions/bi ophysical -agents. 
Accessed April 8, 2022.  
23. Johnson MI, Claydon LS, Herbison GP, Jones G, Paley CA. Transcutaneous 
electrical nerve stimula tion (TENS) for fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Da tabase 
Syst Rev . 2017;10(10):CD012172.  
24. Arienti C. Is transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) effective in adults 
with fibromyalgia? A Cochrane Review summary with commentary. J 
Musculoskelet Neu ronal Interact . 2019;19(3):250 –252.  
25. Coutaux A. Non -pharmacological treatments for pain relief: TENS and 
acupuncture. Joint Bone Spine . 2017;84(6):657 -661.  
 
 19 26. American Physical Therapy Association. Guide to physical therapist practice. 
Physical Therapy. 2nd ed. Vol. 81, Alexandria (VA): American Physical The rapy 
Association, 2001.  
27. Johnson MI. Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS). Research to 
Support Clinical Practice. 1st ed. Oxford (UK): Oxford University Press, 2014.  
28. Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain m echanisms: a new theory. Science . 
1965;150(3699):97 1–9.  
29. Sluka KA, Walsh D. Transcutaneous electrical nerve st imulation: basic science 
mechanisms and clinical effectiveness. J Pain . 2003;4(3):109 –121. 
30. Draper DO, Jutte LS, Knight KL. Therapeutic Modalities:  The Art and Science.  3rd 
ed. Pages 135,140,261,325 . Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2021.  
31. Schmitt LC, Schmi tt LA, Rudolph KS. Management of a patient with a forearm 
fracture and median nerve injury. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther . 2004 ;34(2):47 –56. 
32. Bellew JW , Michlovitz SL, Nolan TP. Michlovitz's Modalities for Therapeutic 
Intervention . 6th ed. Pages 307,339. Philad elphia, PA: F.A. Davis Company; 2016.  
33. Johnson M, Martinson M. Efficacy of electrical nerve stimulation for chronic 
musculos keletal pain: a meta -analysis of randomized contro lled trials. Pain . 
2007;130(1 -2):157 –165. 
34. Johnson MI. Resolving Long -Standing Uncer tainty about the Clinical Efficacy of 
Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation (TENS) to Relieve Pain: A 
Comprehensive R eview of Factors Influe ncing Outcome. Medicina  (Kaunas). 
2021;57(4):378.  
 