Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 1 of 14   
PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Neurocircuit Strategy to Decrease Cocaine Cue Reactivity  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
• Bashar W. Badran, PhD  
 
 
 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 2 of 14    
1.0 Objectives  / Specific Aims  
 
A primary cause of relapse to cocaine use is the high motivation to seek drug produced by cocaine -
associated cues. Cue -induced craving is associated with cue -induced elevated corticostriatal activity. 
Preclinical models demonstrate that decreasing activity  in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and ventral 
striatum (i.e. nucleus accumbens core), henceforth the “corticostriatal circuit,” can block cue -induced 
cocaine seeking. As an extension of these preclinical data, the scientific premise of Project 4 is t hat 
targeted inhibition of the corticostriatal circuit will dampen cue -induced cocaine craving in individuals with 
cocaine use disorder.    
The overarching goal of this project is to evaluate the efficacy of continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS) 
as a tool to restore corticostriatal circuitry function and dampen cocaine cue reactivity among treatment -
engaged individuals. cTBS is a non -invasive brain stimulation tool that induces long -term depression (LTD) 
of neural excitability in the area stimulated an d in monosynaptic targets. Recent data from our group 
demonstrates that a single dose of cTBS to the mPFC selectively decreases activity in t he ventral striatum 
and craving. The efficacy of cTBS as a tool to modulate the striatum depends upon connectivity between 
the frontal cortex and the striatum. Specifically, the experiments described in this proposal will determine 
if LTD -like cTBS deliver ed over mPFC decreases cocaine cue reactivity in individuals with cocaine use 
disorder . We will evaluate  our novel intervention  through a double blinded ( ACTIVE cTBS vs. SHAM;) 
study in 160 cocaine dependent individuals. The chance of being random ly assign ed to any given group 
within one of the two treatment  arms is 1:1. All individuals will undergo a  screening visit  (Visit 1; V1) , and 
a baseline fMRI visit (Visit 2; V2) that will assess rsFC  and drug cue -reactivity . Following Visit 2, individuals 
will be randomly assigned to one of 2 to receive  either : 1) Active cTBS  alone , or 2) Sham cTBS  alone . 
Both group s of participants will undergo a second fMRI visit (Visit 3; V3) that will assess resting -state  and 
drug cue -reactivity: once at the beginning of the session and again immediately following Active cTBS or 
Sham cTBS.  Research staff will follow -up with participants via phone to assess current drug use and 
craving at 1 -day, 1 -week, 2 -week and 3 -weeks post -V3. 
 
Aim – To evaluate mPFC cTBS as a tool to modulate corticostriatal rsFC and drug cue reactivity in 
treatment -seeking cocaine users. Rationale:  Drug cues reliably activate the mPFC & striatum in multiple 
classes of substance users, including cocaine users. This contributes to craving and subsequent relapse. 
Through an LTD -like form of cTBS it is possible to decrease activity in the mPFC and the s triatum and 
dampen self -reported craving in chronic cocaine users. Hypothesis:  LTD-like cTBS to the mPFC of 
individuals with cocaine use disorder will decrease cocaine cue -reactivity BOLD re sponse in corticostriatal 
nodes (i.e. mPFC, ventral striatum)  and enhance corticostriatal rsFC .     
 
2.0 Background  
 
This project utilizes a multi -disciplinary approach with complementary design features to allow for the 
bidirectional translation of findings of treatment effects on neurobiology (animal) and neurocognition 
(human) on corticostriatal circuits. Findings wil l provide the foundation for identifying individual and 
combined neural mechanisms of action of cTBS and will inform the optimization of novel individually -
guided  cTBS for treating cocaine use disorder.  
 
3.0  Intervention  to be studied  
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is an FDA -approved, non -pharmacological intervention for 
Depresison, OCD, and Smoking Cessaion. It is a non -invasive form of brain stimulation that delivers 
magnetic pulses to the human brain to change brain excitabi lity, and ultimately change behavior. TMS is 
not FDA -approve for cocaine use disorder, however PI Dr. Badran is a leading expert in brain stimulation 
and the MUSC IRB, as well as the FDA, have determined repetitive TMS to be a non -significant risk 
interven tion. A specific form (parameter) of TMS known as continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS) will 
be utilized as the intervention in this study.  
 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 3 of 14  Potential Risks of TMS are minor, however include:  
1). Potential risk of a seizure: The major risk using repetitive TMS subjects is the possibility of inducing a 
seizure. We have now studied and given rTMS to more than several hundred subjects over past 15 years. 
None of these patients has developed a seiz ure. We will exclude patients with a prior history of seizures.  
2). Potential for scalp discomfort and headaches: Some people report mild discomfort when the magnetic 
pulses are applied over the scalp. A small number of people (~5%) report headache following TMS. 
However, the headaches are temporary and manageable with  common over -the-counter pain remedies.  
3). Potential hearing loss: The discharge of the rTMS coil generates a high -energy click that may cause 
cochlear damage. Foam earplugs can protect against these changes and will be worn by the subjects and 
the researchers present during TMS sessions.  
The research team is highly experienced in administering TMS and Dr. Badran has been administering 
TMS for over 10 yeas in thousands of sessions. Furthermore, the team will properly pre -screen participants 
to ensure safety and minimize risk.  
 
 
4.0  Study Endpoints  
Change in fMRI brain response.  
 
5.0  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria / Study Population  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Age 18-65 
2. English fluency  
4. Meet criteria for cocaine use disorder (CUD), as determined by DSM -V criteria, using the Structured 
Clinical Interview for DSM -V. 
5. Enrolled in an intensive outpatient treatment program (MUSC Center for Drug and Alcohol Programs 
Intensive Outpatient Program (CDAP -IOP), currently engaged in treatment for substance related 
problems , or interested in seeking treatment for substance related problems . 
6. Able to read and understand questionnaires and informed consent  
7. Lives within 50 miles of the study site.  
8. Is not at elevated risk of seizure (i.e., does not have a history of seizures, is not currently prescribed 
medications known to lower seizure threshold)  
9. Does not have metal objects in the head/neck.  
10. Does not have a history of traumatic brain injury, including a head injury that resulted in hospitalization, 
loss of consciousness for more than 10 minutes, or having ever been informed that they have an epidural, 
subdural, or subarachnoid hemorrhage.  
11. Does not have a history of claustrophobia leading to significant clinical anxiety symptoms.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 
1. Past head injury or primary neurological disorder associated with MRI abnormalities, including 
dementia, MCI, brain tumors, epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease, or demyelinating diseases  
2. Any physical or intellectual disability affecting completion of assessments  
3. Any contraindication to MRI  
4. Current or past psychosis  
5. ECT in last 6 months  
6. Among females, pregnancy at screening will be exclusionary. Females of child bearing potential must 
agree to undergo a pregnancy test 72 hours prior to the fMRI scanning session and regularly before and 
during the medication trial. They must further agree to notify the study physician or PA if they become 
pregnant during the study . 
7. Clinical  Institute  Withdrawal  Assessment  (CIWA -Ar) scale  will be used  to assess  alcohol  withdrawal.  
Individuals  with CIWA  > 8 will be excluded.  
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 4 of 14  8. Individuals  with unstable  medical  illness  (e.g.,  hypertension,  diabetes,  myocardial  infarction)  
9. Has current suicidal ideation or homicidal ideation.  
10. Has the need for maintenance or acute treatment with any psychoactive medication including anti -
seizure medications and medications for ADHD  
11. Suffers from chronic migraines  
12. Any physical or intellectual disability affecting completion of assessments  
 
 
We will not be enrolling vulnerable populations, specifically pregnant women, children, prisoners, or  
institutionalized individuals. We also will not enroll subjects incapable of providing their own consent. 
Should  a potential subject present where there is a concern about their ability to understand study 
procedures and  provide meaningful consent, their cognitive status and understanding of the study will be 
evaluated by Dr. Gray  (Co-I). If there is any concern that the individual may be impaired, they will not be 
eligible for participation and  not enrolled in the study. The rationale will be provided to t he individual as 
well as his or her family members.  Referrals for further evaluation, including urgent or emergent 
evaluation, will be made as needed and clinically  warranted . 
 
6.0 Number of Subjects  
Total enrollment number is 160. We plan to acquire full data sets from 144 individuals (24/group)  to allow 
for a 10% rate of data loss due to motion artifacts in the MRI scanner. This will require 160 individuals to 
be invited  to the consent/screening visit.  
 
7.0 Setting  
All visits will take place on MUSC’s campus at 30 Bee St at the Health Neuroscience Center and the 
Center for Biomedical Imaging.  
 
8.0 Recruitment Methods  
Subjects for this study will be primarily recruited from the MUSC Center for Drug and Alcohol Intensive 
Outpatient Program  (CDAP) . Subjects interested in seeking treatment for substance related  problems will 
also be recruited from advertisements consisting of flyers posted on the MUSC campus and the 
surrounding Charleston community, craigslist postings, posts on social media (i.e., Facebook, Instagram, 
and Twitter)  and Trialfacts, as well as  referrals for treatment to CDAP . Trialfacts will create compliant 
advertisements used in its recruitment strategy. Trialfacts creates a mobile and tablet friendly study web 
page, which is the central destination for all interested participants.  Trialfacts promotes the study to its 
database of 60,000+ volunteers interested in participating in clinical trials. Trialfacts accesses highly 
targeted p articipant  populations by searching online through social media , i.e. Facebook, Instagram, 
YouTube , Reddit, Quora, Craigslist, and Google search es. Trialfacts creates and manages an automated 
pre-screening  questionnaire that participants complete to determine their eligibility . When a participant is 
deemed eligible based on their responses made in the pre -screening questionnaire, Trialfacts will notify 
the study staff immediately by sending an email with a password protected PDF attachment containing 
the participant’s contact information. Once a participant passes the pre-screening, he/she  will have the 
option of  schedul ing a time for a phone call with one of our research personnel . A separate email 
notification will then be sent when a participant books a time to receive a call from the study staff  to 
schedule an in -person screening visit . All other information from potential participants’ responses will be 
stored in a deidentified referral spreadsheet  in a secure , encrypted Google Drive folder  with restricted 
access  to the study staff only . The first point of contact between the research team  and potential 
participants will be at the first INTAKE visit day 1 (orientation) of the CDAP program  or by telephone or 
email contact initiated by the subject . The research staff will talk to the individuals about the rationale for 
this research, explain the  study, and encourage interested and comfortable individuals to sign up to 
participate. The  exclusion criteria of this research study are designed to minimize risks to participants. 
Medical  and psychiatric evaluations are extensive at the beginning of the trial, and these evaluations  may 
be conducted at unscheduled times when clinically indicated for s afety. Individuals who  meet the 
eligibility criteria and sign up will be contacted for a screening visit  (Study V1), which will be  followed by 
an experimental visit 1  (Study V2)  that will include a MRI . At experimental visit 2 (Study V3) individuals 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 5 of 14  will have an MRI before and after cTBS.  Individuals will be followed up with by telephone 1 day, 1 week, 
2 weeks and 3 weeks after their final visit  (V3).  An informed consent  form which details the study 
requirements, risks, and benefits will be given to the potential  research subject to read and sign.  
 
 
9.0 Consent Process  
We will obtain formal written consent from all new participants enrolled in this project. Following policies 
of the MUSC Institutional Review Board, written informed consent will be obtained and documented by 
the study’s Research Coordinator before any stu dy-related procedures are performed. Informed 
consent will be obtained in a private research office. A study coordinator will review study procedures 
and the consent form with each potential participant. Each individual may take as much time as they 
like to read the consent document and  decide if they do or do not wish to participate. A decision not to 
participate will not affect their participation in other studies at MUSC, nor will it affect their access to 
health care at MUSC. Dr . Badran  and research staff  will review all screening material and determine 
study eligibility for each person.    
 
10.0 Study Design  / Methods  
 
Overview  of study  protocol.  The overarching  goal of Project  4 within  the COCA  is to evaluate  the efficacy  
of brain  stimultion  on addiction  pathophysiology  in corticostriatal  circuitry,  and to bidirectionally  translate  
our findings  with the preclinical  COCA  projects  that are discovering  molecular  and physiological  
mechanisms  of cue-induced  drug seeking  in animal  models.  Extending  prior studies  by our team  and 
leveraging  the intellectual  resources  of the COCA  faculty,  we will investigate  the impact  of active  and sham  
cTBS  on corticostriatal  rsFC , drug cue reactivity  and craving . This will be achieved  through  a double  blind,  
active  sham - and placebo -controlled  study  in cocaine  users  from the community  or that have  enrolled  in 
an intensive  outpatient  treatment  program  (MUSC  Center  for Drug  and Alcohol  Programs  Intensive  
Outpatient  Program  (CDAP -IOP).   Participants  will be randomized  to receive  3600  pulses  of either  active  
or sham  cTBS  alone  without  administration  of any study  medication . The study  will require  3 visits  while  
they are enrolled  in the study . The cTBS  sessions  last 5 minutes  and will occur  immediately  before  their 
intensive  outpatient  visits.  Clinical  Assessments  (see Assessments  below)  and neuroimaging  data will be 
acquired  at 2 timepoints:  Baseline  (V2) and immediately  after cTBS  (V3).  
Primary  hypotheses : Real mPFC  cTBS  will cause  a larger  decrease  in cocaine  cue-evoked  functional  
connectivity  than sham  cTBS.  The relationship  between  baseline  rsFC  and changes  in rsFC  will also be 
investigated  as factors  that mediate  the effects  of cTBS  cocaine  cue reactivity  in the striatum  and craving.   
Participants.  We plan to acquire full data sets from 144 individuals (24/group) to allow for a 10% rate of 
data loss due to motion artifacts in the MRI scanner. This will require 160 individuals to be invited the 
Consent/Screening Visit (V1) (see Targeted Enrollment Plan, Inclusion of Women & Minorities).    This is 
based on a 66% eligibility rate from V1 (screening) to V2, followed by a 90% retention rate from V2 to V3.  
These enrollment and retention rates are b ased on prior studies by Dr. Hanlon in cocaine users which 
have used the MUSC Intensive Outpatient Program as a recruitment source (R01DA036617, 
R21DA041610). T reatment -seeking cocaine -dependent men and women, 18- 65 years old will be enrolled 
through the MUSC intensive outpatient substance abuse treatment program (see below) or their own 
initiated contact from study recruitment advertisements and randomized to receive either real or sham 
cTBS (stratified by gender) . Randomization is appropriate for this sample [14] and therefore used to assign 
participants to experimental  arms.  
MUSC  Intensive  Outpatient  Treatment  Program . (More  details  of this program  are found  in Resources ). 
Briefly,  the program  consists  of 20 total treatment  days  (4 hours/day),  spread  across  4-5 weeks.  
Participants  attend  daily individual  and group  therapy  sessions  with staff certified  in Cognitive  Behavioral  
Therapy,  contingency  management,  motivational  interviewing  and other  established  addiction  treatment  
practices.  Approximately  8-10 cocaine  dependent  individuals  enroll  in the Intensive  Outpatient  Program  
each  month  (60%  male,  84% between  the ages  of 21-45, 10% of whom  are court -ordered).  The retention  
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 6 of 14  rate for cocaine  dependent  individuals  is 72% for the 4-week  outpatient  program,  with 60% attending  1 
month  and 44% attending  2-month  Accountability/Continuity  visits.   Participants  will not be exclusively  
recruited  from this treatment  program  – they will also be recruited  from the community  as we intend  to 
enroll  any adult  that meets  inclusion  criteria.  
Power  analyses  for study  Aim 1—effects  of cTBS  on corticostriatal  rsFC  and cue-reactivity —were  based  
on pilot data from a sham -controlled  crossover  study  in which  interleaved  TMS/MRI  was used  to assess  
functional  connectivity  in cocaine  users  immediately  before  and after they received  real or sham  mPFC  
cTBS  (see Significance).  In these  preliminary  data in 12 cocaine  users,  real cTBS  resulted  in a larger  effect  
on BOLD  signal  in the medial  prefrontal  cortex  (eigenvalues  real cTBS  0.62±0.24  vs. sham  cTBS  
0.33±0.44;  Cohen’s  d=0.72).  Subjects  will be assessed  at 2 time points  (m) with an anticipated  interclass  
correlation  coefficient  (ICC)  of 0.8 for the within  subjects  measures.  The design  effect  accounts  for multiple  
correlated  observations  within  each  subject,  is estimated  to be 1.8 (DE=  [1+(2 -1)0.8]; [15]. To allow  for a 
10% rate of data loss due to motion  artifacts  in the MRI scanner  we have  planned  to enroll  160 individuals . 
Overview  of Experimental  Procedures . 
Visit 1 Procedures:  Informed  Consent,  screening  and Assessments.  Participants  will be introduced  to the 
study  procedures  and asked  to sign an informed  consent  approved  by the Medical  University  of South  
Carolina  Institutional  Review  Board,  prior to official  enrollment  in the study.   Following  informed  consent,  
a series  of assessments  designed  to evaluate  cocaine  dependence  and use, psychiatric  conditions,  and 
mood  will be given  to the participants.  These  include  a health  and physical  examine  conducted  with the 
study  physician  or physician’s  assistant,  urine  pregnancy  test for females,  a urine  drug screen,  CIWA -Ar, 
standard  MUSC  clinical  intake  evaluation  screen  for clinical  substance  dependence  research  which  
includes  medical  history  (used  by the PI), MINI  International  Neuropsychiatric  Interview  [17], TLFB  for 
cocaine,  alcohol,  and marijuana  [18], Center  for Epidemiologic  Studies  Depression  Scale  (CES -D), State -
Trait Anxiety  Inventory  [19], Profile  of Mood  States  [20], cocaine  craving  inventory  [21], Fagerström  Test 
of Nicotine  Dependence  [22] & Modified  Cigarette  Evaluation  Questionnaire  [23],  alcohol  use inventory  
(AUDIT) [24], computer  based  tests  of behavioral  value.   Though  these  are not primary  outcomes,  the 
results  will be used  in post-hoc analyses  of the data.  Surveys  will be filled out by the patient  on tablet  
computers  and data entry  done  directly  via Redcap  Software  to prevent  data loss.  
 
Visit 2 Procedures (MRI 1, Medication initiation). Participants will undergo a baseline MRI scanning session 
and the following sequences will be collected:  
• T1 MPRAGE  (5 min) . High-resolution structural scans will be obtained using an inversion recovery  
GeneRalized Autocalibrating Partial Parallel Acquisition ( GRAPPA)  sequence, 192 slices, voxel size: 1.0 
x 1.0 x 1.0  mm, field of view: 256 mm, section thickness:1.0 mm with no gap, giving an in -plane resolution 
of 256. This sequence will be used for anatomic overlays of the functional data and spatial normalization 
to a standard atlas, TMS coil positioning, and subsequent  voxel -based morphometry. Field Map  (1 min) 
Field Map calculations allow for offline correction of imaging distortion during post -processing. Field map 
configurations will include: flip angle (FA)= 60 degrees, field of view (FOV) = 192 mm; voxel size = 2.0 x 
2.0 x 2.0 mm, 72 contiguous slices 2.0 mm thick.  
 
• Resting -State Functional Connectivity ( 24 min).  The resting -state scan consists of four 6 -minute  runs. 
The first two run s will occur just prior to the cocaine  cue reactivity task and the last two resting -state runs 
will occur immediately after the cocaine cue reactivity task. All participants will be ask ed to keep their eyes 
open and to not fall asleep. Participant’s wakefulness during resting -state scans through the use of a) 
respiratory and heart rate signal and b) eye movement monitoring, in order to ensure participants are not 
sleeping. Data processing.  Resting -state functional connectivity (rsFC) will be assessed using the in-house 
scripts with MATLAB and F SL. First, experimental design variables, pre -processed functional images 
filtered with a 0.01 to 0.08 Hz band -pass filter, and segmented images will be uploaded into the toolbox. 
5-mm radius spheres will be created around a priori regions of interest (ROIs)  (nucleus accumbens, 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 7 of 14  mPFC). Individuals’ WM and CSF templates, heart -rate (HR), respiration rate and movement parameters 
will be included as covariates. rZ scores for each person will be generated and entered into statistical 
models.  
• Functional  MRI Cocaine  Cue Reactivity  Task  (24 min). This task has been  used  in 4 original  research  
publications  by our group  and reliably  activates  orbitofrontal  and medial  prefrontal  regions  [26-28]. They  
will receive  two 12m runs of the task (randomized,  counterbalanced  order  within  groups).  During  both runs 
they will be instructed  to ‘allow’  themselves  to crave  (passive  limbic  engagement) . When  the task begins  
participants  are shown  pseudorandomly  interspersed  blocks  of images:  1) cocaine  images  (COC),  2) 
neutral  images  (NEU) , and 3) pleasant  images  (PLE ), all NEU  and PLE images  will be chromatically  
matched  to the COC  images . Stimuli  are presented  in six blocks  across  two runs,  with each  block  lasting  
3 min and 43 sec per image  type (two block s each  of COC,  NEU,  PLE). Each  block  is followed  by a 6-s 
washout  period,  allowing  the hemodynamic  response  from the previous  block  to decline  before  the next is 
presented.  Scanning  parameters:  Multislice  gradient -echo  echo  planar  imaging  (TR=2 000, TE=3 6 msec,  
field of view of 207 mm, voxel  size 2.0 x 2.0 x 2.0 mm, 69 slices,  2 mm thickness,  no skip).  
 
 
Visit 3 Procedures (MRI 2, cTBS, MRI 3). Following three full days of study medication  for the pretreatment 
arm or at least 24 hrs  for the no pretreatment arm, participants will return to the lab and undergo MRI and 
cTBS procedures as outlined below:  
• T1 MPRAGE, Field Map, Resting -State  Functional Connectivity , and Cocaine Cue Reactivity task  (MRI 
2): These scans will be repeated exactly as done in Visit 2.  
• Continuous  Theta  Burst  Stimulation  to the mPFC  (5 min).  The cTBS  treatment  lasts 5 minutes  and will  
be given before the group therapy session.  Detailed descriptions of the real and active sham cTBS 
paradigm have been reported elsewhere [8-9].  After the MRI scans participants will be escorted into the 
Brain Stimulation room (30 feet away) where the TMS  procedure  will be performed . TMS will be 
administered using a neuronavigational targeting approach via the Brainsight imaging system (Rogue 
Industries). This method allows for the integration of participant's individual structural brain images and 
synchronizes these images in the real -life 3 -D setting using infrared cameras and sensors that enable the 
TMS operator to precisely administer magnetic f ields to an individual's precise brain target with sub -5mm 
accuracy. Furthermore, functional brain targets may be incorporated in the structural imagery in order to 
create a network -based personalized treatment approach. This system is safe and does not ad d any further 
risk to the participant - it simply requires the participant to wear a headband containing infrared sensors to 
be tracked in real -time by the camera. No pictures or video will be recorded by the camera, simply the 
reflections of the infrared laser that return to the camera after coming in contact with sensors which detect 
movement in the 3 -D space.  We will then determine the participant’s resting motor threshold (RMT, the 
minimal amount of stimulation required over the hand area of the primary motor cortex to induce contraction 
of the APB muscle of the hand 50% of the time) via the standardized PEST procedure [29]. During each 
TMS session, we will take a non -identifiable photo of the participants' forehead (eyes covered with an index 
card) to ensure the coil is correctly placed each time they return to the lab. The procedures for acquiring 
the motor threshold, perf orming cortical localization, standardized procedures, blinding, establishing 
standardized paradigms and training regimens for all staff, as well as safety and ring the experimental 
procedures are consistent with our prior publications [8-9, 27,30-32]. We will also publish a Standard 
Operating Procedure document and video file as supplementary material with any publications that arise 
from this project. For continuous theta burst stimulation, participants will receive stimulation over the left 
frontal pole (FP1) (each train: 3 pulse bursts presented at 5Hz, 15 pulses/sec, 600 pulses/train, 60 sec 
intertrain interval; 110% RMT, MagPro) using a figure 8 coi l (Coil Cool -B65 A/P).  This protocol has been 
shown to attenuate BOLD activation in the mPFC and str iatum in cocaine dependent individuals in the past 
[8-9].  
Briefly,  two trains  of either  real or sham  LTD-like cTBS  will be applied  over the left frontal  pole (EEG  
10-20 system:  FP1)  (1 train:  120 sec, 3 pulse  bursts  presented  at 5Hz, 15 pulses/sec,  1800  pulses/train,  
60 sec intertrain  interval;  110%  RMT,  MagPro)  using  a figure -of- 8 coil (Coil Cool-B65 A/P).  During  the real 
and sham  cTBS  treatment  sessions  the amplifier  output  will be escalated  (over  30 seconds)  from 80% to 
110%  RMT  to enhance  tolerability.  The MagVenture  MagPro  system  has an integrated,  active  sham  that 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 8 of 14  passes  current  through  two surface  electrodes  placed  on the scalp.  The electrodes  will be placed  on the 
left frontalis  muscle  for all sessions.  A patient  ID card will randomize  participants  to receive  either  real or 
sham  stimulation.  This system  maintains  blinding  by a gyroscope  in the coil which  indicates  to the clinical  
staff whether  the coil should  be rotated  up or down  for this participant  once  the card is entered  into the 
machine.  One side of the coil is active,  the other  is sham.  The integrity  of the double -blind  procedure  will 
be assessed  by asking  the patients  and study  personnel  rate their confidence  regarding  their assignment  
to real or sham  TMS  (scale  1-10). Immediately  after the cTBS  session:  
• Confidence  in Active  or Sham  cTBS  Assignment  (1min).  Participants  will complete  a form indicating  
their confidence  (scale  1-10) in whether  they are receiving  active  or sham  treatment,  and will be prompted  
to audio  record  a reason  (audio  recordings  are then transcribed  to text, in order  to avoid  handwriting  
recognition  challenges).  Pooled  accuracy  from prior work  in our collaborator’s  laboratory  was 47.6%  
suggesting  that individuals  were  not aware  of the stimulation  being  received.  
 
• T1 MPRAGE,  Field  Map,  Resting -State  Functional  Connectivity , Functional  MRI Cocaine  Cue Reactivity  
Task  (MRI  3): These  scans  will be repeated  exactly  as mentioned  above  for V2 (MRI  1).  
 
• Behavioral  Assessments.  In order  to produce  a clinically  meaningful  effect  of TBS on behavioral  
measures  such  as drug craving,  mood,  or usage  multiple  days  (and likely  multiple  weeks  of TBS treatment  
are required).  Therefore,  brain  based  dependent  measures  are the primary  outcomes  of the study  (as they 
are sensitive  to a single  day of real versus  sham  TBS [39]. For the purpose  of being  thorough  however,  
we will acquire  measurements  of cocaine  craving  (Numerical  rating  scale  1-10) before,  10, 20, 30 minutes  
after TBS,  as well the demand  and value  of cocaine  as a reinforcer  using  a delayed  discounting  task and 
hypothetical  purchasing  task (before  TBS as well as at the conclusion  of the TBS visit).    
 
• Participant  compensation.  Participants  will be compensated  up to $250 for completion  of all study  
procedures.  Participants  will receive  $25 at the screening  visit, $80 for the baseline  experimental  visit and 
$80 for the second  fMRI  scanning  session.  Participants  will receive  $10 for each  follow  up phone  call, up 
to $40 for 1 day, 1 week,  2 weeks  and 3 weeks  after their last visit. Participants  will also receive  a $25 
bonus  for completion  of all study  visits,  follow  ups. Compensation  will be made  for each  session  completed  
and will not be contingent  upon  completion  of the entire  study.  During  the informed  consent  procedure,  
participants  will be notified  that they can withdraw  from the study  at any time under  no penalty.  Payment  
will be made  for each  session  completed  and will not be contingent  upon  completion  of the entire  study.  
During  the informed  consent  procedure,  participants  will be notified  that they can withdraw  from the study  
at any time under  no penalty.  
 
• DSM  Board  Plan:  The PIs and Co-I (Kevin  M. Gray,  M.D.)  will have  overall  responsibility  for safety  and 
data monitoring  on a day-to-day basis.  The DSMB,  as noted  below,  will provide  guidance  and input  on a 
scheduled  and as-needed  basis.  As previously  mentioned,  the DSM  Board  will meet  every  5-7 months  
with the PI to discuss  the information  listed  in “Content  of ME/DSM  report”.  This content  of this meeting  
will be formalized  in a report  which  will be circulated  by email  and digitally  approved  by the PI and 
ME/DSMB.  The approved  report  will be sent to the MUSC  IRB, and to the NIH. 
 
 
11.0 Specimen Collection and Banking   
Urine samples will be collected for pregnancy testing and drug screening purposes. There will be no 
identifiers except for a code number on the samples. Urine samples may be stored for point of care for 
pregnancy testing. A digital key to the code numbers will be maintained in password protected database 
on the MUSC network. The study PI (Dr. Badran ) will have access to the password.  
12.0 Data Management   
Prior  to formal  statistical  analysis,  summary  statistics  for all variables  will be obtained  and spaghetti  plots  
will be generated.  All behavioral  outcome  measures  will be based  on standardized  composite  scores  from 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 9 of 14  the literature.  We will also use data reduction  techniques  (such  as factor  analysis  or principle  component  
analysis)  to confirm  the applicability  of the composite  scores  in our population.  In the interests  of eventually  
translating  these  mechanistic  data to a larger  clinical  trial, we will perform  a preliminary  Intent -to-Treat  
analysis  on each  of the 6 groups  to estimate  effect  sizes  for a subsequent  power  analysis.   Analyses  will 
be performed  for each  phase  separately.   Image  pre-processing  will be conducted  with FSL v. 5.0: (FMRIB  
Analysis  Group,  Oxford,  UK) [33] realignment  to the first volume,  smoothing  with an anisotropic  8-mm 
Gaussian  kernel,  high-pass  filtering,  resampling  to 2-mm isotropic  voxels,  and stereotactic  registration  to 
the Montreal  Neurological  Institute  152-subject  average  template.  Subjects  with >3 mm movement  (total  
mean  frame  displacement  across  the entire  task)  will be excluded  from analysis.   
Specific  Aim 1 (cTBS) :  Evaluate  mPFC  cTBS  as a tool to modulate  corticostriatal  rsFC  and drug cue-
reactivity  in treatment -seeking  cocaine  users.  
Rationale:  Drug  cues  reliably  activate  the mPFC  & ventral  striatum  in multiple  classes  of substance  
users,  including  cocaine  users.  Through  an LTD-like form of TBS it is possible  to decrease  activity  in the 
mPFC  and the ventral  striatum  in chronic  cocaine  users  and alcohol  users  [9]. Primary  dependent  
measure:  Change  in cue-evoked  brain  activity  and rsFC  in corticostriatal  circuitry  after real but not sham  
cTBS.   Hypothesis:  LTD-like cTBS  to the MPFC  of individuals  with cocaine  use disorder  will decrease  
cocaine  cue-reactivity  BOLD  response  in corticostriatal  nodes  (i.e. mPFC,  ventral  striatum)  and 
strengthen  rsFC  between  these  key nodes .     
Methods  and analysis:  Using  a standardized  cocaine  cue-reactivity  paradigm  we will quantify  the percent  
BOLD  signal  change  in the mPFC  and the striatum  (dorsal  and ventral)  as well as several  other  brain  
regions  with known  roles  in salience  (anterior  insula  & anterior  cingulate),  drug cue reactivity,  and 
executive  control.   This will be achieved  by extracting  the average  BOLD  signal  timecourse  and the 
percent  signal  change  during  the cocaine  cue versus  neutral  cue blocks  from a priori  anatomically  
defined  regions  of interest  (ROIs),  including  the striatum  (ventral  striatum  and dorsal  striatum),  insula,  
inferior  frontal  gyrus,  and anterior  cingulate  cortex.  Ventral  striatal  and dorsal  striatal  ROIs  are derived  
from the FSL Oxford -GSK -Imanova  striatal  atlas,  mapped  via probabilistic  diffusion  tractography  [34] in 
agreement  with anatomical  projection  zones  from the frontal  cortex  [35]. Percent  signal  change  in these  
areas  will be compared  between  groups  receiving  real versus  sham  cTBS  (Aim 1). These  data will be 
interpreted  relative  to changes  in a positive  (auditory  cortex)  and a negative  (primary  visual)  control  
region.  We will also perform  a whole  brain  seed -based  connectivity  analysis  with the area under  the coil 
as our seed  of interest.   
Alternative  outcomes:  Known  factors  that contribute  to variability  in brain  stimulation  treatment  response  
include  gender  and age (Ziemann  & Sieber  2010).   Variance  in these  factors  may preclude  the detection  
of a true positive.  Consequently,  these  factors  will be included  as covariates  in the analyses.   The scalp -
cortex  distance  will be calculated  using  Standardized  automatic  segmentation  software  developed  by our 
laboratory  (BrainRuler  1.0,MATLAB  Central  repository  open  source)  [36]  From  an exploratory  
hypothesis -generating  perspective,  for Aims  1 & 2 we will also perform  whole  brain  psychophysiological  
interaction  analyses  to evaluate  if there  are other  neural  areas  that are modulated  by TBS that we would  
have  missed  in our primary  ROI-based  strategy .  
 
RIGOR  AND  REPRODUCIBILITY:  Strategies  to Ensure  a Robust  and Unbiased  Approach:  The 
proposed  study  will achieve  robust  and unbiased  results  via explicit  inclusion/exclusion  criteria;  
randomization  of treatment  condition  order  and examination  of order  effects;  sham  control;  double  blinding;  
sophisticated  compliance  monitoring  at MUSC;  use of validated  MRI,  laboratory,  and interview/self -report  
measures;  explicit  hypotheses;  power  estimates;  planned  handling  of attrition  and missing  data;  and 
careful  consideration  of potential  confounds.  Methodology  is reported  in a detailed  and fully transparent  
manner  to support  replication  
 
13.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects   
 
Sources of Material : A total of 144 individuals will be enrolled in the current project.  The behavioral 
assessments, as well as biological data (laboratory and neuroimaging results) will be collected only after 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 10 of 14  obtaining informed consent, and for research purposes only.  These records will be kept by Dr. Badran in 
password protected confidential electronic files with restricted access.  
   
Confidentiality Procedures : As the PI, Dr. Badran will assure all procedures protecting study data 
designed to guard subject confidentiality conform to the MUSC Research Protection Program 
requirements.  Additionally, the MUSC IRB must approve all procedures and safety precautions before 
the study can beg in.  All data (clinical evaluations, MRI data, TMS data) will be stored securely in locked 
offices or laboratories accessible only by study staff. Further, all information that could potentially identify 
a subject directly is removed from all study data.  This includes electronic and paper assessments, MR 
images, and biological samples.  This will be replaced with a unique four -digit code.  The key to linking 
the code to subject identity will be kept separat ely from study data, in a locked electronic file. Only study 
staff involved in clinical recruitment and assessment will have access to individually identifiable private 
information.  All other study staff will only have access to the coded identifier.  
 
14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects   
Female participants who become pregnant during the study will be withdrawn from the study. 
Additionally, the Investigator has the right to withdraw a participant at any time.  
 
15.0 Risks to Subjects  
The main study procedures include brain stimulation, a medication trial, clinical evaluation, MRI, and 
completion of questionnaires. Although these procedures do carry minimal risk, the primary risks of the 
study are a) adverse effects of study medications, b) emotional distress, c) incidental findings, and d) 
loss of confidentiality.  The primary risks are described below:  
 
1. Magnetic Resonance Imaging.   Because the MRI machine acts like a large magnet, it could move 
metallic objects in the MRI room during the examination, which could harmful to the participant. To prevent 
such an event from happening; loose metal objects, like pocket knives or key chain s, are not allowed in 
the MRI room. If a participant has a piece of metal in their body, such as a fragment in their eye, aneurysm 
clips, ear implants, spinal nerve stimulators, or a pacemaker, they will not be allowed into th e MRI room 
and cannot have a MRI.  
 
Having a MRI may be uncomfortable, particularly regarding feelings of claustrophobia and the 
loud banging noise during the scan. Participants will be asked to wear earplugs to avoid 
possible hearing impairment.  
 
2. Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation:  
a. Investigational Device Exemption: Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation is an investigational 
device. The IRB at MUSC (in cooperation with the FDA) have determined repetitive TMS to 
be a non -significant risk intervention.  
b. Potential Risks of TMS  
1). Potential risk of a seizure:  The major risk using repetitive TMS subjects is the possibility 
of inducing a seizure. We have now studied and given rTMS to more than several hundred 
subjects over past 15 years. None of these patients has developed a seizure. We will 
exclude patients wi th a prior history of seizures.  
2). Potential for scalp discomfort and headaches:  Some people report mild discomfort when 
the magnetic pulses are applied over the scalp. A small number of people (~5%) report 
headache following TMS. However, the headaches are temporary and manageable with 
common over -the-counter pain remedies.  
3). Potential hearing loss:  The discharge of the rTMS coil generates a high -energy click that 
may cause cochlear damage. Foam earplugs can protect against these changes and will 
be worn by the subjects and the researchers present during TMS sessions.  
 
3. Incidental Findings: Magnetic Resonance Imaging : Some MRI scans can detect medical conditions, 
such as cancer, brain injury, and abnormal blood vessels; however, this functional MRI is carried out 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 11 of 14  purely for experimental purposes and we are not looking for brain disorders. Furthermore, the study 
researchers are not trained in diagnosing brain disorders; therefore, the researchers are not qualified 
to offer any medical opinions concerning the scan (g ood or bad). It is possible that the study researchers 
will notice something in a participant’s scan that appears unusual and/or abnormal, if this occurs, the 
researchers will inform the participant of the finding and provide them with a copy of their scan , which 
they may take to a medical expert for further review and diagnosis. Being told about such a finding may 
cause anxiety as well as suggest the need for additional tests and financial costs.  Any costs associated 
with clinical follow -up(s) are the par ticipant’s and/or the participant’s insurance carrier’s responsibility. 
Participants who do not wish to be informed of such findings will be advised to not participate in this 
study.  
 
 
4. Breach of confidentiality:   There is the potential risk of breach of confidentiality of clinical and laboratory 
information.  Dr. Badran has experience as an investigator dealing with such sensitive information and 
has experience assuring that data is adequately protected.  Safeguards to protect confidentiality include 
locked records and firewalls around password -protected electronic data, and all study data being coded, 
with the key linking the code with a participant’s identity being kept on secure network storage as a 
password protected document. Similar safeguards are followed for storage and processing of MRI data. 
MRI data is stored on secure network storage maintained by MUSC, where the PI has dual appointment.  
The MRI scans are identified only by subject code , study code, and date of acquisition. Participants’ 
initials will also be present on some questionnaires; however, the questionnaires containing the initials 
will be stored in a locked file cabinet.  
 
5. Interview and psychiatric emergencies :   Subjects may experience discomfort during the clinical 
interview and evaluations when discussing symptoms, life events, and social support.  The Research 
Coordinator and Specialists will be experienced and skilled in interviewing subjects.  Should the 
subject wish to stop or take a break, they will allow it. In addition, should the subject express any 
physical or psychological symptoms that are concerning or possibly represent an emergency, the 
study physician (Dr. Gray) or other approved study clinician wi ll be contacted immediately to assess 
the subject and to determine the appropriate course of action. Possible situations where this would 
occur include but are not limited to thoughts of suicide, homicidal or violent thoughts, psychosis, or a 
change in the  subject’s physical status if they start feeling bad or complaining of new physical 
symptoms (such as chest pain, acute nausea, etc.).  Importantly, the Research Coordinator/Specialist 
is not the only individual screening for such potential emergencies.  T hese domains will be 
independently assessed by Dr. Gray/PA -C during the health and physical exam and any subsequent 
future clinical interview.  Options for addressing such emergencies may include contacting the 
individual’s mental health caregiver, referri ng for urgent evaluation and treatment, or emergent 
hospitalization.  
 
 
ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS  
 
a. Recruitment and Informed Consent. Participants will be recruited from the general community through 
media advertising (print and online sources). The IRB approved Informed Consent (IC) will be 
obtained prior to the initial assessment.  The consent will be explained orally and in the written form, 
and will be documented by the signature of the participant on the IC. Consent will be obtained in a 
private interview room so that the participant may ask any questions to the research staff.  
 
b. Protection against Risk. Research staff will closely supervise participants throughout their enrollment 
in the study.  Specific to the BAC assessment, if a participant’s BAC is greater than 0.0 at any visit, 
the research staff will either a) ask the participant to remain in the la boratory until their BAC returns to 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 12 of 14  0.0, if they are driving, or b) work with the participant to ensure that they have alternative transportation 
home, including providing a taxi, if needed.  
  
c. Loss of confidentiality:   Paper -based information will be kept in on -site locked file cabinet(s) 
designated for study materials. Data collection instruments or forms containing participant names will 
be stored in separate secure locations from those instruments or forms containing subject 
identification (SID) numbers, and both will be stored separately from the master list linking the SID 
and names.  Paper -based information will be accessible only to study personnel who need access to 
the information for st udy purposes.  All electronic records will be stored on a password protected 
secure server with access limited only to study personnel who need access to the information for 
study purposes. All password protected hard -drive backups on will be stored in the PI’s offices in a 
secure location.  The results of drug and BAC testing will be stored in the same manner as other data 
(i.e. in separate location from any information containing participant PHI).  The results will not be 
reported to any authority (e.g. employer or law enforcement) nor will they be available to them upon 
request.  
 
 
16.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  or Others  
Participants will not directly benefit from this study.  
 
 
17.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
The final  results  of the study will not be known until the conclusion of the trial, as the data analysts are 
blind to the treatment arms.  The results  will be made available to study participants following peer -
review and publication of the manuscripts. Pa rticipants will not be notified of the  results  of the study.  
 
18.0 Drugs or Devices (if applicable)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References  
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 13 of 14   
1. Geuter, S., Koban, L., Wager, T.D., The Cognitive Neuroscience of Placebo Effects: Concepts, 
Predictions, and Physiology . Annu Rev Neurosci 2017. 40: p. 167 -188. 
2. Kaptchuk, T.J., Shaw, J., Kerr, C.E., et al., "Maybe I made up the whole thing": placebos and 
patients' experiences in a randomized controlled trial . Cult Med Psychiatry 2009. 33: p. 382 -411. 
3. Kaptchuk, T.J., Kerr, C.E., Zanger, A., Placebo controls, exorcisms, and the devil . Lancet 2009. 
374: p. 1234 -5. 
4.  Ashar, Y.K., Chang, L.J., Wager, T.D., Brain Mechanisms of the Placebo Effect: An Affective 
Appraisal Account . Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2017. 13: p. 73 -98. 
5.  Atlas, L.Y., Wager, T.D., How expectations shape pain . Neurosci Lett 2012. 520: p.140 -8. 
6.  Meissner, K., Bingel, U., Colloca, L., et al., The placebo effect: advances from different 
methodological approaches . J Neurosci 2011. 31: p. 16117 -24. 
7.  Rutherford, B.R., Wall, M.M., Brown, P.J., et al. Patient Expectancy as a Mediator of Placebo 
Effects in Antidepressant Clinical Trials . Am J Psychiatry 2017. 174: p.135 -142. 
 
8. Hanlon, C.A., et al., What goes up, can come down: Novel brain stimulation paradigms may 
attenuate craving and craving -related neural circuitry in substance dependent individuals.  Brain 
Res, 2015.  
9. Hanlon, C.A., et al., Left frontal pole theta burst stimulation decreases orbitofrontal and insula 
activity in cocaine users and alcohol users.  Drug Alcohol Depend, 2017. 178: p. 310 -317. 
10. Hu, Y., et al., Impaired functional connectivity within and between frontostriatal circuits and its 
association with compulsive drug use and trait impulsivity in cocaine addiction.  JAMA Psychiatry, 
2015. 72(6): p. 584 -92. 
11. Hong, L.E., et al., Association of nicotine addiction and nicotine's actions with separate cingulate 
cortex functional circuits.  Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2009. 66(4): p. 431 -41. 
12. Froeliger, B., et al., Association Between Baseline Corticothalamic -Mediated Inhibitory Control 
and Smoking Relapse Vulnerability.  JAMA Psychiatry, 2017. 74(4): p. 379 -386. 
13. Froeliger, B., et al., The effects of N-Acetylcysteine on frontostriatal resting -state functional 
connectivity, withdrawal symptoms and smoking abstinence: A double -blind, placebo -controlled 
fMRI pilot study.  Drug Alcohol Depend, 2015. 156: p. 234 -42. 
14. Hedden, S.L., R.F. Woolson, and R.J. Malcolm, Randomization in substance abuse clinical trials.  
Subst Abuse Treat Prev Policy, 2006. 1: p. 6.  
15. Donner, A. and N. Klar, Design and Analysis of Cluster Randomization Trials in Health Research . 
2000, London: Arnold. 178.  
16. Grandjean, E.M., et al., Efficacy of oral long -term N -acetylcysteine in chronic bronchopulmonary 
disease: a meta -analysis of published double -blind, placebo -controlled clinical trials.  Clin Ther, 
2000. 22(2): p. 209 -21. 
17. Sheehan, D.V., et al., The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the 
development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -
10. J Clin Psychiatry, 1998. 59 Suppl 20 : p. 22 -33;quiz 34 -57. 
18. Sobell, L.C. and M.B. Sobell, Timeline Follow -Back , in Measuring Alcohol Consumption: 
Psychosocial and Biochemical Methods , R.Z. Litten and J.P. Allen, Editors. 1992, Humana Press: 
Totowa, NJ. p. 41 -72. 
19. Spielberger, C.D., R.L. Gorsuch, and R.H. Lushene,  State -trait Anxiety Inventory.  1970, 
Consulting Psychologists Press: Palo Alto.  
20. McNair, D. M., Lorr M.,  and D roppleman, L. F., Profile of Mood States (POMS) –Revised Manual . 
1992, Education and Industrial Testing Service: San Diego, CA.  
21. Tiffany, S.T., et al., The development of a cocaine craving questionnaire.  Drug Alcohol Depend, 
1993. 34(1): p. 19 -28. 
22. Heatherton, T.F., et al., The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the 
Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire.  British Journal of Addiction, 1991. 86(9): p. 1119 -27. 
23. Cappelleri, J.C., et al., Confirmatory factor analyses and reliability of the modified cigarette 
evaluation questionnaire.  Addict Behav, 2007. 32(5): p. 912 -23. 
Version 4; Version Date 07/05/2022 
 Page 14 of 14  24. Saunders, J.B., et al., Development of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT): 
WHO Collaborative Project on Early Detection of Persons with Harmful Alcohol Consumption --II. 
Addiction, 1993. 88(6): p. 791 -804. 
25. Froeliger, B., et al., Restructuring Reward Mechanisms in Nicotine Addiction: A Pilot fMRI Study 
of Mindfulness -Oriented Recovery Enhancement for Cigarette Smokers.  Evid Based Complement 
Alternat Med, 2017. 2017 : p. 7018014.  
26. Moran -Santa Maria, M.M., et al., Right anterior insula connectivity is important for cue -induced 
craving in nicotine -dependent smokers.  Addict Biol, 2015. 20(2): p. 407 -14. 
27. Li, X., et al., Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
reduces nicotine cue craving.  Biol Psychiatry, 2013. 73(8): p. 714 -20. 
28. Hanlon, C.A., et al., Reduction of cue -induced craving through realtime neurofeedback in nicotine 
users: the role of region of interest selection and multiple visits.  Psychiatry Res, 2013. 213(1): p. 
79-81. 
29. Borckardt, J.J., et al., Estimating resting motor thresholds in transcranial magnetic stimulation 
research and practice: a computer simulation evaluation of best methods.  J ECT, 2006. 22(3): p. 
169-75. 
30. Taylor, J.J., et al., Naloxone -reversible modulation of pain circuitry by left prefrontal rTMS.  
Neuropsychopharmacology, 2013. 38(7): p. 1189 -97. 
31. George, M.S., et al., Mechanisms and state of the art of transcranial magnetic stimulation.  J Ect, 
2002. 18(4): p. 170 -81. 
32. George, M.S., et al., Improvement of depression following transcranial magnetic stimulation.  Curr 
Psychiatry Rep, 1999. 1(2): p. 114 -24. 
33. Smith, S.M., et al., Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and implementation 
as FSL.  Neuroimage, 2004. 23 Suppl 1 : p. S208 -19. 
34. Tziortzi, A.C., et al., Connectivity -Based Functional Analysis of Dopamine Release in the Striatum 
Using Diffusion -Weighted MRI and Positron Emission Tomography.  Cerebral Cortex, 2014. 24(5): 
p. 1165 --1177.  
35. Haber, S.N. and B. Knutson, The reward circuit: linking primate anatomy and human imaging.  
Neuropsychopharmacology, 2010. 35(1): p. 4 -26. 
36. Summers, P.M. and C.A. Hanlon, BrainRuler -a free, open -access tool for calculating scalp to 
cortex distance.  Brain Stimul, 2017.  
37. Leal, G., D. Comprido, and C.B. Duarte, BDNF -induced local protein synthesis and synaptic 
plasticity.  Neuropharmacology, 2014. 76 Pt C : p. 639 -56. 
38. Koob, G.F. and N.D. Volkow, Neurocircuitry of addiction.  Neuropsychopharmacology, 2010. 
35(1): p. 217 -38. 
39.  Kearney -Ramos TE, Dowdle LT, Lench DH, Mithoefer  OJ, Devries WH, George MS, Anton RF, 
Hanlon CA. Transdiagnostic Effects of Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex Transcranial Magnetic 
Stimulation on Cue Reactivity. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging. 
2018 Apr 10.  
40.  Gu H, Salmeron BJ, Ross TJ, Geng X, Zhan W, Stein EA, Yang Y. Mesocorticolimbic circuits are 
impaired in chronic cocaine users as demonstrated by resting -state functional connectivity. 
Neuroimage. 2010 Nov 1;53(2):593 -601. 
41.  Marx E, Deutschländer  A, Stephan T, Dieterich M, Wiesmann M, Brandt T. Eyes open and eyes 
closed as rest conditions: impact on brain activation patterns. Neuroimage. 2004 Apr 
1;21(4):1818 -24. 
42.  Sinha, R., D. Catapano, and S. O'Malley, Stress -induced craving and stress response in cocaine 
dependent individuals.  Psychopharmacology (Berl), 1999. 142(4): p. 343 -51. 
 
 
 