 
 
 
Overcoming Barriers and Obstacles to Adopting  
Diabetes  Devices  
04161131  
December  11, 2019  
Molly Tanenbaum, Principal Investigator  
Stanford  University  
Stanford,  California  94305  
 
1. PURPOSE  OF THE  STUDY  
 
a. To address the need for increased support for initiating CGM, we developed a 4 -session  
CGM -focused behavioral intervention called ONBOARD (Overcoming Barriers &  
Obstacles  to Adopting  Diabetes  Devices).  The current  mixed  methods  study  had two 
main goals: 1) to examine the feasibility and acceptability of a pilot of ONBOARD for  
adults with T1D; and 2) to examine preliminary evidence of the impact of ONBOARD on  
glycemic outcomes (i.e. time in glucose target range; diabetes distress). We hypothesi zed 
that ONBOARD would be feasible and acceptable for adults with T1D and lead to  
increases  in time in range  and decreases  in diabetes  distress.  
 
2. STUDY  PROCEDURES  
 
a. Procedures  
 
Once eligibility is confirmed, participants will be consented and enrolled. Once enrolled,  
a baseline assessment survey will be completed online via a secure site (REDCap) to  
obtain demographic and psychosocial data. Blood glucose meter and continuous glucose  
monitor will be downloaded. For participants not currently using CGM but would like to,  
we will work with the clinical team to get them started via standard clinical proce dures.  
In addition,  during  our work  with them  (after  the clinical  start of CGM),  we will use 
FDA -approved Dexcom guides as reminders of standard resources they have access to for  
CGM. Next, all participants will schedule four individual, 60 -minute visits w ith study  
interventionist  to complete  ONBOARD  sessions,  each 3 weeks  apart.  If available,  we 
will ask participants to provide a hemoglobin A1c result obtained in the 3 months prior to  
study enrollment or obtain this via their medical record. Visits will be  conducted via a  
secure, HIPAA -compliant, videoconferencing software. Sessions will be recorded to  
ensure  consistency  and quality  of the intervention  across  participants.  Upon  completion  
of 4 intervention sessions, participants will complete a follow -up 30 -minute REDCap  
survey  and will participate  in a focus  group  to provide  feedback  on the intervention.  

December  11, 2019  Page  2 of 6  Blood glucose meter and continuous glucose monitor will be downloaded. If a 
hemoglobin A1c result was obtained during the course of the study, we will ask  
participants to provide this or obtain it via their medical record. Focus groups will be  
audio -recorded and use a semi -structured interview guide to ensure consistency across  
groups and will aim to elicit feedback about ONBOARD’s clarity, health literacy level  
and comprehension. We will also elicit 1) session -specific feedback; 2) changes in  
device -specific knowledge and problem -solving skills after the intervention; 3) overall  
feedback  on the intervention.  
 
b. Procedure  Risks  
 
The study will be explained as part of the consent process. We will provide detailed  
information about the study, its purpose, and procedure. Participants will be given  
enough time to consider carefully th eir own participation and ask questions about the  
study  prior  to providing  consent.  
 
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
NA 
 
d. Use of Audio  and Video  Recordings  
 
Intervention sessions and focus groups will be video and audio recorded by the software  
on Zoom, which is approved for high risk data. Transcripts will be anonymized prior to  
analysis.  No personal  identifying  information  will be included  in any transcripts.  
 
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
NA 
 
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the participant(s)  
after the conclusion  of the study?  
NA 
 
g. Study  Endpoint(s)  
 
Analyses are intended to iteratively refine ONBOARD intervention mate rials. Therefore,  
quantitative analyses will be descriptive and examine differences between baseline and  
post-intervention in terms of psychosocial variables, technology attitudes, and health  
outcomes. Qualitative analyses will use data from focus groups c arried out post - 
intervention.  Interviews  will be digitally  recorded,  transcribed  and anonymized,  reviewed  
for completeness and accuracy, and then imported into the qualitative software package,  
NVIVO 10 (QSR International Pty Ltd., 2014). We will use cont ent analysis to code  
transcripts, resolve discrepancies between coders, and capture key themes for areas of  
feedback  on the intervention  to refine  each session.  
 
3. BACKGROUND  
 
a. Past Experimental  and/or  Clinical  Findings  

December  11, 2019  Page  3 of 6   
 
Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) is a burdensome chronic disease; many adults with T1D do not  
meet treatment targets. The  Centers for Disease Control and JDRF data estimate that  
there are around 2.5 million adults in the US with T1D (25, 26); 15,000 adults are newly  
diagnosed with T1D annually. T1D requires constant attention to glucose levels, food  
intake and physical activ ity, and insulin dosing decisions. Giving too much or too little  
insulin could result in hypo - or hyperglycemia, both of which carry risks of developing  
long-term complications. Hemoglobin A1c is the indicator that is closely associated with  
likelihood of developing future complications. National data show that the majority of  
adults do not meet ADA’s recommended glycemic target of A1c<7.0% (86% of adults  
18-25; 70% of adults over 25). Existing and emerging diabetes technologies can  
dramatically improve hea lth and reduce burden, but adoption rates are low. Diabetes  
technology offers major advances in diabetes management that reduce self -management  
burden and improve health outcomes and quality of life for individuals with T1D. These  
devices  include  continuou s glucose  monitoring  (CGM)  systems  and insulin  pumps.  CGM  
technology provides in - the-moment information about glucose levels, including direction  
and speed  of change.  CGM  reduces  management burden  by reducing  the need  for 
frequent finger sticks. CGM has been shown to be cost -effective and to help adults  
improve both glycemic control and time spent in target glucose range without increasing  
risk of hypoglycemic episodes or diabetic ketoacidosis. The recent “Beyond A1c”  
Conse nsus Report highlighted the value of looking at time in range as another clinically  
meaningful outcome for T1D. Time in range (% of readings between 70 -180 mg/dL per  
unit of time) captures continuous glucose variability over time through CGM data,  
whereas A1c provides a snapshot at single time points 3 months apart, and is more  
sensitive  and specific  than A1c testing.  We know  that currently,  more  than half (~62%)  
of individuals with T1D use insulin pumps in the US, while only 14% of adults with T1D  
currentl y use CGM. Further, a concerning proportion (27%) quit CGM within the first  
year due to the daily burden of using the device. Providing adults with T1D with the  
resources and tools to work through modifiable barriers could lead to continued CGM use  
and inc reased readiness for closed loop. Despite recommendations for structured  
education, there is no official standard of care for CGM initiation. Strong evidence from  
clinical trials support benefits of CGM for adults with T1D. The ADA also recommends  
that adults with T1D receive  robust  education,  training,  and support  for CGM  use. 
However, this recommendation comes from expert consensus and clinical experience,  
and there is a need to develop high - quality, evidence -based behavioral interventions to  
provide this recommended training and support. It is well understood that structured  
education enhances benefit from self -monitoring of blood glucose. Similarly, if ad ults 
with T1D receive comprehensive education and support when beginning to use CGM,  
they would have increased likelihood of using the devices and experiencing acute and  
long-term health  and quality  of life benefits.  Given  that CGM  is becoming  part of “usual 
care” for people with T1D and is a component of closed loop systems, the next key step  
is to test interventions that provide additional resources and support for CGM uptake  
versus  CGM  alone.Source:  eProtocol  Section  3a 
 
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments  
NA 
 
4. PARTICIPANT  POPULATION  
December  11, 2019  Page  4 of 6   
 
a. Planned  Enrollment  
We plan to enroll  up to 40 participants.  
 
b. Age,  Gender,  and Ethnic  Background  
c. We will actively recruit equal numbers of males and females between 18 and 50 years of  
age. Females are expected to comprise approximately 50% of the adult study sample. The  
study will not select with respect to the racial or ethnic background of the subjects as  
there are no race - or ethnic -specific hypotheses. The final study sample will be  
representative of the diverse ethnic population of patients in the Stanford Hospital &  
Clinics outpatient diabetes program and in the ethnically diverse Bay Area, with  
approximately 50% Caucasian participants, 25% Hispanic, 20% Asian, 2% African  
American,  3% Other.  Vulnerable  Populations  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
NA 
 
e. Stanford Populations  
NA 
 
f. Healthy Voluntee rs 
NA 
 
g. Recruitment  Details  
Recruitment procedures will include direct contact and advertisements/flyers in clinics  
and postings with online Bay Area groups (e.g., JDRF, ADA, Carb DM), as well  as 
referrals from treating physicians. Treating physicians may provide a study brochure  
which patients may use to contact study staff directly. Alternately, treating physicians  
may request permission for study staff to speak with the potential participant about the  
study  during  an appointment  for usual  care or to follow  up with a phone  call or email.  We 
will also recruit from an independent list of non -Stanford clinic adults in the larger San  
Francisco Bay Area who have participated in closed loop trials at Stanford who have  
provided  consent  for contact  about  future  trials  (IRB -approved  databa se). 
 
h. Eligibility  Criteria  
i. Inclusion  Criteria  
1. Subject  is age 18-50 years  at time of screening  
2. Subject is within first year of continuous glucose monitor use OR has not been  
using  CGM  regularly  in the past 6 months  
3. Subject  has a clinical  diagnosis  of type 1 diabetes  
4. Subject comprehends spoken and written English  
Exclusion  Criteria  
December  11, 2019  Page  5 of 6  1. Subject has a medical disorder that in the judgment of the investigator will  
interfere  with completion  of any aspect  of the protocol.  
2. Subject has a neurologic disorder that in the judgment of the investigator will  
affect  completion  of the protocol.  
 
i. Screening  Procedures  
 
Screening procedures include a review of inclusion/exclusion criteria to assess eligibility.  
This information  will be verbally  elicited  from  potential  participants.  
 
j. Participation  in Multiple  Protocols  
We will verbally elicit this information from partici pants. If participants are enrolled in  
another protocol, we will discuss the study with the PI to determine if it is safe for the  
subject  to enroll  in both protocols  simultaneously.  
 
k. Payments  to Participants  
Participants will receive up to an $100 Amazon gift card upon completion of the study  
($25 for baseline assessment; $50 for all 4 intervention sessions; $25 for completing a  
focus  group  and survey  at the end of the study).  
 
l. Costs to Participants  
NA 
 
m. Planned  Duration  of the Study  
 
The probable duration of the entire study is 2 years. We anticipate screening will require  
5 minutes, activate participation in the study will require approximately 3 months, and  
analysis of participant data will require approximately 1 year. Surveys will require  
approximately 30 minutes each to complete and ONBOARD sessions and the focus  
group  will require  approximately  1 hour each.  
 
5. RISKS 
i. Psychological  well-being  
Data  downloaded  from  the CGM  and the home  glucose  meter  will be collected  for 
the study as measures of diabetes self -management behaviors. Some people may be  
uncomfortable with researchers' having such detailed information about their daily  
diabetes habits. Psychological and human factors testing may make study participants  
uncomfor table. Subjects are free to withdraw from the study at any time. We have  
psychologists and health care professionals who will be available to help study  
participants  with their stress  or anxieties.  
ii. Economic  well-being  
Time  away  from  school  and/or  work  is a potential  risk. 
iii. Social  well-being  
Loss  of confidentiality  is a potential  risk. 

December  11, 2019  Page  6 of 6  iv. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low 
 
b. Procedures  to Minimize  Risk 
Subjects will continue to receive type 1 diabetes care from their usual provider. Subjects  
are free to withdraw from the study at any time. For security and confide ntiality purposes,  
subjects will be assigned an alphanumeric identifier that will be used instead of their  
name.  
 
c. Study  Conclusion  
Individual  subjects  will be removed  from  the study  if circumstances  develop  during  the 
study that, in the judgment of the investigator, make it inadvisable for the subject to  
continue  with the study.  
NA 
 
d. Risks to Special Populations  
NA 
 
6. BENEFITS  
It is expected that this protocol will yield knowledge about the impact of physical burden/hassle  
of wearing devices, managing data, social barriers, and trust in diabetes devices. Participants may  
learn something new about diabetes management, however, th ere is no guarantee of any benefit  
from  participating  in this research  study.  
 
7. PRIVACY  AND  CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information and specimens are handled in compliance with the Health Insurance  
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford  
Health  Care,  and Stanford  Children’s  Health.  