Protocol Template Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 w COMIRB Protocol  
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
CAMPUS BOX F -490    TELEPHONE:  303-724-1055   
Fax:  303 -724-0990   
 
 
Protocol #: 18-2098 
 Project Title: 24-hour oral morphine equivalent based opioid prescribing after surgery   
 
Principal Investigator:  Ana Fernandez -Bustamante, MD  
 
Version Date: 02/12/2021        
 I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims:   
 We have previously shown that 83% of patients after Cesarean section and 71% of thoracic surgery report taking half or less of opioids  prescribe d; 53% and 45% respectively report taking 
five or less of the prescribed pills .
1 Such overprescribed opioids are stored in unsecured locations 
in the 75% of cases.1,2 These opioids repr esent a major source of potential morbidity and mortality. 
The rationale  that under lies the proposed research is that once we have proven the efficacy of 
patient-centered pain management approaches, we can improve surgical pain therapy on a large scale.  
 
Specific Aim: We will utilize the electronic health record  to indi viduali ze pain therapy in surgical 
patients after hospital di scharge using last 24-hour opioid intake as the decision variable for the 
amount of opioid pain pills prescribed.  Our p reliminary data indicate that current opioid 
prescription prac tice after surgery  follows a “o ne size fits all” pattern.1 In-hospital opioid use 24 
hours prior to discharge serves as a strong indicator to correctly estimate needs for  analgesi c 
medications  at home.3 We will test our hypothesis that this tool will reduce the amount of opioid 
medications prescribed while maintaining patient post-operative pain control. We will test  this tool 
prospectively for 44 post Cesarean s ection patients anticipated to use about half or less of the 
usually prescribed amount of opioid pain pills randomized equally to prescription tool intervention or no intervention (prescription as usual).  This protocol addresses only Specific  Aim #3 of the original grant. Specific Aim #1 and #2 are 
addressed under a separate COMIRB protocol #14-1938. 
 
II. Background and Significance:  
 
Prescription opioid overdose has  emerged as a leading cause of death in the general 
population.4,5 Opioid-based therapy represents a corner -stone of post-operative pain 
manage ment.6 With increasing emphasis on robust pain therapy, sales of opioid medications have 
increased four-fold in the last decade.7-12 Parallel to this rise, opioid-associated deaths have also 
quadr upled.7 We have shown that long-term opioid use occurs in up to 22% of patients following 
surgery.13 Over -prescribed opioids after surgery can create a reservoir of opioids that become 
available for non-medical use.14,15 Effective strategies to maximize non- opioid pain therapy and 
to limit such a reservoir are lacking. Thus, there is an urgent need to individu alize post -operative 
pain therapy and reduce our reliance on opioids.  
 
Protocol Template Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Converting knowledge on actual need for opioid pain medications after surgery into tangible 
benefits can prevent over -prescription of opioids that become available for non-medical use.16 The 
objective  of this aim is to prescribe pain medications after surgery in a pa tient-centered fashion. 
We will use the average amount of opioid medications (in oral morphine equivalents - OME) taken 
in the last 24 hours prior to discharge to inform and design  a clinical decision support tool. This 
tool will reduce the amount of opioid medications prescribed while maintaining patient post-operative pain control. The calculated “last 24 hour OME dose” will be applied to generate a recommendation for the pres cription of a cumulative opioid dose that will be shared with the 
provider when the post- discharge pain medication is made, e.g. via di splaying the last 24-hour 
opioid use in the electronic health record (EHR). The rationale is that testing of such a decis ion-
making tool will lay the ground work to translate the findings of this project into more secure and 
efficient opioid prescribing practices to a system -wide level. Upon completion, we expect to have 
developed an effective dec ision-making tool t o help providers estimate required pain medication 
following patient discharge.  
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
 
Preliminary Studies.  In a cohort of 652 
patients who had undergone surgery at UCH Metro clinicians chose the same cumulative opioid dose ( 300 oral morphine 
equivalents) in more than 75% of patients 
for the discharge opioid prescription  
(Figure 1). These data indicate that opioids 
following inpatient surgery are not 
prescribed in an individualized fashion, but rather that most patients r eceive a very 
similar regimen for post-discharge pain 
management. Using the same EHR (Epic) 
database that generated the data above, we are able to generate information on types and doses of pain medications that are administered to patients, who are s till in th e hospital in real time (Dr. Lin, Chief Medical Information Officer and 
Dr. Jean Kutner, CMO at UCHealth strongly support this project). We have previously shown that 
83% of patients af ter Cesarean section and 71% of thoracic surgery  patients  report taking half or 
less of opioids pr escribed; 53% and 45% respectively report taking five or less of the prescribed 
pills.
1 Hence, a “one size fits all” appr oach to pain management after discharge is common in 
clinical practice and leads to fr equent over -prescription of opioids. Based on our own preliminary 
data and recommendation published by others, opioids taken 24 hours prior to discharge inform 
the amount of opioids that are likely to be used at home and hence the following prescriptions 
amounts have been suggested for patients taking equal or less than 22.5 MME in the 24 hours 
prior to discharge:  
- no opioids for home use for patients having taken no opioi ds in the las t 24 hours prior to 
discharge  
- 75 morphine mi lligram equivalent (MME), e.g. 10 oxycodone 5mg tablets, for home use 
for patients having taken equal or less than 22.5 MME, e.g. 1-3 oxycodone 5mg tablets in 
the last 24 hours prior to discharge.17  
 
IV. Research Methods 
 
A.  Outcome Measure(s):   
 
Figure 4:  Cumulative opioid dose in oral morphine equivalents 
(OME) prescribed to 652 patients upon hospital discharge 
after surgery. Cli nicians chose the same cumulative opioid 
dose (300 OME) in more than 75% of patients.  
Protocol Template Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Study m easurements will include 24 hour prior to discharge opioid and other medication 
intake, prescribed post- discharge opioid doses in morphine milligram equivalents from 
the EHR, self-reported analgesic medication requirements (post-discharge intake of 
opioid medi cations, left- over opioids, intake of other pain medications, such as 
acetaminophen and non-steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs – NSAIDs), NIH PROMIS18 
outcomes for Pain Intensity and Pain Interference, side effects, reasons for not taking opioids, as well as basic demographic information. We will also collect information about need for additi onal opioid prescriptions, and reported medication disposal for left-over 
opioids, length of hospitalization, repeat vs. first C -section and other relevant 
perioperative variables . For this study, we will be using REDC ap for data collection after 
Cesarean section to administer four weekly surveys following the day of discharge.  
 We will seek follow-up with providers about the usefulness  and acceptability of the EHR -
based intervention. Providers will be surveyed with a REDCap survey using a modified 
version of the GUIDES  checklist, which provides a tool to improve the successful use of 
guideline-based computerized clinical decision support.
21 
 
 
B. Description of Population to be Enrolled:   
 
Survey population:  Inflating enrollment by  approximately  25% to ac count for drop out and result in 44 patient 
completers, we will consent 60 adult patients receiving a Cesarean section pr ocedure.  
After completing an observational study in three surgical groups (thoracic surgery, 
gastrointestinal surgery, C -section), we chose to eval uate this intervention first in C -
Section patients based on their unique characteristics: low procedural variability, low 
incidences of chronic opioid use, and low level of comorbidities. Also, the issue of having 
potentially unsecured opioids  in a household with young children is of special relevance 
for opioid safety research in the Cesarean section c ohort.
19 
 Inclusion Criteria: 1) Women  ages at least 18 years  of age having undergone Cesarean 
section surgery at the University of Colorado Hospital are eligible. 2) Willingness to 
complete weekly surveys for 4 weeks after discharge. 3) Anticipated to need half or less 
of the usually prescribed amount of opioids based on the amount of opioids taken in the 
last 24 hours prior to the opioid medication being written for discharge (only patients who 
took 22.5 MME or less opioids in the last 24 hours prior to the day of discharge will be eligible for this study) . Inclusi on and exclusion criteria (including the amount of opioids 
taken in the last 24 hours prior to discharge) will be evaluated in the morning in patients scheduled to be discharged later that day.   
Exclusion Criteria:  1) Patients under the age of 18 years, 2) Patients returning to 
institutional settings (e.g. prison, jail, mental health facility), 3) Pregnant women (patients 
will be approached after their C-section) , 4) Decisionally challenged patients, 5 ) Blind or 
illiterate patients .  
 
Based on our prior r esea rch factors such as emergency status, prior opioid use, repeat 
vs primary C -section, and associated procedures were not associated with post-
discharge opioid use once we adjusted for last-24 hour inpatient opioid use. Hence, these patients  will not be excl uded. 
 
 
 
Protocol Template Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 We will perform a randomized clinical trial (RCT)  of an EHR-based recommendation to 
prescribe opioids at discharge according to the recorded last 24-hour inpatient use 
according to current recommendations  and evaluate its effect o n the amount o f opioids 
prescribed as well as pain control after discharge .  
 
The medical provider of each patient enrolled (up to n=60) will also be surveyed using 
an online REDCap survey. Inclusion criteria: 1) Medical provider of a patient enrolled in 
the study, 2) Willingness to use the Prescription Tool and complete an online survey. No 
exclusion criteria.  
 Total number of participants counting both patients and providers  will be 114; up to 60 
patients and 54 providers enrolled in the study.  
 
C. Study Design and Resea rch Methods   
Using the UCH Epic/Clarity database, we will continuously identify all patients who underwent Cesarean section surgery at University Hospital.
 Patients will be approached 
regarding interest in the study prior to hospital discha rge. A trained PRA, Perinatal 
CTRC staff or other trained provider will explain the study to prospective participants  
using standard language. Participants will be told that they are being asked to be in this research study because they recently had surgery at the University  of Colorado Hospital.  
 
If the patient is interested in participation the study PRA, Perinatal CTRC staff or trained 
provider will review the consent/HIPAA form with the patient and answer any questions 
the patient may have. Study  staff will also prov ide them with a hard copy of the 
consent/HIPAA form.  
 - OR – 
  
During the SARS -CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic or as required by UCHealth, we will 
minimize in-person contact with patients and complete study visits remotel y whenever 
possible. Perin atal CTR C sta ff will obtain informed consent from patients using the 
procedures detailed below . 
Consent-HIPAA authorization will be obtained remotely  via phone or HIPAA-compliant 
videoconference application (Zoom) following COMIRB guidance (CG-85, Version April 
9, 2020).  
 A tra ined provider with appropriate PPE , who is already providing standard care to the 
patient, will give the patient a hard copy of the consent/HIPAA form  so they have an 
approved copy of the consent form “in hand” at the time of t he informed consent 
discussion .  
 
 Perinatal CTRC staff will call the patient to initiate the informed consent discussion.  
 The discussion will begin with identification of who is  participating on the call ; 
Perin atal CTRC staff will confirm  the potential subject has  a hard copy of the 
consent-HIPAA form before beginning the dis cussion . 
 Perinatal CTRC staff will review the cons ent/HIP AA form  with the patient  and answer 
any questions. 
Protocol Template Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  The patient will sign the consent-HIPAA form and give it to the trained provider already 
providi ng standard care. The provider will give the signed form  to Perinatal CTRC staff  
who will also sign the form noting that consent was obtained by phone. A  copy of the 
signed consent-HIPAA form will be given to the patient.  
  
We will see k a waiver of written consent for surveying  providers who are given the 
dosing suggestion via the EHR -based Prescription Tool . At their convenience, these 
providers will complete an online postcard consent and survey via REDCap.   
 
After consent, demographics and t he best cont act information will be collected (remotely 
by phone during the COVID -19 pandemic  or as re quired by UCHealth ) from those 
enrolled patients who indicate they are interested in completing the survey s after their 
hospital discharge.  
 
We expect 44 patients to complete all four weekly surveys and we define the intent-to -
treat sample as patients who complete one or more surveys (providing at least one 
observation to be used in analyses) .  To conservatively allow for increased variability 
due to attrition, 60 patients will be randomized equally electronically  to intervention 
(prescription tool) or no intervention (prescription as usual). We will use an electronic  
randomization scheme created so that the principal  investigator and statistician can 
remain blin d to a ssignment.   
 At the time of writing the prescription for a patient the provider will be informed that a 
patient may be considered for a lower post-discharge opioid dose (No opioids for 
patients who did not take any opioids in the last 24 hours, and 10 oxy codo ne 5mg 
tablets, for patients having taken less than 22.5 MME, e.g. 1-3 oxycodone 5mg tablets in the last 24 hours ). No dosing recommendations for patients having taken more than 22.5 
MME will be made as these patients are not eligible for this  study. F inal dosing decisions 
and drug choices will remain at the discretion of the treating provider and decisions will be tracked.  
 For this pilot study, the provider information (best practice alert – BPA) will be 
operationalized via a written recommendation on paper handed to the provider by study 
staff in a sealed envelope or emailed with a read receipt that the provider will be asked 
to open and read. Alternatively , the BPA may be presented electronically using a screen. 
Providers will b e asked to acknowled ge that they read the BPA by closing the window  or 
opening the envelope or email .  
 
For the intervention group:  
For patients receiving no opioids in the last 24 hours prior to an oxycodone or oxycodone/acetaminophen discharge prescription being written:  
 BPA:  “In the last 24 hours, your  patient received NO opioids. Consider not 
prescribing any opioids for pain management after discharge.”  
 
For patients receiving >0 MME up to < 22.5 MME in the last 24 hours prior to an 
oxycodone or oxycodone/acetaminophen di scha rge prescription being written (example 
BPA is for 15 MME – 2 oxycodone 5mg tablets):  
 
Protocol Template Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 BPA: “In the last 24 hours, your patient received opioid medication equivalent to 2 
oxycodone 5 mg tablets by mouth. Consider writing for a total of 10 oxycodone 5 
mg tablets for pain management after discharge.”  
 
Note, oxycodone-containing medications are the opioid prescribed in >96% of cases after Cesarean section at our hospital. We will make equivalent recommendations if hydrocodone is used. Based on our data, no other opioid medications have been 
prescribed for use after discharge following Cesarean section.  
 
For the control group:  
BPA:  “Consider prescribing the usual medications for pain management after 
discharge.”  
 
One week after hospital discharge intereste d patients will be contacted and asked to 
comp lete the first of four surveys. Participants will receive a $10 gift card, or equivalent 
money order if requested, for each of four weekly surveys, for a total of $40. All enrolled 
patients  will complete the w eekly post-discharge surveys within REDCap  or by hard 
copy or phone if they do not have internet access .  
 Providers will not be paid to use the Prescription Tool or complete the short, one-time online survey.   
D.   Description, Risks, Justification of Pr ocedures and Data Collection Tools:  
 
Discomforts and other possible risks include:  
Common Risks:  
• Tiredness or boredom when completing study assessments.   
Uncommon Risks: 
• Tension or nervousness  may occur from completing the study assess ments. 
Particip ants can talk with the researchers about such problems, and can 
terminate the study if they  wish.  
  
• Problems with pain management.  
Only patients who are predicted to require approximately half or less than the 
usually prescribed opioid dose (i.e., those taking  equal or less than 22.5 MME in 
the 24 hours prior to discharge) will be  eligible. Patients will be randomized to have 
their provider receive a suggestion for a reduction of opioid dose versus standard 
of care. Providers may still choose to prescribe a higher d ose as clinically 
indicated. The prescription tool will only make a suggestion. We will track the 
recommendation made as well as the actual dose prescribed.  
 
We will follow up with all patients at half of their usual follow -up period (usually 2 
weeks ) via a REDCap survey, phone, email, or in clinic to assess how they are 
doing and if they are likely to run out of opioid medications despite still requiring them for acute surgical pain. For patients, who are running low on opioid pai n 
medications, we wi ll arrange for additional pain medications to be prescribed as 
deemed appropriate by their providers using the electronic prescription route if needed. We will monitor the study progress closely and reassess our study design 
Protocol Template Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 if more than 5 intervention group patients require prescriptions  prior to scheduled 
clinic follow -up.  
 
All patients  are routinely given a phone number where they can reach a surgical  
provider 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in case pain therapy is inadequate.  
 
The study team will m onitor need for secondary prescriptions from providers to 
ensure that no significant under -prescription of opioid medications after surgery 
occurs.   
 
These recommendations are in accordance with current quality improvement 
efforts by th e system -wide Pharmac y and Therapeutics  (P&T ) Opioid 
Subcommittee charged with addressing UCHealth actions to meet the new Joint 
Commission Pain Assessment and Management guidelines. This committee is 
co-chaired by the Co -I of this study (Karsten Bartels) and Dr. Clark Lyda, 
Pharm.D . The PI is also an active member of the system -wide UCHealth Opioid 
and Pain Management Steering Committee that is chaired by Dr. Jean Kutner. 
This committee also supports this application. Lastly, the PI holds an active 
funded 5-year NIH K23 gr ant “Improving Opioid Prescription Safety After 
Surgery ” that provides material and personal support, statistical support, and 
regulatory support for this application.  
 
Rare But Serious Risks:  
• Breaches of confidentiality.   
  
Confidentiality is maintained throughout the study’s entirety and protected health 
information will not be disclosed outside the University of Colorado. The study therefore does not involve any more than minimal risk to patients, namely loss of confidentiality. While there is no direct ben efit to subjects, knowledge gained 
from our study will help to tailor prescription of analgesic medications after surgery to patients’ actual needs.  
 
Strict safeguards for data protection will be followed including storage on protected servers, passw ord protec tion and monitored access to authorized 
users. Please see the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan section for additional details. Patients are provided with the PI’s office phone number, COMIRB’s phone number, and the PI’s email addres s and phone number s hould they have 
any questions. Patients may withdraw from the study at any time.     
 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  
 
Each participant will be assigned a corresponding study ID number. ID numbers will be 
assigned in the order of patient enrollment. A master list connecting the enrollment 
number with the patient’s medical history number will be maintained only for the duration of the data collection. Only PI-approved study personnel  who have current COMIRB-
required human subject protection training w ill have password -protected and monitored 
access to the data. Following the interpretation of the data, the master list will be 
destroyed and no patient identifying information will be maintained.    
Protocol Template Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Demographic data, information on prescribed and non-pres cribed medications, and 
clinical outcome values relevant for pain management will be obtained from the E pic 
database and stored in a secure fashion using REDCap .  
 
E.   Potential Scientific Problems:   
Concomitant provider education may itself lead to a change in pa in management 
practices. To address this, a future larger pragmatic clini cal trial could include cluster 
randomization based on study site.  Few prognostic models actually are in clinical use, 
often be cause they have not been externally validated and becaus e of the data collection 
burden. Our local Clinical Decision Support Program has confirmed the feasibility of our 
proposal to integrate a future decision-making tool into the electronic medical record and order entry system .  
 
F.   Data Analysis Plan:   
 
The intent-to-treat (ITT) sample is defined as those who complete at least one survey. In 
our prior observational study, 100% of the C -section patients satisfied this criterion. If there 
is a subsample that does not complete at leas t one survey, we wi ll compare that group to 
the ITT group on relevant demographic and clinical characteristics . Outcomes not 
requiring any response to the survey will be compared for all patients enrolled, regardless 
if they completed at least one survey.  The prescription to ol and prescription as usual  (PAU) groups will be compared on baseline 
demographic and clinical characteristics using Mann-Whitney tests, independent t-tests 
and chi -square tests as appropriate for continuous and categorical data; when necessary 
(i.e. when variables have distributions violating assumptions), nonparametric procedures 
will be substituted. We expect randomization to ensure group equivalence; should 
variables be different they will be evaluated as covariates in the analyses described below  
as appropriate.   
 Our primary analyses will compare the prescription tool  group with the PAU group on oral 
morphine equivalent dose left over (not used) from the total amount of prescribed opioids. 
Based on our preliminary data, we will assume the control gr oup to receive an opioid 
prescription for 20 oxycodone 5mg tablets (150MME), leading to a mean MME of 101.8 (SD 60.5) left over. Conservatively estimating a 50% adoption rate of the decision support 
tool by prescribing clinicians, we would expect a mean MM E of 55 (SD 37.6) left over 
opioids in the intervention group. Assuming statistical comparisons will be made using 
Mann-Wh itney test a sample size of n=22 per group (44 total using 1:1 allocation) will yield 
90% power with an assumed one-tailed alpha of 0.0 5 (G-Power, version 3.1.9.2).
20  
 
For the primary weekly opioid use varia ble and for secondary longitudinal variables of 
interest (i.e. weekly scores for pain interference and pain intensity), trajectories will first be visually compared between the two groups. Mixed models will then be used to analyze each outcome that will include fixed group, time, and group by time interaction effects and 
random patient effects.  Covariates will only be included if they differ by group at baseline 
and are related to the outcome of interest. The  test of the group by time interaction will  
indicate if each out come differs over time by groups. Overall means for each outcome will 
be estimated and compared between groups as will week 1 and week 4 means of each outcome will be separately compared between groups. These analyses on the ITT sample  
will then be repeated on the subset of patients who complete all 4 surveys and any 
differences between results will be reported. 
Protocol Template Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
Important secondary summary variables that will be compared between groups using chi -
square, t-test, nonparametric, and c ovari ate-a djusted (i.e. ANCOVA) methods as 
appropriate are: need for additional opioid prescriptions  (yes, no) , and amount of opioid 
and non opioid analgesic drugs taken (total  mg). Reported medication disposal by group 
will additionally be described. 
 
G.  Summ arize  Knowledge to be Gained:   
We expect to have designed and demonstrated the feasibility of implementation of a 
decision-making support tool to better estimate individual patient needs for pain therapy after surgery. The instrument will be parsimonious  in na ture, as it will rely on information 
that is readily available in the patient’s medical record and it will not require any special action by the clinician to obtain a dosage recommendation. Creating such a tool will be 
critical to translate the findi ngs of  this line of research into safer opioid prescribing 
practices for our patients. Given that the tool can be integrated into a nationally used 
electronic medical record and order entry system (Epic), usage and further testing of its  
performance wi ll be poss ible in many diverse environments. Eventually, public health will 
be promoted through improving non-opioid analgesia and by decreasing prescriptions of unneeded opioid pain medications. This will lead to a subsequent decreased avai lability 
of opi oid medications for non-medical use. F urther, the data obtained from this aim will be 
used for a subsequent grant application.  
 
H. References:  
 
1. Bartels K, Mayes LM, Dingmann C, et al. Opioid Use and Storage Patterns b y Patients afte r 
Hospital Discharge following Surgery . PLoS One.  2016;11(1):e0147972.  
2. Bateman BT, Cole NM, Maeda A, et al. Patterns of Opioid Prescription and Use After Cesarean 
Delivery. Obstet Gynecol.  2017;130(1):29- 35. 
3. Chen EY, Marcantonio A, Tornetta P, 3rd. C orrelation Between 24 -Hour Predischarge Opioid Use 
and Amount of Opioids Prescribed at Hospital Discharge. JAMA Surg.  2018;153(2):e174859.  
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prescription Drug Overdose: Understanding the 
Epidemic.  http://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/data/index.html  Accessed on 10/28/2017.  
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Leading Causes of Death.  http://www.cdc.gov/inj ury/wisqars/leading_causes_death.html
 Accessed on 09/27/2017.  
6. Acute Pain Management: Operative or Medical Procedures and Trauma. Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality (AHCPR). 1992; http://archive.ahrq.gov/clinic/medtep/acute.htm . Accessed 
12/11/2017.  
7. Prevention CfDCa. Vital signs: overdoses of prescription opioid pain relievers - United States, 
1999 -2008. . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly  Rep.  2011;60(43):1 487-1492.  
8. Volkow ND, Frieden TR , Hyde PS, Cha SS. Medication -assisted therapies --tackling the opioid-
overdose epidemic. N Engl J Med.  2014;370(22):2063- 2066.  
9. Olsen Y, Daumit GL, Ford DE. Opioid prescriptions by U.S. primary care ph ysicians from 1 992 to 
2001. J Pain.  2006;7(4):225- 235. 
10. Calcaterra S, Glanz J, Binswanger IA. National trends in pharmaceutical opioid related overdose deaths compared to other substance related overdose deaths: 1999- 2009. Drug Alcohol Depend.  
2013;131(3):263- 270. 
11. Binswanger IA, Blatchford PJ, Mueller  SR, Stern MF. Mortality after prison release: opioid 
overdose and other causes of death, risk factors, and time trends from 1999 to 2009. Ann Intern 
Med.  2013;159(9):592 -600. 
12. Dart RC, Surratt HL, Ci cero TJ, et al.  Tren ds in  Opioid Analgesic Abuse and Mortality in the 
United States. N Engl J Med.  2015;372(3):241 -248. 
Protocol Template Page 10 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 13. Bartels K, Fernandez -Bustamante A, McWilliams S, Hopfer CH, Mikulich -Gilbertson SK. Long -
Term Opioid Use After Inpatient Surgery – A Retrospective Coho rt Study. Drug Alcohol Depend.  
2018:In press.  
14. Rodgers J, Cunningham K, Fitzgerald K, Finnerty E. Opioid consumption following outpatient 
upper extremity surgery. J Hand Surg Am.  2012;37(4):645 -650. 
15. Harris K, Curtis J, Larsen B, e t al. Opioid pain me dicat ion use after dermatologic surgery: a 
prospective observational study of 212 dermatologic surgery patients. JAMA Dermatol.  
2013;149(3):317- 321. 
16. Bartels K, Binswanger IA, Hopfer CJ. Sources of Prescription Opioids for Nonmedical  Use. J 
Addict Med.  2016; 10(2):132.  
17. Hill MV, Stuc ke RS, Billmeier SE, Kelly JL, Barth RJ, Jr. Guideline for Discharge Opioid 
Prescriptions after Inpatient General Surgical Procedures. J Am Coll Surg.  2018;226(6):996-
1003.  
18. National Institutes of Health, PROMIS too ls for pain intensity and pain interfe rence. 
http://www.healthmeasures.net/explore -measurement -systems/promis  Last accessed on 
03/02/2018.  
19. Lavonas EJ, Banner W, Bradt P, et a l. Roo t causes, clinical effects, and outcomes of 
unintentional exposures to buprenorphine by young children. J Pediatr. 2013;163(5):1377 -1383 
e1371- 1373.  
20. Faul F, Erdfelder E, Buchner A, Lang AG. Statistical power analyses using G*Power 3.1: tests for 
correlation and regression analyses. Behav Res Methods.  2009;41(4):1149- 1160.  
21.  Van de Velde S, et al.,  Implement Sci. 2018 Jun 25;13(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s13012 -018-0772-
3. The GUIDES checklist: development of a tool to improve tfhe s uccessful use of gu idelin e-
based computerised clinica l decision support.  
 
 