Page 1 of 8 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0280  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/28/2017    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pilot, randomized trial of the use of pediatric size phlebotomy tubes in adult critically ill 
patients to reduce red blood cell transfusions  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 09/28/2017  
  
Page 2 of 8 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0280  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/28/2017   Protocol  Title:  Pilot,  randomized  trial of the use of pediatric  size phlebotomy  tubes  in adult 
critically  ill patients  to reduce  red blood  cell transfusions  
 
Principal  Investigator:  Javier Barreda Garcia,  MD 
 
Co-Investigators:  Sujith  V Cherian,  MD;  Garbo  Mak,  MD;  Alisha  Y Young,  MD;  Claudia  Pedroza,  
PhD 
 
Study  Coordinator:  None  
 
Population:  Adult, intensive care unit patients, newly admitted to the  ICU. N=200  
Number  of Sites:  Single site / Memorial Hermann Hospital / Medical ICU,  Transplant  ICU 
Intervention:  Pediatric size phlebotomy  tubes  
Comparison:  Adult size phlebotomy  tubes  
 
 
Outcomes:  Primary : Time to red blood cell transfusion or hemoglobin less than  7 g/dL  
Main secondary : Rate of change in hemoglobin (g/dL per patient per day)  
 
Study  Duration:  6-12 months  
 
Subject  Duration:  Duration of ICU stay, up to 30  days  
 
 
 
1. BACKGROUND AND  RATIONALE  
 
Anemia and red blood cells (RBC) transfusions are common in critically ill patients.1,2 One factor 
associated with the development of anemia3,4 and RBC transfusions5,6 in these patients is the volume of 
diagnostic phlebotomy. Therefore, a more efficient use of blood drawn for diagnostic testing has the 
potential to reduce transfusions.  
 
Even though blood conserving strategies could be beneficial, there are no randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs) assessing their efficacy in reducing RBC transfusions in adults. A blood conserving arterial line 
system reduced the RBC transfusion volume in an RCT of very low birth weight infants.7 However, the 
results o f this trial might not be applicable to adults as their larger circulating blood volume might limit 
the benefit of any blood conserving intervention.8 
 
The use of pediatric size phlebotomy tubes has been proposed to reduce anemia and RBC transfusions  
in adults. Adult phlebotomy volumes exceed pediatric ones for the same tests.9  However, the absence  
of high quality data supporting their efficacy compounded by the loss of automation in the processing of 
pediatric tubes prevents their routine use. Two RCTs assessed their effect on the change in hemoglobin 
in adults. The first trial showed no benefit, but the intervention was limited to basic metabolic profile 
tubes and the study was conducted in a general Internal Medicine population.8 The second trial, 
performed  in  the  Intensive  Care  Unit  (ICU)  setting,  demonstrated  a  reduction  in  the  decline      of 
Page 3 of 8 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0280  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/28/2017   hemoglobin, but used a co -intervention.10     None of these studies analyzed the change in hemoglobin as 
a function of time at risk.  
 
An RCT is needed to evaluate the hypothesis that the use of pediatric s ize phlebotomy tubes reduces  
RBC transfusions in adult ICU patients compared with the use of adult size tubes. However, its design is 
complicated by the lack of knowledge regarding the expected effect size and overall feasibility of this 
intervention. Thu s, we will perform a pilot RCT that will allow us to investigate these  issues.  
 
 
2. OBJECTIVES  
 
2.1 Primary  
 
Estimate the effect size of using pediatric phlebotomy tubes in ICU patients on RBC transfusions 
compared with the use of adult phlebotomy tubes during their ICU stay  
 
2.2 Secondary  
 
 Determine  the rate of recruitment  of participants  
 Evaluate the feasibility of  implementing phlebotomies using pediatric size tubes in an adult 
ICU 
 Establish  the rate of change  of hemoglobin  in the intervention  and control  groups  
 Identify the ICU admission hemoglobin range that best predicts benefit from pediatric 
phlebotomy  tubes  
 
 
3. METHODS  
 
3.1 Trial  design  
 
Randomized controlled trial  
 
3.2 Participants  
 
Inclusion (all of the following)  
 
 Age ≥ 18 years  old 
 New admission to the medical or transplant ICU at Memorial Hermann Hospital in  Houston  
 ICU admission hemoglobin level of at least 7 g/dL. The ICU admission hemoglobin will be  
the most recent hemoglobin value available at the time of screening for inclusion in the 
study.  
 Randomization is expected within 12 hour of admission to the  ICU 
 
Exclu sion (any of the following)  
 
Conditions that affect the generation or loss of RBCs  
Page 4 of 8 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0280  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/28/2017    Clinical bleeding. Defined as menstrual bleeding, bleeding leading to a change in the 
frequency of hemoglobin monitoring or to an order for a medication, trans fusion,  
procedure,  or consultation  intended  to prevent  or treat  bleeding.  
 Known hemolytic disorder (e.g. sickle cell disease, hereditary spherocytosis, autoimmune 
hemolytic  anemia)  
 Bone marrow disorder (e.g. aplastic anemia, marrow infiltration disorder, chemotherapy 
within the last 8  weeks)  
 
Randomization to adult size phlebotomy tubes is not recommended  
 Jehovah’s  Witnesses  
 
Collection of blood tests is not possible or desired  
 Patient is comfort care measures  only  
 
Inability to complete the desired time of follow up  
 Refractory shock: mean arterial blood pressure below 60 mmHg despite maximal doses of 3 
vasopressors. Maximal dose of vasopressors are as follows: Norepinephrine 70 mcg/min; 
vasopressin 0.04 units/min; ep inephrine 35 mcg/min; dopamine 20 mcg/kg/min; 
phenylephrine 350  mcg/min  
 Severe acidosis: pH below 7 in more than one arterial blood gas within 24 hours of ICU 
admission  in the absence of diabetic  ketoacidosis  
 
Other  
 Surgical admission  diagnosis  
 Pregnancy  
 Current  prisoner  
 
3.3 Allocation  
 
All patients admitted to the medical or transplant ICU will be screened for eligibility. Group 
assignment will be done using the randomization module in the Research electronic data  
capture (RedCap). Randomization will be str atified by ICU admission hemoglobin level (7 to 9.49 
g/dL, 9.5 to 11.99 g/dL, and 12 g/dL or greater). Patients will be randomized using permuted 
blocks of 4 or 6 and a 1 to 1 ratio, into one of two groups: the pediatric size phlebotomy tubes 
group or the adult size phlebotomy tubes  group.  
 
3.4 Interventions  
 
Pre-intervention period (1 month)  
 
The first objective of this period is to standardize the pediatric tubes phlebotomy process. Study 
procedures will be presented to the ICU nurses by email, printed material, and lectures. 
Information will include the type of pediatric tube and the blood vo lume needed for each test, 
and the importance to collect only the total estimated blood volume according to the tests that 
need to be performed. Pocket size cards that include the suggested volume of blood to be 
drawn for each pediatric tube will be provid ed. No guidance regarding the phlebotomy process 
when using adult size tubes will be given so that it reflects usual practice.      The volume of fluid  
Page 5 of 8 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0280  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/28/2017   drawn to clear the intravenous line will be returned to the patient in a sterile fashion i n both 
groups whenever possible. The frequency and type of blood tests performed will follow usual 
practice.  
 
The second objective of the pre -intervention period is to provide RBC transfusions 
recommendations to the ICU physicians. This will be accomplishe d by email and during any of 
the regular Critical Care Division meetings. An RBC transfusion will be recommended if the 
hemoglobin is less than 7 g/dL or if there is bleeding with associated hemodynamic instability 
regardless of the hemoglobin level. It wi ll be dependent upon the ICU physician to make the  
final  determination  regarding  the need  of any transfusions.  
 
Intervention period (5 -11 months)  
 
Blood tests will be collected using pediatric and adult phlebotomy tubes in the experimental and 
control gro ups, respectively (Table 1).  Arterial blood gases, blood cultures, and lactate levels  
will be collected using the same tubes in both groups. The exposure period will be from 
randomization until the hemoglobin is less than 7 g/dL, an RBC transfusion order  is placed, the 
patient is discharged from the ICU (time of an acceptance note) or dies (time of death), clinical 
bleeding or surgery occur, comfort care measures only are initiated, or the patient stays in the 
ICU for more than 30 consecutive  days.  
 
3.5 Outco mes  
 
Primary  
The primary outcome will be the time from randomization to hemoglobin less than 7 g/dL or 
RBC transfusion  order.  
 
Secondary  
The main secondary outcome will be the rate of change in hemoglobin (g/dL/patient/day) in the 
ICU.  This will be calculated as the most recent hemoglobin prior to randomization minus the  
last hemoglobin prior to ICU discharge, death, RBC transfusion, clin ical bleeding, surgery, or 
change of clinical status to comfort measures, divided by the number of days (rounded to the 
nearest 0.5) between these two values (crude estimate). If the longitudinal measures of 
hemoglobin levels deviate substantially from a l inear trajectory, we will use a growth model to 
capture the best fitting function of time (see Analysis Plan for details) and generate a predicted 
rate of  change.  
 
Other secondary outcomes will be the proportion of participants receiving an RBC transfusion  
while in the ICU, the proportion of patients with at least one inadequate blood sample for 
laboratory analysis, and the ICU mortality. An inadequate blood sample is defined as any blood 
sample that requires recollection.  
 
The patient’s admission height an d weight will be used to estimate the total blood volume of 
each patient based on Nadler’s equation.11 The total daily phlebotomy volume per participant 
will be calculated based on the number of blood tests per patient per day and the minimal blood 
volume for analysis of each test.  
Page 6 of 8 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0280  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/28/2017   3.6 Blinding  
 
The primary outcome assessors will be blinded to the intervention assignments. Study 
participants, nurses, and physicians will not be blinded.  
 
3.7 Analysis  plan  
 
Baseline variables (e.g. gender, race, age) be tween groups will be examined for clinically 
significant differences that may have occurred by chance. If a clinically significant difference is 
noted, both unadjusted and adjusted analyses will be performed.  
 
Intent -to-treat analyses will be used. The pri mary outcome will be assessed using time to event 
analysis with the Cox proportional hazard model including treatment group and ICU admission 
hemoglobin level group (stratifying variable). Censoring events will be death, ICU discharge, 
clinical bleeding, s urgery, initiation of comfort care measures, and end of the study. We will 
report the hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval (CI).  
 
We will assess whether the longitudinal measures of hemoglobin follow a linear trajectory. If 
they substantially deviate, we will employ multilevel mixed models including a quadratic term  
for time or splines to capture the non -linear change while accounting for within -subject 
correlation. We will generate predicted rates of change to compare between the study  groups.  
 
To compare the rate of change in hemoglobin (either crude or predicted) between the two  
study groups, a linear regression model will be used with treatment and ICU admission 
hemoglobin groups as covariates. Multiple regression analysis will be used to ass ess the 
relationship between the rate of change in hemoglobin as the dependent variable, and age, 
admission hemoglobin, acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (APACHE) II score, acute 
or chronic renal disease, sepsis admission diagnosis, use of med ications that can cause bleeding, 
intervention group, and ICU admission hemoglobin group as independent variables. Proportions 
of RBC transfusion and proportions of at least one inadequate blood sample will be compared 
among the two groups using logistic r egression models with treatment group and ICU admission 
hemoglobin level group as  covariates.  
 
Sample Size  
 
It is estimated that the primary outcome will occur in about 20 -40% of the participants in the 
control group.1,2,6,12 -14 A total of 200 patients (10 0 in each group) will be randomized in the  
study. This number of participants was chosen to allow completion of the study in a reasonable 
time frame while obtaining preliminary information to estimate an unbiased treatment effect. 
This sample size allows a reasonable width of the 95% CI for the rate of the primary outcome in 
each group (+/ - 8%).  
 
 
3.8 Study  duration  
 
It is estimated that about 6 to 12 months will be needed to complete this pilot study. This 
estimate takes into account the pre -intervention peri od (1 month). No more than 5 patients per  
Page 7 of 8 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0280  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/28/2017   day and 25 patients per month will be active in the intervention group as per hospital laboratory 
restrictions.  
 
 
4. DATA AND SAFETY  MONITORING  
 
The adverse events related to the use of pediatric phlebot omy tubes are not expected to  be 
different than the ones that occur with adult tubes. Potential events include local complications at 
the site of blood collection, complications related to blood loss including anemia and RBC 
transfusions, and insufficient  blood for analysis requiring recollection of blood. Previous studies in 
adults have not shown a difference in the number of insufficient samples between patients using 
adult or pediatric size tubes.15,16 
 
Participants that receive the other group’s intervention will remain in their assigned group for the 
duration of the trial.  These protocol deviations as well as instances of inadequate blood samples  
will be recorded  in the blood  tests  record  forms  by the investigators  (Appendix).  
 
 
5. QUALITY CONTROL AND  ASSURANCE  
 
One investigator will be blinded to the group assignments. This researcher will determine when the 
study completion criteria has been met for each participant, the primary outcome, and the 
transfu sion related events.  
 
 
6. ETHICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
 
The study will be conducted in accordance with legal and regulatory requirements, as well as the 
general principles set forth in the Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice and the Declaration  of 
Helsinki.  
 
Before implementing this study, the protocol and any other required information, must be reviewed 
and approved by a properly constituted Institutional Review Board (IRB). Any amendments to the 
protocol, other than administrative ones, must be reviewed and app roved by the IRB before 
implementation. If an immediate change to the protocol is implemented for safety reasons by the 
investigator, the IRB must be informed immediately.  
 
All patients admitted to the medical and transplant ICUs of Memorial Hermann Hospit al will be 
screened for eligibility by reviewing the electronic medical record.  
 
A waiver of informed consent and Health Insurance and Accountability Act (HIPAA) authorization are 
being sought. The study does not involve more than minimal risk, the waiver will not adversely  
affect the rights and welfare of the participants, and whenever appropriate, the participants will be 
provided with additional pertinent information after participation.  The probability and magnitude  
of harm or discomfort anticipated with the use of pediatric phlebotomy tubes is not greater than 
those of blood collection using adult phlebotomy tubes.  Blood is collected routinely in pediatric  
ICUs with the same tubes and processes that will be used in the experimental intervention gro up. 
Obtaining  informed  consent  and HIPAA  authorization  could  create  bias related  to the inclusion  of 
Page 8 of 8 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0280  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/28/2017   healthier participants that are not representative of the typical ICU population. This could yield 
meaningless results.  
 
All records identifying the patient will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by 
applicable laws and/or regulations, will not be made publicly available. The medical record number 
will be the only patient identifier that will be recorded. Pati ent names or any other  patient 
identifiers will not be supplied to third parties. A unique study specific number will be assigned to 
every participant. Records containing patient identifiers will be destroyed as soon as possible 
according to legal  regulat ions.  
 
 
7. DATA COLLECTION AND DATABASE  MANAGEMENT  
 
6.1 Data  collection  
 
The investigators will fill out the blood tests form to document the number of blood tests 
performed and the occurrence of insufficient samples or crossover between interventions. This 
will be done through review of the electronic medical record and interv iew of the nurses. This 
information and data obtained from the patient’s electronic medical record will be entered 
directly in the RedCap database, a secure electronic database (Appendix).  
 
6.2 Storage of data collection  forms  
 
The blood tests record forms wil l be stored in the locked research office.  
 
6.3 Patient  Identifiers  
 
The patient’s medical record number will be recorded on the blood tests record forms only. A 
study specific identifier will be given to each participant and will be used for identification in  the 
electronic database.  
 
6.4 Access to patient’s  information  
 
Only study investigators will have access to the paper and electronic patient’s information.  
 
 
8. PUBLICATION  PLAN  
 
The results of the study will be submitted for publication in scientific journals and/or scientific 
meetings. If the results of the study are published, the patient’s identity will remain confidential.  
 
 
9. REFERENCES  
1. Corwin  HL, Gettinger  A, Pearl  RG, et al. The CRIT  Study:  Anemia  and blood  transfusion  in the critically 
ill--current  clinical  practice  in the United  States.  Crit Care  Med  2004;32:39 -52. 
2. Vincent  JL, Baron  JF, Reinhart  K, et al. Anemia  and blood  transfusion  in critically  ill patients.  JAMA 
2002;288:1499 -507.  
Page 9 of 8 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0280  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/28/2017   3. Salisbury  AC, Reid  KJ, Alexander  KP, et al. Diagnostic  blood  loss from  phlebotomy  and hospital - 
acquired  anemia  during  acute  myocardial  infarction.  Arch  Intern  Med  2011;171:1646 -53. 
4. Thavendiranathan P, Bagai A, Ebidia A, Detsky AS, Choudhry NK. Do blood tests cause anemia in 
hospitalized  patients?  The effect  of diagnostic  phlebotomy  on hemoglobin  and hematocrit  levels.  J Gen 
Intern Med  2005;20:520 -4. 
5. Chant  C, Wilson  G, Friedrich  JO. Anemia,  transfusion,  and phlebotomy  practices  in critically  ill patients 
with  prolonged  ICU length  of stay:  a cohort  study.  Crit Care  2006;10:R140.  
6. von Ahsen N, Muller C, Serke S, Frei U, Eckardt KU. Important role of nondiagnostic blood loss and 
blunted erythropoietic response in the anemia of medical intensive care patients. Crit Care Med 
1999;27:2630 -9. 
7. Widness JA, Madan A, Grindeanu LA, Zimmerman MB, Wong DK, Stevenson DK. Reduction in red 
blood cell transfusions among preterm infants: results of a randomized trial with an in -line blood gas 
and chemistry  monitor.  Pediatrics  2005;115:1299 -306.  
8. Kurniali PC, Curry S, Brennan KW, et al. A retrospective  study investigating the incidence and 
predisposing  factors  of hospital -acquired  anemia.  Anemia  2014;2014:634582.  
9. Hicks  JM. Excessive  blood  drawing  for laboratory  tests.  N Engl  J Med  1999;340:1690.  
10. Harber  CR, Sosnowski  KJ, Hegde  RM. Highly  conservative  phlebotomy  in adult  intensive  care --a 
prospective  randomized  controlled  trial.  Anaesth  Intensive  Care  2006;34:434 -7. 
11. Nadler SB, Hidalgo JH, Bloch T. Prediction of blood volume in normal human adults. Surgery 
1962;51:224 -32. 
12. Roubinian NH, Murphy EL, Swain B E, et al. Predicting red blood cell transfusion in hospitalized 
patients:  role of hemoglobin  level,  comorbidities,  and illness  severity.  BMC  Health  Serv  Res 2014;14:213.  
13. Nguyen  BV, Bota  DP, Melot  C, Vincent  JL. Time  course  of hemoglobin  concentrations  in nonbleeding 
intensive  care  unit patients.  Crit Care  Med  2003;31:406 -10. 
14. MacIsaac CM, Presneill JJ, Boyce CA, Byron KL, Cade JF. The influence of a blood conserving device 
on anaemia  in intensive  care  patients.  Anaesth  Intensive  Care  2003;31:653 -7. 
15. Sanchez -Giron  F, Alvarez -Mora  F. Reduction  of blood  loss from  laboratory  testing  in hospitalized 
adult  patients  using  small -volume  (pediatric)  tubes.  Arch  Pathol  Lab Med  2008;132:1916 -9. 
16. Smoller BR, Kruskall MS, Horowitz GL. Reducing adult phlebotomy blood  loss with the use of 
pediatric -sized  blood  collection  tubes.  Am J Clin Pathol  1989;91:701 -3. 