Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Study Comparing Prandial Insulin A spart vs. T echnosphere Insulin in Patients  
with Type 1 Diabetes on Multiple Daily Injections:  Investigator -Initiated  A Real -life 
Pilot Study —STAT Study  
 
PI:  Satish K. Garg MD  
University of Colorado, Ba rbara Davis Center for Diabetes  
 
Study Sites  and Local PIs : 
1. PI:  Halis Kaan Akturk, MD  
University of Colorado Denver , Barbara Davis Center for Diabetes , 
1775 Aurora Court  Aurora, CO 80045 
2.  PI:  Bruce Bode, MD  
Atlanta Diabetes Associates  1800 , Howell Mill Rd #450, Atlanta, GA 30318  
3. PI:  Anne Peters, MD  
USC Westside Center for Diabetes , 9033 Wil shire Blvd #406, Beverly Hills,  
CA 90211  
4.  PI:  Leslie Klaff, MD  and Ronald Brazg, MD  
Rainier Clinical Research Center , 723 SW 10th St #100, Renton, WA 98057  
5.  PI:  Timothy S. Bailey, MD  
AMCR Institute, 700 West El North Parkway, Suite 201, Escondido, CA  92026  
  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Abbreviations:  
A1c   Hemoglobin A1c  
AE   Adverse Event  
AUC    Area Under The Curve  
CGM    Continuous Glucose Monitoring  
CBC    Complete Blood Count  
CMP    Complete metabolic panel  
CRO    Contract Research Organization  
DKA    Diabetic Ketoacidosis 
FEV1    Forced Expiratory Volume In 1 Second  
FDA   Food and Drug Administration 
IRB   Intuitional Review Board  
MDI   Multiple Daily Injections  
NL   Novolog®, Insulin Aspart  
SAE   Serious Adverse Event  
SMBG   Self-Monitoring of Blood Glucose  
PPBG    Post -prandial Blood glucose  
PPGE    Post -prandial Glucose Excursion  
T1D   Type 1 Diabetes  
TI   Afrezza®, Technosphere Insulin  
 
 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
  
Clinical Trial S ummary  
Title Study Comparing Prandial Insulin Aspart vs. Technospher e Insulin in 
Patients  with Type 1 Diabetes on Multiple Daily Injections: 
Investigator -Initiated , A Real -life Pilot Study —STAT Study  
Trial Location  Multi -center  (USA)  
Study O bjectives  Primary objectives:  
1. Improved time in range (70- 180 mg/dl) with technosphere  
insulin ( TI) on continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)  
2. Better post -prandial glucose excursions  (PPGE)  (1-4 hours 
after meals) with TI 
Secondary objectives:  
1. To assess glucose variability (standard deviation and/or  
coefficient variation) , 
2. The area  under the curve (AUC) in the post -prandial  blood 
glucose (PPBG) and PPGE , 
3. Change in A1c in  one-month  treatment,  
4. To determine above the target (>180 mg/dl) on CGM , and 
5. To evaluate  hypoglycemia (below  the target <70, <60, <50 
mg/dl) on CGM  
Study Design  Randomized, open -label, parallel, multi -center, prospective, 
investigator -initiated  
Study Population  
Main Selection 
Criteria  Inclusion criteria:  
1. Signed informed consent before any study -related activities , 
2. Male or female aged 18- 70 years , 
3. Type 1 diabetes mellitus  (T1D) duration more than six months , 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 4. Treatment with multiple daily injection s (MDI) for at least three 
months before screening visit; stable insulin dose for the last 
one month , 
5. No use of any oral anti -diabetics, any other form of insulin other 
than mentioned in the protocol , or any other type of injections 
such as glucagon- like-peptide- 1 (GLP-1) analogs, pramlintide 
or insulin/GLP -1 analog com binations , 
6. A1c between 6.5 to 10% , 
7. Willingness to routinely collect  at least two blood glucose 
measurements per day to calibrate the CGM. Beyond the 
calibrations,  patients  may use CGM for necessary action 
without having to confirm with fingersticks  self-monitoring blood 
glucose  (SMBG), as approved by the Food  and Drug 
Administration ( FDA), 
8. BMI ≤35 kg/m2, 
9. Ability and willingness to adhere to the protocol including 
clinical and phone visits and 4- week -long CGM  wear , 
10. Using insulin glargine or insulin degludec  as basal insulin,  
11. Able to use and understand CGM data,  
12. Willing to complete phone and clinic visits , 
13. Patients who eat three  main meals in a day (breakfast, lunch,  
and dinner) , 
14. Ability to speak, read, and write English , and 
15. Patients  prandial insulin need must be < 18 units per meal  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Use of any other diabetic medication other than allowed in the 
protocol , 
2. Pregnant or intention to become pregnant during the study , or 
not using adequate birth control methods , 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 3. Severe unexplained hypoglycemia requiring emergency 
treatment in the previous three  months , 
4. Use of systemic or inhaled corticosteroids , 
5. History of hemoglobinopathies , 
6. Diagnosis of anemia,  
7. Post-renal transplantation, currently undergoing dialysis, 
creatinine >2.0 mg/dl or a calculated creatinine clearance of 
<50 mL/min,  
8. Advanced or unstable retinopathy needing laser procedure or vitrectomy , 
9. History of pancreatitis , 
10. Exten sive skin changes/diseases that inhibit wearing a sensor 
on normal  skin, 
11. Known allergy to adhesives , 
12. Known allergy  to study medication,  
13. Participation in another investigational study protocol within 30 days before  enrollment , 
14. Known chronic obstructive pulm onary disease, pulmonary 
hypertension, asthma, pulmonary fibrosis , or any chronic 
pulmonary infection, or any systemic disease that primarily affects the lungs. History of any pulmonary nodule will be 
excluded to participate in the study , 
15. Active smokers,  
16. Marijuana users , 
17. Insulin pump users , 
18. Expected acetaminophen use during CGM , 
19. Using insulin detemir or NPH as basal insulin,  
20. Patients who use mor e than 18 units per meal,  
21. Any other condition, as determined by the investigator, which 
could make the subject unsuitable for the trial, impairs the 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 subject’s suitability for the trial, or impairs the validity of the 
informed consent . 
Total patients  Up to 75 enrolled  for a total of 60 randomized patients  to account for 
dropouts/screen fails  
Study Treatment  
Investigational 
medication(s)  
 Treatment  group: Technosphere insulin  (Afrezza®) 
TI will be supplied as single -use cartridges of inhaled insulin of 4 or 8 
or 12 units each.  
Control group: Insulin aspart (Novolog®) {NL} 
Novolog® will be supplied as 100 U/mL solution for SC injection in the 
Novolog® Flexpen™ disposable pen.  
Routes of 
administration  Treatment  group: TI Inhaler  
Control group: Subcutaneous injection of NL 
Dose regimen and 
adjustment  Patients will continue their routine  meal and correction coverage , if 
applicable. Tables are for recommendations only and will be used as 
guidance.  Since this is a real-life pilot  study, patients will not be 
mandated to use corrections in the NL group. However, in the TI 
group,  patients will use the conversion table from their cur rent prandial 
insulin dosage as  provided (Table 1A). P atients  in the TI group will be 
recommended to use additional post -meal TI bolus  as recommended 
to optimi ze PPBG  {2-hour correction will be used o nly if blood glucose 
is >201 mg/dl and has not decreased by ≥ 50 mg/dl between 1 and 2 -
hours}  (Table 1B) . 
Conversion   Table 1A  
Injected 
mealtime insulin 
dose Technosphere 
insulin dose  
Up to 4 units  4 units  
5-8 units  8 units  
9-12 units  12 units  
13-16 units  16 units  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 17-20 units  20 units  
 
Correction  Table 1B   
Blood glucose  1-hour 2-hour 
<150 mg/dl  - - 
151-200 mg/dl  4 units  - 
>201  mg/dl  8 units  4 units  
 
Basal insulin  Insulin degludec  (Tresiba®), insulin glargine  (Lantus®, Basaglar®, 
Toujeo®) 
Route of 
administration  Subcutaneous injection  
Dose regimen  Patients will continue their current dose  basal insulin once or twice a 
day. 
Statistical 
considerations  Randomization:  Patients will be assigned to TI or NL 1:1 
randomization.  
Sample size determination:  Power Analysis is based on the studies 
done in patients with diabetes. This  sample size will provide 80% 
power to detect a difference in the primary endpoint of time in the 
range of 11% , assuming a standard deviation of 15% and 97% power 
to detect a difference of 1.0 glucose excursion post -prandially, 
assuming a standard deviation of 1.0.  
Analysis population: Statistical analysis will be done after the study is  
complete. The analysis  will be conducted on an intent to treat (ITT) 
population . 
Study duration  Screening  visit followed by randomization visit (up to 7 days)  
4-week treatment period (2 phone visits, 2 clinic visits)  
1-week follow -up period (1 phone visit)  
Total of 6 weeks  
 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Sponsor:      Investigator initiated trial supported by Mannkind, Corp , Valencia, CA . 
 
Project Overview  
This is an investigator -initiated, prospective,  randomized,  multicenter,  parallel, 
open- label,  pilot clinical trial evaluating the ef ficacy of TI  for PPBG, PPGE,  and time- in-
range on CGM  download in patients with T1D . TI is an inhaled,  ultra-rapid- acting  insulin, 
approved by the FDA for use in  patients with diabetes. This is a pilot, real -life study 
where patients will continue their routine diabetes care and use post -meal  correction 
dosages as deemed necessary for normalizing PPBG  as per the protocol.  
This multi- center study will enroll 75 patients with T1D for a total of 60 
randomized patients to account for dropouts/screen fails , A1c values between 6.5 to 
10%. The patients will be randomized in 1:1 fashion to either TI or NL. Patients  who are 
randomized  into the NL arm will continue using their usual prandial insulin dose before 
meal s. Patients  who are randomized into the TI arm will be instructed to dose before the 
meals and take necessary corrections at 1-  and 2- hours after meals to optimize PPBG  
(Table 1B) . There will be a total of 7 study visits  (screening visit, randomization  visit, 2 
clinic , and 3 phone visits ). There will be  a 4-week treatment comparison between TI and 
NL and 1- week of  post-study follow up. (Phone visit; Figure- 1). Standard lab tests  (A1c, 
complete metabolic panel  {CMP}, complete blood count  {CBC} ) will be performed at the 
screening  visit. 
All patients  will use real- time CGM  (Dexc om G5®, San Diego,  CA), which will be 
provided  at the randomization visit for their day -to-day diabetes care. CGM data will be 
downloaded at every clinic visit o n a secured computer. The data will be analyzed after 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 the study for different primary and secondary end points.  All patients  will be allowed to 
keep the CGM after the study is over for t heir day-to-day diabetes care.  
 
Primary objective:  
1. Improved time in range (70- 180 mg/dl) with TI  on CGM  
2. Better PPGE  (1-4 hours after meals) with TI  
 
Secondary objectives:  
1. To assess glucose variability  (GV) (standard deviation and/or  coefficient 
variation) , 
2. The area  under the curve (AUC) in the PPBG and  PPGE , 
3. Change in HbA1c in  one-month treatment,  
4. To determine above the target (>180 mg/dl) on CGM , and 
5. To evaluate hypoglycemia (below  the target <70, <60, <50 m g/dl) on CGM . 
 
Research Design  
What do we intend to do? 
We plan to execute an investigator -initiated, treat -to-target (TTT), multi -center, 
prospective randomized, parallel, open- label pilot clinical trial evaluating the ef ficacy of 
TI for lowering PPBG  and PPGE  in 60 adult patients  (18 to 70 years) wit h T1D  when 
compar ed with NL over a 4-week treatment period.  The study protocol is registered with 
the NCT Government website: ClinicalTrials.Gov . [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
How are we going to do the work?  
The Bar bara Davis Center for Diabetes  (BDC) , primarily a leading T1D  clinical 
and research center equipped for large- scale clinical research , will enroll approximately 
15-20 patients  (Halis Kaan Akturk , MD).  The other four sites are : Atlanta Diabetes 
Associates (Bruce Bode, MD), USC Westside Center for Diabetes (Anne Peters, MD), 
AMCR Institute (Timothy Bailey, MD), and Rainier Clinical Research Center (Leslie 
Klaff, MD, and Ronald Brazg, MD). All other sites will enroll approximately 10- 15 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 patients. Necessary personnel  from all sites will attend an  investigator’s meeting likely in 
Denver in June 2017, which will be organized and conducted before the trial initiation. 
All patients will sign an informed consent form approved by the respective inst itutional 
review boards (IRB). The study will be coordinated by an external contract research 
organization (CRO) , and all sites will be monitored at least once during the study.  
 How will the sites communicate?  
Throughout the duration of the  study, specific events will also be communicated 
by CRO between secondary sites and t he primary investigator site. T hese events 
include protocol exemption, and waiver requests including failed inclusion or exclusion 
criteria.  The patients will be screened within 2 weeks for A 1c deviation.  All serious 
adverse events (SAEs) will be reported to the CRO  and the principal  investigator within 
24 hours.  
 What is the study population? 
The study population will consist of patient s with T1D currently receiving care at 
all respective study site s as listed on the front page. All investigators will attempt to 
recruit males and females with T1D from a variety of ethnic groups for participation in this study. Participants selected for this trial will be adult males and females (18- 70 
years old)  with BMI ≤35.0, diabetes duration > 6 months, A1c between 6.5– 10% with 
T1D, who have not taken any oral anti -diabetics or any other insulin other than 
mentioned in the protocol or GLP -1 analog injections or any combination of insul in/GLP -
1 analog injections in the last three months  (detailed in Appendix 2 and 3) . One repeat 
A1c will be allowed within  two weeks of the screening phase. Patients  who need more 
than 18 units of prandial insulin before meals will be excluded  from the study. Only 
patients  taking glulisine  (Apidra
®), lispro  (Humalog®), or aspart  (Novolog®) as their 
prandial insulin at baseline will be allowed in the study . 
 How are patients  being selected for the study? 
Patients  will be randomly selected from the patient population at all sites. First 
recognized by  the investigator , coordinator, or from a computer -generated  list based on 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 entry criteria, patients who qualify will be offered to participate in the study on a first  
come basis. Patients  who appear to fit the incl usion/exclusion criteria  as mentioned in 
Appendix 2 and 3  during prescreening will be screened.  
 
What are the treatment groups? 
There are two parallel treatment groups. Beginning the day after visit 2, week 1, 
patients  in the TI treatment group will use only TI  for meals and corrections. Patients  in 
the comparison group will be using NL  for meal s as they use it in real life. All patients  
will be provided with TI and insulin aspart  for the duration of the study. All basal insulin  
(Toujeo®, Lantus®, Basaglar®, Tresiba®) except NPH and detemir (Levemir®) are 
allowed before and during the st udy as a part of MDI regimens. Basal insulin will not be 
provided  throughout the study  period.  
 
What is your assignment strategy?  
The patients  will be assigned  in a 1:1 fashion to either the TI or NL group. Sites 
will be responsible for supplying TI , NL, and other necessary materials to the patients 
related to the study . The Barbara Davis Center for Diabetes will be responsible for 
randomization using a computer system  (Janet  Snell -Bergeon, PhD). All patients  will be 
provided  with a CGM  (Dexcom G5®, San Diego, CA)  and six sensors for the duration of 
the study. Patients  will be allowed to keep the CGM systems for their personal use after 
the study. The CGM data will be downloaded and analyzed for different GV  indices  at all 
clinical visits . 
 What are sample size calculations?  
Sixty (60) patients will be randomized  into the TI and NL groups,  and the study 
will likely initiate in summer  of 2017. Power Analysis is based  on the studies d one in 
patients with diabetes. This  sample size will provide 80% power to detect a difference in 
the primary end point of time in  the range  of 11% , assuming a standard deviation of 
15%, and 97% power to detect a difference of 1.0 glucose excursion post -prandially, 
assuming a standard deviation of 1.0.  
 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 What is the schedule of events for the treatment groups? 
All patients  will participate in a 1 -2 hour screening visit 1, week -1. In the same 
week, patients  will be randomized into one of the two treatment groups during baseline 
visit 2 (week 0 ). The treatment  group will only use TI  for rapid acting insulin for meals 
and corrections. The c ontrol group will only use NL  for rapid acting  insulin for  meals. 
The patients  in the control group will continue to use their respective treatments for four  
weeks with no predetermined change in dosage or titration. The patients  in the TI group 
will use TI  insulin as prandial insulin and for PPBG correction at 1-  and 2- hours aft er 
main meals. Three main meals should be at least 4 hours apart from each other. 
Because the duration of action of TI is shorter , but ultra- rapid in onset compared to NL , 
patients in the treatment  group can use TI insulin for correction dose (s) at 1-hour and 2-
hour after the meal  dose , if BG is over 150 m g/dl. All patients in the treatment group will 
use a dose- conversion chart that will be provided at randomization for meals according 
to their usual prandial insulin dose (Table  1A). The s tudy design is summarized  in 
Figure- 1. All patients  in the treatment  group will be given the option of using correction if 
PPBG at 1 -hour after the meal is between 151- 200 mg/dl by 4 units of TI, and if PPBG 
is over 201 mg/dl by 8 units  of TI (Table 1B) . If PPBG does not decrease more than 50 
mg/dl , and still over 201  mg/dl at 2- hour after the meal, they will be given the option of 
using 4 units of TI  (Table 1B ). All patients  in the treatment  group will be instructed  on 
proper use of the TI inhaler . At all clinical visits , all insulin dosages will be recorded.  All 
data will be downloaded an d saved on a secured computer. FEV 1 at baseline , after 2 -
week of treatment and at the end of the study  will be done for all patients . Appendix -1 
summarize s the schedule of events.  
 
Exclu ded medications:  
The patients  who are current  smoker s or have any other significant pulmonary 
disease will not be allowe d to participate in the study. No marijuana consumption will be 
allowed during the study  (since the effects of acute marijuana inhalations on TI  
absorption are unknown).  
All oral anti- diabetics and other forms of insulin and injectable medications other 
than mentioned in the protocol should not be taken  in the last three months. 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Medications  that affect blood sugar, including oral anti -diabetic medications , are not to 
be used for the duration of the study. The patients  must not be taking inhaled or oral 
systemic corticosteroids.  
Other drugs that  interact with TI  and/or  NL are to be considered on a case- by-
case basis by the investigator, including herbs with hypoglycemic properties.  
 
Visit Descriptions : 
Screening, Visit 1 (Week - 1): 
A screening visit: Visit 1 (Week -1). Informed consent will be obtained before 
commencement of any trial -related activities, defined as any procedure that would not 
have been performed  during standard care of the  subject outside of the study.  
During this visit, patients  will receive a physical exam, EKG, vitals and medical 
history, demographics, and a concomitant medications list will be recorded. A blood 
draw will be performed to assess for A1c  (point of care preferred) , CMP , and CBC . A 
urine pregnancy test will be administered for females of childbearing potential.  If the 
patient has a qualified HbA1c done in the last two weeks, it will not be repeated at the 
screening visit  unless the PI deems it necessary . All patients  will receive  a spirometry 
(FEV 1) test for screening.  
 
Baseline/ Randomization, Visit 2  (Week 0)  ± 3 days : 
Patients  who meet the screening  criteria will be randomized into one of two 
groups  and necessary study medication will be dispensed. Instruction s will be given on 
how to use the study medication , TI, starting the day following this visit  with meals and 
corrections  with doses recommended as seen in T able 1A and 1B , and to basal insulin 
regimen throughout the trial  without any dose change. However, the PI  may make 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 necessary changes  in patients’ insulin dosages especially keeping patient safety in 
mind.  Any changes that are  done by the PI out of the protocol  for patient safety will be 
recorded and considered in  statistical analysis.  
Patients  will have their vitals, weight , any adverse events , and con comitant 
medications recorded. All patients  will start real -time CGM  (Dexcom G5®, San Diego, 
CA) at that visit. All patients will wear  CGM through out the study. They will be allowed to 
keep the CGM after the study. They will be trained to use CGM if they do not know how 
or if they are not already on it.  Patients  will be trained on study paperwork (food, 
glucose  and insulin diaries). Patients will continue to check thei r blood glucose levels 
via SMBG  as they deem necessary. However, as approved by the FDA, Dexcom G5® 
data may be used to take necessary  action,  but all patients  must calibrate the sensor 
two times a day per the label . 
All patients  in the treatment  group will be given  the option of using c orrection if 
PPBG at 1 -hour after the meal is between 151- 200 mg/dl by 4 units of TI and if PPBG is 
over 201 mg/dl by 8 units  of TI. If PPBG does not decrease more than 50 mg/dl and  still 
over 201 mg/dl at 2- hours after the meal, they will be given  the option of using 4  units of 
TI. All patients  in the treatment  group will use the recommended conversion ( Table 1A) 
when they calculate their prandial insulin dose.  Since this is a  real-life study, patients in 
the treatment  group will be instructed to use TI  for post -prandial hyperglycemia;  
however , they will not be mandated. In the control  group, patients will continue their 
current NL prandial dose 15 minutes before meals accordin g to their prandial insulin 
dose.  If they use correction, they will correct; however , they will not change their routine 
pre- and post-prandial management.  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
   
Telephone Visits (Visits 3, 5, and 7) ± 3 days  (Figure -1): 
 A phone call will be made  by the study site staf f to each subject at visits 3, 5 , and 
7. Although the window is ± 3  days, call time  will be arranged in advance during the 
clinic visit. At this visit, staff will review any adverse even ts and changes in medications.  
Compliance to study protocol rules and CGM use will be reviewed.  
 
Visit 4  (Week 2)  ± 3 days:  
This visit will occur at Week 2. At Visit 4, study site staff  will record patients’ 
vitals, weight, review of CGM data, and any adverse events and concomitant 
medications . Glucose download,  insulin use/dose,  and sensor glucose data  will be 
discussed  with the provider or  the study coordinator.  
The patients will remain i n the same treatment  or control group. Basal, bolus,  and 
total daily dose of insulin will be recorded. The patients  will receive necessary refills for 
CGM supplies and study medications.  All patients  will be reminded about the study  
protocol and insulin conversion and correction doses  (Table 1A and 1B) . Patients will 
get FEV 1 spirometry test . Patients who have  decline more than 20%  at FEV 1 test at 2 -
week of treatment  will be excluded.  
 
End of study , Visit 6  (Week 4) or Early Termination Visit  ± 3 days:  
For patients  who withdraw at any point during the trial period, this visit  will also 
be offered as an early termination visit  (ETV).  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Patients  who complete treatment will schedule an end of  study visit. This will be 
Visit 6 at Week 4. During this visit, a physical exam will be conducted. Vitals, weight, 
review of CGM data , adverse events, and concomitant medications will be recorded. 
Additional blood will be drawn for A1c  or point of care A1c will be done. Unused 
medication will be returned.  Active treatment with TI will end at this visit.  
Basal, bolus , and total daily dose of insulin will be recorded. After the study, 
patients  will be expected to continue their previous therapy . All patients  will receive a 
spirometry (FEV 1) test.  
 
Risks and Justification of Procedures  
Technosphere insulin ( Afrezza®) 
 
Technosphere insulin ( TI) (MannKind  Corporation, Valencia, CA) is a dry powder 
formulation of regular human insulin adsorbed onto t echnosphere microparticles for oral 
inhalation (1). Upon inhalation, these microparticles can reach the deep lung where they 
dissolve rapidly because of the phy siological pH, allowing absorption of insulin into the 
systemic circulation with a time to maximum serum insulin concentration of ∼ 12–15 min  
(2). TI is currently appr oved for the treatment of T ype 1 and 2 diabetes. Hypoglycemia is 
a potential risk of taking any insulin and/or  TI therapy. Typical symptoms of 
mild/moderate hypoglycemia include:  cold sweats, cool pale skin, nervousness or 
tremor, anxious feeling, unusual tiredness or weakness, confusion, difficulty conc entrating, drowsiness, excessive hunger, and/or transient  vision changes  (3). 
Acute bronchospasm has been observed in patients with asthma and COPD 
using TI (3). TI is contraindicated in patients with chronic lung disease. Before starting 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 TI, detailed medical history, physical exam , and a spirometry (FEV 1) test are mandatory  
to identify potential  lung disease in all patients  (3). Patients who had > 20% decrease in 
FEV 1 during treatment will be discontinued from using TI. 
In patients with T1D  receiving basal insulin, HbA1c reduction with TI  was 
noninferior  to that of aspart, with less hypoglycemia and less weight gain (3). A multi-
center randomized clinical trial in patients with T ype 2 diabetes showed that p atients 
had significantly lower weight gain and fewer mild- to-moderate and severe 
hypoglycemic  events on TI  plus insulin glargine than on biaspart  insulin  (4). Another 
study in patients with T1D  compared insulin NPH to TI  and TI was not inferior for post -
prandial blood glucose control and had better results at fasting plasma glucose (5).  
Safety Measures:  
CRO  will oversee safety data throughout the study via reporting of hypoglycemic 
events, adverse events, and serious adverse events ( SAEs ). All AEs, repor ted 
spontaneously by the patients , as well as those noted by the investigator or study staff, 
regardless of seriousness, severity, expectedness, or relationship to the study drug, will 
be recorded on source documents from the time of obtaining the informed consent to 7 days after the last  dose of the study drug.  
Severe hypoglycemia, a hypoglycemic episode requiring assistance or 
hospitalization with or without an SMBG  or CGM data , is to be reported as  a SAE.  A 
hypoglycemic event “requiring assistance” is identified when the subject is  unable to 
treat the event  on their own. Any untoward event resulting in hospitalization,  an 
extension of hospitalization, death, or threat of death will also be considered an SAE.  All 
SAEs will be reported to FDA MedWatch by the CRO.  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Statistical Analysis Plan  
Statistical analysis will be done  after the study is complete. The analysis will be 
conducted on the intent to treat (ITT) population. Sample size and power calculations 
were based on the pilot study conducted at the BDC (7). 
The primary end points are to demonstrate improved time in range (70- 180mg/dl) 
with TI on CGM and better PPGE  (1-4 hours after meals). The secondary end points are 
to assess hypoglycemia, measure HbA1c changes, evaluate glucose variability , and to 
assess above the target (>180mg/dl) on  CGM  download.  
Publication Strategy  
Study results may be presented at national and international conferences 
including:  the Scientific Sessions of the American Diabetes Association, E uropean 
Association for the S tudy of D iabetes , Advanced Technologies for the Treatment of 
Diabetes , etc. The PI may submit the study results for publishing to peer-reviewed  
scientific journals, particularly within the fields of diabetes and endocrinology . All study  
results and data will be shared  with the sponsor.  
  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 References  
 
1. Rathbone M, Hadgraft J, Roberts M, Lane M, Leone- Bay A, Grant M. 
Technosphere/ insulin : mimicking endogenous insulin release. In Modified-
Release Drug Delivery Technology. Vol. 2, 2nd ed. Rathbone M, Hadgraft J, Roberts M, Lane M, Eds. New York, Informa Healthcare USA, Inc., 2008, p. 673–679 
2. Richardson PC, Boss AH. Technosphere insulin technology. Diabetes Technol Ther 2007;9(Suppl. 1):S65– S72pmid:17563306  
3. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2014/022472lbl.pdf , April 
2017  
4. Bode BW , McGill JB , Lorber DL, Gross JL , Chang PC , Bregman DB ; Affinity 1 
Study Group.  Inhaled Technosphere Insulin Compared With Injected Prandial 
Insulin in Type 1 Diabetes: A Randomized 24- Week Trial. Diabetes Care.  2015 
Dec;38(12):2266- 73. doi: 10.2337/dc15- 0075. Epub 2015 Jul 15.  
5. Rosenstock J, Lorber DL, Gnudi L , Howard CP , Bilheimer DW , Chang PC , 
Petrucci RE , Boss AH , Richardson PC . Prandial inhaled insulin plus basal insulin 
glargine versus twice daily biaspart  insulin for type 2 diabetes: a multicentre 
randomised  trial. Lancet.  2010 Jun 26;375(9733):2244- 53. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(10)60632- 0. 
6. Skyler JS, Weinstock RS, Raskin P, et al ; Inhaled Insulin Phase III Type 1 
Diabetes Study Group. Use of inhaled insulin in a basal/bolus insulin regimen in 
type 1 diabetic subjects: a 6- month, randomized, comparative trial. Diabetes 
Care 2005;28:1630– 1635pmid:15983312  
7. Garg SK, Kelly W, Freson  B, Ritchie P. Treat -to-target technosphere insulin 
study in adult subjects with type 1 diabetes. Poster presented at American 
Diabetes Association 2011 annual meeting.  
  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Table -1A Injected insulin to technosphere insulin conversion chart at  study 
initiation  
 
Injected 
mealtime 
insulin dose  Technosphere 
insulin dose*  
Up to 4 units  4 units  
5-8 units  8 units  
9-12 units  12 units  
13-16 units  16 units  
17-20 units  20 units  
 
*Investigators may change the dosage based on patient safety, this table will be used 
as a guide. Patients  who take more than 18 units on insulin aspart per meal will be 
excluded from the study . 
 
  
 
Table -1B Correction doses for technosphere  insulin group  
 
Blood glucose  1-hour 2-hour 
<150 mg/dl  - - 
151-200 mg/dl  4 units  - 
>201  mg/dl  8 units  4 units * 
 
*2-hour correction will be used only if blood glucose is >201 mg/dl and has not 
decreased by ≥ 50 mg/dl between 1 and 2- hours.  
  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Appendix -1 Schedule of events  
 
*HbA1c test may not be waived at Visit 1 if the patient  had an A1C done in the last 2 weeks.  
+All insulin (basal and prandial) will be recorded in a diary provided.  Visit 1 2 3 4  5 6 7 
Week  -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 
Visit Type  Clinic  Clinic  Phone  Clinic  Phone  Clinic  Phone  
Assessment  Screening 
and 
Baseline  Randomization  Treatment 
week  Treatment 
week  Treatment 
week  Treatment 
week  Post-
study follow up  
 Final  Early 
termin
ation  
Day (±3)  -7 0 7 14 21 28 35 
Informed 
consent -
Eligibility criteria  x      
  
Demographic 
Data, Medical 
History  x       
Concomitant 
medications  x x x x x x  
Adverse events    x x x x x 
Physical exam  x x  x  x  
EKG  x       
Urine 
pregnancy test 
if applicable  x       
HbA1c*  x     x  
Complete blood 
count  x       
Complete 
metabolic panel  x       
Spirometry(FEV
1) x   x  x  
Vital 
signs/weight  x x  x  x  
Randomization   x      
Record 
basal,bolus, 
total insulin 
dose+ x x  x  x  
Dispense TI   x  x    
Dispense insulin 
aspart   x  x    
Dexcom CGM -
training and 
dispense CGM   x      
CGM 
change/downloa
d/ removal     x  x  
Glucose meter 
download   x  x  x  
TI-NL 
conversion 
chart dispense 
and education   
 x  x    
Compliance 
check    x x x x  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
   
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Appendix -2 
Inclusion Criteria:  
Patients  that meet the following criteria will be considered for admission to the study:  
1. Signed informed consent before any study -related activities , 
2. Male or female aged 18- 70 years , 
3. Type 1 diabetes mellitus duration more than six months , 
4. Treatment with MDI for at least three months before  screening visit; stable insulin 
dose for the last month , 
5. No use of any oral anti -diabetics, any other forms of insulin other than mentioned 
in the protocol , or any other types of injections such as GLP -1 analogs, 
pramlintide or insulin/GLP -1 analog combinations , 
6. A1c between 6.5 to 10% , 
7. Willingness to routinely practice at least two blood glucose measurements per 
day needed to calibrate the CGM. Beyond the cal ibrations , patients  may use 
CGM for necessary action without having to confirm with fingersticks (SMBG), as approved by the FDA,  
8. BMI ≤ 35 kg/m
2, 
9. Ability and willingness to adhere to the protocol including clinical and phone visits 
and 4- week -long CGM wear , 
10. Using insulin glargine or insulin degludec  as basal insulin,  
11. Able to use and understand CGM data,  
12. Willing to complete phone and clinic visits , 
13. Patients who eat three  main meals in a day (breakfast, lunch, and dinner) , 
14. Ability to speak, read, and write English , 
15. Patient ’s prandial insulin need must be < 18 units per meal . 
  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Appendix -3 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Patients  will be excluded from the study if any of the following apply:  
1. Use of  any other diabetic medication other than allowed in the protocol , 
2. Pregnant or intent to become pregnant during the study  or not using adequate 
birth control methods , 
3. Severe unexplained hypoglycemia requiring emergency treatment in the previous 
three months , 
4. Use of systemic or inhaled corticosteroids , 
5. History of hemoglobi nopathies , 
6. Diagnosis of anemia,  
7. Post-renal transplantation, currently undergoing dialysis, creatinine >2.0 mg/dl or 
a calculated creatinine clearance of <50 mL/min,  
8. Advanced or unstable retinopathy needing laser procedure or vitrectomy , 
9. History of pancreatitis , 
10. Extensive skin changes/diseases that inhibit wearing a sensor on normal  skin, 
11. Known allergy to adhesives , 
12. Known allergy  to study medication , 
13. Participation in another investigational study protocol  within 30 days before  
enrollment , 
14. Known chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, pulmonary nodule, pulmonary hypertension, asthma, pulmonary fibrosis or any chronic pulmonary infection, or 
any systemic disease that primarily affects the lungs,  
15. Active smokers,  
16. Marijuana users , 
17. Insulin pump users , 
18. Expect ed acetaminophen use during CGM , 
19. Using insulin detemir or NPH as basal insulin,  
20. Patients  who use more than 18 units per meal , 
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 21. Any other condition, as determined by the investigator, which could make the 
subject unsuitable for the trial, impairs the subject’s suitability for the trial, or impairs the validity of the informed consent   
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 Appendix -4 
Discontinuation Criteria : 
1. A major  change in exercise regimen during study participation,  
2. Diabetic ketoacidosis , 
3. Development of pancreatitis , 
4. Pregnancy , 
5. A decli ne in glucose control or an increase in hypoglycemia which, in the opinion 
of the PI , is considered to compromise patient safety , 
6. Initiation of any other insulin or other injectable or oral form of anti -diabetics 
during the study other than the mentioned c ontrol or intervention group 
medications , 
7. Developing significant shortness of breath or intolerance and cough to inhaled 
insulin , and/or  
8. Decline >20% in FEV 1 test as compared to baseline during TI  treatment . All 
patients  will receive a spirometry test (FEV 1) at baseline, visit -4 and at the end of 
the study.  
9. Acetaminophen use during CGM (4- week treatment period)  
  
Version 3  
August 15, 2017 
 
Figure -1 Flow diagram of the study  
  
 