IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0294 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/22/2017    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management of Sub -Clinical Bacteriuria in Pregnancy: A Feasibility Trial  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 08/22/2017  
 
  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0294 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/22/2017                     
 
Management of Sub -Clinical Bacteriuria in Pregnancy: A Feasibility Trial  
   
Akwugo A. Eziefule, MD  
Jerrie S. Refuerzo, MD 
Joey A. England, MD 
Diana A. Racusin, MD  
 
Background:  
 
Bacterial Colonization in the Urine  
Assessm ent and treatment of bacterial colonization in the urine during pregnancy is a routine part of 
prenatal care.1 A urinary tract infection ( UTI) is defined as urine culture colonization >100,000 ( 105) 
colony forming units ( CFU) of bacteria per ml with signs and symptoms of UTI including dysuria, 
frequency, urgency, suprapubic pain, and/or hematuria.1-3 Asymptomatic bacteriuria ( ASB) is defined as 
urine culture colonization > 105 CFU in the absence of  signs and symptoms of UTI, and occurs in 2 -10% of 
pregnancies.3,4 Pregnant women with a UTI or ASB are routinely prescribed antimicrobial therapy based 
on identified organisms and sensitivities.  
 
Sub-Clinical Bacteriuria  
Sub-clinical bacteriuria (SCB ) occurs when urine culture colonization is between 1 - 105 CFU. The 
frequency by which SCB occurs in pregnancy is unknown. It is also unknown the rate of progression from 
SCB to UTI and/or ASB, and subsequently development in to pyelonephritis. Moreover, there are no 
current guidelines that direct management in this pa rticular condition in pregnancy. In current clinical 
practice, there is strong variation in care such that many patients are treated, despite the lack of proven 
benefit while other clinicians do not treat.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic of potential progression of bacterial colonization in the urine.  
 
Clinical Importance  
Bacterial colonization in the urine during pregnancy can lead to adverse maternal and neonatal 
outcomes. Pyelonephritis is the primary concern in pregnancy due to its association with potential 
urosepsis, renal abscess, decline in renal function, preterm l abor and preterm birth.5 Although untreated  Neg Urine Culture  UTI ASB SCB 
Pyelonephritis  2.0 %  Unk  2.4%  Unk  Unk  Unk  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0294 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/22/2017   UTI is the greatest risk factor for d eveloping pyelonephritis, ASB can also lead to pyelonephritis. In a 
recent randomized controlled trial of 4200 women in the Netherlands, they report that the incidence of 
pyelonephritis is only 2.4% when ASB is untreated compared to 0.6% when treated.6 With such a low 
incidence, there is new debate whether to treat or expectantly manage ASB. This same debate also 
pertains SCB. It is unknown whether treatment or expectant management of SCB will lead to difference 
in the rate of progression to UTI and/or SCB, and ultimately pyelonephritis.  
 
Risk of Antimicrobial Therapy  
The two main risks of empiric antimicrobial therapy include potential for adverse drug effects and 
contribution to drug resistance.  The use of antibiotics is not benign especially during pregnancy. 
Adverse drug effects include masking a diagnosis with emp iric treatment of symptoms and no 
identification of an organism. Often times the diagnosis maybe correct, but the antibiotic that was 
chosen for treatment does not have sufficient coverage of the organism that is causing the infection. 
Common side effects to routinely used antibiotics such as nitrofurantoin, sulfa, amoxicillin and 
cephalexin includes rash and diarrhea.9-10 The rise in antibiotic resistance over the past decades is 
evidence to the clinical consequences of unnecessary antimicrobial treatment across the disciplines in 
medicine. Such consequences also have been evident in the field of obstetrics. Nearly 50% of urinary 
isolates are resistant to routine ambulatory antibiotic therapy. Zhanel et al. looked at resistance to 
treatment in the NAUTICA t rial. The goal of the North American Urinary Tract Infection Collaborative 
Alliance (NAUTICA) study was to determine antibiotic susceptibility to commonly used agents for urinary 
tract infections against outpatient urinary isolates obtained in various geog raphic regions in the USA and 
Canada. This study reports higher rates of antibiotic resistance in US versus Canadian outpatient urinary 
isolates and demonstrates the continuing evolution of resistance to antimicrobial agents.7 Thus, if 
antibiotic therapy is not necessary for the management of subclinical cystitis due to low incidence of 
progression  to pyelonephritis,  it should  not be prescribed.  
 
Gap in Knowledge  
The gap in knowledge is whether the risks and benefits of empiric  treatment with antimicrobial therapy 
for treatment of SCB outweigh the risk and benefits of developing UTI, ASB or pyelonephritis from 
expectant management or no treatment of SCB.  
 
Rationale for this clinical trial  
The rational for this clinical trial is to determine if treatment of urine cultures with organisms of 1 – 
100,000 CFU are beneficial to pregnancy outcomes when obtained at routine prenatal clinic visits. In 
current clinical practice, there is a strong variation in care such that many patients ar e treated for urine 
cultures with organisms of <105 CFU despite the lack of proven benefit while other clinicians do not 
treat.  
 
If it is found that treatment of urine cultures with 1 - 105 CFU impact clinical care of a pregnant patient 
by decreasing adver se pregnancy outcome, guidelines will need to be modified to include treatment 
recommendations of urine cultures that do not currently meet criteria of a urinary tract infection. On  
the other hand, if there is no benefit to treatment of urine cultures 1 - 105 CFU, then unnecessary 
antibiotics could be avoided thereby potentially reducing unknown adverse effects to these drugs or 
resistance  to antibiotics,  which  continues  to be an alarming  health  challenge.  
 
Hypothesis:  
We hypothesize that treating urine cultures with organisms between 1 - 105 CFU grown in culture media 
in a pregnant population leads to improvement of pregnancy outcomes.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0294 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/22/2017    
Objectives:  
To determine the rate of progression from SCB to either UTI  or ASB with antimicrobial treatment of 
urine  cultures  with  organisms  of 1- 105 CFU compared  to no treatment  at prenatal  care  clinic  visits.  
 
Study Design:  
For this pilot study, we propose a feasibility trial to determine if a randomized control trial for the 
treatment of subclinical cystitis to prevent pyelonephritis and culture proven cystitis. The trial will 
investigate the effects of treatment or non -treatment of urine cultures obtained during prenatal care 
visits prompted by a positive urinalysis or sy mptoms, and determine if a randomized control trial is 
needed to further investigate outcomes.  
 
Patients meeting clinical indications will have a urine culture ordered due to two reasons: a) symptoms 
of a UTI or b) positive UA suspicious for infection/infl ammation. A negative urine analysis is defined as 
an analysis that is negative for bacteria, leukocyte esterase, nitrites, and protein. A negative urine 
culture is defined as no growth or any amount of skin flora  only.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
We will include pregnant women who seek prenatal care within the University of Texas Health System 
with UT Physicians.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
We will exclude women:  
 Less than 18 years of  age 
 Risk factors  to complicated  UTI (including  but not limited  to: diverticula,  urolithiasis,  renal  cysts, 
indwelling catheter, intermittent catheterization, stent placements, nephrostomy tubes, 
neurogenic  bladder,  cystocele,  vesicoureteral  reflux,  ileal conduit)8 
 Use of immunosuppressant  drugs 
 Abnormalities of the urinary tract (including but not limited to: known ureteric or urethral 
strictures,  tumors  of the urinary  tract,  pelvicalyceal  obstruction,  congenital  anomalies,  history 
of urological  procedures)  
 History  of renal  disease  including  renal  failure  and transplants  
 Urine culture > 105 CFU of any  organism  
 
Those with a urine culture for bacteria but 1 - 105 CFU will be randomized to one of two management 
plans:  
1. Prenatal  care  with  treatment  for any urine  culture  with  growth  of 1- 105 CFU of any organism  
2. Prenatal  care  without  treatment  for any urine  culture  with  growth  of 1-105 CFU of any organism  
 
Randomization:  
Randomization will be performed based on a computer -generated list that will be created by a non - 
clinical member of the research team. Randomization will be stratified by clinic site. A permuted block 
randomization with a random fashion will be used to pr event imbalances between sites. At subsequent 
clinic visits, clinic staff will continue to obtain urine culture from symptomatic patients or patients where 
further work up of a urine culture is warranted. ‘Physician to treat urine culture with 1 - 100,000 ( 105) 
CFU” or ‘Physician to NOT treat urine culture with 1 -100,000 (105) CFU”, based on the computer - 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0294 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/22/2017   generated list, stored on the RedCap database. The research nurses and team may access the RedCap 
database from any clinical site.  
 
Methods : 
At the initial prenatal care clinic visit all pregnant women will have their urine screened with a UA and 
urine culture. Patients meeting inclusion criteria will be approached for randomization.  
 
Those with a urine culture positive for bacteria 1 - 10x5 C FU will be randomized to treatment or no 
treatment.  
 
Those randomized to NO treatment will have a test of cure performed three weeks after initial negative 
urine culture or at next clinical visit thereafter.  
 
Those randomized for treatment will be prescrib ed the most commonly used antibiotic for urinary tract 
infections in pregnancy. This includes: Nitrofurantoin, Cephalexin, and Amoxicillin. It is unsure which 
antibiotic the participant will receive but a majority of the time it will be one of the above na med 
antibiotic. The choice will be determined by the physician, but will accommodate participants’ prior 
medication history and adverse events.  
 
Treatment will continue with a test of cure (urine culture performed after treatment with antibiotics) 
after ea ch round of antibiotic until the urine culture shows no growth of bacteria and/or shows any 
amount of skin flora only.  
 
Written, informed consent will be obtained by a member of our research team, either a physician or 
research assistant.  
 
Once the patien t is randomized to their designated arm, urine cultures will continue to be collected 
throughout prenatal care visits as clinically indicated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Urine culture  
Prenatal visits  
> 105  CFU= UTI and ASB  1 - 105  CFU 0 CFU = negative  
Exclude from study   
 
RANDOMIZE  
Monitorurine cultures  
Treatment 
N=25  No treatment 
N=25  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0294 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/22/2017   Figure 2. Flow diagram of study  
 
 
Primary Outcome:  
The incidence of cystitis defined as a urine culture with >105 at any point during antenatal care in this 
pregnancy population and the incidence of pyelonephritis.  
 
Data Collection:  
Data will be collected using standardized forms regarding maternal demographics, pregnancy 
characteristics, laboratory tests ordered in r esponse to clinical signs or symptoms, medications 
prescribed and/or administered, and maternal/fetal adverse effects. Information for these forms will be 
obtained from UTPB and Bellaire clinical schedule, Care4 and AllScripts. The standardized forms that will 
be used during the study have been developed an approved by the Department of Obstetrics, 
Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences for the purposes of uniform data collection of Internal Review 
Board approved studies being conducted.  
 
Sample Size:  
Becaus e this is a feasibility trial, 50 patients will be recruited from all clinical sites. 25 patients will be 
randomized to prenatal care with treatment for any urine culture with growth between 1 -105 CFU of any 
organism and 25 patients will be randomized to p renatal care without treatment for any urine culture 
with growth between 1 -105 CFU of any organism. Recruitment will be stopped after recruitment of 50 
randomized patients or a 10 -month time period whichever is completed first.  
 
Data Analysis  
Chi-square te sts will be used to compare categorical data between the two treatment groups. Student’s 
t-test will be used to compare numerical data. The rate of progression to SCB, UTI, or pyelonephritis will 
be determined by clinical findings, diagnosis if admitted to  the hospital and laboratory/urine culture 
results meeting criteria for those mentioned above.  
 
Procedures to Maintain Confidentiality  
All information and data will be kept on paper research charts that will be stored in a locked file cabinet 
within a lock ed research office of our research team/research coordinator. In addition, an electronic 
database of information and data will be stored on the computer of our research coordinator that is 
password protected, and in a locked office of the research coordina tor. We will record subject 
information only by study code number.  
 
Potential Benefits and Risks  
There are potential risks and benefits to either treatment strategy. Since treatment or no treatment are 
currently both generally accepted standard of care opt ions, providers, based on their personal 
preference and practice style, may choose to treat or not. Potential benefits of antibiotic treatment of 
those with 1 - 10 5 CFU in urine culture may be decreased development of UTI, pyelonephritis, PTL, and 
preterm birth. Potential risks of treatment may be side effects of the medications as well as potential 
untoward effects of antibiotic therapy that may increase development of resistant organisms in urine 
and other locations (e.g. vaginal, cervix, gut) or may lead  to change in flora (e.g. vaginal, cervix, gut) 
which may increase risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. The benefits of no treatment may be to avoid 
unnecessary and unindicated antibiotic therapy. If evidence shows that treatment of this subset of  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0294 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/22/2017   pregnant patients decreases adverse pregnancy outcome, this can leave a lasting impact on how we 
treat urinary tract infections in pregnancy.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0294 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/22/2017   References  
1. Nicoll e LE, Bradley S, Colgan R, Rice JC, Schaeffer A, Hooton TM. Infectious Diseases Society of 
America guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in adults. 
Clinical  infectious  diseases  : an official  publication  of the Infectious  Diseases  Society  of America. 
Mar 01  2005;40(5):643 -654.  
2. Bent S, Nallamothu BK, Simel DL, Fihn SD, Saint S. Does this woman have an acute 
uncomplicated  urinary  tract  infection?  Jama.  May  22-29 2002;287(20):2701 -2710.  
3. Creasy RK, Resnik R, Iams JD, Lockwood C J, Greene MF, Moore TR. Creasy and Resnik's maternal - 
fetal  medicine:  principles  and practice.  Elsevier  Health  Sciences;  2013.  
4. Smaill  FM, Vazquez  JC. Antibiotics  for asymptomatic  bacteriuria  in pregnancy.  The Cochrane 
Library.  2015.  
5. Jolley JA, Kim S, Wing DA. Acute pyelonephritis and associated complications during pregnancy 
in 2006 in US hospitals. The journal of maternal -fetal & neonatal medicine : the official journal of 
the European Association of Perinatal Medicine, the Federation of Asia and Oceania P erinatal 
Societies,  the International  Society  of Perinatal  Obstet.  Dec 2012;25(12):2494 -2498.  
6. Kazemier BM, Koningstein FN, Schneeberger C, et al. Maternal and neonatal consequences of 
treated  and untreated  asymptomatic  bacteriuria  in pregnancy:  a prospective  cohort  study  with 
an embedded randomised controlled trial. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2015;15(11):1324 - 
1333.  
7. Zhanel GG, Hisanaga TL, Laing NM, et al. Antibiotic resistance in outpatient urinary isolates: final 
results from the North Ameri can Urinary Tract Infection Collaborative Alliance (NAUTICA). 
International  journal  of antimicrobial  agents.  Nov 2005;26(5):380 -388.  
8. Nicolle  LE. Complicated  urinary  tract  infection  in adults.  The Canadian  journal  of infectious 
diseases & medical microbiology = Journal canadien des maladies infectieuses et de la 
microbiologie medicale. Nov 2005;16(6):349 -360.  
9. Price  JR, Guran  LA, Gregory  WT, McDonagh  MS. Am J Obstet  Gynecol.  2016  Nov;215(5):548 -560. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2016.07.040 . Epub  2016  Jul 22. Review.PMID:27457111)  
10. Zalmanovici Trestioreanu A, Green H, Paul M, Yaphe J, Leibovici L. Antimicrobial agents for 
treating  uncomplicated  urinar  y tract  infection  in women.  Cochrane  Database  of Systematic 
Reviews  2010,  Issue  10. Art. No.: CD007182.  DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD007182.pub2  