1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
 
1.0 Background  
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the gastrointestinal tract 
which includes Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis  (UC).  1 A recent epidemiological 
investigation estimates that nearly 4 million people worldwide are affected and  approximately 
1.4 million of these cases occur in the United States. 2  IBD can lead to debilitating symptoms, 
hospitalizations, decreased quality of life , frequent  procedures and/or surgery. Treatment options 
consist of immunosuppressive therapy, such as systemic corticosteroids, immunomodulators 
(thiopurines and methotrexate) and/or biologics, such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF) 
agents or an integrin inhibitor, vedolizumab.  They can achieve clinical remission and decrease 
the risk of complications, but also increase the risk for infection s, including influenza. 3 4  
 Influenza is a common respiratory illness that can lead to complications and hospitalizations . 
Those with chronic medical conditions or who are immunosuppressed, including patients being 
treated for IBD,  are at particularly high risk of complications and mortality from influenza 
infection . 
7    Patients with IBD  who develop influenza may require hospitalization, including 
intensive care and interruption of their therapy.   Additionally, disease flares have been reported with influenza infection.
7 Annual seasonal influenza vaccine is  recommended for all IBD 
patients. However,  immunosuppressed IBD patients are at risk of a blunted vaccine response and 
decreased clinical protection from infection.  
 Multiple studies  have shown lower influenza vaccine responses in patients with IBD compared 
to healthy individuals; IBD patients treated with TNF agents or combination therapy (TNF 
inhibitors and immunomodulators) are very likely to mount a poor immune response. 
8-10  
Influenza s erum antibody concentration correlates with protection from infection following 
vaccination . 11 Therefore, increasing influenza antibody responses in patients with IBD would 
appear to be critical to improving protection from influenza. A high dose ( HD) influenza vaccine 
containing four times more hemagglutinin was licensed based on its ability to induce higher antibody concentrations compared to standard dose (SD) in adults 65 years or older. 
12 Based  on 
this information , we propose the following two specific aims:  
 
Specific Aim #1:   Determine whether HD influenza vaccine induces higher antibody 
concentrations and sustained response in immunosuppressed IBD patients  compared to 
SD.   We hypothesize that IBD patients who receive HD influenza vaccine will mount higher 
antibody concentrations to at least two of the influenza vaccine viruses.  
 
Specific Aim #2:   Evaluate the influenza vaccine response in IBD patients treated with  
vedolizumab, a new gut selective immunosuppressant.    We hypothesize that patients on 
vedolizumab will mount a normal immune response since vedolizumab affects  only gut 
lymphocyte trafficking  and does not induce systemic immunosuppression. 13 
 
We will test our hypotheses by  performing a single center double blind randomized control led 
trial in IBD patients receiving influenza vaccination  during one season.  At the completion of this 
project, we will have determined the most effective influenza vaccine for immunosuppressed 
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
IBD patients  and determine if patients on vedolizumab mount a normal response. Th is study 
could provide influenza vaccination protocols for other immunosuppressed populations.   
2. Objectives  
 
2.1 Primary Objective 
 
To evaluate if vaccination with HD influenza vaccine induces higher antibody concentration in IBD patients on TNF inhibitors.   
2.11 Primary objective aim #1:  Antibody response  
We will evaluate if the HDIV induces higher antibody concentrations in IBD pa tients compared 
to SDIV by comparing the week 3 antibody concentrations between the two groups 
 
Specific aim #2  
To evaluate the influenza vaccine response in IBD patients treated with vedolizumab, a new gut 
selective immunosuppressant 
 2.12 Primary Objective aim #2:   Antibody Response  We will compare influenza antibody 
concentrations after vaccination in patients with IBD treated with vedolizumab to healthy individuals using the 3 week post immunization time point.   
2.2  Secondary Objectives  
 
2.21 Secondary outcomes #1 aim #1: Sustained response  
A subsequent titer will be done in 6 months post vaccination to assess sustainability of antibody concentration through the season. We will compare antibody concentrations 6 months post vaccination  between  HD and SD groups and post- immunization to the 6 month post vaccination 
time point in each group.  
2.22 Secondary outcomes # 2 aim # 1: Vaccine response rates   
We will compare seroprotection and seroconversion rates between the HDIV and SDIV groups. 
 
2.23 Secondary outcomes #3 aim # 1: Vaccine safety   
Study participants will be given a diary card to record  symptoms following influenza vaccine 
administration .  We anticipate that the HDIV  will cause more injection site reactions
12 than the 
SDIV but will otherwise be well -tolerated .  
 
 
2.31 Secondary outcomes # 1 Specific aim # 2: Sustained response  
A subsequent titer will be done in 6 months to assess sustainability of antibody concentration 
through the season.   
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
2.32 Secondary outcomes # 2 Specific aim # 2: Vaccine response rates   
We will compare seroprotection and seroconversion rates between the vedolizumab treated and healthy groups.   
 
 3. Selection of Subjects  
 
The subject population will consist of individuals with inflammatory bowel disease and healt hy 
controls.  All IBD patients will meet the inclusion criteria but not the exclusion criteria outlined 
in the section below: 
CASES  Specific Aim# 1  
3.1  Inclusion Criteria  
3.11  A history of chronic (greater than 3 month) ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease 
diagnosed and documented by the standard clinical, radiographic, endoscopic and 
histopathologic criteria.  
3.12 Ages 18-64 
3.13 Currently taking anti- TNF therapy (infliximab,  golilumab, adalimumab, or certolizumab) 
for at least 3 months  
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
3.21 Received season’s influenza vaccine  
3.22   Allergy to eggs or influenza vaccine 3.23 Current use of systemic steroids  (oral budensonide and rectal steroids allowed) 
3.24 Other autoimmune condition(s) (e.g. Rheumatoid arthritis, autoimmune hepatitis)  
Specific Aim #2  
 
3.3  Inclusion criteria  
 
3.31 A history of chronic (greater than 3 month) ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease 
diagnosed and documented by the standard clinical, radiographic, endoscopic and histopathologic criteria.   3.32 Ages 18-64  3.33 Currently on vedolizumab therapy  
 
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
3.4 Exclusion Criteria  
 3.41 Received season’s influenza vaccine  
 3.42   Allergy to eggs or influenza vaccine  
 3.43 Currently use of systemic steroids  (oral budesonide or rectal steroids allowed) 
 
3.44  Other autoimmune condition(s) (e.g. Rheumatoid arthritis, autoimmune hepatitis) 
  
 
Control group  
The control group with consist of 20 individuals who meet the following inclusion and exclusion 
criteria. 
Individuals will be obtained from patients without an IBD diagnosis, chronic liver disease, celiac 
disease or other chronic health condition coming to Digestive Health Center for endoscopic 
procedures or clinic visits.  
3.5 Inclusion criteria  
  
3.51 Age 18-64  3.52 Willing to participate in study  
 3.6 Exclusion criteria  
  3.61  Currently on immunosuppressive therapy   3.62 Has a chronic health condition that may have an impact on vaccine antibody 
concentrations as deemed by the investigators, including chronic liver disease, celiac disease, history of solid organ or bone marrow transplantation. 
 3.63 Older than age 65 years  3.64  Patient s in whom venipuncture are not feasible due to poor tolerability or lack of easy 
access.   
 3.65    Vulnerable groups will be excluded from the study (pregnant, lacking consent capacity,   Non-english speaking)  
 
3.7  Patient Discontinuation  
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
Discontinuatio n is a patient who is enrolled in the study and who terminated from the study prior 
to completion of study.   The patient is free to withdraw from the study for any reason and at any time without giving reason for doing so and without penalty or prejudice.  The investigator is also free to terminate a patient’s involvement in the study at any time if the patient’s clinical condition warrants it.  
Potential discontinuation criteria for individual patients;  
• Adverse Events  
• Withdrawal of consent  
• Patient is lost to follow -up 
 
4.0 Methods 
Specific Aim #1 HD 
We plan  a randomized control led trial of HDIV vs. SDIV for IBD patients on TNF monotherapy.  
Those meeting the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be invited to participate and  be 
randomized.     We will enroll approximately 40 patients and randomized them in a 5:3 fashion to HDIV or 
SDIV.   Subjects who enroll and do not complete 3 week blood draw will be discontinued and 
another subject will be enrolled. Randomization will generated  by a random n umber generator 
and investigator will be blinded to randomization scheme.    Both groups will have blood drawn prior to immunization , 3 weeks, and 6 months post 
vaccination .   P articipants will be invited to enroll when the seasonal  influenza vaccine becomes 
available, typically about the middle of August until March.  
 
4.1  Control Group 
A third group of 20 healthy individuals without IBD, other chronic diseases, or 
immunosuppressive therapy will be enrolled.  All healthy individuals will rece ive SD influenza 
vaccine. The influenza vaccine formulation changes annually.  Therefore, a measure of response in healthy individuals is necessary in order to rule out any irregularities that may be due to the seasonal  vaccine and not IBD or its treatment.   
   
4.2  Vedolizumab group  
A prospec tive study of  IBD patients  receiving vedolizumab therapy  will be conducted .  
We will enroll approximately 20 patients who are currently on vedolizumab. Subjects who enroll 
and do not complete 3 week blood draw will be discontinued and another subject will be 
enrolled.All individuals in this group will receive SD IV and have blood drawn for influenza 
antibody concentrations prior to immunization , 3 weeks , and 6 months post vaccination.  
  The study will also be conducted during the influenza season  in conjunction with the HD IV 
study.  We will use the healthy control group in the HD IV study to compare the vedolizumab 
patients.    
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
5.0  PRIOR TO RANDOMIZATION EVALAUTION 
 5.1 Initial Evaluation 
Patients coming to the University of Wisconsin for care of their inflammatory bowel disease will 
be invited to participate.    This will include the Digestive Health Center and UW Infusion 
Center. A member of their health team will give patients information about the study.  Th e 
research coordinator will further review information and invite patients to participate in the study.   Patients with UC or CD  who meet the inclusion criteria and are in the GI -Hep registry (HSC# 
2011-0168) will be invited to participate via re- contact l etter (previously IRB approved).   The 
study coordinator will review all the patient information to make sure that the patient qualifies for the study.  
5.2  Consent    
The patient will be told about the purpose of the study and informed consent will be obtained.  
Patients 18 years old and older will provide written informed consent prior to randomization.    
5.3  Demographic information 
Once the patient is enrolled in the study the following information will be collected prior to 
randomization.     Baseline Data Collected  
a. Age  
b. Sex 
c. Race  
d. Influenza vaccine in prior season (patient report) 
e. Type of Inflammatory Bowel Disease  
a. Ulcerative Colitis  
b. Crohns Disease 
c. Indeterminate Colitis  
 
f. Type of ulcerative colitis  
a. Proctitis  
b. Proctosigmoiditis  
c. Left sided disease  
d. Pancolitis  
g. Crohns Subtype per Montreal Criteria (12) 
a. A1/A2  
b. L1, L2, L3, L4  
c. B1, B2, B3 
d. Perianal disease  
h. Length of disease (as official diagnosis  in months. )  
i. Current Medications, doses, and duration 
a. Mesalamine  
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
b. Azathioprine or 6MP 
c. Biologic (infliximab, adalimumab, or certalizumab) 
d. Combination biologic and azathioprine or 6MP 
e. Corticosteroids 
j. Other Comorbid Illness 
a. Cardiovascular Disease  
b. Diabetes  
c. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  
d. Cerebrovascular Disease  
e. Solid Organ Malignancy  
f. Leukemia or Lymphoma 
 The baseline data listed above will be collected by the study coordinator interviewing the subject to get the information and/or collecting this information from the medical record. The demographic data collection sheet will be used.    5.4  Study summary   
 Start of study.  
After all the baseline demographic information is collected the patient will have blood drawn for a serum antibody measurement , randomized to SD or HD, and the influenza vaccine dose will be 
administered.   Patients will also be given a c ontact phone number to call and discuss any 
adverse events that might have occurred.  Patients will also be provided with an adverse event dairy.   The diar y will allow patients to en ter any potential adverse events for 7 days after 
vaccine administration .   The dia ry will be a paper copy consisting of the adverse events reported 
in the package insert for influenza vaccine.   Participants will be randomly assigned in a 5:3 fashion to HDIV or SDIV. 
 Those in the vedolizumab group will not be randomized and will receive SDIV.  
   5.41   Visit 2  
At the 3  week study visit all participants will undergo phlebotomy for post vaccination serum 
antibody measurement.    5.42   Visit 3  
At the 6 month study visit all participants will have phlebotomy for antibody measu rement.  
       
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
         SDIV  Group  
 
 
    High Dose Vaccination Group   
Month 
6
Week 3
 Week 0
 Week 0
Baseline  Antibdody 
Measurement
Standard dose vaccine
 Antibody Measurement
 Antibody Measurement
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
 
   5.45   Laboratory Assessments  Bloo d will be collected at week 0, 3 , and  month 6 in all subjects.   
   
6.0  Randomization  
 
6.1  
At the first study visit patients will randomized to the SDIV OR HDIV .    
 6.2 Randomization Randomization will occur at week 0.     Randomization will be in a 5:3  ratio based on a random number generator.   
 
7.0 Adverse Events and other Safety aspects  
7.1 Definition of Adverse Event 
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a patient administered either of the vaccines.    AE will be recorded after administration of the vaccine and will continue to be recorded for days 0 -6 using the adverse event dairy. Common adverse events (36) that have been 
reported in vaccination studies are the following: 
• Injection -site pain/soreness/tenderness  
• Injection -site swelling/induration  
• Injection -site erythema  
Month 
6
Week 3
 Week 0
 Week 0
Baseline  Antibdody 
Measurement
High dose vaccine
 Antibody Measurement
 Antibody Measurement
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
• Headache  
• Myalgia  
• Fatigue  
• Muscle pain  
• Fever  
Parti cipants will be asked about additional adverse events that may have occurred when they 
return at 3 weeks for a blood draw.  
 
7.2  Definition of Serious Adverse Events  An AE is considered serious if, in the view of the investigator results in any of the following outcomes: 
• Inpatient hospitalization  
• A life threatening AE (an AE is considered “life threatening” if, in the view of the investigator, its occurrence places the patient at immediate risk of death.  It does not include an AE that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death).  
• Death  
 
7.3  Reporting of Adverse Events  Adverse events will be reported to the HSC IRB as required and to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS).  https://vaers.hhs.gov/index
 
 
7.4  Follow up to Adverse Events All AEs occurring during the study are to be followed up until resolved or judged to be no longer clinically significant, or until they become chronic to the extent that they can be fully characterized.  
  
8.0 Measure of effect  
 8.1 Influenza antibody concentrations  
Antibody responses following influenza immunization reach maximum concentrations at 2 to 3 
weeks.  Studies suggest that anti body levels at 2 and 4 weeks following immunization  are 
indistinguishable. 
27,28 Each individual in the trial will be also categorized as either “Yes” or 
“No” in terms of seroconversion.29,30 All three measures (mean fold increase (MFI)  in antibody 
concentration pre to post- immunization , seroconversion, and seroprot ection) for all of each 
year’s  three antigens, will be assessed  and statistically analyzed individually.  
 
8.2  Influenza antibody concentration analysis 
Hemagglutination inhibition assay (HIA) will be used to measure influenza antibodies .  HIA will 
be performed in duplicate using standard microtiter techniques and serial dilutions.  Titrated 
influenza antigen is incubated with the serum dilutions for 30 minutes.  Guinea pig red blood 
cells (50 µl of 0.5% in phosphate buffered saline) are added and incubated for 45 minutes. The 
dilution of serum that no longer inhibits hemagglutination is the influenza antibody titer. These 
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
assays will be performed in Dr. Hayney’s laboratory. Her laboratory has substantial experience with these assays.
31-34 
 
9.0 Statistical Plan  
 9.1Data Analysis  
We will compare geometric mean antibody concentrations and mean fold increase in antibody 
concentrations between groups using t- tests.  Seroprotection rates between the groups, defined as 
an antibody titer of at least 1:40 and rates of seroconversion, defined as having a fourfold increase in antibody concentrations following immunization, will be compared using chi square tests or Fisher’s exact tests.   
 
9.2 Power Calculation 
Forty individuals will be enrolled in the study in a five high dose to three standard dose vaccine 
ratio.  This strategy yields 89% power to detect an A/H3N2 antibody concentration of 80 hemagglutination inhibition units, which is higher than that reported in patients with IBD treated with TNF based therapy who received SDIV. 
26  The power to detect differences in A/H1N1 
influenza antibody concentrations is greater than 90%.  However, this sample size yields only a 60% power to detect the similar difference between groups. The likely reason for this low power is that the study upon which we are basing our sample size calculations showed a GMT of 98 for influ enza B.  It is unrealistic to hypothesize that we can push it much higher, even with HDIV.  
 
10.  Lab Specimens and Future Research  
After we have performed the tests we plan to perform for this study, we will keep any leftover blood and use it in future re search projects. Data created from the subjects’  participation in this 
study will also be stored. This will be stored and locked in the GI Research Office. Although the specific research using your specimens is not known, the research will be related to th e study of 
IBD and/or vaccine- related research . Banking of these samples is required for participation, and 
not optional. Dr. Caldera and the GI Research Office staff will have access to the codes links. If 
subjects no longer wish for their sample to be st ored they can contact Dr. Caldera or the research 
office and the specimens will be disposed of according to standard medical research procedures. If subjects do not make such a request, the specimen will be stored indefinitely.  Specimens will be labeled w ith the subjects study ID number and date of collection so that data 
collected for this protocol can be linked to the sample. Samples will be stored in Rennebohm Hall at the University of Wisconsin. Only investigators and key personnel assigned to the laboratory have access to the lab. Samples will be coded (labeled with subject ID and date of collection) 
before they arrive to the lab. All computers used for data storage and analysis are password 
protected and used exclusively by key personnel.  Any future studies that will use these specimens will be don e by UW researchers and will be 
submitted for a separate IRB approval. Only coded samples and data will be released for future 
research. The information linking the samples and data to individual subjects wi ll not be released.  
 
11.  Drugs/ Vaccines  
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
 11.1  High Dose Influenza  A high dose (HD) influenza vaccine containing four times more hemagglutinin was licensed based on its ability to induce higher antibody concentrations compared to standard dose (SD) in adults 65 years or older  (Fluzone High- Dose) trade name.Patients on TNF inhibitors will be 
randomized to this arm of the study.  11.2  Quadrivalent vaccine  
Standard dose flu vaccine (Fluzone Quadrivalent) will be used in the vedolizumab arm, control and TNF inhibitors not receiving high dose.  
 
  
 
1. Mowat C, Cole A, Windsor A, et al. Guidelines for the management of inflammatory 
bowel disease in adults. Gut 2011;60:571-607. 2. Molodecky NA, Soon IS, Rabi DM, et al. Increasing Incidence and Prevalence of the Inflammatory Bowel Diseases With Time, Based on Systematic Review. Gastroenterology;142:46-54.e42. 3. Dassopoulos T, Sultan S, Falck–Ytter YT, Inadomi JM, Hanauer SB. American Gastroenterological Association Institute Technical Review  on the Use of Thiopurines, 
Methotrexate, and Anti–TNF -α Biologic Drugs for the Induction and Maintenance of Remission 
in Inflammatory Crohn's Disease. Gastroenterology;145:1464-78.e5. 4. Rahier JF, Magro F, Abreu C, et al. Second European evidence- based consensus on the 
prevention, diagnosis and management of opportunistic infections in inflammatory bowel disease. Journal of Crohn's and Colitis 2014;8:443-68. 5. Thompson WW, Shay DK, Weintraub E, et al. Influenza- associated hospitalizations in 
the United States. JAMA 2004;292:1333-40. 6. Sinclair JA, Wasan SK, Farraye FA. Health Maintenance in the Inflammatory Bowel 
Disease Patient. Gastroenterology Clinics;41:325 -37. 
7. Rahier JF, Papay P, Salleron J, et al. Influenza A (H1N1)v infection in patients with inflammatory bowel disease: a case series. Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics 
2011;33:499-500. 8. Andrisani G, Frasca D, Romero M, et al. Immune response to influenza A/H1N1 vaccine in inflammatory bowel disease patients treated with anti TNF -α agents: Effects of combined 
therapy with immunosuppressants2013. 9. Rahier J -F, Papay P, Salleron J, et al. H1N1 vaccines in a large observational cohort of 
patients with inflammatory bowel disease treated with immunomodulators and biological therapy. Gut 2011;60:456-62. 10. Cullen G, Bader C, Korzenik JR, Sands BE. Serological response to the 2009 H1N1 influenza vaccination in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Gut 2012;61:385-91. 11. Coudeville L, Bailleux F, Riche B, et al . Relationship between haemagglut ination -
inhibiting antibody titres and clinical protection against influenza: development and application of a bayesian random-effects model. BMC Medical Research Methodology 2010;10:18-. 
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
12. DiazGranados CA, Dunning AJ, Kimmel M, et al. Efficacy of high-dose versus standard-dose influenza vaccine in older adults. New England Journal of Medicine 2014;371:635-45. 13. Feagan BG, Rutgeerts P, Sands BE, et al. Vedolizumab as Induction and Maintenance Therapy for Ulcerative Colitis. New England Journal of Medicine 2013;369:699-710. 14. Agarwal N, Ollington K, Kaneshiro M, Frenck R, Melmed GY. Are immunosuppressive medications associated with decreased responses to routine immunizations? A systematic review. Vaccine 2012;30:1413-24. 15. Ison MG. Influenza prevention and treatment in transplant recipients and immunocompromised hosts. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses 2013;7:60-6. 16. Kapetanovic MC, Saxne T, Sjöholm A, et al . Influence of methotrexate, TNF blockers 
and prednisolone on antibody responses to pne umococcal polysaccharide vaccine in patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology 2006;45:106-11. 17. Oren S, Mandelboim M, Braun-Moscovici Y, et al. Vaccination against influenza in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: the effect of rituximab on the humoral response. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases 2008;67:937-41. 18. Gelinck LBS, van der Bijl AE, Beyer WEP, et al. The effect of anti -tumour necrosis 
factor α treatment on the antibody response to influenza vaccination. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases 20 08;67:713-6. 
19. Van Ermen A, Hermanson MP, Moran JM, et al . Double dose vs. standard dose influenza 
vaccination in patients with heart failure: a pilot study. European Journal of Heart Failure 2013;15:560-4. 20. Radwan HM, Cheeseman SH, Lai KK, Ellison RT, III. Influenza in human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients during the 1997-1998 influenza season. Clinical Infectious Diseases 2000;31:604-6. 21. Safrin S, Rush JD, Mills J. Influenza in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection. Chest 1990;98:33-7. 22. Lin JC, Nichol KL. Excess mortality due to pneumonia or influenza during influenza seasons among persons with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Arch Intern Med 2001;161:441-6. 23. George VK, Pallikkuth S, Parmigiani A, et al. HIV infection worsens age- associated 
defects in antibody responses to influenza vaccine. Journal of Infectious Diseases 2015. 24. McKittrick N, Frank I, Jacobson JM, et al. Improved immunogenicity with high-dose seasonal influenza vaccine in HIV -infected sersons. A s ingle -center, parallel, randomized trial. 
Annals of Internal Medicine 2013;158:19-26. 25. GiaQuinta S, Michaels MG, McCullers JA, et al. Randomized, double-blind comparison of standard-dose vs. high-dose trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine in pediatric solid organ transplant patients. Pediatric Transplantation 2014:n/a- n/a. 
26. Hagihara Y, Ohfuji S, Watanabe K, et al. Infliximab and/or immunomodulators inhibit immune responses to trivalent influenza vaccination in adults with inflammatory bowel disease.  
2014;8:223-33. 27. Gross PA, Russo C, Dran S, et al . Time to earliest peak serum antibody response to 
influenza vaccine in the elderly. Clinical & Diagnostic Laboratory Immunology 1997;4:491-2. 28. Gross PA, Russo C, Teplitzky M, et al . Time to peak serum antibody response to 
influenza vaccine in the elderly. Clinical & Diagnostic Laboratory Immunology 1996;3:361-2. 
1/27/17 Randomized Trial of High Dose vs. Standard Dose Influenza Vaccine in Inflammator y 
Bowel Disease Patients  
 
 
29. Levine M, Beattie BL, McLean DM, Corman D. Characterization of the immune 
response to trivalent influenza vaccine in elderly men. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 1987;35:609-15. 30. Phair J, Kauffman CA, Bjornson A, Adams L, Linnemann C, Jr. Failure to respond to influenza vaccine in the aged: correlation with B-cell number and function. Journal of Laboratory & Clinical Medicine 1 978;92:822-8. 
31. Dopp JM, Wiegert NA, Moran JJM, et al. Effect of annual influenza immunization on antibody response in lung transplant patients. Progress in Transplantation 2009;19:153-9. 32. Hayney MS, Coe CL, Muller D, et al . Age and psychological influences on immune 
responses to trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine in the meditation or exercise for preventing acute respiratory infection (MEPARI) trial. Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics 2014;10:83-91. 33. Hayney MS, Love GD, Buck JM, et al . The association between psychosocial factors and 
vaccine -induced cytokine production. Vaccine 2003;21:2428-32. 
34. Hayney MS, Welter DL, Francois M, Reynolds AM, Love RB. Influenza vaccine antibody responses in lung transplant patients. Progress in Transpl antation 2004;14:346-51. 
35. Colombel JF, Sandborn WJ, Reinisch W, et al. Infliximab, Azathioprine, or Combination Therapy for Crohn's Disease. New England Journal of Medicine 2010;362:1383-95. 
36. Sanofi- Pasteur, Inc. Fluzone® High Dose (Influenza vacc ine) suspension for intramuscular 
administration 2014 -2015 Formula Package Insert. February 2014.  