Cover Page: Protocol
We The Village Family Support Study
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Document Date: 05.04.2020
Public Health Management CorporationHuman Subjects Research Protocol
INDEX1Protocol Background6Informed Consent2Participants7Study Data3Recruitment and Screening8Privacy and Confidentiality4Study Procedures9Risks and Benefits5Participant Payment10References
PROTOCOL OVERVIEWProtocol Number1906Protocol TitleSBIR Phase 1: Scalable digital delivery of evidence-basedtraining forfamily to maximize treatment admission rates of opioiduse disorder inloved ones--We The Village Family Support StudyProtocol Version(mm/dd/yyyy)05/04/2020
Principal InvestigatorCalum HandleyPI’s Institution/DepartmentWe The Village, Inc.PI’s Email Addresscalum@wethevillage.coPI’s Phone Number917.684.4267Funder/SponsorNIH/NIDAFunding Start Date09/30/2019Funding End Date09/30/2020Anticipated IRB ClosureDate08/31/2020
1.PROTOCOL BACKGROUND
1.1 Describe the scientific/scholarly rationale andbackground for your project. Describe the gapsin current knowledge your project is intended to address.
The United States is in the midst of an opioid crisis--opioiduse problems (OUPs) are increasingly widespread andlethal. In 2016, more than two million Americans werediagnosed with opioid use disorder (OUD) and morethan42,000 have died of an overdose involving opioids(SAMHSA, 2019). The death rate is more than any yearonrecord and has quadrupled since 1999 (Vice Chairman’sStaff of the Joint Economic Committee, 2017.) Severaleffective medications are now available for treatingOUD but many people, who could benefit from medication,
do not receive them (Sarlin, 2018)
 
.
 
 Despite thefact that effective treatments for opioid use disorderexist, onlyabout one in four people (28.6 percent) with thisdisorder received specialty treatment for illicitdrug use in thepast year (Center for Behavioral Health Statisticsand Quality, 2017.) For those struggling with opioidaddiction,compared to others dependent on drugs, “the recoveryperiod is longer, and the chance of relapse is higher.”(Wogan, 2017.)  Smith and colleagues (2010) interviewed109 residential addiction treatment patients after
Page1of26

discharge and found over nine in ten patients reported a relapse, with nearly six in ten patients relapsing in firstweek after discharge.
Substance use impairs executive decision making anddepletes defenses against impulse reactivity (Officeof theSurgeon General, 2016), creating challenges for theperson with an OUP to recognize the need for treatmentaswell as navigate the treatment entry process. Havingconcerned significant others, including family members(hereinafter known as CSOs) trained in best-practicesand equipped with effective tools to take actionisgame-changing. Family members have been filling gapsin the substance use disorder (SUD) care continuumfordecades, frequently without recognition from the healthcare system. Cycles of urgent acute care followedbydischarge home with no formal support are common inthe US addiction treatment system as well as waitingweeks or months to move from one level of care tothe next. To fill this gap, untrained family membersoftenhave no choice but to provide life-sustaining transitionalcare at home. Research shows that family membersmake the majority of the decisions around treatment,including financial decisions (Ventura et al., 2017)andthus, have high potential to impact the trajectoryof their loved one’s OUP for better or worse.
One study showed that social and familial reasonswere the most expressed reasons for entering drugtreatmentand people with substance use disorders perceive treatmententry as an important way to obtain positivecontingencies in their interpersonal relationships,which further underscores the potential utility ofconjointinterventions with CSOs. It also suggested that theinformal pressure of one’s natural social network,of whichCSOs are an integral part, to be influential in improvingtreatment retention and abstinence (Marlowe, D. etal.,1996). Despite continued and mounting empirical supportthat family members and loved ones play an integralrole in the success and wellbeing of individuals’engagement along the OUP care continuum and contributetohealth outcomes and mortality rates, family membersremain on the periphery, overlooked by our currenthealthcare system. Similarly, they are overlookedby entrepreneurs. There has been little innovationin tools toprovide help for family members and friends of anindividual with an OUP (hereinafter known as identified
person or IP). The significance
  
 of this projectis to address this critical gap in OUP treatment byprovidingevidence-based training and tools to CSOs to reducefatal and non-fatal overdoses and to increase treatmentutilization.
Since it has been shown that training a CSO in CRAFTimproves ability to get a treatment-resistant individualintolife-saving treatment, it is highly valuable. Furthermore,new laws around delivering medical assisted treatment(MAT) online via telemedicine provides the proposedproject the opportunity to fill a gap for CSOs usingonlinetechnology to help them increase their treatment resistantIP’s motivation to engage in treatment andconnecting them to treatment online, whether it bebooking a bed or accessing telemedicine and prescriptionsfor MAT. The project team involves We The Village,Inc, a small business already providing support toCSOs usingconsumer technology, Dr. Robert Meyers, creator ofCRAFT, Dr. Kimberly Kirby, research expert in thefield ofsubstance use disorders, Dr. Ben Bearnot, primarycare physician specializing in addiction treatment,andcertified CRAFT coaches. Phase One of this projectwill develop and refine digital delivery of two modifiedCRAFT(Community Reinforcement and Family Training) interventions:automated and Group CRAFT protocol (CRAFT-A)and automated CRAFT protocol with live coaching (CRAFT-C)and assess the effectiveness of the adapted CRAFTprotocols with WTV’s business as usual model of PeerSupport Forum (PEER). The goal of the project isto deliveran innovative and effective evidence-based behavioralintervention with consumer technology to an existingandgrowing online audience.
Abbreviations:OUP - Opiate Use Problem  - this is opioid use thathas been identified by a concerned significantother as problematic but has not necessarily beenformally diagnosed as an opioid use disorder.MAT - Medically Assisted Treatment. IP - the identifiedtreatment-resistant person (in our case,with an OUP.) CSO - concerned significant other -this is the friend or family member of the IP.
Page2of26
CRAFT - Community Reinforcement and Family Training. WTV - We The Village. Live coach -trained human coach. CRAFT-C - digital CRAFT + digitalor telephone live coaching. CRAFT-A -digital automated CRAFT plus digital or telephonelive group. PEER - Peer support (current WTVplatform.)
1.2 List the primary and secondary aims, researchquestions, and hypotheses.
Primary Hypothesis:a.At the 3-month post study intake survey, we expectthat CSOs assigned to CRAFT-C will report a greaterproportion of IPs entering treatment as compared tothe CRAFT-A and PEER groups, and the CRAFT-Agroup will report a greater proportion of IPs enteringtreatment as compared to the PEER group.Secondary Hypotheses:b.At the 2-month and 3-month post study intake survey,CSOs in all three groups will report that theirrelationship happiness has improved relative to baselineas measured by the Relationship HappinessScale (RHS).c.At the 2-month and 3-month post study intake survey,CSOs in all three groups will self-report that theirown anxiety, depression, anger and physical illnesshas improved relative to baseline as measured bythePOMS survey, SF12 Health Survey, and the SAS-SR worksubscale.d.At the 2-month and 3-month post study intake survey,CSOs assigned to CRAFT-C and CRAFT-A willdemonstrate higher fidelity of learning CRAFT principlesas compared to the CSOs assigned to thestandard condition (PEER), as measured by correctanswers on the revised CRAFT knowledge test.e.At the 3-month post study intake survey, all threegroups will report similar high satisfaction (averagescore above 3.5 on a 5-point scale) on Usability ofthe websiteand the CRAFT-C group will report thegreatest satisfaction in the Usefulness of the websiterelative to the CRAFT-A and PEER groups asmeasured by the User Satisfaction Survey.
1.3 List the primary and secondary outcomes.
The primary outcome variable that will be measuredis the CSO’s reporting their IP entered treatmentfor theirOUP or received additional treatment for their OUP.
Secondary outcome variables that will be measuredinclude CSO and IP relationship happiness; CSO’s physicaland mental health status; CRAFT knowledge of CSOs;and CSO’s satisfaction with website content and delivery.
2.PARTICIPANTS
2.1 Describe the general characteristics of the intendedprimary participant populations,including age range, gender, sexual orientation, racial/ethnicbackground, socioeconomic status,health status, criminal history, and any other characteristicsrelevant to the study.
Proposed initial and primary recruitment strategydrawing from the existing WTV member basewill produce a sample that is representative of thisgroup but not representative of all CSOs of anIP with an OUP. Many CSOs may have drug or mentalhealth problems themselves, distrustmental health services, or are content being distancedfrom their problem-wrought IP (Slesnicket al., 2000). These CSOs often do not seek help andthey are not the target population for this
Page3of26
study. The target population consists of CSOs who are concerned about their loved one’sproblems in general and their opioid use in particular,and whose own functioning is notseriously impaired by their own drug use or mentalhealth issues.  Also, the sample will belimited to CSOs who have internet access and are willingto receive services from web-basedsites.  Although this is not representative of allCSOs of individuals with OUP, it is representativeof those who would use the services being evaluated.
Gender Representation:In past CRAFT studies, thevast majority (anywhere from 75%-90%) ofparticipants are female. Because women are more likelyto seek help (Trudeau et al., 2002), weexpect CSOs in this study sample will continue tobe predominantly female. Because this is anearly stage pilot and feasibility study, we will notconduct targeted recruitment efforts to recruitmale CSOs but in the future this would be possible.
Racial/Ethnic Representation:Given the proposed smallsample size (up to 84 CSOs) for thispilot and feasibility study, we anticipate that wewill not have a sufficient number of minoritiesin any group to do demographic analysis. Still weexpect to have some minority representationin our participants. If we receive an overwhelmingresponse to our recruitment efforts, ifeligible, we will over include individuals in thosegroups to increase representation. Relative tothe racial demographics in the 2017 Census for theUnited States (60.7% White, 13.4% Black,5.8% Asian, 18.1% Hispanic or Latino, 1.3% AmericanIndian or Alaska Native, 0.2% NativeHawaiian Other Pacific Islander), if we were to representthis makeup in our study, we mightexpect: 27, 6, 2, 8, 1 participants respectively;we’d expect this distribution adjusted for theonline over-indexing of white participants.
Socio-economic Representation:Given the study isto be implemented completely online usingdigital intervention and data collection methods,we expect the sample to skew with CSOs froma higher SES background. Furthermore, inclusion criteriarequire CSOs to have smart phoneswith data or computers with internet, which may bea barrier for some people with limitedinternet/data plans or CSOs who do not have theirown smart phone or computer. However, thismay not occur given many people across SES levelsdo have their own smartphones andcomputers with internet capability.
While the increase in opioid use has increased acrossdiverse groups, white, non-Hispanic adultscontinue to experience higher rates of opioid useproblems and overdose deaths. According toan analysis of National Vital Statistics by the KaiserFamily Foundation, the overall rate of opioidoverdose death in 2017 was 14.9 per 100,000 personsin the United States. In 2017, white,non-Hispanic persons had the highest fatal opioidoverdose rate (19.4 per 100,000 adults)compared to their black and Hispanic counterparts(12.9 & 6.8 per 100,000 persons,respectively). In addition, the rate of opioid overdosedeaths among males is approximatelytwice as high for males compared to females (20.4vs. 9.4 per 100,000 persons, respectively).Persons from a lower SES background, including those“living in poverty, being unemployed andhaving Medicaid,” continue to experience opioid useproblems and overdose deaths at higherrates compared to their more well-off counterparts(Ghertner & Groves, 2018).
We The Village currently does not collect demographicinformation from members; however,anecdotal review of their existing membership foundthe majority were white, female and froma higher SES background. During the pilot study, WTVwill collaborate with organizations servinga wider, diverse population, especially communitiesof color and lower SES backgrounds.
Page4of26
2.2 Select all populations, settings, or records thatwill be involved in the research. Complete thecorresponding appendix for each selection.
☐People who use substances, substance use treatmentsites, and/or substance use records (Appendix J)
☐Students, school settings, and/or student educationrecords (Appendix L)
For protocols that meet the criteria for exempt research,skip to Section 4.
2.3 Select all intended primary participant populations.Complete the corresponding appendixfor each selection.
☐Pregnant women (Appendix G)
☐Prisoners (Appendix H)
☐Children (Appendix I)
☐People with limited decision-making capacity (AppendixK)
2.4 List the study inclusion criteria.
1.Identify as a concerned significant other (CSO) ofa loved one with an OUP2.Be 19 years or older3.No substance use disorder4.Has concern about the opioid use of a loved one (IP)5.Plans to be in close contact (phone/face-to-face)with the IP6.The IP is not currently receiving treatment, or theIP is in treatment, but the CSO perceives the IPmaybenefit from additional treatment (e.g., receivingMAT but the IP may benefit from attending outpatientservices, or in residential treatment, but will needto enter outpatient treatment upon discharge).
2.5 List the study exclusion criteria.
1.Does not agree to sign the consent form
2.Is not English-speaking3.Is not able to understand the consent forma.Pass a multiple choice consent quiz (i.e., 100% correctresponses) that tests the participant’scomprehension of basic elements of informed consentand the requirements of the protocoladministered by the research team over the phone.b.Participants will be given up to three opportunitiesto pass the consent quiz4.Does not have personal access to a smart phone withdata or a computer with internet to be able toaccess the digital platform for the study conditions,quizzes, questionnaires, and follow-upcommunication5.Reports that they have a drug abuse problem or a historyof drug abuse or dependenceandthat theyhave not been in recovery for at least 2 years6.Resides outside the United States
2.6Provide justification for the exclusion of broad populationgroups.
Page5of26
The study design excludes anyone under 19 years old. The primary hypothesis for the study is to help CSOsincrease treatment utilization among IPs. Childrenare typically not the CSO who is responsible fortreatmentdecisions of the IP with an OUP.
While the adult population may include persons age18 years old, the proposed study is excluding potential18-year-old participants because they may still bein high school and not the primary CSO to supporttreatmentdecisions.
3RECRUITMENT AND SCREENING
3.1 Identify the expected number of individuals screenedand the expected number of individualsconsented/enrolled to reach your target sample size.If multi-site, break the total down per studysite. If multi-year, break the total down per studyyear.
For this pilot and feasibility study we plan to enrollup to 84 CSOs
3.2 Describe how prospective participants will beidentifiedandrecruited. Include informationabout: how, when, where, and by whom (by positionor role, not by name). Describe anyrecruitment materials that will be used to recruitprospective participants.
As shown in Figure A, we will conduct outreach usingmultiple recruitment methods. We expect the majorityofparticipants may be recruited from the existing 1,500WTV member base, who currently engage in We TheVillage’s peer support online forum; however, we willalso utilize personal WTV member referrals, socialmediaplatforms, print media, and referrals from partnerorganizations. Currently, WTV’s social network outreachcouldpotentially reach 15,000 persons. WTV team (PI, coaches,and staff) will post recruitment ads and flyers ontheWTV website and forum, as well as on other socialmedia platforms. In addition, we will develop partnershipswith providers, who serve diverse populations, includingcommunities of color and lower SES. TheJoinGroups.Com organization goes into underservedrural areas and establishes a health center to addressmedical and behavioral health needs, including in-personsupport groups for people with substance useproblems. The Sixth Street Community Center servesa Latinx population. We will post recruitmentadvertisements on professional counseling member boards,such as the Association of Black Social Workers.Allrecruitment materials will direct interested individualsto the study page, so they can learn more about thestudyand complete an anonymous screening survey.  We willnot collect any identifying information during thescreening process. If someone starts the screeningsurvey but does not finish it, we will not be ableto reach outto them and they will not be included in the screenedcategory. We will track the number of incompletescreenings throughout the pilot study and where inthe screening survey do people drop off. If theyscreeneligible, they will be directed to click the consentform link. If they screen ineligible, they will bedirected to clicka link to learn more about WTV and joining the businessas usual peer support online forum. They will alsobeprovided the study number if they have any questionsand want to speak to a study staff person. If someonecallsinto the study to be screened over the phone, we willanswer any questions, then refer them to the linklocatedon the study’s landing page to complete screeningand the consent form.
After completing informed consent, participants willbe asked to call the research study phone numbertocomplete a consent quiz and to confirm enrollment.They will have the option of calling the number tospeakwith a study staff person or completing an onlinerequest contact form. The brief contact form willask for aparticipant’s phone number and email address and besttime period to contact them. The goal is to speakwithparticipants within one business day after completinginformed consent. These calls will be completed bystudystaff, including the research assistant, senior projectmanager, and intervention staff, if needed. Duringthe
Page6of26
confirmation call, study staff will administer the brief consent quiz and provide information on next steps, if theparticipant answers 100% of the questions correct.If the person does not answer 100% of the questionscorrectly, the study staff person will review theconsent form with the participant and re-administerthe consentquiz. Participants will have up to three times topass the consent quiz. If they do not pass the thirdtime, they willbe informed that they are not eligible for the study.
After administering the consent quiz during the confirmationcall, study staff will answer questions, review nextsteps, and clarify expectations. If a potential participantdid not pass the consent quiz, study staff will beable toreview the appropriate consent form sections and tore-administer the consent quiz. After completingtheconfirmation call, all eligible study participantswill be considered enrolled into the study. Studystaff will send viaemail secure Survey Gizmo links with the HIPAA authorizationform, locator form and baseline survey. The HIPAAauthorization form will now have an option for “I’mnot sure.” If someone selects the not sure option,they willbe directed to call the study number to discuss theirconcerns or ask questions before moving forward intheenrollment process. Participants must agree to theHIPAA authorization to continue with the study. Afteragreeing to the HIPAA authorization, participantswill click the next step link to complete the locatorform. Aftercompleting the locator form, participants will clicka link to complete the baseline survey. The brieflocator formwill request important contact information in orderto locate participants for the follow-up survey andtore-engage with research and intervention activities,if needed. For participants who report they sharetheir emailaddress with someone else, we will ask them if theyare sure it is okay for us to send information tothis emailaddress. If they say No or Prefer not to answer, theywill be asked if they have a secondary email addresstheywant to use. If someone does not complete the locatorform or baseline survey, study staff will reach outto theparticipants to encourage them to complete these requiredactivities. All participants will have one week tocomplete the enrollment process. Randomization willoccur after completing the baseline survey. We willuseblock randomization to assign a group of three participantsto each condition. We will wait till we have at leastpeople randomized to Program A to begin the program.Participants will be informed of their assigned groupafter completing their baseline survey.  WTV willnotify participants of their randomly assigned programand theappropriate next steps for their specific programassignment. This change will allow us to conduct blockrandomassignment computed by Dr. Kirby and to allow us toequal number of people in each group throughout thestudy recruitment period. We will program Survey Gizmoto send the research team an automatic email whensomeone completes the baseline survey.
When Program A reaches approximately nine participants,we will form the next group assigned to Program A.We will follow-up participants who have incompletedigital data collection that occurs after consentfor up to twotimes.
Figure A: Recruitment and Enrollment Flowchart
Page7of26
Recruitment activities will be conducted after IRBapproval through March 31, 2020 or until we recruitup to 84eligible CSOs, whichever comes first. We will trackand document which recruitment strategies yield thebestengagement. Please see examples of images and messagingwe will use for different methods of recruitment.Weplan to implement the following recruitment methods:a.Recruitment channelsi.Participants will be recruited through the followingmethods as needed:1.WTV Promotions (e.g., website callouts, emails, socialmedia posts and 1:1message) to existing and future WTV members.2.Engagement of the membership group to suggest a friendand make a referral ifthey know anyone who fits the participant description.3.Reaching out to existing partners who provide servicesto patients with OUD.a.Sixth Street Community Centerb.Tempestc.Rebel For A Changed.Best Day Evere.Center for Motivation and Change
Page8of26

f.JoinGroups.Com (medication-assisted treatment (MAT) for opioidaddiction)4.Develop recruitment strategies to increase diversificationof study participantsa.Promote research study on the following professionalcounselingmember websites:i.Association of Black Psychologists (ABPsi)ii.National Association of Black Social Workers (NABSW)b.Develop new partnerships with providers who servemore diversepopulations, including communities of color and lowerSES5.Targeted digital and local advertising efforts.a.Facebookb.Instagramc.Google
3.3 Describe how prospective participants will bescreened. Include information about: how,when, where, and by whom (by position or role, notby name). Describe any instruments that willbe used or tests that will be performed during thescreening process.
As discussed above, we plan to utilize wide-rangingrequirement strategies to reach our target samplesize. WhileWTV is located in New York City, participants maylive across the United States. When a prospectiveparticipantresponds to a recruitment message, flyer or referral,they will be directed to visit the We The VillageFamilySupport study webpage. On the study website, prospectiveparticipants will have the opportunity to read adescription of the study, including goals and expectations.If individuals are still interested, they will bedirectedto click the Screening Survey link. The link willtake them directly to the start of the Screening Survey.TheScreening Survey is a self-administered multiple choiceonline SurveyGizmo tool.
We will program automated scoring to inform participantsimmediately after filling out the screening surveyifthey are eligible, unless their answers are not clearlyeligible or ineligible, such as reporting “othertype of drugused by their loved one.” If the results of theirscreening survey are indeterminate, they will receivea message tocall the study number to speak with a study staffperson.
3.4 Describe the information you will obtain for screening.Explain whether you will retain this aspart of the study data.
We will retain all the information we received aspart of the screening process.  During the screeningprocess, wewill collect information on prospective participant’syear of birth, US residency, access to a computeror smartphone, their own substance use disorder diagnosis,type of relationship with IP, frequency of face-to-faceinteractions with their IP, perceptions of their IP’sopioid use, IP’s symptoms of opioid use or misuse,the types ofsubstances used by IP, current treatment plan fortheir IP, and their ability to commit the time andresources tothe study. All screening data will be de-identifiedand will not be connected to any future data collectionactivities.
3.5 Describe how screen failures will be handled and,if applicable, describe the conditions andcriteria upon which re-screening is acceptable.
Page9of26
A study phone number and email address will be listed on the study landing page for prospective participants ifthey experience technical difficulties or have questions.If a prospective participant’s answers do not makethemclearly eligible or ineligible, they will be encouragedto call, or email the study team, most likely theResearchAssistant, for additional information. We will attemptto communicate with participants within one businessday.The Research Assistant will re-screen participantswithout collecting any identifying information todetermineeligibility. If the person is eligible, they willbe re-directed to the study landing page to completethe informedconsent process and re-enter the digital enrollmentflow. This procedure will improve screening ratesandminimize potential eligible participants screeningout of the study. If the person is not eligible,study staff willinform the person and ask them if they are interestedin learning more about the We The Village community.
4STUDY PROCEDURES
4.1 Provide a detailed description of the study proceduresin chronological order. As applicable,include information on: differences between the controland experimental groups, the number offollow-up visits, study visit windows, participanttime commitment per activity, and thesetting/location per activity.
Study procedures are outlined in the figure below.After screening eligible participants complete onlineenrollment, which includes providing informed consent,passing a consent quiz during the confirmation callbystudy staff (research assistant), agreeing to theHIPAA authorization form, and completion of the locatorformand baseline survey.  Participants are then randomizedinto one of three groups.
Participants assigned to the PEER group (Program C)will participate in an online peer support forumwith otherCSOs. Members of the forum post questions or commentsto weekly peer-led discussions and receive responsesand feedback from other CSO forum members. Memberstypically express concerns regarding their IP’s wellbeingand ask other members to share any strategies theyhave employed when dealing with their IPs.
Page10of26
Page11of26

Interactions typically, are based either in 12-Stepstrategies members have learned (usually throughAl-Anon orNar-Anon Family Groups or Family Training Workshopsprovided by treatment programs) or in CRAFT skillslearned (usually from treatment programs or otherWe The Village members). A staff member from We TheVillage monitors forum interactions to ensure membersare interacting respectfully. This individual alsowillreport any adverse or severe adverse events that membersmention online.
Participant assigned to the CRAFT-A (Program A) andCRAFT-C (Program B) groups will have access to a12-module on-line CRAFT intervention and asked tocomplete one module weekly for 12 weeks.  Modulesintroduce CRAFT concepts and provide workbooks toassist participants in learning and applying the concepts.The modules include: 1) Introduction to CRAFT; 2)Communication Training; 3) Functional Analysis ofDrug Using;4) Positive Reinforcement; 5) Withdrawing Reinforcement;6) Allowing Natural Consequences; 7)Problem-solving; 8) Life Enrichment; 9) SuggestingTreatment; 10) Recovery and Relapse; 11) Relationship;and12) Recap of Skills.  CRAFT-A participants also attenda weekly 60-minute online group sessions facilitatedby aCRAFT-certified coach. CRAFT-C participants attenda weekly 60-minute individualized on-on-one coachingsession with a CRAFT-certified coach. During weeklygroup or individual sessions concepts are brieflyreviewed,questions are answered, and skills are practiced throughrole-plays of common situations.  One-on-one sessionsinvolve role-plays that are tailored to the participants’specific circumstances.
Counselors must complete their CRAFT training andcertification prior to implementing Program A andProgramB. In addition, CRAFT counselors must complete CITItraining as limited personnel.
STUD Y ACTIVITIE S BY PR OGRAMExperimen tal Pr ogramsStandar d Car e ProgramProgram A & Pr ogram BProgram C
●Commit 1½ to 1¾ hours a week
●Commit 1 to 1½ hours a week
●Watch a 12-module online support programdelivered weekly
●Join a private online support forum for people withaloved one with an opioid use problem
●Each module will be 30 to 45 minutes in length
●Gain access to knowledge and experiences of fellowCSOs shared in peer-led forum discussions
●Attend weekly 60-minute online sessionsfacilitated by a CRAFT coach via Zoom or phone
●Post your own questions specific to your currentsituation and receive support from peers and WTVmoderators
●Review content from the weekly module
●Share your knowledge and experience to answer fellowCSOs’ questions and to support others through theirjourney
●Participate in a Question and Answer segment
●Practice content with role-playsProgram AProgram BProgram C
●Weekly sessions are ina small group withWTV coach and 3 to 8study participantsusing Zoom
●Weekly sessionsfollow a specificcourse outline andschedule
●Weekly sessions areone-to-one withWTV coach usingZoom
●Weekly sessions aretailored to theindividual studyparticipant
●Discussions are self-initiated and ongoing
●Engagement can occur at any time of the day or night
●Benefit from the extensive database of shared peerexperiences
Page12of26
4.2 Briefly describe the sources or measures thatwill be used to collect data about participants.As applicable, include information on: instrumentsor surveys that will be administered, teststhat will be performed, and the time points when eachdata will be accessed or obtained.
Data collected directly from participants:Similar to screening and consent procedures, datacollection for baseline, 8-week, and 12-week postenrollmentfollow-up surveys will be self-administered usingSurvey Gizmo software since participants may be locatedanywhere across the country. Participants will bedirected to a separate link to complete the locatorform andbaseline survey after they complete the followingsteps:
1.Provide informed consent2.Pass the consent quiz3.Speak with a study staff person during the confirmationcall4.Agree to HIPAA authorization form
We will include a message that informs participantsof the time estimate for completing the baselinesurvey, aswell as the content of the baseline survey. They willbe told that their contact information will be storedseparately from the rest of the survey and never bedirectly connected to their survey answers. The baselinesurvey consists of socio-demographic questions, suchas gender, age, race/ethnicity, and other standardizedsocio-demographic measures adapted from the GPRA instrumentand the National Survey on Drug Use andHealth. The questions in the 8-week and 12-week follow-upsurveys will ask the same questions. The 8-weekfollow-up survey will enable the research team toassess changes in the lives of participants in anearlier phase ofthe intervention, with the 12-week assessing programimpact at a later stage of the study.
Behavior / Domain
Measure
Timepoints
1.
Socio-demographic 
questions
Measures adapted from GPRA and the 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health 
will include age, gender identity, race, 
ethnicity, sexual identity, and SES
Baseline only
2.
Treatment entry
Revised Supplemental Services Form
Baseline, 8-Week 
&12-Week Post 
Enrollment
3.
Relationship happiness
Relationship Happiness Scale
Baseline, 8-Week 
&12-Week Post 
Enrollment
4.
Missed work
SAS-SR – Work, Housekeeping, School 
sections (sections: A, B, C) only.
Baseline, 8-Week 
&12-Week Post 
Enrollment
5.
Depression, Anxiety, 
Anger
POMS
Baseline, 8-Week 
&12-Week Post 
Enrollment
Physical illness
SF12 Health Survey
Baseline, 8-Week 
&12-Week Post 
Enrollment
6.
Learning CRAFT
Revised Family Training Survey
Baseline, 8-Week 
&12-Week Post 
Enrollment
7.
User satisfaction
Usefulness and Usability Survey
8-Week and 12-Week 
Post Enrollment only
Page13of26
Revised measures have been adapted specifically for CSOs with IPs with an OUP, as appropriate.  In addition, weadded questions specific to the impact of COVID-19on the CSO, the CSO’s contact with the IP, and IP’sability toaccess treatment and to receive quality treatmentdue to COVID-19 restrictions. The IP’s treatment entryis thestudy’s primary outcome and we need to understandthe impact of COVID-19 on our participants’ IPs gainingandreceiving treatment to assess the study’s impact ona primary outcome.
Participants may be contacted through email, text,calls, letters, and social media direct messaging.In addition,we will ask participants to give us the names andcontact information for two people who can reach themif allother contact methods fail. Participants will be ableto provide the messages we can send and/or leave,as wellas any instructions they wish for us to follow whenattempting to contact them or the contacts they sharedwithus.
Data collected from other sources (identify each source;e.g., health care provider, parent, public records):N/A. We will only collect information directly fromthe study participants. We will not collect informationfromthe CSO’s IP.
4.3 Describe pre-defined criteria for removing participantsfrom the study and the procedures forinforming participants of their removal from the study.Include information on the handling oftheir data and measures to ensure individuals’ safetyand privacy after ceasing researchactivities.
Participants may be removed from the study for thefollowing reasons:
a.They engage in hostile behavior with other participantsduring online interactionsb.They break the confidentiality and share personalinformation of other participants
Participants will be notified of their removal fromthe study by the Principal Investigator, Calum Handley.The PIwill call the participant to explain the reason fortheir removal. In addition, a formal letter willbe sent toparticipants. Both the phone call and letter willexplain the reason for their removal, how their datawill behandled, and provide referrals for support, if needed.
Removed participants’ data will be deleted and willnot be used for analysis and dissemination.  Allcontactinformation will be deleted within two weeks afterinforming the participant of their removal. We willtrack anddocument all reasons for removing participants inorder to ensure they are not rescreened and re-enrolledinto
the study.
     
For protocols that meet the criteria for exempt research,skip to Section 7.
5PARTICIPANT PAYMENT
5.1 Describe anycompensationthat will be given toparticipants for the completion ofresearch-related activities. Include the monetaryvalue and type of compensation per activity.
Participants will be asked to complete surveys atthree time points—baseline, 8-weeks, and 12-weekspostenrollment. They will receive a $20.00 incentive forcompleting each survey, a total of $60.00. The incentivewillbe in the form of a $20.00 Amazon gift card that willbe emailed to the participant within two businessdays ofcompleting each survey. We expect participants mayreceive their incentives sooner, but we want to allowtimeto communicate the completion of a survey betweenPHMC R&E Group and WTV. PHMC R&E Group is
Page14of26
responsible for all data collection activities and WTV is responsible for sending incentive payments toparticipants.
5.2 Describe anyreimbursementsthat will be givento participants to repay them for costs theymay have incurred over the course of the study. Includethe monetary value and type ofcompensation per activity.
N/A. We will not reimburse participants for any coststhat they may incur for participating in this onlinestudy,including data or internet plans. We specify no reimbursementswill be given to participants in the consent form.
6INFORMED CONSENT
6.1 Provide a brief summary of the informed consentprocess by selecting all of the consentprocedures you will use and specifying for which studyprocedures. Complete the correspondingappendix as indicated.Consent ProcessSpecific Study Procedures
☒Standard written informed consentInformed consent will be obtained using onlinemethods, so a written signature is not possible. Wewill require participants to check a box agreeingtojoin the study and to type in their first and lastname. We will download the checked consent formand save the file as a PDF in a protected foldersecured on PHMC’s network drive. All participantswill receive an automatic email from Survey Gizmoafter completing the consent form. In addition, allparticipants will be emailed a copy of the PDFinformed consent form with the box agreeing tojoin the study checked off and with their nametyped into the “I agree” section.
☐Waiver of documentation of consent(Appendix D)Alteration of informed consent (Appendix D)
☐Waiver of informed consent (Appendix D)
☐Short form (Appendix E)
☐Child assent and parental permission(Appendix I)
☐Waiver of child assent (Appendix I)
☐Waiver of parental permission (Appendix I)
6.2 Describe in detail the assent and/or consent proceduresin chronological order. Includeinformation about: how, when, where, and by whom (byposition or role, not by name).
Eligible participants will have the option to completethe informed consent process immediately after completingthe Screening Survey if they meet eligibility requirements.They will be directed to click a link that will remainopen for a period of 48 hours. They will be provideda brief explanation of time estimates for enrollmentactivityprior to clicking the appropriate link. After clickingthe link, they will be directed to a self-administeredonlineconsent form.
Page15of26
The next step after informed consent is to administerthe Consent Quiz during the Confirmation Call withallparticipants who agreed to participate. Participantswill be informed that their enrollment is not finaluntil theyspeak with a study staff person to complete the quizand call with study staff. We will attempt to returnphonecalls and emails within one business day.
The final step in enrollment is for participants toagree to HIPAA authorization (See Appendix C).TheHIPAA formwill be sent to participants after passing they passthe Consent Quiz during the Confirmation Call.
With the addition of the 8-week follow-up interviewand the need to get the Consent Addendum from allparticipants, WTV coaches will mention the ConsentAddendum email to the participants in the ProgramA andProgram B conditions during a scheduled session. Forparticipants in the Group C condition, WTV will postamessage on the community forum regarding the ConsentAddendum. Scripts of these messages are includedinAttachment 1. The research staff will send out theSurvey Gizmo link with the Consent Addendum in abrief emailmessage. Please refer to Attachment 1. Communicationwith participants for the messages that WTV and theresearch staff will use for contacting participantsto notify them of reading and agreeing to the ConsentAddendum.
We will send participants, who agree to the ConsentAddendum, an electronic version of the Consent Addendumfor their records. Program staff and research staffwill reach out to participants who did not respondto ourrequest to review the consent addendum. We will contactthem via phone, text, and email as appropriate giventhe permissions they allowed on the contact form atbaseline (Attachment 1).
If a participant selects, “I do not agree to completethe 8-week follow-up survey but agree to continueparticipating in this research study” in the consentaddendum, we will not complete the 8-week follow-upsurveyand we will only send them the 12-week follow-up survey.If someone selects, “I am not sure,” they will beinstructed to call research staff to ask their questionsor to get their concerns addressed. If someone selects,“Ido not agree to complete the 8-week follow-up surveyand do not agree to continue participating in thisresearchstudy, they will receive a follow-up question askingthem to provide a reason for not continuing withthe researchstudy. This will help us document reasons for withdrawal.In addition, if we do not receive a response fromanycontact attempts to review and to agree to the consentaddendum, we will not complete the 8-week follow-upsurvey and we will honor the original consent form.We will not complete the consent quiz with participantsforthe Consent Addendum.
6.3 Describe any measures to ensure or test participants’understanding of the informationpresented during the informed consent process.
We will use a multiple-choice Consent Quiz to testparticipant’s understanding of the information presentedinthe informed consent form. We will implement the followingprotocol to ensure participants comprehend thebasic elements of the study information presentedin the consent form:
a.The quiz will be administered during the ConfirmationCall by a study staff person over thephoneb.Participants must take the quizc.Participants will be required to have 100% correctresponsesd.If a participant does not pass (100%) of the consentquiz, we will re-administer the consent quizafter reviewing the consent form with them over thephone.e.Participants will be given up tothreeopportunitiesto pass the consent quiz
Page16of26
f.If participants are not able to pass the consent quiz after three attempts, they will be informedthat they are not eligible for the study and they will be invited to join WTV’s standard onlineprogram outside of the study.g.All participants will be provided an opportunity toask questions or to receive additionalinformation about WTV.
6.4 If a child who provided assent to participatein the study becomes 18 years old during thecourse of the study, describe the process to re-consentthe participant.
N/A. We will not enroll children. Study participantsmust be over 18 years old.
7STUDY DATA
7.1 Select all of the personal identifiers you willaccess and obtain during this study.Accessmeans to view or to perceive data, but notto possess or record it.Obtainmeans to possess orrecordin any fashion (writing, electronic, video, email,voice recording, etc.) and to retain for any lengthof time.
☒Names
☒Address (street address, city, county, precinct,ZIP code)
☒Dates related to an individual (birth date,admission/discharge dates, date of death)
☒Telephone numbers
☐Fax numbers
☒Electronic mail addresses
☐Social security numbers
☐Medical record numbers
☐Health plan beneficiary numbers
☐Account numbers
☐Certificate/license numbers
☐Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers
☐Device identifiers and serial numbers
☒Web URLs
☒Internet protocol (IP) addresses
☐Biometric identifiers including fingerprints andvoiceprints
☐Full-face photographic images
☒Any other unique identifying number,characteristic, or code
7.2 Does your study involve PHI and need to complywith HIPAA regulations?
HIPAA regulations apply to covered entities that access,collect, use, or disclose protected health information(PHI). PHMC is a HIPAA-covered entity and thus,anystudy that involves PHI must comply with HIPAAregulations. HIPAA only coversidentifiable healthinformation. Studies that involve only (A) healthinformation without any of the 18 personal identifierslisted above or (b) non-health related informationthat contain identifiers do not need to comply withHIPAA because neither form of data meets the definitionof PHI. Use the guide below to verify if your studyinvolves PHI.
All or somestudy data:(a)Contain one or more of the 18 personalidentifiers.
☒Yes
☐NoIf you answered “No” to (a), thenHIPAA regulations do NOT apply.
If you answered “Yes” to (a)AND(b), (c),or(d), thenHIPAAregulations apply to thisproject.SubmitAppendix C.(b)Relate to an individual’s past, present, or futurephysical or mental health or condition.
☒YesNo
(c)Relate to an individual’s past, present, or futureprovision of healthcare.
☐Yes
☒No
Page17of26
(d)Relate to an individual’s past, present, or futurepayment for the provision of healthcare.
☐Yes
☒No
7.3 Is there a possibility thatde-identifiedinformationor biospecimens will be used for futureresearch studies or distributed to another investigatorfor future research studies withoutadditional informed consent from participants?This only applies to studies that prospectively collectinformation or biospecimens. Select “No” if yourstudyinvolves secondary analysis only.
☒Yes, de-identified information or biospecimens maybe used or distributed for future research.
☐No, de-identified information or biospecimens willnot be used or distributed for future research.
8PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY
8.1 Describe procedures to protect participants’privacyduringthe study (i.e., precautions youhave taken to protect the participant from being recognizedas a research subject).
1.Participants will be assigned an identification numberwhich will be affixed to all collected data. Linkagebetween participant identity and identification numberswill be stored in a password protectedelectronic file on a secure network drive at PublicHealth Management Corporation accessible by keystudy staff.2.Participant enrollment spreadsheet will be password-protectedand sent to WTV via encrypted email.WTV will be responsible for contacting enrolled participantsto inform them of their random assignment,to discuss next steps, and to provide $20.00 giftcard incentive payment for completing a survey.  Thisfilewill not be connected to study data.3.Data collected as part of the online interventionactivities will also be kept confidential. Participantswillbe instructed to create a unique username that does
not use their last name or email address.
 4.When contacting participants for study-related purposes,staff will follow a locating and contact protocolthat will decrease the chances someone will be identified
as a research subject. 
    
  8.2 Describe all of the procedures you will use toprotect participants’confidentialityduringthestudy (i.e., precautions you have taken to protectparticipants’ data from being unnecessarily andinappropriately disclosed; e.g., authorization ofaccess, password protection, encryption, physicalcontrols, certificates of confidentiality, separationof identifiers and data). Include information onany measures that will be taken during storage, access,use, and transmission of study data.If you will obtain information on participants’ substanceuse disorder from a treatment provider, then onlyanswer this question for all other data not relatedto substance use records (e.g., self-report data).Allconfidentiality and data security questions aroundsubstance use records should be recorded inAppendixJ.
1.Data collected in the study will be kept strictlyconfidential and will not be shared with anyone outsideofthe research team. All research specific materialswill be coded with a research number to de-identifythe data and will contain no other identifying informationto protect participant confidentiality.2.All computer spreadsheets containing data and SPSSdata sets will be saved in password protected fileson a secure server located at Public Health ManagementCorporation and accessible only to designatedresearch staff.3.Participant enrollment spreadsheets will be sent viaencrypted emails to WTV.
Page18of26
4.All research instruments will be computerized for this study, and the data will be entered via the Webusing SurveyGizmo platform. R&E Group maintains a Business Associate Agreement with SurveyGizmo,allowing staff to securely collect private and confidentialinformation in compliance with the HealthInsurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA),Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA),and other applicable data security and protectionlaws.5.For those participating in intervention activitiesvia Zoom, Zoom ensures information is not storedintheir network; the data is only transmitted duringa session. We will provide participants with a securelink to ensure no one other than the participant canenter a group. WTV agreed to purchase thehigher-level membership account that is HIPAA compliant.6.Participants will be visible to one another duringthe CRAFT sessions; however, their visibility issimilar toattending an in-person group-level intervention session.Zoom sessions will not be recorded.7.Counselors will record intervention fidelity usingan intervention activity checklist. The checklistswill nothave a participant’s name on them. They will onlyhave their ID numbers.8.After collecting and cleaning all data from the baselineand follow-up time points, PHMC will upload thefinal clean and de-identified data set to the study’ssecure Google drive in order to share the data withthe study’s statistician for analysis purposes.9.All study staff will be required to undergo trainingin confidentiality procedures (including HIPAAregulations) which review data handling procedures,as well as addressing questions about participantsposed by individuals outside of the immediate projectstaff and by project staff members who do notneed the information requested. Certification of successfulcompletion of this training is kept in theappropriate project binder. Should any breaches ofparticipant confidentiality occur during the courseofthe study, they will be reported to the relevant IRBand DSMB.
8.3 If identifiers will be obtained, indicate howthe identifiers will be stored.If you will obtain information on participants’ substanceuse disorder from a treatment provider, then onlyanswer this question for all other data not relatedto substance use records (e.g., self-report data).Allconfidentiality and data security questions aroundsubstance use records should be recorded inAppendixJ.
☐Not applicable; identifiers will not be obtained.
☒Identifiers will be stored separately from studydata and a key or code will be kept.
Describe where the data study, identifiers, and keywill be stored, and state the retention period:1.Participants will be assigned an identification numberwhich will be affixed to all collected data. Linkagebetween participant identity and identification numberswill be stored in a password protectedelectronic file on a secure network drive at PublicHealth Management Corporation accessible only bykey study staff.2.Participant enrollment spreadsheet containing identifyinginformation will be sent to WTV via encryptedemail and in a password protected spreadsheet. Thisfile will not be connected to study data.3.Electronic obtained consent forms will be stored ina separate restricted folder located on a securenetwork drive at Public Health Management Corporationaccessible only by key study staff.4.Informed consent forms, screening data, and surveydata will be kept for a period of five years aftertheend of the pilot study as required by NIH/NIDA.5.Identifying data will be kept for a period of fiveyears after the end of the pilot study then deleted.Theinformation will be retained for this period so thatwe can ensure pilot study participants do not enrollina future full research trial, if funded.6.Contact information will be deleted one year afterthe end of the pilot study.
    
Page19of26
☐Identifiers will be removed or destroyed.
Describe how identifiable data will be de-identifiedor destroyed. Include information on how, when, andbywhom (by role or position, not by name):
     
☐Identifiers will not be removed or destroyed.
Provide the rationale for retaining identifiable dataand state the retention period. Include informationonhow and where the identifiable information will bestored:
     
9RISKS AND BENEFITS
9.1 Select all of thereasonably foreseeablerisksof harm, discomforts, and hazards to theparticipants and others as a result of study participation.
☒Breach of confidentialityto records containingidentifiable private information or biospecimens
☐Disclosure of participants’ responses outside ofthe research context could place the subjects atrisk ofcriminal or civil liability
☐Disclosure of the participants’ responses outsideof the research context could bedamagingto theparticipants’ financial standing, employability, insurability,education, reputation, social relationships, services,oreligibility services
☒Psychological discomfort or distressfrom providingor being exposed to personal or sensitive information
☒Possibility of or perceivedinvasion of privacyto the participant or their family
☐Possibility of or perceivedcoercion or undue influenceto participate in the study
☐Presentation of materials which some participantsmay considersensitive, offensive, or threatening
☐Physical or psychological harmsuch as pain, injury,or disease including side effects from drugs anddevices
☐
Other (please specify): 
     
☐No risks
9.2 For each risk selected above, describe the magnitude,probability, duration, and/orreversibility of the harm, discomfort, or hazard.This study poses minimal risks to participants. Ifthe following risks occur, we anticipate the magnitudeto be lowbecause of the protections we have put in place toprotect identity and the access to study staff todiscuss
concerns.
     
9.3 For each risk selected above, describe how youwill manage or minimize the risk.1.Risk Resulting from a Breach of confidentiality –Data collected in the study will be kept strictlyconfidential and will not be shared with anyone outsideof the research team. We have developed strictprotocols for collecting, securing, storing, and transmittingdata. All study staff must complete a HumanSubjects training protocol.
2.Risk Resulting from Discomfort or Distress- completingresearch measures and procedures –Beforegiving consent, participants will be informed of potentialdiscomforts from completing researchmeasures. Participants will be allowed to refuse toanswer any question without penalty.Discomfortassociated with the treatment intervention- The levelof distress associated with interventions   isexpected to be similar to that which they would experienceduring any training program and is not a
Page20of26
function of the research participation per se. We have not encountered any instances of significantemotional upset from research activities with individualswho have participated in our previous CRAFTand self-help studies. Nonetheless, participants willbe informed about this possible risk beforeconsenting and will be told that they can withdrawfrom the study at any time without penalty.
3.Risk Resulting from Possible or Perceived Invasionof Privacy -Participants are at risk for harm asaresult of being identified as a study participantor as someone with a loved one with an opioid useproblem. Participants will be informed of this riskduring the consent process. Participants will receiveinstruction on how to protect their identity by creatingstrong passwords, completing intervention andresearch activities when they have enough time andprivacy to participate, and using unique usernames when participating in online study activities.In addition, participants will be informed of theimportance of not sharing another person’s information.The likelihood of this occurring is small.
     
For protocols that meet the criteria for exempt research,skip to Section 10.
9.4 Are there any risks to individuals related topregnancy, fertility, lactation, or effects on a fetusor neonate? If yes, describe how you will manage orreduce this risk.Some studies will require unique considerations ifa participant becomes pregnant during the study (e.g.,discontinuation of a diet-based intervention or medications).
No. We are conducting a behavioral online interventionthat poses no risks to participants who are pregnantorwho become pregnant during the study.
9.5 Describe whether participants who become pregnantwill be able to continue theirparticipation in the study. If they will continueto be included in the study, describe any measuresto accommodate the pregnancy, if applicable.
Yes. CSOs who become pregnant during the study willbe able to continue. The proposed study is a behavioralhealth intervention and is conducted online. We donot expect pregnant participants to require additionalaccommodations because they can participate via asmartphone or computer at any location.
9.6 Describe the potential direct benefits to individualparticipants or to others as a result ofstudy participation. Indicate if there may not beany direct benefits to participants or to others.Participants may not receive direct benefits fromthis study; however, the study uses teaching approacheswhendelivered face-to-face have been shown to help peopleinteract with their loved ones using healthier strategies.In addition, participants may feel more supportedby engaging with other CSOs or by interacting withtheircoach, depending on their assigned group. CurrentWTV members have reported increased level of happiness,
support, and healthy behaviors. 
   
9.7 Define reportable and non-reportable Adverse Events(AEs).
Reportable AEs:Will be defined as: significant discomfort from answeringresearch questions or participating in the treatmentintervention such that the participant decides tostop their participation, reports of new diagnosesof
Page21of26
depression, anxiety, or panic attacks. In addition, we will document reports from the CSO of domestic or intimatepartner violence that may occur during their timein the study. We plan to collect reportable AEs thatoccur forthe participant.
Non-reportable AEs:Clinically insignificant events are not consideredAE’s. Examples of clinically insignificant eventsinclude mild viralillness (e.g., colds, flu, and runny nose), commonheadaches, minor scratches, and mild symptoms orproblemsassociated with medical conditions or accidents notrelated to drug use (e.g., back pain). As per thedefinition ofAEs, only significant worsening of psychiatric problemsor new problems will be reported as AEs. We willmonitorattrition rates but drop out from the study will notbe reported as an AE.
Reportable SAEs:will be defined as death; a life-threateningevent such as suicidal attempt, or inpatienthospitalization (including psychiatric hospitalizations)due to suicidal behavior, or psychiatric distress;orsubstance use overdose; or an event that extends anexisting hospitalization as defined above. Althoughwe donot believe the study procedures or intervention placesparticipants at increased risk for clinical worsening,wewill review and report events of clinical worseningthat leads to a psychiatric hospitalization of theparticipant.We plan to collect reportable SAEs that occur fromthe participant. These events are not anticipatedto occur ona regular basis, if at all, for participants.
9.8 Define reportable Serious Adverse Events (SAEs).Choose one or both as applicable to yourstudy.
☒Any adverse event that:1.Results in death;2.Is life-threatening (places the subject at immediaterisk of death from the event as it occurred);3.Results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongationof existing hospitalization;4.Results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity;5.Results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect; or6.Based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardizethe subject’s health and may require medicalor surgical intervention to prevent one of the otheroutcomes listed above.(OHRP Guidance on Unanticipated Problems and AdverseEvents; January 15, 2007)
☒Other, or in addition to the above (please describe):Although we do not believe the study procedures orintervention places participants at increased riskfor clinicalworsening, we will review and report events of clinicalworsening that leads to a psychiatric hospitalization.Weplan to collect reportable SAEs that occur for theCSO from the CSO participants. These events are notanticipated to occur on a regular basis, if at all.
9.9 Describe plans to identify, monitor, manage, andreport AEs and SAEs. Include information onthe method and frequency of collecting AE and SAEinformation (e.g., weekly through telephonecalls, monthly at study visits, every time the subjectcomes to the clinical setting), the individualsresponsible for collecting this information (e.g.,research assistants, case managers, counselors),and the start and end of collection (e.g., from theparticipant’s first exposure to the interventionto their last study visit).
All WTV and PHMC staff who interact with participantsor monitor online conversations will be trained onthedefinitions of reportable and non-reportable AEs andSAEs and the way to complete the forms reportingthem.The PI and Co-I will monitor the WTV forum and meetregularly with CRAFT counselors to track and to documentany AEs and SAEs. The WTV clinical team will be interactingwith participants in the CRAFT interventions on a
Page22of26
regular basis and will be responsible for collecting AE and SAE information shared during their interactions andreporting them to the PHMC team. In addition, theresearch assistant will document information relatedto AEsand SAEs shared when contacting participants. Also,the WTV team monitor online comments and interactionsand will report any AEs or SAEs reported there tothe PHMC team.
All adverse and serious adverse events occurring duringthe study are documented on a form, reviewed andsigned by Dr. Kimberly Kirby and the PI, Calum Handley,and reported to the IRB. All SAEs are reported tothe IRBwithin 48 hours of our awareness of the event (24hours for fatal events). A summary of all SAEs andAEs thatoccurred during six-month pilot study will be includedin any progress reports to the IRB. We will beginto collectAE and SAE information between the first interventionsession and their 12-week post enrollment assessment.
9.10 Will you submit or have you submitted the protocolfor additional oversight by a Data andSafety Monitoring Board (DSMB)?
☒Yes:The protocol will be submitted to PHMC’s DSMB.
☒PHMC’s DSMB conducted the initial review on November15, 2019.
☐The protocol will be submitted to an external DSMB.
☐An external DSMB or monitoring committee has reviewedthe study. All reports are attached.
☐No, a DSMB is not needed for this study
10REFERENCES
Bibliography And References CitedBischof, G., Iwen, J., Freyer-Adam, J., Rumpf, H.(2015). Efficacy of the CommunityReinforcement and Family Training for concerned significantothers of treatment-refusing individuals with alcoholdependence: A randomized controlled trial. Drug andAlcohol Dependence 163: 179-185
Bischof, G., Iwen, J., Freyer-Adam, J., & Rumpf, H.(2016). Efficacy of the Community Reinforcement andFamilyTraining for concerned significant others of treatment-refusingindividuals with alcohol dependence: Arandomized controlled trial. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,163,179-185. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.04.015
Benishek, L. A., Dugosh, K. L., Faranda-Diedrich,T. M., & Kirby, K. C. (2006). Development of the significantothersurvey: An interview for family members of substanceusers. American Journal of Family Therapy, 34(1),33-46.
Bresani, E., Kirby, K.C., Meyers, R.J., Case, T.,Miller, T.G., Festinger, D.S., Serna, B., & Grasso,S. (2016). Theparent’s modular toolkit: Development of an onlineCRAFT program for parents of emerging adults withSUD.Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 156, e27-e28
Brigham, G.S., Slesnick, N., Winhusen, T.M, Lewis,D.F., Guo, X. and  Somoza, E. (2014.) A randomizedpilot clinicaltrial to evaluate the efficacy of Community Reinforcementand Family Training for Treatment Retention (CRAFT-T)for improving outcomes for patients completing opioiddetoxification. Drug Alcohol Depend. 138: 240–243.
Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality.(2017.) National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailedtables. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and MentalHealth Services Administration; 2018.
Page23of26
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) Multiple Cause of Death 1999–2017 on CDC Wide-ranging Online Data forEpidemiologic Research (CDC WONDER). Atlanta, GA:CDC, National Center for Health Statistics. 2018.Availableat http://wonder.cdc.gov.
Ghertner, R., & Groves, L. (2018). The opioid crisisand economic opportunity: geographic and economictrends. ASPE Research Brief, 1-22.
Hartley, J. (1998). Learning and studying: A researchperspective. Florence, KY: Taylor & Frances/Routledge.
Hudson, C. R., Kirby, K. C., Firely, M. L., Festinger,D. S., & Marlowe, D. B. (2002). Social adjustmentof familymembers and significant others (FSOs) of drug users.Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 23(3), 171-181.
Kaiser Family Foundation analysis of Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention (CDC), National Center forHealth Statistics. (2019). Multiple Cause of Death1999-2017 on CDC WONDER Online Database, released2018.Data are from the Multiple Cause of Death Files, 1999-2017,as compiled from data provided by the 57 vitalstatistics jurisdictions through the Vital StatisticsCooperative Program. Accessedat http://wonder.cdc.gov/mcd-icd10.html on January10, 2019. Accessed  athttps://www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/opioid-overdose-deaths-by-raceethnicity/?dataView=2&currentTimeframe=0&selectedRows=%7B%22wrapups%22:%7B%22united-states%22:%7B%7D%7D%7D&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7DonDecember 3, 2019.
Kirby, K. C., Marlowe, D. B., Festinger, D. S., Garvey,K. A., & LaMonaca, V. (1999). Community reinforcementtraining for family and significant others of drugabusers: A unilateral intervention to increase treatmententry ofdrug users. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 56(1), 85-96.
Kirby, K. C., Dugosh, K. L., Benishek, L. A., & Harrington,V. M. (2005). The Significant Other Checklist: Measuringthe problems experienced by family members of drugusers. Addictive Behaviors, 30(1), 29- 47.
Kirby, K.C., Meyers, K., Carpenedo, C.M., Bresani,E., Dugosh, K.L., Zentgraf, K., & Zaslav, D. (2016).Randomized,controlled trial of CRAFT for parents of treatment-resistantadolescents and young adults: Interim results. Drugand Alcohol Dependence, 156, e112
Kirby, K.C., Benishek, L.A., Kerwin, M.E., Dugosh,K.L., Carpenedo, C.M., Bresani, E., Haugh, J.A.,Washio, Y.,Meyers, R.J. (2017.) Analyzing Components of CommunityReinforcement and Family Training (CRAFT): IsTreatment Entry Training Sufficient Psychology ofAddictive Behaviors. Vol. 31, No. 7, 818 – 827
Lovett, L. (2018) Senate passes bill to address opioidcrisis, expands telemedicine scope. Mobihealthnews.https://www.mobihealthnews.com/content/senate-passes-bill-address-opioid-crisis-expands-telemedicine-scope?mc_cid=f7c67890d1&mc_eid=3bfb3dd1e7
Marlowe, D.B., Kirby, K.C., Bonieskie, L.M. Glass,D.J. Dodds, L.D., Husband, S.D., Platt, J.J., Festinger,D.S., (1996.)Assessment of coercive and noncoercive pressures toenter drug abuse treatment. Drug and AlcoholDependence 42:77-84
McLellan, A. Thomas Wolfe, B. L., & Meyers, R. J.(2004). Community reinforcement and family training:Gettingloved ones sober. In The counselor publication ofthe National Association of Alcoholism and Drug AbuseCounselors, Vol. 5, No. 3 (pp. 57-60).
Meyers, R. J., Miller, W. R., Smith, J. E., & Tonigan,J. (2002). A randomized trial of two methods forengagingtreatment-refusing drug users through concerned significantothers. Journal of Consulting and ClinicalPsychology, 70(5), 1182-1185.
Page24of26
Meyers, R. J. (2008). Providing a CRAFT book – Get your loved one sober – resulted in treatment entry in greaterproportions than seen in twelve-step facilitationcontrol groups. Unpublished raw data.
Miller, W. R., Meyers, R. J., & Tonigan, J. (1999).Engaging the unmotivated in treatment for alcoholproblems: Acomparison of three strategies for intervention throughfamily members. Journal of Consulting and ClinicalPsychology, 67(5), 688-697.
Osilla, K.C., Kennedy, D.P., Hunter, S.B., Maksabedian,E. (2016.) Feasibility of a computer-assisted socialnetworkmotivational interviewing intervention for substanceuse and HIV risk behaviors for housing first residents.Addiction Science & Clinical Practice. 11:14
Ray GT, Mertens JR, Weisner C. (2007.) The excessmedical cost and health problems of family membersofpersons diagnosed with alcohol or drug problems. MedCare; 45:116–122.
Ray GT, Mertens JR, Weisner C. (2009.) Family membersof people with alcohol or drug dependence: healthproblems and medical cost compared to family membersof people with diabetes and asthma. Addiction; 104:203 – 214.
Rhoades, H., La Motte-Kerra, L., Duan, L., Woo, D.,Rice, E., Henwood, B., Harris, T., Wenzel, S.L. (2018.)Socialnetworks and substance use after transitioning intopermanent supportive housing. Drug and AlcoholDependence Volume 191, Pages 63-69
Roozen, H. G., Waart, R. D., & Kroft, P. V. (2010).Community reinforcement and family training: An effectiveoption to engage treatment-resistant substance-abusingindividuals in treatment. Addiction,105(10), 1729-1738.doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2010.03016.x
Roozen, H. G., Boulogne, J. J., Tulder, M. W., Brink,W. V., Jong, C. A., & Kerkhof, A. J. (2004). A systematicreviewof the effectiveness of the community reinforcementapproach in alcohol, cocaine and opioid addiction.Drugand Alcohol Dependence,74(1), 1-13. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2003.12.006
Rounsaville, B. J., Carroll, K. M., & Onken, L. S.(2001). A stage model of behavioral therapies research:Gettingstarted and moving on from stage I. Clinical Psychology:Science and Practice, 8(2), 133-142.
Sarlin, E. (2018) As Opioid Use Disorders Increased,Prescriptions for Treatment Did Not Keep Pace. NIDANOTES.
Scholl L, Seth P, Kariisa M, Wilson N, Baldwin G.Drug and Opioid-Involved Overdose Deaths – UnitedStates,2013-2017. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ePub: 21 December2018.
Singer, N. (2018) New York Times. Take This App andCall Me in the Morning (March 18)https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/18/technology/take-this-app-and-call-me-in-the-morning.htm
Sisson, R. W., & Azrin, N. H. (1986). Family-memberinvolvement to initiate and promote treatment ofproblemdrinkers. Journal of Behavior Therapy & ExperimentalPsychiatry, 17(1), 15-21.
Slesnick, N., Meyers, R. J., Meade, M., & Segelken,D. H. (2000). Bleak and hopeless no more: Engagementofreluctant substance-abusing runaway youth and theirfamilies. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 19(3),215-222.
Smyth B.P.,Barry J.,Keenan E.,Ducray K. (2010).Lapse and relapse following inpatient treatment ofopiatedependence. Ir Med J. 103(6) 176-9.
Page25of26
Stanton, M. D. (2004). Getting reluctant substance abusers to engage in treatment/self-help: A review ofoutcomes and clinical options. Journal of Marital& Family Therapy, 30(2), 165-182.
Thomas, E. J., & Santa, C. A. (1982). Unilateral familytherapy for alcohol abuse: A working conception.AmericanJournal of Family Therapy, 10(3), 45-58.
Thomas, E. J., & Yoshioka, M. R. (1989). Spouse interventiveconfrontations in unilateral family therapy foralcohol abuse. Social Casework, 70, 340-347.
Trudeau, J. V., Deitz, D. K., & Cook, R. F. (2002).Utilization and cost of behavioral health services:Employeecharacteristics and workplace health promotion. TheJournal of Behavioral Health Services & Research,29(1),61-74.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS),Office of the Surgeon General, (2016.) Facing AddictioninAmerica: The Surgeon General’s Report on Alcohol,Drugs, and Health. Washington, DC: HHS.
van Dommelen-Gonzalez, E., Deardorff, J., Herd, D.,Minnis, A.M. (2015.) Homies with Aspirations andPositivePeer Network Ties: Associations with Reduced FrequentSubstance Use among Gang-Affiliated Latino Youth.Journal of Urban Health. Volume 92, Issue 2, pp 322-337.
Vice Chairman’s Staff of the Joint Economic Committee.(2017). The Numbers Behind the Opioid Crisis:https://www.lee.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/b54a2abb-978d-4bbb-a868-531cdfaeae7a/the-numbers-behind-the-opioid-crisis-final.pdf 2.
Ventura, A. S., Bagley, S. M.  (2017). To ImproveSubstance Use Disorder Prevention, Treatment and Recovery:Engage the Family. J Addict Med;11: 339–341.
Wogan, J.B., (2017). Governing States and Localities.Health and Human Services. For Opioids' YoungestVictims,Is Help Too Little, Too Late?http://www.governing.com/topics/health-human-services/gov-opioid-epidemic-child-welfare.html
Page26of26