20191576 
 
 
 
 
In vivo Three-Dimensional Determination of 
OA Brace Effectiveness IRB Conditions 
Satisfied at the Protocol 
Level 
Jun 24, 2019 
 
Richard D Komistek, PhD 
University of Tennessee 
1506 Middle Drive 
310 Perkins Hall 
Knoxville, TN 37996 
Phone: (865) 974-4159 
Fax: (865) 946-1787 
Email: rkomiste@utk.edu  
 
In vivo knee kinematics will be assessed for 20 subj ects that have been cl inically diagnosed with 
substantial unicompartmental osteoarthritis (O A) by one of the surgeons of Colorado Joint 
Replacement; this is the location from wh ich participants will be recruited. 
Enrollment will be increased to 24 subjects to  account for any dropouts.  Medial joint space 
narrowing will be clinically asse ssed in all patients on standing anteroposterior radiographs. The 
objective of this study will be  to analyze subjects with symptomatic unicompartmental 
osteoarthritis under in vivo dynamic, weight-b earing conditions using video fluoroscopy to 
determine if present-day OA knee braces provi de separation of the femoral condyle from the 
tibial plateau, thus avoiding excessive loads on the degenerative compartment. 
 
The study will be submitted to Western IRB (W IRB); the University of Tennessee’s IRB and 
Centura Health/Catholic Health Initiatives (for Colorado Join t Replacement/Porter Adventist 
Hospital) have waived oversight to WIRB. The required Reliance Agreements will be included 
with this submission to WIRB. 
 
We will use the following inclusion criteria  to recruit participants for this study: 
1. Must be a patien t of Colorado Joint Replacement. 
2. Must be diagnosed with marked unicompart imental degenerative joint space narrowing. 
3. Bilateral subjects may not be included in the subject population. 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
1. Pregnant, potentially pregnant or lactating females. To satisfy radiation protocol, each 
female subject will be asked if she is pr egnant, or possibly c ould be pregnant. A 
pregnant person will not be allo wed to participate in the study. 
2. Subjects who are unable to  perform normal walking. 
3. Subjects who are unwilling to sign Informed Consent/ HIPAA documents. 
4. Does not speak English. 
 
Investigators 
Richard D. Komistek, Ph. D. (PI) Douglas A. Dennis, MD (Co-PI) Jason Jennings, MD (Sub-I) Michael T. LaCour, Ph. D. (Sub-I) 
Jacob Elkins, MD (Sub-I) 
Lindsay Kleeman-Forsthuber, MD (Sub-I) 
IRB Approved at the 
Protocol Level 
Jul 11, 2019
2 –Breg OA Brace Effectiveness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  Study locations 
Subject Recruitment will take pl ace at Colorado Joint Replacement: 
Colorado Joint Replacement 2535 S Downing St., Suite 100 Denver, CO 80210 (720) 524-1367 
 
Fluoroscopic exams, ultrasound exams a nd CT exams will be performed on 
all 20 (or possibly 24) subjects at : Porter Adventist Hospital 
2525 S Downing St. Denver, CO 80210 (303) 778-1955 
 
Satellite sites: Analysis will take plac e at the University of Tennessee’s Center for Musculos keletal Research 
laboratories: Science and Engineerin g Research Facility 
1414 Circle Dr. Knoxville, TN 37996 
 
CMR administrative offices: 310 Perkins Hall 1506 Middle Dr. Knoxville, TN 37996 
 
Recruitment 
Patients of Colorado Joint Replacement in Denver, Colorado will recommend eligible subjects for recruitment who have been  clinically diagnosed to ha ve marked unicompartimental 
degenerative joint spac e narrowing. Since there are no inclus ion criteria other than being a 
patient of Colorado Joint Replacement and having unicompartmental OA, review of patient medical files prior to contacti ng about participation is not n ecessary. No inclusion/exclusion 
checklists will be used to ensure eligibility sinc e no other criteria must be met other than being a 
patient of Colorado Joint Repla cement, having the unicompartimental degenerative joint space 
narrowing, being able to speak English and perf orm normal walking. The surgeons of Colorado 
Joint Replacement will be aware of which of their patients have this joint condition. Even though 
a HIPAA waiver for recruitment will not be necessary, patient medical files will need to be 
accessed in order to acquire contact information for each potential subject. 
 Ms. Roseann Johnson will contact th e patients to explain the study using an approved script and 
inquire as to whether or not they  are interested in participating.  A partial waiver of HIPAA has 
been included for this. The surgeons of Colorado Joint Replacement may also bring the study to patients’ attention during regular office visits and wi ll use language similar to that in the script. 
If a patient is agreeable to participate, s/he will be scheduled  to visit Porter Adventist Hospital 
on the day of data collection. On this scheduled day, UT researcher s will travel to Porter to 
collect the kinematic data of participants’ kne es under fluoroscopic surv eillance using a C-arm 
fluoroscopic unit while subjects perform normal treadmill walki ng in the frontal plane. The 
fluoroscopic images will be stor ed on password protected computer  workstations for subsequent 
analysis. 
3 –Breg OA Brace Effectiveness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019   
Data Collection 
Fluoroscopy On the scheduled day of data collection, here will  be at least two UT re searchers pres ent (which 
could also include the PI), as well as a st udy PI, (Drs. Komistek, Dennis; Jennings, Elkins, 
Kleeman-Forsthuber, LaCour [Sub-Investigators] ) to conduct the fluoroscopic evaluation. Each 
subject will be asked to perfor m gait without the assi stance of an offloadi ng brace (Figure 1a). 
Then, each subject will be fitted with a Bre g, off-the-shelf OA brace and will perform normal 
gait while under fluoroscopic surveillance (Figure 1b). To ensure each brace was fitted properly, 
Breg will be asked to send eith er a sales representative or an engineer to the evaluation site. 
Therefore, the sales representati ve or engineer will be asked to fit their brace on each of the 
subjects. This individual will sign a pledge of confidentiality. 
 
a b 
Figure 1. Subject on a treadmi ll perform gait without a brace  (a) and with a brace (b). 
 
A Radiation Technician (RT) employed by Porter  Adventist Hospital wi ll perform the actual 
fluoroscopy procedure, following the subjects’ OA knee with the unit as the activity is performed 
with and without the OA brace; only the knee join t (from the fluoroscopy machine) will be 
recorded on the fluoroscopy footage. The UT res earchers, graduate resear ch assistants (GRAs), 
which may include any of the following - Garett  Dessinger, Jarrod Nachtrab, Milad Khasian, 
Lauren Smith, Seth Coomer – will be present, although they will not perfo rm the actual 
fluoroscopy procedure. They will  be present during the fluorosc opy procedure to walk subjects 
through the activities, answer any questions that may arise, ensure  data collection equipment is 
set up as needed and serve as consultants to the RT. 
 
Any of these UT individuals, or study staff from Colorado Joint Replacement, will consent the 
participants. They will meet with each potential participant individually to make sure s/he has 
been properly informed of the procedures and to help with any of the IC form. CMR researchers 
will inform all subjects that they do not have to participate and are free to leave if they wish and will answer any questions subjects may have about the study. Participation is entirely voluntary. 

4 –Breg OA Brace Effectiveness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  Participants will be asked to prac tice the activity to ensure they  can comfortably complete it and 
experience no pain with the fluoroscopy machine off (no radiation). The practice portion of the 
data collection without radiatio n will not be video-recorded. 
 
Multiple trials of each activity may be conducted to ensure usable  images have been acquired to 
complete the study. Radiation ti me will be kept as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA) and 
will not exceed two minutes. The RT will start the fluoroscope ju st prior to the subject beginning 
the activity trial and will stop the fluoroscope immediately after the subject completes each 
activity trial to ensure that the subject is not exposed during idol periods. On-time will be 
recorded on the subjec t’s IC, as well as any output the fluoroscopy unit is able to provide. 
 
In addition to fluoroscopy video, subjects will  be videotaped from the shoulders down (to 
maintain subject anonymity) while performing the activities (live feed perspective). The speed 
level of each trial will be base d on the comfort level of the subject . One of the researchers will be 
ready and in close proximity to assist each subject in case the participant requires help. This 
precaution will be practiced for all participan ts, regardless of physical  wellbeing, age or prior 
results; no assumptions will be made as to an y participant’s capabilities. The participant will be 
allowed to rest as necessary and be instructed to stop the activity at the first sign of pain. 
 
The fluoroscopic and video footage for the study activi ties will be stored on digital video files on 
a secure computer workst ation and stored securely by UT res earchers. It will then be uploaded 
onto the secure CMR database by th ese researchers. Once the data has been uploaded, identifiers 
are removed from the data automatically by the database, and a study and subject-specific 
identifier will be assigned to each subject. 
 
JointVue three-di mensional ultrasound 
Since the skeletal geometry is different for every person, computer ai ded design (CAD) models 
of the femur and tibia will be created for each specific subject. In orde r to create these CAD 
models, each subject will be asked to undergo a three-dimens ional (3D) ultrasound using the 
JointVue proprietary software  to reconstruct 3D femoral and tibial bones (Figure 2). A 
representative from JointVue will be present during data collection to conduct the ultrasound 
procedure in order to create the CAD models . This individual will  sign a statement of 
confidentiality. 
 
Study data will then be uploaded onto a secure se rver that University of Tennessee researchers 
will use to conduct the kinematic analysis using a model-fitting approach, the relative pose of 
knee implant components will be determined in 3D  from a single-perspective fluoroscopic image 
by manipulating a CAD model in 3D space. 
 
Using a model-fitting technique, the 3D bones will be overlaid ont o the fluoroscopic images to 
determine amount of medial OA offloading. Succe ssive fluoroscopic images  of each subject’s 
stance phase, with and without th e OA brace, will be downloaded to  a computer. Images will be 
captured at five instances during stance-phase of  gait: heel strike, 33% of stance phase, mid- 
stance, 66% of stance-phase and at toe-off. A comparative analysis wi ll be conducted for each 
subject while wearing the OA brace and with thei r non-braced test. Then, the amount of medial 
condylar separation will be assessed for each subject. 
5 –Breg OA Brace Effectiveness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  
 
Figure 2. Example of 3D bone creation. 
 
CT Scan 
Participants will be asked to sche dule a CT scan at Porter Adven tist Hospital at their convenience 
within 1 month of the initial data collection day.  To ensure subject safety , CT will be limited to 
the affected knee and the rest of patient’s body will be protected from radiation with lead 
protection.  The CT scan will be limited to the study knee and will image 6 inches distal on the 
tibia and 6 inches proximal on the femur. 
 
Private Health Information/Medical Record Data 
It is not anticipated th at the subjects’ medical files should need to be accessed for any PHI for the 
study for recruitment or for the conduct of the study itself. However, contact information from 
patient files will be acquired for inquiring as to whether or not  patients would be willing to 
participate. The only subject-specifi c data that will be necessary will be measurements of medial 
condyle separation from the medial  tibial plateau for each subj ect with and wi thout a brace. 
Researchers will acquire the measurements with  the brace while they are conducting the data 
collection. Researchers may also acquire the subjects’ medial condyle separation without the 
brace while they are present for da ta collection. However, if this is not possible or time does not 
permit, Colorado Joint Replacement staff may send that information to UT researchers via secure transfer (e.g., UT Vault). 
 
The subject data – fluoroscopy frames, video footage and ultrasound– will be uploaded and 
stored on CMR’s secure server for use in this and future studies (if participant permission is 
obtained via IC) by the researcher(s) who attend data collection or appointed by Dr. Komistek. 
Once data has been uploaded, the database automa tically removes subject identifiers and assigns 
an ID for each subject. Only these files of de-ide ntified data are now available for researchers to 
review and analyze. Only Dr. Komistek, Dr. La Cour and Garett Dessinger have access to the 
6 –Breg OA Brace Effectiveness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  identifiable data that was orig inally uploaded by the GRA, as it remains in a password-protected 
portion of the secure server. Only Dr. LaCour and Mr. Dessinger can grant access to this 
identifiable password- protec ted portion of the database by changing a user's level of 
authentication with diff erent privilege levels. 
Researchers would like to retain this study data in our secure data base so as to continue to add 
relevant, current data to our digita l collection to help us  work with manufacturers in the future to 
create better orthopaedic products . Participants will be asked if  their study data may remain a 
part of the CMR data collection for use in futu re studies in the IC. Li kewise, should a subject 
choose to withdraw from the study, s/he will have the option as to whether or not data collected 
from them at the point of withdrawal may be used for data analysis or if their information should 
be destroyed from CMR records; subjects choosing to withdraw  will be asked to complete a 
Revocation of Consent wherein they may indicate their preference regarding the data collected 
from them. 
 
On the day of data collection, th e list of patient names will be given to UT researchers and the 
researchers will generate subject-specific iden tifiers for each participant. A table will be 
generated for this study, indicating the participant’s name a nd generated ID number; this table 
with subject names and corresponding ID num bers will be provided to Colorado Joint 
Replacement staff, so the staff will be aware of which identifier is linke d with each subject. If 
necessary (i.e., time not permitti ng during data collection; re searchers unable to collect 
measurement), Colorado Joint Replacement staff ma y relate the measuremen ts of medial condyle 
separation from the medial tibial plateau for each subject without a brace securely to UT 
researchers via the UT Vault https://vault.utk.edu/ . 
 
SPECIFIC RISKS AND PR OTECTION MEASURES 
 
1. Fluoroscopic Procedures 
As with every clinical study, there may be some  risks. However, doses of radiation exposure 
received will be much lower than those known to  produce detectable health effects. Previously 
reported literature shows that fluoroscopy-base d procedure (angiography) on the lower limb 
result in a typical effect ive dose of 0.83 mSv per min (0.083 rem per min) (Verdun 1). Mettler, et 
al. have reported that the typi cal effective dose for a conventional knee procedure is 0.005 mSv 
(0.0005 rem)2. According to either estim ate, the additional risk of a fluoroscopic procedure 
involving the knee ranges between "Negligible"  to "Low" for a 2 minute exam (Verdun). A 
previous fluoroscopy TKA study conducted at anot her hospital with a 2 minute on-time limit 
shows that the average effective dose was 0.14 mSv (0.0014 rem) with a maximum dose of 0.27 
mSv (0.027 rem). The additional risk for all subjects in this previ ous study would be considered 
"Negligible." To account for subject variability and differences in imagining techniques, all 
subjects enrolled in this study wi ll receive less than 2.0 rem. 2.0 rem is considered "Low" risk. It 
is unlikely that anyone in this study will approa ch the 2.0 rem limit. Since the fluoroscopy data 
will be collected in one session, there will only be one day in which the participants will be 
exposed to this amount of radiation.  
 
2. CT Scan 
In addition to the radiation exposure from the fluoroscopy procedure, all subjects will be 
exposed to radiation from the CT scan of th e knee (which is considered an “extremity”), 
estimated at 0.01 rem, according to the Ameri can Nuclear Society’s Ra diation Dose Chart, 
7 –Breg OA Brace Effectiveness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  http://www.ans.org/pi/res ources/dosechart/ (Attachment 4). Th e radiology department at Porter 
Adventist hospital uses a software program call Caredose that automatically keeps the dose as 
low as possible on all CT exams.  Insofar as the amount of time for the CT scans taking place, 
we estimate approximately 30 minutes for the exam itself. 
 
In conclusion, a participant who will be fluorosc oped for less than two minutes will be exposed 
to a maximum amount of only 2.0 rems of radiation. This means that the maximum total exposure rate will be less than  2.0 rems per subject for the entire experiment. The participant's 
knee joint will be fluoroscoped using negligible to low risk levels of radiation according to 
published literature. 
 
The participant has the right to stop the procedure at a ny time; researchers or the RT can end the 
procedures at any time if they feel the participant is at risk, but the participant can choose to 
remain in the study if s/he feels that there is no risk to her/his surgical procedure or 
recuperation.  
3. Participant Confidentiality  
The investigators will ensure subject confidentialit y to the extent that is permissible by law is 
maintained throughout the study and after. Researchers not notated as Invest igators of this study 
that have access to subjects during data collectio n will sign pledges of confidentiality. Complete 
confidentiality cannot be guaranteed. 
 
Computer Database 
As noted, on the day of data colle ction, the list of patient names wi ll be given to UT researchers 
and researchers will generate subject-specific iden tifiers; Colorado Joint Replacement staff will 
be provided with this list of subject names and corresponding generated identifiers. These 
assigned identifiers will be uploaded into an excel spreadsheet created by UT researchers. 
Colorado Joint Replacement staff will be aware of each subject’s respective identifier from the 
table provided to them on the day of data collec tion after UT researchers generate the subject- 
specific identifiers 
 
Researchers present durin g data collection or appointed by Dr. Komistek will upload the subject 
data, including fluoroscopy, video and ultras ound, into the CMR digital data collection. 
Consequently, student researcher s in CMR who assist in data analysis ca nnot access subject- 
specific information. All participant queries (lookups) generate the participant identification 
number and no subject identi fiers. No identifiable images exis t in the database. This study data 
will be kept indefinitely on the secure CMR da tabase for possible future research (with the 
permission of each participant – re quested in the IC). In the case  of participant withdrawal from 
the study, the Revocation of Consent that the participant will be asked to complete requests that 
the participant indicate whether or  not data collected prior to withdrawal may be used for data 
analysis purposes, or if it s hould be removed from the CMR da ta collection completely and 
destroyed. 
 
Hard Copy 
In compliance with HIPAA regulations, all particip ants will have their identities withheld from 
all public files. Individuals not indicated as Investigators belo w will have access to participant 
information and they will sign pledges of confid entiality. The personnel in the following list will 
have access to participant study data: 
8 –Breg OA Brace Effectiveness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019   
List of Persons Involved in Research: 
 Dr. Richard Komistek, PI, UT Professor, Biomedical Engineering 
 Dr. Michael LaCour, Sub-Investigator, UT Re search Assistant Professor, Biomedical 
Engineering 
 Dr. Douglas Dennis, Co-PI, Colorado Jo int Replacement, Orthopaedic Surgeon 
 Dr. Jason Jennings, Sub-Investigator, Colora do Joint Replacement, Orthopaedic Surgeon 
 Jacob Elkins, Sub-Investigator, Colorado Joint Replacement, Orthopaedic Surgeon 
 Lindsay Kleeman-Forsthuber, Sub-Invest igator, Colorado Joint Replacement, 
Orthopaedic Surgeon 
 Clinical Research Staff, including Ms. Roseann Johnson, Ms. Anna Brady and Ms. Aviva 
Pollet, Colorado Joint Replacement 
 Radiation technician(s) will operate the fluoroscopy machine, Porter Adventist Hospital 
 Required MD present during the fluoroscopy procedure 
 Rebecca Robertson, Research Coordinator, UT staff 
 Researchers present durin g data collection at the Univers ity of Tennessee and/or the lead 
researchers appointed by Dr. Komistek. 
 Graduate students: 
 Garett Dessinger 
 Jarrod Nachtrab 
 Milad Khasian 
 Lauren Smith 
 Seth Coomer 
 * Undergraduate student researchers em ployed by CMR will be involved in 
analyzing the data after it has been co llected and transferred to CMR’s digital 
data collection. Since subject information will be removed and replaced with the 
assigned identifiers before the data is tr ansferred to the databa se, it will not be 
possible for these undergraduate  students to be able to identify subjects. They 
will only have access to the study data th at has been uploaded onto the secure 
CMR digital collection. These undergraduate  student researchers will not have 
contact with subjects. 
 Institutional Review Boards 
 The University of Tennessee will/has waived oversight to WIRB. Reliance 
Agreement included. 
 Centura Health/Catholic Heal th Initiatives will/ has waived oversight to WIRB. 
Reliance Agreement included. 
 Western Instituti onal Review Board. 
 A representative from Breg, Inc. will be pres ent at data collection to  fit subjects with the 
brace properly. This individual will sign a pledge of confidentiality. 
 A representative from JointVue will be present at data collection to acquire 3 
dimensional bone images using JointVue’s  ultrasound procedure and software. This 
individual will sign a pledge of confidentiality. 
 
Clinical Observations: 
There are no clinical observati ons made during this data collect ion or from the images obtained 
through data collection. UT researchers do not require any kind of report from the radiology 
9 –Breg OA Brace Effectiveness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  department. Unless the data collection site requi res such a report, there will be no radiology 
report generated for this procedure conducted as a result of this study. Therefore, no  RT will 
review such a report for the procedures, whic h would be the only way such a “significant 
problem” would be determined. No data will be returned to the physician’s office for evaluation 
or review. However, if research ers see anything in the imaging that is extremely out of the 
ordinary ( e.g., floating body , severe dislocation , potential tumors [spots of incredibly dense tissue 
on bones and skin]), they will bring this to the attention of  Drs. Dennis or Jennings or their staff.  
 
It is not anticipated that the imaging collected during this study would potentially provide benefit to specific subjects by influencing the physician’s treatment plan. 
 
BENEFITS 
The potential benefits from this study include, but are not limited to: 
 Better understanding of the joints analyzed  with the same technique in the past. 
 Future brace design improvements based on the kinematic findings. 
 There is no intention of any di rect benefit to participants of  the study. Information related 
to the data gathered may be provided to Dr s. Dennis or Jennings by the researchers if 
something out of the ordinary is seen duri ng the imaging. However, researchers are not 
radiologists and cannot  interpret anything they may see. If there is something within the 
imaging that is obviously wrong as mentioned above, then this could result in potential 
modification of a subject’s treatment plan if images collected as a result of this study 
reveal any kind of “significant problem.” 
 
COMPENSATION The participants in this study will receive a $50 onetime payment in the form of a check for participation 
that will be mailed to the particip ate after completion of their CT Scan. 
 
METHODS TO OBTAIN "INFORMED CONSENT" FROM PARTICIPANTS Informed consent will be obtained prior to a ny procedures being conduc ted. Subjects who are 
agreeable to participate will be scheduled to visit Porter Adventist Hospital on the day that UT 
researchers will travel there for data coll ection. Appointed staff from Colorado Joint 
Replacement and/or UT researchers will be respons ible for consenting the participants, giving 
them ample time to review and complete the forms and assist the participan ts with review of the 
documentation, if the participants are unable to  read the form on their own. Only upon signed 
consent will the subject be allowed to participate in the study. If the subject chooses to be 
removed from the study after participating, hi s/her video, fluoroscopy footage and ultrasound 
data that was collected will be managed according to the su bject’s response on the Revocation of 
Consent form. A copy of his/her Revocation of Cons ent will be attached to his/her IC and placed 
in a separate, secure file for IRB review. Thes e consent forms will be stored at UT, Knoxville 
and will be accessible by only the aforementioned personnel. 
 
Drs. Dennis and Jenning s will not be present during the c onsenting process to avoid possible 
subject coercion to participat e. Subjects may contact Colorado Joint Replacement with any 
questions they may have. 
 
From previous studies, we  have determined that it takes ap proximately 15 minutes to consent a 
subject and answer any questions that s/he may have. We have also estimated approximately 20 
minutes for researchers to guide the subject through the steps of the procedure, allow the subject 
10 –Breg OA Brace Effectiv eness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  to practice the activity and then to actually perform the activity  under fluoroscopic surveillance; 
actual radiation ex posure will be up to, but not more than two minutes. The ultrasound portion of 
the data collection should take approximately 10 minutes. We have estimated a total time of 
approximately 45 minutes for each subject to be consented and complete the fluoroscopy and 
ultrasound procedures. 
11 –Breg OA Brace Effectiv eness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019   
ATTACHMENT 1 
 
Verdun FR, Bochud F, Gundinchet F, Aroua A,  Schnyder P, Meuli R. Quality Initiatives 
Radiation Risk: What You Should Know to Tell Your Patient 1. Radiographics 2008 Nov 
28(7):1807-16. 
 
 
 
 

12 –Breg OA Brace Effectiv eness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019   
 
13 –Breg OA Brace Effectiv eness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  ATTACHMENT 2 
Mettler, et al. “Effective Doses in Radi ology and Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine.” Radiology 
248.1 (2008): 254-263.  http://radiology.rsna.org/ content/248/1/254.full.pdf+html  
 

14 –Breg OA Brace Effectiv eness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  ATTACHMENT 3 
 
 

15 –Breg OA Brace Effectiv eness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  
 
16 –Breg OA Brace Effectiv eness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019   
 
 
17 –Breg OA Brace Effectiv eness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019   
 
18 –Breg OA Brace Effectiv eness V1.1 protocol 
6/7/2019  ATTACHMENT 4  
 
 
 
     
 