Clinical Trial: Effects of Carboxymethylcellulose Artificial Tears on the Eye Microbiome  
NCT: 05292755  
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Plan  3/31/2022  
 
• Principal Investigator: Yujia Zhou , M.D.  
• Co-Investigator: Elizabeth Dawson  
• Co-Investigator: Gary Wang, M.D., Ph.D.  
• Supervisor: Walter Allan Steigleman, M.D.  
 
Protocol Pa ge 1 of 5 
IRB version 03.09.04  
PI version 3/9/2014 4:00 PM 
 University of Florida IRB -01 
Protocol  
  
1. Title:  
Effects of Carboxymethylcellulose Artificial Tears on the Eye Microbiome: A 
Randomized, Controlled, Double -Blind Study  
2. Investigators:  
• Principal Investigator: Yujia Zhou  
• Co-Investigator: Elizabeth Dawson  
• Co-Investigator: Gary Wang, M.D., Ph.D.  
• Supervisor: Walter Allan Steigleman, M.D.  
3. Abstract:  
Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC), a common component in artificial tears, modif ies the gut 
microbiome  when ingested . We will identify  its effects on the eye microbiome  of adult UF 
eye clinic patients in this randomized, controlled, double -blind study.  Effects of CMC on 
the eye microbiome are unknown and have implications for ocular disease and artificial 
tear choice.  Participant s will be given either CMC artificial tears  or artificial tears without 
CMC , complete symptom surveys, and undergo conjunctival swabs. Investigators will 
conduct chart reviews, bacterial genome sequencing, and analyze  microbiome s using 
Shannon’s diversity index  and principal coordinate analysis on R statistical packages.  
Protocol Pa ge 2 of 5 
IRB version 03.09.04  
PI version 3/9/2014 4:00 PM 
 4. Background:   
Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) is a thickener  frequently included in FDA-approved 
artificial tears . A study by Chassaing et al. in 2021 entitled “ Randomized Controlled -
Feeding Study of Dietary Emulsifier  Carboxymethylcellulose Reveals Detrimental 
Impacts on the Gut  Microbiota and Metabolome ” demonstrated that CMC ingestion 
alters the gut microbiome . The eye also has a microbiome  distinct from other organ 
system s. The ocular microbiome influences  eye diseases including  dry eye disease  
and keratitis , as summarized in an article entitled “ Microbes of the human eye: 
Microbiome, antimicrobial resistance and biofilm formation ” by Ranjith et al. in 2021. 
Interventions such as contact lens wear can change t he diversity and composition of 
eye bacteria, as demonstrated in an article entitled “ Changes in the Eye Microbiota 
Associated with Contact Lens Wearing ” by Hakdong et al. in 2016.  
Therefore, we hypothesize tha t the use of CMC in artificial tears may affect the eye 
microbiome  and influence  ocular disease s. Similar studies on microbiome composition 
used  bacterial ribosom al RNA  sequencing and statistical analysis with existing R 
packages such as  phyloseq and  DADA2. A UF investigator , Rachel Newsome,  recently  
conducted a  microbiome  study entitled “The gut microbiome of COVID -19 recovered  
patients returns to uninfected status in a minority  dominated United States cohort ” at 
the University of Florida in 2021 . For these reasons, we are conducting a similar  study  
on the use of artificial tears containing CMC  compared to control artificial tears without 
CMC . Resul ts of this study will lead to  a better understanding of the risks and benefits 
associated with CMC artificial tears  for eye lubrication and dry eye disease . 
5. Specific Aims:  
We aim to examine  whether  carboxymethylcellulose in artificial tears changes the  eye 
microbiome  and identify which bacterial genera are enriched . 
6. Research Plan:   

Protocol Pa ge 3 of 5 
IRB version 03.09.04  
PI version 3/9/2014 4:00 PM 
 • Recruitment:  During the spring  of 2022, 80 patients  of the UF Oaks Eye Clinic  who 
meet inclusion criteria  will be identified by study staff prior to their visit by chart 
review using the  Epic electronic medical record and clinic scheduler  on a secure 
encrypted UF computer . Up to 20 participants are expected to drop out over the 
course of this study. When pati ents have completed their clinical  workup , Dr. 
Steigleman  will approach  patients without exclusion criteria  to ascertain 
willingness/interest in the study , then recruit them . Study staff will give w illing 
participants the appropriate informed consent form  and counsel  participants  for 
consent to enroll  in a private examination room . Completed consent forms will 
labelled with the participant’s randomly selected numerical identifier as described 
below and  stored securely in the UF Oaks Eye Clinic Office.  
• Participant Criteria : This study includes  adults above age 18  of either sex  who 
can self -administer artificial tears  and are scheduled to  return for  clinical  follow -up 
in 1 week . This study excludes  individuals with active eye infection s, have 
prosthetic eyes, are immunocompromised , or are diagnosed with autoimmune  
diseases  or malignant neoplasms about  the eye . Individuals who take 
immunomodulatory therapy, steroids, antibiotics , medicated eyedrops, or are 
already using CMC artificial tears  within 1 week of the study will also be excluded. 
These  criteria maximize  the number of self -consenting participants  while minimizing  
participants whose compliance, conditions , or medic ations  may change the eye 
microbiome.  
• Research Intervention : Participants will be given either artificial tears without CMC  
(control) or commercial artificial tears  containing CMC  (treatment)  and told that they 
may have received either CMC or a placebo. B oth are FDA -approved for over -the-
counter use and for treatment of dry eye . Both interventions are standard therap ies 
for dry eye  disease . Prospective p articipants have the option to not enroll in  the 
study , and the alternative is to complete a normal clinic visit . Individuals for whom 
artificial tears do not constitute standard therapy are excluded from this study . 
• Assignment : This study  design will include an experimental  control, random 
assignment, and double blinding  of staff and participants. The principal investigator 
will create a securely saved  Excel spreadsheet with unique randomly generated 
numerical identifiers keyed to either t he control group receiving  artificia l tears 
without CMC or the treatment group receiving  CMC artificial tears . The principal 
investigator will then create plain cardboard boxes with the identifier on removable 
adhesive labels . Boxes will contain a copy of the informed consent form, participant  
instructions, and 21 plastic vials of either artificial tears without CMC  or CMC 
artificial tear s as assigned on the identifier spreadsheet . Patients will be blinded to 
their assigned intervention group . Study staff other than the principal investigator , 
who are blinded to box contents,  will give participants a randomly selected  box and 
an electronic survey  (PDF) on an encrypted clinic computer in their private 
examination room . Labels will be placed on co nsent forms  and identifiers will 
replace personal identifying information  on electronic surveys . 
• Data Collection:  Electronic s urvey s will contain the Ocular Surface Disease Index  
and a box for entry of the patient’s unique identifier.  After completion of the survey, 
licensed physicians serving as study staff will swab the participant’s right and left 
eye conjunctiva  with a  single  cotton tip applicator , seal the applicator in a sample 
Protocol Pa ge 4 of 5 
IRB version 03.09.04  
PI version 3/9/2014 4:00 PM 
 tube, attach a label, and free ze it for storage in d ry ice.  The participant will complete 
a normal clinical schedule afterwards and will be scheduled to return in 1 week. 
Upon 1 week follow -up, participants will be swabbed again and complete a second 
survey. The second survey will be identical to the first survey but  contain an 
additional question quantifying eye drop use  to measure  compliance.  Patients will 
complete a normal clinical schedule  afterwards.  Study staff will correlate identifiers 
to patients using the informed consent forms and record ophthalmic history, 
ophthalmic medications, age, gender, tobacco usage, diabetes  status, and race by 
chart review during  this study.  
• Sample Processing  and Data Analysis : Samples will be frozen  at -80 degrees 
Celsius  and transported to a BSL -2 lab at UF  for processing. During processing, 
samples will be lysed, amplified, and sequenced for bacterial 16S RNA using 
protocol supplied by Illumina MiSeq. Swabs and conta iner tubes will be destroyed 
after sequencing. The sequenced bacterial microbiome of each sample will then be 
trimmed, error -corrected, and classified using the DADA2 R package as described 
in the article described above (Newsome 2021).  After all samples are sequenced, 
microbiomes will be grouped by principal coordinate analysis using the phyloseq R 
package. Shannon’s diversity  indices will be calculated using the phyloseq R 
package. Differences in alpha diversity before and after treatment  will be tested by 
PERMANOVA  using the vegan R package, and differences in beta diversity will be 
tested by ANOVA using the nlme  R package . 
• Data Security:  The original consent forms with unique identifier stickers will be 
kept securely in a folder and stored in a locked office within the UF Oaks Eye Clinic. 
Surveys will be accomplished  on a pdf  and do not contain any participant 
identification aside from the study -assigned numerical identifier. All other 
documents and data files will be deidentified and stored on an encrypted computer 
within the UF IT environment.  Only medical students, resident physicians, and 
attending physicians serving as study staff will access participant medical records 
on the Epic EMR using a secure encrypted computer or smartphone.  This study will 
not have a Data Safety Monitoring Board. Dr. Steigleman will serve as oversight for 
this research project and will meet weekly with study staff to monitor study conduct 
and patient safety.  
Protocol Pa ge 5 of 5 
IRB version 03.09.04  
PI version 3/9/2014 4:00 PM 
 7. Possible Discomforts and Risks:  
Enrolled study participants may more commonly encounter mild eye discomfort during 
conjunctival swabs, anxiety regarding assignment to a treatment group, short delays in 
clinic flow (1 -2 minutes), and inconvenience of completing  surveys during the study.  
Rare discomforts or risks may include breach of  protected  patient data, eye pain, dry 
eye, eye infection, and eye trauma  including corneal abrasions and conjunctival 
hemorrhage because of  methods used in this study.  Participants will not be charged for 
any time , medication,  or procedure used in this study.  
To mi nimize anxiety and medical risks , patients will receive counseling and treatment 
interventions in the setting of the UF Oaks Eye Ophthalmology Clinic by a licensed 
attending ophthalmologist or an ophthalmology resident  capable of mitigating and 
treating such harms . The inconvenience of enrolling in the study will be mitigated by 
utilizing the wait time (10 to 40 minutes) during a routine clinic appointment. The 
conjunctival swab is a routine technique practiced by atten ding and resident 
ophthalmologists with minimal risk. Eye discomfort and pain  during this procedure will 
be reduced with a soft cotton -tip applicator, and patients may be given routine topical 
anesthetic s or eye lubricants after the procedure if needed. Topical anesthesia  prior to 
swabbing and  other methods of collecting microbiome samples such as eye irrigation 
will not be used  due to their anticipated negative effect on sample quality.  
8. Possible Benefits:  
The participants will receive free FDA-approved treatment (artificial tears) for dry eye 
during the study and improved guidance on artificial tear choice after the study’s 
conclusion based on the study results.  This may not benefit all participants directly but 
may directly help some participants alleviate dry eye.  There are no other direct benefits 
to participants.  
To date, there is no data on whether this common artificial tear ingredient may have 
deleterious or favorable effects on the eye microbiome. The composition of eye 
microbio mes has been shown to have associations with eye diseases, including dry 
eye disease. This information may guide artificial tear choice in the future, as opposed 
to the status quo , where all brands of preservative -free artificial tears are treated as 
equiv alent.  
These benefits outweigh the minimal risk to enrolled study participants , who will be in 
the care of a trained ophthalmologist during the length of this study  in the unlikely 
event that harm occurs to them. Our study methods use minimally invasive te chniques 
to gather data and are routine in the setting in an ophthalmology clinic. We designed 
the study such that the risk of unreasonable harms such as billing for research time, 
eye infections, and patient discomfort are minimized or eliminated.  
9. Conflict of Interest:  
We do not have any conflicts of interest to disclose . Neither the principal investigator , 
co-investigators , or UF  hold patents, licenses, or stock in the artificial tears used. We 
have no external sponsors.  
 