Page  1 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  
                                                                                       
HRP-591  - Protocol  for 
Human  Subject  Research
Protocol  Title:
Remote  pulmonary  function  testing  in amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis  (ALS)
Principal  Investigator:
Name:  Andrew  Geronimo  
Department:  Neurosurgery
Telephone:  (717)  531-0003,  x282576
E-mail  Address:  ageronimo@pennstatehealth.psu.edu
Version  Date:
March  7, 2021
Clinicaltrials.gov  Registration  #:
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Important  Instructions  for Using  This Protocol  Template:
1. Add this completed  protocol  template  to your  study  in CATS  IRB (http://irb.psu.edu ) on the “Basic  Information”  
page,  item  7. 
2. This template  is provided  to help  investigators  prepare  a protocol  that includes  the necessary  information  needed  
by the IRB to determine  whether  a study  meets  all applicable  criteria  for approval.  
3. Type  your  protocol  responses  below  the gray  instructional  boxes  of guidance  language.   If the section  or item  is 
not applicable,  indicate  not applicable.
4. For research  being  conducted  at Penn  State  Hershey  or by Penn  State  Hershey  researchers  only,  delete  the 
instructional  boxes  from  the final  version  of the protocol  prior  to upload  to CATS  IRB (http://irb.psu.edu ).  For all 
other  research,  do not delete  the instructional  boxes  from  the final  version  of the protocol.
5. When  making  revisions  to this protocol  as requested  by the IRB, please  follow  the instructions  outlined  in the Study  
Submission  Guide  available  in the Help  Center  in CATS  IRB (http://irb.psu.edu ) for using  track  changes.  
If you need  help…
University  Park  and other  campuses:
Office  for Research  Protections  Human  Research  Protection  Program
The 330 Building,  Suite  205
University  Park,  PA 16802-7014
Phone:  814-865-1775
Fax: 814-863-8699
Email:  irb-orp@psu.eduCollege  of Medicine  and Hershey  Medical  Center:
Human  Subjects  Protection  Office
90 Hope  Drive,  Mail  Code  A115,  P.O. Box 855
Hershey,  PA 17033
(Physical  Office  Location:  Academic  Support  Building  Room  1140)
Phone:  717-531-5687
Fax number:  717-531-3937
Email:  irb-hspo@psu.edu
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  2 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  Table  of Contents
1.0 Objectives
2.0 Background
3.0 Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria
4.0 Recruitment  Methods
5.0 Consent  Process  and Documentation
6.0 HIPAA  Research  Authorization  and/or  Waiver  or Alteration  of Authorization
7.0 Study  Design  and Procedures
8.0 Subject  Numbers  and Statistical  Plan
9.0 Confidentiality,  Privacy  and Data  Management
10.0 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan
11.0 Risks
12.0 Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  and Others
13.0 Sharing  Results  with  Subjects
14.0 Subject  Stipend  (Compensation)  and/or  Travel  Reimbursements
15.0 Economic  Burden  to Subjects
16.0 Resources  Available
17.0 Other  Approvals
18.0 Multi-Site  Research
19.0 Adverse  Event  Reporting
20.0 Study  Monitoring,  Auditing  and Inspecting
21.0 Future  Undetermined  Research:  Data  and Specimen  Banking
22.0 References
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  3 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  1.0 Objectives
1.1 Study  Objectives
The speciﬁc  objective  of this proposal  is to utilize  the practice  of telemedicine  via connected  health  
devices  to enable  the guided  performance  of a remote  pulmonary  function  test (rPFT)  in the home.   The 
rationale  for this study  is to determine  whether  telemonitoring  of respiratory  health  can help  exceed  
standards  of ALS care.
Part  1: Demonstrate  the reliability  of remote  pulmonary  function  testing,  performed  via telemedicine,  
for monitoring  respiratory  function  in patients  with  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis  (ALS)
Primary  Hypothesis:  There  is no difference  in the results  of PFT and rPFT  for respiratory  assessment  of 
FVC and MIP.
Secondary  Hypothesis:   The respiratory  therapist,  patient,  and caregiver  will express  confidence  in 
conducting  the rPFT,  as determined  by surveys  of procedure  acceptance.
Part  2: Weekly  remote  pulmonary  function  testing  (rPFT)  and nurse  respiratory  health  coaching  
(NRHC)  in ALS telemedicine
This part randomizes  subjects  into two arms  – both  perform  weekly  rPFT  testing  and one receives  
monthly  NRHC.
Aim 1: Clinically-meaningful  benefit  of weekly  rPFT
Primary  Hypothesis:  Home  respiratory  assessment  enables  thresholds  for non-invasive  ventilation  (NIV)  
recommendation  to be met on average  30 days  sooner  when  measured  weekly  compared  to the 
standard  3-month  interval.
Secondary  Hypothesis:  Determine  the factors  associated  with  adherence  to weekly  rPFT  procedures.
Aim 2: The impact  of NRHC  on patient  outcomes
Primary  Hypothesis:  Patient  and caregiver  teams  in the NRHC  arm report  higher  self-efﬁcacy  in the 
respiratory  management  of the disease  at 6 months  compared  to those  in the non-NRHC  arm.
Secondary  Hypotheses:  Patients  in the NRHC  arm report  higher  self-efﬁcacy  at 12 months,  experience  
less decline  of respiratory-related  quality  of life and fewer  respiratory  complications  compared  to those  
in the non-NRHC  arm.
1.2 Primary  Study  Endpoints
Part 1:  The primary  endpoint  is completion  of a standard  PFT and an experimental  rPFT  during  a single  
clinic  appointment.   At the endpoint,  study  outcomes  will include:
1)The best  forced  vital  capacity  (FVC)  and maximal  inspiratory  pressure  (MIP)  results  from  that visit’s  
PFT
2)The best  FVC and MIP results  from  that visit’s  rPFT
3)Survey  responses  from  study  participants.
Part 2: The primary  endpoint  for Aim 1 occurs  at the clinic  visit following  initiation  of NIV.   At this time,  
participants  will have  had weekly  measurements  of FVC and MIP from  self-administered  rPFT  
procedures,  as well as standard  PFT assessments  performed  with  the assistance  of the respiratory  
therapist  at approximately  three-month  intervals  during  standard  in-person  or telehealth  clinic  
appointments.   The primary  endpoint  for Aim 2 will be the change  in self-efficacy  scores  from  baseline.   
Changes  will be compared  across  arms.
1.3 Secondary  Study  Endpoints
In Part 2: All participants  will undergo  a training  period  for rPFT  procedures,  which  entails  weekly  rPFT  
coaching  by a member  of the research  team  for the first four  weeks.   To proceed  with  the remainder  of 
the study,  the participant  team  must  demonstrate  the ability  to perform  and transmit  rPFT  results  to the 
research  team  during  the 4th rPFT  training  session,  and demonstrate  FVC test results  that are within  10%  
of the mean  values  achieved  during  the first three  training  sessions.   Training  sessions  will occur  at 
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  4 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  weeks  8 and 12 to monitor  aptitude.    Changes  in self-reported  respiratory  quality  of life will be 
measured  as part of procedures  in Part 2.  Participants  completing  the study  may  be offered  the 
opportunity  to participate  in a focus  group  on their  experience  in the study,  which  will be conducted  via 
Penn  State  Health  Zoom  videoconferencing  and have  audio  recorded.
2.0 Background  
2.1 Scientific  Background  and Gaps
Non-invasive  ventilation  (NIV)  lengthens  survival  and improves  QoL for patients  with  ALS.
According  to the Quality  Measurement  Set put forth  by the American  Academy  of Neurology  (AAN),  two 
parameters  of high  importance  in ALS care  are monitoring  of respiratory  function  and management  with  
NIV [Miller2013].    The practice  parameter  of the AAN  regarding  ALS care  states  that NIV is effective  in 
prolonging  survival  and slowing  the rate of respiratory  decline  [Miller2009].   NIV has been  documented  
to have  a positive  effect  on QoL in the areas  of sleep  quality,  daytime  sleepiness,  physical  fatigue,  and 
depression  [Butz2003].   NIV is recommended  when  a patient  presents  with  either  an FVC≤50%  predicted  
or a MIP > -60 cm H2O [Miller2009].   It is recommended  that PFTs  be done  at least  once  every  three  
months,  and that doctors  discuss  options  for NIV support  regularly.   
The multidisciplinary  clinical  model  may  not provide  optimal  management  for patients  with  rapidly  
progressing  respiratory  symptoms.
Although  disease  course  varies  substantially,  some  patients  experience  rapid  respiratory  decline.   In 
prospective  study  of 38 newly  diagnosed  patients,  half presented  with  chronic  hypoventilation  after  one 
year,  necessitating  the introduction  of NIV [LoCoco2006].    The authors  suggest  that efforts  should  be 
made  to evaluate  pulmonary  function  in these  patients  at least  once  every  month.    Furthermore,  it has 
been  shown  that early  initiation  of NIV at an FVC threshold  of 65%  predicted  was associated  with  a 
significant  increase  in the median  time  from  ALS diagnosis  to death  [Lechtzin2007].   The current  practice  
of quarterly  respiratory  assessment  may  leave  some  individuals  in danger  of developing  to untreated  
respiratory  insufficiency  or beginning  treatment  later  than  would  be optimal  or other  more  scientific  
wording.
Telemedicine  has impacted  other  areas  of neurology,  but is understudied  for efficacy  in ALS.
The practice  of telemedicine  involves  the delivery  of medical  care  via long-distance  and electronic  
communication  between  a health  care  professional  and a patient  or another  health  care  professional.    
This type  of intervention  can expand  medical  coverage  into underserved  regions,  while  maintaining  the 
high  quality  of care.  Success  with  telemedicine  in other  areas  of neurology,  such  as in the treatment  of 
Parkinson's  disease  [Samii2006],  epilepsy  [Ahmed2008],  and stroke  [Demaerschalk2009],  provide  a 
framework  for achieving  positive  outcomes.
It is largely  unknown  whether  remotely-provided  multidisciplinary  care  results  in outcomes  for ALS 
patients  and their  caregivers  that are comparable  to those  achieved  with  traditional  care.   A review  by 
Hobson  et al. identified  32 publications  addressing  telemedicine  in ALS [Hobson2016],  which  concluded  
that patients  are comfortable  using  the videoconferencing  interface  to discuss  most  concerns,  they  
appreciated  the reduced  travel  time  and costs,  and the use of telemedicine  extended  the period  for 
which  they  received  multidisciplinary  care.    Some  programs  offered  live interaction  with  providers  as a 
way to delivered  care  to individuals  in rural  areas  with  no alternative  treatment  options  [ALS-
Maine2010,  Bedlack2014].    Other  models  utilized  a traveling  nurse  to perform  the assessment  in the 
patient's  home,  which  is stored  and forwarded  to the appropriate  providers  at the multidisciplinary  
clinic  [Pulley2015,  McClellan2013].   Others  have  taken  on a more  passive  role,  with  monitoring  of 
oximetry  and non-invasive  ventilation  (NIV)  data  by a nurse  led to fewer  hospital  visits,  and higher  
treatment  adherence  [Pinto2010,  Vitacca2010,  Ashcroft2016].   
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  5 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  Despite  these  results,  Hobson  concludes  “There  is limited  evidence  to recommend  the use of 
telemedicine  or telehealth  in the case  of patients  with  ALS.   Using  telehealth  as an alternative  to clinic  
visits  appears  technically  feasible  but further  research  needs  to establish  its safety  and effectiveness ” 
[Hobson2016].    To address  gaps  in telemedicine  care,  randomized  controlled  clinical  trials  must  be used  
to identify  methods  that can meet  or surpass  the standards  of in-person  assessment.
2.2 Previous  Data
Preliminary  work  by our group  as part of a pilot  study  assessing  the benefits  of ALS telemedicine  has 
shown  that the practice  of live telemedicine  is viewed  favorably  by ALS patients,  caregivers,  and 
multidisciplinary  ALS team  members,  although  less so by the latter  group  (Figure  1, [Morris2016,  
Geronimo2017]).   Overall,  the three  rater  groups  were  concerned  that the lack of physical  contact  
lessened  the ability  for providers  to deliver  equal  care.   This led us to identify  and act upon  one area  of 
care  that could  be improved  in telemedicine  – assessment  of breathing  function.
Figure  1: Patient  (P), caregiver  (C), and health  care  provider  (H) ratings  of the ALS telemedicine  pilot  
in four  domains  [Geronimo2017].  Circles  containing  an X mark  the medians,  thick  lines  span  the ﬁrst 
to third  quartile  of data,  with  thin lines  extending  up to two times  this range.  Outliers  are those  small  
circles  outside  this range
From  January  to September  2018,  the procedures  for part 1 were  completed  in forty  patients.   The main  
result  was that the simulated  remote  assessment  produced  similar  values  of FVC and MIP compared  to 
standard  assessments  (Figure  2).  In this sample,  the specificity  and sensitivity  of FVC measurements  
were  100%,  for MIP assessments  was 89%  and 82%,  respectively  [Geronimo2019].   The results  of part 1 
indicate  that rPFTs  are accurate  and acceptable  measures  of respiratory  health.
 
Figure  2: FVC (Left)  and MIP (Right)  data  from  40 subjects  of the rPFT  pilot  study,  comparing  standard  
PFT measures  to therapist-guided  remote  assessments.  Four  shaded  quadrants  are created  by 
segmenting  standard  and remote  tests  by predeﬁned  clinical  thresholds.
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  6 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  2.3 Study  Rationale
The rationale  for this study  is to determine  whether  telemonitoring  of respiratory  health  can help  
exceed  standards  of ALS care.
3.0 Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria
3.1 Inclusion  Criteria
Part 1
Patients:
1)Possess  a diagnosis  of definite,  probable,  probable  laboratory-supported,  or possible  ALS by revised  
El Escorial  research  criteria  [Brooks2000],  or a diagnosis  of primary  lateral  sclerosis  (PLS,  upper  
motor  neuron  involvement  only)  or progressive  muscular  atrophy  (PMA,  lower  motor  neuron  
involvement  only).
2)Be 18 years  of age or older.
3)Have  a caregiver  available  to participate  in the study
Caregivers:
1)Be 18 years  of age or older,  of either  gender.
2)Be able  and willing  to provide  informed  consent.
Controls:
1)Be 18 years  of age or older,  of either  gender.
2)Be able  and willing  to provide  informed  consent.
Respiratory  Therapist
1)Be a member  of the Hershey  Medical  Center  ALS multidisciplinary  care  team.
2)Be able  and willing  to provide  verbal  informed  consent  after  receiving  a summary  explanation  of 
research  (SER).
Part 2:
Patients:
1)Possess  a diagnosis  of definite,  probable,  probable  laboratory-supported,  or possible  ALS by revised  
El Escorial  research  criteria.
2)Be 18 years  of age or older.
3)Have  a caregiver  available  to assist  with  home  PFTs  or, in the opinion  of the investigator,  can 
perform  home  PFTs  unassisted.
4)Symptom  onset  within  the last three  years.
5)Have  a computer  and home  internet  service  sufﬁcient  for engaging  in telemedicine  sessions.
6)Have  a second  device  capable  of downloading  the spirometer  application  from  an app store  
(Android-  or iOS-based  smartphone  or tablet).
Caregivers  (not necessary  to be enrolled  if patient  can perform  home  PFTs  unassisted):
1)Be 18 years  of age or older,  of either  gender.
2)Be able  and willing  to provide  informed  consent.
3.2 Exclusion  Criteria
Part 1
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  7 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  Patients:
1)Cognitive  impairment,  as judged  by the ALS clinic  neurologist,  that prevents  participation  in the 
study.
2)Unable  to perform  pulmonary  function  testing  with  mouthpiece  or with  mask,  as determined  by one 
of the study  investigators.
Caregivers:  None
Controls:  None
Respiratory  Therapists:  None
Part 2 imposes  additional  exclusion  criteria  for patients  only.
Patients:
3)Use of NIV or diaphragm  pacer  at time  of obtaining  informed  consent.
4)FVC ≤50%  predicted
3.3 Early  Withdrawal  of Subjects
3.3.1 Criteria  for removal  from  study
Participants  may  voluntarily  withdraw  from  the study  at any time.   The research  team  may  also 
terminate  the study  if the participant  does  not meet  the inclusion  criteria  or exhibits  one or more  
of the exclusion  criteria  during  the course  of the study.   For part 2 of the study,  participants  may  
be removed  if they  exhibit  non-compliance  to study  procedures.   Non-compliance  is defined  as 30 
days  without  submission  of an rPFT  report  if still eligible  for rPFT  reporting,  or 3 months  without  a 
nurse  coaching  session  if in the nurse  coaching  arm.
3.3.2 Follow-up  for withdrawn  subjects
The research  team  will follow  up with  withdrawn  subjects  to collect  the research  equipment.   If 
the participant  agrees,  they  will be given  the endpoint  assessment  to document  their  reason  for 
withdrawal.   They  may  be asked  to participate  in a future  focus  group  on subject  experience  in 
the study.   There  will be no additional  follow-up.   The withdrawn  subjects  may  be replaced  by 
another  patient  and caregiver  from  the recruitment  waitlist.
4.0 Recruitment  Methods
4.1 Identification  of subjects
Potential  patient  participants  will be identified  by study  staff  of the Penn  State  Hershey  ALS center  at 
the time  they  are seen  for routine  visits  to the Penn  State  Hershey  ALS Clinic,  or based  on their  
responses  to recruitment  letters  (see below).    Potential  subjects  may  also learn  of the study  by a flyer  
posted  in the ALS clinic  area.   Practice  control  participants  will be recruited  from  clinical  staff.   
Respiratory  therapists  sought  for participation  in the study  will be those  providing  respiratory  therapy  
services  to ALS patients  in the clinic  on the date  of the study.   The study  will be listed  on StudyFinder.
4.2 Recruitment  process
Potential  patients  and caregivers  will be approached  by study  staff  of the Penn  State  Hershey  ALS center  
at the time  they  are seen  for routine  in-person  or telehealth  visits  to the Penn  State  Hershey  ALS Clinic.   
In addition,  a letter  will be sent  via mail  or email  to patients  of the Penn  State  Hershey  Medical  Center  
ALS clinic,  as well as those  who  are registered  with  the Greater  Philadelphia  chapter  of the ALS 
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  8 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  Association.   A flyer  will be posted  in the clinic  area  informing  patients  of the study.   Study  information  
and contact  information  will be posted  on Studyfinder.
Interested  individuals  will respond  to a member  of the study  team  who  will follow  up as in Section  4.4.
Practice  control  participants  will be recruited  from  clinical  staff  by members  of the study  team.
Respiratory  therapists  will be approached  by study  staff  prior  to their  first rPFT  administration  so that 
they  may  be delivered  the SER and give verbal  consent.
4.3 Recruitment  materials
Potential  patient  participants  may  be mailed  (see “Recruitment  Letter”  in Recruitment  Materials)  or 
emailed  (see “Email  Recruitment  Letter”  in Recruitment  Materials)  a recruitment  letter.   There  will also 
be a flyer  for the study  posted  within  the clinic  area  (see “Study  Flyer”  in Recruitment  Materials).
4.4 Eligibility/screening  of subjects
Before  enrolling  prospective  participants,  we will contact  the potential  them  by phone,  email,  or in 
person.  For those  individuals  who  are Hershey  Medical  Center  patients,  we will ask for their  consent  to 
access  their  medical  record  to confirm  certain  inclusion  and exclusion  criteria.    For potential  
participants  who  are not treated  at the Hershey  Medical  Center,  we will request  that they  release  
medical  records  to us from  their  doctor.   These  will be reviewed  by the study  physician  to confirm  the 
diagnosis  of ALS and other  inclusion/exclusion  criteria.
We will confirm  that they  and their  caregiver  are aware  of the study  requirements  and are willing  to 
complete  the study  procedures  according  to the procedures  described  (see “Screening  questionnaire”  in 
recruitment  materials).   This form  addresses  the remaining  inclusion  and exclusion  criteria.  In it, we will 
ask the patient  if they  anticipate  any issues  relating  to performing  spirometry  or lack or devices  or 
adequate  internet  access  to participate  (in the case  of Part 2).  They  will be directed  to an online  
internet  speed  test to ensure  sufficient  connection  speed.   We also ask if the caregiver  anticipates  they  
will be able  assist  in administering  the procedure.    If a caregiver  is not available,  a patient  may  be 
enrolled  in the study  if the investigator  judges  that they  have  the capacity  to perform  home  PFTs  
unassisted.  If at any point  in the study  a patient  enrolled  without  a caregiver  is no longer  able  to 
perform  the home  tests  without  additional  assistance,  a caregiver  must  be enrolled  to aid home  PFT 
administration,  or the patient  will be exited  from  the rPFT  portion  of the study.
Eligibility  of respiratory  therapists  will be determined  by their  role in the Hershey  Medical  Center  ALS 
clinic  as well as their  verbal  consent  to participate  in the study.
5.0 Consent  Process  and Documentation  
5.1 Consent  Process  
 
5.1.1 Obtaining  Informed  Consent
5.1.1.1 Timing  and Location  of Consent
A member  of the study  team  will review  the informed  consent  documents  with  the 
participants  and receive  their  written  consent  to participate  in the study.   This 
consent  procedure  will take  place  only  after  initial  screening  procedures  have  been  
completed.   This will take  place  either  at the Hershey  Medical  Center  ALS clinic,  
over  the phone,  or using  the telemedicine  interface  between  the clinic  and the 
patient’s  home.
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  9 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  Prior  to any phone  consent,  participants  will be provided  with  a physical  or 
electronic  copy  of the informed  consent  document.   The researcher  attesting  to the 
appropriateness  of the consent  process  will complete  the Phone  Consent  
Signature  Page .  The patient  will mail  back  the signed  consent  forms,  and the 
member  of the research  team  who  explained  the research  will attach  the 
completed  Phone  Consent  Signature  Page  to the consent  forms  with  the original  
signatures  of the patient  and LAR.  The study  team  will then  send  the patient  and 
LAR a copy  of their  signed  consent  form  and the Phone  Consent  Signature  Page  for 
their  records.   Once  the original  signed  documents  are received  by the study  team,  
the participant  may  begin  research  procedures.
A member  of the study  team  will deliver  the summary  explanation  of research  
(SER)  to participating  respiratory  therapists  before  their  first clinical  interaction  in 
this study.   The SER will be delivered  at the Hershey  Medical  Center  ALS Clinic.
5.1.1.2 Coercion  or Undue  Influence  during  Consent
Patients  will be informed  that the treatment  they  receive  for ALS will not be 
affected  by their  choice  to participate  in the study.   Explanation  of the study  and 
obtaining  consent  will be performed  by a member  of the research  team  who  is not 
part of the clinical  care  team.
5.1.2 Waiver  or alteration  of the informed  consent  requirement
Partial  waiver  of consent  is requested  for pre-screening  purposes.
5.2 Consent  Documentation
5.2.1 Written  Documentation  of Consent
We will verify  that we are using  the most  current  IRB-approved  version  of the study  specific  
consent  form  and that the consent  form  is in language  understandable  to the subject.  Whenever  
possible,  the consent  form  will be provided  to the subject  in advance  of the consent  discussion.  
A member  of the research  team  will review  the informed  consent  documents  with  the 
prospective  participants  and receive  their  written  consent  to participate  in the study  described  
in this protocol.   If performed  over  the phone  or telemedicine  interfaces,  participants  will sign a 
physical  copy  of the form  and mail/email  it to the research  team.   The patient  and the caregiver,  
if available,  will sign their  own  consent  forms.   This consent  procedure  will take  place  either  in 
the ALS Clinic  or over  the telemedicine  interface  between  the clinic  and the patient’s  home.   
Written  documentation  of consent  will be delivered  after  participants  have  been  given  an 
overview  of the study's  goals,  procedures,  risks,  and benefits.    Participants  will receive  a copy  of 
the consent  after  it has been  signed  and dated  by the person  explaining  the study.  
5.2.2 Waiver  of Documentation  of Consent  (Implied  consent,  Verbal  consent,  etc.)
Verbal  consent  will be obtained  by the respiratory  therapist  participant  before  their  first study  
session.
Verbal  consent  will also be obtained  by participants  via telephone  to ask screening  questions.
5.3 Consent  – Other  Considerations  
5.3.1 Non-English  Speaking  Subjects
Non-English  speaking  subjects  will not be enrolled.
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  10 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  5.3.2 Cognitively  Impaired  Adults
5.3.2.1 Capability  of Providing  Consent
The physician  investigator  will determine  whether  an individual  is capable  of 
providing  informed  consent.  Cognitively  impaired  patients  will not be enrolled  in 
this study.
Due to disease  progression,  some  subjects  may  not be able  to physically  sign the 
consent  form,  regardless  of cognitive  status  thereby  requesting  LAR signature.
5.3.2.2 Adults  Unable  To Consent
The procedure  outlined  in HRP 013,  “SOP:  Legally  Authorized  Representatives,  
Children,  and Guardians”  will be followed  to determine  the legally  authorized  
representative  capable  of providing  informed  consent.  Written  informed  consent  
from  the subject’s  LAR will be obtained  before  any study  procedures  take  place.
5.3.2.3 Assent  of Adults  Unable  to Consent
Subjects  who  are unable  to sign the consent  will be asked  to provide  verbal  assent,  
which  may  be provided  using  an assistive  communication  device.
5.3.3 Subjects  who  are not yet adults  (infants,  children,  teenagers)  
5.3.3.1 Parental  Permission
N/A
5.3.3.2 Assent  of subjects  who  are not yet adults
N/A
6.0 HIPAA  Research  Authorization  and/or  Waiver  or Alteration  of Authorization
6.1 Authorization  and/or  Waiver  or Alteration  of Authorization  for the Uses  and Disclosures  of PHI
Check  all that  apply:
 Not applicable,  no identifiable  protected  health  information  (PHI)  is accessed,  used  or 
disclosed  in this study.  [Mark  all parts  of sections  6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]
Authorization  will be obtained  and documented  as part  of the consent  process.  [If this is the 
only  box checked,  mark  sections  6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]
Partial  waiver  is requested  for recruitment  purposes  only  (Check  this box if patients’  medical  
records  will be accessed  to determine  eligibility  before  consent/authorization  has been  
obtained).  [Complete  all parts  of sections  6.2 and 6.3]
Full waiver  is requested  for entire  research  study  (e.g.,  medical  record  review  studies).  
[Complete  all parts  of sections  6.2 and 6.3]
Alteration  is requested  to waive  requirement  for written  documentation  of authorization  
(verbal  authorization  will be obtained).  [Complete  all parts  of sections  6.2 and 6.3]
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  11 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  6.2 Waiver  or Alteration  of Authorization  for the Uses  and Disclosures  of PHI
6.2.1 Access,  use or disclosure  of PHI representing  no more  than  a minimal  risk to the privacy  of the 
individual
6.2.1.1 Plan  to protect  PHI from  improper  use or disclosure
Information  is included  in the “Confidentiality,  Privacy  and Data  Management”  
section  of this protocol.
6.2.1.2 Plan  to destroy  identifiers  or a justification  for retaining  identifiers  
The identifiers  collected  in the study  and stored  on REDCap  will be maintained  until  
the completion  of the study,  including  analysis,  and dissemination  of results.   Email  
addresses  and phone  numbers  may  be retained  for those  participants  who  are 
interested  in participating  in future  research  studies.
6.2.2 Explanation  for why  the research  could  not practicably  be conducted  without  access  to and 
use of PHI
Certain  PHI is used  to maintain  contact  with  the research  subject  though  phone,  mail,  or email.   
Other  PHI are variables  related  to the analysis  of the study,  such  as date  of birth,  diagnosis,  and 
gender.   Voice  recordings  of the subject  during  coaching  sessions  will be used  to assess  quality  
and consistency  of NRHC  procedures.   Voice  recording  of post-study  focus  groups  will allow  for 
easy  transcription  for analysis.
6.2.3 Explanation  for why  the research  could  not practicably  be conducted  without  the waiver  or 
alteration  of authorization
In order  to be able  to screen  participants,  we will need  to access  their  medical  record,  either  
through  the Hershey  Medical  Center  EMR  or through  the release  of records  from  an external  
care  provider.   We will access  patients’  medical  records  for the purpose  of confirming  the 
diagnosis  of ALS before  we admit  them  into the study  and obtain  consent.   In order  to contact  
patients,  to describe  the study  and schedule  the study  visit,  we will need  access  to phone  
numbers  and email.   Additionally,  in the case  of Study  2, we will need  to know  the patient’s  
address  to be able  to ship the rPFT  kit.
6.3 Waiver  or alteration  of authorization  statements  of agreement
Protected  health  information  obtained  as part of this research  will not be reused  or disclosed  to any 
other  person  or entity,  except  as required  by law, for authorized  oversight  of the research  study,  or for 
other  permitted  uses  and disclosures  according  to federal  regulations.  
The research  team  will collect  only  information  essential  to the study  and in accord  with  the ‘Minimum  
Necessary’  standard  (information  reasonably  necessary  to accomplish  the objectives  of the research)  
per federal  regulations.  
Access  to the information  will be limited,  to the greatest  extent  possible,  within  the research  team.  All 
disclosures  or releases  of identifiable  information  granted  under  this waiver  will be accounted  for and 
documented.
7.0 Study  Design  and Procedures
7.1 Study  Design
Part 1: This is a self-controlled  study  where  each  participant  will be administered  a standard  of care  PFT 
for measurement  of FVC and MIP,  as well as an rPFT,  separated  by at least  an hour,  for measurement  of 
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  12 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  experimental  FVC and MIP.    The rPFT  is guided  by a respiratory  therapist  in another  room,  utilizing  the 
telemedicine  interface  of the Hersey  ALS clinic  and devices  for measuring  FVC and MIP (Error!  Reference  
source  not found. ). 
Figure  3: Tools  for remote  pulmonary  testing.   Left:  Air Smart  Spirometer  and turbine.  Right:  respiratory  
pressure  meter  and mouthpiece.
Part 2:  This is a two-arm,  randomized  study  to determine  1) whether  weekly  monitoring  of respiratory  
function  can lead  to timelier  initiation  of NIV and 2) whether  structured  nurse  coaching  leads  to 
improved  self-efficacy  for managing  disease  and better  maintenance  of respiratory  health.   For enrollees  
in both  arms,  standard  FVC and MIP measurements  obtained  approximately  every  three  months  by the 
respiratory  therapist  during  ALS Clinic  are supplemented  with  self-administered  rPFTs  performed  
weekly.   To train  the participant  in the performance  of rPFTs,  a member  of the research  team  will be 
present  either  in person  or virtually  to guide  the patient  and caregiver  in the appropriate  use of the 
equipment  during  the first four  weeks  of the study.   Enrollees  in the NRHC  arm will additionally  receive  
monthly  coaching  with  the study  nurse  via telehealth.   Approximately  5% of NRHC  sessions  will include  
audio  recordings  that will be evaluated  by a second  clinician  nurse  for quality  and consistency.
rPFT  protocol
Two  devices  are used  to measure  respiratory  function:
1) Air Smart  Spirometer,  NuvoAir  AB
The following  information  is paraphrased  from  the user  manual,  which  is included  in the “devices”  page  
of the protocol.  
The Air Smart  Spirometer  measures  the forced  vital  capacity  (FVC)  in a forced  expiratory  maneuver.  The 
Air Smart  Spirometer  is intended  to be used  by:
Healthcare  professionals  trained  to perform  spirometry  tests  on patients.  
Adults  trained  by healthcare  professionals  or through  self-learning  who  understand  how  
to perform  a high  quality  spirometry  test.
The Air Smart  Spirometer  works  iOS and Android  devices.   The Air Smart  Spirometer  has a built-in  
battery  designed  to function  for at least  2 years  or 1 000 single  tests.  The Air Smart  Spirometer  is 
designed  to work  with  disposable  and single  use FlowMir®  turbines.  When  performing  a spirometry  test,  
the user  exhales  into the turbine.  The airflow  generated  sets a rotor  in motion.  The Air Smart  Spirometer  Air Smart  spirometer  and mouthpiece Pressure  gauge  and mouthpiece
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  13 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  registers  the speed  of the spinning  rotor,  converts  it and transfers  the data  to the smartphone  with  the 
Air Smart  Spirometer  app.
The study  subject  will conduct  3-5 spirometry  maneuvers  to generate  a forced  vital  capacity  using  the 
spirometer  and associated  application.   Subjects  may  use the "Home  Monitoring"  version  of the app,  
which  requires  the user  to enter  their  date  of birth,  height,  gender,  and ethnicity.   Alternatively,  the 
"Clinical  Trial"  version  of the application  may  pair the subject's  smartphone  to a cloud  database  hosted  
by Nuvoair  using  a subject-specific  code.   The coordinator  will enter  date  of birth,  height,  gender,  and 
ethnicity  into the database,  to which  all spirometry  recordings  made  by the subject  will be synced.    
2) NIF Meter  NS 120-TRR,  Instrumentation  Industries
The following  information  is paraphrased  from  the user  manual,  which  is included  in the “devices”  page  
of the protocol.
“The  Instrumentation  Industries,  Inc. Negative  Inspiratory  Force  (NIF)  Meters  are devices  used  to 
measure  and monitor  patient  inspiratory  effort.  During  use the NIF Meter  is attached  to the patient  
airway  at a point  that provides  optimal  readings  of patient  respiratory  effort.”
During  each  guided  rPFT  administration,  a member  of the research  team  and/or  respiratory  therapist  
will guide  the patient  and caregiver  through  three  valid  maneuvers  of the FVC and MIP tests.  The 
participants  prepare  the spirometer  by connecting  it to the tablet  and opening  the associated  
application.  The patient  is told to sit as upright  as possible  for the measurement  of FVC.  They  will be told 
that to do this they  will 1) inhale  maximally,  2) exhale  as hard  and fast as possible,  and 3) continue  to 
exhale  until  indicated  by the therapist.  The researcher  will also demonstrate  this procedure  to the 
patient.  The caregiver  applies  nose  clips  to block  airﬂow  through  the nose,  holds  the turbine  of the 
spirometer  to the patient’s  mouth  and performs  three  repetitions  of this sequence,  with  periods  of 
relaxation  between  testings.   Testing  is repeated  until  three  valid  maneuvers  are achieved.  The 
application  on the tablet  computes  the FVC and percentage  predicted  value,  the best  of which  is 
retained.
To perform  the MIP test,  the participant  inserts  the mouthpiece  into the pressure  meter.  The patient  is 
told they  will be asked  to draw  breath  in as quickly  and powerfully  as possible,  for at least  one second.  
The researcher  tells the caregiver  to place  a ﬁnger  over  the valve  outlet  so that no air ﬂows  through  the 
mouthpiece  during  inhalation.  Nose  clips  will be used.  The patient  performs  three  repetitions  of this 
task.   The maximal  negative  pressure  from  a valid  run is recorded.
Each  piece  of reusable  equipment  will be labeled  with  an identification  number.   A log of all loaned  
materials  will be maintained  by the researchers.   This log, included  in the supporting  documents,  will be 
maintained  on REDCap.   Before  delivery  of the system  to the study  participant,  each  piece  of equipment  
will be inspected  and tested.   This study  will not collect  prior  medical  therapy  relevant  to the use of the 
device.   There  are no restrictions  on medicines  or therapies  used  by the participants  in this study.
Randomization  (Part  2 only)
An unblinded  blocked  minimization  method  will randomize  participants  based  on demonstrated  factors  
affecting  prognosis  [Chio2009].  These  include:  time  since  diagnosis,  age at consent,  most  recent  FVC,  
and FVC slope  from  up to the previous  year,  if available.
NRHC  protocol  (Part  2 only)
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  14 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  Nurse  Respiratory  Health  Coaching  - The NRHC  intervention  follows  the “teamlet”  model  described  by 
Bennett  et al. [Bennett2010],  made  up of the research  coordinator  who  performs  respiratory  testing,  
and the nurse  practitioner  using  an ALS-tailored  variant  of the GROW  model.   5 percent  of NRHC  
sessions  will undergo  audio  recording  and be reviewed  by a nurse-researcher  on the study  team.
Goal  setting  - Discuss  patient-driven  goals  for the session  as well as for short  and long  term  
respiratory  management  for the patient/caregiver  dyad.
Reality  Check  - Explore  current  situation.  Review  PFT results  and answers  to the respiratory  
questionnaire.   Share  information  and gently  challenge  assumptions  that may  present  barriers  
to goal  attainment.
Options  - Identify  options  and alternative  strategies,  including  NIV,  Cough  Assist,  Nebulizer,  and 
Breath  Stacking.  Discuss  patient  and system  barriers  to pursuing  these  options.
Wrap-up  - Coach  dyad  towards  implementing  endorsed  plan  with  a focus  on trouble-shooting  
barriers  and enhancing  facilitators  to successful  implementation.  Address  what  is to be done  
and by whom.
Those  randomized  to the coaching  arm will receive  brief  coaching  checkups  from  another  nurse  on the 
study  team  who  is not the coach.   These  will occur  during  the 4th and 8th months  after  randomization,  
and at study  exit.   The nurse  performing  the checkup  will guide  the participant  to reflect  on the coaching  
process,  using  prompts  provided  in the Focus  Group  template.   Coaching  checkups  will be by phone  or 
via Penn  State  Health  Zoom  videoconferencing.  Audio  of these  sessions  may  be recorded.
Focus  groups  (Part  2 only)
Focus  groups  may  be convened  comprised  of subjects  who  have  completed  the study.   Focus  groups  will 
ask subjects  to reflect  on their  experiences  in the study  regarding  the use of technology,  nurse  coaching,  
and any behavioral  changes  observed.   Focus  groups  will be conducted  either  at the location  of the 
Hershey  ALS Clinic  or via Penn  State  Health  Zoom  videoconferencing.  Audio  recordings  of the focus  
groups  will be captured.
7.2 Study  Procedures
7.2.1 Part  1
On or before  the date  scheduled  for Study  1, a member  of the research  team  who  is not part of 
the ALS clinical  team  will describe  the procedures  and receive  written  informed  consent  from  
the patient  and caregiver  dyad,  as well as the respiratory  therapist.   The participant  team  
undergoes  the initial  in-person  pulmonary  function  testing,  followed  2-3 hours  later  at the end 
of the clinical  visit by the rPFT.   rPFT  administration  is described  in Section  7.4.2.   For roughly  
half of the enrolled  participants,  the order  of assessments  is reversed.   Following  the study  
procedures,  the therapist  and patient/caregiver  dyad  will complete  a survey  concerning  the ease  
of use and confidence  in the rPFT  assessment.
Part 1 includes  the recruitment  of up to 20 practice  control  participants  for validation  of the 
study  procedures.   They  will perform  the same  procedures  as the patient  and caregiver,  in 
conjunction  with  the respiratory  therapist.
7.2.2 Part  2
Following  consent,  the researcher  will collect  demographic  and clinical  information:  date  of 
birth,  gender,  time  since  symptom  onset,  ALSF  Functional  Rating  Scale  - Revised,  PFT history,  
and region  of symptom  onset.  The researcher  will guide  the subject  through  completion  of the 
respiratory  health  questionnaire  and self-efficacy  assessment.   
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  15 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  Subjects  consented  on the day of their  in-person  clinic  visit will be sent  home  with  an rPFT  kit 
and scheduled  for weekly  training  appointments  with  a member  of the research  team.   For 
patients  consented  remotely,  the research  team  will ship a kit and schedule  them  for weekly  
training  appointments.
The weekly  schedule  following  the first site visit at week  0 is shown  in Error!  Reference  source  
not found. . Weekly  training  sessions  will be guided  through  the telehealth  interface  by a 
member  of the research  team.   If by the 4th training  session  the participant  is able  to complete  
rPFT  procedures  without  guidance  as determined  by the researcher-completed  aptitude  
assessment,  and achieve  an FVC result  within  10%  of the average  value  from  the first three  
sessions,  the participants  will be randomized  to one of the two study  arms.
Patients  may  be enrolled  without  a caregiver  available  if the investigator  determines  that the 
patient  is able  to perform  the home  breathing  tests  without  additional  assistance.   The patient’s  
ability  to perform  these  tests  solo will be reviewed  at a minimum  interval  of successive  clinic  
visits.   If they  are no longer  able  to perform  the home  tests  without  additional  assistance,   a 
caregiver  must  be enrolled  aid home  PFT administration,  or they  will be exited  from  the rPFT  
portion  of the study.   Caregivers  enrolled  part-way  into the study  will receive  training  on 
administering  rPFTs  at that time.
rPFT  arm: Subjects  will continue  to self-administer  rPFTs  every  week.   A research  team  member  
will schedule  rPFT  training  appointments  at weeks  8 and 12 order  to re-assess  aptitude.   rPFT  
procedures  are not performed  during  weeks  in which  a clinical  appointment  occurs.    Subjects  
will complete  the following  patient-reported  outcomes:
Respiratory  health  questionnaire  (monthly)  - The questionnaire  contains  three  Patient-
Reported  Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System  (PROMIS)  sub-scales  on Dyspnea  
Characteristics  (5 items,  [PROdc2016]),  Dyspnea  Functional  Limitations  (10 items,  
[PROdfl2016]),  and Sleep  Related  Impairment  (8 items,  [PROsri2016]).  The PROMIS  sub-
scales,  all of which  utilize  Likert-type  scaling,  will be summed  as composite  scores,  with  
higher  numbers  indicating  poorer  quality  of life. Also  included  are seven  questions  
regarding  respiratory  complications  experienced  in the previous  month.  
Self-efficacy  assessment  (quarterly)  - The self-efﬁcacy  assessment  contains  questions  
from  the PROMIS  item  banks  on Self-Efﬁcacy  for Managing  Symptoms  (9 items,  
[PROms2017]),  Self-Efficacy  for Managing  Social  Interactions  (5 items,  [PROsi2017]),  and 
Self-Efficacy  for Managing  Medications  and Treatments  (4 items,  [PROmt2017]).   These  
assessment  tools,  designed  for use in chronic  conditions,  are scored  as an average  of 
individual  components  on a 1-5 scale.
ALS-Specific  Quality  of Life (quarterly)  – Brief  Form  [Felgoise2018]  – 20 questions  in 5 
domains  encompassing  quality  of life.  If the subject  has completed  this document  in the 
last 30 days  as part of clinical  care,  we may  access  this data  from  their  chart.
rPFT  + NRHC  arm: In addition  to the rPFT  schedule  described  above,  subjects  randomized  to the 
NRHC  arm will begin  monthly  coaching  sessions,  with  the first session  scheduled  as close  as 
possible  to the randomization  date  (week  4). These  coaching  sessions  will take  place  over  the 
ALS clinic  telehealth  interface  and will last up to 30 minutes.   Coaching  sessions  will end at the 
completion  of the 5th study  session,  with  approximately  12 sessions  per subject.   Five percent  of 
total  sessions  (20 subjects   12 sessions    5% = 12 sessions)  will have  audio  recorded.   Audio  
recordings  are collected  for review  of quality  and consistency  of NRHC  interactions  by a second  
nurse  member  of the study  team.
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  16 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  Coaching  checkups  will be initiated  by a nurse  member  of the study  team  who  is not involved  in 
patient  coaching.  These  will occur  at months  4 and 8 after  randomization  into the rPFT+NRHC  
arm and at study  exit.   These  will last 15-30  minutes  each.   
If a subject  records  an FVC ≤50%  predicted  or a MIP > -60 cm H20,  the researcher  will forward  
the test report  to the ALS clinical  team,  including  nurse,  respiratory  therapist,  and neurologist.  If 
the decision  is made  to initiate  NIV,  the ALS clinic  physician  will provide  an order,  and the ALS 
clinic  nurse  will arrange  for initiation  of in-home  NIV via a third-party  vendor  according  to usual  
standards  of care.   At the initiation  of NIV,  the subject  stops  rPFT  procedures  and returns  the 
study  equipment.   The remaining  procedures  continue  through  the end of the study  period.  The 
subject  can also opt to end the study  at any time.
Figure  4: Timeline  of study  interventions  and outcomes.  The primary  outcome  of Aim 1 is the time  
difference  between  ﬁrst identiﬁcation  of NIV need  and the next  standard  clinic  visit,  (∆). An example  ∆ 
of 60 days  is shown  following  threshold  crossing  indicated  by the dotted  vertical  line.  The outcomes  of 
the second  aim are monthly  respiratory  questionnaires  and self-efﬁcacy  assessments  completed  in 
clinic.
When  the subject  has completed  all study  procedures  or withdrawn  from  the study,  they  may  
be asked  to participate  in a focus  group  which  will have  them  reflect  on their  experiences  in the 
study  regarding  the use of technology,  nurse  coaching,  and any behavioral  changes  observed.   
7.3 Duration  of Participation
Part 1: The study  procedures,  including  screening,  consent,  assessment,  and survey,  are expected  to 
take  45 minutes.   Administration  of the simulated  PFT with  patient  participants  will be performed  on the 
day of a scheduled  clinic  visit.
Part 2: Patient  participants  will be enrolled  for approximately  one year.   During  this time,  patients  will 
engage  in approximately  five standard  PFT assessments  during  in-person  or telehealth  clinic  activities,  
requiring  no additional  time  commitment.   Participants  will also complete  approximately  47 rPFTs,  each  
taking  10-30  minutes  to complete,  depending  on level  of experience.   The respiratory  questionnaire  and 
the self-efficacy  assessment  each  take  approximately  10 minutes  to complete.   Finally,  those  in the 
NRHC  arm will receive  up to 12-30  minute  coaching  sessions  and 3-30  minute  coaching  checkups.   
Patients  receiving  nurse  coaching  can expect  a total  time  commitment  of approximately  26.5  hours,  and 
those  in the non-coached  group  can expect  19 hours  of time  spent  on study  procedures.   Caregivers  may  
be enrolled  for the same  period  or for a shorter  period  depending  whether  one is available  and needed  
at the initiation  of study  procedures.
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  17 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  8.0 Subject  Numbers  and Statistical  Plan
8.1 Number  of Subjects
Approximately  (but no more  than)  123.   We will enroll  40 patient/caregiver  teams  for Part  1 and up to 
60 patient/caregiver  teams  for Part  2 to achieve  40 pairs  completing  procedures  for Part 2.   
Participants  in the two studies  may  overlap.   Up to 20 practice  control  participants  may  be recruited  for 
Part 1.  Up to three  respiratory  therapists  will also be recruited  for these  studies.
8.2 Sample  size determination
Our sample  size is predetermined  based  on our subjective  ability  to recruit  patients  within  the time  
frame  of the study.  Power  analysis  was based  on studies  of FVC decline.  Lo Coco  et al., [LoCoco2006],  
showed  that 50%  of study  participants  dropped  below  50%  predicted  FVC in one year.  Given  that our 
exclusion  criteria  for Part 2 will reject  many  of the 37%  of individuals  in their  study  who  were  “slow  
progressors,”  we estimate  that 75%  of patients  enrolled  in our study  will meet  the respiratory  criteria  to 
recommend  NIV.  This results  in a sample  size per arm of n=15,  which  provides  80%  power  to detect  a 
difference  in mean  outcome  between  the two groups  if the effect  size is found  to be 0.95.   
Assuming  a monthly  change  in FVC of 3.5±3.4%  found  by Schiffman  et al. [Schiffman1993],  we 
conducted  10,000  Monte-Carlo  simulations  of 40 participants  declining  at this rate for 12 months.  Half 
were  sampled  once  every  three  months,  and half were  sampled  every  month.  80.6±6.3%  of simulated  
participants  met the requirements  for NIV recommendation,  in roughly  equal  proportions  across  groups.  
The average  FVC at recommendation  was 47.0%  predicted  in the experimental  group,  and 43.4%  
predicted  in the control  group.  The effect  size of the difference  in FVC between  groups  was .964±.343.  
8.3 Statistical  methods
Part 1:  The primary  hypothesis  is that there  is no difference  in the results  of PFT and rPFT  for respiratory  
assessment  of FVC and MIP.   We will use a paired  sample  t-test  to determine  if the mean  test results  are 
comparable  between  the standard  and experimental  treatments.   We will conduct  a qualitative  analysis  
to determine  whether  the patient,  caregiver,  and therapist  determine  the rPFT  to be an effective  way to 
conduct  tests  of breathing  function.
Part 2: Aim 1 will be analyzed  to determine  if the study  date  of NIV initiation  is at least  30 days  sooner  
based  on rPFTs  compared  to standard  clinic  PFTs.  This will be done  using  a non-parametric  two sample  
test of means,  the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney  rank  sum  test.   For analysis  of Aim 2, a linear  mixed  effects  
model  will be used  to analyze  the change  from  baseline  between  study  groups  of self-efﬁcacy  scores  and 
respiratory  health  [Verbeke2000].  The effect  size will be quantiﬁed  from  the model  using  the difference  
in means  between  the groups  with  their  associated  95%  conﬁdence  intervals.
9.0 Confidentiality,  Privacy  and Data  Management  
Please  see HRP-598  Research  Data  Plan  Review  Form
10.0 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan
N/A
11.0 Risks
The risks  posed  to subjects  in the study  will be no different  than  those  presented  during  standard  of care  
administration  of pulmonary  function  testing.  In addition  to guidance  from  the research  team,  those  
participating  in remote  assessments  will be required  to have  a caregiver  present  to aid the patient  in case  
assistance  is required.  
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  18 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  Loss  of confidentiality  is a risk of this study,  but steps  are taken  to project  the participants'  identities.  Personal  
information,  clinical  assessments,  test results,  and survey  responses  will be labeled  with  a participant  code  
assigned  by REDCap  and stored  in this database.   All data  containing  PHI will be collected  either  from  the 
electronic  medical  record  or in person.   Data  transmitted  through  the Air Smart  Spirometer  app will be labeled  
with  the user’s  initials,  gender,  date  of birth,  and height,  end ethnicity.   Audio  from  telemedicine  interactions  
during  nurse  coaching  interventions  may  be stored  on REDCap  for review  by a member  of the research  team.  
Video  from  telemedicine  interactions  and focus  groups  will not be stored.
12.0 Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  and Others
12.1 Potential  Benefits  to Subjects
Participants  in Part 2 may  benefit  from  timelier  recommendation  of NIV support.
12.2 Potential  Benefits  to Others
This knowledge  gained  by this study  may  benefit  those  who  are managed  remotely  using  telemedicine.   
This will enable  virtual  care  to be more  equivalent  to in-person  care.
13.0 Sharing  Results  with  Subjects
Participants  will be informed  of the results  of their  breathing  tests  at each  visit.   The respiratory  therapist  and 
nurse  clinician  will be responsible  for making  appropriate  recommendations  based  on those  results,  and 
following  up with  the neurologist  for NIV recommendation  if necessary.
Participants  will not be informed  of overall  study  results  unless  they  request  it.  Study  results  include  the public  
presentation  of research  at academic  conferences  or through  peer-reviewed  journals.   
14.0 Subject  Stipend  (Compensation)  and/or  Travel  Reimbursements
There  will be no compensation  in Part 1.  For Part 2, the patient  participant  will be compensated  $10 per month  
they  are in the study,  capped  at a total  compensation  of $120.   
15.0 Economic  Burden  to Subjects
15.1 Costs  
Subjects  will incur  no cost for their  participation.   
15.2 Compensation  for research-related  injury
It is the policy  of the institution  to provide  neither  financial  compensation  nor free medical  treatment  
for research-related  injury.  In the event  of injury  resulting  from  this research,  medical  treatment  is 
available  but will be provided  at the usual  charge.   Costs  for the treatment  of research-related  injuries  
will be charged  to subjects  or their  insurance  carriers.
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  19 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  16.0 Resources  Available
16.1 Facilities  and locations
For Part 1, the consent  procedure  will be conducted  within  the ALS Clinic  at 30 Hope  Drive  on the 
Hershey  Medical  Center  campus.   The clinic  houses  a room  set up by the Penn  State  Hershey  
information  technology  department  that is dedicated  to ALS telemedicine.   This room  will also be used  
as the site for the respiratory  therapist  to conduct  the rPFT  assessment.   This research  room  is in a 
private  location  and contains  all the tools  necessary  for engaging  in secure  videoconferencing.
For Part 2, consent  may  be obtained  in the ALS clinic  or over  the telemedicine  interface.   The home  of 
the patient  will be the site of most  of the study  procedures.   When  engaging  in procedures  via 
telehealth,  a member  of the study  team  will communicate  with  the participant  from  a private  office  or 
from  a research  room  in the ALS clinic.   The study  team  will exclusively  use the HIPAA-compliant  HMC  
Telemedicine  system  by AmWell  that is used  for routine  clinical  care  of ALS patients.   
16.2 Feasibility  of recruiting  the required  number  of subjects
We anticipate  high  interest  in Part 1 due to the short  time  commitment  and participation  during  a single  
clinical  visit.   We anticipate  no issues  recruiting  40 individuals  for this study.   The resource  and timing  
limitations  of Part 2 will make  enrollment  more  challenging.   We expect  to screen  and consent  60 
participants,  with  the goal  of having  40 participants  meet  the endpoint  criteria.   We anticipate  the 
participation  of two respiratory  therapists  to aid with  rPFT  administration.
16.3 PI Time  devoted  to conducting  the research
The PI has devoted  25%  time  to oversight  of this project,  involving  discussion  the goals,  procedures,  
analysis,  and data  review,  as well as input  on clinical  matters  as requested  by members  of the study  
team.  
16.4 Availability  of medical  or psychological  resources
If any medical  or psychological  resources  are found  to be needed  during  the course  of the study,  the 
participant  will be directed  to contact  his/her  Primary  Care  Provider  or emergency  care  if warranted.
16.5 Process  for informing  Study  Team
Before  recruitment  and any time  a change  is made  to the protocol,  the study  team  will meet  to discuss  
changes  in their  role within  the study,  if applicable.
17.0 Other  Approvals
17.1 Other  Approvals  from  External  Entities
N/A
17.2 Internal  PSU Committee  Approvals
Check  all that  apply:
  Anatomic  Pathology  – Hershey  only  – Research  involves  the collection  of tissues  or use of pathologic  
specimens.  Upload  a copy  of HRP-902  - Human  Tissue  For Research  Form  on the “Supporting  
Documents”  page  in CATS  IRB. This form  is available  in the CATS  IRB Library.   
  Animal  Care  and Use – All campuses  – Human  research  involves  animals  and humans  or the use of 
human  tissues  in animals
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  20 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)    Biosafety  – All campuses  – Research  involves  biohazardous  materials  (human  biological  specimens  
in a PSU research  lab, biological  toxins,  carcinogens,  infectious  agents,  recombinant  viruses  or DNA  
or gene  therapy).
  Clinical  Laboratories  – Hershey  only  – Collection,  processing  and/or  storage  of extra  tubes  of body  
fluid  specimens  for research  purposes  by the Clinical  Laboratories;  and/or  use of body  fluids  that 
had been  collected  for clinical  purposes,  but are no longer  needed  for clinical  use. Upload  a copy  of 
HRP-901  - Human  Body  Fluids  for Research  Form  on the “Supporting  Documents”  page  in CATS  IRB. 
This form  is available  in the CATS  IRB Library.  
  Clinical  Research  Center  (CRC)  Advisory  Committee  – All campuses  – Research  involves  the use of 
CRC services  in any way.
  Conflict  of Interest  Review  – All campuses  – Research  has one or more  of study  team  members  
indicated  as having  a financial  interest.
  Radiation  Safety  – Hershey  only  – Research  involves  research-related  radiation  procedures.  All 
research  involving  radiation  procedures  (standard  of care  and/or  research-related)  must  upload  a 
copy  of HRP-903  - Radiation  Review  Form  on the “Supporting  Documents”  page  in CATS  IRB. This 
form  is available  in the CATS  IRB Library.
  IND/IDE  Audit  – All campuses  – Research  in which  the PSU researcher  holds  the IND or IDE or 
intends  to hold  the IND or IDE.
  Scientific  Review  – Hershey  only  – All investigator-written  research  studies  requiring  review  by the 
convened  IRB must  provide  documentation  of scientific  review  with  the IRB submission.  The 
scientific  review  requirement  may  be fulfilled  by one of the following:  (1) external  peer-review  
process;  (2) department/institute  scientific  review  committee;  or (3) scientific  review  by the Clinical  
Research  Center  Advisory  committee.   NOTE:  Review  by the Penn  State  Hershey  Cancer  Institute  
Scientific  Review  Committee  is required  if the study  involves  cancer  prevention  studies  or cancer  
patients,  records  and/or  tissues.  For more  information  about  this requirement  see the IRB website  
at: http://www.pennstatehershey.org/web/irb/home/resources/investigator  
18.0 Multi-Site  Research
N/A
19.0 Adverse  Event  Reporting
19.1 Reporting  Adverse  Reactions  and Unanticipated  Problems  to the Responsible  IRB
In accordance  with  applicable  policies  of The Pennsylvania  State  University  Institutional  Review  Board  
(IRB),  the investigator  will report,  to the IRB, any observed  or reported  harm  (adverse  event)  
experienced  by a subject  or other  individual,  which  in the opinion  of the investigator  is determined  to be 
(1) unexpected;  and (2) probably  related  to the research  procedures.  Harms  (adverse  events)  will be 
submitted  to the IRB in accordance  with  the IRB policies  and procedures.
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  21 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  20.0 Study  Monitoring,  Auditing  and Inspecting
20.1 Auditing  and Inspecting
The investigator  will permit  study-related  monitoring,  audits,  and inspections  by the Penn  State  quality  
assurance  program  office(s),  IRB, the sponsor,  and government  regulatory  bodies,  of all study  related  
documents  (e.g.,  source  documents,  regulatory  documents,  data  collection  instruments,  study  data  
etc.).   The investigator  will ensure  the capability  for inspections  of applicable  study-related  facilities  
(e.g.,  pharmacy,  diagnostic  laboratory,  etc.).
The study  will be monitored  by the Clinical  Trial  Monitoring  Team  from  the Department  of Public  Health  
Sciences  at Penn  State  Hershey  College  of Medicine.  The monitors  will provide  an independent  review  of 
the regulatory  and subject  records  and the data  collected  to assure  compliance  with  the protocol,  GCP,  
and applicable  federal  regulations.  The monitoring  will occur  at regular  intervals  after  the enrollment  of 
the first subject  and the times  will be predetermined  by the monitoring  plan  developed  by the Clinical  
Trial  Monitoring  Team.
21.0 Future  Undetermined  Research:  Data  and Specimen  Banking
21.1 Data  and/or  specimens  being  stored
Clinical  tests,  surveys,  and respiratory  assessment  results  will be retained  indefinitely  for undefined  
future  research.   All data  will be labeled  with  the subject’s  REDCap  code.  
21.2 Location  of storage
Digital  data  including  respiratory  test results  and surveys  will be retained  on Dr. Geronimo’s  
Hersheymed.net  drive  in a password  protected  folder.   Clinical  tests  that are administered  in paper  form  
will be retained  in the locked  offices  of the research  team.
21.3 Duration  of storage
Data  will be stored  for six years  after  study  closure.
21.4 Access  to data  and/or  specimens
The study  team  will have  access  to the data.   
21.5 Procedures  to release  data  or specimens
Coded  data,  including  surveys,  clinical  tests,  and respiratory  assessments  will be made  available  to 
individuals  performing  research  in ALS.   We will require  a formal  request  from  such  researchers  on 
Institutional  letterhead.
21.6 Process  for returning  results
We will not return  to study  participants  results  derived  from  future  undetermined  research.  
22.0 References
S. N. Ahmed,  C. Mann,  D. B. Sinclair,  A. Heino,  B. Iskiw,  D. Quigley,  and A. Ohinmaa.  Feasibility  of epilepsy  follow-
up care  through  telemedicine:  A pilot  study  on the patient’s  perspective.  Epilepsia,  49(4):573 –585,  2008.
ALS Association.  ALS Association  Certiﬁed  Centers  and Clinics.  http://www.alsa.org/community/centers-clinics/.  
Accessed:  2017-1-25.
ALS - Maine  Collaborative  Teams  Up with  Massachusetts  General  Hospital  for Better  Care  of Patients  with  Lou 
Gehrigs  Disease,  Dec 2010.  Press  Release.
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  22 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  H. Ashcroft,  H. Ando,  B. Chakrabarti,  R. Angus,  R. Hallhead,  and R. Cousins.  Telemonitoring  to optimise  care  in 
motor  neurone  disease:  A pilot  study.  European  Respiratory  Journal,  48(suppl  60), 2016.
R. Bedlack.  Telemedicine  in the Home  for Veterans  with  Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis  (P5.082).  Neurology,  
82(10  Supplement),  2014.
H. D. Bennett,  E. A. Coleman,  C. Parry,  P. T. Bodenheimer,  and E. H. Chen.  Health  coaching  for patients  with  
chronic  illness.  Fam  Pract  Manag.,  17(5):24 –29, 2010.
S. C. Bourke,  M. Tomlinson,  T. L. Williams,  R. E. Bullock,  P. J. Shaw,  and G. J. Gibson.  Effects  of non-invasive  
ventilation  on survival  and quality  of life in patients  with  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis:  a randomised  
controlled  trial.  The Lancet  Neurology,  5(2):140  – 147,  2006.
S. C. Bourke,  R. E. Bullock,  T. L. Williams,  P. J. Shaw,  and G. J. Gibson.  Noninvasive  ventilation  in ALS:  Indications  
and effect  on quality  of life. Neurology,  61(2):171 –177,  2003.
B. R. Brooks,  R. G. Miller,  M. Swash,  and T. L. Munsat.  El Escorial  revisited:  Revised  criteria  for the diagnosis  of 
amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis.  Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis  & Other  Motor  Neuron  Disorders,  1(5):293  – 
299,  2000.
M. Butz,  K. H. Wollinsky,  U. Wiedemuth-Catrinescu,  A. Sperfeld,  S. Winter,  H. H. Mehrkens,  A. C. Ludolph,  and H. 
Schreiber.  Longitudinal  effects  of noninvasive  positive-pressure  ventilation  in patients  with  amyotrophic  
lateral  sclerosis.  American  Journal  of Physical  Medicine  & Rehabilitation,  82(8):597 –604,  2003.
J. M. Cedarbaum,  N. Stambler,  E. Malta,  C. Fuller,  D. Hilt, B. Thurmond,  and A. Nakanishi.  The ALSFRS-R:  a 
revised  ALS functional  rating  scale  that incorporates  assessments  of respiratory  function.  Journal  of the 
Neurological  Sciences,  169(1  - 2):13  – 21, 1999.
A. Chiò,  G. Logroscino,  O. Hardiman,  et al. Prognostic  factors  in ALS:  A critical  review.  Amyotroph  Lateral  Scler.,  
10(5-6):310 –323,  2009..
M. Demaerschalk,  M. L. Miley,  T.-E.  J. Kiernan,  B. J. Bobrow,  D. A. Corday,  K. E. Wellik,  M. I. Aguilar,  T. J. Ingall,  D. 
W. Dodick,  K. Brazdys,  T. C. Koch,  M. P. Ward,  and P. C. Richemont.  Stroke  Telemedicine.  Mayo  Clinic  
Proceedings,  84(1):53 –64, 2009.
S. Dorman,  A. Byrne,  and A. Edwards.  Which  measurement  scales  should  we use to measure  breathlessness  in 
palliative  care?  A systematic  review.  Palliative  Medicine,  21(3):177 –191,  2007.
C. Dougan,  C. O. Connell,  E. Thornton,  and C. Young.  Development  of a patient-speciﬁc  dyspnoea  questionnaire  
in motor  neurone  disease  (MND):  the {MND}  dyspnoea  rating  scale  (MDRS).  Journal  of the Neurological  
Sciences,  180(12):86  – 93, 2000.
S.H. Felgoise  et al., Amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis-specific  quality  of life-short  form  (ALSSQOL-SF):  A brief,  reliable,  
and valid  version  of the ALSSQOL-R.   Muscle  & Nerve  2018,  58: 646-654.
W. W. Flemons  and M. A. Reimer.  Development  of a Disease-speciﬁc  Health-related  Quality  of Life 
Questionnaire  for Sleep  Apnea.  American  Journal  of Respiratory  and Critical  Care  Medicine,  158(2):494 –503,  
1998.
A. Geronimo,  C. Wright,  A. Morris,  S. Walsh,  B. Snyder,  and Z. Simmons.  The incorporation  of telemedicine  into a 
multidisciplinary  ALS Clinic:  A pilot  study,  Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis  and Frontotemporal  Degeneration,  
18(7-8):555-561,  2017.
A. Geronimo  and Z. Simmons.  Evaluation  of remote  pulmonary  function  testing  in motor  neuron  disease,  
Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis  and Frontotemporal  Degeneration,  20(5-6):348-355,  2019.
J. L. Hankinson,  J. R. Odencrantz,  and K. B. Fedan.  Spirometric  Reference  Values  from  a Sample  of the General  
U.S. Population.  American  Journal  of Respiratory  and Critical  Care  Medicine,  159(1):179 –187,  1999.
E. V. Hobson,  W. O. Baird,  C. L. Cooper,  S. Mawson,  P. J. Shaw,  and C. J. Mcdermott.  Using  technology  to improve  
access  to specialist  care  in amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis:  A systematic  review.  Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis  
and Frontotemporal  Degeneration,  17(5-6):313 –324,  2016.
C. Jackson,  J. Rosenfeld,  D. Moore,  W. Bryan,  R. Barohn,  M. Wrench,  D. Myers,  L. Heberlin,  R. King,  J. Smith,
K. A. Kleopa,  M. Sherman,  B. Neal,  G. J. Romano,  and T. Heiman-Patterson.  Bipap  improves  survival  and rate of 
pulmonary  function  decline  in patients  with  {ALS}.  Journal  of the Neurological  Sciences,  164(1):82  – 88, 
1999.
N. Lechtzin,  Y. Scott,  A. M. Busse,  L. L. Clawson,  R. Kimball,  and C. M. Wiener.  Early  use of noninvasive  ventilation  
prolongs  survival  in subjects  with  ALS.  Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis,  8(3):185 –188,  2007.
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023
Page  23 of 23 (V.06/27/2016)  D. Lo Coco,  S. Marchese,  S. Corrao,  M. C. Pesco,  V. La Bella,  F. Piccoli,  and A. Lo Coco.  Development  of chronic  
hypoventilation  in amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis  patients.  Respiratory  Medicine,  100(6):1028  – 1036,  2006.
F. McClellan,  M. Washington,  R. R, and S. SM. Early  and innovative  symptomatic  care  to improve  quality  of life of 
ALS patients  at the Cleveland  VA ALS Center.  J Rehabil  Res Dev.,  50(4):vii –xvi, 2013.
R. G. Miller,  B. R. Brooks,  R. J. Swain-Eng,  R. C. Basner,  G. T. Carter,  P. Casey,  A. B. Cohen,  R. Dubinsky,  D. 
Forshew,  C. E. Jackson,  E. Kasarskis,  N. J. Procaccini,  M. Sanjak,  and F. P. Tolin.  Quality  improvement  in 
neurology:  Amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis  quality  measures:  Report  of the Quality  Measurement  and 
Reporting  Subcommittee  of the American  Academy  of Neurology.  Neurology,  81(24):2136 –2140,  2013.
R. G. Miller,  C. E. Jackson,  E. J. Kasarskis,  J. D. England,  D. Forshew,  W. Johnston,  S. Kalra,  J. S. Katz,  H. 
Mitsumoto,  J. Rosenfeld,  C. Shoesmith,  M. J. Strong,  and S. C. Woolley.  Practice  Parameter  update:  The care  
of the patient  with  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis:  Drug,  nutritional,  and respiratory  therapies  (an evidence-
based  review):  Report  of the Quality  Standards  Subcommittee  of the American  Academy  of Neurology.  
Neurology,  73(15):1218 –1226,  2009.
A. Morris,  S. Walsh,  and Z. Simmons.  Telemedicine  in ALS.  In Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis  and Frontotemporal  
Degeneration,  Abstracts  from  the 27th  International  Symposium  on ALS/MND,  volume  17, 2016.
A. Pinto,  J. P. Almeida,  S. Pinto,  J. Pereira,  A. G. Oliveira,  and M. de Carvalho.  Home  telemonitoring  of non-
invasive  ventilation  decreases  healthcare  utilisation  in a prospective  controlled  trial of patients  with  
amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis.  Journal  of Neurology,  Neurosurgery  & Psychiatry,  2010.
A. Pinto,  M. de Carvalho,  T. Evangelista,  A. Lopes,  and L. Sales-Lus.  Nocturnal  pulse  oximetry:  a new  approach  to 
establish  the appropriate  time  for non-invasive  ventilation  in ALS patients.  Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis  & 
Other  Motor  Neuron  Disorders,  4(1):31,  2003.
[PROdc2016]  PROMIS  Pool  v1.0  - Dyspnea  Characteristics  18Aug2016  
http://www.healthmeasures.net/index.php?option=com_instruments&view=measure&id=765&Itemid=992
[PROdfl2016]  PROMIS  Short  Form  v1.0  - Dyspnea  Functional  Limitations  - 10a 02Sept2016  
http://www.healthmeasures.net/index.php?option=com_instruments&view=measure&id=774&Itemid=992
[PROms2017]  PROMIS  Item  Bank  v1.0  - Self-Efficacy  for Managing  Symptoms  21Jun2017  
http://www.healthmeasures.net/index.php?option=com_instruments&view=measure&id=569&Itemid=992
[PROmt2017]  PROMIS  Item  Bank  v1.0  - Self-Efficacy  for Managing  Medications  and Treatment  21Jun2017  
http://www.healthmeasures.net/index.php?option=com_instruments&view=measure&id=575&Itemid=992
[PROsi2017]  PROMIS  Item  Bank  v1.0  - Self-Efficacy  for Managing  Social  Interactions  21Jun2017  
http://www.healthmeasures.net/index.php?option=com_instruments&view=measure&id=551&Itemid=992
[PROsri2016]  PROMIS  ShortForm  v1.0  - Sleep-Related  Impairment  - 8a 09May2016  
http://www.healthmeasures.net/index.php?option=com_instruments&view=measure&id=185&Itemid=992
M. Pulley,  A. Berger,  W. Hodges,  and R. Brittain.  Feasibility  study  of the use of telemedicine  in the care  of ALS 
patients.  (P4.127).  Neurology,  84(14  Supplement),  2015.
A. Samii,  P. Ryan-Dykes,  R. A. Tsukuda,  C. Zink,  R. Franks,  and W. P. Nichol.  Telemedicine  for delivery  of health  
care  in Parkinson’s  disease.  Journal  of Telemedicine  and Telecare,  12(1):16 –18, 2006.
P. L. Schiffman  and J. M. Belsh.  Pulmonary  Function  at Diagnosis  of Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis:  Rate  of 
Deterioration.  Chest,  103(2):508  – 513,  1993.
G. Verbeke  and G. Molenberghs.  Linear  Mixed  Models  for Longitudinal  Data  (Springer  Series  in Statistics).  
Springer-Verlag,  2000.
M. Vitacca,  L. Comini,  M. Tentorio,  G. Assoni,  D. Trainini,  D. Fiorenza,  R. Morini,  G. Bruletti,  and S. Scalvini.  A 
pilot  trial of telemedicine-assisted,  integrated  care  for patients  with  advanced  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis  
and their  caregivers.  Journal  of Telemedicine  and Telecare,  16(2):83 –88, 2010.
J. E. Ware  and C. D. Sherbourne.  The MOS  36-Item  Short-Form  Health  Survey  (SF-36):  I. Conceptual  Framework  
and Item  Selection.  Medical  Care,  30(6).
STUDY00006924
Approval: 6/12/2023