LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 1 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 INFORMATION AND CONSENT FORM  
Sponsor / Study Title:  
  LIB Therapeutics, LLC.  / “Randomized, Double -Blind, 
Placebo -Controlled, Phase 2, Dose -Finding Study to 
Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of LIB003 in Patients on 
Stable Lipid- Lowering Therapy Requiring A dditional LDL -
C Reduction”  
 
Protocol Number:  
 LIB003 -002 
Principal Investigator:  
(Study Doctor)  
 «PiFullName»  
 
Telephone:  
 «IcfPhoneNumber»  
 
Additional Contact(s) : 
(Study Staff)  
 «AdditionalStaffMemberContacts»  
 
Address:  «PiLocations»  
 
 
THE INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS  
You are being asked to participate in a clin ical research study sponsored by  LIB Therapeutics, 
LLC , the company paying for this study. Before you decide if you want to participate, you need 
to understand the purpose of the study, the possible risks and benefits , and what is expected of 
you. This pro cess is called Informed Consent.  
This informed consent form will explain to you the purpose and procedures in the study, describe 
possible discomforts and risks that may occur and describe any possible benefits . This form will 
also include information about the health information that will be obtained from you, the extent 
of confidentiality that will be maintained, if there is any compensation and/or medical treatment 
available to you if injury occurs, and whom to contact if you have any questions about the study 
or you r rights as a research subject.  Your participation in this study is entirely voluntary and you 
have the right to stop your participation at any time. 
Please read this form carefully.  Take as much time as you need to read this form, to ask the  study 
doctor or study staff questions, to discuss it with your regular doctor, family, friends , and/or 
anyone you choose  before deciding whether or not to participate.  If there are any words or 
information that you do not understand, the study doctor or s tudy staff will explain them to you.  
Reading this form and talking to the study doctor or study staff may help you decide whether to 
participate in this study or not.  If you agree to participate in this study, you must sign and date  
this consent form befor e any study -related tests or procedures are performed.  You will be asked 
to provide consent for the study doctor or study staff to inform your primary -care doctor about 
your participation in this study.  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 2 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
The study doctor and LIB Therap eutics, LLC , the sponsoring drug company, are conducting this 
research study of an investigational drug named LIB003 for potentially lowering LDL (low 
density lipoprotein) cholesterol , which is sometimes called ‘bad’ cholesterol . Lowering LDL 
with drugs ha s been shown to reduce cardiovascular risk. LIB003 is small protein, called an 
Adnectin, modified from a naturally occurring protein in the body called fibronectin, which has 
been designed to block PCSK9, a protein in the blood stream  that inhibits  or redu ces the removal 
of LDL cholesterol which is usually done by the liver. The investigational drug  LIB003 in this 
study is given by injection  under the skin. An “investigational” drug is one that has not been 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  for use in the United States, but  has been 
approved for testing  in research studies such as this one. You may be eligible to participate in 
this study because you have increased LDL cholesterol while  on diet and taking a statin or other 
type of cholestero l lowering medication.  About 80 subjects  will be enrolled in this study in the 
US which will be the second study in humans of this investigational drug LIB003.  
The purposes of this study are:  
• To assess the safety and tolerability (how a person’s body react s) to LIB003  when given 
multiple  dose s by subcutaneous [SC] (under the skin) injection. LIB003 will be tested in 
people with increased LDL -C levels either taking  a statin medication alone, or ezetimibe 
(Zetia) alone or both. This  assessment  will be done by  performing a physical exam 
including vital signs ( including  heart rate, blood pressure , breathing rate, and 
temperature), laboratory tests (including blood and urine samples), and 
electrocardiograms (ECGs). We will also keep track of any side effects  subj ects might 
experience.   
• To assess, through blood test s, the effect of  LIB003  on LDL cholesterol, triglyceride and 
other related tests.   
• To collect information about how the levels of LIB003 and PCSK9 change  in subjects’ 
blood over time  prior to and after r eceiving this investigational drug.  
• To assess subjects’ immune response (to see if their bodies  will make antibodies against 
LIB003) to  this investigational drug.  
PROCEDURES INVOLVED IN THIS STUDY 
This study is a double -blind, randomized study. “Double -blind” means that neither you nor the 
study doctor will know who is receiving  LIB003 and who is receiving placebo ( an inactive 
substance containing no study drug  also given by injection  under the skin) . “Randomized” means 
that the group you will be placed in is decided by chance  from a computer , similar to drawing 
numbers out of a hat or flipping a coin.  
Be aware that this form refers to  both LIB003 and placebo as “study drug.”  
A total of about 80 s ubjects will be enrolled in this roughly 20 week outpatient s tudy with  about 
60 subjects randomized to receive LIB003 (SC) and about 20 to receive placebo  (SC). There will 
be three (3) LIB003 dose groups , with each group consisting of about 20 subjects . The three  
LIB003 groups will receive doses of 150 mg or 300 mg or 350 mg  or placebo, which will be 
given by SC injection every 4 weeks for a total of 3 doses.  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 3 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 The subjects  participating in this study include  men and women who are 18 years of age or older 
(women of childbearing potential must be using an effective for m of birth control and have a 
negative pregnancy test at screening) with either previous heart disease (CVD), at high risk for 
developing heart disease ( greater than or equal to 10% in 5 year s or greater than or equal to7.5% 
in 10 years), or inherited high cholesterol (called FH) and also have a LDL -C greater than or 
equal to 80 mg/dL (CVD or high CVD risk) or greater than or equal to 100 mg/dL ( heterozygous 
familial hypercholesterolemia  [HeFH ] and no CVD) . All subjects  must also have  triglycerides 
(TG) les s than or equal to 400 mg/dL and be on stable diet and cholesterol lowering medication 
consisting of a statin or ezetimibe or both. Subjects unable to tolerate statins or approved doses 
of a statin may take lower than approved doses and less frequently tha n daily as long the dose 
and dosing frequency is consistent.  
If you are currently taking a statin and /or ezetimibe  you will have had to be  on a stable  (same)  
dose for 4 or more weeks prior to enrollment in the study and must remain on that dose for the 
duration of the study.  
If you would like to participate in the study you cannot be taking , or have taken, in the last 6 to 8 
weeks any other prescription cholesterol lowering drugs, or over -the-counter supplements, or 
herbal medications such as  certain vita mins  such as high doses of niacin or fish oils  unless 
approved by the study doctor . Stable doses of hormone replacement therapy which you have 
been on for 2 or more months prior to the study and will continue throughout the study  is 
allowed as are other ch ronic medications for treating conditions like diabetes, high blood 
pressure etc. The study nurse or doctor will review all your medications to make sure they are 
allowed in this study and inform you if not . You will be excluded from the study i f you have 
previously participated in a study with any other adnectin product, if you have history of allergy 
to monoclonal antibody and vaccines , if you have history of significant drug allergy , or 
participated in another clinical study within 1 month prior to scree ning. You cannot participate if 
you have donated or lost a significant amount (more than 1 pint) of blood or plasma within 31 
days prior to the anticipated start of study drug administration  and you cannot donate blood or 
plasma during the study . 
If you qualify for this study, your participation will be for about 20 weeks . After a screening 
period to assess eligibility of participation,  which could be up to 28 day s, or as short as 7 days, 
you will return to receive the 1st dose of LIB003 or placebo by SC in jection .  
This will be followed by  8 additional outpatient visits  at 2 week intervals for  the next 16 weeks . 
The study staff will review all the restrictions and requirements of the study with you to 
determine if you qualify for the study and to answer your questions.  
Blood samples:  An important part of this study is the blood samples that will be taken during 
each of your visits after an overnight 10 hour fast  (water will be allowed  and encouraged) . These 
blood samples have several different purposes:  
1. The samples will be taken to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of th e study  drug. This will 
be done by laboratory measurements to see if there are any changes in your blood compared to 
before you were given the study drug . The changes in LDL cholesterol  and other blood fats as 
well as PCSK9 will be measured.  
2. Other samples are being taken to measure the amount of LIB003 in your blood over time (also 
known as pharmacokinetics  or PK ). 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 4 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 3. Some samples are being taken to see if your body makes any antibodi es to LIB003 (also 
known as Immunogenicity  or anti LIB003 -antibod ies). Making antibodies is a common reaction 
by your body to anything foreign in your blood, and it may or may not occur in your body.  
4. Some samples may be used to study other proteins in your blood. These samples may also 
help us to understand how  LIB003 is working in the body. Some of these samples may also be 
stored for future studies of other cholesterol carrying fractions and inflammation. 
All of the information that we collect from th ese samples helps us to better understand the way 
that your body deals with the study drug, and also any effect that the study drug might be having 
on your body.  
WHAT WILL HAPPEN DURING THE STUDY 
Visit 1: Screening Visit  
At the Screening Visit, or before,  you will be asked to read this informed consent form. If after 
all your questions have been answered to your satisfaction and you would like to participate in 
this study, you will be asked to sign and date this form.  The following will also occur at this 
visit:  
• A number of questions will be asked about your demographics, medical history and 
current health status . 
• You will be asked some general questions about how you are feeling and about any 
medication s or over -the-counter supplements  you are taking.  Specific questions will be 
asked about cholesterol medications such as statins you are , or have been , taking . 
• A physical examination . 
• Your blood pressure, height, weight, breathing, temperature and heart rate will all be 
measured . 
• An electrocardiogram (a traci ng of your heart rhythm) will be done . 
• A fasting blood sample will be taken, using a needle to collect blood from a vein in your 
arm. A total of  19 ml ( about  1⅓ tablespoons ) of blood will be drawn for the routine 
clinical tests listed below to determine if you are eligible to participate in the study.  The 
study doctor or study staff will explain this process to you and what will happen based on 
your test results.   
o Full safety chemistry, hematology, and TSH  (Thyroid Stimulating  Hormone)  
o Brief  lipid panel  
o Serum pregnancy test (for women of child- bearing potential)  
• A urine sample will be collected for routine clinical tests . 
• If you are a woman and pregnant or  breas tfeeding, you cannot participate in the study. 
Women who  can have children and are taking an effective form of birth control such as 
diaphragm or cervical cap with spermicide or i ntrauterine device, oral, implantable, or 
injectable contraceptives, or  women  who can no longer bear children due to a surgical 
procedure (a hysterectomy, both ovaries removed, or both tubes cut or tied) , or are 
postmenopausal for at least 1 year (if uncertain, a blood test called follicle -stimulating 
hormone [FSH] with a level gre ater than 40 mIU/mL must  be documented ) can 
participate . To make sure no woman who can have children is pregnant , a pregnancy test 
will also be done. You must agree to use effective birth control for 90 days beyond the 
last dose of the study drug.  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 5 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 • If you a re a man you will need to be either surgically sterile or agree to use, from the time 
you start the study drug  until 90 days following the last dose of study drug, one of the 
following forms of contraception: male or female condom with spermicide; a female  
partner who is sterile or who agrees to use the following contraceptives, diaphragm or 
cervical cap with spermicide; or intrauterine device (IUD), oral, implantable, or injectable 
contraceptives. You must also refrain from sperm donation from when you start the study 
drug until 90 days following the last dose of study drug.  
Visit 2: Day 1  
You will come to the clinic in the morning so we can review your health and medication history 
since your previous visit, take  fasting (10 hours with only water allowed  and encouraged)  blood 
sample s, and be randomized to the study drug or placebo. The  following will occur at this visit:  
• You will be asked some general questions about how you are feeling and about any 
medication you have taken since your last visit  including statin, statin dose and/or 
ezetimibe plus adherence . 
• Your blood pressure, weight, breathing, temperature and heart rate will all be measured.  
• A fasting blood sample will be taken , using a needle to collect blood from a vein in your 
arm. A total of 37 ml ( about 2.5 tablespoons ) of blood will be drawn for  clinical 
laboratory  tests  listed below. 
o Full safety chemistry and hematology  
o Expanded lipid panel  
o PK 
o PCSK9 (total and free)  
o Immunogenicity  
o Exploratory biomarkers  
• A urine sample will be collected for routin e clinical  tests .  
• A physical examination  will be done if the previous one done at the screening visit was 
more than 14 days earlier. 
• You will be randomized to study drug  and receive the first injection under the skin (SC) 
in your abdomen a few inches away  from the belly button. You will wait at least 15 
minutes after the injection to make sure everything is OK . 
Visit 3: Day 15  
You will come to the clinic in the morning so we can review your health and medication history 
since your previous visit and take f asting (10 hours with only water allowed and encouraged) 
blood samples. The following will occur at this visit:  
• You will be asked some general questions about how you are feeling , side effects, or 
health problems since your last visit.  
• You will be asked ab out any medications since the previous visit including statin, statin 
dose and/or ezetimibe plus adherence . 
• Your blood pressure, breathing, temperature and heart rate will be measured.  
• A fasting blood sample of about  22ml ( 1.5 tablespoons ) will be taken, using a needle to 
collect blood from a vein in your arm  for the following tests :  
o Brief Safety chemistry panel  
o Brief Lipid panel  
o PK 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 6 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 o PCSK9 (total and free)  
• The SC injection site will be assessed.  
Visit 4: Day 29  
You will come to the clinic in the morning so  we can review your health and medication histor y 
since your previous visit, take fasting (10 hours with only water allowed and encouraged) blood 
samples , and receive the second dose of study drug or placebo. The following will occur at this 
visit:  
• You wil l be asked some general questions about how you are feeling, side effects or 
health problems since your last visit.  
• You will be asked about any medication you have taken since your last visit including 
statin, statin dose and/or ezetimibe plus adherence. 
• Your blood pressure, weight, breathing, temperature and heart rate will all be measured.  
• A urine sample  will be collected  for routine clinical tests . 
• A fasting blood sample of about 37 ml ( 2.5 tablespoons ) will be taken, using a needle to 
collect blood from  a vein in your arm for the following tests : 
o Full Safety chemistry and hematology  
o Expanded Lipid panel  
o PK 
o PCSK9 (total and free)  
o Immunogenicity  
• You will receive the second  SC dose of study drug. 
• The injection site will be  assessed before and 15 mins post -dose. 
Visit 5:  Day 43  
You will come to the clinic in the morning so we can review your health and medication history 
since your previous visit and take fasting (10 hours with only water allowed and encouraged) 
blood samples. The following will occur at thi s visit:  
• You will be asked some general questions about how you are feeling, side effects or 
health problems since your last visit.  
• You will be asked about any medication you have taken since your last visit including 
statin, statin dose and/or ezetimibe p lus adherence. 
• Your blood pressure, breathing , temperature and heart rate will be measured . 
• A fasting blood sample of about 22ml ( 1.5 tablespoons ) will be taken, using a needle to 
collect blood from a vein in your arm for the following tests:  
o Brief Safety chemistry panel  
o Brief Lipid panel  
o PK 
o PCSK9 (total and free ) 
• The SC injection site will be assessed.  
Visit 6: Day 57  
You will come to the clinic in the morning so we can review your health and medication history 
since your previous visit, take fasting (10 hours with only water allowed and encouraged) blood 
samples, and receive the third dose of the study drug or placebo. The following will occur at this 
visit:  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 7 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 • You will be asked some general questions about how you are feeling, side effects or 
health problems  since your last visit.  
• You will be asked about any medication you have taken since your last visit including 
statin, statin dose and/or ezetimibe plus adherence. 
• Your blood pressure, weight, breathing, temperature and heart rate will all be measured  
• A urine sample will be collected for routine clinical tests . 
• A fasting blood sample of about 37 ml ( 2.5 tablespoons ) will be taken, using a needle to 
collect blood from a vein in your arm for the following tests : 
o Full Safety chemistry and hematology  
o Expanded L ipid panel  
o PK 
o PCSK9 (total and f ree) 
o Exploratory biomarkers  
o Immunogenicity  
• You will receive the third SC dose of study drug . 
• The injection site will be assess ed before and 15 mins post -dose. 
Visit 7:  Day 71  
You will come to the clinic in the morning so we can review your health and medication history 
since your previous visit and take fasting (10 hours with only water allowed and encouraged) 
blood samples. The following will occur at this visit:  
• You will be asked some general questions about how you are fee ling, side effects or 
health problems since your last visit.  
• You will be asked about any medication you have taken since your last visit including 
statin, statin dose and/or ezetimibe plus adherence. 
• Your blood pressure, breathing , temperature and heart rate will be measured.  
• A fasting blood sample of about 22ml ( 1.5 tablespoons ) will be taken, using a needle to 
collect blood from a vein in your arm for the following tests:  
o Brief Safety chemistry panel  
o Brief Lipid panel  
o PK 
o PCSK9 (total and free)  
• The SC inj ection site will be assessed.  
Visit 8:  Day 85  
You will come to the clinic in the morning so we can review your health and medication history 
since your previous visit and take fasting (10 hours with only water allowed and encouraged) 
blood samples. The fol lowing will occur at this visit:  
• You will be asked some general questions about how you are feeling, side effects or 
health problems since your last visit.  
• You will be asked about any medication you have taken since your last visit including 
statin, statin  dose and/or ezetimibe plus adherence. 
• You will be weighed and have a physical examination.  
• You will have a  12-lead ECG.  
• Your  blood pressure, breathing , temperature, and heart rate will be measured.  
• A urine sample will be collected for routine  clinical tes ts. 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 8 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 • A fasting blood sample of about 37 ml ( 2.5 tablespoons ) will be taken, using a needle to 
collect blood from a vein in your arm for the following tests : 
o Full Safety chemistry and hematology  
o Expanded Lipid panel  
o PK 
o PCSK9 (total and free)  
o Immunogenicity  
o Exploratory biomarkers  
• The injection site  will be assessed . 
Visit 9:  Day 99  
You will come to the clinic in the morning so we can review your health and medication history 
since your previous visit and take fasting (10 hours with only water allowed and encouraged) 
blood samples. The following will occur at this visit:  
• You will be asked some general questions about how you are feeling, side effects or 
health problems since your last visit.  
• You will be asked about any medication you have taken since your last  visit including 
statin, statin dose and/or ezetimibe plus adherence. 
• Your blood pressure, breathing , temperature and heart rate will be measured.  
• A fasting blood sample of about 22 ml ( 1.5 tablespoons ) will be taken, using a needle to 
collect blood from a vein in yo ur arm for the following tests:  
o Brief Safety chemistry panel  
o Brief Lipid panel  
o PK 
o PCSK9 (total and free)  
• The SC injection site will be assessed.  
 
Visit 10:  Day 113/Early Termination Visit  
This is the final visit for everyone completing the enti re study  or for subjects who are withdrawn 
early from the study prior to completion  of all other 9 visits. At this visit you will have the 
following performed;  
• You will be asked some general questions about how you are feeling, side effects or 
health probl ems since your last visit.  
• You will be asked about any medication you have taken since your last visit including 
statin, statin dose and/or ezetimibe plus adherence. 
• You will be weighed.  
• If you are terminating the study early you w ill have a physical exami nation. 
• If you are terminating the study early before visit 8 you will have a 12- lead ECG.  
• Your blood pressure, breathing , temperature and heart rate will be measured . 
• A urine sample will be collected for routine clinical tests . 
• A fasting blood sample of a bout 37 ml ( 2.5 tablespoons ) will be taken, using a needle to 
collect blood from a vein in your arm for the following tests : 
o Full Safety chemistry and hematology  
o Expanded Lipid panel  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 9 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 o PK 
o PCSK9 (total and free)  
o Immunogenicity  
o Exploratory biomarkers  
• If you ar e a woman of childbearing potential  you will have a pregnancy test. 
• The injection site will be assessed.  
Follow -up Visit for subjects who develop positi ve antibodies to the study drug  
If you develop positive antibodies to the study drug and they are associ ated with clinical 
symptoms that are considered safety related at final visit (week 16) you may be asked to return 
for additional monthly follow -up testing.  
If you develop antibodies that are known as neutralizing antibodies, which then prevent the study 
drug from working properly at the final visit (week 16) you will be asked to return for follow ‑up 
testing every 3 months until either these antibodies are no longer detectable or you have been 
followed for a period of at least 12 months. For subjects who te st positive but have not received 
active drug follow -up testing will not be required.  
The following procedures will be performed at the follow up visits:  
• You will be asked some general questions about how you are feeling, side effects or 
health problems si nce your last visit.  
• You will be asked about any medication you have taken since your last visit including 
statin, statin dose and/or ezetimibe plus adherence.  
• You will be weighed.  
• Your blood pressure, breathing, temperature and heart rate will be measured. 
• A urine sample will be collected for routine clinical tests . 
• A fasting blood sample of about 22 ml ( 1.5) tablespoons will be taken, using a needle to 
collect blood from a vein in your arm for the following tests : 
o Full Safety chemistry and hematology  
o Brief Lipid panel  
o PCSK9 (total and free)  
o Immunogenicity.  
• The injection site will be assessed . 
 
A total of about  19 tablespoons or 1 .25 cup of blood will be taken from you during this study 
(Screening period through End- of-Study Visit).  For comparison, the standard blood donation of 1 
unit, is about 32 tablespoons  or 2 cups , and may be donated every eight weeks. 
DISCOMFORT AND RISK  
This is the second  study in humans with LIB003. It is the first  study in which subjects with CVD 
or high risk of CVD and high chole sterol on statins or ezetimibe or both will receive  multiple 
doses of LIB003.  
Placebo Risks  
Subjects assigned to placebo will not be anticipated to have any risks other than that possible 
from the SC injection which may cause pain and swelling. However, r eceiving placebo is the 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 10 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 same as not taking any additional medication other than the statin or ezetimibe or both for your 
increased cholesterol. Your symptoms may not improve or get worse. Please ask the study doctor 
or study staff if you have any questions  about placebo. 
Risks Associated with LIB003  
LIB003 is not marketed in any country. There has been one previous clinical (human) study with 
LIB003 where both normal volunteers or patients taking statins with LDL -C greater than or 
equal to 100 mg/dL  and le ss than or equal to 190 mg/dL  received a single dose of LIB003. A 
total of 45 study subjects  received LIB003 at doses ranging from 25 mg to 600 mg and the  study  
drug was given SC at all doses , except for  2 groups that received the 300 mg and 600 mg dose 
intravenously (IV – directly into a vein). Each study subject was observed in an inpatient unit for 
3 days after  receiving  the study drug and then as outpatients for at least 6 weeks (43 days) after 
receiving  the study drug. LIB003 was well tolerated, no stu dy subject either on LIB003 or 
placebo experienced injection site reactions such as rash, redness, itching or swelling. One study 
subject experienced swelling of his lips after 2 days which decreased after a few days and was 
treated with an oral antihistamine medication. A total of 6 of 18 (33%) placebo subjects and 13 
of 45 (29%) LIB003 subjects none  of these were considered serious or study drug related.  
The most common adverse events (side effects) reported by more than 1 subject were respiratory 
infecti ons, gastrointestinal, eye (blurred vision), Central nervous system ( CNS [ headache] ) and 
musculoskeletal; all other adverse events were reported by 1 subject only. None appeared dose 
related or more frequent in LIB003 treated subjects  compared to placebo. One subject on the 
lowest dose, 25 mg, of LIB003 developed a low level of antibodies to LIB003 but this was not 
associated with any clinical or laboratory side effects.  A second subject  who received  600 mg IV 
of LIB003 developed an antibod y response after 3 weeks , which became progressively more 
positive, with higher levels  by Day 43. The subject is still being followed at monthly intervals 
until the antibodies  become negative or are deemed stable. There were no associated clinical or 
laboratory adverse eff ects and there did not appear to be any neutralizing antibodies  as LDL -C 
reduction, which extended past 6 week s, did not appear lower  compared to other subjects treated 
with LIB003 with the same dose of LIB003.  
Study subjects will receive no known health benefit from participating in this study.  A large 
amount of information in people with naturally occurring very low levels of PCSK9 and for two 
other drugs similar to LIB003 which block PCSK9 and are now marketed show  no side effects or 
toxicity.   
Single a nd multiple dose toxicity studies o f LIB003  were conducted in cynomolgus monkeys to 
assess the overall potential risk of exposing human subjects. The  highest doses  tested in these 
monkey studies were more than 20- fold higher than the highest doses planned in this human 
study.  There were no adverse findings.  Thus, the overall safety profile of  LIB003 in monkey 
studies supports evaluation of the safety and tolerability  of the doses of LIB003 to be used in this 
study in human subjects.  
Like other drugs that ma y suppress the function of PCSK9, LIB003 has theoretical risks  
associated with suppression of your immune system , although none of these have been found 
with other drugs, such as monoclonal antibodies, which inactivate PCSK9. If your immune 
system is suppr essed significantly, you may be more susceptible to infections and if this occurs 
over long periods  even cancer.  Additionally, like other anti -PCSK9 compounds, LIB003 has the 
theoretical risk of causing liver injury, colon cancer, and increased susceptibil ity to hepatitis C 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 11 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 virus infection, although none of these have been found with current approved and marketed 
drugs approved to inactivate PCSK9. In this study, you will be given a single dose  of LIB003. 
Any potential effect of the study drug is expected t o be temporary and insufficient to cause 
lasting impairment of your immune system, liver function, or susceptibility to hepatitis C.  
The study drug will be given by subcutaneous (under the skin) injection into the abdomen. This 
may cause pain , discomfort , bruising, dizziness, infection, or irritation . 
Allergic Reaction Risks  
Sometimes, people have serious allergic reactions to drugs. A severe allergic reaction could be 
life-threatening and may result in death. Symptoms of allergic reactions include rash, di fficulty 
breathing, coughing, wheezing, sudden drop in blood pressure, swelling of the mouth, throat or 
eyes, seizures, flushing, fainting,  a fast pulse, and sweating.  If you believe you are having a 
serious allergic reaction, you should seek emergency med ical treatment immediately and alert 
the study doctor and study staff as soon as possible. You will be under observation for at least 15 
mins  in the clinic after you have received the study drug should any of these side effects occur.  
Some people may exper ience irritation at the injection site or even an allergic reaction to the 
study drug . You may have a reaction at the site of the injection which can be mild to severe and 
painful. The study staff will treat either of these conditions if they should occur.  
Ask the study doctor or study staff if you have questions about the signs or symptoms of any side 
effects you  read about in this consent form. 
Be sure to tell the study doctor and/or study staff about any changes to your health during the 
study, including  but not limited to any of the side effects described here.  
Unknown Risks  
It is possible that there will be other side effects associated with LIB003 that are unknown at this 
time, including  serious, life -threatening, and even fatal side effects.  You shoul d tell your study 
doctor or a member of the study staff about any new health problems that develop while you are 
in this study and about any new medications you start taking (including nonprescription, over -
the-counter medication).  
Statin and Ezetimibe Ri sks 
Statins and ezetimibe are approved drug s for the treatment of elevated LDL cholesterol  and have 
been prescribed by your doctor unrelated to this study . The products labeling describes two 
important risks (potential damage to muscle tissue and/or to the  liver). Large and long term 
studies with patients taking statins and/or ezetimibe have shown no increased side effects when 
combined with drugs which inhibit PCSK9. 
Reproductive Risks  
The effects of LIB003 on an unborn baby or nursing (breast feeding) inf ant are unknown. It is 
possible that the use of LIB003 may be associated with unanticipated risks to a pregnancy or 
fetus.   
Female subjects who can become pregnant must use an effective form of birth control such as  
diaphragm or cervical cap with spermicid e or i ntrauterine device, oral, implantable, or injectable 
contraceptives, or women who can no longer bear children due to a surgical procedure (a 
hysterectomy, both ovaries removed, or both tubes cut or tied) . 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 12 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 Male subject options include male or female c ondom and spermicide, and a female partner who 
is sterile or who agrees to use the following contraceptives; diaphragm or cervical cap with 
spermicide; or intrauterine device, oral, implantable, or injectable contraceptives;  or a 
vasectomy.  Male subjects m ust also refrain from sperm donation until 90 days following the last 
dose of the study drug.  
If you are a man, you must avoid getting a woman pregnant during the study . If you think that 
you have gotten a woman pregnant, you must tell the study doctor at once.   
Both male and female subjects must use effective contraception during the entire time of taking 
the study drug and for 90 days after the last dose of study drug.  
If you or (for men) your partner gets pregnant during the study, the expectant mother will be 
asked to provide additional consent for release of information to follow the pregnancy, any 
complications, and the health of the baby. The study doctor or study staff may share this 
information with the sponsor and Advarra  (study IRB) (a group of p eople who review research 
studies to protect the rights and welfare of research participants).  If additional follow -up is 
necessary, the study doctor will inform you of the necessary procedures.  
PROCEDURE -RELATED RISKS  
Risks Associated with Blood Draws  
Your blood will be drawn by individual needle sticks, it is possible that more than one try may 
be needed to get enough blood. The total amount of blood to be drawn at all of the study visits is 
about 290 mL, which is about 1.25 cups . That is a little more than half the amount of blood that 
would be drawn if you donated a unit of blood at a blood bank.  
Risks related to drawing blood may include discomfort, swelling, bruising, infection, bleeding, 
pain, lightheadedness, and/or redness at the site of the needl e stick.  If you feel faint, tell the study 
staff right away.  
ECG Risk  
Electrocardiograms (ECGs) will be done during this study. An ECG is a tracing of your heart’s 
electrical activity and is used to look at the pattern of your heartbeat and detect abnormal ities of 
the heart’s action.  The procedure requires having small wires attached to your body (using small 
adhesive patches) in several places.  Each ECG will take about 15 minutes to complete.  
You may experience temporary discomfort (pulling on the skin/ski n hair) during removal of the 
patches.  Male subjects  may require having their chest shaved for the ECG.  
Fasting Risks  
You will be asked to fast  overnight  (no food or liquids except water  which you are encouraged to 
drink) for at least 10 hours before comin g to the study clinic.  Fasting may cause dizziness, 
headache, stomach discomfort, or fainting.  
If you feel faint, you should tell the study staff right away.  
Confidentiality  
There is a risk of loss of confidentiality of your information that is used in thi s study.  You will 
read more about the protection of your information later in this form. Please ask the study doctor 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 13 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 or study staff if you would like to know more about how your information will be protected 
while you are in this study.  
NEW INFORMATION ABO UT THE STUDY  
The information in this form reflects what is known about the research study at the time it is 
signed  and dated . If any new information is discovered during the research study that may affect 
whether you want to continue to take part in the st udy, you will be informed. 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS FROM STUDY PARTICIPATION  
Being in this study will not help you. Your participation in this study may add to the scientific 
data related to the treatment of high cholesterol and may potentially help others in the future.  
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT  
There are approved therapies for treating high cholesterol which include different or higher doses 
of statins than what you are currently taking. The risks for each statin is outlined in the  product ’s 
labeling which describe s two important risks/side effects of potential damage to muscle tissue 
and/or to the liver.  
Other cholesterol lowering drugs include  ezetimibe, which you may or may not already be 
taking, and which works differently than statins and has fewer potential s ide effects.   
There are also two approved drugs which inhibit PCSK9, called evolocumab (Repatha) and 
alirocumab (Praluent) which are given by injection every 2 weeks and lower LDL cholesterol 
and have been shown to reduce heart disease. Both are generally well tolerated with the main 
side effects related to injection site reactions.   
The study doctor can discuss these treatment options with you. In addition, you may discuss your 
options with your regular health care provider.  
CONFIDENTIALITY OF PERSONAL INF ORMATION 
Collection of Study Data 
Your study doctor and study staff will collect information about you which is relevant to this 
study , specifically information about your name, address, contact details, date of birth, medical 
records, health, your race, e thnic origin and your life habits and sexual life. This collected 
information about you is called “data” or “study data” in this document.  
Records, created by a doctor or hospital as part of your medical care, are called medical records. 
Records created b y a research study are called research records. The records that will be 
collected, used, and shared for this study may include your research records, supporting 
information from your medical records, results of laboratory, diagnostic or other tests, resul ts of 
tests on samples (blood or  urine,) that have been stored, and clinical and research observations 
made during your participation in the research study.  
As part of this study, the study doctor and staff will record health information about you that 
contains your name and other personal identifiers. Authorized representatives of LIB 
Therapeutics, LLC or its business partner, Medpace, in the research study, the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), the IRB, a group that looks out for the rights and welfare of research  
subjects , other US government agencies, and possibly government agencies of other countries, 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 14 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 will be given access to these records at their request and may copy them. Copies of the study 
records that do not include your name but may be traced b ack to you may be given to LIB 
Therapeutics, LLC and laboratories working with the sponsor on this study. The sponsor may 
send a copy of the records to government regulatory agencies as required by law.  
Absolute confidentiality cannot be promised because i nformation needs to be shared as described 
above. However, information will be collected and shared following professional standards of 
confidentiality.  
Information and results from this study may be presented at meetings or published in journals. 
Your nam e and information that can easily be traced back to you will not be included in any 
presentation or publication. 
For your safety, the study doctor should tell your regular care provider that you are in this study 
if the study doctor is not your regular car e provider. Please discuss any concerns about this with 
the study doctor.  
A description of this clinical trial may be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required 
by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web 
site will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.  
Confidentiality of Study Data and Key- coded Data  
For the purposes of your participation in this study and the protection of your identity, your study 
doctor  will assign you a unique code, such as a series of numbers and/or letters. The study doctor 
will record the study data collected from you in a report form that uses your assigned code, not 
your name.  This is to protect your study data by making it anonymo us for most study purposes.  
The data that is recorded with your assigned code rather than your name is called “key -coded 
data”. The key -coded data will be entered into the study’s computer database. Your study doctor 
will keep a confidential list linking y our name to your code and only authorized persons will 
have access to this list. The ways in which key -coded data may be used and shared is described 
below.  
Some study data will identify you (such as medical records), and the ways in which this data may 
be used and shared is described below.  
Use and Sharing of Key -Coded Data  
Your key -coded data may be shared with and used by the following:  
• The study doctor and study staff  
• The study sponsor, its current or future research partners, collaborators, assignee s, 
licensees or designees and their affiliates, agents, and employees  
• Other individuals and organizations that analyze or use your information in connection 
with these research activities, including laboratories and study sites (in the event you 
transfer t o another study site);  
• Domestic or foreign health authorities e.g., the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  
• Advarra or o ther persons required by law  
Your key -coded data will be used in connection with this study and may also be:  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 15 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 • used for other current or f uture research involving the same study drug, the same or 
related health conditions, or for other relevant health research;  
• transferred to individuals or companies located outside of the country or region in which 
you reside. However, all access to the key  coded data will be controlled in accordance 
with applicable laws and regulations. This may include written agreements that require 
that the data be kept confidential and secure and be used only for the purposes permitted 
by this consent form or applicable  laws and regulations;  
• used in publications about this study but it will remain coded. Your identity will not be 
revealed in any compilation, study report or publication at any time. 
Use and Sharing of Study Data that Identifies You  
The use and sharing b y your study doctor of study data that identify you, such as your original 
medical records, are explained in a separate Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
of 1996 ( HIPAA ) Authorization at the end of this form . By signing the HIPAA Authoriz ation , 
you show that you give permission for the uses and sharing of this data as described in the 
HIPAA Authorization. You do not have to sign th e HIPAA Authorization, but if you do not, you 
will not be allowed to participate in this study.  To withdraw yo ur HIPAA a uthorization, you will 
need to do so in writing.  
Your Access to and Correction of Study Data that Identifies You  
You have the right to obtain any initial and updated information about the study data that 
identifies you, as well as the right accor ding to local law and procedures to require the correction 
of any errors.  
This information, as well as the fact of your participation in this study, can also be provided or 
made known to your primary physician if you wish. 
You can discuss this further wit h your study doctor, who will be your primary contact person for 
your access rights.  
Use and Collection of Study Data If You End Study Drug Dosing or Withdraw From the 
Study  
When you stop or complete study drug dosing , you will begin the last part of the s tudy which 
follows your continued health condition. This is referred to as the follow -up period. The follow -
up period includes the following activities:  
1. Collection of Follow -up Data. Additional information about your health or health status 
may be collected in order to properly conduct the study. This information can be referred 
to as “necessary follow -up data”. Collecting necessary follow -up data is important for 
this study because without it, it may be difficult to assess the safety or effectiveness of 
the study drug being studied or whether or not other study objectives have been met.  
2. Follow -up Contact.  Study staff may attempt to contact you to request that you come in 
for follow -up visits or take additional tests in order to preserve the validity or inte grity of 
the study.  
3. Use of Third Party Representatives.  If your study doctor is unable to locate you during 
this follow -up period, you authorize your study doctor to disclose your contact 
information (e.g., your name, last known address or other relevant information)  to a third -
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 16 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 party representative for the sole purpose of updating the study doctor and his/her study 
staff with your current contact information or health status. The representative(s) may be 
hired directly by the study sponsor. The representat ive(s) and the study sponsor will not 
contact you or your family members. The representative(s) will share your information 
only with the study doctor and study staff to help them complete the follow -up portion of 
the study.  
If at any time you would like to end your participation in any of the study follow -up activities 
listed above, please notify your study doctor in writing  and list the specific follow -up 
activity(ies) that you wish study staff not to perform.  Even if you completely end your 
participation  in the study, all study data that has already been collected will continue to be used 
and processed to maintain the integrity of the research.  
Use of Your Blood Samples in this Study  
Like key -coded data, these samples will be labeled with a unique code instead of your name. 
These samples and any information created from using these samples will be treated as key -
coded data and will be used and shared only as key -coded data may be used and shared as 
described above in this consent.  
Study -related Injuries:  Treatment and Costs  
If you are injured during your participation in this study, you should contact the study doctor as 
soon as possible in person or at the telephone number listed on page one of this consent form. 
Medical care may be obtained in the same w ay you would ordinarily obtain other medical 
treatment.  
If you suffer a study -related injury , the reasonable costs of necessary medical treatment of the 
injury will be reimbursed to the extent these costs are not covered by your insurance or other 
third pa rty coverage. A study -related injury  is a physical injury that is directly caused by the 
study drug administered as described in the study protocol.  
A Study -related injury  does not include injuries directly caused by any of the following:  
• The natural cour se of your underlying disease or medical condition  
• Not following the instructions provided in this consent form or by study staff  
There are no plans to provide any other payments or other forms of compensation for a study -
related injury (for example, for lost wages or discomfort). You do not give up any legal rights by 
signing this consent form. 
Be aware that your health care payer/insurer might not cover the costs of study -related injuries or 
illnesses.  
To pay medical expenses, the sponsor will need to know some information about you like your 
name, date of birth, and Medicare Beneficiary Identifier (MBI). This is because the sponsor has 
to check to see if you receive Medicare and if you do, report the payment it makes to Medicare.  
WHOM TO CONTACT ABOUT T HIS STUDY  
During the study, if you experience any medical problems, suffer a research -related injury, or 
have questions, concerns or complaints about the study, please contact the Investigator  at the 
telephone number listed on the first page of this consent document.  If you seek emergency care, 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 17 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 or hospitalization is required, alert the treating physician that you are participating in this 
research study.   
 
An institutional review board (IRB) is an independent committee established to help protect the 
rights of research subjects.   If you have any questions about your rights as a research subject, 
and/or concerns or complaints regarding this research study, contact : 
 
• By mail: 
Study Subject Adviser  
Advarra IRB  
6940 Columbia Gateway Drive, Suite 110 
Columbia, MD 21046 
• or call toll free:        877- 992-4724 
• or by email :              adviser@advarra.com  
Please reference the following number when contacting the Study Subject Adviser: 
Pro00027493. 
VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION  
Entering a research study is voluntary. Anyone who is asked to be in a research study may say 
no. No one has to become a research subject.  If you start a research study, you may stop at any 
time without penalty or loss of benefit to you. You do not need to give a reason.  No doctor can 
discriminate against you or treat you differently if you choose not to be in a research study or 
later decide to stop your participation. Your medical care will not be affected by your decision, 
nor will your ability to participate in future studies. If you stop, it is in your best interest to tell 
the study staff and follow any instructions that they may give you.  
COMPENSATION  
You will be financially compensated for your time and travel costs related to your participation 
in this study.  You may receive up to $410 depending on how many study visits you complete. 
You will be compensated in the following way:  
For long visits (Visits 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10) $45  
For short visits (Visits 3, 5, 7 and 9) $35  
If you do not complete the st udy, you will be paid a pro- rated amount as stated above  
If you are required to return for follow up visits because you develop antibodies to LI003 you 
will receive $45 for each visit.  
You will be personally responsible for paying taxes on any compensation that you receive from 
your study participation according to the IRS (Internal Revenue Service) guidelines. The study 
doctor is required to send to you a 1099 -form and report to the IRS any compensation that you 
receive that totals $600.00 or more for the calendar year.  If you change your mailing address 
after your participation in the study, it is your responsibility to inform study doctor of your new 
mailing address in order to ensure that you receive your 1099 for your year -end tax reporting.  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 18 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 WITHDRAWAL  
The sponsor and/or the study doctor may stop the research or stop your participation in it at any 
time.  This may be done for many reasons (for example, if you need additional medicine, if you 
do not follow the study plan, if you experience a study -related injury, or for administrative 
reasons) and does not require your agreement.  
If you withdraw or are withdrawn from the study after having taken the study drug, you will be 
asked to come back to the research center for a follow -up visit, which will be done f or your 
safety.  At this visit, you will have discharge procedures performed and blood tests to ensure that 
there are no changes to your current health status.  You will be asked about any changes in your 
healthy or in the medications you are taking.  
COSTS O F PARTICIPATING IN THE STUDY 
Routine costs associated with conduct of the study  will be paid by the study doctor through a 
grant from  LIB Therapeutics, LLC . There will be no charge to you for study clinic visits, tests, 
study drug, or supplies related to t he study.  
YOUR ROLE IN THE STUDY 
Your responsibilities as a study participant include the following:  
• To follow the instructions you are given  
• To come to the study clinic for all visits with the study doctor  
• To provide truthful information about your medica l history and current conditions  
• To inform the study doctor or study staff if you have been in a research study in the last 
30 days or are in another research study now  
• To tell the study doctor or study staff about any problems you have during the study or  if 
you have a new address or phone number  
• To tell the study doctor or study staff about any prescription, over -the-counter, or herbal 
supplements you are taking or have taken recently  
• To tell the study doctor or study staff if you want to stop being in the study at any time  
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE  
If a commercial product is developed from the research performed in the Study, LIB 
Therapeutics, LLC will own all rights to the product.  By participating in the s tudy, you do not 
acquire any rights in such a product . 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 19 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN / SPECIALIST NOTIFICATION OPTION  
 
Please indicate below whether you want us to notify your primary care physician or your 
specialist of your participation in this study.  
 
________ Yes, I want the study doctor to inform my primary c are physician/specialist of my 
participation in this study.  
 
________ No, I do not want the study doctor to inform my primary care physician/specialist 
of my participation in this study.  
 
________ I do not have a primary care physician/specialist.  
 
________ The study doctor  is my primary care physician/specialist.  
 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 20 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 STATEMENT OF CONSENT  
 
I have read this form and its contents were explained. I agree to be in this research study for the 
purposes listed above. All of my questions were answered to my satisfact ion. I have been told 
that I will receive a signed and dated copy of this form for my records.  
 
I am not giving up any of my legal rights by signing this form.  Nothing in this form is intended 
to change applicable laws.  
 
 
  
Printed Name of Subject  
 
 
    
Signature of Subject   Date  
 
 
The study subject has indicated that he/she is unable to read.  The consent document has been 
read to the subject by a member of the study staff, discussed with the subject by a member of the 
study staff, and the subject has been  given an opportunity to ask questions of the study staff.  
 
 
_______________________________________________ 
Printed Name of Impartial Witness  
 
 
_______________________________________________  _________________ 
Signature of Impartial Witness*         Date  
 
*Impartial Witness: A person, who is independent of the study, who cannot be unfairly influenced by people involved with the 
study, who attends the informed consent process if the subject cannot read, and who reads the informed consent and any other 
written information supplied to the patient.  Guidance for Industry E6 Good Clinical Practice:  Consolidated Guidance  
 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 21 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 STATEMENT OF PERSON EXPLAINING CONSENT  
 
I have carefully explained to the subject the nature and purpose of the above study. The subject 
signi ng this form has been given enough time and an adequate place to read and review this 
form.  There has been an opportunity to ask questions and receive answers regarding the nature, 
risks, and benefits of participation in this research study. The subject appears to understand the 
nature and purpose of the study and the demands required of participation.  
 
 
  
Printed Name of Person Explaining Consent   
 
 
    
Signature of Person Explaining Consent   Date  
 
 
I attest that I or my representative discussed this stud y with the subject named above.  
 
 
   
Signature of Principal Investigator or Sub -Investigator  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 22 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 AUTHORIZATION TO USE AND DISCLOSE PERSONAL HEALTH 
INFORMATION 
The United States government has issued a privacy rule to protect the privacy 
rights of patients and subjects in research studies.  This rule was issued under a law 
called the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).  
The Privacy Rule is designed to protect the confidentiality of your personal health 
information.  The document y ou are reading, called an “Authorization,” describes 
your rights and explains how your health information will be collected, used, and 
disclosed (shared).  
The health information that will be obtained from you for use in the study includes:  
• information obta ined from your medical history, physical examinations, or 
other procedures to determine your eligibility for the study  
• information that is created or collected from you during your participation in 
the study, including the results of various tests and proc edures.   
The above information may identify you by name, address, telephone number, 
photograph, social security number, health plan number, date of birth, dates 
relating to various tests and procedures, or other identifying information.  
HOW YOUR INFORMATIO N WILL BE USED OR DISCLOSED  
By signing this authorization, you permit the s tudy doctor to use your personal 
health information to carry out and report the results of this study.  The study doctor 
will provide your personal health information to LIB Therapeutics, LLC , the 
sponsor of the study, and to certain agents and representatives working on behalf 
of. LIB Therapeutics, LLC  
By signing this authorization, you also authorize the s tudy doctor to provide your 
health information to Advarra,  and to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
and other regulatory authorities in the U.S. or other countries for the purpose of 
assuring the quality of the study conduct, the quality of the data, or for purposes 
otherwise required by law.   
Once your personal health information is provided to LIB Therapeutics, LLC and 
its agents, to  Advarra  IRB,  or to the FDA or other regulatory authorities, your 
personal health information may no longer be protected by federal privacy 
regulations, and there is a potential that your personal health information will be 
passed on to others.  The laws of your state may provide further protection.  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 23 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 ACCESS TO YOUR INFORMATION 
You have the right to see and receive a copy of your records related to the study for 
as long as the study doctor has this information. However, while the study is in 
progress, your access to your study records will be temporarily suspended.  You 
will be able to access your information when the study is completed.   
HOW TO REVOKE YOUR AUTHORIZATION  
You may cancel this authorization at any time by sending a written notice to the 
study doctor, whose contact information appears on page 1 of this informed 
consent form.  If you cancel this authorization and withdraw from the study, the 
study doctor will stop collecting your personal heal th information in connection 
with this study unless the information concerns an adverse event (a bad effect) 
related to the study.  If an adverse event occurs, your entire medical record may be 
reviewed.  In addition, the study doctor will stop using and pro viding your personal 
health information, except to the extent that it has already been used.  For instance, 
the study doctor may need to use or provide personal health information obtained 
before you canceled your authorization in order to preserve the scie ntific integrity 
of the study.  Personal health information sent to LIB Therapeutics, LLC and its 
Agents prior to your cancelation may still be used by LIB Therapeutics, LLC and 
its agents.  
If you withdraw from the study, but do not withdraw your Authorization, new 
personal health information may be collected until this study ends.   
EXPIRATION 
Your authorization for the use and disclosure of your personal health information 
has no expiration date.  If you do not withdraw this Authorization in writing, it will 
remain in effect indefinitely. Your study doctor will keep this Authorization for at 
least 6 years.  
IMPORTANT NOTICE  
If you do not sign this authorization or if you cancel this authorization, you will not 
be allowed to participate, or to continue participation, in the study.  Your decision 
to withdraw your Authorization or not to participate will not involve any penalty or 
loss of access to treatment or other benefits to which you are entitled.  
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 24 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 AUTHORIZATION  
I authorize the release of my medical records an d personal health information 
related to this study to the sponsor, LIB Therapeutics, LLC , Inc. and its agents and 
representatives,  Advarra , the FDA, and other regulatory agencies as described 
above.  I have been told that I will receive a signed and dated copy of this 
Authorization for my records.  
 
  
Printed Name of Subject  
 
 
    
Signature of Subject   Date  
 
The study subject has indicated that he/she is unable to read. The consent 
document has been read to the subject by a member of the study staff, discussed 
with the subject by a member of the study staff, and the subject has been given an 
opportunity to ask questions of the study staff.  
 
 
_______________________________________________ 
Printed Name of Impartial Witness  
 
 
______________________________________________ _________________ 
Signature of Impartial Witness*        Date  
 
*Impartial Witness: A person, who is independent of the study, who cannot be 
unfairly influenced by people involved with the study, who attends the informed 
consent process if the subject cannot read, and who reads the informed consent and 
any other written information supplied to the patient. Guidance for Industry E6 
Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guidance  
 
LIB Therapeutics, LLC / Protocol Number LIB003 -002 Page 25 of 25   
 
 
«PiFullName » Advarra IRB Approved Version 18 May 2018  Revised «PIApprovalDate » 
 I attest that the subject named above had enough time to consider this information, 
had an opportunity to ask questions, and voluntarily agreed to be in this study.  
 
 
  
Printed Name of Person Obtaining Authorization   
 
 
    
Signature of Person Obtaining Authorization   Date  