Version 06/2 7/2024  Study IRB130502007 -OBE  STUDY PROTOCOL and STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
Human subjects Involvement, Characteristics and Design   
The study will  recruit adults from the Birmingham area for a low oxalate controlled diet. The individuals  will be 
recruited, consented, and have blood samples  collected at the UAB CCTS Clinical Research Unit. Sample 
processing, data acquisition and analysis will be performed in the Urology Stone Research L aboratory. A total 
of 60 participants is expected. An equal number of males and females is planned from all ethnic backgrounds.   
• Inclusion criteria:  mentally competent adults, who are able to read and comprehend the consent form 
(written in Engl ish); >18 and < 70 yrs; BMI 20 -25 (in the low BMI  group); BMI 25-30 (in the overweight  
group);  BMI >30 (in the obese group); good health as judged from a medical history without other 
medical comorbidities. individuals  will need a normal bloo d comprehensive metabolic panel.  Those 
with controlled hypertension (systolic blood pressure <160mmHg, diastolic <90 mmHg) and without 
severe dyslipidemia  (LDL <200 mg/dL, HDL >30 mg/dL, and triglycerides <250 mg/dL) will be included.  
• Exclusion criteria:  history of any hepatic, renal  (including kidney stone disease) , bowel or endocrine 
disease (including diabetes)  or any other condition that may influence the absorption, transport or urine 
excretion of ions, which will compromise the interpretation of results; abnormal blood metabolic profiles; 
poor 24 hour urine collections judged by 24 hour urine creatinine excret ion (indicative of not collecting 
all urine in 24 hour period); pregnancy, intention to become pregnant in the near future, or lactation; 
<18 and > 70 years of age; BMI<20 ; GFR<60 ml/min/1.73 m2 . 
• Screening:  fasted blood draw for  comprehensive metabolic panel and lipid panel.  
• Dietary Study:  the subje cts will consume for 4 days a controlled diet prepared in the metabolic kitchen 
of the CRU containing 16% protein, 30% fat and 54% carbohydrat e, calcium (1000 mg), oxalate (5 0 
mg) and other nutrients. Daily 24 hour urine collections will be performed  on days 2 -3-4. A fasting blood 
draw will be done on the morning of Day 5. 
 
Statistical Analysis  
Comparisons of means between groups, will be performed using the two -group t -test. In addition, the relationship 
between glycolate and oxalate will be examined using correlation analysis and linear regression analysis. 
Comparisons between groups will also be performed using analysis of covariance in order to account for any 
covariates of scientific interest. Distributions of continuous variables will be examined for normality using stem -
and-leaf plots, normal probability plots, and the Kolmogorov -Smirnov te st; variables that are determined to be 
non-normally distributed will either be log10 transformed prior to analysis, or will be analyzed using appropriate 
nonparametric methods such as the Wilcoxon rank -sum test or the Kruskal -Wallis test. All statistical tests will be 
two-sided, and differences will be considered statistically significant at p < 0.05.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  