 
 
 
Effect of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document Date: May 2, 2017  
 
 
 
Effect of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
 
05/2/2017   Page 1 of 8 1. Protocol Title – Effect  of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
 
2. Purpose of the study  
Aim: Evaluate the effect s of bupropion  on seizure duration and seizure threshold during  ultra brief  right 
unilateral ( RUL) electroconvulsive therapy  (ECT). Hypothesis : Addition of Bupropion  will increase seizure 
duration and lower seizure threshold . 
3. Background and Significance  
Depression is the leading cause of disability in individuals aged 15 -44, resulting in 400 million disability days in 
a year (1). The total economic burden of the disease is estimated to be composed of $26.1 billion in direct 
medical costs, $5.4 billion in suicide -related mortality costs, and  $51.5 billion in indirect workplace cost  (1).  
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is the gold -standard treatment for major depressive disorder (MDD) that is 
severe  (2-5).  The standard method of ECT used in the US now is right unilateral ultra -brief study. RUL ECT uses 
a pulse width of </= 0.3 ms, this optimizes electrical dosing  and causes decreased severity of cognitive side 
effects.  With right unilateral ECT it is essential for the stimulus to be above seiz ure threshold. The stimulus 
dosing is titrated to estab lish what seizure threshold is and this is titrated over the course of ECT sessions  (6). 
Because the maximum ECT output is limited by FDA, a frequent problem encountered by ECT clinicians is high 
seizure threshold which at times cannot be provided by the ECT device  and this compromises efficacy  (7). 
Hence i t would be useful to develop means to lower  seizure threshold.    
In addition, some  studies show a reduction in efficacy with ultra -brief as compared to brief ECT with the 
former requiring higher number of ECTs to achieve remission in depression symptoms (8).  There represents a  
need for increasing the efficacy for RUL ultra brief  ECT given its favorable cognitive -side effect profile.  
Combining RUL ultra brief  ECT with appropriate psychopharmacological agents t o alter seizure profile is a 
feasible way of optimizing the efficacy.  
4. Design and Procedures  
4.1 Study protocol overview  
The study is designed to evaluate the effect of bupropion on seizure threshold in patients with major 
depressive disorder (MDD) referred for  RUL ultra brief  ECT. The study is powered to determine changes in 
seizure duration and seizure threshold by enrolling 10 subjects.  We plan to screen 20 subjects to have 10 
participants.   
The participant is not responsible for any research -related costs.  The participants will be under the purview of 
their physician who is responsible for the participant’s care. The study te am will ask for participant s’ 
permission to contact ECT team  so that information can be provided to  the ECT team  regarding the 
partici pant’s enrollment during the study.   
 
 4.2 Screening  
Potential p articipants will be discussed with the ECT team to which the pat ient would have been referred .  
Once a potential participant has been identified, a study team person will discuss the study and  desire for 
participation in person with that individual during the ECT consult session which is needed prior to scheduling 
of the ECT session.  If participants are found to be eligible they will be invited to participate in the study and 
 
Effect of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
 
05/2/2017   Page 2 of 8 the study will be  initiated in conjunction with  their first ECT session. Participants will go through the informed 
consent procedure. After providing informed consent participants will undergo a clinical assessment to 
confirm the inclusion/exclusion criteria.   
 
All female subjects in the reproductive age group will  be tested for pregnancy using a commercially available 
test kit specified by Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. The Pregnancy test must be negative to 
continue in the study. If sexually active, subjects mus t agree to  use appropriate contraceptive measures for 
the duration of the study  for inclusion . Medically acceptable contraceptives include: (1) surgical sterilization 
(such as a tubal ligation or hysterectomy), (2) approved hormonal contraceptives (such as  birth control pills, 
patches, implants or injections), (3) barrier methods (such as a condom or diaphragm) used with a spermicide, 
or (4) an intrauterine device (IUD). Contraceptive measures such as Plan B (TM), sold for emergency use after 
unprotected se x, are not acce ptable methods for routine use and will result in exclusion from the study . 
 
4.3 Bupropion administration  
Patients will receive ECT treatment as usual, however, study participants  will be randomized to receive a 
single, extended -release bupr opion (Wellbutrin® XL) 300 mg tablet to be taken by mouth, in the morning (4 
hours prior to ECT)  on the day of ECT session 1 or session 2.  This will be a one-time administration of 
bupropion at this dose with no discontinuation of medications that patient  is already on. There will also be no 
washout period before bupropion administration or ECT.   
 
The study is powered to determine changes in seizure duration and seizure threshold by enrolling 10 subjects  
(5 subjects will receive bupropion prior to ECT sess ion 1 and 5  will receive it prior to  ECT session 2) . 
Counterbalanced r andomization will be used to assign subject drug administration to ECT session 1 or 2  with 
inter -individual cross -over . The PI (Steven T Szabo Jr MD PhD) and coordinator (Gopalkumar Rake sh) will be 
blinded to randomization details. Computer generated r andomization  would be done by Richard Weiner MD 
PhD – the director of the ECT program.  The sleep lab clinical care coordinator (Mark Mayo) would be backup 
to generate randomization if Dr Wei ner is absent.  
 
The medication would be dispensed from Central Pharmacy in Duke North. It would be stored in the sleep lab 
in the red zone on the fifth floor of Duke South and carried by sleep lab clinical care coordinator ( Mark Mayo ) 
to the ECT suite for administration to study patients.  
 
4.4 ECT administration  
The clinical procedure of ultra brief  RUL ECT in these subjects will not be deviated  from  the usual procedure 
that is described below .  ECT treatments will be provided three times a week, with stand ard right unilat eral 
electrode placement with a MECTA spectrum device (MECTA Corporation, Portland, Ore.) with a pulse width 
</= 0.3 and a current of 0.8 A. A standard  dose titration procedure to determine seizure threshold will be 
conducted a t the first a nd second treatment s, subjects would receive bupropion during one of these sessions . 
Subsequent treatments would be  administered at 5.5 times seizure threshold  from the treatment session 
without bupropion  administration .  
 
4.5 Clinical assessments  
The Mont gomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) is an assessment tool for depression symptom 
severity and will be carried out at baseline at every ECT visit.  This is usual practice that the ECT clinician 
employs prior to the clinical administration of ECT.  We will also measure time to orientation recovery post 
 
Effect of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
 
05/2/2017   Page 3 of 8 ECT after the first and second ECT treatments.  
 
4.6 Blood collection  
During ECT sessions 1 and 2, just prior to administration of right unilateral (RUL) ECT, patients will be placed 
with a venous cath eter and we will acquire a 3 mL blood sample to be used to ascertain  serum bupropion 
level.  
 
4.7 Timeline of Assessments  
Assessments  ECT  Session 1  ECT  Session 2  
Screening  X X 
RUL ECT seizure profile  X X 
MADRS Rating Score  X X 
 
5. Subject Selection - Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
(1) Male and female subjects, age > 25 years . 
(2) Meet ing diagnostic criteria for  major depressive disorder per DSM5 . 
(3) Referred for ultra brief  RUL ECT. 
(4) Right motor dominant . 
(5) Competent to provide informed consent . 
(6) Able to read or comprehend English . 
(7) H/O treatment with  bupropion .  Subjects need to be of f bupropion for at least a week to be 
included.  
(8) Concomitant treatment with benzodiazepines, dosing of which has remained stable for a wee k 
prior to study ECT session .  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
(1) Lifetime history of schizophrenia,  bipolar disorder,  schizoaffective disorder, mental retardation , 
seizure disorder . 
(2) Current alcohol abuse or dependence within past 6 months . 
(3) Current substance abus e or dependence within past 6 months . 
       (4) Recently received ECT within preceding 3 -6 months.  
(5) Currently on any formulation of bupropion.  
(6) Currently on any anticonvulsants or clozapine.  
(7) Pregnancy test positive  
(8) Contraindications to use o f bupropion , which include the following:  
 Eating disorder  
 MOAI use in the past 14 days  
 Levodopa or amantadine use  
 Abrupt discontinuation of alcohol, benzodiazepines, barbitu rates, or antiepileptic drugs  
 Known hypersensitivity to bupropion or other componen ts of study drug  
(9) BUN > 20 mg/dl or serum creatinine >1.5 or AST> 41 U/L or ALT > 63 U/L or total bilirubin >1.5 
mg/dl  
 
 
Effect of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
 
05/2/2017   Page 4 of 8 6. Subject recruitment and compensation  
We will recruit both inpatients and outpatients referred for ECT. Patients are referred by priva te physicians 
and by clinical services within Duke University Health Systems and other psychiatric facilities. Inpatients 
admitted on Williams’ Ward in Duke South (4 th floor red zone) will be approached for participation after 
discussion with the ECT team they have been referred to. Outpatients will be recruited in the manner as 
described in section 4.2. Selection criteria for subjects has been described in Section 5.  Capacity to consent 
will be assessed by a member of the treatment team who is not an inves tigator on this study (such as the 
inpatient attending psychiatrist or the unit director). Study team members (who are not members of the 
subject's clinical team) will approach potential subjects after the study is introduced to potential subjects 
first by  the ECT Team attending. For both inpatients/outpatients referred to ECT recruitment would 
proceed as follows: 1) study team member reviews charts for ECT consult roster to ID potential eligible 
individuals 2) Discuss with ECT team w hether someone is appro priate 3 ) A member of patient's clinical ECT 
team asks patient if they  want to hear about study and 4 ) With patient agreement, study team member 
discusses study with them. Study team member  discussing  informed consent will fully disclose and explain 
the ri sks and benefits of the study procedures, and answer the patient’s questions about the study and the 
material presented in the informed consent form. Alternatives to study participation will be discussed, and 
the voluntary nature of participation in the st udy will be emphasized. This consent discussion will be 
documented in a consent note placed in the patient’s chart.  
 
There would be no compensation for patients in this study. We do not deviate from usual course of 
treatment except for a one -time administr ation of bupropion which is an antidepressant and an additional 
session of seizure threshold titration. Subjects would receive standard of care and there are no additional 
visits or rating scales applied as part of the study.  
 
7. Consent Process – see Sectio n 14 of the e -IRB submission form  
8. Subject’s Capacity to Give Legally Effective Consent – All patients recruited for this study must have 
capacity to give legally effective consent.  
 
9. Study Interventions  – This has been described in detail in section 4.3  
 
10. Risk/benefit assessment  
The potential risks of the study design are problems associated with ECT  and administratio n of 
extended -release bupropion administration  and possible suicidal ideation.   Risk and benefits are for 
procedures done specifically for the s tudy.  
10.1 Potential risks  
10.1.1 ECT 
Immediately following ECT, patients are typically disoriented or confused. Following ECT sessions, 
some patients report headache, muscle soreness, or nausea. These side effects usually respond to 
simple treatment.  Se rious medical complications are rare. Cardiac complications are more common 
and constitute the leading cause of morbidity and mortality with ECT. The likelihood of these 
complications is reduced by (1) careful medical workup and the use of cardiology consu ltants in 
patients with significant preexisting cardiac disease; (2) careful monitoring of cardiac status during 
ECT; (3) modification of anesthetic procedures for prophylactic purposes (e.g., use of 
pharmacological agents to block hemodynamic changes). Fa tality associated with ECT is estimated 
to occur in 1/10,000 patients, and to our knowledge has never occurred at Duke.  
 
Effect of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
 
05/2/2017   Page 5 of 8  
ECT commonly results in memory deficits. These memory deficits are of two types: anterograde and 
retrograde amnesia. There is little ob jective evidence that memory  impairments persist more than 
four weeks following an ECT course. The effect of ECT on memory is cumulative, depending on 
number of sessions. It is unusual to see these deficits after the first or second treatments.  
 
The magnit ude of both memory deficits depends on  parameters used in the conduct of ECT.  In 
general, these deficits are more severe with bilateral (BT) versus right unilateral (RUL) electrode 
placement. Spacing of treatments may be increased or the treatment course terminated in the 
context of unacceptable side effects.  
For the study, patients would have seizure threshold estimated during second ECT  in addition to 
seizure threshold estimation during the first . This exposes them to debatable cardiovascular risk 
from  sub convulsive stimulations  (9). Some rare but concerning adverse effects related to supra -
threshold stimulus titration of ECT in elderly patients are post -ECT delirium/confusion and persistent 
memory impairment (6)  
 
10.1.2 Specific risks/side effects of bupro pion  
 
Like all antidepressants, bupropion increases the risk of suicidal thoughts and behavior in children, 
adolescents, and young adults in short -term trials. These trials did not show an increase in the risk of 
suicidal thoughts and behavior with antide pressant use in subjects aged 65 and older.  Other  
common side effects are tachycardia, insomnia, headache, agitation, dizziness, constipation, weight 
loss and nausea. Patients with a history of a seizure disorder or head trauma with loss of 
consciousness c ould have a seizure with bupropion.  
 
10.1.3 Risk of spontaneous seizure with simultaneous  administration of bupropion and ECT  
Seizure risk is 0.1 % for 450 mg  of sustained release Bupropion . This risk  is comparable to  that of other 
antidepressants  (10).  
Regarding safety for combined use of Bupropion and ECT, we found 3 case reports that reported the 
occurrence of seizures when this combination was used together. In 2 case reports there were other 
medications used in addition to bupropion, and one case report had discontinuation of benzodiazepine 
such as clonazepam contributing to seizure occurrence (11-13). In all these patient scenarios,  they received 
bilateral (BT) ECT, and the bupropion administered was immediate release (IR) and not sustained release 
(SA). Another set of 3 case reports do talk about the safe administra tion of the combination of bupropion 
with ECT with no occurrence of spontaneous seizures other than those that occurred as part of ECT (14, 15).  
 
     10.1.4 Risk of spontaneous seizures with ECT  
 
There are case reports and studies that detail the development of spontaneous seizures after a course of 
ECTs or after a few ECTs (16-18). The incidence of the phenomenon is less than 0.1%.  We plan to use only 
300 mg sustained release  bupropion. The SA  preparation offers a steady level of bupropion, thus 
minimizing risk of sei zures.  
 
 
Effect of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
 
05/2/2017   Page 6 of 8 10.1.5 Evaluation procedures  
The medical evaluations present no risks beyond what is expected for routine clinical care of a 
patient undergoing a course of ECT.   
 
 10.1.6 Risks of blood collection  
As described above, blood collection  will occur twice (3 ml each time) through a catheter placed in 
the individual’s arm vein just before they receive ECT.  Complications of drawing blood from a 
catheter which is placed in an individual’s arm vein for a brief period occur at approximately 2% of 
the time, a nd include discomfort at the site of puncture, possible bruising and swelling around the 
puncture site, and rarely infection or faintness from the procedure.  
 
10.2 Methods to minimize risks: - The following are methods to minimize r isks associated with thi s 
study  
 
10.2.1 Screening of participants prior to study enrollment  
As described above, the screening assessment of potential participants will identify and exclude 
from participation individuals with current or past medical conditions that may place them at 
increased risk for adverse effects from ECT.  Screening will include assessment of medical history, 
neurological history (seizure, stroke, and brain  lesion), head trauma, pregnancy, and substance 
abuse/dependence. Screening will be performed by physicia n evaluation, physical examination, and 
blood work.    
 
10.2.2 Supervision of participants during ECT sessions  
ECT sessions will be conducted by the study investigators and physicians.  These personnel will be in 
visual and auditory contact with the patient s always .  Health status will be monitored continuously 
as described in the protocol.  
 
10.2.3 ECT device safety features  
The ECT device has internal limits on stimulation parameters.  These limits prevent the device from 
being programmed to deliver pulses that exceed predetermined limits.  The device logs all 
parameter values.  
 
10.2.4 Minimizing risks associated with blood collection  
To minimize the risks of drawing blood from a catheter  vein, sterile technique s will be used by 
trained individuals.  
 
10.2.5 Minimizing risk of seizures with bupropion  
We will use the sustained release  formulation of bupropion. Review of literature indicates 300 mg of 
sustained release formulation to be a safe dose in patients  (10). The sustained  release preparation 
reaches peak level more gradually compared to  other preparations of bupropion .  
 
10.3 Risk and benefit analysis  
As outlined above, extensive precautions will be taken to ensure  of the safety of study participants. 
All patients participating in this study will receive treatment with a full course of electro convulsive 
therapy as part of their routine clinical care.  The study is proof of concept an d would provide  data 
 
Effect of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
 
05/2/2017   Page 7 of 8 to design a larger trial aimed to optimize psychopharmacology in conjunction with RUL  ultra brief  
ECT to lower seizure threshold.  
Estimation of seizure thresholds will be done twice in this study, which exposes subjects to debatable 
cardiovascular risk due to sub con vulsive stimulations . However, for the study, it is imperative that we 
measure differences in seizure threshold between the first and second ECT sessions  to estimate the 
difference s in seizure threshold caused by bupropion administration . The study will in form us about the 
effect of bupropion on seizure parameters in patients with major depressive disorder. This would help us 
optimize ECT treatments for patients with depression.  
 
Costs to the Subject – Subjects would not incur any costs because of participa tion in this research study. 
There would be no compensation for patients in this study. We do not deviate from usual course of 
treatment except for a one -time administration of bupropion which is an antidepressant and an additional 
session of seizure thres hold titration. Subjects would receive standard of care and there are no additional 
visits or rating scales applied as part of the study. The study sponsor would pay for the study drug and 
blood draws to obtain bupropion serum levels.  
 
 
11. Data Analysis & Sta tistical Considerations  We will use mixed effects modeling to see if extended -release 
bupropion influences seizure parameters in ECT. The independent grouping variable will be session (ECT 
session 1 vs ECT session 2) with primary outcome variables being se izure duration and seizure threshold.  
There are no previous studies that have looked at effect of bupropion on seizure threshold apart from case 
reports and hence it becomes difficult to calculate an ideal sample size to get good study power. We plan 
to recruit only 10 patients as this would be a pilot study.  
 
12. Data & Safety Monitoring  
 
Data and safety monitoring will follow standard protocol procedures. Any serious adverse event will be 
reported within 24 hours to the Duke IRB. Adverse events will be doc umented and addressed accordingly. 
The participants will be fully informed of the nature of the study requirements prior to enrollment and 
periodically throughout the study. The participants’ well -being will be continuously monitored by the 
experimenter, a nd the Principal Investigator will report all serious adverse events in an expedited manner 
to the Duke University Health System (DUHS) Institutional Review Board (IRB) office and all applicable 
regulatory authorities in accordance with the Center’s standa rd operating procedures.  The study monitor 
will be Dr. Steven Szabo. Dr. Szabo will ensure the quality of the study and establish that all study staff are 
complying with the investigational plan and IRB regulations.  Monitoring of this protocol is simplifi ed by 
the fact that this study involves a small number of investigators and a single facility in which the study is 
being conducted.  Throughout the investigation, the monitor will ensure that the facilities being used 
continue to be acceptable for the purp oses of the study, that the investigational plan is being followed, 
that any changes to the protocol have received IRB approval and have been reported to the sponsor, that 
accurate, complete, and current records are maintained, that accurate, complete, and  timely reports are 
made to the IRB.  This will be accomplished through quarterly meetings during which the status of the 
protocol, investigators, and IRB compliance are reviewed.  The monitor will review each research chart for 
completeness and accuracy. He will confirm that inclusion and exclusion criteria have been met for each 
subject enrolled, and compliance with all other aspects of the investigational plan are met.  
 
 
Effect of Bupropion on Seizure Threshold in Depressed Patients  
 
05/2/2017   Page 8 of 8 13. Privacy, Data Storage & Confidentiality  – see Section 12 of the e -IRB submission form  and complete the 
questions in that section  
 
References  
1. Greenberg PE, Fournier AA, Sisitsky T, Pike CT, Kessler RC. The economic burden of adults with 
major depressive disorder in the United States (2005 and 2010). The Journal of cli nical psychiatry. 
2015;76(2):155 -62. 
2. Beckford -Ball J. An overview of the new NICE guidelines on bipolar disorder. Nursing times. 
2006;102(34):23 -4. 
3. Fountoulakis KN, Vieta E, Sanchez -Moreno J, Kaprinis SG, Goikolea JM, Kaprinis GS. Treatment 
guideline s for bipolar disorder: a critical review. Journal of affective disorders. 2005;86(1):1 -10. 
4. Frances AJ, Kahn DA, Carpenter D, Docherty JP, Donovan SL. The Expert Consensus Guidelines for 
treating depression in bipolar disorder. The Journal of clinical p sychiatry. 1998;59 Suppl 4:73 -9. 
5. Yatham LN, Kennedy SH, Parikh SV, Schaffer A, Beaulieu S, Alda M, et al. Canadian Network for 
Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) and International Society for Bipolar Disorders (ISBD) 
collaborative update of CANMAT gui delines for the management of patients with bipolar disorder: update 
2013. Bipolar disorders. 2013;15(1):1 -44. 
6. Sackeim HA, Devanand DP, Prudic J. Stimulus intensity, seizure threshold, and seizure duration: impact 
on the efficacy and safety of electroco nvulsive therapy. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 1991;14(4):803 -43. 
7. Lisanby SH, Devanand DP, Nobler MS, Prudic J, Mullen L, Sackeim HA. Exceptionally high seizure 
threshold: ECT device limitations. Convuls Ther. 1996;12(3):156 -64. 
8. Tor PC, Bautovich A, Wang  MJ, Martin D, Harvey SB, Loo C. A Systematic Review and Meta -
Analysis of Brief Versus Ultrabrief Right Unilateral Electroconvulsive Therapy for Depression. The Journal of 
clinical psychiatry. 2015;76(9):e1092 -8. 
9. Mizen L, Morton C, Scott A. The cardiova scular safety of the empirical measurement of the seizure 
threshold in electroconvulsive therapy. BJPsych Bull. 2015;39(1):14 -8. 
10. Fava M, Rush AJ, Thase ME, Clayton A, Stahl SM, Pradko JF, et al. 15 years of clinical experience with 
bupropion HCl: from bupropion to bupropion SR to bupropion XL. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 
2005;7(3):106 -13. 
11. Doellinger OV, Ribeiro JP, Ribeiro A, Freitas C, Ribeiro B, Silva JC. Spontaneous seizures after ECT in 
a patient medicated with bupropion, sertraline a nd risperidone. Trends in psychiatry and psychotherapy. 
2016;0:0.  
12. Conway CR, Nelson LA. The combined use of bupropion, lithium, and venlafaxine during ECT: a case 
of prolonged seizure activity. The journal of ECT. 2001;17(3):216 -8. 
13. Dersch R, Zwerne mann S, Voderholzer U. Partial status epilepticus after electroconvulsive therapy and 
medical treatment with bupropion. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2011;44(7):344 -6. 
14. Kellner CH, Pritchett JT, Jackson CW. Bupropion coadministration with electroconvulsive therap y: two 
case reports. Journal of clinical psychopharmacology. 1994;14(3):215 -6. 
15. Figiel GS, Jarvis MR. Electroconvulsive therapy in a depressed patient receiving bupropion. Journal of 
clinical psychopharmacology. 1990;10(5):376.  
16. Rasmussen KG, Lunde M E. Patients who develop epilepsy during extended treatment with 
electroconvulsive therapy. Seizure. 2007;16(3):266 -70. 
17. Blackwood DH, Cull RE, Freeman CP, Evans JI, Mawdsley C. A study of the incidence of epilepsy 
following ECT. J Neurol Neurosurg Psych iatry. 1980;43(12):1098 -102. 
18. Ray AK. Does electroconvulsive therapy cause epilepsy? J ECT. 2013;29(3):201 -5. 
 
 