IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0333 
IRB APPR OPVaAgLe D1 AofT7E: 05/25/2022  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines    
           
The prevalence of local IgE elevation and it s effect on intranasal capsaicin therapy 
in the non- allergic rhinitis population  
 
NCT  05093478  
 
Version Date: 05/25/2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0333 
IRB APPR OPVaAgLe D2 AofT7E: 05/25/2022  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Protocol  Title:  The prevalence of local IgE elevation and its effect on intranasal capsaicin 
therapy in the non -allergic rhinitis  population  
 
Principal  Investigator: Kunal Shetty, MD 
Faculty  Investigator:  Amber Luong, MD, PhD 
Study  Coordinator:  Sorour  Ahmadi  
Population: Non -smoking Adults > 18 years of age with chronic  rhinitis  
 
Number  of Sites:  Single  site 
 
Study  Duration:  1 year  
 
Subject  Duration:  15 weeks  
 
 
 
General Information  
Our study aims to determine the therapeutic response of patients with non -allergic rhinitis with local IgE 
elevation to intranasal capsaicin, the prevalence of non -allergic rhinitis with local IgE elevation in the 
non-allergic rhinitis population, and to determine the change in intranasal IgE after capsaicin treatment.  
 
Background Information 
Rhinitis is inflammation of the nasal lining characterized by 2 or more of the following nasal symptoms: congestion, rhinorrhea, sneezing or itching. Chronic rhinitis is categorized as allergic or non -allergic 
rhinitis.  Allergic rhinitis is driven by an IgE -mediated response to allergens in the environment. Non - 
allergic rhinitis represents a heterogenous group of disorders whose underlying pathology is not IgE - 
mediated. Allergy testing distinguishes between allergic an d non -allergic rhinitis. Subtypes of non - 
allergic rhinitis include drug -induced, hormonal, atrophic, gustatory, non -allergic rhinitis with 
eosinophilia syndrome (NARES), and non -allergic rhinitis with local IgE elevation. This heterogenous 
group can be di vided into conditions that demonstrate nasal inflammation histologically (NARES and 
non-allergic rhinitis with local IgE elevation) and those that do not. Those that do not are often referred 
to as non -allergic rhinopathy rather than rhinitis due to the lack of inflammation. Allergic rhinitis is 
typically best treated with a combination of nasal steroids, nasal antihistamines, oral steroids, and oral antihistamines. Non -allergic rhinitis demonstrating inflammation (NARES and non -allergic rhinitis with 
local IgE elevation) may best be treated similarly. However, non -allergic rhinopathy tends to be driven 
by an imbalance in autonomic input. Therefore, ipratropium sprays are currently the mainstay of  
medical therapy for non -allergic rhinopathy. When medical therapy is insufficient, interventions focusing 
on the ablation of the parasympathetic innervations of the nasal mucosa are options including vidian neurectomy or cryotherapy of the nerve.  
 
A thorough history and physical can sometimes identify a specific subtype of non -allergic rhinitis to 
guide therapy. However, certain conditions, such as non -allergic rhinitis with local IgE elevation, cannot 
be confirmed without further evaluation. Two te chniques have recently been proposed to differentiate 
inflammatory and non -inflammatory subtypes of non -allergic rhinitis: detection of local IgE levels from  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0333 
IRB APPR OPVaAgLe D3 AofT7E: 05/25/2022  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   mucosal brush biopsy of inferior turbinate and optical rhinometry after intranasal capsaicin challenge. 
These techniques potentially can be combined to subtype non -allergic rhinitis patients and monitor 
response to treatment.  
 
Mucosal brush biopsy of the i nferior turbinate has been demonstrated to be capable of detecting 
antigen -specific IgE within the nasal mucosa. 1 In fact, Reisacher et al. in 2014 reported that in a group of 
20 patients with chronic, idiopathic, nonallergic rhinitis all were found to have antigen -specific IgE to at 
least 1 antigen. 2 Other studies have demonstrated that patients with elevated local IgE levels may 
respond similarly to oral antihistamines and topical nasal steroids as patients with allergic rhinitis. It is this rationale t hat has led some to propose using nasal provocation testing and local IgE levels in the 
diagnostic evaluation of patients with non -allergic rhinitis. 
3 
 
Optical rhinometry is a technique which measures the blood flow in nasal vessels reported as optical 
density (OD). When used with intranasal provocation testing, it is useful in measuring changes in blood 
flow which correlates with onset of symptoms and increase in nasal mucosal swelling. 4 Additionally, the 
use of optical rhinometry with intranasal capsaic in challenge has been reported as a viable option in the 
diagnosis of non -allergic irritant rhinitis. 5 
 
More recently, intranasal capsaicin has been described as a novel therapeutic option for non -allergic 
rhinitis  6, and the cellular mechanism  underlying its use has been  further  defined.  It has been  shown  that 
patients with idiopathic rhinitis have higher baseline levels of transient receptor potential villanoid 1 (TRPV1) within the nasal mucosa 
7 and lower thresholds for response to TRPV1 agonists. 8 Treatment 
with repeated intranasal capsaicin is thought to cause down regulation or degeneration of nerve terminals expressing TRPV1 resulting in a reduction in TRPV1 levels as well as an increase in response 
threshold to TRPV1 agonists. 
8 This translates int o a reduction in nasal symptomology that is sustained 
through 12 weeks post -treatment.  7 
 
Our current understanding of outcomes after treatment with intranasal capsaicin is incomplete. Most 
studies analyzing the effect of intranasal capsaicin have evaluate d a heterogenous group of non -allergic 
rhinitis patients with idiopathic rhinitis without distinguishing among subtypes. Consequently, we do not 
know whether certain subtypes of idiopathic rhinitis are more likely to respond to treatment with 
intranasal capsaicin treatment than other subtypes. Due to the relative paucity of information regarding therapeutic efficacy of intranasal capsaicin for non -allergic rhinitis, the most recent Cochrane review 
describes capsaicin as an option for patients with idiopathic, non -allergic rhinitis. 
9 We hope to further 
delineate the group of idiopathic non -allergic rhinitis patients that will benefit from intranasal capsaicin 
in an effort to refine the treatment algorithm for non -allergic rhinitis.  
 
Objectives  
− Primary: To de termine the therapeutic response of non -allergic rhinitis patients that have been 
subtyped  as non-allergic  rhinitis  with  local  IgE elevation  or non-allergic  rhinopathy  to intranasal 
capsaicin based on visual analog scale and optical rhinometry  
o The total as well as individual symptom VAS scores at enrollment, 4 weeks post -treatment, 
and 12 weeks post -treatment will be  compared  
o The maximum optical density determined via optic al rhinometry at enrollment and 12 
weeks post -treatment will be  compared  
− Secondary: To determine the prevalence of non -allergic rhinitis with local IgE elevation in this 
study’s  cohort  of patients  with  non-allergic  rhinitis  identified  by rhinitis  history  and negative  skin 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0333 
IRB APPR OPVaAgLe D4 AofT7E: 05/25/2022  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   testing for allergic rhinitis, and to determ ine the change, if any, in intranasal IgE levels after 
capsaicin treatment.  
o The local IgE level obtained from the brush biopsy of the inferior turbinates at  enrollment 
and at 12 weeks post- treatment will be  compared  
 
Study Design  
− Prospective cohort  study  
− The study is expected to last 1 year with subject participation lasting 15  weeks.  
− Therapeutic response to intranasal capsaicin will be measured using major nasal symptoms on a 
visual analog scale, as well as optical rhinometry.  
o Nasal symptoms of rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, nasal itching, and sneezing, will be 
measured using a visual analog score. Results range from 0 -10. The major nasal symptom 
will be defined  as the nasal symptom  with  the highest  score  on VAS at screening.  The pre- 
and post -treatment data can be compared to measure change in  symptoms.  
o Optical rhinometry: Maximum optical density will be recorded following the initial capsaicin 
challenge, as well as at 12 weeks  post -treatment  
− Assessment of efficacy will be based  on repeat symptoms scores (nasal symptom inventory pre - 
treatment and at 4 and 12 weeks, optical rhinometry pre -treatment and 12 weeks post- treatment). 
Additionally, brush biopsy of the inferior turbinates will be performed pre -treatment and 12 weeks 
post -treatment in order to determine any change in local IgE  levels.  
− This study is using previously described methods with good safety profiles. Patients may experience 
minimal pain and some discomfort with the skin prick test for allergy testing, the mucosal swab for IgE levels, and the intranasal capsaicin.  
− Patients will receive skin allergy testing with results and clinic visits with physician at no charge. In 
addition, study drugs will be provided at no cost to the patient. Although no monetary 
compensation  will be provided  for participating  in the study,  study  participants  will be reimbursed 
the fee for parking at all three  visits.  
 
Study Population 
All patients that present with chronic rhinitis not otherwise classified as allergic based on prior positive skin or blood test to the Texas Sinus Institute will be screened for study inclusion.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Adult > 18 years of  age 
2. Chronic  rhinitis  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Active  smoker  
2. Anatomic source of nasal symptoms  
3. Chronic rhinosinusitis or other nasal infection  
4. History of sinonasal  malignancy  
5. Pregnancy or  lactation  
6. Use of medication affecting nasal function (topical steroids, topical anticholinerg ics, oral 
antihistamines) in the previous 4  weeks  
7. Use or abuse of nasal decongestants.  
8. Positive skin prick test for allergic  rhinitis  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0333 
IRB APPR OPVaAgLe D5 AofT7E: 05/25/2022  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Study Procedures  
 
At the first visit after enrollment:  
− Rate  major  nasal symptoms  (rhinorrhea,  nasal obstruction,  nasal itching,  and sneezing)  on a visual 
analog  scale  
− Complete skin prick allergy  testing  
− A nasal brushing to determine local IgE  levels  
− Optical rhinometry  with  intranasal capsaicin  challenge  to confirm  diagnosis  of non-allergic  irritant 
rhinitis1 
 
This will be followed by treatment:  
− Intranasal capsaicin,  5 applications  each  delivering  2 micrograms  in each  nostril,  separated  by 1 
hour.  
o The first treatment  will be administered  in the clinic  to demonstrate  how  the spray  is done, 
and to monitor for any side  effects.  
o The patient will then be provided with 4 additional prefilled syringes with capsaicin to  be 
administered at  home.  
o The patient will also be provided with a document that will tell them at what time to 
administer the medication, and so that they can keep track of how many sprays have  been 
completed.  
 
At week 4 post- treatment (+/ - 1 week)  
− Rate major nasal symptoms on a v isual analog  scale  
− To reduce  visits  during the study,  the VAS at 4 weeks  post -treatment  can be done  remotely.  It will 
be conducted via phone call, email, or mail according to patient  preference.  
 
At week 12 post- treatment (+/ - 2 weeks)  
− Rate major nasal sym ptoms on a visual analog  scale  
− A nasal brushing will be obtained to determine local IgE  levels  
− Optical rhinometry with intranasal capsaicin  challenge1 
 
Information gathered for the study will include: personal health information, major nasal symptoms, 
allergy skin test results, mucosal IgE levels, and optical rhinometry.  
 
− Any physical information (Consent, VAS, etc.) will be stored in a locked filing cabinet within the 
locked otolaryngology clinic located at 6400 Fannin, Suite 2700. The data gathered will be entered into a password protected excel spreadsheet and saved on a  UT issued password  protected laptop.  
 
Allergy skin prick testing  
- All consented subjects with history consistent with chronic rhinitis will be screened with a skin prick 
test (Multi -Test II Lincoln Diagnostics, Decatur, IL USA) to common allergens includin g dust mite, cat 
hair,  grass  pollen,  insect  extracts,  fungi/mold  extracts,  and bermuda  grass  extract  to exclude  allergic 
rhinitis. Those with confirmed negative skin prick testing (ruling out allergic rhinitis) will be eligible 
for the  study.  
o Having a posi tive reaction to at least one antigen and the positive control will be considered 
positive testing, and that subject will be excluded from the study  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0333 
IRB APPR OPVaAgLe D6 AofT7E: 05/25/2022  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   o Having no reaction to all tested antigens except the positive control will be considered 
negati ve testing and that subject will be eligible for the  study.  
 
Mucosal brush biopsies  
− The mucosal local IgE levels will be obtained according to the protocol demonstrated by Reisacher et 
al.2 
o A cytology brush will be used to brush the inferior turbinates (3 spins of the brush against 
the medial aspect of the inferior turbinates). The brush is then washed in saline and stored 
at -20C.  
o Antigen specific IgE will be determined using reference lab from the processed  sample.  
 
Intranasal capsaicin treatment  
− The intranasal capsaicin treatment will be completed according to the protocol for treatment  of 
non-allergic irritant rhinitis with intranasal capsaicin established by Van Gerven et  al.3 
o Patients will be treated with 5 intranasal doses of capsaicin separated by 1  hour  
o Capsaicin solution (Sigma Chemical, St. Louis, MO USA) will be diluted in 1% ethanol and 
0.9% normal saline. A mucosal atomizer device (MAdomizer, Wolfe Tory Medical, Inc,  Salt 
Lake City, UT USA) delivering 100 µL solution will be used to deliver a total dose of 2 µg of capsaicin to each nasal cavity for each application. Each application of capsaicin will be 
preceded by application of 100 µL of aerosolized 1% lidocaine for an esthesia 15 minutes 
prior to each planned intranasal capsaicin  application.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
− Serious adverse events are not anticipated. Patients may experience minimal pain and some 
discomfort with the skin prick for allergy testing, the mucosa l brushing for IgE levels, and the 
intranasal capsaicin.  
− The principal investigator  will be notified  of any adverse  events,  protocol  deviations,  and other 
problems. These will be addressed immediately by the PI or  co-investigators.  
− On the first of each mon th, the PI will review the study to ensure that any events or deviations were 
reported, to ensure that the study is proceeding strictly according to protocol. The status of the study will be reviewed during a monthly meeting with the rhinologic team which consists of Drs. 
Luong, Martin Citardi and William  Yao.  
 
Statistics  
In considering our sample size calculation, we considered our primary outcome as the change in VAS for 
the major nasal symptom. Using the study by Gerven et al. to guide a sample size calc ulation, we 
assumed a success rate of capsaicin to be 75% with success defined as a decrease of at least 30% on the 
VAS for the major nasal symptom. In their study, they enrolled 33 patients with non -allergic rhinitis and 
showed a significant response to intranasal capsaicin treatment via VAS. Consequently, we will plan for 
33 patients with non -allergic rhinitis to complete this study.  
 
Differences between all continuous descriptive factors and both pretreatment and posttreatment outcome measure scores, between participants with and without local IgE elevation, will be evaluated using Mann Whitney U or chi -square (χ2) testing where approp riate. Significant improvements in 
outcome measure scores over time and between pretreatment and posttreatment scores will be evaluated using Wilcoxon signed rank tests. Significant differences will be identified at a conventional  
0.050 alpha level.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0333 
IRB APPR OPVaAgLe D7 AofT7E: 05/25/2022  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Ethics  
− IRB approval will be sought from  CPHS  
− Prior to obtaining consent, the study and the subject’s participation requirements will be fully 
explained to the subject. They will be given ample time to read the consent, as well as to ask questions. If needed, a copy of the consent can be provided to t ake home if additional time is 
needed to review. Consent will then be obtained after the subject has had adequate time to  assess 
the study.  
 
Data handling and record keeping  
− Access to source documents will be limited to study personnel with appropriate  training.  
− Source  documents  will be de-identified  appropriately.  Subjects  will be assigned  a subject  number 
which will be associated with all data gathered from that  subject.  
− Subjects will be identifiable through their subject number via an excel spreadsheet w hich links PHI 
with  subject  number.  The ability  to identify  subjects  via their  subject  number  will only  be available 
to study personnel with appropriate  training.  
− All data  stored  in a password  protected  excel  document  will be saved  on a UT issued  password 
protected  laptop.  
− All source documents will be stored in a secured filing cabinet within the locked otolaryngology clinic located at 6400 Fannin, Suite  2700.  
 
Quality control and assurance  
− Printed protocol will be available during data collection to ensure that all steps ar e followed 
consistently  
− Personnel  will be available  to answer  questions  regarding  questionnaire  completion  to ensure  that 
all questions are answered and answered  appropriately  
− Source  documents  will be saved  to confirm  integrity  of the data  transferred  to excel  documents  for 
analysis.  
 
Publication Plan  
− Recruitment for the study is anticipated to begin in April 2019 or once IRB approval is obtained. 
Recruitment and data collection is expected to last 15 months. Data analysis is projected to take two 
months. The study is anticipated to be complete and ready for submission to a national meeting for 
presentation and for publication at the end of  2020.  
− Results will not be returned to research  subjects  
 
ATTACHMENTS 
 
1. Schematic of Study  Design  
2. Study  Schedule  
3. Consent  Document  
4. Major Nasal Symptom  VAS 
 
REFERENCES  
1. Lambert  EM, Patel  CB, Fakhri S, Citardi MJ, Luong A. Optical rhinometry  in nonallergic  irritant 
rhinitis: a capsaicin challenge study. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol . 2013 Oct;3(10):795- 800.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0333 
IRB APPR OPVaAgLe D8 AofT7E: 05/25/2022  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   2. Reisacher WR, Bremberg MG. Prevalence of antigen -specific immunoglobulin E on mucosal 
brush biopsy of the inferior turbinates in patients with nonallergic rhinitis. Int Forum Allergy 
Rhinol. 2014  Apr;4(4):292- 7. 
3. Van Gerven L, Alpizar YA, Wouters MM, Hox V, Hauben E, Jorissen M, Boeckxstaens G, Talavera 
K, Hellings PW. Capsaicin treatment reduces nasal hyperreactivity and transient receptor 
potential cation channel subfamily V, receptor 1 (TRPV1) ov erexpression in patients with 
idiopathic rhinitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 May;133(5):1332 -9, 1339.e1 -3. 