Clinical Utility of Prenatal Whole Exome Sequencing: Study Protocol  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Approval Date: 9/30/2022  
  
 
 
Study Application (Version 1.22)  
 
 
1.0 General  Information  
 
2.0 Add departments  
 
2.1 and Specify Research Location:   
 
 
 
   
3.0 List the key study personnel: (Note: external and affiliated collaborators  who 
are not in the UCSF directory can be identified later in the Qualifications of 
Key Study Personnel section at the end of the  form)  
 
3.1 *Please add a Principal Investigator for the study:   
 
Norton, Mary MD, MD  
 
Select if applicable  
  Department  Chair    Resident  
  Fellow  
If the Principal Investigator is a Fellow, the name of the Faculty Advisor must be supplied below.    
 
3.2 If applicable, please select the Research Staff personnel   
A) Additional Investigators    
 
Ackerman, Sara, PhD, MPH 
Other Investigator 
Beleford, Daniah A MD,  PhD 
Other  Investigator  
Curry, Cynthia 
Study Clinician 
Keller, Roberta,  MD 
Other  Investigator  
Koenig, Barbara, PhD  
*Enter the full title of your study:  
 
Clinical Utility of Prenatal Whole Exome Sequencing    
*Enter the study alias:  
Prenatal WES  
* This field allows  you to enter  an abbreviated  version  of the Study  Title to quickly  identify  this 
study.    
 
Is 
Primary?  Department Name  
 UCSF - 118044 - M_Human Genetics  
 
Co-Principal Investigator 
Kwok, Pui -Yan Dr., MD, PhD 
Co-Principal Investigator 
Lianoglou, Billie R  
Other Investigator 
Michie, Marsha, PhD 
Other Investigator 
Sanders, Stephan  MDPhD 
Other  Investigator  
Sherr, Elliott MD, PhD 
Other Investigator 
Shieh, Joseph, MD,  PhD 
Other  Investigator  
Slavotinek, Anne PhD, PhD 
Co-Principal Investigator 
Sparks, Teresa N  
Study Clinician    
B) Research Support Staff    
 
Amezcua, Jessica M 
Study Coordinator 
Anguiano, Beatriz 
Research Assistant 
Chang, Jiyoo 
Research Assistant 
Chen, Flavia H 
Research Assistant 
Cullen, Caitlin  
Clinical Research Associate 
Dong, Shan  
Technician 
Downum, Sarah L 
Study Coordinator 
Farrell, Rachel L 
Study Recruiter 
Faubel, Amanda J 
Study Coordinator 
Gosnell, Kristen A 
Study Nurse 
Hoban, Hannah G 
Study Coordinator  
Hutchinson, Romobia 
Study Coordinator 
Michelson, Jeremy 
Research Assistant 
Norstad, Matthew 
Research Assistant 
O'Leary, Allison S 
Study Coordinator 
Oman, Natalie  
Study Coordinator 
Outram, Simon M  
Clinical Research Associate  
Patel, Sachi 
Study  Coordinator 
Perry, Rachel L 
Study  Nurse  
Rangwala, Naseem  A 
Research Assistant 
Rego, Shannon M 
Study Recruiter 
Rigler, Nicole A 
Study Coordinator 
Ryan, Tamara L 
Study  Nurse  
Sahin Hodoglugil, Nuriye N 
Study Coordinator 
Schwartz, Grace B 
Technician  
Scudmore, Janice  C 
Study  Nurse  
Shear, Matthew 
Research  Assistant 
Silver, Julia M 
Study Recruiter 
Silver, Julia M 
Study Recruiter 
Thao, Kao  N 
Study Coordinator 
Tick, Katherine  
Clinical  Research  Associate 
Tobias, Sarah  E 
Study  Recruiter  
Valdez Lopez, Priscila A 
Study Coordinator 
Yamane, Taylor A 
Research Assistant  
Yip, Tiffany A 
Study Recruiter    
 
3.3 *Please add a Study Contact   
 
Koenig, Barbara, PhD 
Lianoglou, Billie R 
Norton, Mary MD, MD  
Sahin Hodoglugil, Nuriye N  
 
The Study Contact(s) will receive all important system notifications along with the Principal 
Investigator.  (e.g. The project  contact(s)  are typically  either  the Study  Coordinator  or the Principal 
Investigator  themselves).    
 
3.4 If applicable, please add a Faculty Advisor/Mentor:   
   
 
3.5 If applicable, please select the Designated Department Approval(s)   
   
Add the name  of the individual  authorized  to approve  and sign off on this protocol  from your 
Department (e.g. the Department Chair or  Dean).    
4.0 
Initial Screening Questions  
 
Updated January 2019 - Revised Common Rule (January 2018) Compliant - v92 
4.1 * PROJECT SUMMARY: (REQUIRED) Give a brief overview of this project (250 words or less). Tell us 
what this study is about, who is being studied, and what it aims to achieve. If you have an NIH 
Abstract,  paste  it here  (Click  on the orange  question  mark  to the right  for more  detailed  instructions):  
 
Genome sequencing, which allows physicians to look at many genes concurrently, has been 
rapidly  integrated  into the clinical  setting  but its usefulness  remains  uncertain.  The UCSF  Program 
in Prenatal  and Pediatric  Genome  Sequencing  (P3EGS)  will study  the effectiveness  of sequencing 
as a tool for 1) diagnosing infants and children with serious developmental disorders, and, 2) 
providing genetic information to parents when a prenatal study reveals a fetus with a structural 
anomaly. We will also address ethical, social and economic issues in the delivery of genomic 
sequencing  results  to diverse  populations,  such as under  represented  minorit ies and the medically 
underserved. This protocol is specifically focusing on the prenatal aspect of the broader P3EGS 
project. A separate protocol will be submitted simultaeously for the pediatric patients. Other 
studies,  such as those  using  interviews  to follow  families  offered  sequencing,  will be submitted  to 
the IRB as separate  protocols.   
4.2 * HUD DEVICE: (REQUIRED) Does this application involve a Humanitarian Use Device (HUD):  
 
  No 
  Yes, and it includes  a research  component  
  Yes, and it involves clinical care  ONLY   
4.3 * TYPE OF RESEARCH: (REQUIRED) Select the option that best fits your project (Click the orange 
question mark to the right for definitions and guidance):  
 
  Biomedical research (including medical records review, biospecimen collection and/or use, 
other  healthcare  or health  outcomes  related  activities,  research  database,  biospecimen  bank, 
or recruitment  registry)  
  Social, behavioral, educational, and/or publi c policy  research  
  Hybrid  - includes  aspects  of BOTH  types  of research  (check  this option  if your research  is 
mainly social/behavioral but also involves specimen collection or blood draws to look at 
biological  measures)   
4.4 * SUBJECT CONTACT: (REQUIRED) Does this study involve ANY contact or interactions with 
participants:  
 
  Yes (including phone, email or web  contact)  
  No (limited  to medical  records  review,  biological  specimen  analysis,  and/or  data analysis)   
4.5 * RISK LEVEL: (REQUIRED) What is your estimation of the risk level, including all screening 
procedures and study activities : 
 
  Minimal  risk 
  Greater than minimal  risk  

4.6 * REVIEW LEVEL: (REQUIRED) Requested review level (Click on the orange question mark to the 
right for definitions and guidance):  
 
  Full Committee  
  Expedited  
  Exempt   
4.7 * EXPEDITED REVIEW CATEGORIES: (REQUIRED) If you think this study qualifies for expedited 
review, select the regulatory categories that the research falls under: (check all that apply)  
 
  Category  1: A very limited  number  of studies  of approved  drugs  and devices  
  Category 2: Blood  sampling  
  Category  3: Noninvasive  specimen  collection  (e.g. buccal  swabs,  urine,  hair and nail clippings, 
etc.) 
  Category  4: Noninvasive  clinical  procedures  (e.g. physical  sensors  such as pulse  oximeters, 
MRI, EKG, EEG, ultrasound, moderate exercise testing,  etc.) 
  Category  5: Research  involving  materials  (data,  documents,  records,  or specimens)  that were 
previously collected for either nonresearch or research  purposes  
  Category 6: Use of recordings (voice, video, digital or  image)  
  Category 7: Low risk behavioral research or research employing survey, interview, oral 
history,  focus  group,  program  evaluation,  human  factors  evaluation,  or quality  assurance 
methodologies  
 
* Does the collection of blood samples meet requirements outlined by HHS 
Office for Human Research Protections for Expedited Review Research  
Category 2 : (REQUIRED)  
For healthy, nonpregnant adults who weigh at least 110 pounds the 
amounts drawn may not exceed 550 ml in an 8 week period and 
collection may not occur more frequently than 2 times per week; 
From other adults and children, considering the age, weight, and 
health of the subjects, the collection procedure, the amount of blood 
to be collected, and the frequency with which it will be collected, the 
amount drawn may not exceed the lesser of 50 ml or 3 ml per kg in 
an 8 week period and collection may not occur mor e frequently than 2 
times per  week 
 
  Yes   No  
4.9 * DATA/SPECIMEN ANALYSIS ONLY: (REQUIRED) Does this study ONLY involve records review and  
/or biospecimen  analysis  (do not check  'Yes'  if this is a registry,  research  or recruitment  database,  or 
biospecimen  repository):  
 
   Yes     No  
4.10 * CLINICAL TRIAL: (REQUIRED)  
Is this a clinical trial:  
 
According to The World Health Organization (WHO) and the 
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) a 
clinical trial  is: 
Any research study that prospectively assigns human pa rticipants or 
groups of humans to one or more health -related interventions to 
evaluate the effects on health outcomes.   
 

ICMJE requires registration  of a clinical trial in a public database (such as 
ClinicalTrials.gov) prior to enrollment , for eventual publication of results in 
member biomedical journals.  
Guidance: Public Law 110 -85 requires that all investigators who perform 
an applicable clinical trial must ensure that the trial is registered on a 
government web site called ClinicalTrials.gov . 
The FDA requires registration for 'applicable clinical trials,' defined 
as follows:  
For any trials of drugs and biologics: controlled clinical investigations, 
other than Phase 1 investigations, of a product subject to FDA 
regulation.  
For trials of biomedical devices: controlled trials with health outcomes 
of devices subject to FDA regulation, other than small fe asibility 
studies, and pediatric post -market surveillance.  
For additional information on the ClinicalTrials.gov registration process at 
UCSF and the definition of a clinical trial for purposes of registrati on, visit 
the ClinicalTrials.gov section of the UCSF Clinical Research Resource  
HUB. 
 
 
 
  Yes   No 
 
Clinical Trial Registration - 'NCT' number for this trial:  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
4.11 * CLINICAL TRIAL PHASE: (REQUIRED) Check the applicable phase(s):  
 
  Phase  0 
  Phase  1 
  Phase  1/2 
  Phase  2 
  Phase  2/3 
  Phase  3 
  Phase  4 
  Not Applicable   
4.12 * INVESTIGATOR -INITIATED : (REQUIRED) Is this an investigator -initiated study:  
 
  Yes   No 
 
The UCSF IRB recommends use of the Virtual Regulatory Binder to 
manage your study.   
4.13  * CANCER:  (REQUIRED)  Does  this study  involve  cancer  (e.g.,  the study  involves  patients  with  cancer 
or at risk for cancer,  including  behavioral  research,  epidemiological  research,  public  policy  research, 
specimen analysis, and chart  reviews):  
 
   Yes     No  
 
 

4.14 * RADIATION EXPOSURE: (REQUIRED) Does your protocol involve any radiation exposure to patients  
/subjects  EITHER  from  standard  care OR for research  purposes  (e.g.,  x-rays,  CT-scans,  DEXA,  CT- 
guided  biopsy,  radiation  therapy,  or nuclear  medicine  including  PET,  MUGA  or bone  scans):  
 
   Yes     No  
4.15 SCIENTIFIC REVIEW: If this study has undergone scientific or scholarly review, please indicate 
which entity performed the review (check all that apply):  
 
  Cancer  Center  Protocol  Review  Committee  (PRC)  (Full approval  is required  prior to final IRB 
approval for cancer -related  protocols.)  
  CTSI Clinical  Research  Services  (CRS)  Advisory  Committee  
  CTSI Consultation  Services  
  Departmental  scientific  review  
  Other:  
* Specify Other: (REQUIRED)  
 
 
NIH  
4.16 * STEM CELLS: (REQUIRED) Does this study involve human stem cells (including iPS cells and adult 
stem cells), gametes or embryos:  
 
  No 
  Yes, and requires IRB and GESCR  review  
  Yes, and requires GESCR review, but NOT IRB  review   
4.17  * FINANCIAL  INTERESTS:  (REQUIRED)  Do you or any other  responsible  personnel  (or the spouse, 
registered  domestic  partner  and/or  dependent  children  thereof)  have  financial  interests  related  to 
this study:  
 
   Yes     No  
5.0 Funding  
5.1 * FEDERAL FUNDING: (REQUIRED) Is this study currently supported in whole or in part by Federal 
funding, even by a subcontract , OR has it received ANY Federal funding in the past:  
 
  Yes   No  
5.2 * DoD INVOLVEMENT: Is this project linked in any way to the Department of Defense (DoD):  
(REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  
5.3 SPONSORS: Identify all sponsors and provide the funding details. If funding comes from a 
Subcontract, please list only the Prime Sponsor:  
 
External Sponsors:   
 
 
 
 
View     
 
 
Awardee   
 
 
Contract   
 
 
Project  UCSF 
RAS 
System 
Award  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Funding Sources and Unfunded Research - Gift, Program, 
Departmental or other Internal Funding (check all that apply):  
  Funded by gift (specify source  below)  
  Funded  by UCSF  or UC-wide program  (specify  source  below)  
  Specific departmental funding (specify source  below)  
  Unfunded  (miscellaneous  departmental  funding)  
  Unfunded student  project  
* Identify the gift, program, departmental, or other internal funding source:  
(REQUIRED)  
 
 
UCSF Women's Reproductive Health Research (WRHR) Career Development Program   
6.0 Sites, Programs, Resources, and External IRB  Review  
6.1 UCSF AND AFFILIATED SITES (check all that apply):  
 
  UCSF  Benioff  Children's  Hospital  Oakland  (BCHO)  
  UCSF China Basin clinics and  facilities  
  UCSF  Helen  Diller  Family  Comprehensive  Cancer  Center  
  UCSF Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute  (LPPI)  
  UCSF  Medical  Center  at Mission  Bay (Benioff  Children's  Hospital,  the Betty  Irene  Moore   
 
Details  Sponsor Name  Sponsor Type  Institution:  Type:  Number  Number 
("A" + 
6 
digits)  
 NIH Natl Human 
Genome Research 
Inst.  
01  
UCSF   
Grant   
P0518017   
Sponsor Name:  NIH Natl Human Genome Research Inst.  
Sponsor Type:  01 
Sponsor Role:  Funding  
CFDA Number:   
Grant/Contract Number:   
Awardee Institution::  UCSF  
Is Institution the Primary 
Grant Holder:  Yes 
Contract Type:  Grant  
Project Number:  P0518017  
UCSF RAS System Award 
Number ("A" + 6 digits):   
Grant Number for Studies Not 
Funded thru UCSF:   
 
Grant Title:  Genomic sequencing to aid diagnosis in pediatric and 
prenatal practice: Examining clinical utility, ethical 
implications,  payer  coverage,  and data integration  in a 
diverse  population.  
PI Name:  
(If PI is not the same as 
identified on the study.)   
Pui-Yan Kwok  
Explain Any Significant 
Discrepancy:   
 
Women's  Hospital,  Bakar  Cancer  Hospital,  or outpatient  clinics)  
  UCSF Mount  Zion 
  UCSF  Parnassus  (Moffitt -Long hospital,  dental  clinics  or other  outpatient  clinics)  
  UCSF  Other  Sites (including  Laurel  Heights  and all the other  sites outside  the main hospitals)  
  Zuckerberg San Francisco General  (ZSFG)  
  SF VA Medical Center (SF  VAMC)  
  Fresno  - UCSF  Fresno  OR Community  Medical  Center  (CMC)  
  Gladstone  
  Institute on  Aging  (IOA)  
  Jewish  Home  
  SF Dept of Public Health  (DPH)  
  Vitalant  (formerly  Blood  Centers  of the Pacific  and Blood  Systems  Research  Institute)  
 
Research involving ZSFG: You are required to obtain additional 
approvals from the ZSFG Dean's Office. Download the ZSFG Protocol  
Application Form and submit the completed form to the  
ZSFG Dean's Office.  
 
We rely on the Community Medical Center IRB for all research at 
the UCSF Fresno campus and Community Medical Center. Check 
'Yes' to relying on an external IRB in 6.10 below.   
6.2 LOCATIONS: At what locations will study visits and activities occur:  
 
Study participants will be seen, recruited and followed up with primarily at UCSF Betty Irene 
Moore  Women’s  Hospital  (BIMWH),  UCSF  Benioff  Children’s  Hospital  Mission  Bay (BCHMB),  UCSF 
Benioff Children’s Hospital Mission Bay (BCHO), Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital 
(ZSFGH) and UC SF Fresno Community Medical  Center.   
6.3 OFF -SITE PROCEDURES: Will any study procedures or tests be conducted off -site by non -UCSF 
personnel:  
 
   Yes     No  
6.4 RESEARCH PROGRAMS: Check any UCSF research programs this study is associated with:  
 
  Cancer  Center  
  Center  for AIDS  Prevention  Sciences  (CAPS)  
  Global Health  Sciences  
  Immune Tolerance Network  (ITN)  
  Neurosciences  Clinical  Research  Unit (NCRU)  
  Osher  Center  
  Positive Health  Program   
6.5 * CTSI CRS SERVICES: (REQUIRED) Will this study be carried out at one of the UCSF Clinical Research  
Services (CRS) units or utilize CRS services : 
 
   Yes     No  
6.6 * MULTI -CENTER TRIAL: (REQUIRED) Is this a multi -center or multi -site research trial:  
 
By 'multi -center trial ' we mean a study where the protocol is developed 
by an lead investigator, an industry sponsor, consortium, a disease -group,   

etc.,and multiple sites across the nation or in different countries participate 
in the trial. The local sites do not have any control over the design of the 
protocol.  
   Yes     No  
6.8 OTHER SITE TYPES: Check all the other types of sites not affiliated with UCSF with which you are 
cooperating or collaborating on this project:  
 
Do NOT check any boxes below if this is a multi -center clinical 
trial, UCSF is just one of the sites, and neither UCSF nor one of its 
faculty -linked affiliates (SF VAMC, Gladstone, ZSFG) are the 
coordinating center.  
  Other  UC Campus  
  Other  institution  
  Other  community -based  site 
  Foreign  Country  
  Sovereign  Native  American  nation  (e.g. Navajo  Nation,  Oglala  Sioux  Tribe,  Havasupai,  etc.)  
6.11 * OUTSIDE RELIANCES: (REQUIRED) Are any of the collaborating sites requesting to rely on UCSF's 
IRB:  
 
   Yes     No  
6.14 * RELYING ON AN EXTERNAL IRB: (REQUIRED) Does this application include a request to rely on an 
external IRB (a central IRB (other than the NCI CIRB) or an external IRB (other UC campus, 
commercial, or institutional):  
 
   Yes     No 
 
Check 'Yes' since we rely on the Community Medical Center IRB for 
reseach that takes place in Fresno.   
7.0 Outside Site  Information  
7.1 Outside Site Information  
 
If you have more than 10 sites to add, list the outside sites in the 
Outside Sites List document and upload it in the Other Study 
Documents section of the Initial Review Submission Packet form. 
Any sites requesting to rely on UCSF's IRB must be listed belo w. 
 
Click "Add a new row" to enter  information  for a site. Click it again  to add a second  site again  to 
add a third site, a fourth site,  etc.  
 
 
   
 Outside Site Information   
 
  
8.0 Research Plan and  Procedures  
8.1 HYPOTHESIS: Describe the hypothesis or what the study hopes to prove:  
 
In the pediatric population whole exome sequencing is estimated to identify a diagnosis in 
approximately  one-third of all cases.  Considering  the extreme  phenotype  of cases  with congenital 
anomalies  and experience  from labs that are currently  offering  prenatal  whole  exome  
sequencing, we expect the yield to be higher than the pediatric experience. Whole exome 
sequencing is an ideal approach to the prenatal population given its comprehensive nature and 
ability  to detect  involved  genes  that may not have initially  been suspected.  Additionally,  initiating 
genetic  studies  with whole  exome  sequencing,  as opposed  to targeted  sequential  genetic  testing, 
would  reduce  turn around  time to facilitate  earlier  parental  understanding  of a fetal diagnosis  and 
maximize family planning  options.  
 
This research  will contribute  novel  information  about  the frequency  of genetic  disorders  in fetuse 
with congenital anomalies, enabling providers to more accurately counsel about prognosis, 
individualize antenatal care, allow more informed decision -making, and anticipate specific 
neonatal  needs. By examining  genotype -phenotype  correlations,  it will facilitate  a precision -based 
approach for future targeted neonatal (and ultimately antenatal) therapies such as enzyme 
replacement  or stem cell transplantation.  The NIH has recognized  the importance  of such a  
  Non-UCSF affiliated site information:   
 
Site name:  
 
UCSF Fresno/Community Medical Center  
 
 
Contact name:  
 
Cynthia Curry  
 
 
Email:  
 
cynthia.curry@gmail.com  
Phone:  
559-459-2269   
For Federally -funded studies only, corresponding FWA#:  
  
* The research at this site will be reviewed by:  
 
 The non -affiliated site's IRB or a private  IRB 
 The non-affiliated  site is requesting  UCSF  to be the IRB of 
record for this  study  
 The non-affiliated  site is not engaged  in the human  subjects 
research and has provided a letter of  support  
 
If the other  site's  IRB approval  letter  is available  now, attach  it to 
the application. If the IRB approval letter is not yet available, 
submit it once you receive  it. 
 
Or, if the other  site is not engaged  in human  subjects 
research,  attach  the letter  of support  to your application.   
 
 

precision -based  approach  to medical  care.21 Further,  this research  will contribute  substantially  to 
our understanding  of women’s  preferences  surrounding  crucial  decision  points  during  an affected 
pregnancy and after  delivery.   
8.2 AIMS: List the specific aims:  
 
Our specific aims will:  
 
1) examine  the clinical  utility  of exome  sequencing,  including  assessment  of a variety  of health - 
related and reproductive outcomes, in 400 undiagnosed prenatal  cases.  
 
2) address ethical, social and economic issues in the delivery of genomic sequencing results to 
ancestrally and economically diverse populations through (2.1) a mixed methods, longitudinal 
empirical study of clinical interactions and experiences, (2.2) an eco nomic analysis of insurance 
coverage, price and reimbursement of multigene tests, and (2.3) creation of an Ethics Advisory 
Board  to respond  to emerging  issues  and establishment  of authentic  stakeholder  engagement;  and 
 
3) pilot a user -friendly web -based patie nt/provider application integrating genomic and clinical 
data as a shared evidence base to support result communication, interpretation and clinical 
decision  making;  the application  will be based  on the “Bioscreen”  model  created  and successfully 
implemented at  UCSF.   
8.3 DESIGN: Briefly describe the study design (e.g., observational, interventional, randomized, placebo - 
controlled, blinded, cross -over, cross -sectional, longitudinal, pharmacokinetic, etc.):  
 
Any patient with a fetus identified by ultrasound to have a severe congenital anomaly and have 
had or will have prenatal  diagnosis  for chromosome  analysis  or microarray  analysis  will be offered 
the option for additional testing by whole exome sequencing. The patient will be educat ed 
regarding the anomalies identified on ultrasound and meet with a genetic counselor associated 
with the study  to review  the risks,  benefits  and limitations  of whole  exome  sequencing  (WES).  
After a comprehensive conversation related to WES the patient will be offered to pursue this 
testing  with the cost of testing  covered  through  the study.  Because  exome  sequencing  is a new 
approach, a small number of parents and families will be invited to participate in an additional 
study,  this would  include  both patient  that pursued  WES and those  that declined.  That study  will 
involve  being  interviewed  by a member  of our team,  by telephone  or in person.  
 
To achieve diversity, patient ascertainment and recruitment will occur at three sites where 
prenatal imaging and counseling take place, these sites that serve a broad range of under - 
represented  minority  (URM)  populations  and span the full socio -economic  spectrum,  including  the 
underserved.  The sites include  UCSF  Betty  Irene  Moore  Women’s  Hospital  (BIMWH),  UCSF  Benioff 
Children’s Hospital Mission Bay (BCHMB), Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital (ZSFGH) 
and UCSF Fresno Community Medical Center; these sites have patient populations representing 
up to 80% URM and 60% from underserved  backgrounds.  
 
Following  consent  and collection  of standardized  phenotypic  and demographic  data,  the families 
will undergo WES as part of clinical care. If prenatal testing had been performed at an outside 
laboratory specimen will be coordinated, for WES at UC SF. After counseling, sequencing and 
variant analysis and interpretation by our expert group, study subjects will meet with their 
clinicians  to receive  results.  For pregnancies  resulting  in a live birth,  infants  will continue  to be  
followed  for 6-12 months  after birth to assess  medical  decision -making  for the child and provision 
of genetic information for other family  members.  
 
We will examine  the following  outcomes  in order  to assess  clinical  utility  in prenatal  patients:  (i) 
pregnancy termination, (ii) in -utero medical or surgical intervention, (iii) perinatal decision - 
making, e.g. antepartum surveillance, location and mode of delivery, non -intervention or 
perinatal hospice care, (iv) immediate neonatal management, and (v ) reproductive decision - 
making subsequent to the index  pregnancy.  
 
Our team  of clinicians,  molecular  genetics  specialists  and bioinformaticians  are highly  qualified  to 
perform these analyses; we will examine and contrast clinical and personal utility across the 
social spectrum and among under -represented minority groups. In parallel, our bioethics and 
health economics groups will follow and study patient/provider interactions and insurance 
coverage/reimbursement. And to enhance clinical decisio n making, our clinical and informatics 
groups  will design  and implement  a pilot approach  to user-friendly  sharing  of clinical  and genetic 
information to families and health care  providers.  
 
A series  of surveys  will be administered  to the patient  at various  time points  including  the time of 
consent, return of results and 6 -12 month follow -up. These surveys are designed to further the 
study  goals  of understanding  the personal  and clinical  utility  of exome  sequencing.  These  surveys 
may be done in person , by phone, emailed, or mailed to you after the clinic visit. A $50 total in 
gift cards will be provided to subjects that complete the surveys. $20 will be provided after the 
first survey and $30 for the  second.   
8.4 BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE: Briefly p rovide the background and significance of this study (e.g. 
why is this study needed) (space  limit:  one half page):  
 
If this is a first in humans study, please summarize the safety data from 
the animal studies. For pediatric drug or device studies, please identify if 
this is the first study in pediatric populations.  
 
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is changing the paradigm of clinical genetic testing. Unlike 
highly focused single -gene tests, NGS allows one to examine gene panels, the exome, and the 
whole genome. With the broad array of molecular tests now available, ordering physicians face 
the conundrum  of selecting  the best diagnostic  tool for patients  with suspected  genetic  conditions. 
Single -gene testing is often most appropriate for conditions w ith distinctive clinical features and 
minimal locus heterogeneity. NGS -based gene panel testing, which can be complemented with 
chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) and other ancillary methods, provides a comprehensive 
and feasible approach for well docum ented but genetically heterogeneous disorders. Whole 
exome  sequencing  (WES)  and whole  genome  sequencing  (WGS)  have the advantage  of enabling 
parallel interrogation of most of the genes in the human genome. To some, WES is preferable to 
previously used methods due to higher diagnostic yield, shorter time to diagnosis, and improved 
cost-efficiency.  
 
The ability to survey the exome opens up both new opportunities and new challenges. For 
example, all coding regions of known genes must be analyzed when applying WES to 
undiagnosed  cases  with unclear  inheritance  patterns.  Current  limitations  on variant  interpretation 
capabilities  and clinical  validity  raise questions  about  the clinical  utility  of WES as either  a stand - 
alone  or a first-choice  diagnostic  test. Additional  challenges  include  pre- and post-test counseling 
with appropriate and robust informed consent, bioinformatics analysis setup and validation, 
variant interpretation and classification, the need for policies and protocols concerning the 
discovery and reporting of secondary findings unrelated to the presenting indication, a 
requirement  for validation  of WES results,  assurance  of conformation  to quality  control  standards, 
data storage and accessibility, and reimbursement  issues.   
Current clinical standards recommend offering chromosomal microarray (CMA) in the prenatal 
setting when fetal structural anomalies are detected via prenatal ultrasound. In these cases, 
clinically  relevant  copy number  variants  have been reported  in 6.0-9.1%  of fetuses  with a normal 
karyotype.  However,  informed  consent  processes  for prenatal  CMA are challenging —particularly  in 
cases with ultrasound anomalies, as parents are absorbing challenging news and under 
considerable stress. Women have reported being “b lindsided” by positive CMA results, or feeling 
that these results were “toxic information” —information they wished they did not have, 
particularly  in cases  of uncertain  genetic  information  or uninterpretable  variants.  Nonetheless,  in 
that same study women who were referred for CMA because of ultrasound anomalies reported 
less frequent  negative  reactions,  since  they already  anticipated  abnormal  results.  
 
Introducing WES into prenatal clinical care of underrepresented populations rais es additional 
issues  and considerations  of payment  coverage,  access,  and standards  of care. Beyond  the sheer 
complexity of the test and its results, clinicians and health systems must address numerous 
considerations,  including:  private  and public  insurance  coverage;  language  and culture  differences 
and their implications for genetic counseling and clinician -patient relationships; ability to access 
follow -up testing and clinical care; ability to access appropriate treatment and services; and 
particu larly in the prenatal setting, local, state, and national abortion laws and decision -making 
about pregnancy termination. These issues and others will affect not only patients’ decision - 
making regarding WES, but also their post -test needs for patient follo w up, counseling and 
support. The importance of systematically assessing the clinical utility of NGS is critical for 
determining in which clinical and health care contexts WES will be useful and for commencing 
research on these  considerations.   
8.5 PRELIMINARY STUDIES: Briefly summarize any preliminary studies relevant to your proposed 
research (space  limit:  one half page) : 
 
The UCSF group has gained significant experience over the past 3 years in providing NGS to 
patients through its Personalized Genomics Clinic and the Genomic Medicine Initiative. UCSF 
BCHMB  has a specialized  clinic that unifies  the consent  process,  results  session  and follow  up for 
patients  undergoing  WES.  The clinic is currently  held twice  a month  and staffed  by Drs. 
Slavotinek and Shieh, together with a dedicated genetic counselor, Marta Sabbadini. To date, 
more  than 150 patients  ranging  in age from newborn  to adult,  referred  from numerous  providers, 
have been seen in this clinic. Referring indications have included ID, multiple congenital 
anomalies,  seizures/encephalopathy,  and other  neurological  presentations,  including  stroke  
/hemorrhage, chronic p ain, ataxia, muscle weakness, central hypoventilation, dysautonomia, 
pontocerebellar  hypoplasia,  and movement  disorders.  Over 90% of patients  have been sequenced 
as trios (proband and both biological parents). In the first 57 patients taken from the group of 
greater than 150 patients, a possible causative sequence variant was identified, and a definitive 
diagnosis was made in 25/57 (44%). In an assessment of clinical utility for the first 49 positive 
results (excluding fetuses), 24/49 had a result -directed improvement in clinical care, one had 
withdrawal of care, three had the introduction of a targeted treatment or diagnosis related 
therapy, 43/49 received critical reproductive information and 13/49 received reproductive 
information that was directly relevant for testing of other family members or for other family 
members  planning  children  (data  not shown).We  therefore  have experience  in the assessment  of 
clinical utility from patients undergoing  WES.  
 
IHG Genomics  Core Facility  and the Genomic  Medicine  Initiative.  Under  the auspices  of the UCSF 
Genomic  Medicine  Initiative,  we have achieved  CLIA certification  for next-generation  sequencing 
for over one year. The first clinical sequencing test launched was a cancer gene panel that 
compares  the tumor and germline  DNA of a patient.  Over the last year,  we have sequenced  2,844 
samples successfully, resulting in many cases where target specific therapies are chosen for the 
patients. We have also obtained WES data for 152 clinical and control samples in the process of 
obtaining  CLIA certification  for clinical  WES at UCSF.  The data obtained  so far compared  favorably 
against  sequencing  data for the same  samples  from outside  CLIA certified  laboratories  (including 
that at UCLA  and GeneDx).  In addition,  we have performed  WES on 10,768  samples  for research 
purposes. With a highly experienced sequencing staff and bioinformatics group, we have 
established  a strong  team  to perform  both clinical  and research  sequencing.   
8.6 * TREATMENT PROTOCOL: Is this a treatment study, i.e. does this study intend to provide treatment 
to individuals with a medical or psychological condition: (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  

8.7 * BILLABLE PROCEDURES: Does this study involve any procedures, lab tests or imaging studies that 
have a CPT code and could be billable to patients, their insurance, Medi -Cal, Medicare, or any other 
entity (answer 'Yes' even if the study is going to pay for all the procedures): (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No 
 
If you are not sure if your study involves billable procedures , send 
an email to the UCSF Office of Clinical Research (OCR) for help 
answering this question.   
8.8 * COMMON RESEARCH ACTIVITIES: Types of research activities that will be carried out. Check all that 
apply and describe in more detail in the 'Procedures / Methods' section: (REQUIRED)  
 
  Interviews,  questionnaires,  surveys  
  Educational or cognitive  tests 
  Focus  groups  
  Social media -based  research  activities  
  Observation  
  Fitness  tests or other  exertion  activities  
  Use of mobile  health  apps or other  apps 
  Collection  of data from wearable  tech such as Fitbit,  Apple  Watch,  Garmin,  motion  actigraphs, 
etc.) 
  Non-invasive imaging or testing (MRI, EEG, pulse oximetry,  etc.) 
  Imaging  procedures  or treatment  procedures  that involve  radiation  (x-rays, CT scans,  CT- 
guided biopsies, DEXA scans, MUGA or PET  scan)  
  Administration of contrast  agent  
  Randomization  to one intervention  versus  another  
  Use of  placebo  
  Biopsy  conducted  solely  for research  purposes  
  Sham surgical  procedure  
  None of the  above   
8.9 * PROCEDURES / METHODS: (REQUIRED)  
 
Describe the research methods and study activities taking place at each site 
(e.g. what will participants be asked to do and what will members of the 
study team do?). If there will be multiple participant groups or study sites, 
explain what will happen wit h each group or study sites.  
If some of the activities would occur even if the person were not in the 
study, as in the case of treatment or tests performed for diagnostic 
purposes, clearly differentiate between those activities that will be 
done solely for  research purposes and those that are happening as 
part of routine care.  
Please call our office at 415 -476-1814 and ask to speak to someone on the  
Expedited Review team if you need help differentiating between what parts  
are research and what parts aren't.  
 
We anticipate enrolling up to 75 -85 participants per year.  
1. Recruitment:  
Personnel within the UCSF Fetal Treatment Center, UCSF Prenatal Diagnosis Center, 
Benioff  Children's  Hospital  Oakland  Fetal Treatment  Center,  Zuckerberg  San Francisco 
General  Hospital  or UCSF  Fresno  Community  Medical  Center  will identify  and recruit   

participants. Additionally, we will offer enrollment to patients consented to exome 
sequencing  through  a second  study  our team  is offering  (IRB 17-21662  (Fetal birth defects 
prospective database: Toward a precision -based  approach)).  
 
2. Consent:  
Personnel  at each site will consent  to Exome  Sequencing.  Anticipated  enrollment  will be 
around 75 -85 cases per year from all  sites.  
Trio Exome Sequencing obtained for each enrolled participant  
Affected  fetus and biological  parents  are both important  for estimating  clinical  implications 
of variants.  The following  fetal samples  will also be collected:  chorionic  villli, amniotic  fluid, 
cord blood, fetal tissue (stillbirth or Intrauterine Fetal Demise), neonatal blood, or 
extracted fetal/neonatal DNA from the above detailed specimens. Parents saliva or blood 
will suffice for biological parents  samples.  
Sample Processing and Reporti ng 
 
Consent,  sample  collection,  whole  exome  sequencing  and banking.  Findings  will be reported  to 
clinical staff including physicians and genetic counselors associated with this study. These 
clinicians will review results with the the patient and their  family. 
 
Results from exome sequencing that will be provided to the participants and their families, and 
that could  contribute  to clinical  decision -making  include  (1) variants  known  to cause  or contribute 
to the birth defect  found  in the fetus and, (2) in cases  where  the participant  has indicated  in the 
consent  form that they wish to learn  about  additional  findings  with medical  significance,  variants 
in genes of medical significance outside of the primary indication for testing (additional or 
secondary  findings).  
 
In cases  in which  a variant  is identified  that could  be either  inherited  or de novo,  if the father  has 
declined  participation,  the potential  that this variant  could  be inherited  from the father  will not be 
shared with him, given his active  declination.  
 
If the father  has declined  participation,  and a variant  is found  in the fetus that is likely  to have 
been inherited  from the father  (e.g. an autosomal  recessive  disorder  is diagnosed  in the fetus), 
the basic genetic inheritance will be explained to the mother. If the father has declined 
participation, we will not contact him again to share  results.  
 
As part of the consenting  process,  when  talking  with the fathers,  we will explain  these  potential 
outcomes  to assure  they understand  the full implications  of consenting,  or declining  to consent.  
 
We may use exome sequencing to sequence a large proportion of the currently known and 
unknown  genes  in some  affected  individuals.  Sequencing  unknown  genes,  such as many  of the 
tests that will be performed  for this study,  are considered  experimental  in nature.  As such,  the 
accuracy and usefulness of these experimental tests has yet to be determined, and the 
conclusions of these test results may be  uncertain.  
 
We will place  the resulting  phenotypic  and genotypic  data in a controlled -access  database  at the 
National Institutes of Health. Use of the data will not be restricted to any one condition or the 
condition for which the sample was obtained. The patient will have the option to opt out of 
inclusion of their data in this database in the consent  process.  
 
After informed  consent  has been obtained  a series  of surveys  will be administered  to the patient 
at various time points including the time of consent, return of results and 6 -12 month follow - 
up. These surveys are designed to further the study goals of understanding the personal and 
clinical  utility  of exome  sequencing.These  surveys  may be done in person,  by phone,  emailed,  or 
mailed  to you after the clinic visit. A $50 total in gift cards  will be provided  to subjects  
that complete the surveys. $20 will be provided after the first survey and $30 for the second. 
Participation in the study will take a total of about 2 -3 hours over a period of 3 or more days.  
In addition: We will contact executives, administrators, managers or clinicians at UCSF via 
email  to ask if they are willing  to complete  a survey  about  organizational  readiness  to change  
(ORCA).  This survey  will be administered  once via Redcap  or on paper  and will not involve  any 
personal  identifiers.  The goal of the survey  is to learn  more  about  their views  on the potential 
for implementation  of clinical  sequencing  in healthcare  systems  and communities.  The de- 
identified  data will be pooled  by the University  of Washington  to include  data from the rest of the 
CSER2  consortium.  The ORCA  will be administered  to 6-10 administrators,  managers,  or clinicians 
at each site participating on our  project.  
 
Consent  from the administrators,  managers,  etc. who will answer  the ORCA  questionnaire  will be 
implicit  if they agree  to return  the surveys  that are emailed  to them.  We have requested  a waiver 
of documentation  of consent  and have attached  the email  we plan to send to the providers.   
ORCA  survey  data will be collected  anonymously  and will be pooled  with data from other  sites in 
our NIH -funded consortium in order to minimize risk of  re-identification.  
 
The completion of this survey should take approximately 10 -15 minutes.   
8.11 INSTRUMENTS: List all questionnaires, surveys, interview, or focus group guides that will be used for 
this study:  
 
If the instruments are not complete or not available because they will be 
developed as part of this study, describe the basic content or include an 
outline and submit the final versions to the IRB with a modification for 
approval prior to use.  
 
A series  of surveys  will be administered  to the patient  at various  time points  including  the time of 
consent, return of results and 6 -12 month follow -up. These surveys are designed to further the 
study  goals  of understanding  the personal  and clinical  utility  of exome  sequencing.  
 
Specifically, after initial consent is obtained the patients will be admi nistered a demographic 
survey to characterize the patient population undergoing exome sequencing through our study. 
Subsequent surveys will be specific to the patient's circumstance and have been tailored to be 
appropriate  for patients  that have an on-going pregnancy,  a pregnancy  that has resulted  in a live 
birth,  or a pregnancy  loss due to either  elective  termination  or natural  causes.  
 
After the return of results the patient will be administered a survey that can be conducted in 
patient or through email, or can be return to us by mail. Finally there will be surveys obtained 
after the 6 -12 month point of having received results from the exome sequencing. All of these 
surveys  are designed  to obtain  information  regaring  the patient's  experience  of having undergone 
genetic sequencing in their pregnancy, what information they understood about the results of 
their testing, where they sought information outside of our clinical service to understand these 
results  and how the sewuencing  results  were incorporated  into their understanding  of their child's 
health or adverse pregnancy  outcome.  
 
We will contact  executives,  administrators,  managers  or clinicans  at UCSF  via email  to ask if they 
are willing to complete a survey about organizational readiness to change (ORCA). This survey 
will be administered  once via Redcap  or on paper  and will not involve  any personal  identifiers.  The 
goal of the survey is to learn more about their views on the potential for implementation of 
clinical sequencing in healthcare systems and communities. The de -identified data will be pooled 
by the University  of Washington  to include  data from the rest of the CSER2  consortium.  
 
Attach any unpublished instruments in the 'Other Study  Documents' 
section of the Initial Review Submission Packet form after 
completing the study application. Published instruments should 
NOT be  attached.   
8.12 * BIOSPECIMEN COLLECTION: Are you drawing any blood or collecting other biosamples (e.g. tissue, 
buccal swabs, urine, saliva, hair, etc.) for analysis under this protocol and/or storage for future 
research: (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes   No 
 
* Could this study generate genetic data that may be broadly shared (e.g., submitted to 
NIH in compliance with Genomic Data Sharing (GDS) /Genome -Wide Association  
Studies (GWAS) requirements): (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes   No 
 
Please make sure your consent form includes the recommended  
genomic data sharing language .  

 
8.13 STATISTICAL METHODS: Briefly summarize the methods and types of anal yses that will be 
performed:  
 
Our study  design  will allow  several  statistical  comparisons  that will generate  useful  data regarding 
exome  sequencing  implementation.  Clinical  outcomes  will be scored  across  multiple  domains;  for 
example,  assigning  one point  for changes  in care or interventions  that are deemed  to have minor 
clinical utility, two points for those with moderate utility and three points for those with high 
clinical utility. The scoring will be independently performed by two clinicians who did not see the 
patient  or family,  and who are not familiar  with the case.  The clinical  information  will derive  from 
a compilation of material derived from direct examinations that occurred prior to study initiation 
and all clinical informat ion available in the EHRs. Results for parents and/or family will be based 
on interviews. The study coordinator or a research assistant will prepare this information for 
review  by the clinicians  and will remove,  when  possible,  all statements  that could  reveal whether 
the subject had a positive or negative exome result (i.e. unblind the raters). The two raters will 
reconcile  any differences  in their scores,  or simply  average  them  if agreement  does not occur.  
Our group  will work with the CSER  consortium  to develop  the specific  clinical  utility  outcomes  that 
will be  scored.  
 
After all scores are made for each patient, scores will be totaled within and across domains. The 
analyst will also have the results of the exome sequencing, and separate th e patients into two 
groups – one with a positive (i.e. diagnostic) test result, and the other without such a result 
(negative  test result).  We will compare  the scores  of those  with a positive  test result  versus  those 
with a negative test result. By comparing these two groups, we are not evaluating the overall 
clinical  utility  that may derive  from having  any exome  sequencing  test performed  (i.e. we have no 
comparison  group  of those  without  exome  sequencing).  We have chosen  to focus  instead  on only 
those benefits  that may derive  from having  a diagnostic  exome  sequencing  result.  
 
The size of the “positive” and “negative” groups will depend on the diagnostic success rate of 
exome sequencing in our cohort. Based on prior experience in the Personalized Genomics Clinic 
(see Preliminary  Results),  we anticipate  a minimum  of 17% of subjects  will have a positive  result  
– but that rate could  be as high as 38%.  In any event,  assuming  a low rate of 20%,  we expect  a 
minimum  of 220 individuals/families  with a positive  test result,  which  should  be adequate  for the 
analyses we  propose.  
 
It is also important to determine how clinical utility may vary based on a number of factors, 
including  setting  (prenatal,  neonatal,  pediatric),  by disease  indication,  by race/ethnicity,  and by 
socioeconomic  status.  Such stratified  analyses  will depend  on the actual  observed  sample  sizes 
within each  stratum.   
8.14  REFERENCES:  List only the 5-10 most  relevant  references  (a separate  bibliography  can be attached 
for reference  purposes  if this study  involves  novel  approaches,  agents,  or an emerging  technology 
that the IRB may not be familiar  with):  
 
1. Yang Y, Muzny  DM, Reid JG, Bainbridge  MN, Willis  A, Ward  PA, Braxton  A, Beuten  J, Xia F, 
Niu Z, Hardison  M, Person  R, Bekheirnia  MR, Leduc  MS, Kirby  A, Pham  P, Scull J, Wang  M, 
Ding Y, Plon SE, Lupski JR, Beaudet AL, Gibbs RA, Eng CM. Clinical whole -exome 
sequencing for the diagnosis of mendelian disorders. N Engl J Med. 2013; 369(16):1502 - 
1511. PubMed PMID: 24088041; PubMed Central PMCID:  PMC4211433.  
2. Norton  ME, Rink BD. Changing  indications  for invasive  testing  in an era of improved 
screening.  Seminars  in Perinatology.  2016;40(1):56 -66. PubMed  PMID:  26725145  
3. Cowan  RS. Aspects  of the history  of prenatal  diagnosis.  Fetal Diagnosis  and Therapy.  1993; 
8(Suppl. 1):10 -17. PubMed PMID:  11653011.  
4. Chervenak  FA, McCullough  LB. Ethical  issues  in perinatal  genetics.  Seminars  in Fetal and 
Neonatal Medicine. 2011;16(2):70 -73. PubMed PMID:  21051301.  
5. Donley  G, Hull SC, Berkman  BE. Prenatal  Whole  Genome  Sequencing:  Just because  we 
can, should we? Hastings Center Report. 2012;42(4):28 -40. PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC4113095.  
6. American College of Obstetricians and Gyne cologists Committee on Genetics, Society for 
Maternal - Fetal Medicine.  Committee  Opinion  No. 581: the use of chromosomal  microarray 
analysis in prenatal diagnosis. Obstet Gynecol. 2013;122(6):1374 -1377. PubMed PMID: 
24264715.  
7. Wapner RJ, Martin CL, Levy B, Ballif BC, Eng CM, Zachary JM, Savage M, Platt LD, 
Saltzman D, Grobman WA, Klugman S, Scholl T, Simpson JL, McCall K, Aggarwal VS, 
Bunke  B, Nahum  O, Patel A, Lamb  AN, Thom  EA, Beaudet  AL, Ledbetter  DH, Shaffer  LG, 
Jackson L. Chromosomal microarray versu s karyotyping for prenatal diagnosis. N Engl J   
Med. 2012;367(23):2175 -2184.  PubMed  PMID:  23215555;  PubMed  Central  PMCID: 
PMC3549418.  
8. de Wit MC, Srebniak  MI, Govaerts  LC, Van Opstal  D, Galjaard  RJ, Go AT. Additional  value 
of prenatal genomic array testing in fetuses with isolated structural ultrasound 
abnormalities  and a normal  karyotype:  a systematic  review  of the literature.  Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol. 2014;43(2):139 -146. PubMed PMID:  23897843.  
9. Miller  DT, Adam  MP, Aradhya  S, Biesecker  LG, Brothman  AR, Carter  NP, Church  DM, Crolla 
JA, Eichler EE, Epstein CJ, Faucett WA, Feuk L, Friedman JM, Hamosh A, Jackson L, 
Kaminsky EB, Kok K, Krantz ID, Kuhn RM, Lee C, Ostell JM, Rosenberg C, Scherer SW, 
Spinner NB, Stavropoulos DJ, Tepper berg JH, Thorland EC, Vermeesch JR, Waggoner DJ, 
Watson  MS, Martin  CL, Ledbetter  DH. Consensus  statement:  chromosomal  microarray  is a 
first-tier clinical  diagnostic  test for individuals  with developmental  disabilities  or congenital 
anomalies. Am J Hum Genet. 2010;86(5):749 -764. PubMed PMID: 20466091; PubMed 
Central PMCID:  PMC2869000.  
10. Hussain -Gambles M, Atkin K, Leese B. Why ethnic minority groups are under -represented 
in clinical  trials:  a review  of the literature.  Health  & Social  Care in the Community.  2004;12 
(5):382 -388. 
11. Robinson  JO, Carroll  TM, Feuerman  LZ, Perry  DL, Hoffman -Andrews  L, Walsh  RC, 
Christensen  KD. 
12. Green RC, McGuire AL. Participants and Study Decliners' Perspectives About the Risks of 
Participating  in a Clinical  Trial of Whole  Genome  Sequencing.  J Empir  Res Hum Res Ethics. 
2016;11(1):21 -30. PubMed  PMID:  26928896;  PubMed  Central  PMCID:  PMC4842131.  
13. Lupo PJ, Robinson JO, Diamond PM, Jamal L, Danysh HE, Blumenthal -Barby J, Lehmann 
LS, Vassy JL, Christensen KD, Green RC, McGuire AL. Patients' perceived utility of whole - 
genome  sequencing  for their healthcare:  findings  from the MedSeq  project.  Per Med. 2016; 
13(1):13 -20. PubMed PMID:27019659; PubMed Central PMCID:  PMC4806392.  
14. Kohane  IS. Ten things  we have to do to achieve  precision  medicine.  Science.  2015;349 
(6243):37 -38. 
15. Reiff M, Bernhardt  BA, Mulchandani  S, Soucier  D, Cornell  D, Pyeritz  RE, Spinner  NB. "What 
does it mean?":  uncertainties  in understanding  results  of chromosomal  microarray  testing. 
Genet Med. 2012;14(2):250 -258. PubMed PMID: 22241091; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC3445036.   
9.0 Biospecimen Collection and/or Bank  Administration  
9.1 * TYPE OF SPECIMENS (check all that apply): (REQUIRED)  
 
  Blood (provide  amount  below)  
  Tissue (describe  below)  
  Other  type of biospecimen,  such as sputum,  cerebrospinal  fluid,  buccal  swabs,  etc. (describe 
below)  
  Existing/archival materials (name source  below)  
 
Briefly describe the types of biospecimens that will be collected. Provide the 
amount of blood, if applicable. For leftover/existing/archival material, 
identify the source:  
Exome sequencing of prenatal specimens will include either cultured cells or extracted DNA from 
chorionic villi, amniocytes of products of conception including fetal tissue , fetal cord blood or 
neonatal blood. These specimens would have been left over from previous testing, no additional 
procedure would be performed to obtain fetal specimen. Maternal and paternal samples will also 
be requested  and can be blood,  bucchal  swab  or saliva  samples.  For particpants  of IRB 17-21662  ( 
Fetal birth defects prospective database: Toward a precision -based approach) we will only be 
collecting a single sample to perform exome sequencing for participation in both studies. No 
additional sample  will be obtained for the purposes of enrollment in this study if they elect to 
participate in  both.   
9.2 * SPECIMENS ARE: (check all that apply): (REQUIRED)  
 
  Leftover specimens from a clinical diagnostic or therapeutic  procedure  
  Specimens  collected  for research  purposes  only (including  extra  samples  taken  during  a 
clinical  procedure)   

  Other   
9.3 * FUTURE SPECIMEN USE: Will any specimens or portions of specimens be retained after the study is 
over for possible use in future research studies: (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes   No  
9.4 * SPECIMEN BANKING - CONSENT METHOD: Consent for retaining specimens for future research 
studies will be obtained via (check all that apply): (REQUIRED)  
 
  Specimen  section  within  a main research  study  consent  form 
  Separate specimen consent  form 
  UCSF surgical consent form with tissue donation  brochure   
9.5 * SPECIMEN DESTINATION: Indicate where specimens will ultimately be stored: (REQUIRED)  
 
Outside Entities: Indicate where specimens will be sent if they will not 
remain at UCSF (choose at least one; check all that apply):  
  Cooperative  group  bank 
  NIH 
  Other university  or collaborator  
  Industry  sponsor  
  Other  
  N/A - all specimens will remain at  UCSF  
 
 
Internal Storage : If specimens will remain at UCSF, in what kind of 
facility will they reside (choose at least one; check all that apply):  
 
  UCSF  repository/bank  being  established  under  this protocol  
  Existing  UCSF  specimen  repository/bank  with IRB approval  
  National cooperative group bank housed at  UCSF  
  Other location at UCSF (please  describe)  
  N/A - no specimens will be retained at UCSF  facilities  
 
 
Please provide the name of the department, the program, and the physical 
location where the specimens will be housed. If the specimens will be 
stored in an already established bank, provide the name of the bank and its 
iRIS approval  number.:  
 
 
UCSF Genomic  Medicine Laboratories 
University of California, San Francisco 
Institute for Human Genetics  
513 Parnassus Ave., HSW 901A 
San Francisco, CA 94143   
9.7 * CLINICAL FOLLOW -UP DATA: Will clinical follow -up data be linked to specimens (i.e., will medical 
record information continue to be abstracted after the specimen is collected): (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes   No 
 
Provide duration of follow -up or 'indefinitely':  
 
 
12 months after delivery   
 

 
9.8 * UCSF -BANKED SPECIMENS - LINKING AND SHARING OF IDENTIFIERS: (REQUIRED)  
 
  Samples  are completely  de-identified  before  being  added  to the bank/repository.  There  is no 
way to link the specimens back to the  subjects.  
  Samples  are coded  and researchers  are able to link the specimens  to specific  subjects.  
  Samples are stored with direct identifiers in the  repository.  
Explain under what circumstances identifiers may be released with 
specimens or say 'None' if identifiers will NEVER be released with 
specimens:  
The samples  will be stored  with the UCSF  Genomic  Medicine  Laboratories.  Upon  lab recipt  specime 
ns receive  non-PHI lab identifiers  and will be maintained  in that way.  
9.9 UCSF -BANKED SPECIMENS – IDENTIFIERS: List the identifiers that will be collected, stored, or 
linked with the specimens:  
 
  Name  
  Date of  birth 
  Social  Security  number  
  Medical  record  number  
  Address  
  Phone  number  
  Email  address  
  Other dates (dates of surgery, visit  dates)   
9.10 DISTRIBUTION: Specimens banked at UCSF may be made available to (check all that apply):  
 
  UCSF  researchers  
  Non-UCSF  researchers  
  Industry  
  None  of the above  - specimens  will be retained  and used within  our own research  program   
9.11 UTILIZATION REVIEW: Is there a formal utilization review process for distribution of specimens:  
 
   Yes     No  
10.0 Drugs and  Devices  
10.1 * DRUGS AND/OR BIOLOGICS: Are you STUDYING any drugs and/or biologics that are either 
approved or unapproved: (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No 
 
Note: This question is frequently answered incorrectly.  If any drugs 
or biologics, approved or unapproved, are being administered under 
this protocol, you should check 'Yes' unless you are absolutely sure 
that NONE of the drugs are part of the research protocol. Tip: Ask 
the PI or the sponsor if you are not sur e how to answer this 
question.   
10.3 * MEDICAL DEVICES: Are you STUDYING any medical devices, in vitro diagnostics, or assays that are 
either approved or unapproved: (REQUIRED)  

 
  Yes   No  
10.4 * NSR: Are you requesting a Non -Significant Risk (NSR) determination for an investigational device:  
(REQUIRED)  Note:  an NSR determination  is different  from  an Investigational  Device  Exemption 
(IDE).  Check  the Help link for more  guidance  on what  types  of devices  can qualify  for an NSR 
determination.  
 
  Yes   No 
 
* Explain why the use of the device in this study poses a non -significant 
risk: (REQUIRED)  
1) We plan to use exome sequencing to clarify a possible genetic cause of congenital anomalies 
identified clinically  by fetal anatomic ultrasound. As an entry criterio n for the study, all 
participants  will have previously  undergone  prenatal  genetic  diagnosis  by established  methods  of 
chromosome analysis and microarray. DNA samples submitted for WES in this study will be 
derived  from a previously  obtained  specimen.  No invasive  procedures  are connected  with the use 
of the exome sequencing test in our  study.  
 
Thus, our use of exome sequencing meets the “non -significant risk” criteria:  
 
1) Exome  sequencing  testing  is non-invasive,  and is done on previously  obtained  samples.  
2) Exome  sequencing  presents  no risk to the health  or welfare  of the subject;  results  provide 
information  only. 
 
3) and 4) 
 
We first address  “informational  risks”  associated  with return  of results  relevant  to the primary 
finding of a fetal  anomaly.  
 
We believe this use constitutes “non -significant risk” to study participants as they will only be 
asked to participate in research after the clinical diagnosis of a severe congenital anomaly has 
been made.  Any genetic  finding  revealed  by sequencing  of the trio (fetus  plus parents)  will inform 
the clinician’s understanding of the etiology of the anomalies identified, but will not modify the  
severity of the already -diagnosed physical  anomaly.  
 
All clinically  significant  findings  identified  through  whole  exome  sequencing  will be confirmed  by a 
secondary sequencing method, specifically Sanger  sequencing.  
 
Although  information  will be returned  to the family  based  on the exome  sequencing  testing,  we 
believe this constitutes non -significant risk because results based on CLIA -approved tests for 
single  genes  and gene panels  are routinely  offered  to pregnant  women.  Thus our use of exome 
sequencing — findings  confirmed  by an orthogonal  method — to obtain  genetic  information  does 
not convey additional risk to the fetus or pregnant  women.  
 
We next address  “informational  risks”  associated  with return  of results  not relevant  to the primary 
finding  of a fetal anomaly,  referred  to here as secondary  or additional  findings.  
 
Results,  including  “additional  findings,”  will be returned  to the pregnant  woman  in order  to assess 
their utility  (one of the study  aims).  These  results  will be returned  in accord  with our established 
clinical pathway. That policy includes an allowance for return of secondary/additional findings in 
accord with the American College of Medical Genetics recommendations. We will follow that 
clinical policy, which is a vailable on request. In all cases, all family members sequenced are 
given the option to “opt out” of receiving all secondary  findings.  
 
The purpose of this study is to determine if exome sequencing can help identify the etiology of 
structural fetal anomali es in pregnancy, to clarify additional benefits to the family and/or fetus 
from identifying  risks to the fetus secondary  to a pathogenic  result  from exome  sequencing,  and 
to clarify  reproductive  risks for future  pregnancies,  or cascade  testing  of other  family  members.  
 
Attach any documentation you have from the manufacturer and/or 
FDA to support this determination.   
10.5  
 

LIST  THE DEVICES:  List the medical  devices  or in vitro  diagnostics  to be studied  or used.  In the 
device details screen you will be asked questions such  as: 
 
Whether  the device  is FDA approved  or investigational 
Medicare device  category  
If the device will be provided at no cost  
If an IDE is necessary,  the IDE number,  and who holds  the IDE 
Risk category of the  device  
FDA status of the device  
 
Please see the UCSF IRB website for more details about the use of devices in research, including the 
Investigator Checklist for Significant Risk, Non -Significant Risk, and/or IDE Exempt Device Studies  
Verification of IDE numbers: If the sponsor’s protocol does not list the IDE number, you must submit 
documentation from  the sponsor or FDA identifying the IDE number for this study. Attach this 
documentation in the Other Study Documents section of the Initial Review Submission Packet.  If  
you have any correspondence from the FDA or sponsor regarding this device,  
please attach it to the  application.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
10.6 * EXPANDED ACCESS: Is this an expanded access or compassionate use protocol, meaning the 
primary  purpose  is to diagnose,  monitor  or treat  a patient's  condition,  rather  than  the collection  of 
safety and efficacy data of the experimental agent:  (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  
11.0 Sample Size and Eligibility  Criteria  
11.1 ENROLLMENT TARGET: How many people will you enroll:  
 
 
View 
Details   
Device Name   
Is the Device 
FDA Approved  Is this a new 
device or a new 
use of an already 
approved device   
IDE Number  
 Illumina Sequencer  No Yes  
Manufacturer/Supplier of 
Device  UCSF  
Medicare Category  A B 
Where will the Devices Be 
Stored   
Will Devices be supplied at no 
Cost Yes 
Is this a HUD (HDE)  No 
HDE Number   
Is the Device FDA Approved  No 
Is this a new device or a new 
use of an already approved 
device   
Yes 
Is an IDE necessary  No 
IDE Number   
Who holds the IDE  N/A 
IDE details   
In the opinion of the sponsor, 
select the level of risk 
associated with this device   
No Significant Risk  
 
 
 
400 
 
 
If there are multiple participant groups, indicate how many people will be 
in each group:  
 
1. The key clinicians  from each of our study  sites will ascertain  and recruit  patients  together  with 
dedicated genetic counselors and research assistants who will be located on -site. We will recruit 
individuals with African American, Latino, Native American, Asian/Pacific Islander, and mixed 
ancestries, with a target of 75% underrepresented minorities (URM) overall, but at a minimum 
60%.  Our anticipated  breakdown  is approximately  40% Latino,  20% African  American,  15% other 
URM;  25% non-Hispanic  white  and non-URM Asian  patients  based  on current  clinical  composition 
(see Enrollment form). More than 500 cases of fetal anomalies identified by ultrasound are seen 
per year,  indicating  an easily  achieved  recruitment  rate of 14% overall,  20% for URM and 8% for 
non-URM.  
 
2. We anticipate  recruiting  6-10 administrators,  managers  or clinicians  at each participating  site 
to complete the Organizational Readiness for Change (ORCA)  survey.   
11.3 SAMPLE SIZE JUSTIFICATION: Explain how and why the number of people was chosen. For multi -site 
studies, this is referring to the number that will be enrolled across all sites:  
 
UCSF Fetal Treatment Center at UCSF Betty Irene Moore Women's Hospital. P regnant women 
carrying fetuses with anomalous ultrasound findings will be recruited through the UCSF Fetal 
Treatment  Center  (FTC).  The FTC was the first such program  in the world,  established  nearly  30 
years  ago, and sees a diverse  patient  population  with a broad  spectrum  of congenital  anomalies 
and suspected  genetic  disorders.  Approximately  500 patients  per year are seen through  the FTC, 
which has a long history of participation in clinical studies involving fetal abnormalities.63 -65 
Recent ly, the Center for Maternal -Fetal Precision Medicine (CMFPM) has been established to 
conduct clinical and translational research through the FTC; Dr. Norton is a co -Director of the 
CMFPM  and an active  member  of the FTC clinical  team.  The FTC includes  a genetic  counselor  that 
is actively  involved  in research  efforts,  and a team  of research  nurses  who are supportive  of, and 
experienced in, the recruitment of patients and the conduct of clinical research. A protocol is in 
place for recruitment of  women with fetal anomalies for  WES 
 
ZSFGH  will also be a site for recruitment  of fetal cases.  The obstetrical  service  at ZSFGH  cares  for 
approximately  1,200  pregnant  women  per year from a very diverse  patient  population,  and these 
women  all undergo  obstetrical  ultrasound  on site. When  fetal anomalies  are detected,  patients  will 
be counseled by a genetic counselor and a perinatologist or obstetrical specialist with genetics 
training. Dr. Juan Vargas, the Director of Obstetrics at ZSFGH, is very supportive of this project. 
Our teams have collaborated on a large number of clinical studies and our research staff screen 
and recruit patients at ZSFGH for a number of clinical trials, having access to the electronic 
medical record (EMR) and the clinics for patient recruitment. We anticipate recruitment of 
approximately 50 antenatal patients from ZSFGH over the 4 years of the project; recruitment 
efforts  will be supported  by the genetic  counselor  and research  assistants  who are enrolling  at the 
FTC. 
 
UCSF Fresno Community Medical Center will also be a site for recruitment of fetal cases. UCSF 
Fresno Community Medical Center serves a diverse patient population, and these women all 
undergo obstetrical ultrasound on site. When fetal anomalies are detected , patients will be 
counseled by a genetic counselor and a perinatologist or obstetrical specialist with genetics 
training. We anticipate recruitment of approximately 30 antenatal patients from UCSF Fresno 
Community  Medical  Center  over the remaining  2 years  of the project;  recruitment  efforts  will be 
supported  by the genetic  counselor  and research  assistants  who are enrolling  at the FTC. 
 
We are electing to recruit patients participating in an analogous study (1 7-21662  (Fetal birth 
defects  prospective  database:  Toward  a precision -based  approach))  as this study  is also offering 
exome sequencing in pregnancies affected by a specific anomaly called non -immune hydrops 
fetalis. The additional participation in this protocol would involve these participants completing 
the surveys related to clinical utility of the test. There is no additional procedures other than 
these study  surveys.   
11.4 * PARTICIPANT AGE RANGE: Eligible age ranges: (REQUIRED)  
  
  0-6 years  
  7-12 years  
  13-17 years  
  18-64 years  
  65+  
11.5 * STUDY POPULATIONS: Data will be collected from or about the following types of people (check all 
that apply): (REQUIRED)  
 
  Inpatients
 Outpatients  
  Family members  or caregivers  
  Providers  
  People  who have a condition  but who are not being  seen as patients  
  Healthy  volunteers  
  Students  
  Staff of UCSF  or affiliated  institutions  
  None of the  above   
11.6 * SPECIAL SUBJECT GROUPS: Check the populations that may be enrolled: (REQUIRED)  
 
  Children /  Minors  
  Adult subjects unable to consent for  themselves  
  Adult  subjects  unable  to consent  for themselves  (emergency  setting)  
  Subjects with diminished capacity to  consent  
  Subjects  unable  to read,  speak  or understand  English  
  Pregnant  women  
  Fetuses
 Neonates
 Prisoners  
  Economically  or educationally  disadvantaged  persons  
  None of the  above  
If not already addressed in the Background and Significance questions in 
the Research Plan section or elsewhere, explain why it is appropriate to 
include the types of subjects checked above in this particular study:  
 
 
Describe the additional safeguards that have been included in the study to 
protect the rights and welfare of these subjects and minimize coercion or 
undue influence:  
Here are some examples:  
evaluating capacity to consent for individuals who may be decisionally 
impaired (specify how)  
calibrating payment amounts to be non -coercive for the financially 
disadvantaged  
conducting more in -depth evaluations of subjects’ understanding of 
the study and the voluntary nature of participation  
involving advocates in the consent process  
More information and other safeguards are described here: Vulnerable  
Subject Populations and Recruiting Staff and Students .  
 

We will be offering whole exome sequencing to potential research subjects who have already 
completed  a prenatal  diagnostic  procedure  and would  be performing  this testing  on the previously 
obtained specimen. Study subjects will be educated using non -directi ve counseling by a board 
certified and licensed genetic counselor who is trained in educating patients on complex genetic 
topics  and providing  information  including  the risks,  benefits  and limitations  of genomic  analysis.   
11.7 INCLUSION CRITERIA: Briefly describe the population(s) that will be involved in this study. Include 
anyone that data will be collected from or about (e.g. patients, healthy controls, caregivers, 
providers, administrators, students, parents, family members, etc.):  
 
Women carrying a pregnancy with an ultrasound diagnosis of a major structural anomaly (or 
multiple  anomalies)  in a major  organ  system  (cardiac,  central  nervous  system,  thorax,  genito - 
urinary, gastrointestinal/ventral wall, skeletal and or multiple anomal ies ) 
 
Clnical concern for a potential underlying genetic condition  
 
Completed  or plan to complete  CVS or amniocentesis  with chromosome  analysis  or microarray 
(including VOUS) or this testing on products of  conception  
 
Available maternal sample   
11.8 EXCLUSION CRITERIA: List any exclusion criteria (e.g. reasons why someone would not be included 
in the study):  
 
Prior exome  sequencing  performed  for a clinical  or research  indication 
Lack of phenotypic indication of a likely underlying genetic etiology 
Mother unwilling or unable to provide a  specimen   
11.9 * RESEARCH CONDUCTED ON PATIENT CARE WARDS: Do any study activities take place on any 
patient  care units  including  inpatient  wards,  peri- or post-operative  care units,  operating  rooms,  or 
in the Emergency  Department  at UCSF  Health  medical  facilities:  (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes   No 
 
Attach a letter of acknowledgement for the study from the involved 
patient care manager. If you don't know who the patient care 
manager is, click here to send an email to the nursing group.   
11.10 * INTENSIVE CARE NURSERY (ICN): Will you be enrolling any babies who are admitted to the 
Intensive  Care  Nursery  (ICN)  (this  includes  critically  ill babies  as well as lower  acuity  patients  who 
need overnight monitoring and support):  (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  
11.11 * EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT: Does your protocol or study involve any of the following patient 
related  activities  in the emergency  department  (e.g.  subject  identification,  recruitment,  consent, 
blood  draws,  specimen  retrieval,  involvement  of ED staff  (nursing,  tech,  and/or  physician),  or any 
other ED based procedures):  (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  
12.0 Inclusion of Minors in  Research  
 

12.1 REGULATORY CATEGORIES OF RESEARCH: Select all the regulatory categories that apply:  
 
  No greater than minimal risk (45 CFR 46.404, 21 CFR  50.51)  
  Greater  than minimal  risk but presenting  prospect  of direct  benefit  (45 CFR 46.405,  21 CFR 
50.52)  
  Greater  than minimal  risk (though  only a minor  increase  over minimal  risk) and no prospect 
of direct benefit but likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the subjects disorder or 
condition (45 CFR 46.406, 21 CFR  50.53)  
  Research  not otherwise  approvable  which  presents  an opportunity  to understand,  prevent,  or 
alleviate  a serious  problem  affecting  the health  or welfare  of children  (45 CFR 46.407,  21 CFR 
50.54)  
 
Explain why the research in this study falls under the above category or 
categories:   
12.2  
MINORS CONSENTING: Will this study enroll minors who can legally consent for themselves (as in 
the case of emancipated minors or minors being treated for pregnancy or drug use without their 
parents  knowing).  This is different  from  agreeing  to be in the study  even  when  their  parents  are the 
ones  providing  'official'  consent,  which  we refer  to as 'providing  assent':  
 
Note: This is very rare and the answer is usually 'No.'  
 
   Yes     No  
12.3  
PARENTAL  PERMISSION  VS. WAIVER:  Please  review  the guidance  to see under  what  circumstances 
the IRB can waive parental  permission.  
 
  Parental permission will be  obtained  
  Waiver  of parental  permission  is requested:  The waiver  meets  the provisions  for a waiver  of 
consent  (i.e., the research  poses  minimal  risk, it could  not practicably  be carried  out without 
the waiver of parental permission, AND the waiver will not adversely affect the rights and 
welfare of the minor participants (45 CFR  46.116(d))  
  Waiver of parental permission is requested: Parental permission is not a reasonable 
requirement  to protect  the minor (e.g. neglected  or abused  children)  or parental  knowledge 
of the study  may endanger  the health  or welfare  of the minor  (45 CRF 46.408(c))  
 
Provide details on the other protections that will be in place:   
12.4 ASSENT OF MINORS OR WAIVER: Please review the guidance to see under what circumstances the 
IRB can waive assent.  
  Assent  of children  developmentally  and psychologically  able to provide  assent  will be obtained  
  Waiver  of assent  is requested:  The capability  of some  or all of the children  is so limited  that 
they cannot reasonably be consulted  
  Waiver of assent is requested: The research holds out a prospect of direct benefit that is 
important  to the health  or well-being  of the children  and is available  only in the context  of the 
research  
  Waiver  of assent  is requested:  The activities  involving  the minor  are limited  to chart  review  or 
the something equally  innocuous  
  Waiver  of assent  is requested:  It is not culturally  appropriate  to involve  the minor  in the 
decision to participate (e.g. some foreign  research)   
12.5 DOCUMENTATION OF PERMISSION AND ASSENT: (select all that will be used):  
 
  Permission form addressed to the  parents   

  Simplified  assent  form addressed  to the child,  7-12 years  old (parents  get separate  form)  
  Assent  form addressed  to the child,  13 years  and older (for subjects  and parents)  
  Assent  form addressed  to the child,  13 years  and older (parents  get separate  form) 
Check  one: 
  One parent's signature will be  obtained  
  Two parents' signatures will be  obtained  
 
If this study  is approvable  under  regulatory  category  .405 and you plan to get permission  from 
only one parent,  explain  why you think  one parent's  permission  is sufficient:   
12.6 WARDS OF THE STATE: Might this study enroll wards of the state:  
 
   Yes     No  
13.0 Recruitment and  Consent  
13.1 * COMPETITIVE ENROLLMENT: Is this a competitive enrollment clinical trial? By competitive 
enrollment,  we mean  that sites  who do not enroll  participants  early  may not get to participate  at all: 
(REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  
13.2 * SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION METHODS: What kinds of methods will be used to identify potential 
participants for recruitment (check all that apply): (REQUIRED)  
 
  Review of patients' conditions, history, test results, etc. (includes patients seen in clinic, 
scheduled  for surgery,  a procedure,  imaging,  or tests,  or seen in the Emergency  Department 
as well as searching  through  medical  record  data for possible  cohort  identification)  
  Already approved recruitment  registry  
  Re-contact of participants from the investigators' previous  studies  
  Referrals  from colleagues  (attach  the 'Dear  Colleague'  letter  or other  recruitment  materials 
you will provide to  colleagues)  
  Referrals from the community / word of  mouth  
  Advertisements  (flyers,  brochures,  radio  or t.v. ads, posting  on clinical  research  sites or social 
media, presentation of the study at community events/media,  etc.) 
  Online  recruiting  tool (describe  below)  
  CTSI Recruitment Services  unit 
  Posting  on UCSF  Clinical  Trials,  ClinicalTrials.gov  or other  publicly  available  clinical  trial website  
  Other method (describe  below)  
Attach your recruitment materials (e.g., flyers, ads, recruitment 
letter templates, email text, etc.) in the Other Study Documents 
section of the Initial Review Submission Packet Form.  
 
* Provide details about the subject identification methods: (REQUIRED)  
Potentail referring providers have been sent the study brochure and heard about the study by 
word of mouth. We will use the attached exome sequencing recruitment script to reach out to 
patients that have been identified by their provider that is not directly involved in the study 
recruitment. We will also use this brochure to offer enrollment to this study for patients enrolled 
and consented  under  IRB 17-21662  (Fetal birth defects  prospect ive database:  Toward  a precision - 
based  approach).  
 
Our principal  investigators  have identified  a list of potential  respondents  who meet  the criteria  for 
completion of the Organization Readiness for Change (ORCA)  survey.   

13.3 * SEARCHING OF MEDICAL RECORDS: (REQUIRED)  
 
Whose patients are they:  
  Investigators'  own patients  or patients  seen within  the same  practice  
  Patients not under the care of the  investigators  
How and by whom will records be accessed and searched (check all that 
apply):  
  Self-search in APeX or other medical records  source  
  Self-search  using  UCSF's  Research  Cohort  Selection  Tool 
  CTSI Consultation Service Recruitment  Services  
  UCSF Academic Research Services  (ARS)  
  University  of California  Research  Exchange  (UC ReX) 
  Other method (describe  below)   
13.4 DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY: How, when, and by whom will eligibility for recruitment be 
determined:  
 
The key clinicians  from each of our study  sites will ascertain  and recruit  patients  together  with 
dedicated  genetic  counselors  and research  assistants  who will be located  on-site. This will occur 
at the time of a prenatal clinical visit and involve review of ultrasound findings and previously 
completed prenatal diagnosis  procedures.  
 
Our principal  investigators  have identified  a list of potential  respondents  who meet  the criteria  for 
completion of the Organization Readiness for Change (ORCA)  survey.   
13.5 * INITIATION OF CONTACT: Who initiates contact (check all that apply): (REQUIRED)  
 
  Investigators/study  team  
  UCSF  recruitment  unit (e.g. CTSI Consultation  Services)  
  Potential  participant  
  Other (explain  below)   
13.6 * HOW IS CONTACT INITIATED: (check all that apply): (REQUIRED)  
 
  In person  
  Phone  
  Letter  / email  
  Website or  app 
  Other (explain  below)  
 
Attach the telephone recruitment script in the Other Study 
Documents section of the Initial Review Submission Packet Form. If 
potential participants will initiate contact, attach the telephone 
screening script that will be used to provide more information about 
the study and determine if callers are eligible to participate.  
 
Attach the recruitment letter or email template in the Other Study 
Documents section of the Initial Review Submission Packet Form.   
13.7 RECRUITMENT PLAN: Based on the checkboxes you chose above, please provide a narrative 
describing your recruitment plan. We want to know:  

Who is conducting the search for potential participants, and how?  
How are potential subjects being approached for recruitment? By whom, and when?  
 
If there  will be more  than  one participant  group  (e.g.  patients,  healthy  controls,  caregivers,  family 
members, providers, etc.), provide details about the recruitment plans for each group. 
(Recommended length - 100-250 words)  
 
For fetal cases, patients will be approached by a clinician, typically a maternal -fetal specialist, 
who has counseled  the patient  regarding  the fetal anomaly  that has been detected.  At the time of 
recognizing  a potential  study  participant  they will be educated  regsarding  the option  for research 
participation  and provided  an informational  study  specific  brochure.  Written  informed  consent  will 
be obtained  by the study  prenatal  genetic  counselor.  Many  patients  will have undergone  prenatal 
diagnostic  testing  in an outside  laboratory;  in such cases,  cells or extracted  DNA from the original 
fetal sample  will be used for the purpose  of this study.  The consent  process  for prenatal  WES will 
include  pre-test counseling  and the option  of choosing  whether  or not to receive  uncertain  results 
and secondary findings. A study brochure, informing prospective participants of the aims of the 
study  and whole  exome  sequencing  procedure  has been created  and will be provided  for review.  
 
This study  is specific  to UCSF/ZSFGH  and UCSF  Fresno  Community  Medical  Center  locations.  We 
will educate providers in our MFM and genetic counseling program through the already 
established  methods  of information  dissemination  in these  teams.  We will educate  the UCSF  MFM 
community that services the prenatal diagnosis center in their quarterly PDC meeting. The 
genetic counselors in the UCSF pr enatal diagnosis center also service the genetic counseling 
needs of ZSFGH. They will be educated and given updates regarding this study in their weekly 
meeting held Wednesdays. This meeting is devoted to discussing complex cases, testing 
strategies and/or  research opportunities to offer to  patients.  
 
We will not be actively  recruiting  from sites outside  of UCSF,  however,  patients  sent to UCSF  for a 
second opinion with concern for a fetal anomaly that is confirmed will be offered enrollment 
during their visit to  UCSF.  
 
Finally, study participants pursuing exome sequencing under IRB 1 7-21662  (Fetal birth defects 
prospective  database:  Toward  a precision -based  approach)  will be offered  enrollment  in this study 
as well. These  participants  will be recruited  for the purposed  of enabling  us to incude  their health 
data and exome  sequencing  results  in our database,  there  will not be any study  procedures  such 
as blood draw or exome duplicated by participating in both projects. Those that have consented 
to IRB 17-21662  and agree  to also enroll  in this study  will also be asked  to complete  the surveys  
associated with this study  protocol.  
 
We will also be recruiting  6-10 administrators,  managers  or clinicians  at each participating  site to 
complete  the Organizational  Readiness  for Change  (ORCA)  survey,  which  will be emailed  to these 
potential participants. Completion of the survey reflects these participants consent since these 
surveys  are anonymous  and project  activities  do not involve  the collection  of personal  information 
about the  respondent.   
13.8  * CONSENT  METHODS:  How  will permission  to participate  (i.e.,  informed  consent)  be obtained  from 
each  potential  participant.  If there  will be multiple  groups  and different  plans  for consenting  each, 
check all that apply. See the orange Help bubble to the right for more detailed guidance. 
Participants will (check all that apply):  (REQUIRED)  
 
  Sign a consent  form at the end of the consent  discussion  (signed  consent)  
  Provide online 'eConsent' using an E -Signature  system  
  Click through  a link in a survey  or email  after reading  about  the study  and then complete  the 
study online (electronic  consent)  
  Be told about  the study  and be given  a handout/information  sheet  and be asked  if they agree 
to participate (verbal  consent)  
  Complete  the study  activities  and turn in materials,  as in the case of a completed  survey  that 
is placed  in a drop box or mailed  to the study  team  (implied  consent)  
  Not be able to provide  consent  and will have a family  member  consent  for them,  as in the 
case of a critically ill or unconscious patient (surrogate  consent)  
  Not be able to provide consent (emergency waiver of consent - allowed for minimal risk 
research  or greater  than minimal  risk research  with an approved  community  consultation  plan)  
  Not know  about  the study,  as in the case of chart  reviews  or observations  of public  behavior 
(waiver of  consent)   
 

  Other method (describe  below)  
 
Attach your consent form, information sheet, or electronic consent 
text in the Informed Consent Documents section of the Initial 
Review Submission Packet Form.   
13.9  * CONSENT  PROCESS:  Describe  the process  for obtaining  informed  consent,  including  details  such  as 
who will have  the consent  discussion  and when  participants  will be asked  to sign the consent  form  in 
relation to finding out about the study: (REQUIRED) We encourage researchers to review our  
guidance on obtaining and documenting informed  consent . 
 
If there  are multiple  groups  being  consented  differently,  provide  details  about  the consent 
process for each  group.  
If you are relying  on verbal  or implied  consent , provide  details  about  how that will happen. 
For studies  using  online  recruitment  and consent  or consent  via mail,  provide  details  here.  
 
The patient  will be educated  regarding  the anomalies  identified  on ultrasound  in their pregnancy 
and meet with a genetic counselor associated with the study to review the testing completed so 
far in the pregnancy  and how it contrasts  from whole  exome  sequencin g. A detailed  explaination 
of the risks,  benefits  and limitations  of whole  exome  sequencing  (WES)  will take place.  After this 
discussion the patient will be offered to pursue this testing with the cost of testing covered 
through  the study.  Because  exome  sequencing  is a new approach,  a small  number  of parents  and 
families will be invited to participate in an additional study, this would include both patient that 
pursued  exome  sequencing  and those  that declined.  That study  will involve  being  interview ed by 
a member of our team, by telephone or in person. For those patients being consented remotely 
we will be using Docusign as the e -consent  platform.  
 
Regarding  the ORCA  survey  for administrators,  managers  or clinicians,  these  participants  will be 
sent and email explaining the survey. Completion of the survey reflects these participants 
consent  since  these  surveys  are anonymous  and project  activities  do not involve  the collection  of 
personal information about the  respondent.  
 
* It is important that the people obtaining consent are qualified to do so. 
Briefly describe the training and experience these individuals have in 
obtaining informed consent: (REQUIRED)  
Informed  consent  will be obtained  by genetic  counselors  supporting  this study.  Genetic  counselors 
are uniquely trained to educate patients on complex genetic information to ensure informed 
decision making regarding the benefits, limits and risks for pursing this tesitng that may be 
related to the fetus, their p arents and other family  members,   
13.10  * CONSENT  COMPREHENSION:  Indicate  how the study  team  will assess  and enhance  the subjects' 
understanding  of study  procedures,  risks,  and benefits  prior  to signing  the consent  form  (check  all 
that apply): (REQUIRED) Tip: Review the Consent Comprehension - Learning Notes in the Help 
bubble at the right for specific questions that can be asked to assess comprehension, consider 
using the UCSF Decision -Making Capacity Assesment Tool , and review our guidance on obtaining  
written  or verbal  informed  consent  for more detail  on how to conduct  the assessment.  
 
  The study team will engage the potential participant in a dialogue, using open -ended 
questions  about  the nature  of the study  or the experimental  treatment,  the risks and benefits 
of participating, and the voluntary nature of  participation  
  Potential participants will be asked or shown a series of questions to assess their 
understanding  of the study  purpose,  procedures,  risks and benefits,  as well as the voluntary 
nature  of participation  (especially  appropriate  when  the consent  process  happens  online  or 
through a mobile health  app) 
  Other method (describe  below):  
 
Provide details of the other approaches that will be used, if using another 
method to assess comprehension:   
 

13.11 * DECEPTION: Does this study rely on some deception or misinformation about what the 
researchers are observing to get valid data? (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  
13.13 * WAIVER OF DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNED CONSENT: Select the regulatory category under which 
the IRB may waive the requirement to obtain signed consent for this study:  
 
  The only record  linking  the subject  and the research  would  be the consent  document  and the 
principal  risk would  be potential  harm  resulting  from a breach  of confidentiality.  Each subject 
will be asked whether they want documentation linking them with the research. 46.117(c) 
(1) 
  The research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to su bjects and involves no 
procedures  for which  written  consent  is normally  required  outside  of the research  context. 
46.117(c)  (2)  
13.14 TIME: What is the estimated time commitment for participants (per visit and in total):  
 
Initial  participation  in the study  will take a total of 2-3 hours  on 2 different  days.  One of these 
visits will be devoted to education around the benefits, limits and risks of whole exome 
sequencing,  as well as patient  consent.  The second  visit will be edvoted  to review  results.  The 
follow  up interviews  and visits  will take 5 minutes  to one hour during  several  follow  up visits. 
Participation in this study will take place over 12 -18 months.  
 
 
IMPORTANT TIP: Ensure this information is consistent with the 
information provided in the consent form.   
13.17 OTHER ALTERNATIVES: Describe other alternatives to study participation, if any, that are available 
to prospective subjects:  
 
For study participants that declined whole exome sequencing a small number of parents and 
families will be invited to participate in an additional study. That study will involve being 
interviewed  by a member  of our team,  by telephone  or in person.  This interview  is expected  to 
take about 20  minutes.  
 
Potential  study  participants  may also pursue  clinical  prenatal  whole  exome  sequencing  outside  of 
this study.   
14.0 Waiver of Consent/Authorization for Recruitment 
Purposes  
This section is required when medical records may be reviewed to 
determine eligibility for recruitment.  
14.1 * PRACTICABILITY OF OBTAINING CONSENT PRIOR TO ACCESS: Study personnel need to access 
protected  health  information  (PHI)  during  the recruitment  process  and it is not practicable  to obtain 
informed consent until potential subjects have been identified:  (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes 
 
If no, a waiver of consent/authorization is NOT needed.   
14.2 * RISK TO PRIVACY: A waiver for screening of health records to identify potential subjects poses no 
more than minimal risk to privacy for participants:  
  

  Yes 
 
If no, a waiver of authorization can NOT be granted.   
14.3 * RIGHTS/WELFARE: Screening health records prior to obtaining consent will not adversely affect 
subjects' rights and welfare:  
 
  Yes 
 
If no, a waiver of authorization can NOT be granted.   
14.4 * IDENTIFIERS: Check all the identifiers that will be collected prior to obtaining informed consent:  
 
  Names
 Dates  
  Postal  addresses  
  Phone  numbers  
  Fax numbers  
  Email  addresses  
  Social  Security  Numbers*  
  Medical  record  numbers  
  Health plan  numbers  
  Account  numbers  
  License or  certificate  numbers  
  Vehicle ID  numbers  
  Device  identifiers  or serial  numbers  
  Web URLs 
  IP address  numbers  
  Biometric  identifiers  
  Facial  photos  or other  identifiable  images  
  Any other unique  identifier  
  None  
 
Note: HIPAA rules require that you collect the minimum necessary.   
14.5 * HEALTH INFORMATION: Describe any health information that will be collected prior to obtaining 
informed consent:  
 
Prior to obtaining  informed  consent  the patients  prenatal  ultrsaound  reports  and results  from 
prenatal diagnosis will be  reviewed.  
 
Note: HIPAA requires that you collect the minimum necessary.   
14.6 * DATA RETENTION/DESTRUCTION PLAN: Describe your plan to destroy any identifiable data 
collected  to determine  eligibility  for recruitment.  This should  be done  at the earliest  opportunity.  If 
you plan to retain  identifiable  recruitment  data,  provide  the justification  for doing  so: 
 
All study  participants  will be assigned  a study  number  and clinical  information  for data analysis 
will be performed  using  that assigned  study  number.  There  will be a locked  master  list that will 
include a key to identify study subjects with their study  number.   
15.0 Risks and  Benefits  
15.1 RESEARCH -RELATED RISKS: Check if your study involves any of these specific research -related risks  

to participants that may need to be disclosed in the consent form:  
 
  Physical discomforts or  pain 
  Risks to employment, or social or legal  standing  
  Risk that the study  team  may observe  possible  evidence  of child abuse,  elder abuse,  or a 
threat to self or others that they are required to  report  
 
* For any boxes checked above, describe how you will minimize these risks 
and discomforts, e.g., adding or increasing the frequency  
of monitoring, additional screening to identify and exclude people with 
diminished kidney or liver function, or modification of procedures such as 
changing imaging studies to avoid giving contrast agent to people who are 
more likely to suffer side effects from it, etc.: (REQUIRED)  
Physical discomfort or pain from blood draws:  
 
Risks to employment, or social or legal standing from genetic research:  
 
Possible personal discomfort due to sensitive topics (genetic testing in pregnancy)   
15.2 * RISKS: Describe any anticipated risks and discomforts not listed above: (REQUIRED)  
 
Sometimes  people  feel anxiety  about  learning  new or uncertain  genetic  information  about 
their pregnancy or their family. Uncertain results in a pregnancy can be especially 
challenging  to incorporate  into prenatal  decision  making. Information  about  biological 
relationships  will not be shared  by the researchers,  unless  this information  is of 
medical importance to you or your  family.  
Information  about  family  relationships  can be learned  during  testing.  Testing  may reveal 
unexpected  information  about  blood -relatedness.  It may reveal  situations  where  a father 
or another relative has no biological relationship with a  child.  
Genetic  testing  can also cause  stress  to family  relationships  when  different  family 
members disagree about the need for  testing.  
The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) is a federal law tha t protects 
patients against employment and health insurance discrimination. That means that 
employers  and health  insurance  companies  cannot  use genetic  information  when  making 
hiring  or coverage  decisions.  The law has limits,  however.  Life insurance,  long-term care 
insurance,  and disability  insurance,  are not included  in the law’s  protections.  GINA  does 
not cover those serving in the military. Some state laws also include protection against 
genetic discrimination but safeguards are not  compl eted 
We will take appropriate  steps  to ensure  that personal  health  information  is kept 
private,  however,  unforeseen  events  could  result  in a loss of privacy.   
15.3  
MINIMIZING  RISKS:  Describe  the steps  you have  taken  to minimize  the risks/discomforts  to 
subjects. Examples  include:  
 
designing the study to make use of procedures involving less risk when appropriate 
minimizing  study  procedures  by taking  advantage  of clinical  procedures  conducted  on the 
study  participants  
mitigating  risks  by planning  special  monitoring  or conducting  supportive  interventions  for the 
study  
having a plan for evaluation and possible referral of subjects who report suicidal ideation  
 
We will take extensive precautions to maintain participant confidentiality throughout the 
study.  First,  lists of individuals  who will be participating  will be kept in a locked  drawer  and in 
password  protected  computer  files in the office  of the study  coordinator.  Used consent  forms  will 
also be locked  in a filing cabinet  in the office  of the study  coordinator,  and electronic  forms  of the 
transcripts will be maintained securely on her computer. Confidentiality of all study -related 
records  will be maintained  in accordance  with State  and Federal  laws.  Only the PI and a limited  
number of study personnel will have access to data which will be encrypted and stored on a   
 

secure server. De -identified data will be stored in a secure HIPAA compliant database. Datasets 
used for analysis  will be de-identified.  Participant  identities  will not be revealed  in any publication 
that may result from the proposed  study.  
 
While there is a risk of emotional distress should be acknowledged, women are only eligible for 
this study  if they have already  elected  to undergo  prenatal  genetic  diagnosis,  where  the potential 
pychological and personal/family health risks upfront for patient consideration and informed 
decision making regarindg research participation by a consultati on with a licensed and certified 
genetic counselorwhere the potential risk for false negative and positive results are typically 
discussed with a genetic counselor. Every effort will be made to educate study subjects and 
provide  information  about  the study  in a way that mitigates  this risk. 
 
To mitigate  risks for inaccurate  information  from the technology  we will confirm  all variants  using 
a secondary Sanger  sequencing.   
15.5 * BENEFITS: (REQUIRED) Note: These are the benefits that the IRB will consider during their review. 
They are not necessarily appropriate to include in the consent form.  
 
Possible immediate and/or direct benefits to participants and society at 
large (check all that apply):  
  Positive  health  outcome  (e.g. improvement  of condition,  relief  of pain, increased  mobility, 
etc.) 
  Closer  follow -up than standard  care may lead to improved  outcomes  or patient  engagement  
  Health and lifestyle changes may occur as a result of  participation  
  Knowledge may be gained about their health and health  conditions  
  Feeling  of contribution  to knowledge  in the health  or social  sciences  field 
  The research  presents  a reasonable  opportunity  to further  the understanding,  prevention,  or 
alleviation  of a serious  problem  affecting  the health  or welfare  of children  
  Other benefit  (describe  below)  
  None   
15.6 RISK TO BENEFIT RATIO: Explain why the risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to anticipated 
benefits, if any, to the participant or society:  
 
We may find a gene variant  or variants  that are important  to the health  of the 
patient's pregnancy and/or the health of their  family.  
If a variant  is found  to explain  the birth defects  identified  in the pregnancy  this information  may 
be valuable to enable providers to more accurately counsel about long term outcomes, 
individualize  antenatal  care, allow  more  informed  decision -making,  and improve  the ability  of the 
care team to plan for specific neonatal  needs.   
15.7  * DATA  AND SAFETY  MONITORING:  Do you have  a Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan  (DSMP)  for this 
study  (A DSMP  is required  for Greater  than  Minimal  Risk research ): (Click  the Help  link for guidance 
on risk determination)  (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No 
 
This is not required for minimal risk research but the UCSF IRB strongly recommends 
one to ensure the data collected are adequate to meet the research aims:   
16.0 Confidentiality, Privacy, and Data  Security  
16.1 PROTECTING PRIVACY: Indicate how subject privacy will be protected:  
 
  Conduct conversations about the research in a private  room  
  Ask the subject  how they wish to be communicated  with – what phone  numbers  can be 
called,  can messages  be left, can they receive  mail about  the study  at home,  etc.  

  Take special  measures  to ensure  that data collected  about  sensitive  issues  do not get added 
to their medical  records  or shared  with others  without  the subject’s  permission  
  Other methods (describe  below)   
16.2 SENSITIVE DATA: Do any of the instruments ask about illegal or stigmatized behavior:  
 
   Yes     No  
16.3 SIGNIFICANT CONSEQUENCES OF A LOSS OF PRIVACY OR CONFIDENTIALITY: Could a breach of 
privacy  or confidentiality  result  in any significant  consequences  to participants,  such  as criminal  or 
civil liability,  loss of state  or federal  benefits,  or be damaging  to the participant's  financial  standing, 
employability, or  reputation:  
 
  Yes   No 
 
 
Check all that apply:  
 
  Embarrassment  
  Criminal or civil  liability  
  Loss of state or federal  benefits  
  Damaging  to the participant's  financial  standing,  employability,  or reputation  
  Potential  risks to insurability  (health,  disability,  or life insurance)  
Describe the potential consequences:  
The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) is a federal law that protects patients 
against  employment  and health  insurance  discrimination.  That means  that employers  and health 
insurance companies cannot use genetic information when making hiring or c overage decisions. 
The law has limits, however. Life insurance, long -term care insurance, and disability insurance, 
are not included  in the law’s protections.  GINA  does not cover  those  serving  in the military.  Some 
state laws also include  protection  against  genetic  discrimination  but safeguards  are not completed   
16.4 EXTRA CONFIDENTIALITY MEASURES: Explain any extra steps that will be taken to assure 
confidentiality  and protect  identifiable  information  from  improper  use and disclosure,  if any: 
 
For our analysis all study subjects including their clinical information (ultrasound findings in the 
pregnancy, prenatal health records, pregnancy decision making and long term pregnancy 
outcome) and whole exome sequencing test result s will be fully de -identified and assigned a 
study number. The master key that identifies study subject with their study number will be 
maintained  in a locked  folder  with only a small  amount  of study  staff including  key researchers  to 
have access to this  key.  
16.5  * REPORTABILITY:  Do you anticipate  that this study  may collect  information  that State  or Federal 
law requires  to be reported  to other  officials,  such  as elder  abuse,  child  abuse,  or threat  to self or 
others:  (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  
16.6 CERTIFICATE OF CONFIDENTIALITY: Will this study obain a Certificate of Confidentiality:  
 
  Yes   No 
 
Please include the recommended Certificate of Confidentiality  
language in the consent form.   
16.7 SHARING OF RESEARCH RESULTS: Will there be any sharing of EXPERIMENTAL research test results  

with subjects or their care providers:  
 
  Yes   No 
 
Note: This is unusual and not recommended, particularly in cases 
where the tests are carried out in a non -CLIA certified laboratory, 
the results are of unproven clinical significance, or where there are 
not known preventative strategies and/or treatmen ts. If these are 
the most likely scenarios for your study, you should check 'No.'  
If you have an incidental finding of clear clinical significance, call 
the HRPP QIU at 415 -476-1814 for a consult.  
 
Explain under what circumstances research results may be shared:  
This testing will be performed in a CLIA certified lab to perform prenatal clinical whole exome 
sequencing.  These  results  will therefore  be shared  with both the patient  and their care team  per 
patient consent  indications.   
16.9 * HIPAA APPLICABILITY: Study data will be: (REQUIRED)  
 
  Derived  from a medical  record  (e.g. APeX,  OnCore,  etc. Identify  source  below)  
  Added to the hospital or clinical medical  record  
  Created  or collected  as part of health  care 
  Used to make health care  decisions  
  Obtained  from the subject,  including  interviews,  questionnaires  
  Obtained ONLY from a foreign country or  countries  
  Obtained  ONLY  from records  open to the public  
  Obtained from existing research  records  
  None of the  above  
  Derived  from the Integrated  Data Repository  (IDR)  or The Health  Record  Data Service 
(THREDS) at  SFGH  
 
In addition to signing a consent form, each subject will have to sign 
the UCSF Research Subject Authorization Form (HIPAA Form).  
Upload the HIPAA Author ization Form in the Other Study 
Documents section of the Initial Review Submission Packet Form. 
Failure to have patients sign the HIPAA Authorization is one of the  
most common findings from QIU Routine Site Visits.  Please call 
the IRB office at 415 -476-1814 if you have questions about HIPAA 
research  requirements.  
 
If derived from a medical record, identify source:  
 
 
APeX, Epic systems   
16.10 * IDENTIFIERS: Check all identifiers that will be collected and included in the research records, 
even temporarily: (REQUIRED)  
 
  Names
 Dates  
  Postal  addresses  
  Phone  numbers  
  Fax numbers  
  Email  addresses   
 

  Social  Security  Numbers*  
  Medical  record  numbers  
  Health plan  numbers  
  Account  numbers  
  License or  certificate  numbers  
  Vehicle ID  numbers  
  Device  identifiers  or serial  numbers  
  Web URLs 
  IP address  numbers  
  Biometric  identifiers  
  Facial  photos  or other  identifiable  images  
  Any other unique  identifier  
  None  
 
* Could study records include ANY photos or images (even 'unidentifiable' 
ones): (REQUIRED)  
   Yes     No  
16.11 * PATIENT RECORDS: Will health information or other clinical data be accessed from UCSF Health, 
Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland, or Zuckerberg San Francisco General (ZSFG): (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes   No  
16.12   * CLINICAL  DATA  - GENERAL  DESCRIPTION:  Provide  a general  description  of the types  of clinical 
data that you are requesting access to:  (REQUIRED)  
 
We will be collecting data regarding fetal ultrasound findings, postnatal phenotype 
information,  maternal  prenatal  labwork  and any genetic  testing  results  including  microarray  
analysis,  other  specific  genetic  testing  if pursued  and the results  of the exome  sequencing  that is 
coordinated as a part of the study  participation.   
16.13 * CHART/CLINIC NOTES AND OTHER FREE TEXT FIELDS: Will the medical record data include any 
information extracted from free text fields: (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes   No 
 
Data sets that include free text from fields such as chart notes, 
clinic notes, and other text fields are considered identifiable, even 
without direct identifiers.   
16.14 * HIPAA - PERMISSION TO ACCESS SENSITIVE DATA: Does the research require access to a ny of 
the following types of health information from the medical record: (check all that apply)  
(REQUIRED)  
 
  Drug or alcohol  abuse,  diagnosis  or treatment  
  HIV/AIDS testing  information  
  Genetic testing  information  
  Mental  health  diagnosis  or treatment  
  None of the  above  
Important note: Ensure that participants initial the corresponding 
line(s) in Section C of the HIPAA authorization form during the 
consent process.   
 

16.15 * ACCESS TO OTHER SENSITIVE OR PROTECTED DATA: Are you requesting access to any 
sensitive  health  data  not protected  under  HIPAA  (any  other  health  history  that patients  would 
expect to be kept private such as records relating to treatment for obesity, STDs, compulsive 
behaviors,  embarrassing  health  conditions,  sexual  orientation  and practices,  etc.):  (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  
16.17 * IDENTIFIABILITY OF FINAL DATA SET: (REQUIRED)  
 
Which type of data set are you requesting IRB approval for:  
A de-identified data set  does not include ANY of the 18 HIPAA 
identifiers in the list above or any free text fields.  
A limited data set  (LDS) is described as health information that 
excludes direct identifiers but that may include:  
City 
State 
ZIP Code 
Elements of date (including dates such as admission, discharge, 
service, month and year)  
Other numbers, characteristics, or codes not listed as direct 
identifiers, including ages in years, months or days or hours  
Identifiable data sets  include direct ident ifiers and/or information from 
free text fields.  
Review the HIPAA FAQs on the IRB website for more details about 
identifiability of data sets.  
  De-identified  data set 
  Limited data  set 
  Identifiable data set without direct identifiers (includes free text  fields)  
  Identifiable  data set with direct  identifiers  (may  or may not also include  free text fields)   
16.18 * DATA COLLECTION AND STORAGE: (check all that apply): (REQUIRED)  
 
Collection methods:  
  Electronic  case report  form systems  (eCRFs),  such as OnCore  or sponsor -provided  clinical  trial 
management  portal  
  UCSF  ITS approved  Web-based  online  survey  tools:  Qualtrics  or RedCap  
  Other  web-based  online  surveys  or computer -assisted  interview  tool 
  Mobile  applications  (mobile  or tablet -based)  
  Text Messaging  
  Wearable  devices  
  Audio/video  recordings  
  Photographs  
  Paper -based  (surveys,  logs, diaries,  etc.) 
  Other:  
* What online survey or computer assisted interview tool will you use:  
(REQUIRED)  
 
  Qualtrics  (Recommended)  
  RedCAP  (Recommended)  
  Survey  Monkey  (NOT  recommended  and may require  UCSF  ITS Security  review)  
  Other   
 

* Data will be collected/stored in systems owned by (check all that apply):  
(REQUIRED)  
 
  Study  sponsor  
  UCSF data center (including OnCore, RedCap, Qualtrics, and  MyResearch)  
  UCSF  encrypted  server,  workstation,  or laptop  residing  outside  of UCSF  data center  
  Personal  devices,  such as laptops  or tablets  that are not owned  or managed  by UCSF  
  SF VAMC  
  Zuckerberg  San Francisco  General  Hospital  
  Benioff Children's Hospital  Oakland  
  Langley Porter Psychiatric  Institution  
  Other UCSF affiliate clinic or location (specify  below)  
  Cloud  vendor  such as Amazon  Web Services  (AWS),  Salesforce,  etc. (specify  below)  
  Other academic  institution  
  3rd party  vendor  (business  entity)  
  Other (explain  below)   
16.19 * ADDITION OF RECORDS TO A REGISTRY: Will patient records reviewed under this approval be 
added  to a research  database,  repository,  or registry  (either  already  existing  or established  under 
this protocol):  (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes   No 
 
This activity generally requires patient consent and HIPAA  
Authorization . A Waiver of Consent/Authorization may be granted 
for patients who are deceased or lost to follow up, but ongoing 
patients should be consented at their next clinic visit prior to 
accessing their health records or they may provide consent and 
HIPAA authorization for res earch use of their health information by 
mail or through a certified E -Signature system such as  
DocuSign. You may be asked to revise your consent plans.   
16.20 * DATA SHARING: During the lifecycle of data collection, transmission, and storage, will identifiable 
information be shared with or be accessible to anyone outside of UCSF : (REQUIRED)  
 
   Yes     No  
17.0 Financial  Considerations  
17.1 * PAYMENT: Will subjects be paid for participation, reimbursed for time or expenses, or receive any 
other kind of compensation: (REQUIRED)  
 
  Yes   No  
17.2 PAYMENT METHODS: Subjects payment or compensation method (check all that apply):  
 
Payments will be (check all that apply):  
  Cash
 Check  
  Gift card 
  Debit  card 
  UCSF Research Subject Payment  Card  

  Reimbursement  for parking  and other  expenses  
  Other:  
Specify other payment/compensation method:  
Exome sequencing test will be covered for by the study.   
17.3 PAYMENT SCHEDULE: Describe the schedule and amounts of payments, including the total subjects 
can receive for completing the study:  
 
If there  are multiple  visits  over  time,  explain  how payments  will be prorated  for partial 
completion  
If deviating  from  recommendations  in Subject  Payment  Guidelines,  include  specific 
justification  below  
 
Patient  are asked  to complete  mutliple  surveys  in the study  period.  They will be compensated  $50 
total in gift cardsall  surveys  are completed.  $20 after the first survey  and $30 for the second.   
17.4 COSTS TO SUBJECTS: Will subjects or their insurance be charged for any study activities:  
 
   Yes     No  
18.0 Other Approvals and  Registrations  
18.4 OTHER APPROVALS: Indicate if this study involves other regulated materials and requires approval 
and/or authorization from the following regulatory committees:  
 
  Institutional  Biological  Safety  Committee  (IBC) 
Specify BUA  #: 
  Institutional  Animal  Care and Use Committee  (IACUC) 
Specify IACUC  #: 
  Controlled  Substances   
19.0 Qualifications of Key Study Personnel and  Affiliated 
Personnel  
 
NEW: January 2019 - Affiliated personnel who do not 
need access to iRIS no longer need to get a UCSF ID. 
Instead, add them below in the Affiliated Personnel 
table below.  
19.1 Qualifications of Key Study  Personnel:  
Instructions:  
For UCSF Key Study Personnel (KSP)* listed in Section 3.0, select the KSP 
from the drop down list and add a description of their study responsibilities,   
 

qualifications and training. In study responsibilities, identify every individual 
who will be involved in the consent process. Under qualifications, please 
include:  
Academic Title  
Institutional Affiliation (UCSF, SFGH, VAMC, etc.) 
Department  
Certifications  
NOTE: This information is required and your application will be 
considered incomplete without it. If this study involves invasive or 
risky procedures, or procedures requiring special training or 
certification, please identify who will be conducting these 
procedures and provide details about their qualifications and 
training. Click the orange question mark for more information and 
examples.  
Training Requirements:  
The IRB requires that all Key Study Personnel complete Human Subjects 
Protection Training through CITI prior to approval of a new study, or a 
modification in which KSP are being added. More information on the CITI 
training requirement can be found on our website . 
 
* Definition of Key Study Personnel and CITI Training Requirements (Nov, 
2015): UCSF Key Study Personnel include the Principal Inves tigator, other investigators 
and research personnel who are directly involved in conducting research with study 
participants or who are directly involved in using study participants’ identifiable private 
information during the course of the research. Key P ersonnel also include faculty mentors  
/advisors who provide direct oversight to Postdoctoral Fellows, Residents and Clinical 
Fellows serving as PI on the IRB application.  
 
 
 
The Principal 
Investigator, Mary 
Norton  MD, is a Professor 
in the Department of 
Obstetrics, Gynecology 
and Reproductive 
Sciences at UCSF. She 
has been the principal 
and co -investigator of 
numerous clinical 
studies, which have 
involved recruiting, 
consenting, enrolling, 
and following thousands 
of pregnant women from 
throughout the San 
Francisco Bay  area.  Dr. Norton, Mary MD,  MD  
 
 
 
Qualifications, Licensure, and 
Training  Description of Study 
Responsibilities - Briefly 
describe what will each 
person be doing on the study. 
If there are procedures 
requiring special expertise or 
certification, identify who will 
be carrying these out. Also 
identify who will be obtaining 
informed consent.  KSP Name  
Kao Thao earned her  As Principal Investigator, 
Dr. Norton will  be 
responsible for 
overseeing development 
and implementation of 
study guidelines and 
protocols, as well as the 
analysis and publication 
of data.  
 
 
 
 
Thao, Kao N  Bachelors of Art in 
Integrative Biology from 
University of California, 
Berkeley. She will be 
involved with 
coordinating patient 
recruitment at UCSF. She 
has experience as a 
research assistant in 
multiple studies in a 
women's health setting.  
 
 
 
 
Lianoglou, Billie R  
 
 
 
 
Dr. Slavotinek, Anne PhD, 
PhD 
 
 
Dr. Shieh, Joseph, MD, 
PhD  
Medical  Geneticist   
 
 
Dr. Kwok, Pui -Yan Ph.D., 
MD, PhD  
Dermatologist   
 
 
Gosnell,  Kristen  A Clinical Nurse  Specialist   
 
 
 
Dr. Koenig,  Barbara,  PhD Medical  Anthrologist   
 
 
 
Scudmore, Janice C  
 
 
 
Dr. Keller,  Roberta,  MD Neonatologist   
 
 
 
Dr. Michie,  Marsha,  PhD Anthropologist   
 
 
 
O'Leary, Allison S  
 
 
 
Dr. Sherr, Elliott  MD, PhD Pediatric  Neurologist   
 
 
 
Michelson, Jeremy  Study Coordinator  Mr. Michelson is certified 
in human subject 
research  Dr. Sherr is certified in 
human subject research  Ms. O'Leary is certified in 
human subject research  Study Coordinator, 
Research Assistant  Dr. Michie is certified in 
human subject research  Dr. Keller is certified in 
human subject research  Nurse Practitioner  Mrs. Scudmore is 
certified in human 
subject research  Dr. Koenig is certified in 
human subject research  Ms. Gosnell is certified in 
human subject research  Dr. Kwok is certified in 
human subject research  Dr. Shieh is certified in 
human subject research  Medical Geneticist  Dr. Slavotinek is certified 
in human subject 
research  Study Recruiter: 
Recruitment and Consent 
patients  Billie Lianoglou is a board 
certified and licensed 
genetic counselor at the 
UCSF Fetal Treatment 
Center and is certified in 
human subject research.  Study Coordinator, 
Research Assistant  
 
Anguiano, Beatriz  Ms. Anguiano is certified 
in human subject 
research  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sahin Hodoglugil,  Nuriye  N Program  Manager    
Dr. Nuriye Nalan Sahin 
Hodoglugil, MD, MA, 
DrPH is the Program 
Manager for the P3EGS 
Project. Previously she 
worked in global health, 
and collaborated with 
partners in academia, 
Ministries of Health and 
international health 
organizations to  generate 
evidence to guide 
programs and policy for 
improving women's 
health. She worked in 
reproductive health 
programs and research  in 
several countries in sub - 
saharan Africa and Asia, 
as wel l as monitoring  and 
evaluation of large scale 
maternal health 
interventions. She has 
also worked as a 
researher at UC San 
Francisco and UC 
Berkeley,  and as a Senior 
Reproductive Health 
Technical Advisor at 
Johns Hopkins  University. 
She holds an MD from 
Hacettepe University 
Faculty of Medicine, 
Turkey; an MA in cultural 
anthropology from 
Hacettepe University 
Institute of Social 
Sciences, and a DrPH 
from University of 
California,  Berkeley.  
 
 
Dong,  Shan  bioinformatician   
 
 
 
Rangwala,  Naseem  A study  coordinator   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Outram, Simon M  Dr. Outram is also a 
study coordinator and 
will conduct  ethnographic 
observations and 
interviews.  Dr. Outram is certified in 
human subject’s 
research. He has done 
research in Cultural 
Anthropology, Qualitative 
Social Research, Science 
and Technology Studies, 
and Bioethics. He has 
experience with multiple 
social science research 
methodologies, including  
in-depth interviewing and 
ethnographic  observation.  certified in human 
subject research  certified in human 
subject research  Study coorinator  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Sanders, Stephan 
MDPhD   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bioinformatician    
Dr. Sanders Dr Sanders 
trained as a pediatric 
physician at Nottingham 
and London in the UK 
before undertaking a  PhD 
and postdoctoral 
research position at  Yale. 
His research focuses on 
using genomics and 
bioinformatics to 
understand the etiology 
of human di sease, 
especially autism 
spectrum disorder  (ASD). 
He is certified in human 
subject  research  
 
Schwartz, Grace B   
lab technician    
certified in human 
subject research  
 
 
 
Tobias, Sarah E   
 
Study Recruiter: 
Recruitment and Consent 
patients   
Sarah Tobias is a board 
certified and licensed 
genetic counselor at the 
UCSF Fetal Treatment 
Center and is certified in 
human subject research.  
 
 
 
Farrell, Rachel L   
 
Study Recruiter: 
Recruitment and Consent 
patients   
Rachel Farrell is a board 
certified and licensed 
genetic counselor at the 
UCSF Prenatal Diagnosis 
Center and is certified in 
human subject research.  
 
Hoban, Hannah G   
study  coordinator    
certified in human 
subject research  
 
 
 
 
 
Rego, Shannon M   
 
 
 
Study Recruiter: 
Recruitment and Consent 
patients   
Shannon Rego is a board 
certified and licensed 
genetic counselor 
working as the lead 
genetic counselor in the 
Program for Prenatal and 
Pediatric Genomic 
Sequencing study. She is 
certified in human 
subject research.  
 
 
Ackerman, Sara, PhD, MPH   
 
Medical Anthropologist   
Dr. Ackerman is certified 
in human subject 
research  
 
Norstad, Matthew   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subject research  
 
Chen, Flavia H   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subjects research  
   
 
 
 
 
 
Yip, Tiffany A   
 
 
Study Recruiter: 
Recruitment and Consent 
patients   Tiffany Yip is a licensed 
genetic counselor, and 
the assistant genetic 
counselor in the Program 
for Prenatal and Pediatric 
Genomic Sequencing 
study. She is experienced 
in consenting for exome 
testing and certified in 
human subject research.   
 
 
 
 
Silver, Julia M   
 
Study Recruiter: 
Recruitment and Consent 
patients   
Julia Silver is a board 
certified and licensed 
genetic counselor at the 
UCSF Prenatal Diagnosis 
Center and is certified in 
human subject research.  
 
Patel, Sachi   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subjects research  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Curry, Cynthia   
 
 
 
 
 
Medical  Geneticist    
Dr. Cynthia Curry is a 
Board -certified Clinical 
Geneticist at UCSF 
Fresno. She will recruit 
patients for this study 
from those seen at 
Community Regional 
Medical Center. Board - 
certified Clinical 
Geneticist who has 
experience with cons ent 
for exome sequencing.  
 
Amezcua, Jessica M   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subjects research  
 
Faubel, Amanda J   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subjects research  
 
Rigler, Nicole A   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subjects research  
 
Oman, Natalie   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subjects research  
 
Downum, Sarah L   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subjects research  
 
Yamane, Taylor A   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subjects research  
 
Cullen, Caitlin   
Study  coordinator    
Certified in human 
subjects research  
 
Tick, Katherine   
Study  coordinator    
 Certified in human 
subjects research   
 
   
 
19.2 Affiliated Personnel:  
 
Instructions:  
 
This section is for personnel who are not listed in Section 3.0: Grant Key 
Personnel Access to the Study because their names were not found in 
the User Directory when both the iRIS Database and MyAccess directories 
were searched. Add any study personnel who fit ALL of the following criteria 
in the table below:  
They meet the definition of Key Study Personnel ( see above), and 
They are associated with a UCSF -affiliated institution (e.g., VAMC, 
Gladstone, Institute on Aging, Vitalant, NCIRE, SFDPH, or ZSFG), and 
They do not have a UCSF ID, and 
They do not need access to the study application and other study 
materials in iRIS.  
Note: Attach a CITI Certificate for all persons listed below  in the Other 
Study Documents section of the Initial Review Submission Packe t 
Form after completing the Study Application . 
 
Click the orange question mark icon to the right for more information on 
who to include and who not to include in this section.  
Do not list personnel from outside sites/non -UCSF -affiliated institutions. 
Conta cts for those sites (i.e. other institution, community -based site, 
foreign country, or Sovereign Native American nation) should be listed in 
the Outside Sites section of the application.  
 
If there are no personnel on your study that meet the above 
criteria , leave this section blank.  
 
 
Name  Institution  Telephone  E-mail Role  
No External Personnel has been added to this IRB Study  
 
Please describe the study responsibilities and qualifications of each affiliated 
person listed above:  
 
 
20.0 End of Study  Application  
 
End of Study Application Form  
 
To continue working on the Study Application : 
Click on the section you need to edit in the left -hand menu. Remember to save through 
the entire Study Application after making changes.  
 
If you are done working on the Study Application : 
Important: Before proceeding, please go back to Section 4.0 Initial Screening 
Questions and Save and Continue through the form to make sure all the relevant  
 sections and questions have been includ ed. If you've changed any answers since you 
started, the branching may have changed. Your application will be incomplete and it will 
have to be returned for corrections.  
 
Once you are sure the form is complete, click Save and Continue . If this is a new 
study, you will automatically enter the Initial Review Submission Packet Form , 
where you can attach consent forms or other study documents . Review the Initial  
Review Submission Checklist for a list of required attachments.  
 
Answer all questions and attach all required documents to speed up your 
approval.  
The UCSF  IRB welcomes  feedback  about  the IRB Study  Application  Form.  Please  click the link to 
answer a survey about the application  form.  