Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 1  
Comparison of Liposomal Bupivacaine , Plain 
Bupivacaine , and Placebo for Transversus 
Abdominis Plane Block s: 
A Randomized, Blinded  Trial  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
Alparslan Turan, MD ,  
And Colleagues  
 
 
 
Department of OUTCOMES RESEARCH  
Cleveland Clinic  
 
 
 
  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 2 Amendment s 
Amendment 1: 10/1/2021  
Summary of Changes:  
1. The primary outcome was changed to opioid consumption in the first 24 hours and 24 -48 
hours after surgery.  
2. The secondary outcomes are now abdominal wall sensation with ice and pinprick, pain 
scores 72 hours after surgery, and opioid consumption 48 -72 hours after surgery.  
3. Sample Size Considerations  was updated to reflect the changes in the study outcomes.  
  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 3 Table of Contents  
Specific Aims  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  4 
1. Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  6 
A. Postoperative Pain  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 6 
B. Postoperative pain management and Regional Analgesia  ................................ ............................ 6 
C. Transversus Abdominis Block  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......7 
D. Liposomal bupivacaine (Exparel; bupivacaine liposome injectable suspension, Pacira 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Parsippany, NJ USA)  ................................ ................................ ..................... 9 
E. Rationale of the Study  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  12 
2. Study Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  13 
3. Method and Study Design  ................................ ................................ ................................  16 
A. Study Overview  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  16 
B. Setting and Population  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  16 
Inclusion criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  16 
Exclusion criteria:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  16 
C. Withdrawal Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  17 
D. Protocol  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 17 
E. Measurements  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  19 
F. Data Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  22 
G. Sample Size Considerations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 25 
H. Economic Analysis  ................................ ................................ ............  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
3. References  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  27 
 
  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 4  
Specific Aims  
Pain management after major abdominal surgery remains challenging. The bes t-
accepted  traditional  analgesic approach is continuous epidural analgesia . However, 
epidural analgesia is rapidly being replaced by transversus abdominis plane  (TAP)  
block s. TAP infiltration is an alternative to epidural blocks for  providing postoperative 
analgesia to the anterior abdominal wall. TAP infiltrations are  relatively easy to perform, 
generally safe, and can be performed in patients who are anti -coagulated. TAP infiltration 
can be performed as a single injection, or a catheter can be inserted for continuous local 
anesthetic infusion.  
Single shot plain bupivacaine is often used  for TAP blocks , but plain bupivacaine  
provides <24 hours of analgesia Catheters provide analgesia for longer, but they are 
difficult to position properly and difficult to maintain in the proper anatomical location. An 
alternative to TAP catheters  is infiltration of  liposomal bupivacaine which , in other sites,  
lasts up to three days . But whether  liposomal bupivacaine is preferable  to plain 
bupivacaine for TAP blocks remains controversial , with a vailable studies being sparse 
and inconclusive . 
We therefore  proposed to compare  single -shot TAP infiltration with liposomal 
bupivacaine , plain  bupivacaine , and placebo on length of anesthetic effect   determined by 
the opioid consumption . We will evaluate  the following specific aims, all of which will be 
assessed over 72 hours , or the duration of hospitalization if shorter:   
 
 Primary Aim 1 : To assess the relative effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, 
plain bupivacaine and placebo on cumulative opioid consumption in first 24 hours with 
TAP blocks.  
Primary Aim 2:  To assess the relative effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, 
plain bupivacaine and placebo on cumulative opioid consumption in 24 to 48 hours with 
TAP blocks.  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 5 Secondary Aim 1:  To assess the relative effects of TAP blocks with liposomal 
bupivacaine, plain bupivacaine and placebo on the duration of abdominal wall analgesia 
(determined by pinprick and cold).  
Secondary Aim 2:  To assess the relative effects of TAP blocks with liposomal 
bupivacaine, plain bupivacaine and placebo on pain after surgery in first 72 hours.  
Secondary Aim 3:  To assess the relative effects of TAP blocks with liposomal 
bupivacaine, plain bupivacaine and placebo on cumulative opioid consumption 48 to 72 
hours.  
Tertiary  Aim 1 : To compare the effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain 
bupivacaine, and placebo on a composite of postoperative opioid -related side effects.   
Tertiary  Aim 2:  To compare the effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain 
bupivacaine and placebo on patients’ satisfaction with their pain treatments after 72 
hours/discharge surgery.  
Tertiary Aim 3:  To assess total and specific costs of hospital care in patients receiving 
TAP with liposomal bupivacaine vs. those with plain bupivacaine following abdominal 
surgery. [2 groups only]  
Tertiary Aim 4:  To compare the effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain 
bupivacaine and placebo on patients’ pain with movement for 72 hours/discharge surgery.  
Tertiary Aim 5. To compare the effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain 
bupivacaine and placebo on patients’ mobility for 72 hours/discharge surgery.  
 
 
  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 6 1. Background  
A. Postoperative Pain  
Pain is a psychological sensory experience that is provoked by surgical tissue 
injury. Postoperative pain results from a of combination of nociceptive and inflammatory 
components.1 The nociceptive component results from activation of peripheral sensory 
neurons damaged by surgical incision and fades gradually as tissues heal. The 
inflammatory component enhances pain sensitivity via release of mediators from 
surgically injured tissue.  Central neuronal sensitization also seems to contribute to 
postoperative pain and hyperalgesia.1,2 Both mechanisms contribute to resting pain is in 
and around surgical incisions. Movement of wounds or touching them, breathing, 
coughing, and gastrointestin al motility can all provoke  pain.  
Postoperative pain causes a number physiological and psychological 
consequence , which potentially worsen outcomes. For example, inadequate 
perioperative analgesia is associated with myocardial ischemia, impaired wound healing, 
delayed gastrointestinal motility, atelectasis, and postoperative pneumonia.3-5 
Furthermore, poorly controlled acute pain is strongly associated with development of 
persistent incisional pain, which can be devastating for patients.6,7 
B. Postoperative pain management and Regional Analgesia  
Pain management after major abdominal surgery is difficult  and complicated . Thirty 
percent of patients report severe postoperative pain and 47% report moderate pain .8 
Furthermore, 10 -40% report  persistent  pain after abdominal and pelvic surgery .9 
Multimodal analgesia combin es various classes of drugs  in an effort to provide good 
analgesia with few side effects .1,10,11 But the most common approaches are a combination 
of an opioid and non -opioid, with or without regional anesthesia -analgesia.11 Opioids 
cause various complications including  ileus, sedation, and hyperalgesia . Opioids  also 
impair cellular and humoral immune function in humans, thereby potentially enhancing 
infection risk.13-16 But the most lethal complication  of opioid use  is respiratory depression  
which  has been identified as a safety target by the Joint Commission on Hospital 
Accreditation.12 Reducing perioperative opioid use is thus a clinical priority . 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 7 Regional Anesthesia  or analgesia  reduces  the need for high -dose opioids. 
Regional analgesia techniques can be categorized as neuraxial (spinal  and epidural  
blocks ) that involve  injection of  local anesthetics around the spinal cord , or as peripheral 
nerve blocks that involve local anesthetic administration near peripheral nerves. The 
basis of regional analgesia is local anesthetics which locally block voltage -gated sodium 
channels, thus interrupting nerve conductions and causing  regions to be insensitive to 
pain.17 Peripheral nerve blocks, especially, have become popular in recent decades 
largely because improvements in ultrasound technology make blocks faster and safe r — 
and more importantly , because peripheral nerve  blocks s peed recovery and improve  
patient satisfaction.18  
Surgery provokes a  stress response  which releases  catecholamine s, cortisol , and 
inflammatory  cytokines systemically .19 The stress response is associated with increased 
catabolism, immunosuppression, poor postoperative outcomes, and prolonged 
recovery.20,21 Regional anesthesia blocks afferent neural transmission from reaching the 
central nervous system and activating the stress response, thereby  blocking descending 
efferent activation of the sympathetic nervous system.22-24 In clinical practice, regional 
anesthesia  has proven  to be superior to systemic opioids alone after thoracic, abdominal, 
gynecological, and orthopedic surgeries.25-28 Studies have consistently shown  that 
regional anesthesia  reduce s postoperative pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and cardiac 
morbidities. Furthermore, there is evidence that RA decreases postoperative morbidity 
and mortality, and shortens postoperative hospitalization.29-32  
Epidural analgesia is the reference method  for controlling post -operative pain after 
abdominal surgery. However epidural analgesia provokes  hypotension , delay s 
mobilization and d ischarge . Furthermore , catheter related problems  are common, as is  
failure of epidural analgesia . Rarely, epidural analgesia results in  inadvertent  dural  
puncture, epidural hematoma, abscess, cord compression , and permanent paraplegia 
due to hematoma. An important limitation of epidural analgesia is that it should not be  
used in anticoagulated patients. These limitations have prompted  clinicians to use  
alternative blocks, including the  transvers abdominal block.     
C. Transvers us Abdominis Block  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 8 Transversus Abdominis Block  was described by Rafi in 2001 and provides post -
operative analgesia for anterior abdominal wall.33 The target area of the local anesthetics 
is between the transvers abdominis and internal oblique muscle to block the spinal nerves  
(T6-L1). There are various type s of TAP block s, including  intercostal/subcostal, 
lateral/classical, anterior, and posterior  approaches .34 
Figure 1: 4 -quadrant TAP block  
  
Ultrasound -guided TAP block s are easier and safer than epidural blocks,  and 
complications are rare. TAP block s are generally  performed with a single injection , 
because catheter s are tricky to insert properly and are  frequent ly dislodge d, especially 
when they are near the  surgical site.44 TAP block s have  been used for various  types of 

Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 9 surgeries including  open appendectom ies, hysterectom ies, caesarean deliveries , 
abdominoplasties , prostatec tomies, renal transplant ation,  and laparoscopic 
procedures .35-41 In open gynecologic surgeries, cesarean deliveries, and open 
gastrectomies, bilateral TAP block s provides better analgesia  than placebo  groups.33  
All anterior branches of spinal nerves communicates, each segmental nerve 
supplies different areas and therefore analgesic effect and sensorial distribution of loca l 
anesthetics vary.42 Four-quadrant TAP block s (Bilateral Dual) were  described by Borglum 
et al. and provides wider coverage  for upper - and lower -abdominal wall incisions  because 
there is no communication between upper and lateral TAP  spaces.  (Figure  1).43 Dual 
block s combin e subcostal and lateral/posterior TAP block s, thus providing complete 
coverage. Four quadrant TAP blocks should be performed to have good coverage 
especially for any incision that goes above umbilicus.  
TAP block s only provide somatic pain relief ; they therefore provide analgesia for  
surgical incision s, but not for  visceral pain . Numerous  studies show that TAP block with 
plain bupivacaine provided substantially better  analgesia and redu ced opioid 
consumption compare d to unblock ed or placebo patients for  up to 24 hours.44 TAP block s 
with conventional local anesthetics including bupivacaine, ropivacaine and 
levobupivacaine in TAP block provide  safe and effective  analgesia, but only  for the initial  
24 postoperative  hours. Long -acting local anesthetics are an alternative that might 
provide analgesia through the initial and most painful postoperative days.    
D. Liposomal bupivacaine (Exparel; bupivacaine liposome injectable 
suspension, Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Parsippany, NJ USA)  
Exparel is the prolonged -release formulation of the bupivacaine used for a single -
shot infiltration of surgical site s or for nerve block s. Exparel was approved by the US Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2011 for infiltration blocks , and in 2018  it received 
approval for the inters calene brachial plexus block.45 
Liposomal bupivacaine d epofoam technology is based on multiple microscopic 
spherical particles with many aqueous chambers separated by lipid membranes. When 
refrigerated, the particles are stable; but after injection of liposomal bupivacaine  into soft 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 10 tissue, bupivacaine is released from the multivesicular liposomes . The components of 
depofoam particles are non -toxic and clinical trials have demonstrated no adverse events. 
Furthermore , this technology previously has been safely used in various  settings and 
provide s sustained release  of bupivacaine  in other target areas. Liposomal bupivacaine 
administration produces dose -dependent increases in plasma bupivacaine 
concentrations, and that the half -life of liposomal bupivacaine  was almost twice that of 
plain  bupivacaine. However, maximum plasma concentrations are no higher  with plain 
than liposomal bupivacaine .  
a. Infiltration and liposomal bupivacaine   
Postsurgical pain is intense in first few days and liposomal bupivacaine  may be 
good option for controlling  post-surgical pain. Many  studies have evaluated infiltration of 
liposomal bupivacaine. Golf et al ,46 for example, compared liposomal bupivacaine  and 
placebo in bunionectomies . Cumulative pain scores were lower, and the time to first 
opioid use was significantly prolonged by liposomal bupivacaine . Hass et al .47 compared 
bupivacaine and various  dose s of liposomal bupivacaine  in hemorr hoidectom ies and 
found progressive  reduction s in opioid consumption as the  dose of liposomal bupivacaine  
increased . Postoperative opioid consumption was significantly lower in patients given  
266 mg of Exparel than in those given plain  bupivacaine over 12 to 72  hours 
postoperative ly. Local infiltration of liposomal bupivacaine  also reduced pos toperative 
pain compare with plain bupivacaine. A recent meta -analysis of  10 ran domized wound 
infiltration studies  concluded  that cumulative pain scores were improved with liposomal 
bupivacaine  through 24 -72 hours. First use of opioid rescue medication  was also  delayed , 
and patient were more  satisf ied and experienced fewer opioid -related side effects .48 
A systematic review  that evaluated  liposomal bupivacaine infiltration for total hip 
arthroplasty showed that local liposomal bupivacaine  infiltration reduced pain score, 
nausea  and vomiting , and opioid consumption . However, this analysis was weakened by 
inclusion of studies with small sample size s and others that were  observational .49 The 
PILLAR  cohort  study compared liposomal  and plain  bupivacaine  infiltration  for total knee 
arthroplasty and showed that 10% of patients in liposomal bupivacaine  group were opioid 
free. Total opioid consumption and pain intensity score also less when compare d to 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 11 bupivacaine group. The se PILLAR study results suggest  that local infiltration of liposomal 
bupivacaine  is analgesic and  reduc es or even  eliminat es the need for opioids after total 
knee arthroplasty .50 A number  of studies report  that liposomal bupivacaine  has good 
efficacy and safety profile s in patients having  knee, hip,  and shoulder replacement s.51-61 
Liposomal bupivacaine  has also been  effective in  plastic surgical procedures  including  
mammoplasty  and abdomino plasty , and provide s longer pain relief. Howev er, dose  
heterogeneity and small sample size s make these results difficult to interpret .  
b. Nerve block and liposomal bupivacaine   
Single -shot peripheral nerve block s with liposomal bupivacaine  have distinct 
advantages  compared  to a continuous catheter . Specifically,  patients  given liposomal 
bupivacaine  will not require  infusion pump s and  cannot develop cathe ter-related  infection, 
hematoma , or dislodgement.  Because liposomal bupivacaine was only recently approved 
for peripheral nerve blocks, and only at one site, there is currently little information  about 
the approach . However, Hadzic et al. compared  liposomal bupivacaine  to placebo  for 
femoral nerve block s and found lower pain score and decreased opioid consumption were 
reduced .62 A retrospective analysis of peripheral nerve block s with  liposomal bupivacaine  
suggests that  safety and  the side effect profile are similar with bupivacaine and placebo .63 
Intercostal nerve block s with l iposomal bupivacaine  were  evaluated after thoracic 
surgeries and compared with plain  bupivacaine . Liposomal bupivacaine reduced hospital 
duration — but curiously without  a reduction in  postoperative pain score or opioid use.64,65 
Further studies are  clearly needed  to evaluate  the efficacy of liposomal bupivacaine  in 
nerve blocks.66 
c. TAP block and liposomal bupivacaine  
So far only  a few trials directly compare liposomal and plain bupivacaine for TAP 
blocks , and  there is no consensus among them . According to a Cochrane systemic 
review, evidence  is lacking  for the efficacy of liposomal bupivacaine in TAP block s, and 
concludes that  there is no advantage to use of liposomal bupivacaine for this indication .67 
It is important to recognize, though, that th is conclusion is based on lack of evidence  for 
benefit  rather than robust evidence against.  In another  study , Guarre et al.68 compared 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 12 plain  and liposomal bupivacaine in TAP block s for laparoscopic colorectal surgery. 
Patients treated  with liposomal bupivacaine required  less opioid,  had earlier return of 
bowel  function , and left the hospital sooner . Hutchins et a l.69 showed that TAP block s with 
liposomal bupivacaine provided long -lasting analgesia compare d to plain  bupivacaine for 
laparoscopic -assisted donor nephrectomy , and reduced  nausea and vomiting and the 
duration of hospitalization .69 In contrast , Ha et al.70 compared liposomal bupivacaine and 
plain bupivacaine  in TAP blocks  for breast reconstruction and reported no benefit .70 
E. Rationale of the Study  
The recent enhancement of conventional bupivacaine with encapsulated 
bupivacaine much prolongs the duration -of-action and resulting pain control with a single 
application. TAP blocks appear to be easier to perform (especially with ultrasound 
guidance), saf er, relatively inexpensive, and can be used safely in patients who are anti -
coagulated. However, the literature is scarce on comparison of plain bupivacaine versus 
liposomal bupivacaine in TAP blocks . Some  clinicians therefore question the efficacy and 
benefit of liposomal bupivacaine for TAP blocks , especially  considering the cost of 
liposomal bupivacaine. We therefore aim  to compare the analgesic efficacy of TAP blocks 
with liposomal bupivacaine, plain bupivacaine , and placebo in patients who are scheduled 
for major abdominal surgery.  
  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 13 2. Study Objectives  
We will prospectively compare the analgesic efficacy of TAP blocks with  liposomal 
bupivacaine , plain bupivacaine , and placebo  in patients who are scheduled for  major  
abdominal surgery. The proposed research will have the following aims:  
  
Primary Aims  
  Primary Aim 1:  
          To assess the relative effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain 
bupivacaine and placebo on opioid consumption in first 24 hours post surgery.  
Hypothesis . Opioid consumption over the initial 24 hours after major abdominal surgery 
is less when four -quadrant TAP blocks are performed with liposomal bupivacaine and 
plain bupivacaine compared to placebo. Opioid consumption will be evaluated as 
morphine sulfate equivalents; a difference of at least 10  mg in first 24 hours will be 
considered to be a clinically mean ingful difference.   
Primary Aim 2:  
To assess the relative effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain 
bupivacaine and placebo on opioid consumption between 24 and 48 hours post surgery.  
Hypothesis. Opioid consumption between 24 and 48 hours after major abdominal surgery 
is less when four -quadrant TAP blocks are performed with liposomal bupivacaine than 
with plain bupivacaine or placebo. Opioid consumption will be evaluated as morphine 
sulfate equivalents; a difference of at least 10 mg will be considered to be a clinically 
meaningful difference.   
Criteria for success will be 1) superiority of bupivacaine and exparel groups over placebo 
and noninferiority between plain bupivacaine and exparel groups in the first 24 hours of 
opioid consumption and superiority of exparel group over placebo and bupivac aine in the 
24-48 hours opioid consumption.   
 
Criterion for success of each intervention in each period.  
0-24 hours: for each of bupivacaine and exparel, success will be concluded if found to be 
superior over placebo (i.e., less opioid consumption).  As well, exparel or bupivacaine will 
be concluded better than the other if found superior on opioid consumptio n. 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 14 24-48 hours:  exparel will be concluded successful if found better than both placebo and 
bupivacaine in the 24 -48 hours opioid consumption.   
 
Secondary Aims   
Secondary Aim 1:  
            To assess the duration of the local analgesia (determined by pinprick and cold) in 
all four quadrants with liposomal bupivacaine, plain bupivacaine, and placebo after major 
abdominal surgery.  
Hypothesis . Abdominal wall analgesia from four -quadrant TAP blocks with single ‐shot 
liposomal bupivacaine lasts longer after major abdominal surgery than the same blocks 
with plain bupivacaine or placebo. Our major outcome will be time from end of the block 
until abdominal wall sensation with both ice and pinprick  recovers in at least six of eight 
designated locations. Two sequential evaluations will be needed to be negative and first 
negative time point will be accepted as the return of sensation.  
Secondary Aim 2:  
           To compare the effect of liposomal bupivacaine, plain bupivacaine, and placebo 
on pain after surgery in first 72 hours or the duration of hospitalization if shorter.  
Hypothesis . Pain scores over the initial 72 hours or duration of hospitalization  after major 
abdominal surgery are lower when four -quadrant TAP blocks are performed with 
liposomal bupivacaine than with plain bupivacaine or placebo. Pain will be assessed on 
a 0-10-point scale (10 points being worst) at 4 -hour intervals while patients are awake. A 
difference of at least 1.2 points will be considered clinically meaningful.  
 Secondary Aim 3:  
To evaluate TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain bupivacaine, and 
placebo on opioid consumption in 24 to 48 hours.  
Hypothesis. Opioid consumption from the 48 to 72 hours or duration of hospitalization 
after major abdominal surgery is less when four -quadrant TAP blocks are performed with 
liposomal bupivacaine than with plain bupivacaine or placebo. Opioid consumption wi ll 
be evaluated as morphine sulfate equivalents; a difference of at least 10 mg will be 
considered to be a clinically meaningful difference.   
Tertiary   
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 15 Tertiary Aim 1. To compare the effect of liposomal bupivacaine, conventional 
bupivacaine, and placebo on a composite of opioid -related postoperative side effects.  
Hypothesis.  Opioid -related side effects  over the initial 72 hours or duration of 
hospitalization  after major abdominal surgery are less common when four -quadrant TAP 
blocks are performed with liposomal bupivacaine than with plain bupivacaine or placebo. 
Opioid -related side effects will be evaluated as composite of events, and a difference of 
20% in incidence will be accepted as c linically important difference.  
Tertiary  Aim 2.  To compare the effect of liposomal bupivacaine, conventional 
bupivacaine, and placebo on satisfaction with their pain treatment after first 72 hours or 
the duration of hospitalization if shorter.  
Hypothesis.   Patients are more satisfied with pain management  over the initial 72 hours 
or duration of hospitalization  after major abdominal surgery when four -quadrant TAP 
blocks are performed with liposomal bupivacaine than with  plain bupivacaine or placebo.  
Tertiary  Aim 3.  To assess total and specific costs of hospital care in patients receiving 
TAP with liposomal bupivacaine vs. those with plain bupivacai ne following abdominal 
surgery.  
Tertiary  Aim 4.  To compare the effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain 
bupivacaine and placebo on patients’ pain with movement for 72 hours/discharge surgery.  
Hypothesis.  Pain scores with movement over the initial 72 hours or duration of 
hospitalization after major abdominal surgery are lower when four -quadrant TAP blocks 
are performed with liposomal bupivacaine than with plain bupivacaine or placebo. Pain 
will be assessed  on a 0 -10-point scale (10 points being worst) at 12 -hour intervals while 
patients are elevating their leg. A difference of at least 1.2 points will be considered 
clinically meaningful.   
Tertiary Aim 5. To compare the effects of TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain 
bupivacaine and placebo on patients’ mobility for 72 hours/discharge surgery.  
Hypothesis.  Total amount of mobilization over the initial 72 hours or duration of 
hospitalization after major abdominal surgery are higher when four -quadrant TAP blocks 
are performed with liposomal bupivacaine than with plain bupivacaine or placebo.  
  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 16  
3. Method and Study Design  
A. Study Overview  
We propose  a randomized  double -blind  trial compar ing TAP block s with liposomal 
bupivacaine , plain bupivacaine , and placebo in patients  having elective abdominal 
surgery. The study will be performed at various  Cleveland Clinic hospital s with IRB 
approval and  written  consent from patients . Study will be registered at Clinical Trials.gov 
website  before the first patient is enrolled . 
B. Setting and Population  
Inclusion criteria :  
(1) Written informed consent;  
(2) 18 -85 years old;  
(3) ASA Physical Status 1 -3;  
(4) Scheduled for elective open or laparoscopic -assisted  abdominal surgery;  
(5) Anticipated hospitalization of  at least  three nights;  
(6) Expected require ment for  parenteral opioids for at least 72 hours for 
postoperative pain;  
(7) Able to use IV PCA systems.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
(1) Hepatic disease, e.g. twice the normal levels of liver enzymes;  
(2) Kidney disease, e.g. twice the normal level of serum creatinine;  
(3) Bupivacaine  sensitivity or known allergy;  
(4) Women  who are pregnant or breastfeeding;  
(5) Anticoagulants considered to be a contraindication for TAP block s;  
(6) Surgeries with high port sites ; 
(7) Weight < 70 kg. 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 17  
C. Withdrawal Criteria   
Patients will be free to withdraw from study at any time. Patients will also be 
removed from study at any time for adverse events, or deemed necessary for patient 
safety.  
D. Protocol  
After eligibility is confirmed, patients will receive complete information about the 
study both verbally and in writing. Informed consent will be obtained from the patients 
prior to randomization and study -specific procedures.   
Randomization will be based on computer -generated codes and use random -sized  
blocks . Allocations will be concealed until the  morning of surgery  where they will be 
provided by a web -based system . Randomization will be stratified  by study site and  
chronic opioid use , defined by opioid use for more than 30 consecutive days  within three 
preoperative months , at a daily dose of 15 mg or more of morphine or equivalent. 
Randomization will also be stratified according to  anticipated  type of surgery (open vs. 
laparoscopic -assisted).  Clinicians doing the blocks will not be involved in data collection 
and all the evaluators will be blinded to group allocation s. 
All blocks will be performed preoperatively or after induction of anesthesia by 
attending anesthesiologists or regional anesthesia fellows who are experienced in TAP 
blocks . Premedication will be administered at the discretion of the attending 
anesthesiologist and standard monitors will be used.  Patients will be given 1 g oral 
acetaminophen an hour before surgery , and an additional  500 mg every 6 hours for 72 
hours after surgery starting with oral intake.  
Patients will be randomly assigned to:  1) 4-quadrant  TAP block with liposomal 
bupivacaine ; 2) 4-quadrant TAP block with plain bupivacaine ; or, 3) placebo (normal 
saline) . An in -plane  ultrasound will be guide  TAP block s. Two subcostal injections will be 
applied by placing the probe midline and then moving lateral along the subcostal margin 
identifying area between the rectus abdominis sheath and the transversus abdominis 
muscle. The lateral two TAP block injections will be applied in the midaxillary line between 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 18 the thoracic cage and iliac crest between external oblique and transversus abdominis 
muscles.  Once the target area  is positioned , the following injections will be given, based 
on randomization:  
Liposomal bupivacaine . 40 ml of p lain bupivacaine 0.25%  will be mixed with 
20 ml liposomal bupivacaine  and 20  ml of saline .  20 ml of the mix will be injected at each 
location of the 4 -quadrant TAP block.  
Plain bupivacaine group . 50 ml of p lain bupivacaine 0. 5% will be combined with 
30 ml of normal saline  making a total of 80 ml . 20 ml will be injected at each location of 
the 4-quadrant TAP block.  
Placebo group;  patients will receive total of 80 ml of normal saline , injected 20 ml 
in each of the four-quadrant sites .  
General anesthesia will be induced using propofol or etomidate, fentanyl,  and 
rocuronium  to facilitate intubation.  Anesthesia will be maintained with sevoflurane or 
isoflurane , along with opioids and muscle relaxants as clinically indicated . However, 
intraoperative analgesic use will be limited to fentanyl, a short -acting opioid .  
Postoperatively, patients will be given intravenous patient -controlled analgesia  and 
nurses will be free to give additional opioid as clinically indicated . Hydromorphone  will be 
the default drug, but fentanyl will be substituted if necessary. Clinicians  blinded to trial 
drug will adjust analgesic management as necessary in an effort to keep verbal response 
pain scores (details below) <4  points on a 0 -10 scale, with 10 being worst pain . When 
patients no longer need  PCA, they will be switched  to as-needed  hydromorphone or 
fentanyl.  
A single dose of dexamethasone (4 -8 mg) will be given  to all patients for PONV 
prophylaxis, and inhaled steroids will be permitted as necessary to treat reactive airway 
disease. The use of non-steroidal anti -inflammatory  drugs  and gabapentinoids will be 
allowed as part of the ERAS approach (enhanced recovery after surgery) according to 
hospital’s clinical practice . Other opioid -sparing medications such as  ketamine and 
lidocaine patch es will not be permitted through the initial 72 postoperative hours.  Vital 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 19 signs and patient activity will be continuously monitored and recorded with a wireless 
monitor (ViSi mobile, Sotera Wireless, San Diego, CA). Monitoring will be started about 
30 minutes after arrival in the postanesthesia care unit and continued for 72 hours while 
patients remained hospitalized.  Clinicians w ill be blinded to continuous monitoring data; 
clinical decisions therefore will be guided by routine intermittent vital signs which were 
typically obtained at 4 -hour intervals.  
Patients will be allowed to receive prophylactic anti -emetic (first choice 
ondansetron) intraoperatively based on the risk assessment for nausea and vomiting. 
Postoperative anti -emetics for symptomatic treatment will also be allowed; again 
ondansetron will  be the first choice.  
E. Measurements  
Demographic data to be obtained includes height (cm), weight (kg), age (yr), sex, 
(ASA) physical status, self -declared ethnicity, and the specific type  of procedure will be 
recorded.  Patients will be questioned about tobacco  and alcohol use, and about illegal 
drug us e. They will also be asked about their  medical history  including pulmonary 
disease, kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, neurological disease, chronic pain conditions, 
previous surgery or stent placement , and medication s. Available preoperative laboratory 
tests and medication list will be recorded. Preoperative pain scores and opioid use will be 
recorded. Patients excluded for any reason including technical considerations or 
contraindications will be recorded.   
All the procedures for the ultrasound guided TAP blocks will be recorded to the 
ultrasound and two blinded independent adjudicators will evaluate the success of the 
blocks. Blocks will be accepted as successful if 3 out of 4 locations were done correctly 
according to adjudicators.  
 
Primary Outcome  1 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 20 Opioid requirements will be measured as the total amount of opioids (converted to 
morphine sulfate equivalents) used during the first 24 postoperative hours after surgery. 
Use of PCA and discontinuation will be recorded.  
Primary Outcome 2  
Opioid consumption will be measured as morphine equivalents between 24 -48 
hours.   
To evaluate TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain bupivacaine, and 
placebo on opioid consumption in 24 to 48 hours. Use of PCA and discontinuation will be 
recorded.  
Secondary Outcome 1  
           The duration of the local anesthetic effect (determined by pinprick and cold) will be 
evaluated in all four quadrants. The evaluation will be made in eight locations, three in 
each side and two in midline. The first will be below the subcostal margin at midclavicular 
line, the second will be on the midclavicular line between the thoracic cage and iliac crest 
level of umbilicus, the third will be below umbilicus on the same line. The same sites will 
be evaluated on the contralateral side.  There wi ll be two more locations on midline. The 
first will be midway between umbilicus and xiphoid, and the second will be midway 
between umbilicus and midpoint of a line drawn between iliac crests.  
Cold tests will be performed by using ice contained in a clean nitrile glove, first 
applied to the patient’s forearm where they will be asked to describe how it feels to confirm 
ice cold. Then the same ice -filled glove will be applied to the same 8 points on the 
abdomen described above, asking the patient to confirm “yes” when they feel cold 
equivalent or greater to that on their forearm. Pinprick will be evaluated by calibrated force 
of 256 mN and a flat contact area of 0.2  mm in diameter using a stimulato r (PinPrick 
Stimulator Set, MRC Systems, Heidelberg, Germany).  
The initial measurement will be in the preanesthesia care unit, prior to block 
administration. The first postsurgical evaluation will be performed within 5 -30 minutes of 
the patient arriving in the post -anesthetic care unit (PACU) or the intensive care uni t (ICU), 
whichever is applicable. Two further assessments will be performed in PACU/ICU/regular 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 21 nursing floor at one hour intervals. Subsequently, assessments will be performed at 2 
hourly intervals (x3) then at 12 hours postop (defined as patient leaving the OR), 18 hours 
postop, 24 hours postop, 30, 36 hours postop, 48 hours postop, 60 hours postop , 72 
hours postop (when patients are not sleeping). Testing will continue until abdominal wall 
sensation returns or 72 hours have elapsed since surgery. We will consider sensation 
recovered when patients feel both ice and pinprick in at least 6 of the 8 de signated test 
locations. If the TAP block did not initially cover all eight locations, sensation will be 
considered recovered when patients sense ice and pinprick at ≥75% of the covered points 
(i.e., 5/7, 5/6, 4/5, 3/4, 3/3, etc.). Two sequential evaluatio ns will be needed to be negative 
and first negative time will be accepted as the return of sensation.  
Secondary outcome 2  
Pain Scores after surgery will be measured using a Verbal Response Scale (VRS). 
VRS is a scale from 0 to 10 where 0 signifies no pain and 10 signifies worst pain ever 
experienced. The VRS will be recorded at the same intervals as cold and pinprick 
sensatio n assessment described in secondary outcome 2 above and thereafter at 4 -hour 
intervals while patients are awake for 72 hours.  
Secondary outcome 3  
Opioid consumption will be measured as morphine equivalent in first between 48 -
72 hours.   
To evaluate TAP blocks with liposomal bupivacaine, plain bupivacaine, and 
placebo on opioid consumption in 48 to 72 hours. Use of PCA and discontinuation will be 
recorded.  
Tertiary Outcome 1  
A composite of opioid -related side effect after surgery will be recorded for 72 hours. 
Components of the composite include nausea, vomiting, ileus, constipation, pruritus, 
itching, urinary retention, use of antiemetics or naloxone or antihistamines.  
 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 22 Tertiary  Outcome 2  
Patients will be asked to rate their satisfaction with pain management at using a 0 -
10 point scale at 72 hours or upon discharge if earlier .  
Tertiary  Outcome 3  
Total cost of hospital care and specific care costs will be estimated from data in 
the electronic medical records database.  Data obtained from electronic medical records 
will include: operation time, surgery type, intraoperative opioid consumption, 
postoperative opioid consumption in PACU and in ward, breakthrough pain medication 
requirements, pain scores in PACU and ward, req uirement of oxygen in PACU and ward, 
pruritus, requirement of antihistaminic medications, requirement of naloxone, itching, 
ambulatio n time, flatus, ileus, bowel movements (first time documented), constipation, 
length of stay and any side effects or complications.  
Tertiary  Outcome 4   
Pain Scores with movement after surgery will be measured using a Verbal 
Response Scale (VRS).  The VRS will be recorded every 12 hours by asking patient to lift 
their legs up to 72 hours postop or until discharge, whichever is sooner. The patient will 
also be asked to report their VRS at rest prior to leg raise for reference.  
Tertiary Outcome 5.  
           Patient’s mobility will be obtained from VISI monitoring device for 72 
hours/discharge surgery  
 
F. Data Analysis  
Randomized groups will be compared for baseline balance using standard descriptive 
statistics and the standardized difference (difference in means or proportions divided by 
the pooled standard deviation).  
 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 23 Primary Outcomes .  Opioid consumption .  The following tests for superiority on opioid 
consumption will be conducted (see type I error control below):  1) 0 -24 hours post -
surgery: compare each of exparel and plain bupivacaine to placebo; and 2) 24 -48 hours 
post-surgery: compare exparel to each  of plain bupivacaine and placebo.   Groups will be 
compared using linear regression on log -transformed morphine equivalents, with results 
reported as ratio of geometric means between each pair of interventions.   
Type I error control across Primary outcomes 1 and 2 . We will use a parallel 
gatekeeping procedure to control the type I error at 5% across the 2 primary outcomes.  
The 2 comparisons for the 0 -24 hour period will constitute Set #1, and the 2 comparisons 
for the 24 -48 hour period will constitute Set #2. With in each set we will use the Holm -
Bonferroni (HB) multiple comparison procedure among the two comparisons.  If either 
test in the first Set is significant (HB: significance criterion of 0.025 for smaller P -value 
and 0.05 for the larger), analysis will continue to Set #2. Otherwise, Set #2 will not be 
analyzed.   If analysis proceeds to Set #2, the overall alpha for Set #2 will be 0.05 x 
proportion of significant tests in Set #1 (i.e., Set #2 alpha = either 0.05 x 1 or 0.05 x ,5 = 
0.025).  
Secondary Outcomes.    
Time to return of sensation .   We will compare the 3 randomized groups on the time to 
detection of return of sensation (see above; i.e., when patients feels both ice and pinprick 
in at least 6 of the 8 designated test locations, or ≥75% of the covered points if the TAP 
block did not initially cover all eight locations) using a time -to event Kaplan -Meier analysis 
and log -rank test, and comparing patients on the estimated median time to return of 
sensation.  If all patients do have return of sensation (as exp ected), the analysis will be 
equivalent to a Wilcoxon rank sum test, and so this test and the corresponding Hodges -
Lehman estimator of median difference (CI) will be reported as a sensitivity analysis. The 
significance criterion for each of the 3 compariso ns will be 0.05/3 = 0.0167 to control the 
type I error at 0.05 for the primary outcome.  
Pain score . We will compare the 3 randomized groups on mean pain score over the first 
72 hours using a linear mixed effects model in which we adjust for within -subject 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 24 correlation assuming an autoregressive correlation structure (or unstructured or other, 
whichever fits best; but making sure to also account for the differences in timing between 
the measurements) with fixed effects of treatment and categorical time.  Whil e we will 
assess the treatment -by-time interaction, main results will be reported collapsing over 
time regardless of a significant interaction.  
Opioid consumption 48 -72 hours .  This will be analyzed using linear regression as with 
the primary outcomes.  
Type I error will be controlled at 0.05 for secondary outcomes by using a significance 
criterion of 0.05/3=0.017 for each outcome.  
Tertiary Outcomes . 
Groups will be compared on the collapsed composite of opioid -related side effects in the 
first 72 hours after surgery using  
chi-square tests.  Groups will be compared on satisfaction with pain management at using 
a 0-10 point scale at 72 hours, or upon dis charge if earlier , using the Kruskal -Wallis test 
overall and Wilcoxon rank sum test between interventions.      
Economic Analysis.   Finally, if a treatment effect between the 2 local anesthetic  TAP 
blocks is detected, we will conduct a cost -effectiveness analysis estimating the 
incremental cost -effectiveness ratio (ICER) as the mean difference in costs divided by the 
mean difference in the primary outcome of time to return of sensation [or an an alogous 
ratio using summaries which best fit the distribution of the data].    
Total cost of hospital care and specific care costs will be estimated from data in the 
electron ic medical records database.  Data obtained from electronic medical records will 
include: operation time, surgery type, intraoperative opioid consumption, postoperative 
opioid consumption in PACU and in ward, breakthrough pain medication requirements, 
pain scores in PACU and ward, req uirement of oxygen in PACU and ward, pruritus, 
requirement of antihistaminic medications, requirement of naloxone, itching, ambulation 
time, flatus, ileus, bowel movements (first time documented), constipation, length of stay 
and any side effects or compli cations.  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 25 Interim Analyses.  We will use a group sequential design to conduct interim analyses at 
each 25% of the planned enrollment to assess efficacy and futility of the intervention using 
a gamma spending function. Specifically, we will maintain the overall alpha level 
(monitoring efficacy) at 0.05 using gamma parameter of -4 [similar to O’Brien Fleming], 
and power at 90% (monitoring beta, type II error) using gamma parameter of 0 [more 
aggressive, similar to Pocock].  Under the alternative hypothesis (assuming a true 50% 
relative r eduction in the primary outcome) the cumulative probability of crossing an 
efficacy (and futility in parentheses) boundary at the 1st through 4th analyses will be 0.09 
(0.025), 0.39 (0.05), 0.75 (0.075) and 0.90 (0.10) as shown in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1 .  Group sequential stopping boundaries as a function of sample size.  
Pink region represents futility.  Lower blue represents efficacy of NAC, upper blue  
represents harm.  Y -axis represents the treatment effect (Z= difference in means  
divided by standard  error).  
 
G. Sample Size Considerations  
 

Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 26 We plan the study to have 90% power at the overall 0.05 significance level to be 
able to detect a relative improvement of 40% or more in mean opioid consumption(i.e., 
ratio of geometric means of 0.60) between any of the 3 interventions, assessing 
separatel y for 0 -24 hours (primary outcome #1) and 24 -48 hours (primary outcome #2) 
postoperatively.   Assuming a coefficient of variation (CV = SD/,mean) for opioid 
consumption of 0.85 [since the outcome is expected to be log -normal], the required 
sample size to w ill be 67 per group or 201 total.  After adjusting for the interim analyses 
the maximum sample size will be 79 per group or a total of 237.  Alternatively, for example, 
a total (maximum) sample size of 722 would be required to detect a more modest 25% 
reduction in the mean.  
 
Internal pilot assessment of variability. At the second interim analysis, we will 
conduct an internal pilot study to assess the observed variability in the primary outcome 
and the related coefficient of variation (CV). If the CV is larger than planned in t he 
protocol, we will resize the study accordingly, keeping everything else the same. For 
example, if the observed CV is 1.0 (instead of 0.85), the new maximum sample size would 
be a total of 298 patients to detect the same 40% relative reduction in the out comes. The 
internal pilot assessment will not affect the type I error of the study nor alter the effect size 
of interest.  
 
Adaptive design option.  At the 3rd interim analysis we may consider an adaptive design 
in which the study is repowered for a smaller but still clinically important treatment effect.  
Specifically, if the conditional power at the 3rd look is between 30% an d 75%, the DSMB 
(or Executive Committee) we will consider resizing the study to have 90% power to detect 
a relative reduction as small as 20% (i.e., a ratio of geometric means of 0.80).  71  
 
  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 27  
3. References  
1. Buvanendran A, Kroin JS: Multimodal analgesia for controlling acute 
postoperative pain. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009; 22: 588 -93  
2. Brennan TJ, Kehlet H: Preventive analgesia to reduce wound hyperalgesia and 
persistent postsurgical pain: not an easy path. Anesthesiology 2005; 103: 681 -3  
3.  Desborough JP: The stress response to trauma and surgery. Br J Anaesth 2000; 
85: 109 -17  
4.  Wilmore DW: From Cuthbertson to fast -track surgery: 70 years of progress in 
reducing stress in surgical patients. Ann Surg 2002; 236: 643 -8  
5. Holte K, Kehlet H: Postoperative ileus: a preventable event. Br J Surg 2000; 87: 
1480 -93  
6. Nikolajsen L, Minella CE: Acute postoperative pain as a risk factor for chronic 
pain after surgery. European Journal of Pain Supplements 2009; 3: 29 -32  
7. Perkins FM, Kehlet H: Chronic pain as an outcome of surgery. A review of 
predictive factors. Anesthesiology 2000; 93: 1123 -33  
8. Apfelbaum JL, Chen C, Mehta SS, Gan TJ: Postoperative pain experience: 
results from a national survey suggest postoperative pain continues to be 
undermanaged. Anesth Analg 2003; 97: 534 -40 
9. Rijckevorsel DCM, Vries M, Schreuder LTW, Wilder -Smith OHG, Goor  H.Risk 
factors for chronic postsurgical abdominal and pelvic pain.  Pain Manag. 
2015;5:107 –16 
10. Weinbroum AA: Non -opioid IV adjuvants in the perioperative period: 
pharmacological and clinical aspects of ketamine and gabapentinoids. 
Pharmacol Res 2012; 65: 411 -29  
11. White PF, Kehlet H, Neal JM, Schricker T, Carr DB, Carli F: The role of the 
anesthesiologist in fast -track surgery: from multimodal analgesia to perioperative 
medical care. Anesth Analg 2007; 104: 1380 -96 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 28 12. Hadimioglu N, Ulugol H, Akbas H, Coskunfirat N, Ertug Z, Dinckan A: 
Combination of epidural anesthesia and general anesthesia attenuates stress 
response to renal transplantation surgery. Transplant Proc 2012; 44: 2949 -54. 
13. Sacerdote P, Bianchi M, Gaspani L, Manfredi B, Maucione A, Terno G, 
Ammatuna M, Panerai AE: The effects of tramadol and morphine on immune 
responses and pain after surgery in cancer patients. Anesth Analg 2000; 90: 
1411 -4  
14. Beilin B, Shavit Y, Hart J, Mordashov B, Cohn S, Notti I, Bessler H: Effects of 
anesthesia based on large versus small doses of fentanyl on natural killer cell 
cytotoxicity in the perioperative period. Anesth Analg 1996; 82: 492 -7  
15. Yeager MP, Colacchio TA, Yu CT, Hildebrandt L, Howell AL, Weiss J, Guyre PM: 
Morphine inhibits spontaneous and cytokine -enhanced natural killer cell 
cytotoxicity in volunteers. Anesthesiology 1995; 83: 500 -8  
16.  Boland JW, Foulds GA, Ahmedzai SH, Pockley AG: A preliminary evaluation of 
the effects of opioids on innate and adaptive human in vitro immune function. 
BMJ Support Palliat Care 2014; 4: 357 -67 
17.  Lipkind GM, Fozzard HA: Molecular modeling of local anesthetic drug binding by 
voltage -gated sodium channels. Mol Pharmacol 2005; 68: 1611 -22 
18. Elkassabany N, Cai LF, Mehta S, Ahn J, Pieczynski L, Polomano RC, Picon  
S, Hogg R, Liu J: Does Regional Anesthesia Improve the Quality of 
Postoperative PainManagement and the Quality of Recovery in Patients 
Undergoing Operative Repair ofTibia and Ankle Fractures? J Orthop Trauma 
2015; 29: 404 -9  
19. Pflug AE, Halter JB: Effect of spinal anesthesia on adrenergic tone and the 
neuroendocrine responses to surgical stress in humans. Anesthesiology 1981; 
55: 120 -6  
20. Ledowski T, Bein B, Hanss R, Paris A, Fudickar W, Scholz J, Tonner PH: 
Neuroendocrine stress response and heart rate variability: a comparison of total 
intravenous versus balanced anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2005; 101: 1700 -5  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 29 21. Vallejo R, Hord ED, Barna SA, Santiago -Palma J, Ahmed S: Perioperative 
immunosuppression in cancer patients. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 2003; 22: 
139-46  
22. O'Riain SC, Buggy DJ, Kerin MJ, Watson RW, Moriarty DC: Inhibition of the 
stress response to breast cancer surgery by regional anesthesia and analgesia 
does not affect vascular endothelial growth factor and prostaglandin E2. Anesth 
Analg 2005; 100: 244 -9  
23.  Kehlet H: The stress response to surgery, Neural blockade in anaesthesia and 
pain management. Edited by Cousins M, Brinderbough M. New York, Lippincott -
Williams, 1998.  
24.  Buggy DJ, Smith G: Epidural anaesthesia and analgesia: better outcome after 
major surgery?. Growing evidence suggests so. Bmj 1999; 319: 530 -1  
25. Tiippana E, Nilsson E, Kalso E: Post -thoracotomy pain after thoracic epidural 
analgesia: a prospective follow -up study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2003; 47: 
433-8  
26. Werawatganon T, Charuluxanun S: Patient controlled intravenous opioid 
analgesia versus continuous epidural analgesia for pain after intra -abdominal 
surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005: Cd004088  
27.  Xu J, Chen XM, Ma CK, Wang XR: Peripheral nerve blocks for postoperative 
pain after major knee surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 12: 
Cd010937  
28. Rivard C, Dickson EL, Vogel RI, Argenta PA, Teoh D: The effect of anesthesia 
choice on post -operative outcomes in women undergoing exploratory laparotomy 
for a suspected gynecologic malignancy. Gynecol Oncol 2014; 133: 278 -82 
29. Rodgers A, Walker N, Schug S, McKee A, Kehlet H, van Zundert A, Sage D, 
Futter M, Saville G, Clark T, MacMahon S: Reduction of postoperative mortality 
and morbidity with epidural or spinal anaesthesia: results from overview of 
randomised trials. BMJ 2000; 321: 1493  
30. Neuman MD, Silber JH, Elkassabany NM, Ludwig JM, Fleisher LA: Comparative 
effectiveness of regional versus general anesthesia for hip fracture surgery in 
adults. Anesthesiology 2012; 117: 72 -92  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 30 31. Guay J, Choi P, Suresh S, Albert N, Kopp S, Pace NL: Neuraxial blockade for the 
prevention of postoperative mortality and major morbidity: an overview of 
Cochrane systematic reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 1: Cd010108  
32. Neuman MD, Rosenbaum PR, Ludwig JM, Zubizarreta JR, Silber JH: Anesthesia 
technique, mortality, and length of stay after hip fracture surgery. Jama 2014; 
311: 2508 -17 
33.  Rafi AN: Abdominal field block: a new approach via the lumbar triangle. 
Anaesthesia 2001; 56: 1024 -6. 
34. Børglum J, Gogenur I, Bendtsen TF. Abdominal wall blocks in adults. Co -
Anesthesiology 2016;29:638 -43 
35. Carney J, McDonnell JG, Ochana A, Bhinder R, Laffey JG: The transversus 
abdominis plane block provides effective postoperative analgesia in patients 
undergoing total abdominal hysterectomy. Anesth Analg 2008; 107: 2056 -60  
36.  Belavy D, Cowlishaw PJ, Howes M, Phillips F: Ultrasound -guided transversus 
abdominis plane block for analgesia after Caesarean delivery. Br J Anaesth 
2009; 103: 726 -30  
37.  Gravante G, Castri F, Araco F, Araco A: A comparative study of the transversus 
abdominis plane (TAP) block efficacy on post -bariatric vs aesthetic 
abdominoplasty with flank liposuction. Obes Surg 2011; 21: 278 -82  
38.  Skjelsager A, Ruhnau B, Kistorp TK, Kridina I, Hvarness H, Mathiesen O, Dahl 
JB: Transversus abdominis plane block or subcutaneous wound infiltration after 
open radical prostatectomy: a randomized study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2013; 
57: 502 -8  
39.  Soltani Mohammadi S, Dabir A, Shoeibi G: Efficacy of transversus abdominis 
plane block for acute postoperative pain relief in kidney recipients: a double -
blinded clinical trial. Pain Med 2014; 15: 460 -4  
40. Albrecht E, Kirkham KR, Endersby RV, Chan VW, Jackson T, Okrainec A, 
Penner T, Jin R, Brull R: Ultrasound -guided transversus abdominis plane (TAP) 
block for laparoscopic gastric -bypass surgery: a prospective randomized 
controlled double -blinded trial. Obes  Surg 2013; 23: 1309 -14  
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 31 41.  Sandeman DJ, Bennett M, Dilley AV, Perczuk A, Lim S, Kelly KJ: Ultrasound -
guided transversus abdominis plane blocks for laparoscopic appendicectomy in 
children: a prospective randomized trial. Br J Anaesth 2011; 106: 882 -6. 
42. Tsai HC, Yoshida T, Chuang TY, Yang SF, Chang CC, Yao HY, Tai YT, Lin JA 
and Chen KY .Transversus Abdominis Plane Block: An Updated Review of 
Anatomy and Techniques. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:8284363. doi: 
10.1155/2017/8284363. Epub 2017 Oct 31.  
43. Børglum J, Maschmann C, Belhage B, Jensen K. Ultrasound -guided bilateral 
dual transversus abdominis plane block: a new four -point approach. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2011;55:658 -63.  
44. Taylor R, Pergolizzi JV, Sinclair A, Raffa RB, Aldington D, Plavin S , Apfel CC. 
Transversus Abdominis Block: Clinical Uses, Side Effects, and Future 
Perspectives. Pain Pract. 2013;13:332 -44. 
45. Ilfeld BM, Viscusi ER, Hadzic A, et al. Safety and side effect profile of liposome 
bupivacaine (Exparel) in peripheral nerve blocks. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2015;40:572 –582. 
46. Golf M, Daniels SE, Onel E. A phase 3, randomized, placebo -controlled trial of 
DepoFoam(R) bupivacaine (extended -release bupivacaine local analgesic) in 
bunionectomy. Adv Ther. 2011;28:776 –788 
47.  Haas E, Onel E, Miller H, Ragupathi M, White PF. A double -blind,randomized, 
active -controlled study for post -hemorrhoidectomy pain management with 
liposome bupivacaine, a novel local analgesic formulation. Am Surg. 
2012;78:574 –581 
48.  Bergese SD, Ramamoorthy S, Patou G, Bramlett K, Gorfine SR, Candiotti KA. 
Efficacy profile of liposome bupivacaine, a novel formulation of bupivacaine for 
postsurgical analgesia. J Pain Res. 2012;5:107 –116. 
49. Zhang  X, Yang Q, Zhang  Z .The efficiency and safety of local liposomal 
bupivacaine infiltration for pain control in total hip arthroplasty; A systematic 
review and meta -analysis. Medicine 2017;96:49  
50. Mont MA, Beaver W, Dysart SH, Barrington JW, Gaizo D. Local Infiltration 
Analgesia With Liposomal Bupivacaine Improves Pain Scores and Reduces 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 32 Opioid Use After Total Knee Arthroplasty: Results of a Randomized Controlled 
Trial. Journal of Arthroplasty 2018;33:90 -96 
51. Jain RK, Porat MD, Klingenstein GG, et al. The AAHKS Clinical Research Award: 
liposomal bupivacaine and periarticular injection are not superior to single -shot 
intra-articular injection for pain control in total knee arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty. 
2016;31(suppl 9):22 -25. 
52. Jamison RN, Ross MJ, Hoopman P, et al. Assessment of postoperative pain 
management: patient satisfaction and perceived helpfulness. Clin J Pain. 
1997;13:229 -336. 
53.  Kehlet H. Postoperative opioid sparing to hasten recovery:what are the issues? 
Anesthesiology. 2005;102(6):1083 -1085.  
54.  Kehlet H, Dahl JB. The value of “multimodal” or “balanced analgesia” in 
postoperative pain treatment. Anesth Analg.1993;77(5):1048 -1056.  
55.  Kirkness CS, Asche CV, Ren J, et al. Cost -benefit evaluation of liposomal 
bupivacaine in the management of patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty. 
Am J Health Syst Pharm.2016;73(9):e247 -e254.  
56.  Klug MJ, Rivey MP, Carter JT. Comparison of intraoperative periarticular 
injections versus liposomal bupivacaine as part of a multimodal approach to pain 
management in total knee arthroplasty. Hosp Pharm. 2016;51(4):305 -311. 
57. Ma J, Zhang W, Yao S. Liposomal bupivacaine infiltration versus femoral nerve 
block for pain control in total knee arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta -
analysis. Int JSurg. 2016;36(Pt A):44 -55. 
58. Matsumoto T, Parekh SG. Administration technique of liposomal bupivacaine for 
total ankle arthroplasty. J Surg Orthop Adv. 2014;23(4):229 -232. 
59. Mendicino RW, Statler TK, Catanzariti AR. Popliteal sciatic nerve blocks after 
foot and ankle surgery: an adjunct to postoperative analgesia. J Foot Ankle Surg. 
2002;41(5):338 -341. 
60. Meneghini RM, Bagsby D, Ireland PH, et al. Liposomal bupivacaine injection 
technique in total knee arthroplasty. J Knee Surg. 2017;30(1):88 -96. 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 33 61.  Okoroha KR, Lynch JR, Keller RA, et al. Liposomal bupivacaine versus 
interscalene nerve block for pain control after shoulder arthroplasty: a 
prospective randomized trial. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 2016;25(11):1742 -1748.  
62. Hadzic A, Minkowitz HS, Melsın TI, Berkowitz R,  USkova A , Ringold F, 
Lookbaugh J , ILLfed BM, Liposome Bupivacaine Femoral Nerve Block for 
Postsurgical Analgesia after Total Knee Arthroplasty. Anesthesiology. 2016 
Jun;124(6):1372 -83 
63.  Ilfeld BM, Viscusi ER, Hadzic A, Minkowitz HS, Morren MD, Lookabaugh J, 
Joshi GP. Safety and Side Effect Profile of Liposome Bupivacaine (Exparel) in 
Peripheral Nerve Blocks.  
64.  Dominguez DA, ELY S, Bach C, Lee T, Velotta JB Impact of intercostal nerve 
blocks using liposomal versus standard bupivacaine on length of stay in 
minimally invasive thoracic surgery patients. J Thorac Dis. 2018 
Dec;10(12):6873 -6879.  
65. Rincavage M, Hammond L, Reddy S, Sytsma C, Prater A, Brackbill M. Pain 
control using liposomal bupivacaine versus bupivacaine for robotic assisted 
thoracic surgery. Int J Clin Pharm. 2019 Feb;41(1):258.  
66.  NeMoyer RE, Pantin E, Aisner J, Jongco R, Mellender S Chiricolo A, Moore DF, 
Langenfeld J.Paravertebral Nerve Block With Liposomal Bupivacaine for Pain 
Control Following Video -Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery and Thoracotomy. J 
Surg Res. 2020 Feb;246:19 -25 
67.  Hamilton TW, Athanassoglou V, Trivella M et al (2016) Liposomal bupivacaine 
peripheral nerve block for the management of postoperative pain. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews. Issue 8. CD011476. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011476.pub2.  
68.  Guerra L, Philip S, Lax EA, Smithson L, Pearlman R, Damadi A.Transversus 
Abdominis Plane Blocks in Laparoscopic Colorectal Surgery: Better Pain Control 
and Patient Outcomes with Liposomal Bupivacaine than Bupivacaine Am Surg. 
2019;85(9):1013 -1016.  
69. Hutchins JL, Kesha R, Blanco F, Dunn T, Hochhalter R. Ultrasound -guided 
subcostal transversus abdominis plane blocks with liposomal bupivacaine vs. 
Comparison of  Exparel , Bupivacaine and Placebo in TAP blocks Version 10 October 1, 2021                                
 34 non-liposomal bupivacaine for postoperative pain control after laparoscopic 
hand -assisted donor nephrectomy: a prospective randomised observer -blinded 
study. Anaesthesia. 2016;71:930 -7.  
70. Ha, A.Y., et al., The Analgesic Effects of Liposomal Bupivacaine versus 
Bupivacaine Hydrochloride Administered as a Transversus Abdominis Plane 
Block after Abdominally Based Autologous Microvascular Breast Reconstruction: 
A Prospective, Single -Blind, Rando mized, Controlled Trial. Plast Reconstr Surg, 
2019;144: 35 -44 
71. Muller H, Schafer H: Adaptive group sequential designs for clinical trials: 
combining the advantages of adaptive and of classical group sequential 
approaches. Biometrics 2001, 57:886 - 891. 