 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]        IRB approval: 2/22/2011  
 
 
Dietary Sodium’s Effect on Urinary Sodium and Dopamine Excretion  in 
Patients with Postural Tachycardia Syndrome  
 
 
Emily M. Garland, PhD, MSCI  
Department  of Medicine  
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine  
AA3228 MCN  
Nashville, TN 37232 -2195  
 
 
NIH grant R01 HL071784 to David Robertson, PI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sub-Investigators:  
Satish R. Raj MD, Marcus C. Ferguson PhD, C. Victor Nwazue MD, David Robertson MD , Italo 
Biaggioni MD, Cyndya A. Shibao MD, Alfredo Gamboa MD, Luis Okamoto MD, Amy Arnold PhD, 
Bonnie K. Black RN, NP, Mary Ginnie Farley, Sachin Y. Paranjape BS  
from the Division of Clinical Pharmacology  
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine  
Nashville, TN 37232  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.0 Study Procedures  
7.0 Risks of Investigational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
8.0 Costs and Compensation to Participants  
9.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others  
10.0  Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
11.0  Statistical Considerations  
12.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
13.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
Appendices  
Appendix A  Study Procedure Calendar  
 
1.0 Background  
 
Assumption of upright posture leads to major hemodynamic changes, including a decrease in 
cardiac output and stroke volume and an increase in heart rate.  There is substantial pooling of 
blood in the lower extremities, the buttocks, and in the spl anchnic vascular beds that  is felt to 
be responsible for much of the heart rate increase that occurs with standing.   Blood pooling 
lessens the absolute blood volume in the heart and central circulation, leading to activation of 
low and high -pressure baror eceptors, causing activation of the sympathetic nervous system and 
withdrawal of the parasympathetic nervous system.  In conditions of low baseline blood 
volume, cardiovascular responses to standing are more dramatic.   
 
Angiotensin II (ANG II) is synthesi zed from angiotensinogen via the sequential actions of renin 
and angiotensin -converting enzyme (ACE). Renin catalyzes the rate -limiting step in this 
pathway. Renin secretion is stimulated by a fall in NaCl concentration at the macula densa, a 
decrease in a rterial pressure, and an increase in sympathetic tone. ANG II stimulate s sodium 
reabsorption  in the proximal tubule, causes arteriolar vasoconstriction, and stimulates 
aldosterone production, thereby decreasing sodium excretion and maintaining or increasing 
plasma volume.   
 
Dopamine (DA) also plays an important role in the regulation of plasma v olume, especially at 
the level of the kidney.  Plasma DA has a renal vasodilatory effect that is associated with 
increases in urine flow and excretion of sodium, phosphate, calcium and magnesium.  In 
addition, intrarenal DA, synthesized from filtered DOPA,  induces natriuresis via inhibition of 
tubule sodium reabsorption.  DA also promotes natriuresis by inhibiting renin secretion and 
decreasing ANG II -stimulated sodium reabsorption.  Renal DA production is stimulated by 
extracellular fluid volume expansion and a high sodium diet , whereas a low salt diet decreases 
renal DA synthesis.  
  
Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) occurs in approximately 500,000 Americans, 
predominantly in young women.  POTS is a chronic 
condition of consistent orthostatic tachycardi a (> 30 bpm 
increase) and symptoms that are worse on standing but 
relieved by lying down. Orthostatic symptoms include 
palpitations, lightheadedness, chest pains, dyspnea, 
tremulousness, blurred vision, and mental clouding.  
When studied in balance on 150 mEq sodium/day, many 
patients with POTS have a low plasma volume.  
Furthermore, POTS patients have inappropriately low 
plasma renin activity and aldosterone for their level of 
hypovolemia.  
 
Physicians often prescribe a high sodium diet for the treatment of  POTS. The rationale behind 
this approach is that sodium in the diet will help subjects to retain fluid, and thereby raise blood 
volume and/or blood pressure.  We will compare urinary DA and sodium responses to low and 
high dietary sodium intake in POTS an d controls. Assessment of urinary catechols under these 
circumstances, well developed in our laboratory, permits a legitimate characterization of renal 
DA production and its metabolites since these collectively represent an index of DA synthesis in 
the kid ney.  Urine will be collected for 24hr intervals throughout the study for analysis of 

 
creatinine, electrolytes, and catecholamines, so that we can look at differences during 
transitional periods as well as during sodium balance.  Plasma levels of DOPA  and c atechols 
allow us to assess DOPA  available to the kidney, as well as the amount of sympathetic 
stimulation.   We will also measure  plasma renin activity ( PRA) and aldosterone.  
 
We have preliminary evidence that a high salt diet raises plasma volume (as determined by 
changes in hematocrit) and blunts the tachycardia with standing. This treatment is also felt to 
decrease symptoms in some patients with POTS . We will now use the DAXO R BVA -100 Blood 
Volume Analyzer to test whether patients with POTS have a blunted plasma volume expansion 
in response to a high sodium diet and assess whether  raising the amount of sodium consumed 
in the diet  can lessen orthostatic symptoms in POTS . We wil l look at associations between 
alterations in urinary sodium and DA and changes in plasma volume.  
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
Patients with POTS may not adequately expand their plasma volume in response to a high 
sodium diet. Mechanisms involved in the r egulation of plasma volume, such as the renin -
angiotensin -aldosterone system and renal DA, may be impaired in POTS and may respond 
inappropriately to changes in dietary sodium. The purpose of this study is to determine (1) 
whether changes in  dietary sodium level appropriately influence  sodium  excretion  in POTS;  (2) 
whether changes in dietary sodium level appropriately influence DA  excretion  in POTS;  (3) 
whether a high dietary sodium level appropriately expands  plasma volume in POTS;  and (4) 
whether patients with POTS have improvements in their orthostatic tachycardia and symptoms 
as a result of a high dietary sodium level .  
 
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
 
In an unpublished study (Biaggioni et al., Vanderbilt University) comparing 1 50 mEq sodium 
versus 10 mEq sodium in the daily diet , there was a significant effect on the orthostatic change 
in heart rate in some patients with POTS. The orthostatic tachycardia was diminished in the 
moderate sodium diet (30±3 bpm) compared with the low  sodium diet (53±7 bpm). In another 
small unpublished study, we fed POTS patients diets consisting of 10 mEq/day sodium (low), 
150 mEq/day sodium (normal) and 300 mEq/day sodium (high) for 5 days each. Our 
preliminary findings in 5 patients indicated great er orthostatic tachycardia in the low salt diet 
(43±12 bpm) than with either a normal (29±9 bpm) or high salt diet (29±10 bpm).  
 
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion:  
• Premenopausal p atients with POTS and healthy volunteers, 18-50 years old , who are 
non-smokers and free of medications with the potential to influence blood pressure  
• Patients d iagnosed with postural tachycardia syndrome by the Vanderbilt Autonomic 
Dysfunction Center  
• Increase in heart rate ≥30 beats/min with position change from supine to 
standing (10 minutes)  
• Chronic symptoms consistent with POTS that are worse when upright and get 
better with recumbence  
 
• Only female participants are eligible. Since 80 -90% of POTS patients are female, and 
there can be differences in measures with the menstrual cycle, including a small number 
of males might introduce a significant amount of noise.   
• Able and willing to provide informed consent  
 
Exclusion:  
• Smokers  
• Overt cause for postural tachy cardia, i.e., acute dehydration  
• Significant cardiovascular, pulmonary, hepatic, or hematological disease by history or 
screening results  
• Positive pregnancy test or breastfeeding  
• Hypertension defined as BP>1 45/95 off medications when supine or needing 
antihypertensive medication  
• Other factors which in the investigator’s opinion would prevent the participant from 
completing the protocol, including poor compliance during previous studies or an 
unpredictable schedule  
• Unable to give informed con sent 
 
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
 
The participants with POTS will be recruited from patients referred to the Vanderbilt University 
Autonomic Dysfunction Center. Healthy volunteers will be recruited from a population of 
previous participants in autonomic studies, through the ResearchMatch.o rg database, and 
through advertising and emails around the Vanderbilt community.  
 
When contacting appropriate study candidates, the investigator will describe the complete 
protocol.  The participants will then be given a written informed consent form that  has been 
approved by the Vanderbilt Institutional Review Board.  The subject will be given adequate time 
to read the consent form, ask questions, and if satisfied by the responses, sign the form.  
Consent or refusal to participate in this study will not a ffect medical care.  No modifications or 
waiver of the elements of consent will be necessary in the execution of this study.  Consent 
procedures will take place in the Autonomic Dysfunction Center at Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center.  
 
Randomization tab les will be used to determine whether the 10 mEq sodium/day or 300 mEq 
sodium/day diet will be consumed first.  
 
6.0 Study Procedures  
 
Participants will be given a screening medical exam, including a pregnancy test, 12 lead ECG in 
supine and upright positions, and blood for a CBC and a Comprehensive Metabolic Panel.  If the 
pregnancy test is positive, the subject will not continue with the study.  Patients will often be 
identified from a prior assessment at the Vanderbilt Autonomic Dysfunction Center. Screening 
procedures , other than the pregnancy test,  will not be repeated if results are available from 
within the previous 3 month s. Individuals  shown to be an appropriate candidate for the study 
will be told to abstain from medications that could affect blood pressure or blood volume for at 
least 3 days prior to and during admission for the study. Individuals who take such medication 
routinely will not be in cluded in the control group.  Patients with POTS will be advised to consult 
 
their primary care physician before stopping any medication and to contact the Principal 
Investigator or an Autonomic nurse if any problems occur prior to admission.  Approved 
participants will be studied on an experimental diet with a fixed amount of sodium consumed 
per day (confirmed by analysis of 24hr urine sample) and will consume no substances that 
interfere with catecholamine synthesis, release or assay.   
 
• Pre-study assessme nts include: H&P, CBC, Comprehensive Metabolic Panel, pregnancy 
test, 12 lead ECG in supine and upright positions  
• 3-day drug withdrawal of any medication with the potential to influence blood pressure  
• Day 1: start 150 mEq sodium diets.  Diets will contain 60 -80 mEq potassium, be free of 
methylxanthines and low in monoamines and provided by the kitchen of the Clinical 
Research Center (CRC). The study participants will need to drink 1.5 -2 liters of water per 
day to ensure they are well hydr ated.  Participants will document that they consumed all 
food provided by the kitchen and no other food.  
o Start 24 hr urin e collection  for sodium, potassium, creatinine, and catechols.   
o POTS patients will generally be admitted to the CRC on Day 1, whereas 
normal volunteers will do initial part of study as outpatients.  
• Days 2 -5: 10 mEq or 300 mEq sodium diet  in a random order starting after 3 m eals of 
150 mEq Na/day diet . Must consume 1.5 -2.0 liters/day of water.   
o Continue daily 24 hr urine collection s for sodium, potassium, creatin ine, and 
catechols . 
• Day 5: Start 24hr Holter combined ECG monitor and BP monitor  
• Day 6: continue study diet  and 24hr urine collection for sodium , potassium, creatinine , 
and catechol s;  
o Complete ambulatory BP monito ring;  
o Admit to CRC in  afternoon (healthy control subjects only as POTS patients 
will have already been admitted ).  Each subject will spend the night in the 
CRC and remain supine with nothing by mouth overnight  
• Day 7:  
o NPO after midnight  
o IV catheter inserted  
o End 24 hr urine  
o Body weight after voiding, before breakfast  
o Posture Study, during which  blood pressure and heart rate will be monitored 
with an automated oscillometric arm cuff (Dinamap) in the supine position, 
immediately after standing,  and at 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 30 minutes after 
standing ; blood collection for  catecholamines, renin and aldosterone ; and 
symptom rating while supine and standing  for up to 30 minutes . The total 
amount of blood collected will be 30 ml supine and 30 ml in the upright 
position . Symptom Severity will be evaluated with the Vanderbilt Orthostatic 
Symptoms Score, a published tool that is sensitive to orthostatic  symptoms in 
patients with POTS  
o Blood co llection (2 ml) while supine for BMP (for creatinine and sodium ) 
o Plasma Volume Assessment using up to 25 µCi of 131I-Human Serum Albumin 
(BVA-100 Blood Volume Analyzer, DAXOR Corp.)  
▪ Blood samples drawn through IV catheter before injection and for 
~30 minutes post -injection  
▪ Total amount of blood drawn will be ~25 ml  
 
▪ Test will take ~45 minutes  
▪ This will be done in the middle of the posture study (after supine 
assessment but before standing the subject up)  
o Exercise Capacity Test  
▪ At least 2 hours after eating  
▪ Will estimate maximal oxygen consumption (VO 2 max)  
▪ This test  will be conducted on a stationary bicycle  
▪ Effort will be gradually increased while expired air is measured during 
exhaustive physical work.  
▪ The test will last approximately 30 minutes and be conducted in the 
CRC.  
▪ A mouthpiece with a one way re -breathing  valve attached to a 
breathing tube will be used to collect air samples during the exercise 
test. Essentially, subjects will breathe room air through a mouthpiece, 
and then exhale the air into a tube that connects to a machine 
(metabolic cart). This machin e analyzes carbon dioxide and oxygen 
content, which allows us to calculate the amount of oxygen they are 
using under resting and exercise conditions.  
▪ A test will be considered valid and finished when two of the following 
three conditions are met:  
(1) pre dicted maximal heart rate is obtained,  
(2) the respiratory exchange ratio reaches 1.15 or higher,  
(3) oxygen consumption plateaus.  
▪ Verbal encouragement will be given to help subjects achieve a valid 
exercise test.  
▪ To assess VO 2 max directly, an individ ual’s expired air is measured 
during exhaustive physical work.  
▪ The workload will be gradually increased on the bike by increasing the 
resistance. As the workload increases, oxygen consumption also 
increases. Throughout the test period exhaled air will be collected. 
When subjects can no longer continue, the test will be stopped.  
▪ Blood pressure will be measured at the end of each resistance -stage. 
Heart rate data will be recorded continuously.  
▪ Urine will be collected over the 2 hour period preceding the te st and 
again over the 2 hours following the test.  
▪ Before and after completing the exercise test, subjects will be 
required to complete a “warm -up” and “cool -down” session including 
stretching exercises.  
o Saline Bolus (optional)  
▪ Subject can receive an option al 2L saline bolus IV to prepare them for 
discharge to home  
o Study Completed  
▪ Discharge Subject to home  
o Discharge  after testing  
 
The same protocol will be performed with study diets providing 10 mEq sodium/day or 300 mEq 
sodium/day and 60 -80 mEq potassium/day. The order of the diets will be randomly assigned. 
 
To minimize variability due to phase of the menstrual cycle, each particip ant will undergo 
testing on the 2 diets during the same phase  of the menstrual cycle.  
 
7.0 Risks  
 
Consuming a sodium - and caffeine -controlled diet  might not be to the subject’s taste 
preferences.  If the subject drinks caffeinated beverages regularly, their body may have become 
used to having caffeine.  If they stop caffeine intake suddenly, they might have headaches and 
fatigue for a few days.  The y can avoid these symptoms if they cut down gradually on the 
amount of caffeine in their diet.  
 
Stopping intermittent medications  might worsen symptoms.  POTS patients will be 
supervised by a nurse and physician, and will be monitored on the CRC during mos t of the 
duration of their medication withdrawal.  If necessary, medications will be restarted.  Healthy 
subjects will not be allowed to participate in this study if they routinely take medication that 
alters blood pressure or heart rate.  
 
There are minor risks and discomforts associated with blood sampling .  We will insert a 
plastic catheter into the vein to allow drawing blood without repeated sticks during the study.  
This may cause a brief period of pain and possibly a small bruise at the site.  Occasio nally, a 
person feels faint when their blood is drawn.  There is a small risk of bleeding after removal of 
the catheter and possibly a bruise at the site, which can be prevented by tight compression on 
the site.  Rarely, an infection develops which can be treated.   
 
Blood pressure cuff:  some may find it uncomfortable to hold their arms with an inflated cuff 
placed around the forearm, or finger, in a relatively fixed position, or have the cuff inflated 
frequently.  
 
Electrodes : Sticky patches will be put on the chest and limbs to record electrical activity from 
the heart or for the body impedance measurements.  This might be uncomfortable.  This can 
occasionally cause a rash.  
 
Rating symptoms  may be inconvenient.  
 
24-hour urine  collection. Collecting urine for 24 hours might be an inconvenience. We try to 
make it more convenient by fitting the toilet with a collection device and/or providing a urinal 
for their use.  
 
As part of this research study, participants will receive a small amount of radioactive 
substance  called Iodine -131.  Iodinated I -131 albumin (Volumex), injected intravenously for 
determination of total plasma volume, is a radiopharmaceutical and, as such,  requires that care 
be taken to ensure minimum radiation exposure consistent with proper patient management.  
Each 1 ml dose of Volumex contains 25 microcuries in a pre -filled injection kit.  This radioactive 
substance will expose participants  to a small a mount of radiation (x -rays).  The radiation dose 
that they will receive from each procedure is about the same amount that they would receive 
over a period of four months from natural background radiation. Natural background radiation 
comes from naturally o ccurring radioactive material that is present in everyone’s body, from 
outer space (cosmic radiation), and from naturally occurring radioactive material in soil, rocks, 
 
and building materials.  This procedure will be performed a maximum of 2 times at an interval 
of at least several weeks .  I-131 tagged human albumin  is a human blood product.  This 
product has been screened and heat -treated for at least 10 hours at 60 C.  Experts believe that 
this treatment kills the encapsulated viruses (like HIV and Hepati tis C). Recent studies have 
shown that the risk of getting a disease from human blood products such as this is extremely 
small.  However, some individuals may not want to receive human blood products for religio us 
or other ethical concerns.  Prior to havin g this test, and for two days afterwards, the subjects 
will be given SSK I (iodine 5%/potassium iodide 10%, strong iodine solution)  as a safety 
precaution.  
 
Exercise test . The risks involved in this exercise test may include abnormal blood pressure, 
fainting, irregular heartbeat, and in the most rare instances, heart attack, or even death. Every 
effort will be made to minimize these risks by continuously monitoring partici pants throughout 
the exercise testing. Participants will be encouraged to inform the study investigator if they feel 
dizzy, ill -feeling, or other symptoms, during or after the test.  
 
We cannot foresee any other risks, but there may be previously unknown or  unforeseen risks.  
By not allowing pregnant females to participate, we will eliminate any risks these procedures 
might have for a pregnant woman.  
 
8.0 Costs and Compensation to Participants  
 
Costs to Participants  
Study related materials will be provided to th e participants without charge.  The Inpatient stays 
will be covered by a grant from the Vanderbilt Institute of Clinical and Translational Research 
(VICTR). Assay and testing costs will be covered by an NIH grant.  The participants will be 
responsible for their own travel expenses to come to Vanderbilt and any extraneous expenses 
related to their time in Nashville.  
 
Participant Compensation  
Participants will be compensated at a rate of $ 450 for the entire study ($1 75 for each phase 
and an extra $ 100 at completion).  For patients with POTS, this may help to defray some of 
their travel expenses.  For the healthy  control subjects, this will compensate them for 2 stays 
on the CRC and 2 separate weeks of diet (which may no t be pleasant).  If participants  are 
unable to finish the study or withdraw from the study, their compensation will be rated 
according to  how much of the study they completed.  
 
9.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Particip ants or Others  
 
The P.I. and at least one co -investigator will review data from subjects enrolled in this study on 
a bi-monthly basis.  
 
Adverse events will be monitored on an ongoing basis by Drs. Satish Raj & Emily Garland (both 
of whom will be responsib le for tracking adverse events in this study).  Any adverse event of a 
serious or greater nature will be reviewed immediately with the P.I.   
 
 
The adverse event will be described with the following information: description of the event; 
outcome of the event; duration of the event; relationship to study procedure; requirement, if 
any, for treatment or intervention; and outcome.  
Adverse events will be graded according to the following scale:  
0 = No adverse event or within normal limits  
1 = Mild adverse ev ent (transient and mild in nature, and no treatment is 
necessary)  
2 = Moderate adverse event (some intervention and treatment are necessary, 
but participant completely recovers  
3 = Severe adverse event (an event that results in hospitalization, disability,  or 
death or is life -threatening)  
 
The investigator will state his opinion on whether there is a reasonable possibility that the event 
or experience is elated to a procedure performed as part of this study.  Serious adverse events 
will be reported in writi ng to the Vanderbilt IRB  within 72 hours of occurrence.  All study 
adverse events will be summarized once a year, as part of the annual review report to the IRB . 
 
10.0  Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
The investigators or Vanderbilt may stop participants from taking part in this study at any time 
if it is in their best interest, if they do not follow the study rules, or if the study is stopped.  
 
Participants are free to withdraw from this study at any time.  We will cease to collect study 
information at the time of withdrawal of consent.  Withdrawal of consent or refusal to 
participate will not prejudice their health care.  
 
11.0  Statistical Considerations  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Primary outcomes will be 24 hr urinary DA and sodium excretion.  The primary analyses will 
involve a comparison of values for  urine excretion as a result of a high -sodium or low -sodium 
diet and between patient and control groups . Secondary endpoints will include the change in 
plasma volume  and measures of  orthostatic tachycardia and orthostatic symptoms (VOSS) . 
Differences will be assessed using a Student’s  t-test and Mann -Whitney U  test for group 
comparisons and a paired t test an d Wilcoxon signed rank test for diet comparisons.  It is 
possible that the speed of achievement of sodium balance, as well as cumulative sodium 
balance, may provide additional information about sodium handling. A mixed -effects model will 
be developed to des cribe the time, diet and group effects.  
 
Data will be entered into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet or a CTSA generated, HIPAA compliant 
Research Data Capture (REDCap ) web -based database 52. SPSS for Windows (version 17.0), 
Stata 11.0 , and R (www.r -project.org) will be used for data analysis. The sample size 
calculations were performed using the software package PS Power and Sample Size Calculations 
version 3.0.1 53. A  co-investigator on this grant, William Dupont PhD, Professor of Biostatistics 
at Vanderbilt University,  will be primarily responsible for the statistical analyses of this study.  
 
Sample Size  
 
Based on a standard deviation of 35 mEq for urinary sodium excre tion in a group of 87 normal 
volunteers on our moderate -sodium diet, a sample size of 1 7 subjects in each group will have 
80% power to detect a difference of 3 5 mEq with a 0.05 two -sided significance  level. A 
difference of 0.5 6 moles urinary DA will be de tectable based on a standard deviation of 0.56 
moles from our laboratory.  Twenty healthy volunteers and 20 POTS patients will be enrolled 
to allow for data loss and subject dropout.  
 
12.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
All the investigators have completed Vanderbilt training in compliance with the HIPAA 
regulations.  Every effort will be made to protect and respect patient confidentiality and privacy 
within the limits of HIPAA.  Research data will be entered into a password -protected database.  
The Principal Investigator’s Assurance Statement has been submitted with the proposal.  
 
 
13.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
The study will last 3 -4 weeks for each participant, and it will likely take 2-2 1/2 years  to enroll 
the required number of participants.  The study results will be retained in our research records 
for at least six years after the study is completed.  At that time any research information in the 
medical record will be kept indefinitely.  Any research information not already in the medical 
record may be kept indefinitely.  
 
 
 
 
Appendix A  Study Procedure Calendar  
 
Day 1  Start 150 mEq sodium with breakfast  Start 24hr urine at 0700hr (sodium, 
potassium, creatinine, cats)  
Day 2  Start 10 mEq or 300 mEq  sodium with 
breakfast  Continue 24hr urines (sodium, 
potassium, creatinine, cats) 0700 -
0700hr  
Day 3  Continue study diet  Continue 24hr urines (sodium, 
potassium, creatinine, cats) 0700 -
0700hr  
Day 4  Continue study diet  Continue 24hr urines (sodium, 
potassi um, creatinine, cats) 0700 -
0700hr  
Day 5  Continue study diet  24hr BP  
Day 6  Continue study diet  Start 24hr urine(sodium, potassium, 
creatinine, cats); Admit to CRC, NPO 
after midnight  
Day 7  Continue study diet  End 24hr urine(sodium, potassium, 
creatinine, cats); Study day with 
posture study, plasma volume 
measurement , symptom score, exercise 
test; Discharge  
Repeat on alternate diet during same phase of menstrual cycle  
 
 