 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-cigarettes to Promote Smoking Reduction Among Individuals With Schizophreni a 
 
NCT0291863 0 
 
Version Date: 05/17/2017  
  
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0667  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 ABSTRACT 
This pilot feasibility project will assess reducing tobacco  cigarette smoking among individuals with serious 
mental  illness  (SMI)  by  providing  access  to  an  electronic  nicotine  delivery  system  (e-cigarette).  SMI 
populations of interest will consist of individuals with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder,  bipolar disorder, 
and post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD). Preliminary data will be used to inform and support a future NIH 
application to ultimately conduct a full-scale clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy of  e-cigarettes as an 
intervention to treat tobacco add iction in adults with SMI. 
Rates of tobacco  smoking are 2-4 times higher among individuals with SMI compared to those without 
mental illness and the rate of smoking decreases has lagged behind that of the general population 1,2. Tobacco 
smokers with SMI are more dependent on nicotine and less likely to quit compared  to those without mental 
illness 3-5. Tobacco -smoking related death and morbidity are high among individuals with SMI, with half the 
deaths in this population due to tobacco  related cancers, respiratory diseases, and cardiovascular conditions 
6,7. Predominate theories point to a number of potential causal mechanisms including but not limited to: 1) 
alleviation from negative symptoms and cognitive deficits associated; 2) genetic, environmental, and neural 
deficits that increase vulnerability to tobacco d ependence; and 3) increased  susceptibility to withdrawal 
symptoms 13,14. Although tobacco  smoking cessation is an ideal goal, many individuals with SMI are not 
motivated to quit tobacco smoking in the near future. As an alternative strategy, reducing tobacco smoking 
may result in more viable hea lth gains. For example, smoking reduction has health ben efits on its own and a lso 
increases  the likelihood that smokers may initiate and succeed in quitting smoking in the future 15,16. However, 
reducing tobacco smoking also poses a number of challenges. Simply reducing the number of daily cigarettes 
smoked may have unintended consequences including compens atory increases in smoking and worsen ing of 
psychiatric symptoms. Additionally, two of the first-line medications for nicotine dependence (i.e., varenicline, 
bupropion)  carry  black-box  warnings  for  increased  risk  of  psychiatric symptoms and  suicidal  ideation  in 
patients with a history of psychiatric illness. 
E-cigarettes present a potential innovative solution to the challenges of reducing tobacco smoking among 
adults with SMI. E-cigarettes provide an experience close to tobacco smoking, which may increase their 
acceptability and use. The long-term health consequences of e-cigarette use are unknown. However, no 
negative health consequences of short-term use as in the current study have been reported, and most 
researchers agree that e-cigarettes are likely healthier than tobacco  smoking 17. Importantly, two small open- 
label studies observed decreased tobacco smoking among non-treatment seeking adults with schizophrenia 
and schizoaffective disorder following one month of access to e-cigarettes 18,19. Such results are promis ing as 
individuals with schizophrenia exhibit severe tobacco  smoking, even when comp ared to others populations 
with SMI. 
In the cu rrent pilot proposal, adults with SMI (N=10/group) interested in reducing their tobacco smoking will 
be randomized to receive either nicotine replacement therapy (NRT; patch 21 mg) as the standard of care or 
NRT plus e-cigarettes (36 mg/ml) for one month according to a double-blind, randomized controlled trial 
design. We will use a previously evaluated e-cigarette including nicotine liquid solutions that have been 
independently tested. 
 
SPEC IFIC AIMS AND HYPOTHESE S 
Specific Aim 1: Assess feasibility, acceptabi lity, and safety of providing  e-cigar ettes to adults with SMI 
to reduce tobacco smoking.  
Hypothe sis 1.a: We predict that a high propor tion of participants will consent to participate (≥ 80%) and 
comp lete (≥ 70%) the study. 
Hypothe sis 1.b: We predict that end of  study participant satisfaction ratings will indicate high acceptability of 
e-cigarettes and likelihood of  future use. 
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0667  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 Hypothe sis 1.c: We predict e-cigarettes will be safe as measured by frequency of  adverse  events (AEs) and 
side-effects.  In addition, we predict e-cigarettes will not be associated with increases in symptom specific 
measures. 
 
Specific Aim 2:  To compare  reductions in tobacco smoking between NRT vs NRT +  e-cigarettes (36 
mg/ml). 
Hypothe sis 2: Significantly greater reductions in smoking (tobacco  cigarettes/day, breath CO) will be 
observed  in the NRT + e-cigarette vs. the NRT condition. 
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 NUMBER:  BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
SMI and Increased Risk of Tobacco Smoking.  Rates of tobacco smoking are 2-4 times higher amo ng 
individuals with SMI compared to those without mental illness and the rate of smoking decreases has lagged 
behind that of the general population 1,2. Tobacco  smokers with SMI are more dependent on nicotine and less 
likely to quit comp ared to those without mental illness 3-5. Tobacco -smoking related death and morbidity are 
high amo ng individuals with SMI, with half the d eaths in this population due to tobacco related ca ncers, 
respiratory diseases, and cardiovascular conditions 6,7. Tobacco  smoking prevalence among  adults with 
schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder  is 80-90% and Predomin ate theories point to a number of potential 
causal mechanisms including but not limited to: 1) alleviation from negative symptoms and cognitive deficits 
associated;  2) genetic, environmental, and neural deficits that increase vulnerability to tobacco  dependence; 
and 3) increased  susceptibility to withdrawal symptoms 13,14. 
Benefits of Targeting Tobacco Smoking  Reduction. Cessation of tobacco smoking is ideal, but the 
majority of tobacco smokers with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder  report no desire to quit in the 
immediate future 28,29. Therefore, a more viable strategy may be  to target reducing tobacco smoking. 
Epidemiological s tudies have observed benefits of reduced tobacco s moking on ischemic heart disease, lung 
cancer, and chron ic obstructive pulmonary disease 30, particularly when tobacco  smoking reductions occur 
among  heavy  smokers  15.  However,  results  have  been  mixed  with  some  studies  reporting  no  b enefits. 
Disparate results are likely influenced by compe nsatory tobacco  smoking (longer, deeper, more frequent puffs) 
to maintain nicotine levels. Compens atory tobacco smoking can be mitigated by pro viding NRT. A number of 
randomized co ntrolled trials providing NRT to promote smoking reduction have noted significant decreases in 
tobacco  smoking  accompanied  by  d ecreases  in  breath  carbon  monoxide  (CO)  and  cotinine  and  other 
measures  of cardiovascular risk 31-34. Additionally, greater cessation was obser ved among those receiving NRT 
vs placebo, suggesting that tobacco smoking reduction with NRT could lead to cess ation. This finding is 
supported in a meta-analysis of 10 randomized-controlled trials compa ring pharmacological, behavioral, or 
comb ined interventions to promote tobacco  smoking reduction among individuals not ready to quit 16. Results 
showed  that  both  the  pharmacological  and  comb ined  interventions  increased  likelihood  of  long-term 
abstinence. 
Therefore, tobacco  smoking reduction can 1) improve tobacco  smoking-related health risks, particularly 
when comb ined with access to alternative sources of nicotine; and 2) increase the future likelihood of tobacco 
smoking cessation among those with no desire to quit. However, areas  of improvement still exist. For example, 
some  authors in the above studies noted evidence of some compensatory tobacco  smoking, albeit at a 
reduced level with NRT. Additionally, NRT comp liance was identified as a target for improvement. E-cigarettes 
present  an innovative solution that may address these two areas and provide an alternative sou rce of nicotine. 
E-Cigarettes as a Novel Source of Nicotine. Since their introduction just over a decade ago, awarene ss 
and use of e-cigarettes has increased  dramatically. E-cigarettes consist of a battery, a heating elemen t, and 
the ability to store a liquid typically nicotine and flavor. Compared  to NRT, e-cigarettes provide an experience 
closer to tobacco smoking, which may increase their acceptability and use.  For example, a secon dary post-hoc 
analysis of 86 individuals identified with mental illness from the ASCEN D trial showed greater ratings of 
acceptability  (83%  vs  37%),  compliance  (53%  vs.  20%),  and  significantly  greater  reductions  in  tobacco 
smoking (9.9±7.0 vs. 5.7±6.3) 35 among  individuals in the e-cigarette vs. NRT condition. Two open-label trials 
have examined the effects of providing e-cigarettes to non-treatment seeking tobacco-smokers with 
schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder  18,19. Primary outcome measures  differed for both studies, but 
significant reductions in tobacco  smoking were observed after one month of e-cigarette access. Additionally, 
significant reductions in brea th CO were observed, suggesting that compens atory tobacco  smoking was 
mitigated. No SAEs were observed and the most common AEs were nausea, throat iteration, dizziness, head 
ache,  and  dry  cough.  Importantly,  one  study  noted  no  change  in  positive  and  negative  symptoms  of 
schizophrenia and sch izoaffective disorder  following smoking reduction, which is in acc ord with the results from 
other s tudies using NRT among those with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disordIRerB36,37.  
HSC -MS-16-0667  
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0667  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 
There are a number of potential concerns  regarding the use of e-cigarettes as an intervention for tobacco 
smoking. First, the health consequences of long-term e-cigarette use are  currently unknown. However, this is 
not an issue  given the current study’s duration. Overall, evidence from chemical, toxicological, and clinical 
studies designed to evaluate the safety of e-cigarettes suggests they may result in significant reduction in harm 
compared  to continued use of tobacco c igarettes 17. Second, previous studies have not controlled for variability 
in levels of nicotine delivered  via e-cigarettes, an important concern affecting compensatory tobacco smoking. 
The current propos al addresses  this limitation by  utilizing e-cigarettes that have been pre viously studied and by 
testing the nicotine concentrations in an independent lab 38-41, resulting in nicotine delivery that is similar to 
traditional tobacco  cigarettes. 
 
METHODS 
Research Team. Dr. Yoon will serve as the PI on the current propos al. Significant collaborators include 
Drs. Cho, Meyer, Reddy, Eissenberg, Lope z, and Weaver. They have also agreed to serve as collaborators on 
future grant  proposals related to the cu rrent project. Dr. Cho is an ex perienced research psychiatrist and 
Director  of the Integrated Clinical Neuroscience and Treatment Program (ICNTP) for serious mental illness. Dr. 
Cho will assist in referring participants from the ICNTP. Dr. Meyer is clinical psychologist and expert in the field 
of bipolar disorder. He is the director of the Psychological Intervention a nd Research Laboratory for Mood 
Spectrum Disorders (PIRL-M). The clinic associated with PIRL-M will be helping with recruitment of patients 
experiencing bipolar disorde r. Dry Reddy is a licensed clinical psychologist with expertise in the assessment 
and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. She is the Director  of the Clinical a nd Translational Research 
Program on Traumatic Stress and the Stress, Trauma, and Recovery Services (STARS) Clinic. The STARS 
Clinic will recruit patients experiencing PTSD. Drs. Eissenberg and Lopez are experts in e-cigarette research. 
Many critical aspects of the current study have been informed by their research at the Virginia Commonwealth 
University  Center for the Study of Tobacco  Products (VCU CSTP). They have provided recommendations on 
an effective e-cigarette model and will also provide nicotine solution that has been independently tested. 
Additionally, they have provided cop ies of  tobacco smoking and e-cigarette related questionnaires used in their 
studies, which will aid in making cross-study comparis ons and also solidify future collaborative efforts. Dr. 
Weaver is the Medical Director  at the Center for Neurobehavioral Research (CNRA ) and has previously 
worked on a number of e-cigarette studies. He will provide medical guidance and ensure participant safety 
over the co urse of the study. 
Study Design and Overview. We will utilize a double-blind, randomized controlled design to assess the 
feasibility and acceptability of using e-cigarettes to reduce tobacco  smoking among individuals with SMI 
(schizophrenia and sch izoaffective disorde r, bipolar disorde r, or PTSD). Participants will consist of tobacco 
smokers with SMI interested  in reducing or quitting their tobacco s moking. Note that these two experimental 
conditions were chosen b ased on available funds and likelihood of obtaining preliminary data that would be 
useful in a future NIH grant  application. We plan to assess other conditions in the future (e.g., placebo e- 
cigarette, etc.). Following a one -week baseline lead-in period, participants will be randomized to either the NRT 
or NRT + e-cigarette condition. Study visits will be scheduled for once a week (5 weeks total). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of study design.  
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0667  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 Study Procedures and Assessments  
Participant Recruitment and Selection. Participants will be recruited from the ICNTP, PIRL-M, and 
STARS clinic. Eligible participants will meet the following inclusion criteria: 1) be diagnosed with schizophrenia 
or schizoaffective disorde r, bipolar disorder, or PTSD and in stable medical co ndition (DSM-5); 2) report 
smoking ≥10 tobacco  cigarettes/day  and prese nt a breath CO ≥10 ppm; 3) report wanting to quit or reduce 
their cigarette smoking; 4) be fluent in English; 5) be between 18 and 65 years of age; and 6) have a stable 
living situation. Participants will be ineligible if they meet the following  exclusion criteria: 1) be currently 
pregnant or breastfeeding; 2) report wanting to quit smoking in the immediate future; 3) test positive for illicit 
drugs except THC; and 4) have any illness, medical condition, or use of medications, which in the opinion of 
the study physicians (Drs. Cho and Weaver) would preclude safe and/or successful comp letion of the study. 
Following informed consent, participants will comp lete an initial general evaluation protocol (HSC -MS-05- 
0322; General evaluation of Eligibility for Substance Abuse/Dependence Research)  to assess their psychiatric 
status, medical e valuation, and drug use  history. 
E-cigar ette. The e-cigarette will consist of 1) a 3.3 V, 1000 mAh battery; and 2) a 1.5 Ohm, dual-coil 
cartomizer (SmokTech; Shenzhen, China). Study staff will load the cartomizer with 1 ml tobacco  flavored 70% 
propylene glycol/30% vegetable glycerin liquid containing nicotine conce ntrations 36 mg/ml (AVAIL; Richmond, 
Virginia, USA). Nicotine concentration will be tested at an independent laboratory at VCU (±2 mg/ml). Virtually 
every aspect of the e-cigarette (model, voltage, resistance, liquid, and nicotine co ncentration) has been chosen 
based on systematically conducted studies by Dr. Eissenberg and his colleagues 38-41. With these parameters, 
e-cigarettes with 36 mg/ml nicotine liquid produce blood plasma  nicotine levels similar to that of tobacco 
cigarettes after 10 puffs. Participants will be provided verbal  and written instructions on how to use and 
maintain the e-cigarettes at Week 1 visit. Risking of spilling nicotine liquid is minimal as  the cartomizer contains 
cotton batting for liquid absorp tion. However, to mitigate any potential risks, participants will be pr ovided gloves 
to be used when changing cartomizers. Additionally, they will receive pill bottles to hold spare cartomizers, 
instructed not to try and open the cartomizer, and told to keep them away from children.  
Nicotine Replacement Therapy. Participants will receive nicotine patch (21 mg) starting study Week 1. 
Participants will be instructed to app ly a new  patch each  morning on a clean, dry, non-hairy area of skin. 
E-Cigarette and Tobacco Smoking  Related Assessments. Tobacco  smoking will be assessed  using a 
comb ination of breath CO, urinary cotinine, and self-report via time-line follow-back. Standard questionnaires 
will be used to assess a number of tobacco -smoking related measures. The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine 
Dependence (FTND) will used to assess tobacco cigarette dependence 42. The Questionnaire of Smoking 
Urges (QSU) will be used to assess craving for tobacco  cigarettes 43. The Minnesota Nicotine Withdrawal 
Questionnaire (MNWQ) will be used to assess withdrawal symptoms from tobacco  cigarettes 44. The Stages of 
Change Questionnaire  will be administered to assess desire to quit from tobacco cigarette smoking 45. The 
Clinical COPD Questionnaire (CCQ) will be used to assess changes in COPD-related symptoms 46. Additional 
smoking-related assessment will include the Confidence to Quit (CQ) and Hooked on Nicotine Checklist 
(HONC). E-cigarette related questionnaires de veloped and provided by Dr. Eissenberg will be us ed to evaluate 
e-cigarette dependence, patterns of use, evaluation of  using e-cigarettes, and side-effects. These 
questionnaires will include Confidence to Quit, E-Cigarette Dependence Scale, E-Cigarette Patterns of Use, E- 
Cig Evaluation, E-Cig Side Effects, and Hooked on Nicotine Checklist. 
Assessing Changes in Symptoms Relevant to SMISchizophrenia. The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale 
(BPRS ) 47   will assess symptom  severity among individuals with SMI. Potential changes in key cognitive 
domains associated with will be assessed  with the MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery (MCCB ). The 
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS ) will assess suicide ideation. Changes in mood 
symptomatology including also anhedonia  and mania will be assessed  with the Beck Depression Inventory 
(BDI),  Snaith-Hamilton  Pleasure  Scale  (SHAPS),  and  the  Altman  Self-Rating  Mania  Scale  (ASRM) 
respectively. Changes in PTSD symptoms will be ass essed us ing the PTSD Checklist for DSM 5. 
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0667  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 Safety and Health-Related Measures. Adverse events (AEs) and severe AEs, along with concomita nt 
medications, will be assessed  at weekly study visits. Heart Rate (HR) and blood press ure (BP) will also be 
assessed us ing standard hospital-grade equipment. 
 
Table 1. Outline of Study Procedures and Assessments. 
 
Study Visits 
Procedure and Ass essments Week 
0 Week 
1 Week 
2 Week 
3 Week 
4 Week 
5 
Baseline Screening X      
Receive E-Cigarettes (36 mg/ml) and NRT Patch (21 mg)   X X X X 
Smoking Related Assessments 
Breath CO, QSU, MNWQ, , TLFB, CCQ , CQ, HONC 
Urinary Cotinine 
FTND, Stages of Change 
E-Cigarette Questionnaires  
X 
X 
X  
X  
X 
 
 
 
X  
X 
 
 
 
X  
X 
 
 
 
X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
AEs, Concomitant Meds, HR, BP X X X X X X 
BPRS , CSSRS , BDI, SHAPS, ASRM, PTSD X X X X X X 
MCCB X     X 
 
DATA ANALYSIS PLAN 
Preliminary data analyses will inspect b aseline, group differenc es as well as correlations between baseline 
variables and specified outcomes. Baseline or demographic variables demons trating a correlation with both 
predictors and outcomes, meet criteria for being potential confounders,i,ii and will result in two sets of analyses: 
one in which the relevant variable is included as a covariate and one in which it is not.  This will determine the 
degree to which any group differences might confound conclusions regarding treatment. Statistical analyses 
will use R v. 3.3.0iii and SAS v.9.3.iv 
Analyses will prima rily use generalized linear modeling.  Continuous, count, dichotomous and time-to-event 
data will utilize linear, Poisson, logistic, and proportional hazards regression respectively (Proc GENMOD and 
PROC PHRE G; SAS v. 9.3, function glm(); R v. 3.3.0).  Longitudinal analyses will employ generalized linear 
mixed models (Proc MIXED, Proc GLIMMIX and Proc MCMC; SAS 9.3).   Evaluation of distributional 
assumptions will use residual plots and, where possible, formal statistical tests. Depending upon statistical 
technique, transformations, robust estim ators, stratification and/or scaling coefficients will address violations of 
assumptions.  Analyses of cross-sectional data with missing values will utilize multiple imputation (Proc MI; 
SAS v.9.3)v. Multiple imputation and maximum likelihood are robust to data missing at random.  Sensitivity 
analyses w ill permit evaluation of the robustness of findings to missing data ass umptions. 
 
Specific Aim 1: Assess feasibility, acceptabi lity, and safety of providing  e-cigar ettes to adults with SMI 
to reduce tobacco smoking.  
Hypothe sis 1.a: We predict that a high propo rtion of participants will consent to participant (80%) and 
comp lete the study (70%) completion rate. Descriptive statistics  will evaluate consent and completion rates. 
Hypothe sis 1.b: We predict that end of study participant satisfaction ratings will indicate high acceptability of 
e-cigarettes and nicotine patch and likelihood of future use. Generalized linear models will evaluate the 
relationships between participant satisfaction, acceptability of e-cigarettes and nicotine patch, and likelihood 
of future use. 
Hypothe sis 1.c: We predict e-cigarettes will be safe as measured by frequency of  adverse  events (AEs) and 
side-effects, and not associated  with increases in negative symptoms (BPRS ) or decreases in cognitive 
performance (MATRICS). Generalized linear modeling will evaluate relationships between adverse 
events/side-effects, negative symptoms, and cognitive pe rformance. 
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0667  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 Specific Aim 2:  To compare  reductions in tobacco smoking between NRT vs NRT +  e-cigarettes (36 
mg/ml). 
Hypothe sis 2: Significantly greater reductions in smoking (tobacco  cigarettes/day, breath CO) will be 
observed  in the NRT + e-cigarette vs. the NRT condition. Generalized linear modeling will evaluate group 
differenc es in smoking reduction between NRT and NRT + e-cigarettes over time as measured by breath CO 
(using a Gaussian distribution) and tobacco-cigarettes/day (using a Poisson distribution). 
 
Power/Sample Size Considerations. For the current propos al, power will focus on Aim 2. Effect size is 
derived using G*Power 3.1.9.2. Assumi ng alpha = 0.05 and a correlation among repeated measures of 0.5, a 
samp le size of n = 20 (n = 10 NRT and 10 NRT + e-cigarette) provides 80% power to detect a Cohen’s f = 0.51 
for group differences between NRT and NRT + e-cigarette. The Frequentist findings will be augmented with a 
Bayesian approach to characterize the probability that effect sizes of varying magnitude exist. 
 
JUSTIFICATION 
Results from the current pilot study will be used as preliminary data in support of a future NIH R21 grant 
submission. The immediate goal of that R21 will be to assess a longer intervention period (3 months), which is 
the standard in clinical trials, as well as additional experimental conditions (e.g., 0 mg/ml e-cigarette condition) 
to enhance the experimental rigor of the study. Based on the current results, we will also assess the need for 
additional intervention components (e.g., contingency management, motivational interviewing, etc.). Finally, we 
will also assess other  indices of reduced tobacco smoking toxicity such  as 4-methylnitrosamino-1-3-pyridyl-1- 
butanol (NNA L) and lung function using spirometry. The R21 will in turn lead to a future R01 application. 
Additionally, comp letion of the cu rrent propos al will also be beneficial in estab lishing a history of cooperation 
with Drs. Cho, Eissenberg, Lopez, and Weaver that will also support the compe tiveness of future NIH grant 
submissions on which they serve as collaborators. 
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0667  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 CITATIONS 
1. Lasser K, Boyd JW, Woolhandler S, Himmelstein DU, McCor mick D, Bor DH. Smoking and 
mental illness: A population-based prevalence study. JAMA.  2000;284(20):2606-2610. 
2. Lawrence  D,  Mitrou  F,  Zubrick  SR.  Smoking  and  mental  illness:  results  from  population 
surveys in Australia  and the United States. BMC Public Health. 2009;9:285. 
3. Smith PH, Mazure CM, McKee SA. Smoking and mental illness in the U.S. population. Tob 
Control. 2014;23(e2):e147-153. 
4. Weinberger AH, Pilver CE, Desai RA, Mazure CM, McKee SA. The relationship of major 
depressi ve disord er and gende r to changes in smoking for current and former smokers: 
longitudinal evaluation in the US population. Addiction. 2012;107(10):1847-1856. 
5. Cook BL, Wayne GF, Kafali EN, Liu Z, Shu C, Flores  M. Trends in smoking among adults with 
mental  illness  and  association  between  mental  health  treatment  and  smoking  cessation. 
JAMA.  2014;311(2):172-182. 
6. Kelly DL, McMahon RP, Wehring HJ, et al. Cigarette smoking  and mortality risk in peop le with 
schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull. 2011;37(4):832-838. 
7. Calla ghan RC, Veldhuizen S, Jeysingh T, et al. Patterns of tobacco-related mortality  among 
individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or depressio n. J Psychiatr Res. 
2014;48(1):102-110. 
8. George TP, Krystal JH. Comorbidity  of psychiatric and substance abuse disord ers. Current 
Opinions in Psychiatry. 2000;13(3):327-331. 
9. de  Leon  J,  Diaz  FJ.  A  meta-analysis  of  worldwide  studies  demonstrates  an  association 
between schizophrenia and tobacco smoking beha viors. Schizophr Res. 2005;76(2-3):135- 
157. 
10. Hennekens CH. Aspirin in the treatment and prevention of cardiovascular disease: current 
perspectives and future directions. Curr Atheroscler R ep. 2007;9(5):409-416. 
11. Wehring HJ, Liu F, McMahon RP, et al. Clinical characteristics of  heavy and non-heavy 
smokers with schizophrenia. Schizophr Res.  2012;138(2-3):285-289. 
12. Shanmugam G, Bhutani S, Khan DA, Brown ES. Psychiatric considerations in pulmonary 
disease. Psyc hiatr Clin North  Am. 2007;30(4):761-780. 
13. Parikh V, Kutlu MG, Gould TJ. nAChR  dysfunction as a common substrate for schizophrenia 
and comorbid nicotine addiction: Current trends and perspectives. Schizophr Res. 2016 ;171(1- 
3):1-15. 
14. Tidey JW, Miller ME. Smoking cessation and reduction in people with chronic mental illness. 
BMJ. 2015;351:h4065. 
15. Godtfredsen NS, Prescott E, Osler M. Effect of smoking reduction on lung cancer risk. JAMA. 
2005;294(12):1505-1510. 
16. Asfar T, Ebbert JO, Klesges RC, Relyea GE. Do smoking  reduction interventions promote 
cessation in smokers not ready to quit? Addict Behav. 2011;36(7):764-768. 
17. Farsalinos KE, Polosa R. Safety evaluation and risk assessme nt of electronic cigarettes as 
tobacco cigarette substitutes: a systematic review. Ther Adv Drug  Saf. 2014;5(2):67-86. 
18. Caponnetto P, Auditore R, Russo C, Cappello GC, Polosa R. Impact of an electronic cigarette 
on smoking reduction and cessation in schizophrenic smok ers: a prospective 12-month pilot 
study. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2013;10(2):446-461. 
19. Pratt  SI, Sargent J, Daniels L, Santos MM, Brunette M. Appeal of electronic cigarettes in 
smokers with serious mental illness. Addict Behav. 2016;59:30-34. 
20. Hughes JR, Fiest er S, Godstein RG, Resnick MP, Rock  N, Ziedonis D. American Psychiatric 
Association practice  guideline for the treatment of nicotine dependence. American Journal of 
Psyc hiatry. 1996;153:S1-S31. 
21. Addington  J.  Group  treatment  for  smoking  cessation  among  persons  with  schizophrenia. 
Psyc hiatr Serv. 1998;49(7):925-928. 
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 22. Hughes  JR,  Hatsukami  DK,  Mitchell  JE,  Dahlgren  LA.  Prevalence  of  smoking  among 
psychiatric outpatients. Am J Psyc hiatry. 1986;143(8):993-997. 
23. Lohr JB, Flynn K. Smoking and schizophrenia. Schizophr Res.  1992;8(2):93-102. 
24. Olincy  A, Young DA, Freedman R. Increased levels of the nicotine metabolite cotinine in 
schizophrenic smokers compared to other smokers. Biol Psyc hiatry. 1997;42(1):1-5. 
25. Strand JE, Nyback H. Tobacco use in schizophrenia: a study of cotinine concentrations in the 
saliva of patients and controls.  Eur Psy chiatry. 2005;20(1):50-54. 
26. Spring B, Pingitore R, McChargue DE. Reward value of cigarette smoking for comparably 
heavy  smoking  schizophrenic,  depressed,  and  nonpatient  smokers.  Am  J  Psychiatry. 
2003;160(2):316-322. 
27. Diaz  FJ,  Rendon  DM,  Velasquez  DM,  Susce  MT,  de  Leon  J.  Datapoints:  Smoking  and 
smoking   cessation   among   persons   with   severe   mental   illnesses.   Psychiatr   Serv. 
2006;57(4):462. 
28. Etter M, Mohr S, Garin C, Etter JF. Stages of change in smokers with schizophrenia or 
schizoaffective disord er and in the general population. Schizophr Bull. 2004;30(2):459-468. 
29. Siru R, Hulse  GK, Tait RJ. Assessing  motivation to quit smoking in people with mental illness: 
a review. Addiction. 2009;104(5):719-733. 
30. Begh R, Lindson-Hawley  N, Aveyard P. Does reduced smoking if you can't stop make any 
difference? BMC Me d. 2015;13:257. 
31. Bolliger CT, Zellweger JP, Danielsson T, et al. Smoking reduction with oral nicotine inhalers: 
double blind, randomised clinic al trial of efficacy and safety. BMJ. 2000;321(7257):329-333. 
32. Bolliger CT, Zellweger JP, Danielsson T, et al. Influence of long-term smoking  reduction on 
health risk markers and quality of life. Nicotine Tob Res. 2002;4(4):433-439. 
33. Wennike P, Danielsson T, Landfeldt B, Westin A, Tonnesen P. Smoking reduction promotes 
smoking cessation: results from a double blind, randomized, placebo-controlled  trial of nicotine 
gum with 2-year follow-up. Addiction. 2003;98(10):1395-1402. 
34. Rennard SI, Glover ED,  Leischow S, et al. Efficacy of the nicotine inhaler in s moking reduction: 
A double-blind, randomized trial. Nicotine Tob Res. 2006;8(4):555-564. 
35. O'Brien B, Knight-West O, Walker N, Parag V, Bullen C. E-cigarettes versus NRT for smoking 
reduction or cessation in people with mental illness: secondary analysis of data from the 
ASCEND  trial. Tob Induc Dis.  2015;13(1):5. 
36. Dalack GW, Becks L, Hill E, Pomerleau OF, Meado r-Woodruff JH. Nicotine withdrawal and 
psychiatric symptoms in cigarette smokers with schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
1999;21(2):195-202. 
37. Dalack GW, Meador-Woodruff JH. Acute feasibility and safety of a smoking reduction strategy 
for smokers with schizophrenia. Nicotine Tob Res. 1999;1(1):53-57. 
38. Talih S, Balhas Z, Eissenberg T, et al. Effects of user puff topography, device voltage, and 
liquid nicotine concentration on electronic cigarette nicotine yield: measurements and model 
predictions. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17(2):150-157. 
39. Shihadeh A, Eissenberg T. Electronic cigarette effectiveness and abuse liability: predicting  and 
regulating nicotine flux. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17(2):158-162. 
40. Vansickel  AR,  Cobb  CO,  Weaver  MF,  Eisse nberg  TE.  A  clinical  laboratory  model  for 
evaluating   the   acute   effects   of   electronic   "cigarettes":   nicotine   delivery   profile   and 
cardiovascular and subjective effects. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev.  2010;19(8):1945- 
1953. 
41. Lopez  AA,  Hiler  MM,  Soule  EK,  et  al.  Effects  of  Electronic  Cigarette  Liquid  Nicotine 
Concentration on Plasma Nicotine and Puff Topography in Tobacco Cigarette Smokers: A 
Preliminary Report. Nicotine Tob Res. 2016;18(5):720-723. 
42. Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Fagerstrom KO. The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine 
Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict. 
1991;86(9):1119-1127. IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0667 
Progra m Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle): Yoon, Jin H. 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  05/17/2017   
 43. Tiffany ST, Drobes DJ. The development and initial validation of a questionna ire on smoking 
urges. Br J Addict. 1991;86(11):1467-1476. 
44. Hughes JR, Hatsukami D. Signs and symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. Arch Gen Psyc hiatry. 
1986;43(3):289-294. 
45. Biener L, Abrams DB. The Contemplation Ladder: validation of a measure of readiness to 
consider smoking cessation. Health Psychol. 1991;10(5):360-365. 
46. van  der Molen  T, Willemse  BW, Schokker S,  ten  Hack en  NH,  Postma  DS,  Juniper  EF.  
Development, validity and responsiveness of the Clinical COPD  Questionnaire. Health Qual 
Life Outcomes. 2003;1:13. 
47. Overall  JE,  Gorham  DR.  The  Brief  Psychiatric  Rating  Scale.  Psyc hological  Reports. 
1962;10:799-822. 
 
 
i Assmann, S.F., et al., Subgroup analysis and other (mis)uses of baseline data in clinical trials. Lancet, 2000. 355(9209): p. 1064 -9. 
ii Pocock, S.J., et al., Subgroup analysis, covariate adjustment and baseline comparisons in clinical trial reporting: current 
practice and problems. Stat Med, 2002. 21(19): p. 2917-30. 
iii R Core  Team (2015). R: A language environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 
Vienna, Austria. URL http://www. R-project.org/. 
iv SAS v. 9.3. (2012). SAS Institute Inc. Cary, N.C. 
v Schafer, J.L. & Graham, J.W. (2002) Missing Data :  Our View of the State of the Art.  Psycho logical Methods. Vol. 7, No. 2, 147-177. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0667  