DEPRESSED MOOD IMPROVEMENT THROUGH NICOTINE DOSING 2 
(THE DEPRESSED MIND STUDY 2)  
 
PHASE 1: R61 PHASE  
 
NIH Grant R61 MH122464  
Grant Title: Nicotinic modulation of the cognitive control system in late -life depression 
 
Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier:  NCT04433 767 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Warren D. Taylor, MD, MHSc  
James G Blakemore Professor of Psychiatry  
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences  
Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
 
Co-Investigators:  
Vanderbilt University Medical Center : 
Patricia Andr ews,  MD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences  
Hakmook Kang, PhD , Department of Biostatistics  
Paul Newhouse, MD , Department of Psychiatry  and Behavioral Sciences  
Baxter Rogers, PhD, Vanderbilt University Institute of Imaging Science, Depa rtment of 
Radiology and Radiological Sciences  
 
Weill -Cornell Medical College:  
 Faith Gunning, PhD, Department of Psychiatry  
 
Consultant : 
Rachel F. Tyndale, PhD, Professor of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Centre for Addiction and 
Mental Health, University of  Toronto  
  
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  2 
 
 
Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema 
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims 
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies 
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
5.0 Enrollment  and Consent  
6.0 Study Visits and Assessments  
7.0 Cognitive Assessments  
8.0 Study Drug Administration  
9.0 MRI Pr oced ures 
10.0 Measurement of Levels of Nicotine and Nicotine Metabolites  
11.0 Risks –  Study Drug 
12.0 Risks –  Other than Study Drug  
13.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or Others  
14.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation 
15.0 Subj ect Rei mbur sement  
16.0 Statistical Considerations 
17.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
18.0 Data Sharing  
19.0 Follow- up and Record Retention  
20.0 Literature Cited 
 
Appendices : 
Appendix A  List of Abbreviations   
Appendix B List of Prohibited Medications  
 Separate Attachments:  
Schedule of Events 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  3 
1.0 BACKGROUND 
Late- life depression (LLD) is characterized both by affective symptoms and broad cognitive deficits.  The co -
occurrence of cognitive deficits in LLD, particularly executive dysfunction, is a clinically relevant phenotype 
characterized by significant disability and poor antidepressant response. Cognitive deficits can persist even 
with successful antidepressant treatment and increase the risk of depression relapse. Despite the clinical importance of cognitive deficits in LLD, there  are no established treatments that specifically target cognition in 
this population. This is particularly important, as the cognitive deficits appear to directly contribute to disability 
and poor antidepressant treatment outcomes.  The lack of clear pharm acologi c targets and therapies 
aimed at improving cognitive deficits in depression is a substantial deficiency in current therapeutics.  
 We propose that modulation of the  cognitive control network by stimulation of cholinergic system 
nicotinic acetylcholine rece ptors will improve both mood and cognition in depressed elders .  As 
observed in smokers, nicotine’s effect to increase cognitive control network activity while reducing default 
mode network activity will reduce depression’s characteristic bias to ne gativel y valenced stimuli and decrease 
rumination. Supporting this theory, nicotinic receptor activity stimulates serotonin release and protects against 
worsening mood with tryptophan depletion. Clinically, transdermal nicotine improves mood in smokers whi le a 
placebo -controlled pilot trial  in nonsmoking depressed adults found that transdermal nicotine significantly 
improved mood.  
In our initial pilot trial in LLD (1), we demonstrated that open- label  administration of  transdermal nicotine  
patches safely improved depression severity.  We also observed trends suggesting that transdermal nicotine 
(TDN) may provide benefit for cognitive performance, specifically in domains of episodic memory, working 
memory, and attention.  In unpublished functional MRI pilot data acquired during this trial, we observed that TDN also enhanced activity in th e cogni tive control network and that such changes were associated with 
greater reductions in depression severity.  
These data supported a successful application to NIMH for a R61/R33 proposal .  This grant mechanism 
initially supports the R61 phase, a 2 -year study to establish target engagement of an investigational 
intervention.  If a priori thresholds demonstrating target engagement are met, this would be followed by a 3-
year R33 phase.  The current protocol only covers the initial R61 study phase . 
 
2.0 RATIONALE AND SPECIFIC AIMS  
Cognitive control is a set of interrelated executive processes (2) involving the anterior cingulate -insular 
salience network and the frontoparietal network.  Jointly, these networks are conceptualized as a 
superordinate “multiple -demand” cognitive control network (CCN)  (3,4) , involved in emotional regulation, 
attention, working memory, and inhibiting irrelevant information. CCN dysfunction is a core feature of late -life 
depression (LLD), contributing to mood d isturbances, executive function d eficits in inhibitory control and 
working memory, poor antidepressant responses and disability. Improvement of CCN dysfunction could benefit 
cognitive performance and mood, but no current pharmacotherapy targets CCN functio n in LLD.  
 
We propose that enhanc ement o f CCN function by nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonists (5) will 
improve mood and cognitive symptoms in LLD (6).  This is supporte d by our pilot trial  in LLD (N=15) 
where 12-weeks of open -label transdermal nicotine (TDN) patches significantly improved depression severity  
(1).  In unpublished  pilot data using an emotional Stroop task, TDN reduces the difference in fMRI activation 
between Stroop conditions in a key CCN hub region, the left middle and superior frontal gyri (M/SFG).  As TDN 
also improves e motional Stroop task accuracy and reaction time to incongruent stimuli, in context of past work 
(5) we propose TDN enhances cognitive control function  (7,8) .  The M/SFG is a compelling imaging target 
as the dorsolateral PFC (including the M/SFG) exhibits reduced activation an d functional connectivity in LLD 
(9-13), while antidepressant treatment enhances activity in this region  (14,15) .  Critically,  in our pilot data, 
when TDN administration redu ces the difference in M/SFG activation between Stroop conditions, we observe a 
corresponding reduction in depression severity.  Based on these data , we hy pothesize that nicotinic 
receptor agonists enhance CCN function in LLD.  This effect in the M/SFG, a r egion exhibiting 
dysfunction in LLD, benefits depressive symptoms and cognitive performance  (5,6) .  
 
 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  4 
The R61 pha se (N=36) will test for target engagement, defined as a TDN exposure -dependent effect on 
cognitive con trol network (CCN) activation.  Based on pilot data, we  will test for enhancement of CCN function 
by examining the M/SFG Stroop B OLD fMRI response , or the  reduction in the M/SFG activation difference 
between incongruent and congruent conditions of the emotional Stroop task  during fMRI . We will assess the 
effects of variability in nicotine exposure on target engagement by measuring nicotine blood leve ls in 
conjunction with repeat MRI. 
 
AIM 1: R61 Phase: Test CCN engagement over 12 weeks of open -label transde rmal nicotine (TDN) 
Hyp 1A (Target Engagement) : TDN will enhance CCN function, measured as a reduction in the M/SFG 
Stroop BOLD response (the activ ation diffe rence between incongruent and congruent conditions of the 
emotional Stroop task).  60% or more of subjects will exhibit a M/SFG z -score reduction of 0.5 or greater . 
 
Hyp 1B ( Exposure) : Higher nicotine exposure measured by patch dose or nicotine metabol ite levels will be 
associated with a greater reduction in the M/SFG Stroop BOLD response. 
 
3.0 ANIMAL STUDIES AND PREVIOUS HUMAN STUDIES  
3.a. Overview: Late Life Depression (LLD) has a prevalence of 5% in community -dwelling older adults, high 
healt hcare co sts, and a high risk of suicide. (16,17)   Individuals with LL D often exhibit a poor response to 
current antidepressant medications (18)  with no differences in response rates between current drug 
classes. (19,20)  Cognitive deficits are common in LLD and associated with disability (17,21- 25) and poor 
treatment outcomes. (26-34) There are no pharmacological treatments targeting cognition in older adults with 
depression.  Drugs developed for AD either have no benefit ( 35) or may worsen depression. (36) 
 
3.b. Brief Introduction to the Cognitive Control Network (CCN): Cognitive control refers to the ability to 
dynamically respond to changing contingencies to meet environmental dem ands.(2,4)   Cognitive control 
mediates executive functions of set shifting and flexibility, inhibition, sustained attention, and working memory. (2,4)   These functions are ach ieved thr ough the cognitive control network (CCN), a regulatory 
superordinate network consisting of regions more active during executive tasks. (4) The CCN includes regions 
of frontoparietal cortices with network hub s in the  dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), posterior parietal 
cortex and the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC). (4)  Recent CCN models include salience network 
regions (37,38) conceptualizing the CCN as a “multiple demand” network addressing diverse cognitive 
challenges. (39) 
 3.c. Cognitive control deficits in LLD : CCN deficits in LLD clinically manifest as executive dysfunct ion in 
selective attention, working memory, response inhibition, and performance monitoring.  CCN -mediated  
executive dysfunction is common in LLD, (40-43) clinically presenting as difficulty with planning, sequencing , 
organi zing, and abstracting.  Although also influenced by processing speed, (44) CCN dysfunction negatively 
affects other cognitive domains including verbal learning and recall. (45,46)   CCN dysfunction predicts negative 
clinical outcomes, inc luding poor acute responses to antidepressant medications.(28,32,34,47)  CCN- mediated 
cognitive performan ce deficits may persist into remission (48-51) and are associated with persist ent 
disability. (52) Antidepressant treatment enhances activity in this reg ion whil e therapeutic benefit may arise by 
targeting this region. (14,15,53 -55)  Much of this work focuses on the dlPFC, a CCN region including the 
middle and superior frontal gyri (M/SFG) .(56,57)    
CCN dysfunctio n also contributes to emotion dysregulation. (58)  The CCN is involv ed in explicit emotion 
regulation,(59)  automatic and effortful processes that modulate emotional responses. (59) For example, 
difficulty inhibiting ruminative or negatively valenced thoughts may lead to persistent depressive symptoms.(46)   
 
3.d. Nicotine effects on depressi ve symptoms: The concept that there is an association  between cholinergic 
function and depression dates back decades.  The original cholinergic hypothesis of depression by Jano wsky 
and colleague s propos ed that depression is associated with hyperactivation of the cholinergic system, resulting 
in decreased noradrenergic activity (60).  Pharmacologically, cholinergic effects on mood must be mediated 
either by the nicotinic receptor (nAChR) fami ly or th e muscarinic receptor (mAChR) family.  The cholinergic 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  5 
hypothesis is supported by observations that smoking rates are high in MDD (61,62)  while depressed smokers 
have difficulty wit h smoking cessation and ar e at ris k for depression relapse during smoking cessation (63-68). 
However, these data do not inform about specific effects of nAChR stimulation.  
Animal models support that modulation of n AChR activity may be  benef icial in  depression (69,70) .  Several 
studies in rat models of depression demonstrate that nicotine and nAChR agonists reduce depressive behavior 
(71-77). Clinical studies in humans support that nAChR stimulation may have antidepressant properties.  The 
few studies examining nonsmokers with MDD demonstrate that transdermal nicotine administration 
results in significant improvement in mood (78-80) and may have long- term efficacy comparable to that of 
fluoxetine (81).  Although these studies examined small samples, nicotine exhibited antidepressant effects 
even at low doses in a placebo -controlled t rial (79).  To our knowledge, only our pilot 12 -week trial has 
examined individuals with LLD.  Our study supports that transdermal nicotine may have clinical benefit  for 
depressive symptoms (Fig 1). (1) 
 
3.e. Nicotine as a cognitive enhancer : The cholinergic system 
is the primary neurotransmitter  system  responsible for cognitive 
symptoms in dementia (82), with nicotinic receptors being 
particularly important (83) .  Neuronal nicotinic receptors 
(nAChRs) are found throughout the central nervous system  and 
nicotinic innervation of the hippocampus, amygdala and frontal 
cortex are vital to memory function (Levin 2000) (84). In addition 
to direct stimulation of nAChRs , nicotine stimulates  the release 
of a variety of transmitters involved in cognitive function, 
including dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, and glutamate 
(85,86).  
Cognitive improvement is a well -established effect of 
nicoti ne. A re cent meta- analysis of over 41 double- blind placebo -controlled studies concluded that nicotine has 
positive effects on attention, memory, and motor abilities which likely represent true performance enhancement 
(87). In sm okers, nicotine improves performance on attentionally and cognitively demanding vigilance tasks 
(88-90) even  in the absence of withdrawal effects (87,91) . The nicotinic system appears to modulate controlled 
attentional processing when task conditions are difficult (92-94).  Past w ork in impaired populations further 
supports that nicotine improves CCN -mediated cognitive domains including working memory, learning and 
attention.(6,87)   Specifically, nicotine may show particular benefit f or cogni tively demanding tasks requiring 
focused attention  despite distracting stimuli. (95,96)   Nicotine also benefits episodic memory (87) although this 
may be mediated through im provemen ts in attentional functioning. (95)  
 
3.e.1. Clinical Studies of Nicotinic Stimulati on for Cognition  in Older 
Populations : Newhouse and colleagues first showed evidence of improved 
memory with intravenous nicotine injection in Alzheimer Disease (AD) 
subjects (97) . Subcutaneous nicotine injection (98,99)  and nicotine skin 
patch treatment also significantly improves cognitive function in AD patients 
(100,101) . In AD, nicotine improves attention and lessen errors (102) . 
Newhouse extended this work to show that the novel nicotinic agonist ABT -
418 also has positive effects on learning and memory in AD (103) . More  
recently,  Newhouse and colleagues (104)  showed that chronic 
transdermal nicotine treatment improved attention and episodic 
memory in patients with Mild Cognitive Impa irment (MCI ) (see Fi g 1 
and 2) . These findings are being examin ed in a NIA-funded multi -site MIND 
Study (Memory Improvement through Nicotine Dosing; Newhouse, PI).   
 
3.f.  Pharmacoimaging studies of nicotine : Work in smokers and 
nonsmokers led to hypotheses (5,95,105)  that nAChR agonists benefit cognition by increasing task -related 
information processing while decreasing activity in regions involved in task -irrelevant information processing. A 
meta -analysis examining task -indepe ndent ef fects of nAChR agonists supports this, rep orting two patterns of 
for adverse events than placebo-treated subjects (0)
(/H92732[1]/H110053.79; p/H110050.05). No withdrawal symptoms
were reported by subjects or informants nor were anysubjects reported to be continuing to use nicotineafter the study was completed.
Subject- and informant-completed behavioral mea-
sures. OASR and OABCL. The self-rated Worries and
Anxiety subscales showed significant (F2,86/H110053.48,
p/H110050.04 and F2,86/H110053.14, p/H110050.05) interactions
with the nicotine-treated group showing improved
scores by day 182. There was a strong trend (F2,86/H11005
2.74, p/H110050.07) for nicotine to improve scores in the
DSM-oriented dementia subscale (consisting of
items from the OASR commonly associated with aDSM dementia diagnosis). The informant-completed
OABCL showed lower ratings on the Anxiety/De-pression subscale (F
2,90/H110055.00, p/H110050.009) for pla-
cebo treatment. The Beck Depression Inventory
showed no significant treatment effect ( p/H110050.72) or
interactions ( p/H110050.50).
DISCUSSION This study demonstrated that trans-
dermal nicotine treatment for 6 months improvedcognitive performance in subjects with amnestic
MCI. The primary cognitive outcome (Connors
CPT) showed a significant nicotine-induced im-provement with an effect size of 0.78 which com-pares favorably to a previous study of nicotine inAAMI
34in which the effect size was 0.53 at 4 weeks
on the same measure. Several secondary cognitivemeasures showed significant nicotine-induced im-provement including psychomotor speed and atten-Figure 2 Primary efficacy variables
(A) Continuous Performance Task: hit reaction time standard error change over interstimulus intervals, change from base-
line (n/H1100567). Nicotine treatment significantly improved performance on this measure (F1,57/H1100514.96, p/H110050.0003) com-
pared to placebo treatment. (B) Clinical Global Impression of Change (CGIC). CGIC all categories (n /H1100567): there was no
statistical difference between treatments in the distribution of subjects rated improved or not improved ( p/H110050.13).
Neurology 78 January 10, 2012 97
Figure  1. Continuous 
Performance Task  (CPT ), change 
from baseline.  Nicotine improved 
perform ance over place bo (F 1,57 = 
14.96, p =  0.003).  
Figure 1 Tr ansder mal nicotine effects 
on depression severity over time  
tion on several tasks as well as significant effects on
long-term memory seen in both the paragraph recalltask and computerized word recall task (e.g., figure
3B). This is consistent with prior studies of nicotinicstimulation in AD, where we saw more robust effectson long-term recall than short-term recall,
15,35and
suggests that this is a specific effect on patients withmemory impairment, as studies have indicated thatnicotine does not generally improve performance un-less subjects are impaired.
36There were trends for
improvements in a number of other cognitive mea-sures. Whether these trends would become statisti-cally significant with larger sample sizes is unclearand will require further study to assess the overallimpact of nicotinic stimulation. There was no evi-dence for loss of cognitive effects over time. Theprimary clinical outcome, the Clinical Global Im-pression by the clinician, did not show significantimprovement; however, patients and their infor-
mants did report nicotine-induced improvements.
Nicotine was well-tolerated with few subjects
withdrawing because of medication side effects. All
but one subject tolerated the highest administereddose. Transdermal administration method probablycontributed to improved tolerability, particularly re-ducing the incidence of potential gastrointestinal sideeffects. Nicotine treatment was associated with amodest reduction in systolic blood pressure. The re-duction in weight (approximately 2.5 kg by day 182)is not unexpected considering the mild anorectic ef-fects of nicotine. No significant medical conse-quences related to the loss of weight occurred in thenicotine-treated subjects and no subject developed aclinically low BMI (/H1102118.5) over the course of the
trial. However, further study will be necessary toconfirm that there are no long-term negative conse-Figure 3 Secondary verbal memory cognitive performance variables
(A) Paragraph recall: immediate recall minus delay recall; change from baseline (n /H1100567). Note that negative score indicates
improvement (less forgetting from immediate to delay trials). Nicotine treatment produced a significant ( F1,60/H110054.42, p/H11005
0.04) effect showing reduced loss of information between the immediate and delayed trials compared to the placebo-
treated group. (B) Delayed word recall accuracy, Cognitive Drug Research Battery. Change from baseline (n /H1100567). There
was a significant effect of nicotine treatment (F1,70/H110055.92, p/H110050.018) with the nicotine-treated group showing a signifi-
cant improvement over time in delayed word recall accuracy compared to the placebo group.
98 Neurology 78 January 10, 2012
Figure  2. Episodic Memory .  
A) Paragraph recall, nicot ine > placebo 
(F1,60=4.42, p=0.04).  B) Word recall, 
nicotine >  placebo  (F1,70=5.92, p=0.018).   
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  6 
activity changes. (5) First, nAChR agonists enhanced activation in CCN regions, including the dorsal ACC, 
lateral prefrontal and dorsomedial pr efronta l cortices. Second, nAChR agonists decrease d activation in other 
regions, reflecting enhanced deactivation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, and 
parietal cortex.  Thus nAChR agonists have general neuropharmacological  effects  of enhancing activation in 
CCN regions wh ile decreasing activation in default mode network (DMN) regions. (5)   
 
3.g. Safety of transdermal nicotine (TDN) patches : TDN patches are well tolerated, with a meta- analysi s in 
over 5500 individuals (106) identifying only minor adverse effects such as sleep disturbances, nausea, and 
minor skin irritation. Few adv erse car diovascular ev ents were reported, with no excess of events occurring 
among patch users compared to placebo.  This is concordant with our prior 6- month trial in Mild Cognitive 
Impairment(104) and our pilot LLD trial .(1)  We h ave not observed withdrawal or craving in past studies.   
In our  LLD Pi lot trial, participants exhibited > 95% compliance with study patches. There were no SAEs 
and the most common adverse effects included nausea (N=7), dizzines s (N=4) and headache (N=4).  These 
were dose -limiting in 7 subjects (including 1 early withd rawal). We observed no significant changes in blood 
pressure or heart rate but observed a decrease in weight (6.7lb, t= 4.30, p<0.01).  Individuals who received 
TDN with an antidepressant tole rated a higher mean dose  than those receiving TDN monotherapy (p <0.01).   
We observed no ill effects or craving after tapering and discontinuing TDN over an additional 3 weeks.   
 
4.0 INCLUSION/EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Men and women of  all backgrounds are eligibl e.  Criteria are similar for both phases.  
 
Inclusion Criteria :  
1) Age > 60 years;  
2) diagnosis of major depressive disorder, single or recurrent episode (DSM5);  
3) On a stable therapeutic dose of an allowed  SSRI or SNRI for a t least 6  weeks;  
4) severity: MADRS (107) ≥ 15;  
5) cognition: MMSE (108) >24;  
6) fluent in English  
 
Exclusion Criteria :  
1) Other Axis I psychiatric disorders, except for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)  or social phobia symptoms 
occurring in a depressive episode;  
2) Use of other medications  for depression,  e.g., bupropion or augmenting agents, although short- acting 
sedatives are allowed (see below);  
3) Any use of tobacco or nicotine in the last year;  
4) Living with a smoker or regular exposure to secondhand smok e;  
5) History of  alcohol or drug dependence or abuse in the last 3 year  alcohol use disorder or substance use 
disorder of  moderate or greater severity (endorsing 4 or more of the 12 criteria ) in the last 12 months ;  
6) Acute suicidality;  
7) Acute grief ( <1 month);  
8) Current or pa st ps ychosis;  
9) Primary neurological disorder, including dementia , stroke, epilepsy, etc.;  
10) MRI contraindication;  
11) Electroconvulsive therapy or transcranial magnetic stimulation  in last 2 months;  
12) Current or planned psychotherapy;  
13) Allergy or hypersensi tivity t o nicotine patches;  
14) In the l ast 4 weeks, regular use of drugs with central cholinergic or anticholinergic properties or moderate / 
severe CYP2A6 inhibitors /inducers ( see Appendix B ) 
 
Allowed Antidepressants:  Eligibility criteria require curre nt use o f a commercially available an tidepressant 
medication at a therapeutic dose. To decrease variabi lity in the underlying antidepressant regimen, we define a 
therapeutic dose of allowable antide pressants as: fluoxetine( 20mg), sertraline (50mg), citalop ram ( 20mg), 
escitalopram ( 10mg), venlafaxine (75mg), de svenlafaxi ne (50mg), levomilnacipran (40mg) or vilazodone 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  7 
(20mg) , duloxetine (30mg)  or their equivalents.  Higher doses are allowable.  
Due to anticholinergic effects, effects on n icotinic acetylcholine  receptors, or other sa fety concerns, w e 
exclude for and do not allow for the use of som e antidepressants.  These exclusions include : a) paroxetine; b ) 
bupropion; c) tricyclic antidepressants ; and d) monoa mine oxidase i nhibitors.  We also exclude for curren t use 
of ketamine or  esketam ine for depression . 
 
Concomit ant Medica tions : Most non- psychotropic medications are permitted.  The exceptions are for  
medications with substantial procholinergic or anticholi nergic properties or medications inf luencing CYP2A6 
activit y (see Appendix B ), the main pathway for nicotine meta bolism. (109)   Prohibited cholinergic ag ents  
include but are not limited to a cetylcholinesterase inhibito rs and some agents used for t remor, inc ontinence, or 
vertigo. We allow short -acting hypnotics ( zolpidem, zalpelon, or eszopiclone) and lorazepam up to 2mg daily 
for sleep or an xiety.   
 
5.0 ENRO LLMENT AND CONSENT 
5.a. Recruitment  :We will enroll patients from clinical referrals and respons e to adv ertisements.  For cli nical 
referrals, referring providers  may either provide informatio n about the study to the participant, including our  
contact information.  Alternatively , they m ay obtai n per mission from th e participant for the study team to 
contact th em.  With the clinici an’s agreement, study staff can review their clinic schedules to h elp identify 
potentially eligible patients, however  data will not be recorded for resea rch purp oses.  A dvert isements may 
include radio, newspapers, internet, and  flyers / brochures.  When re sponding to advertisements, potential 
participants will contact us  by telephone or through email.  During the initial  contact, we  will describe the study  
purpose and procedures to them, inc luding a description of study entry cr iteria.  Those who continue t o be 
interested  will then be schedul ed for an evaluation.  After s cheduling, a study doctor will review their electro nic 
medical record to assure that po tential subjects  meet  entry criteria , however no data will be recorded.  If that 
review determines the individual is n ot eligible, they wil l be informed, the screening v isit cancelled, and the 
referring clinician notified.  
 
In order to enhance the recruitm ent efforts, thi s project is using the services  of Trialfacts.  
Trialfacts is a third-party service which prov ides specialized recruitment methods in digital ad vertising . 
Trialfacts provides marketing  strate gies and campaigns  to speed up participant recrui tment  by leverag ing 
social media and digital platforms. Trialfacts creates GCP- compliant advertising and recruitment materials  
used in the recruitment process, including study information pages, landing pages, pre -screen ing 
questionnaires, and online adver tisements. They will on ly share IRB approved materi als with referrals. 
Interested  candidates  will s ign a study interest form and  be  directed to research  staff, who  will fu rther screen 
potential participants.   
 
 
5.b.  Enrollment and Consent:  Potential par ticipants will b e initially evalua ted using our current telephone or 
REDCap screening approach.  If they appear eligible, they w ill be scheduled for a n in-person or  Zoom 
screening evaluation .  Upon presenting for evaluat ion, we will obtain forma l written c onsent f rom all 
participants.  Fol lowing policies of the Vanderbilt U niversity Health System Institutional Review Board, written  
informed consent will be obtained and documented by the study’s Research Coordinator before  any study-
related proced ures are performed.   The st udy coordinator wi ll review study procedures and the consent form 
with each potential participant.  A study doct or will be available should any consent -related questions arise.  
Each individual may take a s much time as they like to de cide if they d o or do not wish to partic ipate.  
 
We also allow that pa rticipants can be consented without coming physically to VU MC. This will be conducted 
via HIPAA compliant Zoom teleconferencing, as is recommended for telem edicine. We will use  Facetime or 
other videoconferencing  software it there are any technical difficu lties on Zoom or  at the participant’s request. 
An e -consent process will be conducted using a REDCap -based electronic consent form. The consent form 
has been developed in REDCa p, a secur e, web- based , HIPAA -compl iant, data coll ection platform with a user 
management system allowing project owners to grant and contro l varying levels of access to data collection 
instruments and data (e.g. read only, de -identified -only data views for  other users.   A study coordinat or or 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  8 
approved stu dy staff will review the conse nt form while teleconferencing with the participant and ans wer any 
questions before the participant signs.  
 
Patient signatures will be obtained using REDCap ’s ‘Signature’ field  type on the sur vey.  Upon compl etion of 
the conse nt, participants will be able to download a signed copy of the consent form.  We will als o provide 
them with a copy of their version of the consent document signed by them and by the con senting study staff 
member by mailin g of a hard copy of the consent.  
 
A deidentified document confir ming that each participant  has provided signed informed consent will be signed 
by the research coordinator and the Principal  Investigator and kept in the re search file.  
  
5.c. Anticipate d Enrollment : Accou nting for screen fail ures, we anticipate consenting up to 60 subjects total  
to have 36 individuals complete baseline procedures and start study patches.   
 
6.0 STUDY VISITS AND ASSESSMENTS  
Overview: After a screening visit t o confirm eligibi lity a nd diagnosis, p articipants will then be scheduled to 
complete a baseline  assessment consisting of a broad symptom assessment, memory testing, and crani al 
MRI.  They will then complete 12 weeks of open -label trans dermal n icotine patch es.  At the end o f the 12 
weeks, they will then repeat ba seline assessments, have blood drawn f or measurement of nicotine 
metabolites, and have study drug tapered over three weeks.  
 
6.a. Assess ment Burden:  The clinical and cognitive b atteries are similar to those used in our past LLD  
studies.   They are not burd ensome and we allow breaks.  Refer to the separate “Schedule of Events” file for a 
timing of all procedures.  
 
6.b. Initial Evaluation : In the initial screening evaluation , current a nd past psychiatric diagnoses are a ssessed 
with the MINI (Mini-Internationa l Neuropsychiatric Interview) , followe d by a clinical interview with a study 
clinician that will assess age of initia l onset.  The study  clinician will assess antidepressant expo sure in the 
current e pisode using a modified Antidepressant Treatment History Form (ATHF) (110,111) updated to  include 
current medications approved for MDD.  Medical history and comorbidity will be quantified with the Cumulativ e 
Illness Rating Scale -Geriatrics  (CIRS- G).(112)  Screening for cognitive impair ment occurs with the MMSE, 
requiring a score of > 24.   
Concomitan t medication use  will be documented and anticholi nergic burden quantified using the 
Anticholinergic Cognitive Burden ( ACB) Scale.(113)  We selected this approach as the ACB scale is sensit ive 
to drug effects on cognition and  disability, while serum anti cholinergic activity is not consistently associated 
with cognition. (114- 116) 
Smo king history  will be assessed by sel f-repor t items from the PhenX tool kit.(117)   Questions inc lude 
duration and amount of past smoking, symptoms o f smoking dependence, and secondhand smoke exposure.  
Participant s will also complete secondary self- repor t measu res of depressive symptoms, including 
rumination (the Ruminativ e Response Scale ) (118) , apathy (Apathy Evaluat ion Scale, AES)  (119) , sleep 
(Insomnia Severity Index,  ISI), worry ( Penn State Worry Question naire,  PSWQ ), fatigue ( Fatigue Severity 
Scale , FSS), anhedonia (the D imension al Anhedonia Rat ing Scale, D ARS), anxiety (the Gener alized  Anxiety 
Disorder 7 item scale , GAD7;   the Anxiety Severity Index 3; ASI3 ) and participant ’s social support , includin g 
frequency of contacts, subjective and instrument support (Duke Social Support  Index, DSSI ). They will also 
complete self -reports of percei ved cogn itive performance,  including both t he PROMIS Applied Cognition 
Abilities Short Form and the Attentional Contro l Sca le.  Finally, disabili ty will be measured with the World 
Health Organization Disab ility A ssessment Schedule ( WHODAS ) 2.0. 
 
6.c. Study Visit Sche dule: After the  baseline visit , where MRI, cognitive, and self-report data are acquired,  
participants will be seen e very 3 weeks (+/- 4 working days) , allowing us to assess tolerability prior to dose 
increases. At  each study visit (Wee ks 0, 3, 6, 9, 12), d epression sever ity will be mea sured u sing the MADRS , 
administered by a study physician.  Vital signs (wei ght, heart r ate, blood pressu re) will be measured.  Blood 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  9 
(10m l) will be drawn at each visit after b aseline  (Weeks 3, 6 , 9, 12) to measure levels of  nicotine and nicoti ne 
metabolite s. 
Side effects are assess ed at each visit using the Frequency and Intensity of Side E ffects Rating / Gl obal Rating 
of Side Effect Burden (FISER/GRSEB) scales. (120)  Adherence will be assessed using a count of  empty 
wrappers, returned unused p atches, and monitoring of blood level s. The Quick Inventory of Depress ive 
Symptoms —Self Report  questionnaire (QIDS-SR) will provide a self -report measure for depressive symptoms  
at baseline, weeks 3,6,9 and 12.  
 
Safety and thoughts of suicide will be asses sed at e very contact.  In divid uals endorsing thought s of 
death will be questioned  by a psychiatrist about  thoughts of suicide, intention, and potential plans.  When there 
are concerns for safety,  subjects will be withdrawn from the study and treated per cl inical care.  
 MRI, cognit ive d ata, a nd self -report m easu res (both depressive symptoms an d perceived cogni tive 
performance) will be repeate d at w eeks 6 and 12. 
 
7. COGNITIVE ASS ESSMENTS:  
7.a. Neg ativity Bias (Secon dary Outcome ): To evaluate negativity bias , we use  an out -of-scanner, adapted 
version  of the Trait Adjectives Task. (121)  Participants view a seri es of randomized , rapidly presen ted posi tive 
and negat ive characterist ics and quickly indicate whether each adje ctive does or does not ap ply to them .  This 
is follo wed 15 minutes later with a test of emotional  memory ,where in participants must recall the adjectives 
they have view ed.  Posi tive and nega tive adjective s are balanced an d selected from a normed list, ma tched for 
word len gth and arousal. (122)   Measures inclu de num ber of ad jectives endorsed or rejected,  and RT for those 
trials.  Task performance assesses self- referential negativity bias and is associated wi th antidepressant 
respons e.(123)   This task wi ll be administered  at bas eline,  week 3 ,week 6, week9 and week 12.   The follow -
up test of emotional memory will only be conducted at baseline and week 12.  
 7.b. Cogn itive Domain Performance ( Secondary Outcomes ):  These tasks are administered out -of-scanner 
at baseline and week 12. 
• Executive Fun ction: Executive f uncti on will  be measured usi ng the NI H EXAMI NER computerized t est 
battery (124) .  The EXAMINER battery assesse s multiple domains:  
o Inhibition : Inhibition will be measured usin g the Flanker t ask (usi ng ar rows and resp onse to stim uli 
to probe spa tial reorientat ion); the Continuou s Perfo rmance Test (CPT) (125) (responding to some 
stimuli  and not others); and an antisaccades ey e movement  task, (where they move t heir eyes i n 
the same or opposite directio n of a stimulus).  
o Working Memory : Assessed using the dot counting task and the N-back task .  We will use the 1- 
and 2- back conditions with alternative versions for  repeated testin g. 
o Set Sh ifting :  Participants wil l match a stimulus on the top of the s creen to one of two stimuli on 
lower corners of the  screen. 
o Fluency :  Tests of phonemic (letter fluency) and cat egory fl uency 
o Planning:  Using the “Unstructured Task”, su bjects complete  multiple cognit ively simple puzzl es 
o Insight : Participants then ra te the msel ves on their performance compared to 100 indivi duals of their 
same age and education.  
The EXAMINER battery’ s primary outcome i s its Executi ve Composite score .  Seco ndary outcomes include 
its facto r scores: Cognitiv e Cont rol, Fluency, and Working Memory .  The Executive Composite and Factor 
scores are ca lculated from the tasks above.  
• Psychomotor Speed : The Choice Reactio n Time task will be  used as a test of  psyc homotor  speed.  
Partic ipants mu st hold  a button down unti l a light appears above one of severa l other buttons, then move to 
push that button as qui ckly as possible.   This task measures both response and psychomotor  speed. 
• Episodic Me mory : We will utilize t he compl ex Selective R eminding Task as a test of immediat e and 
delayed verbal memory. (126)  This is an 8 -trial, 16 -word te st where the interviewer read s unrelated words 
to the parti cipant who must  recall t hem.  Any missed items are  then r epeated before the next attempt.  
Alternative word lists are available for repeat ed assessments.  A delayed trial is administered af ter 20 
minutes.  
 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  10 
8. STUDY DRUG ADMIN ISTRA TION:  
 
8.a. R61  Transdermal Ni cotine Dosing: P articipants will we ar the study patch during the d ay and remove it at 
night (16 hours).  Titration will be slower than in our pilot project (1) in order to improve tolerability. Per our 
revis ed schedule (Table 1), participants will receive patc hes st arting at 3.5mg dai ly, incr easing to a maximu m 
of 21mg. D oses can be red uced to the prev ious level if neede d for tolerability.  In t hese cases, if the 
precipitating adverse event resolves, the pa rticipant can 
be rechallenged once at the higher dose.  If the adverse 
event ree merges, the participant can again be r educed 
to the pr ior dose, but cannot be rechallenged again.  This 
protocol has been added to  Dr. Newhouse ’s (co -
investigator)  IND 131918 for nicotine tran sdermal 
patches.  
 
8.b. Assessmen t Blin ding: Study clinicians cond ucting 
the MA DRS will be b linde d to levels of nicotine  or 
nicotine metabolites and resul ts of the f unctional MRI 
studies until participants have completed the  12-week 
trial. 
 
8.c. Design Rationale : We obtain MRI biomarker d ata at 6- and 12- weeks.  This pro vides an  opportunity to 
examine the rel ationship betw een exposure and target engageme nt at l ower and higher doses.  Moreove r, for 
individuals who cannot tolerate highe r doses, it provides a naturalistic opportunity to exami ne target 
engagement across time in indiv idual s on a stable  dose.   Othe r designs, such as a single administration dose -
finding study , are not feasible given  poor tol erability of higher doses without gradual ti tration.   
We obtain nicotine and metabolite levels every 3 weeks. This will sup port ana lyses  of target en gagem ent 
and allows us to c onduct exploratory analyses of: a) the relationship between dose and exposure in an elderly, 
nonsmoking population ; and b) the relationship between dose, metabolism, and adverse events. 
 
8.d. End of stud y medication procedures :  Follow ing com pletion of the  12-week trial, doses will be sl owly 
lowered and study drug discontinued over 3  additional weeks (Table 1).  This time can be shortened for 
participants who do not reach the targ et dose of 21mg daily.  If indivi duals feel the stu dy dr ug has provided 
benefi t and elect to continue its use by purchasing over-the-counter patches , we will not require this 
discontinuation.  Subjects will return for a final safety assessment.  For indi viduals who have tolerated study 
patch w ell, this final saf ety visit can optional ly be conducted by telephone.  
 9. MRI PROCEDU RES 
 
9.a. MRI Screening:  To assur e safety for MRI, we carefully scre en partic ipants for metal.  Working with the 
Vanderbilt Univer sity Institute for Imaging Science,  we identify past medic al proce dures and surge ries that may 
include metal imp lants.  In these cases, we request med ical reco rds to determine if metal was used,  and if so,  
if it is safe for 3Tesla MRI.  However, in s ome cases th ese records cannot be  obtained.  In such cases we ma y 
obtai n an x- ray if th ere was a question whether ther e was or was not implanted metal. 
We w ill only obtain an x- ray in cases where a) t here is a safety concern about a potential implant or 
metal; b ) medi cal records for the s urgery a re not available; and c)  participants do not think that metal was 
involved in  the surgery.  Thus this procedure wil l not be needed for the majority of particip ants.   If the x-ray 
shows there is implanted metal that could be a MRI contraindication, that par ticipant will be withdr awn from the 
study.  R adiation exposure will vary depe ndent on the area needing to be evalua ted. 
 
9.b.  Image Acquisition: We will image  subjects at the Vanderbilt University Institute for Ima ging Sci ence 
(VUIIS) on a 3T research- dedicate d MRI  using a protocol tha t acquires multi-contrast data to allow a utomated 
tissue identification and BOLD data at rest and during the cognitive task.  Cr anial  MRI will be performed over 1 
hour.  Similar MRI durations have been well tolerated in our p ast studies of LLD .  Thi s protocol includes  T1-Table  1. TDN Dosi ng   
Week  Days Patch 
Strength  Patch 
Application  Dose 
1 MRI   
1 1-7 7mg 0.5 3.5mg  
2-3 8-21 7mg 1 7mg 
4-6 22-42 21mg 0.5 10.5mg 
6 MRI   
7-9 43-63 14mg 1 14mg 
10-12 44-84 21mg 1 21mg 
12 MRI   
13-14 85-98 14mg 1 14mg 
15 99-105 14mg 0.5 7mg 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  11 
weighted  and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)  images.  Fu nctional MRI BOLD acquisitions will be 
obtai ned at re st where subjects have their eyes open and focu s on a  fixation cross  and during the emotional  
Stroop task.  Subjects will complete the emotional Stroop task twice (13 .5min each; 3m m isotropic voxels, 
TR=2 sec). The emotional Stroop task is presented  in E-Prime and described below.  Prior to MRI, particip ants 
practice the task outside th e scanner. 
 
9.c. fMRI Tasks :  
 
Partici pants will comp lete two fMRI tasks during each scan.  
 
Similar to our pilot study, for this pro posal we will use  an emotional Stroop task. (127)   The classic Stroop  
paradi gm was modified and adapt ed to an emotional conflict task in which faces wi th fearful a nd happy 
expressions are presented with  the words “happy” or “fear”  written across them. We ask subje cts to  identify the 
emotional expression of the faces while i gnoring  the words, which ar e either congruent or incongruent with the 
facial expre ssion. Incon gruent stimul i are thus associated with  a response conflict that a rises from an 
emotional incompatibi lity b etween task- relevant and task -irreleva nt stimulus dimensions (e.g., a  fearful 
expressio n with the word “happy”).  This task dissociates n eural  syste ms involved in  resolvi ng conflict between 
cong ruent  versus incongru ent emotional distractors. (127,128)  
Participants will c omplet e two ru ns of 148 trials f or a total of 27 minutes of testing.  Behavioral r esponse 
times and neural activati on wi ll be analyze d as a funct ion of target co ngruency.  The main variable of interest  
will be activation (percent signal ch ange) of the CCN in res ponse to incongruent -congruent stimuli.   
Our co -I Dr. Gunning obtained emot ional  Stroop  fMRI data on  10 elders before & after 12 wee ks.  T he 
intraclass c orrelation coefficient (ICC) for th e MFG was 0.61.  This is consistent with the literature on reliabil ity 
of task- elicited activation in older adults (129)  and qualifies as good reliabilit y for repeat ed assessments.  
 
Participants will also complete a  scene  process ing task.  While in the scanner , participants will view images of 
scenes, faces,  and scrambled images for a brief (4  minute) run . Images are projected to a  mirror above the 
participant’s head fr om a projector  located outside the scanner room. Stimul i will be presented in the center of 
the screen at a rate of 750 ms, with a 250 ms  interstimulus interval. During the instruction phase, the 
participant views a series of  instruction scree ns whi le the rater reads th e task instructions aloud. Fol lowin g 
instructions, participants are asked to pr actice the task and are allowed to ask questions freely. Participants will 
complete 1 -2 runs of this task. Scenes depict ind oor or o utdoor locations ( e.g., buildin g exteriors or interior 
rooms). Face images depict male  and female faces with neutral or plea sant expressions. To maximize 
participants’ attention to the images, on some trials an image will be repeated. Participants will be instr ucted to 
push a but ton to detect these t argets. Runs with performance less than 50% correct will be excluded from final 
analyses.  
 
9.d. Image Processing:  Functiona l MRI Anal ysis: fMRI data will be preprocessed and analyzed us ing 
SPM 12 (h ttps://ww w.fil.ion.u cl.ac.uk/spm / ). Given the longitudinal nature of our a nalyse s, we will use the 
SPM12 pairwise longitudinal mod ule to create an average MPRAGE image that can be applied to the 
functional scans.  Stan dard fMRI preprocessing steps will be utilized , includin g realignme nt/ motion es timati on, 
slice- timing correction, ART outlier detection, coregistration of functional a nd average d anatomical images and 
normalization to the MNI tem plate,  and spatial smoothing.  First -level analys es include motion regr essors.   
Examin ing CC N Engagement:  To assess target engagement, we  will use RO I-level data in native space.  
To gene rate these  data, middle and superior FG will be identified on indivi dual MPRAGE images using t he 
Neuromorphetri cs atlas (acad emic subscripti on; http://neuromorph ometri cs.com) implemented in SPM. For 
each subjec t, session , and ROI we will calculate the average percent signal cha nge for the primar y contra st of 
incongruent -congr uent tri als.  We will examine the diff erence in M/SFG act ivatio n between Stroop conditions  
prior to and after TDN administration using a change z-score. This will provide ROI data for the Go Decision.  
Testin g for DM N Involvem ent: To assess  potential DMN involvemen t, we will use  an identi cal app roach 
as for the C CN.  W e will focus on key DMN hu b regions,(130- 132) the medial PFC and precuneus.   
 
9.e. Resting State Funct ional Connectivity Analysis : Preprocessing uses the Conn toolbox in SPM 12 with 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  12 
standar d steps of: realign ment o f the functional runs and correctio n for head motion, coregistration of func tional 
and anatomical images, segmentation of the anatomical image, n ormalization of the anatomical  and function al 
images to the standard MN I templat e, and spatial smoothing with a Gaussian filter. The resu lting BOL D time 
series will be band -pass filtered to further  reduce noise and increase sensitivity.  
First-level indiv idual wh ole brain seed- to-voxel  functional connectivity m aps w ill be cr eated for each C CN 
seed (6mm sphere ) in the bilateral MFG and SFG a s well as DMN seeds in the medial PFC and bilatera l 
precuneu s.  Second -level ANCOVAs will test for differences between baselin e and subsequent acquisi tions, 
contr olling for a ge and sex whil e adjusting for m ultiple comparison s using at FDR = 0.05. Beta value s 
(difference between baseline and subsequent acq uisitions) for significant clusters will be further examined to 
deter mine th e strength  and dir ection  of change.  
 
 
10. MEASUR EMENT OF LEVELS OF NICOTINE AND NICOTINE METABOLIT ES 
Every 3 weeks participants wi ll hav e 10ml  of blood drawn to measure metabolites  including  nicotine, cotinine, 
and 3 hydroxycotinine. This will occu r after at least 2  weeks o n a st able dose, and approximat ely 4 hours aft er 
patch applic ation.  This schedu le allows for participants to be  at steady -state levels. (133)   These data will 
provide information o n drug level expo sure and  the nicotine met abolite ratio (3hydroxycotin ine / cotinine),  a 
measure highly c orrelated with the rate of nicot ine clearance. (134,135) Sampl es will be stored at -70 degrees 
until sent for a nalyses  to Dr. Ty ndale at  the University o f Toronto.  T hese compounds will be quantifi ed by LC -
tandem mass spec trometry. (136)  
 These samples will be de- identified in cluding only the study coded ide ntifier and first and last subject 
initials .  They will also  include the d ate of the bloo d draw.  Permiss ion for sh aring of  sampl es with Dr. Tyndale 
is inc luded in the  informed consent document.  
 
11.  RISKS  – STUDY DRUG  
Side Effects of Nicotine:  At the ni cotine doses propo sed in this study, the ma jor peripheral act ion of nicoti ne 
is facilitat ion of im pulses through al l autono mic ga nglia, stimulation of the adrenal medu lla and stimulation of 
sensory recepto rs includ ing chemor eceptors in the carotid body.  G anglionic depressi on occurs at high er 
nicot ine levels.  In c ardiovascular  systems, mild increases in hea rt rate and blood pressur e from sympathetic 
ganglion stim ulation, catecholamine release from adrenal medul la, and aortic and carotid body chemoreceptor 
stimulation may oc cur.  A  mild para sympathe tic response may be seen in the  gastrointesti nal tract and bl adder 
(increased tone and motor activity), with inc reased secre tion of exocrine glands.  Nausea and vomiti ng ca n 
occur f rom peripheral (bowel activity a nd vagal efferent nerve stimulation ) and central  (medullary emetic 
chemore ceptor trigger  zone stimulation ) causes.  Low dose stim ulation of the CNS could i n theory produce 
tremors and respiratory stimulation, altho ugh this i s rarely seen except in patients  with tremor disor ders.  Toxic 
nicotinic doses result in CNS  depression. W ith 
use, toler ance devel ops to virtually all acut e 
adverse effects.  
 
General Safe ty Exp erienc e with the Nicotine 
Transdermal Patch:  A large m eta-analys is was 
conducted examining data  from 35 clinical trials 
utilizing the tran sderm al nicotine patch in over  
5500 individua ls (106). Few adver se 
cardiov ascular outcomes were reported a nd no 
excess of th ese out comes was detected among 
patients as signed to ni cotine patch use  
compared to pla cebo patch users.  Minor  
adverse effects such as s leep d isturb ances, 
nausea, localized skin irritati on, and r espiratory  
symptoms were elevated in patch  users 
compared to  placebo users.   
 

 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  13 
In our published MCI tr ial (104), total adver se eve nts (AEs) for the double -blind t reatment period were 82 for 
nicotine versus 52 for pl acebo (p <  0.05). However, the majority of  AEs were mild (ni cotine 57.3 %; pl acebo 
54.9%) and there was  no statistic ally significa nt difference in the proportion of adverse events within the 
differ ent severity  classifications between treatments (M ann-Whitne y test p = 0.97). No severe AEs were 
classified as related to drug  treatment in eith er treatment group .  Adverse e vent rates by bo dy system s 
reported in mor e than 10% of subjects (Figure) were gen erally compa rable with the exception of 
gastrointestina l and neurologi cal for which there were more A Es reported in the  nicoti ne-treated  group.  
Appr oximately 75 % of AEs in b oth placebo and nicotine groups were judged not related or doubtfully related to 
treatment. More nicotine -treated subjects (N=4) discontinued treatment for adverse events than placebo -
treated subjects (N=0) (X2 (1) = 3 .79; p =  0.05).  No withdr awal symptom s were reported by subjects or 
informants nor were any subjects reported to be continuin g to use nicotine after the six -month study was 
compl eted. 
 
Dermatologic Safety:  The most commo n adverse side eff ect of the nicotine transdermal patch is s kin irritation  
and accounted for approximate ly 25 percent of adverse event reports regarding th e nicotine transdermal patch 
to the FDA (137).  T hese effects consist of ery thema, pru ritus,  edema, and rash.  Mild s kin irritation is common 
and generally occurs after three weeks of continuous use .  Mild to mod erate reddening of the skin is s een in 
25% of subj ects and transient itchin g in 29%. More se vere reactions  requiring mod ification of trea tment have 
been reported in up to 12% of users (Dr ugDex Drug E valuation Monograph). Management of th e sym ptom s is 
usual ly straightforward and is accomp lished by patch ro tation, local tre atments,  and instructing the patient to  
remo ve the pa tch prior to goin g to bed. Dr. Newhouse has experience in administe ring t ransdermal nicotine for 
over five years to a non-smok ing patient  with Huntington's disease for movement disorder control.  This lo ng-
term exposure has been extre mely we ll tolerated wi th only mi nor ski n irritati on seen.   
 
Cardiovascular Safety:  There are a number  of mechanisms whereby nicotine could potentiall y cause o r 
aggravate cardiovascular disea se (138).  Nic otine stimulate s CNS sym pathet ic systems and incr eases release 
of catecholamines from the adr enal and vascular nerve endings.  Whil e toleranc e appears to develop to these 
cardiac sti mulatory effects, the tolerance developed i s only partial.  While there m ay be a small c hronic cardio-
stimulatory e ffect (a pproxi mately seven beats per min ute), the do se response curve appears to be flat (138) .  
 However,  studies h ave not demonstrated that  nicotine rep laceme nt therapi es are associate d with inc reased 
cardiovascular risk or increased incide nce of  cardiovascular adverse events (DrugDe x Dru g Eva luation 
Monograph).  The largest and long est such study was  the Lu ng Health Study th at enrolled almos t 6000 
indivi duals in a stud y over 5 years i nvolving ni cotine r eplacement therapies for smoking  cessa tion.  In this 
group with chronic lung disea se, n icotine use was  found to be marginally protect ive of cardiovascu lar hea lth 
compared to non -use of nicotine (139).  This  protective effect persisted  even when adjus ted for sm oking 
status.  Even within the ex -smokin g sub- group in the same study, nicotine users had substanti ally lower  rates 
of hospitalization then n on-users.  Nicotin e also showed a m arginall y pro tective effe ct against pe ptic ulcer 
disea se in the same s ubjects.  In a lon g-term maintenance study of non -smokin g pati ents with ulcerative colitis, 
there we re no increased car diovascular events and markers o f cardiovascular risk eit her did not change  or 
actually decr eased (e.g. f ibrinogen) (140). An inves tigation of the effects of 26 weeks of  chron ic oral nicotine 
showed improved cardi ovascular  risk para meters (e.g. capillary flow, fib rinogen) after smo king ce ssation with 
no negative effects of  nicotine (141). Nicotine does no t appear t o promote thrombosis or platelet  aggregation 
nor does nicotine repl acement thera py increase the risk of a cute myocardial infarction (Drug Dex Drug 
Evaluatio n Monograph).  
 
Studies of patie nts wi th kno wn cardiovascular disease have similar ly no t shown an inc rease in cardiovascular 
events or toxicity seconda ry to nicotine th erapy.  Two l arge studies of men with docume nted coron ary artery 
disea se with up  to 10 w eeks of nicotine therapy showed lower rates of cardiovascular endpoints and events  in 
the ni cotine -treated group (142).  A study o f myocardial perfusion in me n with cor onary artery disease showed 
that cigarette smoking was associated wit h significantly greater myocardial per fusio n def icits tha n nicotine 
therapy alone, sugges ting that such a p erfusion defect i s due to  factors from tob acco other th an nicotine.  I n 
reviewin g the available c linical trial literature and data report ed to the FD A as of 1998, Rennard and colleagues 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  14 
concluded:  "the avai lable clinical trial and the cli nical experience r eported to date a re consi stent with the 
relative safety  of transdermal  nicotine in sta ble patient s with c ardiac disease."  
 
In our MCI study, an  exam ination of change in systolic blood 
pressur e rev ealed a si gnificant reduction  in systolic blood 
pressure compared to placebo  treatme nt (F igure below) . By 
day 182,  the placebo gr oup showed an ave rage increase of 
9.6 mmH g in SBP compared to a red uction of 4 mmHg in the 
nicotine- treated group. Th ere w as a small redu ction in 
diastolic blood pressur e by day 182 in t he nicotine -treated 
group.  An  examination of the change  in pulse showe d no 
overall treatment effect (p =  0.51) . 
 Safety Experienc e in In dividuals with Cardiovascular Disease : The results  of two co ntrolled trials of NRT in 
patients with cardiovascular dise ase have been published  (143,14 4).  The first study was a 5 -week, placebo-
controlled trial of  14 to 21 mg/day of transd ermal nicotine in 156 patients with stable coron ary artery 
disea se (143) .  Cardiac symptoms were r ecorded, and in a subgroup, 24 -h ambulatory elect rocar diographic 
(ECG) monitoring was performed before and during  the fi rst and last weeks  of treatment. Of  note, the qui t rates 
were l ow, so there was much concomitant s moking  and patch use in each gro up. Fr equency 
of angina decli ned both in nicotine and placebo groups, with no di fference b etween treatments. Ambulatory 
ECG monitoring revea led no d ifferences in  arrhythmias or ST segment d epression  changes in nicotine - versus  
placebo- treated patients. Plasma nicotine c oncentrati ons aver aged 14.1 ng/ml with transdermal nicotine in 
those who did  and 21.1 ng/ml in those who did not  quit smoking . Joseph et al . (144)  reported the resu lts of a 
large Ve terans Affair s cooperative st udy of 584 smoke rs with cardiovasc ular disease. Patients received a 10-
week course of transdermal nicotine (beginnin g at 21 m g/day and  tapering to 7 mg/day) or placebo. Many 
participant s continued to sm oke cigarettes. The incid ence of prima ry end points ( death, myocardial  infarction, 
cardi ac arrest and admission to the h ospital for increase d severity of angina, arrhythm ias o r con gestive heart 
failure) was similar in both groups (nicotine  group:  5.4%; pla cebo gro up: 7.9%). These t wo studies (143,144)  
found no evidence of aggravation  of corona ry artery disease by NRT.  
 
An experiment al st udy (145)  further suppo rts the safety of  transde rmal nicotine, eve n in the set ting of 
concomi tant cigar ette sm oking, in patients  with severe coronary artery dis ease. Thirty- six male smok ers with 
a baseline ≥5% rever sible perfusion defect by quantitative  thallium -201 single- photon emission computed 
tomography  were treated  with 14- and 21 -mg nicotine patches sequentially. Despite instructions to stop, most 
continued smo king, althou gh they smoke d fewer cigaret tes per day. In the setting of incr easing plasma 
nicotine levels (average : 15.8 ng/ml at base line, 24.2 ng/ml for 14 -mg ni cotine patc hes, 30.4 ng/ml for 21 -mg 
nicotine patches), there was a highly significant reducti on in total exercise- induced perfusion def ect size 
(aver age: 17.5% at baseline, 1 2.6% for 14 -mg nicotine pa tches,  11.8% for 21 -mg nic otine patches). No 
patient ha d a signifi cant increase in myocardial i schemia while using nic otine  patches . The 
progressive reduction in defect size was most closely related to the reduction i n the 
blood carboxyhemoglobin  concentration, which had decreased as a conseq uence of smok ing fewer 
cigarettes. This study (145)  suggests that carbon monoxide  or some other component of tobac co smoke 
rather than nicotine is  most impor tant in limitin g myocardial nutrient su pply in patients with  coronary heart 
diseas e. In that the perfusio n def ect size is known to have predictive implications for future myocardial 
infarction or death, o r both (146) , this study (145) suggests that treatm ent with transdermal nic otine  is not 
hazardous in patients with coronary heart disease and may even reduce cardiovascular r isk in 
conti nuing smokers if the smoking rate is reduced.  
 
In another study  (147), nicotine replaceme nt therapy was found to improve myocardial function. Thirty- six of 
the 40 enrolled patients had exe rcise SPECT at baseline a nd during treat ment with at lea st 14-mg nicotine 
patches. These patients had an in itial perfusion defect size of 17.5 +/ - 10.6% whil e smoking an average of 31 
+/- 11 cigarettes per day for 40 +/ - 12 years. A significant reduction in the total perfusion def ect size (p < 
0.001) was observ ed from  baseline (17.5 +/-  10.6%) to treatment with  14-mg (12.6 +/ - 10.1%) an d 21- mg Systolic Blood Pressure
-15-10-5051015
0 50 100 150 200
DayChange from baseline 
(mm Hg)Nicotine
Placebo
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  15 
(11.8 +/ - 9.9%) nicot ine patches. This reduction occurred despite an increase in treadmill exercise duration (p 
< 0.05) and hig her serum nic otine levels (p  < 0.001). There was a significant correlation between the 
reduction in d efect size and exhaled carbon monoxide level s (p < 0.001) because patients reduced their 
smoking by approximately 74% during the trial.  Nicotine patches, wh en used to p romote smoking 
cessation, signif icantl y reduce the exten t of exercise -induced myocardial  ischemia as assesse d by 
exercise thallium -201 SPECT.  
 
Cerebrovascular Safety:  Smoking is a preventable risk factor for ischemic stroke and som e preclinica l studies 
have  suggested  potential mechanis ms by which smoking and/or  nicotine might increase the risk of ischemic 
strok e (148-151). However, a large me ta-analysis of 35 smoking cessa tion trials did not find a ny incre ased 
incide nce of stroke in nicotine replacement therapy users (106).  
 Conclusion r egardi ng cardio-  and cerebrovascular safety : As the subje cts to b e enrolled in this study will be 
nonsmokers selected for the absence of unstable cardiovascular or cerebrovascular d isease, we believe that 
the cardiova scular and cerebrova scular risk profile  of transdermal nicotine in suc h pati ents is excellent.  
 Insulin Sensitivity : There have been some epidemiologic studies suggesting a positive relationship between 
smoking and insul in resistan ce (152) although som e studies are contradictor y (153). Some in vestiga tions have 
sugge sted that changes in insulin sensitivity may be restricted to smokers who are also diabetic (154) . 
Contradictory results were also seen  in studies  of smokeless t obacco use on cardiovascular risk factors and 
insulin l evels with one study of h eavy users finding impaire d measur es of glucose to leran ce (155) while 
another study did not ( 156). At this point, it is not clear that nicot ine us e alone in nonsmokers is associ ated with 
changes in  insulin  sensitivit y.  
 
Carci nogenesis:   Nicotine alone has not been shown to be carcinogenic.  Long -term epidemiologic studies o f 
oral tobacco use s uggest that  the nitrosamine co ntent of tobacco is critic al to determining the cancer risk from 
non- smoke re lated t obacco use, rather than nicotine (157) .  Whether nicotine can act as a permissive agent to 
encourage the development  of can cer is unclea r, but it does not seem to hav e any effect unless co-
administered with tobacco (157). 
 
Fetal Developme nt: The FDA does not rec ommend the use of transdermal nicotine patches during 
pregnancy. Given how our age entry criterion (age 60 year s or older) is  concordant  with a post-menopa usal 
state, we will not require pregnancy testing.  
 
Safety Experience in Older  individua ls: We h ave extensive experienc e in admini stering nicotine and no vel 
nicotinic agonists to ol der patients with Al zheimer's and Parkinson's  disease (158-160) .  We have performed 
over 200 int ravenous infus ions of nicotine bitartra te salt to such  patients with cardiac telemetr y.  No ins tances 
of cardiac ectopy or irritability have been s een and no other significant side effects  other than nausea and/or 
vomiting  have occurred.  We have als o admi nistered nicot ine by transdermal patch f or four weeks to elderly 
patients with Parkins on's dise ase (161). Tolerability was excellent,  even up to 22 mg nicot ine patch per day.  
Only mi nor gastrointestinal  upse t was seen that was easily mana ged by dose reduction.  No incidenc es of 
cardiovascular sympt oms or difficulties occurred.  
 
Chronic nicoti ne has been administered transdermally by other investigators to n onsmoking AD and PD 
patient s in s everal studies  for up to several weeks 
(161-165) without significant probl ems.  No significant 
cardiovasc ular problems have been documented. 
Patie nts reported a vague feeling of  lightheade dness, 
and some had mil d behavioral changes.  
 Weig ht:  In our recently published MCI study, 
exam ination of  the change in body weight across 
visits show ed that the nicotine -treated group showing Weight
-4-3-2-1012
0 50 100 150 200DayChange from baseline: 
kgNicotine
Placebo
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  16 
a signifi cant decline in body weight by day 91 compared to pl acebo (- 2.6 kg versus -0.1 kg for the placebo -
treated subjects). Howeve r the nicotine- treated gr oup stabili zed and no further decline in weight  occurred  
through day 182 .  We  observed a similar pattern in our 12- week pilot trial in LLD.  We will monitor wei ght over 
the course of t he study. 
 
Abuse Potential:  We be lieve that the  probability that the sub jects in th is study might be prompted by their  
participation to begin to  use nicotine containing products or  tobacco is extrem ely low.  There have been no 
cases  reported in the medica l literature of primary abus e by never smokers of nic otine replacement th erapies.  
Further more, there are no cases repor ted of ex- smokers taking up ni cotine replacement therapy and becoming 
addicted or dependent.  Addition al reasons for our assertion that the risk of abuse of transde rmal nicotine in 
this po pulation is low inclu de: 
 1) Nicotine r eplacement therapies have an ex tremely low abuse liabilit y (166) . Nicotine patche s have some 
unpleasant si de ef fects and therefore are unlikely to be re inforcin g.  
 2) Studies (167,168) show that experimenta l admi nistration of tobacco does not induce ex -smokers t o rela pse 
into smoking.  In another  study (166), w hen non-smokers and ex -smokers were  followed after participat ing 
in a study of nicotine gum admin istration,  no subj ects were found to be smoking or u sing other nicotine 
products three months following completion of the study .  
 
3) An important char acteristic of all drugs that produce dependency  is the p harmacokinetic parameters 
associated with the route and form of administration (169). With respect to nicotin e, researchers of the 
NIDA Addiction Research Cente r (17 0,171), as well as others in the field (172- 175), have reported th at the 
slower abso rption of nicotine offe red by the transdermal patch relat ive to tobacco products substantia lly 
reduces th e likelihood of nicotine dependence in users of the patch.  This was su pported by  a study 
describing a  double- blind placebo -controlle d study investigating the therapeutic pot ential of t he transdermal 
nicotine patch for patients sufferin g from  ulcerative co litis (140).  Although all of the subjects were adults 
and many former tob acco users, despite 26 weeks of dail y applications of 15 mg nicotine patches,  no 
withdra wal symptoms were repor ted from these patients following discontinuatio n of the patch.  In addit ion, 
a crossove r trial evaluating the "liking"  rating fo r the patch (22m g or 44 mg/24hr) in adults found no 
difference in scor es between the active a nd placebo systems (176).  
 
4) We have administered i ntrav enous and/or transder mal nicoti ne and
 structurally related nicotin ic agonist s 
over the past 20 years to several hundred non- smok ing subjec ts including young and elderly normal 
volunteers, patients with A lzheimer's disease, MCI, and  patients with Parki nson' s disease.  We have not 
had a singl e subject take up tobacco use a s a conseq uence of study participation.  Perhaps most 
importan tly, in ou r recent ly completed MCI trial,  no withdraw al symptoms were repor ted by subjects or 
informant s nor were any subje cts reported to be continu ing to use nicot ine after the study was compl eted. 
 There are potential  unknown risks related to transdermal nicotine  patches.  
 
Experience in Late -Life Depress ion: The majority of ad verse events in our publishe d pilot trial of 15 subj ects 
with LLD were  expected and conc ordant with what is described a bove.  There were no SAEs and t he most 
common adverse effects included n ausea (N =7), dizziness (N=4) an d headache (N=4).  These were dose -
limiting in 7  of the 15  subjects (including 1 e arly withdrawal). One part icipant re ported a sharp increase in 
anxiety when incre ased from the 7m g pat ch to the 14mg patch.  This anx iety resol ved on lowering the dose. 
We ob served no s ignificant changes in bl ood pressure or heart rate but observe d a decrease in weight (6.7lb, 
t= 4.30, p< 0.01).  We observed no ill effects or c raving a fter tapering and  discontinuing TDN over an additiona l 
3 weeks.    
 
RISK/BENEFIT RATIO: When th e safety rec ord outlined above is considered, the risks of par ticipation in this 
study are low.  The risks mainly cons ist of temporary side effects from t he nicoti ne and/or the transdermal 
patch that do not constitute a serio us danger when administered wit hin a medica l environment.  Long -term 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  17 
cardiovascular, cerebrov ascular, and neurolo gical  safety of transderm al nicotine appears to be very favorable. 
Subjects may b enefit from cognitive  improvement and mood. The bene fits to so ciety of greater knowledge 
about the treatm ent of the cognitive c hanges in late- life depressi on and their possibl e am elioration, consideri ng 
the huma n and economic costs of this disord er, would appear great.  O verall the risk/benefit ratio appear s to 
be in favor o f conducting these studies.  
 
12. RISKS – OTHER THAN STUDY  DRUG  
1. Diagnostic, Cognitive,  and C linical Interv iews:  Subjects may exper ience boredom or discomfort during the 
clinica l intervie w and evaluation s whe n discussing symptoms and recen t life eve nts.  They may also 
experience frustration  with some cognitive ta sks.  The study coordinators  are experienced and  skilled in 
interviewing depressed older  adults.  Should the subject wi sh to stop or take a break, the  coordinator will 
allow it.  Dr . Taylor o r another study doctor will be available a s a backup. Should the subject express 
suicidal ide ation  at any time during the interview, Dr. Ta ylor or an other study doctor will be contacte d 
immediat ely to assess th e subject and to determine the appro priate course of action.  Thoughts of sui cide 
will be  taken very seriously .  Options for addressing thi s may include contac ting the individual’s 
outpatient men tal health caregiver, referring for urgent psychiatric evalua tion and treatment, or emergent 
evaluation and hospitalization.  Similar prac tices will be used for other emerg encies, including but not 
limited to psychosis, homi cidal or violent thoug hts, or an  acute  change in a subject’s physic al status. 
 
Safety Procedu res for Telemedicine Evaluations: In context of the COVID -19 pandemic, we will allow some 
study procedures, inc luding the initi al screening visit, to be conducted at a distance using telemedicine 
appro aches.  If there are safety con cerns, t he study clinici an can always  require in -person visi ts instead of 
telemedicine visits.   This is concordant with clinica l practice in the  Vanderbilt Department of Psychiatry  and 
Behavioral Science  that is using telem edicine for both new and est ablished pati ent visits.  We will follow 
their clinical guidance for this study .   
 Prior to the screening visit, a study clinician will rev iew the p otential subject ’s Vanderbilt me dical r ecord.  If 
there is a  history of suicida lity in the medical record, the v isit will be conducted i n per son.  For telemedicine 
visits (both screening and follow- up visits) , at initi ation of the visit we will ob tain: 1) the address of the 
subject’ s location; 2) a phone number where th e subject can be reached; and 3 ) the identity o f any family 
members  or friends at their  location .  This allows us to contact the subject if disconnected, but also to kno w 
where they are and who may be available to assist i n case of an emergency.  If thou ghts of suicide arise 
during  the interview, the p atient will be directed to the Vanderbilt Psychiatric Hospit al emergency 
Psychiatric Admissions Service for further evaluation.  If a f amily membe r or friend is available, we will a sk 
the subject for  permissi on to share our concerns with them and enlist th eir assi stance.  We will  then notify 
the Psychiatric Admissi ons Service about the expected arrival.  If the subject  is unable or unwill ing to come 
to Vanderbilt or a local emergency room for evaluation, and a family member or friend is not av ailable, we 
will conta ct the local pol ice to detail our concerns and request a check on the subject’ s welfare.   In either 
case, we will follow -up wit h the subject to assure their safety and disposi tion. 
 
2. Magnetic Resonance  Imaging:   Although this procedure is generally low-risk, there are part icular concer ns.  
Individuals will b e screened for the presence of im planted metal (incl uding but not limited t o medical 
devices, shrapnel, tattoos or per manent makeup); those who scre en positive wil l be excluded from the 
study.  Claustroph obia is also an issue for ma ny potential subjects.  During the MRI, subjects wi ll hav e 
voice contact wi th a radiology technicia n, and m ay request the scan be stopped at an y time.  
Another MRI -related r isk is the occu rrence of incidental findin gs on MRI.  All scans are revi ewed at time 
of acquisition and concerning findings are reviewed with an attending neuro radiologist .  Should an y 
concer ning findings be seen, Dr. Taylor o r another study doctor will con vey these findin gs to the subject 
along with  recommenda tions  for further  evaluation  and facilitate referral s for such evaluation and t reatment.  
 3. X-Rays:  Occa sionally there may be a concern on screening for MRI safety in indi viduals who may have 
past surgi cal histories or have been exposed to met al fragm ents.  We will attempt  to acquire m edical 
records when pos sible, but may also obtain an x- ray when it is uncl ear whether or not there  is implanted or 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  18 
embedded metal.  In these cases, if metal is found on x- ray and safety cannot be assured, the subj ect wi ll 
be wi thdrawn.  This w ill be an unc ommon study procedure, but does involve exposure t o a sm all amount of 
radiation.  As this will be a single  x-ray image obtained at one time p oint, this radiation exposure is of low 
risk. 
 
4. Blood draw for levels of nicoti ne and nicotine metaboli tes:  We wil l draw 10mL of blood to measure levels 
of nicotine and ni cotine metabolites  four times over the 12- week trial.  This is a minimal risk procedu re and 
amount.  Risks involve mild discomfort , bruising, or bleeding.  Blood w ill be d rawn by a phlebo tomist using  
sterile technique.   Blood samples will be identifi ed onl y by a subject ID number, initials (first and last) and 
date.  They will be stored in  a secured, locked, research -dedicated -70 degr ee freezer.   
 
5. Worsening Depressi ve Sym ptoms:   If indiv iduals do no t experience benefit wit h the patch, it is possible  
depressive symptoms wou ld worsen and suicidal i deation develop.  We are mitigating this ri sk by 
examining transdermal ni cotine in an au gmentation trial, so all particip ants wil l be on a stable  therapeutic 
dose of a SSRI or SNRI antidepressant. We will saf eguard against this risk  by frequent monitoring and 
availability for phone calls or urgent in-person visits for worsening  depression.  I f participants exhibit 
wors ening depressi ve symptoms, the y can withdra w or be withdrawn from the study and referred for 
appropriate clinical car e.  Similarly, the devel opment of suicidal thoughts will result in study withdrawal and 
referral to the appropriat e level of clinical care (outpatient, partial hospital,  or inpatient ). 
 
6. End of Study Proced ures:  During the course of the study we will work w ith study subjects to id entify 
providers who will continue their ca re at the end of the study.  A fter completion of the 12 -week final 
assessments , all subjects will unde rgo a three -week patch taper.  They will then return for a fina l safe ty 
visit.  We will then communicate to thei r physi cian about study procedures, their study participation, and if 
they benefited fr om their participation.  
 
7. Breach of confidentiality:   Ther e is the po tential risk of breach of confidentiality of clinic al, genetic, and 
laborat ory information.  Dr. Ta ylor has extensive experience as a clinical  investigator dealing with suc h 
sensitive inf ormation and have experienc e assuring that data is adequa tely protect ed.  Safeguards to 
protect confidentiality include locked  records and firew alls around password -protected e lectronic data, and 
all study data being coded, with the key link ing the code wi th a subject’s identity bei ng kept in a s eparate, 
locked file accessi ble only to key study st aff. 
 12. Reporting of Adve rse Events or Unanticipa ted Problems involving Ri sk to Participants or Others  
 
Subjects wil l be assessed for safety, medi cation tolerability, and unanticipated pro blems at each contact.  
Emerge ncy contact information will be provided to each subject for ur gent, unanticipated probl ems.   
 
12.a. Definitio n of Adverse Events ( AEs) and s erious adverse  events (SAEs) .  We define reportable non-
serious adverse event s as any advers e change in health or development of a sid e effect occurri ng in a study 
participant after e nrollment .  These ma y be expected events ( known drug effects , as detailed in the conse nt 
form, safety monitoring pl an, or package in sert) or unexpected events.  We define a SAE as any even t that 
resul ts in h ospitalization, disability or permanent dam age, i s life threatening,  results in death, or a ny other 
serious e vent that does not fit thes e out comes but require s urgen t medical inte rvention.    
 12.b. AE Monitoring and Reporting.  All adver se events w ill be r eviewed by Dr. T aylor and/or Dr. Newhouse 
approxi mately  weekly as the y occur. All AEs, r egardless of being judged as related or no n-related, will be 
summari zed a nd included in the  annual IRB continuing review.  Unanticip ated, non- seriou s AEs will b e 
reviewed by Dr. Ta ylor and Dr. Newhouse.  If felt  to be  likely related to s tudy participation,  we will consider 
whether they need to be  added to the consent form .  If so,  we will submit  them as an AE report and submit an 
amendment adding that  risk to the  consent form and ot her study documents.  
 12.c. SA E Repo rting.  All SAEs, re gardless of whether  they are determined to be related or not to study 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  19 
procedures, will  be repor ted to the Vand erbilt IRB within 7 calendar days of when  study staff lea rn about the 
event .  SAEs will a lso be reviewed jointly by Drs.  Taylo r and Newhouse to co nsider whether they need to be 
added to the consent form.  
 
12.d. Data Safety Monitorin g Boar d.  As we will be using transdermal nicotine patche s off-label in a differen t 
population  than the approved i ndication, we will establish a  DSMB for this study.  The  DSMB will consist of 
scientists including a geriatric psych iatrist, a geriatric inter nist, and a statistician .  These individuals will be 
independent of and not includ e members o f the study team .  The DSMB will be named and the c harter 
provided both t o NIH and to the Vander bilt IRB prior to initiation of study enr ollment.  It is anticipated  the DSMB  
will meet eve ry 6 months after initiation.  
 
The DSMB, based on its rev iew of the pr otocol, will wor k to id entify the study -specific d ata parameters and 
format of the information to be regularly reported. All adverse event s related to study medication and all severe 
adver se events and SAEs will be reported to the DSMB. The DSMB will convene to review these  cumulative    
study medication related A Es, severe AEs and SAEs every 6 months while subjects are participating in the 
study.  
DSMB reports wi ll be prov ided to NIH a nd the Vanderbilt IRB at each continuing renewal .  
  
Based on the review of safety data, the DS MB will make recommendati ons regarding the conduc t of the stud y. 
These may include am ending safety monitoring procedur es, m odifying the pr otocol or c onsent, term inating the 
study or continuing the study a s designed .   
 
 
13. STUDY WITHDRAWAL/DISCONTINUATION  
Participants may with draw from the study at any time.  If par ticipants leave the stu dy early, we will recommend  
a medication taper and cli nical ref errals for f urther  care.   
 
A participant will be withdr awn from the study if:  
1) The participant withdraws his  or her consent  
2) The PI  conside rs it is in the bes t interest of  the patient for him or her to stop study particip ation 
3) In the PI’s judgment , the parti cipant’s de pressive sy mptoms have worsened significantl y since study drug 
initiation  
4) The patient develops s uicidal ideation where  he or she should be referre d for regul ar clinical care for saf ety 
5) The patie nt is lost to follow -up 
 
14.  SUBJECT REI MBURSEMENT  
 
Participan ts may rec eive up to $600.  Reimbursement i s pro -rated for each visit:  
• Screening Visit: $25  
• Assessment visits with MR I (Weeks 0, 6 and 12):  $15 0 / each.   
• Clinic visits with blood  draws but wi thout MRI (Wee ks 3 a nd 9) : $50 / each  
• Final safety  visit (Week  15): $25 
 
15. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
15.a. Data Management: All study data will be stored i n a REDCap study datab ase.  The exception is for the 
raw and processed MRI scans that  will be stor ed in the Vand erbilt  XNAT Image Database  system.  
 
15.b Statis tical Plan:  After assessing normality, tests  will be conducted as two -sided using alpha=0.05.  I f 
data are not normally  distributed, we will eith er transform  data or use nonparametr ic approaches .  For this 
proof of concept study, no m ultiple com parison cor rections wi ll be used and results presented in that context.   
 
Aim 1: Test CCN engagement over 12 weeks of open- label  transde rmal nicotine (TDN) 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  20 
Hyp 1A (Targ et Engagement) : TDN wil l enhance CCN  function, mea sured as a reduction in th e M/SFG 
Stroop BOLD res ponse  (the activation difference between incongruent and congruent conditions of the 
emotional Stroop task).  60% or m ore of subjects will exhibi t a M /SFG z -score reduction of 0.5 or greater.  
 
We will test f or change i n the differenc e in M/SFG  ROI activat ion between the incongruent and congruent 
conditions of the emotional Stroop task. We will determine the signal differ ence between conditions and  
calcu late th e z-score change as det ailed for our Go criteria ( Sect C .10). Analyses will include al l subjects 
regardless of final dose.   
The primary outco me will be change in activation difference from base line to week 12.  This will be 
examined as both a conti nuous variable and a categorical variable, defined by our  Go cr iterion of whether a  
subject ex hibits a z -score reduction of at least 0.5 in M/SFG act ivity at 12 -weeks.  Change from baseline to 
week 6 a nd week 6 to week 12 ar e secondary outcomes.  Ana lyses will include key covariates of  age and sex.   
Exploratory analys es wi ll examine the relationsh ip between ch ange in the M/SFG Stroop response and change 
in MADRS, using an approach similar to that described for the R33 phase, Hypothesis 2A, described in  the 
R33 Pha se Section 4.4, Statist ical Design a nd Power.  
 
Hyp 1B (Exposu re): Higher nico tine expo sure measure d by dose or metabolite levels will be assoc iated with a 
greater reduction in the M/SFG Stroop B OLD response.  
 
Subsequ ent models will be structure d as for Hyp  1A but include nicotine blood level  exposure or final d ose as 
explanatory va riables.  Primary ana lyses will examine 12- week change, with post -hoc analyses examining 
change from baseline to week  6 and week 6 to week 12.  
To test for the associ ation between  the change in the Stro op BOLD response and the ch ange i n nicotine 
exposure across visi ts (baselin e, wee k 6, week 12), we will employ a linear  model in which change in activation 
will be the out come variable and expl anatory variables include c hange in bloo d nicotine level, visit  time, and 
the interaction between change in blood lev els and v isit while a djusting for the effects of age and sex. The  
statistical significance of the regression coeffici ent associated with the  interaction term is of pr imary  interes t to 
address the difference in the association between v isits.  Similar appr oaches wil l be used to exam ine dose.  
 For each visit, we will also  examine contemporaneous correlation between change in the Stroop BOLD 
response and change in the ste ady-state plasma nicotine concentrat ion or dose. Moreover, the prolonged 
effect of nicoti ne on the M /SFG Stroop  BOLD response will be examined via lagged c orrelation, i.e., correlation 
between BOLD response at week 6 (or week 12) and blood level of nicotine  at week 3 (or week 9). Finally, we  
will examine  z-score chang e in t he BO LD response as both a con tinuous and categorical measure based on 
meeting target engagement Go Criteria.  Jointly, these analyses wil l inform R33 phase dos ing. 
 
Exploratory Analyses : Analyses of  blood samples will prov ide levels of  nicotine, cot inine,  and the log 3-
HC/cot inine rat io (a measur e of nicotine clearance).  We will examine whether nicotine or metabolite levels at 
week 3 predi ct subsequent dose -limiting effects.  We will als o exam ine how  a past smoking history (defined 
as > 100 cigarett es over lif etime) or diffe rences in antidepressa nt use  (SSR I vs SNRI) is associated with tar get 
engagement, change in depression severity, or vu lnerability to adverse  effects. 
 15.c. Statistica l Power: Per  RFA MH- 18-702, the R61 phase focuses on the prelim inary evaluation of whether  
an inter vention (TDN)  modulates  the target (M/SFG activity). In pilot data, 64% (7 of 11) of subjects met our 
neural  circuit criterion for  CCN engagement.  Assuming that this is a reasonable estimate o f the true pr oportion 
of individu als showing target en gagement with TDN, N= 30 produces a one- sided 95% lower- limit conf idence 
interval with a lower bound of at least 0.5, i.e., a chance of 50% o f parti cipants meeting thi s criterion. The 
bootstrap distribution of the de lta Z based on  our pilot study further s upports th at we will ha ve 80% pow er to 
detect  at least 50% true po sitives, i.e., more than 15 out of 30 satisfy the de lta Z <  -0.5 criterion . 
 
16.0 PRIVACY/CONFIDENTIA LITY ISSUES 
16.a. Confidentiality Pr ocedures: As the PI, Dr. Ta ylor w ill assure all proce dures prot ecting study  data 
designed to guard subject confidential ity conform to the Vanderbilt Human Research Protect ion Program 
requiremen ts. All non- electronic data (clinical e valuations, paper assess ments) will b e stored secur ely in 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  21 
locked offices or l aboratories  accessible  only by st udy staff.  All electronic data will be stored in secured 
servers with limited access .  RedCAP will be used for data management.  
 
Further, all information that could pote ntially direc tly identify a subje ct is removed from a ll study d ata.  This 
includes MRI data, electronic and paper assessments.  Direct identifie rs will be replaced with a unique four -
digit code.   The key to linking the c ode to subje ct identity will be kept  separately f rom study data , in a  locked 
file in passw ord-protec ted computer  in Dr. Ta ylor’s office. Only study staff i nvolved in clinical recruitment and 
assessment will have access to individ ually identifiable private information.  All other study staff,  including 
image analysts, will b e blinded to subject  identity and will onl y have access to the coded identifier.  
 16.b. Privacy Procedures : Informed consent and all study procedures will occur  in private research offices  
and private research examination r ooms.   
 16.c. Creation of Global Unique Identifier ( GUID): To f acilitate N IMH-required data sharing described below, 
participants will be assigned a GUID using the GUID t ool (https://nda.nih.gov/s/guid/nda -guid.html).  The GUID 
Tool is software that a ccepts the  personal inf ormation o f subjects and uses it to create a series of hash codes. 
These codes are sent to the NIH system and checked  against the GUID database.  If these co des have been 
seen befor e, that means  the informati on matches an existing GUI D, and thi s GUID is sen t bac k. If no match is 
found, a new GUID is  created and sent back. If someone else enters the s ame information later, the tool will 
detect this m atch and sen d back the same GUID. The GUID itsel f is a series of alpha- numeric character s. With 
this system: 1 ) No personally identifying information ever  leaves the institution’s computers; 2) There is not hing 
about a GUID that woul d allow someone to inf er the ident ity of the individual to  whom it belo ngs; and 3) The 
same individual's inform ation will result in t he same GUI D across time, location, and rese arch study. This 
allows researchers to match shared data from that partici pant regardless of source, w ithout ever sharing or 
viewing personally identi fying informat ion. 
To create a GUID, at e nrollment we will gat her all of the following required informatio n: sex, first name, last 
name, middle name, date of birth, and city/munici pality of birth. In all case s, all of this information should b e 
obtained and entered as it appears on the birth cert ificate.  The GUID wi ll serve as  a secondary more complex 
coded identifier, in addition to the simpler primary 5 -digit identifier.  The GUI D will be the only identifi er use d 
when  sharing data outside of  UIC, UPMC, a nd VUMC.  
 
16.d. Tran sfer of Blood Samples  for Analy ses: Blood s amples will be leaving Vanderbilt Universit y Medical 
Center for analys es of levels of nicotine and nicotine metabolit es by Dr. Rachel Tyndale at  the Center f or 
Addiction and Mental  Health at th e University of Toronto.  These samples will be de identified an d include only 
the subject’s study ID numbe r, initials (first, last), and date of sample acquis ition.   
 
17. DATA SHAR ING 
 The proposed research  will include  clinical, cognitive, a nd neuroimagi ng data from o lder d epressed subjects. 
The final d ataset will also include sensitive clinical information about subject psychiatric diagnoses, psychiatric 
and medical history.  Data will be deidentified and stored  in RE DCap and the Vanderbilt XNAT image storage 
database.  G iven our data safeguar ds we feel  that subject  identity will be protected.  
 
We will  also follow NIH guidance by planning to share data.   These data will be shared  with investigators 
working under  an ins titution with a Federal Wide Assuran ce (FWA) and can be used for secondary s tudy 
purpos es.  The na mes and Institutions of persons either given or denied access to the data, and the bases for 
such decisions, will be s ummar ized in the annual NIH progr ess re ports. 
 All data, the da ta dictionary , and technica l deta ils of assessments w ill be ava ilable for s haring and will be 
facilitated through our s tudy data manager.  All imaging data will have direc t identifiers excised from the files 
prior to sha ring.  Data w ill be available for sh aring as soon as possible b ut no later than within one  year of the 
completio n of the funded project period for the pare nt award or upon acceptance of the primary data for 
publication.  
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  22 
 
Given NI MH data sharing requirement s and pursuan t to NOT -MH-15-012, we will also sha re data via th e 
National Institute of Me ntal Healt h Database ( NDA) a t the National Institutes of Health (N IH). The NDA 
provides a secure platform for data -sharing allowing for commu nicatio n of research data,  tools, and supporting 
documents.  D ata to be sha red includes c linica l data, cognitive dat a, and ne uroimaging da ta gathered over the 
course of this study.  No direct identifiers will be shared with the NDA a nd data coded using a G UID.  
Participants can refu se to  have their data included in t he NDA and st ill participat e in t he st udy. 
 
18. FOLLOW -UP AND RE CORDS RETEN TION 
 
Study  records will be maintained for  at least seven  years after all study procedures are complete, all subject 
contact h as ended, and the s tudy is close d with the IRB.  After that time, study data may be dest royed or 
anonymized,  meaning al l links to direct identifiers will be destroyed.  Any study data in the medical record will 
be kept indefinitely.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
1.  Gande lman J A, Kang H, Antal A, Albert K, Boyd BD, Conley AC, Newhouse P, Taylor  WD. Transdermal 
nicotine  for the tre atment of mood and cognitive symptoms in non -smokers with late -life depression. Journal 
of Clini cal Psychiatry. 2018;79(5):18m12137.  
2.  Diamond A. Ex ecutive functions. Annu Rev Psy chol. 2013;64:135- 68. PMCID:PMC4084861 . 
3.  Dosenbach NU, Fair DA, Cohen AL , Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. A dual -networks  architecture of top -down 
control. Trends Cogn Sci. 2008;12(3):99- 105. PMCID:PM C3632449.  
4.  Niendam TA, La ird AR, Ray KL, Dean YM, Glahn DC, Carter CS. Meta -analytic evidence  for a superordinate 
cogn itive contro l network subserving diverse executive functions. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 
2012;12(2):241- 68. PMCID:PMC3660731.  
5.  Su therland MT, Ray KL, Riedel M C, Yanes JA, Stein EA, Laird AR. Neurobiological impact of nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor ag onists: an a ctivation likelihood estimation meta -analysis of pharmacologic 
neuroimaging studies. Biol Psychi atry. 2015;78(10):711 -20. PMCID:PMC44949 85. 
6.  G andel man JA, Newhouse P, Taylor WD. Nicotine and networks: Potential for e nhancement of mood and 
cognition in l ate-life depression. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2018;84:289 -98. PMCID:PMC5729074.  
7.  MacDonald AWr,  Cohen JD, Stenger VA, Ca rter CS. Dissociating th e role  of the dorsolateral prefronta l 
cortex and anterior cingulate cortex  in cognitive control. Sci ence. 2000; 288:1835- 8. 
8.  Shenhav A, Cohen JD, Botvini ck MM. Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the valu e of control. Nat 
Neurosc i. 2016;19(10):1286- 91. 
9.  F itzgerald PB, Laird AR, Maller J, Daskalakis ZJ. A meta- analytic stud y of changes in brain act ivation in 
depression. Human Brain Mapping. 2008;29(6):6 83-95. PMCID:2873772.  
10.  Aizenstein HJ, Butters MA , Wu M, Mazurkewicz LM, Ste nger VA, Gianaros PJ, Becker  JT, Reynolds CF, 3rd, 
Carter CS. Altered functioning of the executi ve control circuit in lat e-life depre ssion: episodic and persistent 
phenomena. Am erican Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2009;17(1):3 0-42. PMCID:2626170.  
11.  Alexopoulos GS, Hoptman MJ, Yuen G, Kanellopoulos D, Seirup  JK, Lim KO, Gunning FM. Functional 
connectivity in apathy of l ate-life dep ression: a preliminary study. J Affect Disord. 2013;149(1 -3):398- 405. 
PMCID:3636174.  
12.  Alexop oulos GS, Hoptman MJ, Kan ellopoulos D, M urphy CF,  Lim K O, Gunning FM. Functional connectivity 
in the cognitive control netw ork and the default mode network in la te-life depression. Journal of Affective 
Disorders. 2012;139(1):56 -65. PMCID:3340472.  
13.  Yuen  GS, Gunning -Dixon FM, Ho ptman MJ, AbdelMalak B, McGov ern AR, Seirup JK, Alexopoulos GS. The 
salience network in the apathy  of late -life depression.  Int J Geriat r Psychiatry. 2014.  
14.  Fales CL, Barch DM , Rundle MM, Mintun MA, Mathews J, Snyder AZ, Shelin e YI. Antidepressant trea tment 
normalize s hypoact ivity in dorsolateral prefrontal cor tex during emotional interference proc essing in major 
depression . J Affect Disord. 2009;112(1 -3):206- 11. PMCID:2825146.  
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  23 
15.  Yang Z, Oathes DJ, Linn KA, Bruce SE, Satterth waite TD, Cook PA, Satche ll EK, Shou H, Sheline Y I. 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Is Associated With Enhanced Cognitive Cont rol Network Activity in Ma jor 
Depressi on and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2018;3(4):311 -9. 
PMCID:PMC5908226.  
16.  Taylor WD. Clinical practice . Depression in the elderly. N  Engl J Med. 2014;371(13):1228 -36. 
17.  Blazer DG. Depression i n late life:  review and commentary. J Gerontol A Biol Sc i Med Sci. 2003;58(3):249 -
65. 
18.  Beekman AT, Geerl ings SW, Deeg DJ, Smit JH , Schoevers RS,  De Beurs E, Br aam AW, Penninx BW, van 
Tilburg W. The natural history of late- life depression: a 6- year prosp ective stud y in the community. Archives of 
General Psyc hiatry. 2002;59:605 -11. 
19.  Nelson JC, Delucchi K, Schneider LS. Efficacy of  second generat ion antid epress ants in late- life depression: 
a meta- analysis of the evidence. Ameri can Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2 008. 
20.  Taylor WD, Doraiswamy PM. A syste matic review of antidepressant placebo -controlled tr ials for geriatric 
depres sion: limitatio ns of cur rent d ata and directions for the fut ure. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2004;29( 12):2285- 99. 
21.  Alexopo ulos GS, Buc kwalter K, Olin J, Martinez R, Wainscott C, Krishnan KR. Comorbidity of late -life 
depression: an opportunity for research  in mechanisms and treat ment.  Biological Psychiatry. 2002;52 :543 -58. 
22.  Alexopoulos GS, Vrontou C, Kakuma T, Meyers BS, Yo ung RC, Klau sner E, Clarkin J. Disability in geriatric 
depression. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1996;153 :877 -85. 
23.  Kiosses DN,  Klimstra S, Mu rphy C, A lexop oulos GS. Executive dysfunction  and disability in elderly patients 
with major depression. Amer ican Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2001;9:269 -74. 
24.  Johnson JK, Lui LY, Yaffe K. Executive function, m ore than global cognition , predicts func tional decline  
and mortality in elderly women. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2007; 62(10):1134- 41. PMCID:2049 089. 
25.  A tkinson HH, Rosano C, Simonsick EM, Williams on JD, Davis C, Ambrosius WT, Rapp SR, Cesari M, 
Newman AB, Harris TB, Rubin SM , Yaffe K, Sa tterfield  S, Kritchevsky SB, Health ABCs. Cog nitive function, gait 
speed decline, a nd comorbidities: the heal th, aging a nd body composition study. J Gerontol A Biol  Sci Med Sci. 
2007;62(8):844- 50. 
26.  Alexopoulos GS , Kiosses DN, Murphy C, Heo  M. Executive  dysfunct ion, h eart disease burden, and 
remission of geriatric depression. Neuropsy chopharmacology. 2004;29: 2278-84. 
27.  Bogner HR, Bruce ML, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Mul sant BH, Cary MS, Morales K, Alexopoulos GS. The eff ects of 
memory, attention , and executive  dysfunct ion o n outcomes of depression in a p rimary care intervention trial: 
the PR OSPECT study. Internationa l Journal o f Geriatric Psychiatry. 2007;22(9):922 -9. PM CID:2810955.  
28.  Kalayam B, Alexopoulos GS. Prefron tal dysfunction and treat ment response i n geriatr ic de pression. 
Archives of General Psychiatry. 1999;56:713 -8. 
29.  Potter GG, Kittinger JD, Wagner H R, Steffens  DC, Krishnan KR. Prefrontal neuropsychologi cal predictors of 
treatment remission in late -life d epression. Neuropsychopha rmacology. 2004;29:2266 -71. 
30.  Baldwin R, Jeffries S, Jack son A, Sutcliffe C, Thacke r N, Scott M , Burns A. Treatment resp onse in late -
onset depression: relationship to neuropsyc hological, neuroradiological and vascular risk facto rs. Psychological 
Medicin e. 2004;34:125 -36. 
31.  Sneed  JR, Roose SP, Keilp JG, Krishn an KR, Alexopoulos GS, Sackeim HA. Res ponse inhibition predicts 
poor antidep ressant treatment response in very old depr essed patients. American Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry. 2007;15:553- 63. 
32.  Sheline YI, Pieper CF,  Barch  DM, Welsh -Boehmer K, McKinstr y RC, MacFall JR, D'Angelo  G, Garcia K S, 
Gersing K, Wilkins C, Taylor W, St effens DC, Krishnan RR, Doraiswamy PM. Suppo rt for the vascular 
depression hypothesis in late- life depression: results of  a 2-site, prospective, antid epressant treatment trial. 
Archives of General Psychiatry . 2010;67(3) :277 -85. PMCID:2838210.  
33.  Bella R, Pennisi G, Cantone M, Palermo F, Pennisi M,  Lanza G, Zappia M, Paolucci S. Clinical presentatio n 
and outcome of geriatri c depression in subcortical i schemic vascular disease. Geron tology. 2010;56(3):298 -
302. 
34.  Alexo poulos GS, Kiosses DN, He o M, Murphy CF, Shanmugham B, Gunning- Dixon F. Executive  dysfunction 
and the course of geriatric depression.  Biological Psychiatry. 2 005;58:204 -10. 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  24 
35.  Lenz e EJ,  Skidmore ER, Begley AE, Newcom er JW, Butters MA, Whyte E M. Memantine  for late -life 
depression and apathy after a disabling medical event: a 12 -week, double -blind placebo- controlled pilot study. 
Int J G eriatr Psychiatry. 2012;27(9):974- 80. 
36.  Reynolds CF,  3rd, Butters MA, Lopez O, Pol lock BG, Dew MA, Mulsant B H, Lenze EJ,  Holm M, Rogers JC, 
Mazumd ar S, Houck  PR, Begley A, Anderson S, Karp JF, Miller M D, Whyte EM, Stack J, Gildengers A, Szanto K, 
Bensasi S, Kaufer DI, Kamboh MI , DeKosky ST. Maintenanc e tre atment of depression in old age : a 
randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled evaluation of the efficacy and safety of donepezil combined with 
antid epressant pharmacotherapy. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011 ;68(1):51 -60. PMCID:3076045.  
37.  Seeley WW, Meno n V, S chatzberg AF, Keller J, Glover  GH, Kenna H, Reiss AL, Gr eicius MD. Dissociable 
intrinsic conn ectivity net works for salience processing and executive control. Journal of Neuroscience. 
2007;27(9):2349- 56. PMCID:2680293.  
38.  Goo dkind M, Eickhoff SB, Oa thes D J, Jiang Y, Chang A, Jones -Hagata LB, Ortega BN, Zaiko Y V, Roach EL, 
Korgaonkar MS, Grieve SM , Galatzer- Levy I, Fox PT, Etkin A. Identification of a common neurobiological 
substrate for mental illness.  JAMA psychiatry. 2015;72(4):305- 15. PMCID:PMC479 1058.  
39.  McTeague LM, Huemer J, Ca rreon DM, Jiang Y, Eickhof f SB, Etkin A. Identification of Commo n Neural 
Circuit Disruptions in Cognitive Control Acros s Psychiatric Disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2017;174(7 ):676- 85. 
PMCID:PMC554341 6. 
40.  Boone KB, Lesser  IM, M iller BL, Wohl M, Berman N, Lee ABP, Back C. Cognitive functioning i n older 
depressed outpatie nts: relatio nship of presence and severity of depression to neuropsychological test scores. 
Neuropsychology . 1995;9:390 -8. 
41.  Beats BC, Sahakian BJ, Levy R. Co gnitive performance in tests se nsitive to frontal lobe dysfunction in  the 
elderly depressed. P sychological Medicine. 1996;26(3):591 -603. 
42.  Lesser IM, Boone KB, Mehringer CM, Wohl MA, Miller BL, Berman NG. Cognition and white  matter 
hyperintensities in older depressed patients. American Journal of Psychiatry. 1996;153:128 0-7. 
43.  Sexton CE, McDe rmott L, Kal u UG, Herrmann LL, Bradley KM, Allan CL, Le Masurier M, Mackay CE, 
Ebmeier KP. Exploring the pat tern and neural correlates of neuropsychological impair ment in late- life 
depression. Psychol Med. 2011:1 -8. 
44.  Butters MA , Whyte EM, Nebes RD, Beg ley AE, Dew MA, Mulsant BH, Zmuda MD, Bhalla R, Meltzer CC, 
Pollock BG, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Becker JT. The nat ure and determinants of neu ropsychological functi oning  in 
late- life depression. Archi ves of General Psychiatry.  2004;61:587 -95. 
45.  Elderkin -Thompso n V, Mintz J, Haroon E, Lavretsky H, Kumar A. Executive  dysfunction and memory in 
older patients with major  and minor depression. Ar ch Clin Neuropsychol. 20 06;21( 7):669- 76. 
46.  Morimoto SS, G unning FM, Kanellopoulos D , Murphy CF, Klimstra SA, Kelly RE, J r., Alexopou los GS. 
Semantic organizational strategy pre dicts verbal memory and remission rate of geriatric depression. 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychia try. 2012;27(5):506 -12. PMCID:3188360.  
47.  Pimontel MA, Culang -Reinl ieb ME, Morimoto SS, Sneed  JR. Execut ive dysfunction and treatment response 
in late-life depression. International Journal of Geriatr ic Psychiatry. 2012;27:89 3-9. 
48.  Taylor WD, Wag ner HR , Steffens DC. Baseline depres sion severity predicts les s improvemen t in 
depression- associate d cognitive impairment in older subjects. Am J Geriatr P sychiatry. 2002;10:632 -5. 
49.  Butters MA, Becker JT , Nebes RD, Zmuda MD, Mul sant BH, Pollock BG, Rey nolds  CF. Changes in cognitive 
functioning following treatment  of late -life depression. American Jo urnal of Psy chiatry. 2000;157:1949 -54. 
50.  Bhalla RK, B utters MA, Mulsant BH, Begley AE, Zmuda MD, Schoderb ek B, Pollock BG, Reynold s CF, 3rd, 
Becker JT. Pe rsistence of neuropsychologic defici ts in the remitted state o f late- life depression. American 
Journal of Geria tric Psychiatry. 2006;14(5):419 -27. 
51.  Lee  JS, Potter GG, Wagner HR, Welsh -Bohmer KA, Steffens  DC. Persistent mild cogn itive impairment in 
geriatric depression. Int Psychogeriatr.  2007;19(1):125- 35. 
52.  A lexopoulos G S, Kiosses DN, Klimstra S , Kalayam B,  Bruce ML. Clinical presentation of the "dep ression -
executive dysfunction syndrome" of late life . American Journal of Ger iatric Psychiatry. 2002; 10:98- 106. 
53.  Anguera JA, Gunning FM, Arean PA. Improving late life depr ession and cognitive cont rol through the use 
of therapeutic video game technology : A proof -of-concept randomized trial. Depress Anxie ty. 2017;34:508 -17. 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  25 
54.  Lantrip C, Gunning FM, Flashm an L, Roth RM, Holtzheimer PE. Effects of Transcranial Ma gnetic 
Stimu lation on the Cognitive C ontrol of Em otion: Potential Antidepressant Mechanisms. J Ect. 2017;33(2):73 -
80. 
55.  Morimoto SS, Wexler BE , Liu J, Hu W, Seirup J, Alexopoulos GS. Neuroplasticit y-based computerized 
cognitive  remediation for treatment -resistant g eriatric depression. Nat C ommun. 2014; 5:4579. 
PMCID:PMC4139707.  
56.  Chang CC, Yu  SC, McQuoid DR, Messer DF, Taylor WD, Singh K, Boyd  BD, Krishnan KR, MacFall  JR, 
Steffens DC, Payne ME. R eduction of dorsolateral prefro ntal cortex gray matter in late- life d epression. 
Psychiatry Rese arch Neuroim aging. 2011;193:1 -6. PMCID:3105213.  
57.  Crespo- Facorro B, Kim J, Andreasen NC, Spinks R, O'Lea ry DS, Bockholt HJ, Harris G, Magnotta VA. 
Cerebr al cor tex: a topographic segmentatio n method using magnetic re sonance imag ing. Psychiatry Research.  
2000;100:97 -126. 
58.  Ochsner KN, Silvers JA, Buhle JT.  Functional imaging studies of emotion re gulation: a synthetic review and 
evolving model of the cogni tive control of emotion. Ann N Y Aca d Sci. 2012;1251:E1 -24. PMCID:PMC41337 90. 
59.  Etkin A, Buchel C, Gross JJ. The neural bases of emotion regulation. Nat  Rev Neurosci. 2015;16(11):693 -
700. 
60.  Janowsky DS, el- Yousef MK, Davis JM,  Sekerke HJ. A cholinerg ic-adrenergic hypothesis of mania an d 
depression. Lancet. 1972;2(7778):632 -5. 
61.  Kalman D, Moriss ette SB, Geo rge TP. Co- morbidity of smoking in patients with psychiatric and substance 
use disord ers. The Am erican journal on addicti ons / American Academy o f Psyc hiatrists in Alcoholism and 
Addictions. 2005;14(2):106 -23. PMCID:1199553.  
62.  Lasser K, Boyd  JW, Woolhan dler S, Himmelstein DU, McCormick D, Bor DH.  Smoking and mental illness: A 
population- based prevalence study. Jama. 2000; 284(20):2606- 10. 
63.  Da ni JA,  Harris RA. Nicotine addiction  and comorbidity with alcohol abuse an d mental illness. Nat 
Neur osci. 2005;8 (11):1465 -70. 
64.  Hughes JR. Depression du ring tobacco abstinence. Nicotine & tobac co research  : official journal of th e 
Society for Research o n Nico tine and Tobacco. 2007;9(4):44 3-6. 
65.  Gilbert DG, Crauthers DM, Mo oney DK, McClernon FJ, Je nsen RA. Eff ects of monetary contingencies on 
smoking re lapse: influences of trait depression, pe rsonality, and habitual nicotine int ake. Exp Clin 
Psychophar macol . 1999;7(2):174- 81. 
66.  Gilber t DG, McClernon FJ, Rabinovich NE, Pla th LC, Masson CL, Anderso n AE, Sly KF . Mood disturbance 
fails to resolve across 3 1 days of cigarette abstinence in women. Journal of consulting and clinical p sychology. 
2002;70(1):142 -52. 
67.  Glassman AH, Covey LS, St etner F, Rivelli S. Smoking cessation and the course of major d epression: a  
follow-up study. Lancet. 2001;357(9272):192 9-32. 
68.  Covey LS, Glassman AH, Stetner  F. Major depression following smoki ng cessation. Am J Psych iatry.  
1997;154(2):263- 5. 
69.  Phili p NS, Carpenter LL, Tyrka AR, Price LH . Nicotinic acetylcholine  receptors an d depression: a review of 
the preclinical a nd clinical literature. Psychopharmacolog y (Berl). 2 010;212(1):1- 12. 
70.  Min eur YS, Picciotto MR. Ni cotin e receptors and depression: revisiting and revising the cholinergic 
hypothesis. Trends Pharmac ol Sci. 2010 ;31(12):580- 6. PMCID:2991594.  
71.  Tizabi Y,  Getachew B, Rezvani AH, Hauser SR, Overs treet DH. Antidepressant -like effect s of nicotine and 
reduce d nic otinic receptor binding in the Fawn -Hooded rat, an animal model of co -morbid depression and 
alcoholism. Pr og Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 200 9;33(3):398- 402. PMCID:2871164.  
72.  Djur ic VJ, Dunn  E, Overstreet DH, Dragom ir A, Steiner M. Antidep ressa nt effect of ingested nicotine in 
female rats of Flinders resistant a nd sensitive lines. Physi ol Behav. 199 9;67(4):533 -7. 
73.  Andreasen JT, Henningse n K, Bate S, Christiansen S, Wiborg O. Ni cotine reve rses anhedonic -like respo nse 
and cognitive impair ment i n the rat chronic mild stress model of depression: comparison with s ertraline. J 
Psychopharmac ol. 2011;25( 8):1134- 41. 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  26 
74.  Popik P, Kozela E, Krawczy k M. Nicotine and nicotinic receptor anta gonists pot entiate the antidepressant -
like effects of imipra mine and citalopram. British journal  of pharmacology. 2003;139(6):1196 -202. 
PMCID:1573951.  
75.  And reasen JT, R edrobe JP. Nicotine, but not mecamylamine, e nhances antidepressant -like effects of 
citalopram an d reboxetine in the mouse  forced swim and tail su spensi on tests. Behav Brain Res. 
2009;197(1):150- 6. 
76.  Semba J, Mataki C , Yamada S, Nankai M, Tor u M. Antidepr essantlike effects of chronic nicotine on learned 
helplessness paradigm in rats. Bio l Psychiatry. 1998;43(5):389 -91. 
77.  Tizabi Y, Overstreet D H, Rez vani AH, Louis VA, Clark E, Jr ., Janowsky DS, Kling MA. Antidepressant effects 
of nicotine in  an animal mo del of depression. Psychopharmacology (Berl ). 1999;142(2):193 -9. 
78.  Salin -Pascual RJ, Drucker -Colin R. A novel effect of nicotine on mood and sleep  in major depression. 
Neurorepo rt. 1998;9(1):57- 60. 
79.  McClernon FJ , Hiott FB, Westman EC, R ose JE, Levi n ED. Transdermal nicotine attenuates depres sion 
symptoms in nonsmokers: a double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. Psycho pharmacology (Berl). 
2006;189( 1):125- 33. 
80.  Salin -Pascual RJ, Rosas M, Jimenez -Genchi A, Rivera -Meza BL, Delgado -Parra V.  Antidepress ant effect of 
transdermal nicotine patches i n nonsmoking patients with major depressi on. J Clin Psychiatry. 1996;57(9):38 7-
9. 
81.  Haro R, Drucke r-Colin R. Effects of long- term administration of nicotine and fluoxetine on sleep in 
depressed pat ients. Archi ves of medical research. 2004;35(6):499 -506. 
82.  Bartus RT, Dean III RL, Beer B, Lip pa AS. The cholinergic hypothesis of  geriatric memory dysfun ction . 
Science. 1982;217:408 -17. 
83.  Rusted JM, Newhouse PA, Levin ED. Ni cotinic treatment for deg enerative ne uropsychiatric disorders such 
as Alzheimer's  disease and Parkinson's disease. Behav B rain Res. 2 000;113(1- 2):121- 9. 
84.  Le vin ED. Nicotinic rece ptor subtypes and cognitive function . Journal of neurobiology. 2002;53(4): 633- 40. 
85.  McGehee DS, Heath MJ, Gel ber S, Devay P, Role LW. Nicotine enhanceme nt of fast excitatory synaptic 
transmissi on in CNS by presynaptic receptors. Science. 1995;269(5231): 1692- 6. 
86.  Wonnacott S, Soliakov L , Wilkie G, Redfern P, Marshall D. Presynaptic nicotinic acetyl choline rece ptors in 
the brain. Drug Develop Res. 1996;3 8(3-4):149- 59. 
87.  Heishman SJ, Kleykamp BA, Single ton EG. Meta -analysis of the acute effects of nicotine and smoking on 
human performan ce. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2010;210(4):453 -69. PMCID:3151730 . 
88.  Provo st SC, Woodward R. Effects of nicotine gum on repeated administ ration of the Stroop test. 
Psych opharmacology (Berl). 199 1;104(4):536- 40. 
89.  Ru sted J, Graupner L, O'Connell N, Nic holls C. Does nicotine improve cogniti ve function? 
Psychopharmac ology (Berl ). 1994;115(4):547- 9. 
90.  Wesnes K, Warburt on DM. Effects of scopolamine and nicotine on human rapid information process ing 
performance. Psychop harma cology (Berl). 1984;82(3):147 -50. 
91.  Warburton DM, Arnall C. Improv ements in performance wit hout nicotine  withdrawal. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl). 199 4;115(4):539- 42. 
92.  Warburton DM, Rusted JM. Choli nergic control of cogniti ve resources. Neuropsych obiolo gy. 1993;28(1 -
2):43- 6. 
93.  Ne whouse PA, Potter A, Kelton M, Corwin J. Nicotinic treatment of  Alzheimer's  disease. Biol Psychiatry. 
2001;49(3):268- 78. 
94.  Sarter M, Has selmo ME, Bruno JP, Givens B. Un raveling the attentional fu nctions of cortical ch oline rgic 
inputs: interactions betwe en signal -driven and cognitive modulat ion of signal detection. Brain resear ch Brain 
research reviews. 2005;48(1):98 -111. 
95.  Newhouse PA, Potter A, Singh A. Effects of ni cotinic stimulation on co gnitive performance. Cur rent o pinion 
in pharmacology. 2004;4 (1):36- 46. 
96.  McClernon FJ, Gilbert DG, Radtke R. Effects of transdermal nicotine on lateralized identification and 
memory interference. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2003;18(5):339- 43. 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  27 
97.  Newhouse PA,  Sunderland T, Tariot PN , Blu mhardt CL, Weingartner H, Mello w A, Murphy DL. Intravenous 
nicotine i n Alzheimer's disease: a pilot study.  Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1988;95(2):171 -5. 
98.  Jones GM, Sah akian BJ, Levy R, Warburton DM, Gray JA. Effects of acute  subcutaneous nicotine o n 
attention, information processing and short- term memory in Alzheimer's d isease. Psychopharmacology  (Berl). 
1992;108(4):485- 94. 
99.  Sahakian BJ, Jones GM . The effects of nic otine on attention, information processing, and working mem ory 
in patients with d ement ia of the Alzheimer type. In: A dlkofer F, Thurau K, editors. Effects of nicotine on 
biological  systems. Ber lin: Birkhauser Basel; 1991. p. 623 -30. 
100.  White HK, Levin E D. Four- week nicotine skin patch  treatment effects on cogni tive performance in 
Alzheim er's disease. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1999;143(2):158 -65. 
101.  Wi lson AL, Langley LK, Monl ey J, Bauer T , Rottunda S, McFalls E, Kovera C, McCarten  JR. Nicotine 
patche s in Alzheimer's disease: pilot study on learning, memory , and safety. Pharmacol Bioch em Behav. 
1995;51(2- 3):509- 14. 
102.  Newhouse PA, Potter A, Singh A. Effects of nicotinic stim ulation on c ognitive performance. Current 
Opinion in Pha rmacology. 2004;4:36 -46. 
103.  Potter A, Corwin J, L ang J, Piasecki M, Lenox R, Newhouse PA. Acute ef fects  of the selective cholinergic 
channel activator (nicotinic agonist) A BT-418 in Alzheimer's dis ease. Psycho pharm acology (Berl). 
1999;142(4):334- 42. 
104.  Newhouse P, Kella r K, Aisen P, White H, Wesnes K, Coderre E, Pfaff A, Wilkin s H, Howard D, Levin E D. 
Nicotine treatment of mild cognit ive impairment: a 6 -month double- blind pilot clinical trial. Neu rology. 
2012 ;78(2):91- 101. PMCID:3466669.  
105.  Newhous e PA, Potter AS, Dum as JA, Thiel CM. Functional brai n imaging of nicotinic ef fects on higher 
cognitiv e pro cesses. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011;82(8):943 -51. PMCID:3162085.  
106.  Greenland S, Satterfield MH , Lanes SF. A meta-analysis to assess the incidence of a dverse effects 
associated with the transdermal nicot ine patch. Drug Safety. 1 998;18(4):297- 308. 
107.  Mont gomery SA, Asberg M. A new depr ession scale designed to be sensitive to change. British Journa l of 
Psychiat ry. 1979;134:382 -9. 
108.  Folstein MF, Fols tein SE, McHugh PR. "Mini -mental state" a practical method for grading the co gnitive 
state of patient s for the clinician. Journal of Psyc hiatric Research. 1975;12:189 -98. 
109.  Messina ES, Tyndale RF,  Sellers EM.  A major role for CYP2A6 in nicotine C -oxidation by human liver 
microsomes. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1997;282(3):1608 -14. 
110.  Keller MB, Lavori PW , Frie dman DS, Nielsen E, Endicott J , McDonald- Scott P, Andreasen NC. The 
longitudinal interval fol low-up evalua tion. A comprehensive method for assessing outcome in prospecti ve 
longitudinal studies. Archive s of General Psychiatry. 1987;44:540 -8. 
111.  Sackeim HA, Prudic J, Devanand DP, Deci na P, Kerr B, Malitz S. The impact of medication resistance and  
continuatio n pharmacotherapy on relapse following respo nse to electroconvul sive therapy in major depression . 
Journal of Clinical Psy chopharmacology. 1990;10 :96-104. 
112.  Miller MD, Paradis CF , Houck PR, Mazumdar S, Stack JA, Rifai AH, Mulsant B, Reynolds  CF. Rating 
chronic medical illness burden in geropsychi atric practice and research: application of the Cumu lative Illness 
Rating Sca le. Psychiatry Research. 1992; 41:237- 48. 
113.  Boustani M, C ampbell NL, Munger S, Maidment I, Fox C. Impact of anticholiner gics on the aging brain: A 
review and practical application. Aging Health. 2 008;4:311 -20. 
114.  Pasina L, Dj ade CD, Lucca U, Nobili A , Tettamanti M, Franchi C, Sal erno F, Corrao S, Marengoni A, Iorio 
A, Marcucci M, Violi F, Mannucc i PM. Association of antic holinergic burden with cognitive and functional status 
in a cohort of hospi talized elderly: comparison of t he anticholinergic cognit ive burden scale and ant icholi nergic 
risk scale: results fro m the REPOSI study. Drugs Aging. 2013; 30(2):103 -12. 
115.  Lampe la P, Lavikai nen P, Garcia -Horsman JA, Bell JS, Huuppone n R, Hartikainen S. Anticholinergic drug 
use, serum anticholinergic activity,  and adverse drug events amon g older people: a population -based study. 
Drugs Aging. 2013;30(5):321 -30. 
116.  Kersten H, Wyl ler TB. Anti cholinergic drug burden in older people's br ain -  how well is it measured? Basic 
Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2014;114(2):151 -9. 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  28 
117.  Barch DM, Gotli b IH,  Bilder RM, Pine DS, Smoller JW , Brown CH, Huggins W, Hamilton C, Hai m A, Farber 
GK. Common Mea sures for N ational Institute of Mental Health Funded Re search. Biol Psychiatry. 
2016;79(12):e91- 6. PMCID:PM C4968690.  
118.  Nolen -Hoeksema S, Morrow J, Fredr ickson  BL. Response styles and the d uration of episodes of 
depressed mood.  J Abnorm Psychol. 1993;1 02(1):20- 8. 
119.  Marin RS, Biedrzycki RC, Firinciogulla ri S. Reliability and validity of the Apathy Evaluat ion Scale. 
Psychiatry Res. 1991;38(2):143- 62. 
120.  Wis niewski SR, Rush AJ, Balasubra mani GK, Trivedi MH, Nierenberg AA. Se lf-rated global measure o f the 
freque ncy, intensity, and burden of side effects. Journal of Psychiatric Practice. 2006;12(2):71 -9. 
121.  Harmer CJ, Shelley NC , Cowen PJ, Goodwin GM. Increa sed positive versus negative affective perception 
and memory in heal thy v olunteers following selective se rotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibiti on. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2004;161(7):1256 -63. 
122.  Ande rson NH. Likableness rati ngs of 555 personality -trait words. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1968 ;9(3):272 -9. 
123.  Tranter R, Bell D, Gutti ng P, Harmer C, Heal y D, Anderso n IM. The effect of serotonergic and 
noradre nergic antidepressants on face emotion processing in  depressed patients. J Af fect Disord. 2009;118(1 -
3):87- 93. 
124.  Kramer JH, Mungas D,  Possin KL, Rankin KP, Boxer AL, Rosen  HJ, Bostrom A, Sinha L, B erhel A, 
Widmeyer M. NIH EXAMINER: conceptualization an d development of an executive function battery. J In t 
Neuropsychol Soc. 2014; 20(1):11- 9. PMCID:PMC447 4183.  
125.  Conners CK. The Conners Continuous Performance Test. Toronto, Canada: Multi -Health Syst ems; 1994.  
126.  Buschke H. Selective Reminding for Analysis of Memory and Learning. J Verb Learn Verb Be. 
1973;12(5):543- 50. 
127.  E tkin A, Egner T, Peraza DM, K andel ER, Hirsch J. Resolving emotional conflict: a role for the rostral 
anterior cingulate co rtex in modul ating activity in the amygdala. Neuron. 2006;51(6):871- 82. 
128.  Egner T, Etkin A, Gale S, Hirs ch J. Dissociable neural systems resolve conflict from  emotional versus 
nonemotional distracters. Cereb Cortex. 2008;18(6):1475- 84. 
129.  Zanto TP, Pa J, Gazzale y A. Reliability measures of functional mag netic resonance imaging in a 
longitudinal evaluation  of mild cognitive impair ment. NeuroImage. 2014;8 4:443- 52. PMCID:PMC3855402.  
130.  Bu ckner RL, Sepulcre J, Talukdar T, Krie nen F M, Liu H, Hedden T, A ndrews -Hanna  JR, Sperling RA, 
Johnson KA. Cortical hubs  revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapp ing, assessment of stabil ity, and 
relation to Alz heime r's disease. J Neurosci. 2009;29(6):1860- 73. PMCID:2750039.  
131.  Utevsky AV, Smith DV, Huette l SA. Precune us is a functional core of the default -mode  network. J 
Neurosci. 2014;34(3):932 -40. PMCID:PMC38 91968.  
132.  Tomasi D, Vo lkow ND. Functional conn ectivi ty hubs in the human brain. Ne uroImage. 2011;57(3):908 -
17. PMCID:PMC3129362.  
133.  Gorsline J , Gupta SK, D ye D, Rolf CN. Steady- state pharmacokinetics and dose relationship of nicotine 
delivered from N icoderm (Nicotine Transderm al System). J Clin Pharmaco l. 1993;33(2):161- 8. 
134.  Beno witz NL, Swan GE, Jacob P, 3rd, Lessov -Schlaggar CN, Tyndale RF.  CYP2A6 gen otype and the 
metabolism and disposition kin etics of nicotine. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2006;80(5):4 57-67. 
135.  Dempsey D, T utka P, Jacob P, 3rd, Allen F , Schoedel K, Tyndale RF, Benowitz NL. Nicotine metabolite 
ratio as a n index of cytochrome P450  2A6 metabol ic activity. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2004;76(1 ):64- 72. 
136.  Tanner JA, Novalen M, Jatlow P, Huest is MA, Murphy SE, Kaprio J,  Kankaanpaa A, Galanti L, St efan C, 
George TP, Benowitz NL , Lerman C, Tyndale RF. Nicotine metabolite ratio (3- hydroxycot inine/cotinin e) in 
plasma and urine by different analyti cal methods and laboratories: implications for clini cal implementation. 
Cance r Epidemiol Biomarkers P rev. 2 015;24(8):1239- 46. PMCID:PMC45 26326.  
137.  Spyker DA, Alderfer RJ, G oetsch RA, Longmire AW, Kr amer ED. Adv erse Events and Prolonged Use of 
Nicotine Gum and Patch. In: Benowitz NL, editor. Nicotine Safe ty and Toxicity: Oxford U niversity Press; 1998. 
p. 167- 72. 
138.  Benowitz NL. Cardiov ascular Toxicity of Nicotine: Pharmaco kinet ic and Pharmacodynam ic Considera tions. 
In: Benowitz NL, editor. Nicotine Safety and Toxicity. New York: Oxford University Press;  1998. p. 19 -27. 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  29 
139.  Mu rray RP, Daniels K. Long -Term  Nicotine Therapy. In: Benowitz NL, editor. Nicotine Safety and Toxicity: 
Oxford University Pr ess; 1998. p.  173-82. 
140.  Rhodes J, Green J, Thomas G.  Nicotine and the Gastrointestinal Tract. In: Benowi tz NL, editor. Nicotine 
Safety and Toxicity: Oxford Un iversity Press; 1998. p. 161- 6. 
141.  Haustein KO, Haffner S, Woodcoc k BG. A review of the phar maological and psychopharmacological 
aspects of smoking  and smoking cessation in psychiatric patients. Inte rnational Journal of Clin ical 
Pharmacology and Th erapeu tics. 2002;40(9):404 -18. 
142.  Rennard SI, Daughton D, Windle J. Tox icity of Nicotine Replace ment in Patie nts with Coronary Artery 
Disease. In: Benow itz NL, editor. Nicotine Safety and Toxicity: Oxford  University Press; 1998. p. 49-53. 
143.  Disease WGftSo TNiPwCA. Nicotine replacement therapy for patients with coronary art ery d isease. 
Working Grou p for the St udy of Transdermal Nicotine in Patients with  Coronary artery disease. Archives of 
internal medic ine. 1994;154(9):989 -95. 
144.  Joseph AM, Norman SM, Fe rry LH, Prochazka AV, Westman EC, Steele BG, Sherman SE, Cleveland M , 
Antonuccio DO, Hartman N, McGovern PG. The safety of transdermal nicotine as an aid to smoking cessation 
in patients with cardiac d isease. N Engl J Med. 199 6;335(24):1792- 8. 
145.  Mahma rian JJ, Moye LA, Nasser GA, Nagueh SF, Bloom MF, Benowitz NL, Verani MS, Byrd WG, Pratt CM. 
Nicotine patch  therapy in smoking cessation reduces the e xtent of exercise- induced myocardial ischemia. 
Journ al of the American Colleg e of Cardiology. 1997;30(1):12 5-30. 
146.  Marie PY, Danchin N, Durand JF, Feldmann L, Grentzinger A, Olivier P, Karcher G, Juilliere Y, Virion JM, 
Beurrier D, et al. Long- term prediction of major ischemic events by exercise thalliu m-201 single -photon 
emiss ion computed tomog raphy.  Incre mental prognostic value compar ed with clinical, exercise testing, 
catheterization and radionuc lide angiog raphic data. Journal of the American College  of Cardiology. 
1995;26(4):879- 86. 
147.  Benowitz NL , Gourlay SG. Cardiovascu lar toxicity of ni cotine : imp lications for nicotine replacem ent 
therapy. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 199 7;29(7):1422- 31. 
148.  Hawkins BT, Brown RC, Davis TP. S moking and ischemic stroke: a role for nicotine? Tre nds in 
Pharmacological Sciences. 2002;23(2) :78-82. 
149.  Gerzanich V, Zhang F, West G A, Simard JM. Chronic nicotine alters NO signaling of Ca(2+) ch annels in 
cerebral arterioles. Circ Res. 2001;88(3):359- 65. 
150.  Hawkins BT, Brown RC, Davis TP. Smoking an d ischemic stroke: a role  for nicotine? Tre nds Pharmac ol 
Sci. 2002;23(2):78 -82. 
151.  Zidovetzki R, Chen P, Fisher M, Hofman FM, Faraci FM. Nicotine  increases p lasminogen activator 
inhibitor- 1 production by human brain endothelial cells via protein kinase C -associated pathway. Stroke. 
1999;30(3):651 -5. 
152.  M ikhailidis DP, Papadakis JA, G anotakis ES. Smoking, diabetes and hyp erlipidaemia. Journal of the Royal 
Society of Health. 1998;118(2):91- 3. 
153.  Hen kin L, Zaccaro D, Haffner S, Karter A, Rewers M, Sho linsky P, Wagenknecht L. Cigarette smoking,  
environmen tal tobacco smoke exposure and insulin sensitivity: the Insulin Resis tance Atherosclerosis Stu dy. 
Annals o f Epidemiology. 1999;9(5):290 -6. 
154.  Targh er G, Alberiche M, Zenere MB, Bonadonna RC, Muggeo M , Bonora E. Cigarette smoking and insulin 
resistance i n patients with noninsulin -depe ndent diabetes mellitus. Journal of Cl inical Endocrinology & 
Metabolism. 199 7;82(11):3619 -24. 
155.  Persson PG, Carlsso n S, Svanstrom L, Ostenson CG, Efendic S, Grill V. C igarette smoking, oral mo ist 
snuff use and glucos e intolerance. Journal of Internal Medicine. 2000;248(2):103 -10. 
156.  Eli asson M, Asplund K, Evrin  PE, Lundbla d D. Relationship of cigarette smoking and s nuff dipping to 
plasma fibrinogen, fibrinolytic vari ables and serum insulin. The Northern Swede n MONI CA St udy. 
Atherosclerosis. 1995;113( 1):41- 53. 
157.  Benowitz NL. Risks and  benefits of nicotine. In : Benowitz NL , editor. Nicotine Safety and Toxicity. New  
York: Oxford University Press; 1998. p. 185 -94. 
158.  Newhouse PA, Sunderland T, Tariot PN, Blumhard t CL, Weingartner H, Mellow A, Murphy DL. 
Intravenous nicotine in Alzheime r's disease: A pilot stud y. Psychophar macology. 1988;95:171 -5. 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  30 
159.  Newhouse P, Potter A, Corwin J. Effects of nicotinic cholinergic  agents on cognitive func tioning in 
Alzheim er's a nd Par kinson's disease. Drug Develop ment Research. 1996;38(3 -4):278- 89. 
160.  Potter A, Corwin J, L ang J, Piasec ki M, Lenox R, Newhouse P. Acute effects of  the selective cholinergic 
channel activator (nicoti nic agonist) ABT- 418 in A lzheimer's disease . Psyc hopha rmacology. 1999;142:334 -42. 
161.  Kelton MC, Kahn HJ, Conrath CL, Newhouse PA. The effects of nicotine on Parkinson's disease. Brain and 
Cognition. 2000;43:274 -82. 
162.  Wilson AL, Langley LK, Monley J,  Bauer T, Rottunda S, McF alls E, Kovera C, McCart en JR . Nicotine 
patches in Alzheimer 's disease: pilot study on learning, m emory, and safety. Pharmac ology, Bioc hemistry and 
Behavior. 1995;51(2 -3):509- 14. 
163.  Katayama S, Hirata K, Tanaka H, Yamazaki K, Fu jikane M, Ichimaru Y. Efficacy of transderm al nicotine in 
dementia: a study using event -related potentials and a middle latency response. In: Domino  EF, editor. Brain 
Imaging of Nicotine and Tobacco Smoki ng. Ann Arbor, MI: Npp Books; 1995. p. 289 -302. 
164.  Parks RW, Young CS, Rip pey RF, Danz V, Vo hs C, Matthe ws JR, Collins GT, Zigler SS, Urycki PG, Keim P, 
Kabatay E, Becker R E. Nicotinic stimulation of anterior regional cerebral glucose metabolism in Alzh eimer's 
disease:  preliminary study transdermal patc hes. In: Giacobini E, Becker R, editors. Al zheime r dise ase: 
Therapeutic strategies. B oston: Birkhauser; 1994. p. 424 -7. 
165.  Fagerstrom KO, Pomerle au O, Giordan i B, Stelson F. Nicotine may relieve symptoms of Parkinson's 
disease. Psychopharmacology. 1994; 116:117- 9. 
166.  Hughes J R, Strickler G, King D, Higgi ns ST, Fenwick JW, Gulliver SB,  Mireault G. Smoking history, 
instructions and the effects of n icotine:  two  pilot studies. Pharmacology Biochemistry a nd Behavior. 
1989;34:149 -55. 
167.  Seyler Jr. LE, Po merleau OF, Fertig JB, Hu nt D, Parker K. Pi tuitary hor mone response to cigarette 
smoking. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Beh avior. 1986;24:159- 63. 
168.  Fertig J , Sayler LE, Pomerleau O, Hunt D, Parker K. Release of five human pituitary hormones during 
smoking correlates with nause a and not with plasma nicotin e. Clinical Research. 1982;30(2 ):270A.  
169.  Farre M, Cami J. Pharmac okinetic considerations i n abuse liab ility evaluation. British Journal of Addicti on. 
1991;86(12):1601- 6. 
170.  Henningfield JE, Keena n RM. Nicotine delivery k inetics and abuse liability. J ournal of Consulting & Clinical 
Psychology. 1993;61(5):743 -50. 
171.  Henningfield JE, Keenan RM. Nicotine delivery kinetics and abuse liability. Jour nal of consulting and 
clinical psychology. 1993;61(5 ):743- 50. 
172.  Pomerleau  OF. Nicotine and the central  nervous system: biobehavioral effects of cigarette smoking. 
American Journal of Medicine. 199 2;93(1A):2S- 7S. 
173.  Marks MJ, Stitzel JA, Collins AC. Influence of kinetics of nicotine administration on tolerance development 
and receptor levels. Pharmacolog y, Biochemistry & Behavior. 198 7;27(3):505- 12. 
174.  Rose JE, Westman EC, Behm FM. Nicotine/mec amylam ine c ombination treatment for smoking cessation. 
Drug Development Research. 1996;38(3/4):243 -56. 
175.  Shytle RD, Silver AA, P hilipp MK, McConville BJ , Sanb erg PR. Transdermal nicotine for tourette's 
syndrome. Drug Developme nt Research. 1996;38(3/4) :290-8. 
176.  Bunker E, Pickworth W, Henningfield J. Nic otine patch: spontaneous smoking. In: Problems of Dr ug 
Dependence 1991 - proceedings of the 53rd annu al sci entific meeting of the committee on problems of drug 
dependence, Inc,. 1992:470.  
 
 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  31 
APPENDIX A: LIST OF ABBREV IATIONS  
 
ACB  Anticholinergic Cognitive  Burden  
AD Alzheimer’ s Disease  
AE Adverse Event  
AES Apath y Evaluation Sca le 
ASI3  Anxiety Severi ty Index 3 
ATHF  Antidepressant Treatm ent H istory Form  
BOLD  Blood Oxygen Le vel Dependent  
CIRS-G Cum ulative I llness Rating Scale - Geriatrics  
CCN  Cognitive  Control Network  
CPT Continuous Performanc e Test  
dACC  Dorsal Anterior C ingulate C ortex 
DARS  Dimensional Anhedonia Rating Scale  
dlPFC  Dorsol ateral Prefrontal Cortex 
DMN  Default M ode Network 
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
FIBSER  Frequenc y, Intensit y, Burden of Side Effects Rating  
FLAIR  Fluid-Attenu ated Inversion Recovery 
fMRI Functional Magnet ic Re sona nce Imaging 
FSS Fatigue Severity  Scale  
GAD  Genera lized Anxie ty Disorer 
GAD7  Generalized An xiety Diso rder 7 item scal e 
GRSEB  Global Rati ng of Side Effect Burden 
ISI Insomnia Severity In dex 
LLD Late-Life Depression  
mACh R Muscarinic Receptor  
MADRS  Montgomery Asberg De pression Rat ing Scale  
MCI Mild Cogn itive Impa irment 
MINI Mini-Internation al Neuropsy chiatric Interview  
MMSE  Mini-Mental St ate Exam  
MRI Magnetic Res onance Imaging 
M/SFG  Middl e / Superior  Frontal  Gyri 
nAChR  Nicotinic Acetyloc holin er Receptor  
nAChRs  Nicotinic  Acetylocholin e  Receptors 
NDA  National Institute of Mental Heal th Database  
PSWQ Penn State Wo rry Questionnaire  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
TDN Transd ermal Nicotine  
UPRTSO  Unanticipated Problem Involving Risk to Subje cts o r Oth ers 
VUMC  Vanderbilt Universi ty Medical Center  
WHODA S 2.0  World He alth Organization Disabili ty Assessm ent Sc hedul e 2.0 
 
 
Protocol V ersion  #:1.4   
Proto col Date:  05/06 /2021  32 
APPENDIX B: PROHIB ITED ME DICATIONS  
 
Antidepressa nts: 
 
• Monoami ne oxidase inhib itors (parnate, selegil ine, etc) 
• Tricyclic ant idepr essan ts (amitrip tyline, nortriptyl ine, imiprami ne, desipramine, etc)  
• Bupropion 
• Paroxet ine 
 
Other Medications:  
• Acetylcholines terase I nhibitors 
• Donepezil  
• Galantami ne 
• Rivastigmine 
 
• Other  anticholinergic drugs  
• Benz tropin e 
• Cyproheptad ine 
• Diphenhydramine  
• Hydroxyzine  
• Meclizi ne 
• Promethazi ne 
• Oxybutynin  
 
• CYP2A6 Inh ibitors / Ind ucers (1)  
• Amiodarone 
• Bupenorp hine 
• Clotrimazole  
• Disulfram  
• Fenofibrate  
• Ketoconozole 
• Letrozole 
• Micona zole 
• Modafinil  
• Tiocona zole 
 1.  Cytochrome P450 E nzymes: Substrates, Inhibitors, and Indu cers. In: Lucy CF, Armstrong LL , Goldman MP, 
Lance LL, eds. Drug Information Hand book. 15th edition ed. Hudson, OH: L exiComp Inc.;  2007:18 99-1912.  
 