Patient Centered Mobile Health Technology 
Enabled Atrial Fibrillation Management
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
8/25/2023
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 1 of 17 
  
JHM IRB - eForm A – Protocol  
 
 
• Use the section headings to write the JHM IRB eForm  A, inserting the appropriate material in 
each. If a section is not applicable, leave heading in and insert N/A.  
• When submitting JHM IRB eForm A (new or revised), enter the date submitted to the field at 
the top of JHM IRB eForm A.  
 
*********************** ***************************************************************
******  
 
 
Patient Centered mobile health TECH nology Enabled Atrial Fibrillation Management (mTECH Afib):  A 
Pilot Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
1. Abstract  
a. Provide no more than a one page research abstract briefly stating the problem, the research 
hypothesis, and the importance of the research.  
 
Atrial fibrillation (A fib) is the most common arrhythmia.1 Lifetime risk of A fib is one in five to one in three 
individuals.2 Increased overall time spent in A fib (Afib burden) and recurrent AF episodes have been 
associated with higher risk of heart failure, stroke, poor quali ty of life, and mortality. 3 Early 
implementation of strategies to maintain sinus rhythm reduces cardiovascular mortality, stroke or 
hospitalization for heart failure or acute coronary syndrome  and improves quality of life .4, 5 Efficacy of 
these intervent ions can be limited in the setting of uncontrolled A fib risk factors. Modifiable A fib risk 
factors include sleep apnea, hypertension, obesity, physical inactivity, inadequate cholesterol and 
glycemic control, smoking, and alcohol use.6, 7 Both observational and randomized studies have 
demonstrated significant reduction in A fib burden and recurrent A fib episodes with aggressive risk factor 
modification intervention programs delivered in -person among patients with A fib.8-11 Risk factor 
modification is now re commended by American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology 
Afib Guidelines.7 Such interventions are not widely implemented, due to its association with high costs 
and the need for trained personnel, which deprives numerous patients fr om this evidence -based care. 
Furthermore, evidence suggests poor translation of guidelines in patient care for other core aspects of AF 
care, including stroke prevention and rhythm control, especially among underserved minorities.3, 12 
Additionally, patients with A fib have poor quality of life13 and report poor commu nication and guidance 
while experiencing AF episodes ( IRB00230621) . Mobile health technologies, including smartphone 
applications (“apps”) and wearable devices have tremendous potential to bridge this gap and enable 
delivery of risk factor modification pro grams to patients with A fib at scale. By digitizing the processes and 
system of A fib management program, we will be able to increase access to guideline directed A fib care at 
scale and ultimately improve the quality of the service we provide to our patients as well as  improve  
health outcomes.  
             We co -designed the Corrie Virtual  Atrial Fibrillation Management Program “Corrie VCare A fib” on 
the platform of Corrie Health in an inclusive manner together with patients, their health partners and 
clinicians in a way that meets their needs ( IRB00230621). This comprehensive and multi -component 
program aims to empower patients to a) take an active role in learning about A fib management options, 
starting and adhering to evidence -based ther apies b) help build new healthy habits for risk factor 
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 2 of 17 
 modification c) guide them during A fib episodes which are associated with anxiety and impairment in 
quality of life and d) provide peer support for emotional health.  
 
We aim to 1) evaluate the Corrie VCare A fib intervention in a pilot randomized clinical trial of 100 
patients to inform feasibility - recruitment and retention rates of study participants, evaluate  effect size, 
feasibility and acceptability of the intervention and study measurement proced ures. Findings from this 
pilot phase will provide critical information to inform  evaluation of the intervention in a larger  
randomized clinical trial  powered for health outcomes, including measures to mitigate attrition rates 2)  
estimate  the prevalence of Afib risk factors 3)  characterize sleep symptoms and cardiovascular  stress, as 
one of the core risk factors for Afib, sleep apnea is under characterized specifically in this population.   
        
2. Objectives (include all primary and seco ndary objectives)  
 
The primary objective of this pilot study is to inform the feasibility of conducting the study:   
 
Primary outcome: Retention rates at 3 months (number of individuals who continue study participation 
(defined by App interaction, Coaching  call participation or follow up survey completion) divided by the 
number of individuals who consent to participation in the study at 3 months after enrollment.  
Retention rates of at least 60% at 3 month  will be considered acceptable. 
(https://www.cvdigitalhealthjournal.com/article/S2666 -6936(22)00002 -0/fulltext#figures )  
 
As part of feasibility objective  will also evaluate : 
a) screen failure rates (number of individuals who are eligible for enrollment di vided by number of 
individuals screened (meeting inclusion criteria),  
b) recruitment rates (number of individuals who are eligible for participation in study divided by the 
number of individuals who provide consent to participate in the study) as well as n umber of individuals 
who are enrolled in a study per month,  
 
The secondary objective of the study is to evaluate feasibility of implementing study procedures, 
measurement tools and collecting study data. We will evaluate secondary objectives by examining :  
 
a) Completion rates for study interventions (e.g. survey completion rates, coaching call completion rates  
b) App engagement ( Total number of interactions in the smartphone app and overall amount of time 
spent using the smartphone app per participant, collected via the Corrie Health Platform User Analytics) , 
rhythm check log rates, vital sign log rate)  
c) User satisfaction – System Usability Scale modified for Corrie Afib  
 
We will conduct exploratory analysis of the results of the followin g effectiveness measurements as well 
as metrics that may be relevant to  heterogeneity  of treatment effects  and intervention’s mechanism of 
action :  
 
❑ Quality of Life - measured by Atrial Fibrillation Effect on Quality‐of‐Life  (AFEQT),  validated 
disease specific measure which consists of 20 items. Score ranges from 0 to 100 with higher 
scores signifying better quality of life. 14Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. At least 5 point 
change in AFEQT score is considered clinically meaningful.15 
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 3 of 17 
 ❑ Atrial Fibrillation episode burden, symptom burden and healthcare utilization – measured by the 
Atrial Fibrillation Severity Scale ( AFSS)  – validated 19 item  questionnaire.16  
❑ Berlin Sleep Questionnaire - 10 item questionnaire assessing sleep apnea risk through 3  different 
categories, and classifies patients as high or low risk .17 
❑ Brief Sleep Characterization  – Team designed  Afib specific  questions to characterize sleep apnea 
in patients with atrial fibrillation  
❑ Social Support  – measured by  Medical Outcomes Social Support Survey Instrument (MOS Social 
Support Scale) -  Is a 19 item questionnaire  with final score ranging between 0 – 100 with higher 
scores suggesting more support 18Error! Hyperlink reference not valid.   
❑ Skills in applying electronic health information to health problems – measured by 8-item 
questionnaire eHealth Literacy Scale (eHEALS) 19, 20  
❑ Depressive symptoms – Patient Health Questionnaire 8 (PHQ – 8) - 8‐item measure with  (≤4: no 
depressive symptom, 5 –9: mild, ≥10: moderate to severe depressive symptoms)21 
❑ Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7 (GAD 7) – score ranges from 0 to 21 with higher scores indicating 
more anxiety  22  
❑ Perceived Stress Score (PSS -10). In this 10 item questionnaire score ranges from 0 -40 with higher 
scores indicating higher level of anxiety.23 
❑ AF Episode Burden as assessed by the ratio of 30 second single lead ECG recordings (via Apple 
Watch) reporting Afib divided by total number of 30 second single lead ECG recordings  
❑ Physical Activity – As assessed by The Rapid Assessment of Physical Activit y (RAPA)24  
❑ Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea, Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy  
❑ Alcohol use – as assessed by The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT), 10 -item 
questionnair e. The score range is from 0 to 40 with 0 referring to abstainer with no history of 
alcohol abuse and higher scores indicate gradually higher and hazardous alcohol dependence. 25, 
26 
❑ Smoking status – as assessed by study team developed questionnaire responses and evaluating 
the ratio of participants who report quitting smoking at 1 2 week f/u divided by number of 
participants who report smoking at baseline  
❑ Diet – Rate Your Plate. A 27 item scale administered at 12 weeks with the following scoring 
system: 27 -45: There are many ways you can make your eating habits healthier. 46 -63: Th ere are 
some ways you can make your eating habits healthier. 64 -81: You are making many healthy 
choices.27, 28 
❑ Blood pressure Attainment of BP less than 130/80 mmHg, averaged over two measurements per 
time  point29 
❑ Body Mass Index  
 
 
Safety Outcomes:  
❑ Hospitalization, Emergency room visits, myocardial infarction, Stroke - as reported in electronic 
health records or via patient/caregiver report, verified by health records.  
❑ Death – as reported in electronic health records or via caregiver report, verified by death 
certificates or health records  
 
To further characterize sleep apnea patterns and assess validity of Afib specific sleep apnea questionnaire 
we aim to conduct one time home sleep apnea testing (FDA approved Itamar WatchPA T device) in 
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 4 of 17 
 patients enrolled in usual care arm after they complete 12 week follow up assessments. WatchPAT 
devices will be mailed to patients home address and results of the study will be shared with patients and 
their cardiologist/care team.  
 
3. Backgroun d (briefly describe pre -clinical and clinical data, current experience with procedures, 
drug or device, and any other relevant information to justify the research)  
 
Our study team has conducted inclusive design sessions (Human Centered Design Sessions) in 
collaboration with Johns Hopkins Center for Health Equity with support from American Heart Association 
to identify challenges that diverse group of patients and thei r health partners with A fib face in everyday 
life and similarly challenges that clinicians face while managing Afib (IRB00230621). Guidance with 
evidence based A fib care, peer support, A fib episode management and risk factor modification were 
identified as  top problems patients and clinicians wish to be addressed via digital toolkit. These 
challenges are in line with well established gaps in care suggested in literature.  
 
In order to bridge the gap in A fib care and provide access to guideline recommended Afib management 
to patients, we have designed virtual A fib care model “ Corrie VCare A fib” on Corrie Health platform. 
Program leverages digital health technologies, namely Corrie Health patient facing app, Clinician 
Dashboard,  FDA approved wearable devices providing data generation ( Apple Watch, Bluetooth enabled  
blood pressure cuffs (Omron ) and Itamar Watch PAT home sleep apnea testing. The role of the industry 
collaborators  is hardware and software donation and advice on technology best practices. There is no 
expectation for data sharing . 
 
The app, Corrie, is the same platform  used in IRB0009 9938, QI project (IRB00148849), Human Centered 
Design Studies (IRB00266731 and IRB 00230621). App owners will have access to limited PII and PHI 
(name and email). Core app functions include: 1) medication tracking; 2) CPAP use tracking via patient 
logs 3 ) vital signs and heart rhythm and physical activity tracking; 4) patient education; 5) summary 
report for care team; 6) assistance in organization of care, 7) connecting with care team and Johns 
Hopkins nurse -led patient coaching 8) access to already establ ished social media patient led support 
groups.  
 
Furthermore, one of the core risk factors for atrial fibrillation is sleep apnea. Sleep is an essential period 
for cardiovascular system as during this time heart rate and blood pressure are  reduced allowing 
restoration and recovery of cardiovascular system.30 In patients with sleep disorders, such as  sleep apnea 
however, sleep  is a significant source of cardiovascular stresses related to periods of hypoxemia,  changes 
in intrathoracic pressure and surges of sympathetic activity during arousals .31 However true prevalence 
and characterization of sleep apnea is lacking in patients with atrial fibrillation.  By deploying sleep 
assessment to all patients enrolled in the trial (at baseline for individuals in intervention arm and at 
follow up in control group) as well as deploying sleep characterization questionnaires we will be able to 
bridge this gap and chara cterize sleep among patients with sleep apnea (detailed sleep apnea testing and 
treatment plan is uploaded in Section 20.2 as part of Corrie VCR program document.  
 
 
 
4. Study Procedures  
a. Study design, including the sequence and timing of study procedures   
(distinguish research procedures from those that are part of routine care).  
 
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 5 of 17 
  
General Overview:  
 
We will conduct a pilot, parallel arm randomized clinical trial in a convenience sample of 100 patients 
with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation ( diagnosed not more than 12 months prior to randomization)  who 
presents for evaluation (Afib at Johns Hopkins Outpatient Cardiology Clinic , Johns Hopkins Bayview 
cardiology or electroph ysiology clinics , or Medical Pavilion at Howard County electrophysiology clinic ). 
We will evaluate feasibility and preliminary efficacy of multi -component Corrie VCare AF Program in 
addition to usual care vs usual care alone.  
Given proven benefits on card iovascular outcomes with 12 -week rehabilitation programs for patients 
with range of other cardiovascular diseases we will deploy digital AF program for 12 weeks.  
 
Table 1.  
Components of Corrie VCare Afib Program  Multi  Component Intervention  
Corrie Afib App,  Apple Watch, Itamar WatchPAT Home Sleep Apnea Test, BP cuff, scale, Nurse -coach 
for Corrie Afib  (guidance document uploaded in Section 20.2) and contextual motivational messages  
(document uploaded in Section 20.2) , voluntary access to public patient led Facebook AF support 
group ( https://www.facebook.com/groups/AtrialFibrillationSupportForum )  
 
 
Enrollment, Randomization and Measurements:  
 
1. The list of patients in the cardiology and electrophysiology outpatient clinics at Johns Hopkins 
Hospital (JHH) , Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center (JHBMC) , and Medical Pavilion at Howard 
County (MPHC)  will be reviewed daily by study team member. Furthermore, flyers will be placed 
at JHH and JHBMC cardiology outpatient clinician work rooms to increase visibility of the study 
and allow clinicians to refer patients to the study. Patients who meet the incl usion criteria (see 
below in section 5) will be entered into REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) dataset.  
2. Study team members will subsequently screen patient charts for exclusion criteria.  
3. Before approaching eligible patients for consent, study tea m members will ask the attending 
physician of the patient to obtain permission from patients for study team to approach them. 
Study team members will also assess whether treating clinicians deem Corrie VCare A fib program 
safe for patients  
4. Patients will be approached in the outpatient clinic either before or after their scheduled clinic 
visit. Once patients are approached, further questions will be asked to screen for exclusion 
criteria including visual, motor, and/or auditory impairment limiting digital hea lth technology use 
(precludes meaningful use of intervention technology).  
5. Research team member will provide patients with  detailed information and consent form to 
review prior to starting further discussion.  
6. Confirmation about having as much time as neces sary will be done by allowing the patient to 
read the consent form with unlimited time and a repeat of information  
7. Patients will be given the opportunity to ask any questions of research team before considering 
consenting to participate in study.  
8. After con sent is obtained, patients will be randomized at a 1:1 ratio, stratified by location of 
enrollment (JHH vs JHBMC  vs MPHC ) and practice (Cardiology vs Electrophysiology)  to the VCare 
Afib  program along with usual care or usual care alone. Usual care is defined by care delivered by 
patients clinical team.  
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 6 of 17 
 9. We will use a web -based tool for randomization using variable -sized blocks (2 -6). We will 
minimize bias by concealed allocation.  
10. Once ra ndomization arm is determined, a study team member will inform each patient of their 
allocation.  
 
11. Individuals randomized to the Corrie Afib Virtual Program will receive onboarding from a study 
team member.  Patients will receive step by step guidance on h ow to download the Corrie Afib 
app onto the phone, use Apple Watch device, blood pressure cuff [Omron Blood pressure cuff 
(FDA cleared)], which will be paired with the smartphone via Bluetooth and scale. They will also 
be instructed on the use of  one-time  Itamar Watch PAT home sleep apnea testing  (Detailed 
description of sleep apnea testing and treatment is uploaded in Section 20.2 as part of the Corrie 
VCare Afib Program description document) . We will ask patients to keep WatchPAT on for the 
entire night. For a study to be considered acceptable, we will require a minimum recording 
duration of 4 hours, which is standard of care. If a recording does not meet minimum duration 
requirement, then the participant would be asked to repeat the sleep study. Patients  will be able 
to keep Apple Watch, BP cuffs and scale after the study if they will plan to use the equipment, 
otherwise they will be provided with return mailers  for Apple Watch device . The research team 
will have access to data collected via these devices  and will review them on a weekly basis. 
Patients will be provided with an email to allow them to contact study investigators in case they 
have questions about technology use. They will also be able to submit feedback or questions 
regarding app use directl y via the app. Patients will be encouraged to start using the app 
immediately ; they will be able to receive education and log medication use and CPAP wearing 
time via the app as soon as the a pp is downloaded. Patients will be instructed to record single 
lead (Apple watch) ECG twice a day and when they experience symptoms concerning for Afib.  
12. To promote privacy of health information, a login will be required to access the app (created 
upon onboarding). Additionally, the iPhone will be set to password protec ted mode / face ID 
activated.  
13. After obtaining consent, app permissions will be given. In order for an app to access any 
information on an iOS smartphone, the app must ask the user for permission and only if that 
permission is granted, can the app access t hat information. This is inherently enforced on all apps 
by the operating system. In our case we only will ask for permissions to access:  
• Relevant digital health data from iOS HealthKits, in particular: physical activity, blood 
pressure and heart rate.  
• Photos to store an insurance card or other cards like a stent card. Even if the access -
permission is granted, it is limited to the images specified by the user.  
• Display notifications, such as an alert to take medications . 
• Send email function to allow users t o send a PDF of their consent form or a PDF of 
relevant health info (e.g., medication list, progress report) to their care providers. No app 
is allowed to read any data from the mail app.  
Participants will be given the option to take a photo in which they are identifiable using the app 
and can specify authorization for internal or external use via the standard media consent form.  
14. All patients in the Corrie VCare A fib program will receive weekly check -in calls from Johns 
Hopkins Cardiology Nurse (Stephney Bl air or Courtney Eddy) – Corrie Afib coach to guide patients 
with individualized risk factor modification. If during conversation with the Corrie Afib health 
coach patients report concerning symptoms, including chest pain, shortness of breath and more, 
the health coaches will follow study Standard Operating Procedure Protocol to handle the 
different scenarios (attached in supplementary documents in Section 20.2 Patients will be 
informed that the Corrie Afib  team cannot replace their care teams and patients should contact 
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 7 of 17 
 their clinicians, call 911 or go to emergency room when experiencing symptoms or abnormal vital 
signs.  
15. Patients in the Corrie VCare AF program will also receive messages tailored to their risk factor to 
facilitate lifestyle modification. Tex t messages  which will be sent as push notifications via an app. 
Corrie Message Bank has been developed by combining validated messages from mACTIVE trial,  
American Heart Association’s Care Pathway messages and patient generated messages. 
(Attached as supplemental document  in Section 20.2 ). There are slight modifications in the 
message bank for Afib version compared to cardiac rehabilitation version  approved  by the IRB 
(IRB00308410 ) with addition of sleep apnea messages and modified physical activity messages. 
Patient specific risk factors will be reviewed by the chart review and confirmed with patients. 
Then based on patients’ goals for each risk factor mess ages promoting building healthy habits for 
patient preferred risk factor will be sent to them with patient desired frequency.  
16. Through the app patients in Corrie VCare AF program will be able to record ECG (using Apple 
Watch device), log CPAP wear times, record their vital signs, symptoms and perceived triggers. 
They will be able to alert their clinician via app and receive guidance for episode management. 
They will also be able to alert health partner (pre -specified in the app) that they are experiencing 
Afib episode. App will alert patients that if they are experiencing medical emergency, they should 
call 911.  
17. At 12 weeks follow up, all study participants will receive a survey via REDCap to report any 
adverse events   -  stroke, emergency room visit, heart attack or hospital readmission.  If a patient 
is readmitted to a Hopkins affiliated hospital their record will be searched for confirmation and 
cause of readmission. If the person is readmitted to an outside hospital, we will email them an 
Authorization for Release of Health Information f orm asking for permission to obtain their 
records of readmission. If patients cannot be reached, we will contact their emergency contact to 
identify whether the patient is alive and also search electronic health records, if death is reported 
it will be ver ified by death certificates or health records.  
18. Study measurements and their timing is summarized in Table 2. Detailed list of data elements 
collected is uploaded in Section 20.2  
 
Table 2. Study visits and variables obtained (comprehensive list of variabl es uploaded in Section 20.2)  
 
Visit 1. Baseline visit  Virtual Visit at 3 months  
From Chart (day of enrollment )  
sex  
age  
race/ethnicity   
insurance type   
contact information (email, phone)   
Enrollment location   
smartphone ownership   
height   
hypertension   
diabetes   
dyslipidemia   
left ventricular ejection fraction (latest within 6 months)   
aortic dissection   
icd  
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 8 of 17 
 cardiac surgery within 12 months   
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with >25mmHg resting 
gradient   
cardiac arrest or ventricular arrhythmia   
Untreated h igh grade atrioventricular block   
Severe valvular disease (any)   
Mitral stenosis   
Presence of artificial heart valve or valve repair   
Coronary artery disease   
Congestive heart failure   
Atrial fibrillation type   
TIA/stroke   
CHADSVASC Score   
Vascular disease   
Sleep Apnea   
Incomplete revascularization of coronary artery disease   
pregnancy   
Implanted cardiac device   
Cholesterol panel (within 6 month of enrollment) * Cholesterol panel (within 1 month of 
follow up )* 
Hb A1c (within 6 month of enrollment) * Hb A1c (within 1 month of follow up )* 
Determined upon enrollment    
iPhone ownership   
Apple watch ownership   
Access to wifi   
Health Metrics   
Weight  Weight**  
Blood Pressure  Blood Pressure**  
From  Corrie Health Analytic Platform & Devices ( for 
individuals in Corrie VCare Afib Program)   
Heart rate  Heart rate  
Average Weekly Step Count  Average Weekly Step Count  
 User Engagement - Total number of 
interactions in the smartphone app and 
overall amount of time spent using the 
smartphone app per participant, collected 
via the Corrie Health Platform User 
Analytics  
 Rhythm Check Proportion  
 BP check proportion  
 HR check proportion  
 Medication log proportion  
 Exercise log proportion  
 Proportion of AF Episodes  
 Number of times called nurse team  
 Number of nurse coaching completed  
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 9 of 17 
  Symptom/AF episode concordance  
 Identified AF trigger (self -report)  
 User Satisfaction – System Usability Scale 
(Modified for Corrie Afib)  
Surveys delivered via email through REDCap** *  
e-Health Literacy scale  e-Health Literacy scale  
AFEQT  AFEQT  
AFSS  AFSS  
Medical Outcomes Social Support Survey Instrument 
(MOS Social Support Scale)   
Rate Your Plate  Rate Your Plate  
Rapid Assessment of Physical Activity  Rapid Assessment of Physical Activity  
minutes of exercise per week and perceived exertion 
score combination  minutes of exercise per week and 
perceived exertion score combination  
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -8)*** Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -8) 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7 (GAD 7)  Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD 7)  
Perceived Stress Score -10 Perceived Stress Score -10 
Sociodemographic survey (education level, income level)   
Smoking Status  Smoking Status, quitting attempts  
Alcohol use status, AUDIT questionnaire  
 Alcohol use status, AUDIT questionnaire  
 
Sleep Apnea diagnosis, CPAP use  Sleep Apnea diagnosis, CPAP use 
Sleep Characterization  tailored for Afib patients   
Berlin Questionnaire (sleep apnea screening)   
 Adverse Outcome Survey  
** Patients will be advised to complete those surveys 
within 48 hours of enrollment. The standard email 
greeting is included as a Supplemental Study Document. 
Survey responses will be recorded electronically via 
REDCap. All surveys are uploaded in suppleme ntary data 
material section.   
 The hospital costs (in US dollars) for 
emergency department (ED) visit, hospital 
readmission, and acute myocardial 
infarction (MI) will be compared between 
Corrie Virtual Afib Program and usual care 
groups.  
*If available  
** Blood pressure cuff and scale will be mailed to patients at 12 weeks to obtain self-assessment at 
12 weeks  
*** If PHQ 8 score is  ≥10 and patient is randomized to Corrie VCare Afib  program, study team member will 
ask patient to obtain permission from patients primary care clinician to exercise at home and won’t be allowed to 
engage in exercise portion of the intervention until patient confirms permission from the treating clinician. ” 
 
 
 
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 10 of 17 
 b. If your study involves data/biospecimens from participants enrolled under other research studies 
with a written consent or under a waiver of consent, please list the IRB application numbers for 
those studies.  Please note:  Certificate of Confidentiality (CoC) protections applied to the data in 
source studies funded by NIH or CDC will extend to this new study if the funding was active in 
2016.  If this situation applies, Section 36, question 6 in the application will need to be answered 
“Yes” and “Hopkins Faculty” should be selected in question 7. No other documents are required.  
 
      N/A 
 
c. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participants.  
 
Each participant will be enrolled in the study from the time of enrollment  for 12 weeks. Study visits 
will occur at baseline only, 3 months follow up visits will be virtual  limited to data collection remotely 
as above (Table 2).  
 
d. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable.  
 
Although b linding participants or study team members enrolling patients is not possible, outcome 
assessors will be blinded to intervention allocation.  
 
 
e. Justification of why participants will not receive routine care or will have current therapy 
stopped.  
 
All parti cipants will continue to receive usual care.  
 
 
f. Justification for inclusion of a placebo or non -treatment group.  
 
All participants will continue to receive usual care.  
 
g. Definition of treatment failure or participant removal criteria.  
 
For participants with  Corrie VCare Afib program : If an individual  stops using platform for >30 days or 
does not respond to phone calls from study team or after failing to complete the study surveys after 
7 days  without response to phone calls the participant w ill be considered lost to follow up.  
 
For participants in the Control group: If the participant does not respond to phone calls after failing 
to complete the study surveys after 7 days, the participant will be considered lost to follow up.  
 
 
h. Description o f what happens to participants receiving therapy when study ends or if a 
participant’s participation in the study ends prematurely.  
 
When the study ends or a participant’s participation in the study ends prematurely, participants in 
the Corrie VCare AFib p rogram who have received loaned smartphone will be expected to return the 
device , if they chose to continue using devices they will be allowed to keep the rest of the study 
equipment. Otherwise we will ask patients to return Apple Watch device.  
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 11 of 17 
  
Participan ts may be given the option to participate in future research studies  
 
i. If biological materials are involved, please describe all the experimental procedures and analyses 
in which they will be used.  
 
N/A 
 
 
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
 
Inclusion Criteria  
 
• 18 years or older  
•  Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation   
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 
• Non -English speaking  
• Does not own  an iPhone 5 or newer  
• Moderate to severe mitral stenosis  
• Presence of Artificial  Heart Valve   
• Severe valvular disease  (any)  
• Physical disability that would preclude technology use, safe and adequate exercise performance  
• Hearing or Visual Impairment that would preclude technology use  
• History of fall  one or more times in the last year  
• Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy with  peak resting left ventricular outflow gradient of 
>25 mmHg  
• Known aortic dissection  
• Severe resting arterial hypertension (SBP >200 mmHg or diastolic BP >110mmHg)  upon 
enrollment (obtained during clinic visit)  
• Mental impairment leading to inability to cooperate with study procedures  
• Untreated high degree atrioventricular block  
• History of cardiac arrest, sudden death  
• History of MI  
• Left ventricular ejection fraction < 40% 
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 12 of 17 
 • Clinically significant depression  
• Presence of implanted cardiac device   
• Incomplete revascularization procedure  
• Pregnancy  (pregnancy status will be determined by self report and at enrollment patients will be 
asked to report if they become pregnant in whic h case they will be asked to stop participating in 
the study and their data will be excluded from the intention to treat analysis. Of note, Afib 
generally affects older individuals with only <0.1% prevalence of Afib in women under age of 55).  
• Previous open -heart surgery  
• Unsafe to participate in the program as per treating clinician  
 
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be used.  
b. Justification and safety information if FDA approved drugs will  be administered for non -FDA 
approved indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant populations are 
changed.  
c. Justification and safety information if non -FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered.  
 
1. The Corrie app is available on iPhone platforms. In discussion with an FDA -consultant, 
because the functionality of the app is as an organizational and navigational tool for patients, 
it does not require pre -approval from the FDA before use with patients. It falls within th e 
category of mobile apps for which the FDA is exercising enforcement discretion.  
2. Apple Watch, Itamar Watch PAT, and Omron blood pressure cuff all have received FDA 
clearance and are safe for patient use (see supplementary documents).  
 
 
7. Study Statistics  
a. Primary outcome variable.  
b. Secondary outcome variables.  
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and interim data analysis.  
d. Early stopping rules.  
 
In this two -arm, parallel group RCT we will evaluate feasibility (primary outcome) of a 12 -week Corr ie AF 
digital toolkit intervention. We will recruit a convenience sample of 100 patients with paroxysmal atrial 
fibrillation . With 100 patients enrolled we would be able to detect difference in quality of life measured 
by AFEQT  of ~ 19 points with 80% power and 0.05 alpha  but it would be unlikely to see such large effect 
size with 12 week intervention . Similarly, we will be able to detect 10% difference in AF burde n, previous 
studies have shown 7.6% point reduction in AF burden with 12 week exercise program and given our 
comprehensive approach we anticipate that we will achieve at least 10% difference in AF burden  from 
baseline to follow up in the intervention group . 
  
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 13 of 17 
  
 
8. Risks  
a. Medical risks, listing all procedures, their major and minor risks and expected frequency.  
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks.  
c. Plan for reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations.  
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with breach of confidentiality.  
e. Financial risks to the participants.  
 
 
Risks include feeling tired with filling out surveys. Other risks include risk of adverse events with diet 
and exercise. However weight loss is class I recommendation by American Heart Association and 
American College of Cardiology guidelines for atrial fibrillation pat ients. We will not ask patients to do 
extreme diet or engage in exercise that is beyond what they can safely tolerate. Furthermore, we 
have implemented the following interventions to further minimize the risk  (1) We will exclude 
patients who are not deemed  fit for study participation by treating clinician (2) We will only enroll 
participants in the study who have significant comorbidities (see exclusion criteria)   (3) We will 
provide nurse led weekly check -ins with patients to guide them accordingly if thei r vitals are not 
within normal range or if patients report concerning symptoms. The guide for these check -ins has 
been compiled based on the Johns Hopkins cardiac rehabilitation program and atrial fibrillation clinic 
protocols and is attached in supplement ary document section .  
 
Risks also include patient relaying on study clinician during the A fib episode that is causing medical 
emergency. To minimize this risk, we will have disclaimer that if patients are experiencing medical 
emergency, they should call 9 11. Otherwise patients will be connecting with healthcare team as they 
would in usual care team, except they will have option to use the App to make the connection.  
  
Another risk is breach of confidentiality. The Corrie Health digital platform uses a hig h level of 
personal security password protection and encryption to meet privacy standards. The study team will 
disclose to the participant and IRB if a breach of confidentiality occurs.  
 
There are no study procedures that would put patient at financial ris k.   
 
 
9. Benefits  
a. Description of the probable benefits for the participant and for society.  
 
 
Overall, the participants in the intervention group will be given access to a Corrie Vcare Afib program. 
Through this intervention they may benefit from greater kno wledge about their diagnosis, risk 
factors, how to modify their risk factors and develop self -efficacy to continue risk factor modification 
after completion of the program. Furthermore, they may benefit from physical activity and develop 
skills that help t hem manage their medications as well as follow -up appointments with their 
clinicians. Patients enrolled in usual care may not derive significant direct benefit. Moreover, the data 
that they contribute as a research participant could help others in the futu re. 
 
 
 
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 14 of 17 
 10. Payment and Remuneration  
a. Detail compensation for participants including possible total compensation, proposed 
bonus, and any proposed reductions or penalties for not completing the protocol.  
 
 
The Corrie App, Apple Watch , One time Itamar  Watch PAT home sleep study,  blood pressure 
monitor, and scale will be provided to participants if they do not o wn one at no cost to the them. If 
participants opt to continue using devices after the completion of the program they will be allowed 
to do so.  Participants randomized to usual care arm will be provided with blood pressure cuff, scale 
as well as home sleep study test after the completion of 12 week follow up surveys.  
 
 
11. Costs  
a. Detail costs of study procedure(s) or drug (s) or substance(s) to parti cipants and identify 
who will pay for them.  
 
Costs associated with hardware and software support for Apple Watch and Watch PAT single use 
home sleep study will be covered by companies, Apple and Itamar.  
 
 
12. Transfer of Materials  
Transfer of biospecimens fro m Johns Hopkins to another organization for research purposes and 
receipt of biospecimens from an outside organization for your research must adhere to JHU 
policies for material transfer ( https://ventures.jhu.edu/faculty -inventors/forms -policies/  ) and 
biospecimen transfer 
(https://hpo.johnshopkins.edu/enterprise/policies/176/39187/policy_39187.pdf?_=0.62232423
2879 ).  
 
Please complete this section if your research involv es transfer or receipt of biospecimens . 
 
a. Will you receive  biospecimens from an external entity for this research? [Yes/No].  
 If “Yes”, please confirm you will secure an MTA/research agreement from the appropriate office 
 (JHTV/ORA) prior to transfer.  
 See: https://ventures.jhu.edu/technology -transfer/material -transfer -agreements/  . 
 
b. Will you transfer  biospecimens to an external entity as part of this research? [Yes/No]  
 If “Yes”, please address each of the following:  
1) Describe the nature of the research collaboration with the external entity and the rationale 
for the transfer. (Include an explanation o f your intellectual contribution to the design of the 
research study, resulting data and sharing, and participation in the planned publications.)  
2) Please confirm you will secure an MTA through the appropriate office (JHTV or ORA) prior to 
transfer.  
(See: https://ventures.jhu.edu/technology -transfer/material -transfer -agreements/ .) 
  
3) If the biospecimens you intend to transfer were obtained through clinical or research 
procedures at Johns Hopkins and “Other” is selected in Item 4, Section 23, please submit the 
following items in that Section:  
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 15 of 17 
  
a. A pdf version of a completed JHTV Online “Material  Transfer Agreement Request 
Form for Outbound Material” https://ventures.jhu.edu/technology -
transfer/material -transfer -agreements/  OR a copy of the COEUS PD (Proposal 
Development Summary).  
b. A completed Biospecimen Transfer Information Sheet 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/institutional_review_board/forms/ .   
c. A signed and dated “De -identified Human Subject Certification” 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/institutional_review_board/forms/   
d. Approval documents from recipient site, if a pplicable.  
e. Copies of the consent forms associated with the IRB protocols under which the 
biospecimens were collected, with language appropriate to this transfer highlighted .  
f. The name of the specialist you are working with in ORA to complete a contract/MTA . 
Please see the following website for more information about transferring human biospecimens to 
outside entities: 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/institutional_review_board/news/announcement_transfer_h
uman_biospecimens_outside_entities.html/  .   
 
 
 
 
 
1. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, Calkins H, Cigarroa JE, Cleveland JC, Jr., Conti JB, Ellinor PT, 
Ezekowitz MD, Field ME, Murray KT, Sacco RL, Stevenson WG, Tchou PJ, Tracy CM, Yancy CW and American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Forc e on Practice G. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for 
the management of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014;64:e1 -76. 
2. Mou L, Norby FL, Chen LY, O'Neal WT, Lewis TT, Loehr LR, Soliman EZ and Alonso A. Lifetime Risk of 
Atrial Fibrillation by Race and Socioeconomic Status: ARIC Study (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities). Circ 
Arrhythm Electrophysiol . 201 8;11:e006350.  
3. Tsao CW, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, Alonso A, Beaton AZ, Bittencourt MS, Boehme AK, Buxton AE, 
Carson AP, Commodore -Mensah Y, Elkind MSV, Evenson KR, Eze -Nliam C, Ferguson JF, Generoso G, Ho JE, 
Kalani R, Khan SS, Kissela BM, Knutson KL, Levin e DA, Lewis TT, Liu J, Loop MS, Ma J, Mussolino ME, 
Navaneethan SD, Perak AM, Poudel R, Rezk -Hanna M, Roth GA, Schroeder EB, Shah SH, Thacker EL, VanWagner 
LB, Virani SS, Voecks JH, Wang NY, Yaffe K and Martin SS. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics -2022 U pdate: A 
Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation . 2022;145:e153 -e639.  
4. Kirchhof P, Camm AJ, Goette A, Brandes A, Eckardt L, Elvan A, Fetsch T, van Gelder IC, Haase D, 
Haegeli LM, Hamann F, Heidbuchel H, Hindricks G, Kautzner J, Kuck KH, M ont L, Ng GA, Rekosz J, Schoen N, 
Schotten U, Suling A, Taggeselle J, Themistoclakis S, Vettorazzi E, Vardas P, Wegscheider K, Willems S, Crijns H, 
Breithardt G and Investigators E -AT. Early Rhythm -Control Therapy in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. N En gl J 
Med. 2020;383:1305 -1316.  
5. Mark DB, Anstrom KJ, Sheng S, Piccini JP, Baloch KN, Monahan KH, Daniels MR, Bahnson TD, Poole 
JE, Rosenberg Y, Lee KL, Packer DL and Investigators C. Effect of Catheter Ablation vs Medical Therapy on 
Quality of Life Among Patients With Atrial Fibrillation: The CABANA Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA . 
2019;321:1275 -1285.  
6. Chung MK, Eckhardt LL, Chen LY, Ahmed HM, Gopinathannair R, Joglar JA, Noseworthy PA, Pack QR, 
Sanders P, Trulock KM, American Heart Association E, Arrhyt hmias C, Exercise CR, Secondary Prevention 
Committee of the Council on Clinical C, Council on Arteriosclerosis T, Vascular B, Council on C, Stroke N, Council 
on L and Cardiometabolic H. Lifestyle and Risk Factor Modification for Reduction of Atrial Fibrill ation: A Scientific 
Statement From the American Heart Association. Circulation . 2020;141:e750 -e772.  
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 16 of 17 
 7. January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, Chen LY, Cigarroa JE, Cleveland JC, Jr., Ellinor PT, Ezekowitz MD, 
Field ME, Furie KL, Heidenreich PA, Murray KT, Shea JB , Tracy CM and Yancy CW. 2019 AHA/ACC/HRS 
Focused Update of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for the Management of Patients With Atrial Fibrillation: A 
Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society in Collaboration With the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation . 
2019;140:e125 -e151.  
8. Malmo V, Nes BM, Amundsen BH, Tjonna AE, Stoylen A, Rossvoll O, Wisloff U and Loennechen JP. 
Aerobic Interval Training Reduces  the Burden of Atrial Fibrillation in the Short Term: A Randomized Trial. 
Circulation . 2016;133:466 -73. 
9. Parkash R, Wells GA, Sapp JL, Healey JS, Tardif JC, Greiss I, Rivard L, Roux JF, Gula L, Nault I, Novak P, 
Birnie D, Ha A, Wilton SB, Mangat I, Gray C, Gardner M and Tang ASL. Effect of Aggressive Blood Pressure 
Control on the Recurrence of Atrial Fibrillation After Catheter Ablation: A Randomized, Open -Label Clinical Trial 
(SMAC -AF [Substrate Modification With Aggressive Blood Pressure Control]). Circulation . 2017;135:1788 -1798.  
10. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Lau DH, Mehta AB, Mahajan R, Twomey D, Alasady M, Hanley L, Antic NA, 
McEvoy RD, Kalman JM, Abhayaratna WP and Sanders P. Aggressive risk factor reduction study for atrial 
fibrillation and implicat ions for the outcome of ablation: the ARREST -AF cohort study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 
2014;64:2222 -31. 
11. Pathak RK, Middeldorp ME, Meredith M, Mehta AB, Mahajan R, Wong CX, Twomey D, Elliott AD, 
Kalman JM, Abhayaratna WP, Lau DH and Sanders P. Long -Term Effec t of Goal -Directed Weight Management in 
an Atrial Fibrillation Cohort: A Long -Term Follow -Up Study (LEGACY). J Am Coll Cardiol . 2015;65:2159 -69. 
12. Eberly LA, Garg L, Yang L, Markman TM, Nathan AS, Eneanya ND, Dixit S, Marchlinski FE, Groeneveld 
PW and Fr ankel DS. Racial/Ethnic and Socioeconomic Disparities in Management of Incident Paroxysmal Atrial 
Fibrillation. JAMA Netw Open . 2021;4:e210247.  
13. Aliot E, Botto GL, Crijns HJ and Kirchhof P. Quality of life in patients with atrial fibrillation: how to as sess 
it and how to improve it. Europace . 2014;16:787 -96. 
14. Spertus J, Dorian P, Bubien R, Lewis S, Godejohn D, Reynolds MR, Lakkireddy DR, Wimmer AP, 
Bhandari A and Burk C. Development and validation of the Atrial Fibrillation Effect on QualiTy -of-Life ( AFEQT) 
Questionnaire in patients with atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol . 2011;4:15 -25. 
15. Abu HO, Saczynski JS, Mehawej J, Tisminetzky M, Kiefe CI, Goldberg RJ and McManus DD. Clinically 
Meaningful Change in Quality of Life and Associated Factors Among Older Patients With Atrial Fibrillation. J Am 
Heart Assoc . 2020;9:e016651.  
16. Dorian P, Guerra PG, Kerr CR, O'Donnell SS, Crystal E, Gillis AM, Mitchell LB, Roy D, Skanes AC, Rose 
MS and Wyse DG. Validation of a new simple scale to measure s ymptoms in atrial fibrillation: the Canadian 
Cardiovascular Society Severity in Atrial Fibrillation scale. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol . 2009;2:218 -24. 
  
17. (Netzer NC, Stoohs RA, Netzer CM, Clark K, Strohl KP. Using the Berlin Questionnaire to identify patients 
at risk for the sleep apnea syndrome.  Ann Intern Med.  1999 Oct 5;131(7):485 -91).   
18. Sherbourne CD and Stewart AL. The MOS social support survey. Soc Sci Med . 1991;32:705 -14. 
19. Norman CD and Skinner HA. eHealth Literacy: Essential Skills for Consumer Health in a Networked 
World. J Med Internet Res . 2006;8:e9.  
20. Norman CD and Skinner HA. eHEALS: The eHealth Literacy Scale. J Med Internet Res . 2006 ;8:e27.  
21. Kroenke K, Strine TW, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Berry JT and Mokdad AH. The PHQ -8 as a measure of 
current depression in the general population. J Affect Disord . 2009;114:163 -73. 
22. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB and Lowe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety 
disorder: the GAD -7. Arch Intern Med . 2006;166:1092 -7. 
23. Cohen S, Kamarck T and Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc Behav . 
1983;24:385 -96. 
24. Topolski TD, LoGerfo J, Patrick DL, Williams B,  Walwick J and Patrick MB. The Rapid Assessment of 
Physical Activity (RAPA) among older adults. Prev Chronic Dis . 2006;3:A118.  
25. Bohn MJ, Babor TF and Kranzler HR. The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT): validation 
of a screening instrumen t for use in medical settings. J Stud Alcohol . 1995;56:423 -32. 
26. Saunders JB, Aasland OG, Babor TF, de la Fuente JR and Grant M. Development of the Alcohol Use 
Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT): WHO Collaborative Project on Early Detection of Persons with Harmful 
Alcohol Consumption --II. Addiction . 1993;88:791 -804. 
 
Date:  8.25.2023  
Principal Investigator: David Spragg, MD  
Application Number:  IRB00321575  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 4 Dated:   01/2021  
Page 17 of 17 
 27. Kim M. Gans PhD M, LDN,Mary Lynne Hixson MA, RD,Charles B. Eaton MD, MS,Thomas M. Lasater 
PhD. Rate Your Plate: A Dietary Assessment and Educational Tool for Blood Cholesterol Control. Nutrition in 
Clinical Care . 2001;Volume3,.  
28. Gans KM, Sundaram SG , McPhillips JB, Hixson ML, Linnan L and Carleton RA. Rate your plate: An eating 
pattern assessment and educational tool used at cholesterol screening and education programs. Journal of Nutrition 
Education and Behavior . 1993;25:25 -36. 
29. Muntner P, Shimbo  D, Carey RM, Charleston JB, Gaillard T, Misra S, Myers MG, Ogedegbe G, Schwartz 
JE, Townsend RR, Urbina EM, Viera AJ, White WB and Wright JT, Jr. Measurement of Blood Pressure in Humans: 
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association. Hyperten sion. 2019;73:e35 -e66. 
30. Koo DL, Nam H, Thomas RJ and Yun CH. Sleep Disturbances as a Risk Factor for Stroke. J Stroke . 
2018;20:12 -32. 
31. Drager LF, McEvoy RD, Barbe F, Lorenzi -Filho G, Redline S and Initiative I. Sleep Apnea and 
Cardiovascular Disease:  Lessons From Recent Trials and Need for Team Science. Circulation . 2017;136:1840 -1850.  
32. Marvel FA, Spaulding EM, Lee MA, Yang WE, Demo R, Ding J, Wang J, Xun H, Shah LM, Weng D, 
Carter J, Majmudar M, Elgin E, Sheidy J, McLin R, Flowers J, Vilarino V, L umelsky DN, Bhardwaj V, Padula WV, 
Shan R, Huynh PP, Wongvibulsin S, Leung C, Allen JK and Martin SS. Digital Health Intervention in Acute 
Myocardial Infarction. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2021;14:e007741.  
33. Spaulding EM, Marvel FA, Lee MA, Yang WE, Demo R, Wang J, Xun H, Shah L, Weng D, Fashanu OE, 
Carter J, Sheidy J, McLin R, Flowers J, Majmudar M, Elgin E, Vilarino V, Lumelsky D, Bhardwaj V, Padula W, 
Allen JK and Martin SS. Corrie Health Digital Platform for Self -Management in Secondary Prevention  After Acute 
Myocardial Infarction. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . 2019;12:e005509.  
34. Martin SS, Feldman DI, Blumenthal RS, Jones SR, Post WS, McKibben RA, Michos ED, Ndumele CE, 
Ratchford EV, Coresh J and Blaha MJ. mActive: A Randomized Clinical Trial o f an Automated mHealth 
Intervention for Physical Activity Promotion. J Am Heart Assoc . 2015;4.  
35. Silverman -Lloyd LG, Kianoush S, Blaha MJ, Sabina AB, Graham GN and Martin SS. mActive -Smoke: A 
Prospective Observational Study Using Mobile Health Tools to A ssess the Association of Physical Activity With 
Smoking Urges. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth . 2018;6:e121.  
36. Shan R, Yanek LR, Silverman -Lloyd LG, Kianoush S, Blaha MJ, German CA, Graham GN and Martin SS. 
Using Mobile Health Tools to Assess Physical Activity Guid eline Adherence and Smoking Urges: Secondary 
Analysis of mActive -Smoke. JMIR Cardio . 2020;4:e14963.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 