Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended: 2/26/08   
  
 
 
 
A trial of r adioimmun otherapy, reduced -dose external beam cranio spinal radiation 
therapy with IMRT boost, and chemot herapy for patie nts with standard -risk 
medullobl astoma  
 
THE RAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  PROTO COL 
 
 
 
Principal Investigat or: Ira Dunkel,  M.D.  
Pediatric s: Pediatrics  
639-2153 
 
Co-Princi pal Investigato r(s): Kim Kramer, M.D.  
Pediatric s: Pediatrics  
Suzanne  L. Wolden,  M.D.  
Radiation  Oncology:  Brachytherapy  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended: 2/26/08   
  
Investig ator(s): Oren Becher,  M.D.  
Pediatric s: Pediatrics  
Nai-Kong V. Cheung,  M.D., Ph.D.  
Pediatric s: Pediatrics  
Sofia  Cooper man, M.D.  
Radiology:  Neuroradiology  
Mark Edgar,  M.D.  
Pathology:  Neuropathology  
Ronald  D. Finn,  Ph.D.  
Radiology:  Radiopharmaceutical  Chemistry 
Timothy Gershon, M.D., Ph.D.  
Pediatrics:  Pediatrics  
Stephen  Gilheeney,  M.D.  
Pediatrics:  Pediatrics  
John L.  Humm,  Ph.D.  
Medical  Physics:  Clinical  Physics  
Yasmin Khakoo, M.D.  
Pediatric s: Pediatrics  
Steven  M. Larson,  M.D.  
Radiology:  Nuclear  Medicine  
Eric Lis, M.D.  
Radiology:  Neuroradiology  
David  Lyden,  M.D., Ph.D.  
Pediatric s: Pediatrics  
Marc  Rose nblum, M.D.  
Pathology:  Neurop athology  and Autopsy  
Charles  A. Sklar,  M.D.  
Pediatric s: Pediatrics  
Mark Souweidane,  M.D. 
Surgery:  Neurosurgery  
Howard T.  Thaler,  Ph.D.  
Epide miology  and Biostatistics:  Biostatistics  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended: 2/26/08   
  
Consenting Professional(s):  Oren Becher  Ira 
Dunkel  Timothy 
Gershon  
Stephen  Gilheeney 
Yasmin Khakoo 
Kim Kramer 
David  Lyden  
Mark Souweidane  
Suzanne  Wolden 
 
 
 
 
 
Collaborating Institu tion (s):  Columbia University  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center  
1275  York  Avenue  
New York, N.Y.  10021  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08   
 
A trial of r adioimmun otherapy, reduced -dose external beam cranio spinal radiation 
therapy with IMRT boost, and chemot herapy for patie nts with standard -risk 
medullobl astoma  
 
Table Of Contents  
 
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEMA  ................................................................1  
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC AIMS  ..........................................................................1  
3.0 BACKGROUND A ND RATIONA LE ...............................................................................1  
4.0 STUDY DESIGN ............................................................................................................ ....5 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC AGENTS  .......... .............................................................5  
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR PATIENT/SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  .....................................................7  
6.1 PATIENT/SUBJECT  INCLUSION CRITER IA  .....................................................7  
6.2 PATIENT/SUBJECT  EXCLUSION CRITERI A....................................................7  
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  .....................................................................................................8  
8.0 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  ........... .......................................................................8  
9.0 TREATM EN T/IN TER VEN TIO N  PLAN  ..........................................................................9  
10.0 EVALUAT ION DURING TRE ATMENT/INTERVENTION  .......................................13  
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS  .........................................................................................14  
12.0 CRITERIA  FOR THERAPEUTIC R ESPONSE/OUT  COME ASSESSMENT ..............15  
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR  REMOVAL FROM STUDY  ................................................................15  
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  .......................................................................................................... ...15 
15.0 SUBJECT REGISTRATION AND  RANDOM IZATION  PROCEDURES  .....................16  
15.1 PATIENT/SUBJECT  REGISTRATION  ..............................................................16  
15.2 RANDOM IZATION  .............................................................................................16  
16.0 DATA MANAGEM ENT ISSUES  ...................................................................................16  
16.1 QUALI TY ASSURANCE  .....................................................................................16  
17.0 PROTECT ION OF HUMAN SUB JECTS  .......................................................................17  
18.0 INFORMED CONSENT PROCEDURES  .......................................................................17  
19.0 REFER EN C E(S )..................................................... ...........................................................18  
20.0 APPENDICE(S)  
APPENDIX A: MODEL  ORD ER SHEET  FOR DAY 0 CHEMOTH ERAPY  ................22  
APPENDIX B:  SUMMARY OF T IMING OF REQUIRED OBSERVATIONS……….23  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  1  
  
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHE MA 
 
In this  pilot study,  20 patie nts with standard -risk medulloblasto ma will be treated  post- 
operatively  with intrathecal  131-I-3F8, red uced-dose external  beam  radiation  therapy 
(1800 cGy craniospinal  + primary site boost to 5400 cGy via  IMRT), and standard 
chemotherapy  (vincristine,  lomustine,  cisplatin).  
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIF IC AIMS  
 
• To assess t he feasibility  of combining  intrathecal radioimmunotherapy  with 
external  beam  radiation  therapy  and chemotherap y. 
 
• To maintain  or exceed  the current  progress ion-free survival  rate for patients  with 
standard -risk medulloblasto ma while  using  the protocol -prescribed  regimen that is 
hypothesized  to have less long -term serious morbidit y. 
 
• To evaluate  the long-term morbidities  in patients treated with this regimen, with 
specific  attention  to neuropsychological,  neuroendocrine,  audio metric and growth 
outco mes. 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
 
Brain  tumors are a significant cause  of mortality  and severe morbidity  in the pediat ric age 
range.  They  are the most common  type of solid  tumor in children  and recent  data have 
suggested  that their incide nce has exceeded  that of acute  lymphoblastic  leuke mia to 
represent  the most common  type of cancer  in children.  About 3,000 cases  are estimated to 
occur  per year in the United  States and 30,000 to  40,000 cases  are estimated to occur  per 
year world wide. 
 
Medullo blastoma and other  central nervous  system primitive neuroectoder mal tumors 
have been estimated to represent  20 to  25% of pediatric  brain  tumors. SEER  data have 
suggested  that approximately  317 cases  of medulloblasto ma are diagnosed  in patien ts 
aged 0 to 24 years  in the United  States per year, with approxi mately 218 in  the group 3 to  
24 years  old. Approxi mately 1/2 of these  patients  are thought  to have standard - risk 
disease,  leading  to an estimate of 110 patients  per year potentially  eligible for this  study. 
 
Patients  with medulloblasto ma are divided  into 3 groups for clinical  trials.  Patients  older 
than 3 years  of age  are divided  into standard -risk and high-risk groups. Standard -risk (the 
group of subjects  to be involved  in this study)  is defined  as the  absence  of metastatic 
disease  (disease  beyond  the primary site) and the lack of post -operat ive residual  tumor at 
the primary site greater  than 1.5 c m2. High-risk disease  is defined  by the  presence  of either  
or both  of those  criteria.  Patients  less than  3 years  of age  are usually  treated  with protocols  
that attempt to avoid  the use of RT due to the high risk of severe  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  2  
  
neuropsychological  damage  associated  with its use in these patients with immature 
brains.  
 
Medulloblasto mas are highly  malignant  tumors that are very unlikely  to be cured  by 
surgery alone  due to either  recurrence  at the primary site or disse mination  through  the 
cerebrospinal  fluid (CSF) to  distant  leptomeningeal  sites.  The use of post -operative  RT 
can be curative.  The historical  approach  was to use RT without  chemotherap y, with doses 
of 3600 cGy craniospinal,  with a boost  to 5400 cGy to  the posterior  fossa. Several  recent 
studies  have indicated  that this approach  produces  an approxi mate 5-year event -free 
survival  rate of 60% in  patients  with stand ard-risk disease.  Howeve r, these  doses of RT 
are associated  with a significant  risk of severe  chronic  neuropsychological  and 
neuroendocrine  morbidities,  and growth retardation,  as will  be described  below. These 
proble ms can be ascribed  both to the cranios pinal component  of the  radiation  treatment 
and also to the temporal  lobe and auditory apparatus  inadvertently  recei ving a significant 
proportion  of the  boost  dose when convent ional treatment techn iques are utilized.  An 
attempt to reduce  the craniospinal  dose to 2340 cGy without  the addition  of 
chemotherapy  in patients  with standard -risk disease  resulted an increased  risk of early 
relapse,  early  isolated  neuraxis  relap se and a strong trend  towards lower  5-year event-free 
survival  (p=0.080).1 
 
Howeve r, in single -arm studies, the addition  of che motherapy  appears  to both improve 
event -free survival  and to allow  the use of  reduced -dose craniospinal  RT. The Children 's 
Cancer  Group treated  65 children  between  3 and  10 years  of age  with non-metastatic 
medulloblasto ma with reduced -dose crani ospinal  RT (2340 cGy) and  a boost  to the 
posterior  fossa to  5580 cG y. Patients  also received  weekly  vincristine  during  the RT and 
beginning  6 weeks after  completion  of RT began  a planned  eight cycles  of vincristine, 
cisplatin  and lomustine  chemotherap y. Progression -free survival  was 86% +/ - 4% at  3 
years  and 79% +/ - 7% at  5 years.  Hearing  loss (presu mably due to both cisplatin  and RT 
to the auditory apparatus) occurred in 32%. Neuropsychological  outco me was not 
described.2 This regimen has been  explored  on a larger scale  in CCG -9961.  The study 
completed  accrual  in Dece mber 2000, but  results are not yet available.  
 
Only very  limited data exist regarding the use of even  lower  craniospinal  radiation  doses. 
Investigat ors at the Children 's Hospital  of Philadelphia  treated  10 children  between  18 and 
60 months of age  with non-metastatic  medulloblasto ma with very reduced -dose 
craniospinal  RT (1800 cGy) and  a boost  to the posterior  fossa to  5040 to  5580 cG y. 
Patie nts also received  weekly  vincri stine during  the RT and beginning  6 weeks after 
completion  of RT began  a planned  eight cycles  of vincristine,  cisplatin  and lomustine 
chemotherap y. Actuarial  survival  at over 6 years  was 70% +/ - 20%. Of the  3 patients  
whose tu mor recurred, in 1 recurre nce was si multaneously  appreciated  in the primary site 
and distantly  and 2 at distant  sites only. IQ testing  of the  survivors suggested  minimal 
neurocognitive  damage.3 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  3  
  
Neuropsychological  outco me of children  treated for medulloblasto ma was assessed by 
investigators  at St. Jude.  They  described  22 patients  who were  treated  with RT only and 
whose craniospinal  dose was randomly  assigned to 3600 versus 2340 cG y. They  noted 
that the patients  that received  the lower dose su ffered less severe  neuropsychological 
toxicity.4 
 
Poor linear  growth and  adult short stature  are extremely common  in survivors of 
medulloblasto ma and result  from a combination  of inadequate  production  of essential 
hormones such as growth hor mone and thyroxine,  and impaired  spinal  growth. In 
general,  these  abnor malities  are directly  correlated  with the dose of radiation.  Doses  
>3500  cGy to  the hypothala mus result  in growth  hormone deficiency  in 80-100% of 
subjects  within  5 years .5-7 Similar doses ad ministered  to the whole  spine  are associated 
with a 60% incidence  of pri mary hypothyroidism8 and an estimated loss in  height  in the 
range  of 5 to  9 cm.9 Limited data suggest that  reducing  the dose of craniospinal  RT from 
2340 cGy to  1800 cGy would result  in an improve ment in growth and  final height ,10 as 
well as reduce the risks of  neurocogniti ve dysfunction .11 
 
Preliminary Data  
 
Radioim munotherapy  
 
3F8 is  an IgG3 murine  monoclonal  antibody  directed  against  the ganglioside  GD2 that  is 
expressed  on many human  neural  tumors,  including  20 of 21 medulloblasto ma tumors that 
we have  tested  (unpublished  data).  The 3F8 antibody  localizes  to GD2+ tu mors in 
humans,12 mediates  tumor cell lysis in vitro via interactions with human complement and 
leukocytes,  can be conjugated  to 131-I for targeted radioimmunotherap y, and has been 
effective  intravenously  in patien ts with metastatic  neuroblasto ma.13 Intrat hecal 
administration  of radiolabeled  3F8 to  nude rats with GD2+ lepto meningeal  neoplastic 
xenografts  demonstrated  a tumor dose of  1870 cGy /mCi versus only  40 cGy/mCi  using  a 
radiolabeled  control  antibod y. Area  under  the curve  values  in tumor tissue  were  14-fold 
greater  than in blood .14 A trial of intrathecal  131-I-3F8 was perfor med in 8 cyno molgus 
monkeys  at MSKCC.  The therapy was tolerable  and therape utically  relevant  doses of 
radiation  (1900 to  8200 cGy) were  delivered  to the CSF space .15 No long -term toxicity 
was observed  with more than 4.5 years  of follow -up from treatment. 
 
Intrathecal 131-I-3F8 is  curre ntly the subje ct of a phase  I clinical trial at our instit ution 
(MSKCC 97 -021) in  patients  with GD2+ leptomeningeal  tumors.  Ten patients  (including  
4 with  medulloblasto ma or PNET), aged  1 to 61 years,  have received  22 intrathecal 
injections of 131-I-3F8. They  first received 1 to 2 mCi of intrath ecal 131-I-3F8 via 
Ommaya reservoi r, were  imaged to obtain  dosimetr y, and then 7 patients  received  a 
second  dose of 7.8 to  12 mCi .16 
 
Side effects  for the  10 patients  receiving  the dosimetry dose were  all transient and < 
grade  2 including  fever  (n=5),  headache  (n=5),  emesis (n=4),  and leg pain (n=2).  One 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  4  
  
patient  had raised  intracranial  pressure above  his baseline  for 48 hours,  associated  with a 
headache.  He was observed  without  treatment. Three  patients  had no toxicit y. 
 
Seven  of the  above  patients  received  single  therapeutic  injections  of 7.8 to  12 mCi of 
intrathe cal 131-I-3F8. P harmacokinetics,  dosimetry, imaging  and clinical evaluation  were 
carried  out in an identical  manner  and compared to that obtained  in the dosimetry doses. 
Acute  toxicities  included grade  1 or 2 feve r, headache  and emesis. One patient  with a pre- 
existing  seizure  disorder  had a generalized  seizure  4 days after treatment requiring 
treatment and hospitalization.  This patient  was found to  have sub-therapeutic  anti- 
convulsant  medications  and progressive  tumor on MRI i maging.  One patient  with pre- 
existing  communicating  hydrocephalus  was treated  with more than one therapeutic 
injection;  sympto ms of raised  intracranial  pressure occurred  after the 4th injection,  and 
required  the place ment of a ventric ulo-periton eal shunt.  No long-term toxicity  has been 
observed  in one patient  surviving  14 months.  
 
Dosimetry to CSF and  marrow  appears  favora ble: the estimated  dose r eceived  to the CSF 
was 14.9 to  56.7 cGy/mCi  (test doses) and  15 to  78.9 cGy/mCi  (therapy  doses), with  little 
intra-patient  variabi lity. Dose to  blood  and other  organs outside  the central  nervous  
system  was <  2 cGy/ mCi. Radioactivity  was detected  in the thecal  sac by 4 hours and 
over the convexity  by 24 hours. Focal  uptake  consistent  with tumor was seen  along  the 
cranios pinal axis in most patients; in the 1 patient  with a normal MRI, clearance  was 
rapid  with no focal  uptake.  There  was close  agree ment in CSF clearance  in patients who 
received  2 injections,  ranging  from 6 to 14 hours.  
 
Given  the selective  tumor uptake,  tumor dose is  expected  to be 5 to 10 fold  the CSF dose, 
and thus we hypothesize  that this agent  may have clinical  utility  in the treatment of GD2+ 
cancers  with a high-risk of lepto meningeal  disse mination  such as medulloblasto ma. Only 
minimal doses of radiation  are delivered  to the brain  and spinal  cord parenchy ma due to 
the short path  length  (~1 m m) of the  131-I isotope. This is potentially  advantageous  to 
these  patients since  parenchy mal disease  is rare. 
 
The MSKCC neurosu rgical staff reviewed  the recent institutional  experience  of placing 
Ommaya reservoirs  in patients  for the  treatment of prophylaxis  of lepto meningeal 
metastases.17 Between  January  1995 and  June 1998, O mmaya reservoirs  were  placed  in 
107 patients.  Complications  occurred  in 10 patients  (9.3%) and  included  2 infections,  5 
catheter  malpositio ns, and 3 intracra nial hemorrhages.  Two deaths  occurred secondary  to 
intracranial  hemorrhage,  but both had risk factors  that should  not apply  to our patients. 
One was receiving  anti-coagulation  therapy  for a mechanical  heart  valve and the other 
had thrombocytopenia  secondary  to other  treatment. 
 
Intensity  modulated  radiation  therapy  (IMRT) 
 
IMRT is a new technology  for the  planning  and delivery  of RT. It represents  a significant 
improvement over traditional  3-dimensional  (3D) planning.  IMRT features  sophisticated  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  5  
  
computer-optimized intensity  distributions  within  a number of radiation  beams. This is 
achieved  by using  an inverse -planning  algorithm with dose and  volume constraints  for 
every  target and critical  tissue  in the treatment field.  Penalti es are set for each  constraint 
in order  to set priorities  among the various  volumes. Treatment  is delivered  using 
dynamic multileaf  collimators  (tiny strips  of metal shielding)  whose movements 
throughout  each field during  the treatment are controlled  by a computer. The result  is a 
dramatically  higher  degree of conformality of dose to  the target and significant sparing of 
adjace nt healthy  tissues.  
 
IMRT is currently  available  in only a limited number  of centers.  There  is only 1 
publication  that we are  aware  of reporting  its use for patients  with medulloblasto ma. The 
authors  noted that the auditory  apparatus received  lower  doses of radiation  when 
compared  to historical  patients  treated  with conve ntional  techniques .18 
 
We have treated  10 patients  with newly-diagnosed  medulloblasto ma from July 1999 to 
the present  with IMRT boosts and  have shown a  significant  improve ment in dose 
distributions  for every  patient compared  to 2D and  traditional 3D plannin g. In all  cases, 
the dose co nformality to the tumor target volume is improved  while  doses to  the inner 
ears and other critical  tissues are minimized. This decrease  is expected  to result  in 
improved  long-term hearing  and a lower risk of endocrine  dysfunction  and 
neurocognitive  delay, but this has not  yet been proven.  All 10 patients  are currently  event - 
free survivors, suggesting  that the smaller boost  volume does not adversely  effect local 
control,  but follow -up has been  short (4 to  34 months,  median  20 months,  as of 5 -31-02) 
and contin ued surveillance  necessary. 
 
4.0 STUDY DESIGN  
 
This is a single -arm study  of post -operative  radioimmunotherapy  (intrathecal  131-I-3F8), 
reduced -dose craniospinal  radiation therapy  (1800 cGy), pri mary site boost  (to 5400 cGy) 
via IMRT and  standard  chemotherapy.  Statist ical stopping  rules are defined  to minimize 
the risk of excessive  failures.  Long -term neuropsychological,  neuroendocrine,  
audio metric and growth  parameters  will be closely followed  to assess lo ng-term 
morbidities  that are hypothesized  to be reduced  with this regimen.  
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC AGENTS  
 
5.1 131-I-3F8 
 
Source  and pharmacology:  Monoclonal  antibody  3F8 is  a murine  IgG3 antibody.  It is 
raised  in BALB/c  mice and specifically  recognizes  the ganglioside  GD2. For mulation  and 
stability:  3F8 is stored  as 2 mg/ml in pH 4.2 citrate  phosphate  buffer.  Vials  are stored  at - 
80 C.  
 
Route  of ad ministration:  Intrathecal.  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  6  
  
Supplier:  3F8 is produced  using  FDA  guidelines  for good laboratory  practice  within  the 
premises of Me morial Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Cente r. All lots have to pass sterilit y, 
safet y, pyrogen,  murine  viruses, and  DNA  testing  before  human  use. 131 -I-3F8 is 
prepared  by the  Radioche mistry/C yclo tron  Core  Facility  under  the supervision  of Dr. R. 
Finn.  It is approved  for hu man use via  IND BB -IND-2299.  
 
5.2 Vincristine  
 
Roue  of ad ministration:  Intravenous  
 
Supplier:  Commercially  available.  NSC-67574. 
Formulation:  Clear  liquid,  1 mg, 2 mg,  and 5 mg vials. 
Storage:  Refrigerate.  Protect from light. 
Stability:  Multiple-dose contai ners with preservatives  are stable 30 days a fter opening if 
refrigerated.  
 
5.3 Lomustine 
 
Route  of ad ministration:  Oral 
 
Supplier:  Commercially  available. NSC-79037. 
Formulation:  10 mg, 40 mg,  and 100 mg capsules. 
Storage:  Room temperature.  
5.4 Cisplatin  
 
Route  of ad ministration:  Intravenous  
 
Supplier:  Commercially  available.  NSC-119875. 
Formulation:  50 mg vials.  
Storage:  Room  temperature.  Protect  from light. 
 
Reconstitution:  Reconstitute  each vial with sterile water  to achieve  a final concentration 
of 1 mg/ml. Cisplatin  is compatible  with KC1, mannitol,  and magnesium  but NOT 
NaHCO3.  
 
Stability:  Reconstituted  solution  is stable  for 20 hours at  room  temperature.  May 
preci pitate if refrigerated  after recon stitution. Aluminum reacts  with cisplatin causing 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  7  
  
precipitate  formation and loss of potenc y. Therefore,  needles or intraven ous sets 
containing  aluminum parts that may come in contact  with the drug must not be used for 
the preparation  or ad ministration  of cisplatin.  
 
6.0 CRITERIA FOR PAT IENT/SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
6.1 PATIENT /SUBJECT INCLUSION CR ITERIA  
 
• Patients  must have histologic  proof of medulloblasto ma reviewed  by the  
Depart ment of Pathology  at the Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Cente r. 
 
• Patients  must begin  study  prescribed  therapy  within  42 days of 
neurosu rgical resection  of the  tumor 
 
• Age ≥ 3 -years -old. 
 
• Post-operative  head MRI must confirm  ≤ 1.5 cm2 of residual  tumor is 
present.  
 
• Head  and spine  MRI and  lumbar CSF cytology  must not show  any 
definitive evidence  of leptomeningeal  dissemination  (Chang  stage  M-0). 
 
• Examinations  evaluating  extra -neural  sites will not be mandated,  but any 
perfor med for clinical  indications  must be free of metastatic  disease.  
 
• No prior  RT or che motherapy  for the  medulloblasto ma is permitted.  
 
• Patients  must have adequate  CSF flow (defined  as lack  of 
compartmentalization)  on an 111-Indium  DTPA flow study. 
 
• Patients  must have adequate  organ function  as defined  by: 
 
• Hepati c: total bilirubin  < 2.0 mg/dl, AST < 3 x the upper  limit of 
normal. 
 
•  Renal : Calculated  creatinine  cleara nce or nuclear  GFR ≥ 70 
ml/min/1.73  m2. 
 
• The patient,  or for minors, a parent  or legal  guardian,  must give informed 
written  consent indicating they are aware of the investi gational nature of 
this study. 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  8  
  
6.2 PATIENT /SUBJECT EXCLUS ION CRITERIA  
 
• Unable  to start study  prescribed  therapy  within  42 days of neurosurgical 
resection of the tumor 
 
• Age less than  3 years  
 
• > 1.5 c m2 residual  tumor on post -operative  head MRI 
 
• Evidence  of lepto meningeal  disse mination  on head  or spine  MRI or CSF  
cytology  positivity 
 
• Evidence  of extra -neural  metastases  
 
• Prior radiation  therapy  or che motherapy  for the  medulloblasto ma 
 
• Inadequate  CSF flow on  111-Indium  DTPA flow study  
 
• Patients  with signs or sympto ms suggestive  of increased  intracranial 
pressure (headache,  emesis, ocular  paresis)  will not be eligible until they 
are cleared  by neurology  and/or  neurosu rgery. 
 
• Pregnancy  
 
• Total  bilirubin ≥ 2.0 mg/dl 
 
• AST ≥ 3 x the  upper  limit of nor mal 
 
• Creatinine  clearance  and GFR <  70 ml/min/1.73  m2 
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT PLAN  
 
Patients  will be offered  the opportunity  to participate  in this trial if they meet the 
eligibility  criteria. There will be no discrimination again st females or minorities.  Infor med 
consent  will be obtained  from the patient,  or if they are non-emancipated  minors, their 
parent  or legal guardian. Consent  will be obtained by an  investigator autho rized to obtain 
consent. Patients  will not receive  any payment for their  particip ation in this study. 
 
8.0 PRETREATMENT EVALUAT ION 
 
• Review  of the  pathology  by the  Mem orial Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  
Depart ment of Pathology  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  9  
  
• Post-operative  head MRI 
 
• Spine  MRI 
 
• CSF cytology  obtained  via lumbar puncture  
 
• 111-Indium  DTPA CSF flow study  
 
• Liver  function  tests:  Total bilirubin,  AST 
 
• Renal  function  tests:  Creatini ne clearance  or nuclear  GFR study  
 
• For f emales ≥ 12-years -old, pregnancy  test 
 
• All of these  pre-treatment evaluations  (other  than pathology  review)  should  have 
been perfor med ≤ 30 days before  registration  onto study  
 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN  
 
Patients  will receive  3 components  of therap y, as described  below. 
 
9.1 Intrathecal  131-I-3F8 
 
Treatment will be given  via an Ommaya  reservoir  that will be placed  by neurosu rgery if 
not already  present.  If the  patient  has a  ventriculoperitoneal  shunt,  and CSF flow study 
using  the shunt tubing  has confir med acceptable  CSF flo w, the shunt  may be used for the 
administration  of 131 -I-3F8. 
 
9.1.1  Premedications  for 131 -I-3F8 
 
The following  pre-medication  guidelines  are strongly  suggested,  but may be altered  based 
on the  clinical  judgment of the  investigators  without  being  considered  a protocol  
violation.  
 
To start about 2 weeks  prior to injection:  
 
Levetiracetam  (Keppra):  Start at 10-20 mg/kg divided  BID about  2 weeks prior  to 
injection,  after one week  increase  by 10  mg/kg.  The pills come  in 250 and  500 mg 
strength  and no liquid  preparat ion is curre ntly available. For patie nts unable to tolerate 
oral tablets,  phenytoin  may be substituted.  Taper of the  anti-convulsant  is recom mended 
(decrease  dose by about  50% 2 weeks post -injection,  then discontinue  medication  3 days 
later)  rather  than abrupt  discontinuation.  
 
To start about  5 days  prior to injection: 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  10  
  
SSKI: 7 drops daily  (to begin  5 days pre -injection  and to continue  for 2 weeks post - 
injection) 
 
Liothyronine  (Cyto mel): 25 mcg/day  if weight  less than  25 kg, 50 mcg/day  if weight 
greater  or equal  to 25 kg (to  begin 5 days pre -injection  and to continue  for 2 weeks post - 
injection) 
 
To start 1-2 days  prior to injection: 
 
 
 
 
Dexamethasone  (for those  patients not already  on a higher  dose of dexa methasone):  0.5 
mg po bid  if weight  less than  15 kg, 1 mg po bid if weight  greater  than or equal  to 15 kg 
(to begin  about  24 hours pre-injection  and to be tapered  over 1 to 2 weeks)  
 
To be started  about  1 to 2 hours before  injection:  
 
Hydroxyzine  (Vistaril): 1 mg/kg IV, then  Q 4 hours x 24 hours post -injection  
 
Aceta minophen  (Tylenol):  10 mg/kg po before  injection  and then Q4 hours x 24 hours 
post-injection 
 
Lorazepam  (Ativan):  0.05 mg/kg IV x 1 
 
Hydro morphone  (Dilaudid):  0.015 mg/kg/dose  x 1, then  PRN  
 
9.1.2  Treatment and dosimetry 
 
Patie nts will receive an intrathecal dose of 2 mCi of 131 -I-3F8 via  the Ommaya  reservoi r. 
Distrib ution throughout  the thecal  sac will be confirmed via whole  body i maging  at 
approxi mately 24 hours post -injection. Patie nts will have CSF and blood  (2 ml/sample) 
obtained  for radioactivity  levels at approxi mately 5, 15, and  30 minutes,  and 1, 2, 4, 18, 
and 44 hours post -injection.  Pharmacokinetic  data obtained  from whole  body and  SPECT 
imaging  will be used in  conjunction  with direct  counting  of CSF and  blood  samples in a 
well scintillation  counter, and combined  with MRI anato mical imaging  to estimate the 
absorbed  dose to  brain,  spinal  column,  blood  and visible  tumor nodules.  
 
About 1 week  after the initial  dose, patients  will receive  a therapeutic  dose of 10 mCi. 
They  will have the same CSF and  blood  monitoring specified  in the previous paragra ph, 
but will not have the SPECT imaging.  
 
Patie nts will be hospitalized  overnight for supporti ve care after each of the 2 131 -I-3F8 
injections.  
 
9.2 External  beam  radiation  therapy  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  11  
  
Dose:  A dose of 1800 cGy will  be delivered  to the craniospinal  axis using exter nal beam 
photons.  The posterior  fossa tu mor bed boost  will be treated  to a total dose of 5400 cGy 
(1800 cGy craniospinal  + 3600 cGy focal).  The whole  brain  dose is  calculated  at 
midplane  while  the spine dose is  calculated  at the avera ge anterior  cord depth.  The IMRT 
boost  will be prescribed  to the isodose line  that includes  at least 95% of the  plannin g 
target volume  (PTV).  
 
Radiation  should  begin  as soon as possible  after the patient  has recovered  from surgery 
and intrathecal  131-I-3F8. Treatment will be given accor ding to standard fractionation  at 
180 cGy per  day, 5 days per  week.  All fields  shall be treated  daily. Days missed due to 
holidays  or for other  unavoidable  reasons  are acceptable  but should  be kept to a 
minimum. Holding  radiation  treatments is allowed  at the discretion  of the  radiation 
oncologist,  but interruptions  in radiation  therapy  should  be avoided  whenever  possible. 
There  are no minimum blood  count  require ments for radiation  therapy  and radiation 
therapy  may be given  even if chemotherapy  is held. 
 
Treatment volume: Radiation  will be delivered  to the entire  craniospi nal axis with an 
inferior  border 1 to 2 cm  below  the thecal sack. Care  will be taken  to include  the 
cribriform  plate while  shielding the lenses  of the eyes.  The clinical  target volume (CTV) 
for the  boost  to the posterior  fossa tumor  bed will include  the postoperative  cavity  and any  
residual  disease  plus a 1 cm  margin in all dimensions.  The only exception is that the CTV  
should  not extend  into bones (skull  base,  calvariu m, vertebral  bodies)  and thus the margin 
may be less than  1 cm  in these  regions. The PTV  is defined  as the  CTV  plus a 0.5 cm  
margin in all dimensions. The PTV  may extend into bones.  The entire  posterior  fossa is  
NOT  intended  for treat ment in the boost  field.  
 
Technique:  Patie nts will receive  craniospinal  radiation  using  standard  techniques.  They 
will be simulated in the prone  position  using  immobiliz ation casts  as well as ane sthesia 
when neces sary. A treatment planning  CT scan will be performed and images will be 
fused with  a diagnostic  MRI scan  for better  definition  of anato my. The brain  will be 
treated  with lateral  or lateral  oblique  fields  (depending  upon t he technique  chosen  for lens 
sparin g) matched  to posterior  spine  field(s). Appropriate gantry and collimator  angles will 
be calculated to preve nt overlap ping fields. There  will not be a gap betw een the cranial and 
spine  fields  but the match line will be shifted 1 cm  half way throu gh treatment, at 900 cG y. 
 
Inten sity modulated  radiation  thera py will be used for focal  treatment of the  tumor bed 
boost.  The number of fields  and orientation  of bea ms will be deter mined on an  individual 
basis.  The general  goals  of the  optimization  algorithm  are to maximize coverage  of the 
target volume  (PTV  as defined  above)  while  minimizing heterogeneity  within  the target 
and sparing  the cochlea to the extent  possible. The maximum dose to  any point in the 
brainstem  must not exceed  6000 cGy and  the maximum dose to  any point in the cord must 
not exceed  5000 cGy in  the composite  plan (including  the craniospinal  portion  of 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  12  
  
treatment). Dose to  the hypothala mic-pituitary  axis should  also be constrained  as much as 
possible.  The parotid  glands  and oral cavity should  be contoured  and the cumulative  
mean dose to  each of these struct ures should  not exceed  2600 cGy. 
 
All fields  will be treated  using  6MV  photons.  Initial and weekly portal  films will be taken 
to ensure  correct  positioning.  
 
Evaluation  on treat ment: Patients  will be evalu ated by a radiation  oncolo gist at least once 
per week.  Complete blood  counts  will be drawn about  weekl y. 
 
9.3 Chemotherapy  
 
Starting  at about  the onset  of exter nal beam  RT, patients will receive  8 weekly  doses of 
vincristine  (1.5 mg/m2/dose,  maximum 2 mg). 
 
Starting  about  6 weeks after  completion  of the  RT (about  4 weeks after  the 8th dose of 
vincristine  noted above),  we will  start 8 planned cycles  of vincristine, cisplatin, and 
lomustine  chemotherap y. Each  cycle  consi sts of: 
 
Vincristine  (1.5 mg/m2/dose,  maximum 2 mg) IV push on days 0, 7, &  14. 
 
Cisplatin  (75 mg/m2/dose)  IV over about  6 hours on day  0 with  mannitol  and hydration.  A 
sample order  set is included  as an  appendix.  
 
Lomustine (75 mg/m2/dose)  po on day 0. Becau se the capsules  only are availa ble in 10, 
40, and  100 mg  doses, the  actual  dose of lomustine  will be rounded  off to the closest 
possible  dose.  
 
Cycles  are intended  to be repeated  about every  6 weeks depending  on the  ANC and 
platelet  count (see below). The post-RT chemotherapy  may be given  at another  center  if 
more  convenient  for the  patient  as long  as adequate  documentation  is sent to the MSKCC 
PI in a timely fashion.  
 
9.4 Chemotherapy  dose modification  rules:  
 
Hematopoietic  toxicity:  If the ANC is  < 750 or platelet  count  < 75,000, a  cycle  should  not 
be started.  If the  ANC is  ≥ 750, but  < 1000, or the  platelet  count  is ≥ 75,000 but  < 
100,000, the  cycle  may start,  but the lomustine  dose will  be reduced  by 50%.  
 
Neurotoxicity:  For vincristine  neurotoxicity  grade  3 or 4 and/or  for vincristine 
neuropathy:  motor  grade  2 to 4: hold vincristine.  When  toxicity  resolves to less t han 
grade  3 (less than  grade  2 for vincristine  neuropathy:  motor),  vincristine  may be restarted 
at 50% dose (0.75 mg/m2). If the  neurotoxicity  completely  resolves,  increase  to full 
dosage  may be considered.  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  13  
  
Hepatotoxicity:  If total  bilirubin  is > 1.9 mg/dl, do not  administer  vincristine  dose. If total 
bilirubin  is 1.5 to 1.9 mg/dl, administer  vincristine  at 1 mg/m2 (1.5 mg maximum). 
 
Nephrotoxicity:  If the  creatinine  clearance  or GFR are  > 60 ml/minute/1.73  m2, 
administer  the full dose. If the  creatinine  clearance  or GFR are  30-60 ml/minute/1.73  m2, 
administer  50% of the dose (37.5 mg/ m2). If the creatinine  clearance  or GFR are  < 30 
ml/minute/1.73  m2, do not  administer  cisplatin.  
 
Ototoxi city: For a  decrease in auditory acuity  of (1) ≥ 30 decibels  at 4000 to  8000 Hz or 
(2) ≥ 20 decibels  at 500 to  3000 Hz or (3) gra de 3 ototoxicity  (subje ctive loss correctable 
with hearing aid), a 50% reduction  in cisplatin  dosage will be made. For grade  4 
ototoxicity  (deafness not correctable), cisplatin  will be disco ntinued  unless follow -up 
audiogram  shows an  improve ment in hearing  function.  
 
9.5 Supportive  care guidelines  
 
Clinical  judgment may be used to  alter the following  guidelines  without  being  a protocol 
violation.  
 
Patients  should  receive  PCP prophylaxis.  
 
Filgrastim  (G-CSF) is  allowed  to be used acc ording  to clinical  judgment. 
 
10.0 EVALUATION DUR ING TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
 
A tabular  summary  of the  timing of the  mandated  observations  is included  as an  appendix 
to the protocol.  
 
Dosimetry studies  during  phase  1 of the  protocol  (see section  9.1). 
 
CBC  will be obtained  about weekly  during  external  beam  radiation  therap y. 
 
CBC,  total bilirubin,  AST, creatinine  clearance  or GFR, and  audiogra ms will be obtained 
at baseline  and prior to each cycle  of cisplati n-containing  chemotherap y. 
 
Serum  for anti -idiotype testing  (order as Rese arch test: 1 red  top tube to be sent to Dr. 
Cheung ’s laborator y, Z-1431)  will be obtained about  every  6 months.  
 
Neuropsychological  battery  will be perfor med at “baseline”,  and at about  1 year  and 4 
years  post- completion  of treat ment. The “baseline”  testing  may be perfor med up to  4 
months  post-completion  of external  beam radiati on therap y. 
 
The tests in the assessment  battery  are presented  in Table 1 below  for parents  and 
children  by age  and by function al domain assessed.  The attending  neuropsychologist  may 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  14  
  
make necessary  modifications  to the battery  as indicated  for an  individual  patient ’s 
special  circu mstances  without  it being considered  a protocol  violation.  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  15  
  
 
 
 
 
Table  1. Neuropsycholog ical and Behavioral  Battery  
Child’s  Age 
 
Test > 3 & 
≤ 4 yrs >4 & 
≤ 6 yrs > 6 & 
≤ 12 yrs > 12 & 
≤ 16 yrs > 16 yrs 
Children  
Intelligence  
WPPSI -III (Vocabular y, Block  Design)  (15 min) X X    
WISC -IV (Vocabular y, Block  Design)  (15 min)   X X  
WAIS -III (Vocabular y, Block  Design)  (15 min)     X 
Processing  Speed/Attention  
WPPSI -III (Symbol Search,  Coding)  (10 min) X X    
WISC -IV (Symbol Search,  Coding)  (10 min)   X X  
WAIS -III (Symbol Search, Coding)  (10 min)     X 
Memory 
NEPSY  (Story  Memory) (5 min) X (3-5 yrs)    
CMS  (15 min)  X (≥ 5 yrs)  
CVLT -C (15 min)  X (≥ 5 yrs)  
WISC -IV (Digit Span)  (5 min)   X X  
WAIS -III (Digit Span)  (5 min)     X 
WMS -III and CVLT -II (20 min)     X 
Parents  
Attention  and Behavior/S oc ia l/E motiona l  Function  
BASC -II (20 min) X 
Executive  Function  
BRIEF (5 min) X X X X X 
Quality  of Life 
PedsQL  4.0 (Generic  Version)  X X X X X 
 
 
Index  of Test Abbreviations  
WPPSI -III Wechsler  Preschool  and Primary Scale  of Intelligence  – 3rd Edition 
WISC -IV Wechsler  Intellige nce Scales  for Children  – 4th Edition 
WAIS -III Wechsler  Adult Intelligen ce Scales  – 3rd Edition  
NEPSY  NEPSY:  A Developmental  Neurops ychological  Assess ment 
CMS  Children ’s Memory Scale  
CVLT -C California  Verbal  Learning  Test – Child ren’s Version  
WMS -III Wechsler  Memory Scale  – 3rd Edition 
CVLT -II California  Verbal  Learning  Test – 2nd Edition  
BASC -II Behavior  Assessment  System  for Children  – 2nd Edition 
BRIEF  Behavior  Rating  Inventory of Executive  Function  Scales 
PedsQL  4.0 Pediatric  Quali ty of Life Invento ry Version  4 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  16  
  
Neuropsychological  Battery  
 
As indicated  in Table 1 above,  the tests that are administered  depend  on the  child’s age at 
the time of the assess ment. Procedural  information for the  tests in the neuropsychological 
and behavioral  battery  is provided  by age  group in  Appendix  II. General  information about  
each of the measures  in the Neuropsychol ogical and Behavioral  Battery  is 
provided  below. 
 
Wechsler  Preschool  and Primary Scale  of Intelli gence – 3rd Edition  (WPPSI -III) 
 
The WPPSI-III is a test for asse ssment of intelle ctual function  in individuals greater than 
2 years  of age  but less than  7 years  of age.  Four subtests  from this measure  will be used:  
1. Vocabula ry will be utilized  to assess verbal  intellectual function; 2. Block Design will 
be utilized  to assess no nverbal  intellectu al function;  3. Sy mbol Search  and 4. Coding  will 
be used to  assess processing  speed.  Reliability  for this  measure has been  reported  to be 
between  0.83 and  0.95. Criterion  and discri minant validity  have been established  for this 
measure.  
 
Wechsler  Intelligence  Scales  for Children  – 4th Edition  (WISC-IV) 
 
The WISC-IV is a test for assess ment of int ellectual  function  in individuals  7-16 years  of 
age. Five subtests  from this measure  will be used: 1. Vocabulary  will be utilized  to assess 
verbal  intellectu al function;  2. Block  Design will  be utilized  to assess nonverbal 
intellectual functio n; 3. Sy mbol Search and 4. Coding  will be used to assess proces sing 
speed;  and 5. Digit  Span will  be used to assess short-term memory. Relia bility has been 
reported  between  0.79 and  0.97 for this  measure.  Construct  validity  has been  established 
for this  measure.  
 
Wechsler  Adult Intelligence Scales – 3rd Edition  (WAIS-III) 
 
The WAIS-III is a test for asse ssment of intellect ual function  in individ uals greater  than 
16 years  of age. Five subtests  from this measure  will be used: 1. Vocabulary  will be 
utilized  to assess ver bal intellect ual functio n; 2. Block  Design will  be utilized  to assess 
nonverbal  intellect ual function; 3. Symbol  Search  and 4. Coding  will be used to assess 
proces sing speed;  and 5. Digit  Span will  be used to assess short-term memory. Very good 
reliability  as well as co ncurre nt and criterion validity  have been establi shed for this 
measure.  
 
NEPS Y: A Develop mental Neuropsych olo gical  Assess ment 
 
The NEPSY  is a test for assess ment of a wide range  of children ’s neuropsychological 
function.  One subte st, Story Memory, will be utilized  for asse ssing narrati ve memory  in 
children  3 to 5 years  of age.  Relia bility of this measure  has been reported  to be between  
0.77 and  0.85.  Validity  has also  been established  for this  measure.  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  17  
  
 
 
Childre n’s Memory Scale  (CMS)  
 
The CMS is  a test to assess verbal  and visual  memory  in individuals  5-16 years  of age. 
The following  subtests  will be utilized: Story Memory, Story Memory Recall,  Faces, 
Faces  Recall,  Dot Location,  and Dot Location  Recall. Relia bility and validity have been 
established  for this  measure. 
 
California  Verbal Learning  Test – Child  (CVLT-C) or Adult  2nd Edition  (CVLT-II) 
 
The CVLT-C and CVLT-II involve  verbally  presenting  a list learning task over the course 
of 5 trials.  The test measures  multiple  aspects of how verbal  learning  occurs, or fails to 
occur, as well as the  amount of verbal  material learned.  The CVLT-C is for individuals  5- 
16 years  of age  while  the CVLT-II is for individ uals older than 16 years  of age. Test-retest 
reliability  of this measure  has been  reported  to be between  0.80 and  0.84.  
 
Wechsler  Memory Scale  – 3rd Editi on (WMS-III) 
 
The WMS-III is a test to assess v erbal and visual memory in individ uals greater  than 16 
years  of age. The following  subtests  will be utilized: Logic al Memory I, Logical  Memory 
II, Faces  I, Faces II, and  Spati al Span. Inter nal consiste ncy reliability  has been reported to 
be above  0.70 for this  measure.  Construct,  conve rgent, and discri minant validity  have been 
established  for this  measure.  
 
Behavior  Assess ment System  for Children  – 2nd Edition  (BASC -II) 
 
The BASC -II describes  the behaviors,  thoughts,  and emotions  of children  and adoles cents. 
The parent  rating scale will be utilized for individuals  older than 2 years  of age.  The 
questionnaire  yields  composite and scale scores in  the domains of externalizing, 
internalizin g, school,  and other  problems as well as adaptive  skills and behavioral 
symptoms. Internal  consistency  reliability  has been  reported  to be between  0.80 and  0.95, 
test-retest  reliability  between  0.72 to  0.92, and  interrater  reliability  between  0.53 and  
0.86. Content  and construct  validity  have been established  for this  measure. 
Behavior  Rating  Inventory  of Exec utive Function  Scales  (BRIEF)  
The 86-item parent -report version of the BRIEF  will be used to assess executive  function 
in individuals  6 years  of age  and older. This pertains  to the following  functional  areas: 
inhibition  and shifting  of attention,  emotional  control,  initiation,  working memory, 
planning,  organization  and self-monitoring.  Internal consistency  of the  BRIEF  has been 
reported  from 0.80 to  0.98 and  test-retest  reliability has been  reported  between  0.76 and  
0.85.  The preschool  version of the  question naire will be utilized  for individuals  younger 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  18  
  
than 6 years  of age.  Constru ct, content,  conve rgent, and discri minant validity  have also 
been established  for this  measure.  
 
 
 
 
Pediatric  Quality  of Life  Inventory  Version  4 (PedsQL  4.0) 
 
The PedsQL  4.0 is  a modular  approach  to measuring  health -related  quality  of life  in 
healthy  children  and adolesce nts as well  as in those with acute and chronic health 
conditions.  The Generic  Version  consists  of 23 ite ms, with parent -report  for ages  2-4, 5-7, 
8-12, and  13-18. The questionnaire  yields  domain scores for Physical,  Emotional,  Social, 
and School  Functioning  as well  as summary  scores for  Total, Physical  Health,  and 
Psychosoci al Health.  Reliability  and validity have been established  for this  measure.  
 
Neuroendocrine  assessment perfor med at baseline will include standing and sitting  
height,  Tanner  staging  of pubert y, free thyroxine,  TSH, and  bone age x-ray. For patients  > 
12-years -old or who have  ≥ Tanner  2 pubert y, LH/FSH, and  testosterone  or estradi ol will 
be asses sed. Follow -up examinations  will be perfor med until 5 years  post-diagnosis  and 
will consist of standing  and sitting  height,  Tanner  staging, free thyro xine, and TSH every  
6 months.  Growth hormone  stimulation  testing  will be performed if yearly  growth 
velocity  post-treatment is < 4cm per year or at 2 years  post-completion of all therapy, 
whichever  occurs  first. Bone  age x-ray, and LH/FSH, and  testosterone  or estradiol  for 
patients  > 12 years  or who have  ≥ Tanner  2 pubert y, will be perfor med annuall y. 
 
Assess ment of tumor status  via brain  MRI will  be perfor med about 4 weeks after 
completing  RT (pre-cycle  1 che motherapy),  then about  every  3 months while  on therapy 
(prior to cycles 3, 5, and  7). After completion  of therap y, brain MRI scans  will be 
perfor med about every  3 months  for 1 yea r, then every  6 months  for 2 years,  then every  
12 months  for 1 yea r. Total spine  MRI scans will  be perfor med at about  1 yea r, 2 years, 
and 3 years  post-completion  of therap y. Subsequent  scans will  be perfor med at the 
clinician 's discretion  and are not mandated  by this  protocol,  but brain  MRI scans are 
recom mended  to be done about  annuall y. 
 
Mandated  evaluations  including  lab work, audiogra ms, and MRI scans may be perfor med 
at other  (non-MSKCC) centers  if deemed clinically  indicated  by an  investigato r. Outside 
MRI scans should  be submitted to PACS, and  reports  submitted to medical  records, as 
soon as possible.  
 
11.0 TOXICIT IES/SIDE EFFECTS  
 
Toxicities  will be assessed via the NCI toxi city criteria.  All toxicities  will be recorded in 
CRDB until  30 days after  the last dose of 13 1-I-3F8. Subsequentl y, only toxicities  greater 
than or eq ual to grade 3 will  be recorded in CRDB.  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  19  
  
The most common  side effects  expected  are alopecia  (likely),  nausea  and vomiting due to 
RT and/or  chemotherapy  (likely),  myelosuppression  (blood  product  transfusions and need 
for hospitalization  for fever  and neutropen ia both possible),  ototoxicity  (likely), 
nephrotoxicity  (possible),  infertility  (possible),  and second  malignancies  due to RT and/or 
chemotherapy  (possible).  Hospitalizations  for therapy  administration,  fever  and 
neutropenia,  central  venous cathete r-associated  bactere mia, possible  septice mia, 
vomiting, or dehydration  will not be conside red serious  adverse events  (SAE) and  will 
not be reported  to the IRB or FDA. Non -life threatening  grade 3 and  4 toxicities  clearly 
due to the external  beam  radiation  therapy  and/or  chemotherapy  will not be reported  as 
SAE’s. Howeve r, life-threatening infections or other  life-threatening  side effects will be 
conside red SAE's and  will be promptly  report ed. 
 
Possible  risks inclu de the possibility of unexpected  side-effects  from the addition  of 
radioimmunotherapy  to external  beam  radiation  therapy  and chemotherapy,  and the 
possibility  of increased  failures from the reduced cranios pinal radiation  dose and  reduced 
boost  volume via IMRT.  
 
11.1 131-I-3F8 
 
For patients  who received  one test dose and  one therape utic dose on MSKCC protocol  
97-21, no grade  3 or 4 side  effects  were  seen at dose level  1, the  dose to  be used in  this 
study. Among the  first 7 patients,  acute  side effects  seen included low-grade  fever  in 2, 
headache  in 2, and  emesis in 1. Two patients  had no side  effects.  One patient  had elevated 
opening  CSF pressure that  remained  elevated  for 36 to  48 hours post -injection  of the  test 
dose.16 He was observed  without  any intervention  and complications  ensued.  
 
11.2 Radiation  therapy  
 
Acute  toxicities:  Nausea  with or without  emesis is an anticipated  side-effect and may be 
treated  with antiemetic medications.  Fatigue  and a decrease  in all blood  counts  are 
expected.  Patients  generally  have transient complete alopecia and may have permanent 
epilation  in some regions.  Skin erythe ma is expected  but is rarely  severe  when IM RT is 
used.  Temporary  xerosto mia and dysphagia  as well as diarrhea  may occur. 
 
Late effects:  The goal of this  study  is to reduce the incidence  and severity  of late  effects 
of radiation  therapy  by reducing  the dose of exter nal beam  radiation  and by treating  a 
focal  boost  volume using  IMRT. Common  late effects  of radiation  for medulloblasto ma 
include  neurocognitive  dysfunction,  growth i mpairment, hearing  loss, and  endocrine 
dysfunction  (hypothalamic/pituitar y, thyroid,  and gonadal).  Radiation  dose to  the gonads 
may increase  the risk of infertilit y, especially  in girls. Rare  but severe  late effects  may 
include  secondary  malignancies  (approxi mately 5%) and  necrosis  of central  nervous 
system  tissue, including brainstem  and spinal  cord (approxi mately 1-2%).  
 
11.3 Vincristine  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  20  
  
Neuro muscular  effects, periph eral neuropath y, jaw pain, abdominal pain, mucositis, 
nausea  and vomiting, hypersens itivity, urinary  retention,  optic atrophy  (rare),  blindness 
(rare),  constipation,  loss of deep  tendon  reflexes,  foot and wrist drop, paresthesia, 
alopecia,  convulsion  (rare).  Hyponatre mia (SIADH). Severe  soft tissue  damage if 
extra vasate d. Vincristine  is very irritat ing and must not be given  intramuscularl y, 
subcutaneo usly or intrathecally. Intrathecal  administration  of vincristine  almost  always 
has resulted  in death.  
 
11.4 Lomustine  
 
Myelosuppression.  Anorexia,  nausea and vomiting, mucosal  ulceration.  Alopecia. 
Transie nt liver function  abnor malities. Pulmonary  infiltrate  and fibrosis. Decreased  renal 
size, progressive  azote mia, kidney  failure.  
 
11.5 Cisplatin  
 
Myelosuppression. Severe  nausea  and vomiting. Peripheral  neuropath y, seizures,  and 
high frequency  hearing  loss. Abnormalities  in serum  creatinine  and creatine  clearance, 
renal  tubular  necrosis,  proteinuria,  hypocalce mia, hypomag nese mia. Anaphylactic 
hypersensitivity  (tachycardia,  wheezing,  and hypotension).  Optic  neuritis,  papilledema. 
Transie nt liver function  abnor malities. 
 
12.0 CRITERIA FOR THERAPEUT IC RESPONSE/OUT COME ASSESSMENT  
 
The study’s stopping  rule (section  14.0) refers  to failures.  Failures  are defined  as 
unequivocal  tumor progression or treat ment-associated  death.  Unequivocal  tumor 
progression may be deter mined via radiological  studies  (head  or spine  MRI) reviewed  by 
the study  radiologi st or CSF cytology  positi vity reviewed  by the  study  pathologist.  If 
radiological  studies  suggest possible,  but not unequivocal,  progression, biopsy  should  be 
strongly  considered.  
 
13.0 CRITERIA FOR RE MOVAL FROM STUDY  
 
Patients  will be removed from the study  if grade 4 toxicity  due to the test dose of 131-I- 
3F8 occurs,  tumor recurs  or progresses post -external  beam  radiation  therapy,  if the 
patient is significantly  non-compliant  with the treatment plan, if they withdraw consent, 
or in the event  of death.  
 
14.0 BIOSTAT ISTICS  
 
A total of 20 patients will be enrolled on this  pilot study. We have recently  seen 3 to 4 
patients per year potentially  eligible for this  study  at MSKCC, but  it is anticipated  that the 
unique  approach  proposed in  this protocol  will allow  accrual  to be approxi mately 6 
patients  per year. 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  21  
  
Children  with standard -risk medulloblasto ma have been reported  to achieve  3-year 
progression -free survival  of 86%. Of those  who failed,  half failed within the first 2 years 
of diagnosis .2 CCG -9961 expanded  the approach  to a larger group of patients,  but 
outco me data are not yet available.  If they  become available  during the conduct  of this 
trial, the statistical  considera tions described  in this section  will be revised  if necessar y. 
 
We will stop the trial if 6 or more patients  fail before  3 years.  The likelih ood of stopping 
the trial is only 7% if  the true 3-yr PFS is  comparable  to the control  data (85%), and 
increases  to 23% if  the true PFS is  75% and to 76% if  the true 3-yr PFS is  only 65%.  
 
Neuropsyc hological  test results will be reported  in tabular  format for each  evaluation 
time (baseline,  and annual post-treatment), using  means and standard  deviations  or 
medians  and ranges,  as appropri ate. They  will be reported  both as raw sc ores and  as 
age/se x-adjusted "z-scores" and  tracked  for changes  over time relative  to baseline.  Thus, 
given  the relatively  small sample size of 20  patients,  the analysis  of these  scores for 
evidence  of neuroto xicity, or lack  thereof, will primarily be descri ptive. 
 
Should  the results  of this  trial be encouraging,  future  possibilities  would include  use of this 
strategy  on a larger scale  though  the Children 's Oncology  Group, and/or  additional 
institutional  study  of further  decrease  of the  craniospinal  RT dose, possibly  in conjunction 
with the use of an  increa sed radioimmunotherapy  dose.  
 
15.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT R EGISTRAT ION AND RANDOM IZATION 
PROCEDURES  
 
15.1   RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION  
The following  person(s) can  obtain  informed consent: 
Oren Becher,  MD 
Ira Dunkel,  MD 
Timothy Gershon, MD, PhD 
Stephen  Gilheeney,  MD, MMS 
Yasmin Khakoo, MD  
Kim Kramer, MD 
David  Lyden,  MD 
Mark Souweidane,  MD 
Suzanne  Wolden, MD 
 
Confi rm in the electro nic medical  record  that the patient has rec eived the Notice  of 
Privacy  Practice.  This must be obtained  before the eligibility  confir mation and obtaining 
of the  research  informed consent.  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  22  
  
Confirm eligibility  as defined in the section  entitled  Crite ria for Patient/ Subject  
Eligibility. 
 
Obtain  written  informed consent,  by following  procedures  defined  in section  entitled  
Infor med Consent  Procedures.  
 
All particpants  must be registered  through  the Protocol  Participant  Registration  (PPR) 
Office  at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center.  PPR is  available  Monday through 
Friday  from 8:30am  - 5:30pm  at (646)  735-8000. The  PPR fax  numbers are (646) 735 - 
0008 and  (646) 735 -0003.  Registrations  can be phoned  in or faxed.  The completed 
signature  page of the  informed consent  form, the completed  signature  page of the 
Research  Authorization  and a completed  Eligibility  Checklist  must be faxed  to PPR.  
 
During the  registration  process r egistering  individuals  will be required  to answer specific 
eligibility  questions  and provide  the following  information:  
 
Registering  Individual  [Last,  First Name] 
Notice  of Privacy  Status  [Yes, No, N /A] 
Research  Authorization  [Date] 
MSKCC IRB  Protocol#  
Attending  of Record  (if applica ble)  [Last,  First Name] 
Consenting  Professional  [Last,  First Name] 
Infor med Consent  Date  
Participant 's Full Name [Last,  First Name] 
Participa nt MRN  
 
 
 
15.2 RANDOMI ZATION  
 
Not appli cable. 
 
16.0 DATA MANAGEMENT ISSUES  
 
A Research  Study  Assistant  (RSA) will  be assigned to the study. His or her 
responsibilities  will include  data collection,  abstraction  and entry  into CRDB, monitoring 
of co mpliance,  and data reporting.  
 
16.1 QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
Registration  reports  will be generated  by the  RSA on a  regular  basis to  monitor 
patient  accruals  and completeness  of the  registration  data.  Routine  data quality 
reports  will be generated  to assess missing  data and inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  23  
  
and extent and accur acy of evaluati ons and follow-up will be monitored 
periodically  throughout  the study  period.  
 
17.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
Most patie nts on this  study will be children,  adolescents,  and young adults,  due to the 
nature  of this  tumor type.  Patients  of both  sexes and  all ethnic  backgrounds  are eligible 
for the  study. Particip ation will be voluntary.  Potential benefits include comparable 
event -free survival  with hypothesized  decreased  risk of long -term side effects  
(neuropsychological,  neuroendocrine,  audio metric, growth). Alternati ves include  external 
beam  radiation  therapy  alone  (3600 cGy cra niospinal  with poste rior fossa boost)  or 
reduced -dose radiation  therapy  (2340 cranios pinal with posterior  fossa b oost) with  the 
same chemotherapy  that will be prescribed  in this study.  
 
Patients  are responsible  for all  costs of their  care including  (but not limited to) physician 
visits,  hospitalizations,  medications  (exce pt for the  3F8 antibody),  MRI scans, and 
laboratory  work (except  for dosi metry studies).  
 
Patient  confidentiality  will be protected,  but records  may be reviewed  by appropriate  staff 
of the  Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  or the  Food and  Drug Ad ministration 
(FDA).  
 
17.1 Privacy  
 
It is the responsibility  of the Rese arch Staff to ensure  that Memorial  Sloan -Kettering 
Cancer  Center  has on file  a written  ackno wledgment of receipt  by the subject of the 
Center’s  Notice  of Privacy  Practices.  If the  subject  has not  already  done so, he/she  must 
sign such an  acknowledg ment before  participating  in this study.  
 
MSKCC’s Privacy  Office  may allow  the use and  disclosure  of protected  health 
information pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form. The use and 
disclosure of prote cted health  information will be limited to the individuals  described in  
the Research  Authorization  form. A Resea rch Authorization  form must be completed by 
the Principal Investigator and approved  by the  IRB and Privacy  Board.  
17.2 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting  
 
Any SAE must  be reported  to the IRB as soon as possible  but no later  than 5 calendar 
days. The IRB requires  a Clinical  Research  Database  (CRDB) AE report  to be delivered  
to the Instit utional SAE Manager  (307 East  63rd Street,  1st Floor) containing  the following  
information:  
Fields  populated  from the CRD B: 
• Subject’s  name (generate  the report  with only initials if it will be sent outside  of 
MSKCC)  
• Medical  record  number 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  24  
  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number  and title 
 
Data  needing  to be entered:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• Relationship  of the  adverse  event  to the treatment (drug, device,  or intervention)  
• If the  AE was expected  
• The severity  of the  AE 
• The intervention 
• Detailed  text that includes the following informatio n: 
o A explanation  of how the  AE was handled  
o A description  of the  subject 's condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains on the  study  
o If an amendment will need to be made to the protocol and/or consent  form 
The PI’s si gnature  and the date it was s igned are required  on the  completed  report. 
For IND/IDE protocols:  
The CRDB AE report  should  be completed  as above  and the FDA assigned  IND/IDE  
number written  at the top of the report. The report will be forwarded  to the FDA by the  
Institutional  SAE Manager  through  the IND Office.  
 
18.0 INFORMED CONSENT PROCEDURES  
 
All patients  (or for unemancipated  minors,  their parents  or guardians)  will be required  to 
sign an IRB-approved  form documenting  informed consent.  The consent  form is included 
as an  appendix  to this protocol.  It is written  in layman's language  and includes  
 
The nature  and purpose of this  study,  its objectives  and possible  benefits  
 
The length  of the  study  and follow -up required  
 
Risks or discomforts  involved  
 
Alternatives  to the proposed study  
 
The names of the  investigators  responsible  for the  study  
 
The patient 's rights  to refuse  partici pation and to withd raw from the study  
 
A state ment that the patient 's confidenti ality will be maintained  
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  25  
  
18.1 Research  authorization  
 
Procedures  for obtaining  Research  Authorization:  Before  any protocol -specific 
procedu res are carried out, investigators and/or design ated staff will fully explain  the 
details  of the  protocol,  study  procedures,  and the aspects  of patient  privacy  concerning 
research  specific  information.  In ad dition to signing the IRB Informed Consent,  all 
patients  must sign the Research  Authorization  component  of the  informed consent  form. 
The Research  Authorization  requires a separate signature  from the patient. The original 
signed  documents will become part of the patient’s medical  record,  and each patient  will 
receive  a copy of the  signed  documents. 
 
19.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Thomas PRM, Deutsch  M, Kepner  JL, et  al. Low-stage  medulloblasto ma: final 
analysis  of trial  comparing  standard -dose with reduced -dose neuraxis  irradiation.  J Clin 
Oncol  2000;  18:3004 -3011. 
 
2. Packer  RJ, Goldwein  J, Nicholson  HS, et  al. Treatment of children  with 
medulloblasto mas with reduced -dose craniospinal  radiation  therapy  and adjuvant 
chemotherapy:  a Children 's Cancer  Group stud y. J Clin  Oncol  1999;  17:2127 -2136.  
 
3. Goldwein  JW, Radcli ffe J, Johnson J, et  al. Updated  results  of a pilot study  of low dose 
craniospinal  irradiation  plus chemotherapy  for children  under  five with cerebellar pri mitive 
neuroecto dermal  tumors (medullo blastoma). Int J Radiat  Oncol Biol Phys 1996;  
34:899 -904. 
 
4. Mulhern  RK, Kepner  JL, Thomas PR, et  al. Neuropsychologic  functioning  of survivors 
of childhood  medulloblasto ma rando mized to receive  conventional  or reduced -dose 
craniospinal  irradiation:  a Pediatric  Oncology  Group stud y. J Clin  Oncol  1998;  16:1723 - 
1728.  
 
5. Clayton  PE, Shalet  SM. Dose dependency  of time of on set of radiation -induced  growth 
hormone deficienc y. J Pediatr  1991;  118:226 -228. 
 
6. Oberfield  SE, Sklar  C, Allen  J, et al. Thyroid  and gonadal  function  and growth of long - 
term survivors of medullob lasto ma/PN E T. In: Green  DM, D'Angio GJ, editors.  Late 
Effects  of Treatment for Childhood  Cance r. New  York: Wiley-Liss, 1992:55 -62. 
 
7. Sklar  CA, Constine  LS. Chronic  neuroendocr inological  sequelae  of radiation  therap y. 
Int J Radiat  Oncol  Biol Phys 1995;  31:1113-1121. 
 
8. Chin  D, Sklar  C, Donahue  B, et al. Thyroid  dysfunction  as a late effect in survivors of 
pediatric  medullob last oma/primitive neuroect odermal tumors. Cancer  1997; 80:79 8-804. 
Memorial S loan-Kettering  Cancer  Cent er 
IRB P rotocol 
IRB#:  02-088A(5)  
Amended:  2/26/08  
Page  26  
  
9. Shalet  SM, Gibson B,  Swindell  R, Pearson D.  Effect of spinal  irradiation  on growth. 
Arch Dis Child  1987;  62:461 -464. 
 
10. Sklar  C, Mertens  A, Walter A, et  al. Final height  after treatment for childhood  acute 
lymphoblastic  leuke mia: comparison  of no cranial  irradiation  with 1800 and  2400 
centigrays  of cranial  irradiation.  J Pediatr  1993;  123:59 -64. 
 
11. Silber  JH, Radcli ffe J, Peckham  V, et al. Whole-brain  irradiation  and decline  in 
intelli gence:  the influence  of dose and  age on IQ score.  J Clin  Oncol  1992;  10:1390 -1396. 
 
12. Yeh SD, Larson  SM, Burch  L, et al. Radioimmunodetection  of neuroblasto ma with 
iodine -131-3F8: correlation  with biops y, iodine -13 1-metaiod obenzylguanid ine  and 
standard  diagnostic  modalities.  J Nucl  Med 1991;  32:769 -776. 
 
13. Cheung  NKV, Kushner BH, Cheung  IY, et al. Anti-G(D2) antibody  treatment of 
minimal residual  stage  4 neurob lastoma diagnosed  at more than 1 year  of age.  J Clin 
Oncol  1998;  16:3053 -3060.  
 
14. Be rgman I, Pohl  CR, Venkatara manan R, et al. Intrathecal  administration  of an  anti- 
ganglioside  antibody  results  in specific  accumulation  within  meningeal  neoplastic 
xenografts  in nude rats. J Immunotherapy  1999;  22:114-123. 
 
15. Kra mer K, Cheung  NK, Humm  J, et al. Pharmacokinetics  and acute  toxicology  of 
intraventricular  131 I -monoclonal  antibody  targeting  disialoganglioside  in non-human 
primates. J Neurooncol  1997;  35:101 -111. Update  with unpublished  data.  
 
16. Kra mer K, Cheung  NKV, Humm  JL, et  al. Targeted  radioim munotherapy  for 
leptomeningeal  cancer  using  131-I-3F8. Med Pediatr  Oncol  2000;  35:716 -718, updated 
with unpublished  data 
 
17. Sandbe rg DI, Bilsky  MH, Souw eidane MM, Bzdil  J, Gutin  PH. Ommaya  reservoirs 
for the  treatment of lepto meningeal  metastases.  Neurosu rgery 2000;  47:49 -54. 
 
18. Huang E,  Teh BS, Strother  DR, et  al. Intensity -modulated  radiation  therapy  for 
pediatric  medulloblasto ma: early  report  on the  reduction  of ototoxicit y. Int J Radiat  Oncol 
Biol Phys 2002;  52:599 -605. 
 
20.0 APPEND ICES  
 
Appendix  A: Model  order  sheet  for Day 0 chemotherapy  
 
Appendix  B: Summary  of timing of required  observations  