1 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020   The HOVER Study  
Heterotopic Implantation Of the Sapien 3 Transcatheter  Aortic  Valve in 
the Inferior VEna cava for the treatment of severe tricuspid 
Regurgitation  
 
  This protocol represents an original investigation al device exemption (IDE) for placement of a SAPIEN -XT 
or S3 Transcatheter Heart Valve in the inferior vena cava for treatment of severe tricuspid regurgitation.  
 Physician -led US Multi -Center IDE Pilot Study  - IDE: G-140131- S2 
  Sponsor Investigator:  
 
Brian O’Neill, MD  
 
Henry Ford Hospital  
Center for Structural Heart Disease  
2799 West Grand Blvd.  
Clara Ford Pavilion # 44 0 
Detroit, MI 48202  
313-970-6483  (p) 
313-916-2819  (f) 
 Partial financial support provided by : 
Edwards Lifesciences LLC  
One Edwards Way  
Irvine, CA 92614  
 
Version 2. 3   24 Apr  2020 
  
2 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS…………………………………………………………………………………………….. 4 
STATEMENT OF INVESTIGATOR…………………………………………………………………………..…… …6 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY…………………………………………………………… ………………………………..… 7 
STUDY DESIGN SCHEMATIC………………………………………………………………………………………… 10 
1.0 BACKGROUND.. ……………………………………………………………………………………………………. 11 
2.0 PROJECT  PLAN…………………………… …………….. …………………………………………………………. 13 
 2.1 Rationale For study…………………………………………………………………………………. .13 
 2.2 Design……………………………………………………………………………………………………… .13 
  2.2.1 Definition of the  Heart Team……………………………………………… …..…14  
  2.2.2 Core Lab………………………………………………………………………………… ….14 
  2.2.3 Executive Committee…………………………………………………………… .…..14 
  2.2.4  Use of Edwards -Sapien Transcatheter Valve……………………… .…....15 
 2.3 Statistical Analysis………………………………………………………………………………… ……15 
 2.4 Study Endpoints……………………………………………………………………………………… ...16 
3.0 STUDY ENROLLMENT AND WITHDRAWAL …………………………………………… .…………… ..….17 
 3.1 Baseline………………………………………………………………………………………………… …...17 
 3.2 Informed Consent…………………………………………………………………………………… ….17 
 3.3 Eligibility Process…………………………………………………………………………………… ……18 
 3.4 Participant Inclusio n Criteria………………………………………………………………… …….18 
 3.5 Participant  Exclusion Criteria………………………………………………………………… ….…18 
4.0 RISK AND BENEFIT ANALYSIS ………………………………………………………………………… ..…...….19 
 4.1 Efforts to Minimize Procedural Risk……………………………………………………… ….….20 
  4.1.1.  Si te Heart Team and Executive Committee Presentation…… …..….20 
  4.1.2.  Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)………………………………… ….…20 
  4.1.3.  Interim Monitoring and Stopping Rules…………………………… ….…….20 
 4.2 Potential Benefits ………………………………………………………………………………… ……..21 
5.0 STUDY PROCEDURES AND SCHEDULE .……………………………………………………………… ……...22 
 5.1  Pre -Procedure Assessments………………………………………………………………… ….....22  
 5.2 Procedure  Description ………………………………………………………………………… ….…...23 
  5.2.1 Placement of per cutaneous aortic valve in the IVC…………… …..……..23 
 5.3 Post -Procedure Assessments …………………………………………………………… …..………24 
 5.4 Discharge Assessments …………………………………………………………………… ..……… .…25 
 5.5 Follow -Up Assessments …………………………………………………………………………… ....25  
5.6 Annual Study Visit, Final Study Visit, P remature Discontinuation or  
 Unscheduled Study Visit..………..………………………………………………………………… ……..2 6 
 5.7  Patient Withdrawal ……………………………………………………………………………..… …...28 
6.0 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES ……………………………… ……………………….. ……… …..…..2 8 
 6.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Information ……………………………………… ……….28 
  6.1.1 Institutional Review Board Approval Letter ……………………… …..……..28  
 6.2 Informed Consent ………………………………………………………………………… .…….……...2 8 
 6.3 Confidentiality ……………………………………………………………………………… .…….………28  
7.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING ………………………………………………………………… ………………… 29 
 7.1  Adverse events…………………………………………………………………………… ….…………..2 9 
7.2  Serious Adverse Events ……………………………………………………………… …..…………..2 9 
7.3  Non -Serious Adverse Events………………………………………………………… ….…………29  
7.4 Unanticipated Adverse Events ………………………………………………………… ….…….…29 
7.5  Anticipated Adverse Events …………………………………………………… ….………………. 30 
3 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 7.6  Unant icipated Adverse Device Effects …………………………………………………… ….30 
7.7  Adverse Event Follow -Up……………………………………………………………………… ....30 
8.0 DATA MONITORING AND QUALITY CONTROL ………………………………………………… ….….30  
 8.1 Case Report Forms (CRFs) ……………………………………………………………… …..……..30  
8.2 Data Reporting ……………………………………………………………………………………….. …30 
8.3 Data Review ………………………………………………………………………………… …..… …….30 
8.4 Records ……… ……………………………………………….……………………………. ……….…….31 
9.0 ETHICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS . …………………………… ……………… ……...32 
 9.1 Role of the Sponsor investigator……………………………………………………… ….…..32  
9.2  General Duties ………………………………………………………………………………….… ….32 
9.3 Selection of Investigators ………………………………………………………………… ….…..32  
9.4 Monitoring (See also Monitoring Plan) …………………………………………… ..……..32 
9.5 Supplemental Applications………………………………………………………………… ...…32  
 9.6 Maintaining Records …………………………………………………………………………… ..…32 
9.7 Submitting Reports …………………………………………………………………………… ..…..3 2 
9.8 Informed Consent ……………………………………………………………………………… ..….3 2 
10.0 STUDY DATA REPORTING AND PROCESSING ………………………………………………… .....33 
 10.1  Data Processing and Quality Control …………………………………………… .…..….33 
10.2  Data Entry ………………………………………………………………………………… .…….….33 
10.3  Data Cleaning ………………………………………………………………………………… ...…33 
10.4  Data Editing …………………………………………………………………………………… ..….33 
10.5  Confidentiality and Protection of Study Files ………………………………… …….33 
10.6  Coordinating Center……………………………………………………………………… ….…33  
REFERENCES…………………………………………………………… ………………………………………………..34  
ADVERSE EVENT FORM………………………………………………………………………………………… .…37 
UNANTICIPATED ADVERSE DEVICE EFFECT FORM……………………………………………… ..…..3 8 
STUDY CONSENT FORM……………………………………………………………………………………… .…..39 
APPENDIX A:  HOVER ECHO PROTOCOL .................................................................. ....49  
APPENDIX B:  VARC -2 ENDPOINT DEFINITIONS…………………………………………………… .…55 
APPENDIX C:  HOVER CT PROTOCOL AND PATIENT DOSE ESTIMATIO N……………… ..…6 4 
APPENDIX D:  INCLUSION/EXCLUSION CHECKLIST ……………………………………………… .….66 
APPENDIX E:  HIGH RISK DOCUMENTATION ……………………………………………………………7 0 
 
  
4 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AE Adverse Event  
ACC American College of Cardiology  
ACT Activated Clotting Time  
AHA  American Heart Association  
AST Alanine Transaminase  
AST Aspartate Transaminase  
BIB Balloon in Balloon  
BNP  Brain Natriuretic Peptide  
BUN  Blood Urea Nitrogen  
CAVI  Caval Valve Implant  
CBC Complete Blood Count  
CEC Clinical Events Committee  
CKMB  Creatinine Kinase MB  
CRF Case Report Form  
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
CV Curriculum Vitae  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
ECG Electrocardiogram  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  
Gy Gray  
Hgb Hemoglobin  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act 
IDE Investigational Device Exemption  
IEC Independent Ethics Committee  
IFU Instructions for Use  
IMA Internal Mammary Artery  
INR International Normalized Ratio  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
IVC Inferior Vena Cava  
IVUS  Intravascular Ultrasound  
KAP Kerma Air Product  
KCCQ  Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire  
LE Lower extremity  
LLC Limited Liability Corporation  
LMW  Low molecular weight  
MELD  Model for End Stage Liver Disease  
mmHg  Millimeters of mercury  
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging  
NYHA  New York Heart Association  
PA Pulmonary Artery  
PAH  Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension  
PFT Pulmonary Function Testing  
Plt Platelets  
5 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 PT Prothrombin Time   
PTT Partial Thromboplastin Time  
RA Right Atrium  
RV Right Ventricle  
RVEF  Right ventricular ejection fraction  
SAE Serious Adverse Events  
SD Standard Deviation  
SRDL  Substantial Radiation Dose Level  
STS Society of Thoracic Surgeons  
SVC Superior Vena Cava  
TAPSE  Tricuspid Annular Plane Systolic Excursion  
TAVR  Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement  
TEE Transesophageal Echocardiogram  
THV Transcatheter Heart Valve  
TIA Transient Ischemic Attack  
TR Tricuspid Regurgitation  
TTE Transthoracic echocardiogram  
TVR Tricuspid Valve Replacement  
UADE  Unanticipated Adverse Device Event  
UF Unfractionated  
US Ultrasound  
VARC  Valve Academic Resea rch Consortium  
WBC  White Blood Cell Count  
WHO  World Health Organization  
6MWT  6-Minute Walk Test  
 
  
6 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Statement of Investigator  
This statement is required to comply with the Investigational Device Exemption regulations contained in 
the 21CFRR 812.43(c)  
Study Title: The HOVER Study: Heterotopic Implantation Of the Sapien 3  Transcatheter Aortic Valve in 
the Inferior VEna cava for the trea tment of severe tricuspid Regurgitation  
Protocol Number:   v2.3 24 Apr 2020  
Investigator Name:  
Institution Name:  
Address:  
Telephone Number:  
Email:  
I have read and understood the Clinical Investigational Plan and agree to participate in this trial and 
prov ide to the Sponsor the required information.  
I certify that I am a(n) __________________ __ (insert medical specialty) qualified by training and 
experience to conduct this trial.  As evidence of my training and experience, I will provide the Sponsor 
with a  signed and dated copy of my curriculum vitae.  
I was ____/ I was not ____ involved in an investigation or other research in which my participation was 
terminated by a Sponsor, IRB/IEC or FDA. (If I was, an explanation of the circumstances that led to 
termi nation is attached to this Agreement.)  
☐I agree to conduct the investigation in accordance with the agreement, the investigational plan, 
Code of Federal Regulations Title 21, Parts 50, 56 and 812, and the conditions of approval imposed 
by the reviewing I RB and FDA.  
☐(For Principal Investigators only) I agree to supervise the handling of the device and its use 
involving human subjects;  
☐N/A  (not site Principal Investigator)  
☐I agree to ensure that the requirements for obtaining informed consent are met.  
☐I agree to allow the Sponsor (or approved representative) to monitor the progress of the clinical 
investigation through the review of subject source documentation and study records.  
 
Signature:__________________________    Date:_______________  
7 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 HOVER PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Title:   The HOVER Study :  Heterotopic Implantation Of the Sapien 3  Transcatheter 
Aortic Valve in the Inferior VEna cava for the treatment of severe tricuspid 
Regurgitation  
 
Design:  This is a prospective multi- center, non -blinded (open label), non -randomized 
safety and feasibility study of the heterotopic implantation of the Sapien 3  valve 
in the inferior vena cava for the treatment of severe tricuspid regurgitation in 
patients who ar e inoperable or at a very high surgical risk for tricuspid valve 
replacement.  A total of 15 patients will undergo implantation.  Primary 
endpoints will be assessed at 30 -days and 6 -months.  This study is an off -label 
use of an FDA -approved and commerciall y available medical device.     
 
Study Objectives:   #1:  Determine the shor t term safety (<30 days) of Caval Valve Implant (CAVI)  
#2:  Determine the intermediate term (6 months) efficacy of CAVI on palliation 
of patient symptoms of right heart congestion.  
 Primary Endpoints:  #1:  Safety as defined by successful vascular access without unplanned major vascular complication as defined by VARC -2, delivery and retrieval of the 
transcatheter valve delivery system, correct position of both the vascular 
stent(s) and transcatheter valve in the IVC, a single val ve placed within the IVC, 
and no need for additional surgery or re -intervention (including drainage of 
pericardial effusion) with the patient being alive at 30 -days.  
#2:  Efficacy as defined by Improvement of KCCQ score >15 , or i mprovement in 
6-minute wal k test (6MWT)>70 meters  or improvement of greater than 6% of 
peak Vo2 in cardiopulmonary exercise testing .   
 Population:   Patients with severe symptoms (NYHA class III -IV) and signs of peripheral and 
venous congestion (specifically lower extremity edema and abdominal ascites 
requiring diuretics),    resulting from documented severe tricuspid regurgitation.  
These patients may benefit from tricuspid valve repair or replacement, but are believed to be at high risk or are deemed inoperable for standard tricu spid valve 
surgery as assessed by at least one cardiac surgeon.  
 
Phase:    1-2 
 
Clinical Sites :  
1. Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan  – site PI: Dr. Brian O’Neill 
(Coordinating Center)   
2.  Temple University Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania  – site PI: 
Vladimir Lakhter, DO  
3. University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California –  site PI: 
Dr. Vaikom Mahadevan  
4. Baptist Hospital of Miami, Miami, FL –  site PI: Dr. Ramon Quasada  
      
8 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Statement:   This protocol represents an original investigation al device exemption (IDE) for 
placement of a SAPIEN XT or S3 Transcatheter Aortic Heart Valve in the inferior 
vena cava for treatment of severe tricuspid regurgitation.  
 
Study Duration:   84 months from start of enrollmen t to completion of follow up  
 
Participant Duration:  60 months   
 
Sponsor Investigator  and overall PI : Brian O’Neill, MD  
     Henry Ford Hospital  
Center for Structural Heart Disease  
2799 West Grand Blvd.  
Clara Ford Pavilion # 44 0 
Detroit, MI 48202  
313-970-6483  (p) 
313-916-2819  (f) 
 
 Sponsor Site Co -Investigators:   
William O’Neill, MD; Marvin Eng, MD; Tiberio Frisoli, MD; Pedro Villablanca, MD; Dimitrios Apostolou , 
MD; Hassan Nemeh , MD; Daizo Tanaka, MD ; Gillian Grafton,  DO 
 Sponsor Site Echocardiologists:   Dee Dee Wang , MD; James Lee , MD  
 
Manufacturer Information:  Edwards LifeSciences LLC  
    One Edwards Way  
    Irvine, CA 92614  
    949-250-2500 (p)  
    949-250-2525 (f)  
  
Scientific Committee & DSMB:  
 Jesus Gomez -Abraham MD  
 Surgical Dire ctor Lung Transplantation  
 Cardiac Surgery/MCS/TAH/VAD Surgeon  
 201 Lyons Avenue Suite G5  
 Newark, NJ 07112  
   Hector R. Cajigas MD  
 Senior Associate Consultant Pulmonary H ypertension Program Mayo Clinic  
 Critical Care Medicine, Pleural Disease, Pulmonary Vascular Medicine  
 Mayo Clinic  200 First Street SW  
Rochester, MN 55905  
Phone : (507) 266- 3958 
Fax: (507) 266- 4372 
 Eduardo DeMarchena  
Professor of Medicine and Surgery  
9 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 University of Miami Medical Group  
1400 NW 10th Avenue Dominion Tower 206 (M- 815)  
Miami Fl. 33136  
Phone:  305-243-9200 
Fax:  305-243-2138 
 
  
 
Pre-Submission Meetings:  The concept of this study was initially proposed to the structural heart 
disease branch of the FDA in a conference call on 4/4/2014.  After that call a preliminary protoco l was 
submitted for review to Changfu Wu on 4/24/2014.  Feedback for the initial protocol was provided on 
4/28/2014 by the FDA.  Additional correspondence was received and on January 08, 2016 the FDA 
approved the updated protocol to include: 1. The use of e ither the Sapien XT or the Sapien S3 valve and 
2. Expansion of the study to the 4 additional sites.  
   
10 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 SCHEMATIC OF STUDY DESIGN  
Prior To Enrollment  
 
 
 
  
 
 Procedure Date  
  Post -Op and Discharge  
 
 30-Day Visit  
 
 
6-Month Visit  
 1-year Visit  
 
 
Annual  Visit s up to  
5 years  Obtain informed consent, screen potential patients by inclusion 
and exclusion criteria, evaluation by members of heart team.  
Presentation at local s ite heart team meeting.  
Conference call with executive committee to review patient case.  
If 2/3 committee agree then patient is enrolled in study.  
Perform baseline assessments as per Table 1.  Caval Valve 
Implantation  
Post procedure and discharge assessments, schedule 30 -day visit 
as per Table 1  
Follow up assessments.  Safety endpoints evaluated as per Table 
1 
Follow up assessments.  Efficacy endpoints evaluated as per 
Table 1  
Follow up assessments.  Efficacy endpoints evaluated as per 
Table 1  
Follow up assessments and study close out (at year 5).  
11 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
1.0 BACKGROUND  
Severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR) is an under treated disease state associated with significant morbidity 
and mortality.  Nath and colleagues showed a 1 -year mortality of 33.1% in patients diagnosed with 
severe tricuspid regurgitation1.  In the United States alone , 1,600,000 patients are diagnosed with severe 
tricuspid regurgitation each year, while only 8,000 (less than 1%) are treated with tricuspid valve 
surgery2.  The reasons for this are varied, however, many of these patients who are not treated go on to 
exhibit signs of central and peripheral venous congestion, including irreversible hepatic cirrhosis and 
chronic kidney disease.  This creates a vicious spiral,  in which those patients who are initially good 
operative candidates may become high risk or inoperable for conventional tricuspid valve surgery.  Additional therapeutic options are therefore needed for these patients and their treating physicians.  
 
Curren tly, there are no specifically designed devices for the transcatheter treatment of tricuspid valve 
disease.  As a result, the treatment of these patients to date has relied on the off -label use of 
transcatheter aortic valve technology.  Multiple case reports have shown the feasibility of percutaneous transcatheter aortic valve impantation  within degenerated tricuspid valve bioprostheses or “valve -in-
valve ” 
3,4.   The experience is less robust for transcatheter tricuspid rep lacement within a native tricuspid 
valve5 and is likely limited in part to the annular dilatation which is present in patients with severe TR6.  
Despite this promising experience with transcatheter aortic valve placement directly within the tricuspid valve, long term data is lacking, and recent reports have demonstrated ea rly valve failure in patients 
using this technique
7. 
 Recently, caval valve implant of the Edwards  Sapien Transcatheter valve for treatment of severe 
tricuspid regurgitation has show n promise as an additional therapy for patients with severe TR who are 
high risk or inoperable.  Placement of a valve in the right atrial (RA)/caval junction would in theory prevent the massive reflux of blood into the IVC, thereby protecting the hepatic, renal, and lower 
extremity veins from volume overload.  Santhanakrishnan and colleagues evaluated the effects of 
placing a unidirectional valve in the IVC in a bench model simulating a Fontan procedure, in which the SVC and IVC are directly anastomosed to the right and left pulmonary artery in those patients with one 
ventricle.  Although short term effects of this procedure are favorable, long term patients go on to 
develop elevation in the systemic venous pressure from retrograde flow in expiration, partic ularly to the 
hepatic veins.  In their study, the authors created a flexible wall model to simulate the IVC/SVC/PA 
connections.  Using a Medtronic melody valve placed in the IVC in a sub -diaphragmatic position, they 
demonstrated a significant decrease in h epatic venous pressure through 20% of the cardiac cycle, with 
minimal gradient across the valve.  They concluded this therapy may have potential for lowering hepatic 
venous pressure by arresting retrograde flow occurring in the IVC 
8. 
 
The first in -vivo animal experience of this procedure was by Corno and colleagues in 20039.  In their 
study, bovine j ugular xenografts were mounted on self- expanding nitinol stents and placed in the IVC of 
5 adult pigs.  Animals were anesthe tized and the diameter and length of the IVC was measured using 
Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS).  After placement of the valve, pres sures were measured proximal and 
distal to assess for any gradients.  IVUS showed partial opening and closing of the valve, with complete closure occurring during deep breaths.  Autopsy showed adequate positioning of the valve stent without any deformation , with the proximal most portion of the valve 2cm proximal to the right atrial junction 
without any deformation of the valved stent.   Sochmann et al performed twin valve caval stenting in a 
series of studies of three sheep and one swine.  In their series,  severe TR and reflux into the SVC and IVC 
was induced through papillary muscle avulsion in sheep, while the swine served as a control.  Self-
designed stents were placed in the  caval veins through a 12 -French sheath.  5 -French pigtail catheters 
12 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 were introd uced into the femoral and jugular veins so that bicaval venography could be performed.  In 
the swine, the valve functioned well for 3 hours without a position change and remained stable on 
necropsy.  In 3 sheep, after placement of the stents, right ventric ular (RV) angiography demonstrated 
retrograde filling of the SVC and IVC to the valves but not beyond10.  At necropsy, the valve position 
remained stable.    
Contemporary animal models have confirmed and expounded on these early results.  Lauten and 
colleagues created acute severe TR in a sheep model via papillary muscle and chordae avulsion
11.  
Successful creation of TR was verified by a prominent ventricular (v) wave wh ich was present in the 
central venous pressure tracing.  Self- expanding nitinol stents containing a porcine pulmonary valve 
were placed in the superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC).  In both an acute group (n=9) 
and chronic group (n=4), a s ignificant decrease in the v -wave was demonstrated post- implant with an 
accompanying increase in cardiac output.  At autopsy in the chronic group, the stents were covered with 
fibrous tissue and adhered strongly to the vessel wall.  In one animal in the ac ute group, the SVC valve 
embolized into the right atrium with resultant hemodynamic instability.  This did not cause immediate 
death.  Autopsy showed correct device position in all successfully treated animals.   
 The effectiveness of this therapy in animal s has also translated to humans.  In the first -in-man report, a 
79 year old woman with a history of severe TR who was declined for traditional tricuspid valve surgery had been experiencing worsening symptoms of right ventricular (RV) congestion for several years.  After 
institutional review board (IRB) approval the patient underwent the procedure.  Reflux into the caval and hepatic veins were confirmed by angiography.  After careful position guiding by fluoroscopy and 
echocardiography, the valve, a self- mad e nitinol stent frame porcine pericardial valve, was placed in the 
IVC.  Transesophagehal echo (TEE) performed immediately after the procedure and repeated every 2 
weeks demonstrated stable position and valve function.  At 8 weeks of follow- up, CT -angiogra m 
confirmed the absence of regurgitation into the IVC.  The patient had clinical improvements in New York 
Heart Association Functional Class (NYHA), and improvement in both peripheral edema and ascites.  Sadly, 3 months later, the patient was admitted with  an intracranial hemorrhage and expired.  Autopsy 
revealed stable position of the valve, with fibrous tissue covering the valve helping to anchor it in position 
12.  The same authors describe a second case of an 83 year -old woman with severe TR also with 
symptoms of chronic right heart failure.  Caval valve implant was performed as part of a compassionate treatment.  Valves were again individually designed with the upper segment of the IVC valve to lay in the right atrium  above the diaphragm to avoid backflow into the IVC, with a funnel shape to the SVC valve.   
After deployment of both valves, both the IVC and SVC mean pressures decreased with a stable mean 
right atrial (RA) pressure.  Clinical follow up of the patient de monstrated complete resolution of ascites 
and peripheral edema, with normalization of synthetic liver function.  Echo and CT confirmed stable 
valve position without paravalvular regurgitation
13.  In the largest series to date, Laule et al report on 
three patients who underwent caval valve implant for severe TR.  Each of these patients had recurrent 
right heart failure despite optimal medical therapy.  2 of these patients underwent stenting to the IVC alone.  These investigators employed a novel technique of pre -stenting the IVC with placement of an 
Edwards -Sapien XT (2 9mm) valve within the stent.  Follow up at 30 -days showed no adverse events 
according to valve academic research consortium criterium (VARC).  In addition, all patients improved by at least 1 NYHA class, symptoms of right heart congestion, and improvements  in indices of RV function.  
Longer term follow up of these patients is forthcoming.  
 An unanswered question with this technique is the effects of redirection of blood flow from the IVC to 
the right atrium, and the clinical impact on increased volume load do the right atrium and SVC.  
13 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 The initial animal studies by Lauten demonstrated an increase in RA pressure with the creation of severe 
TR, with minimal increases in RA pressure after the implantation of the IVC valve  11.  In addition, there 
were increases in cardiac output noted.  In the 12 -Month follow up of a patient undergoing bicaval valve 
implant, RA pressure was noted to decrease from 21 -16mmHG at 3 -month follow up  13.  This suggests a 
chronic decrease in right ventricular volume load from effective diuresis of the patient, as demonstrated by a 9kg body weight loss the patient was noted to have at follow- up.  These findings are also 
demonstrated  in follow up from a patient in the HOVER trial.  In this patient, mean RA pressure was 
noted to decrease from 12 -10mmHG immediately post- implantation.  At 6 -month follow up there was a 
further decrease in mean RA pressure noted to 5mmHg
14.   These decreases in RA pressures were again 
accompanied by increasing cardiac output.  Although these observations will require further study, these reports suggest that this re- directed flow is well tolerated by the right heart, and may improve 
overall hemodynamics through diuresis and augmentation of cardiac output.  We hope to evaluate the effects of this, as well as clinical improvement in symptoms of right heart congestion with this study.  
 
 
2.0 PROJECT PLAN  
 
2.1  Rational e for Study  
Severe TR is characterized by right heart congestion and volume overload15.  Non -surgical treatment for 
TR relies on the administration of increasing doses of diuretic therapy to pr omote diuresis and volume 
contraction.  However, many patients go on to become refractory to chronic diuretics over time.  This is 
in part to the effects on chronic right he art congestion on the kidney.  Based on previous studies, we 
believe that protectio n of the hepatic and renal veins with a one -way valve from the transmitted TR will 
allow for continued diuresis, and improvement in symptoms .  Although CAVI has shown improvements 
in right heart congestion in a small series of patients, several questions r emain.  Previous studies have 
not clearly excluded TR that can occur with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH.)  As 2/3 of the 
regurgitant flow from tricuspid regurgitation is directed to the IVC, the effects of redirection of this flow to the SVC are unk nown.  The degree of TR can be sensitive to changes in pre -load.  It remains unclear if 
improvement in right heart congestion may therefore also affect degree of TR and indices of right ventricular (RV) function.  Finally, the durability of the procedure b eyond the intermediate term (6 
months) is not well characterized.  To help clarify these issues, we have created the Heterotopic 
Implantation Of the Edwards  Sapien 3 Transcatheter Aortic Valve in the Inferior VEna cava for the 
treatment of severe Tricuspid  Regurgitation study.  
 
2.2 Design:  
This is a prospective multi- center, non -blinded (open label), non -randomized safety and feasibility study 
of the heterotopic implantation of the Edwards  Sapien 3 valve in the inferior vena cava for the 
treatment of severe tricuspid regurgitation in patients who are inoperable or at a very high surgical risk 
for tricuspid valve replacement.  Patients enrolled will have severe TR and cardiac symptoms of right 
heart congestion in whom conventional tricuspid valve surgery (TVR) would be associated with high risk.  
Severe TR is defined by a vena contracta width > 7mm OR evidence of systolic hepatic vein flow reversal OR visible tricuspid valve coaptation defect + dense/ triangular continuous wave with early peaking as 
assessed by continuous wave signal  AND  a very large central jet or eccentric wall impinging jet as 
assessed by color flow. 
16.  All patients must be on diuretics with documented evidence of continued 
venous congestion, such as lower extremity or abdominal wall edema.   
 
14 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 All patients will be evaluated by at least one  cardiac surgeon.  The cardiac surgeon must agree that 
based on his assessment the patient is high risk or inoperable for TVR  as per the surgical office note and 
attached (appendix E).    Most inoperable patients have elevated STS risk scores including one  or more 
STS risk elements that exceed thresholds considered safe for operation. A common example is 
respiratory disease, for which the STS risk -scoring threshold usually signals increased risk in operable 
patients, but which may be severe enough in a give n pa tient to explain inoperability.  In trials of TAVR, 
oxygen dependency in particular, has been independently associated with increased one -year mortality  
17.  Other "inoperable" patients, regardless of STS score, are rendered inoperable by severe co -
morbidities of the low -prevalence, high -heterogeneity variety that are difficult to represent statistically 
and are not part of the STS  risk model. Common examples include liver disease, porcelain aorta, chest 
wall abnormalities, and frailty.  Chest wall abnormalities may include prior chest irradiation, a graft close 
to the sternum, or an absent or reconstructed sternum  18,19.  It must be acknowledged that "inoperable" 
is frequently an integration of multiple dimensions of an individual patient in whom no simple, single -
factor quantifiable line can be drawn between operable and "inoperable."  Factors which make a patient 
high risk or inoperable will be clearly de -lineated in the patient’s surgical evaluation.    The “operable” 
patient will have characteristics which include a normal RVEF, normal creatinine, no previous open heart 
surgeries, preserved left ventricular ejection fraction.  As the STS is undefined for these patients, should a patient have n o other characteristics which make them high risk, an STS score for a simulated mitral 
valve procedure of <5 can also be considered in declaring a patient operable.    
 2.2.1 Definition of the Heart Team  
When a potential subject is identified in the clinical practice of a participating site , the subject will be 
referred  to the site heart team.   The goal of the heart team is to optimize patient selection and improve 
procedural success.  Originally intended for transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) decision 
making, the concept of the heart team has expanded to involve patients with structural or complex coronary artery disease in whom the participation of multiple physicians from differing areas of 
expertise is beneficial 
20 21.  Ideally, this team is comprised of an interventional cardiologist and cardiac 
surgeon at the core , with other expertise from advanced imaging , cardiac anesthesia, and heart failure 
as important adjuncts.   Patients are seen individually by physicians, or, as part of a dedicated visit to 
multiple specialties in the form of a valve “clinic.”  After patients are evaluated, the members of the 
heart team will discuss the patient’s case at a weekly conference.  Here, a patient’s clinical history and 
clinical data are reviewed, and a group recommendation is made.  If after evaluation by an interventional cardiologist, heart failure specialist, and cardiac surgeo n, as well as presentation at the 
local heart team conference, a patient is deemed a suitable candidate for the trial, they will be 
presented to the executive committee of the trial.   The credentialing of heart team members will be the 
responsibility of th e local heart team site.  
 
2.2.2 Core Lab  
Either concomitantly or after decision by the local heart site to presentation to the executive committee, baseline echocardiograms and CT scans will be reviewed by the coordinating center ( Henry 
Ford Hospital) to confirm severe TR and anatomic suitability  for implant.  
 2.2.3  The Executive Committee  
The purpose of presentation of patients to the executive committee is to provide additional consultation 
from experts to further review and approve the selection prior to the patient  being enrolled in the trial .  
The executive team will be comprised of the site PI from each site.  The presentation will occur in the 
form of a conference call which is open to any member of the individual site s included in the HOVER 
trial.  During the executive committee conference call, the local site will verify that the patient meets the 
15 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 inclusion, and is free from ex clusion criteria for the trial.  The local site will present the patient’s case for 
committee review.  Any questions the executive committee may have regarding the c ase will be 
addressed during this call.    If after the case presentation,  2/3 of the executive committee agree the 
patient is suitable for CAVI, the patient will be enrolled in the trial and an implantation date will be set.   
Documentation of approval for the trial of the patient by the executive committee will be added to the 
patient’s chart.  If all members of the executive committee are unable to convene on one conference 
call, the case will be presented individually to members of the committee in separate phone calls.  
 
2.2.4  Use of Edwards -Sapien Transcatheter Valve  
This trial represents the off -label use of an approved medical device.  The on -label indications are as 
follows:   
 The Edwards SAPIEN 3 transcatheter heart valve (THV), model 9600TFX, and accessories are indicated 
for relief of aortic stenosis in patients with symptomatic heart disease due to severe native calcific aortic 
stenosis who are judged by a heart team, includ ing a cardiac surgeon, to be appropriate for the 
transcatheter heart valve replacement therapy.  
 
 2.3 Statistical Analysis  
A total of up to 15 patients will be enrolled.  Due to the lack of preliminary data as well as exploratory nature of the study, no sa mple size and power analyses were performed. We expect to screen 
approximately 45 patients to enroll up to 15 eligible patients into  this trial.  
 All clinically relevant baseline and follow -up data  will be tabulated. Means  (SDs) , medians  (ranges),  and 
95% confidence intervals will be reported  for continuous variables and frequencies, percentages,  and 
95% confidence intervals  for categorical variables . Specifically, each of t he two primary endpoints (the 
procedural success at 30 -days  and the composite binary  response variable at 6 -months ) will be 
summarized using both a point estimate and its exact confidence interval based on a  binomial 
distribution. Other binary safety and efficacy secondary endpoint s will be analyzed similarly. Continuous  
secondary endpoint s (e.g., hemodynamics data) will be reported using  descriptive summary statistics as 
well as  a point estimate and its confidence interval based on a  normal  distribution  assumption . The 
changes from baseline to each follow -up timepoint will addition ally be evaluated using the McNemar 
matched pairs test for dichotomous variables and the t- test for continuous variables. In the presence of 
distributional non -normality, the Wilcoxon signed rank test will be used instead of the t -test. Data 
transformation s such as log or square -root may also be considered. The analys es of NYHA functional 
classification will involve comparison of the baseline and post -operative (at each timepoint) functional 
class and  determination of  the percentages  of patients improving, not changing, or worsening at each 
postoperative timepoint. The same principle will be appl ied to quality of life score (KCCQ) and 6 -minute 
walk distance.   Although this is an exploratory analysis , we anticipate 50% of patients will demonstrate 
improvement  in one of the three pre -specified components of the primary efficacy outcome.  
 
The time- to-event approach may be considered to analyze some of safety and efficacy  endpoints (e.g., 
time to treatment failure, event -free survival, and overall survival) while  taking censoring into account in 
data analyses. Such endpoints will be summarized using the Kaplan -Meier method . Confidence intervals 
for the median s and survival rates at different time points will be constructed , when  appropriate . For a 
continuous endpo int measured repeatedly over time, a mixed -effects regression model may be 
employed to study its over -time trajectory or change patterns.  All these results  will be reported 
descriptively.  
16 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 The intent- to-treat approach will be used for data analys es of this trial. That means all enrolled patients 
will be included in the interim and final data analyses  regardless of their eligibility or subsequent events . 
Patients who are lost to follow -up or drop out of study prior to their scheduled follow -up evaluation 
time due to any reason will be treated as a treatment failure  for response determination and censored 
for time -to-event type of endpoints at the time of  their last follow -up if no relevant event has occurred 
by then. A secondary analysis that includes only all eligible patients may be conducted in addition to the 
primary analysis described above at the discretion of the trial PI and study biostatistician.  However, such 
analysis may not serve as the basis for drawing conclusions concerning treatment safety or efficacy, and 
the reasons for excluding patients from the analysis should be clearly reported.  
 
All enrolled  patients will be evaluable for adverse ev ents  from the time of their protocol treatment. 
Adverse events will be tabulated by type and severity  according to the NCI  Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE)  version 4.0.  
 
During the entire study period, adverse events  will be closely m onitored by the  trial PI and clinical trial 
coordinator of this study , working along with the study DSMB . In particular, formal stopping rules on the 
6-month  mortality are stipulated in this protocol ( please refer to section 4.1 “Efforts to minimize 
proced ure risks” ).  In addition, i n the event that  other  adverse events  (e.g., surgical complications) are  
thought to be excessive for the study patient population at any point of the trial, the patient accrual to 
the trial will be suspended immediately, pending a review of all adverse events  data. A final decision will 
be made by the trial PI and DSMB  as to w hether the trial should be amended, terminated or continue 
accrual. Such decision should be filed with and pre -approved by the institutional IRB. 
  2.4 Study Endpoints:  
The primary safety endpoint  is pr ocedural success at 30 -days.  Procedural success will include : 
• Successful vascular access without unplanned major vascular complication as defined by VARC -
2, delivery and retrieval of the transcatheter valve delivery system, correct position of both the vascular stent(s) and transcatheter valve in the IVC, a single valve placed within the IVC, and no need for additional surgery or re -intervention (including drainage of pericardial effusion) with 
the patient being alive at 30 -days.  
   
The primary efficacy endpoint  will be improvement in one  of three variables  assessed from baseline to 
6-months .     
• Improvement  of KCCQ score  >15.  This has been shown to correlate with improvement in quality 
of life with heart failure patients
22.   
• Improvement in  6-minute walk test (6MWT)> 70 meters .  This has been show n to provide 
prognostic information in patients with congestive heart failure after an intervention23.   
• Improvement of greater than 6% of peak Vo2 in cardiopulmonary exercise testing .  In a heart 
failure population, this has been shown to help assess prognosis in patients who were instituted 
in an exercise progr am 24.   
 
Secondary endpoints  will be evaluated at several time points  and will be divided into safety and efficacy :  
The first in the acute setting which will be out to 30 days or hospital discharge whichever being longer; 
additional time points will be at midterm (6 months post -procedure) , long term ( 1 year  and annually up  
to 5-years post -procedurally.)   
Secondary safety endpoints  include:  
17 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 • All stroke and TIA (VARC -2) 
• Mortality (VARC -2) 
• Myocardial infarction (VARC -2) 
• Acute Kidney Injury (VARC -2) 
• Major Vascular Complication (VARC -2) 
Secondary efficacy endpoints include: 
• Asse ssment of improvement of LE edema by the Villa lta Sc ore25.  A 3.1 point improvement 
in this scale was associated with improved quality of life26.   
 
Besides the above formal secondary  endpoints, we will monitor for the following throughout the trial:   
• Deep Vein/IVC thrombosis or pulmonary embolism  
• Improvement in grades of tricuspid regurgitation  as assessed by echocardiogram   
• Changes in TAPSE by echocardiogram  for RV function  
• Pleural effusions    
• Additiona l quality questionnaires to assess for changes in ascites (EORTC QLQ -C30 27 and ESAS -
AM 28).  A 10 -point change in mean score in the QLQ -C30 has been shown to be a meaningful 
response  (O’Connor R. Measuring Quality of Life in Health Churchill Livingstone: Philadelphia; 
2004).  A decrease of 1.25  points  in the ESAS -AM has been shown to correlate with symptom 
improvement after paracentesis28. 
 
3.0 STUDY ENROLLMENT AND WITHDRAWAL 
 3.1. Baseline  
The screening phase of the trial is designed to meet two objectives:  
1. Patient Consent.  
2. Determ ine study patient eligibility and access site for the procedure.  
 3.2. Informed Consent  
Informed Consent will be obtained from all prospective subjects prior to beginning any study activities. All aspects of the  trial including that participation is voluntary, will be explained and the patient will 
have the opportunity to have their questions answered before deciding whether to participate.   Patients 
who agree to participate and sign the informed consent document will be given a copy of their signed 
consent to take home with them.  
 Upon completion of the screening process, the patient’s case will be presented to the site heart team.   If 
after presentation to the site heart team it is agreed by the members the patient is a suitable cand idate, 
the patient will be presented to the executive committee of the trial.  If after the conference call 2/3 of the executive committee members agree, the patient is enrolled in the trial.  
 3.3  Eligibility Process  
All patients with severe tricuspid regurgitation and symptoms who are high risk or inoperable will be screened for study inclusion.  Patients must have all inclusion criteria,  and be free from all exclusion 
criteria.  Screening and enrollment logs will be maintained.  Reasons for screen failures will be 
documented.   The full description and timing of screening tests can be found  in Table 1.  
 
 
18 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 3.4  Participant Inclusion Criteria:  
In order to be eligible to participate in this study, an individual must meet all of the following criteria  
1. Patients must be at lea st 21 years old.   
2.  The patient must have severe, symptomatic (ACC/AHA Stage D symptoms) tricuspid regurgitation 
(TR) as assessed by 2D echocardiogram  with evidence of peripheral and central ve nous congestion  
(specifically lower extremity edema and abdominal ascites requiring diuretics .)    
3.  The patient must be evaluated by a “heart team” of physicians including an interventional 
cardiologist, cardiothoracic surgeon, heart failure specialist , and imaging specialist,  and presented for 
review at a local multi -disciplinary conference.  By consensus, the heart team must agree (and verify in 
the case review process) that valve implantation will likely benefit the patient.  
4. The heart team must agree that medical factors preclude operation, based on a conclusion that the 
probability of death or serious, irreversible morbidity exceeds the probability of meaningful 
improvement.  Also, other factors which may increase the patients perceived surgical risk for inclusion in 
the trial will be clearly delineated if they are present.  These include, but are not limited to the following 
as defined by VARC 2:  Frailty, Hostile chest, porcelain aorta, IMA or other critical conduit crossing the 
midline or adhe rent to the posterior table of sternum, severe right ventricular (RV) dysfunction.  The 
surgeons' consultation notes shall specify the medical or anatomic factors leading to that conclusion.  At least one of the cardiac surgeon assessors must have intervie wed and examined the patient.  
5. The study patient provide s informed consent and agrees to comply with all required post -procedure 
follow -up visits , including annual visits  up to 5 years . 
6.  Mean diameter of the IVC at the right atrial junction or superi or most hepatic vein ≤ 30.5mm  
 3.5  Participant  Exclusion Criteria:  
Patient or Subject  will be excluded from the study if any of the following conditions are present:  
1. Heart Team assessment of operability (the heart team considers the patient to be a good  surgical 
candidate).  
2. Evidence of an acute myocardial infarction ≤ 1 month (30 days) before the intended treatment 
[defined as: Q wave MI, or non -Q wave MI with total CK elevation of CK- MB ≥ twice normal in the 
presence of MB elevation and/or troponin l evel elevation (WHO definition)].  
3.  Untreated, severe, left sided valvular heart disease including mitral regurgitation or stenosis, and 
aortic regurgitation or stenosis.  
4.  Mean pulmonar y artery pressures ≥40 mmHG  and PVR >4 woods units  as assessed  by right heart 
catheterization . 
5. Any therapeutic invasive cardiac procedure resulting in a permanent implant that is performed within 
30 days of the index procedure.  Examples of permanent implant would include any new heart valve.  
Implantation of a pe rmanent pacemaker is excluded.  
6. Patients with planned concomitant surgical or transcatheter ablation for Atrial Fibrillation.  
7. Leukopenia (WBC < 3000 cell/mL), acute anemia (Hgb < 9 g/dL), Thrombocytopenia (Plt < 50,000 cell/mL).  
8. Hemodynamic or resp iratory instability requiring inotropic support, mechanical ventilation or 
mechanical heart assistance within 30 days of screening evaluation.  
9. Need for emergency surgery for any reason.  
10. Left ventricular ejection fraction < 40%.  
11. Echocardiographic  evidence of intracardiac mass, thrombus or vegetation.  
12. Active upper GI bleeding within 3 months (90 days) prior to procedure.  
13. A known contraindication or hypersensitivity to all anticoagulation regimens, or inability to be anticoagulated for the study procedure.  
19 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 14. Recent CVA clinically confirmed (by neurologist) or neuroimaging confirmed stroke or transient 
ischemic attack (TIA) within 6 months (180 days) of the procedure.  
15. Estimated life expectancy < 1 year  from condit ions other than TR.  
16. Expectation that patient will not improve despite treatment of tricuspid regurgitation  
17. Currently participating in another investigational cardiac device study  or any other clinical trial, 
including drugs or biologics . Note: Trials requiring extended follow -up for products that were 
investigational, but have since become commercially available, are not considered investigational trials.  
18. Active bacterial endocarditis within 6 months (180 days) of procedure.  
19.  Patients with s igns or symptoms of SVC syndrome, or hepatic cirrhosis not felt due to passive 
congestion from TR.  
20: Subject unable to personally provide informed consent   
21.  FEV1<30% of predicted29 
22.  Model for End State Liver Disease ( MELD ) score ≥21 (calculated per reference study  30) for patients 
not on blood thinners  
  
4.0 RISK AND BENEFIT ANALYSIS 
 
There are potential risks associated with transcatheter heart valve implantation. There are risks related to the overall procedures (complications associated with standard cardiac catheterization which include bleeding, infectio n, stroke, death, cardiac arrest, pacemaker implantation, allergic reactions, emergency 
open heart surgery, and emergency blood transfusion, prolonged hospital stay, renal failure, groin 
lymphocele, limb ischemia, myocardial infarction, injury to adjacent structures including nerves, blood 
vessels, or other structures.)  In addition, there are also risks associated with the valve itself which include valve embolization  and/or migration  and the emergent need for open heart surgery and possibly 
death , as well as valve thrombosis which can lead to death, stroke, pulmonary embolism, or venous 
thrombosis.  Structural valve deterioration may also occur in the form of wear, fracture, calcification, 
leaflet tear/tearing from the stent posts, leaflet retract ion, suture line disruption of components of a 
prosthetic valve, thickening, stenosis.   
 
There are risks associated with stenting of the IVC for valve implantation.  These include migration of the stent and injury to the vessels of the heart or the heart i tself, as well as venous thrombosis and stroke.   
Although these risks are present, the potential of a new therapy which improves the quality of life in those patients who are otherwise ineligible for surgery outweighs these potential risks.  
 Pleural effusions may occur either immediately post- operatively, or at follow up.  It is recommended 
that a trial of diuretic therapy, as well as attempts at diagnosis of the effusion (exudative vs. 
transudative) be attempted if the patient becomes symptomatic.  If diur etic therapy fails, a 
thoracentesis should be considered for symptomatic relief.  If the effusion reoccurs, additional 
thoracenteses may be considered.  Alternatively, the placement of a permanent drainage catheter, or pleuredesis  may be another option in patients with continued fluid accumulation who remain 
symptomatic.  
 4.1 Efforts to minimize procedure risks  
Efforts to minimize procedural risks will be addressed in the following manner.  
 4.1.1.  Site Heart Team and Executive Committee Presentation  
20 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 All po ssible patients will be presented at a site  heart team conference.  There the data will be reviewed, 
including any aspects which may or may not affect the possible success of the procedure.   After this 
step, patients will be presented to a panel of experienced operators outside of the local heart team 
institution, the executive committee.  There, the data will be reviewed a second time prior to 
enrollment in the trial.    
 
4.1.2.  Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
A DMSB will be established.  The DSMB is independent from the Sponsor, the investigators, or anyone 
involved in the medical care of the study subjects. Members will not have scientific, financial, or other 
conflict of interest related to the Sponsor or the investigators. The committee will be selected by the overall Principal Investigator and managed independently.  
The members must have the following characteristics:  
• working professionally as physicians or statisticians;  
• at least one member with specific  expertise in cardiothoracic surgery clinical trials;  
• no relevant conflicts of interest;  
• they will not be involved in the conduct of this trial in any other capacity, such as principal investigators, sub -principal investigators;  
• they will not be enga ged in any simultaneously occurring competitive trials;  
• they should not be on the NIDPOE or debarred list of investigators.  
Members will not serve on the DSMB, Clinical Event Adjudication Committee (CEC) or Operating Committee of a competing device trial. Members will not have any affiliation with the core laboratories, the data coordinating center, or the principal investigator of the trial. The DSMB committee will review all safety data from the HOVER Trial and make recommendations based upon the safety  analyses. The 
frequency of the DSMB meetings will be determined prior to study commencement; however, the DSMB 
may call a meeting at any time if there is reason to suspect safety is an issue. DSMB oversight for this trial is expected to be rigorous with frequent review of all essential safety data. The DSMB chairperson will notify the principal investigator of any safety or compliance issues. They will also provide 
confidential recommendations, when necessary, of study termination. All DSMB reports will re main 
strictly confidential, but will be made available to regulatory authorities. The principal investigator will 
notify the FDA if any member of the DSMB advises to terminate the study due to safety concerns.  
  4.1.3.  Interim Monitoring and Stopping Rule s 
The interim monitoring and stopping rules will focus on the 6 -month mortality. Based on current 
literature, it is reasonable to assume a 6 -month mortality of at least 30% for the high risk patients 
targeted in this clinical trial  
31.   For the purpose of this trial, we will focus on device -related mortality.  
  The interim monitoring will be implemented with stopping rules when 3, 6, and 9 patients have been 
enrolled and treated with the protocol device. The proposed stopping rule s are:  
Number of patients on 
trial:  When number of 6 -month  
deaths ≥: Probability of stopping the trial early 
when the true 6-month  mortality is 30%:  
3 2 0.216  
6 3 0.105  
9 4 0.064  
15 6 0.064  
 
As it can be seen from the above table, the probability of stopping the trial early is very small (≤10.5%) assuming the true 6 -month mortality rate is no more than 30% when there are at least 6 patients 
21 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 enrolled and treated on the clinical trial. When ther e are only 3 patients enrolled, we are only stopping 
the trial early when two (or more) out of the first three patients died within 6 months on trial  due to a 
device -related death . This probability is reasonably small as well (21.6%).  
In addition to mortal ity, should valve thrombosis occur in ≥ 30% of patients at 6 -months, the trial will be 
paused to evaluate if any additional precautions are required.  
 
The trial PI (Dr. Brian O’Neill, MD), working along with the study DSMB, will monitor other safety 
parameters such as significant surgery complications, one -year mortality, overall survival, and event -free 
survival at least biannually (every 6 months) as well in an effort to make certain that the patients on trial 
are not inadvertently harmed by the pro posed protocol treatment.  
  4.2 Potential Benefits  
Implantation of the transcatheter heart valve into the IVC may have immediate and long term benefits.  
In the immediate term, patients may notice stability to the amount of edema they have in their 
abdomen and legs.  In the long term, with protection of the renal veins from the TR, patients may notice improvement in central and peripheral venous congestion, improvement in end organ function including liver and kidneys, and improve ment in overall quality of life.  
 
 
  
22 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 5.0 STUDY PROCEDURES AND SCHEDULE  
The study procedures and schedule are listed below.  If patients are unable to perform examinations for 
any reason, justification of this must be provided by the study site PI.  
 5.1  Pre -Procedure Assessme nts 
The following will be collected in all patients  at baseline  (within 90 days of procedure , except for 
Informed Consent which will be obtained prior to beginning screening) . Items in bold font are required 
to determine eligibility  and must be performed prior to the Heart Team and Executive Committee 
meetings.  
• Informed Consent  
• Medical history .  This will include past medical and surgical history, social history, family history.  
• Physical Exam .  This will include vital signs and weigh t, head, ears, eyes, nose and throat 
(HEENT), neck, lungs, cardiovascular, abdomen, genitourinary,  gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, 
neurological 
• NYHA functional Class  as per The Criteria Committee of the New York Heart Association. 
Nomenclature and Crite ria for Diagnosis of Diseases of the Heart and Great Vessels . 9th ed. 
Boston, Mass: Little, Brown & Co; 1994:253- 256 
• Diuretic types and doses  
• Surgical note documenting high risk/inoperable status.  
Laboratory Measurements  
• CBC with differential  (During 6 months of screening and within 21 days of procedure)  
• Cardiac Enzymes (Troponin I and/or CK and CKMB)  (≤72 hours before the procedure)  
• Comprehensive metabolic panel  (within 90 days of procedure)  
• Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH)  
• ACT (within 21 days of procedure)  
• aPTT  (within 21 days of procedure)  
• PT/INR  (within 90 days of procedure)  
• Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP)  (within 21 days of procedure)  
Non -Invasive Tests  
• ECG (within 21 days of procedure)  
• Chest X -ray (portable or PA and lateral)  (within 21 days of procedure)  
• Echocardiogram  (Transthoracic)   (within 90 days of procedure)  
• Chest and Abdominal CT  (within 90 days of procedure)  
• Cardiopulmonary Exercise Stress test  
32  (within 90 days of procedure)  
• Venous Lower Extremity Duplex Study  (within 21 days of procedure)  
• Pulmonary Function Testing  (PFT)  (within 90 days of procedure)  
Functional Assessments  
• 6-minute walk test 33 (within 90 days of procedure)  
• Villal ta Scale  25,26 (within 21 days of procedure)  
• EORTC QLQ- C30 27 (within 21 days of procedure)  
• ESAS- AM 28 (within 21 days of procedure)  
• Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ)  22 (within 21 days of pro cedure)  
Invasive Tests  
• Left Heart Catheterization with or without LV gram and IVUS . (Within one year of baseline)  
• Right Heart Catheterization (within 90 days of procedure)  
23 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 5.2 PROCEDURE Description  
 
Procedure Assessments  
The following tests and assessments will be performed on the day of or during the procedure:  
Total procedure time is defined as the time from skin incision to the time of skin incision access closure. The following invasive hemodynamic data must be collected pre and post implant:  
 
• Echo assessments of severity of tricuspid regurgitation and RV function  
• Fluoroscopic imaging of the implanted valve  
• Medications given for cardiovascular effect including anti- platelet/anti- thrombins  
• Event assessment  
 
5.2.1 Placement of percutaneous aortic valve in the inferior vena cava  
 The procedure will be performed in the cath lab/ hybrid Cath Lab/OR under general anesthesia and transesophageal echocardiographic as well as fluoroscopic guidance.  
 Measurements obtained p rior to the procedure  
The diameter of the IVC at the RA/IVC junction will be measured prior to the procedure by contrast CT 
or rotational cine fluoroscopy to determine sizing of the stent which will be placed in the IVC.  In order 
to avoid compromise of th e hepatic veins with the valve skirt, distances from the RA/IVC junction to the 
hepatic veins will be measured by contrast CT.  
 Procedure  
The procedure will be performed through the right or left femoral vein using standard technique.  We will use fluorosc opic and ultrasonographic landmarks to locate the right femoral vein and using a 
micropuncture needle for initial access, and then will place an  8F sheath in the right Common Femoral 
vein. We will than perform a cavogram using a Omniflush catheter.  The Ed wards expandable sheath and 
delivery system will be placed into the right femoral vein.  A 5 -French sheath will be placed in the right 
or left radial femoral artery to monitor arterial pressure and secure arterial access throughout the procedure, and a cat heter may or may not be placed in the right internal jugular vein.  Heparin will be 
administered to achieve an activated clotting time (ACT) between 250 -300s.  To achieve stable position 
of the valve in the IVC, we will perform pre -stenting of the IVC with  with either a balloon expandable or 
self- expandable stent according to standard technique.  A repeat cavogram with an Omniflush catheter 
will be done to delineate the takeoff of the hepatic veins prior to valve implantation.    When positioning is confirm ed the Edwards or balloon in balloon (BIB) delivery system will be deployed into the 
suprahepatic segment of the IVC by standard technique.  Right ventricular (RV) angiography from IJ access and echocardiogram will be performed to confirm intact valve func tion and any evidence of 
regurgitation.  At the end of the procedure, the venous sheath will be removed and perclose devices will 
be deployed or a figure of 8 suture will be used to achieve adequate hemostasis.  The arterial sheath will 
be removed with clo sure devices or with direct manual pressure.  
 
Anticoagulation Regimen:  
Pre-procedure: Patients in atrial fibrillation on warfarin may be bridged with LMW or UF heparin prior to 
the procedure.  During the procedure: IV heparin will be given to maintain ACT > 250 sec .  Patients may 
be bridged to a therapeutic INR with either heparin or Lovenox post- procedurally.  
 
 
24 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Recommended Antiplat elet/Anticoagulation Regimen  
Aspirin 81 mg p .o. daily indefinitely plus warfarin therapy to maintain an INR between 2 -3.  In those 
patients with severe hepatic dysfunction whom have elevated INR at baseline, ASA 81mg will be 
continued and the level of additional anti -coagulation will be decided on a case by case basis.  
 Radiation precautions:  
Radiation exposure will be documented at each study visit in the CRF, with options to record whether 
chest x- ray, including additional plain x -rays, CT scans and all fluoroscopy procedures were performed. 
In the ev ent that a dose isn’t recorded; such as a plain X -ray, an average dose will be assigned for each 
applicable test. A trigger will be applied in the database such that when the cumulative estimated 
radiation exposure calculation exceeds 150 to 250 Gy/cm2.  
Additional precautions: for any study patient, the site coordinator and investigator will be notified and a 
follow -up visit advised to assess patient for skin reaction. Substantial radiation dose level (SRDL) -  The 
operator should be notified promptly if SRD L was exceeded. The SRDL is a trigger level to initiate follow -
up of a radiation dose that might produce a clinically relevant injury in an average patient. Some suggested values for the SRDL are a skin dose of 3 Gy, a KAP of 500 Gy/cm2, or an air kerma at  the 
interventional reference point of 5 Gy (NCRP 2010). For cardiology procedures, a level greater than 2Gy will be noted and close follow up will be performed to evaluate for skin toxicity.  
 The operator should write an appropriate note in the patient's medical record, stating that a substantial 
radiation dose has been administered, and indicating the reason. This information may be included in the post procedure notes. Patients with reported KAP between 150 and 250 Gy/cm2 must be further evaluated for radiation injury and the event must be reported as a serious adverse event in the case report form.  
Acute evaluation -  When the SRDL has been exceeded, clinical follow- up essential for early detection 
and management of skin injuries. The patient should be a dvised of the possibility of a skin injury due to 
a tissue reaction, and should be told to examine the beam entrance site at 2 -4 weeks after the 
procedure. The operator should be notified if any skin changes are seen. Patients who have not 
previously notified the operator should be contacted by telephone at approximately 30 days after the 
procedure, in order to ensure that a skin injury is not missed.  
Long- term evaluation - If a skin injury is suspected, the interventionalist should see the patient at an 
office visit, and should arrange for appropriate follow -up care. The physician responsible for the 
patient's care should be informed of the possibility of radiation effects.  
 5.3 Post -Procedure assessments:  
Study patients will be continuously monitored clini cally, hemodynamically, and  electrocardiographically 
during catheterization for all local, systemic side effects and complications. After completion of the procedure, patients will be admitted to the hospital for further monitoring.     
• Physical Exam.  Thi s will include vital signs and weight, head, ears, eyes, nose and throat 
(HEENT), neck, lungs, cardiovascular, abdomen, genitourinary,  gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, 
neurological 
• NYHA functional Class as per The Criteria Committee of the New York Heart Association. 
Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis of Diseases of the Heart and Great Vessels . 9th ed. 
Boston, Mass: Little, Brown & Co; 1994:253- 256 
• Diuretic types and doses  
• Event assessment as per VARC -2 
19. 
 
 
 
25 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Laboratory Measurements  
• CBC with differential  
• Cardiac Enzymes (Troponin I and/or CK and CKMB) every 8 hours x3  
• Comprehensive metabolic panel  
•  Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH)  
• ACT (optional)  
• PT/INR  
• Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP)  
Non -Invasive Tests  
• ECG 
• Echocardiogram (Transthoracic)  
 
 
5.4 Discharge Procedures  
The following data will be collected f or all study patients  as close to the date of discharge as possible.  A 
post -procedure echocardiogram will also be performed prior to discharge .  If a patient is discharged over 
a weekend or holiday, the discharge tests may be completed on the last weekday prior to discharge.  
Systems:  
• Physical Exam.  This will include vital signs and weight, head, ears, eyes, nose and throat (HEENT), neck, lungs, cardiovascular, abdomen, genitourinary,  gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, 
neurological 
• NYHA functional Class as per The Criteria Committee of the New York Heart Association. 
Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis of Diseases of the Heart and Great Vessels . 9th ed. 
Boston, Mass: Little, Brown & Co; 1994:253- 256 
• Diuretic types and doses  
• Event  assessment as per VARC- 2 
19. 
Laboratory Measurements  
• CBC with differential  
• Comprehensive metabolic p anel  
• Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP)  
• Haptoglobin  
•  Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)  
  
5.5 Follow -Up Procedures  
Patients will follow up at 1, 6 and 12 months with a member of the study team.  The following 
information will be collected at follow up visits.  
Systems:  
• Physical Exam.  This will include vital signs and weight, head, ears, eyes, nose and throat 
(HEENT), neck, lungs, cardiovascular, abdomen, genitourinary,  gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, 
neurological 
• NYHA functional Class as per The Criteria Com mittee of the New York Heart Association. 
Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis of Diseases of the Heart and Great Vessels . 9th ed. 
Boston, Mass: Little, Brown & Co; 1994:253- 256 
• Diuretic types and doses  
• Event assessment as per VARC- 2 
19. 
 
26 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Laboratory Measurements  
• CBC with differential  
• Comprehensive metabolic panel  
• Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP)  
• Haptoglobin  
•  Lactate Dehydrogenase  (LDH) 
Non -Invasive Tests  
• ECG 
• Chest X -ray (portable or PA and lateral)  
• Echocardiogram (Transthoracic)  
• Chest and Abdominal CT (6 -months only)  
• Cardiopulmonary Exercise Stress test  32 (6-months only)  
Functional Assessments  
• 6-minute walk test 33 
• Villal ta Scale  25,26 
• EORTC QLQ- C30 27 
• ESAS- AM 28 
• Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ)  22 
Invasive studies  
• Right heart catheterization (6 -mont hs only)  
 
5.6 Annual Study Visit, Final Study Visit, premature discontinuation or unscheduled study visit  
The following variables will be collected for the above parameters.  
• Physical Exam.  This will include vital signs and weight, head, ears, eyes, nose and throat 
(HEENT), neck, lungs, cardiovascular, abdomen, genitourinary,  gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, 
neurological 
• NYHA functional Class as per The Criteria Committee of the New York Heart Association. 
Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis of Diseases of the Heart and Great Vessels . 9th ed. 
Boston, Mass: Little, Brown & Co; 1994:253- 256 
• Diuretic types and doses  
• Event assessment as per VARC- 2 19. 
 
Table 1:  Summary Schedule of Procedure and Follow -Up  
Baseline  
During the 
procedure  
 
24 hrs. after the 
procedure  
7 days after 
procedure or at 
discharge  
At 30 days  
(+/- 7 days)  
At 6 months  
(+/- 14 days)  
At 1 yr  
(+/- 21 days)  
Annually up to 5 
years  (+/- 21 day)  
Premature 
discontinuation or 
unscheduled visit  
Informed Consent  Xb†         
Medical History  Xb†         
Physical Exam (incl. Vital 
signs)  Xb†  X X X X X X X 
NYHA Class  Xb†  X X X X X X X 
Diuretic types and doses  Xb†  X X X X X X X 
Event Assessment  Xb  X X X X X X X 
Surgical note 
documenting high 
risk/inoperable status  Xb†         
27 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Laboratory 
Measurements           
CBC with Differential  Xd  x X  X X   
Cardiac Enzymes 
(Troponin I and/or CK and 
CK-MB)  Xe  X (every 
8 hours 
x 3)       
Comprehensive Metabolic 
Panel  Xb†  X X X X X   
 LDH  (to assess 
hemolysis)  Xc  X X X X X   
ACT^   X* X*       
aPTT  Xc X*        
PT/ INR  Xb†  X       
Brain Natriuretic Peptide 
(BNP)  Xc  x X X X X   
Haptoglobin  Xc   X X X X   
Non -Invasive Tests           
ECG Xc  X  X X X   
Chest X -ray Xc    X X X   
Echocardiogram - TTE or 
TEE Xb† X X  X X X   
Chest and/or Abdominal 
CT Xa†     X    
Cardiopulmonary Exercise 
Stress test  Xb     X    
Venous Lower Extremity 
Duplex Study  Xc         
Pulmonary Function Test 
(PFT)  Xb†         
Functional Assessments           
6-Minute Walk Test  Xb    X X X   
Quality of Life (Kansas 
City Cardiomyopathy 
Questionnaire (KCCQ)  Xc    X X X   
Villa lta Scale  Xc    X X X   
EORTC QLQ -C30  Xc    X X X   
ESAS -AM Xc    X X X   
Invasive Tests           
Left Heart Catheterization 
w/wo LV gram and IVUSa Xa† X*        
Right Heart 
Catheterization  Xb† X    X    
 
a.        The following assessment  will be collected within one year of procedure day .   
b. The following assessments will be completed within 90 days before the procedure day  
c. The following assessments will be completed within 21 days before the procedure.  
d. The following assessment needs to be done during the 6 months screening and within 21 days  
               before the procedure.     
e. CK/CKMB and/or Troponins ≤ 72 hours before the procedure  
f.             Right heart catheterization only  
*             Optional  
† Required prior to Heart Team and Executive Committee meeting s to determine eligibilit y 
  
28 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 5.7  Patient Withdrawal  
All study patients are required to complete clinical follow -up for all designated study visits. A careful 
review of these requirements must be communicated to the patient and family members prior to 
obtaining the study consent. Patients who cannot make study visits due to physical or geographical 
constraints should be encouraged to complete as many assessments within the planned visit as possible . 
A study patient that has been withdrawn from the study will not be replaced and may  impact the ITT 
analysis.  
 Every patient should be encouraged to remain in the study until they have completed the protocol required follow -up period. If the patient discontinues prematurely from the study, the reason for 
discontinuation must be documented . Possible reasons for premature discontinuation may include, but 
are not limited to the following:  
• Withdrawal of consent: Patient decides to withdraw from the study.  
• Lost to follow- up: All patients should be encouraged to return to the clinic for eval uation during long 
term follow -up. The patient will be considered lost to follow -up if this communication is unsuccessful. 
Patients who discontinue prematurely will be included in the analysis of results, and will not be replaced.  
• Death registries: In the event of a patient withdrawal or lost to follow -up, the sponsor may opt to 
obtain the death certificate, search the Social Security Death Index and/or other death registries to 
obtain survival information.  
 
 
6.0 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBI LITIES  
 6.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Information  
This protocol and the informed consent must be reviewed and approved by the appropriate IRB before 
enrollment of patients.  All changes to the protocol must be approved in writing by the IRB be fore t he 
change is implemented.  
 
6.1.1 Institutional Review Board Approval Letter  
Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval to participate in this trial is required from each institution participating in this investigation. Prior to patient enrollment, a signed copy of the IRB approval letter must be submitted to the sponsor investigator certifying trial approval. Investigators are responsible for submitting and obtaining initial and continuing review of the trial at least annually unless oth erwise 
directed by their IRB.  
 6.2 Informed Consent  
Informed consent is mandatory and must be obtained from all study patients prior to their participation in this trial.  Any modifications to the Informed Consent Form must be approved by the IRB. A copy o f 
the IRB approved Informed Consent Form along with a copy of each patient’s signed consent form must 
be maintained by each investigator in a designated clinical trial administrative file. A signed copy of the 
consent form must be given to each patient.  
 
6.3 Confidentiality  
All information and data collected in this trial will be considered confidential.  Only authorized data 
management center personnel will have access to these confidential files. Authorized personnel from 
the regulatory authorities have t he right to inspect and copy all records pertinent to this trial. All data 
used in the analysis and reporting of this evaluation will be without identifiable reference to the patient.  
29 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 7.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
 
7.1  Adverse events:  
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical event in a patient and does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the use of the device.   Symptoms or medically significant laboratory or instrumental 
abnormalities of a preexisting disease, such as hypertension or ot her disease, should not be considered 
adverse events but must be documented in the medical history if clinically significant. New symptoms or 
laboratory abnormalities, however, as well as worsening of existing ones, are considered adverse 
events.   Study de vice causality for adverse events will be graded as unlikely, possible or probably.  
 
7.2  Serious Adverse Events  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any untoward medical occurrence that:  
• results in death  
• is life -threatening, i.e., an event that, in the v iew of the investigator, places the subject at immediate 
risk of death from the event as it occurred (it does not include an event that could have caused death if it had been more severe)  
• requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongs the existing hospit alization  
• results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity, where disability is defined as a substantial disruption of a person’s ability to conduct normal life functions, either reported or defined as per clinical judgment  
• is a congenital anomaly or birth defect (if exposure to product just before conception or during 
pregnancy resulted in an adverse outcome in the child)  
 All investigators will be responsible for reporting serious adverse events to the sponsor and their reviewing IRBs in accordance with local guidelines. In addition, all SAEs will be reviewed by an 
independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) in accordance with their charter. (An SAE will be 
reported to the Sponsor and DSMB Chair within 24 hours from when the event was discovered and the 
SAE CRF will be submitted no later than ten (10) days after the SAE was discovered)   Study device 
causality for SAE’s will be graded as unlikely, possible or probably.  
 7.3  Non -Serious Adverse Events  
A non -serious adverse event is any AE that does not meet the criteria listed above for a serious adverse 
event, or the outcome (subject treatment, life- threatening condition, hospitalization, recovery) cannot 
be determined with the information provided. Non -serious AEs will be documented on  the AE log and 
will be reported to IRB per local regulations.  
 7.4 Unanticipated Adverse Events  
An unanticipated adverse event is an AE for which the nature or severity are not consistent with the applicable product information (refer to IFU and on -label use) .  Unanticipated adverse events are to be 
reported to the study sponsor, each reviewing IRB, and the FDA, no later than ten (10) days after the date the adverse event was discovered. The coordinating center will be responsible for the communication wit h the regulatory bodies.  
 
7.5  Anticipated Adverse Events  
An anticipated adverse event is an AE for which the nature and severity are consistent with the 
applicable product information (e.g. Package insert/summary of product characteristics for an approved 
product). This term relates only to the treatment, not the patient’s underlying condition.  
 
30 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 7.6  Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects  
Unanticipated adverse device effects (UADE) are defined as any serious adverse effect on health or 
safety or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, 
problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the 
investigational plan or application (including a supplementary  plan or application), or any other 
unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of 
study patients.  
 
All UADEs must be reported to the FDA immediately upon the Investigator’s awareness of the event. The AE Forms of the CRF must be completed with 7 working days for all UADEs. The Investigator is also responsible for notifying his/her IRB of all UADEs occurring at his/her site no later than 10 days after the investigator first learns of the effect (and any additional information as required by EC/IRB or local regulations). All UADE adverse events must be followed until resolution or until a stable clinical endpoint 
is reached. All required treatments and outcomes of the UADE adverse event must be recorded.  
 
 7.7  Adverse Event Follow -up 
All adverse events occurring within the follow -up period (whether serious, non -serious, unanticipated, 
or anticipated) will be monitored and documented according to the follow -up. To be compliant with 
ethical and regulator y principles, treatment -related SAEs that occur after follow -up is completed 
(outside the protocol) and are assessed by the investigator as “unanticipated” must be updated to the FDA via the MAUDE reporting system in accordance with FDA regulations  
  
8.0 DATA MONITORING AND QUALITY CONTROL  
 
8.1 Case Report Forms (CRFs)  
Case report forms (CRFs , see addendum ) will be generated , based on the investigational plan. An 
electronic clinical trial management system (RedCap, Vanderbilt U, TN) will be used to collect all patient 
data during the trial by the data coordinators or their designee.  Data will be collected in a paper form  or 
in electronic format  and entered into the electronic clinical trial management  system .  Paper forms will 
be kept in a secure location and only accessible to the data coordinator or investigator.  
 8.2 Data Reporting  
The Investigator or his/her designee is re sponsible for recording all data from the trial onto the CRFs. 
Completed CRFs will be reviewed at regular intervals throughout the trial. To this end, the Investigator 
must permit inspection of the trial paper files and patient CRFs by such representatives  and/or 
responsible government agencies including the FDA or DMSB.  
 
  8.3 Data Review  
All CRFs will be thoroughly reviewed and all missing or unclear data will be adjudicated by the 
investigator or his designee throughout the study.  Any data which has no t been collected or is 
unavailable will also be noted. For purposes of safety review the DMSB will have access to all necessary 
safety and event data.  
 
 
31 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 8.4 Records  
Records to be maintained by the site investigator include:  
• Correspondence  
o IRB Correspondence  (incl. IRB approval)  
o Sponsor  correspondence  
o General correspondence  
• Study documents  
o Clinical protocol including all amendments  
o Informed consent and HIPAA authorization  
o Sample case report form (database)  
o Instruction for use (device)  
o Statement of investigator  
o Laboratory certifications  
o Laboratory reference ranges  
• Study tracking logs  
o Subject logs  
o Adverse events and unanticipated adverse device effects  log 
o Device accountability log  
o Monitoring log  
• Research personnel  
o PI (site PI):  
 curriculum vitae  
 current medical license  
 human subject protection training document  
 conflict of interest or financial disclosure form(s)  
o Sub-PI: 
 curriculum vitae  
 current medical license  
 human subject protection training document  
 conflict of interest or fin ancial disclosure form(s)  
o Signature and delegation of responsibility log  
• For sites that are using a local IRB  
o IRB compliance document (FWA)  
• Bi-annual reports to the FDA  
 
The following records must be maintained for each patient enrolled in the trial:  
• Sig ned Patient Informed Consent Form;  
• All completed CRFs;  
• Supporting documentation of any complications or serious adverse  events.  
  Investigator’s Final Report  
Upon completion or termination of the HOVER study , the overall Principal Investigator must submit a 
final written report to the FDA and the IRB. The report must be submitted within 3 months (90 days) of completion or termination of the trial.  
  
32 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Protocol Deviations /Violations  
The investigator will not deviate from the protocol without the prior written approval of the IRB except 
where necessary to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard.  
 
9.0 ETHICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS 
 
9.1 Role of the Sponsor investigator  
The sponsor investigator has the overall responsibility for the conduct of the study, including assurance 
that the study meets the regulatory requirements of the appropriate regulatory bodies. In this study, the 
sponsor will have certain direct responsibilities and may delegate other responsibilities to the study coordinator or other investigators.  
 9.2  General Duties  
The Sponsor's general duties consist of submitting the appropriate regulatory applications, obtaining IRB or Ethics Committee approval, selecting investigators, ensuring proper clin ical site monitoring and 
ensuring study patient informed consent is obtained.  Based on data collected from the study, the 
sponsor will prepare written progress reports and a final report.  
 
9.3 Selection of Investigators  
The Sponsor will select qualified investigators, obtain a signed Investigator’s Agreement and provide the investigators with the information necessary to conduct the study.  
 
9.4 Monitoring (See also Monitoring Plan)  
The Sponsor or its designee, will monitor the study to  ensure compliance w ith the protocol and the 
Investigator’s Agreement.  The sponsor will evaluate circumstances where an investigator deviates from 
the clinical protocol and will retain the right to remove the investigator from the study. The Sponsor will 
review significant n ew information, including unanticipated adverse events and ensure that such 
information is provided to the DMSB, study investigators and to all reviewing IRB/ECs.  
 
9.5 Supplemental Applications  
As appropriate, the principal investigator will submit changes  in the Investigational Plan to the 
regulatory authority. The principal investigator will submit all changes in the Investigational Plan to 
investigators to obtain IRB re -approval.   
 9.6 Maintaining Records   
The Sponsor will maintain copies of correspondence, all data, adverse device effects and other records 
related to the clinical trial as appropriate.  
 9.7 Submitting Reports  
The Sponsor will submit all reports required by the appropriate regulatory authorities, including unanticipated adverse device effects, withdrawal of IRB approval, current investigators list, annual progress reports, final reports protocol violations.  
 
9.8 Informed Consent  
All study patients must personally provide written informed consent .  Copies of the informed consent 
form must be maintained for the duration of the study. One copy will reside in the medical chart, one 
copy will be provided to the patie nt, and the original resides  in the regulatory binder on site. The IRB 
approval letter for the study will also be maintained.  The study patient has been informed of the nature 
33 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 of the study, agrees to its provisions and has provided written informed consent  as approved by the 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the respective clinical site.  
 
10.0  STUDY DATA REPORTING AND PROCESSING  
 
10.1  Data Processing and Quality Control  
The online database will reside on a central server accessible through the Internet.  It will be password protected and available only the investigators and study personnel .   The database will be protected by 
whole disk encryption.  
 10.2  Data Entry  
The data entry is performed by study personnel on a secured and dedicated website. All data entered is 
subjected to data type verification.   10.3  Data Cleaning  
All CRFs will be subjected to initial inspection for omitted data, data inconsistencies, and deviations. The 
resolution of data inconsistencies will be done by the investigat ors or other data management 
specialists.  
 
10.4  Data Editing  
Corrections to the CRFs will be made by the research coordinator, and approved by the investigator or designee.  
 10.5  Confidentiality and Protection of Study Files  
Passwords will be issued to appropriate data management personnel to ensure confidentiality and 
protection of the data by allowing variable levels of access to the computer system.  
 10.6  Coordinating Center  
Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI will serve as the coordinating ce nter, providing administrative, 
regulatory, and statistical support for the trial.   Henry Ford Hospital staff will coordinate activities across 
the HOVER sites and will perform the following functions:  
• Participate in study start -up site inservicing and training;  
• Ongoing site monitoring to assure compliance with federal regulations and GCP;  
• Oversight of compliance  with IRB requirements, including initial and continuing review 
approvals, modifications and Serious Adverse Event submissions;  
• Coordination of DSMB meetings and communications;  
• Registration and updates on clinicaltrials.gov ; 
• Oversee data collection and verification via RedCap;  
• Perform statistical analyses;  
• Perform study close out activities;  
• Execute and administer contractual/financial agreements between Henry Ford Hospital and the 
other sites;  
• Liaison between investigator, FDA, IRB, DSMB and study sites.  
34 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 REFERENCES  
1. Nath J, Foster E, Heidenreich PA. Impact of tricuspid re gurgitation on long -term survival. Journal 
of the American College of Cardiology. 2004;43(3):405 -409.  
2. Taramasso M, Vanermen H, Maisano F, Guidotti A, La Canna G, Alfieri O. The growing clinical 
importance of secondary tricuspid regurgitation. Journal of  the American College of Cardiology. 
2012;59(8):703 -710.  
3. Ribichini F, Pesarini G, Feola M, et al. Transcatheter tricuspid valve implantation by femoral 
approach in trivalvular heart disease. The American journal of cardiology. 2013;112(7):1051 -
1053.  
4. Kenny D, Hijazi ZM, Walsh KP. Transcatheter tricuspid valve replacement with the Edwards 
SAPIEN valve. Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for 
Cardiac Angiography & Interventions. 2011;78(2):267 -270.  
5. Kefer J, Sluysmans T, Vanoverschelde JL. Transcatheter Sapien valve implantation in a native 
tricuspid valve after failed surgical repair. Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography & Interventions.  2014;83(5):841- 845.  
6. Mutlak D, Aronson D, Lessick J, Reisner SA, Dabbah S, Agmon Y. Functional tricuspid 
regurgitation in patients with pulmonary hypertension: is pulmonary artery pressure the only 
determinant of regurgitation severity? Chest. 2009;135( 1):115 -121.  
7. Bentham J, Qureshi S, Eicken A, Gibbs J, Ballard G, Thomson J. Early percutaneous valve failure within bioprosthetic tricuspid tissue valve replacements. Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography & Interventions. 2013;82(3):428 -435.  
8. Santhanakrishnan A, Maher KO, Tang E, Khiabani RH, Johnson J, Yoganathan AP. Hemodynamic effects of implanting a unidirectional valve in the inferior vena cava of the Fontan circulation pathway: a n in vitro investigation. American journal of physiology Heart and circulatory 
physiology. 2013;305(10):H1538- 1547.  
9. Corno AF, Zhou J, Tozzi P, von Segesser LK. Off -bypass implantation of a self- expandable valved 
stent between inferior vena cava and righ t atrium. Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic 
surgery. 2003;2(2):166 -169.  
10. Sochman J, Peregrin JH, Pavcnik D, et al. Twin valve caval stent for functional replacement of 
incompetent tricuspid valve: a feasibility animal study. Cardiovascular and int erventional 
radiology. 2011;34(1):174- 179.  
11. Lauten A, Figulla HR, Willich C, et al. Percutaneous caval stent valve implantation: investigation 
of an interventional approach for treatment of tricuspid regurgitation. European heart journal. 
2010;31(10):1274 -1281.  
12. Lauten A, Hamadanchi A, Doenst T, Figulla HR. Caval valve implantation for treatment of 
tricuspid regurgitation: post -mortem evaluation after mid -term follow -up. European heart 
journal. 2014;35(25):1651.  
13. Lauten A, Doenst T, Hamadanchi A, F ranz M, Figulla HR. Percutaneous bicaval valve implantation 
for transcatheter treatment of tricuspid regurgitation: clinical observations and 12 -month 
follow -up. Circulation Cardiovascular interventions. 2014;7(2):268- 272.  
14. Rakita V, Lakhter V, Patil P, O'Neill BP. Intermediate term hemodynamic effects of single inferior vena cava valve implant for the treatment of severe tricuspid regurgitation. Catheterization and 
cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Socie ty for Cardiac Angiography & 
Interventions. 2017.  
15. Rodes -Cabau J, Taramasso M, O'Gara PT. Diagnosis and treatment of tricuspid valve disease: 
current and future perspectives. Lancet. 2016;388(10058):2431 -2442.  
35 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 16. Lancellotti P, Moura L, Pierard LA, et al. European Association of Echocardiography 
recommendations for the assessment of valvular regurgitation. Part 2: mitral and tricuspid regurgitation (native valve disease). Eur J Echocardiogr. 2010;11(4):307- 332.  
17. Dvir D, Waksman R, Barbash IM, et al. Outcomes of patients with chronic lung disease and 
severe aortic stenosis treated with transcatheter versus surgical aortic valve replacement or 
standard therapy: insights from the PARTNER trial (placement of AoRTic TraNscathetER Valve). 
Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2014;63(3):269 -279.  
18. Makkar RR, Jilaihawi H, Mack M, et al. Stratification of outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement according to surgical inoperability for technical vers us clinical reasons. Journal of 
the American College of Cardiology. 2014;63(9):901- 911.  
19. Kappetein AP, Head SJ, Genereux P, et al. Updated standardized endpoint definitions for transcatheter aortic valve implantation: the Valve Academic Research Consort ium-2 consensus 
document (VARC -2). European journal of cardio -thoracic surgery : official journal of the 
European Association for Cardio -thoracic Surgery. 2012;42(5):S45- 60. 
20. Holmes DR, Jr., Mack MJ, Kaul S, et al. 2012 ACCF/AATS/SCAI/STS expert consens us document 
on transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2012;59(13):1200- 1254.  
21. Coylewright M, Mack MJ, Holmes DR, Jr., O'Gara PT. A call for an evidence -based approach to 
the Heart Team for patients with se vere aortic stenosis. Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology. 2015;65(14):1472- 1480.  
22. Green CP, Porter CB, Bresnahan DR, Spertus JA. Development and evaluation of the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire: a new health status measure for heart  failure. Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology. 2000;35(5):1245 -1255.  
23. Passantino A, Lagioia R, Mastropasqua F, Scrutinio D. Short -term change in distance walked in 6 
min is an indicator of outcome in patients with chronic heart failure in clin ical practice. Journal 
of the American College of Cardiology. 2006;48(1):99- 105.  
24. Swank AM, Horton J, Fleg JL, et al. Modest increase in peak VO2 is related to better clinical 
outcomes in chronic heart failure patients: results from heart failure and a controlled trial to 
investigate outcomes of exercise training. Circ Heart Fail. 2012;5(5):579- 585.  
25. Kahn SR. Measurement properties of the Villalta scale to define and classify the severity of the post -thrombotic syndrome. J Thromb Haemost. 2009;7(5):88 4-888.  
26. O'Donnell MJ, McRae S, Kahn SR, et al. Evaluation of a venous -return assist device to treat 
severe post- thrombotic syndrome (VENOPTS). A randomized controlled trial. Thromb Haemost. 
2008;99(3):623 -629.  
27. Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, et al. The European Organization for Research and 
Treatment of Cancer QLQ -C30: a quality -of-life instrument for use in international clinical trials 
in oncology. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993;85(5):365- 376.  
28. Easson AM, Bezjak A, Ross S, Wright JG. The ability o f existing questionnaires to measure 
symptom change after paracentesis for symptomatic ascites. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;14(8):2348 -
2357.  
29. Schunemann HJ, Dorn J, Grant BJ, Winkelstein W, Jr., Trevisan M. Pulmonary function is a long-term predictor of mortality in the general population: 29 -year follow -up of the Buffalo Health 
Study. Chest. 2000;118(3):656 -664.  
30. Dunn W, Jamil LH, Brown LS, et al. MELD accurately predicts mortality in patients with alcoholic 
hepatitis. Hepatology. 2005;41(2):353 -358.  
31. Iscan ZH, Vural KM, Bahar I, Mavioglu L, Saritas A. What to expect after tricuspid valve 
replacement? Long- term results. European journal of cardio -thoracic surgery : official journal of 
the European Association for Cardio -thoracic Surgery. 2007;32(2):296 -300. 
36 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 32. American Thoracic S, American College of Chest P. ATS/ACCP Statement on cardiopulmonary 
exercise testing. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003;167(2):211 -277.  
33. Laboratories ATSCoPSfCPF. ATS statement: guidelines for the six -minute walk test. Am J Resp ir 
Crit Care Med. 2002;166(1):111- 117.  
   
39 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 RESEARCH SUBJECT INFORMATION AND CONSENT FORM  
 
 
TITLE OF RESEARCH STUDY : The HOVER Study:  Heterotopic Implantation O f the Sapien 3  Transcatheter 
Aortic  Valve in the Inferior VEna cava for the treatment of severe tricuspid Regurgitation.  
 
PROTOCOL NO:  Version 2. 3 
WIRB ® Protocol #20161648 
 
SPONSOR: Henry Ford Hospital 
 LEAD  INVESTIGATOR and  SITE:  
Brian O’Neill, MD  
Henry Ford Hospital  
Center for Structural Heart Disease  
2799 West Grand Blvd.  
Clara Ford Pavilion # 440  
Detroit, MI 48202  
313-970-6483  (p) 
313-916-2819  (f) 
  
LOCAL INVESTIGATOR /study doctor :  {First, Last Name, Degree}  
 
LOCAL SITE: { Name , Department,  and Address where patients will be seen}  
 
LOCAL STUDY -RELATED PHO NE NUMBER(S):  
         DAYTIME PHONE NUMBER:  
         24-HOUR EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBER:  
 
 
 Why you are being invited to take part in a research study  
Your tricuspid valve is very leaky. This leakiness is causing symptoms, such as shortness of breath, and swelling in your legs or stomach. This leakiness may be affecting the other organs in your body. If the 
valve is not fixed, you will continue to have these problems.  
 
The current standard treatment is to repair or replace the leaking valve with an artificial val ve using 
open heart surgery. However, you are at a very high risk of experiencing serious complications from this treatment. Because of this, we invite you to take part in a research study investigating a way to replace the function of the tricuspid valve without using open heart surgery. Instead, the valve is replaced 
during a cardiac catheterization where an artificial valve is inserted through a large vein in your body. 
Your old tricuspid valve will not be replaced as is the normal practice with su rgery.  Instead, a valve will 
be inserted into your body which will assist your leaky valve with its function.  The valve used in this 
research study is FDA -approved to replace the aortic valve. It is designed to replace the aortic valve, not 
the tricuspid  valve. It is also designed to be inserted through an artery, not a vein. It is not FDA approved 
to use as a replacement for function of the tricuspid valve. Therefore, use of this valve in this research is experimental and investigational.  
40 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
Who can I talk to?  
{Non- Henry Ford sites replace information in bolded italics with site -specific information}  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, contact the research 
team at Phone: 313-970-6483  or send a letter to  
 
Brian O’Neill, MD  
Henry Ford Hospital  
Center for Structural Heart Disease  
2799 West Grand Blvd.  
Clara Ford Pavilion # 440  
Detroit, MI 48202 
 
 
This research has been reviewed and approved by Western Institutional Review Board. You may talk to 
them at 1 -800-562-4789 or 360 -252-2500, 1019 39th Avenue SE Suite 120, Puyallup Washington 98374 -
2115, or e -mail them at: Help@wirb.com for any of the follo wing:  
 
• Your questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.  
• You cannot reach the research team.  
• You want to talk to someone besides the research team.  
• You have questions about your rights as a research subject.  
• You want to get information or provide input about this research.  
 
WIRB is a group of people who perform independent review of research.  
 WIRB will not be able to answer some study -specific questions, such as questions about appointment 
times.  However, you may contac t WIRB if the research staff cannot be reached or if you wish to talk to 
someone other than the research staff.  
 Disclosure Of Potential Conflict Of Interest  
In addition to serving as the principal investigator (PI) on the study, Dr. Brian O’Neill also ser ves as a 
consultant for Edwards Lifesciences LLC. In this position he receives funding from Edwards for his 
expertise. Edwards is providing partial financial support for this study in form of a research grant. 
Involvement as a consultant is independent of this study and has no financial relationship to the 
enrollment or conduct of this study. Although none of the Henry Ford Health System doctors are 
supposed to let his/her financial interests affect the study, this may not always be possible.  
The investigat or(s) in this study are also healthcare providers. They are interested in the knowledge to 
be gained from this study and are interested in your well- being. Henry Ford Health System  receives 
funding from Edwards in form of a research grant to support this r esearch study. However, investigators 
do not  receive salary or other financial support from Edwards  in exchange for conducting this study.  
 
 
 
41 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Why are we doing this research?  
Blood that flows between different chambers of your heart must flow through a heart valve. These 
valves open up enough so that blood can flow through. They then close, keeping blood from flowing backward.  
 The tricuspid valve separates the right lower heart chamber (the right ventricle) from the right upper 
heart chamber ( right atrium).  
 
Tricuspid regurgitation is a disorder in which this valve does not close tightly enough. This problem causes blood to flow backward into the right upper heart chamber (atrium) when the right lower heart chamber (ventricle) contracts.  
  
 
 
The current standard treatment is to repair or replace the leaking valve with an artificial value using 
open heart surgery. However, some patients are too sick to undergo surgery.  

42 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
A few  years ago , the FDA approved a new method to treat seriously diseased aortic valves. This 
procedure repairs the aortic valve without removing the old, damaged valve. Instead, it wedges a replacement valve into the aortic valve’s place. The procedure is called a transcatheter aortic valve 
replacement (TAVR) or transcatheter a ortic valve implantation (TAVI).  
 
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement involves threading a catheter through an artery into the heart 
and then threading a collapsed replacement valve to the valve site through a catheter. Once the new 
valve is expanded, i t pushes the old valve out of the way and the replacement valve takes over the job of 
regulating blood flow.  
 The Edwards SAPIEN 3
TM (S3) Transcatheter Heart Valve are valves that are FDA- approved for 
transcatheter aortic valve replacement. The Edwards SAP IEN 3TM Transcatheter  Heart Valve is not FDA 
approved to surgically implant to replace the function of the tricuspid valve.  Therefore, use of the The 
Edwards SAPIEN 3TM Transcatheter Heart Valve in this research is experimental and investigational.  
 The p urpose of this research is to try using the The Edwards SAPIEN 3
TM Transcatheter Heart Valve as an 
implant to replace the function of the triscuspid valve. The Edwards SAPIEN 3TM Transcatheter Heart 
Valve is designed to replace the aortic valve, not the tricuspid valve. It is also designed to be inserted through an artery, not a vein. This research will place the valve at the junction of the inferior vena cava (large vein that drains the lower body) and the heart to prevent blood from the heart from flowing backwards to the lower body. This research will be the first time the safety and effectiveness of using the The Edwards SAPIEN 3
TM Transcatheter Heart Valve as a replacement for the function of the 
tricuspid valve is tested in humans as part of a clinical trial.  
    
 
     
 
There is very limited experience with surgically implanting the The Edwards SAPIEN 3
TM (S3) 
Transcatheter Heart Valve to replace the function of the tricuspid  valve with fewer than thirty  patients 
reported in the literature. The research team at the lead investigative site has used this valve to replace 
the aortic valve. However, before starting this research study , Dr. O’Neill, who is also the lead principal 
investigator, has performed research into the field of transcatheter valve replacement.  In preparation 
for this research protocol, Dr. O’Neill performed extensive research into the field including a review of all the literature available.  He has spoken with physicians who are performing this procedure in 
Germany, and also participated in the first procedure which was performed in the United States.  Dr. O’Neill has worked closely with your doctors  participating  in this study along with an  excellent team of 
cardiothoracic surgeons who have performed hundreds of tricuspid valve replacements over the years, and who will be involved in all parts of your workup and procedure.   
  

43 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 How long will the research last?  
We expect that you will be in this research study for up to 5 years. You will have a visit with one of the 
doctors involved in the research study at 30 -days, 6 -months, and 1 year, and then annually after that for 
up to 5 years . In addition to scheduled vis its, you may also be contacted via the telephone in -between 
visits to see how you are doing and schedule your follow –up visits.  
 
How many people will be studied?  
This study will take place at several institutions. We expect up to 15 people in total to be e nrolled in the 
research study .   Up to 10 patients will be enrolled at this institution.  
 
Do I have to participate?  
Your participation in this study is voluntary.  You may decide not to participate or you may leave the study at any time.  Your decision will not result in any penalty or loss of benefits to which you are 
entitled.  
 
Your participation in this study may be stopped at any time by the study doctor or the sponsor without your consent for any reason, including:  
• if it is in your best int erest;  
• If you do not consent to continue in the study after being told of changes in the research that may affect you.  
 What happens if I say yes, I want to be in this research?  
If you choose to be included in the study, you will have the following studies  performed if they have not 
already been done as part of your regular clinical care, to determine if you would meet the criteria for 
inclusion in the study.  
  Prior to the Procedure  
o Physical Exam including vital signs  
o NYHA classification  
o 12-Lead Electrocardiogram (EKG)  
o Chest X -ray 
o Echocardiogram (heart ultrasound)  
o CT scan (computed axial tomography) of your chest, abdomen, and pelvis  
o Cardiopulmonary exercise stress test (VO2)  
o Lower extremity venous dopplers  
o 6-minute walk test  
o Right heart catheterization, intravascular ultrasound of the inferior vena cava and right 
ventriculogram  
o Left heart catheterization  
o Quality of Life Assessment (Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire KCCQ)  
o ESAS:AM and EORTC QLQ- C30 questionnaire  
o Formal Frailty Assess ment  
o Villal ta Scale  
 Clinical laboratory tests including  
o Comprehensive metabolic panel  
o CBC with differential and platelet count  
44 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 o Liver panel including AST and ALT  
o Albumin  
o B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)  
o  LDH 
o Haptoglobin  
o PTT or PT/INR  
o CK/CKMB and/or Troponi ns ≤ 72 hours before the procedure  
 
At your subsequent follow up visits  
o NYHA classification  
o Standard 12 -lead ECG  
o Comprehensive transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)  
o Clinical laboratory tests (see above)  
o Functional Assessments:  
o 6-minute walk test  
o Quality of Life Assessment (Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire KCCQ)  
o Chest X -ray examination  
o CT scan (at 6 -month visit only)  
o ESAS:AM and EORTC QLQ- C30 questionnaire s 
 
• Finally, you will have doctors’ visits during enrollment with a heart failure specialist, an 
interventional cardiologist, and a cardiothoracic surgeon. You will see some, if not all of these 
doctors at subsequent follow up visits.  
• During the procedure you will be put to sleep by the anesthesia team using medications that will 
make you sl eep and prevent you from having any pain. You will also be given heparin which is a 
medication that will thin your blood during the procedure.  
• A metal stent will be placed in the vein leading to your heart which will allow the heart valve to remain implant ed. After the procedure you will remain in the hospital for several days while the 
doctors work to ensure that the valve is functioning properly.  
• After you leave the hospital you will be seen at 30 -days, 6 months, 1 -year, and then annually up 
to 5 years. I f you are not feeling well you may be seen on a more frequent basis by members of 
the study team or your primary care physician.  
• These doctor visits should only take up to 1 hour based on how you are feeling.  
• A total of up to 50mL of blood will be drawn fr om you at your follow up visits, but most likely 
less than this.  
• At your visits you will speak with the members of the study team and research coo rdina tor. 
• It is important to understand that although studies have shown this is a safe procedure to perform in humans, it has not been studied extensively in a large trial which is why at this time the procedure is experimental. The valve which will be im planted has been studied in large scale 
clinical trials which have proved it is safe, although it has not been implanted in the position in which we plan for you.  
• After the invasive procedure  is performed there are no additional invasive planned procedures 
as part of the study protocol. You will undergo routine lab testing and ultrasound as part of the 
protoco l. However, if any additional invasive procedures are required, they will be explained to 
you and your consent for them will be obtained on a different form.  
• As there currently are no long term studies to tell us how you will improve with this procedure, 
as well as how the valve will function in the part of your body in which it will be placed, we will 
45 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 be performing laboratory testing, ultrasound, and q uestionnaires to see how you are feeling, to 
see how your body responds to the valve, and to ensure the va lve functions properly in its 
position.  
• If you choose not to be included in the procedure, you will continue to have follow up 
appointments with your doctors which will likely include blood testing and ultrasound, although 
this will be decided between you and your doctor.  
 Once you decide to participate in this trial, and if you qualify, you will be treated with the valve. If there are any unexpected findings from this procedure, for example a change in the way the valve functions, you will be notified in a timely manner and counseled regarding any additional procedures which may or 
may not need to be performed.  
 
What are my responsibilities if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this research:  
1. You will need to follow up with the study doctors as outlined in the consent form.  
2. You will need to agree to have the follow up blood testing and other follow up testing 
performed.  
3. You will need to notify your study doctors if there is a change in how you feel to determine if this is due to the pl acement of the valve.    
4. You will need to notify the doctors if you are admitted to the hospital for any reason.  
 This valve can form blood clots that can lead to serious life -threatening side effects. During the 
procedure you will be given drugs that will stop your blood from clotting. After the procedure you will 
need to take medicine to prevent blood clots for the rest of your life.  
 If you expire during study participation, your family/next -of-kin will be asked to allow an autopsy.  
 
What happens if I say no, I do not want to be in this research?  
You may decide not to take part in the research and it will not be he ld against you. It will in no way 
affect your relationship with the study doctor. Instead of being in this research study, your choices may 
include: The continuation of your medicines for your condition, finding a surgeon who would agree to valve surgery and re -consideration of valve surgery if your condition should improve in the future.  
 
What happens if I say yes, but I change my mind later?  
If you agree to take part in the research now and if you decide to  stop at any time, it will not be held 
against yo u. Again, it will in no way affect your relationship with the study doctor.  
 
If you decide to leave the research, then you may not undergo the recommended follow up to make 
sure that your body is functioning properly with the device in place. In addition, any changes in the valve 
that may affect your health may not be noticed.  
 If you decide to leave the research, contact the investigator so that the investigator can make note of 
this and notify the proper officials who are also involved with the monitoring  of the trial.  
 
If you stop being in the research, already collected data may not be removed from the study database. You will be asked whether the investigator can collect data from your routine medical care. If you agree, this data will be handled the sa me as research data.  
 
46 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Is there any way being in this study could be bad for me?  
We have limited knowledge about the risks of using the SAPIEN 3  Transcatheter Valve for replacement 
of the tricuspid valve.  
 
The known risks of the valve replacement procedures in general include bleeding, infection, stroke, 
death, cardiac arrest, pacemaker implantation, allergic reactions, emergency open heart surgery,  
emergency blood transfusion, prolonged hospital stay, rena l failure, groin lymphocele, limb ischemia, 
myocardial infarction, and injury to adjacent structures including nerves, blood vessels, or other 
structures.  
 
Pleural effusions ( excess fluid that accumulates in the space that surrounds the lungs ) may occur ei ther 
immediately post -operatively, or at follow up.  
 
There are risks associated with stenting of the vessel for valve implantation. These include migration of 
the stent and injury to the vessels of the heart or the heart itself, as well as venous thrombosi s and 
stroke.  
 
You may need surgery to remove the valve.  
 Although it is impossible to predict which, if any, of the above risks may occur with your procedure, based on our experience of using the Edwards  SAPIEN 3
TM Transcatheter Valve to replace the aortic 
valve, the likelihood of each of these risks can be best estimated as follows:  
 Occasional:  Bleeding, infection, pacemaker implantation, allergic reactions, prolonged hospital stay, 
renal failure  
 Rare: Emergency blood transfusion, groin lymphocele, limb  ischemia, myocardial infarction, injury to 
adjacent structures including nerves, blood vessels, stroke, death, cardiac arrest, emergency open heart surgery . 
   
The risks of using the Edwards  SAPIEN 3
TM Transcatheter Valve to replace the tricuspid valve may be 
different than the risks of using the Edwards  SAPIEN 3TM Transcatheter Valve to replace the aortic valve. 
Because of the extremely limited experience with this procedure, the exact side effects, their severity, and their frequency are essentia lly unknown.  
 There is a risk that the procedure may not work and may make your heart condition worse.  
 With any new procedure, physicians get better over time. Since the physicians have no prior experience 
in performing this procedure in humans to replac e the tricuspid valve, risks may occur more often or be 
more severe than when physicians have more experience in performing this procedure.  
 Because this treatment is experimental, there may be risks that are currently un known. These risk s may 
be a minor inconvenience or severe enough to cause disability and death.  
 
The tests that you undergo in preparation for the procedure may also have risks . The known risks 
associated with each test will be explained to you . . The risks may include but are not limited t o: 
bleeding, infection, stroke, death, cardiac arrest, pacemaker implantation, allergic reactions, emergency 
open heart surgery, emergency blood transfusion, prolonged hospital stay, renal failure, groin 
47 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 lymphocele, limb ischemia, myocardial infarction, in jury to adjacent structures including nerves, blood 
vessels, or other structures.  
 
In addition to the risks which may occur during the procedure, the following risks may be encountered 
during your workup for the procedure.  
 
• CT scan : There is a small risk you may have an allergic reaction with the contrast which is given 
to you during this test. This reaction can be very serious in some cases and cause death. In 
addition, there is also a risk that the contrast given to you may cause problems to your kidneys and you may require dialysis.  
• Cardiopulmonary exercise stress test : You will be monitored closely during this procedure. 
However, in rare circumstances you may suffer abnormal beating of the heart which may 
threaten your life and cau se death or permanent disability.  
• Echocardiogram : In certain circumstances, a contrast agent may be required to evaluate your 
heart function. In rare circumstances, yo u may develop an allergic reaction to this contrast 
which could cause death or perma nent disability.  
• Right and left heart catheterization : You may experience bleeding, infection, stroke, death, 
cardiac arrest, pacemaker implantation, allergic reactions, emergency open heart surgery,  
emergency blood transfusion, prolonged hospital stay, renal failure, groin lymphocele, limb 
ischemia, myocardial infarction, and injury to adjacent structures including nerves, blood 
vessels, or other structures.  
 
Although it is impossible to predict which, if any, of the aforementioned risks may occur with your procedure, the likelihood of each of these risks can be best estimated as follows.  
 Being a part of this study while pregnant may expose the unborn child to significant risks as you will be 
exposed to radiation during the initial procedure, CT scan of the ch est and body and chest x -ray. If you 
are a woman capable of having children, you must use a medically acceptable form of birth control. 
Medically acceptable contraceptives include: surgical sterilization (such as a tubal ligation or 
hysterectomy), approved  hormonal contraceptives (such as birth control pills, patches, implants or 
injections), barrier methods (such as a condom or diaphragm) used with a spermicide, or an intrauterine 
device (IUD). Contraceptive measures such as Plan B sold for emergency use after unprotected sex is not 
an acceptable method for routine use. If you do become pregnant or have unprotected sex any time 
after signing the consent form, you must notify the study physician immediately.  
 If you take part in this research, you will be ex posed to radiation from fluoroscopy needed for the 
implantation of the experimental Edwards  SAPIEN 3
TM Transcatheter Valve, 3  catheterization 
procedures to prepare for implantation, a ventriculography procedure if the physician is unable to adequately assess your condition by echocardiogram as well as radiation from 2 chest and abdomen CT 
scans and 4  chest x -rays for stent sizing  and implant follow -up. Not all parts of your body receive the 
same amount of radiation from this experimental valve implant procedure and your heart and breast 
individually receive a larger amount. Based on current scientific understanding, there is a small risk of causing cancer from this amount of radiation exposure. The radiation dose we have discussed is what you will receive from this study only and does not include any exposure you may have received or will receive from other tests or treatments.  The additional radiation exposure is a minimal risk except for the 
fluoroscopy guidance placement where skin injury could result.  
 
 
48 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Are there costs involved with participating in this research?  
 
The investigational drug/device will not be provided by the spon sor. The cost of the device, the 
procedure to implant the device, and all supporting medical care will be billed to your insurance. Your 
insurance may not cover some or all of these procedures, in which case, the costs will be billed to you. 
Before you agr ee to be in the study, the research team will talk to your insurance provider and 
determine what costs are likely to be billed to you. In some cases, insurance will not pay for services 
ordinarily covered because these services were performed in a research  study . 
 
You and your insurance company will be charged for the health care services that you would ordinarily be responsible to pay. In some cases, insurance will not pay for services ordinarily covered because these services were performed in a research study. You should check with your insurance to see what services will be covered by your insurance and what you will be responsible to pay.  
 
You will not be paid for being in this study.  
 
Will being in this study help me  anyway?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from taking part in this research. However, possible benefits include improvement in your level of energy, breathing, functioning of vital organs, functioning 
of your heart, and decreases in the amount of fluid that may have been built up in your stomach, legs, 
chest and lungs.  
 What happens to the information we collect?  
Efforts will be made to limit your personal information, including research study and medical records, to 
people who have a need to review this information. We ca nnot promise complete secrecy. For example, 
though the study team has put in safeguards to protect your information, there is always a potential risk of loss of confidentiality.  
 Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include the IRB, Henry Ford Hospital , Henry 
Ford Health System  and its affiliates , and other representatives of these organizations, and the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA).  
 The, monitors, auditors, the IRB, and the Food and Drug Administration will be granted direct acce ss to 
the portion of your medical records which are related to this research study for verification of the 
research procedures and date. You will need to sign a separate “Authorization to use and disclose your 
protected health information” to be a part of this research study.  
 We may publish the results of this research. However, we will keep your name and other identifying information confidential.  
 A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by U.S.  
Law. This website will not include information that can identify you. At most, the website will include a summary of the results. You can search this website at any time.  
 
Federal law provides additional protections of your personal information. These are  described in an 
attached Authorization document referred to above.  
 
 
49 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Can I be removed from the research without my permission?  
The person in charge of the research study or the sponsor can remove you from the research study 
without your approval. Possible  reasons for removal include if the research being conducted is no longer 
in your best interest. The sponsor can also end the research study early.  
 We will tell you about any new information that may affect your health, welfare, or choice to stay in the 
research.  
 
What if I am injured because of taking part in this research?  
{Non- Temple sites replace information in bolded italics with site -specific information}  
If you are injured as a result of taking part in this research, immediately notify the research team and 
they will arrange for you to get immediate medical care. There is no commitment by Henry For d 
Hospital , Henry Ford Health System  or its subsidiaries  to provide monetary compensation or free 
medical care to you in the event of a research -related injury. If you have a research -related injury, 
please contact Dr. O’Neill at ( 313) 970 -6483  during regular hours and at ( 313) 916- 2600 after hours and 
on weekends  and holidays.  
The study patient has been informed of the nature of the study, agrees to its provisions, and has provided consent as approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the respective clinical site.  
 Signature Block for Adult Subject Capable of Consent  
 
Your signature documents your permission to take part in this research.  
 
   
Signature of subject   Date and Time  
  
Printed name of subject  
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date and Time  
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
  
50 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 APPENDIX A :  HOVER ECHO PROTOCOL  
-left parasternal long axis  
 -Coronary sinus dimension 
 -proximal RVOT dimension 
 
 
 
-left parasternal RV inflow  
-2D: distinguish functional vs. degenerative/rheumatic/carcinoid TR etiologies  
 -Color Doppler:  
  -identify TR etiology  
  -help identify TR severity  
 -Vena contracta: >7 mm is in favor of severe TR; <6mm -   non -severe TR  
 -Continuous wave Doppler  
-assess density/contour of TR signal  
-measure RVSP 
 
-left parasternal RV outflow  
 -distal RVOT dimension  
 -pulsed wave/continuous Doppler of RVOT (RVOT VTI)  
 -RV stroke volume  
  
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
  

51 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
  
-left parasternal short axis  
-2D: distinguish functional vs. degenerative/rheumatic/carcinoid TR etiologies  
-2D: proximal/distal RVOT dimension  
 
 -Color Doppler:  
  -identify TR etiology  
  -help identify TR severity  
 -Continuous wave Doppler  
-assess density/contour of TR signal  
-measure RVSP 
 - pulsed wave/continuou s Doppler of RVOT (RVOT VTI)  
 -RV stroke volume  
  
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   

52 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
-Apical 4 chamber  
 
 
 
-2D: distinguish functional vs. degenerative/rheumatic/carcinoid TR etiologies  
-2D: Measure tenting area and coaptation distance 
-Coronary sinus dimension (apical 4 chamber tilted inferiorly)  
-RV TAPSE (*obtained from whichever apical view with best alignment)  
 -Color Doppler:  
  -identify TR etiology  
  -help identify TR severity  
 -PISA:  
  -lower Nyquist limit to 15 -40 cm/s  
-EROA >= 40 mm2 or Regurgitant Volume >= 45 mL suggestive of severe TR  
 -Pulsed Doppler of TV inflow  
-get E/A with sample volume at TV tips; E >= 1 m/s suggests severe TR  
 -Continuous wave Doppler  
-assess density/contour of TR signal  
-measure RVSP 
 -RV dp/dt (from best TR signal)  
 
 -RV lateral tricuspid annulus tissue Doppler (*obtained from whichever apical view 
with best alignment)  
 
 
 
   
 
 

53 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  -RV Tei index (tissue Doppler) (*obtained from whichever apical view with best 
alignment)  
  
 -RA volume index (via area- length or method of discs)  
 
 
 
    
 
   
 
   
    
 
    
 
   
 
   
 
 -RV-focused apical 4 -chamber 
 

54 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
 
 -RV basal and mid dimensions  
 
-RVEF (2D planimetry of end -sys and end -dias area)  *consider contrast 
microbubble contrast  
 -
 
 
 -RV global longitudinal strain 
 
 
  
 
-RV modified apical 4 -chamber  

55 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
 
 
-subcostal views with IVC /SVC  and R/L hepatic vein visualization  
 -hepatic vein flow reversal  
 -Bubble study – looking at reflux in hepatic veins  
 -measure IVC  flow  and hepatic vein dimension  
 -measure SVC flow and dimensions  
 -measure distance between hepatic vein os and IVC -RA junction 
 -measure RV free wall thickness  
 -(post CAVI) identify position of Edwards -Sapien valve in relation to hepatic vein os 
and IVC -RA junction  
 
-3D TTE of TV (obtained in any view with greatest TV visualization)  
-distinguish functional vs. degenerative/rheumatic/carcinoid TR etiologies  
-Measure tenting area and coaptation distance  
-Color Doppler:  
  -identify TR etiology  
  -help identify TR severity  
 -Vena contracta: EROA > 75 mm2 by 3D C olor – severe TR  
 
-3D TTE of RV  
 -quantify RV volume with full volume acquisition 
  References:  
 Recommendations for Cardiac Chamber Quantification by Echocardiography in Adults: An Update from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging, JASE Jan 2015; 28:1 -39. 
  European Association of Echocardiography recommendations for the assessment of valvular regurgitation. Part 2: mitral and tricuspid regurgitation (native valve disease) European Jour nal of Echocardiography (2010) 11, 307 -332  
   
  

56 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 APPENDIX B :  VARC -2 ENDPOINT DEFINITIONS  
 

57 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
 

58 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 =  

59 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  

60 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
 

61 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  

62 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  

63 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  

64 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020  
  

65 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 APPENDIX C:  HOVER CT PROTOCOL AND PATIENT DOSE 
ESTIMATION  
 
 
Scanner:  Philips iCT 256  
 Dose estimation for an average adult (BMI < 30 and equivalent to 32 cm. diameter water equivalent phantom)  
 
I. CT Protocol:  
 
Scan 1:  Topogram     
 Dual projection –  Cardiac c hest and upper abdomen  
Centered around the diaphragm  
 
Scan 2:  Spiral Retrospective ly ECG Gated acquisition  
 Single Post -contrast phase  
FOV: Z –Axis: Superior cardiac margin down to T12 vertebra  (~10 -12 cm) 
 
kVp       -  100 kVp for BMI < 30; 120 kVp for BMI > 30  
mAs (mA)     -  400(242) @ 100 kVp  
Beam collimation  -  0.6 x 128 mm  
Pitch     -  0.2  
Gantry speed    -  0.27 s  
   
Contrast:  Omnipaque 350 IV,  60 cc @ 5 cc/s followed by saline 30 cc @ 5 cc/s.  
Bolus track in MPA; 150 HU threshold; Minimum scan delay  
 
     
Reconstruction:  
 
Iterative reconstruction (iDose (L3) / IMR (L1) as required)  
Phases:  20%, 30%, 40% R -R interval  
Multiphase:  0 – 90%  
Axial slice thickness/overlap –  0.8 mm/50%  
COR & SAG Reconstruction 1 mm.  
Axial slice thickness 3 mm (ST Kernel)  
 
II. Patient Dose estimatio n: 
 
66 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 Scan  mAs2 kV2 CTDI vol  
mGy  DLP 
mGy*cm.  Z axis FOV  
cm. 
Topogram  30 120 0.01  1.5 30 cm.  
Spiral  400 100 15.4  265 12 cm1. 
 
Total DLP ( 1.5 + 265 ) = 266.5  mGy -cm. 
Estimated Effective Dose = 271.5  mGy -cm. x 0.015 = ~ 3.8 mSv (3.5 -  4.5 mSv)  
 
1. Z axis FOV for spiral scanning will be superior cardiac margin down to T12 vertebra.   
2. Exposure factors will be adjusted depending on the patient’s BMI (i.e. smaller than normal BMI < 20 and larger than normal BMI > 30).  Automatic Exposure Control ( Cardiac DoseRight) will be utilized as 
appropriate.  
3. Effective dose conversion factor based on European guidelines on quality criteria for computed tomography EUR 16262.  
 
All studies are supervised by a Board certified Radiologist.  
  
67 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 APPENDIX D:  INCLUSION/EXCLUSION CHECKLIST  
I. Study Information 
 
Protocol Title:  Heterotopic Implantation Of the Edwards -Sapien  3 Transcatheter 
Aortic Valve in the Inferior Vena cava for the treatment of severe 
tricuspid Regurgitation  
IRB Number:   
Principal Investigator:  Brian O’Neill, MD  
 
 II. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
(From IRB -approved protocol)  Yes No Supporting 
Documentation * 
1. Patients must be at least 21 years old          
2. The patient must have severe, 
symptomatic (ACC/AHA Stage D symptoms) tricuspid regurgitation (TR) 
as assessed by 2D echocardiogram with 
evidence of peripheral and central venous congestion (specifically lower extremity edema and abdominal 
ascites requiring  diuretics.)            
3. The patient must be evaluated by a 
“heart team” of physicians including an interventional cardiologist, cardiothoracic surgeon, heart failure 
specialist, and imaging specialist, and 
presented for review at a local multi -
disciplinary conference.  By consens us, 
the heart team must agree (and verify in the case review process) that valve implantation will likely benefit the 
patient.          
68 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 4. 4. The heart team must agree that 
medical factors preclude operation, 
based on a conclusion that the probability of death or serious, 
irreversible morbidity exceeds the 
probability of meaningful 
improvement.  Also, other factors 
which may increase the patients perceived surgical risk for inclusion in the trial will be clearly delineated if 
they are present.  These include, but 
are not limited to the following as defined by VARC 2:  Frailty, Hostile chest, porcelain aorta, IMA or other critical conduit crossing the midline or adherent to the posterior table of 
sternum, severe right ventricular (RV) 
dysfunction.  The surgeons' 
consultation notes shall specify the medical or anatomic factors leading to that conclusion.  At least one of the cardiac surgeon assessors must have 
interviewed and examined the patient.          
  
 
5. The study patient provides informed 
consent and agrees to comply with all required post -procedure follow -up 
visits, including annual visits up to 5  
years          
Exclusion Criteria  
(From IRB -approved protocol)   
1. Heart Team assessment of operability 
(the heart team considers the patient 
to be a good surgical candidate)          
2. Evidence of an acute myocardial 
infarction ≤ 1 month (30 days) before the intended treatment [defined as: Q wave MI, or non -Q wave MI with total 
CK elevation of CK- MB ≥ twice normal 
in the presence of MB elevation and/or 
troponin level elevation (WHO 
definition)]          
3. Untreated, severe, left sided valvular 
heart disease including mitral 
regurgitation or stenosis, and aortic 
regurgitation or stenosis          
69 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 4. Mean pulmonary artery pressures 
≥40m mHG and PVR >4 woods units as 
assessed by right heart 
catheterization               
5. Any therapeutic invasive cardiac 
procedure resulting in a permanent 
implant that is performed within 30 days of the index procedure.  Examples 
of permanent implant would include 
any new heart valve.  Implantation of a 
permanent pacemaker is excluded.          
6. Patients with planned concomitant 
surgical or transcatheter ablation for 
Atrial Fibrillation          
7. Leukopenia (WBC < 3000 cell/mL), 
acute anemia (Hgb < 9 g/dL), Thrombocytopenia (Plt < 50,000 
cell/mL)          
8. Hemodynamic or respiratory instability 
requiring inotropic support, mechanical ventilation or mechanical heart assistance within 30 days of screening 
evaluation               
9. Need for emergency surgery for any 
reason     
10. Left ventricular ejection fraction <40%     
11. Echocardiographic evidence of intra-
cardiac mass, thrombus or vegetation     
12. Active upper GI bleeding within 3 
months (90 days) prior to procedure     
13. A known contraindication or 
hypersensitivity to all anticoagulation regimens, or inability to be 
anticoagulated for the study procedure     
14. Recent CVA clinically confirmed (by 
neurologist) or neuroimaging confirmed stroke or transient ischemic 
attack (TIA) within 6 months (180 days) 
of the procedure     
15. Estimated life expect ancy < 1 year     
70 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 16. Expectation that patient will not 
improve despite treatment of tricuspid 
regurgitation     
17. Currently participating in another 
investigational cardiac device study or 
any other clinical trial, including drugs 
or biologics. Note: Trials requiring 
extended follow- up for products that 
were investi gational, but have since 
become commercially available, are not 
considered investigational trials     
18. Active bacterial endocarditis within 6 
months (180 days) of procedure     
19. Patients with signs or symptoms of SVC 
syndrome, or hepatic cirrhosis not felt 
due to passive congestion from TR     
20. Subject unable to personally provide 
informed consent     
21. FEV1<30% of predicted     
22. MELD score >21     
 
 *All subject files must include supporting documentation to confirm subject eligibility.  The method of 
confirmation can include, but is not limited to, laboratory test results, radiology tes t results, and medical 
record review.    III. Statement of Eligibility  
 
This subject is   eligible  /  ineligible for participation in the study.  
  
Signature:  Date:  
Printed Name:  
   
71 
  V2.3  24 Apr 2020 APPENDIX E:  HIGH RISK DOCUMENTATION  
 
 
 
Documentation of High Risk/Inoperability  
 
Subject ID#____________ was evaluated by the heart team on (date) ____________ and is unsuitable 
for surgery due to:  
☐Probability of death or serious, irreversible morbidity exceeds the probability of meaningful 
improvement (specifically, the probability of death or serious, irreversible morbidity is ≥ 50%).   
☐The subject was interviewed and examined by the heart failure physician (name) 
__________________, MD on (date): __________________  
☐The subject was interviewed and examined by the cardiac surgeon (name) __________________, MD 
on (date): __________________  
☐Other factors, which would elevate the patient’s surgical risk which are unique to this patient and not reflected in the risk score calculation include*: 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________  
*The cardiac surgeon’s consultations note must specify the medical or anatomic  factors leading to this 
conclusion.  
______________________________   ________________________  
Signature of Site Investigator    Date  
 