The Effect  of Vytor in on Intracellular  Lipid  and Inflammation  in Obese  Subjects   
 
Version: 03/27/2012  
 
 
 INVESTIGATOR :  Paresh Dandona, M.D., Ph.D    
  
 SUB-INVESTIGATOR (S):  Ajay Chaudhuri, M.D.   
     Sandeep Dhindsa, MD.  
     Antonio Makdissi MD  
     Reema Patel MD  
     Husam Ghanim, PhD  
 
 
Study Site:  
Diabetes -Endocrinology Center of Western New York  
Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism  
115 Flint Road  
Amherst, NY 14221  
Phone Number: 716 -626-7998  or 716 -626-7999  
 
 
*Corresponding Investigator – pdandona@kaleidahealth.org  
 
 
 
SOURCE OF SUPPORT: Merck Pharmaceuticals  
 
 
NCT0142032 8 
 
Abstract  
 
Following  the  first  demonstration  by  our  group  that  macronutrient  (glucose,  cream  and  a  high  fat  high 
carbohydrate  meal) intake  results  in increased  ROS generation  and oxidati ve stress  at the cellular and molecular 
level,  we have  now shown  in our preliminary  data that cream intake  induces  comprehensive  inflammation  as 
reflected  in increased intranu clear NFB binding,  decreased  IBα expression,  increased  expression  of IL-1β, 
IL-12, TNFα  and other  pro-inflammatory  mediators.  While carrying  out these  experi ments, we asked whether 
cream  intake  was associated  with an uptake  of lipid by peripheral  blood  mononuc lear cells  (MNC).  Indeed, 
there  was a signi ficant increa se in intracellular lipid which was visualized  as intracellular  lipid droplets.  The 
increase in intracellular lipid droplets was associated with an increa se in intracellular superoxide  generation; the 
expression  of CD68,  a  marker  for macrophages;  and PECAM,  the adhesion  molecule  which  mediates  trans - 
endothelial  transfer  of leucocytes.  We also found  that the lipid fractions  to increase  were  cholesterol  ester, 
triglyceride and fatty acids.  In view  of the tantalizing  observation  that the lipid droplet laden  MNC appeared  to 
be monocytes,  looked  like foam cells and the fact that CD68 expression  had increased,  there  is a possibility  that 
foam cells may be formed in peripheral  circulation  by monocytes  after a lipid rich meal. This simple model of 
foam cell formation  also lends  itself for the study of the  effect  of various  lipid lowering drugs.  Our investigation 
will be the first to  study this novel  paradigm. We plan to study  the effect  of a cholesterol  lowering  agent, 
Vytorin  (simvastatin  and ezeti mibe), on  intracell ular lipid in MNC,  expression  of CD68  and PECAM,  ROS 
generation  and inflammation  in obese  subjects.  This investigation  may provide  an additional  mechani sm of 
action by which these drugs may reduce atherosclerosis.  
 
 
 
SPECIFIC  AIMS  
Our recent work  shows  that follo wing the intake of cream  there  is an increase  in intrac ytoplas mic lipid and 
evidence  of cellular  inflammation  in mononuc lear cells (MNC)  and monocytes.  The main objective  of this 
research  is to investi gate the effect  of Vytorin  (simvastatin  and ezeti mibe) on intracellular lipid accumulation 
and inflammatory mechanis ms at the cellular and molecular level in  the monocytes of hu mans, in vivo. 
 
Hypothesis  1 (prim ary objectiv e): Vytorin  (simvastatin  and ezeti mibe) can decrease  the accumulation  of 
lipids  in the circulating monocytes of obese subjects.  
Aim 1.1: To study  the effect  of dairy  cream  (33 g) intake on the accumulation  of cholester ol esters,  cholesterol, 
triglycerides,  fatty  acids  and phospholipids  in the monocytes  of obese  subjects  with LDL  ≥100mg/dl  before 
after 6 wee ks of therapy with Vytorin or placebo.  
Aim 1.2: To investigate  the effect  on cream  intake  on monocyte  activation  markers  including  CD68  and 
PECAM  before and after 6 weeks of above mentioned drugs.  
 
Hypothesis  2 (secondary  objective):  Dairy  cream  intake  causes  an acute  oxidative  and inflammatory  response 
at the cellul ar and molecular level. This in flammatory  response can be decreased after therapy with Vytorin . 
Aim 2.1: To measure  the activity and the expression  of pro-inflam matory transcription  factor  NF-B and its 
activating  proteins,  IB Kinase   (IKK ); and the expression  of pro-inflammatory  NF-B-regulated  genes  and 
proteins  including  IL-1β, IL-12, TNFα in normal subjects  after the intake  of dairy  cream  before and after 
Vytorin or placebo for 6 weeks on obese subjects.  
Aim 2.2: To measure  the oxidative  stress  in MNCs  induced  by cream  challenge  before  and after 6 weeks  of 
Vytorin.  
 
Hypothesis  3 (secondary  objective): The intake  of cream  induces  an increase in the expressi on of toll like 
receptor and the mediators  of TLR  signal  transd uction,  and suppressor  of cytokine signaling  (SOCS) -3 in MNC 
and monocytes. This response can be decreas ed after therapy with above mentioned drugs.  
Change  in NFkB  binding ( %) 
Change  in IKK kinase  activity (%) Aim 3.1: To measure  the expression  of TLR -2, TLR -4, MyD88,  SOCS -3 and TRIF  in MNC  and monocytes 
after cream  intake in o bese subjects before  and after Vytorin or placebo for 6 weeks.  
 
Backgro und 
We have  previously  demonstrated  that the intake  of macronutrients  including  glucose,  cream  and a high 
fat high  carbohydrate  (HFHC)  fast food meal induces  oxidative  stress  as reflected  in an increase  in ROS 
generation  and an increase  in plasma TBARS  concentration(1).  Further more, there is an incre ase in intranucl ear 
NFκB binding  and a decrease  in IκBα,  with an  increase in IKKα and IKKβ(2).  Clearly,  therefore,  these 
macronutrients  induce  post  prandial  oxidative  stress  and  inflam mation.  These  observations  have  potential 
implications  in terms of the relationships  between  macronutrient  intake  and ather ogenesis  since  post prandial 
glyce mia and lipemia have  been  implicated in this process.  In this respe ct, it is also importa nt that the oxidati ve 
stress  and inflammation  induced  by a HFHC  meal  is of a greater  magnitude  and lasts for longer  in the obese 
than in normal subjects(2).  In addition,  our work  has also shown  that the obese  start with a higher  level  of basal 
(fasting)  oxidative  and inflammatory  stress  than normal subjects.  Since  T2D patients  have  higher  basal  levels  of 
oxidative a nd infl ammatory stress, it is likely they will resp ond to macronutrient  challenge with greater levels of 
oxidative  and inflammatory  stress. In this respect it is also relevant  that equicaloric meals composed  of fruit and 
fiber  do not induce  oxidative  and inflam matory  stress.  Similarly,  orange  juice  and alcohol  do not induce  either 
oxidative or  inflam matory stre ss(3). 
Our experi ments with cream  have  shown  that its intake induces  not only an increase  in ROS  generation 
but also lipid peroxidation  products  in plasma (TBARS).  Our recent data show  that cream  intake  induces  an 
increase in NFκB  binding,  IKKα  and IKKβ  activity  (Figure  1) and an increase  in the expression  of several  pro- 
inflam matory cytokines  including  IL-1, IL-12 and IL-18 (Figure  2). It also induces  an increase  in another  pro- 
inflam matory transcription  factor,  Egr-1, and c-fos (Figure  3). c-fos is a component  of the transcription  factor,  
AP-1 which  regulates  the expression  of matrix metallo -protein ases (MMPs).  Indeed, MMP -9 increases after 
cream  intake and a HFHC meal (2). The pro -inflammatory effect of cream lasts for more than 3h. 
IKK kinase activity 
 
25 0 
 
22 5 
 
20 0 
 
17 5 
 
15 0  
C rea m 
W a ter 
 
*# 
 
*# 180 Cream challenge 
Water challenge 
 
160 
 
 
140 
* + 
 
120 
 
12 5 100 
 
10 0 
 
75  
 
50   
 
 
 
 
0  1  2  3 
 
Tim e (h o u rs)  
80 
 
 
60 
 
 
40 
0 1 2 3 
A B Time (in hours) 
 
Figure  1: Perce nt chan ge in NFB (A) and IKK () activities  in MNC  following  cream intake.  N=12,  
* P<0.05  by One Way Repeated  Measures  ANOVA  followed  by Holm-Sidak  method  for comparison 
versus  the baseline,  #  P<0.05  by Two Way Repeated  Measures  ANOVA for comparison  versus  control 
group.  
Change in serum  PAI-1(%) Change in plasma IL-18 (%) 
Change  in serum  ICAM -1(%) 
Change  in serum  MMP-9 (%)  
 
 
 
16 5 
 
15 0  
P las m a In te rleukin-1 8  
 
 
 
Cre a m Ch a lle n g e 
W a te r C h a lle n g e P lasm a sIC A M -1 
 
14 0 Cre a m Ch a lle n g e 
Wa te r C h a lle n g e 
*  + 
13 0 
 
 
13 5 
 
12 0  
*+ 
*+  *+ 12 0 
 
+ 
 
11 0 
 
10 5 
 
90   
 
10 0 
 
75 90  
 
60  
 
 
0  1  2  3 
 
Tim e (in ho urs )  
80  
0 1 2 3 
 
Tim e (in ho urs ) 
 
 
S e ru m P la s m inoge n A c tiv a tor Inhibito r-1 Serum MMP-9 
 
200 Cre a m C h a lle n g e 
W a te r C h a lle nge  270 Cream C hallenge 
W ater Challenge 
180  
 
160  
 
140   
 
 
*+ * 240 * 
 
210 
 
180 
 
120   
150 
 
100  120 
 
80 90 
 
60 60 
 
40 30 
 
20  
0 1 2 3 
 
Tim e (in  hou rs ) 0 
0 1 2 3 
 
Tim e (in hours) 
 
Figure.  2: Percent  change  in plasma/Serum  levels  of various  mediators:  Graphical  represe ntation of values 
obtained  by ELISA  for IL-18 (A), ICAM -1 (B), PAI-1 (C) and MMP-9 (D). All values  are presented as 
mean±SE.  *  P<0.05  by  One  Way   Repeated  Measures  ANOVA  followed  by  Holm-Sidak  method  for 
comparison  versus  the baseline,  +  P<0.05  by Two Way Repeated  Measures  ANOVA  followed  by Holm-Sidak 
method for comparison versus control group .
Percent  Change  in TLR4  mRNA  Expression  Change  in EGR -1expression  (%) 
Change in SOCS -3 mRNA  Express ion (%) 
Change in cFOS expression (%) EGR -1 mRNA levels   
cFOS mRNA  levels 
 
 
 
1500   
Cream Challenge  
Water Challenge  
 
*  
 
 
900  
 
Cream Challenge 
Water Challenge 
 
1250   
750  *  + 
 
1000  
 
 
750 600  *  + 
* 
 
450 
 
500 300  * 
 
250  
150 
 
0 
0 1 2 3 
 
Time (in hours)  
0 
0  1  2  3 
 
Time  (in hours) 
 
Figure  3ercent  change  in mRNA levels of Egr-1 and c-fos by RT-PCR:  All values  are presented  as mean±SE. 
n=12.  * P<0.05  by  One Way Repeated  Measures  ANOVA  followed  by Holm-Sidak  method  for comparison 
versus  the baseline,  +  P<0.05  by Two Way Repeated  Measures  ANO VA followed  by Holm-Sidak  method  for 
comparison versus control group.  
 
In our most recent experi ments, we have  also shown that following  the intake  of cream  the expression  of 
TLR -4 (Figure  4A)  is increased  both at mRNA  and protein  level. This increase  is observed  at 1h and is 
sustai ned for at least 3h. Similarly,  there  is an increa se in the expres sion of SOCS -3 following  cream  intake 
both at mRNA  and protein levels  (Figure  1B). This combination  of effects is important  since  it has implicati ons 
not only in terms of post prandial  inflammation  but also for a potential  role in the pathogenesis  of insulin 
resistance.  The selecti ve deletion  of each of these  two proteins leads  to a protecti on from  diet induced  obesity 
related insulin re sistanc e. 
 
 
 
180 
 
 
160 
 
 
140  
WTT 
CTT 
 
* 250    
 
*# 225 
*# 200 
 
175  
*# 
Water 
Cream  
 
120 
 
 
100 
 
 
80  
150 
 
125 
 
100 
 
75 
 
60 
0 1 2 3 
 
(Time Hr)  
50 
0 1 2 3 
 
Time (hours) 
 
Figure  4: Perce nt change in mRNA levels  of TLR4  and SOCS -3 by RT-PCR: All values  are prese nted as 
mean±SE.  n=12.  *  P<0.05  by One Way  Repeated  Measures  ANOVA  followed  by Holm-Sidak method  for 
comparison  versus  the baseline,  #  P<0.05  by Two Way Repeated  Measures  ANOVA  followed  by Holm-Sidak 
method for comparison versus control group.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 During  our experi ments with cream  exploring  its effects  on oxidative  and inflam matory  stress,  we asked 
whether  its intake  would  increase  intracellular  lipid in MNC.  Indeed,  we were  able to demonstrate  an increase 
in intrac ellular lipid in MNC  both chemically  and microsc opically  (Figure  5-6). These dramatic changes  raised 
important  issues.  Firstly,  it was important  to define  whether  this increase  was in monocytes,  the cells which 
infiltrate  the arterial intima to form foam cells by taking  up lipid,  and thus forming the fatty streak.  The second 
was to define the type of lipid contained  in these cells. We also asked  whether  these  cells  expressed  more 
CD68,  the characteristic  marker  for macrophages  and whether they expressed  more of PECAM,  the adhesion 
molecule  which  is cardinal to the process  of trans -endothelial transfer of leucocytes.  Indee d, there  was an 
increase  in the expression  of CD36,  CD68  and PECAM.  These  findings  were  indicati ve of an increase  in the 
ability  of these  cells to take up lipid, to transform  to the macrophage  pheno type and to develop  the key adhesion 
molecule which would potentially facilit ate their tra ns-endothelial trans fer of these cells into arterial wall.  
 
 
 
0H 1H 2H 3H 
 
Figure  5: Lipid  droplet  accumulation  in MNC  after cream  intake in normal  subjects.  Nile Red stain  of MNC 
is shown  before  (0 hour)  and after (1, 2 and 3 hours)  lipid intake.  At the indicated  times, cells were  fixed  and 
stained  for lipid.  This experi ment was perfor med 6 times. Peak  lipid accumulation  was at 2h. Results  from 
one experiment are shown.  
Time  (hou rs) 
 
Control  0h 1h 2h 3h 
 
Choleste rol Esters  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Triglycerides  
 
FFA 
Choleste rol 
Phospholipids   
Figure.  6: Intracellular 
accumulation of lipids in  the 
MNC analyzed by Thin Layer 
Chro matography (TLC): A 
representative TLC of lipids 
extracted from the MNC at  
the baseline and followi ng 
cream  challenge in one of the 
subjects. Lane 1 is the pooled 
control sample, lane 2 
repre sents intracellular lipids 
at the baseline and lanes 3, 4 
and 5 repre sent intracellular 
lipids at 1, 2 and 3 hours 
following t he cream  intake. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our most recent  experi ments have  also shown  that following  cream  intake,  monocytes  separated  from 
the MNC  by magnetic  beads  coated  with CD14  antibody  show  lipid loading,  inflammation  and an increase  in 
the expression  of CD68  and PECAM  (Figure  7). The non-monocytic  fraction  of MNC  does not demonstrate 
significant  lipid intake.  Further more, the lipid laden  monocytes  have  the typical  appearance  of the foam cell. 
We are not certain  of the fate of this cell in circulation  and whether  one important  destination for this cell is the 
atherosclerotic  plaque  (MCP -1 and CCR -2). This needs  to be investigated  further.  However,  in the mean time, 
the possibility  that this ‘foam cell’ formed after the intake of cream  and possibly other  fatty meals, is a potential 
resident  of the atherosclerotic  plaque  has to be entertained. After all, the conce pt that the uptake of lipid by 
monocyte/macrophages  occurs  only in the arterial  wall after the arrival  of both the cell and LDL-C in the 
arterial  intima, is a product  of a series of experi ments conducted,  in vitro,  followed  by a series  of  hypotheses  to 
define  a potential  mechanis m. Our  data  do not exclude  the possibility  that lipid may be taken  up in the 
atherosclerotic  plaque.  However,  they serio usly raise  the  possibility  that the foam  cell may be formed post 
prandially  in the circulation.  
0H 2H 5H 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A) 
Nile Red 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B) 
CD68  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C) 
PECAM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7:  Lipid  accumulation  and activation  of Monocytes  before  and at 2H and 5H following  cream  intake  in 
normal  subjects.  A)  Nile  Red  stain  of  monocytes,  B)  immunohistoche mistry  staining  of  CD68  and  C) 
immunohistoche mistry staining for PEC AM. Da ta representative of N=8.  
Cardiovascular  disease  is  currently  the  leading  cause  of  death  in  the  developed  countries  (4). 
Atherosclerosis  is the most important  cause of cardiovascular  disease.  It is a chronic  inflammation  of the  arterial 
wall.  Vascular  disease,  including  in   the  heart  and  brain,  is  assoc iated  with  monocyte  activation  and 
differentiation  to macrophages  which  infiltrate  into the intima  of arteries.  Activated  monocytes/ macrophages 
are capable  of uptaking  native  and modified  lipids  from  the surrounding  matrix and  transform  to foam  cells 
(lipid -laden  macrophages).  Aggregates  of foam cells form  fatty streaks  which  evolve  to a more  complex 
atherosclerotic  lesion  which eventually  leads  to clinical  manifestations.  This process  involves  the participation 
of many cell types  including  leuco cytes, endothelial  cells and smooth muscle  cells secreting  many  compounds 
and enzy mes that participate in the progres sion of the ather oma. 
The current  screening  tests for vascular  disease  are not sensitive  enough  to detect  vascular  disease  in its 
early  stages.  Most  of  the  current  technology  including  EKG  stress  test,  thallium  stress  test,  ultrasound, 
angiography,  CT scans  and MRI  are not capable  of detect ing micro-atherosclerotic  lesions  or evaluate  foam  cell 
formation,  the crucial  step in atherogenesis.  Thus, an early  and direct  screening  test is needed  to identify 
subjects  with  risk  of  developing  vascular  disease  years  earlier  than  other   technologies  so  the  proper 
prevention/treat ment progra ms can be initiate d. Plasma lipid levels  are one of the risk markers  for  vascular 
disease  since  higher  plasma lipids,  especially  low-density lipoprotein  cholesterol  (LDL -C), lead to increased 
lipid  infiltration  to the intima where  it will be uptaken by activated  monocytes/ macrophages  and begins  the 
transfor mation  to foam cells.  Although  low-density  lipoprotein  cholesterol  (LDL -C) remains the primary target 
for vascular  disease  prevention,  many individuals  who have  vascular  disease  do not have  substantially  elevated 
LDL -C. This indicates  that plasma lipids  alone  do not necessary  reflect  increased  foam cell formation  in the 
intima and therefore,  atherosclero sis. Thus,  there is a need  for other  biomarkers  that can reflect  the events 
occur ring in the i ntima and is cru cial for early detection and prevention of vascular disease.  
Postprandial  lipemia, a state characterized  by increased triglyceri des and triglyceride rich lipoproteins 
(TRLP)  is  related  to an incre ased risk of atheroscler osis and cardio vascular  disease (5). The mechanisms 
underlying  this association  are not clearly  understood.  Part of this association  can be explained  by the effect  of 
TRLP  on the vasculature.  Vogel  et.al.  found  that intake  of a single  fatty meal containing  50 g fat and 900 kcal 
impairs  flow-mediated  vasodilatation  (6). A single  high fat meal containing  50 g fat and 760 kcal stimulated 
endothelial  expression  of adhesion  molecules  in normal healthy  subject s(7). Further more, hypertriglyceride mia 
also seems to affect  haemostatic  variables.  TRLP  induce the production  of antifibrin olytic,  PAI-1 from  cultured 
human umbilical vein endothelial  cells (8). The activity of coagulation  factor VII increases  in response to TRLP 
remnants  (9). A few studies  have  examined the effect  of a fatty meal or lipid particles  on the leukocytes.  A 
challenge  with 33 g of dairy  cream  has been  shown  to induce  an increase  in reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS) 
generation  by MNC,  similar to an  equicaloric  amount of glucose  (1). The incubation  of macrophages  with 
chylo microns  and VLDL  from  15 hypertrigylceride mic subjects resulted  in the conversion  to cells similar to 
foam  cells seen in the atheroscler otic plaque (10). But the acute  effect  of lipids intake on the circulating  MNC 
or monocytes, in particular on intracellular lipid accu mulation and inflam mation is not known.  
              Inflam mation  at the cellular  level  can be described  as an increa se in the intranuclear  binding of the 
proin flammatory  transcription  factor  NFκB  to promoters  of pro-inflammatory  genes  like TNFα. Many  different 
stimuli  have  been  shown  to  activate  NFκB,  such  as  cytokines,  oxidants,  viruses,  immune  stimuli,  and 
lipopolysaccharides  (11). Activation  of NFκB  has also  been  implicated  in atherosclerosis  (12).  The genes 
regulated  by NFκB  include  cytokines  (e.g. IL-1β, IL-18), chemokines  (e.g. MCP -1, MIF),  adhesion  molecules 
(e.g. ICAM,  VCAM),  metalloproteinases  (e.g. MMP -1, MMP -9). Other  transcr iption  factors  which are involved 
in inflam mation include  Egr-1 and AP-1. Egr-1 is a rapidly  and transiently  induced  by a variety  of extracellular 
stimuli  related  to hypoxia  and vascular  injury,  growth  factors,  cytokines,  and physical  damage to the blood 
vessels  (13-16). It induces the transcription of TNF  α, ICAM -1, PAI-1, TF, TGFβ, and MMPs.  Egr-1 also 
regulates  tissue  factor  (TF) expression,  which  is a cell surface  receptor  of coagulation  factor  VII and initiates 
the extrinsic   pathway  of  coagulat ion  (15).  AP-1 modulates  transcription  of  various  inflammatory  genes 
including  MMP -9  (17).  MMP -9 h yd r ol ys es  e xt r ac e llu l ar  ma tr i x  c om po ne nt s  a nd a ll ow s  th e 
s p r e ad  of inflam mation. MMP -9 has also been i mplicated in atherosclerotic plaque  destabilization (18).  
Toll-like  receptors  (TLRs)  activate  intracellular  signaling  pathways  that  lead  to  the  induction  of 
inflam matory cytokine  genes  such as TNF  alpha,  IL-6, IL1 beta and IL-12 in respon se to binding  of microbial 
and foreign  products  including  lipopeptides  and peptidoglycans  from  Gram  positive  bacteria  and endotoxin  
from  gram  negati ve bacteria.  TLRs  activation  stimulates  the recruitment of a set of intracellular  TIR-domain- 
containing  adaptors,  including  MyD88,  TRIF.  Recruit ment of MyD88  leads  to activation  of MAP kinases  and 
trans cription factor  NFκB  to control  the expression  of inflam matory  genes. It has been  shown  that high fat diet 
induces  insulin resistant in mice in a TLR4  dependent  fashion.  We would like to investigate the effect of lipid 
lowering drugs on cream intake induced increase in TLRs and downstream  signaling.  
Our preliminary  data demonstrate  that monocyte  transfor mation  to foam  cell begins  in the circulation  in 
response  to increased  inflammation  and oxidative  stress  that activates  lipid uptake  and/or  de novo  synthesis. 
These  activated -lipid laden monocytes  will then migrate  to the subendothelium  and uptake  more  lipids  and 
progress  to form  the atherosclerotic  lesion.  This observation  represents  an early  stage  in atherogenesis  and can 
be used,  therefore,  as an early  screening  test for vascular disease.  Other leucocytes,  including  T-cells and B- 
cells,  are also recruited  to the injury  site and participate  in the process  of plaque  formation.  Deter mination  of 
intracellular  levels  monocytes  and  lymphocytes,  there fore,  represents  a  direct  and  early   marker  of 
monocyte/macrophage  activation  level  and the process  of foam cell formation  and therefore,  the risk for 
atherosclerosis  and vascular  disea se. The current  proposal  provides  a method  for the determination  of post 
cream  challenge levels of intracell ular lipids in monocytes as a mechanistic model for vascular disease. 
 
Significa nce of the St udy 
1.  Clinic al relevance.  Since the formation  of the foam cell is potentially  important  in atherogenesis,  it 
would  be  important  to  deter mine  whether  drugs  that  lower  LDL  cholesterol  and  atherogenic  risk 
decrease for mation of these foam  cells.  
2.  Mechani stic and biological/path ological  significance.  The confir mation  of our preliminary  data in a 
larger study  is importa nt since these data provide the first evidence  that the formation  of the foam cell 
may occur  in circulation  and that the monocyte  may get loaded  with lipid after every  fatty meal.  This 
may potentially  contribute  to atherogenesis.  This study  may provide  a model to study  novel  mechanisms 
of action of lipid lowering drugs.  
 
Study  Sample:  
This will be a double blind , prospective  study  conducted  in 20 qualifying  volunteers.  Subjects  will be 
recruited from  the hospital  and university . All subjects  will sign a written  infor med consent  approved  by the 
institutional  review  board  of SUNY  at Buffalo.  Women and members of minority  groups  will be encouraged  to 
participate in this study and efforts will be made to recruit subjects from these grou ps. 
 
Subject  Assignment:  
Experi ments will be carried out in o bese subjects.  There will be 2 groups in the study:- 
Group  1 will receive Simvastatin 40  mg and Ezeti mibe 10 mg daily co mbination pill (Vytorin) for 6 weeks  
Group  2 will receive a matching placebo pill for 6 weeks  
 
Randomization:  
  Subjects will be randomized to 2 groups with 10 patients in each using a computer generated randomization 
chart.  
 
  Group 1 will be getting vytorin 40/10 mg daily for 6 weeks  
  Group 2 will receive placebo daily for 6 weeks.  
 
Inclusion  Criteria for all groups:  
• Age: 18 to 65 years of age.  
• Obese (BMI ≥30 kg/ m2) 
• LDL cholesterol of ≥100 mg/dl 
• Subject will be available for dur ation of the study and willing to co mply w ith all study require ments 
• Written and in formed consent sig ned and dated  
• Not taking any vita mins or antioxidants  
 
 
Exclusion  Crite ria: 
• Currently using anti -hyperlipide mic therapies  
• Triglycerides >500 mg/dl. 
• Myocardial infarction, angioplasty/stent  place ment or coronary artery b ypass surgery in the past 6 months  
• Patient on chronic use of non -steroidal  anti-inflammatory drugs or steroids  
• Hepatic disease  
• Renal i mpairment 
• History of drug or alcohol abuse  
• Participation in any other  concur rent clinical trial 
• Use of an investigational agent or the rapeutic regi men within 30 days of study.  
• Smoker 
• Pregnancy  
• Premenopausal wo men who are not on b irth control pills and have not h ad a hysterectomy or tubal ligation  
• Anemia with he moglobin <12 g/dl  
 
RECRUITMENT  OF SUBJECT S: 
 
The recruit ment into the study will be  carried out by the following methods:  
 
1. Patients for the Diabetes -Endocr inology Center of WNY Clinic  
2. Diabetes -Endocrinology  Center of WNY - Research Division - Recruit ment Database  
 
Accrual  Rate : On an average, we plan to recruit 1 patient per week.  
 
All subjects will have c ompleted the following p rocedures prior to participating in the study.  
1) Medical History;  
2) Physical Exam  
3) Infor med consent  
4) Baseline  lab draws  to measure  CBC,  SMA  and lipid profile. All labs will be drawn in the fasting  state in the 
morning before 10a m. 
 
Informed Consent  
Study process and required visits will be explained to patient in lay terms. All subjects will be asked to sign a 
consent form approved by IRB and a copy given to all subjects.  
 
STUDY  PROCEDUR ES 
Subjects  will be rando mized to recei ve Vytorin or matching placebo for 6 weeks.  
Visit  1 at week 0 : Subjects  will arrive after having  fasted  (10 hour)  overnig ht. A fasting  blood  sample will 
be taken, followed by cream  challenge and bl ood sa mple will be drawn 1, 2, 3 and 5 hours after the cream  
challen ge. Cream  challenge : Subjects  will be given  100 mL of dairy  cream (gour met heavy  whipping  cream, 
Land  ‘O’ Lakes  Inc., Arden  Hills,  MN)  to be consu med over 10 minutes.   This preparation of dairy  cream has 
33 g fat (300 Calories) per 100 mL. 
Subjects  will then be given a supply of their drug to be t aken once a day at bedtime.  
Visit 2  at week 3 : Subject will come fasting for a short visit for a blood draw at 4 weeks.  
Visit  3 at Week 6 : A fasting  blood  sample will be taken,  followed  by cream challe nge same as the 1st visit 
and blood sample will be drawn  at 1, 2, 3 and 5 hours after the challenge. Subjects  will then be discharged fr om 
the study.  
 
COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION:  
To help defray the costs of your participation, you will receive $150.00 for completing the entire study. In the 
event that you do not complete the en tire study, you will receive $60 .00 at Visit 1 and Visit 3 each , and $30 for 
Visit 2 . You will not be paid for the screening visit.  . Please be aware that occasionally additional visits are 
required, for safety evaluations or to repeat blood test, and that these visits are not a par t of the 3  required visits.  
There will be no additional compensation for extra visits.  
 
METHODS:  
1)  MNC  and PMN  isolation  by Ficoll -hypaque  method:  Blood samples will be colle cted in Na-EDTA as an 
anticoagulant.  Three  and a half mL of anticoagulated  blood  sample are carefully  layered  over 3.5 mL of 
PMN  medium  (Cedarlane  Laboratories,  Hornby,  ON).  Samples are centrifuged  and  at  the  end  of  the 
centrifugation, two bands separ ate out at the top of the RBC p ellet. The top band consists of MNC, while 
the bottom  consists  of PMN.  The MNC  band is harvested  and washed  twice  with Hank 's balanced  salt 
solution (HBSS). This method provides yields greater than 95% pure PMN and MNC suspensions.  
2)  Monocytes  isolation  by magnetic  beads.  Monocytes  will be isolated  from  MNC  fraction  by magnetic 
beads coated with CD14 antibodi es ( Maltyni Biotec, Auburn, CA) .  
3)  NF-B activation:  Nuclear  NF -B DNA  binding  activity  will be measured  by EMSA.  DNA -binding 
protein  extracts  will be prepared  from  monocytes  by high salt extraction  as described  by Andrews et al 
(19). NF -B gel retardation  assay  will be perfor med using  double -stranded  oligonucleotide  contai ning a 
tandem repeat  of the consensus  sequence  for the NF-B binding  site is radiolabeled  with -P32 by T4 kinase.  
Then,  5 
g of the nucle ar extract will be mixed with the incubation  buffer and the mixture  is pre-incubated  at 4 
C 
for 15 minutes.  Labeled  oligonucleoti de (60,000  cpm) is added  and the mixture  is incubated  at room  
temperature  for 20 minutes.  Samples will be then applied  to wells  of 6% non-denaturing  
polyacryla mide gel.  The gel is dried  under  vacuum  and exposed  to X-ray film.  The specificity  of the band  
is established  by super  shift EMSA  using  antibo dies against  p65 and p50 proteins. Negati ve and positive  
controls  will be also used to confirm  the specificity of the bands.  
4)  Western  blotting:  MNC total cell lysates  are prepared  as and electrop horesis  and immunoblotting  will be 
carried  as described  before  (20).  Polyclonal  or monoclonal  antibodies  against  TLR4 (Abca m, Cambridge, 
MA),  CD68,  (Transduction  labs, CA), PECA M, IKK and actin  (Santa  Cruz  Biotechnology,  CA) are used 
and the membranes  are developed  using super  signal,  chemiluminescence  reagent  (Pierce  Chemical, IL). 
Densito metry is performed  using  molecular  analyst  software  (Biorad,  CA) and all values  are corrected for 
loading with actin.  
5)  ROS  generation  measurement  by chemiluminescence  as an index  of NADPH  oxidase  activation:  Five 
hundred  L of PMN  or MNC  (2 x 105  cells)  will be delivered  into a Chronolog  LumiAggrego meter cuvette. 
Luminol is then added,  followed  by 1.0  L of 10 mM formylmethionyl  leucinyl  phenylalanine  (fMLP). 
Chemiluminescence  is recorded  for 15 minutes.  In this assay  syste m, the release  of superoxide  radical  as 
measured  by chemiluminesce nce, has been  shown to be linearly  correlated  with  that measured  by the 
ferricytochro me C method. The interassay coefficient of vari ation of this assay is 8 %.  
6)  Nile Red staining  of intracellular  lipids:  Freshly  isolated  monocytes  are layered  on slides  treated  with 
poly lysine  solution  for 20 minutes.  Fix cells with freshly  prepared  3.7%  formalin solution  followed  by 2 
PBS washes,  3 minutes  each.  Cover  cells with freshly  prepared  working  solution  of Nile red stain  (1:100  of 
stock  solution in  PBS)  for 5 minutes.  Fluorescence  microscope  will be used to examine lipid stain at 
excitation  maximum  =549nm  and  emission  maximum  =  628n m.  Intracellular  Lipids  Scoring:  100 
monocytes  will be examined from  each sample for their  stain intensity and will be given  a score  (0-4) 
accor ding to  the followi ng syste m: 
0 No positive stain in cytoplasm  
1 up to 25% of cell cytoplasm  stains positive  
2 25% - 50% 0f cell cytoplasm  stains positive  
3 50% - 75% of cell cytoplasm  stains positive  
4 all/tot al cell cyto plasm stains positi ve 
7)  Circulating  pro-inflammatory  mediators:  Plasma MMP -9, IL-1 and IL-12 will be assayed  with ELISA 
Kits from  R&D syste ms (Minneapolis, MN).  
8)  Quantification  of Pro-inflammatory  gene  mRNA expression  in MNC and monocytes  by Real -Time 
Reverse   Transcription   Polymerase   Chain   Reaction   (RT-PCR):   Total   RNA   is   isolated   using 
commercially  available  RNAqueou s®-4PCR  Kit (Ambion,  Austin,TX).  The quality  and quantity  of the 
isolated RNA is determined before using  the  RNA.  One μg of total RNA  is reverse transcribed using 
Advantage  RT-for-PCR  Kit (Clontech,  CA).  Real Time RT-PCR  is perfor med using  Cepheid  Smart Cycler 
(Sunnyvale,  CA) in which  2 μL cDNA,  10 μL Sybergreen  Master  mix (Qiagen,  CA) along  with 0.5 μL of 
20 μM gene  specific  primers for IL-1β and IL-12 (Life  Technologies,  MD)  are used.  The specificity  and the 
size of the PCR  products  are tested  by adding  a melt curve at the end of the amplifications  and by running  it 
on a 2% agarose gel. All values are normalized to  actin, u biquitin C and cyclophilin A  expres sion. 
 
9)  DATA ANALYS IS: 
Statistical  analysis  will be carried  out using  SPSS  and SigmaStat software  (Jandel  Scientific,  CA).  All data will 
be expres sed as mean ± S.E of arbitrary units  and percent  change  is calculated  from  the means.  To evaluate 
similarity  between  the  study  groups,  baseline  values  for  subject’s  demographics  will  be  compared  using 
appropriate  parametric  and  non-parametric  tests  based  upon  the  nature  of  the  data.  To  account  for  the 
anticipated  wide  inter-patient variability,  baseline  measures  will be  standardized  to 100%.  All subseq uent 
values  will be reported  as the percent  change  from  the baseline  value.  Comparisons  for each endpoint  will be 
made using repeated measures ANOVA.  
The primary  endpoint  of the study  is to evaluate  the change  in intracellular  lipids in MNCs  following  cream 
challenge  before  and  after Vytorin  therapy  for 6 weeks.  Our preliminary  studies  have  shown  an increase  of 
70±24%  in intracellular  lipids  staining  following  cream  intake in normal subjects.  Assu ming approxi mately  a 
25% decrease  in the cream  induced  intracellular  lipid accumulation,  a sample size of 20 subjects  per group  
should  provide  adequate  power  (β = 0.8) to detect  a statist ically  significant  difference  (α = 0.05),  provided  the 
standard deviation of the residuals  is not equal  to or greater than the mean difference.  
Secondary  endpoints:   We  will  measure  markers  of  monocyte  activation  including  CD68  and  PECAM 
expres sion as well  as the activity  and the expression  of pro-inflam matory transcription  factor NF-B and its 
activating  protein,  IKK, the expression  of pro-inflammatory  NF-B-regulated  genes,  TLR -4, and SOCS -3 and 
oxidative  stress  in monocytes  follo wing cream  challenge  before and after Vytorin  (simvastatin  and ezeti mibe). 
The decre ase in intracellular  lipids before and after combination  of the Simvastatin  and Ezeti mibe will also be 
analyzed.  
 
Data  Safety  Monito ring Plan:  
A data and safety  monitoring  board  is not required  for this study.  The Investigator will be responsible  for the 
proper  conduct, data  collection  and safety  monitor ing. Subjects  will be given  an adverse  event diary  and 
instructed to call the Investigator for any problems or changes  in their physic al condition or medications.  Any 
serious  adverse events will be reported immediately  to the University  IRB.  Recruit ment and accrual will be 
reported  to the IRB quarterly.  Annual  reports  regarding  patient recruitment  follow  up, adverse  events,  dropout 
rates, and findings of the  study will also be sent to  the University IRB.  
LITERA TURE  CITED: 
 
 
1. Mohanty  P, Ghanim  H, Hamouda  W, Aljada  A, Garg  R, Dandona  P: Both  lipid and protein  intakes  stimulate 
increased  generation  of reactive  oxygen species  by polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  and mononuclear  cells.  Am J 
Clin Nutr 75:767 -772, 2002  
2. Patel  C, Ghanim  H, Ravishankar  S, Sia CL, Viswanathan  P, Mohanty  P, Dandona  P: Prolonged  reactive 
oxygen  species  generation  and nuclear  factor -kappaB  activation  after a high-fat, high-carbohydrate  meal in the 
obese. J Clin Endocrinol Metab  92:4476 -4479, 2007  
3. Ghan im H, Mohanty  P, Pathak  R, Chaudhuri  A, Sia CL, Dandona  P: Orange  juice  or fructose  intake  does not 
induce oxidative and inflam matory response. Diabetes Care  30:1406 -1411,  2007  
4. Murray CJ, Lopez  AD: Global  mortality,  disability,  and the contribution  of risk factor s: Global  Burden of 
Disease  Study. Lancet 349:1436 -1442, 1997  
5. Hyson  D, Rutledge  JC, Berglund  L: Postpra ndial lipemia and cardiovascular  disease.  Curr  Atheroscler  Rep 
5:437 -444, 2003  
6. Vogel  RA, Corretti  MC, Plotni ck GD: Effect of a single  high-fat meal on endothelial  function  in healthy 
subjects. Am J Cardiol 79:350 -354, 1997  
7. Nappo  F,  Esposito  K,  Cioffi  M,  Giugliano  G,  Molinari  AM,  Paolisso  G,  Marfella  R,  Giugliano  D: 
Postprandial  endothelial  activation  in  healthy  subjects  and  in  type  2  diabetic  patients:  role  of  fat  and 
carbohydrate meals. J Am Coll Cardiol 39:1145 -1150, 2002  
8. Stiko -Rahm  A, Wiman B, Hamsten A, Nilsson  J: Secretion  of plasminogen  activator  inhibitor -1 from 
cultured  human  umbilical  vein endothelial  cells is induced  by very low density  lipoprotein.  Arteriosclerosis  
10:1067 -1073,  1990  
9. Silveira  A, Green  F, Karpe  F, Blomback  M, Humphries  S, Hamsten A: Elevated  levels  of factor  VII activity 
in the po stprandial state: effect of  the factor VII Arg-Gln polymorphis m. Thromb Haemost 72:734 -739, 1994  
10. Gianturco  SH, Bradley  WA:  Pathophysiology  of triglycer ide-rich lipoproteins  in atherothro mbosis:  cellular 
aspects. Clin Cardiol 22:II7 -14, 1999  
11. Barnes  PJ, Karin  M: Nuclear  factor -kappa B: a pivotal  transcription  factor  in chronic  inflammatory  diseases.  
N Engl J Med 336:1066 -1071, 1997  
12. Brand  K, Page  S, Rogler  G, Bartsch  A, Brandl  R, Knuechel  R, Page  M, Kaltsch midt C, Baeuerle  PA, 
Neumeier D: Activated  transcription factor  nuclear  factor -kappa  B is present  in the atherosclerotic  lesion.  J Clin 
Invest 97:1715 -1722, 1996  
13. Khachi gian LM, Lindner V, Williams AJ, Collins  T: Egr-1-induced  endothelial  gene expression:  a common 
theme in vascular inj ury. Science  271:1427 -1431, 1996  
14. Kharbanda  S, Nakamura  T, Stone  R, Hass  R, Bernstein  S, Datta  R, Sukhat me VP, Kufe  D: Expression  of 
the early  growth  response  1 and 2 zinc finger  genes  during  induction  of monocytic  differentiation.  J Clin Invest  
88:571 -577, 1991  
15. Yan SF, Pinsky  DJ, Mack man N, Stern  DM:  Egr-1: is it always  immediate  and early? J Clin I nvest 105:553 - 
554, 2000  
16. Maltzman  JS, Carmen  JA, Monroe  JG: Transcriptional  regulation  of the Icam-1 gene  in antigen  receptor - 
and phorbol  ester -stimulated  B lymphocyte s: role for transcr iption  factor  EGR1.  J Exp Med 183:1747 -1759,  
1996  
17. Yokoo  T, Kitamura M: Dual  regulation  of IL-1 beta-mediated  matrix  metallopro teinase -9 expression  in 
mesangial cells by NF-kappa B and AP -1. Am J Physiol 270:F123 -130, 1996  
18. Gough  PJ, Gomez IG, Wille PT, Raines  EW: Macrophage  expre ssion of active  MMP -9 induces  acute 
plaque disruption in apoE -deficient mice. J Clin Invest 116:59 -69, 2006  
19. Andrews  NC, Faller  DV: A rapid  micropreparation  technique  for extraction  of DNA -binding  proteins  from 
limiting n umbers of mammalian  cells.  Nucleic Acids Res 19:2499, 1991  
20. Dandona  P,  Aljada  A,  Mohanty  P,  Ghanim  H,  Hamouda  W,  Assian  E,  Ahmad  S:  Insulin  inhibits 
intranuclear  nuclear  factor  kappaB  and stimulates  IkappaB  in mononuclear  cells in obese  subjects:  evidence  for 
an anti -inflammatory effect?  J Clin Endocrinol  Metab  86:3257 -3265, 2001  
 
 