Study Protocol
Title: Non-Invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Date: 7.18.2022
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 1 of 52 Emory IRB version 9-10-2019 7.18.2022PROTOCOL TITLE:
Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
J Douglas Bremner, MD
SOM/Psychiatry
 
VERSION NUMBER/DATE:
Version 11/7.18.2022
REVISION HISTORY
Revision 
#Version Date Summary of Changes Consent 
Change?
1 12/15/19 New new
2 1/6/2020 Requested changes from IRB and M. Huber Yes
3 1/29/20 Response by PI No
4 9/25/2020 Add MRI, study updates Yes
5 10/9/2020 Compensation changes – check or ClinCard Yes
6 11/5/2020 Revised exclusion criteria Yes
7 11/23/2020 Compensation updates Yes
8 1/20/2021 Updating psychiatric testing No
9 3/29/2021 Update assessments, add follow up call Yes
10 10/14/2021 Revise inc/exc wording No
11 7/18/2022 Revise eligibility Yes

PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 2 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022Table of Contents
1.0 Study Summary ........................................................................................................3
2.0 Objectives* ...............................................................................................................4
3.0 Background*.............................................................................................................4
4.0 Study Endpoints*......................................................................................................5
5.0 Study Intervention/Investigational Agent.................................................................5
6.0 Procedures Involved* ...............................................................................................6
7.0 Data and Specimen Banking*.................................................................................13
8.0 Sharing of Results with Participants*.....................................................................13
9.0 Study Timelines* ....................................................................................................14
10.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria* ..........................................................................14
11.0 Vulnerable Populations*.........................................................................................15
12.0 Local Number of Participants.................................................................................15
13.0 Recruitment Methods..............................................................................................15
14.0 Withdrawal of Participants* ...................................................................................16
15.0 Risks to Participants* .............................................................................................16
16.0 Potential Benefits to Participants*..........................................................................20
17.0 Data Management* and Confidentiality.................................................................20
18.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Participants* ...................22
19.0 Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Participants .....................................24
20.0 Economic Burden to Participants ...........................................................................24
21.0 Consent Process ......................................................................................................24
22.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing...............................................................25
23.0 Setting .....................................................................................................................25
24.0 Resources Available ...............................................................................................26
25.0 Multi-Site Research when Emory is the Lead Site*...............................................33
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 3 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.20221.0Study Summary
Study Title Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use 
Disorders
Study Design Sham controlled, two groups
Primary Objective Map physiology of vagal nerve stimulation in patients with 
OUDs
Secondary Objective(s) Study #1 maps effect of varying durations of vagal nerve 
stimulation (nVNS) on craving and sympathetic function; 
Study #2 explores neurophysiology of nVNS or sham 
stimulation paired with drug cues.
Research 
Intervention(s)/ 
Investigational 
Agent(s) Study #1 involves open label dose finding (varying durations 
of nVNS). Study #2 involves randomization to non-invasive 
vagal nerve stimulation (nVNS) or sham control stimulation 
with assessment of brain, behavioral, physiological, and 
biomarker responses to drug cues and/or craving.
IND/IDE # IND 52220
Study Population Men and women with a history of Opioid Use Disorders 
(OUDs) 
Sample Size N=20 for study 1 and n=20 for study 2
Study Duration for 
individual participants2-3 study visits, 6 week follow up call
Study Specific 
Abbreviations/ 
Definitions Non-invasive Vagal nerve stimulation (nVNS or VNS), Opioid 
Use Disorders (OUDs)
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 4 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.20222.0Objectives*
2.1The purpose of this study is to measure neural and biomarker 
correlates of vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) in men and women with 
a history of Opioid Use Disorders (OUDs). In the UG3 phase we will 
have two studies, Study #1 will be to optimize dosing (N=20) and 
Study #2 to measure brain and biological correlates of nVNS versus 
sham in conjunction with exposure to drug use cues (N=20). We will 
proceed to the UH3 phase which is a larger study in OUD patients if 
the goals of the UG3 phase are met per NIDA. Only the UG3 phase is 
covered here.
2.2Brain function will be measured with positron emission tomography 
(PET) and biomarkers will be measured in blood, with an 
assessment of a broad range of stress responsive sympathetic, 
hormonal and immune markers
2.3We hypothesize a decrease in sympathetic function and enhanced 
anterior cingulate function with VNS. 
3.0Background*
3.1Opioid Use Disorders (OUDs) are highly prevalent and potentially 
lethal conditions (21). OUDs are often linked to trauma and 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (2-20) and limited treatment options 
exist (21-25) the use of nVNS in this project during the opioid withdrawal 
period represents a new innovation from the current treatments using 
medication and counseling, widely acknowledged to have limitations for 
this critical period (26-31). Treatments are needed that address the 
underlying neurobiology of OUDs involving the sympathetic nervous 
system, inflammation, and brain areas and systems mediating craving 
and addiction like dopamine and the anterior cingulate, all potential 
targets of VNS (32-68, 73-94). VNS is effective for a number of conditions, 
including depression and epilepsy (69-72) and is effective for the 
underlying neurobiology of OUDs (96-244). Earlier generations of VNS 
devices had limited implementation due to the requirement for surgical 
implantation, cost, inconvenience, and the inability to do placebo 
comparisons related to ethical considerations (95). The failure of 
Medicare and therefore other insurance agencies to reimburse for VNS 
implantation has been a major limitation to date (95). Further innovation 
lies in the use of HR-PET imaging of the brain with equivalent resolution 
but lacking technical challenges related to interference of VNS electrical 
signal with scan acquisition using magnetic pulses seen with fMRI. Use of 
wearable sensing devices for measurement of sympathetic and 
parasympathetic function and modelling approaches for verification and 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 5 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022exploration of stimulation parameters represent additional innovations 
made possible by our collaborations with the Georgia Institute of 
Technology and the City University of New York. We have a multi-
disciplinary and diverse research team of investigators with expertise in 
engineering, computer sciences, behavior, radiology, modelling, nuclear 
physics, neuroimmunology, psychiatry, epidemiology, cardiology and 
biostatistics.
3.2Our preliminary data on the effects of non-invasive Vagal Nerve 
Stimulation (nVNS) on stress response in traumatized human 
subjects and patients with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
show that nVNS reliably blocks peripheral sympathetic and 
enhances parasympathetic function, reduces inflammatory 
responses (interleukin-6, or IL-6), and enhances central brain 
responses (anterior cingulate) to stress (72). We now propose to 
apply this technology to the treatment of patients with OUDs. 
Following verification using modelling and determination of optimal 
dosing parameters, we will use these parameters to assess effects 
of nVNS versus sham stimulation on opioid craving, peripheral 
autonomic, cardiovascular, inflammatory, and brain functional 
responses measured with High-Resolution Positron Emission 
Tomography (HR-PET) and radiolabeled water to videos of drug 
cues in recently treated patients with OUDs.
3.3This project will assess a new device, non-invasive Vagal Nerve 
Stimulation (nVNS), that does not require surgery or implantation, 
and that electrically stimulates the vagus nerve as it passes through 
the neck, dampening the sympathetic nervous system and 
modulating brain regions in a way that may help patients during the 
opioid withdrawal period and reduce relapse. Studying the effects 
of nVNS on opioid craving and brain and physiological responses in 
patients with OUDs has the potential to reduce relapse and save 
lives, as well as increase our knowledge of changes to the brain and 
physiology that underlie OUDs and successful response to 
treatment. 
4.0Study Endpoints*
4.1The primary study endpoint is subjective drug craving and change in 
neurophysiological variables (enhanced anterior cingulate function, 
increased pre-ejection period (PEP) and photoplethysmogram (PPG) 
amplitude, both indicating decreased sympathetic function.
5.0Study Intervention/Investigational Agent
5.1Description: This study assesses nVNS versus a sham stimulation 
effects on behaviors of drug craving with and without exposure to 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 6 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022drug cues as well as brain response, neurophysiology and 
biomarkers. NVNS is applied to the neck and electrically stimulates 
one of the cranial nerves (the vagus) as it passes through the 
carotid sheath, exerting effects centrally in the brain and 
peripherally on autonomic and inflammatory function
5.2Drug/Device Handling: Active nVNS and sham control are kept by 
research staff under lock and key and only used for the purposes of 
the study under supervision of the research coordinator.
5.3The nVNS device has been approved by the Emory IRB for use in a 
current study in patients with PTSD. It is non-invasive with 
minimum side effects and has been shown to be well tolerated and 
there have been no adverse events or untoward effects in 56 
subjects to date.
6.0Procedures Involved*
6.1Study Design: Study #1: This is a randomized dose finding study of 
nVNS versus sham stimulation in patients with a history of Opioid Use 
Disorders (OUDs). This study will optimize dosing (N=20) by testing 
different stimulation duration parameters. We will measure how these 
different parameters affect drug craving using analogue scales (248) as 
well as physiological signals with wearable sensing devices.
6.2
Study #2 is also in patients with OUDs whose aim is to measure brain and 
biological correlates of nVNS versus sham in conjunction with exposure 
to drug use cues (N=20). Active and sham devices are assigned serial 
numbers by ElectroCore Inc. and delivered to the Data Manager who 
keeps the blind and assigns to subjects as they are recruited using a 
random number generator. Subjects then undergo nVNS or sham over 
one day in conjunction with control neutral versus drug use videos to 
stimulate craving in conjunction with nVNS or sham with brain imaging, 
measurement of biomarkers and collection of wearable sensing device 
data. We proceed to the UH3 phase which is a larger study in OUD 
patients if the goals of the UG3 phase are met per NIDA. Only the UG3 
phase is covered here. We hypothesize a decrease in sympathetic 
function and interleukin 6 (IL-6, an inflammatory marker) enhanced 
anterior cingulate function with VNS.
6.3All subjects undergo assessment with behavioral measures, 
including the SCID (245, 246), a craving measure called the Clinical Opiate 
Withdrawal Scale (COWS) (248), the SHAPS-C, NRS pain scale, Addiction 
Severity Index, The Snaith Hamilton Pleasure Scale-Clinician (251), the 
Subjective Units of Distress Scale (263) The Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) 
consists of 10-point lines anchored with "not at all" on one end and 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 7 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022"extremely" on the other where participants report the extent to which 
they felt any craving for opiates, severity of withdrawal symptoms, and 
the extent to which the study intervention has helped to ease the 
cravings. 
Medical History, is taken with a structured questionnaire which assess 
socio-demographic factors, medical history, handedness, history of 
substance use, medications including antidepressants, mood stabilizer 
and antipsychotics, usage will be quantitated for number of years of 
usage for utilization in additional analyses. Urine drug testing may be 
done at study visits. The Early Trauma Inventory (ETI) is 56-item 
instrument for measurement of childhood traumatic experiences which 
has been shown to be reliable and valid. All subjects will be assessed with 
both the ETI-SF-SR for events before the age of 18 and the Adult Trauma 
Inventory (ATI) for after age of 18. Reinforcement Learning Task (Positive 
and Negative Valence Domain): Measures reward attainment using an 
instrumental conditioning task (90 trials). Trials for this task involve a 3s 
cue presentation during which subjects choose between two abstract 
stimuli, followed by an exponentially jittered delay, and then a 3s 
feedback presentation with positive (monetary win), negative (monetary 
loss) or neutral outcomes. Reward Motivation Task (Positive Valence 
Domain): Effort-Expenditure for Rewards Task (EEfRT) is a multi-trial 
game in which participants are given an opportunity on each trial to 
choose between two different task difficulty levels in order to obtain 
monetary rewards. 
Study #1: Description of Research Procedures, Monitoring for Safety and 
Minimization of Risks: Patients with OUDs will undergo stimulation at the 
different parameters outlined. Subjects will first be outfitted with 
wearable sensing devices (patches attached to the chest and arms) for 
measurement of physiological signals including the electrical rhythm of 
the heart (electroencephalogram) as shown in the figures. These figures 
outline how parameters of interest like PEP and PPG amplitude are 
measured. Craving is measured with visual analogue scales. Patients will 
undergo VNS or sham stimulation while viewing neutral and opioid use 
related videos.
6.4Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the Brain: Subjects in both 
Study #1 and Study #2 will undergo MRI brain imaging at CSI for 
identification of the vagus nerve in the neck. Sequences to be obtained 
include volumetric interpolated breath-hold examination (VIBE), TR=4.93, 
TE=2.46, flip angle=9, Field of View 210 mm, 112 slices, voxel .78 x .78 x 
.8, averages 3, time of acquisition 4:38. 3D constructive interference in 
steady state (CISS), TR=5.46, TE=2.43, flip angle=42, Field of View 152 
mm, 112 slices, voxel .6 x .6 x .6, averages 1, time of acquisition 5:17.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 8 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.20226.5
For Study #2 we 
look at physiology 
with nVNS or sham 
in OUD patients. 
Brain function will 
be measured with 
high resolution 
positron emission 
tomography (HR-
PET) (264-270), 
autonomic function 
with wearable 
sensing devices, and 
biomarkers will be 
measured in blood, 
with an assessment 
of a broad range of 
stress responsive 
sympathetic, 
hormonal and 
immune markers. A 
complete outline of study procedures for Study #2 is presented in Figure 
4.
After initial set up and rest period subjects will rest for 30 min. Next, 
subjects will undergo a series of viewing exercises while lying in the High 
Resolution Positron Emission Tomography (HR PET) scanner with 
physiologic monitors attached. After an initial baseline period of resting 
(condition 1), the subjects will then view two neutral 120 second videos 
(condition 2), followed by a playback of two opioid use related videos 
(condition 3). The subject will be instructed 
to image each event as vividly as possible. 
VNS or sham will be randomized and given 
during exposure to the videos. For two of the 
scans, we are looking at effects of nVNS on 
the brain with no intervention. The subjects 
will undergo nVNS vs. Sham VNS stimulation 
as per published methods (see above). 
The VAS and SUDS and other behavioral 
measures are assessed in the beginning and 
after each task to assess the efficacy of the Figure 2: Measurement of physiological signals using wearable sensing devices in conjunction with 
nVNS/sham in human subjects. nVNS or sham are attached with a strap to the neck and for electrical 
stimulation of the vagus nerve as it passes through the carotid sheath. Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
and seismocardiogram (SCG) are placed on the chest for measurement of heart function and 
photoplethysmogram (PPG) placed on the finger measures blood volume/peripheral 
vasoconstriction. The ECG measures the distance on a beat-by-beat basis of the R wave interval 
(ventricular depolarization, which allows measurement of heart rate (HR) and with SCG pre-
ejection period (PEP) as described in Figure 3). Sensing devices on the hand measure electrodermal 
activity (EDA), with output of skin conductance level (SCL), a marker of sympathetic function. A 
band on the chest measures respiratory rate (RR), width (RW), and prominence (RP) which tracks 
parasympathetic function. Data is reduced and analyzed and machine learning models are applied 
to predict the stimulation type (nVNS or sham). Subjects also undergo brain imaging with High 
Resolution sPositron Emission Tomography (HR-PET) in Study #2 and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) of the brain in both studies
Figure 3. ECG measures electrical activity of 
the heart (See Fig. 2) and SCG measures 
chest wall movements used to register cardiac 
function including Aortic valve opening (Ao). 
The time interval between the R wave and Ao 
is PEP, which shortens with increased 
cardiac sympathetic tone. The difference in 
PPG amplitude (see Fig. 2) between time 
points measures vasoconstriction, an 
indicator of increased sympathetic function. 

PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 9 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022trauma recall task in eliciting stress. Patients will stay at the Emory 
University Center for Systems Imaging while they are undergoing detailed 
autonomic monitoring and sampling of blood biomarkers. The blood 
draws will occur at baseline, 15 minutes before the drug cue task, during 
the task itself, and then 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, and 120 minutes post-task.
The “VNS” group will be administered nVNS using the electroCore 
GammaCore-S non-invasive VNS device. The intensity of the stimulus (i.e. 
the current amplitude) will be adjusted by the user, to the maximum 
tolerable level to ensure nVNS without causing excessive pain (typically 
10-30 V), the burst frequency to 5 kHz, and the envelope frequency to 25 
Hz. These are the standard frequency settings that electroCore has 
demonstrated to be most effective in capturing the vagus nerve based on 
evoked potential studies. The duration of delivery will be 2 minutes, and 
the beginning will coincide with initiation of acquisition of the HR-PET 
scan which will be 90 seconds in duration; following an additional 8 
minutes, a second VNS delivery will be administered, in conjunction with 
which another scan will be obtained. Each subject in the “SHAM” group 
will undergo the action of administering the intervention, but the device 
will be programmed such that the vagus nerve is not actually stimulated.
6.6Procedures Performed to Lessen Probability or Magnitude of Risks:
Psychological Assessments: There is a risk that patients 
may become more upset as a result of being administered 
questionnaires or assessments. If this occurs they will be 
assessed by the research coordinator and if needed Dr 
Bremner or one of the other study psychiatrists on the 
protocol. If deemed clinically appropriate they will be 
assessed with the Sheehan Suicidality Scale and if there is 
a score greater than 0 escorted to the Emergency Room 
for further evaluation
Intravenous Catheters and Venipuncture: Placement of an 
intravenous catheter can result in infection, bruising of the 
skin, or a blood clot in the vein. The risk of these 
complications occurring will be reduced by having the 
procedures performed by a professional under clean 
conditions and using sterile procedures. Dizziness and 
fainting are rare risks of blood draws that will be reduced 
by having the subject supine. There are no long-term side 
effects. 
Vagal Nerve Stimulation: Stimulation of the vagus nerve 
may cause muscle twitching, discomfort, or pain during 
treatment. Hoarseness, a change in voice, or change in 
taste are other temporary possible consequences but 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 10 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022these resolve when treatment is stopped. These risks will 
be minimized by stopping the procedure or reducing the 
intensity of the stimulation
H2[15O] and PET: H2[15O] or radiolabeled water has been 
administered to thousands of subjects without side effects 
or toxicity to date at the doses to be used in this study. Dr 
Bremner holds an IND for use of radiolabeled water at 
Emory University. H2[15O] is a radioactive materials. Each 
patient will have eight H2[15O] blood flow scans. For each 
O-15 water scan 20 mCi of H2[15O] will be injected as an 
intravenous bolus. The body organs which receive the 
highest dose of H2[15O] is the intestine and gonads. The 
radiation dose to body organs in this study is well within 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) national 
guidelines for radiation exposure for human research 
studies and less than the total amount that is permitted 
for research studies in one year. Risk will be reduced by 
careful screening. The subjects will be asked if they have 
participated in research studies that involved radiation 
over the past year. Risks are reduced by the principles of 
ALARA, or As Low As Reasonably Allowable, which involves 
time (reducing time exposure), distance (keeping dose 
away from subject) and shielding (using lead shields to 
protect from radiation as much as possible). Risk will also 
be reduced by ensuring radiation administration is not 
greater than that outlined in the protocol, and which is 
below limits for a single session set by regulatory agencies, 
and that subjects do not participate in more than three 
research sessions with radiation in a 12 month period, also 
per guidelines. Also, they will be advised that they should 
not participate in other research studies involving 
radioactivity over the next year without consulting Dr. 
Bremner first. There is a small risk of claustrophobia with 
PET. If needed the study will be stopped. 
MRI: Subjects can become claustrophobic in the scanner. If 
needed the study can be stopped or 1-2 mg lorazepam 
given by mouth. If there is indwelling metal in the head 
this can cause injury. Subjects will be screened for 
indwelling metal.
Opioid Use Related Videos: Viewing videos about opioid 
use may result in an increase in opioid craving. Viewing 
videos on smart glasses may cause wooziness or motion 
sickness. The research staff will debrief subjects, which 
involves talking about the experiences and helping 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 11 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022subjects to process whatever emotions come up for the 
subject. If needed, for example if the subject is 
experiencing suicidal thoughts, further action will be taken 
if necessary as outlined above. Risks will also be reduced 
by having the research coordinator talk about their 
thoughts and feelings and craving after exposure to the 
drug use video. 
Procedure for Protecting Against Potential Risks: 
Supervision: All of the scans will be done in the presence 
of constant supervision with experienced research staff 
always in attendance and in an institution specifically 
designed, equipped and functioning in support of these 
type studies. In the event that some serious medical 
complications could occur, the PET scan facilities are 
located in Wesley Woods Hospital on the Emory University 
campus and can provide immediate care. Confidentiality:  
All of the information obtained from patients is quoted by 
number and kept locked in confidential files. This 
information is available to study investigators. Risk-Benefit 
Ratio: The risks of participation in this study are small. 
These are outweighed by the potential benefit which a 
better understanding of the effects of OUDs could have for 
society.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 12 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022Adverse events (AEs) are evaluated at each visit and 
reported to IRB using standard Emory IRB reporting 
guidelines. Serious adverse events (SAEs) (as defined by 
CRF 312.32) are reported to the IRB using standard Emory 
IRB reporting guidelines. All AE and SAE reports will 
include a description of the event, severity, relationship to 
the study medication or procedures, any intervention 
required, and date of the resolution of the event (or 
otherwise listed as ongoing). SAEs include any fatal event, 
immediately life threatening event, permanently or 
significantly disabling event, event requiring prolonged 
inpatient hospitalization, or any congenital anomaly, and 
any other event that deems to result in a significant 
hazard, contraindication, side effect or precaution. 
Written IND safety reports will be submitted to the FDA by the IND 
sponsor, for serious, unexpected suspected adverse reactions 
within 15 calendar days of learning of its occurrence. If the event is 
fatal or is deemed to be life threatening, the report will be made 
within 7 calendar days.  The IND sponsor will also make an 
assessment of whether the event constitutes an unanticipated 
problem posing risks to subjects or others (UP). This assessment will  
Figure 4. UG3 Brain Imaging Study Protocol. Patients receive two minute VNS or sham stimulation at 
onset of opioid cue videos and with no stimulus. Blood is drawn at the time points bounded by purple 
box. O-15 functional scans show red/yellow activity in cortex.

PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 13 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022be provided to the Emory University IRB, which, in turn will make a 
final determination.  If the Emory IRB determines an event is a UP it 
will notify the appropriate regulatory agencies and institutional 
officials.
All non-compliance/unanticipated problems, serious 
adverse events, audits and investigation reports will be 
reported to the Emory IRB following the standard 
reporting obligations.
NVNS devices are provided by ElectroCore Inc, are FDA 
approved for the treatment of headache, and currently 
approved by the Emory IRB for the study of PTSD with 
demonstrated safety and efficacy.
Included are all surveys and questionnaires. Data stored 
include information from surveys and questionnaires and 
all data are stored in the Emory Redcap system. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 14 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.20226.7Data Collected and Method of Attainment: Data is collected with surveys 
and questionnaires and stored securely in the Emory Redcap system. Other 
data collected include blood for measurement of biomarkers, brain imaging 
data and wearable sensing device (autonomic function) data. Data is kept 
on secured Emory servers and under double lock and key in EP12 Emory 
Clinic Psychiatry and the CSI. 
7.0Data and Specimen Banking* N/A ☐
7.1 Data or specimens will not be banked for future use.
7.2 Data will not be stored or associated with each specimen for future 
use.
7.3 Data or specimens will not be released for future use.
8.0Sharing of Results with Participants*
8.1There are no plans to share results with study participants. If we 
find something of urgent medical importance, then we would like to 
be able to share it with the participant. This will be a very rare 
occurrence. 
8.2If the researchers are concerned about something they see on the 
scan they will tell the participant, and ask them if they want the  
Figure 2.The UG3 phase involves an initial dose finding and parameter verification phase with iterative modeling and machine 
learning to refine the protocol in an exploratory open label basis in 20 patients with recently treated OUDs, followed by a second 
group of similar OUD patients randomized to nVNS or sham with assessment of physiologic, inflammatory, behavioral and brain 
response to drug cues (videos). Go/No Go criteria determines movement to UH3 phase. 

PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 15 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022scan to be reviewed for healthcare purposes (possibly by other 
clinicians). They may then be referred for medical treatment.  The 
participant and/or their insurance company may have to pay for the 
review for healthcare purposes, and for any such treatment.
9.0Study Timelines*
9.1Describe:
The duration of an individual participant’s participation in the 
study will be up to 3 study visits. We may also call them 
around 6 weeks after the visits to repeat a few questionnaires 
(Addiction Severity Index, SHAPS-C, COWS, NRS Pain Scale, the 
Subjective Units of Distress Scale, and the Visual Analogue 
Scale (VAS)) and see how they are doing. If they took a VNS 
device home then we will ask them about usage and remind 
them to return this to the study team.
We expect to enroll all study participants within 2 years. 
The estimated date for the investigators to complete this 
study is 3/31/2025 but this depends on whether they are 
allowed to continue to the UH3 phase. This protocol contains 
details about the UG3 phase.
10.0Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria*
10.1Inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed below. Potential 
participants will be screened for eligibility by a staff member. We 
will try to pre-screen subjects via phone using a verbal consent and 
a waiver of documentation when possible. Otherwise, potential 
subjects will come in for a screening visit. At the first visit, study 
staff will confirm eligibility using a checklist.
10.2The Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Study #1: Subjects aged 18 
and over who: 1) meet criteria for OUDs based on DSM-5 criteria. 
The Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Study #2: Subjects aged 18 
and over who: 1) meet criteria for OUDs based on DSM-5 criteria; 2) 
have IV access.
Exclusion Criteria: 1) positive pregnancy test; 2) meningitis; 3) 
moderate traumatic brain injury; 4) neurological disorder or organic 
mental disorder; 5) history of loss of consciousness greater than 
one minute; 6) current pregnancy or breastfeeding for women; 7) 
current or lifetime history of schizophrenia, based on the SCID; 8) a 
history of serious medical or neurological illness, such as 
cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, hepatic, renal, neurologic or other 
systemic illness; 9) evidence of a major medical or neurological 
illness that is based on the clinical judgment of the study 
psychiatrist; 10) carotid atherosclerosis; 11) cervical vagotomy. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 16 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022Several of the above exclusions will be based on the clinical 
judgment of the study physician. If reviewed and deemed 
acceptable by the study physician some exclusions may not 
preclude participation.
10.3The following populations will also be excluded from the research: 
Adults unable to consent
Individuals who are not yet adults (infants, children, 
teenagers)
Pregnant women
Prisoners
11.0Vulnerable Populations* N/A ☒
12.0Local Number of Participants
12.1Study #1 will be to optimize dosing (N=20) and Study #2 to measure 
brain and biological correlates of nVNS versus sham in conjunction 
with exposure to drug use cues (N=20). 
12.2We will ask IRB to approve 60 enrollees (total) in order to account 
for some screen failures. We would like to have 20 in each study to 
complete research procedures.
13.0Recruitment Methods
13.1Subjects will be recruited from newspaper advertisements, 
websites (like Nextdoor) and/or fliers. We may also recruit from the 
general outpatient population at Emory and the data warehouse. 
Providers may also refer patients for the study. Participants in 
previous research studies who have opted in for future contact 
might also be invited. Once a potential subject is identified, a staff 
member will schedule a screening interview with them to ensure 
eligibility with study enrollment criteria. If done via phone, a verbal 
consent will be obtained by the study staff member. If eligible, 
subject will sign study consent at first visit before starting any 
research related procedures. If screening is not able to be done via 
phone then screening for eligibility will be done in-person.
13.2Fliers will be used describing the study inclusion criteria and a few 
of the procedures. 
13.3For study 1:
Compensation ranges from $75 to a total of up to $250 for the 
study. We will also pay for parking, if needed, at each clinical visit.
Visit 2: $175 ($75 for the MRI and $100 for the visit) 
If subjects are given a VNS device to take home, they will get an 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 17 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022additional $75 upon successful return of the device using a prepaid 
return mailer.
For study 2:
Compensation ranges from $75 to a total of up to $350 for the 
study.  We will also pay for parking, if needed, at each clinical visit. 
If used as a backup participant: $50 to cover time and 
transportation costs
Visit 2: $150 (PET Day)
Visit 3: $75 (MRI Day) 
If subjects are given a VNS device to take home, they will get an 
additional $75 upon successful return of the device using a prepaid 
return mailer.
Subjects could potentially participate in both studies. 
A check will be mailed to the participant after participation is 
completed. Sometimes this can take 3-4 weeks for Emory to 
approve and cut the check. Another method of payment that will be 
offered is using the Greenphire ClinCard system.
14.0Withdrawal of Participants*
14.1The PI does not anticipate any circumstances where a participant 
may wish to withdraw since this study only requires a very short-
term in-person participation. However, if after data collection, a 
participant contacts the PI wishing to not be included in any data 
analysis/publication, their data will be withdrawn from analysis 
when possible.
14.2If the investigator decides to terminate a subject’s participation in 
the research, the investigator will explain to the subject the reasons 
for this action and, as appropriate, other options for this 
participant. 
14.3As soon as a participant informs the PI they wish to withdraw, a 
notation will be made in the subject’s binder and/or in Redcap. This 
documentation will include the date, rationale, and what 
components of the study for which the subject chooses to continue 
participation. 
15.0Risks to Participants*
15.1List the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or 
inconveniences to the participants related the participants’ participation 
in the research.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 18 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022Psychological questionnaires/interview: Being asked 
questions about the stress in your life or your mood and 
opioid use may cause you to have unpleasant and/or 
upsetting feelings or have an increase in opioid craving.  If 
this happens, then you can take a break from the 
interviews.  You can also slow down and take longer to do 
the tests. Should you so desire, a counseling session 
and/or referral for counseling will be made available.
Physiological monitors: (Biopac, Glove, EDA, PPG, SCG, 
etc.) These monitors require you to have sensors attached 
to your skin which may represent an inconvenience to you 
e.g. when adhesives are removed. They may also cause 
mild skin irritation or itching. The glove cold application 
may cause temporary numbness, which stops after 
application. The hot application may cause temporary 
redness/skin sensitivity. The subject may feel itchiness due 
to sensor hookups on hands (due to sticky electrodes and 
gels) and temporary numbness of the arm is possible, 
since the subject will remain in the same position for half 
an hour. The EDA requires you to wear a bracelet-type 
device during (and possibly after) the visit, which may 
represent an inconvenience to you.
Intravenous (IV) catheter and blood draw.  The IV can 
result in infection, bruising of the skin, or a blood clot in 
the vein.  These complications are not common when the 
catheter is inserted by a professional under clean 
conditions.  Dizziness and fainting are rare risks of blood 
draws. There are no long-term side effects. The subject 
may have some discomfort from the blood drawing.  The 
risk from blood drawing is minimal, but may include 
bruising and infection.  The use of sterile precautions will 
decrease the risk of infection.  However, the subject may 
develop a bruise at the site of the puncture, but this is 
expected go away in two to three days.
PET scan:  This research study involves exposure to 
radiation from a Positron Emission tomography (PET) scan.  
This PET scan procedure is routinely used for medical 
purposes; however, radioactive water is investigational 
and not approved by the FDA. This radiation dose is not 
necessary for a subject’s medical care and will occur only 
as a result of the subject’s participation in this study. If a 
subject has had any significant exposure to radiation over 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 19 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022the past year or plans to participate in other research 
studies involving radioactivity over the next year, he/she 
should consult with the study team and Dr. Bremner first. 
Some people experience anxiety from the PET scan 
procedure.  Viewing videos on smart glasses may cause 
wooziness or motion sickness. A nurse or technologist will 
be with the subject during the PET scan procedure. If a 
subject becomes claustrophobic, anxious or agitated in the 
PET scanner, the scan will be stopped.  If a subject is not 
able to complete the first PET scan, he/she may not be 
able to continue in the study.  This study will expose 
subjects to a small amount of radiation.  The radiation 
dose that subjects will receive is equal to or less than the 
annual radiation exposure limit allowed for persons who 
are occupationally exposed to radiation (x-ray technicians, 
radiologist). The principal risk associated with a radiation 
does is the possibility of developing a radiation-induced 
cancer later in life. The risk for radiation-induced cancer 
from this study is minimal. Although the risk from 
radiation is cumulative it is not expected to adversely 
affect a subject’s condition or treatment. The risk from 
radiation exposure of this magnitude is considered to be 
comparable to other everyday risks. 
MRI scan: There is the risk that if subjects have indwelling 
metallic foreign bodies in the head that MRI scanning may 
cause local tissue damage. All subjects will be screened for 
indwelling foreign bodies and individuals with indwelling 
bodies will be excluded. Some individuals may feel anxiety 
while in the scanner. If needed, the study will be stopped. 
There are no other risks of MRI scanning.
Subjects will be getting a scans (PET/MRI) for research 
purposes only.  The research does not require the scans to 
be read for healthcare purposes. However, if the 
researchers are concerned about something they see on 
the scans they will tell the subject, and ask if he/she wants 
the scans to be reviewed for healthcare purposes (possibly 
by other clinicians), and he/she may then be referred for 
medical treatment.
Opioid Use Related Videos. The viewing of opioid use 
related videos may cause some anxiety or feelings of 
craving for opioids. Subjects are able to stop this test at 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 20 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022any time if they experience anxiety, excessive cravings, or 
other problems or are uncomfortable with the procedure.
VNS Testing. Sometimes, a subject may experience 
hoarseness, shortness of breath, throat pain, cough, 
abdominal pain, headache, and/or change in voice during 
treatment. A tingling/pricking/twitching feeling where the 
device is applied is normal, but should not cause major 
discomfort. These effects usually stop right away once the 
treatment is completed. Mild skin irritation or dizziness 
are other possible side effects. The VNS device should not 
be used on patients who have any of the following 
conditions: an active implantable medical device, such as a 
pacemaker, defibrillator, cochlear implant, and other 
implanted electronic device; a history of significant carotid 
atherosclerosis; or a cervical vagotomy.
Reproductive Risks. Since this research may have bad 
effects on a fetus and should not be done during 
pregnancy, it is necessary that a pregnancy test be done 
first, even if, to the best of the subject’s knowledge, they 
are not pregnant now.  Women of childbearing potential 
will take a urine pregnancy test when they arrive for their 
visits.  If the test is positive they will not be able to 
participate in the study.  This study may be hazardous to a 
breast-feeding child.  Breast feeding mothers may not 
participate in this study.
Women who may be pregnant should not be in this study 
because of possible effects of radiation exposure on their 
unborn child.  Both men who may later father children and 
women of childbearing potential should be aware that 
exposure to radiation poses a very slight risk of genetic 
mutation in the next generation.
Fasting. In order to undergo study testing, subjects need to 
be fasting before their study visit for the scan day until the 
scans are completed. Some people may show discomfort 
from this prolonged fasting, although true hypoglycemia is 
rare. A sweetened beverage will be administered if 
patients complain of lightheadedness or other fasting-
related symptoms.
15.2The long-term effects of the chronic use of VNS have not been 
evaluated. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 21 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.202215.3The PET scans and VNS testing may have risks to an embryo or fetus 
should the subject be or become pregnant.
16.0Potential Benefits to Participants*
16.1This study is not designed to directly benefit participants. 
17.0Data Management* and Confidentiality
17.1We will use analysis of variance models with change in blood flow 
as dependent variable and absolute blood flow during control task as well 
as study group as explanatory variables. This analysis will assess 
differences in brain function according to diagnosis correcting for 
potential differences in baseline (control task) values. The ANOVA model 
will be blocked by the matching factor of past alcohol exposure. Analyses 
will be adjusted for whole brain blood flow. Additional control factors, 
including patients’ age, age of onset of traumatization, years of 
education, IQ, OUD symptom level and duration of disease, use of oral 
contraceptive birth control, and smoking, will be entered in the model if 
they are significantly different between the study groups at an alpha level 
of 0.25, and/or if they are found to be confounders in the analysis, i.e., if 
they cause a change of >10% in the parameter estimate for study group 
when entered in the model. Adjusted means of blood flow will be 
computed for each combination of group and task to better describe the 
results. Point estimates and confidence intervals for the difference 
between groups will be assessed before and after including the 
covariables mentioned above in the model. Additional analyses will 
compare OUD patients with and without a history of co-morbid 
depression. 
In all these analyses linear model assumptions, adequacy of fit, and 
presence of outliers will be checked by inspecting residual plots and 
influence statistics. Collinearity for variables included in the model will 
also be checked. Appropriate remedies will be applied, if necessary, to 
improve model fit and minimize collinearity.
Additional exploratory analyses will use subtraction analysis techniques 
to look for additional areas of activation for the purpose of generating 
hypotheses for future studies. Images of absolute blood flow will be 
subjected to a subtraction type analysis. Images will be realigned to the 
first image in the series and warped into a common anatomical space 
using methods described in the preliminary results. Images will be then 
analyzed using the general linear model of Friston for statistical analysis. 
The mean of blood flow scans within condition will be calculated and 
comparisons performed between conditions to assess blood flow with 
the condition. Areas of increased and decreased blood flow within 
patient group will be examined, as well as the interaction between 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 22 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022condition and diagnostic group. Images of t statistic will be created and 
surveyed for hypothesized regions (i.e. medial prefrontal cortex) where 
uncorrected z score values are greater than 2.86 (corresponding to a 
corrected p value of > 0.005).
Calculation of Sample Size 
For calculation of sample size needed for PET measurement of anterior 
cingulate activation, we used values for blood flow in the amygdala 
(scaled to whole brain blood flow) based on previous pilot data. Fear-
related tasks resulted in a 6.9 + 4.8% increase in amygdala blood flow 
versus 1.2 + 1.4% in controls (effect size 1.39). With two tails, an alpha 
value set at 0.05 and a power of 0.80, 10 subjects are needed in each 
group (VNS v sham) to show a significant difference between patients 
and controls (i.e. group by condition interaction). The number of subjects 
in each group will therefore be adequate to answer the questions 
proposed in this study. 
17.2All study staff will take required training prior to working with 
participants and/or PHI. All data will be kept in either locked offices 
in secure buildings or online via Redcap or on a password restricted 
research server. A certificate of confidentiality will be in place.  
Confidentiality will be assured by the use of subject codes when 
possible rather than personal identifiers. After the study is 
completed, the study database will be secured, and information will 
only be entered using subject identifier codes rather than personal 
identifiers.  Published results will be presented as group data, 
without identifiers.
17.3A (bi) weekly meeting with the staff, Study Coordinator and the PI is 
held to discuss any issues that may arise. A review of data is done 
for accuracy and protocol compliance. Data collection forms are 
verified for accuracy before storing in database. Describe any 
procedures that will be used for quality control of collected data.
17.4Describe how data or specimens will be handled study-wide:
Study ID, date of visit, and type of sample will be included for 
each specimen
Specimens will be stored in a -80 freezer at EP12 or RSPH 
Specimens will be stored until they are fully utilized for testing 
The Pearce Lab and the study team will have access to the 
data and/or specimens
The Pearce Lab uses a spreadsheet system to inventory what 
has been brought to their lab for testing. A study team 
member will deliver the samples and the lab will sign off on 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 23 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022the delivery. The data will be sent from Dr. Pearce to the PI 
and/or study staff for saving to the research server. 
Specimens will be transported via dry ice using coolers from 
Wesley Woods and/or EP12 to the Pearce Lab in RSPH.
18.0Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Participants*
18.1Describe:
The Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) outlined below will adhere to 
the protocol approved by the institutional IRB responsible for study 
oversight. An IRB-approved written informed consent will be obtained 
from each subject at entry into the study; elements of informed consent 
will include:  (a) having the subject review the study consent form; (b) 
having the investigator(s) or study staff meet with the subject to review 
the consent, confirm understanding, and answer any questions; and (c) 
once the investigator(s) or study staff are convinced that the protocol is 
understood and that there is agreement to participate, having the 
consent signed.  A copy of the signed consent form will be provided to 
subject. Documentation of the informed consent process will be made in 
the research and/or medical records as appropriate or in Redcap.  The 
principal investigator (PI) or his designated appointee will review data 
collection forms for completeness and accuracy of the data as well as 
protocol compliance on an as needed basis. Any data inconsistencies will 
be resolved by study staff as soon as possible.  The PI will review this 
protocol on a continuing basis for subject safety and protocol deviations 
or study noncompliance.  Reportable Events will be communicated to the 
local institutional IRB as required. Self-monitoring will be completed by 
the study staff every 6 months. All findings/observations related to safety 
will be documented in REDCap and shared with the study team as well as 
independent monitor. Any candidate safety-related adverse events will 
be discussed immediately, and the independent monitor will provide 
recommendations about the next best steps.  
Stopping Rules for Mental Stress Testing.
Absolute Indications for Termination
• Moderate-to-severe chest pain at a level that the patient 
wishes to stop. 
• Central nervous system symptoms (eg, ataxia, dizziness, or 
near syncope). 
• Signs of poor perfusion (cyanosis or pallor). 
• If the patient becomes excessively anxious or uncomfortable, 
or requests us to stop.
Relative Indications for Termination
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 24 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022• Drop in systolic blood pressure >10 mm Hg (persistently below 
baseline) despite an increase in workload, in the absence of 
other evidence of ischemia. 
• Increasing chest pain. 
• Fatigue, shortness of breath, or wheezing
• General appearance (see below). 
• Hypertensive response (systolic blood pressure >250 mm Hg) 
• Development of bundle-branch block that cannot be 
distinguished from ventricular tachycardia. 
Stopping Rules for Study
      Absolute indications for study wide termination (determined by the 
PI)
• the intervention is associated with adverse effects that call 
into question the safety of the intervention
• difficulty in study recruitment or retention that will 
significantly impact the ability to evaluate the study endpoints 
• any new information becomes available during the trial that 
necessitates stopping the trial
• other situations occur that might warrant stopping the trial
Plans for transmission of temporary or permanent suspension actions: Any 
actions that mandate temporary or permanent suspension of study will be 
transmitted to the institutional IRB, and, if appropriate, to the IND sponsor, FDA, 
or the National Institutes of Health.
Plans for protecting subject confidentiality: All information and materials that 
are obtained for research purposes only will be kept in strict confidence.  
Confidentiality will be assured by the use of subject codes when possible rather 
than personal identifiers. After the study is completed, the study database will 
be secured, and information will only be entered using subject identifier codes 
rather than personal identifiers.  
Plans for assuring data accuracy and protocol human safety compliance: An IRB-
approved written informed consent will be obtained from each subject at entry 
into the study; elements of informed consent will include:  (a) having the subject 
review the study consent form; (b) having the investigator(s) or study staff meet 
with the subject to review the consent, confirm understanding, and answer any 
questions; and (c) once the investigator(s) or study staff are convinced that the 
protocol is understood and that there is agreement to participate, having the 
consent signed.  A (bi) weekly meeting with the staff, Study Coordinator and the 
PI is held to discuss any issues that may arise. A review of data is done for 
accuracy and protocol compliance. Data collection forms are verified for 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 25 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022accuracy before storing in database. The PI will review this protocol on a 
continuing basis for subject safety. Patient Monitoring: will be performed by the 
PI, the Co-Investigators, and the Research Coordinator(s). Any unanticipated 
events are reported to the IRB in a timely manner per protocol.  
The above detailed plans should assure data accuracy and protocol human safety 
compliance for this study.  These include computerized database management, 
and IRB oversight and communication.  This plan, together with oversight by the 
IRB, should be sufficient for studies that do not require a DSMB.
The Independent Monitor for this study is Dr. Jeanie Park. Dr. Park is not 
associated with this research project and thus works independently of the PI, Dr. 
Bremner. Dr. Park is not a part of the key personnel involved in this grant, and is 
qualified to review the patient safety data generated by this study because of 
her unique expertise in autonomic physiology. Dr. Park’s CV is attached. 
She will review documentation of subject-reported adverse events every 6 
months.
19.0Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Participants
19.1Participants will be interviewed in private research room with the 
study staff. A Certificate of Confidentiality is in place since this is 
funded by NIH/NIDA. Sensitive questions will only be asked as 
needed for scientific aims.
19.2Study staff will strive to limit interactions from people outside of 
the study team. Private areas will be used when possible. The study 
staff will explain study procedures to the participant.  At any time, 
the participant is able to request a break or skip a question if s/he is 
uncomfortable with the question and/or interview. 
19.3The study team is able to access any information at any time since 
they are protecting all the hardcopy and digital data. No one else 
outside of the study team will be able to access the information.
20.0Economic Burden to Participants
20.1Participants will not have any costs, except for basic things like 
transportation, for participating in the research. 
21.0Consent Process
21.1Verbal consent may be done for screening purposes to ensure the 
subject is eligible for the study. If not, screening will be done at the first 
in-person visit.
At the first clinic visit, the study staff will begin the visit with the signing 
of the informed consent. After signing the consent form, they will begin 
the study procedures.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 26 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022The consent process will take place at either Wesley Woods, 
EP12, Emory Clinics, or RSPH.
The study will be discussed with the potential participant prior 
to the visit. The study will begin after the consent process. 
The study staff will ensure that the participant continues to 
understand the procedures and will answer any questions that 
come up.
Informed Consent Process:
oOne of the study coordinators will lead the informed 
consent process.
oThe consent discussion will vary but should take around 
15-20 minutes prior to any procedures being done. 
oOnce at the research center, the research coordinator 
will discuss all aspects of the research protocol with the 
subject and go over the consent and any questions they 
may have in regards to the study. After the discussion, 
the research coordinator will ask the subject if they wish 
to participate in this study and both will sign the written 
consent. The subject will be given a copy of the consent 
to keep. The consent clearly states that participation in 
this study is voluntary and they can leave the study at 
any time, for any reason or for no reason. If they 
withdraw they will still keep all health care services that 
they would expect from Emory University and their 
affiliates.
oSubjects will be asked to restate some of what they have 
heard in order to make sure they are aware of all 
procedures. 
Non-English Speaking Participants N/A ☒
Participants who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers) 
N/A ☒
Cognitively Impaired Adults N/A ☒
Adults Unable to Consent N/A ☒
22.0Process to Document Consent in Writing
22.1Consent of the subject will be documented in writing in the 
subject’s chart or in Redcap.
23.0Setting
23.1Describe the sites or locations where your research team will 
conduct the research.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 27 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022Subjects will be recruited from the clinic, newspaper 
advertisements, online websites, referrals, and/or fliers. 
Research procedures will be performed at Emory Clinics, 
Wesley Woods, and/or Executive Park 12 research rooms.
Local detox or drug treatment centers might be used as sites 
with an IRB approved Site permission letter.
24.0Resources Available
24.1Describe the resources available to conduct the research:
Subjects in this study will be patients with opioid use disorders 
based on DSM-5 criteria recruited from the greater Atlanta 
metropolitan area. We will study patients with OUDs on 
medication treatment. According to the Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), 109,777 
(4.18%) have non-medical use of prescription pain relievers, 
and 48,302 are estimated to have an OUD. Based on this, 
there is an ample population of individuals for the study. 
Recruitments for studies 1 and 2 will take place over two 
years.
Emory is one of the top biomedical research institutions in the 
nation, ranking among the top 20 schools of medicine in NIH 
research funding, at $218 million in 2008. Emory has more 
than 2,500 faculty members. Emory Healthcare, which 
includes Emory’s own or affiliated clinics and hospitals, is the 
largest service provider in Georgia. The clinics and hospitals, 
with almost 3,000 inpatient beds and more than 2 million 
annual outpatient and emergency visits, create an exceptional 
environment for patient-oriented research. Emory physicians 
also provide a major portion of the city’s indigent and public 
health care. It is considered to be the premier institution for 
cardiology and cardiac surgery care in the Southeastern 
United States. Atlanta has also one of the largest African 
American populations of any city in the U.S. and 
approximately 30% of all patients in Emory Healthcare 
hospitals and clinics are African American in origin.
Emory Brain Health Center and Department of Psychiatry. 
The Emory Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, 
chaired by Mark Rapaport, M.D., is one of the most exciting 
and rapidly growing psychiatry departments in the U.S. today. 
The faculty of the department actively pursue goals of 
innovation in research, education and delivery of care. Emory 
has moved from being a primarily a clinical and regional 
department to one of the most rapidly expanding psychiatry 
departments in the country. Drs. Rapaport, Bremner, Welsh 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 28 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022and Dudley are all clinical psychiatrists in the Emory Clinic 
Psychiatry located at the Emory Brain Health Center in 
Executive Park, Atlanta, Georgia. Drs Welsh and Dudley have 
access to hundreds of patients with opioid use disorders. The 
department now has a number of NIMH-funded investigators, 
and the Psychiatry Department within Woodruff Memorial 
Building (WMB) has basic research laboratories for psychiatry 
faculty. The laboratories include facilities for molecular 
biology, neurochemistry, in vitro autoradiography, and 
psychopharmacology. One of the highlights of working at 
Emory is the lack of boundaries between departments, the 
warm collegiality, and the opportunity to collaborate with 
other scientists in different departments, as well as at Emory 
College, the CDC, and Georgia Tech. A number of our faculty 
have joint appointments and laboratory space as well as active 
collaborations with the Center for Disease Control
(CDC). The CDC is conveniently located on the Emory Campus. 
Highlights of the program include collaborations in Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome, Psychoimmunology, and Mind-Body 
interactions. The Wesley Woods Hospital has large inpatient 
and outpatient programs in geriatric psychiatry with active 
research programs. Emory Clinic is our outpatient adult 
psychiatry clinic and is an excellent source for research subject 
recruitment. At Grady Hospital, the public hospital which 
serves Fulton and DeKalb counties, there are both inpatient 
and outpatient psychiatric treatment facilities, laboratory 
space, and active research programs. The Emory faculty treat 
the Grady patient population through a foundation program. 
Many of our faculty are located at the Yerkes Regional 
Primate Center and the Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, 
which are described in more detail below. Other programs in 
which Psychiatry faculty collaborate or participate are listed 
below.
The Department of Psychiatry is part of the Emory Brain Health 
Center, located at the newly-built Executive Park site of Emory 
Healthcare. As a part of the Emory Healthcare Network, the 
Center brings together more than 400 researchers and clinicians 
specializing in neurology, psychiatry and behavioral sciences,
neurosurgery, rehabilitation medicine, and sleep medicine to 
more rapidly predict, prevent, treat, and cure devastating 
diseases and disorders of the brain. The Emory Brain Health 
Center holds more than 20 centers and programs including the 
Child and Adolescent Mood Program, Epilepsy Center, Pituitary 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 29 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022Center, Stroke Center, Treatment Resistant Depression 
Program, and Veterans Program. The facility has fully equipped
conference rooms, office rooms, and rooms dedicated to 
research subject interview purposes. The Child and Adolescent 
Mood Program (CAMP) is located on the second floor of the 
Emory Brain Health Center. CAMP offers services including 
psychopharmacological evaluations, medication management,
individual therapy, and various psychological testing to children 
and adolescents. As part of CAMP, Emory Adolescent Substance 
Use Treatment Services (EAST), Directed by Justine Welsh, 
M.D., a co-investigator on this project, provides psychiatric and 
behavioral interventions to adolescents and young adults with
substance use disorders. The clinic is equipped with a clinical 
laboratory and ancillary services. The clinical laboratory is 
capable of running various urine analyses and blood sample 
tests. A full-time LCSW certified to provide Adolescent 
Community Reinforcement Approach (A-CRA) therapy is 
available to provide treatment on site. Fidelity for A-CRA will be 
measured by recorded session procedures. Recording devices 
are on site and available to each provider. Limited counseling 
sessions will also be documented to monitor endorsed
medication adherence, medication side effects, assessment of 
withdrawal/cravings and reasons for any dose adjustment in the 
electronic health record. The Department of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences will provide administrative and computer 
support.
Emory Clinical Neuroscience Research Unit (ECNRU). The 
ECNRU, J. Douglas Bremner, MD, Director, is a research program 
at the Emory Briarcliff campus for the study of the neurobiology 
of PTSD and depression and mechanisms of these disorders in 
heart disease. There is 5,000 square feet of space including 
offices and cubicles for the PI and staff and an image processing 
laboratory.
Pearce Lab: A number of serum biomarker analysis 
instrumentation tools are available to Dr. Brad Pearce in
his molecular neuroimmunology laboratory space. In addition, 
the RSPH supplies a shared equipment facility for Dr. Pearce and 
other PIs on the 4th floor. This facility includes a BioRad 
Chemidoc XRSt gel imaging system, an Applied Biosystems 7500 
Fast Real-Time PCR System, Biotek Epoch plate reader with 200 
nm to 999 nm wavelength range and 6- to 384- microplate 
reading capability, and BLX405 plate washer, Sorvall RC64 
centrifuge, Eppendorf 5810R bench-top centrifuge, a Perkin 
Elmer Victor3 1420 fluorescence and luminescence multilabel 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 30 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022plate reader, and a Beckman Optima L Series Ultracentrifuge. In 
addition, Dr. Pearce routinely uses the Emory University Flow 
Cytometry Core Facility for his immunology work. This facility
includes the BD FACSort two-laser, four-color benchtop 
analyzer. In addition, the Emory Multiplexed Immunoassay Core 
provides Dr. Pearce and other Emory researchers with use of 
equipment (SECTOR Imager 2400), training and expertise for the 
Meso Scale Discovery Platform. This immunoassay platform 
uses electrochemiluminescence (ECL) detection based on 
ruthenium(II)-tris-bipyridine derivatives. The sensitivity
and dynamic range of the platform is better than most ELISAs 
and has shown fewer matrix effects than ctytobead systems. We 
routinely use this multiplex assay platform for other studies.
Emory Center for Systems Imaging (CSI). The neuroimaging facilities at 
Emory include three research dedicated, Siemens 3T Prisma and Trio 
scanners. All of the functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
facilities are equipped with conventional 12-channel head coils, 32-
channel head coils, and new 64-channel head coils that allow for state of 
the art, high temporal and spatial resolution, functional MRI. In 
particular,
these systems are equipped with 32 channels, which can be configured in 
a wide variety of combinations through the TIM software. It includes 
standard sequences for EPI BOLD, diffusion, perfusion imaging, and 
Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI). We will have a variety of coils, including a 
32-channel head coil, 12-channel head coil, transmit/receive birdcage 
head coil, flex coils, neck matrix and spine matrix coils. The neuroimaging
community at Emory is comprised of the Biomedical Information 
Technology Center (BITC), Center for Systems Imaging (CSI), and the 
Facility for Education and Research in Neuroscience (FERN). Each of these 
centers are fully staffed with expert MRI physicists, MRI technicians, and 
cognitive neuroscientists. All of these
centers feature (a) MRI simulator ("mock scanner"), to acclimate 
participants to the imaging environment and train them to remain still 
(critically important for pediatric and special populations); (b) full 
psychophysiology recording suite (Biopac: heart rate, startle, skin 
conductance); (c) Eye-Link MRI compatible eye tracker; (d) behavioral 
testing space; and (e) computer room, for data processing and analysis. 
The major imaging equipment housed at CSI includes a 
cyclotron/Radiochemistry lab, a 3T MRI system, a High Resolution 
Research Tomograph (HRRT, CTI Corp.) human brain High Resolution 
Positron Emission Tomography (HRPET) system, an Inveon micro Positron 
Emission Tomography-Computed Tomography (PET-CT) system, and a 
multispectral fluorescence animal imaging system. The Wesley Woods 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 31 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022Medical Center has a brain dedicated High Resolution Research 
Tomograph (HRRT) obtained with a National Center for Research 
Resources (NCRR) and Georgia Research Alliance (GRA) grant to Dr. Doug 
Bremner. Other facilities include an on site cyclotron and radiochemistry 
facilities including hot cells and robotic arms as well as a high resolution 
3T MRI.
The Center for Systems Imaging (CSI) Radiochemistry Lab This resource 
is directed by Dr. Mark Goodman and is located on the 2nd floor of the 
Wesley Woods Health Center. It houses a Siemens RDS 111 multiport, 
self-shielded, automated cyclotron producing a 11 MeV, 50 μA proton 
beam. The cyclotron is equipped with targets for the routine production 
of curie amounts of [18F]fluoride, [18F]fluorine, [11C]carbon dioxide, and 
[15O]oxygen. The radiochemistry area is a 2,100 square foot cyclotron 
vault and laboratory which includes:
• four master slave manipulator arm-equipped hot cells
• five mini-cells
• one Siemens computer programmable two reaction vessel 
radiochemical processing unit
• one GE TracerLab FXN unit
• one semi-automated remote mini-syringe pump
• two reaction vessel radiochemical processing units
• one semi-automated remote mini-syringe pump fluorine-18 F2 
radiochemical processing unit
• one automated oxygen-15 water synthesis module
• one GE PETtrace carbon-11 methyl iodide module
• one clean room , hot and cold waste systems and ventilation 
chemical and radiation monitoring
systems.
The radiochemistry laboratory is equipped with four pneumatic tube 
systems located in the four hot cells for rapid delivery of 
radiopharmaceuticals. It also has a variety of modern analytical 
instruments which include 
• one Carroll and Ramsey Associates eleven probe radiation 
detection system
• one Waters Alliance radio-HPLC unit that is configured with 
UV/Vis and IN/US Radiometric detectors and one Waters radio-
HPLC unit that is configured with UV/Vis and Bioscan Radiometric 
detectors
• one Raytest radioactivity thin-layer chromatography system
• two electrically activated rheodyne HPLC injectors
• eight manual rheodyne HPLC injectors and 4 Waters' 515 HPLC 
pumps
• one Bioscan hot cell radiometric detector
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 32 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022• one Agilent 6890N radio-gas chromatograph equipped with a 
thermal conductivity and flame ionization detectors
• one Oxford sodium iodide detector and well 
counter/multichannel analyzer
• two Capintec 712M dose calibrators with four remote ionization 
chambers and four remote readouts and four Mettler electronic 
balances.
Here is a list of tracers currently produced:
2-FDG (PETNET) Human
C-11 HOMADAM (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Human
N-13 NH3 (PETNET) Human
F-18 FECNT (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Human
C-11 PIB (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Human
F-18 FACBC (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Human
C-11 Flumanezil (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Human
F-18 FACPC (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Human
C-11 Raclopride (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Human
F-18 FEmZIENT* (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Animal
O-15 Water (WW-CSI) Human
F-18 FEpZIENT* (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Animal
O-15 Oxygen (WW-CSI) Human
C-11 MENET* (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Animal
F-18 Fallypride (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Animal
Cu-64 ligands (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Animal
F-18 WAY (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Animal
C-11 MDL (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Animal
C-11 WAY (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Animal
F-18 FMISO (WW-CSI & Yerkes#) Animal
*eIND in progress for first in humans
#Yerkes only animals
Georgia Tech/Emory Department of Biomedical Engineering In 
September 1997, after an intense planning and review process that 
involved faculty from both institutions, Georgia Tech joined with Emory 
University School of Medicine to establish the Georgia Tech/Emory 
Department of Biomedical Engineering (BME) (Michael Thomas, PhD, 
Acting Chairman). This new academic unit is a unique partnership 
between a public and a private institution. Dr. Clifford is a faculty 
member in this department. This Department represents the strong 
commitment that both Emory and Georgia Tech have toward enhancing 
research in the biomedical and bioengineering sciences, and will 
significantly enhance research and education opportunities in these 
areas. State-of-the-art facilities are available at Georgia Tech, including 
the new biocomplex building to be completed in the future. Georgia Tech 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 33 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022is located just west of downtown Atlanta, about 15 minutes from the 
Emory campus.
The Inan Research Group is housed in the Technology Square Research 
Building (TSRB), one of eleven buildings on the campus that houses 
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) faculty. The Inan Research 
Group has its own lab space in TSRB, with state-of-the-art test 
instruments including oscilloscopes, function generators, power supplies, 
multimeters, and signal analyzers. The lab is also well-equipped for rapid
electromechanical prototyping (e.g., soldering stations, hand tools), 
physiological monitoring, and data acquisition, and includes computers, 
microcontroller and sensor evaluation boards, and all other necessary 
tools for prototyping and evaluating the proposed hardware. For data 
analysis and visualization, in addition to the computers in the lab, there is 
a separate student carrel space with computers equipped with necessary 
specialized software tools (e.g., MATLAB, SolidWorks).
Neural Engineering Group, City University of New York
The Neural Engineering Group at The City College of New York, directed 
by Marom Bikson, Ph.D., analyzes nervous system function at multiple 
scales spanning sub-cellular, single cell, tissue, animal, to human 
cognitive levels. Similarly, our translational research and development 
program integrates experimental testing, medical device development, 
and clinical trials – with the over-arching goal of improving human health 
through engineering innovation.
There is a risk that patients may become more upset as a result of 
being administered questionnaires or assessments. If this occurs 
they will be assessed by the research coordinator and if needed 
Dr. Bremner or one of the other study psychiatrists on the 
protocol (Drs. Welsh, Dudley).
Viewing videos about opioid use may result in an increase in 
opioid craving. The research staff will debrief subjects, which 
involves talking about the experiences and helping subjects to 
process whatever emotions come up for the subject. If needed, 
for example if the subject is experiencing suicidal thoughts, 
further action will be taken if necessary. For example, if subjects 
are suicidal they will be escorted to the Emergency Room, and 
they will be instructed that if they have problems with feeling 
upset they should call one of the clinicians and if they develop 
active suicidal ideation with a plan they should go to the 
Emergency Room.
A (bi) weekly meeting with the staff, Study Coordinator and the PI 
will be held to discuss any issues that may arise and to ensure that 
all persons assisting with the research are adequately informed 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 34 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022about the protocol, the research procedures, and their duties and 
functions.
25.0Multi-Site Research when Emory is the Lead Site*N/A ☒ 
Bibliography
1. Buchanich JM, Balmert LC, Williams KE, Burke DS. The effect of incomplete 
death certificates on estimates of unintentional opioid-related overdose deaths in the 
United States, 1999-2015. Public Health Rep. 2018;133(4):423-443.
2. Prevention CfDCa. Drug Overdose Death Data. 2017; 
https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/data/statedeaths.html. Accessed July 9, 2018, 2018.
3. Anda RF, Felitti VJ, Walker J, Whitfield C, Bremner JD, Perry BD, Dube SR, 
Giles WH. The enduring effects of childhood abuse and related experiences in childhood: 
A convergence of evidence from neurobiology and epidemiology. Eur Arch Psychiatry 
Clin Neurosci. 2006;256(3):174-186.
4. Grice DE, Brady KT, Dustan LR, Malcolm R, Kilpatrick DG. Sexual and physical 
assault history and post traumatic stress disorder in substance dependent individuals. Am 
J Addict. 1995;4:297-305.
5. Farrugia PI, Mills KL, Barrett E, Back SE, Teesson M, Baker A, Sannibale C, 
Hopwood S, Rosenfeld J, Merz S, Brady KT. Childhood trauma among individuals with 
co-morbid substance use and post traumatic stress disorder. Mental Health Subst Use. 
2011;4(4):314-326.
6. Lawson KM, Back SE, Hartwell KJ, Moran-Santa Maria M, Brady KT. A 
comparison of trauma profiles among individuals with prescription opioid, nicotine or 
cocaine dependence. Am J Addict. 2013;22(2):127-131.
7. Ladwig GB, Anderson MD. Substance abuse in women: Relationship between 
chemical dependency in women and past reports of physical and sexual abuse. Int J 
Addict. 1989;24(8):739-754.
8. Dube SR, Felitti VJ, Dong M, Chapman DP, Giles WH, Anda RF. Childhood 
abuse, neglect, and household dysfunction and the risk of illicit drug use: The Adverse 
Childhood Experiences Study. Pediatrics. 2003;111(3):564-572.
9. Brady KT, Killeen T, Saladin ME, Dansky B, Becker S. Comorbid substance 
abuse and post traumatic stress disorder: Characteristics of women in treatment. Am J 
Addict. 1994;3:160-164.
10. Gros DF, Szafranski DD, Brady KT, Back SE. Relations between pain, PTSD 
symptoms, and substance use in veterans. Psychiatry. 2015;78(3):277-287.
11. McCauley JL, Killeen T, Gros DF, Brady KT, Back SE. Posttraumatic stress 
disorder and co-occurring substance use disorders: Advances in assessment and 
treatment. Clin Psychol. 2012;18(3):1-27.
12. Sinha R. Chronic stress, drug use, and vulnerability to addiction. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci. 2008;1141:105-130.
13. Wittenauer Welsh J, Knight JR, Hou SS-Y, Malowney M, Boyd JW. Association 
between substance use diagnoses and psychiatric disorders in an adolescent and young 
adult clinic-based population. J Adolesc Health. 2017;60:648-652.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 35 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.202214. Fareed A, Eilender P, Haber H, Bremner JD, Whitfield N, Drexler K. Comorbid 
posttraumatic stress disorder and opiate addiction: A literature review. J Addict Dis. 
2013;32(2):168-179.
15. Chilcoat HD, Breslau N. Posttraumatic stress disorder and drug disorders: testing 
causal pathways. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1998;55:913-917.
16. Nazarian D, Kimerling R, Frayne SM. Posttraumatic stress disorder, substance 
use disorders, and medical comorbidity among returning U.S. veterans. J Trauma Stress. 
2012;25(2):220-225.
17. Ouimette P, Goodwin E, Brown PJ. Health and well being of substance use 
disorder patients with and without posttraumatic stress disorder. Addict Behav. 
2006;31(8):1415-1423.
18. Saal D, Dong Y, Bonci A, Malenka RC. Drugs of abuse and stress trigger a 
common synaptic adaptation in dopamine neurons. Neuron. 2003;37(4):577-582.
19. Saladin ME, Drobes DJ, Coffey SF, Dansky BS, Brady KT, Kilpatrick DG. PTSD 
symptom severity as a predictor of cue-elicited drug craving in victims of violent crime. 
Addict Behav. 2003;28:1611-1629.
20. Back SE, Lawson K, Singleton L, Brady KT. Characteristics and correlates of 
men and women with prescription opioid dependence. Addict Behav. 2011;36(8):829-
834.
21. Charney DS, Heninger GR, Kleber HD. The combined use of clonidine and 
naltrexone as a rapid, safe, and effective treatment of abrupt withdrawal from methadone. 
Am J Psychiatry. 1986;143(7):831-837.
22. Gold MS, Redmond DE, Kleber HD. Clonidine blocks acute opiate-withdrawal 
symptoms. Lancet. 1978;2(8090):599-601.
23. Volkow ND. Medications for opioid use disorder: Bridging the gap in care. 
Lancet. 2018;391(10118):285-287.
24. Lott DC. Extended release naltrexone: Good but not a panacea. Lancet. 
2018;391(10118):283-284.
25. Mattick RP, Hall W. Are detoxification programs effective? Lancet. 
1996;347(8994):97-100.
26. Simpson DD, Joe GW, Bracey SA. Six-year follow up of opioid addicts after 
admission to treatment. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1982;39:1318-1323.
27. Mattick RP, Breen C, Kimber J, Davoli M. Methadone maintenance therapy 
versus no opioid replacement therapy for opioid dependence (Review). Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2009(3):Art. No.: CD002209.
28. Beetham R, Saloner B, Wakeman SE, Gaye M, Barnett ML. Access to office-
based buprenorphine treatment in areas with high rates of opioid-related mortality: An 
audit study. Ann Intern Med. 2019;171(1):1-9.
29. Lagisetty PA, Bohnert A. Role of an accurate treatment locator and cash-only 
practices in access to buprenorphine for opioid use disorders. Ann Intern Med. 
2019;171(1):58-59.
30. Lee JD, Friedmann PD, Kinlock TW, Nunes EV, Boney TY, Hoskinson RA, 
Wilson D, McDonald R, Rotrosen J, Gourevitch MN, Gordon M, Fishman M, Chen DT, 
Bonnie RJ, Cornish JW, Murphy SM, O’Brien CP. Extended-release naltrexone to 
prevent opioid relapse in criminal justice offenders. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(13):1232-
1242.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 36 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.202231. Tanum L, Solli KK, Latif ZE, Benth JS, Opheim A, Sharma-Haase K, Krajci P, 
Kunøe N. Effectiveness of injectable extended-release naltrexone vs daily buprenorphine-
naloxone for opioid dependence: A randomized clinical noninferiority trial. JAMA 
psychiatry. 2017;74(12):1197-1205.
32. Nestler EJ, Lüscher C. The molecular basis of drug addiction: Linking epigenetic 
to synaptic and circuit mechanisms. Neuron. 2019;102(1):48-59.
33. Kreek MJ, Levran O, Reed B, Schlussman SD, Zhou Y, Butelman ER. Opiate 
addiction and cocaine addiction: underlying molecular neurobiology and genetics. J Clin 
Invest. 2012;122(122):10.
34. Bremner JD, Krystal JH, Southwick SM, Charney DS. Noradrenergic 
mechanisms in stress and anxiety: I. Preclinical studies. Synapse. 1996;23:28-38.
35. Bremner JD, Krystal JH, Southwick SM, Charney DS. Noradrenergic 
mechanisms in stress and anxiety: II. Clinical studies. Synapse. 1996;23:39-51.
36. Bremner JD, Licinio J, Darnell A, Krystal JH, Owens M, Southwick SM, 
Nemeroff CB, Charney DS. Elevated CSF corticotropin-releasing factor concentrations in 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 1997;154:624-629.
37. Baker DG, Ekhator NN, Kasckow JW, Dashevsky B, Horn PS, Bednarik L, 
Geracioti TD. Higher levels of basal serial CSF cortisol in combat veterans with 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2005;162:992-994.
38. Kalivas PW, Nakamura M. Neural systems for behavioral activation and reward. 
Curr Opin Neurol. 1999;9(2):223-227.
39. Kalivas PW, Duffy P. Similar effects of daily cocaine and stress on 
mesocorticolimbic dopamine neurotransmission in the rat. Biol Psychiatry. 1989;25:913-
928.
40. Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Wang G-J. The addicted human brain: insights from 
imaging studies. Journal of Clinical Investigation. 2003;111:1444-1451.
41. Deutch AY, Roth RH. The determinants of stress-induced activation of the 
prefrontal cortical dopamine system. Prog Brain Res. 1990;85:367-402.
42. Howell LL, Murnane KS. Nonhuman primate positron emission tomography 
neuroimaging in drug abuse research. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011;337(2):324-334.
43. Murnane KS, Howell LL. Neuroimaging and drug taking in primates. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2011;216(2):153-171.
44. Cabrera EA, Wiers CE, Lindgren E, Miller G, Volkow ND, Wang G-J. 
Neuroimaging the effectiveness of substance use disorder treatments. J Neuroimmune 
Pharmacol. 2016;11:408-433.
45. Kreek MJ. Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology and Pathophysiology of Opiate 
Addiction. In: Davis KL, Charney D, Coyle JT, Nemeroff C, eds. 
Neuropsychopharmacology: The Fifth Generation of Progress. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 2002:1491-1506.
46. Quirk GJ. Memory for extinction of conditioned fear is long-lasting and persists 
following spontaneous recovery. Learn Memory. 2002;9:402-407.
47. Davis M. The role of the amygdala in fear and anxiety. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
1992;15:353-375.
48. Hitchcock JM, Davis M. Efferent pathway of the amygdala involved in 
conditioned fear as measured with the fear-potentiated startle paradigm. Behav Neurosci. 
1991;105:826-842.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 37 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.202249. Phillips RG, LeDoux JE. Differential contribution of amygdala and hippocampus 
to cued and contextual fear conditioning. Behav Neurosci. 1992;106:274-285.
50. Brewer JA, Bowen S, Smith JT, Marlatt GA, Potenza MN. Mindfulness-based 
treatments for co-occurring depression and substance use disorders: what can we learn 
from the brain? Addiction. 2010;105(10):1698-1706.
51. Stein EA. fMRI: a new tool for the in vivo localization of drug actions in the 
brain. J Anal Toxicol. 2001;25(5):419-424.
52. Childress AR, McLellan AT, O’Brien CP. Conditioned responses in a methadone 
population: a comparison of laboratory, clinic, and natural settings. J Subst Abuse Treat. 
1986;3:173-179.
53. Nestler EJ, Aghajanian GK. Molecular and cellular basis of addiction. Science. 
1997;278(58-62).
54. Foote SL, Bloom FE, Aston-Jones G. Nucleus locus coeruleus: new evidence of 
anatomical and physiological specificity. Physiol Behav. 1983;63:844-914.
55. Aston-Jones G, Shipley MT, Chouvet G, Ennis M, VanBockstaele EJ, Pieribone 
V, Shiekhattar R. Afferent regulation of locus coeruleus neurons: Anatomy, physiology 
and pharmacology. Prog Brain Res. 1991;88:47-75.
56. Cedarbaum JM, Aghajanian G K. Catecholamine receptors on locus coeruleus 
neurons: Pharmacological characterization. Eur J Pharmacol. 1977;44(4):375-385.
57. Rasmussen K, Aghajanian GK. Withdrawal-induced activation of locus coeruleus 
neurons in opiate-dependent rats: Attenuation by lesion of the nucleus 
paragigantocellularis. Brain Res. 1989;505(2):346-350.
58. Korf J, Bunney BS, Aghajanian GK. Noradrenergic neurons: morphine inhibition 
of spontaneous activity. Eur J Pharmacol. 1974;25(2):165-169.
59. Nestler EJ. Under siege: The brain on opiates. Neuron. 1996;16:897-900.
60. Back SE, Gros DF, McCauley J, Flanagan J, Cox E, Barth K, Brady KT. 
Laboratory-induced cue reactivity among individuals with prescription opioid 
dependence. Addict Behav. 2014;39(8):1217-1223.
61. Back SE, Gros DF, Price M, LaRowe S, Flanagan J, Brady KT, Davis C, Jaconis 
M, McCauley JL. Laboratory-induced stress and craving among individuals with 
prescription opioid dependence. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2015;155:60-67.
62. Gilmore AK, Guille C, Baker NL, Brady KT, Hahn CK, Davis CM, McCauley 
JL, Back SE. Gender differences in subjective stress and neuroendocrine response to a 
stress task among individuals with opioid dependence: A pilot study. Addict Behav. 
2019;92:148-154.
63. Back SE, Brady KT, Jackson JL, Salstrom S, Zinzow H. Gender differences in 
stress reactivity among cocaine-dependent individuals. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
2005;180:169-176.
64. Coffey SF, Saladin ME, Drobes DJ, Brady KT, Dansky BS, Kilpatrick DG. 
Trauma and substance cue reactivity in individuals with comorbid posttraumatic stress 
disorder and cocaine or alcohol dependence. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2002;65:115-127.
65. Svensson TH, Bunney BS, Aghajanian GK. Inhibition of both noradrenergic and 
serotonergic neurons in brain by the alpha-adrenergic agonist clonidine. Brain Res. 
1975;92(2):291-306.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 38 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.202266. Kienbaum P, Heuter T, Michel MC, Scherbaum N, Gastpar M, Peters J. Chronic 
μ-opioid receptor stimulation in humans decreases muscle sympathetic nerve activity. 
Circulation. 2001;103(6):850-855.
67. Kienbaum P, Thürauf N, Michel MC, Scherbaum N, Gastpar M, Peters J. 
Profound increase in epinephrine plasma concentration and cardiovascular stimulation 
following μ-opioid receptor blockade in opioid addicted patients during barbiturate 
anesthesia for acute detoxification. Anesthesiology. 1998;88(5):1154-1161.
68. Kienbaum P, Heuter H, Michel MC, Scherbaum N, Gastpar M, Peters J. 
Sympathetic neural activation evoked by Mu-receptor blockade in patients addicted to 
opioids Is abolished by intravenous clonidine. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(2):346-351.
69. Sackeim HA, Rush AJ, George MS, Marangell LB, Husain MM, Nahas Z, 
Johnson CR, Seidman S, Giller C, Haines S, Simpson RK, Goodman RR. Vagus nerve 
stimulation (VNS) for treatment-resistant depression: Efficacy, side effects, and 
predictors of outcome. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2001;25(5):713-728.
70. George MS, Ward HE, Ninan PT, Pollack M, Nahas Z, Anderson B, Kose S, 
Howland RH, Goodman WK, Ballenger JC. A pilot study of vagus nerve stimulation 
(VNS) for treatment-resistant anxiety disorders. Brain Stimul. 2008;1(2):112-121.
71. Schomer AC, Nearing BD, Schachter SC, Verrier RL. Vagus nerve stimulation 
reduces cardiac electrical instability assessed by quantitative T-wave alternans analysis in 
patients with drug-resistant focal epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2014;55(12):1996-2002.
72. Gurel NZ, Huang M, Wittbrodt MT, Jung H, Ladd SL, Shandhi MH, Ko Y-A, 
Shallenberger L, Nye JA, Pearce B, Vaccarino V, Shah AJ, Bremner JD, Inan OT. 
Quantifying acute physiological biomarkers of transcutaneous cervical vagal nerve 
stimulation in the context of psychological stress. Brain Stimul. 2019;S1935-
861X(19):30346-30348.
73. Wakeford AGP, Morin EL, Bramlett SN, Howell LL, Sanchez MM. A review of 
nonhuman primate models of early life stress and adolescent drug abuse. Neurobiol 
Stress. 2018;9:188-198.
74. Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Wang GJ, Baler R, Telang F. Imaging dopamine's role in 
drug abuse and addiction. Neuropharmacology. 2008;56(Suppl 1):3-8.
75. Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Wang G-J, Swanson JM, Telang F. Dopamine in drug 
abuse and addiction: Results of imaging studies and treatment implications. Arch Neurol. 
2007;64(11):1575-1579.
76. Kimmel HL, Nye JA, Voll R, Stehouwerc J, Goodman MM, Votaw JR, Carroll 
FI, Howell LL. Simultaneous measurement of extracellular dopamine and dopamine 
transporter occupancy by cocaine analogs in squirrel monkeys. Synapse. 2012;66(6):501-
508.
77. Kimmel HL, O’Connor JA, Carroll FI, Howell LL. Faster onset and dopamine 
transporter selectivity predict stimulant and reinforcing effects of cocaine analogs in 
squirrel monkeys. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2007;86(1):45–54.
78. Howell LL, Hoffman JM, Votaw JR, Landrum AM, Wilcox KM, Lindsey KP. 
Cocaine-induced brain activation determined by positron emission tomography 
neuroimaging in conscious rhesus monkeys. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2002;159:154-
160.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 39 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.202279. Howell LL, Votaw JR, Goodman MM, Lindsey KP. Cortical activation during 
cocaine use and extinction in rhesus monkeys. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
2010;208:191-199.
80. Henry PK, Murnane KS, Votaw JR, Howell LL. Acute brain metabolic effects of 
cocaine in rhesus monkeys with a history of cocaine use. Brain Imaging Behav. 
2010;4:212-219.
81. London ED, Broussolle EPM, Links JM, Wong DF, Cascella NG, Dannals RF, 
Sano MC, Herning R, Snyder FR, Rippetoe LR, Toung TJK, Jaffe JH, Wagner HN. 
Morphine-induced metabolic changes in human brain: Studies with positron emission 
tomography and [fluorine-18]fluorodeoxyglucose. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1990;47:73-81.
82. London ED, Cascella NG, Wong DF, Phillips RL, Dannals RF, Links JM, 
Herning R, Grayson R, Jaffe JH, Wagner HN. Cocaine induced reduction of glucose 
utilization in human brain. A study using positron emission tomography and [fluorine 
18]fluorodeoxyglucose. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1990;47:567-574.
83. Liu J, Liang J, Qin W, Tian J, Yuan K, Bai L, Zhang Y, Wang W, Wang Y, Li Q, 
Zhao L, Lu L, von Deneen KM, Gold MS. Dysfunctional connectivity patterns in chronic 
heroin users: An fMRI study. Neurosci Lett. 2009;460(1):72-77.
84. Brody AL, Mandelkern MA, London ED, Childress AR, Lee GS, Bota RG, Ho 
ML, Saxena S, Baxter LR, Madsen D, Jarvik ME. Brain metabolic changes during 
cigarette craving. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2002;59(12):1162-1172.
85. Liu J, Qin W, Yuan K, Li J, Wang W, Li Q, Wang Y, Sun J, von Deneen KM, Liu 
Y, Tian J. Interaction between dysfunctional connectivity at rest and heroin cues-induced 
brain responses in male abstinent heroin-dependent individuals. PLoS One. 
2011;6(10):e23098.
86. Childress AR, Mozley PD, McElgin W, Fitzgerald J, Reivich M, O'Brien CP. 
Limbic activation during cue-induced cocaine craving. Am J Psychiatry. 1999;156(1):11-
18.
87. Breiter HC, Gollub RL, Weisskoff RM, Kennedy DN, Makris N, Berke JD, 
Goodman JM, Kantor HL, Gastfriend DR, Riorden JP, Mathew RT, Rosen BR, Hyman 
SE. Acute effects of cocaine on human brain activity and emotion. Neuron. 1997;19:591-
611.
88. Wexler BE, Gottschalk CH, Fulbright RK, Prohovnik I, Lacadie CM, Rounsaville 
BJ, Gore JC. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of cocaine craving. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2001;158:86-95.
89. Kaufman JN, Ross TJ, Stein EA, Garavan H. Cingulate hypoactivity in cocaine 
users during a GO-NOGO task as revealed by event-related functional magnetic 
resonance imaging. J Neurosci. 2003;23(21):7839-7843.
90. Schmidt A, Borgwardt S, Riecher-Rössler A, Wiesbeck GA, Gerber H, Walter M, 
Lang UE, Seifritz E, Brenneisen R. Normalizing effect of heroin maintenance treatment 
on stress-induced brain connectivity. Brain. 2015;138(1):217-228.
91. Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Wang G-J, Hitzemann R, Logan J, Schlyer DJ, Dewey 
SL, Wolf AP. Decreased dopamine D2 receptor availability is associated with reduced 
frontal metabolism in cocaine abusers. Synapse. 1993;14:169-177.
92. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fischman MW, Foltin RW, Fowler JS, Abumrad NN, 
Vitkun S, Logan J, Gatley SJ, Pappas N, Nitzemann R, Shea K. Relationship between 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 40 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022subjective effects of cocaine and dopamine transporter occupancy. Nature. 
1997;386:827-830.
93. Volkow ND, Wang G-J, Fowler JS, Gatley SJ, Ding Y-S, Logan J, Hitzemann R, 
Lieberman J. Relationship between psychostimulant induced high and dopamine 
transporter occupancy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996;93:10388-10392.
94. Shi J, Zhao L-Y, Copersino ML, Fang Y-X, Chen Y, Tian J, Deng Y, Shuai Y, Jin 
J, Lu L. PET imaging of dopamine transporter and drug craving during methadone 
maintenance treatment and after prolonged abstinence in heroin users. Eur J Pharmacol. 
2008;579:160-166.
95. Bremner JD, Rapaport MH. Vagus Nerve Stimulation: Back to the future. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2017;174(7):609-610.
96. Bikson M, Grossman P, Thomas C, Zannou AL, Jiang J, Adnan T, 
Mourdoukoutas AP, Kronberg G, Truong D, Boggio P, Brunoni AR, Charvet L, Fregni F, 
Fritsch B, Gillick B, Hamilton RH, Hampstead BM, Jankord R, Kirton A, Knotkova H, 
Liebetanz D, Liu A, Loo C, Nitsche MA, Reis J, Richardson JD, Rotenberg A, 
Turkeltaub PE, Woods AJ. Safety of transcranial Direct Current Stimulation: Evidence 
based update 2016. Brain Stimul. 2016;9(5):641-661.
97. Woods AJ, Antal A, Bikson M, Boggio PS, Brunoni AR, Celnik P, Cohen LG, 
Fregni F, Herrmann CS, Kappenman ES, Knotkova H, Liebetanz D, Miniussi C, 
Mirandam PC, Paulus W, Priori A, Reato D, Stagg C, Wenderoth N, Nitsche MA. A 
technical guide to tDCS, and related non-invasive brain stimulation tools. Clin 
Neurophysiol. 2016;127:1031-1048.
98. Bikson M, Bulow P, Stiller JW, Datta A, Battaglia F, Karnup SV, Postolache TT. 
Transcranial direct current stimulation for major depression: A general system for 
quantifying transcranial electrotherapy dosage. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 
2008;10(5):377-385.
99. Ekhtiari H, Tavakoli H, Addolorato G, Baeken C, Bonci A, Campanella S, 
Castelo-Branco L, Challet-Bouju G, Clark VP, Claus E, Dannon PN, Del Felice A, den 
Uyl T, Diana M, di Giannantonio M, Fedota JR, Fitzgerald P, Gallimberti L, Grall-
Bronnec M, Herremans SC, Herrmann MJ, Jamil A, Khedr E, Kouimtsidis C, Kozak K, 
Krupitsky E, Lamm C, Lechner WV, Madeo G, Malmir N, Martinotti G, W/ M, C/ M, 
E.M. N-P, Nasehi M, Noël X, Nosratabadi M, Paulus M, Pettorruso M, Pradhan B, 
Praharaj SK, Rafferty H, Sahlem G, Jo Salmeron B, Sauvaget A, Schluter RS, Sergiou C, 
Shahbabaie A, Sheffer C, Spagnolo PA, Steele VR, Yuan TF, van Dongen J, Van Waes 
V, Venkatasubramanian G, Verdejo-García A, Verveer I, Welsh J, Wesley MJ, 
Witkiewitz K, Yavari F, Zarrindast MR, Zawertailo L, Zhang X, Cha YH, George TP, 
Frohlich F, Goudriaan AE, Fecteau S, Daughters SB, Stein EA, Fregni F, Nitsche MA, 
Zangen A, Bikson M, Hanlon CA. Transcranial electrical and magnetic stimulation (tES 
and TMS) for addiction medicine: A consensus paper on the present state of the science 
and the road ahead. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2019;S0149-7634(19):30307-30300.
100. Li W, Olshansky B. Inflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide in heart failure and 
potential modulation by vagus nerve stimulation. Heart Fail Rev. 2011;16(2):137-145.
101. Das UN. Can vagus nerve stimulation halt or ameliorate rheumatoid arthritis and 
lupus? Lipids Health Dis. 2011;10:19.
102. Levy MN. Sympathetic-parasympathetic interactions in the heart. Circ Res. 
1971;29(5):437-445.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 41 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022103. Hardy SG. Medullary projections to the vagus nerve and posterolateral 
hypothalamus. Anat Rec. 1995;242(2):251-258.
104. Wen J, Desai NS, Jeffery D, Aygun N, Blitz A. High-resolution isotropic three-
dimensional MR imaging of the extraforaminal segments of the cranial nerves. Magn 
Reson Imaging Clin N Am. 2018;26:101-119.
105. Hays SA, Rennaker RL, Kilgard MP. Targeting plasticity with vagus nerve 
stimulation to treat neurological disease. Prog Brain Res. 2013;207:275-299.
106. Manta S, Dong J, Debonnel G, Blier P. Enhancement of the function of rat 
serotonin and norepinephrine neurons by sustained vagus nerve stimulation. J Psychiatr 
Neurosci. 2009;34:272-280.
107. Hassert DL, Miyashita T, Williams CL. The effects of peripheral vagal nerve 
stimulation at a memory-modulating intensity on norepinephrine output in the basolateral 
amygdala. Behav Neurosci. 2004;118(1):79-88.
108. Roosevelt RW, Smith DC, Clough RW, Jensen RA, Browning RA. Increased 
extracellular concentrations of norepinephrine in cortex and hippocampus following 
vagus nerve stimulation in the rat. Brain. 2006;1119(1):124-132.
109. Hulsey DR, Riley JR, Loerwald KW, Rennaker RL, Kilgard MP, Hays SA. 
Parametric characterization of neural activity in the locus coeruleus in response to vagus 
nerve stimulation. Neurology. 2017;289:21-30.
110. Manta S, Dong J, Debonnel G, Blier P. Optimization of vagus nerve stimulation 
parameters using the firing activity of serotonin neurons in the rat dorsal raphe. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2009;19:250-255.
111. Manta S, El Mansari M, Debonnel  G, Blier P. Electrophysiological and 
neurochemical effects of long-term vagus nerve stimulation on the rat monoaminergic 
systems. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013;16:459-470.
112. McGaugh JL. Peripheral and central adrenergic influences on brain systems 
involved in the modulation of memory storage. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1985;444:150-161.
113. Dorr AE, Debonnel G. Effect of vagus nerve stimulation on serotonergic and 
noradrenergic transmission. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2006;318(2):89-898.
114. Nichols JA, Nichols AR, Smirnakis SM, Engineer ND, Kilgard MP, Atzoni M. 
Vagus nerve stimulation modulates cortical synchrony and excitability through the 
activation of muscarinic receptors. Neuroscience. 2011;189:207-214.
115. Perez SM, Carreno FR, Frazer A, Lodge DJ. Vagal nerve stimulation reverses 
aberrant dopamine system function in the methylazoxymethanol acetate rodent model of 
schizophrenia. J Neurosci. 2014;34(2):9261-9267.
116. Hammond EJ, Uthman BM, Wilder BJ, Ben-Menachem E, Hamberger A, Hedner 
T, Ekman R. Neurochemical effects of vagus nerve stimulation in humans. Brain Res. 
1992;583(1-2):300-303.
117. Brock C, Brock B, Aziz Q, Møller HJ, Pfeiffer Jensen M, Drewes AM, Farmer 
AD. Transcutaneous cervical vagal nerve stimulation modulates cardiac vagal tone and 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2017;29(5):1-4.
118. Clancy JA, Mary DA, Witte KK, Greenwood JP, Deuchars SA, Deuchars J. Non-
invasive vagus nerve stimulation in healthy humans reduces sympathetic nerve activity. 
Brain Stimul. 2014;7:871-877.
119. Thayer JF, Lane RD. The role of vagal function in the risk for cardiovascular 
disease and mortality. . Biol Psychiatry. 2007;74:224-242.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 42 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022120. Weber CS, Thayer JF, Rudat M, Wirtz PH, Zimmermann-Viehoff F, Thomas A, 
Perschel FH, Arck PC, Deter HC. Low vagal tone is associated with impaired post stress 
recovery of cardiovascular, endocrine, and immune markers. Eur J Appl Physiol. 
2010;109(2):201-211.
121. Pagani M, Lombardi F, Guzzetti S, Rimoldi O, Furlan R, Pizzinelli P, Sandrone 
G, Malfatto G, Piccalluga E, Turiel M, Basellli G, Malliani A. Power spectral analysis of 
heart rate and arterial pressure variability as a marker of sympatho-vagal interaction in 
man and conscious dog. Circ Res. 1986;59:178-193.
122. Bansal V, Ryu SY, Lopez N, Allexan S, Krzyzaniak M, Eliceiri B, Baird A, 
Coimbra R. Vagal stimulation modulates inflammation through a ghrelin mediated 
mechanism in traumatic brain injury. Inflammation. 2012;35(1):214-220.
123. Borovikova LV, Ivanova S, Zhang M, Yang H, Botchkina GI, Watkins LR, Wang 
H, Abumrad N, Eaton JW, Tracey KJ. Vagus nerve stimulation attenuates the systemic 
inflammatory response to endotoxin. Nature. 2000;405(6785):458-462.
124. Corsi-Zuelli FMG, Brognara F, Quirino GFS, Hiroki CH, Sobrano Fais R, Del-
Ben C, M., Ulloa L, Salgado HC, Kanashiro A, Loureiro CM. Neuroimmune interactions 
in schizophrenia: Focus on vagus nerve stimulation and activation of the alpha-7 nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor. Front Immunol. 2017;8.
125. Cunningham JT, Mifflin SW, Gould GG, Frazer A. Induction of c-Fos and delta-
FosB immunoreactivity in rat brain by vagal nerve stimulation. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008;33:1884-1895.
126. De Herdt V, Bogaert S, Bracke KR, Raedt R, De Vos M, Vonck K, Boon P. 
Effects of vagus nerve stimulation on pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine induction in 
patients with refractory epilepsy. J Neuroimmunol. 2009;214(1-2):104-108.
127. Lerman I, Hauger R, Sorkin L, Proudfoot J, Davis B, Huang A, Lam K, Simon B, 
Baker DG. Noninvasive transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation decreases whole blood 
culture-derived cytokines and chemokines: A randomized, blinded, healthy control pilot 
trial. Neuromodulation. 2016;19(3):283-290.
128. Majoie HJM, Rijkers K, Berfelo MW, Hulsman JARJ, Myint A, Schwarz M, Vles 
JSH. Vagus nerve stimulation in refractory epilepsy: effects on pro-and anti-
inflammatory cytokines in peripheral blood. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2011;18(1):52-56.
129. Zubelewicz B, Muc-Wierzgoń M, Harbuz MS, Brodziak A. Central single and 
chronic administration of morphine stimulates corticosterone and interleukin (IL)-6 in 
adjuvant-induced arthritis. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2000;51(4 Pt 2):897-906.
130. Qu J, Tao X-Y, Teng P, Zhang Y, Guo C-L, Hu L, Qian Y-N, Jiang C-Y, Liu W-
T. Blocking ATP-sensitive potassium channel alleviates morphine tolerance by inhibiting 
HSP70-TLR4-NLRP3-mediated neuroinflammation. J Neuroinflammation. 
2017;14(228):1-17.
131. Houghtling RA, Bayer BM. Rapid elevation of plasma interleukin-6 by morphine 
is dependent on autonomic stimulation of adrenal gland. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2002;300:213-219.
132. Wang Z, Yang X, Song H, Cao B, Yin F, An Z, Kang L, Li J. Immune function 
alterations during 12 weeks of abstinence in heroin users. Folia Biologica. 
2016;61(6):241-246.
133. Kapasi AA, Gibbons N, Mattana J, Singhal PC. Morphine stimulates mesangial 
cell TNF-alpha and nitrite production. Inflammation. 2000;24(5):463-476.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 43 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022134. Lashkarizadeh MR, Garshasbi M, Shabani M, Dabiri S, Hadavi H, Manafi-Anari 
H. Impact of opium addiction on levels of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines after 
surgery. Addict Health. 2016;8(1):9-15.
135. Dyuizen I, Lamash NE. Histo- and immunocytochemical detection of inducible 
NOS and TNF-alpha in the locus coeruleus of human opiate addicts. J Chem Neuroanat. 
2009;37(2):65-70.
136. Huston JM, Gallowitsch-Puerta M, Ochani M, Ochani K, Yuan R, Rosas-Ballina 
M, Ashok M, Goldstein RS, Chavan S, Pavlov VA. Transcutaneous vagus nerve 
stimulation reduces serum high mobility group box 1 levels and improves survival in 
murine sepsis. Crit Care Med. 2007;35(12):2762-2768.
137. Wang X-W, Karki A, Du D-Y, Zhao X-J, Xiang X-Y, Lu Z-Q. Plasma levels of 
high mobility group box 1 increase in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder after 
severe blunt chest trauma: a prospective cohort study. J Surg Res. 2015;193(1):308-315.
138. Myint AM. Kynurenines: From the perspective of major psychiatric disorders. 
FEBS J. 2012;279(8):1375-1385.
139. Klinkenberg S, van den Borne C, Aalbers M, Verschuure P, Kessels A, Leenen L, 
Rijkers K, Aldenkamp A, Vles J, Majoie H. The effects of vagus nerve stimulation on 
tryptophan metabolites in children with intractable epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 
2014;37:133-138.
140. Noble LJ, Meruva VB, Hays SA, Rennaker RL, Kilgard MP, McIntyre CK. 
Vagus nerve stimulation promotes generalization of conditioned fear extinction and 
reduces anxiety in rats. Brain Stimul. 2018;12(1):9-18.
141. Marin MF, Camprodon JA, Dougherty DD, Milad MR. Device-based brain 
stimulation to augment fear extinction: Implications for PTSD treatment and beyond. 
Depress Anxiety. 2014;31(4):269-278.
142. Engineer CT, Engineer ND, Riley JR, Seale JD, Kilgard MP. Pairing speech 
sounds with vagus nerve stimulation drives stimulus-specific cortical plasticity. Brain 
Stimul. 2015;8(3):637-644.
143. Engineer ND, Riley JR, Seale JD, Vrana WA, Shetake JA, Sudanagunta SP, 
Borland MS, Kilgard MP. Reversing pathological neural activity using targeted plasticity. 
Nature. 2011;470(7332):101-104.
144. Kim HJ, Shim H-J, Kwak MY, An Y-H, Kim DH, Kim YJ, Kim HJ. Feasibility 
and safety of transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation paired with notched music therapy 
for the treatment of chronic tinnitus. J Audiol Otol. 2015;18(3):159-167.
145. Li T-T, Wang Z-J, Yang S-B, Zhu J-H, Zhang S-Z, Cai S-J, Ma W-H, Zhang D-
Q, Mei A-G. Transcutaneous electrical stimulation at auricular acupoints innervated by 
auricular branch of vagus nerve pairing tone for tinnitus: Study protocol for a randomized 
controlled clinical trial. Trials. 2015;16(101):1-9.
146. Liu A, Zhao F-B, Wang J, Lu YF, Tian J, Zhao Y, Gao Y, Hu X-J, Liu X-Y, Tan 
J, Tian Y-L, Shi J. Effects of vagus nerve stimulation on cognitive functioning in rats 
with cerebral ischemia reperfusion. J Transl Med. 2016;14(101):1-12.
147. Clark KB, Naritoku DK, Smith DC, Browning RA, Jensen RA. Enhanced 
recognition memory following vagus nerve stimulation in human subjects. Nat Neurosci. 
1999;2(1):94-98.
148. Suthana N, Fried I. Deep brain stimulation for enhancement of learning and 
memory. Neuroimage. 2014;85:996-1002.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 44 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022149. Cahill L, McGaugh JL. Mechanisms of emotional arousal and lasting declarative 
memory. Trends Neurosci. 1998;21:294-299.
150. McGaugh JL. Memory - A century of consolidation. Science. 2000;287:248-251.
151. Bremner JD, Vythilingam M, Vermetten E, Newcomer JW, Charney DS. Effects 
of dexamethasone on declarative memory function in posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD). Psychiatry Res. 2004;129(1):1-10.
152. Bremner JD, Vythilingam M, Vermetten E, Newcomer JW, Charney DS. Effects 
of glucocorticoids on declarative memory function in major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 
2004;55(8):811-815.
153. Cahill L, Prins B, Weber M, McGaugh JL. Beta-adrenergic activation and 
memory for emotional events. Nature. 1994;371:702-704.
154. Southwick SM, Horner B, Morgan CA, Bremner JD, Davis M, Cahill L, Gold PB, 
Charney DS. Relationship of enhanced norepinephrine activity during memory 
consolidation to enhanced long-term memory in humans. Am J Psychiatry. 
2002;159:1420-1422.
155. Flood JF, Smith GE, Morley JE. Modulation of memory processing by 
cholecystokinin: Dependence on the vagus nerve. Science. 1987;236(4803):832-834.
156. Williams CL, Jensen RA. Effects of vagotomy on leuenkephalin-induced 
impairments in memory storage. Physiol Behav. 1993;54(4):659-663.
157. Clark KB, Krahl SE, Smith DC, Jensen RA. Post-training unilateral vagal 
stimulation enhances retention performance in the rat. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 
1995;63(3):213-216.
158. Clark KB, Smith DC, Hassert DL, Browning RA, Naritoku DK, Jensen RA. 
Posttraining electrical stimulation of vagal afferents with concomitant vagal efferent 
inactivation enhances memory storage processes in the rat. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 
1998;70(3):364-373.
159. Shen H, Fuchino Y, Miyamoto D, Nomura H, Matsuki N. Vagus nerve 
stimulation enhances perforant path-CA3 synaptic transmission via the activation of beta-
adrenergic receptors and the locus coeruleus. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2012;4:523-
530.
160. Ura H, Sugaya Y, Ohata H, Takumi I, Sadamoto K, Shibasaki T, Maru E. Vagus 
nerve stimulation induced long-lasting enhancement of synaptic transmission and 
decreased granule cell discharge in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of urethane-
anesthetized rats. Brain Res. 2013;1492:63-71.
161. Zuo Y, Smith DC, Jensen RA. Vagus nerve stimulation potentiates hippocampal 
LTP in freely-moving rats. Physiol Behav. 2007;90(4):583-589.
162. Revesz D, Tjernstrom M, Ben-Menachem E, Thorlin T. Effects of vagus nerve 
stimulation on rat hippocampal progenitor proliferation. Exp Neurol. 2008;214:259-265.
163. Santarelli L, Saxe M, Gross C, Surget A, Battaglia F, Dulawa S, Weisstaub N, 
Lee J, Duman R, Arancio O, Belzung C, Hen R. Requirement of hippocampal 
neurogenesis for the behavioral effects of antidepressants. Science. 2003;301(5634):805-
809.
164. Duman RS. Depression: a case of neuronal life and death? Biol Psychiatry. 
2004;56:140-145.
165. Duman RS, Heninger GR, Nestler EJ. A molecular and cellular theory of 
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1997;54:597-606.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 45 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022166. Pena DF, Childs JE, Willett S, Vital A, McIntyre CK, Kroener S. Vagus nerve 
stimulation enhances extinction of conditioned fear and modulates plasticity in the 
pathway from the ventromedial prefrontal cortex to the amygdala. Front Behav Neurosci. 
2014;8(327):1-8.
167. Peña DF, Engineer ND, McIntyre CK. Rapid remission of conditioned fear 
expression with extinction training paired with vagus nerve stimulation. Biol Psychiatry. 
2013;73(11):1071-1077.
168. Noble IJ, Gonzalez IJ, Meruva VB, Callahan KA, Belfort BD, Ramanathan KR, 
Meyers E, Kilgard MP, Rennaker RL, McIntyre CK. Effects of vagus nerve stimulation 
on extinction of conditioned fear and post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms in rats. 
Transl Psychiatry. 2017;7(e1217):1-8.
169. Souza RR, Robertson NM, Pruitt DT, Gonzales PA, Hays SA, Rennaker RL, 
Kilgard MP, McIntyre CK. Vagus nerve stimulation reverses the extinction impairments 
in a model of PTSD with prolonged and repeated trauma. Stress. 2019.
170. Agorastos A, Boel JA, Heppner PS, Hager T, Moeller-Bertram T, Haji U, 
Motazedi A, Yanagi MA, Baker DG, Stiedl O. Diminished vagal activity and blunted 
diurnal variation of heart rate dynamics in posttraumatic stress disorder. Stress. 
2013;16(3):300-310.
171. McLaughlin KA, Alves S, Sheridan MA. Vagal regulation and internalizing 
psychopathology among adolescents exposed to childhood adversity. Dev Psychobiol. 
2014;56(5):1036-1051.
172. Polak T, Markulin F, Ehlis A-C, Langer JBM, Ringel TM, Fallgatter AJ. Far field 
potentials from brain stem after transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation: optimization of 
stimulation and recording parameters. J Neural Transm. 2009;116:1237-1242.
173. Hays SA. Enhancing rehabilitative therapies with vagus nerve stimulation. 
Neurotherapeutics. 2016;13(2):382-394.
174. Hays SA, Ruiz A, Bethea T, Khodaparast N, Carmel JB, Rennaker RL, Kilgard 
MP. Vagus nerve stimulation during rehabilitative training enhances recovery of forelimb 
function after ischemic stroke in aged rats. Neurobiol Aging. 2016;43:111-118.
175. Khodaparast N, Kilgard MP, Casavant R, Ruiz A, Qureshi I, Ganzer PD, 
Rennaker RL, Hays SA. Vagus nerve stimulation during rehabilitative training improves 
forelimb recovery after chronic ischemic stroke in rats. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2015;30(7):676-684.
176. Pruitt DT, Schmid A, N., Kim LL, Abe CM, Trieu JL, Choua C. Vagus nerve 
stimulation delivered with motor training enhances recovery of function after traumatic 
brain injury. J Neurotrauma. 2016;33:871-879.
177. Hays SA, Khodaparast N, Hulsey DR, Ruiz A, Sloan AM, Rennaker RL, Kilgard 
MP. Vagus nerve stimulation during rehabilitative training improves functional recovery 
after intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2014;45(10):3097-3100.
178. Smith DC, Modglin AA, Roosevelt RW, Neese SL, Jensen RA, Browning RA, 
Clough RW. Electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve enhances cognitive and motor 
recovery following moderate fluid percussion injury in the rat. J Neurotrauma. 
2005;22(12):1485-1502.
179. Smith DC, Tan AA, Duke A, Neese SL, Clough RW, Browning RA, Jensen RA. 
Recovery of function after vagus nerve stimulation initiated 24h after fluid percussion 
brain injury. J Neurotrauma. 2006;23(10):1549-1560.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 46 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022180. Li M, Zheng C, Sato T, Kawada T, Sugimachi M, Sunagawa K. Vagal nerve 
stimulation markedly improves long-term survival after chronic heart failure in rats. 
Circulation. 2004;109(1):120-124.
181. Groves DA, Brown VJ. Vagal nerve stimulation: a review of its applications and 
potential mechanisms that mediate its clinical effects. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 
2005;29:493-500.
182. Meyers R, Pearlman A, Hyman R. Beneficial effects of vagal stimulation and 
bradycardia during experimental acute myocardial ischemia. Circulation. 1974;49:943-
947.
183. Kent KM, Smith ER, Redwood DR, Epstein SE. Electrical stability of acutely 
ischemic myocardium: Influences to heart rate and vagal stimulation. Circulation. 
1973;47:291-298.
184. Childs JE, DeLeon J, Nickel E, Kroener S. Vagus nerve stimulation reduces 
cocaine seeking and alters plasticity in the extinction network. Learn Memory. 
2016;24(1):35-42.
185. Dawson J, Pierce D, Dixit A, Kimberley TJ, Robertson M, Tarver B, Hilmi O, 
McLean J, Forbes K, Kilgard MP, Rennaker RL, Cramer SC, Walters M, Engineer ND. 
Safety, feasibility, and efficacy of Vagus Nerve Stimulation paired with upper-limb 
rehabilitation after ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2016;47:143-150.
186. Shim HJ, Kwak MY, An Y-H, Kim DH, Kim YJ, Kim HJ. Feasibility and safety 
of transcutaneous Vagus Nerve Stimulation paired with notched music therapy for the 
treatment of chronic tinnitus. J Audiol Otol. 2015;19(3):159-167.
187. Sjögren MJ, Hellstrom PT, Jonsson MA, Runnerstam M, Silander HC, Ben-
Menachem E. Cognition-enhancing effect of vagus nerve stimulation in patients with 
Alzheimer’s disease: A pilot study. J Clin Psychiatry. 2002;63(11):972-980.
188. Merrill CA, Jonsson MA, Minthon L, Ejnell H, C-son Silander H, Blennow K, 
Karlsson M, Nordlund A, Rolstad S, Warkentin S, Ben-Menachem E, Sjögren MJ. Vagus 
nerve stimulation in patients with Alzheimer's disease: Additional follow-up results of a 
pilot study through 1 year. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;67(8):1171-1178.
189. Bikson M, Unal G, Brunoni A, Loo C. What psychiatrists need to know about 
transcranial direct current stimulation. Psychiatric Times. 2017:1-3.
190. Tortella G, Casati R, Aparicio LVM, Mantovani A, Senço N, D’Urso G, Brunelin 
J, Guarienti F, Lorencini Selingardi PM, Muszkat D, de Sampaio Pereira B, Valiengo L, 
Moffa AH, Simis M, Borrione L, Brunoni AR. Transcranial direct current stimulation in 
psychiatric disorders. World J Psychiatr. 2015;5(1):88-102.
191. Schachter SC, Saper CB. Vagus nerve stimulation. Epilepsia. 1998;39:677-686.
192. Busch V, Zeman F, Heckel A, Menne F, Ellrich J, Eichhammer P. The effect of 
transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation on pain perception – An experimental study. 
Brain Stimul. 2013;6(2):202-209.
193. Babygirija R, Sood M, Kannampalli P, Sengupta JN, Miranda A. Percutaneous 
electrical nerve field stimulation modulates central pain pathways and attenuates post-
inflammatory visceral and somatic hyperalgesia in rats. Neuroscience. 2017;356:11-21.
194. Barbanti P, Grazzi L, Egeo G, Padovan A, Liebler E, Bussone G. Non-invasive 
vagus nerve stimulation for acute treatment of high-frequency and chronic migraine: an 
open-label study. J Headache Pain. 2015;16(1):1-5.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 47 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022195. Nesbitt AD, Marin JCA, Tomkins E, Ruttledge MH, Goadsby PJ. Non-invasive 
vagus nerve stimulation for the treatment of cluster headache: a case series. J Headache 
Pain. 2013;14(1):1-1.
196. Ben-Menachem E, Revesz D, Simon BJ, Silberstein S. Surgically implanted and 
non-invasive vagus nerve stimulation: a review of efficacy, safety and tolerability. Eur J 
Neurol. 2015;22(9):1260-1268.
197. Gaul C, Magis D, Liebler EJ, Straube A. Effects of non-invasive vagus nerve 
stimulation on attack frequency over time and expanded response rates in patients with 
chronic cluster headache: A post hoc analysis of the randomized, controlled PREVA 
Study. J Headache Pain. 2017;18(22):1-7.
198. Ben-Menachem E, Hellström K, Waldton C, Augustinsson LE. Evaluation of 
refractory epilepsy treated with vagus nerve stimulation for up to 5 years. Neurology. 
1999;52:1265-1267.
199. Ben-Menachem E, Mañon-Espaillat R, R. R, Wilder BJ, Stefan H, Mirza W, 
Tarver WB, Wernicke JF. Vagus nerve stimulation for treatment of partial seizures: 1. A 
controlled study of effect on seizures. Epilepsia. 1994;35(3):616-626.
200. George R, Salinsky M, Kuzniecky R, Rosenfeld W, Bergen D, Tarver WB, 
Wernicke JF. Vagus nerve stimulation for treatment of partial seizures: 3. Long-term 
follow-up on the first 67 patients exiting a controlled study. Epilepsia. 1994;35(3):637-
643.
201. Handforth A, DeGiorgio CM, Schachter SC, Uthman BM, Naritoku DK, Tecoma 
ES, Henry TR, Collins SD, Vaughn BV, Gilmartin RC, Labar DR, Morris GLr, Salinsky 
MC, Osorio I, Ristanovic RK, Labiner DM, Jones JC, Murphy JV, Ney GC, Wheless JW. 
Vagus nerve stimulation therapy for partial-onset seizures: A randomized active-control 
trial. Neurology. 1998;51(1):48-55.
202. Salinsky MC, Uthman BM, Ristanovic RK, Wernicke JF, Tarver WB. Vagus 
nerve stimulation for the treatment of medically intractable seizures. Results of a 1-year 
open-extension trial. The Vagus Nerve Stimulation Study Group. Arch Neurol. 
1999;53(11):1176-1180.
203. The Vagus Nerve Stimulation Study Group. A randomized controlled trial of 
chronic vagus nerve stimulation for treatment of medically intractable seizures. 
Neurology. 1995;45(2):224-230.
204. Berry SM, Broglio K, Bunker M, Jayewardene A, Olin B, Rush AJ. A 
patient‑level meta-analysis of studies evaluating vagus nerve stimulation therapy for 
treatment-resistant depression. Med Devices (Auckl). 2013;6:17-35.
205. Brunoni AR, Moffa AH, Fregni F, Palm U, Padberg F, Blumberger DM, 
Daskalakis ZJ, Bennabi D, Haffen E, Alonzo A, Loo CK. Transcranial direct current 
stimulation for acute major depressive episodes: meta-analysis of individual patient data. 
Br J Psychiatry. 2016;208(6):522-531.
206. Brunoni AR, Moffa AH, Sampaio‑Junior B, Borrione L, Moreno ML, Fernandes 
RA, Veronezi BP, Nogueira BS, Aparicio LVM, Razza LB, Chamorro R, Tort LC, 
Fraguas R, Lotufo PA, Gattaz WF, Fregni F, Benseñor IM, the ELECT-TDCS 
Investigators. Trial of electrical Direct-Current Therapy versus escitalopram for 
depression. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(26):2523-2533.
207. Brunoni AR, Valiengo L, Baccaro A, Zanão TA, de Oliveira JF, Goulart A, 
Boggio PS, Lotufo PA, Benseñor IM, Fregni F. The sertraline versus electrical current 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 48 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022therapy for treating depression clinical study: Results from a factorial, randomized, 
controlled trial. JAMA psychiatry. 2013;70(4):383-390.
208. Dell-Osso B, Oldani L, Palazzo MC, Balossi I, Ciabatti M, Altamura AC. Vagus 
nerve stimulation in treatment-resistant depression: Acute and follow-up results of an 
Italian case series. J ECT. 2013;29(1):41-44.
209. George MS, Rush AJ, Marangell LB, Sackeim HA, Brannan SK, Davis SM, 
Howland R, Kling MA, Moreno F, Rittberg B, Dunner D, Schwartz T, Carpenter L, 
Burke M, Ninan P, Goodnick P. A one-year comparison of Vagus Nerve Stimulation with 
treatment as usual for treatment-resistant depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2005;58:364-373.
210. George MS, Rush AJ, Sackeim HA, Marangell L. Vagus Nerve Stimulation 
(VNS): Utility in neuropsychiatric disorders. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2003;6:73-83.
211. Marangell LB, Rush AJ, George MS, Sackeim HA, Johnson CR, Husain MM, 
Nahas Z, Lisanby SH. Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS) for major depressive episodes: 
Longer-term outcome. Biol Psychiatry. 2002;51(4):280-287.
212. Rush AJ, George MS, Sackeim HA, Marangell LB, Husain M, Giller C, Nahas Z, 
Haines S, Simson RK, Goodman R, Burt T. Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS) for 
treatment-resistant depression: A multicenter study. Biol Psychiatry. 2000;47(4):276-286.
213. Rush AJ, Marangell LB, Sackeim HA, George MS, Brannan SK, Davis S, M., 
Howland R, Kling MA, Rittberg BR, Burke WJ, Rapaport MH, Zajecka J, Nierenberg 
AA, Husain MM, Ginsberg D, Cooke RG. Vagus Nerve Stimulation for treatment-
resistant depression: A randomized, controlled acute phase trial. Biol Psychiatry. 
2005;58:347-354.
214. Rush AJ, Sackheim HA, Marangell LB, George MS, Brannan SK, Davis SM, 
Lavori P, Howland R, Kling MA, Rittberg B, Carpenter L, Ninan P, Moreno F, Schwartz 
T, Conway C, Burke M, Barry JJ. Effects of 12 Months of Vagus Nerve Stimulation in 
treatment-resistant depression: A naturalistic study. Biol Psychiatry. 2005;58(5):355-363.
215. Sackeim HA, Brannan SK, Rush AJ, George MS, Marangell LB, Allen J. 
Durability of antidepressant response to vagus nerve stimulation (VNS). Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2007;10:817-826.
216. Sackeim HA, Keilp JG, Rush AJ, George MS, Marangell LB, Dormer JS, Burt T, 
Lisanby SH, Husain M, Collum M, Oliver NC, Zboyan HA. The effects of vagus nerve 
stimulation on cognitive performance in patients with treatment-resistant depression. 
Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychol Behav Neurol. 2001;14(1):53-62.
217. Brunelin J, Mondino M, Gassab L, Haesebaert F, Lofti Gaha L, Suaud-Chagny 
M-F, Saoud M, Mechri A, Poulet E. Examining transcranial direct-current stimulation 
(tDCS) as a treatment for hallucinations in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 
2012;169(7):719-724.
218. Hasan A, Wolff-Menzler C, Pfeiffer S, Falkai P, Weidinger E, Jobst A, Hoell I, 
Malchow B, Yeganeh‑Doost P, Strube W, Quast S, Müller N, Wobrock T. 
Transcutaneous noninvasive vagus nerve stimulation (tVNS) in the treatment of 
schizophrenia: a bicentric randomized controlled pilot study. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin 
Neurosci. 2015;256(7):589-600.
219. D’Urso G, Brunoni AR, Mazzaferro MP, Anastasia A, de Bartolomeis A, 
Mantovani A. Transcranial direct current stimulation for obsessive-compulsive disorder: 
A randomized, controlled, partial crossover trial. Depress Anxiety. 2016;33(12):1132-
1140.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 49 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022220. Rong P, Liu J, Wang L, Liu R, Fang J, Zhao J, Zhao Y, Wang H, Vangel M, Sun 
S, Ben H, Park J, Li S, Meng H, Zhu B, Kong J. Effect of transcutaneous auricular vagus 
nerve stimulation on major depressive disorder: A nonrandomized controlled pilot study. 
J Affect Disord. 2016;195:172-179.
221. Lamb DG, Porges EC, Lewis GF, Williamson JB. Non-invasive Vagal Nerve 
Stimulation effects on hyperarousal and autonomic state in patients with posttraumatic 
stress disorder and history of mild traumatic brain injury: Preliminary evidence. Front 
Med. 2017;4:124.
222. Gurel NZ, Mobashir HS, Bremner JD, Vaccarino V, Ladd SL, Shah A, Inan OT. 
Toward closed-loop transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation using peripheral 
cardiovascular physiological biomarkers: A proof-of-concept study. IEEE: Body Sensor 
Networks (BSN). 2018:78-81.
223. Bremner JD, Gurel N, Wittbrodt M, Nye J, Alam Z, Herring I, Ladd S, 
Shallenberger L, Haffer A, Levantsevych O, Murrah N, Huang M, Ko Y, Pearce B, 
Shandhi M, Shah A, Vaccarino V, Inan O. Non-invasive vagal nerve stimulation paired 
with stress exposure in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Brain Stimul. 
2019;12(2):438.
224. Bohning DE, Lomarev MP, Denslow S, Nahas Z, Shastri A, George MS. Vagus 
Nerve Stimulation (VNS) synchronized BOLD-fMRI. Radiology. 2001;36:470-479.
225. Bohning DE, Shastri A, Lomarev MP, Lorberbaum JP, Nahas Z, George MS. 
BOLD-fMRI response vs. transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) pulse-train length: 
testing for linearity. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2003;17(3):279-290.
226. Chae JH, Nahas Z, Lomarev M, Denslow S, Lorberbaum JP, Bohning DE, George 
MS. A review of functional neuroimaging studies of Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS). J 
Psychiatr Res. 2003;37(6):443-455.
227. Lomarev M, Denslow S, Nahas Z, Chae J-H, George MS, Bohning DE. Vagus 
nerve stimulation (VNS): Synchronized BOLD fMRI suggests that VNS In depressed 
adults has frequency and/or dose dependent effects at rest and during a simple task. J 
Psychiatr Res. 2002;36:219-227.
228. Yakunina N, Kim SS, Nam E-C. Optimization of transcutaneous vagus nerve 
stimulation using functional MRI. Neuromodulation. 2017;20(3):290-300.
229. Henry TR. Therapeutic mechanisms of vagus nerve stimulation. Neurology. 
2002;59(Suppl 4):S3-14.
230. Henry TR, Bakay RA, Votaw JR, Pennell PB, Epstein CM, Faber TL, Grafton ST, 
Hoffman JM. Brain blood flow alterations induced by therapeutic vagus nerve 
stimulation in partial epilepsy: I. Acute effects at high and low levels of stimulation. 
Epilepsia. 1998;39(9):983-990.
231. Henry TR, Sutherling WW, Engel J. Interictal cerebral metabolism in partial 
epilepsies of neocortical origin. Epilepsy Res. 1991;10:174-182.
232. Henry TR, Votaw JR, Pennell PB, Epstein CM, Bakay RA, Faber TL, Grafton ST, 
Hoffman JM. Acute blood flow changes and efficacy of vagus nerve stimulation in partial 
epilepsy. Neurology. 1999;52(6):1166-1173.
233. Conway CR, Sheline YI, Chibnall JT, Bucholz RD, Price JL, Gangwani S, 
Mintun MA. Brain blood-flow change with acute vagus nerve stimulation in treatment-
refractory major depressive disorder. Brain Stimul. 2012;5(2):163-171.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 50 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022234. Fang J, Egorova N, Rong P, Liu J, Hong Y, Fan Y, Wang X, Wang H, Yu Y, Ma 
Y, Xu C, Li S, Zhao J, Luo M, Zhu B, Kong J. Early cortical biomarkers of longitudinal 
transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation treatment success in depression. Neuroimage 
Clin. 2017;14:105-111.
235. Liu J, Fang J, Wang Z, Rong P, Hong Y, Fan Y, Wang X, Park J, Jin Y, Liu C, 
Zhu B, Kong J. Transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation modulates amygdala functional 
connectivity in patients with depression. J Affect Disord. 2016;205:319-326.
236. Van Laere K, Vonck K, Boon P, Versijpt J, Dierckx R. Perfusion SPECT changes 
after acute and chronic vagus nerve stimulation in relation to prestimulus condition and 
long-term efficacy. J Nucl Med. 2002;43(6):733-744.
237. Sperling W, Reulbach U, Bleich S, Padberg F, Kornhuber J, Mueck-Weymann M. 
Cardiac effects of vagus nerve stimulation in patients with major depression. 
Pharmacopsychiatry. 2010;43:7-11.
238. Frangos E, Ellrich E, Komisaruk BR. Non-invasive access to the vagus nerve 
central projections via electrical stimulation of the external ear: fMRI evidence in 
humans. Brain Stimul. 2015;8(3):624-636.
239. Badran BW, Dowdle LT, Mithoefer OJ, LaBate NT, Coatsworth J, Brown JC, 
DeVries WH, Austelle CW, McTeague LM, George MS. Neurophysiologic effects of 
transcutaneous auricular vagus nerve stimulation (taVNS) via electrical stimulation of the 
tragus: A concurrent taVNS/fMRI study and review. Brain Stimul. 2018;11(3):492-500.
240. Yakunina N, Kim SS, Nam EC. BOLD fMRI effects of transcutaneous vagus 
nerve stimulation in patients with chronic tinnitus. PLoS One. 
2018;28(13(11)):e0207281.
241. Fang J, Rong P, Hong Y, Fan Y, Liu J, Wang H, Zhang G, Chen X, Shi S, Wang 
L, Liu R, Hwang J, Li Z, Tao J, Wang Y, Zhu B, Kong J. Transcutaneous vagus nerve 
stimulation modulates Default Mode Network in Major Depressive Disorder. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2016;15(79):266-273.
242. Tu Y, Fang J, Cao J, Wang Z, Park J, Jorgenson K, Lang C, Liu J, Zhang G, Zhao 
Y, Zhu B, Rong P, Kong J. A distinct biomarker of continuous transcutaneous vagus 
nerve stimulation treatment in major depressive disorder. Brain Stimul. 2018;11(3):501-
508.
243. Wang Z, Fang J, Liu J, Rong P, Jorgenson K, Park J, Lang C, Hong Y, Zhu B, J. 
K. Frequency-dependent functional connectivity of the nucleus accumbens during 
continuous transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation in major depressive disorder. J 
Psychiatr Res. 2018;102(123-131):123-131.
244. Frangos E, Komisaruk BR. Access to vagal projections via cutaneous electrical 
stimulation of the neck: fMRI evidence in healthy humans. Brain Stimul. 2017;10(1):19-
27.
245. Spitzer RL, Williams JBW, Gibbon M. Structured Clinical Interview for 
DSMIIIR. In. New York: New York State Psychiatric Institute; 1987.
246. American Psychiatric Association. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). 5 ed. Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric 
Association; 2013.
247. Bremner JD, Vermetten E, Mazure CM. Development and preliminary 
psychometric properties of an instrument for the measurement of childhood trauma: The 
Early Trauma Inventory. Depress Anxiety. 2000;12:1-12.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 51 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022248. Wesson DR, Ling W. The Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale (COWS). J 
Psychoactive Drugs. 2003;35(2):253-259.
249. Insel TR. The NIMH Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) Project: Precision 
medicine for psychiatry. Am J Psychiatry. 2014;171(4):395-397.
250. Felger JC, Li Z, Haroon E, Woolwine BJ, Jung MY, Hu X, Miller AH. 
Inflammation is associated with decreased functional connectivity within corticostriatal 
reward circuitry in depression. Mol Psychiatry. 2016;21(10):1358-1365.
251. Ameli R, Luckenbaugh DA, Gould NF, Holmes MK, Lally N, Ballard ED, Zarate 
CA, Jr. SHAPS-C: the Snaith-Hamilton pleasure scale modified for clinician 
administration. PeerJ. 2014;2:e429.
252. Pessiglione M, Seymour B, Flandin G, Dolan RJ, Frith CD. Dopamine-dependent 
prediction errors underpin reward-seeking behaviour in humans. Nature. 
2006;442(7106):1042-1045.
253. Palminteri S, Justo D, Jauffret C, Pavlicek B, Dauta A, Delmaire C, Czernecki V, 
Karachi C, Capelle L, Durr A, Pessiglione M. Critical roles for anterior insula and dorsal 
striatum in punishment-based avoidance learning. Neuron. 2012;76(5):998-1009.
254. Treadway MT, Buckholtz JW, Schwartzman AN, Lambert WE, Zald DH. Worth 
the 'EEfRT'? The effort expenditure for rewards task as an objective measure of 
motivation and anhedonia. PLoS One. 2009;4(8):e6598.
255. Kane MJ, Conway ARA, Miura TK, Colflesh GJH. Working memory, attention 
control, and the N-back task: a question of construct validity. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem 
Cogn. 2007;33(3):615-622.
256. Gajewski PD, Hanisch E, Falkenstein M, Thones S, Wascher E. What Does the n-
Back Task Measure as We Get Older? Relations Between Working-Memory Measures 
and Other Cognitive Functions Across the Lifespan. Front Psychol. 2018;9:2208.
257. Braver TS, Cohen JD, Nystrom LE, Jonides J, Smith EE, Noll DC. A parametric 
study of prefrontal cortex involvement in human working memory. Neuroimage. 
1997;5(1):49-62.
258. Manoach DS, Schlaug G, Siewert B, Darby DG, Bly BM, Benfield A, Edelman 
RR, Warach S. Prefrontal cortex fMRI signal changes are correlated with working 
memory load. Neuroreport. 1997;8(2):545-549.
259. Ragland JD, Turetsky BI, Gur RC, Gunning-Dixon F, Turner T, Schroeder L, 
Chan R, Gur RE. Working memory for complex figures: an fMRI comparison of letter 
and fractal n-back tasks. Neuropsychology. 2002;16(3):370-379.
260. Owen AM, McMillan KM, Laird AR, Bullmore E. N-back working memory 
paradigm: a meta-analysis of normative functional neuroimaging studies. Hum Brain 
Mapp. 2005;25(1):46-59.
261. Gray JR, Chabris CF, Braver TS. Neural mechanisms of general fluid 
intelligence. Nat Neurosci. 2003;6(3):316-322.
262. Newcomer JW, Craft S, Hershey T, Askins K, Bardgett ME. Glucocorticoid-
induced impairment in declarative memory performance in adult humans. J Neurosci. 
1994;14:2047-2053.
263. Wolpe J. The Practice of Behavior Therapy. New York: New York Pergamon 
Press; 1969.
264. Schmand M, Weinhard K, Casey ME, Eriksson L, Jones WF, Reed JH, Treffert J, 
Lenox M, Luk P, Bao J, Young JW, Baker K, Miller SD, Knoess C, Vollmar S, 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Non-invasive Vagal Nerve Stimulation in Opioid Use Disorders
Page 52 of 52Emory IRB version 9-10-20197.18.2022Richerzhagen N, Flugge G, Heiss WD, Nutt R. Performance evaluation of a new LSO 
High Resolution Research Tomograph-HRRT. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 
1999;2(October Nuclear Medicine Science):1067-1071.
265. Weinhard K, Schmand M, Casey ME, Baker K, Bao J, Eriksson L, Jones WF, 
Knoess C, Lenox M, Lercher M, Luk P, Michel C, Reed JH, Richerzhagen N, Treffert J, 
Vollmar S, Young JW, Heiss WD, Nutt R. The ECAT HRRT: Performance and first 
clinical application of the new high resolution research tomograph. IEEE Trans Med 
Imaging. 2000;3(Nuclear Science Symposium Conference Record):17/12-17/16.
266. Reiman EM, Lane RD, Ahern GL, Schwartz GE, Davidson RJ, Friston KJ, Yun 
L-S, Chen K. Neuroanatomical correlates of externally and internally generated human 
emotion. Am J Psychiatry. 1997;154(7):918-925.
267. Mickey RM, Greenland S. A study of the impact of confounder selection criteria 
on effect estimation. Am J Epidemiol. 1989;129:125-137.
268. Weisberg S. Applied Linear Regression. New York: Wiley, J.; 1980.
269. Friston K. Statistical parametric mapping. In: Thatcher R, Hallett M, Zeffiro T, 
John E, Huerta M, eds. Functional Neuroimaging: Technical Foundations. San Diego: 
Academic Press; 1994:79-93.
270. Friston KJ, Frith C, Liddle P, Frackowiak R. Comparing functional (PET) images: 
the assessment of significant change. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1991;11:690-699.