Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 1 - of 96 
  
 
 
CLINICAL PROTOCOL  
 
Title:  
A clinical trial  of mirabegron for overactive bladder  
symptoms  in pa tients with Parkinson Disease and   
impaired cognition  (MICT -PD) 
 
 
Compound Name:     Mirabegron  
ClinicalTrials.gov Number:  
Document Date:     June 29, 2016  
Protocol Version:     1.0, Amendment 05 
Phase:       4 
Sponsor:  Struthers Parkinson’s Center, HealthPartners  
Institute  
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 2 - of 96 
 STUDY LEADERSHIP AND CONTACT INFORMATION:  
 
 
Principal  Investigator:   Sotirios A. Parashos, MD, PhD  
 
Co-investigators:   Martha A. Nance, MD  
    Daniel J. Kuyper, MD 
    Jyothi Kesha , MD 
    Catherine L. Wielinski, MPH  
 
Statistician:    Avis Thomas , MS  
    Steve As che, MA  
 
Study Site:    Struthers Parkinson’s Center  
    6701 Country Club Drive  
    Golden Valley, MN, 55427  
    USA  
 
Institution:    Park Nicollet Health Services  
 
Departments:    Struthers Parkinson’s Center (SP, MN, DK, CW)  
Urological Surgery (JK)  
HealthPartners  Institute ( AT, SA ) 
 
Contact:    Catherine Wielinski, MPH  
    Director of Research  
    Struthers Parkinson’s Center  
    6701 Country Club Drive  
    Golden Valley, MN, 55427  
    USA  
    wielic@parknicollet.com  
    Tel: 001 -952-993-5607  
    Fax: 001 -952-993-2254  
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 3 - of 96 
  
  

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 4 - of 96 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
TITLE ……………………………………………………………………………..   1 
STUDY LEADERSHIP AND CONTACT INFORMATION ……………………   2 
TABLE OF CONTENTS, LIST OF TABL ES, FIGURES AND APPENDICES ...   4 
TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ………………………………………………..    7 
STUDY SYNOPSIS ……… ………………… .……………………………………    9 
SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES  …………………………………………………....   13 
1.0 INTRODU CTION …………………………………………………… …… …..  14 
1.1 Backgrou nd …………………………………………………………………….  14 
1.2 Clinical experience with mirabegron ………………………………………… ..  15 
1.3 Study ratio nale …………………………………………………………………  16 
2.0 STUDY OBJ ECTIVES ……………………………………………………..... .  18 
2.1 Primary objective ………………………………………………………………   18 
2.2 Secondary objectives ...………………………… .…..…………………………  18 
2.3 Exploratory a nalyses ………………………………………………………… … 18 
3.0 STUDY METHODOLOGY  ………………………………………………… … 19 
3.1 Study design  ……………………………………………………………………  19 
3.2 Subject selection  ………………………………………………………………..  19 
3.3 Inclusion Criteria  ……………………………………………………………….  20 
3.4 Exclusion Criteria  ………………………………………………………………  21 
3.5 Criteria for Early Treatment Discontinuation  ………………………………….  22 
3.6 Registration  …………………………………… ……………………………….  22 
3.7 Randomization  …………………………………………………………………  23 
3.8 Identification  …………………………………………………………………..   23  
3.9 Visit and assessment schedule  …………………………………………………  23 
3.9.1 Screening (Visit 1)  …………………………………..……… ………. ….. 23 
3.9.2 Baseline (Visit 2; Da y -14) ……………………………………..………..  24 
3.9.3 Randomization (Visit 3; Day 0)  ………………………………………….  25 
3.9.4 Low -dose phase maintenance visit (Visit 4 -telephone call; Day 7)  ……..  26 
3.9.5 Dose escalation visit (Visit 5; Day 14)  …………………………………..  26 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 5 - of 96 
 3.9.6 High -dose phase maintenance visit (Visit 6; Day 42)  ……………………  26 
3.9.7 End of treatment/Early termination visit (Visit 7; Day 84)  ……………..  27 
3.9.8 Safety follow up visit (Visit 8; Day 84 +14)  …………………………….  28 
3.9.9 Unscheduled visit  ………………………………………………………..  28  
3.10 Efficacy  assessments  …………………………………………………………  29 
3.11 Safety assessments  ……………………………………………………………  34 
4.0 ADVERSE AND SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  …………………  36 
5.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  ……………………………………  37 
6.0 STUDY DRUG SUPPLY  ………………………………………………………….  38 
6.1 Mirabegron  …………………………………………………………………………  38 
 6.1.1 Drug manufacturer  …………………………………………………………...  38 
 6.1.2 Known potential toxicities  ……………………………………………………  39 
 6.1.3 Known key drug interactions  …………………………………………………  41 
 6.1.4 Storage  ………………………………………………………………………. . 42 
 6.1.5 Formulation of study drug  ……………………………………………………  42 
 6.1.6 Route and administration  …………………………………………………….  43 
 6.1.7 Dose schedule  ………………………………………………………………..  43 
 6.1.8 Dose increase/dose reduction  ………………………………………………...  44 
 6.1.9 Drug accountabilit y …………………………………………………………..  44 
 6.1.10 Subject compliance ………………………………………………………….  44 
 6.1.11 Prior and concomitant medications  …………………………………………  45 
 6.1.12 Prohibited medications  ……………………………………………………...  45 
 6.1.13 Blinding and Unblinding  ……………………………………………………  46 
7.0 DATA ANALYSIS AND STATISTICAL METHODS  …………………………... 46  
8.0 STUDY DOCUMENTATION, CRF, AND RECORD KEEPING  ……………….. 49 
9.0 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES  …………………………………………….. 49  
10.0 REFERENCES …………………………………………………………………… 5 1 
 
 
 
 
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 6 - of 96 
 TABLES  
Table 1:  Schedule of  Activities  ………………………………………………………  13 
Table 2:  Percentages of patients with adverse reactions, derived from all adverse 
events, exceeding placebo rate and reported by 1% or more patients treated 
with mirabegron 25 mg or 50 mg once daily in 3 clinical trial s …………….  39 
Table 3: Percentages of Patients with Adverse Reactions, Derived from all Adverse 
Events, Reported by  Greater Than 2% of Patients Treated With Myrbetriq 50 
mg Once Daily in Study 4  …………………………………………………..  40 
Table 4: Daily dose schedule  ……………………… ………………………………….  43 
 
FIGURES  
Figure 1: Study design  ………………………………………………………………….  19  
 
APPENDICES:  
Appendix I: Myrbe triq® Full Prescribing Information  
Appendix II : Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)  
Appendix III: Overactive Bladder Questionnaire (OABQ)  
Append ix IV: 3-Day Voiding Diary  
Appendix V: Patient Perception of Bladder Condition (PPBC)  
Appendix VI: Parkinson’s Impact Scale (PIMS)  
Appendix VII: Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)  
Appendix VIII:  Parkinson’s Fatigue Scale (PFS)  
Appendix I X: Beck Depression Inv entory -II (BDI -II) 
Appendix X: Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)  
Appendix XI: Constipation Questions (CQ)  
Appendix XII: Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS)  
 
 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 7 - of 96 
 TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  
Abbreviation    Definition  
3-day VD    Voiding diary  
AE    Advers e event  
BAI    Beck Anxiety Inventory  
BDI-II    Beck Depression Inventory -II 
BOO     Bladder outlet obstruction  
CI    Impaired cognitive function  
CL cr    Creatinine clearance  
CQ    Constipation question s 
CRF     Case Report Forms  
DBP     Diastolic blood press ure 
DSMC     Data Safety and Monitoring Committee  
ECG     Electrocardiogram  
ESS    Epworth Sleepiness Scale  
eGFR     Glomerular filtration rate  
HRQL     Health -Related Quality of Life  
HVLT     Hopkins Verbal Learning Test  
MoCA     Montreal Cognitive Assessment  
NYHA     New York Heart Association  
OAB     Overactive bladder  
OABQ     Overactive Bladder Questionnaire  
PD    Parkinson Disease  
PFS    Parkinson Fatigue Scale  
PI    Principal Investigator  
PIMS     Parkinson’s Impact Scale  
PPBC     Patient Perception of Bladder Condition  
PVR     Post-void residual  
SBP    Systolic blood pressure  
SF    Semantic Fluency  
TMT A    Trail Making Test, part A  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 8 - of 96 
 TMT B    Trail Making Test, part B  
UPDRS I, II, III, IV   Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale parts I, II, II, IV  
UPDRS -6   UPDRS  Question 6 regarding excessive salivation  
VS    Vital signs  
WOCP     Women of childbearing potential  
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 9 - of 96 
 STUDY  SYNOPSIS  
    
 
Name of Sponsor: Struthers Parkinson’s Center, Park Nicollet Institute  
 
Name of Investigational Product:  Mirabegron (Myrbetriq®) in 25 mg extended 
release tablets; matching placebo tablets.  
 
Study Title:  A clinical trial of mirabegron for overactive bladder symptoms in patients 
with Parkinson Disease and impaired cognition  (MICT -PD) 
 
Study Center:  Struthers Parkinson’s Center, Park Nicollet Methodist Hospital, Park 
Nicollet Health Services, Golden Valley, MN USA  
 
Study Duration:  Approximately 16 months (from enrollment of first subject to last 
subject completion)  
 
Phase of Development:  4 
 
Indication:  Overactive bladder (OAB) sympt oms in patients with Parkinson Disease 
(PD) and impaired cognitive function (CI)  
 
Rationale:  There is a high prevalence of OAB symptoms  among  patients with 
Parkinson’s disease and a lack of pharmacotherapies with an acceptable side effect 
profile. Specifi cally, available anticholinergic medications have a high risk of cognitive 
side-effects, which preclude their use in PD patients with CI. PD can also cause a 
number of non -motor symptoms that are likely to be adversely affected by the 
currently available a nticholinergic agents. Mirabegron is the first pharmacologic 
treatment which may not exacerbate CI, constipation, orthostatic hypotension  (OH) , 
somnolence, and dry mouth in PD.  
 
Objectives:  
Primary Objective:   
 To assess cognitive tolerability of mirabegro n while treating OAB in PD 
patients with CI.  
 
Secondary Objectives:   
 To assess the efficacy of mirabegron for treating OAB symptoms in PD with 
CI.  
 To assess the effect of mirabegron on health related quality of life in PD 
patients with OAB symptoms and CI.  
 To assess the effect of mirabegron on excessive daytime sleepiness in PD 
patients with OAB symptoms and CI.  
 
Exploratory analyses:  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 10 - of 96 
  To assess the effects of mirabegron on orthostatic changes in blood pressure in 
PD patients with OAB symptoms and CI.  
 To assess the effect of mirabegron on depressive and anxiety symptomatology, 
excessive salivation, and constipation in PD patients with OAB symptoms and 
CI.  
 To assess effects of mirabegron on PD motor symptom severity  in PD patients 
with OAB symptoms and C I. 
 
Study Design:  
This is a p ilot study  conducted in one study center. Study design will be a randomized , 
double-blind , placebo -control study. Subjects will receive a two -week, single -blind 
placebo run -in followed by 2 weeks of a 1:2 randomize d double -blind phase 
(placebo:25 mg mirabegron), followed by 10 weeks dose escalation (placebo:50 mg 
mirabegron) , followed by a two -week washout period.  
 
Study Duration:  
Maximum participation will be 20 weeks, consisting of 2-4 weeks screening period, 2 
weeks of placeb o run -in, 12 weeks of double -blind placebo -control led treatment, and 2 
weeks of safety follow up.  
 
Study Population:  
Adult ambulatory outpatients with PD, CI,  and OAB symptoms . 
 
Statistical Analysis:  
Descriptive statistics will be performed. The primary gr oup for analysis will consist of 
all subjects who received at least one dose during the double -blind placebo -controlled 
phase. Analyses will compare change from randomization (visit 3) to end of treatment 
(visit 7). Tests of equivalence will be performed o n primary, secondary and exploratory 
outcomes, with significance level of p<.05.  
 
Study Procedures:  
Refer to the Study Schedule/Flowchart, below.  
 
Number of Subjects:  30 (20 active treatment, 10 placebo group) . 
 
Eligibility criteria:  
 
INCLUSION CRITERIA:  
1. Aged 25 -80 at screening.  Subjects older than 80 will be allowed at the 
discretion of the PI.  
2. Ambulatory (defined as able to ambulate at least 10 meters, with or without 
assistance).  
3. Clinical Diagnosis of PD based on the United Kingdom Brain Bank diagnosti c 
criteria for PD.  
4. At baseline visit (Visit 2) patients must have:  
a. At least 8 micturitions  per 24 hours and  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 11 - of 96 
 b. At least 3 urgency episodes per 3-day diary . 
5. A MoCA score between 19 and 28 (inclusive)  at screening .  For those on 
cognitive enhancers (donepezil, rivastigmine, memantine, galantamine) a 
MoCA score between 19 and 29 (inclusive) at screening.  
6. Provide informed consent to participate in the study and understand that they 
may withdraw their consent at any time without prejudice to their future 
medical ca re. 
7. Be cognitively capable, in the opinion of investigator, to understand and 
provide such informed consent.  
8. Be cognitively capable to complete the required questionnaires and 
assessments, OR have a care partner who is willing and capable to assist them 
in the completion of these tasks.  
9. Be on a stable regimen of antiparkinson’s medications at least 30 days prior to 
screening, and be expected to remain on a stable dose for the duration of the 
study.  
10. If taking cognitive enhancers (donepezil, rivastigmine, mem antine, 
galantamine), must be on stable dose at least 30 days prior to screening, and be 
expected to remain on a stable dose for the duration of the study.  
 
EXCLUSION CRITERIA:  
1. Known or suspected alcohol or substance abuse in the preceding 12 months.  
2. Women  who are pregnant or breastfeeding.  
3. Women of childbearing potential (WOCP) who are not using at least one 
method of contraception.  
4. Patients with severe renal impairment (CL cr ≤ 29 mL/min, or eGFR ≤ 29 
mL/min/1.73 m2), or moderate or severe hepatic impairme nt (Child -Pugh 
classes B or C).  
5. Patients with bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) that, in the opinion of the study 
urologist, would expose them to risk of urinary retention during treatment with 
mirabegron.  
6. Patients treated with drugs  that require dose adjus tment when co -administered 
with CYP2D6 inhibitors . 
7. Patients with supine  systolic blood pressure (SBP) ≥ 180 mm Hg, or diastolic 
blood pressure (DBP) ≥ 110 mm Hg.  
8. Clinically significant, uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmia, unstable angina, 
congestive heart failure (NYHA Class 3 or 4), or history of myocardial 
infarction in the pre ceding 2 years.  
9. History of cancer in the preceding 2 years other than successfully treated, non -
metastatic, squamous cell or basal cell carcinoma, or cervical cancer in situ.  
10. Any major urological procedure in the preceding 90 days.  
11. Any major surgical proce dure in the preceding 30 days.  
12. Previously treated with mirabegron within 60 days prior to the baseline visit 
(Visit 2), or previously having failed treatment with mirabegron regardless of 
duration and timing of treatment.  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 12 - of 96 
 13. Current or previous, within the 60  days preceding the baseline visit (Visit 2), 
treatment with antimuscarinic agents for OAB symptoms ; and, willingness to 
not use antimuscarinic agents for the duration of the study . 
14. Currently receiving any other investigational drug or having received an 
investigational drug within the 60 days preceding the baseline visit (Visit 2).  
15. Any condition or laboratory test result, which, in the opinion of the I nvestigator  
or the Study Urologist , might result in an increased risk to the patient, or would 
affect thei r participation in the study.  
16. Any patient who, in the opinion of the Investigator, is not a good candidate for 
the study or will not be able to follow study procedures.  
 
Dosage and Administration:  
During the 2 -week run -in placebo period all subjects will receive placebo  tablets 
matching the 25 mg mirabegron extended release tablets. During the first two weeks of 
the double -blind placebo -controlled phase, subjects will be randomized to either 25 mg 
extended release mirabegron or matching placebo (2:1 ratio) . During the following 10 
weeks of the double -blind placebo -controlled phase, subjects tolerating treatment 
without side -effects will be escalated to 50 mg mirabegron (two 25 mg mirabegron 
extended release tablets) or matching placebo  (two placebo tablets) ; subjects 
experiencing side -effects that do not preclude continuation of the study will continue at 
the dosage level of one 25 mg extended release mirabegron tablet or matching placebo  
daily . Subjects who have escalated to 50 mg mirabegron or matching pla cebo and 
experience side -effects at that level, will be allowed one dose reduction to 25 mg  
mirabegron or matching placebo.  
Depending on dose level, one or two tablets will be administered daily, with or without 
food, swallowed whole with water; chewing, c rushing or dividing is not allowed.  
 
Primary Endpoint:  
Relative mean change to the MoCA score between randomization  visit (Visit 3) and 
week 14 visit (Visit 7).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 13 - of 96 
 Table 1. Schedule  of Activities : 
VISIT/PROCEDURE:  Screening 
Visit  Baseline 
Visit  Randomizati
on Low dose 
phase  Dose 
escalation  High dose 
phase  End of TX / 
Early Term  Follow -up / 
Week 16  
Visit number  1 2 3 4 phone  5  6 7 8 
Visit time  week -4 to -6 week -2 day 0  day 7  day 14  day 42  day 84  day 98  
Informed c onsent  X                
Inclus ion/Exclusion criteria  X                
Past history/d emographic  X                
Neurol ogical and physical exam X  X      X    X  X  
Urologic e xam X *       X*      X* 
Cystoscopy  X*        
Concomitant  medication  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
Adverse event s   X X X X X X X 
Study drug  compliance      X  X  X  X  X    
UPDRS  X        X    X  X  
Vital s igns (includes weight , height 
and orthostatics)  X  X  X    X    X  X  
ECG  X        X    X   
Pregnancy test (for WOCP)  X               X 
Urinalysis  X*       X*   X  X* 
Blood samples (safety)  X            X   
OABQ  X   
X    X  X  X    
3-day VD training and concordance  X                
3-day VD a ssessment    X  X    X  X  X    
PVR  X*    X*   X* 
PPBC   X X  X X X X 
CQ   X    X  
UPDRS -6   X    X  
MoCA  X   
X       X    
Map Search       X        X    
HVLT      X       X    
TMT A and B       X        X    
BAI  
   X       
X   
BDI-II      X        X    
ESS  
   X        X    
PFS  
   X        X    
PIMS   
   X        X    
Drug dispense    X X    
X     
 
* Procedu res performed during the urology visit 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 14 - of 96 
 1.0 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Background  
 
1.1.1  Parkinson Disease  
 
Parkinson disease (PD) is a chronic, progressive degenerative disease of the nervous 
system. The disease affects approximately 7 out of every 1000 persons abo ve the age of 
40, 3 out of every 100 persons older than 80, and its incidence increases dramatically 
with age .1,2 Apart from the well-known  motor dysfunction, PD causes numerous non -
motor symptoms at every stage of the disease .3  
 
1.1.2  PD and urinary trac t symptoms  
 
Bladder dysfunction in the form of lower urinary tract symptoms has been reported in 38 -
71% of patients with PD4 and even in the early and untreated stages .5 Various types of 
lower urinary symptoms have been reported in PD patients, but storage  related symptoms 
are the most common, relating to detrusor overactivity and uninhibited external sphincter 
relaxation, which are the main contributors to overactive bladder in PD.  Such bladder 
dysfunction has a well -recognized negative impact on the quali ty of life of patients 
suffering f rom chronic neurologic diseases.6 In more general terms, beyond bladder 
dysfunction, PD pathology affects the entire sympathetic chain, and particularly 
adrenergic neurons, resulting in a variety of dysautonomic symptoms.  
 
1.1.3  PD and cognitive dysfunction  
 
Another category of non -motor symptoms of PD is that of  cognitive deficits, which can 
be mild, yet often obtrusive in early PD, even in the absence of dementia. Such deficits 
may include impaired attention, impaired rec all but not recognition, executive 
dysfunction, and visuospatial impairment,7 and may affect activities of daily living, 
employment status,  and quality of life .8 Dementia occurs in more advanced stages of PD , 
and its prevalence in PD is reported between 11 % and 36%.9 When compared to their 
age-peers, patients with PD have a five - to six -fold risk for dementia.10 As the presence 
of dementia adversely affects the natural history and prognosis of PD,11,12  preserving 
cognition is an important element in the cli nical management of PD.  
 
1.1.4  Current treatment of overactive bladder in PD  
 
Current treatment of overactive bladder (OAB) in PD  relies primarily on the use of 
anticholinergic agents, such as oxybutynin, tolterodine, solifenacin and darifenacin .13 
Unfortu nately, no clinical trials assessing efficacy and tolerability of these agents in the 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 15 - of 96 
 PD population have been conducted . None of these medications’ list of adverse effects 
include the potential for cognitive dysfunction, yet this has been well demonstrat ed for 
the case of oxybutynin .14 Tolterodine, solifenacin and darifenacin have virtually no 
information on their impact on patient populations vulnerable to cognitive adverse 
effects, so the current clinical practice is that they should be used “with caution ”.15 The 
current clinical practice consensus is that such medications should be avoided in 
Parkinson patients with overactive bladder and cognitive dysfunction. Botulinum toxin 
injections have shown some effectiveness in this population, but this is an off -label use .16  
 
1.1.5  Mirabegron  
 
Mirabegron  is a selective β 3 adrenoreceptor agonist approved in the USA for the 
treatment of overactive bladder symptoms  under the brand name Myrbet riq®, produced 
by Astellas Pharma . A recent meta -analys is of the four phase III randomized clinical 
trials of mirabegr on in the treatment of overactive bladder concluded that the compound 
is an effective and safe treatment for the treatment of overactive bladder symptoms, 
combining data from  a total of 5,761 participants .17  
 
1.1.6  Pharmacology  (Myrbetriq Full Prescribing  Information  - Appendix I ) 
 
Mirabegron is a beta -3 adrenergic agonist. The chemical name is 2 -(2-aminothiazol -4-
yl)-N-[4-(2-{[(2R) -2-hydroxy -2-phenylethyl]amino}ethyl)phenyl]acetamide with the  
empirical formula of C21H24N4O2S and molecular weight of 396.51 . The structural 
formula of mirabegron is:  
 
Mirabegron is a white powder. It is practically insoluble in water (0.082 mg/mL). It is 
soluble in methanol and dimethyl sulfoxide. Each Myrbetriq® extended release tablet  for 
oral administration contains either  25 mg or 50 mg of mirabegron and the following 
inactive ingredients: polyethylene oxide, polyethylene glycol, hydroxypropyl cellulose, 
butylated hydroxytoluene, magnesium stearate, hypromellose, yellow ferric oxide, and 
red ferric oxide (25 mg tablet only ). 
 
1.2 Clinical experience  with mirabegron : efficacy, safety, and tolerability  
 
Mirabegron efficacy, safety and tolerability were evaluated in three 12 -week, double -
blind, randomized, placebo -controlled, parallel -group, multicenter clinical trials. Long -

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 16 - of 96 
 term safety and tolerability were further assessed in one 12 -month, double -blind, 
randomized, active -control, parallel -group, multicenter clinical trial in patients with 
overactive bladder with symptoms of urinary incontinence and urinary frequency. Entry 
criteria for each of the four clinical trials required that patients had symptoms of 
overactive bladder ≥3 months, ≥8 micturitions per day, and ≥3 episodes of urgency with 
or without incontinence over a 3 -day period .18-21 (see Myrbetriq  Full Prescribing 
Information , Appendix 1 ) It is estimated that over 10,500 subjects have received 
mirabegron in clinical trials over approximately 10 years, with over 5,500 patient s with 
OAB symptoms having received the drug during Phase II and III clinical trials spo nsored 
by Astellas .22  
 
In Phase III clinical trials , mirabegron showed significant efficacy in treating the 
symptoms of OAB at daily doses of 25, 50, and 100 mg.  Specifically, improvements 
were demonstrated in micturition frequency, urgency incontinence, and urgency. At daily 
doses of 50 and 100 mg of mira begron, sustained improvements were attained as early as 
during week 4. Among r esponder s, the magnitude of the therapeutic effect measured an 
at least 50% reduction in mean daily (24h) number of incontinence episodes, and in the 
proportion of patients with  8 daily (24h) micturitions or less. Of importance to the present 
discussion, patients aged 65 or older  benefit ed from mirabegron  50 and 100 mg. Long -
term clinical trials of up to 12 months demonstrated good long  term safety and 
tolerability . The most common adverse events included hypertension, nasopharyngitis , 
and urinary tract infection. When looking specifically at anticholinerg ic side effects, t he 
incidence of dry mouth was similar to placebo, and was between three and fivefold less 
than for tol terodine extended release 4 mg.  
 
1.3  Study r ationale  
 
Clinical trial s of mirabegron  found no central nervous system -related adverse eve nts, 
such as confusion and somnolence. Its pharmacology would suggest that it has no central 
nervous system action, and hence should be well tolerated in patient populations 
vulnerable to cognitive adverse effects. This is of special interest to the PD pop ulation, 
because confusion, hallucinations and somnolence are common side effect s among PD 
patients treated with anticholinergic agents (current standard of practice)  for overactive 
bladder symptoms , although unfortunately  this statement cannot be supporte d by cli nical 
trials which do not exist  yet constitute the experience of most experts treating PD 
patients.  Apart from the cognitive issues, sympathetic dysfunctions are very common 
non-motor manifestation of PD, one  of the most disruptive being orthostati c hypotension. 
Mirabegron  is a peripheral sympathomimetic agent , and it  is reasonable to assume that 
the use of mirabegron  in PD patients may result in improved sympathetic function , 
conceivably lessening the burden of these symptoms . 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 17 - of 96 
  
1.3.1  Dose and sche dule of administration   
 
Current prescribing recommendations for mirabegron include an initial dose of 25 mg 
daily for 8 weeks with subsequent escalation to 50 mg depending on efficacy and 
tolerability. Daily doses of 25, 50, and 100 mg have been proven bo th efficacious and 
safe. Due to the limited duration of the present protocol , dose escalation was contracted 
to 2 weeks, allowing for a one -time dose reduction after escalation if problems with 
tolerability arise . Because of the pilot character of this stu dy, the allowed daily dose was 
limited to 25 and 50 mg. No dose adjustment is necessary for age. This was a 
consideration as it is expected that the majority of the enrolled subjects will fall within 
this age demographic, simply because of the age effect o n prevalence of PD. Dose 
adjustments are recommended for sever e renal and moderate hepatic impairments. Again, 
given the pilot character of the present protocol , subjects with these impairments  are 
excluded from participation.  
 
1.3.2  Selection of primary outcome  
 
Although it may seem unusual for a clinical trial on OAB, a global cognitive measure 
was selected as the primary outcome measure, since the essence of this trial lies in 
demonstrating cognitive tolerability of this medication in PD patients with o veractive 
bladder. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment23 (see Appendix I I) was chosen as a 
concise, comprehensive, and sensitive global measure of cognitive dysfunction, with 
proven accuracy in PD .24 In this patient group, it has been demonstrated to be superior to 
the Minimental State Examination (MMSE) and equivalent to the more extensive and 
time consuming Scales for Outcomes in Parkinson disease -Cognition (SCOPA -COG)25 in 
detecting mild cognitive impairment . The instrument takes approximately 10 minutes t o 
administer, and contains tests of the cognitive domains of attention and concentration, 
executive function, memory, language, visuoconstructional skills, conceptual thinking, 
calculations, and orientation . Three versions are available to improve  test-retest reliability  
and reduce practice effects . It is scored 0 -30, with higher scores reflecting better 
cognitive function. Normative dat a have been developed and cut -off scores are 
available.26 A score of <26  is considered a cut off for both mild cognitive im pairment and 
dementia.  
 
In this protocol we use the MoCA both as an outcome measure and as an inclusion and 
exclusion criterion. The purpose of this study is to examine the cognitive tolerability o f 
mirabegron in PD patients with some impaired cognitive f unction (CI) , yet not having 
cognitive dysfunction of an exten t that would a) interfere with the subject ’s ability to 
participate in study procedures and provide informed consent or b) affect the subject ’s 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 18 - of 96 
 ability to control bodily functions and thus inter fere with measures of efficacy. 
Additionally there is a mounting evidence in the literature that the cut off of 26 may be 
too strict, with 66% of subjects in a recent populati on based study falling below this  
suggested cutoff .27  
 
2.  STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
Study objectives will focus on cognitive tolerability of mirabegron in PD patients with CI 
and OAB , while demonstrating efficacy in this population; exploratory analyses will look 
for potential positive or negative impact of the intervention on motor and non -motor 
aspects of PD.  
 
2.1 Primary objective  
 
The primary objective of this experimental protocol is t o assess cognitive tolerability of 
mirabegron while treating OAB symptoms in patients with PD and CI.  
 
2.2 Secondary objectives   
 
Secondary objectives will assess efficacy of mirabegron in PD and the impact of 
mirabegron on other non -motor symptoms in PD :  
 To assess the efficacy of mirabegron for treating OAB  symptoms in PD with CI .  
 To assess the effect of mirabegron on health related quality of life in PD  patients 
with OAB symptoms and CI.  
 To assess the effect of mirabegron on excessive daytime sleepiness in PD patients 
with OAB symptoms and CI.  
 
2.3 Exploratory analyses  
 
As discussed  earlier, PD has a number of non -motor symptoms resulting from periphera l 
sympathetic dysfunction, which could conceivably respond favorably to mirabegron. It is 
also of interest to ensure that mirabegron does not worsen any of the motor and non -
motor symptoms of PD. Although as per protocol any worsening of these symptoms wil l 
be logged as an adverse event (AE), more specific evaluations utilizing dedicated 
measures will also be obtained and analyzed. Therefore , additional exploratory analyses 
will be performed :  
 To assess the effects of mirabegron on orthostatic changes in bl ood pressure in 
PD patients with OAB symptoms and CI.  
 To assess the effects of mirabegron on depressive and anxiety symptomatology, 
excessive salivation , and  constipation in PD patients with OAB symptoms and CI . 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 19 - of 96 
  To assess effects of mirabegron on PD motor symptom severity  in PD patients 
with OAB symptoms and CI . 
 
3.0 STUDY METHODOLOGY  
 
3.1 Study design  
 
This is a single -site, randomized, parallel -group, placebo -controlled, double -blind pilot 
study with a 12 -week treatment period, consisting of an initial 2 -week,  single -blind 
placebo run -in, followed by  2-week  randomization to low dose mirabegron (total daily 
dose of 25 mg) vs. placebo (2:1 active vs. placebo randomization), followed by 10-week, 
dose escalation randomization to high dose mirabegron (total dai ly dose of 50 mg) vs. 
placebo.   Study design is outlined in figure 1.  
 
Figure 1  Study design  
 
3.2 Subject Selection  
 
3.2.1 Number of subjects and assignment to treatment groups  
 
A sufficient number of subjects will be screened and randomized until 30 subj ects have 
received at least 1 dose of double -blind study medications (i.e. complete visit 3 and 
receive at least one dose of study drug after randomization). An effort will be made to 
assign equal proportions of men and women into the two treatment assig nments. 
Randomization will be  a 2:1 ratio between mirabegron and placebo.  
 
3.2.2   Study site  
 
2 weeks
2 weeks
6 weeks 4 weeks2 weeks
2 weeks
Screening High -dose phase Run-in
placeboLow-dose phase High -dose phase Safety follow -up
Visit 1 Visit 8 Visit 3 Visit 7 Visit 2
BaselineVisit 6
Randomization ScreeningVisit 5
Visit 4
Phone callDose escalation End of treatment High dose maintenance Safety follow up
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 20 - of 96 
 The study will be conducted in a single study location: Struthers Parkinson’s Center  
SPC) , Park Nicollet Methodist Hospital, Park Nicollet Health Services, Golden Valley, 
Minnesota, United States of America.  The center is nationally recognized for its team 
approach to PD management, and is a designated  Center of Excellence of the National 
Parkinson Foundation. Staff includes 4 neurologists and 18 additional FTEs.  T he center 
is part of Park Nicollet Health Services, which recently merged with Health Partners. 
SPC research staff includes a Lead Physician for Clinical Research, a full -time Research 
Director, and two  full-time RN/BS N-level Research Coordinators. SPC res earch staff 
have participated in numerous clinical trials of PD , Huntington disease and related 
disorders, continuously since 1998. The center currently provides medical and allied 
health services for approximately 1500 outpatients with PD. The immediate r eferral 
network includes 8 neurologists and numerous primary care providers of the Park 
Nicollet Health Services, and 34 neurologists of the Minneapolis Clinic of Neurology 
Ltd. 
 
3.2.3 Study population  
 
Adult ambulatory outpatients with PD and CI with OAB symptoms, who fulfill inclusion 
criteria. The degree of CI and OAB symptom severity necessary for participation are 
defined by the inclusion criteria.  Subjects will be required  to have been on a stable 
regimen of antiparkinsonian agents and/or cognitive en hancers for 30 days prior to 
screening, and be expected to remain so for the duration of the study.  
 
3.3 Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Aged 25 -80 at screening.  Subjects older than 80  will be allowed at the discretion 
of the PI.  
2. Ambulatory (defined as able to ambulat e at least 10 meters, with or without 
assistance).  
3. Clinical Diagnosis of PD based on the United Kingdom Brain Bank diagnostic 
criteria for PD .28  
4. At baseline visit (Visit 2) patients must have:  
a. At least 8 mict uritions per 24 hours  and 
b. At least 3 urgency ep isodes per 3-day diary . 
5. A MoCA score between 19 and 28 (inclusive)  at screening.   For those on 
cognitive enhancers (donepezil, rivastigmine, memantine, galantamine) a MoCA 
score between 19 and 29 (inclusive) at screening.  
6. Provide informed consent to partic ipate in the study and understand that they may 
withdraw their consent at any time without prejudice to their future medical care.  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 21 - of 96 
 7. Be cognitively capable, in the opinion of investigator, to understand and provide 
such informed consent.  
8. Be cognitively capab le to complete the required questionnaires and assessments, 
OR have a care partner who is willing and capable to assist them in the 
completion of these tasks.  
9. Be on a stable regimen of antiparkinson’s medications at least 30 days prior to 
screening, and be  expected to remain on a stable dose for the duration of the 
study.  
10. If taking cognitive enhancers (donepezil, rivastigmine, memantine, galantamine), 
must be on stable dose at least 30 days prior to screening, and be expected to 
remain on a stable dose for the duration of the study.  
 
3.4 Exclusion Criteria  
 
1. Known or suspected alcohol or substance abuse in the preceding 12 months.  
2. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.  
3. Women of childbearing potential (WOCP) who are not using at least one method 
of contracep tion. 
4. Patients with severe renal impairment (CL cr ≤ 29 mL/min, or eGFR ≤ 29 
mL/min/1.73 m2), or moderate or severe hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh classes 
B or C).  
5. Patients with bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) that, in the opinion of the study 
urologist, w ould expose them to risk of urinary retention during treatment with 
mirabegron.  
6. Patients treated with drugs that require dose adjustment when co -administered 
with CYP2D6 inhibitors . 
7. Patients with supine systolic blood pressure (SBP) ≥ 180 mm Hg, or diastol ic 
blood pressure (DBP) ≥ 110 mm Hg.  
8. Clinically significant, uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmia, unstable angina, 
congestive heart failure (NYHA Class 3 or 4), or history of myocardial infarction 
in the preceding 2 years.  
9. History of cancer in the preceding 2 years other than successfully treated, non -
metastatic, squamous cell or basal cell carcinoma, or cervical cancer in situ.  
10. Any major urological procedure in the preceding 90 days.  
11. Any major surgical procedure in the preceding 30 days.  
12. Previously treated wit h mirabegron within 60 days prior to the baseline visit (Visit 
2), or previously having failed treatment with mirabegron regardless of duration 
and timing of treatment.  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 22 - of 96 
 13. Current or previous, within the 60 days preceding the baseline visit (Visit 2), 
treatme nt with antimuscarinic agents for OAB symptoms ; and, willingness to not 
use antimuscarinic agents for the duration of the study . 
14. Currently receiving any other investigational drug or having received an 
investigational drug within the 60 days preceding the baseline visit (Visit 2).  
15. Any condition or laboratory test result, which, in t he opinion of the Investigator or 
the Study Urologist , might result in an increased risk to the patient, or would 
affect their participation in the study.  
16. Any patient who, in the  opinion of the Investigator, is not a good candidate for the 
study or will not be able to follow study procedures.  
 
3.5  Criteria for study discontinuation or early treatment termination  
 
Study discontinuation may occur as a result of a decision from regu latory authorities, 
change of the opinion of the Park Nicollet Institutional Review Board  (IRB) , safety 
concerns raised by the Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) , or unavailability 
of the study drug.  
 
The investigator retains the right to terminat e the study at any time and for any reasons. 
Such study termination, however , will be subject to adequate consideration of the 
subject s’ interests.  
 
Individual subjects  will be terminated from the study  if they withdraw consent. In that 
instance, every eff ort will be made for the subject to attend an early termination visit and 
safety follow up.  
 
Subjects  may be withdrawn from the study at the discretion of the Investigator, for 
considerations relating to subject  safety, or for non -adherence or loss of abi lity to comply 
with study requirements.  
 
3.6  Registration  
 
All materials and procedures will be approved by the Park Nicollet Institute  Institutional 
Review Board ( IRB) before recruitment begins. Over a 12 month period, all eligible 
patients will be scree ned by the research staff for enrollment. Informed consent will be 
signed prior to the performance of any study related procedures or assessments.  
 
During screening, the investigator or designee is to assess the need and requirements for a 
caregiver during  the course of the study, and to assure the commitment of the person(s) 
so designated.  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 23 - of 96 
 Subjects will be considered enrolled into the study after they have signed the informed 
consent, have met all study mandated inclusion/exclusion criteria, and are enrol led at 
Visit 2 (Day 0, Baseline).  
 
3.7  Randomization  
 
After a 2-week run -in period in which all subjects take placebo  in a single -blinded 
fashion , subjects will be randomized to a blinded dose of study drug at their 
randomization  visit. This is a double -blind, pilot study. Neither the subject, treating 
physician, principal investigator, co -investigators, nor study coordinators will know to 
which group the subject  has been randomized. The randomization scheme will be 
prepared by the study statistician. Stud y subjects  will receive identical tablets  in identical 
containers which will contain either 25 mg mirabegron extended release or placebo 
tablets , depending on which group they are randomized to. Study subject s will be 
instructed to take study drug in the m orning  with food and 8 ounces of water. A subject’s 
dose assignment will be un -blinded if the Medical Monitor and PI determine it is 
medically necessary (for instance, allergic reaction).  
 
3.8  Identification  
 
At the time of study enrollment all subjects  will be assigned a unique subject  number. 
This identification number, in combination with the subject ’s initials , will be used as the 
identifier on all case report forms and study related documentation.  
 
3.9 Visit and assessment schedule  
 
3.9.1 Screening (V isit 1)  
 
Written informed consent will be obtained before any study specific procedures are 
undertaken. Visit 1 has to be completed at least 2 weeks and no longer than 4 weeks prior 
to baseline visit, to allow sufficient time to review collected informatio n and determine 
subject eligibility for participation. Urology screening procedures  (urologic examination 
with cystoscopy , urinalysis  and PVR) can be conducted anytime between Visit 1 and one 
week prior to baseline, including the same day as visit 1, but p rocedures for visit 1 have 
to preced e urology visit . 
 
Screening visit 1 will be conducted by the Investigator, or his designee, and will 
include:  
 Review and signing of the written informed consent  
 Assignment of patient identification number  
 Review of inclu sion and exclusion criteria  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 24 - of 96 
  Demographics  
 Review of medical history  
 Review of concomitant medications  
 Vital signs,  including  weight , height, and orthostatics  
 Physical examination  
 Neurological Examination  
 Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS)  
 12-lead ECG recording  
 Blood samples for chemistry and hematology (Na, K, Cl, HCO 3, blood glucose, 
BUN, creatinine, GFR, AST, ALT, total bilirubin, Alkaline phosphatase, GGT, 
CBC with differential and platelets)  
 Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)  
 Overactive B ladder Questionnaire (OABQ)  
 3-day VD training and concordance  
 Serum pregnancy test (SPT) for WOCP  
 Urologic examination  with cystoscopy  
 Urinalysis  
 Post-void residual  
 
All screening visit results must be reviewed by the Investigator or designee prior to Visi t 
2. In cases of screen failure resulting from treatable and reversible causes (e.g. urinary 
tract infection, other intercurrent illness during the screening period, etc.)  or scheduling 
conflict , the screening period can be extended up to 56 days at the In vestigator’s 
discretion, provided subject still meets eligibility criteria. Screening assessments may 
need to be repeated at the Investigator’s discretion.   
 
3.9.2 Baseline (Visit 2 ; Day -14) 
 
The baseline visit (Visit 2) will occur 14 -28 days from Screeni ng visit 1. Procedures will 
be conducted by the Investigator or designee:  
 Concomitant medications  
 Adverse events  
 Vital signs, weight, height, and orthostatics  
 Physical Examination  
 Neurological Examination  
 3-day VD assessment  
 Patient Perception of Bladder C ondition (PPBC)  
 Study drug dispense  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 25 - of 96 
 At the end of  the baseline visit , subjects will be dispensed study drug sufficient for the 
run-in period (to last until Visit 3 ). At this time , subjects will be dispensed placebo in a 
single -blinded fashion (subjects wi ll be unaware that they are receiving placebo). Study 
drug will be in the form of mirabegron 25 mg  extended release -matching placebo tablets, 
and will be given in a dose of 1 tablet  daily. The intent  of the single -blind , placebo phase 
is to minimize the im pact of the placebo effect.  
 
3.9.3 Randomization (Visit 3 ; Day 0 ) 
 
Randomization visit procedures will aim at collecting data that will be utilized as baseline 
measures for the st atistical analysis for primary and secondary outcomes, and exploratory 
analys es. 
 
 Concomitant medications  
 Adverse events  
 Study drug compliance  
 Vital signs, weight, height, and orthostatics  
 OABQ  
 3-day VD assessment  
 PPBC  
 CQ 
 UPDRS -6 
 MoCA  
 Map Search  
 Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (HVLT)  
 Trail Making Test (TMT) parts A and B  
 Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)  
 Beck Depression Inventory version II (BDI -II) 
 Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)  
 Parkinson Fatigue Scale (PFS)  
 Parkinson’s Impact Scale (PIMS)  
 Study drug dispense  
 
At the conclusion of the randomization visit, subjects will  be randomized  in a d ouble -
blind fashion  in a ratio  of 2:1 to mirabegron  25 mg daily vs. placebo. Study drug will be 
administered in the form of 1 mirabegron 25 mg  extended release  matching placebo 
tablet daily (placebo arm) or 1 mirabegron 25 mg extended release tablet daily (active 
treatment arm). Thus all subjects will continue to receive 1 tablet daily. Sufficient study 
drug will be dispensed to last until Visit 6. 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 26 - of 96 
  
3.9.4 Low -dose phase maintenance visit (Visit 4 - telephone call; Day 7)  
 
The purpose of this telephone call is to asse ss adverse events  and medication compliance. 
It can be conducted via telephone interview.  
 
 Concomitant medications  
 Adverse events  
 Study drug compliance  
 
3.9.5 Dose escalation visit (Visit 5; Day 14)  
 
The purpose of this visit is to assess adverse  events, medication compliance, and obtain 
interim measures for analyses.  
 
 Concomitant medications  
 Adverse events  
 Study drug  compliance  
 Vital signs, weight, height, and orthostatics  
 Physical Examination  
 Neurological Examination  
 ECG  
 UPDRS  
 Urologic examinati on 
 PVR  
 Urinalysis  
 OABQ  
 3-day VD assessment  
 PPBC  
 Study drug dose escalation instru ctions  
 
The urologic examination, PVR, and urinalysis may be obtained at a separate visit, within 
the 3 days preceding scheduled Visit 5. At the conclusion of Visit 5, subject s will be 
instructed to increase the dose to ge2 mirabegron 25 mg  extended release - matching 
placebo tablets daily (placebo arm) or 2 mirabegron 25 mg extended release tablets daily 
(active treatment arm). Thus all subjects will begin receiving  2 identica l looking tablets 
daily.  
 
3.9.6 High -dose phase maintenance visit (Visit 6; Day 42)  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 27 - of 96 
  
The purpose of this visit is to establish interim overall tolerability of the medication , 
medication  compliance, and obtain interim measures for analysis . 
 
 Concomitant med ications  
 Adverse events  
 Study drug compliance  
 OABQ  
 3-day VD assessment  
 PPBC  
 Study drug dispense  
 
At the conclusion of Visit 6, subjects will be dispensed mirabegron 25 mg tablets or 
matching placebo. Study drug will be administered in the form of 2 mirabeg ron 25 mg , 
matching placebo tablets daily (placebo arm) or 2 mirabegron 25 mg tablets daily (active 
treatment arm). Thus all subjects will continue to receive 2 identical looking tablets daily. 
Sufficient study drug will be dispensed to last until the end of treatment visit  (Visit 7). 
 
3.9.7 End of treatment / Early termination visit (Visit 7 ; Day 84 ) 
 
During Visit 7 , screening and baseline safety and tolerability as well as efficacy and 
outcome measures will be repeated . 
 
 Concomitant medications  
 Adverse ev ents 
 Study drug  compliance  
 Vital signs, weight, height, and orthostatics  
 Physical Examination  
 Neurological Examination  
 ECG  
 UPDRS  
 Blood samples for chemistry and hematology (Na, K, Cl, HCO 3, blood glucose, 
BUN, creatinine, GFR, AST, ALT, total bilirubin, Al kaline phosphatase, GGT, 
CBC with differential and platelets)  
 Urinalysis  
 OABQ  
 3-day VD assessment  
 PPBC  
 CQ 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 28 - of 96 
  UPDRS -6 
 MoCA  
 Map Search  
 Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (HVLT)  
 Trail Making Test (TMT) parts A and B  
 Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)  
 Beck Depression Invento ry version II (BDI -II) 
 Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)  
 Parkinson Fatigue Scale (PFS)  
 Parkinson’s Impact Scale (PIMS)  
 
If a subject  at any point during the study requests to withdraw from treatment, they 
should return for an early termination visit. The proc edures of visit 7 and visit 8 can be 
combined in a single visit for early termination subjects. It would be desirable that 
subjects continue to receive study drug until early termination procedures can be 
completed.  
 
3.9.8 Safety follow up visit (Visit 8; Day 84+14)  
 
The purpose of this visit will be to ensure lack of any delayed adverse events. These 
procedures can be combined with visit 7 for early termination subjects who request 
withdrawal from treatment.  
 
 Concomitant medications  
 Adverse events  
 Vital si gns, weight, height, and orthostatics  
 Physical Examination  
 Neurological Examination  
 Urological Examination  
 Urinalysis  
 UPDRS  
 PVR  
 PPBC  
 Serum pregnancy test (SPT) for WOCP  
 
The urologic examination, PVR, and urinalysis may be obtained at a separate visit, wit hin 
the 3 days preceding scheduled Visit 8. 
 
3.9.9 Unscheduled visit  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 29 - of 96 
  
Unscheduled visits can be conducted at the Investigator’s discretion. Procedures during 
these visits will be focused to the problem that precipitated the visit. If a subject develops 
intolerable side effects during the treatment period, but wishes to continue in the study, 
he/she may come in for an unscheduled visit. A dose reduction is permitted only once 
during treatment and only after the dose escalation to mirabegron daily dose of 50 mg vs. 
placebo . The dose can be decreased at that time to 25 mg of mirabegron vs. placebo. 
Subjects that require such dose reduction will be receiving one tablet daily. Further dose 
reductions will not be permitted, and, if deemed necessary, subjects will be brought in for 
early termination.  
 
Changes in the antiparkinsonian agents or cognitive enhancers will only be permitted to a 
limited degree, and only if, in the opinion of the investigator, are not likely to alter the 
outcome measures of the study. Natu rally, if these medication changes are triggered by 
worsening of the PD or cognitive symptoms, such worsening will have to be logged as an 
adverse event or serious adverse event as appropriate.  
 
3.10 Efficacy As sessments  
 
3.10.1  Procedures related to prim ary end point (cognitive tolerability)  
 
3.10.1.1 Montreal Cognitive Asses sment  (Appendix II)  
 
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment  (MoCA)23 is a brief cognitive battery, designed 
initially as a screening instrument for mild cognitive dysfunction . It has been 
standardized for use in Parkinson disease24, and normative data have been developed with 
proposed cut -offs for both mild cognitive impairment and dementia .26 It is generally 
sensitive to mild cognitive difficulties common in PD even in the absence of demen tia. It 
assesses the following cognitive domains: attention and concentration, executive 
function, memory, language, visuoconstructional skills, conceptual thinking, calculations, 
and orientation. Three versions are available to improve  test-retest reliabi lity and reduce 
practice effect . Time to administer the MoCA is approximately 10 minutes. The total 
possible score is 30 points; a score of 26 or above is considered normal. A one -point 
correction is added for education of less than 13 years.  
 
3.10.1.2 Map  Search  
 
Map Search is a test of selective attention, developed as one of the components of Tests 
for Everyday Attention (TEA) .29 It is a 2 -minute, timed task that involves searching a 
map for a target symbol among competing and irrelevant distracters. Sub jects are 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 30 - of 96 
 instructed to circle as many of the target symbols as possible. By the use of different 
colored pens the number of target symbols circled in  1 min ute versus the total for 2 
minutes can be counted . There are 80 of each type of symbol.   
 
3.10.1.3 Hopkins Verbal Learning Test  (HVLT)  
 
The HVLT is a validated test of episodic verbal memory .30 The revised HV LT-R will be 
utilized for this study.31 It consists of a 12 -item word list derived from three semantic 
categories, 4 words for each category. Catego ries are generally simple, straightforward 
and of common usage, e.g. ‘precious stones’, ‘animals’, etc. One of five available forms 
will be randomly administered to each subject as per the standard instructions. The list is 
read to the subject  on three con secutive learning trials. After each trial, subjects are asked 
to recall the words. A delayed recall trial follows 20 –25 min utes after the third learning 
trial. Finally, subjects are presented with a 24 -word list composed from the 12 original 
words togethe r with 12 novel, distractor  words , and are asked to respond with ‘yes’ or 
‘no’ to the question of which words were part of the original list.  The following scores 
will be  calculated: (a) sum of words correctly recalled on the three learning trials, (b) 
number of words recalled on the delayed recall trial, and (c) recognition discrimination 
index (true positive minus false positive responses ). 
 
3.10.1.4 Trail Making Test (parts A and B)  
 
The Trail Making Test (TMT) is a measure of attention, speed and mental  flexibility.32 It 
requires the subject to connect, by making pencil lines, 25 encircled numbers randomly 
arranged on a page in proper order (Part A) and 25 encircled numbers and letters in 
alternating order (Part B). Subjects are presented with one exampl e prior to the 
administration of each part. Mistakes are counted and the subject is told when they have 
made a mistake by the examiner, and are directed to correct the mistake. The time to 
complete each part  in seconds is the main measure obtained from thi s test. No penalty is 
given for mistakes.  
 
3.10.2  Procedures related to secondary end points  
 
3.10.2.1 Overactive Bladder Questionnaire  (OABQ – Appendix III)  
 
Overactive bladder (OAB) is characterized by symptoms of urinary frequency and 
urgency, with and  without incontinence. The Overactive Bladder Questionnaire33 
(OABQ ) is a 33 -item, self -administered instrument that contains a symptom bother scale 
(8 items  to be administered during visits 1, 3, 5, 6, and 7 ) and a health -related quality of 
life scale (HRQL-to be administered during visits 3 and 7 ), pertaining to OAB symptoms 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 31 - of 96 
 impact on HRQL. The OAB Q was developed from an initial version of 62 items to its 
final form and has been shown to be a valid and reliable instrument in distinguishing 
normal from cli nically diagnosed continent and incontinent patients . In addition to 
measuring the severity of symptom bother, the OAB Q is also useful in quantifying the 
negative impact of both continent and incontinent symptoms on HRQL. This instrument 
has been used as an efficacy outcome in the pivotal randomized clinical trials of 
mirabegron , and the drug’s efficacy was indeed accurately reflected in the instrument.  
The OABQ has also been studied and found useful in PD. 34 
 
3.10.2.2 3-Day Voiding Diary  (Appendix IV)  
 
A 3-day voiding diary will be implemented to collect additional efficacy measures of 
average daily incontinence episodes, micturition frequency, and volume voided per 
micturition. Subjects will be trained in the diary completion. A toilet hat will be supplie d 
for volume measurement. Subjects are instructed to record the times of every voiding 
event during three consecutive days; amount voided with each event; instances of leaking 
including incontinence;  whether there was associated urge to void with any voidi ng 
event; and, whether they had to get out of bed to void . 
 
3.10.2.3 Patient Perception of Bladder Condition (PPBC – Appendix V)  
 
The PP BC is a validated , patient -reported , single question measure of OAB severity .35 
This measure has demonstrated validity, but also good responsiveness to change. It 
consists of one single question with 6 possible answers, in which the subject is asked to 
indicate if his or her bladder dysfunction cause him or her no problems at all, or very 
minor, minor, moderate, severe, or very severe problems.  
 
3.10. 2.4 Parkinson’s Impact Scale  (PIMS  – Appendix VI)  
 
There are 10 areas (self, feelings, family, community, work, travel, leisure, safety, 
financial security and sexuality)  in the  validated, s elf-reported,  Parkinson’s Impact Scale  
(PIMS)36, with four identified factors : 
 psychological  
 social  
 physical  
 financial  
 
Subjects are asked to consider how much impact their Parkinson’s symptoms have had on 
each area  of the PIMS , scored from 0 to 4 points.  There is a maximum possible score of 
40, with higher scores indicating greater impact . This is one of six quality of life scales 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 32 - of 96 
 recommended by the Movement Disorder Society for use in Parkinson’s Disease. 
Administration time is approximately 5 -10 minutes.  
 
3.10.2. 5 Epworth Sleepiness Scale  (Appendix VII)  
 
The Epworth Sleepiness Scale has been used repeatedly in PD and  is one of the best 
available methods to measure excessive daytime sleepiness in these patients.37,38 It is 
comprised of 8 everyday activities (such as ‘Watching TV’) and the resp ondent is to 
determine the chance of dozing or sleeping during the activity. There are four possible 
responses  ranging from 0 to 3 points.  The maximum possible score is 24, with higher 
scores indicating a greater chance of dozing or sleeping during activit ies. Self-reported 
administration times is approximately less than 5 minutes.  
 
3.10.2 .6 Parkinson’s Fatigue Scale  (Appendix VIII)  
 
The Parkinson’s Fatigue Scale39 is a 16 -item self -report instrument designed to measure 
the physical aspects of fatigue and i ts impact on the patient’s daily function.  Each item 
has four possible responses  ranging from 1 to 5 points, with higher scores indicating 
greater fatigue . An average score of greater or equal to 2.95 optimally distinguished those 
who experienced fatigue from those who did not. Administration time is approximately 
5-10 minutes.  
 
3.10.3 Procedures related to exploratory analyses  
 
3.10.3.1  Orthostatic Blood Pressure and Heart Rate measurements  
 
Supine blood pressures (systolic and diastolic) will be obtaine d after 5 minutes of 
reclining, along with heart rate. Immediately following these measurements the subject 
will arise to full standing position, and systolic and diastolic blood pressures and heart 
rate will be obtained at 3 minutes after arising. Supine measurements will be obtained 
with the subject reclining with the head elevated at 30o from the horizontal. If the 
investigator determines that the subject will be unable to stand for 3 minutes, then 
standing measurements will be obtained as close to the 3  minute time as possible. Blood 
pressure measurements will be obtained manually using a sphygmomanometer, always 
using the same side upper extremity for each subject (either left or right, but always the 
same side in the same subject).40  
 
Heart rate will be manually counted for 30 seconds in the radial artery on the same side, 
and will be obtained after the blood pressure measurement. Presence of orthostatic 
hypotension will be documented for a drop in systolic blood pressure equal or greater 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 33 - of 96 
 than 20 mm Hg , or in diastolic blood pressure equal or greater than 10 mm Hg. 
Symptomatic orthostatic hypotension will be documented if the subject also experiences 
presyncopal or syncopal symptoms.  
 
3.10.3. 2 Beck Depression Inventory version II  (BDI -II – Appendix IX)  
 
The Beck Depression Inventory41 (BDI) has been used in a number of studies in 
Parkinson’s disease and is an established screening tool that reliably discriminates  
depression  from anxiety  in various populations. It consists of 21 questions scored from 0 -
3 with higher scores indicating greater severity; a total score of all 21 questions provides 
an indicator of depressive symptomatology. Administration time is approximately 5 -10 
minutes. Interpretation guidelines for the BDI41,42:  
0-9 Normal range  
10-15 Minimal depressive symptomatology  
16-19 Mild -moderate depressive symptomatology  
20-29 Moderate -to-severe depressive symptomatology  
30-63 Severe depressive symptomatology  
Scores greater than 15 may indicate symptoms of depression which may impair cognitive 
abilities.  
  
3.10.3. 3 Beck Anxiety Inventory  (BAI – Appendix X)  
 
The Beck Anxiety Inventory43 (BAI) was developed to address the need for an instrument 
that would reliably discriminate anxiety from depression while displaying convergent 
validity. The scale co nsists of 21 items, each describing a common symptom of anxiety. 
The respondent is asked to rate how much he or she has been bothered by each symptom 
over the past week on a 4 -point scale ranging from 0 to 3. The items are summed to 
obtain a total score th at can range from 0 to 63 (higher scores indicate greater anxiety). 
The scale has high internal consistency and item -total correlations ranging from .30 to .71 
(median=.60).  Administration time is approximately 5 -10 minutes.   
 
3.10.3.4 Constipation Questi ons (CQ  – Appendix XI)  
 
Subjects will be asked a series of 6 questions to establish if they meet the Rome II criteria 
for constipation.44  The Rome II committee defined functional constipation as occurrence  
of 2 or more of the sympto ms listed in Appendix XI for at least 12 weeks, which need not 
be consecutive, in the preceding 12 months and in the  absence of structural and 
biochemical explanation. The criteria exclude subjects  presenting with loose stool 
episodes and irritable bowel syndrome.  For the purpo se of this study, the reference period 
will be the preceding 2 weeks to conform with the timeline of the study. The questions 
will be administered by the investigator or designee.  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 34 - of 96 
 3.10.3. 5 Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) – Appendix XII  
 
The UPDRS assesses motor and functional abilities of the subjects.45 The total UPDRS 
will be  completed (defined for this study as the sum of Parts I, II , III, and IV  (I-
Mentation, behavior, and mood  section;  II-Activities of Daily Living (ADL); III -motor 
section ; and IV -complications section ) will be completed by history and  examination.  
The UPDRS part s III and IV  evaluation will be conducted by a trained neurologist or 
other senior trained  resea rch staff with at least 10 years’ experience  in conducting the 
UPDRS. All attempts will be  made to ensure that the same trained research staff member 
performs the UPDRS part s III and IV  at all  visits for each subject  and at approximately 
the same time of the day and time following  administration of medication. The UPD RS 
parts I and II may be completed by trained research staff as delegated by the PI.  
 
3.10.3. 6 Excessive Salivation Question ( Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating 
Scale  Question 6 - UPDRS -6) – Appendix XII  
 
This is question 6 on the UPDRS45 which refers spe cifically to excessive salivation. It is 
rated 0 -4 and can be self -administered.  
 
3.11 Safety  assessments  
 
3.11.1 Physical Examination  and Neurological Examination  
 
A complete physical exam (consisting of a review of all body systems) and neurological 
exam  (including evaluation of mental status; motor function; balance and coordination; 
sensory  function; reflexes and cranial nerves) at screening  and end of treatment/early 
termination (visit 7)  will be conducted by the study neurologist  (primary investigator  or 
sub-investigator). On other visits ( baseline, dose escalation (visit 5), follow -up (visit 8) 
and unscheduled visit) a  symptom -directed physical and neurological exam will be 
performed by the study neurologist.  
 
3.11.2 12-Lead El ectrocardiography  
 
12-lead ECG’s will be performed to evaluate the cardiovascular system.  A standard 12 -
lead ECG will be performed at screening, dose escalation (visit 5) and end of 
treatment/early termination (visit 7) . Additional ECGs will be performed if clinically 
indicated. ECGs will be conducted after approximately 5 minutes supine or recumbent 
rest using a standard ECG machine equipped with computer -based interval 
measurements.  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 35 - of 96 
 The Investigator is responsible for evaluating the ECG. ECG findings will be assessed by 
the Inv estigator as normal, abnormal not clinically significant (NCS), or abnormal 
clinically significant (CS), as appropriate. All abnormalities, whether assessed as 
clinically significant or not, will be recorded. The ECG tracing should be initialed and 
dated b y the Investigator.  
 
3.11.3 Urologic examination  
 
The urologist will exam the subject for organic causes of OAB and to determine if the 
subject has bladder outlet obstruction  (BOO) . The urologist will also perform cystoscopy  
during screening and obtain  post-void residuals.  
 
3.11.4 Post-void Residual (PVR)  
 
The post -void residual (PVR) urine test measures the amount of urine left in the bladder 
after urination. The test is used to help evaluate incontinence in women and men, 
problems with urination, and beni gn prostatic hyperplasia. The amount of leftover 
(residual) urine will be measured using cystoscopy  or ultrasound . 
 
3.11.5 Vital signs and weight  
 
Blood pressure and heart rate will be measured as described in section 3.10. 3.1. Height 
will be performed at screening only and weight will be measured at all visits.  
 
3.11.6 Clinical laboratory parameters  
 
The safety laboratory tests (h ematology, chemistry and urinalysis tests ) will be performed 
as general measures of health.  Methodist Hospital  Laboratory servic es will be responsible 
for testing  of all laboratory samples. Instructions will be included in the laboratory 
manual.   Any clinically important abnormal laboratory values noted at the Screening visit 
will be recorded as medical history. In addition, in ord er for the Sponsor to collect 
additional information about clinically important laboratory abnormalities, at minimum, 
the following laboratory abnormalities should be captured at Unscheduled Visits or End 
of Treatment/Early Term on the non -serious or serio us AE pages of the CRF as 
appropriate:  
 
 Any laboratory test result that meets the criteria for an AE or SAE;  
 Any laboratory abnormality that requires the subject to have study drug 
discontinued or interrupted;  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 36 - of 96 
  Any laboratory abnormality that requires the s ubject to receive specific corrective 
therapy.  
 
All clinically important abnormal laboratory tests occurring during the study will be 
repeated in appropriate intervals until (1) the value returns to Baseline, (2) the value is 
judged to be clinically accept able by the Investigator, (3) a diagnosis that explains the 
abnormal laboratory is made or (4) subject is lost to follow -up. When possible, the 
Investigator should report the clinical rather than the laboratory term (e.g., anemia versus 
low hemoglobin.)  
 
4.0 ADVERSE AND SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
 
The two categories of adverse reactions that will be reported to the FDA for review on 
form 3500A are “serious and unexpected” and “unexpected fatal or life threatening”, 
which are assessed by the Principal I nvestigator  as Possibly Related, Probably Related or 
Definitely Related to the study drug. Serious and unexpected events will be submitted to 
the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) for review within 15 days 
of learning of the event. Unexp ected fatal or life threatening events will be submitted to 
the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) for review within 7 days of 
learning of the event.  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE): An adverse event is considered serious if, in the view of 
the Medical Monitor, it results in any of the following outcomes:  
 Death.  
 A life -threatening adverse event.  
 Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization (for >24 
hours).  
 A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disrupti on of the ability to 
conduct normal life functions . 
 A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
 Important Medical Events (IME) that may not result in death, be life threatening, 
or require hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse drug experience 
when, ba sed upon medical judgment, they may jeopardize the subject  and may 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in 
this definition  
 
Life-threatening adverse event or life -threatening suspected adverse reaction: An 
adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered "life threatening" if, in the view 
of either the Principal Investigator  or the Medical Monitor , its occurrence places the 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 37 - of 96 
 subject  at immediate risk of death. It does not include an adverse event or suspecte d 
adverse reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.  
 
AE Identification: The NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 
(CTCAE) provides a descriptive terminology that is to be utilized for AE reporting. The 
grading (severity) scale which is provided for each AE term will be used to grade the 
severity of the event. For this study, CTCAE version 4 will be used.  
 
Attribution: An assessment of the relationship between the AE and the study drug. After 
naming and grad ing the event, the Medical Monitor will assign an attribution to the AE. 
Attributions include:  
 
 Unrelated  
 Unlikely Related  
 Possibly Related  
 Probably Related   
 Definitely  Related  
 
Expectedness: An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered  
"unexpected" if it is not consistent with the ri sk information described in the general 
investigational plan or elsewhere in the current protocol . For this  study, the risks listed in 
the Myrbet riq® package insert will be used to determine expectedness  (App endix I) . The 
Principal In vestiga tor will be contacted as soon as possible after an event is  identified at 
612-993-5495  during regular bus iness hours or paged  at 612 -818-5336  after regular 
business hours. The Principal Investigator  is responsible for AE identification, 
documentation, grading and assignment of attribution to the  study drug or the study 
procedures . The completed FDA 3500A form will be submitted to the following address 
for review:  
 
Food and Drug Administration  
Center for Drug Evaluation and R esearch  
Division of Drug Oncology Products  
5901 -B Ammendale Road  
Beltsville, MD 20705 -1266  
 
Reports will contain patient  initials, age, s ex, and  specific information regarding the 
event.  
 
All adverse events will be recorded in a study specific Adverse Even t (AE) log.  Written 
reports to the DSMC and the PN IRB will be submitted according to the  PN IRB 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 38 - of 96 
 Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Participants or Others  (UPIRTSO) policy and 
only those events that meet the criteria of a UPIRTSO will  be promptly re ported the IRB 
within 10 calendar days of learning of the event.  
 
5.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
 
An external data safety and monitoring committee (DSMC) will monitor the safety of 
study  participants. The PI will report all adverse events to the DSMC  that include 
clinically significant changes in physical exams, abnormal laboratory values and  post 
study adverse events.  Subject  hospitalizations and all adverse events  reported to the PN 
IRB will be reviewed by the DSMC. Interim analysis will be  availabl e to the DSMC after 
15 participants have complete data and then again  at study completion. The study 
biostatistician for this study will prepare the data  for review by the committee and attend 
the DSMC meetings.   
 
The study will be monitored according to F DA/GCP guidelines. The PI will  allocate 
adequate time for such monitoring activities. The PI will also ensure that  the Park 
Nicollet Institute study monitors  and other compliance or quality assurance reviewers  are 
given access to all the above noted study -related documents and study  related facilities 
and have adequate space to conduct the monitoring. Work  standards to monitor study 
procedures and data collection will be in accordance  with Park Nicollet Institute  internal 
investigator -initiated study audit policy and procedures.  
 
6.0 STUDY  DRUG SUPPLY  
Study drug will be provided to study subject s free of charge.  
 
6.1  Mirabegron  
 
Mirabegron extended -release tablets will be supplied as 25 mg oval, brown, film coated 
tablets. Matching placebo will also be supp lied. 
 
6.1.1  Drug Manufacturer  
 
Astellas Pharma US, Inc.  
1 Astellas Way  
Northbrook, Illinois 60062 -6111  
 
6.1.1.1  Distribution and Shipment  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 39 - of 96 
 Study drug (mirabegron and placebo) will be shipped to study site  by Astellas Pharma 
US, Inc . 
 
All study drugs and m aterials will be packed in appropriate storage boxes. If, upon arrival 
at the study site, the study drugs appear to be damaged, the sponsor will be contacted 
immediately.  
 
Each shipment of study drugs for the study will contain a shipment form describing t he 
content of shipment. This form will assist in maintaining current and accurate inventory 
records. When a shipment is received, the coordinator will acknowledge receipt of the 
study drugs by signing and dating the relevant shipping documents.  
 
6.1.2 Know n Potential Toxicities  
 
The most frequent adverse events (0.2%) leading to discontinuation in 3  clinical trials  for 
the 25 mg or 50 mg dose were nausea, headache, hypertension, diarrhea, constipation, 
dizziness and tachycardia.  
 
Atrial fibrillation (0.2%) and prostate cancer (0.1%) were reported as serious adverse 
events by more than 1 patient and at a rate greater than placebo.  
 
Table 2 lists adverse reactions, derived from all adverse events that were reported in 3  
clinical trials  at an incidence greater than placebo and in 1% or more of patients treated 
with mirabegron  25 mg or 50 mg once daily for up to 12 weeks. The most commonly 
reported adverse reactions (greater than 2% of Myrbetriq patients and greater than 
placebo) were hypertension, nasopharyngiti s, urinary tract infection and headache.  
 
Table  2 Percentages of Patients with Adverse Reactions, Derived from All Adverse 
Events, Exceeding Placebo Rate and Reported by 1% or More Patients Treated With 
mirabegron  25 mg or 50 mg Once Daily in 3 Clinical Tr ials 
 Placebo (%)  Mirabegron 25 mg 
(%) Mirabegron 50 mg 
(%) 
Number of patients  1380  432 1375  
Hypertension*  7.6 11.3 7.5 
Nasopharyngitis  2.5 3.5 3.9 
Urinary Tract 
Infection  1.8 4.2 2.9 
Headache  3.0 2.1 3.2 
Constipation  1.4 1.6 1.6 
Upper Respiratory 
Tract Infection  1.7 2.1 1.5 
Arthralgia  1.1 1.6 1.3 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 40 - of 96 
 Diarrhea  1.3 1.2 1.5 
Tachycardia  0.6 1.6 1.2 
Abdominal Pain  0.7 1.4 0.6 
Fatigue  1.0 1.4 1.2 
*Includes reports of blood pressure above the normal range, and BP increased from baseline, occurring 
predom inantly in subjects with baseline hypertension.  
 
Other adverse reactions reported by less than 1% of patients treated with mirabegron in 
clinical trials included:  
 
 Cardiac disorders: palpitations, blood pressure increased  
 Eye Disorders: glaucoma  
 Gastroin testinal disorders: dyspepsia, gastritis, abdominal distension  
 Infections and Infestations: sinusitis, rhinitis  
 Investigations: GGT increased, AST increased, ALT increased, LDH increased  
 Renal and urinary disorders : nephrolithiasis, bladder pain  
 Reproducti ve system and breast disorders: vulvovaginal pruritis, vaginal infection  
 Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders: urticaria, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, rash, 
pruritus, purpura, lip edema  
 
Table 3 lists the rates of the most commonly reported adverse react ions, derived from all 
adverse events in patients treated with mirabegron 50 mg for up to 52 weeks in a fourth 
clinical trial. The most commonly reported adverse reactions (>3% of Myrbetriq patients) 
were hypertension, urinary tract infection, headache, an d nasopharyngitis.  
 
Table 3 Percentages of Patients with Adverse Reactions, Derived from all Adverse 
Events, Reported by Greater Than 2% of Patients Treated With Myrbetriq 50 mg Once 
Daily in Study 4  
 Mirabegron 50 mg (%)  Active Control (%)  
Number of pati ents 812 812 
Hypertension  9.2 9.6 
Urinary Tract Infection  5.9 6.4 
Headache  4.1 2.5 
Nasopharyngitis  3.9 3.1 
Back Pain  2.8 1.6 
Constipation  2.8 2.7 
Dry Mouth  2.8 8.6 
Dizziness  2.7 2.6 
Sinusitis  2.7 1.5 
Influenza  2.6 3.4 
Arthralgia  2.1 2.0 
Cystiti s 2.1 2.3 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 41 - of 96 
  
In Study 4, in patients treated with Myrbetriq 50 mg once daily, adverse reactions leading 
to discontinuation reported by more than 2 patients and at a rate greater than active 
control included: constipation (0.9%), headache (0.6%), dizziness ( 0.5%), hypertension 
(0.5%), dry eyes (0.4%), nausea (0.4%), vision blurred (0.4%), and urinary tract infection 
(0.4%). Serious adverse events reported by at least 2 patients and exceeding active 
control included cerebrovascular accident (0.4%) and osteoart hritis (0.2%). Serum 
ALT/AST increased from baseline by greater than 10 -fold in 2 patients (0.3%) taking 
Myrbetriq 50 mg, and these markers subsequently returned to baseline while both 
patients continued Myrbetriq.  
 
In the fourth clinical trial, serious a dverse events of neoplasm were reported by 0.1%, 
1.3%, and 0.5% of patients treated with mirabegron 50 mg, mirabegron 100 mg and 
active control once daily, respectively. Neoplasms reported by 2 patients treated with 
mirabegron 100 mg included breast cancer , lung neoplasm malignant and prostate cancer.  
 
In a separate clinical study in Japan, a single case was reported as Stevens -Johnson 
syndrome with increased serum ALT, AST and bilirubin in a patient taking mirabegron 
100 mg as well as an herbal medication (Kyufu Gold).  
 
6.1.2.1  Postmarketing Experience  
 
Because these spontaneously reported events are from the worldwide postmarketing 
experience, from a population of uncertain size, the frequency of events and the role of  
mirabegron  in their causation cannot be reliably determined. Urinary retention has been 
reported in association with mirabegron use in worldwide postmarketing experience.  
 
6.1.3 Known Key Drug Interactions  
 
Drug interaction studies were conducted to investigate the effect of co -administered 
drugs on the pharmacokinetics of mirabegron and the effect of mirabegron on the 
pharmacokinetics of co -administered drugs (e.g., ketoconazole, rifampin, solifenacin, 
tamsu losin, and oral contraceptives). No dose adjustment is recommended when these 
drugs ar e co-administered with mirabegron.  
 
The following are drug interactions which are listed as prohibited medications : 
 
6.1.3.1 Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 42 - of 96 
 Since mirabegron is a moderate CYP2D6 inhibitor, the systemic exposure of drugs 
metabolized by CYP2D6 enzyme such as metoprolol and desipramine is increased when 
co-administered with mirabegron. Therefore, appropriate monitoring and dose adjustment 
may be necessary when Myrbetriq is co -administered with these drugs, especially with 
narrow therapeutic index  CYP2D6 substrates, such as thioridazine, flecainide, and 
propafenone.  Subjects on CYP2D6 inhibitors will not be allowed to participate in the 
study.  Subjects receiving drugs which are partly metabolized via CYP2D6, but which do 
not require dose adjustment  when co -administered with CYP2D6 inhibitors will be 
allowed in the study at the discretion of the PI.  
 
6.1.3.2 Digoxin  
 
When given in combination, mirabegron increased mean digoxin C max from 1.01 to 1.3 
ng/mL (29%) and AUC from 16.7 to 19.3 ng.h/mL (27%).  Therefore, for patients who 
are initiating a combination of mirabegron and digoxin, the lowest dose for digoxin 
should initially be considered. Serum digoxin concentrations should be monitored and 
used for titration of the digoxin dose to obtain the desir ed clinical effect.  Subjects on 
digoxin will be allowed in the study at the Principal Investigators discretion.  
 
6.1.3.3 Warfarin  
 
The mean C max of S- and R -warfarin was increased by approximately 4% and AUC by 
approximately 9% when administered as a singl e dose of 25 mg after multiple doses of 
100 mg mirabegron. Following a single dose administration of 25 mg warfarin, 
mirabegron had no effect on the warfarin pharmacodynamic endpoints such as 
International Normalized Ratio (INR) and prothrombin time. Howev er, the effect of 
mirabegron on multiple doses of warfarin and on warfarin pharmacodynamic end points 
such as INR and prothrombin time has not been fully investigated. Subjects on warfarin 
will be allowed in the study at the Principal Investigators discret ion. 
 
6.1.4  Storage  
 
Study drug  will be stored in a secure, locked storage cabinet  at room temperature (15 °C 
to 30°C (59 -86°F)). The cabinet  temperature is monitored daily.  
 
Only authorized personnel will have  access to the study drugs. S tudy site personn el will 
be responsible for correct storage and handling of the study drugs. The study drugs will 
be dispensed by the study coordinator, under the supervision of the PI.  
 
6.1.5 Formulation of study drug  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 43 - of 96 
  
Each My rbetriq extended release tablet  for oral admi nistration contains 25 mg of 
mirabegron as the active ingredient, and the following inactive ingredients: polyethylene 
oxide, polyethylene glycol, hydroxypropyl cellulose, butylated hydroxytoluene, 
magnesium stearate, hypromellose, yellow ferric oxide, and  red ferric oxide (25 mg tablet 
only).  Matching placebo  will contain  the same inactive ingredients and have the same 
appearance as the active study drug, but will not contain mirabegron.  
 
6.1.6 Route and administration  
 
Each subject  will take one to two ta blets of Myrbetriq or matching placebo as follows: 
All subject s will receive one tablet of placebo daily for the first two weeks following 
baseline visit (visit 2). After randomization (visit 3), participants randomized to placebo 
will continue to receive one tablet of placebo daily until dose escalation  (visit 5). At the 
dose escalation visit (visit 5), subjects randomized to placebo will take two placebo 
tablets until the end of active treatment (visit 7).  Participants randomized to study drug 
will recei ve one Myrbetriq 25 mg tablet daily for two weeks, until dose escalation  (visit 
5). At the dose escalation visit  (visit 5 ), subjects randomized to active treatment will have 
their regimen changed to 2 Myrbetriq 25 mg tablets daily  until end of the active t reatment 
phase (visit 7) . Thus, all subject s will be receiving one or two identical  appearing tablets 
daily for the entire active treatment phase.  Subjects will remain blinded to treatment 
(placebo vs. active) for all 14 weeks of treatment.  
 
Subjects  will be instructed to take the tablets together, at the same time every morning , in 
one single dose. The tablets can be taken one at a time, with water, and can be taken with 
food or on empty stomach. Tablets should be swallowed whole and should not be 
chewed, cut, or crushed. To avoid confusion, subject s will be explained that although the 
Myrbetriq package insert instructs patients to only take one tablet a day, in this study they 
will be asked to take one to two tablets a day.  
 
6.1.7  Dose schedule  
 
Table 4 describes the daily dose schedule during each portion of the active treatment  
phase, by treatment assignment.  
 
Table 4. Daily dose schedule  
Treatment 
Assignment  From  visit 1 
to visit  2 From  visit 2 
to visit  3 From visit 3 
to visit  5 From visit 5 
to visit  7 From visit  7 
to visit  8 
Active Drug 
Group  none  1 placebo  1 Myrbetriq  2 Myrbetriq  none  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 44 - of 96 
 Placebo 
Group  none  1 placebo  1 placebo  2 placebo  none  
 
6.1.8  Dose increase / Dose reduction  
 
One scheduled dose increase will occur for the active treatment group subjects as 
described above at visit 5. Dose de -escalations will not be allowed prior to dose 
escalation (visit 5). If the subject  is not tolerating study drug prior to dose escalation then 
the Principal Investigator will consider their withdrawal from the stu dy. One dose de -
escalation will be allowed after the dose escalation has taken place (visit 5). Thus, 
subject s in both treatment groups will be allowed to reduce their daily dose to 1 tablet 
daily, at the discretion of the Investigator. No re -escalations w ill be allowed due to the 
short duration of the study. If subject s cannot tolerate 1 tablet a day, then the Principal 
Investigator will consider withdrawal of the subject  from the study.  
 
6.1.9 Drug accountability  
 
The investigator is responsible for the c ontrol of study drugs under investigation. 
Adequate records of the receipt and disposition of the study drug must be maintained.  
 
Study drug accountability records should contain the following information:  
 Shipment number, kit numbers, batch number, number  of kits and date received 
for all shipments of study drug received by the site . 
 Subject number, medication kit number, the date, batch number, and quantity of 
study drug dispensed to AND returned by the subject (when applicable) . 
 Kits numbers, batch numbe r, number of kits (undispensed study drug) or number 
of tablets  (returned study drug) for all study drug returned to the Sponsor.  
 
6.1.10  Subject compliance   
 
Subjects will be instructe d to bring their medication kit, including used and unused 
bottles, with them every post baseline visit during the treatment phase for compliance and 
accountability checks. During each study visit (visits 3 -7), the investigator and/or site 
coordinator will assess the subject’s compliance with the prescribed regimen for the st udy 
medication. This will include checks of protocol compliance and use of study drug in 
order to assess the reliability of subject -generated data. Subjects who fail to comply with 
the study requirements may be withdrawn from the study . 
 
Compliance with th e dosing regimen will be determined by performing study drug 
accountability of returned study drugs used and unused. The number of used, unused and 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 45 - of 96 
 lost tablets  will be recorded in the study drug accountability records and the CRF by site 
personnel at ever y visit during the treatment phase.  
 
A subject will be considered non -compliant if he/she misses more than 4 doses of study  
medication within a 28 day period (less than 85% compliance) but not on the last week 
prior to a visit – unacceptable noncompliance will be  reported to the  Medical Monitor. 
Examples of acceptable reasons for missing a dose are 1) if a subject develops an adverse  
event that the Investigator believes requires the subject’s dose to be held, or 2) if a 
subject loses  their kit of study medi cation and a replacement kit is requested.  
 
6.1.11  Prior and concomitant medications  
 
All concomitant medication that the subject is taking from the screening visit should be 
recorded on the concomitant medications log. In addition, any changes in concomit ant 
medication or new medications added, including as a result of an inter -current illness 
must be recorded in the case report forms  at each visit . 
 
6.1.1 2 Prohibited medications  
 
The following medications will not be allowed during study participation. If  treatment 
with one of these agents is clinically necessary, then subjects will have to be withdrawn 
from the study:  
 CYP2D6 substrates  that are significantly metabolized by CYP2D6  (Atomoxetine, 
desipramine, dextromethorphan, metoprolol, nebivolol, perphena zine, tolterodine, 
venlafaxine) . Medications metabolized by CYP2D6 in small proportion, such that 
no dosage adjustment is necessary when co -administered with CYP2D6 inhibitors 
will be allowed  at PIs discretion . 
 Antidopaminergic agents (e.g. all neuroleptic s, metoclopramide) . 
 Anticholinergic antiparkinsonian agents (e.g. trihexyphenidyl, benztropine, 
orphenadrine): such agents will be allowed if a subject has been on a stable dose 
for 30 days prior to screening; however, such medications will not be allowed to 
be initiated during the study. Dose adjustment or discontinuation will be at the 
discretion of the Principal Investigator.  
 All other antiparkinsonian agents will be allowed, if, in the opinion of the 
Principal Investigator they will not affect the outco me measure s. 
 Antimuscarinic agents used to treat overactive bladder.  
 Cognitive enhancers (donepezil, rivastigmin e, galantamine and memantine) will 
be allowed, only if the subject has been on these medications and on stable dose 
for 30 days prior to  screeni ng. Dose adjustment or discontinuation will be at the 
discretion of the Principal Investigator.  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 46 - of 96 
  Any other medications that, in the opinion of the Principal Investigator, may alter 
the outcome measures may be prohibited from the study.  
 
If treatment with on e of the prohibited medications is medically necessary during the 
study, then, in consideration of subject ’s interests, subject  may be withdrawn from the 
study.  
 
6.1.13  Blinding and Unblinding  
 
Blinding will be maintained during the entire  study. The inve stigators, study 
coordinators, monitors, analysis and data management will all be blinded to the subject 
assignment. The blind will be held by the statistician and the PI has the authority to 
unblind a subject.  
 
7.0 DATA ANALYSIS AND STATISTICAL METHODS  
 
7.1 Sample size  
 
As this is a pilot study, no formal sample size calculation was performed. For feasibility 
reasons, a total of 30 participants will be enrolled with 10 in the placebo group and 20 in 
the active treatment group.  
 
7.2 Randomization  
 
The rando mization scheme will be prepared by the study statistician per standard 
statistical procedures .  Randomization will be a 2:1 ratio between mirabegron and 
placebo , and aim at equivalent sex distribution in the active treatment and placebo 
groups . 
 
7.3 Analy sis population  
 
The analysi s population is based on intent -to-treat and will consist of all participants who 
received at least one dose during the double -blind placebo -controlled phase.  Participants 
who withdraw from the study or are withdrawn by the stud y PI will be described by 
screening/baseline characteristics, but excluded from analyses.  
 
7.4 Data summary  
 
Data will be collected on case report forms for each participant at each visit and double -
entered into a secure study database.  A quality check o f data will occur after the first five 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 47 - of 96 
 records and prior to analysis , looking for out -of-range values and inconsistent data.  The 
study statistician will conduct additional quality checks prior to data analyses  including 
consistency between rounds of data entry, checking for duplicate entries, truncation of 
data, out -of-range values, inconsistent data and amount of missing data.  Data 
discrepancies will be resolved and documented pr ior to data analysis.  Missing data will 
not be imputed.  After quality chec ks have been completed, a final database will be 
created with proper formatting and any appropriate mathematical algorithms applied 
including change from randomization visit (Visit 3).  
 
Descriptive summaries will be generated for all demographic and clini cal variables by 
study visit and treatment group including number, mean, median, standard deviation, 
minimum and maximum for continuous variables and number and percent for categorical 
variables.  Summaries for change from randomization visit will also be generated.  The 
number and screening/baseline characteristics of withdrawn participants will be recorded.   
 
Subgroups for analyses may include treatment group, time point/study visit, age group 
and sex.  A significance level of 0.05 will be used throughou t with no adjustment for 
multiplicity.  Normality will be tested throughout using the Shapiro -Wilk test.  All 
analyses will be conducted on the final dataset in SAS version 9.3 or higher.  
 
7.4.1 Summary of primary outcome data  
 
The primary objective of th is experimental protocol is to assess cognitive tolerability of 
mirabegron while treating OAB symptoms in patients with PD and CI. The hypothesis is 
that mirabegron will not impact cognitive impairment.  The goal is to demonstrate 
equivalent cognitive impa irment prior to and following treatment with mirabegron as 
well as change compared to the placebo group.  To assess this primary objective, a test of 
equivalence will be performed using the two one -sided tests approach on change from 
visit 3 to visit 7 in MoCA total score within groups as well as between the two groups. 
Normality will be assessed by the Shapiro -Wilk test and the appropriate t -test or non -
parametric alternative will be used. The equivalence range will be set at ( -2, 2).  
 
Other measures of c ognitive impairment will follow similar an alyses, but will not be 
considered the primary endpoint.  Equivalence ranges will be determined for each 
measure based on available literature prior to data analysis.  
 
7.4.2 Summary of efficacy data  
 
The first seco ndary objective of this project is to assess the efficacy of mirabegron for 
treating OAB symptoms in PD with CI.  The hypothesis is that participants in the 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 48 - of 96 
 treatment group will experience improved OAB symptoms compared to  placebo group.  
As this is a supe riority objective, a 2 -sample t -test or the Mann -Whitney -Wilcoxon test 
will be used as appropriate to determine significant differences between treatment groups 
on change in OABQ subscale scores from visit 3 to visit 7.  Other measures of OAB 
symptoms (inc luding PPBC and the average daily values from the diary) will follow 
similar analyses.  
 
The rest of the s econdary objectives are to assess efficacy of mirabegron in PD and the 
impact of mirabegron on other non -motor symptoms in PD  including health related  
quality of life and  excessive daytime sleepiness in PD patients with OAB symptoms and 
CI.  The related hypotheses are that mirabegron will not impact these non -motor 
symptoms.  The goal is to demonstrate equivalent non -motor symptoms prior to and 
followin g treatment with mirabegron as well as change compared to the placebo group.  
Tests of equivalence will be performed using the two one -sided tests approach on change 
from visit 3 to visit 7 in related variables within groups as well as between the two 
groups.  Equivalence ranges will be determined for each measure based on available 
literature prior to data analysis.  
 
7.4.3 Summary of exploratory data  
 
The exploratory objectives are to assess effects of mirabegron on orthostatic changes in 
blood pressure, depressive and anxiety symptomatology, excessive salivation, 
constipation and PD motor symptom severity in PD patients with OAB symptoms and CI.  
The related hypotheses are that mirabegron will not impact these symptoms.  The goal is 
to demonstrate equivale nt symptoms prior to and following treatment with mirabegron as 
well as change compared to the placebo group.  Tests of equivalence will be performed 
using the two one -sided tests approach on change from visit 3 to visit 7 in related 
variables within group s as well as between the two groups.  Equivalence ranges will be 
determined for each measure based on available literature prior to data analysis.  
 
7.4.4 Summary of safety data  
 
Safety data  and adverse events  will be summarized , overall and by group , prior  to each 
DSMB meeting and reported in the final study report.  
 
7.4.5  Interim analysis  
Interim analyses will not be conducted.  
 
7.4.6  Subject replacement policy  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 49 - of 96 
 Subjects who withdraw consent or are withdrawn from the study prior to randomization 
(complete  visit 3) will be replaced. After randomization (visit 3), subjects will not be 
replaced.  
 
8.0 STUDY DOCUMENTATION, CRF, AND RECORD KEEPING  
 
8.1 Case report forms  
 
Data will be collected on case report forms (CRFs). All the information collected during 
the study will identify subjects by unique subject identification number and subject 
initials.  
 
8.2 Management  of data  
 
All the information collected during the study will be recorded on CRFs identified by 
subject initials and subject ID number, for each sub ject enrolled. It is the responsibility of 
the Investigator s to ensure that the CRFs are properly and completely filled in.  
 
The following regulation s will be followed:  
 FDA 21CRF part 11 rule  
 ICH, Good Clinical Practice, Consolidated guideline  
 
8.3 Monitor ing 
 
Study monitoring will be conducted according to a monitoring plan.  
 
9.0 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES  
 
9.1 Compliance with Good Clinical Practice, and ethical considerations  
 
All aspects of the study will be carefully monitored with respect to Good Clinic al 
Practices (GCP) and SOPs for compliance with applicable government regulations. Study 
monitoring will be conducted according to a monitoring plan.  This study will be 
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov.  
 
9.2 Confidentiality of subject information  
 
All s ubject data will be identified only by a unique subject identification number and 
subject initials. However, all laboratory testing will be conducted at Park Nicollet Health 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 50 - of 96 
 Services, Methodist Hospital Laboratory. Patient identifiers, including name, medi cal 
record number, and birth date, will be included on all lab samples sent to the Laboratory.  
 
The subject’s personal data (e.g. name and address) will be blinded  in all data analyses.  
 
9.3 Protocol amendments  
 
Changes to the protocol will be approved b y the IRB prior to implementation of the 
revisions.  
 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 51 - of 96 
 10 REFERENCES  
 
1. Morgante L, Rocca WA, Di Rosa AE, et al, Sicilian Neuro -Epidemiologic Study 
(SNES) Group. Prevalence of Parkinson’s disease and other types of parkinsonism: a 
door-to-door survey in three Sicilian municipalities. Neurology. 1992;42:1901 -1907.  
2. Tanner CM, Thelen JA, Offord KP, Rademacher D, Goetz CG, Kurland LT. 
Parkinson’s disease (PD) incidence in Olmsted County, MN: 1935 -1988 [abstract]. 
Neurology. 1992;42(suppl 3):194. Abstract 1 98S. 
3.  Lim SY, Lang AE. The nonmotor symptoms of Parkinson's disease --an overview. 
Mov Disord. 2010;25 Suppl 1:S123 -30. 
4. Sakakibara R, Tateno F, Kishi M, Tsuyuzaki Y, Uchiyama T, Yamamoto T. 
Pathophysiology of bladder dysfunction in Parkinson's disease . Neurobiol Dis. 
2012;46(3):565 -71. 
5. Uchiyama T, Sakakibara R, Yamamoto T, Ito T, Yamaguchi C, Awa Y, Yanagisawa 
M, Higuchi Y, Sato Y, Ichikawa T, Yamanishi T, Hattori T, Kuwabara S. Urinary 
dysfunction in early and untreated Parkinson's disease. J Neuro l Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2011 ;82(12):1382 -6. 
6. Tapia CI, Khalaf K, Berenson K, Globe D, Chancellor M, Carr LK. Health -related 
quality of life and economic impact of urinary incontinence due to detrusor 
overactivity associated with a neurologic condition: a  systematic review. Health Qual 
Life Outcomes. 2013;11:13.  
7. Parashos SA, Johnson ML, Erickson -Davis C, Wielinski CL. Assessing cognition in 
Parkinson disease: use of the cognitive linguistic quick test . J Geriatr Psychiatry 
Neurol 2 009;22:228 -234. 
8. Rah man S, Griffin HJ, Quinn NP, Jahanshahi M. Quality of life in Parkinson's disease: 
the relative importance of the symptoms. Mov Disord  2008;23:1428 -1434.  
9. Giladi N, Treves TA, Paleacu D, Shabtai H, Orlov Y, Kandinov B, Simon ES, Korczyn 
AD. Risk factors for dementia, depression and psychosis in long -standing Parkinson’s 
disease. J Neural Transm 2000;107:59 -71. 
10. Aarsland D, Andersen K, Larsen JP, Lolk A, Nielsen H, Kragh -Sorensen P. Risk of 
dementia in Parkinson’s disease: a community -based, prospective  study. Neurology 
2001;56:730 -6. 
11. Parashos SA, Maraganore DM, O’Brien PC, Rocca WA. Medical services utilization 
and prognosis in Parkinson’s disease: a population -based study. Mayo Clin Proc 
2002;77:918 -25. 
12. Wielinski CL, Erickson -Davis C, Wichmann R, Walde -Douglas M, Parashos SA. 
Falls and injuries resulting from falls among patients with Parkinson’s disease and 
other parkinsonian syndromes. Mov Disord 2005;20:410 -5. 
13. Jost WH. Urological problems in Parkinson's disease: clinical aspects. J Neural  
Transm. 2013;120(4):587 -91. 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 52 - of 96 
 14. Donnellan CA, Fook L, McDonald P, Playfer JR. Oxybutynin and cognitive 
dysfunction. BMJ. 1997;315(7119):1363 -4. 
15. Pagoria D, O'Connor RC, Guralnick ML. Antimuscarinic drugs: review of the 
cognitive impact when used to tre at overactive bladder in elderly patients. Curr Urol 
Rep. 2011;12(5):351 -7. 
16. Giannantoni A, Rossi A, Mearini E, Del Zingaro M, Porena M, Berardelli A. 
Botulinum toxin A for overactive bladder and detrusor muscle overactivity in patients 
with Parkinson's  disease and multiple system atrophy. J Urol. 2009;182(4):1453 -7. 
17. Cui Y, Zong H, Yang C, Yan H, Zhang Y. The efficacy and safety of mirabegron in 
treating OAB: a systematic review and meta -analysis of phase III trials. Int Urol 
Nephrol. 201 4;46(1):275 -84. 
18. Khullar V, Amarenco G, Angulo JC, Cambronero J, Høye  K, Milsom I, Radziszewski 
P, Rechberger T, Boerrigter P, Drogendijk T, Wooning M, Chapple C. Efficacy and 
tolerability of mirabegron, a β(3) -adrenoceptor agonist, in patients with overactive 
bladder: results from a randomised European -Australian  phase 3 t rial.  Eur Urol. 
2013 ;63(2):283 -95. 
19. Nitti VW, Auerbach S, Martin N, Calhoun A, Lee M, Herschorn S. Results of a 
randomized phase III trial of mirabegron in patients with overactive bladder. J Urol. 
2013;189(4):1388 -95. 
20. Herschorn S, Barkin J, Castro -Diaz D, Frankel JM, Espuna -Pons M, Gousse AE, 
Stölzel M, Martin N, Gunther A, Van Kerrebroeck P. A phase III, randomized, 
double -blind, parallel -group, placebo -controlled, multicentre study to assess the 
efficacy and safety of the β ₃ adrenoceptor agonist,  mirabegron, in patients with 
symptoms of overactive bladder. Urology. 2013;82(2):313 -20. 
21. Chapple CR, Kaplan SA, Mitcheson D, Klecka J, Cummings J, Drogendijk T, 
Dorrepaal C, Martin N. Randomized double -blind, active -controlled phase 3 study to 
assess 12-month safety and efficacy of mirabegron, a β(3) -adrenoceptor agonist, in 
overactive bladder. Eur Urol. 2013 ;63(2):296 -305. 
22. Chapple CR, Cardozo L, Nitti VW, Siddiqui E, Michel MC. Mirabegron in overactive 
bladder: a review of efficacy, safety, and to lerability. Neurourol Urodyn. 
2014;33(1):17 -30. 
23. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bédirian V, Charbonneau S, Whitehead V, Collin I, 
Cummings JL, Chertkow H. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief 
screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am G eriatr Soc. 2005;53(4):695 -9. 
24. Gill DJ, Freshman A, Blender JA, Ravina B. The Montreal cognitive assessment as a 
screening tool for cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 
2008;23(7):1043 -6. 
25. Dalrymple -Alford JC, MacAskill MR, Nakas CT, Livingston L, Graham C, Crucian 
GP, Melzer TR, Kirwan J, Keenan R, Wells S, Porter RJ, Watts R, Anderson TJ. The 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 53 - of 96 
 MoCA: well -suited screen for cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease.Neurology. 
2010;75(19):1717 -25. 
26. Nasreddine  ZS Normative Data http://www.mocatest.org/default.asp 2003 -2014 . 
27. Rossetti HC, Lacritz LH, Cullum CM, Weiner MF. Normative data for the Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) in a population -based sample. Neurolo gy. 
2011;77(13):1272 -5. 
28. Gibb WR, Lees AJ. A comparison of clinical and pathological features of young - and 
old-onset Parkinson's disease. Neurology. 1988 Sep;38(9):1402 -6. 
29. Robertson, I., Ward, T., Ridgeway, V. & Nimmo -Smith, I. (1994). The Test of 
Everyday Attention. Thames Valley Test Company: Bury St Edmunds.  
30. Brandt, J. The Hopkins Verbal Learning Test: Development of a new memory test 
with six equivalent fo rms. Clinical Neuropsychologist. 1991; 5:125–142. 
31. Brandt J., Benedict R. H. B. (2001 ) Hopkins Verbal Learning Test —Revised, 
professional manual. Lutz, FL: Psycholo gical Assessment Resources . 
32. Partington JE, Leiter RG. Partington’s Pathway Test. The Psychological Service 
Center Bulletin 1949;I:9 -20. 
33. Coyne K, Revicki D, Hunt T, Corey  R, Stewart W, Bentkover J, Kurth H, Abrams P.  
Psychometric validation of an overactive bladder symptom and health -related quality 
of life questionnaire: The OAB -q. Qual Life Res 2002; 11:563 -574. 
34. Iacovelli E, Gilio F, Meco G, Fattapposta F, Vanacore N , Brusa L, Giacomelli E, 
Gabriele M, Rubino A, Locuratolo N, Iani C, Pichiorri F, Colosimo C, Carbone A, 
Palleschi G, Inghilleri M. Bladder symptoms assessed with overactive bladder 
questionnaire in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 2010 ;25(9):1203 -9. 
35. Coyne KS, Matza LS, Kopp Z, Abrams P: The validation of the patient perception of 
bladder condition (PPBC): A single -item global measure for patients with overactive 
bladder. Eur Urol 2006; 49: 1079 -1086.  
36. Calne S, Schulzer M, Mak E, Guyette C, et al. Va lidating a quality of life rating scale 
for idiopathic parkinsonism: Parkinson’s Impact Scale (PIMS). Parkinsonism Relat 
Disor dRe 1996;2(2):55 -61. 
37. Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: the Epworth sleepiness 
scale. Sleep. 1991; 14(6): 540-5. 
38. Santamaria J.  How to evaluate excessive daytime sleepiness in Parkinson’s disease. 
Neurology. 2004; 63(8 Suppl 3):S21 -3. 
39. Brown RG, Dittner A, Findley L, Wessely SC. The Parkinson fatigue scale. 
Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2005;11:49 -55. 
40. Aronow WS, Fleg JL, Pepine CJ, Artinian NT, Bakris G, et al. ACCF/AHA 2011 
expert consensus document on hypertension in the elderly: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus 
Documents developed in coll aboration with the American Academy of Neurology, 
American Geriatrics Society, American Society for Preventive Cardiology, American 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 54 - of 96 
 Society of Hypertension, American Society of Nephrology, Association of Black 
Cardiologists, and European Society of Hyperte nsion. J Am Soc Hypertens 2011; 
5(4):259 -352.  
41. Beck AT. 1996. Beck depression inventory. San Antonio:Psychological Corporation.  
42. Marsella AJ, Sanborn KO, Kamboka V, Shizuri L, Brennan J. Cross -validation of 
self-report measures of depression among n ormal populations of Japanese, Chinese, 
and Caucasian ancestry. Journal of Clinical Psychology 1974;30:281 -287. 
43. Beck AT, Brown G, Epstein N, Steer RA, 1988. An inventory for measuring clinical 
anxiety: Psychometric properties. Journal of Consulting and  Clinical Psychology. 
56:893 -897.)  
44. Sharma S and Agarwal BB. Scoring systems in evaluation of constipation and 
obstructed defecation syndrome (ODS).  JIMSA 2012;25(1):57 -59. 
45. Fahn S, Elton R. Unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale. IN: Fahn S, Marsd en CD, 
Calne D, Goldstein M, editors. Recent Developments in Parkinson’s Disease. New 
Jersey: Macmillan Health Care Information; 1987, p. 153 -163.  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 55 - of 96 
 APPENDIX I: Myrbe triq® Full Prescribing Information  (Prescribing information 
from  astellas.com)   
 
FULL PRE SCRIBING INFORMATION: CONTENTS*  
1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE  
2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION  
2.1 Dosing Information  
2.2 Dose Adjustments in Specific Populations  
3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS  
4 CONTRAINDICATIONS  
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS  
5.1 Increases in Blood Press ure 
5.2 Urinary Retention in Patients with Bladder Outlet Obstruction and in  Patients Taking 
Antimuscarinic Medications for OAB  
5.3 Patients Taking Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6  
6 ADVERSE REACTIONS  
6.1 Clinical Trials Experience  
6.2 Postmarketing Experience  
7 DRUG INTERACTIONS  
7.1 Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6  
7.2 Digoxin  
7.3 Warfarin  
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS  
8.1 Pregnancy  
8.3 Nursing Mothers  
8.4 Pediatric Use  
8.5 Geriatric Use  
8.6 Renal Impairment  
8.7 Hepatic Impairment  
8.8 Gender  
10 OVERDOSAGE  
11 DESCRIP TION  
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY  
12.1 Mechanism of Action  
12.2 Pharmacodynamics  
12.3 Pharmacokinetics  
13 NONCLINICAL TOXICOLOGY  
13.1 Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility  
14 CLINICAL STUDIES  
16 HOW SUPPLIED/STORAGE AND HANDLING  
17 PATIENT COUNS ELING INFORMATION  
*Sections or subsections omitted from the full prescribing information are not listed  
 
FULL PRESCRIBING INFORMATION  
1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE  
Myrbetriq® is a beta -3 adrenergic agonist indicated for the treatment of overactive bladder (OAB) with 
symptoms of  urge urinary incontinence, urgency, and urinary frequency.  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 56 - of 96 
 2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION  
2.1 Dosing Information  
The recommended starting dose of Myrbetriq is 25 mg once daily with or without food. Myrbetriq 25 mg is 
effective  within 8 weeks . Based on individual patient efficacy and tolerability the dose may be increased to 
50 mg once daily  [see Clinical Studies (14)] . 
Myrbetriq should be taken with water, swallowed whole and should not be chewed, divided, or crushed.  
2.2 Dose Adjustments in Specific Populations  
The daily dose of Myrbetriq should not exceed 25 mg once daily in the following populations:  
 Patients with severe renal impairment (CL cr 15 to 29 mL/min or eGFR 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m2) 
[see Use in  Specific Populations (8.6) and Clinic al Pharmacology (12.3)] . 
 Patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh Class B) [see Use in Specific Populations 
(8.7) and  Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)] . 
Myrbetriq is not recommended for use in patients with end stage renal disease (ESRD), or in pa tients with 
severe  hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh Class C) [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6, 8.7) and Clinical 
Pharmacology  (12.3)] . 
 
3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS  
Myrbetriq extended -release tablets are supplied in two different strengths as described below:  
 25 mg oval, brown, film coated tablet, debossed with the (Astellas logo) and “325”  
 50 mg oval, yellow, film coated tablet, debossed with the (Astellas logo) and “355”  
 
4 CONTRAINDICATIONS  
None.  
 
5 WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS  
5.1 Increases in Blood Pres sure 
Myrbetriq can increase blood pressure. Periodic blood pressure determinations are recommended, 
especially in  hypertensive patients. Myrbetriq is not recommended for use in patients with severe 
uncontrolled hypertension  (defined as systolic blood press ure greater than or equal to 180 mm Hg and/or 
diastolic blood pressure greater than or  equal to 110 mm Hg) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].  
 
In two, randomized, placebo -controlled, healthy volunteer studies, Myrbetriq was associated with dose -
related  increases in supine blood pressure. In these studies, at the maximum recommended dose of 50 mg, 
the mean  maximum increase in systolic/diastolic blood pressure was approximately 3.5/1.5 mmHg greater 
than placebo.  
 
In contrast, in OAB patients in clinical tria ls, the mean increase in systolic and diastolic blood pressure at 
the maximum recommended dose of 50 mg was approximately 0.5 - 1 mmHg greater than placebo. 
Worsening of preexisting  hypertension was reported infrequently in Myrbetriq patients.  
 
5.2 Urinary  Retention in Patients with Bladder Outlet Obstruction and in Patients Taking  
Antimuscarinic Medications for OAB  
Urinary retention in patients with bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) and in patients taking antimuscarinic 
medications  for the treatment of OAB has been reported in postmarketing experience in patients taking 
mirabegron. A controlled  clinical safety study in patients with BOO did not demonstrate increased urinary 
retention in Myrbetriq patients;  however, Myrbetriq should be administered with cauti on to patients with 
clinically significant BOO. Myrbetriq  should also be administered with caution to patients taking 
antimuscarinic medications for the treatment of OAB [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 57 - of 96 
 5.3 Patients Taking Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6  
Since mirabegron is a moderate CYP2D6 inhibitor, the systemic exposure to CYP2D6 substrates such as 
metoprolol  and desipramine is increased when co -administered with mirabegron. Therefore, appropriate 
monitoring and dose  adjustment may be necessary, especial ly with narrow therapeutic index drugs 
metabolized by CYP2D6, such as  thioridazine, flecainide, and propafenone [see Drug Interactions (7.1) 
and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)] . 
 
6 ADVERSE REACTIONS  
6.1 Clinical Trials Experience  
Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in 
the clinical  trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and 
may not reflect the rates  observed in clinical practice.  
 
In three, 12 week, double -blind, placebo -controlled, safety and efficacy studies in patients with overactive 
bladder  (Studies 1, 2, and 3), Myrbetriq was evaluated for safety in 2736 patients [ see Clinical Studies 
(14)]. Study 1 also  included an active control. For the combined Studies 1, 2, and 3, 432 patients received 
Myrbetriq 25 mg, 1375  received Myrbetriq 50 mg, and 929 received Myrbetriq 100 mg once daily. In these 
studies, the majority of the  patients were Caucasian (94%), and female (72%) with a mean age of 5 9 years 
(range 18 to 95 years).  
 
Myrbetriq was also evaluated for safety in 1632 patients who received Myrbetriq 50 mg once daily (n=812 
patients)  or Myrbetriq 100 mg (n=820 patients) in a 1 year, randomized, fixed dose, double -blind, active 
controlled, sa fety study in patients with overactive bladder (Study 4). Of these patients, 731 received 
Myrbetriq in a previous 12 week  study. In Study 4, 1385 patients received Myrbetriq continuously for at 
least 6 months, 1311 patients received  Myrbetriq for at least 9 months, and 564 patients received Myrbetriq 
for at least 1 year.  
 
The most frequent adverse events (0.2%) leading to discontinuation in Studies 1, 2 and 3 for the 25 mg or 
50 mg  dose were nausea, headache, hypertension, diarrhea, constipation, dizziness and tachycardia.  
 
Atrial fibrillation (0.2%) and prostate cancer (0.1%) were reported as serious advers e events by more than 1 
patient and at a rate greater than placebo.  
 
Table 1 lists adverse reactions, derived from all adverse events that were reported in Studies 1, 2 and 3 at 
an incidence greater than placebo and in 1% or more of patients treated with Myrbetriq 25 mg or 50 mg 
once daily for  up to 12 weeks. The most commonly reported adverse reactions (greater than 2% of 
Myrbetriq patients and greater  than placebo) were hypertension, nasopharyngitis, urinary tract infection and 
headache.  
 
Table 1: Percentages of Patients with Adverse Reactions, Derived fro m All Adverse Events, 
Exceeding Placebo Rate and Reported by 1% or More Patients Treated With Myrbetr iq 25 mg or 50 
mg Once Daily in  Studies 1, 2, and 3  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 58 - of 96 
  
 
Other adverse reactions reported by less than 1% of patients treated with Myrbetriq in Studies 1, 2, or 3 
included:  
 
Cardiac disorders: palpitations, blood pressure increased [see Clinical Pharmacology  (12.2)]  
Eye Disorders: glaucoma [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)]  
Gastrointestinal disorders: dyspepsia, gastritis, abdominal distension  
Infections and Infestations: sinusitis, rhinitis  
Investigations: GGT increased, AST increased, ALT increased, LDH inc reased  
Renal and urinary disorders : nephrolithiasis, bladder pain  
Reproductive system and breast disorders: vulvovaginal pruritis, vaginal infection  
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders: urticaria, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, rash, pruritus, purpura, li p 
edema  
 
Table 2 lists the rates of the most commonly reported adverse reactions, derived from all adverse events in 
patients  treated with Myrbetriq 50 mg for up to 52 weeks in Study 4. The most commonly reported adverse 
reactions (>3%  of Myrbetriq patient s) were hypertension, urinary tract infection, headache, and 
nasopharyngitis.  
 
Table 2: Percentages of Patients with Adverse Reactions, Derived from all Adverse Events, Reported 
by Greater Than 2% of Patients Treated With Myrbetriq 50 mg Once Daily in Stu dy 4 
 
In Study 4, in patients treated with Myrbetriq 50 mg once daily, adverse reactions leading to 
discontinuation reported  by more than 2 patients and at a rate greater than active control included: 
constipation (0.9%), headache (0.6%),  dizziness (0.5%),  hypertension (0.5%), dry eyes (0.4%), nausea 
(0.4%), vision blurred (0.4%), and urinary tract  infection (0.4%). Serious adverse events reported by at 

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 59 - of 96 
 least 2 patients and exceeding active control included  cerebrovascular accident (0.4%) and osteoarthritis  
(0.2%). Serum ALT/AST increased from baseline by greater than  10-fold in 2 patients (0.3%) taking 
Myrbetriq 50 mg, and these markers subsequently returned to baseline while both  patients continued 
Myrbetriq.   
 
In Study 4, serious adverse events of neoplas m were reported by 0.1%, 1.3%, and 0.5% of patients treated 
with Myrbetriq 50 mg, Myrbetriq 100 mg and active control once daily, respectively. Neoplasms reported 
by 2 patients  treated with Myrbetriq 100 mg included breast cancer, lung neoplasm malignant a nd prostate 
cancer.  
 
In a separate clinical study in Japan, a single case was reported as Stevens -Johnson syndrome with 
increased serum  ALT, AST and bilirubin in a patient taking Myrbetriq 100 mg as well as an herbal 
medication (Kyufu Gold).  
 
6.2 Postmarke ting Experience  
Because these spontaneously reported events are from the worldwide postmarketing experience, from a 
population of  uncertain size, the frequency of events and the role of mirabegron in their causation cannot be 
reliably determined.  The follo wing events have been reported in association with mirabegron use in 
worldwide postmarketing experience:  
 
Urologic : urinary retention [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]  
 
7 DRUG INTERACTIONS  
Drug interaction studies were conducted to investigate the effec t of co -administered drugs on the 
pharmacokinetics  of mirabegron and the effect of mirabegron on the pharmacokinetics of co -administered 
drugs (e.g., ketoconazole,  rifampin, solifenacin, tamsulosin, and oral contraceptives) [see Clinical 
Pharmacology (12.3 )]. No dose adjustment  is recommended when these drugs are co -administered with 
mirabegron.  
 
The following are drug interactions for which monitoring is recommended:  
 
7.1 Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6  
Since mirabegron is a moderate CYP2D6 inhibitor, the syst emic exposure of drugs metabolized by 
CYP2D6 enzyme  such as metoprolol and desipramine is increased when co -administered with mirabegron. 
Therefore, appropriate  monitoring and dose adjustment may be necessary when Myrbetriq is co -
administered with these dr ugs, especially  with narrow therapeutic index CYP2D6 substrates, such as 
thioridazine, flecainide, and propafenone [see Warnings  and Precautions (5.3) and Clinical Pharmacology 
(12.3)] . 
 
7.2 Digoxin  
When given in combination, mirabegron increased mean digo xin C max from 1.01 to 1.3 ng/mL (29%) and 
AUC from 16.7 to 19.3 ng.h/mL (27%). Therefore, for patients who are initiating a combination of 
mirabegron and digoxin, the  lowest dose for digoxin should initially be considered. Serum digoxin 
concentrations shou ld be monitored and used  for titration of the digoxin dose to obtain the desired clinical 
effect [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].  
 
7.3 Warfarin  
The mean C max of S- and R -warfarin was increased by approximately 4% and AUC by approximately 9% 
when  adminis tered as a single dose of 25 mg after multiple doses of 100 mg mirabegron. Following a 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 60 - of 96 
 single dose  administration of 25 mg warfarin, mirabegron had no effect on the warfarin pharmacodynamic 
endpoints such as  International Normalized Ratio (INR) and prothro mbin time. However, the effect of 
mirabegron on multiple doses of  warfarin and on warfarin pharmacodynamic end points such as INR and 
prothrombin time has not been fully  investigated [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)] . 
 
8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS  
8.1 Pr egnancy  
Pregnancy Category C  
There are no adequate and well -controlled studies using Myrbetriq in pregnant women. Myrbetriq should 
be used  during pregnancy only if the potential benefit to the patient outweighs the risk to the patient and 
fetus. Women who  become pregnant during Myrbetriq treatment are encouraged to contact their physician.  
 
Risk Summary  
Based on animal data, mirabegron is predicted to have a low probability of  increasing the risk of adverse 
developmental outcomes above background risk. Reve rsible adverse devel opmental findings consisting of 
delayed ossification and wavy ribs in rats and decreased fetal body weights in rabbits occurr ed at exposures 
greater than or equal to 22 and 14 times, respectively, the maximal recommended human dose (MRH D). At 
maternally toxic  exposures decreased fetal weights were observed in rats and rabbits, and fetal death, 
dilated aorta, and cardiomegaly  were reported in rabbits.  
 
Animal Data  
In the rat embryo/fetal developmental toxicity study, pregnant rats receive d daily oral doses of mirabegron 
at 0, 10,  30, 100, or 300 mg/kg from implantation to closure of the fetal hard palate (7th to 17th day of 
gestation). Maternal  systemic exposures were approximately 0, 1, 6, 22, or 96 times greater than exposures 
in women t reated at the  MRHD of 50 mg based on AUC. No embryo/fetal toxicities were observed in rats 
exposed up to 6 times the human  systemic exposure at the MRHD of 50 mg. At systemic exposures equal 
to or greater than 22 times the human  systemic exposure at the MR HD, delayed ossification and wavy ribs 
were observed in fetuses at an increased  incidence. These findings were reversible.  
 
In the rabbit embryo/fetal developmental toxicity study, pregnant rabbits received daily oral doses of 
mirabegron at  0, 3, 10, or 30  mg/kg from implantation to closure of the fetal hard palate (6th to 20th day of 
gestation). Maternal  systemic exposures were 0, 1, 14, or 36 times that in women treated at the MRHD of 
50 mg based on AUC. The  embryo/fetal No Adverse Effect Level (NOAEL) wa s similar to the exposure in 
women at the MRHD and was  established in this species based on reduced fetal body weight observed at 
systemic exposures that were 14 -fold higher than the human systemic exposure at MRHD. At higher doses, 
where systemic exposure s were 36 -fold higher  than the human exposure at MRHD, maternal body weight 
gain and food consumption were reduced, one of 17  pregnant rabbits died, the incidence of fetal death 
increased, and fetal findings of dilated aorta and cardiomegaly  were reported.  
 
The effects of mirabegron on prenatal and postnatal development was assessed in pregnant rats dosed at 0, 
10, 30, or  100 mg/kg/day from the seventh day of gestation until 20 days after birth. Maternal systemic 
exposures were 0, 1, 6,  and 22 times the exp osure in women at the MRHD based on AUC. Rat pups 
exposed to mirabegron in utero and  through 21 days of lactation had no discernable adverse effects at 
maternal systemic exposures 6 times the MRHD.  A slight but statistically significant decrease in the 
survival of pups was observed 4 days after birth at exposures 22  times the MRHD (92.7% survival) 
compared to the control group (98.8%), however, there was no effect on survival  of pups 21 days after 
birth. Absolute body weight of pups was not affected on the day of birth. However, at the 30  mg/kg dose 
(22-fold higher systemic exposure than humans at MHRD) body weight gain of pups was reduced 5% to  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 61 - of 96 
 13% from postnatal day 4 to 7 but not throughout the remainder of the lactation period. In utero and 
lactational exposure did not affect behavior or fertility of offspring at exposures up to 22 times the MRHD.  
 
8.3 Nursing Mothers  
It is not known whether Myrbetriq is excreted in human milk. Mirabegron was found in the milk of rats at  
concentrations twice the maternal plasma level. Mirabegron was found in the lungs , liver, and kidneys of 
nursing pups. No studies have been conducted to assess the impact of Myrbetriq on milk production in 
humans, its presence  in human breast milk, or its effects on the breast -fed child. B ecause Myrbetriq is 
predicted to be excreted in human  milk and because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing 
infants, a decision should be made whether  to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into 
account the importanc e of the drug to the mother.  
 
8.4 Pediatric Use  
The safety and effectiveness of Myrbetriq in pediatric patients have not been established.  
 
8.5 Geriatric Use  
No dose adjustment is necessary for the elderly. The pharmacokinetics of Myrbetriq is not signific antly 
influenced  by age [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)] . Of 5648 patients who received Myrbetriq in the 
phase 2 and 3 studies,  2029 (35.9%) were 65 years of age or older, and 557 (9.9%) were 75 years of age or 
older. No overall differences in  safety or effectiveness were observed between patients younger than 65 
years of age and those 65 years of age or  older in these studies.  
 
8.6 Renal Impairment  
Myrbetriq has not been studied in patients with end stage renal disease (CL cr <15 mL/min or  eGFR <15 
mL/min /1.73 m2 or patients requiring hemodialysis), and, therefore is not recommended for use in these  
patient populations.  In patients with severe renal impairment (CL cr 15 to 29 mL/min or eGFR 15 to 29 
mL/min/1.73 m2), the daily dose  of Myrbetriq should not ex ceed 25 mg. No dose adjustment is necessary in 
patients with mild or moderate renal  impairment (CL cr 30 to 89 mL/min or eGFR 30 to 89 mL/min/1.73 m2) 
[see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)] . 
 
8.7 Hepatic Impairment  
Myrbetriq has not been studied in patients wit h severe hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh Class C), and 
therefore is not  recommended for use in this patient population.  
 
In patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh Class B), the daily dose of Myrbetriq should not 
exceed  25 mg. No dose adjustme nt is necessary in patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh Class 
A) [see Clinical  Pharmacology (12.3)] . 
 
8.8 Gender  
No dose adjustment is necessary based on gender. When corrected for differences in body weight, the 
Myrbetriq  systemic exposure is  20% to 30% higher in females compared to males.  
 
10 OVERDOSAGE  
Mirabegron has been administered to healthy volunteers at single doses up to 400 mg. At this dose, adverse 
events  reported included palpitations (1 of 6 subjects) and increased pulse rate exce eding 100 bpm (3 of 6 
subjects).  Multiple doses of mirabegron up to 300 mg daily for 10 days showed increases in pulse rate and 
systolic blood  pressure when administered to healthy volunteers. Treatment for overdosage should be 
symptomatic and supportive.  In the event of overdosage, pulse rate, blood pressure and ECG monitoring is 
recommended.  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 62 - of 96 
  
11 DESCRIPTION  
Mirabegron is a beta -3 adrenergic agonist. The chemical name is 2 -(2-aminothiazol -4-yl)-N-[4-(2-{[(2R) -
2-hydroxy -2-phenylethyl]amino}ethyl)phenyl]ace tamide having an empirical formula of C 21H24N4O2S and 
a molecular weight  of 396.51. The structural formula of mirabegron is:  
 
Mirabegron is a white powder. It is practically insoluble in water (0.082 mg/mL). It is soluble in methanol 
and dimethyl sulfoxide . 
 
Each Myrbetriq extended release tablet, for oral administration contains either 25 mg or 50 mg of 
mirabegron and  the following inactive ingredients: polyethylene oxide, polyethylene glycol, hydroxypropyl 
cellulose, butylated  hydroxytoluene, magnesium st earate, hypromellose, yellow ferric oxide, and red ferric 
oxide (25 mg tablet only).  
 
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY  
12.1 Mechanism of Action  
Mirabegron is an agonist of the human beta -3 adrenergic receptor (AR) as demonstrated by in vitro 
laboratory  experiments  using the cloned human beta -3 AR. Mirabegron relaxes the detrusor smooth muscle 
during the storage  phase of the urinary bladder fill -void cycle by activation of beta -3 AR which increases 
bladder capacity. A lthough  mirabegron showed very low intrinsic acti vity for cloned human beta -1 AR and 
beta-2 AR, results in humans  indicate that beta -1 AR stimulation occurred at a mirabegron dose of 200 mg.  
 
12.2 Pharmacodynamics  
Urodynamics  
The effects of Myrbetriq on maximum urinary flow rate and detrusor pressure at maximum flow rate were 
assessed  in a urodynamic study consisting of 200 male patients with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) 
and BOO.  Administration of Myrbetriq once daily for 12 weeks did not adversely affect the mean 
maximum flow rate or mean  detrusor  pressure at maximum flow rate in this study. Nonetheless, Myrbetriq 
should be administered with caution to  patients with clinically significant BOO [see Warnings and 
Precautions (5.2)] . 
 
Cardiac Electrophysiology  
The effect of multiple doses of Myrbetriq 50 mg, 100 mg and 200 mg once daily on QTc interval was 
evaluated in a  randomized, placebo - and active - controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) four -treatment -arm 
parallel crossover study in  352 healthy subjects. In a study with demonstrated ability to detect sma ll effects, 
the upper bound of the one -sided  95% confidence interval for the largest placebo adjusted, baseline -
corrected QTc based on individual correction  method (QTcI) was below 10 msec. For the 50 mg Myrbetriq 
dose group (the maximum approved dosage), the mean  difference from placebo on QTcI interval at 4 -5 
hours post -dose was 3.7 msec (upper bound of the 95% CI 5.1  msec).  
 
For the Myrbetriq 100 mg and 200 mg doses groups (dosages greater than the maximum approved dose and 
resulting  in substantial multi ples of the anticipated maximum blood levels at 50 mg), the mean differences 
from placebo in  QTcI interval at 4 -5 hours post -dose were 6.1 msec (upper bound of the 95% CI 7.6 msec) 

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 63 - of 96 
 and 8.1 msec (upper  bound of the 95% CI 9.8 msec), respectively. At the Myr betriq 200 mg dose, in 
females, the mean effect was  10.4 msec (upper bound of the 95% CI 13.4 msec).  
 
In this thorough QT study, Myrbetriq increased heart rate on ECG in a dose dependent manner. Maximum 
mean  increases from baseline in heart rate for the 50  mg, 100 mg, and 200 mg dose groups compared to 
placebo were  6.7 beats per minutes (bpm), 11 bpm, and 17 bpm, respectively. In the clinical efficacy and 
safety studies, the  change from baseline in mean pulse rate for Myrbetriq 50 mg was approximately 1 bpm . 
In this thorough QT study,  Myrbetriq also increased blood pressure in a dose dependent manner (see Effects 
on Blood Pressure ). 
 
Effects on Blood Pressure  
In a study of 352 healthy subjects assessing the effect of multiple daily doses of 50 mg, 100 mg, an d 200 
mg of  Myrbetriq for 10 days on the QTc interval, the maximum mean increase in supine SBP/DBP at the 
maximum  recommended dose of 50 mg was approximately 4.0/1.6 mmHg greater than placebo. The 24 -
hour average increases  in SBP compared to placebo were 3 .0, 5.5, and 9.7 mmHg at Myrbetriq doses of 50 
mg, 100 mg and 200 mg,  respectively. Increases in DBP were also dose -dependent, but were smaller than 
SBP.  
 
In another study in 96 healthy subjects to assess the impact of age on pharmacokinetics of multiple d aily 
doses of  50 mg, 100 mg, 200 mg, and 300 mg of Myrbetriq for 10 days, SBP also increased in a dose -
dependent manner. The  mean maximum increases in SBP were approximately 2.5, 4.5, 5.5 and 6.5 mmHg 
for Myrbetriq exposures  associated with doses of 50 mg,  100 mg, 200 mg and 300 mg, respectively.  
 
In three, 12 -week, double -blind, placebo -controlled, safety and efficacy studies (Studies 1, 2 and 3) in OAB 
patients  receiving Myrbetriq 25 mg, 50 mg, or 100 mg once daily, mean increases in SBP/DBP compared 
to placebo of  approximately 0.5 - 1 mmHg were observed. Morning SBP increased by at least 15 mmHg 
from baseline in 5.3%,  5.1%, and 6.7% of placebo, Myrbetriq 25 mg and Myrbetriq 50 mg patients, 
respectively. Morning DBP increased  by at least 10 mmHg in 4.6%, 4 .1% and 6.6% of placebo, Myrbetriq 
25 mg, and Myrbetriq 50 mg patients,  respectively. Both SBP and DBP increases were reversible upon 
discontinuation of treatment.  
 
Effect on Intraocular Pressure (IOP)  
Myrbetriq 100 mg once daily did not increase IOP in he althy subjects after 56 days of treatment. In a phase 
1 study  assessing the effect of Myrbetriq on IOP using Goldmann applanation tonometry in 310 healthy 
subjects, a dose of  Myrbetriq 100 mg was non -inferior to placebo for the primary endpoint of the trea tment 
difference in mean change  from baseline to day 56 in subject -average IOP; upper bound of the two -sided 
95% CI of the treatment difference  between Myrbetriq 100 mg and placebo was 0.3 mm Hg.  
 
12.3 Pharmacokinetics  
Absorption  
After oral administration of mirabegron in healthy volunteers, mirabegron is absorbed to reach maximum 
plasma  concentrations (C max) at approximately 3.5 hours. The absolute bioavailability increases from 29% 
at a dose of 25 mg  to 35% at a dose of 50 mg. Mean C max and AUC increase m ore than dose proportionally. 
This relationship is more  apparent at doses above 50 mg. In the overall population of males and females, a 
2-fold increase in dose from 50 mg  to 100 mg mirabegron increased C max and AUC tau by approximately 
2.9- and 2.6 -fold, r espectively, whereas a 4 -fold increase in dose from 50 to 200 mg mirabegron increased 
Cmax and AUC tau by approximately 8.4 - and 6.5 -fold. Steady state concentrations are achieved within 7 days 
of once daily dosing with mirabegron. After once daily  administ ration, plasma exposure of mirabegron at 
steady state is approximately double that seen after a single dose.  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 64 - of 96 
  
Effect of Food  
Co-administration of a 50 mg tablet with a high -fat meal reduced mirabegron C max and AUC by 45% and 
17%,  respectively. A low -fat me al decreased mirabegron C max and AUC by 75% and 51%, respectively. In 
the phase  3 studies, mirabegron was administered irrespective of food contents and intake (i.e., with or 
without food) and  demonstrated both safety and efficacy. Therefore, mirabegron ca n be taken with or 
without food at the recommended  dose [ see Dosage and Administration (2.1)] . 
 
Distribution  
Mirabegron is extensively distributed in the body. The volume of distribution at steady state (V ss) is 
approximately  1670 L following intravenous a dministration. Mirabegron is bound (approximately 71%) to 
human plasma proteins,  and shows moderate affinity for albumin and alpha -1 acid glycoprotein. 
Mirabegron distributes to erythrocytes.  Based on In vitro study erythrocyte concentrations of 14C-
mirabe gron were about 2 -fold higher than in plasma.  
 
Metabolism  
Mirabegron is metabolized via multiple pathways involving dealkylation, oxidation, (direct) 
glucuronidation, and  amide hydrolysis. Mirabegron is the major circulating component following a single 
dose of 14C -mirabegron. Two  major metabolites were observed in human plasma and are phase 2 
glucuronides representing 16% and 11% of total  exposure, respectively. These metabolites are not 
pharmacologically active toward beta -3 adrenergic receptor.  Although in vitro studies suggest a role for 
CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 in the oxidative metabolism of mirabegron, in vivo results indicate that these 
isozymes play a limited role in the overall elimination. In healthy subjects who are  genotypically poor 
metabolizers of CYP 2D6, mean C max and AUC tau were approximately 16% and 17% higher than  in 
extensive metabolizers of CYP2D6, respectively. In vitro and ex vivo studies have shown the involvement 
of butylcholinesterase, uridine diphospho -glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) and pos sibly alcohol 
dehydrogenase in the  metabolism of mirabegron, in addition to CYP3A4 and CYP2D6.  
 
Excretion  
Total body clearance (CL tot) from plasma is approximately 57 L/h following intravenous administration. 
The terminal elimination half -life (t 1/2) is ap proximately 50 hours. Renal clearance (CL R) is approximately 
13 L/h, which  corresponds to nearly 25% of CL tot. Renal elimination of mirabegron is primarily through 
active tubular secretion  along with glomerular filtration. The urinary elimination of unchan ged mirabegron 
is dose -dependent and ranges  from approximately 6.0% after a daily dose of 25 mg to 12.2% after a daily 
dose of 100 mg. Following the  administration of 160 mg 14C-mirabegron solution to healthy volunteers, 
approximately 55% of the radioactiv ity dose was recovered in the urine and 34% in the feces. 
Approximately 25% of unchanged mirabegron was recovered  in urine and 0% in feces.  
 
Specific Populations  
Geriatric Patients  
The C max and AUC of mirabegron following multiple oral doses in elderly vol unteers (≥ 65 years) were 
similar to  those in younger volunteers (18 to 45 years).  
 
Pediatric Patients  
The pharmacokinetics of mirabegron in pediatric patients have not been evaluated [see Use in Specific 
Populations  (8.4) ]. 
 
Gender  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 65 - of 96 
 The C max and AUC of mir abegron were approximately 40% to 50% higher in females than in males. When 
corrected  for differences in body weight, the mirabegron systemic exposure is 20% - 30% higher in females 
compared to  males.  
 
Race  
The pharmacokinetics of mirabegron were comparabl e between Caucasians and  African American Blacks. 
Cross studies comparison shows that the exposure in Japanese subjects is higher than that in North 
American subjects.  However, when the C max and AUC were normalized for dose and body weight, the 
difference is smaller.  
 
Renal Impairment  
Following single dose administration of 100 mg mirabegron in volunteers with mild renal impairment 
(eGFR 60 to  89 mL/min/1.73 m2 as estimated by MDRD), mean mirabegron C max and AUC were increased 
by 6% and 31%  relative to volu nteers with normal renal function. In volunteers with moderate renal 
impairment (eGFR 30 to  59 mL/min/1.73 m2), C max and AUC were increased by 23% and 66%, 
respectively. In patients with severe renal  impairment (eGFR 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m2), mean C max and 
AUC values were 92% and 118% higher compared to  healthy subjects with normal renal functi on. 
Mirabegron has not been studied in patients with End Stage Renal  Disease -ESRD (CL cr less than 15 
mL/min or eGFR less than 15 mL/min/1.73 m2 or patients requiring hemodialysis).  
 
Hepatic Impairment  
Following single dose administration of 100 mg mirabegron in volunteers with mild hepatic impairment 
(Child -Pugh  Class A), mean mirabegron C max and AUC were increased by 9% and 19% relative to 
volunteers with normal hepat ic function. In volunteers with moderate hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh 
Class B), mean C max and AUC values were  175% and 65% higher. Mirabegron has not been studied in 
patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh  Class C).  
 
Drug Interaction Studies  
In Vitro Studies  
Effect of Other Drugs on Mirabegron  
Mirabegron is transported and metabolized through multiple pathways. Mirabegron is a substrate for 
CYP3A4,  CYP2D6, butyrylcholinesterase, UGT, the efflux transporter P -glycoprotein (P -gp) and the influx 
organic cation  transporters (OCT) OCT1, OCT2, and OCT3. Sulfonylurea hypoglyce mic agents  
glibenclamide (a CYP3A4  substrate), gliclazide (a CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 substrate) and tolbutamide (a 
CYP2C9 substrate) did not affect the in vitro metabolism of mirabegro n. 
 
Effect of Mirabegron on Other Drugs  
Studies of mirabegron using human liver microsomes and recombinant human CYP enzymes showed that  
mirabegron is a moderate and time -dependent inhibitor of CYP2D6 and a weak inhibitor of CYP3A. 
Mirabegron is  unlikely t o inhibit the metabolism of co -administered drugs metabolized by the following 
cytochrome P450  enzymes: CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP2E1 because 
mirabegron did not inhibit the  activity of these enzymes at clinically relevant concentration s. Mirabegron 
did not induce CYP1A2 or CYP3A.  Mirabegron inhibited P -gp-mediated drug transport at high 
concentrations. Mirabegron is predicted not to cause  clinically relevant inhibition of OCT -mediated drug 
transport. Mirabegron did not affect the metabo lism of  glibenclamide or tolbutamide.  
 
In Vivo Studies  
The effect of co -administered drugs on the pharmacokinetics of mirabegron and the effect of mirabegron on 
the pharmacokinetics of co -administered drugs was studied after single and multiple doses of mi rabegron. 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 66 - of 96 
 Most drug -drug interactions (DDI) were studied using mirabegron 100 mg extended -release tablets. 
However, interaction  studies of mirabegron with metoprolol and with metformin were studied using 
mirabegron 160 mg immediate release  (IR) tablets.  
 
The effect of ketoconazole, rifampicin, solifenacin, tamsulosin, and metformin on systemic mirabegron 
exposure is  shown in Figure 1.  
 
The effect of mirabegron on metoprolol, desipramine, combined oral contraceptive -COC (ethinyl estradiol -
EE, levonorgestrel -LNG), solifenacin, digoxin, warfarin, tamsulosin, and metformin is shown in Figure 2.  
In these studies, the largest increase in mirabegron systemic exposure was seen in the ketoconazole DDI 
study. As a  potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole increased mirabe gron C max by 45% and mirabegron 
AUC by 80% after  multiple dose administration of 400 mg of ketoconazole for 9 days prior to the 
administration of a single dose of  100 mg mirabegron in 23 male and females healthy subjects.  
 
As a moderate CYP2D6 inhibitor, m irabegron increased the systemic exposure to metoprolol and 
desipramine:  
 Mirabegron increased the C max of metoprolol by 90% and metoprolol AUC by 229% after multiple 
doses of  160 mg mirabegron IR tablets once daily for 5 days and a single dose of 100 mg 
metoprolol tablet in  12 healthy male subjects administered before and concomitantly with 
mirabegron.  
 Mirabegron increased the C max of desipramine by 79% and desipramine AUC by 241% after 
multiple dose  administration of 100 mg mirabegron once daily for 18 day s and a single dose of 50 
mg desipramine before  and concomitantly with mirabegron in 28 male and female healthy 
subjects.  
 
Caution is advised if Myrbetriq is co -administered with CYP2D6 substrates such as metoprolol and 
desipramine, and  especially narrow t herapeutic index drugs, such as thioridazine, flecainide, and 
propafenone [see Warnings and  Precautions (5.3) and Drug Interactions (7.1)] . 
 
Figures 1 and 2 show the magnitude of these interactions on the pharmacokinetic parameters and the  
recommendations for dose adjustment, if any:  
 
Figure 1: The Effect of Co -administered Drugs on Exposure of Myrbetriq and Dose  
Recommendation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 67 - of 96 
  
(1) Although no dose adjustment is recommended with solifenacin or tamsulosin based on the lack of 
pharmacokinetic  interaction, Myrbetriq should be administered with caution to patients taking 
antimuscarinic medications for the treatment of  OAB and in patients with clinically significant BOO 
because of the risk of urinary retention [see Warnings and Precautions  (5.2)] . 
 
Figure 2: The Effect of Myrbetriq on Exposure of Co -administered Medication  

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 68 - of 96 
  
(1) Since mirabegron is a moderate CYP2D6 inhibitor, the systemic exposure to CYP2D6 substrates such 
as metoprolol and  desipramine is increased when co -administered with mirabe gron. Therefore, appropriate 
monitoring and dose adjustment may be  necessary, especially with narrow therapeutic index CYP2D6 
substrates, such as thioridazine, flecainide, and propafenone [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Drug 
Interactions (7.1)] . 
(2) For patients who are initiating a combination of mirabegron and digoxin, the lowest dose for digoxin 
should initially be  prescribed. Serum digoxin concentrations should be monitored and used for titration of 
the digoxin dose to obtain the desired  clinica l effect [see Drug Interaction (7.2)] . 
(3) Warfarin was administered as a single 25 mg dose of the racemate (a mixture of R -warfarin and S -
warfarin). Based on this  single dose study, mirabegron had no effect on the warfarin pharmacodynamic 
endpoints such a s INR and prothrombin time.  However, the effect of mirabegron on multiple doses of 
warfarin and on warfarin pharmacodynamic end points such as INR and  prothrombin time has not been 
fully investigated [see Drug Interactions (7.3)] . 
(4) Although no dose adju stment is recommended with solifenacin or tamsulosin based on the lack of 
pharmacokinetic  interaction, Myrbetriq should be administered with caution to patients taking 
antimuscarinic medications for the treatment of  OAB and in BOO because of the risk of ur inary retention 
[see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)] . 
 

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 69 - of 96 
 13 NONCLINICAL TOXICOLOGY  
13.1 Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility  Carcinogenicity  
Long -term carcinogenicity studies were conducted in rats and mice dosed orally with mirabegron for tw o 
years. Male  rats were dosed at 0, 12.5, 25, or 50 mg/kg/day and female rats and both sexes of mice were 
dosed at 0, 25, 50, or  100 mg/kg/day. Mirabegron showed no carcinogenic potential at systemic exposures 
(AUC) 38 to 45 -fold higher in  rats and 21 to 3 8-fold higher in mice than the human systemic exposure at 
the 50 mg dose.  
 
Mutagenesis  
Mirabegron was not mutagenic in the Ames bacterial reverse mutation assay, did not induce chromosomal  
aberrations in human peripheral blood lymphocytes at concentrations  that were not cytotoxic, and was not  
clastogenic in the rat micronucleus assay.  
 
Impairment of Fertility  
Fertility studies in rats showed that mirabegron had no effect on either male or female f ertility at non -lethal 
doses up to 100 mg/kg/day. Systemic ex posures (AUC) at 100 mg/kg in female rats was estimated to be 22 
times the MRHD  in women and 93 times the MRHD in men.  
 
14 CLINICAL STUDIES  
Myrbetriq was evaluated in three, 12 -week, double -blind, randomized, placebo -controlled, parallel group,  
multicenter  clinical trials in patients with overactive bladder with symptoms of urge  urinary incontinence, 
urgency, and urinary frequency (Studies 1, 2, and 3). Entry criteria required that patients had symptoms of 
overactive bladder  for at least 3 months duration, at least 8 micturitions per day, and at least 3 episodes of 
urgency with or without  incontinence over a 3 day period. The majority of patients were Caucasian (94%) 
and female (72%) with a mean age  of 59 years (range 18 – 95 years). The population included both naïve 
patients who had not received prior  antimuscarinic pharmacotherapy for overactive bladder (48%) and 
those who had received prior antimuscarinic  pharmacotherapy for OAB (52%).  
 
In Study 1, patients were randomized to placebo, Myrbetriq 50 mg, Myr betriq 10 0 mg, or an active control 
once daily. In Study 2, patients were randomized to placebo, Myrbetriq 50 mg or Myrbetriq 100 mg once 
daily. In Study  3, patients were randomized to placebo, Myrbetriq 25 mg or Myrbetriq 50 mg once daily.  
 
The co -primary  efficacy endpoints in all 3 trials were (1) change from baseline to end of treatment (Week 
12) in  mean number of incontinence episodes per 24 hours and (2) change from baseline to end of 
treatment (Week 12) in  mean number of micturitions per 24 hours, bas ed on a 3 -day micturition diary. An 
important secondary endpoint was  the change from baseline to end of treatment (Week 12) in mean volume 
voided per micturition.   
 
Results for the co -primary endpoints and mean volume voided per micturition from Studies 1,  2, and 3 are 
shown in  Table 3.  
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 70 - of 96 
 Table 3: Mean Baseline and Change from Baseline at Week 12 ‡ for Incontinence Episodes, 
Micturition  Frequency, and Volume Voided per Micturition in Patients with Overactive Bladder in 
Studies 1, 2, and 3  
 
Myrbetriq 25 mg was effective in treating the symptoms of OAB within 8 weeks, and Myrbetriq 50 mg was 
effective  in treating the symptoms of OAB within 4 weeks. Efficacy of both 25 mg and 50 mg doses of 
Myrbetriq was  maintained through the 12 -week treatment period.  
 

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 71 - of 96 
 Figure s 3 through 8 show the co -primary endpoints, mean change from baseline (BL) over time in number 
of incontinence episodes per 24 hours and mean change from baseline over time in number of micturitions 
per 24 hours,  in Studies 1, 2 and 3.  
 
Figure 3. Mean (SE ) Change from Baseline in Mean Number of Incontinence Episodes per 24 Hours 
–Study 1  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Mean (SE) Change from Baseline in Mean Number of Micturitions per 24 Hours - Study 1  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Mean (SE) Change from Baseline in Mean Number of Incontin ence Episodes per 24 Hours 
- Study 2  
 
 

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 72 - of 96 
 Figure 6. Mean (SE) Change from Baseline in Mean Number of Micturitions per 24 Hours - Study 2  
 
 
 
 

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 73 - of 96 
 Figure 7. Mean (SE) Change from Baseline in Mean Number of Incontinence Episodes per 24 Hours 
- Study 3  
 
 
Figure 8 . Mean (SE) Change from Baseline in Mean Number of Micturitions per 24 Hours - Study 3  
 
16 HOW SUPPLIED/STORAGE AND HANDLING  
Myrbetriq is supplied as oval, film coated extended -release tablets, available in bottles and blister units as 
follows : 
 
 

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 74 - of 96 
 Store at  25oC (77oF) with excursions permitted from 15oC to 30oC (59oF to 86oF). {see USP controlled 
Room  Temperature}  
 
17 PATIENT COUNSELING INFORMATION  
See FDA -approved patient labeling (Patient Information)  
 
Inform patients that Myrbetriq may increase blood pre ssure. Periodic blood pressure determinations are  
recommended, especially in patients with hypertension. Myrbetriq has also been ass ociated with infrequent 
urinary tract infections, rapid heart beat, rash, and pruritis. Inform patients that urinary retenti on has been 
reported when  taking mirabegron in combination with antimuscarinic drugs used in the treatment of 
overactive bladder. Instruct  patients to contact their physician if they experience these effects while taking 
Myrbetriq.  
 
Patients should read th e patient leaflet entitled “Patient Information” before starting therapy with 
Myrbetriq.  
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 75 - of 96 
  
Patient Information  
Myrbetriq (meer -BEH -trick)  
(mirabegron)  
extended -release tablets  
 
Read the Patient Information that comes with Myrbetriq before you start taking  it and each  time you get a 
refill. There may be new information. This leaflet does not take the place of  talking with your doctor about 
your medical condition or treatment.  
 
What is Myrbetriq?  
Myrbetriq is a prescription medicine for adults used to treat the following symptoms due to a  condition 
called overactive bladder:  
 
 Urge urinary incontinence: a strong need to urinate with leaking or  wetting accidents  
 Urgency: a strong need to urinate right away  
 Frequency: urinating often  
 
It is not known if Myrbetri q is safe and effective in children.  
 
What should I tell my doctor before taking Myrbetriq?  
Before you take Myrbetriq, tell your doctor if you:  
 have liver problems  
 have kidney problems  
 have very high uncontrolled blood pressure  
 have trouble emptying your b ladder or you have a weak urine stream  
 are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. It is not known if Myrbetriq will harm your  unborn 
baby. Talk to your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant.  
 are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. It is not known if Myrbetriq passes into your  breast 
milk. You and your doctor should decide if you will take Myrbetriq or breastfeed.  You should 
not do both.  
 
Tell your doctor about all the medicines you take , including prescription and  nonprescription medicines, 
vitamins, and herbal supplements. Myrbetriq may affect the way  other medicines work, and other 
medicines may affect how Myrbetriq works.  
 
Tell your doctor if you take:  
 thioridazine (Mellaril® or Mellaril -S®) 
 flecainide (Tambocor ™) 
 propafenone (Rythmol®) 
 digoxin (Lanoxin®) 
 
How should I take Myrbetriq?  
 Take Myrbetriq exactly as your doctor tells you to take it.  
 You should take 1 Myrbetriq tablet 1 time a day.  
 You should take Myrbetriq with water and swallow the tablet whole.  
 Do not crush or chew the tablet.  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 76 - of 96 
  You can take Myrbetriq with or without food.  
 If you miss a dose of Myrbetriq, begin taking Myrbetriq  again the next day. Do not take  2 
doses of Myrbetriq the same day.  
 If you take too much Myrbetriq, call your doctor or go to the nearest hospital emergency  room 
right away.  
 
What are the possible side effects of Myrbetriq?  
Myrbetriq may cause serious side effects including:  
 increased blood pressure. Myrbetriq may cause your blood pressure to increase or  make 
your blood pressure worse if you have a history of high blood pressure. It is  recommended 
that your doctor check your blood pressure while you are taking Myrbetriq.  
 
 inability to empty your bladder (urinary retention). Myrbetriq may increase your  chances 
of not being able to empty your bladder if you have bladder outlet obstruction or  if you are 
taking other medicines to treat overactive bladder. Tell your doctor right away  if you are 
unable to empty your bladder.  
 
The most common side effects of Myrbetriq include:  
 increased blood pressure  
 common cold sympt oms (nasopharyngitis)  
 urinary tract infection  
 headache  
 
Tell your doctor if you have any side effect that bothers you or that does not go away or if  you have hives, 
skin rash or itching while taking Myrbetriq.  
 
These are not all the possible side effects o f Myrbetriq.  For more information, ask your doctor or 
pharmacist.  
 
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects  to FDA at 1 -800-
FDA -1088.  
 
How should I store Myrbetriq?  
• Store Myrbetriq between 59°F to 86°F (15°C to 30°C). Keep the bottle closed.  
• Safely throw away medicine that is out of date or no longer needed.  
 
Keep Myrbetriq and all medicines out of the reach of children.  
 
General information about the safe and effective use of Myrbetriq.  
Medicines are sometimes  prescribed for purposes other than those listed in Patient  Information leaflet. Do 
not use Myrbetriq for a condition for which it was not prescribed. Do  not give Myrbetriq to other people, 
even if they have the same symptoms you have. It may  harm them.  
 
This Patient Information leaflet summarizes the most important information about Myrbetriq.  If you would 
like more information, talk with your doctor. You can ask your doctor or  pharmacist for information about 
Myrbetriq that is written for health professio nals.  
 
For more information, go to www.Myrbetriq.com website or call 1 -800- 727-7003.  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 77 - of 96 
 What are the ingredients in Myrbetriq?  
 
Active ingredient: mirabegron  
 
Inactive ingredients : polyethylene oxide, polyethylene glycol, hydroxypropyl cellulose,  butylated 
hydroxytoluene, magnesium stearate, hypromellose, yellow ferric oxide and red  ferric oxide (25 mg 
Myrbetriq tablet only).  
 
What is overactive bladder?  
Overactive bladder occurs when you cannot control your bladder contractions. When these  muscle 
contractio ns happen too often or cannot be controlled, you can get symptoms of  overactive bladder, which 
are urinary frequency, urinary urgency, and urinary incontinence  (leakage).  
 
Rx Only  
 
PRODUCT OF JAPAN  
 
Manufactured by:  
Astellas Pharma Technologies, Inc.  
Norma n, Oklahoma 73072  
 
Marketed and Distributed by:  
Astellas Pharma US, Inc.  
Northbrook, Illinois 60062  
 
*Myrbetriq® is a registered trademark of Astellas Pharma Inc. All other trademarks or registered 
trademarks are the property of their respective owners.  
 
© 2012 Astellas Pharma US, Inc.  
 
Revised: February 2014  
13C011 -MIR -WPI  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 78 - of 96 
 APPENDIX II: The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA).   REDACTED – can 
be accessed at  www. mocatest.org  
 
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 79 - of 96 
 APPENDIX III: Overactive Bladder Questionnaire  (OABQ)  
 
 

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 80 - of 96 
 
APPENDIX IV:  3-day voiding diary  
 
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 81 - of 96 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 82 - of 96 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 83 - of 96 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 84 - of 96 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 85 - of 96 
 
 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 86 - of 96 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 87 - of 96 
 APPENDIX V: Patient Perception of Bladder Condition  (PPBC)  
 
Which of the following statements describes your bladder condition best at the moment? 
Please mark “X” in one box only.  
 
⃝  My bladder condition does not cause me any problems at all.  
⃝  My bladder condit ion causes me some very minor p roblems.  
⃝  My bladder condition causes me some minor problems.  
⃝  My bladder condition causes me (some) moderate problems.  
⃝  My bladder cond ition causes me severe problems.  
⃝  My bladder condition causes me many severe problems.  
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 88 - of 96 
 APPENDIX VI:  Parkinson’s Impact Scale (PIMS)  – REDACTED – permission 
required  
 
 
 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 89 - of 96 
 APPENDIX VII: Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)  REDACTED License required 
http://epw orthsleepinessscale.com/  
 
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 90 - of 96 
 APPENDIX VI II: Parkinson’s Fatigue Scale (PFS)  
 
REDACTED – can be accessed at 
www.parkinsons.org.uk/professionals/resources/parkinsons -disease -fatigue -scale  
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 91 - of 96 
 APPENDIX IX: Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI -II) 
 
REDACTED – Permission required.  www.pearsonclinical.co.uk  
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 92 - of 96 
 APPENDIX X: Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)  
 
REDACTED – Permission required.  www.pearsonclinical.co.uk  
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 93 - of 96 
  
APPENDIX XI: Constipation Questions  
 
The following questions will be asked to est ablish the number of Rome II criteria each 
subject meets:  
 
Over the last 2 weeks,  
 
1. Did you have to strain at least 1 out of 4 times when having a bowel 
movement?  
2. Did you have lumpy or hard stools at least 1 out of 4 times when having a 
bowel movemen t? 
3. Did  you have a sense of incomplete evacuation at least 1 out of 4 times when 
having a bowel movement?  
4. Did  you have a sensation of obstruction or blockage in your anal area at least 1 
out of 4 time when having a bowel movement?  
5. Did you have to u se manual maneuvers to facilitate bowel movements at least 1 
out of 4 times when having a bowel movement?  
6. Did you have less than 3 bowel movements per week?  
 
  
Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 94 - of 96 
 APPENDIX XII: Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS)  
 
 
 
  

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 95 - of 96 
  

Mirabe gron in PD with impaired cognition          Version date: Amendment 5, June 29, 2016  
CONFIDENTIAL  Page - 96 - of 96 
  
