Protocol Template  Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 ClinicalTrials.gov  
National Library of Medicine  
8600 Rockville Pike  
Bethesda, MD 20894  
November 2022  
 
 
To Whom it may Concern,  
  
This is a copy of the IRB-approved protocol for the clinical trial registered under  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]. This is the latest version, approved on  July 24, 2021. It underwent 
‘Continuing Review’ with no changes in August 2021 and August 2022.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Dale Terasaki, MD MPH  
Internist and Addiction Medicine Specialist  
Denver Health & Hospital Authority  
dale.terasaki@dhha.org  
ClinicalTrials.gov login: TERASAKI.DALE  
971-259-3994  
 
 
   
  

Protocol Template  Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
  
COMIRB Protocol  
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
CAMPUS BOX F -490    TELEPHONE:  303 -724-1055  Fax:  303 -724-0990   
 
 
Protocol #:  20-2008  
Project Title:  Single -dose interventions to reduce re -admissions for hospitalized patients with 
refractory alcohol use disorder: A randomized pilot feasibility study.   
  
Principal Investigator:  Dale Terasaki  
Version Date:   07/24/2021    
 
 
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims :   
 
Every year, alcohol use disorder (AUD) generates millions of emergency 
department (ED) visits and hospital admissions, costing the U.S. health sector 
over $90 billion.1 These hospital admissions are critical opportunities to start 
patients on addiction pharmacotherapy, but factors like medication non -adherence 
and post -discharge relapse contribute to frequ ent re -admissions. Two single -dose 
interventions are well suited to facilitate treatment retention and prevent re -
admissions due to their prolonged, adherence -independent effects: extended -
release (XR) naltrexone injection and intravenous (IV) ketamine inf usion. These 
have not been thoroughly investigated in the hospital setting among high -utilizer, 
safety -net populations. Therefore,  we aim to:  
1. Test the feasibility of randomizing hospitalized patients (n= 45-60, age 
18-65) with multiple AUD -related admissions to treatment with either 
extended -release ( XR) naltrexone , intravenous ( IV) ketamine , or no 
single -dose medication, all  with enhanced linkage to care. Feasibility 
outcomes such as recruitment rate, patient acceptability, post -discharge 
follow -up rate, and adverse events  will help to identify key lessons for a 
future comparative effectiveness study.   
2. Estimate the 30 -day re -admission rate for patients randomized to 
treatment with XR naltrexone , with IV ketami ne, or no single -dose 
medication, all with enhanced linkage to care . We hypothesize that the 
re-admission rate will be lower for each of the two single -dose medication 
groups  than for  the “linkage -alone”  group .   
 
 
II. Background and Significance :  
 
Alcohol use disorder (AUD)  generates  approximately 5 million U.S. 
emergency department visits every year , leading to 2 million  hospital admission s 
and collectively costing the health s ector  over $ 90 billion dollars  annually.1 
Because addiction treatment is seldom accessed,2 hospital admission  represents 
a major opportunity for linkage to care3,4 and initiation of  oral (PO) naltrexone ,5 a 
first-line medication shown to improve outcomes such as number of drinking 
Protocol Template  Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 days,6 drinks per day,6 and health care utilization.5,7 Denver Health  (DH)  provides 
a dedicated addiction consult service  (ACS)  to assist in these  efforts , and the ACS 
sees hundreds of  new consults per month. Yet alcohol -related admissions at DH – 
estimated at nearly 2,000 per year8 – show  a hig her 30 -day re -admission rate than 
the hospital -wide average  (Figure 1). This is consistent with a  nationally reported 
re-admission rate for alcohol -related disorders  of 21% compared to 14% overall in  
2014 ,9 ranking it  4th among common diagnoses.9 Additionally, there is  low post-
discharge  treatment engagement for these patients : one sample of hospitalized 
DH patients with AUD demonstrated an 11.8% follow -up rate at addi ction clinic 
(chart review) .  
These sub -optimal transitions of care underscore the limited benefit of oral 
naltrexone for high -utilizer, safety -net populations who may have social contexts 
that compromise medication adherence.10 Different tools are needed that can 
facilitate post -discharge treatment engagement and reduce re -admissions, goals 
in line with the DH Center for Addiction Medicine (CAM) and upcoming Hospital 
Transformatio n Project11 application.  
The following two pharmaceutical options are well -suited to the hospital 
setting and complementary to the myriad behavioral strategies to improve 
treatment compliance and  linkage to care:12 
1. An extended -release (30 -day, “XR”), intramuscular injection of naltrexone 
(Vivitrol®).  Studies on XR naltrexone have shown better long -term 
medication continuation compared to oral naltrexone13 and reduced heavy 
drinking days compared with placebos.14 Additionally, one meta -analysis 
showed a trend toward fewer admissions compared to oral naltrexone.15 
One ongoing clinical trial16 is directly comparing oral to XR naltrexone for 
AUD in a safety -net hospital in Boston, and it is expected to evaluate the 
results in late 2020. Regardless, data from multiple centers and regions are 
needed, and our study uniquely targets high -utilizer patients.  
2. A single infusion of intr avenous ketamine,  a dissociative anesthetic used in 
general anesthesia and pain management. At sub -anesthetic doses, 
ketamine provides rapid effects on mood that extend weeks beyond 
administration,17,18 and in 2019 the FDA approved an intranasal formulation 
for treatment -resistant depression.19 For AUD, treatment with ketamine 
decreased cravings and drinking at 10 days post -infusion in a human 
laboratory study that excluded patients with depression.20 In a recent 
randomized trial,  AUD patients were given one ketamine infusion and 
subsequently showed a higher rate of abstine nce at 21 days beyond 
treatment and better attendance at the final study visit compared to the 
control group (100% vs 74%, respectively), with no serious adverse events 
reported.21  
Both single -dose interventions hold great potential for improving AUD post -
hospital transitions and reducing immediate re -admissions, but more data on 
feasibility and effectiveness are needed.   
 
 
Protocol Template  Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
  
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
 
There have been no preliminary studies. However, an initial Tableau query 
showed that at Denver Health, patients admitted to the hospital with an alcohol 
related diagnosis had a 30 -day readmission rate of between about 10 and 40 
percent (see Figure  1). Thi s is notably an underestimation, given that patients may 
have had readmissions at hospitals outside of Denver Health, which would not 
have been captured in those data .  
There is also low outpatient treatment engagement following discharge for 
these patient s. I reviewed a cohort of 17 patients that I cared for in August and 
September 2019, all of whom I referred to outpatient addiction clinic for treatment 
of alcohol use disorder. Only 2 presented within the following month. Among the 9 
who were prescribed o ral naltrexone, only 1 presented.  
 
 
 
IV. Research  Methods  
 
A. Outcome Measure(s):  
See table 1 for primary and secondary outcomes. In brief, our primary outcome s will be 
those related to feasibility as well as risk of 30 -day all -cause hospital re -admissions. 
Secondary outcomes include risk of 30 -day all -cause emergency department visit , 0%10%20%30%40%50%60%
Feb-18
Mar-18
Apr-18
May-18
Jun-18
Jul-18
Aug-18
Sep-18
Oct-18
Nov-18
Dec-18
Jan-19
Feb-19
Mar-19
Apr-19
May-19
Jun-19
Jul-19
Aug-19
Sep-19
Oct-19
Nov-1930-Day Re -admission Rate
Alcohol All Hospital
Figure 1 DH hospital re -admissions. Obtained via Tableau with assistance from Mara Prandi -Abrams. Alcohol 
admissions based on All -Patients -Refined -Diagnosis -Related -Groups  (APR -DRG)  775 and 280 . 
Protocol Template  Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 differences in readiness -to-change , and likelihood of having an alcohol metab olite (EtG) in 
the urine at follow -up.   
 
Table 1 Primary and secondary outcomes  
 Study  
Aim  Description  Instrument(s)  
1’ feasibility 
outcomes  
 1 Recruitment rate (# enrolled / month), follow -
up rate, patient acceptability, adverse effects  
 Chart review, 
questionnaires  
 
1’ clinical 
outcome  2 Risk of 30 -day all -cause hospital re -
admissions  
 Chart review  
2’ clinical 
outcomes  
 2 Risk of 30 -day all -cause ED visits  Chart review  
2 Within -subject difference in readiness -to-change22  Questionnaire  
2 Laboratory(+) for alcohol  at SUDS  Urine EtG  
2 Percent of bing e drinking day s23 since discharge  Questionnaire  
 
 
B. Description of Population to be Enrolled:   
 
See Table 2 and 3 for inclusion and exclusion criteria.  Rationales are also listed.   
 
Table 2 Inclusion criteria  
 INCLUSION  criteria  Rationale  
 Age 18 -65 Limiting study scope to adult 
patients  
 1+ alcohol -related* admission(s)  OR 2+ alcohol -related 
ED visits  in past 12 mo.  
 
*Admission diagnoses includes any of following:  
- alcohol use / intoxication  
- alcohol withdrawal  
- alcohol use disorder / dependence  
- seizure thought to be related to alcohol  
withdrawal  
- encephalopathy thought to be related to alcohol  
- pancreatitis thought to be related to alcohol  
- liver disease thought to be related to alcohol  
- cardiac arrhythmia or heart failure thought to be 
related to alcohol  
- gastrointestinal bleed thought to be related to 
alcohol  
 Limiting study scope to high -
utilizer patients  
 Has insurance (public or private)  Can follow -up at SUDS clinic  
 Seen by addiction consult  Part of recruitment plan  
 
Table 3 Exclusion criteria  
 EXCLUSION criteria  Rationale  
 Known or suspected active COVID -19 infection  
 Staff safety and ability to 
immediately follow up at SUDS 
clinic  
Protocol Template  Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
  Hepatic: AST/ALT >5x upper -limit of normal, 
decompensated liver failure  Naltrexone can rarely cause 
hepatotoxicity. 5x ULN used by 
study by Collins et al (2015)  
 Renal: Glomerular filtration rate <30ml/min  Naltrexone not recommended in 
renal failure  
 Cardiovascular: History of acute co ronary syndrome, 
cerebrovascular event, hypertensive crisis, known 
cardiomyopathy  Ketamine can transiently raise 
blood pressure  
 Known elevated intracranial pressure  Ketamine can transiently raise 
blood pressure  
 Thrombocytopenia (<50/microliter)  Naltre xone can potentially 
worsen thrombocytopenia  
 Active moderate/severe withdrawal (based on hospital 
withdrawal protocol)  May need acute care that would 
interfere with intervention and 
discharge planning  
 Active delirium (alcohol -related or otherwise)  Ketamine’s dissociative effects 
could theoretically worsen 
delirium  
 Already enrolled in study  
 A-priori decision to only enroll 
patients once  
 XR naltrexone or IV ketamine in last 30 days  
 Prior administration could affect 
ability to distingu ish effect of 
current intervention. Recent 
receipt of intervention would 
also be evidence that 
intervention not effective for 
them.   
 Known intolerance to naltrexone or ketamine  
 Avoid harm to patient  
 Other active severe substance use disorder (tobacco, 
cannabis excluded)  
 Limiting study scope to AUD  
 Pregnant or breast -feeding, or planning .  
 Risk of harm to fetus not well 
established for naltrexone or 
ketamine  
 Opioids: physical dependence  or anticipated use in the 
next 30 days  
 Naltrexone i s an opioid -
antagonist  
 Unstable psychiatric illness (active psychosis, active 
suicidality)  
 Ketamine’s dissociative effects 
could worsen psychiatric 
decompensation  
 Moving from region within 30 -days of discharge  
 Cannot have immediate follow 
up at SUDS  
 Discharge to acute/residential treatment  
 Cannot have immediate follow 
up at SUDS  
 Involuntary  hold Cannot have immediate follow 
up at SUDS  
 
C. Study Design and Research Methods   
 
We propose an open -label, pilot feasibility trial (n= 45-60), randomizing 
hospitalized patients to receive XR naltrexone , IV ketamine , or neither  prior to 
hospital discharge , along with enhanced linkage to care . The primary clinical 
Protocol Template  Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 outcome compared across each of the groups will be 30 -day re -admission rates 
ascertained by chart review (Table 1).  
To reduce variability, all participants will undergo a standard addiction 
consultation that includes behavioral components such as supporti ve therapy and 
motivational interviewing. They will also receive enhanced linkage to care  (hereon 
“linkage”)  which includes being met by a staff member  while in the hospital to 
begin the clinic intake  process and assign a follow -up appointment date. Linkag e 
will also include a c ontingency management24–26 (monetary incentive to follow -up) 
in their post -hospital transition and receive standard case management and 
counseling at Sub stance Use Disorder Services (SUDS) clinic.   
ACS t eam members will identify patients meet ing inclusion criteria  (Table 
2), and – after conducting their usual consultation  – approach  them about the 
study . Approximately 900 patients met similar inclusion criteria in 2019 (Query by 
Josh Durfee). After screening for exclusion criteria, informed consent will occur,  
and initial baseline data will be obtained  by “Treatment on Demand”  (TOD),  a 
grant-funded team of counselors who are already linking hospitalized patients to 
addiction care . Consented patients will then be randomized , and the ACS will work 
with the primary team to order and administer the assigned intervention close to 
discharge. Meanwhile, a TOD coun selor will work to establish a follow -up date  
within seven day s post -discharge . Additional data will be collected immediately 
after the intervention  (for those in one of the two medication groups) , at SUDS 
follow up, and 30 -days post -discharge by chart rev iew.  
 
Medication s 
 XR naltrexone is produced by Alkermes. Due to the cost (~$1300 on 
GoodRx  for one dose ), we will receive  sample s from Alkermes  in a process that 
has been pre -arranged between DH inpatient pharmacy and their Colorado -based 
representative, Chris Thurnauer. We received preliminary approval on 12/3/19 
from DH Pharmaceuticals and Therapeutics Committee to use these samples  in 
the hosp ital for this purpose .  
 IV ketamine is currently utilized at DH  at sub -anesthetic doses for pain 
control, with guidance from PolicyStat27 #5253340.  Its use in pain management is 
currently limited to ICU settings and utilizes boluses and infusions titrated to pain . 
According to discussions with inpatient pharmacy , approval  for an infusion dose 
modeled after randomized trials18,28 –30 may be granted for use  on floor units  with 
specific contingencies: physician/investigator will  be present at bedside during the 
infusion  and nursing staff are educated on the protocol.  This was discussed at 
Denver Health’s Medication Administration Forum (MAF) meeting on 3/5/20.   
 
Data Collection  
Data will be primarily collected at four time-points ( Table 4 ). Data will be 
entered  by staff into a REDCap database  on tablet computers  in the hospital and 
at SUDS clinic.  Data collected at enrollment will primarily be descriptive, including 
demographics, recent drinking history,31 readiness to change , and various 
contributing factors to drinking . Immediately  after intervention, vital signs , 
Protocol Template  Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 symptoms , and acceptability  will be recorded. Data collected on post -discharge 
arrival to SUDS clinic will  include  most 2’ clinical outco mes. We will obtain re-
admission rate (1’ clinical outcome) through chart review, conducted by research 
team members  at 30 -days post -discharge .  
 
Table 4 Patient flow and data collection points  
Step  Who   Notes  Data collected – staff entered  
Patient 
identified on 
consult list  
 ACS  Quick screen that 
meets inclusion 
criteria   
    
Addiction 
consult 
performed  
 ACS Evaluation, withdrawal 
management, 
medication (though if 
patient consents to 
study, will not be 
prescribed an 
addiction medication 
at discharge), brief 
therapy, referrals, 
disease 
screening/harm 
reduction   
    
Screen, 
consent, 
randomization  
 ACS Formal screen to 
identify any exclusion 
criteria. Simple 
randomization by 
algorithm  • E-Consent (should include 
consent to see records in “care 
everywhere” – some hospitals 
require permission – when 
checking for ED visits and re -
admissions)  
• Screening documentation 
(inclusion and exclusion criteria)  
• Alcohol -related admissions in last 
12 months (date, location, top 3 
diagnoses)  
• Assigned group  
    
Baseline 
data, referral 
to SUDS  
[data 
collection 
point #1]  
 ToD ToD collects baseline 
data first, then 
performs 
“biopsychosocial 
intake” and sets up 
SUDS appointment 
within 1 week of 
discharge.  
 
Discharge date is not 
always predictable; • Demographics  
• Baseline clinical data  
• Depression symptoms baseline 
(PHQ9 2 wks)  
• Drinking History 7 -days prior to 
admission (TLFB)  
• Readiness to change 
(SOCRATES -8A) 
• ACE Questionnaire  

Protocol Template  Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 ACS to review active 
hospitalized research 
participants and 
contact ToD/update 
date i n RedCap as 
needed.    
    
Intervention 
administered  
[data 
collection 
point #2]  
 RN, ACS  For ‘linkage -alone’ 
group, data to be 
entered following 
consult.  
 
For NTX group, 
intervention 
administered prior to 
discharge (could be 
same day as consent). 
Vitals immediately 
preceding and 40 min 
post- injection. Data 
collected after 
administration.  
 
For KET group, 
intervention 
administered prior to 
discharge (could be 
same day as consent), 
though should have no 
food for at least 3 
hours (~50% gastric 
emptying). Vitals 
immediately 
preceding, after 
completion, and 2 
hours following end of 
intervention.  
 • Vital signs (HR, BP, O2): linkage -
alone group - baseline only, 
recorded after consult. NTX 
group - baseline, 40 min after 
administration. KET group - 
baseline, end of administration 
(~40min), 2 hours after end of 
administration.  
• Most recent AST, ALT  
• UDS -5 data 
• [for KET] Dissociative symptoms 
(CADSS)  after administration (40 
min) 
• [for NTX and KET] Acceptability of 
intervention (10 -point Likert) after 
administration  
• [for NTX and KET] Readiness to 
change (SOCRATES -8A) after 
administration  (40 min)  
 
ORDER: CMP (if not already obtained), 
UDS -5 (if not already obtained)  
 
ORDER in discharge orders (outpatient): 
CMP, UDS -5, urine EtG (if not already 
ordered)  
 
    
Presentation 
to SUDS, 
data entered, 
contingency 
management 
reward 
administered  
[data 
collection 
point #3]  
 SUDS 
staff Upon presentation, 
staff to collect study 
data. After completion, 
will receive 
contingency 
management reward.  
 
Then patient to 
complete standard 
intake/follow -up visit, if 
willing.  
 • Drinking History since discharge 
(TLFB since discharge)  
• Depression symptoms (PHQ9 
modified to read “since 
discharge.”)  
• Readiness to change 
(SOCRATES -8A) 
• [for KET] Dissociative symptoms 
(CADSS)  
• Adverse Events (Modified PRISE)  
• Acceptability of intervention (10 -
point Likert)  

Protocol Template  Page 10 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Staff to instruct patient 
to present to the clinic 
laboratory (e.g. pav G) 
for CMP after the visit.  • Contingency management 
feedback (10 -point Likert, open 
ended)  
    
30-day chart 
review  
[data 
collection 
point #4]  Research 
staff 
 Should check 
encounters tab as well 
as “care everywhere” 
for Denver Metro 
region.  • Admissions (up to 5) within 30 
days of discharge date (date, 
location, up to top 3 main 
diagnoses based on 
documentation available).  
• ED visits (up to 5) within 30 days 
of discharge date (date, location, 
up to top 3 main diagnoses based 
on documentation available).  
• AST, ALT obtained at SUDS f/u (if 
available)  
• Urine EtG obtained at SUDS f/u (if 
available)  
 
 
 
 
Screening : The addiction consult team will attempt to screen  patients meeting the inclusion 
criteria during inpatient admission . We anticipate 10 patients will meet inclusion criteria  weekly . 
They will be assessed for  clear  exclusion criteria  documented in the chart , and if no ne are 
noted the patient will be asked if they would like to join the study  and complete the screening . If 
still no exclusion criteria are met and the patient expresses interest, they will be engage d in 
informed consent . The primary team will be notified by the addiction medicine team. Each 
combined  process of screening and consent is anticipated to require 1 5 minutes  at the end of a 
typical consultation . The screening window is anticipated to last 5 months.  
 
Randomization : Patients will  undergo a simple randomization  algorithm  to one of thre e arms.   
 
 
Intervention:  
- Arm 1: Receive a single dose of XR naltrexone ( 380mg ) prior to discharge . 
- Arm 2: Receive a single infusion of IV ketamine (0.5 mg/kg over 40 minutes) prior to 
discharge.  
- Arm 3 : No single -dose medication  
- All groups will receive e nhanced linkage to care  that includes c ontingency 
management , initiation of biopsychosocial  intake, and appointment scheduling . This  
aspect alone  surpasses the current standard of care.  
 
Contingency Management : Patients will receive a debit card prior to discharge from the 
hospital. We will utilize a pre -existing system - ClinCard by Greenphire. Participants will receive 
$10 upon completion of baseline data, and $20 upon completion of follow -up data (at SUDS 
clinic). 
 
Follow up : Patients will be assigned a  follow -up within 7 days of discharge at the outpatient 
addiction clinic (Denver Health SUDS clinic  in pavilion  K).  
  

Protocol Template  Page 11 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Standard of care:  Current standard of care for alcohol use disorder in the hospital includes 
offer of medications (usually oral naltrexone)  and addiction medicine consultation which can 
result in brief counseling and referral to SUDS clinic or other treatment program.   
  
 
D. Description, Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collec tion Tools:  
 
Table 5 Overview of risk s and justifications  of procedures and data collection tools   
Procedure/Tool  Description, Risks  Justification  
Injection of IM 
medication  
(naltrexone)  
 Risks include minimal pain and discomfort 
at the injection site which will occur on the 
lateral thigh or the buttock. One study 
suggested that the discomfort of an 
injection itself deterred a large number of 
participants.32 If that is the cas e for our 
study, this decision will be honored with no 
repercussion aside from not enrolling in the 
study. More serious risks such as infection, 
blood clot, bleeding and/or allergic reaction 
are rare.  
 These risks are justifiable as 
there is very little r isk of 
serious or permanent harm, 
and potential benefits in terms 
of preventing the 
consequences of heavy 
drinking are almost certainly 
greater.  
Medication -
related risks  of 
naltrexone  
 Risk of opioid withdrawal if the patient is 
taking opioids concurrentl y (an exclusion 
criteria) ; Liver injury can be seen, but is 
usually mild and self -limiting. Patients with 
AST/ALT > 5x ULN, hepatic failure, or 
decompensated cirrhosis will be excluded. 
Nausea, sleepiness and headache are the 
other most common medication si de 
effects.  
 These risks are justifiable as 
there is very little risk of 
serious or permanent harm, 
and potential benefits in terms 
of preventing the 
consequences of heavy 
drinking.  It is a single dose 
which limits exposure.  
 
Medication -
related risks of 
ketamine  
 
 
 Risk of unpleasant dissociative symptoms , 
delirium, hallucinations ; high blood 
pressure which could lead to adverse 
cardiac events if patients are not screened 
carefully ; initiation of ketamine abuse after 
discharge .  These risks are justifiable as 
there is very little risk of 
serious or permanent harm, 
and potential benefits in terms 
of preventing the 
consequences of heavy 
drinking. It is a single dose 
which limits exposure.  
Patients who experienced 
delirium during hos pital stay 
will be excluded. Patients with 
known cardiovascular disease 
will be excluded. The most 
recent randomized trial using 
ketamine found no initiation of 
ketamine “abuse” following 
administration.21 
 
Data collection 
tools – 
questionnaires, 
urine Etg  All questionnaires have the potential to 
bring up unpleasant memories of their use 
and strong emotions related to their 
motivations to change. Gathering re -
admission data from insurance claims has These risks are justifiable as 
strict precautions to safeguard 
protected health information 
will b e applied.  
Protocol Template  Page 12 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 the potential for a breach of confidentiality. 
However, precautions to safeguard 
protected health information in accordance 
with international standards for human 
subjects research will be applied.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Potential Scientific Problems:   
 
One potential limitation is the  small sample size. As a pilot study, our main 
aim is to test feasibility. A more robust , precise  demonstration of clinical 
effectiveness  will be pursued in a future project with data used from this study to 
inform sample size estimates as well as timelines.  
 Secondly,  patients may be re-admitted to hospitals that do not show up in 
our medical record system (Epic). Insurance c laims data would be ideal, but at this 
stage the added value does  not justify  the costs  required for acquisition . Notably , 
Epic “Care Everywhere” can  detect admissions in the University of Colorado 
Health system (12 hospitals in Colorado), SCL Health (5), and Centura Health 
(17). This network of ho spitals provides high coverage based on our population, 
many of whom are homeless and located in a small regional geography.    
 Another potential limitation is a low follow -up rate at SUDS. This is one 
major reason for including contingency management26 as part of our enhanced 
linkage to care.  Regardless, the primary quantitative outcome (hospital re -
admission) will not require  data from SUDS attendance to measure.  
 Alternative designs were considered but deemed beyond the scope of this 
proposal:  
• “Double dummy” placebos , which can minimize bias in both resea rcher and 
participant. However, this would be personnel and time -intensive, and due 
to ketamine’s unique psychoactive effect, patients are unlikely to be 
successfully blinded.  
• 2x2 factorial design , which could gain information on combinations of 
multiple interventions, but would unnecessarily weaken inferences and 
complicate statistical analysis due to interactions in this small sample.  
• 30-day in -person evaluation , which would facilitate additional longitudinal 
measurement. However, we are not confident t hat enough patients would 
show up (or be reachable by telephone) to allow for meaningful analysis.   
 
 
F.   Data Analysis Plan:   
 
Participants’ demographic and baseline clinical data will be tabulated, and 
differences between groups will be assessed using  a Fisher’s Exact Test for 
categorical variables and a two -sample t -test for continuous variables. These tests 
Protocol Template  Page 13 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 will help evaluate the effectiveness of randomization. Feasibility outcomes (Aim 1) 
such as adverse events and acceptability (Likert scale)33 will be compared for 
each group using a Fisher’s Exact Test and Wilcoxon -Mann -Whitney Test, 
respectively. Overall recruitment rate and follow -up rate will be tallied at the 
conclusion of data collecti on.  
For Aim 2, all -cause hospital re -admission within 30 -days of discharge will 
be recorded as a binary outcome. Rates  of the two medication intervention groups 
(XR naltrexone or IV ketamine) will be compared  against the group that received 
enhanced linkage to care alone.   
This pilot study may not be sufficiently powered for robust hypothesis 
testin g. By one crude estimate, we could have approximately  80% power to detect 
a difference between a medication group and the lin kage -alone group with about 
60 participants assuming a re-admission rate is 25% vs 15%. A larger effect size 
would increase our power and/or reduce the number of participants required. 
Regardless, t his will provide parameter estimates that can inform a fut ure sample 
size calculation in a larger effectiveness trial.   
For further descriptive purposes, a secondary utilization outcome is  risk of 
30-day all -cause ED visits. This will be evaluated in a similar manner as hospital 
re-admissions. Additionally, we a re interested in t he within -subject difference in 
readiness -to-change.  For those who follow -up, a mean of  pre/post differences will 
be calculated, and a paired t -test will be used  to determine if the null hypothesis 
(H0: difference = 0) can be rejected . Drinking behavior will be measured using the 
Timeline Follow Back method.31 Binge drinking will be defined as 5+ drinks for 
men, 4+ for women,23 and the proportion of binge drinking days since discharge 
will be calculated for each group. Proportions of positive urine ethyl glucuronide 
(EtG) will also be tabulated for each group.  
Data will be analyzed in SAS.  
 
 
F. Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
 
We hope to demonstrate feasibility of two single -dose interventions 
given in the hospital setting and estimate their effects in terms of 
hospital readmissions. The knowledge gained will help inform a 
future, larger comp arative effectiveness study . The data will also 
help CAM staff related to tracking and in centivizing transitions of 
care for patients with AUD.  
 
 
 
 H. References:  
 
1.  White AM, Slater ME, Ng G, Hingson R, Breslow R. Trends in Alcohol -Related Emergency 
Department Visits in the United States: Results from the Nationwide Emergency Department 
Sample, 2006 to 2014. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. 2018;42(2):352 –9.  
Protocol Template  Page 14 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 2.  SAMHSA. Results from the 2012 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of 
National Findings. Rockville, MD; 2013 p. 178. (NSDUH Series H -46, HHS Publication N o. 
(SMA) 13 -4795).  
3.  Trowbridge P, Weinstein ZM, Kerensky T, Roy P, Regan D, Samet JH, et al. Addiction 
consultation services - Linking hospitalized patients to outpatient addiction treatment. J Subst 
Abuse Treat. 2017;79:1 –5.  
4.  Wakeman SE, Metlay JP , Chang Y, Herman GE, Rigotti NA. Inpatient Addiction Consultation 
for Hospitalized Patients Increases Post -Discharge Abstinence and Reduces Addiction 
Severity. J GEN INTERN MED. 2017 Aug 1;32(8):909 –16.  
5.  Wei J, Defries T, Lozada M, Young N, Huen W, Tu lsky J. An Inpatient Treatment and 
Discharge Planning Protocol for Alcohol Dependence: Efficacy in Reducing 30 -Day 
Readmissions and Emergency Department Visits. J Gen Intern Med. 2015 Mar;30(3):365 –70.  
6.  Leavitt S. Naltrexone Clinical Update: Evidence f or the Efficacy of Naltrexone in the Treatment 
of Alcohol Dependence (Alcoholism). Addiction Treatment Forum. 2002 Mar;8.  
7.  Baser O, Chalk M, Rawson R, Gastfriend DR. Alcohol dependence treatments: comprehensive 
healthcare costs, utilization outcomes, a nd pharmacotherapy persistence. Am J Manag Care. 
2011 Jun;17 Suppl 8:S222 -234.  
8.  Denver Public Health. The Epidemiology of Alcohol & Health in Denver. Powerpoint 
presentation presented at: John Sbarbaro Memorial Lecture in Public Health 2019; 2019 May 
23; Denver, CO.  
9.  Fingar K, Barrett M, Jiang H. A Comparison of All -Cause 7 -Day and 30 -Day Readmissions, 
2014. HCUP Statistical Brief #230 [Internet]. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality; 2017 Oct [cited 2020 Jan 13]. Available from : https://www.hcup -
us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb230 -7-Day-Versus -30-Day-Readmissions.jsp  
10.  Osborn CY, Kripalani S, Goggins KM, Wallston KA. Financial Strain is Associated with 
Medication Nonadherence and Worse Self -rated Health among Cardiovascular Patients. J 
Health Care Poor Underserved. 2017;28(1):499 –513.  
11.  Dept of Health Care Policy & Financing. Colorado Hospital Transformation Program [Internet]. 
Colorado HCPF. 2016 [cited 2020 Feb 6]. Available from: 
https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/hcpf/c olorado -hospital -transformation -program  
12.  Carroll KM, editor. Improving Compliance With Alcoholism Treatment. In: National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Project MATCH Monograph Series [Internet]. Rockville, MD: 
NIH; 1997. p. 112. Available f rom: 
https://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/projectmatch/match06.pdf  
13.  Bryson WC, McConnell KJ, Korthuis PT, McCarty D. Extended -Release Naltrexone for Alcohol 
Dependence: Persistence and Healthcare Costs and Utilization. Am J Manag Care. 2011 
Jun;17(S uppl 8):S222 –34.  
14.  Garbutt JC, Kranzler HR, O’Malley SS, Gastfriend DR, Pettinati HM, Silverman BL, et al. 
Efficacy and tolerability of long -acting injectable naltrexone for alcohol dependence: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2005 Apr 6;293(13):1617 –25.  
Protocol Template  Page 15 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 15.  Hartung DM , McCarty D, Fu R, Wiest K, Chalk M, Gastfriend DR. Extended -release naltrexone 
for alcohol and opioid dependence: a meta -analysis of healthcare utilization studies. J Subst 
Abuse Treat. 2014 Aug;47(2):113 –21.  
16.  Saitz R. Alcohol Disorder hOsPital Treat ment Trial,  Identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] [Internet]. NIH | 
ClinicalTrials.gov. [cited 2019 Oct 31]. Available from: 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
17.  Berman RM, Cappiello A, Anand A, Oren DA, Heninger GR, Charney DS, et al. Antidepressant 
effects of ketamine in depressed patients. Biological Psychiatry. 2000 Feb 15;47(4):351 –4.  
18.  Murrough JW, Iosifescu DV, Chang LC, Al Jurdi RK, Green CE, Perez AM, et al. 
Antidepressant Efficacy of Ketamine in Treatment -Resistant Major Depression: A Two -Site 
Randomized Controlled Trial. AJP. 2013 Oct 1;170(10):1134 –42.  
19.  U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA News Release | FDA approves new nasal spray 
medication for treatment -resistant depression; available only at a certified doctor’s office or 
clinic [Internet]. FDA. 2019 [cited 2020 Jan 8]. Available from: http://www.fda.gov/news -
events/press -announcements/fda -approves -new-nasal -spray -medication -treatment -resistant -
depression -available -only-certified  
20.  Das RK, Gale G, Walsh K, Hennessy VE, Iskand ar G, Mordecai LA, et al. Ketamine can 
reduce harmful drinking by pharmacologically rewriting drinking memories. Nature 
Communications. 2019 Nov 26;10(1):1 –10.  
21.  Dakwar E, Levin F, Hart CL, Basaraba C, Choi J, Pavlicova M, et al. A Single Ketamine 
Infusion Combined With Motivational Enhancement Therapy for Alcohol Use Disorder: A 
Randomized Midazolam -Controlled Pilot Trial. Am J Psychiatry. 2019 Dec 
2;appiajp201919070684.  
22.  Miller WR, Tonigan JS. Assessing drinkers’ motivation for change: The Stages  of Change 
Readiness and Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOCRATES). Psychology of Addictive Behaviors. 
1996;10(2):81 –9.  
23.  National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA). Drinking Levels Defined 
[Internet]. 2011 [cited 2020 Jan 13]. Available fro m: https://www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol -
health/overview -alcohol -consumption/moderate -binge -drinking  
24.  Petry NM, Martin B, Cooney JL, Kranzler HR. Give them prizes and they will come: 
Contingency management for treatment of alcohol dependence. Journal of Co nsulting and 
Clinical Psychology. 2000;68(2):250 –7.  
25.  Barnett NP, Celio MA, Tidey JW, Murphy JG, Colby SM, Swift RM. A preliminary randomized 
controlled trial of contingency management for alcohol use reduction using a transdermal 
alcohol sensor. Addic tion. 2017;112(6):1025 –35.  
26.  Norton BL, Bachhuber MA, Singh R, Agyemang L, Arnsten JH, Cunningham CO, et al. 
Evaluation of contingency management as a strategy to improve HCV linkage to care and 
treatment in persons attending needle and syringe program s: A pilot study. Int J Drug Policy. 
2019;69:1 –7.  
27.  Ketamine in the Adult intensive Care Units. PolicyStat ID 5253340. Pharmacy Guildline. 
[Internet]. Denver Health; 2018. Available from: 
http://denverhealth.policystat.com/policy/5253340  
Protocol Template  Page 16 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 28.  Howton JC , Rose J, Duffy S, Zoltanski T, Levitt MA. Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo -
Controlled Trial of Intravenous Ketamine in Acute Asthma. Annals of Emergency Medicine. 
1996 Feb 1;27(2):170 –5.  
29.  Dakwar E, Nunes EV, Hart CL, Foltin RW, Mathew SJ, Carpenter KM, et al. A Single Ketamine 
Infusion Combined With Mindfulness -Based Behavioral Modification to Treat Cocaine 
Dependence: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Am J Psychiatry. 2019 Nov 1;176(11):923 –30.  
30.  Feder A, Parides MK, Murrough JW, Perez AM, Morgan JE,  Saxena S, et al. Efficacy of 
Intravenous Ketamine for Treatment of Chronic Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Randomized 
Clinical Trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014 Jun 1;71(6):681 –8.  
31.  Sobell LC, Sobell MB. Timeline Follow -Back. In: Litten RZ, Allen JP, edit ors. Measuring 
Alcohol Consumption: Psychosocial and Biochemical Methods [Internet]. Totowa, NJ: Humana 
Press; 1992 [cited 2020 Jan 13]. p. 41 –72. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4612 -
0357 -5_3 
32.  Friedmann PD, Mello D, Lonergan S, Bourgault  C, O’Toole TP. Aversion to injection limits 
acceptability of extended -release naltrexone among homeless, alcohol -dependent patients. 
Subst Abus. 2013;34(2):94 –6.  
33.  Collins SE, Duncan MH, Smart BF, Saxon AJ, Malone DK, Jackson TR, et al. Extended -
relea se naltrexone and harm reduction counseling for chronically homeless people with alcohol 
dependence. Subst Abus. 2015;36(1):21 –33.  
34.  Lee EC, Whitehead AL, Jacques RM, Julious SA. The statistical interpretation of pilot trials: 
should significance thres holds be reconsidered? BMC Med Res Methodol. 2014 Mar 20;14:41.  
 