 
 
Page 1 of 25 
RAMIC  
 CLINICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SAN DIEGO  
DEPARTMENT OF MEDICINE  
  
CLINICAL PROTOCOL NUMBER:   RAMIC                                                                                                                         
TITLE: A Randomized, Double -blind , Placebo -Controlled Trial to Evaluate the Efficacy of Ramipril to 
Prevent ICU Admission, Mechanical Ventilation or Death  in Persons with COVID-19 
ABBREVIATED TITLE:  RAM IC Trial 
AMENDMENT: Amendment 6 , December 9, 2020    
ADVARRA NUMBER:  Pro00043364               
IND NO:  149827                                                                                                                             
IDENTIFYING WORDS:  SARS -CoV-2,  hypertension, ACE inhibitor, Angiotensin II receptor blocker , 
mortality 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATO R: 
Rohit Loomba, MD, MHSc  
ASSOCIATE INVESTIGATORS:  
Veeral Ajmera, MD, MAS  
Davey Smith, MD, PhD Atul Malhotra, MD  
Ravinder Mehta, MD Vaishal Tolia, MD, MPH  
Daniel Bouland, MD, FACP  
Jeffrey Yin, Pharm D  
Wesley K. Thompson, Ph.D  
Lisa Richards, NP  
 
 
Page 2 of 25 
RAMIC  
 Summer Collier, NP 
ESTIMATED DURATION OF STUDY:  1 year  
NUMBER AND TYPE OF PATIENTS : Up to 560 patients with confirmed SARS -CoV-2 diagnosis, ages 
above 18 years, both male and female.  
SUBJECTS OF STUDY:        
Number of patients             Sex                                       Age Range  
 560                      Male & Female                   Above 18 years       
Volunteers                             None  
PROJECT USES IONIZING RADIATION:  No 
PROJECT USES “DURABLE POWER OF ATTORNEY”: No  
TYPE OF STUDY: Randomized -controlled -trial 
MULTI- INSTITUTIONAL PROJECT:  Yes  
 
 
Page 3 of 25 
RAMIC  
 The RAMIC  Trial  
  
A Randomized, Double -blind, Placebo -Controlled Trial to Evaluate the Efficacy of Ramipril to Prevent 
ICU Admission, Mechanical Ventilation or Death in  Persons with COVID-19  
  
SIGNATURE PAGE  
   
I will conduct the study in accordance with the provisions of this protocol and all applicable protocol -related 
documents. I agree to conduct this study in compliance with applicable United States (US) Food and Drug 
Administration regulations; standards of the International Conference on Harmonization Guideline for 
Good Clinical Practice (E6); Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee determination s; Good Clinical 
Practice (GCP) guidelines; all applicable in-country, state, and local laws and regulations; and other applicable requirements and institutional policies. 
 I agree to conduct the study according to all stipulations of the protocol, includi ng all statements  
regarding confidentiality, and according to applicable legal regulations and regulatory requirements.  
  Principal Investigator: _______________________________________________  
           Print/Type  
  Signed: ___________________________________ Date: _____________  
 
  
 
 
Page 4 of 25 
RAMIC  
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
SIGNATURE PAGE  3 
ABSTRACT 6 
BACKGROUND  7 
STUDY OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES  9 
Primary objective: 9 
Secondary objectives:  9 
Exploratory objective: 9 
Primary outcome measure:  9 
Secondary outcomes:  9 
STUDY DESIGN  10 
Randomization  10 
Recruitment  10 
Study Visits  10 
SUBJECT SELECTION  11 
Inclusion Criteria:  11 
Exclusion Criteria:  11 
Subject Enrollment: 11 
TREATMENT 13 
STUDY ASSESSMENTS 14 
Table 1: Schedule of Events  15 
Premature Discontinuation of Study Drug 16 
Post-Treatment Phase:  16 
Long-term follow up visits: 16 
 
 
Page 5 of 25 
RAMIC  
 ADVERSE EVENTS AND STUDY MONITORING  17 
Criteria for discontinuation  17 
Table 2. Scoring of toxicity for dis continuation  19 
The risks and discomforts of frequent phlebotomy  19 
Data and Safety Monitoring  19 
Adverse Event Reporting  19 
Patient Priv acy 20 
STATISTICAL METHODS AND CONSIDERATIONS  191 
APPENDIX A: Screening Diagram  203 
APPEN DIX B: COVID-19 Symptom Assessment  214 
REFERENCES                    26  
CREDITS                          28  
 
  
 
 
Page 6 of 25 
RAMIC  
 ABSTRACT  
As of early April,  2020, the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) pandemic, caused by severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV-2), has infected over 1.1 million people globally and 
caused over 62,000 deaths. Currently, no drug therapies have yet been proven to be effective in treating 
COVID-19 patients, although several are under investigation or in development. Among COVID -19 cases, 
pre-existing comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease have been shown to 
be associated with hig her risk of developing severe symptoms and higher risk of mortality1. Recent data 
suggest that use of angiotensin -converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or angiotensin II  receptor blockers 
(ARBs) may be associated with lower risk of morbidity and mortality in patients with COVID- 192,3,4.  
ACEIs and ARBs are part of the renin -angiotensin -aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibiting agents and 
considered as one of the first-line the rapies for the management of a large proportion of patients with 
hypertension.  However, continued use of ACEI/ARB has become controversial in the setting of COVID -
19. The reason for this controversy stems from the fact that ACEIs and ARBs use may increase the 
expression of ACE2 receptor5-7, which is the known cellular receptor and a necessary entry point for SARS-
COV-2 infection8. Therefore, continued use of ACEIs and ARBs among patients with COVID- 19 infection 
is controversial due to theoretical concerns of potentially increased cellular invasion of SARS -COV-2 or 
enhanced susceptibility towards SARS -COV-2 infection. Conversely, it has been indicated that ACE2 
expression is downregulated following SARS infection, resulting in excessive activation of RAAS  and 
exacerbated pneumonia progression mediated by angiotensin9,10. Therefore, administration of ACEI/ARB 
may in turn be beneficial by blocking the angiotensin-induced hyperactivation of RAAS and thereby preventing acute lung injury and risk of adult respiratory distress syndrome in patients with COVID-19.  
Ramipril is an ACE inhibitor that is approved by the FDA for the treatment of hypertension, to reduce the 
risk of heart failure and death post -myocardial infarction, and reduction of risk of myocardial infarc tion, 
stroke, and death from cardiovascular causes. The drug’s suppressing effects on the renin -angiotensin-
aldosterone system (RAAS) system leads to inhibition of tissue and circulating ACE activity.  This leads 
to cessation of angiotensin II -related vaso constrictive, proinflammatory, and pro-oxidative effects and 
improvement in hypertension, inflammation and oxidative stress. These properties may be useful.  
Ramipril has not been studied in SARS -CoV-2 infected patients. In this study we propose to treat 560 
patients with ramipril or placebo for 14 days. After an initial evaluation for COVID -19 status, medical 
history, and symptom assessment, patients will receive either 2 .5 mg/day of ramipril or placebo. Patients’ 
symptoms and study endpoints will be monitored at regular intervals. Additional follow -up will be 
performed at  day 28. As an exploratory objective, biomarkers of the RAAS axis will also be monitored. 
The primary endpoints of successful therapy will be improved survival, reductions in ICU admissions , 
and/or reductions in use of mechanical ventilator support. Secondary endpoints will be the proportion of patients needing continued hospitalization, time to mortality, time to ICU admission, time to discharge from 
hospital, proportion of patients developing hypotension and needing pressor support, and proportion of 
patients developing septic shock.  
 
 
Page 7 of 25 
RAMIC  
 BACKGROUND  
The global coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) pandemic, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV-2)11, is projected to infect millions of people worldwide and lead to 240,000 
deaths in the United States. Currently, no drug therapies have been proven to be effective in treating 
COVID-19 patients, although several are under investigation or in development. Emerging data suggest hypertension, along with diabetes and cardiovascular disease, predisposes individuals to increased risk for 
more severe COVID-19 symptoms and higher mortality
1. Angiotensin -converting enzyme inhibitors 
(ACEIs) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) block the renin-angiotensin aldosterone system (R AAS) 
and are commonly prescribed treatments for patients with these conditions. Use of this drug class for 
COVID-19 patients has been a subject of controversy, because they have been reported in animal studies 
to increase expression of ACE2, the known receptor and cellular entry point for SARS -CoV-2, and thus 
may increase susceptibility to the virus5,6. Supporting this observation, higher urinary and circulating ACE2 
levels have been observed in patients with hypertension and diabetes, respectively, who underwent treatment with ARBs and ACEIs
76.  
Use of ACEIs/ARBs in COVID-19 patients:  However, several lines of evidence suggest use of ACEIs 
and ARBS may of fer protective effects in COVID -19 patients. A recent study from Shenzhen, China 
reported that serum angiotensin II levels were significantly elevated in COVID-19 patients with pneumonia and were linearly correlated with viral load and lung injury
2.  This observation, combined with animal 
studies, has led to the hypothesis that SARS -CoV- 2 infection may lead to downregulation of ACE2 
expression and subsequent activation of the RA AS system, which in turn may contribute to the severe levels 
of lung injury and respiratory failure widely observed in hospitalized COVID-19 patients2,12. If this working 
model is correct, use of ACEIs and ARBs may offer therapeutic benefit in treatment of the COVID-19 patient population. This hypothesis is supported by another recent study of 1128 adult COVID -19 patients 
admitted to 9 hospitals in Hubei Province, China
3. In this retrospective cohort study of hospitalized COVID-
19 patients with hypertension, the  28-day all -cause mortality rate among patients who had inpatient 
treatment with ACEI/ARB (n=188) compared with ACEI/ARB nonusers (n=940) was 3.7% vs 9.8%, a 
difference that was statistically significant. In this study, inpatient ACEI/ARB treatment associated with a 
lower mortality risk, although the findings may be influenced by confounding factors. Further support 
comes from previous studies showing ACEIs/ARBs may benefit patients with acute lung injury (ALI) or 
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)13-16.  
Ramipril:  First approved for clinical use nearly 3 decades ago, Ramipril is a 2 -aza-bicyclo [3.3.0] -octane-
3-carboxylic acid derivative  that has potent antihypertensive properties. It undergoes de -esterification in 
the liver to form ramiprilat, its active metabolite and a nonsulfhydryl ACE inhibitor. Ramipril is approved 
by the FDA for the treatment of hypertension, to reduce the risk of heart failure and death post -myocardial 
infarction, and reduction of risk of myocardial infarction, stroke, and de ath from cardiovascular causes. The 
drug’s mitigating effects on hypertension are largely attributed to its suppression of the RAAS  system. 
Ramipril’s inhibition of tissue and circulating ACE activity results in reduced angiotensin II formation.  
The drug is generally well tolerated with the most prevalent adverse effects in patients with hypertension 
being headache, dizziness, and fatigue.  
 
 
 
Page 8 of 25 
RAMIC  
 Hypothesis  
We hypothesize that Ramipril 2 .5 mg po once daily will perform better than placebo in reducing the 
compos ite of all -cause mortality, need for ICU admission or invasive mechanical ventilator support among 
hospitalized patients with COVID-19.  
 
Specific Aims We plan to conduct a randomized, double -blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial to examine the efficac y 
of ramipril at 2.5 mg orally daily versus placebo given over 14 days to improve COVID -19 patient outcomes 
including  mortality, ICU admission rates, and rates of invasive mechanical ventilator use.  
In this study, we propose to randomize up to 510 patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, as confirmed by 
PCR or clinical presentation consistent with COVID- 19 infection (fever or cough or shortness of breath) 
with positive IgM serology, to either ramipril or placebo for 14 days. We plan to enroll a total of 560 
patients, expecting some drop outs prior to randomization. After an initial medical history and screening 
labs and procedures, patients will be randomized to receive either  ramipril 2.5  mg or placebo or ally for 14 
days.  Patients’ symptoms and study endpoints will be monitored at regular intervals. After 14 days, in 
patient participants will undergo end-of -treatment visit with collection of lab results from medical records, 
if done as part of routine medi cal care. An additional follow -up visit will be performed at day 28.  For 
outpatient participants, the Day 14 and Day 28 visits will be virtual.  
As an exploratory objective, biomarkers of the RAAS  axis, will also be monitored  in a subset of patients. 
The primary endpoints of successful therapy will be improved survival, reductions in ICU admissions, and/or reductions in use of invasive mechanical ventilator support. Secondary endpoints will be the 
proportion of patients needing continued hospitalization, tim e to mortality, time to ICU admission, time to 
discharge from hospital, proportion of patients developing hypotension and needing pressor support, acute 
kidney injury and proportion of patients developing septic shock.  
 
  
 
 
Page 9 of 25 
RAMIC  
 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES  
Primary objective:  
To examine the efficacy of ramipril 2.5 mg orally daily over 14 days versus placebo in patients with 
COVID-19 infection in improving survival  and reduction in need for admission to intensive care unit or 
invasive mechanical ventilation.  
  
Secondary objectives:  
Proportion of patients needing continued hospitalization at day 14  
Time to discharge from the hospital  
(For discharged to outpatient sub-group only) Need for hospitalization  
Proportion of patients developing hypotension and needing pressor support  
Proportion of patients developing septic shock defined as sepsis with hypotension requiring vasopressors 
to maintain MAP ≥ 65 and serum lactate > 2 mmol/L after fluid resuscitation ( Sepsis-3 JAMA 2016)  
Acute kidney injury defined by KDIGO guidelines, increase in serum creatinine by ≥  0.3 mg/dL within 24 
hours or increase in serum creatinine ≥  1.5 times baseline.  
Composite of mortality or need for ICU admission or invasive mechanical ventilator use within a 28 -day 
window  
 Exploratory objective:  
To examine the efficacy of ramipril in improving biomarkers of  the renin -angiotension-aldosterone axis 
To examine racial differences in response to treatment with ramipril in patients with COVID- 19 infection  
Primary outcome measure:  
Composite outcome includes mortality (yes/no) or need for ICU admission or invasive mechanical  
ventilation (yes/no) at 14-day from the start of treatment (or at any point within the 14-day window).  
Secondary outcomes:  
1. Proportion of patients needing continued hospitalization at day 14  
2. Time to discharge from the hospital  
3. (For outpatient sub-group only) Need for hospitalization  
4. Proportion of patients developing hy potension and needing pressor support  
5. Proportion of patients developing septic shock 
6. Proportion of patients developing acute kidney injury   
7. Composite of mortality or need for ICU admission or invasive mechanical ventilator use within a 
28-day window  
 
 
Page 10 of 25 
RAMIC  
 STUDY DESIGN  
This is a randomized, double -blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial to examine the efficacy of ramipril 
at 2.5 mg orally daily versus placebo given over 14 days to improve outcomes in patients with documented 
COVID-19 infection. 560 subjects will be randomized, monitored at regular intervals for the 14 days, and 
will be invited to continue participating in the study for an additional 1 year for monitoring. Study 
participants and investigators will be blinded to study assignment.  
Randomization  
Randomization will occur in a 2:1 ratio to treatment and placebo study arms respectively using permuted 
block randomization by UCSD investigational drug services.  
Recruitment  
Recruitment will occur through referral from patients presenting to the emergency department , urgent care, 
other ambulatory clinics  or currently hospitalized . In addition, system lists generated to track patients 
undergoing testing for COVID -19 infection will be used for recruitment in accordance with the partial 
HIPAA waiver.  Study sites will communicate study availability to their emergency departments, urgent 
care, other ambulatory clinics  and hospital wards. Given the scope of the pandemic and lack of effective 
therapies we anticipate rapid study accrual.  
Study Visits   
All subjects:  Study visits will occur virtually and in accordance with IRB guidelines to reduce the risk of 
SARS -CoV-2 transmission and preserve personal protective equipment. Informed consent will be obtained 
by study personnel by videoconference or telephone . A HIPAA waiver will be completed by study subjects 
so that study personnel can extract relevant data from the medical record. Subjects may be asked to provide 
copies of their COVID-19 test results, medical history, imaging results and concomitant medicat ions.  
Subsequent study visits will occur by videoconference or telephone.  
Inpatients  only: Regular laboratory assessment will be extracted from the medical record on inpatients.  
Discharged to o utpatient only: A mobile phlebotomy unit maybe used for blood  draws for outpatient 
subjects (Sites will seek approval from  UCSD prior to use of third party vendor for mobile phlebotomy 
services). Patients discharged from the hospital at any point after randomization will receive sufficient 
drug/placebo  to complete t he study and will continue to be monitored by videoconference or telephone and 
will follow up for end of treatment (EOT)/Day 14.  
 
 
Page 11 of 25 
RAMIC  
 SUBJECT SELECTION  
Inclusion Criteria: 
● Age ≥ 18 years 
● Willing and able to provide written informed consent prior to performing study procedures  OR 
legally authorized representative has been fully informed and has given voluntary written informed 
consent in compliance with local regulations.  
● Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV)-2 infection confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test ≤ 7 days before randomization 
OR 
Clinical presentation consistent with COVID-19 infection (fever or cough or shortness of breath) with positive IgM serology  
Exclusion Criteria:  
● Participation in any other clinical trial of an experimental treatment for COVID-1 9 (compassionate 
use of hydroxycholoroquine, choloroquine, azithromycin or emergency use authorization of 
remdesivir outside of a clinical trial is allowed ) 
● Requiring mechanical ventilation  at screening  
● Requiring ICU care at admission/screening visit  
● NSAID use within 12 hours of randomization or requiring continued NSAID use during this trial . 
Use of ASAs is permitted.  
● Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) > 5 X upper limit of normal 
(ULN)  
● Estimated GFR < 40 mL/min  
● History of serum creatinine ≥  2 mg/dl in the previous 28 days  
● Systolic BP < 100 mm hg or diastolic BP < 65 mm hg 
● Hypersensitivity to ACE I 
● History of angioedema 
● Outpatient us e of ACE inhibitor or Angiotensin II receptor blocker in the last 7 days 
● History of renal artery stenosis 
● Serum potassium ≥ 5.1 mEq/L  
● Pregnancy or breastfeeding  
● Use of aliskiren, amifostine, lithium, sacubitril, within 7 days  
 
Subject Enrollment:  
Prior to initiating the study , each site must have the protocol and informed consent form approved as 
appropriate by the appropriate institutional review board or ethics committee. Potential subjects may be 
referred to the research team in one of two ways 1) Patients with positive PCR testing for SARS-COV2 or 
with positive IgM serologic testing for SARS-COV2 and clinical presentation consistent with infection 
 
 
Page 12 of 25 
RAMIC  
 (fever or cough or shortness of breath) who present to the emergency department , urgent  care, other 
ambulatory clinics  or are hospitalized may be referred to participate.  Patients with a clinical suspicion of 
COVID-19 infection may also be referred to participate. Candidates referred to the study will undergo 
informed consent  using one of the following: 1) Subjects will be consented  in-person, or  by 
videoconference or telephonically, which must occur in the presence of a co -signing witness.  A paper copy 
of the consent form can be provided by a designated health care provider caring for the pa tient. 2) 
Alternately, electronic methods may be used for consenting subjects. An electronic copy of the signed 
consent will be provided to the subject. After obtaining informed consent, a structured interview will be 
performed to review the past medical history and medication history. Requisite screening labs and 
procedures will be reviewed.  Patients meeting all eligibility criteria and having no exclusion criteria will 
be enrolled in the study.  The screening process is outlined in Appendix A ( Screening Diagram) . 
  
 
 
Page 13 of 25 
RAMIC  
 TREATMENT 
Subjects meeting all of the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria are eligible for enrollment. 
The subject will be considered to be randomized when the first dose of investigational product is ingested. 
Participants will be randomized one of two treatment arms and receive either  ramipril 2.5 mg/day (1 
capsule) or placebo (1 capsule) orally for a total of 14 days. Study drug is supplied by Pfizer Inc . to the site 
pharmacist who will then distribute the appropriate drug/placebo  to the inpatient pharmacy for distribution 
to the patient. Alternately, the site investigator may receive and dispense study drug to the subjects. The 
study site pharmacist/site investigator  is required to maintain records of all study drug/placebo  
administration. Study drug /placebo  should preferentially be administered after 8 hours of fasting.   
At each visit, particular attention will be paid to symptoms associated with the possible side effects of ramipril and patients will complete a standardized symptom scale.  
All patients will be advised to ab stain from concomitant NSAID while on study drug/placebo. Use of ASAs 
are permitted during the trial. 
Inpatients: For patients admitted to the hospital, a 14-day  supply of study drug/placebo will be provided 
to the inpatient pharmacy from the site pharmacist for daily administration by the health care team.  
Participants were advised to consume the drug in the morning after eight hours of  fasting.  
Discharged to o utpatient: For outpatient subjects , study drug/placebo  will be provided to complete a 14-
day treatment course. Participants were advised to consume the drug in the morning after eight hours of 
fasting.  
STUDY ASSESSMENTS  
Study subjects will attend a virtual information session during which the primary consent document, and 
the UCSD HIPAA forms are reviewed, discussed and signed. The following study procedures will be 
completed at this visit for all study subjects : 
1. Review concomitant medication use 
2. Review past medical history  
3. Review and record blood tests . Complete blood count (CBC) and Comprehensive 
Metabolic Panel (CMP) are required and should be obtained through the study if not 
obtained for routine clinical care.  
4. Review and record clinical chest x -ray and computed tomography results , if available. 
5. Review vital signs: heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation and t he use of 
supplemental oxygen, body temperature, and respiratory rate , if available. 
6. Symptom assessment: Structured tool (Appendix B)  
7. Outcome assessment  
 
  
 
 
Page 14 of 25 
RAMIC  
 Table 1: Schedule of Events 
Assessment   Treatment Period  End of 
Study Early 
Terminatio
n 
 Visit Date  Screening  RAND D3 D7 D14 D28   
 Visit Window           ± 7    
 Visit  V1  V2  V3  V4  V5  V6  ET 
Informed Consent X             
Review of Positive 
SARS -CoV -2 Molecular 
Test X             
Screening Labs and 
Procedures1 X             
Medical History  X            
Concomitant Medication 
History  X X2 X X X X X   
Collect Vital Signs    X      
Imaging Data Extraction   X      
Biomarker Assessment 
and Biobank3 X6 
  X 
   X 
inpatient 
only  X 
inpatient 
only  X 
inpatient only   
includes 
serologic 
testing    
Symptom Assessment 
(Telephone or Video)    X  X  X  X  X  X  
 
 
Page 15 of 25 
RAMIC  
 Laboratory Assessment4   X5 
 X 
inpatient 
only X 
inpatient 
only X 
inpatient 
only  X 
inpatient only  X 
inpatient only  
Dispensing of Study 
Drug    X           
Review of Treatment 
Adherence      X X X  X  X 
AE/SAE Assessment   X X X X X X 
Study Endpoint 
Determination      X X X X X 
Boxes shaded red are required study procedures. Others are as available.  All procedures apply to both inpatients and outpatients, unless otherwise 
indicated. 
1As outlined in study figure: Complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel, oxygen saturation and confirmation of 
pregnancy status . These tests should be obtained through the study if not obtained for routine c linical care.  
2Only required if greater than 24 from screening visit 
4Laboratory assessment: Complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel.  
Premature Discontinuation of Study Drug  
Patients meeting a primary endpoint for  the study defined as invasive mechanical ventilation or transfer to 
the intensive care unit or death will stop study drug/placebo . In addition, patients who discontinue due to 
toxicity rules defined below may stop the study drug /placebo . Additional data on secondary endpoints will 
continue to be collected and the SOE will be completed when possible.  
Post-Treatment Phase:  
At the end of the 14-day treatment phase, patients will be followed for another 14 days until day 28 and 
receive a phone visit to assess any changes in the clinical status related to primary and secondary outcomes. 
It is not possible to predict the outcome of this study, but if  ramipril appears to have a significant effect on 
COVID-19 outcomes, we will likely develop a follow -up prot ocol to assess its impact on long -term 
virologic cure, immune function, lung function and long-term survival and re -infection due to COVID.  
ADVERSE EVENTS AND STUDY MONITORING  
Safety will be assessed on a continuous basis in the study. Adverse events are any unfavorable or unintended sign, symptoms or diagnosis that occurs in a study participant during the conduct of the study independent 
of attribution. All adverse events will be recorded on case report forms within 72 hours if it meets any of 
the followin g criteria: ≥ Grade 3 toxicity (per Table 2) or those that lead to cessation of study drug /placebo  
regardless of toxicity.  
 
 
Page 16 of 25 
RAMIC  
 Risks and hazards of Rami pril:  
First approved for clinical use nearly 30 years ago, ram ipril has been evaluated for safety in over 4,000 
patients with hypertension17-21. In placebo -controlled trials, the most frequent clinical side effects reported 
included headache (5.4%), dizziness (2.2%), and fatigue (2.0%). Only fatigue has been observed to be more 
common in ram ipril groups, compared to the placebo group. Side effects have generally been observed to 
be mild and transient and were not dose -dependent. Discontinuation of ram ipril due to side effects occurred 
in 3% of US patients in clinical trials. The common reasons cited for di scontinuation were: cough (1.0%), 
dizziness (0.5%), and impotence (0.4%). In the Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation study (HOPE 
study)22-23, 4,645 patients taking ram ipril 10 mg daily were followed over a 5- year period. Patients in this 
study were either  normotensive or under treatment with other antihypertensive agents. In this study, the 
only notable side effect that led to excess discontinuation of ram ipril was cough. Ram ipril is a well -studied 
and reasonably safe drug. However, we will monitor study s ubjects carefully for any adverse reactions 
either via physical exams for inpatients or through remotely conducted visits by phone or video for 
outpatients.  
Criteria for discontinuation 
Any patient meeting ≥ Grade 3 toxicity (per Table 2) or meeting the primary endpoint will have the study 
drug/placebo  discontinued. There is no recommended dose modification.  Outpatients will also be screened 
for symptoms and those with symptoms consistent with any of the below adverse events will be assessed by the site PI to determine the need for cessation of study drug/placebo .   
Table 2. Scoring of toxicity for discontinuation  
Adverse 
events  1 2 3 4 5 
Allergic 
reaction  Transient 
flushing or 
rash,  
 
Intervention 
not indicated  Intervention or 
infusion 
interruption 
indicated;  
 
Responds 
promptly to  
symptomatic 
treatment 
(e.g., 
antihistamines
, NSAIDS,  
narcotics);  
 
Prophylactic  
medications 
indicated for  
<=24 hrs  Prolonged (e.g., 
not rapidly 
responsive to 
symptomatic 
medication 
and/or brief 
interruption of 
infusion);  
 
Recurrence of 
symptoms 
following initial 
improvement;  
 
Hospitalization 
indicated for 
clinical sequelae 
(e.g., renal 
impairment, Life 
threatening  
consequences; 
 
Urgent  
intervention 
indicated  Death  
 
 
Page 17 of 25 
RAMIC  
 pulmonary 
infiltrates)  
Anaphylaxis    Symptomatic 
bronchospasm,  
with or without 
urticaria;  
 
Parenteral 
intervention  
indicated;  
 
Allergy -related  
edema/angioede
ma; 
 
Hypotension  Life-
threatening  
consequences; 
 
Urgent  
intervention 
indicated  Death  
Hypotension    SBP < 90 mm 
hg or DBP < 50 
mm hg  Requiring 
vasopressor 
support  Death  
ALT  
(U/L)  Baseline -1.5x 
baseline  >200 and > 
1.5x baseline  >400 and > 2x 
baseline  401-800 and > 
3x baseline  >800  
AST  
(U/L) Baseline -1.5x 
baseline  >200 and > 
1.5x baseline >400 and > 2x 
baseline  401-800 and > 
3x baseline  >800  
Total 
Bilirubin 
(mg/dL)  0.1 to 1  1.1 to 2 and 
direct bilirubin 
>0.5 2 to 5 and direct 
bilirubin > 1  5.1 to 10  >10 
Potassium  
(mg/dL) 5.1-5.3 > 5.3-5.5 > 5.5 - 6.0 
Investigator can 
assess for 
possible 
hemolysis  > 6.0 Death  
Creatinine  
(mg/dL) Creatinine 
level increase 
of >0.3 
mg/dL; 
Creatinine  
1- 1.5 x above 
baseline  Creatinine  
1.5 - 2x above  
baseline  Creatinine >2x 
baseline or 
>2.0 mg/dL;  
Hospitalization 
indicated  Life-
threatening  
consequences; 
 
Dialysis 
indicated  Death  
Table 2. Scoring of toxicity for dose modification.  Scoring of toxicity from the CTC Version 4.0, with 
modifications  is proposed given the short duration of therapy and consideration of signs and symptoms 
 
 
Page 18 of 25 
RAMIC  
 related to COVID-19 infection. Due to the nature of the trial and to minimize exposure to SARS -CoV2 
monitoring laboratory assessments while on study drug/placebo  will only occur in hospitalized patients. 
Grade 3, 4, 5 reactions warrant drug /placebo  discontinuation  
The risks and discomforts of frequent phlebotomy  
Blood samples will be obtained to document changes in levels of biochemical markers of the RAAS system 
and to monitor the metabolic effects and toxicities of ramipril . Blood collection by venipuncture is 
associated with mild discomfort, and the possibility of localized bruising, phlebitis, or extravasation. The risk of infection or fainting is extremely small.  
Data and Safety Monitoring  
The UC San Diego Clinical and Translational Research In stitute will appoint an independent data safety 
monitoring board (DSMB) composed of two independent physicians  and one statistician . The DSMB will 
undertake a review of the interim data from the study to ensure the safety of study participants and to 
recommend changes to the study including early termination or modification of the study if it appears futile. 
The DSMB will review a sum mary of data by randomized treatment arm for the primary outcome, toxicity 
and adverse events. A planned interim analysis will occur after approximately 50% of the planned 
enrollment from the trial has been completed, approximately 280 patients.  
The principal investigator and research coordinator of this protocol will monitor data and safety regularly 
at weekly meetings. These meetings are separate from regular clinical rounds and consist of review of all 
study patients including flow sheets of major safety and efficacy measurements.  All measurements and 
tests are well established in clinical medicine.  Yearly reports are made to the UCSD IRB regarding safety 
and efficacy.  
Adverse Event Reporting  
All serious adverse events will be reported to the local IRB and sponsor within 7 days.  Unexpected and related fatal or life -threatening events will be reported within 48 hours and reports will be sent to the FDA, 
MEDWATCH program (telephone 1 -800-FDA-1088; or via the Internet at  
www.fda.gov/medwatch/index.html .) 
Patient Privacy  
All data and study forms will be in secured locations (locked room or cabinet) and access is limited to study 
personnel.  Subject names are not used; instead a name code is assigned upon enrollment.  Release of data 
to persons or organizations outside study personnel will require written consent of the subject.  
All consents will be stored in well -marked binders in locked file cabinets located in private offices at UCSD 
Medical center. Databases with identifying information will be secure as they will be password protected and encrypted.  Staff will be trained in HIPPA guidelines and confidentiality issues.  
    
 
 
Page 19 of 25 
RAMIC  
 STATISTICAL METHODS AND CONSIDERATIONS  
The primary out come of this study will be represented by a composite of outcomes which will include 
mortality, ICU admission, and/or need for ventilator use within a 14-day period. Statistical analyses will 
compare outcomes between treatment versus placebo -arms. It is no t possible to predict what the 
spontaneous or therapeutic response rate will be. Thus, we predict that the spontaneous improvement rate 
would be zero to less than 1%. In the primary analysis, we assume that the 14 day mortality/ICU 
admission/Ventilator use  of placebo and ramipril -treatment group to be 22% and 12 %, and the proportion 
of the sample from placebo to ramipril -treatment group to be 1:2. Therefore, using Whittemore’s formula 
(Whittemore, 1981), we estimate a sample size of 510 patients--340 in the  ramipril arm and 170 in the 
placebo arm —will be required to detect effects with a power 80% (or higher) with a Type I error rate of 
alpha = 0.05. This formula is used for logistic regression which has an overall event proportion of P and an 
odd ratio of r  at one standard deviation above the mean of the predictor.  
Statistical analysis plan: 
The primary outcome will first be analyzed using a 2x2 contingency table (treatment by outcome) and 
testing will use Fisher’s exact test. Primary analyses will be Intent  to Treat (ITT). 
We expect to enroll up to 560 patients in this study and randomize at least 510 of them to either treatment or placebo arm for a full 2 weeks with a follow-up evaluation. Therapeutic intervention trials have had 
variable dropout rates. Previous short -term studies of ramipril had less than 10 % dropouts. Therefore , we 
expect less than a 10% dropout rate. Dropouts would be considered non-responders based upon intention to treat analysis. A modified intention to treat analysis will be done in which we will exclude the patients 
who dropped out before getting the week 2 exit evaluation.  
 
Primary and secondary outcomes will be assessed comparing placebo and treatment arms using 
parametric or non -parametric tests as indicated.  
The major primary out come  to be evaluated is a composite of mortality or need for ICU admission or 
invasive mechanical ventilator use within a 14 -day window.  
The major secondary outcomes to be evaluated are:  
1. Proportion of patients needing continued hospitalization at day 14  
2. Time to discharge 
3. (For discharged to outpatient sub-group only) Need for hospitalization  
4. Proportion of patients developing hypotension and needing pressor support  
5. Proportion of patients developing septic shock 
6. Proportion of patients developing acute kidney injury  
7. Composite of mortality or need for ICU admission or invasive mechanical ventilator use within a 
28-day window  
  
 
 
Page 20 of 25 
RAMIC  
 APPENDIX A: Screening Diagram  
  

 
 
Page 21 of 25 
RAMIC  
 APPENDIX B: COVID-19 Symptom Assessment  
 
COVID-19 Symptom Assessment  
Pt ID_____________  
Purpose:  To evaluate the symptoms of COVID-19 infection    
 
1. Has the patient had a fever? 
Never  Yes 
(0) ( 1) 
    
 
2. What was the highest measured temperature in the last 24 hours?  
____________ Farenheit  
 
3. Is the patient short of breath or trouble breathing?  
No Yes 
(0) (1) 
  
4. Does the patient have a cough?  
No Yes 
(0) ( 1) 
 
5. Does the patient have loss of sense of smell or change in taste?  
No Yes 
(0) (1) 
 
6. Does the patient have light -headedness?  
No Yes 
(0) (1)  
 
7. Does the patient have body aches?  
No Yes 
(0) (1) 
 
8. Does the patient have chest pain? 
No Yes 
(0) (1) 
 
  Alert site investigator to 
follow up  Proceed to question 3   
 
 
Page 22 of 25 
RAMIC  
 9. Does the patient have drenching sweats?  
No Yes 
(0) (1) 
 
10. Does the patient have diarrhea?  
No Yes 
(0) (1) 
 
 
Completed by ________________________  
 Signature        _________________________  
 Date                  ________________________  
 
  
 
 
Page 23 of 25 
RAMIC  
 REFERENCES  
1 Wu, Z. & McGoogan, J. M. Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the Coronavirus 
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China: Summary of a Report of 72314 Cases From the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Jama , doi:10.1001/jama.2020.2648 (2020),  
2 Liu, Y. et al.  Clinical and biochemical indexes from 2019- nCoV infected patients linked to viral 
loads and lung injury. Science China. Life sciences 63, 364 -374, doi:10.1007/s11427- 020-1643-8 
(2020), PMC7088566.  
3 Zhang, P.  et al.  Association of inpatient use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and 
angiotensin II receptor blockers with mortality among patients with hypertension hospitalized with COVID-19. Submitted.,  
4 Liu, Y et al . Anti -hypertensive Angiotensin II receptor blockers as sociated to mitigation of disease 
severity in elderly COVID -19 patients. medRxiv, doi:  10.1101/2020.03.20.20039586  
5 Ferrario, C. M.  et al. Effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition and angiotensin II receptor 
blockers on cardiac angiotensin -conve rting enzyme 2. Circulation  111, 2605- 2610, 
doi:10.1161/circulationaha.104.510461 (2005),  
6 Klimas, J.  et al. Perinatally administered losartan augments renal ACE2 expression but not cardiac 
or renal Mas receptor in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Journal of cellular and molecular medicine 19, 1965- 1974, doi:10.1111/jcmm.12573 (2015), PMC4549047.  
7 Soro-Paavonen, A.  et al. Circulating ACE2 activity is increased in patients with type 1 diabetes 
and vascular complications. Journal of hypertension 30, 375-38 3, 
doi:10.1097/HJH.0b013e32834f04b6 (2012),  
8 Shang, J.  et al. Structural basis of receptor recognition by SARS -CoV-2. Nature , 
doi:10.1038/s41586-020 -2179-y (2020),  
9 Kuba, K.  et al. A crucial role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS corona virus -
induced lung injury. Nature medicine 11, 875- 879, doi:10.1038/nm1267 (2005), PMC7095783.  
10 Vaduganathan, M. et al . Renin -Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors in Patients with Covid -
19. N Engl J Med. 2020 Mar 30. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsr2005760  
11 The species Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: classifying 2019-nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV-2. Nature microbiology  5, 536- 544, doi:10.1038/s41564- 020-0695-z (2020),  
12 Bavishi, C., Maddox, T. M. & Messerli, F. H. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Infection and Renin Angiotensin System Blockers. JAMA cardiology , doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.1282 
(2020),  
13 Caldeira, D., Alarcao, J., Vaz-Carneiro, A. & Costa, J. Risk of pneumonia associated with use of angiotens in converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers: systematic review and 
meta -analysis. BMJ (Clinical research ed.)  345, e4260, doi:10.1136/bmj.e4260 (2012), 
PMC3394697.  
 
 
Page 24 of 25 
RAMIC  
 14 Imai, Y.  et al. Angiotensin -converting enzyme 2 protects from sever e acute lung failure. Nature  
436, 112- 116, doi:10.1038/nature03712 (2005), PMC7094998.  
15 Kim, J.  et al.  Effect of Renin -Angiotensin System Blockage in Patients with Acute Respiratory 
Distress Syndrome: A Retrospective Case Control Study. Korean journal of  critical care medicine  
32, 154 -163, doi:10.4266/kjccm.2016.00976 (2017), PMC6786717.  
16 Wirtz, H. et al. Ace inhibitor for lung protection during mechanical ventilation for acute lung 
injury -results of the double -blind, placebo controlled, randomised acemevent pilot study. American 
journal of respiratory and critical care medicine 195, doi:10.1164/ajrccm -conference.2017.B16 
(2017),  
17 Ball, S. G. et al. EFFECT OF RAMIPRIL ON MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY OF 
SURVIVORS OF ACUTE MYOCARDIAL -INFARCTION WITH CLINICAL -EVIDENCE OF 
HEART -FAILURE. Lancet (London, England)  342, 821 -828 (1993),  
18 Garg, R. & Yusuf, S. OVERVIEW OF RANDOMIZED TRIALS OF ANGIOTENSIN-
CONVERTING ENZYME -INHIBITORS ON MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY IN PATIENTS 
WITH HEART -FAILURE. JAMA -J. Am. Med. Assoc.  273, 1450- 1456, 
doi:10.1001/jama.273.18.1450 (1995),  
19 Gerstein, H. C.  et al. Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and microvascular outcomes in people 
with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study and MICRO-HOPE substudy. Lancet (London, England)  355, 253- 259 (2000),  
20 Yusuf, S.  et al. Effects of an angiotensin -converting-enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular 
events in high-risk patients. N. Engl. J. Med. 342, 145 -153 (2000),  
21 Yusuf, S.  et al. Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in patients at high risk for vascular events. N. Engl. 
J. Med.  358, 1547- 1559 (2008),  
22 Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study and MICRO -HOPE substudy. Heart Outcomes Prevention Ev aluation 
Study Investigators. Lancet (London, England)  355, 253 -259 (2000),  
23 Yusuf, S.  et al. Effects of an angiotensin -converting-enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular 
events in high-risk patients. The New England journal of medicine  342, 145 -153, 
doi:10.1056/nejm200001203420301 (2000),  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Page 25 of 25 
RAMIC  
 CREDITS  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  
Rohit Loomba, MD, MHSc  
CO-INVESTIGATORS 
Veeral Ajmera, MD, MAS  
Ravinder Mehta, MD  Vaishal Tolia, MD, MPH  Daniel Bouland, MD, FACP  
Davey Smith, MD, PhD  Atul Malhotra, MD  
Jeffrey Yin, Pharm D  
Lisa Richards, NP  
Summer Collier, NP  Wesley K. Thompson, Ph.D  
COLLABORATORS  
Paul Insel, MD 
Krisna Sriram, PhD 
STUDY COORDINATORS  
Shaniqua Bates  
Kevin Matias  PROJECT MANAGER  
Kristin Woods  
 
CONTRACT and BUDGETS  
 Han Nguyen, MPH  
REGULATORY COORDINATOR  
Archana Bhatt  
DATABASE MANANGER  
Ricki Bettencourt  
STUDY STATISTICIANS  
Wes Thompson, PhD  
Xin Tu, PhD  
Tuo Lin  