Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Three -Armed Double -Blind Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial: Exparel® vs. 
Bupivacaine Hydrochloride vs. Placebo for Transversus Abdominis Plane Blocks During Open 
Retromuscular Ventral Hernia Repair  
PI: Michael J. Rosen, MD FACS  
Director, Cleveland Clinic Comprehensive Hernia Center  
 
  
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
INTRODUCTION  
Reduction of postoperative pain is a concern for all surgeons, as higher levels of pain are 
associated with decreased quality of life,  prolonged convalescence, greater consumption of 
narcotic pain medicat ions and prolonged length of stay.[1 -3] Abdominal wall reconstruction 
often requires major midline laparotomies, myofascial releases and extensive dissection into the 
retromuscular, preperitoneal and retroperitoneal spaces, and therefore, not surprisingly,  is 
associated with significant postoperative pain. In order to improve postoperative pain 
management and minimize opioid consumption and its associated side effects, multimodal 
approaches to postoperative analgesia have been used with increasing frequency  in many fields 
of surgery[4] and are important components of protocols for enhanced recovery after surgery 
(ERAS). Such approaches have the objective of  improving pain control using multiple classes of 
medications, ultimately minimizing opioid use [5]. O ne of the possible interventions of such 
multimodal approaches is the transversus abdominis plane block (TAP block), a regional 
anesthetic technique that blocks the neural afferents of the anterolateral abdominal wall.[4] 
Several studies have evaluated the  utility of TAP blocks for postoperative analgesia after 
abdominal surgery and found a significant reduction in opioid consumption, pain scores and 
shortened length of stay.[6] Different local anesthetics can be injected to perform a TAP block, 
including l idocaine, bupivacaine hydrochloride, liposomal bupivacaine, and ropivacaine.[7]  The  
utility of TAP  blocks with bupivacaine hydrochloride  in the management of acute postsurgical 
pain is limited  by its short duration of action [8].  Exparel® (Pacira Pharmac euticals, San Diego, 
California) is a bupivacaine liposomal injectable suspension marketed to diffuse over an 
extended 72 hour period. [9] The joint administration of Exparel® and bupivacaine 
hydrochloride has been shown in a placebo -controlled randomized controlled trial to reduce pain 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
immediately following open reduction internal fixation [10].  Fayezizadeh et al.  suggested that 
Exparel® is efficacious in not only reducing acute  narcotic requirements but also hospital length 
of stay following open abdomin al wall reconstruction [4].  In addition , a Phase IV, prospective, 
single -center trial of 43 patients following ileostomy reversal surgery has suggested that despite 
its diffusion over only a 72 -hour period, Exparel® may even be associated  with decreased 3 0-
day postsurgical opioid use [11].  The ability of Exparel® to produce extended relief is further 
supported by a multicenter study [12].  Despite the ability  of both Exparel® and bupivacaine 
hydrochloride to reduce pain, the additional costs of Exparel® a re irrefutable.  Bupivacaine 
hydrochloride costs  $1.15 per 20 ccs of the product  while Exparel® costs $285 for the same 
amount [13].   
We have incorporated the administration of Exparel® into an enhanced multifactorial  
recovery after surgery (ERAS) pathway  designed to hasten patient recovery postoperatively [14].  
A preliminary retrospective review of 30 patients undergoing our ERAS initiative revealed a 
mean hospital length of stay of 5.14 days [15], which is a reduction versus historical controls 
[16].  Although  the efficacy of Exparel® has been assessed in a variety of studies with 
orthopedic, colorectal and gynecological surgery populations, high -quality  scientific data 
evaluating Exparel® in the abdominal wall reconstruction literature is lacking. Furth ermore, a 
recent Cochrane review [17] concluded that there is lack of data to support or refute the 
administration of Exparel® as a peripheral nerve block for postoperative analgesia since the 
current literature on Exparel® suffers a limited number of tria ls, with a small number of 
participants and inconsistency of results.   
To determine if Exparel® influences on opioid requirements, postoperative pain levels, 
hospital length of stay and patient -reported quality of life following ventral hernia repair, we 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
propose a registry -based randomized clinical trial through the Americas Hernia Society Quality 
Collaborative ( AHSQC ).  The AHSQC is a multicenter, nationwide quality improvement effort 
with the mission of improving the quality of hernia care [16].  We hypo thesize that a TAP block 
with Exparel®, performed intraoperatively by a surgeon during open ventral hernia repair with 
mesh placed in retromuscular position, will result in decreased opioid requirements, reduced 
immediate and extended postoperative pain sc ores, shorten length of hospital stay, and improved 
quality of life when compared to a TAP block with Bupivacaine hydrochloride or placebo 
(normal saline), performed in the same manner and in the same population.   
The aims of this study are:  
Specific Aim  #1: To determine if intra-hospital opioid requirements over initial 72 hours differ 
following the administration of Exparel®, Bupivacaine hydrochloride , or placebo (normal saline) 
through a TAP block during open ventral hernia repair with retromuscular me sh placement.  
Opioid consumption will be assessed by measuring the cumulative dose of opioids administered 
through intravenous and oral preparations. Intravenous opioids will include all opioids infused 
through a patient -controlled analgesia device (PCA) a nd intravenously as a rescue medication for 
breakthrough pain. Specific time points for assessments are: at post -anesthesia care unit 
(PACU/POD0), and daily during the hospital stay up to a maximum of 7 days.   Opioid  
requirements will be recorded  and conve rted into morphine equivalents for standardization. In 
addition, we  aim to record and analyze: (1) amount of opioids administered intraoperatively by 
the anesthesiologist, (2) cumulative dose of opioids during the first 7 days of hospital stay  and 
(3) time  to first oral opioid use.  
Specific Aim #2: To determine if immediate and extended pain scores differ following the 
administration of Exparel®, Bupivacaine hydrochloride , or placebo (normal saline) through a 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
TAP block during open ventral hernia repair with  retromuscular mesh placement.   Immediate  
time points include while patients are at PACU/POD0, and daily during the hospital stay up to a 
maximum of 7 days.  An extended time point includes  30-days postoperatively.  
Specific Aim #3: To determine if hospital length of stay differs following the 
administration of Exparel®, Bupivacaine hydrochloride , or placebo (normal saline) through a 
TAP block during open ventral hernia repair with retromuscular mesh placement.   
Specific Aim #4: To determine if 30 -day patien t-reported quality of life ( PRQOL ) scores 
differ  following the administration of Exparel®, Bupivacaine hydrochloride , or placebo (normal 
saline) through a TAP block during open ventral hernia repair with retromuscular mesh 
placement.  
 
STUDY DESIGN  
As in previous randomized controlled trials executed by our research group, the AHSQC 
will serve as a platform for data collection. Additional data not captured by the AHSQC will be 
recorded by a trained study coordinator or research fellow and uploaded in to Research Electronic 
Data Capture ( RedCAP®).  Baseline and intraoperative variables, as well as some of our 
outcomes of interest (30 -day pain scores, hospital length of stay, PRQOL), are already captured 
within the AHSQC database, allowing for follow -up and data capture with minimal additional 
effort outside that of routine care (11).  
This will be a double -blind, 3 -arm, randomized controlled trial with a treatment 1:  
treatment  2: control allocation ratio of 1:1:1.  No important changes to the methods af ter trial 
commencement are anticipated . We anticipate that this will be a single -institutional study of 
patients undergoing elective open ventral hernia repair  at Cleveland Clinic Comprehensive 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Hernia Center ( Main Campus, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Clev eland, Ohio, USA) performed 
by 4 staff surgeons: Dr. Michael J. Rosen (PI), Dr. Steven Rosenblatt (co -I), Dr. Ajita Prabhu 
(co-I) and Dr. David Krpata (co -I). Nonetheless, we do not discard to turn this trial into a multi -
institutional trial in the future.   No important changes to the methods after trial commencement 
are anticipated . No interim analyses will be performed,  and no  stopping guidelines are needed 
since the interventional arms of this study are already currently performed at our institution,  and 
we do not anticipate adverse events requiring study suspension.    
Inclusion criteria are all adult patients (at least 18 years of age) undergoing open, 
elective, clean or clean -contaminated (wound classification), ventral hernia repairs with mesh 
placed in retromuscular position. We have no restrictions on hernia size, and  the indication of the 
operation will be at the discretion  of the attending surgeon.  Exclusion criteria include: (1) 
patients unable to give informed consent, (2) patients with  allergy,  hypersensitivity or 
contraindication  to bupivacaine, (3) patients with history of chronic liver disease with moderate 
or severe impairment in liver function defined as a Child -Pugh  class B or C (4) patients with a 
history of chronic renal insufficiency on  dialysis; (5) patients who are considered chronic opioid 
users, defined  as daily or near daily use of opioids for at least 90 days in the past year and (6) 
patients from vulnerable populations as further detailed in this protocol. Patients scheduled for 
minimally invasive hernia repairs or open ventral hernia repairs with mesh placed in a position 
other than retromuscular will also be considered exclusion criteria.  Also, open repairs performed 
through a different incision than the standard midline approach  will also be considered  exclusion 
criteria.  
  
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
OUTCOMES OF INTEREST  
Primary outcomes  of Interest  
Primary  outcomes of interest are opioid requirements and pain scores over initial 72 
hours of the postoperative period. Opioid requirements will be assessed  by measuring the 
cumulative dose of  opioids administered intravenously (infused through a patient -controlled  
analgesia device as well as the quantity of opioids administered intravenously as rescue, if 
needed) and the quantity of opioids administered thro ugh oral preparations. This will be assessed 
at time points :  at day of surgery (while patients are at PACU or the nursing floor), at 
postoperative days 1, 2 and 3. Additional time points include daily assessments during the rest of 
the hospital stay up to  a maximum of 7 days. The total dose of opioids used at each time point 
will be recorded and converted  into morphine equivalents for standardization and analysis. We 
will record the cumulative  dose of opioids from 0 hours to 72 hours after the operation an d for 
the total hospital length of stay (up to a maximum of 7 days).  In addition, we  aim to record the 
dose of opioids  administered intra -operatively by the anesthesiologist, time for first oral opioid 
dose over the first 72 hours (discontinuation of PCA) , and the percentage of patients not 
requiring  opioids over the first 72 hours.  
Pain scores will be determined using a 100mm visual analog scale (VAS). The VAS is a 
100mm horizontal line with two endpoints : 0 (no pain) and 100 (worst imaginable pain).  While 
in the hospital, subjects are to assess, “How much pain are you experiencing right now?” Pain 
scores will be assessed at  baseline during preoperative evaluation, at day of surgery (PACU or 
nursing floor ), at postoperative days 1, 2 and 3. Additional time points include daily assessments 
during the rest of the hospital stay up to a maximum of 7 days.  
Additional pain scores will be obtained using the Patient -Reported Outcome 
Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Pain Intensity 3a survey, which is part of the 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
AHSQC patient -reported outcomes, at baseline and postoperative day 30 (± 15 days).   The 
PROMIS pain intensity questionnaire is a National Institutes of Health -developed validated tool 
that focuses on patient -reported outcomes of pain characteristics.  This survey will be completed 
by patients in person  during enrollment, and either in person, by telephone interview or virtual 
visit for 30 -day follow -up, if a patient is unable to come to the clinic duri ng the defined time 
frame (30days±15days).  
 
Secondary Outcomes of Interest  
Secondary outcomes of interest include the length  of hospital stay and Patient -Reported  
Quality of Life (PRQOL). Both information is already routinely collected  through the AHSQC . 
Length of hospital stay will be recorded  in days. PRQOL will be assessed using the HerQLes 
survey. [20] The HerQLes is a 12 -item, validated, a  hernia -specific survey that assesses quality 
of life through abdominal wall function after ventral hernia repair.  HeQLes scores will be 
assessed at baseline and 30 days after the operation. This tool is also part of the patients reported 
outcomes of the AHSQC.  
 
Additional Outcomes of interest  
Pertinent baseline patient demographics, hernia variables, intraoperative details and 30 -
day outcomes including surgical and medical complications are also captured routinely  for all 
patients in the AHSQC , as a standard of care.  
 
 
 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
STUDY PROCEDURES  
The interventions are:  
 Treatment 1 - Administration of a solution of Exparel® combined with 
Bupivacaine Hydrochloride 0.25% and normal saline, through a bilateral TAP 
block performed intraoperatively by the attending surgeon, during open ventral 
hernia repair ;  
  Treatment 2: Administration of a solution of Bupivacaine Hydrochloride 0.25% 
and normal saline, through a bilateral TAP block, performed intraoperatively by 
the attending surgeon, during open ventral hernia repair ;  
 Control (Placebo): administration o f normal saline through a  bilateral TAP block 
performed intraoperatively by the attending surgeon, during open ventral hernia 
repair. These formulations were suggested by the fabricant and are already under 
study in other protocol investigating Exparel at  our institution.  
  
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
INTERVENTION 1 
(EXPAREL® + 
BUPIVACAINE 
HYDROCHLORIDE 0.25%)  INTERVENTION 2  
( BUPIVACAINE 
HYDROCHLORIDE 0.25%)  CONTROL GROUP 
(PLACEBO)  
 20cc of Exparel®  
 60cc Bupivacaine 
Hydrochloride 0.25% 
without epinephrine  
 40cc Normal Saline  
Final  Volume: 120cc   60cc Bupicavaine 
Hydrochloride 0.25% 
without epinephrine  
 60cc Normal Saline  
 
Final Volume: 120cc  
  120cc NORMAL 
SALINE  
 
  
 
Randomization  
Patients will be randomized using a computer -generated random allocation sequence, by 
the investigational pharmacy personnel.  The random allocation sequence will be implemented 
with REDCap®, where a randomization allocation table will be generated and uploaded into 
REDCap® by the study statistician listed in this protocol.  Randomization will o ccur during the 
operation at the end of adhesiolysis, and at the beginning of abdominal wall reconstruction, to 
allow for sufficient time for the investigational pharmacy to prepare and dispense the assigned 
intervention. This study will be double -blinded since p atients will be blinded  to their assigned 
intervention until their participation in the study is complete, and also  surgeons will  be blinded  to 
the intervention  assigned to the subject.  Only the investigational pharmacy will be aware of the 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
assigne d intervention and this information will be stored in the appropriate randomization 
platform in REDCap. The study coordinator and other research personnel who will be abstracting 
opioids doses and pain scores from patients will also be blinded to the inter vention that was 
assigned to patients.  
 
Surgical Procedure  
All patients will undergo the same operation, under a standard of care protocol. Our 
surgical approach to open ventral hernia repair with retromuscular mesh placement is further 
detailed. Skin pr eparation, hair removal, perioperative antibiotics and venous thromboembolism 
prophylaxis will be performed  per Surgical Care Improvement Project protocol guidelines.  The 
procedure  will be performed  through a midline incision. Upon entering the abdominal cavity, all 
adhesions between intra -abdominal contents and the anterior abdominal wall are routinely lysed 
using sharp dissection. When present, hernia contents are reduced back to the cavity. At the end 
of adhesiolysis, the surgeon  will ask the OR nurse t o contact the investigational pharmacy via 
telephone, who will randomize the subject. The investigational pharmacy will be responsible for 
preparing and dispensing the assigned intervention. The OR nurse will receive the drug from the 
investigational pharm acy in a standardized bag and will dispense it to the surgeon at the time of 
the TAP block. Neither the surgeon nor other members of the surgical team will be informed 
about which of the interventions were assigned to the specific patient. Electronic medic al records 
will contain the information: “Patient was randomized and assigned to receive intervention 
according to randomization performed by investigational pharmacy.”  
Retromuscular hernia repair is performed initially incising the posterior rectus sheat h just 
lateral to the linea alba.  The release will be performed at least 5 cm above and below the fascial 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
defect,  and retrorectus dissection is carried out laterally in the direction of  the linea  semilunaris.  
If deemed necessary, a  posterior  component separation will be performed  by incising the 
posterior lamella of the internal oblique, dividing the fibers of the transversus  abdominis  muscle 
and dissecting the preperitoneal and retroperitoneal spaces of the lateral abdominal wall laterally .   
At the end of the myofascial  release, the assigned intervention drug will be dispensed in 
syringes  to the surgeon who will perform the perform a TAP  block under direct visualization.  
The TAP block  
Injections of the designated  drug (group 1, 2 or 3) will be performed  under direct 
visualization by the attending surgeon , in 5 vertical levels, to  the thoracoabdominal nerves  (from  
T7 to T11).  
Other details relating to administration will be per manufacturer’s instructions (4).   
The posterior sheath will be reapproximate d, and a standard piece of polypropylene mesh will be 
placed in the retromuscular space.   
Mesh type will be defined by the surgeon intraoperatively according to the patient  and 
hernia -specific variables.  Mesh fixation will be performed circumferentially using mechanical 
sutures.  Closed suction drains will  be placed  above the mesh and in the subcutaneous space, and 
the timing of removal will be based on the surgeon ’s standard  practice.  Fascial closure and 
management of wound dressings will also follow th e surgeon ’s standard  practice.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
           Multimodal Pain Management  
             
For postoperative analgesia, all patients will also receive a patient -controlled analgesia 
(PCA) device according to the standard of care; preferably:  
 Hydromorphone HCL 0.5mg/ml (Dilaudid®, Purdue Pharmaceuticals, Stamford, CT) in 
100ml of normal saline, with no basal rate infusion, a patient bolus dose of 0.2 -0.4mg, 
bolus interval of 6 minutes (maximum 10 doses per hour).  
In case there is a contraindication to Hydrom orphone, alternative PCA regimens 
can be:  
 Morphine 1mg/ml in 100ml of normal saline, with no basal rate infusion, patient bolus of 
1mg, bolus interval of 6 minutes (maximum 10 doses per hour) or,  
  Fentanyl 20mcg/ml in 100ml of normal saline, with no basal  rate infusion, a patient 
bolus of 20mcg, bolus interval of 6 minutes (maximum 10 doses per hour).  
 
 No epidural analgesia will be administered .  
 
In addition, as part of the multimodal analgesia protocol for our enhanced recovery after 
surgery pathway, pa tients will also receive the following medications:  
 
 
 
 
 
 Acetaminophen  1G every 6 hours, after initiation of oral intake  
Gabapentin  300mg every 8 hours, after initiation of oral intake  
Oxycodone  5mg every 3 -4 hours as needed in the transition of 
weaning PCA, and after PCA has been discontinued  
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Although administration of Ketorolac Tromethamine (Toradol®, La Roche Inc.) is a part 
of the multimodal analgesia protocol of our ERAS pathway, its usage is according to patient age, 
comorbidities, renal func tion and ultimately at surgeon’s discretion, and therefore, it will not be 
included in the postoperative pain management of the patients included in this study to avoid 
introducing bias to our results.   
 
Rescue medication  
To ensure the comfort and adequate pain postoperative pain control, additional 
intravenous or oral opioids are allowed in the protocol, to be administered for breakthrough pain 
(as needed). Subjects should only receive rescue medication upon request, and f or pain control. 
Options for postsurgical rescue medication are:  
 Hydromorphone 0.5mg/ml, 0.4mg administered intravenously; Dose can be repeated 
every 15 minutes, up to 3 doses. The sequence  can be repeated every 6 hours if needed.  
 Morphine 1mg/ml, 1 to 2m g administered intravenously; Dose can be repeated every 15 
minutes, up to 3 doses. The sequence  can be repeated every 6 hours if needed.  
 Fentanyl 20mcg/ml, 25 to 50mcg administered intravenously; Dose can be repeated every 
15 minutes up to 3 doses. The se quence  can be repeated every 6 hours if needed.  
No other pain medications will be allowed in this protocol. All other aspects of 
postoperative management are standard of care and will occur at surgeon’s 
discretion and guided by current best practices of the Cleveland Clinic 
Comprehensive Hernia Center.   
 
 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Exclusions from the study during participation  
Patients will be excluded from participation in the trial if:  
 Remain intubated for more than  12 hours after the end of operation due to any reason 
since important part of the assessments will not be performed  
 Experience any medical event that demands management with opioid medications that 
are used not exclusively for pain management (for example , patients placed in 
mechanical ventilation who receive continuous infusion of opioids)  
Also, patients can be excluded from the study at any moment during the trial if they withdraw 
consent or according to clinical judgment of the PI.  
ANTICIPATED TIME FRA ME 
Estimated patient accrual time is 1 year with data collection to occur over 30 days from 
randomization of each patient.  Data analysis and manuscript production will occur within 6 
months of the completion of data collection.  
 
PATIENT RISKS AND DISCOMFO RTS 
As with any surgical procedure, patients may experience pain, bleeding, and discomfort.  
Common  occurrences following hernia repair include seroma, hematoma, inflammation, wound 
dehiscence, and infection.  Risks of Bupivacaine Hydrochloride  include all ergic reactions, 
arrhythmias, chest pain or pressure, dizziness, confusion, restlessness, tinnitus, blurred vision, 
dyspnea, seizures, nausea, emesis, and lethargy.  Risks of Exparel® include nausea, vomiting, 
constipation, as well as (rarely) seizures and  cardiac arrest.   Patients receiving placebo 
intraoperatively  will not necessarily experience higher levels of pain, as all individuals, 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
regardless of intervention arm, will be provided a multimodal pain management regimen with 
patient -controlled  analgesia  postoperatively.  
  
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
PATIENT BENEFITS  
There are no direct benefits to subjects for participation in this study.  Subject 
participation will, however, help physicians and hospital administrators better understand the 
outcomes of Exparel® use concerning post operative pain management and its influence on 
opioid consumption,  hospital length of stay and quality of life.  
 
COSTS TO THE SUBJECTS  
There are no extra costs  to the subjects  associated with this research endeavor.  
Procedures related to preoperative evaluation, hernia repair, and postoperative monitoring are 
considered standard of care and will be the responsibility of the subject and the subject’s 
insurance company.  
 
ALTERNA TIVES TO PARTICIPATION  
Patients are under no obligation to participate in this study.  A member of the research 
team will discuss all available surgical options with patients.  It will be emphasized  that refusal 
to participate in this study will not impact  any patient’s ability to receive surgical care at the 
Cleveland Clinic Foundation.  
 
PAYMENTS TO SUBJECTS  
There will be no payment for the subjects for the participation in this study.  
 
 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
POWER CALCULATION  
Sample size and power calculation for this study w ere performed by an experienced 
statistician. Our primary outcome of interest on this study is to determine if Exparel® is able to 
decrease the total amount of opioids used during the entire hospital length of stay, especially in 
the first 72 hours where E xparel® should be acting.  We have hypothesized that when compared 
to placebo, Exparel® will confer a 30% decrease in total opioid consumption during hospital 
stay. This was defined by clinical judgment since there is a lack of published data reporting a 
clinically significant reduction in opioid requirements as a consequence of other interventions. 
Additionally, other protocols studying Exparel® have also hypothesized that the intervention 
would confer the same degree of opioid use reduction. Considering a  30% reduction in total 
opioids consumption, an alpha of 0.05, a beta of 0.20, our study will need a sample size of 49 
patients per arm to achieve a statistical power of 80%. To account for losses of follow -up during 
the study , we have included a 10% drop-out rate in our power calculations to anticipate the latter.  
Considering a 10% dropout, the total sample size  for this study will be 54 patients per 
arm. Therefore, the total is 162 subjects.  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
Statistical analysis will be perfor med by the DDSI statistician listed in this protocol , who 
will determine the appropriate statistical tests for each outcome of interest. Categorical variables 
will be reported using proportions and analyzed using Pearson’s Chi -square.  Continuous 
variables  will be reported  using median and interquartile range due to their non -parametric 
nature and examined using either a Student’s t-test or a Wilcoxon signed rank test.  Pain scores, 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
opioid requirements, hospital length of stay, and PRQOL  requirements will b e compared using 
Mann -Whitney U tests.    
 
 
PLAN FOR OBTAINING INFORMED CONSENT  
Screening for eligible subjects will be performed in clinic , by the participating surgeon 
(PI or Co -is), during preoperative evaluation. For each subject, written informed cons ent will be 
obtained  before  any protocol -related activities.  As part of the informed consent procedure, the 
principal investigator, surgeon co -investigator, or one of the approved study coordinators will  
explain verbally and in writing the nature, duratio n, and purpose of the study  in such a manner 
that the subject is aware of potential risks, inconveniences, or adverse effects that may occur.  
Subjects will be informed  that they may withdraw from the study at any time and will receive all 
information requ ired by federal regulations.  
Following identification of a potential study participant, the investigator or the study 
coordinator will be responsible for instituting the informed consent process in a face -to-face 
manner. Before starting any study procedure s, the investigator will discuss the proposed research 
study in detail with the potential subject during the office visit to discuss treatment options.  The 
subject  will be allowed ample time to read and review the informed consent document and ask 
questio ns.  The informed consent document will be reviewed  with the subject in depth by the 
participating investigator or designated member of the research team to ensure that the potential 
participant has a thorough understanding of the study protocol and unders tands the potential risks 
and benefits of study participation and his or her rights as a study participant.  The investigators 
will be available by phone or office visit to answer any questions that the participant may have.  
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
After consideration, the subje ct may return if necessary for another visit with the investigator and 
ask additional questions before signing the informed consent document to participate in this 
study.  
After the subject has read and reviewed  the informed consent document and has agreed  to 
participate, he/she will be asked  to sign and date the document. The study member obtaining 
consent will also sign and date the form, and documentation of the informed consent process will 
be included  in the research file (i.e., the person who obtained  consent, where and when consent 
was obtained , and who was present during the process). A copy of the consent form will be given  
to the subject for their records.  
  
PROVISIONS FOR SUBJECTS FROM VULNERABLE POPULATIONS  
The population to be studied includes adults of at least 18 years of age.  Children, 
cognitively -impaired persons, pregnant women, and students and house staff under the direct 
supervision of the investigator are considered vulnerable populations and will, therefore,  be 
excluded  from participation.  If a Cleveland Clinic Foundation staff member or employee is a 
potential candidate for the study, the subject will be informed  during the consent process that 
his/her participation or refusal to participate will  not influence grades, employment, or 
subsequent recommendations . We will  only enroll individuals who can fluently communicate in 
the English language. If a subject cannot read a consent form due to illiteracy or blindness, a 
member of the research study s taff will read and explain the consent form to the participant or 
the participant’s legally authorized  representative.  A witness who will sign and date the consent 
form must be present during this encounter.  
 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
SUBJECT PRIVACY AND DATA CONFIDENTIALITY  
Subje ct anonymity and data confidentiality will be maintained  throughout this study.  
Every effort will be made to maintain the confidentiality of documents that identify the subject 
by name (e.g., signed informed consent documents, clinic charts), except to th e extent necessary 
to allow monitoring by the Office of Research Compliance at the Cleveland Clinic or by other 
regulatory authorities.   
Much of the information collected, such as name or medical record number, will be 
stored in the AHSQC, a secure databa se that is used nationally to track clinical outcomes in 
patients who undergo hernia repair. Additional patient information will be recorded in RedCap®. 
Written consent forms and data collection forms will be stored in binders, which will stay in a 
locked office, at Crile Building (A10 -133). Randomization will occur with the use of a 
customized REDCap®, a secure network/firewall -protected electronic database for which only 
the investigator and the designated members of the study team will have access using an 
individually -assigned login and password. Only approved study members listed on the IRB 
protocol will have access to the separately -stored master list – which will be stored in a 
Cleveland Clinic password -protected  computer  and saved on an S drive. Only  the Principal 
Investigator, Lead Research Coordinators, and Biostatisticians will be granted access to retrieve 
patient data for data quality assessment and data analysis. All electronic records pertaining to  the 
clinical study will be password -protected  and only approved study members listed on the IRB 
protocol will have password access.  
 
  
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
STUDY PROGRESSION / DATA SAFETY MONITORING  
Progress  of the study will be monitored internally by the research team. Weekly meeting  
between the PI, co -Is and research  team will evaluate adverse events and study progression. 
Those will be reported to the IRB as appropriate.  
 
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE/INNOVATION  
This trial will be among the first to investigate the outcome of TAP blocks with Exparel® 
or Bupivacaine hydroch loride versus placebo through a high -quality (double -blind, 3 -arm, 
prospective, randomized controlled trial) in the field of abdominal wall reconstruction, with 
outcomes considered highly relevant for patients, surgeons, and hospital administrations.  
Expa rel® has various theoretical reasons for reducing hospital length of stay, including 
decreasing the use of oral and intravenous opioids. The average cost of 24 hours of inpatient care 
in Ohio is $2,400 -2,500 [18].  Decreasing patient’s hospital stays would , therefore,  afford 
medical systems a considerable cost advantage.  However, previous studies suggesting that 
Exparel® may be associated  with decreased  hospital costs have frequently been unblinded , 
uncontrolled, and retrospective in nature with Exparel® p ackaged as part of a multimodal  
postoperative recovery program [19].  Such actions do not isolate the effects of each intervention 
and difficult to draw significant  conclusions about the role of Exparel® in a multimodal  pain 
management strategy. The outcom e of this study will help to determine the role of Exparel® in 
postoperative analgesia of procedures with major abdominal incisions.  
 
 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
REFERENCES  
(1) Taylor Rs et al. (2013) The impact of early postoperative pain on health -related 
quality of life. Pain Prac  13:515 -23. 
(2) Palmqvist E, Larsson K, Anell A, et al. (2013) Prospective study of pain, quality 
of life and the economic impact of open inguinal hernia repair. Br J Surg 
100:1483 -8. 
(3) Parsons B, Schaefer C, Mann R et al. (2013) Economic and humanistic burden o f 
post-trauma and post -surgical neuropathic pain among adults in the United States. 
J Pain Res 6:459 -69.  
(4) Fayezizadeh, Majumder A, Neupane R, et a. Efficacy of transversus abdominis 
plane block with liposomal bupivacaine during open abdominal wall 
reconstr uction. Am J Surg 2016 Sep;212(3):399 -405 
(5) Seagle BL, Miller ES, Strohl AE et al. (2017) Transversus abdominis  plane block 
with liposomal bupivacaine compared to oral opioids alone for acute 
postoperative pain after laparoscopic hysterectomy  for early endom etrial cancer: a 
cost-effectiveness analysis. Gynecol  Oncol Res Pract 4:12 doi: 10.1186/s40661 -
017-0048 -7.  
(6) Petersen PL et al. (2010) The transversus abdominis plane block: a valuable 
option for postoperative analgesia? Acta Anaesthesiol  Scand 54(5):529 -35. 
(7) Rahiri J et al.  (2017) Systematic review of the systemic concentrations of local 
anesthetic  after transversus abdominis place block and rectus sheath block. British 
Journal of Anaesthesia 118(4): 517 -26. 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
(8) Asche CV, Ren J, Kim M, et al. Local infiltration for postsurgical analgesia 
following total hip arthroplasty: A comparison of liposomal bupivacaine to 
traditional bupivacaine. Curr Med Res Opin 2017 Jul;33(7):1283 -1290.   
 
(9) https://www.exparel.com/hcp/how -to-use.shtml  
 
(10) Davidovitch R, Goch A, Driesman A, e t al. The use of liposomal bupivacaine 
administered with standard bupivacaine in ankle fractures requiring open 
reduction internal fixation: A single -blinded randomized controlled trial. J Orthop 
Trauma 2017 Apr 6.  
(11) Vogel JD. Liposome bupivacaine (Exparel®)  for extended pain relief in patients 
undergoing ileostomy reversal at a single institution with a fast -track discharge 
protocol: An IMPROVE Phase IV health economics trial. J Pain Res 2013 Jul 
29;6:605 -10. 
(12) Marcet JE, Nfonsam VN, Larach S. An extended pain  relief trial utilizing the 
infiltration of a long -acting multivesicular liposome formulation of bupivacaine, 
Exparel (IMPROVE): A Phase IV health economic trial in adult patients 
undergoing ileostomy reversal. J Pain Res 2013 Jul 18;6:549 -55. 
(13) Nadeau MH, S araswat A, Vasko A, et al. Bupivacaine versus liposomal 
bupivacaine for postoperative pain control after augmentation mammoplasty: A 
prospective, randomized, double -blind trial. Aesthet Surg J 2016 Feb;36( 2):NP47 -
52. 
Version # 4  8/15/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
(14) Fayezizadeh M, Petro CC, Rosen MJ, et a l. Enhanced recovery after surgery 
pathway for abdominal wall reconstruction: Pilot study and preliminary outcomes. 
Plast Reconstr Surg 2014 Oct;134(4 Suppl 2):151S -9S. 
(15) Colvin J. In progress [data not yet published].  
(16) Poulose BK, Roll S, Murphy JW, et al. D esign and implementation of the 
Americas Hernia Society Quality Collaborative (AHSQC): Improving value in 
hernia care. Hernia . 2016;20.2:177 -189. 
(17) Hamilton et al. (2016) Liposomal bupivacaine peripheral nerve block for the 
management of postoperative pain. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 
Doi:10.1002.14651858.CD011476.pub2  
(18) http://www.beckershospitalreview.com/finance/average -cost-per-inpatient-day-
across -50-states.html  
(19) Stephan B, Ramshaw B, Forman B, et al. Value -based clinical quality 
improvement (CQI) for patients undergoing abdominal wall reconstruction. Surg 
Technol Int 2015 May;2:135 -142. 
 
 