Crisp/Hill, Apical Support  
Page 1 of 5 
 
 
Date  9/27 /18 
Title  Are we supporting the apex during hysterectomy for pelvic organ 
prolapse?   
Principal Investigator  Catrina Crisp , MD , MSc  
Sub-Investigators  Austin Hill, MD ; Abigail Shatkin -Margolis, MD; Steven D. Kleeman, 
MD; Jennifer Yeung, DO; Rachel N Pauls, MD   
Research Specialist  Eunsun Yook, MS  
Department  Department of OB/Gyn, Division of Urogynecology and 
Reconstructive Pelvic Surgery  
Hatton #  17-091 
 
Purpose of Study :  
• To determine whether  gynecologic surgeons at a large community hospital are 
already meeting the recently recommended best practice of supporting the vaginal 
apex at time of  hysterectomy for pelvic organ prolapse .  
o Primary Aim: To determine the proportion of patients undergoing hysterectomy 
for the indication of pelvic organ prolapse having concurrent  apical suspension  
such as : McCall’s culdoplasty,  Uterosacral Ligament Susp ension, Sacrospinous 
Ligament Fixation , Abdominal Sacrocolpopexy , or Robotic Sacrocolpopexy .  
o Secondary Aim s: Identify characteristics of surgeons not meeting  the 
recommended best practice including  their  training, location  of operation , 
operative times , concurrent procedures and estimated blood loss.  
  
Hypothesis or Research Question  
• We hypothesize that fewer than 1 0% of patients having hysterectomy for pelvic 
organ prolapse will not undergo  concurrent apical sup port, being defined as  McCall’s 
Culdoplasty, Uterosacral Ligament Suspension, Sacrospinous Ligament Fixation or 
Robotic/ Abdominal Sacrocolpopexy . 
 
Background   
 
The prev alence of pelvic organ prolapse  (POP)  in the United States  is estimated to be between  
40-50% with an anticipat ed increase over the next several decades1-3.  Approximately 300,000 
women undergo surgeries to repair  POP in the United States every year4.  Following pelvic 
reconstructive surgery, r ecurrence  rates  of symptomatic prolapse  range between  6-30%5-9.  This 
number has changed in r ecent years to favor a lower recurrence rate . This change in recurrence 
rate may be attributed to the efforts of pelvic surgeons in restoring proper levels of support 
during repairs.    
 
 
Our understanding of pelvic anatomy an d its support has been significantly improved over 
recent decades, with many researchers reporting on details and mechanics previously not 
understood.  A landmark article by DeLancey11 proposed a now widely accepted model 
Crisp/Hill, Apical Support  
Page 2 of 5 
 
 
outlining the support of the pelvi c organs , ordering specific aspects of support from level one to 
level three.  This model then helped drive continued efforts in improving approaches and 
outcomes for reconstructive surgery.   
 
Historically, a majority of women having pelvic reconstructive  surgery would undergo anterior 
and posterior colporrhaphy for repair of their prolapse12.  This was considered an appropriate 
standard of care.  More recently, the integral relationship between loss of apical support and 
both anterior and posterior compartment defects  has been demonstrated13-15.  Then, in 2013, 
Eilber reported on the outcomes of vaginal prolapse surgery among female medicare 
beneficiaries16.  They investgated  a 10 year period including over 3,200 women who had 
undergone pel vic reconstructive surgery.  They found that women having  concurrent  apical 
support procedures were significantly less likely to have recurrence of prolapse than those 
women who had no apical support performed.   
 
In November 2017, th e American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists released a new 
practice bulletin outlining the current standard of care for the treatment of women with pelvic 
organ prolapse17.  In this bulletin, they state that a hysterectomy alone is not adequate 
treatment for pelvic or gan prolapse, and further that any woman having a hysterectomy for 
pelvic organ prolapse should undergo a concurrent apical suspension procedure as a standard 
of care.  The question then arises, what proportion of our patients currently receive this  
standa rd of care?  
 
Our purpose therefore is to investigate the proportion of patients undergoing hysterectomy for 
the indication of pelvic organ prolapse at a TriHealth facility who receive a conc urrent apical 
support procedure as recommended by ACOG, which inc ludes : McCall’s Culdoplasty,  
Uterosacral Ligament Suspension, Sacrospinous Ligament Fixation and Robotic/ Abdominal 
Sacrocolpopexy .    
 
Research Plan  
• Study Design  
o Retrospective Descriptive Study  
• Setting for the study  
o A retrospective chart review will be performed on TriHealth EPIC platform of 
patients of  TriHealth  who underwent  hysterectomy for  pelvic organ prolapse at 
any of the affiliated TriHealth hospitals  between O ctober 2012  and October of 
2017. 
 
• Participants  
o Study population:  All women 18 years of age or older, who underwent 
hysterectomy  for pelvic organ prolapse,  performed a t a TriHealth  facility  
between October 201 2 and October 2017 . 
o A chart review will be performed on all patients identified.  
Crisp/Hill, Apical Support  
Page 3 of 5 
 
 
o Inclusion cri teria  
▪ Adults 18 years of age or older  
▪ Underwent hysterectomy  for pelvic organ prolapse, performed at a 
TriHealth facility between October 201 2 and October 2017 
o Exclusion criteria  
▪ Age < 18 years old  
▪ Pelvic Organ Prolapse was not an indication for their surgery  
▪ Surgery performed by a physician of Cincinnati Urogyn ecology  Associates.   
o Sample size  
▪ Given the retrospective nature of this study, a sample size calculation is 
not indicated . However, estimating the number of charts that may be 
available can be g arnered from internal reports on department  activity.  
Between October 2012 to October 2017, 792  hysterectomies took pl ace 
at a Trihealth Facility for  the indication of prolapse . Excluding those 
performed by a physician of the Cincinnati Urogyn Associates group, 
there are approximately 194 cases eligible for review. With this in mind, 
in order to provide for potential differences in case number during the 
years within the study period, we request permission to review up to 250 
cases.  
 
• Data Collection  
o Each c hart will be reviewed and the following data will be collected or 
extrapolated:  
▪ General demographic data – name, date of birth, age, race , parity, BMI  
▪ Select comorbidities  (connective tissue disorders, history of chronic 
constipation, history of chronic cough)  
▪ Operative details – Date of surgery, c oncurrent p rocedures performed, 
type of apical support, length of procedure, facility or location of 
procedure performed, estimated blood loss , reported intra -operative 
complications , primary surgeon, wh ether FPMRS or General OB/GYN.  
 
• Intervention or experimental aspect of the study  
o No intervention will occur as part of this study.  
o There are no potential risks to the study population by any aspect of the study.  
 
• Statistical Analysis  
o Given the descriptive nature of this study, limited statistical analysis will be 
performed. The proportion of patients who did not have concurrent apical 
support procedures performed will be calculated . Furthermore, the proportion 
of patients who had vario us postoperative outcomes (as defined above) will be 
calculated and compared to previous published literature.  
 
Ethical Considerations  
• Informed consent  
Crisp/Hill, Apical Support  
Page 4 of 5 
 
 
o Since this is a retrospective study, waivers of Informed Consent and 
Authorization will be requested.  
• Privacy information  
o Extensive efforts will be made to ensure and maintain participant 
confidentiality. All identifying information will be maintained in a secure area 
at all  times. All communication between staff members regarding participant 
data will occu r via the Subject ID number only. However, identifying 
information will be retained in the original/source documents.  
o The Excel spreadsheet will be stored on a password protected, encrypted 
TriHealth computer for ten years following study closure, and then  purged.  
 
Cost/Budget  
• This study will incur no cost to the institution, the participants, or the investigators.  
 
Estimated Period of Time to Complete Study  
When will study begin?  January 201 8 
Protocol Development 
Completed  2 weeks  
Admin Review Time  2 weeks  
IRB Approval  3 weeks  
Data collection  8 weeks  
Data analysis  2 weeks  
Presentation development 
(if applicable)  2 weeks  
Manuscript Development 
(if applicable)  4 weeks  
Journal submission process 
(if applicable)  4 weeks  
Study closure  2 weeks  
 
• When and how will results be disseminated?  
▪ The results will be disseminated at one of our division research meetings and 
potentially as a presentation at a national meeting.  
 
 
References  
1. Hendrix SL, Clark A, Nygaard I, Aragaki A, Banabei V, McTiernan A. Pelvic organ prolapse 
in the Women’s Health Initiative: Gravity and gravidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002; 
186:1160 -66 
2. Luber KM, Boero S, Choe Jy. The demographics of pelvic floor disorders: current 
observations and future projections; Am J Obst et Gynecol 2001; 184:1496 -01 
Crisp/Hill, Apical Support  
Page 5 of 5 
 
 
3. Barber MD, Maher C. Epidemiology and outcome assessment of pelvic organ prolapse. 
Int Urogyneocol J. 2013; 24:1783 -90 
4. Smith FJ, Holman CD, Moorin RE, Tsokos N. Lifetime risk of undergoing surgery for pelvic 
organ prolapse. Obstet Gynecol 2010; 116:1096 -100 
5. Dallenbach P. To mesh or not to mesh: a review of pelvic organ reconstructive surgery. 
Int J Womens Health 2015; 7:331 -343 
6. Nygaard I, Brubaker L, Zyczynski HM, Cundiff G, Richter H, Gantz M, et al. Long -term 
outc omes following abdominal sacrocolpopexy for pelvic organ prolapse. JAMA. 
2013;309:2016 -24 
7. Barber MD, Brubaker L, Burgio KL, Richter HE, Nygaard I, Weidner AC, et al. Comparison 
of 2 transvaginal surgical approaches and perioperative behavioral therapy for apical 
vaginal prolapse: the OPTIMAL randomized trial. JAMA 2014;311:1023 -34 
8. Larson KA, Smith T, Berger MB, Alernethy M, Mead S, Fenner DE, et al. Long -term 
patient satisfaction with Michigan four -wall sacrospinous ligament suspension for 
prolapse. Obstet Gynecol 2013;122:967 -75 
9. Olsen AL, Smith VJ, Bergstrom JO, Colling JC, Clark AL. Epidemiology of surgically 
managed pelvic organ prolapse and urinary incontinence. Obstet Gynecol 1997;89:501 -6 
10. Swift S, Woodman P, O’Boyle A, Kahn M, Valley M, Bland D, et al.  Pelvic Organ Support 
Study (POSST): the distribution, clinical definition, and epidemiologic condition of pelvic 
organ defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2005;192:795 -806.  
11. DeLancey JO. Anatomic aspects of vaginal eversion after hysterectomy. Am J Gynecol. 
1992 ;166:1717 -1724.  
12. Kenton K, Sadowski D, Shott S, Brubaker L. A comparison of women withprimary and 
recurrent pelvic organ prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1999;189:1415 -18. 
13. Lowder JL, Park AJ, Ellison E, Ghetti C, Moalli P, Zyczynski H, et al. The role of apic al 
aginal support in the appearance of anterior and posterior vaginal prolapse. Obstet 
Gynecol 2008;111:152 -157.  
14. Rooney K, Kenton K, Mueller ER, FitzGerald MP, Brubaker L. Advanced anterior vaginal 
wall prolapse is highly correlated with apical prolapse. A m J Obstet Gynecol 
2006;195:1837 -1840.  
15. Elliott CS, Yeh J, Comiter CV, Chen B, Sokol ER. The predictive value of a cystocele for 
concomitant vaginal apical prolapse. J Urol 2013;189:200 -203.  
16. Eilber KS, Alperin M, Kahn A, Wu N, Pashos CL, Clements JQ, et a l. Outcomes of vaginal 
prolapse surgery among female medicare beneficiaries. Obstet Gynecol 2013. 122:981 -
987.  
17. Pelvic organ prolapse. Practice Bulletin No 185. American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 2017;130:e234 -50.  