 
 
Official Title:  Patient -Centered Stomach Cancer Prevention in Chinese Americans  
NCT Number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Study Number:  17-01446  
Document Type:   Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Date of the 
Document:  • May 9, 2023 
 
1 
 Protocol: s17 -01446 
Version Date: 3/22/23 
 
Study Title: Patient- Centered Stomach Cancer Prevention in Chinese Americans 
Principal Investigator: Simona Kwon, DrPH, MPH 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
I. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY AND BACKGROUND 
A. Purpose of the Study  
B. Background 
C. Study  Design  
II. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESEARCH  POPULATION 
III. METHODS & PROCEDURES  
A. Methods &  Procedures  
B. Data Analysis and Data Monitoring  
C. Data Storage and  Confidentiality  
D. Data Sharing  Policy  
IV. RISK/BENEFIT  ASSESSMENT  
V. INVESTIGATOR’S QUALIFICATIONS &  EXPERIENCE  
VI. SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION, RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT/ASSENT  
A. Method of Subject Identification and  Recruitment  
B. Process of  Consent  
C. Capacity 
D. Subject/Representative Comprehension  
E. Debriefing  Procedures  
F. Consent  Scripts  
G. Documentation of Consent  
H. Costs to the  Subject  
I. Payment  for Participation  
J. Subject  Withdrawal  
VII. FUNDING SOURCE  
VIII.  APPENDIX 
IX. REFERENCES  
2 
 I. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY AND BACKGROUND 
A. Purpose of the Study  
The proposed study “Patient -Centered Stomach Cancer Prevention in Chinese Americans” aims to assess 
the efficacy, adoption, and impact of an integrated intervention to improve adherence to recommended 
stomach cancer prevention guidelines ( H. pylori test -and- treat) for at -risk Chinese Americans in NYC. 
The integrated multifaceted theory -based intervention involves: 1) a health systems- level intervention 
using electronic health record (EHR) -based tools to facilitate H. pylori test-and- treat strategies; and 2) a 
community-engaged culturally and linguistically adapted community health worker (CHW)- led patient 
navigation program we are currently pilot testing for feasibility and acceptability. Using a 2 -arm 
randomized controlled trial (RCT) design, we will enroll 144 Chinese American patients across NYC health care facilities (NYU Langone Health – which includes NYU Langone Brooklyn, NYU Langone Brooklyn Family Health Centers and affiliated provider practices, and NYU Ambulatory Care Centers – 
Bellevue Hospital Center and Gouv erneur Hospital). The integrated intervention involves:  
1. A collaboratively developed and refined EHR-based clinical decision support system and 
CHW -led culturally  and linguistically  adapted  stomach  cancer  prevention program  for the 
Chinese American  community.  
2. A H. pylori test-and- treat intervention  using linked  EHR  tools with a CHW -led culturally  and 
linguistically adapted program to improve H. pylori eradication and treatment among 
vulnerable Chinese American  patients.  
 
In addition, using a mixed- methods approach and the RE -AIM framework,1 we aim to systematically 
assess the implementation process and delineate factors that influence feasibility, acceptability, adoption, sustainability and scalability of a combined EHR -CHW strategy within safety nethealth care systems.  
This will be achieved through the completion of: 
1. Assessment of utilization patterns through extracted MCIT  files.  
2. Qualitative key informant interviews will be conducted by study coordinator with key 
providers (1- 3 at each site), and adm inistrator (1 -2 at each site), and the CHWs (1 at each site). 
At baseline, the interviews will be incorporated into the workflow analysis to assess current 
satisfaction and EHR usage and health coaching. At follow -up, the interviews will assess 
barriers an d facilitators to the implementation and adoption process of the integrated EHR - 
CHW intervention, intervention fidelity, and to solicit recommendations for the replication and 
scalability of the intervention to other clinical sites.  
3. Ethnographic data will be collected  by CHWs  in Year  1 and by the study coordinator in Year  5 
and will be guided by the 5 key steps in a rapid assessment process.  
Impact :
 The proposed study will inform efforts to prevent stomach cancer and reduce the burden of 
stomach cancer in Chinese American communities served in safety net health systems and establish a 
reproducible, sustainable patient -centered cancer prevention model integrated within health care systems 
serving vulnerable communities.  
 
Subs
tudy : The proposed substudy aims to evaluate the feasibility and response rate for the collection of 
biosamples among Chinese Americans with a clinically confirmed diagnosis of H. pylori . The biosamples 
will be used to assess differences in oral and gut microbiome profiles before and afte r H. pylori  antibiotic 
therapy. This will be achieved through the optional collection of oral and/or fecal biosamples from 
participants in EHR -CHW Intervention component of the study ‘Patient- Centered Stomach Cancer 
Prevention in Chinese Americans’. The proposed substudy will inform efforts to develop novel 
3 
 biomarkers to improve stomach cancer prevention, risk assessment and early detection among Chinese 
Americans.  
B. Background 
B1. Stomach cancer rates in China and in NYC Chinese American communities. Stomach  cancer is 
the third most common cause of cancer death worldwide (723,000 deaths annually).2 Approximately 42% 
of new cases of stomach cancer worldwide occur in China.3 In the US, the overall incidence of stomach 
cancer is lower than in other countries, about 8.7 per 100,000 people per year. There are clear 
disparities,however, in stomach cancer incidence in the US, particularly among Chinese American 
populations, who have incidence rates of approximately 11.1 per 100,000 persons per year.4,5 While 
Chinese Americans generally have lower incidence and mortality rates for most cancers compared with non-Hispanic whites, they are at higher risk of stomach cancer in the US.
6 Similarly, cancer mortality 
studies indicate that Chinese Americans in NYC have lower all- cause mortality and total cancer mortality 
than whites, but they experience higher stomach cancer mortality.7,8 In 2013, stomach cancer incidence 
among Asian Americans was almost twice that of whites in NYC (15.5 vs. 8.1 per 100,000).9 
 
B2. Chinese Americans and H. pylori, the primary risk factor for stomach cancer. Globally, H. 
pylori is one of the most common bacterial infections with approximately 50% of the global population 
infected.10,11 In 1994, the International Agency for Researc h on Cancer classified H. pylori as a Grade I 
carcinogen in humans.12 Approximately 89% of non- cardia gastric adenocarcinomas can be attributed to  
H. pylori infection.13,14 In East Asian populations, including Chinese, H pylori infection rates can be as 
high as 47-70%.15-17 Our previous NIMHD-funded observational study of H. pylori seroprevalence in a 
NYC East Asian -born population that informs our proposal, found higher seroprevalence, 70.1% 
compared to other NYC groups (<20% seroprevalence), with higher r ates reported for recent Chinese 
immigrants.18 
 
B3. Chinese Americans, a vulnerable health disparity population. In NYC, the population of Chinese Americans is approximately 574,886: 72% are foreign-born, 34% lack a high school diploma, 61% have limited En glish proficiency (LEP), and 21% are living in poverty.
19,20 
 
B4. Chinese Americans, socio- cultural barriers and lifestyle- related stomach cancer risk factors. 
Health care access. For Chinese American communities, the risk of stomach cancer is compounded by 
difficulties in accessing healthcare services, and attendant linguistic, cultural, economic and social barriers, which contribute to delayed cancer screenings,
21-24 poor medication adherence, and poor disease 
self-management skills.25-28 Acculturation ( which includes indicators such as nativity, years in the US, 
English language proficiency) is a significant factor that influences health access and behaviors for 
Chinese American immigrant communities, including impacting screening and disease prevention.25,26 
 
B5. Evidence -base for test -and- treat in high -risk Chinese populations.  
The American College of Gastroenterology’s 2017 clinical guidelines for treating H. pylori infection 
recommends clarithromycin triple therapy consisting of a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), clarithromycin, and amoxicillin or metronidazole for 14 days where H. pylori clarithromycin resistance is known to be 
<15%.
29 This is an oral regimen of 6 -8 pills taken daily at different dosing intervals for 14 days. Test for 
treatment success of  eradication therapy should occur at least 4 weeks after completion of antibiotics and 
with patients off PPI for 1 -2 weeks, using urea breath test, fecal antigen test, endoscopic testing or other 
clinically approved H. pylori infection diagnostic test.  
4 
  
B6. Adherence to H. pylori treatment therapy. Adherence to medication, generally defined as >80% of 
medication uptake,30 is a crucial part of successful treatment and indispensable for reaching clinical 
goals.30,31 In the US, approximately 50%- 60% of patient s are non -adherent with their prescribed 
medicine, yet research into the causes of suboptimal adherence has been of variable quality and generally 
inconclusive.30,32-35 Adherence to the treatment regimen is the single most important factor in H.pylori 
eradication and is of paramount importance in cancer prevention.36,37 Suboptimal adherence may in fact 
contribute to antibiotic resistance and H. pylori reinfection, undermining the effectiveness of the 
therapy.38,39 The benefit gained from H. pylori eradication such as reducing long- term risk of gastric 
cancer may not be obvious to the patient. Thus, patient education is critical for H. pylori therapy, 
especially given the multiple drugs and dosing intervals of the treatment regimen, along with the 
potential non -serious but uncomfortable side effects which can include diarrhea, abdominal pain, and 
nausea/vomiting.40,41 
 
B7. Rationale for a culturally adapted multifaceted integrated approach. Two main factors that affect 
patients’ compliance are the com plexity of H. pylori treatment and the treatments’ side effects.37,42 One 
study in China identified the following specific factors for H. pylori medication nonadherence: lack of guidance on drug administration; lack of information about side effects; and preference for traditional Chinese medicine due to cultural beliefs that western therapies have more side effects.
43,44 Only a few H. 
pylori treatment adherence intervention studies have been conducted, most of which incorporated low- 
touch patient counseli ng and follow-up,36,42,44-46 and outcomes have largely been inconclusive. Patients in 
an Irish hospital who were randomized to receive detailed counseling on treatment rationale, side effects, and compliance importance were significantly more likely to hav e H. pylori eradicated (94.7% compared 
with 73.7%; p-value=0.02).
45 To date, no studies have targeted LEP or vulnerable populations for the 
prevention of stomach cancer. 
 
B7a. CHW approaches: a successful strategy for disease prevention in health disparity communities. The 
role of CHWs as important members of the healthcare workforce to improve health outcomes for vulnerable minority communities is recognized by the Institute of Medicine, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, and the American Public Health Association.
47-49 (By serving as cultural and linguistic 
bridges between community resources and health systems, CHWs have the potential to address health 
disparities and disseminate efficacious interventions to vulnerable communities. Linking Chines e 
American patients with CHWs in clinical settings will help patients understand and navigate the complex  
H. pylori eradication treatment to reduce stomach cancer risk.  
 
B7b. Electronic Health Record (EHR) interventions can improve cancer prevention and ca ncer outcomes. 
Physician recommendation and regular visits to the doctor significantly influence rates of screening within Asian American communities.
21,50 EHR provider prompts are effective tools in health care 
delivery51,52 and have been shown to significantly improve cancer screening, including among Asian 
Americans.53 Furthermore, EHRs can be used as a powerful tool to increase medication adherence54 and 
improve disease management.55,56 The use of clinical decision support systems or alerts using EHR can 
increase provider adherence to recommended screening guidelines and drive quality improvement for disease management and  prevention.
56-59 
 
B7c. An integrated approach (EHR + CHW) is needed to improve education and adherence to stomach 
5 
 cancer prevention for high -risk groups. Several systematic meta- analyses35,60-63 have identified the lack 
of behavioral, theory- based, multifaceted interventions and have collectively called for future research to 
integrate multiple theories and models to inform adherence- enhancing interventions. Similarly, there is 
demonstrated adequate evidence of the effectiveness of CHWs64-68 operating within structured health 
systems69,70 and of the potential for innovations in health information technology to support medication 
adherence.54 Given the complexity of medical adherence, integrated strategies that include socio- 
behavioral science research and theories along with EHR -based decision support tools are needed to 
help identify and address these complex challenges. To our knowledge, no study has tested an 
intervention combining the complementary strategies of EHR enhancements and CHW- led coaching for 
stomach cancer prevention in a health disparity population. 
 
B8. Summary. This project builds upon an evidence base of CHW effectiveness in low -income, LEP 
communities, and CSAAH’s experience in conducting CHW and EHR- based interventions for chronic 
disease prevention, past  observational and current pilot intervention study on H. pylori and stomach 
cancer prevention, and comprehensive hepatitis B- related liver cancer control work. This study proposes a 
unique integration of a health systems-based EHR and CHW-led intervention to address stomach cancer 
disparities among Chinese American communities. H. pylori eradication has demonstrated effectiveness 
in reducing the stomach cancer disparity in at-risk populations; however, insufficient numbers are being 
treated effectively in US. Hence, there is a critical need for theory -informed intervention research in real 
world settings to facilitate H. pylori eradication and reduction of stomach cancer disparities in at- risk 
Chinese American  immigrants.  
 
B9. Substudy Background. Gastric cancer is usually incurable when diagnosed at an advanced stage. 
About four out of five stomach cancers in the United States are diagnosed after the cancer has spread to other areas of the body, with the five- year survival rate at 4 percent 
105-107. Since there is no standard or 
routine screening test for gastric cancer in the US, it is therefore critical to develop novel biomarkers to improve prevention, risk assessment and early detection among Chinese Americans. This substudy aims to evaluate the  feasibility and response rate for the collection of biosamples among Chinese Americans 
with a clinically confirmed diagnosis of H. pylori . The biosamples will be used to assess differences in 
oral and gut microbiome profiles before and after H. pylori  antibiotic therapy.  
 
 
C. Study Design 
C1. Overall Design  
The purpose of this study is to implement and test the relative effectiveness of an integrated H. pylori t est- 
and-treat EHR -CHW intervention among Chinese American patients compared with usual care of EHR - 
only intervention. The primary outcome of interest is H. pylori eradication . The secondary outcomes of 
interest are medication adherence, self- efficacy, health literacy and other factors. This stomach cancer 
prevention study will use a 2- arm RCT desig n to evaluate the efficacy, adoption, and impact of an 
integrated EHR -based decision -support intervention with CHW- led coaching for high -risk Chinese 
American patients to achieve optimal adherence to H. pylori eradication medication regimen. An advisory 
group will guide the development of a user-friendly EHR intervention and culturally adapted materials 
relevant for Chinese Americans. The interventions will be collaboratively developed and implemented in NYC safety net hospitals and clinic sites that serve large proportions of Chinese American patients. 
 
In Year 1, we will engage in a collaborative effort to develop and refine an evidence- based clinical 
decision -support and physician feedback mechanism that can be integrated into existing EHR systems. In 
6 
 Years 2 to 4, we will implement and evaluate the specific EHR intervention and integrated culturally 
adapted CHW- led patient navigation program. In Year 5, we will assess the implementation process and 
use findings to develop a set of best practices and toolk its for public health and healthcare agencies 
regarding integrated EHR- CHW strategies to improve H. pylori test-and- treat strategies for this stomach 
cancer disparity population. Guided by the RE- AIM framework, we will systematically assess program 
adoption and sustainability to enhance reproducibility of findings and transferability to other Chinese 
American and vulnerable health -disparity populations. 
 
The intervention will be implemented at NYU Langone Health – which includes NYU Langone Brooklyn, NYU Langone Brooklyn Family Health Centers and affiliated provider practices, and NYU 
Ambulatory Care Centers – Bellevue Hospital Center and Gouverneur Hospital. 
 
Timeline.  
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
Q1: July -September; Q2: October – December; Q3: January -March; Q4: April -June 
 
 
C2. EHR- CHW Intervention  
Planning Process. Applying a community- engaged approach, we will convene a transdisciplinary 
advisory group and meet on a monthly basis during Year 1 to engage in a collaborative planning process. 
Stakeholders will include representatives from the NYU Medical Center Information Technology 
(MCIT), physician champions from the implementation clinics, project CHWs, representatives from Chinese- serving community organizations (e.g. the Chinese American Pl anning Council) and study 
investigators and staff. We will review existing quality improvement, Health Information Technology (HIT) initiatives, and other patient education resources that are currently integrated with the systems. We will host a series of MCIT supported WebEx online web conference learning exchanges within the first 4 months to share information about safety net hospital and clinic sites quality improvement initiatives 
addressing H. pylori eradication and stomach cancer prevention. Information from these learning 
exchanges will guide the advisory group’s efforts in planning the integrated EHR- CHW initiative.  
 
EHR Components .  We will conduct a workflow analysis ,71   an analysis of the processes by which a 
clinic or hospital provides care to a patient, that will be guided by a transdisciplinary, community - 
engaged advisory group. Using a rapid assessment process72-77 that is informed by the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) recommendations on workflow assessments,71 a baseline 
analysis will be conducted at each site. The workflow analysis consists of an iterative process, including ethnographic observation and key informant interviews, to provide contextual data on organizational workflow, culture, and practice. Analysis results will inform the design of alert and registry functions and 
alignment with the workflow of each  site. 
 Table 4. Project Timeline  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
Convene advisory group  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X X 
Conduct formative data (workflow analysis)     X    X    X    X    X 
Develop, adapt, integrate intervention, tools  X X X X                 
Train CHWs, providers and staffs on tools    X X X                
Recruit, randomize & implement intervention      X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Baseline and follow -up data collection       X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
Ongoing supervision and fidelity checks      X X X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Data analysis and process evaluation           X X X X X X X X X X X 
Dissemination implemented              X X X X X X X X 
Conduct Substudy                X X X X X X 
 
7 
 CHW Components. We will refine the CHW protocol and curriculum. We will conduct a scan of CHW 
and/or care coordination efforts at the sites to determine possible leverage points for the placement of 
CHW initiatives or opportunities to support train-the-trainer models. The advisory group will also review any existing materials, adapt them culturally and linguistically for the target population, and integrate 
with the existing pilot CHW educational curriculum. The Ecological Validity Model
78 complemented by a 
social marketing approach79 will be applied, to assess and adapt the materials. Small media materials will 
be produced by the advisory group using a par ticipatory process, adapted from our previous studies,80-82 
and may include bilingual palm cards and pamphlets on H. pylori eradication therapy, side effects and 
stomach cancer  prevention. 
 
To enhance scientific rigor, measure selection was based on: 1) brevity; 2) presence of domains with face 
validity for Asian American or low-literacy communities; and 3) valid psychometric properties. The 
primary outcome measure is the most rigorous outcome measure related to H. pylori eradication: 
confirmation of H. pylori eradication by fecal antigen test or other clinically approved H. pylori infection 
diagnostic test conducted 4 weeks –3 months post-treatment (to be extracted from EHR). Secondary 
outcomes include: self -efficacy, health literacy, medication adherence and other factors. Medication 
adherence measured using simplified medication adherence questionnaire (SMAQ) and medication adherence report scale (MARS -5). Self- efficacy will be measured by the Ottawa Decision Self -Efficacy 
Scale. Health literacy will be ass essed using the short form of the European Health Literacy Survey 
Questionnaire (HLS- EU-Q12). Health- related quality of life will be measured by the Patient-Reported 
Outcome Measurement Information System Global Health Scale (PROMIS).
86 
 
During the interve ntion period, patients that meet the eligibility criteria will be identified. The bilingual 
CHWs will complete a brief screening form with potential participants in person or via phone (See Script 
for Telephone Screening  and Screening  form ). The screening  form  will assess demographic characteristics, 
participant eligibility, interest in our program, and reasons for refusal to participate. For in- person 
screenings, if the patient is eligible and interested in the study, the CHW will obtain verbal informed co nsent 
for study participation and describe the randomization process (See Combined Verbal Informed Consent ). 
For individuals identified  from  the EHR  registry  list, CHWs  will conduct phone screenings,  and will 
complete the verbal consent process by phone with interested, eligible individuals.  CHWs  will compile and 
share contact  information  for consented  study participants  with the study coordinator on a weekly basis. All 
consented participants will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio using a computer -generated randomization87scheme 
to one of the study  arms.  
 
Consented participants randomized to the EHR- CHW intervention arm will receive a standardized 
protocol. The protocol, designed to be flexible, consists of 4 educational sessions to be delivered in a 
group, or per the participant’s preference one -on-one or via telephone or other social networking 
platforms (eg. WeChat). The sessions employ adult learning techniques and group- based learning 
activities. All session materials will be culturally and linguistically a dapted. The in -person sessions will 
be held at the clinics and community spaces identified by partner agencies. Data will be collected by 
study staff via surveys at baseline, 2, and 6 months. Scheduled office visits will be tracked via data pulls 
from the EHR system. If no visit is scheduled during the follow-up period, project CHWs will conduct 
follow- up calls to schedule participants for data collection events in the community, at the clinic, or in 
their home, with permission. 
 
8 
 C 3. Assessment of Implemen tation, Adoption, Sustainability, and Scalability 
To capture data on utilization patterns of the tailored EHR decision support, provider feedback tools and 
integrated EHR -CHW initiatives, Dr. Mann will work with MCIT to extract system files monthly that 
indicate date and time stamps and user logins for each time the tools were used and/or CHW embedded 
templates were accessed. Data will be extracted into a spreadsheet and analyzed by the study staff.  
Qualitative ke y informant interviews  (See Key Informant Interview Guide) will be conducted by study 
coordinator with key providers (1- 3 at each site), administrators (1 -2 at each site), and the CHWs (1 at 
each site). At baseline, the interviews will be incorporated into the workflow analysis to assess current 
satisfaction and EHR usage and health coaching. At follow -up, the interviews will assess barriers and 
facilitators to the implementation and adoption process of the integrated EHR -CHW intervention, 
intervention fidelity, and to solicit recommendations for the replication and scalability of the intervention to other clinical sites. Questions will be adapted from existing validated measures on acceptability, feasibility, adoption, organizational culture, and scalability.
88-93 
 
Qualitative ethnographic data wil l be collected through observations at the clinic sites. Ethnographic data 
will be collected by CHWs in Year 1 and by the study coordinator in Year 5 and will be guided by the 5 key steps in a rapid assessment process. Observations will occur in clinic waiting and administrative areas. Fidelity checklists will be conducted during CHW educational sessions and follow -up. 
 
C4. SUBSTUDY 
Substudy Design. The substudy is an observational feasibility pilot study. We aim to enroll a minimum of 10 participants. Only participants already enrolled in the main study are eligible for the substudy ( see 
Section II ). After enrollment into the main study, trained study staff will introduce study subjects to the 
substudy and offer subjects the opportunity to participate in th e substudy in several ways: 1) provision of 
oral wash sample only; 2) provision of stool sample only; and 3) provision of both oral wash and stool samples. Study staff will obtain verbal informed consent from interested individuals (See Combined Verbal Informed Consent ). Study staff who have obtained the verbal consent will document the consent 
and the date of consent on the Enrolled Participants Log. The Enrolled Participants Log is the only 
record linking a participant’s name, subject ID and substudy ID (if applicable).  Substudy participants 
will have the option of mail or in-person pick-up for receiving study materials, which include the kits to collect oral wash and fecal samples, participant instructions (See Substudy Instruction Booklet ), and 
return s tamped envelope. Once the substudy materials are received, study staff will set up an 
appointment to call or meet with substudy subjects remotely via WebEx and answer any questions about sample collection and returning the samples of the participant’s choice.  
 After the completion of their H. pylori antibiotic therapy (approximately two months after enrollment), 
subjects will be sent or given another biosample collection kit with instructions and a return stamped 
envelope for sample collection. For those w ho did not return study samples, study staff will give a 
reminder call by phone and/or text message ( See Script for Substudy Telephone Text Reminders ). 
Subjects who return incomplete or unusable study samples will be sent or given another biosample 
collection kit with instructions and return stamped envelope.  
 
 
II. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESEARCH  POPULATION 
The overall number of subjects expected to parti cipate in the EHR- CHW Intervention study is 144. Key 
9 
 informant interviews will be conducted with approximately  10-12 individuals (project  CHWs,  providers, 
and administrators).  
 
EHR -CHW Intervention  
Inclusion Criteria :  An individual is eligible for the inte rvention if s/he: a) self identifies as Chinese 
American; b) is an outpatient aged 21+; c) plans to continue to live in the region during the next 12 
months; d) is willing to be randomized to either treatment or control groups; and e) has a confirmed diagn osis of H. pylori infection by at least one of the following methods: C- urea breath test, histology, 
rapid urease test or bacterial culture, fecal stool antigen test or other clinically approved H. pylori infection diagnostic test.
94 
 
Exclusion Criteria: T he exclusion criteria include: a) advanced chronic disease that would not allow the 
patient to complete follow -up or attend visits; b) allergy to any of the treatment drugs; c) previous gastric 
surgery; d) pregnancy or currently breastfeeding; e) taking antibiotics or bismuth salts within 2 weeks before the study. 
 
Rationale for proposed exclusion of gender and racial/ethnic group members: Individuals from other 
racial/ethnic groups are excluded from participation in the intervention as this study is focused on Chinese American adults. Men and women will both be invited to participate in this intervention. No children or vulnerable subjects will be enrolled in this study.  
 
Subs
tudy 
Inclusion criteria: An individual is eligible for the substudy if s/he is: a) enrolled in the EHR -CHW 
Intervention main study; and b) is willing to provide either an oral sample, a fecal sample, or both. 
Individuals will be excluded from the substudy if they are unable to mail the samples back to the study team.  
 
Key Informan t Interviews  
Inclusion Criteria: Interviewees must be an adult (18 years and over) and they must be a provider, an 
administrator, or a community health worker. Individuals will be excluded  from the interview if the 
interview cannot be conducted in the English language. 
 
III. METHODS & PROCEDURES  
A. Methods &  Procedures  
A1. EHR- CHW Intervention Components  
EHR Component 
Epic,  the EHR  system,  has been  integrated  at NYU Langone Health,  and is  being imp lemented  at 
Bellevue and Gouverneur Hospitals. Dr. Mann will oversee MCIT in creating the proposed EHR 
enhancements.  
 
The integrated EHR -CHW protocol will support team- based care by supporting feedback between clinic 
staff and CHWs, including: First,  templates will be created that CHWs can complete and upload into the 
EHR. Healthcare providers will be able to access these templates using EHR and building upon existing workflow. Second, health coaching and referral materials, to be developed by the adv isory committee, 
will be made available to providers through the EHR. Third , CHW communication with the healthcare 
10 
 team will be facilitated by participation and report- backs from CHWs during regular team “huddles” or 
staff meetings; the frequency of partic ipation will be site -specific and determined by findings from the 
workflow analysis. 
 
Integrated EHR- CHW Protocol Intervention.  
Orientation, Implementation and Training.  CHWs have been trained through the NYU -CUNY Prevention 
Research Center Training Program in a set of core competencies, which was developed by CSAAH 
faculty Trinh -Shevrin and Islam.95 
Enrollment & Randomization. H. pylori infected individuals will be identified and recruited into the study 
from NYC health care facilities (NYU Langone Health – which includes NYU Langone Brooklyn, NYU 
Langone Brooklyn Family Health Centers and affiliated provider practices, and NYU Ambulatory Care 
Centers – Bellevue Hospital Center and Gouverneur Hospital). Participants will be identified by 2 approaches: 1) using ICD codes for H. pylori and Chinese ethnicity identified through a race and 
language code available in EHR, with recently diagnosed H. pylori infection (within 7 -days) will be 
identified; via a EHR registry list, and 2) patients will be recruited direc tly from the above mentioned 
clinics. All consented participants will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio using a computer- generated 
randomization scheme
87 to one of the study arms. 
 
CHW Intervention Components. The intervention arm protocol consists of 4 educational sessions: session 
1 will focus on medication adherence, treatment side effects, and the link between H. pylori and stomach 
cancer; and sessions 2 through 4 will focus on reinforcing session 1 themes, stomach cancer risk reduction, and links to community- based resources. The sessions employ adult learning techniques and 
group- based learning activities. All session materials are culturally and linguistically adapted. The in -
person sessions will be held at the clinics, community spaces identified by partner agencies or by telephone. These sessions will be accompanied by phone call, text or voicemail medication and follow-up reminders in the preferred language (frequency depending on participant preference ). The intervention 
materials will model scripts and messages informed by Social Cognitive Theory and will include reviewing and reinforcing individualized challenges, strategies and action plans for medication adherence 
and stomach cancer prevention. 
 
 
A2. Data Collection 
The recruitment and data collection protocol will be finalized with substantial feedback from the advisory 
group. All study staff involved in recruitment and data collection will receive a standardized training orientation on administerin g surveys and will be certified in human subjects research via the 
Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI Program). 
 
EHR data will be used for recruitment and for the determination of primary outcomes. Dr. Mann will work with MCIT to identify potential participants from EPIC databases. During the recruitment period, registry lists will be generated weekly from EHR for physicians who have approved participation of their patients. Patients will be contacted either by phone (up to 3 calls) or in person by CHW. All preliminary 
EHR data will be deleted or shredded after one week of retrieval. EHR data to be shared with the study 
team include: demographics (gender, age, race/ethnicity (if available), language (if available), diagnosis of H. pylori through ICD codes, dates of clinic visits, name, and telephone number. Scheduled office visits will be tracked via quarterly EHR data pulls. EHR data will also be used to follow -up with the 
11 
 outcome of treatment regimens and to determine H.pylori eradication  via fecal stool antigen tests based 
on treatment follow -up procedures of physicians. 
 
Contact information will be collected from participants, including cell phone and home phone numbers, 
home and work address, email address, and Facebook/social networking account information. We will 
also assess whether participants are willing to receive text reminders on their cell phone. Additionally, a 
reminder letter and a small gift (tote bag, etc) will be sent to every participant who is willing to receive  
mail 4 months after enrollment. These strategies have been shown to be effective in retaining participants in community- based research.  
 
Data will be collected by study staff via surveys at baseline, 2, and 6 months. Scheduled office visits will 
be tracked via quarterly data pulls form the EHR system. If no visit is scheduled during the follow-up 
period, project CHWs will conduct follow-up calls to schedule participants for data collection events in 
the community, at the clinic, or at their home, with permission. Participants will be compensated $25 for each assessments and will receive reminder calls and/or texts 2 weeks prior to data collection events to 
ensure attendance.  
 
Substudy Biosample Collection . Substudy participants will have the option of mail or in -person pick-up 
for receiving study materials, which include the kits to collect oral wash and/or fecal samples and return 
stamped envelope. Once the substudy materials are received, study staff will set up an appointment to 
call or meet with substudy subjects remotely via WebEx and answer any questions about sample 
collection and return.  
 
Substudy subjects will have the option to provide oral wash sample only, fecal sample only, or both. 
Study staff who have obtained the verbal consent will document t he consent on the Enrolled Participants 
Log. The Enrolled Participants Log is the only record linking a participant’s name, subject ID and 
substudy ID (if applicable).   Fecal biospample collection: S ubstudy participants will provide fecal samples (about 8  grams which is 
about 2 teaspoons) in a OMNIgeneGUT fecal sample tube ( DNAgenotek, Ontario, Canada).  
Directions for performing the test:  
1) Remove the fecal sample tube with preservation liquid inside from packaging.  
2) Flush the toilet, allow it to refill. Th e stool cannot touch the toilet bowl or water. Use one of the 
following collection options:  
a. Place saran wrap or provided stool collection paper over the toilet bowl to collect a sample of stool.  
b. Just before finishing a bowel movement, use a piece of toilet paper to c ollect a small 
sample of stool. 
3) Use spoon attached to cap to collect 2 marble sized samples.  
4) Carefully screw the cap closed with sample on spoon. Shake well.  
5) Once the collection is complete, place the tube in the preaddressed package and seal carefully. Return to the study center by mail within one day of collection.  
 Oral wash biosample collection:  Study participants will be asked to swish vigorously with one aliquot of 10 ml Scope Original mouthwash sample ( Proctor & Gamble, Cincinnati, OH) for 30 seconds.  
12 
 Participants will be directed to expectorate the mouthwash into a clean specimen tube, and return to the 
study center by mail within one day of collection. 
 
 
B. Data Analysis and Data Monitoring 
B1. EHR- CHW Intervention  Analysis.  
We will  conduct analyses to determine the comparability of the participants in the 2- arms using standard 
techniques, including Student’s t- tests for normally distributed variables (after necessary transformations) 
and chi- squared tests for dichotomous variables. If the randomized groups differ in baseline 
characteristics, we will adjust for those variables in subsequent analyses of program effects. Descriptive 
statistics will be calculated to characterize study participants and to evaluate the distribution of key clinical, sociodemographic, and outcome variables. Summary data on medical history, years in the US, 
access to and utilization of primary health care services, and social characteristics (e.g., marital status, 
employment) will be reported. 
 
All analyses wi ll be conducted using intention -to-treat methods to minimize the risk of attrition bias. The 
primary analyses of differences in H. pylori eradication between the intervention and usual care groups 
will first be tested using a chi- squared test of binomial proportions. We will assess level of participation 
for those randomized into the intervention arm, and explore whether level of participation is associated with greater changes in health outcomes. Logistic regression analysis will be used to analyze differences in outcome between those who receive the intervention and those who do not, controlling for potential confounding factors. All quantitative data will be entered and analyzed using standard statistical packages 
(e.g., SAS, R, Stata).The primary analysi s will assume that any patient lost to follow -up failed to achieve 
H. pylori eradication. As a sensitivity analysis, we will apply multiple imputation to impute missing 
outcomes assuming a missing -at-random mechanism. 
 
The analysis of secondary outcomes is guided in part by the Social Cognitive Theory. We hypothesize 
that the intervention group, when compared with usual care, will report: 1) increased medication 
adherence; 2) increased self -efficacy for adherence; 3) improved health literacy; 4) improved kn owledge 
about stomach cancer prevention; and 5) higher levels of perceived health related quality of life. We will compare these intermediate outcomes between groups using t- test or its non -parametric equivalent, the 
Wilcoxon rank- sum test. Sex as a biological variable will be addressed by exploring gender as a potential 
moderator of intervention effects.  
 
Power calculations. For the control group, we conservatively estimate that approximately 55% will achieve H. pylori eradication based on several studies of overall and, specifically, Chinese American 
populations.
36,45,46,100 We wish to detect an increase in this rate to approximately 80% in the intervention 
group; this difference is reasonable based on studies in Ireland and China that showed increases of approximately this magnitude in rates of knowledge and high adherence in similar populations.
36,44,45 
Accrual of 144 participants, evenly randomized to intervention or usual care, provide greater than 80% power to detect this difference, using a 2-sided, 0.05- level test.  
 
B1a. Substudy Data Analysis.   
Oral and gut microbiome data will be derived from the 16S rRNA sequencing assay from the oral wash 
and fecal samples. Based on barcoded 16S rRNA gene sequence read, each sample will be described  as 
13 
 having “relative abundance of taxa (from bacterial phyla, genera, and species)”.  The pre -processed 
sequences will be further analyzed using QIIME pipeline for analysis of community sequence data.  In 
short, the pipeline consists of the following baseline/upstrea m statistical analyses: (a) sequence sorting by 
barcode into individual samples; (b) pairwise alignment and clustering of sequences into operational 
taxonomic units (OTUs); (c) computation of absolute abundance matrix; (d) computation of alpha 
(species richness, Shannon index, Simpson index) and beta diversity (e.g. weighted and unweighted Unifrac) with rarefaction; and (e) principal component analysis (PCA) generation.  All representative sequences from OTUs will be classified at taxonomic levels from phyl um to genus using the high 
throughput Classifier at RDP II.  Community structure will be described using membership and 
distribution of every member for a given sample.  Because the number of reads generated from samples 
will vary, we will compare the relative distribution instead of the absolute frequency of organisms between samples.  The relative abundance for a given taxon will be calculated as the number of reads from this taxon divided by the total number of reads from all taxa. 
 
Anonymized demographic information will be extracted from the main study database and shared with 
authorized study staff on a weekly basis. Descriptive statistics will be calculated to characterize substudy 
participants and to evaluate the distribution of key clinical, sociode mographic, and outcome variables. 
Summary data on medical history, years in the US, access to and utilization of primary health care services, and social characteristics (e.g., marital status, employment) will be reported.  
 
B2: Assessment of Implementatio n, Adoption, Sustainability, and Scalability Analysis. 
B2a. Evaluation Framework . Guided by RE- AIM,1,101 we will collect data on the delivery of the 
intervention and its potential for sustainability and scalability with the goal of facilitating  its 
impleme ntation into routine practice. The process evaluation will assess the feasibility, acceptability, and 
sustainability of the intervention. 
 
B2b. Data Sources and Collection. We will use mixed methods to document challenges, barriers, and 
facilitators associated with implementing the multifaceted intervention; these will help to characterize 
feasibility and acceptability in clinic settings, to assess fidelity to the evidence -based strategy, and to 
determine model sustainability and scalability. Data sou rces will include: 1) quantitative data on 
utilization patterns captured from the EHR; 2) qualitative in -depth interview data (key informant 
interviews) from providers, clinic staff, and CHWs; and 3) ethnographic observational data of workflow at clinic si tes, use of EHR tools, and organizational barriers and facilitators. 
 
B2c. Analysis. Analysis to address this aim will be guided by the following questions: 
1. U tilization Patterns: How frequently do providers utilize the integrated EHR- CHW system and does 
the utilization pattern change over time? Does the intervention increase the utilization and quality of 
measurement reports? The system utilization files from MCIT will be used to analyze utilization patterns 
of the enhanced decision-support or physician ale rt function, as well as the integrated EHR -CHW  options. 
These data will yield descriptive trends for frequency of utilization across the clinic sites as well as an estimate of the percentage of adoption in terms of patient follow -up visits. The frequency of quality 
measurement reports will be described and compared 6 months pre- and post-intervention. 
2. Providers and Clinic Staffs’ Attitudes Regarding the Integrated Intervention:  
 What are providers’ 
attitudes regarding H. pylori eradication guidelines? How satisfied or dissatisfied are the providers and 
staff with the integrated EHR- CHW tools? What are the barriers and facilitators of point -of-care use of 
14 
 the tools? How does the intervention affect providers and staffs’ satisfaction with workflow for stomach 
cancer prevention and H. pylori eradication? This set of research questions and the following set will be 
primarily addressed with data from in-depth i nterviews. Qualitative analysis is described below.  
3. B arriers and Facilitators to Implementation Adoption and Implications for Scalability: What 
organizational barriers and facilitators appear to influence implementation of the integrated EHR- CHW 
interventi on and its component strategies and how? Did members of the clinics understand and respect 
the respective roles of providers, CHWs, and other members of the team? How were users involved in design  and implementation?  Interview  data will be transcribed  and observational data will be collected  in 
the form of field notes. 
 
Analysis of qualitative data from transcriptions and field notes will follow the "constant comparison" analytic approach.
102 The “constant comparison” approach is a method of explanation bui lding in which 
the findings of an initial case are compared with a provisional category, property or proposition, revised as necessary and then other details or new cases are then compared against the revision and revised again 
as needed. This iterative pr ocess is continued until theoretical saturation is reached.
102 Central to this 
process is the "thematic" coding scheme. We will develop an initial set of codes, which will be reviewed 
by the advisory group to ensure that they are relevant and complete. For each core code, we will 
ultimately develop one or more "secondary codes" that represent either more specific or restricted aspects of the phenomenon, to contextualize it, or to suggest underlying meanings. The secondary codes will vary 
in specificity or subtlety depending on the judged substantive value of additional refinements. Transcripts 
will be coded by at least 4 coders. Coding discrepancies will be discussed and resolved, then the process will be repeated with a new set of transcripts until an accep table level of inter -coder reliability has been 
achieved, estimated using an appropriate chance-corrected statistic (e.g., kappa for nominal data and T- 
index for ordinal data).
103 Coded transcripts will be analyzed with ATLAS.ti, a software package for 
qualitative data analysis.104 Analysis will be conducted to inform best practices for dissemination and 
scalability.  
 
C. Data Storage and  Confidentiality  
Confidentiality will be maintained for participants according to mandatory Institutional Review Board 
regulations, under the supervision of Dr. Simona Kwon. 
 
EHR -CHW Intervention. Data safety procedures will be implemented for this study to minimize the 
likelihood that PHI will be improperly used or disclosed. All patient data will be de- identified by NYU 
staff prior to transfer to NYU databases via a secure sftp site. All electronic PHI associated with the study, including data received from EHR and information received from questionnaires will be stored on password -protected computers behind the NYULMC fi rewall. Data will ultimately be disseminated 
through oral presentations, reports and manuscripts and will only contain anonymized data (no PHI). 
The following steps will be taken to keep subject’s private information secured: any paper files will be 
stored  in locked file cabinets; only NYULMC IT approved and encrypted storage devices will be used to 
transport/store patient data. Databases will be secured with password protection. The data will be stored 
indefinitely. Patients’ personal information will be k ept confidential to the extent permitted by law and 
will not be released without their written permission except as described in this paragraph. To safeguard 
confidentiality and anonymity, a unique code will be assigned to participants. Only the study staf f will 
have access to the information that links participants with their unique code. Names of survey 
participants will not be reported in any publication. All computer systems are protected from possible 
15 
 external access. Only necessary study personnel will have access to subjects’ private information.  
Efforts will be made to minimize invasion of privacy by using the minimum PHI needed to conduct this 
research and by protecting the confidentiality of all private information through restricted access and protected storage of study data.  
 
Patient Surveys  
To safeguard confidentiality and anonymity, unique identifiers will be assigned to all participants for all portions of the study and all data collection instruments will identify participants only by these unique identifiers. On the baseline and follow -up surveys, the first page of the survey will ask participants for 
updated contact information so that study staff can maintain contact throughout the intervention period. After the data is collected, the firs t page of the survey will be removed from the remainder of the survey 
instrument (which will only contain unique identifiers). Data will be entered into REDCap, a survey database platform, by a study staff member. Only study staff will have password protected access to the 
data. Laura Wyatt, MPH will serve as the data manager for this study. The Data Manager will be 
responsible for the management of information obtained at the various clinic sites.  
The database will be stored on REDCap’s secure database system, which will be utilized for data management purposes. Survey pages containing participant names and contact information and logs linking subjects’ identifying information to study numbers will be kept locked in a file cabinet in a secure 
location. Paper baseline and follow- up survey data will be kept separate from identifiable information and 
kept in locked file cabinets in a secure location. Contact information from consented participants will be 
kept on file for the duration of the trial and will be destroyed (both electronic and hard copy) upon the dissemination of trial results (approximately 5 years).  
 Substudy Biosample Handling and Security . The samples in containers will be received by mail via USPS 
at NYU Smilow Research Center and stored at -80 ˚C  at a laboratory facility with space dedicated to our 
study samples. Within two weeks of receipt, DNA will be isolated from these specimens and used to 
conduct microbiome assays.  Vials will only be labeled with unique study numbers and be clearly marked as substudy samples. No samples will be collected in a vial labeled with patient identifiers. If a sample 
does arrive with patient identifiers, those identifiers will be removed and discarded by study staff before 
storage and will be replaced with a uniq ue study number. Samples will be stored for the duration of the 
study and destroyed upon the dissemination of trial results (approximately 5 years).  Substudy Data Handling and Security . All samples are traced with a computer database that records 
sample t ype, storage location, date of collection and storage, and study identification number. A separate 
Enrolled Participants’ Log will be maintained which links the specimen  to the patient through the study 
identification number. This log will also link the pa tient to the main study. This log will only be 
accessible to authorized study staff. Neither patient identifiers nor the key will be available to staff 
managing samples at the specimen bank. Data and specimens will be stored without linkage codes to 
ensure the permanent anonymity of the study subjects. Anonymized demographic information will be 
extracted from the main study database and shared with authorized substudy staff on a weekly basis. Main study and substudy data will be maintained on separate passw ord-protected databases and server 
locations, and made accessible only to study staff. 
 
Key Informant Interviews. Unique study IDs will be assigned to each key informant in REDCap, and these unique study IDs will track interview logistics (including interview date/time, location), interview audio file names, and interview transcripts. The REDCap data, audio- recordings and interview transcripts 
16 
 will be saved on a password protected desktop and backed up on a password protected external hard 
drive, which will be locked in a file cabinet at the NYU Center for the Study of Asian American Health office. Once audio recordings are transcribed and entered onto a password protected database, the recordings will be deleted from the study files. Only study staff will have access to these audio - 
recordings and study data. To safeguard confidentiality and anonymity, audio- files are de -identified, and 
subject names will not be collected or included in interview  transcripts.  
 
D. Data Sharing  Policy  
The Principal Investigator, advisory committee and research team staff will be responsible for developing 
publication procedures and establishing authorship policies. This study will comply with the NIH Public 
Access Policy, the public will have access to the published results of this intervention. Manuscripts will be submitted to peer-reviewed journals and accepted manuscripts will be submitted to PubMed Central upon acceptance of publication. The study will be submitted to clinicaltrials.gov and updated as necessary 
in accordance with study development. The clinicaltrials.gov record id is [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]. 
 
IV. RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT 
Risks and protection against  risks  
The proposed study and substudy poses minimal risk to participants.  Loss of confidentiality is the 
greatest potential risk to study subjects. There is very minimal risk in providing oral and/or fecal 
biosamples. Participants may feel uncomfortable collecting the samples. Participants can choose not to 
collect the sample(s) if they are uncomfortable. Locked file cabinets will be used to store materials with identifying information. All computer systems are protected from possible external access. All data and interviews will be stored on a password -protected computer at the NYUGSOM. Names will be replaced 
with identification num bers. All audio recorded key informant interviews will be stored on a password-
protected secure computer at the NYUGSOM. Once audio recordings are transcribed and entered onto a password protected database, the recordings will be deleted from the study fil es. Key informant 
participants will have the right to refuse to participate without any compromise of their employment status, reputation or professional relationships. Records of participations will not be linked to employment 
records. Also, if a participant is uncomfortable during an interview situation, they may stop the interview 
at any time without penalty. The data collected for this study will be used strictly for the purposes stated in this application and will only be available to NYU research  staff. 
 
Potential Benefits to the Subjects  
CHW Intervention: By participating in the proposed research, participants may gain the benefit of augmented services related to their H. pylori treatment and stomach cancer -related risk factors. Some 
patients may individually experience no benefit. This study will yield knowledge regarding methods for increasing adherence to evidence- based guidelines for treating H. pylori among providers and heal th staff 
serving Chinese American populations. Overall, the benefits of understanding effective methods for 
helping patients reduce their risk of stomach cancer through incomplete treatment of H. pylori far 
outweigh the remote possibility of a breach of co nfidentiality.  
 Substudy: While participants may individually experience no benefit, the substudy will yield further  
knowledge of the oral and gut health of Chinese Americans with H. pylori  and the impact of antibiotic 
therapy on their microbiome. 
 
1 7 
 Key I nf or m a nt I ntervie ws: Partici pati n g pr o vi ders a n d cli nic staff ma y be nefit fr o m t he i nter ve nti o ns 
w hic h are mea nt t o assist t he m wit h i m pr o vi n g t he q ualit y of care t he y pr o vi de f or C hi nese A merica n 
patie nts at -ris k of st o mac h ca ncer. T he st u d y ma y als o ha ve rele va nce t o t he U S healt h care s yste m b y 
testi n g a practice facilitati o n m o del t o e n ha nce i m ple me ntati o n of tea m -base d care i nte grate d wit h E H R 
s yste ms f or pre ve nti n g st o mac h ca ncer.  
 
U n a ntici p ate d a d verse e ve nts  
A n a d verse e ve nt will be c o nsi dere d u ne x pecte d if t he nat ure, se verit y, or fre q ue nc y of t he e ve nt is n ot 
c o nsiste nt wit h t he ris k i nf or mati o n pre vi o usl y descri be d f or t he st u d y i nter ve nti o n. 
A n y i nci de nt, e x perie nce, or o utc o me t hat meets all  of t he f oll o wi n g criteria:  
 U ne x pecte d i n nat ure, se verit y, or fre q ue nc y  (i.e. n ot descri be d i n st u d y-relate d d oc u me nts s uc h 
as t he I R B -a p pr o ve d pr ot oc ol or c o nse nt f or m, t he i n vesti gat ors br oc h ure, etc)  
 Relate d or p ossi bl y relate d t o partici pati o n i n t he researc h  (i.e. p ossi bl y relate d mea ns t here is  a 
reas o na ble p ossi bilit y t hat t he i nci de nt e x perie nce, or o utc o me ma y ha ve bee n ca use d b y t he 
pr oce d ures i n v ol ve d i n t he researc h)  
S u g gests t hat t he researc h places s u bj ects or ot hers at greater ris k of har m  (i ncl u di n g p h ysical, 
ps yc h ol o gical, ec o n o mic, or s ocial ha r m).  
 
U n a ntici p ate d a d verse e ve nts re p orti n g  
I nci de nts or e ve nts t hat meet t he O H R P criteria f or u na ntici pate d pr o ble ms re q uire t he creati o n a n d 
c o m pleti o n of a n u na ntici pate d pr o ble m re p ort f or m. T he i n vesti gat or is res p o nsi ble t o re p ort 
u na ntici pate d pr o ble ms t o t heir I R B a n d t o t he st u d y s p o ns or. T he u na ntici pate d pr o ble m re p ort 
will i ncl u de t he f oll o wi n g i nf or mati o n:  
• Pr ot oc ol i de ntif yi n g i nf or mati o n: pr ot oc ol title a n d n u m ber, PI’s na me, a n d t he I R B pr oj ect  
n u m ber; 
 A detaile d descri pti o n of t he e ve nt, i nci de nt, e x perie nce, or o utc o me;  
 A n e x pla nati o n of t he basis f or deter mi ni n g t hat t he e ve nt, i nci de nt, e x perie nce, or o utc o me 
re prese nts a n u na ntici pate d  pr o ble m;  
 A descri pti o n of a n y c ha n ges t o t he pr ot oc ol or ot her c orrecti ve acti o ns t hat ha ve be e n ta ke n or 
are pr o p ose d i n res p o nse t o t he u na ntici pate d  pr o ble m.  
T o satisf y t he re q uire me nt f or pr o m pt re p orti n g, U na ntici pate d pr o ble ms will be re p orte d usi n g t he 
f oll o wi n g ti meli ne:  
 U na ntici pate d pr o ble ms t hat are seri o us a d verse e ve nts will be re p orte d t o t he I R B a n d t o t he  
st u d y s p o ns or wit hi n 1 0 b usi ness da ys of t he i n vesti gat or bec o mi n g a ware of t he e ve nt.  
 All u na ntici pate d pr o ble ms will be re p orte d t o t he I R B a n d t o t he st u d y s p o ns or wit hi n 1 0 
b usi ness da ys of t he i n vesti gat or bec o mi n g a ware of t he  pr o ble m.  
 
V.  I N V E S TI G A T O R’ S Q U A LI FI C A TI O N S &  E X P E RI E N C E 
N Y U  Pers o n nel  
Si m o n a K w o n, Dr P H, M P H is a n Ass ociate Pr ofess or of P o p ulati o n Healt h wit hi n t he N Y U Sc h o ol of 
Me dici ne  a n d  will  ser ve  as  t he  PI  of t his  st u d y;  s he has  s u bsta ntial  e x perie nce  i n  a da pti n g a n d i m ple me nti n g 
e vi de nce -base d researc h i nter ve nti o ns i n Asia n A merica n c o m m u nities. Dr. K w o n is t he direct or of t he 
C S A A H ( NI M H D U 5 4 M D 0 0 0 5 3 8) a n d has esta blis he d researc h part ners hi ps wit h 2 0 Asia n A merica n - 
ser vi n g  c o m m u nit y or ga nizati o ns wit h  a trac k  rec or d  of recr uiti n g t h o usa n ds of st u d y  partici pa nts i n  vari o us 
C S A A H researc h trials. Dr. K w o n’s researc h i ncl u des t he f oll o wi n g: direct or of t he 5 -year B Free C E E D: 
18 
 National Center of Excellence in the Elimination of Hepatitis B Disparities, a multi- level hepatitis B and 
liver cancer prevention center (CDC U58DP001022) where she played a critical role in the design and 
dissemination of evidence -based strategies to reduce hepatitis B and liver cancer disparities among Asian 
American  communities; and co-investigator  on several  CHW -led interventions,  including  Project  DREAM 
examining the effectiveness of CHWs in diabetes management in Bangladeshi Americans in community settings (NIMHD P60MD000538). This proposal builds on a completed Perlmutter Cancer Center pilot grant (PI: Kwon) to test the feasibility and acceptability of a CHW intervention for stomach cancer prevention to enhance adherence to H. pylori eradication  treatment  in LEP,  Chinese  American  patients.  
 
Devin Mann, MD, MS, is an Associate Professor of Medicine at the NYU School of Medicine and the 
Senior Director of Informatics Innovation and will serve as co- investigator on this study. Dr. Mann has 
extensive expertise in health systems and EHR -based interventions which will be critical for ensuring 
pragmatic workflow integration  and clinical  adoption  for the proposed integration  of the Community Health 
Worker workflows into the electronic health  record. 
 
Thaddeus Tarpey, PhD will serve as the biostatistici an for the study. He is the current Director of the 
PhD Gradu ate Program in Biostatistics. Dr. Tarpey  will provide epidemiological and biostatistical 
support.  
 
Chau Trinh- Shevrin, DrPH , is an Associate Professor of Population Health and Medicine, the Vice 
Chair for Research within the Department of P opulation Health and the Chief for the Section for Health 
Equity within the New York School of Medicine. Dr. Trinh- Shevrin and will serve as a scientific advisor 
to this study. Dr. Trinh- Shevrin ‘s research for the last 20 years has been centered on the rigorous 
development and evaluation of multi- level strategies to reduce health disparities and advance health 
equity. 
 
Renee Williams, MD is an Assistant Professor of Medicine within the Division of Gastroenterology at 
the NYU Langone Medical Center and will serve as co -investigator from NYC Health+Hospital/Bellevue. 
Dr. Williams  will provide  clinical and site workflow  experience and access to the patient communities. 
 Yu Chen, PhD, MPH  is a Professor of Population Health and Environmental Medicine within the NYU 
School of Medicine and will serve as a co -investigator of the substudy. She has extensive experience as a 
chronic disease epidemiologist. Her research has focused on the role of the gastric and oral microbiome in gastric premalignant and malignant lesions. 
 
Yi-Ling Tan, MPH is the Program Manager for the NYU Center for the Study of Asian American 
Health. She has managed various multi -site clinical trials and community -based research studies in 
numerous settings. Ms. Tan received her MPH in Forced Migra tion and Health from Columbia 
University, Mailman School of Public Health. 
 
Angel Mui , MEd, is the Project Coordinator for the NYU Center for the Study of Asian American Health. She provides 
patient and community outreach and engagement and assist with pro ject and research coordination activities including data 
collection, data analysis, and participant recruitment and retention. She has experience in supporting a number of public 
health projects in the fields of community health research for Chinese- Americ an communities. She received her BA in 
Psychology and Asian Studies from Cornell University and earned her MEd in Mental Health Counseling at Teachers 
College, Columbia University.  
19 
  
 
Laura Wyatt , MPH is the Research Data Manager for the NYU Center for the Study of Asian American 
Health.  She manages and oversees  the data sources across CSAAH,  which  includes the NYU -CUNY PRC, 
and performs analyses and assists with the dissemination of study findings. In addition, she provides 
epidemiological and biostatistic al support for grant development activities within the center. Ms. Wyatt 
received  her MPH  in Epidemiology from  Columbia University,  Mailman  School of Public Health  and also 
studied public health at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 
 
 
VI. SUBJECT  IDENTIFICATION, RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT/ASSENT  
A. Method of Subject Identification and  Recruitment  
EHR -CHW Intervention: H. pylori infected individuals will be identified and recruited into the study from 
the following NYC health care facilities: NYU Langone Health – which includes NYU Langone Brooklyn, NYU Langone Brooklyn Family Health Centers and affiliated provider practices, and NYU Ambulatory Care Centers – Bellevue Hospital Center and Gouverneur Hospital. Participants will be identified by 2 approaches: 1) using ICD codes for H. pylori and Chinese ethnicity identified through a 
race and language code available in EHR, patients w ith recently diagnosed H. pylori infection (within 7- 
days) will be identified; via a EHR registry list, and 2) patients will be recruited directly at the above 
mentioned sites, all of which serve a substantial Chinese American population. In endoscopy clinics, patients are routinely evaluated for H. pylori infection. 
 
CHWs will complete a brief screening form with potential participants in person or via phone, depending on the preference of the potential participant and the safety of the study staff and potential participants. The form will assess demographic characteristics, participant eligibility, COVID -19 symptoms, interest in our 
program, and reasons for refusal  to participate.  For in-person screenings,  if the patient  is eligible  and 
interested  in the study, the CHW will obtain verbal informed consent for study participation and describe 
the randomization process (See Combined Verbal Informed Consent ). All study staff will follow COVID -
19 workplace safety, personal protective equipment and social distan cing policies at each recruiting clinic 
site and as required by NYUGSOM.  
 
Individuals identified from the registry list will receive phone calls by CHWs (See Combined Script for 
Telephone Screening), during which CHWs will explain the study and elements of  informed consent, and 
will complete the process for verbal informed consent over the phone with interested,  eligible  individuals.  
Participant  names and  phone numbers will be needed in order for the CHWs  to contact participants  regarding 
participation in the intervention (Please see Application for Waiver of Authorization and Documentation of 
Consent ). In addition, a screening form (See Telephone Screening Form for CHW Intervention ) will be 
completed to verify eligibility. CHWs will call patients a maximum of 3 times over a one -week period at 
varying times of the day to invite them to enroll in the study. CHWs will compile and share contact information for consented study participants with the study coordinator on a weekly basis.  
 
Substudy . The substudy is only open to participants who are enrolled in the EHR-CHW intervention. 
Once participants have consented to being in the EHR- CHW intervention, CHWs will explain the 
substudy and elements of informed consent, and will complete the process for verbal informed consent over the phone with interested individuals. Study staff who have obtained the verbal consent will 
20 
 document the consent and the date of consent on the Enrolled Participants Log. The Enrolled Participants 
Log is the only record linking a participant ’s name, subject ID and substudy ID (if applicable).  
 No undue pressure will be given to subjects to participate in both studies as participation is entirely voluntary (See Combined Verbal Informed Consent). 
 
 
Key Informant Interviews. Participating providers, administrative staff and community health workers 
of clinic sites will receive an invitation to participate in the interview (See Invitation and Elements of 
Informed Consent for Key Informant Interview ). No undue pressure will be given to subjec ts for 
participation as the participation is entirely voluntary (See Verbal Consent Script for Key Informant 
Interview ). 
 
B. Process of  Consent  
All study personnel will have completed the NYU IRB Mandatory Tutorial and IRB Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Training before commencing any data collection activities. 
The informed consent form for this study have been created by the NYU School of Medicine Office of 
Science and Research in accordance with Federal guidelines, including HIPAA.  
EHR -CHW Intervention . To maintain consistency in consent procedures and to reduce selection bias, 
verbal informed consent obtained for both in- person and telephone enrollment (see Application for 
Waiver of Authorization and Documentation of Consent ).  
 
If screening is conducted in person, consent processes will take place at clinic sites in a manner that maximizes confidentiality and privacy and allows questions to be asked. All study staff will follow COVID -19 workplace safety and personal protective equipment policies at each recruiting clinic site and 
as required by NYUGSOM. Participants will be screened in advance for symptoms and asked in advance to wear a mask/face covering. All study staff and participants will follow efforts for social distanci ng 
whenever possible. Eligible participants demonstrating interest in participating in the project will meet with a study team member who will explain the intervention and answer any questions. Verbal consent 
(see Combined Verbal Informed Consent)  will be obtained in a location allowing privacy and appropriate 
social distancing, on a one-on-one basis.  
 Participants are free to withdraw from participating in the study at any time without repercussions. Participants will be advised during the consent process that they have the right to withdraw entirely and 
that their refusal will not jeopardize their relationships with their CHW or primary care physician.  
 Substudy . Only participants already enrolled in the main study are eligible for the substudy. Study sta ff 
will obtain verbal consent from interested participants ( see Combined Verbal Informed Consent ) and 
offer subjects the opportunity to participate in the substudy in several ways: 1) provision of oral wash sample only; 2) provision of stool sample only; and 3) provision of both oral wash and stool samples. Participants will be advised participation in the substudy is optional and that their refusal to participate in the substudy will not jeopardize their participation in the EHR -CHW Intervention. Participa nts are 
free to withdraw from the substudy at any time without repercussions. 
 
Key Informant Interviews. A Waiver of Documentation of Consent is being requested for participants of 
Key Informant Interviews for this study (See Application for Waiver of Documentation of Consent for 
21 
 Key Informant Interview ). This request is being made because the consent form, if collected would 
require names to be collected and in doing so would be the only record linking the subject’s name to the 
research. Verbal consent wil l be obtained to audio- record prior to the start of the interview, but we will 
not collect any personal information or identifiers. Individual names will not be recorded or appear in 
interview notes. Participants will be free to withdraw from the interview  at any time without 
repercussions. Participants will be provided with an invitation including the elements of the written 
consent as well as contact information for the study PI. Verbal consent will be obtained from the key informants prior to beginning t he interview in -person or over the phone as preferred by participant (See 
Verbal Consent Script for Key Informant Interview ). 
 
C. Capacity 
We anticipate that all subjects will have the capacity to give informed consent. Language barriers will be 
minimized by having data collectors who speak Chinese and translated consent scripts for the CHW 
intervention (to be translated upon approval of the English version). 
 
D. Subject/Representative Comprehension  
To determine that the subject or his/her authorized representative understood the information presented, they will be given the opportunity to ask questions before giving consent to participate. They can also 
choose at that time not to be in the study. The individuals authorized to obtain consent will do so by going 
over the Verbal Informed Consent script with the potential subject. The individuals will explain the purpose of the study, the procedures, possible risks and anticipated benefits, that it is voluntary, and how to withdraw if they choose to at a l ater time. Chinese speaking personnel will obtain consent from limited 
English -speaking individuals using a translated Verbal Informed Consent script. Subjects will also be 
asked if they are willing to receive key information about the study by text messag e. If they are, the Key 
Information Sheet will be texted to them using an NYU- issued, password -protected telephone. 
 
E. Debriefing  Procedures  
Information will not be withheld from the subjects related to their participation in the study. 
 
F. Consent  Scripts  
Please refer to the consent scripts: Combined Verbal Informed Consent Script  and the Key Information 
Sheets  for CHW Intervention  and the substudy;  and Invitation and Elements of Consent and Verbal 
Consent Script documents for the Key Informant Interview. 
 
G. Documentation of Consent  
EHR -CHW Intervention and Substudy . Study staff will obtain consent by reading the verbal informed 
consent script to the subject or the subject’s legally authorized representative, and the subject or 
representative will be given adequate opportunity to ask questions before verbally consenting. The 
subject will receive a copy of the key information sheet by text message if they choose so. A translated verbal informed consent and key information sheet will be used for non-English spe aking subjects, 
depending on their preferred language. 
 
Study staff who have obtained the verbal consent will document the consent and the date of consent on 
the Enrolled Participants Log. The Enrolled Participants Log is the only record linking a participant’s name, subject ID and substudy ID (if applicable).  
22 
  
Signed informed consent forms from participants consented in earlier versions of the protocol will be 
stored in a separate folder in a locked cabinet accessible only to study staff.  
 
Key Informant Interviews. A Waiver of Documentation of Consent is being requested for participants of 
the Key Informant Interview for this study (see Application for Waiver of Documentation of Consent for 
Key Informant Interview ). This request is being made because the consent form, if collected, would 
require names to be col lected and in doing so would be the only record linking the subjects name to the 
research. Verbal consent will be obtained prior to the start of the interview, but we will not collect any personal information or identifiers. Names of individuals will not be recorded nor appear in interview notes. Participants will be free to withdraw from the interview at any time without repercussions.  
Participants will be provided with an invitation including the elements of written consent as well as contact information for the study PI. Verbal consent will be obtained from the key informants prior to 
beginning the interview (See Verbal Consent Script for Key Informant Interview ). 
 
H. Costs to the  Subject  
There are no costs to participate in this study. Any doctor visits and laboratory tests, including the fecal antigen test or other clinically approved H. pylori infection diagnostic test, are part of standard care.  
 
I. Payment for Participation  
Participants will receive a payment of $25 each time they complete a questionnaire ( baseline, 2 months 
and 6 months). Participants may receive metro cards for travel associated with the project.  
 
Substudy. Subjects will be given a $20 gift card if they provide one type of sample  only (either oral 
wash or stool) , and a $35 gift card if they provide both oral wash and stool samples. Gift cards will be 
mailed or given to subjects upon successful return of biosamples collected post -H. pylori  medication 
completion. 
 
J. Subject  Withdrawal  
Any of the participants may withdraw from the study at any time. This will not affect their services and 
care at the clinic site. If a participant is uncomfortable during an interview or survey administration, the participant may stop at any time without penalty. If a participant withdraws consent, no further data from 
that participant will be collected.  
 
Early Termination. The study may be suspended or prematurely terminated if there is sufficient reasonable cause. Written notification, documenting the reason for study suspension or termination, will be provided by the suspending or terminating party to the investigator and/or the NIH NIMHD, as 
applicable. If the study is prematurely terminated or suspended, the PI will promptly inform the 
Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) and provide the reason(s) for the termina tion or suspension.  
Circumstances that may warrant termination include, but are not limited to:  
• Determination of an unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to subjects.  
• Insufficient adherence to protocol requirements.  
• Data that are not sufficiently c omplete and/or  evaluable.  
 
VII. FUNDING SOURCE  
23 
 The main study is supported by NIH -NIMHD U54 MD000538. The substudy is supported by NIH -1P20CA252728-01 
 
 
VIII.  APPENDIX 
A. Combined Script for Telephone Screening  
B. Screening Form for CHW Intervention  
C. Combined Verbal Informed Consent  
D. Key Information Sheet for CHW Intervention  
E. Key Information Sheet for Substudy 
F. Baseline Survey for CHW  Intervention  
G. Follow-up Survey for CHW Intervention 
H. Script for Substudy Telephone Text Reminders 
I. Substudy Instruction Booklet 
J. Key Informant Interview Guide 
K. Invitation and Elements of Informed Consent Written Text for Key Informant Interview  
L. Verbal Consent Script for Key Informant Interview  
M. Application for Waiver of Authorization for Telephone Screening  Form  
N. Application for Waiver of Documentation of Consent for Key Informant  Interview  
O. Application for Waiver of Authorization and Documentation of Consent  
 
 
IX. REFERENCES  
 
1. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion 
interventions: the RE- AIM framework. American journal of public health. 1999;89(9):1322- 
1327. PMC1508772. 
2. I nternational Agency for Research on Cancer. GLOBOCAN 2012: Es timated Cancer Incidence, 
Mortality and Prevalence Worldwide in 2012. 2017;  
http://globocan.iarc.fr/Pages/fact_sheets_cancer.aspx . Accessed  4/25/2017. 
3. International Agency for Research on Cancer. Stomach Cancer Estimated Incidence, Mortality and Prevalence Worldwide in 2012. 2015;  http://globocan.iarc.fr/old/FactSheets/cancers/stomach - 
new.asp . Accessed  4/25/2017. 
4. Lui FH, Tuan B, Swenson SL, Wong RJ. Ethnic disparities in gastric cancer incidence and 
survival in the USA: an updated analysis of 1992-2009 SEER data. Digestive diseases and 
sciences.  2014;59(12):3027-3034. 
5. Torre LA, Sauer AMG, Chen MS, Kagawa‐ Singer M, Jemal A, Siegel RL. Cancer statistics for 
Asian  Americans,  Native  Hawaiians,  and Pacific Islanders,  2016: Converging incidence in males 
and females. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2016. 
6. Liu L. Cancer  Incidence and Mortality  Patterns Among Chinese Americans.  In: Wu AH, Stram 
DO, eds. Cancer Epidemiology Among Asian Americans . Switzerland: Springer International 
Publishing; 2016:19-45. 
7. Fang J, Madhavan S, Alderman MH. Cancer Mortality of Chinese in New York City  1988-1992. 
International Journal of Epidemiology. 1996;25(5):907-912. 
8. Huang V, Li W, Tsai J, Begier  E. Cancer  Mortality  among Asians and Pacific  Islanders in New 
York City, 2001-2010. Jo urnal of cancer epidemiology. 2013;2013:986408. Pmc3876672. 
9. United States Cancer Statistics: 1993 -2013, Wonder Online Database. 2016. 
10. Malfertheiner P, Megraud F, O'Morain CA, et al. Management of Helicobacter pylori infection — 
the Maastricht V/Florence Consensus Report. Gut. 2016. 
11. Go MF. Review article: natural history and epidemiology of Helicobacter pylori infection.  
24 
 Alimentary pharmac ology & therapeutics. 2002;16 Suppl 1:3-15. 
12. IARC  Working Group on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks  to Humans. Schistosomes,  liver 
flukes and Helicobacter pylori. . Lyon, France1994. 1017-1606 (Print).  
13. Plummer  M, de Martel  C, Vignat  J, Ferlay  J, Bray  F, Franceschi  S. Global burden of cancers 
attributable to infections in 2012: a synthetic analysis. The Lancet Global Health. 
2016;4(9):e609-e616. 
14. IARC Helicobacter pylori Working Group. Helicobacter pylori Eradication as a Strategy for Preventing  Gastric Cancer.  Lyon, France:  International Agency for Research  on Cancer;2014. 
15. Zhang DH, Zhou LY, Lin SR, et al. Recent changes in the prevalence of Helicobacter pylori 
infection among children and adults in high- or low- incidence regions of gastric cancer  in China. 
Chin Med J (Engl). 2009;122(15):1759-1763. 
16. Nagy  P, Johansson S, Molloy -Bland  M. Systematic review  of time trends  in the prevalence of 
Helicobacter pylori infection in China and the USA. Gut Pathog. 2016;8:8. PMC4791971. 
17. Zhang Z, Zheng Q, Chen  X, Xiao  S, Liu W, Lu H.  The Helicobacter  pylori duodenal ulcer 
promoting gene, dupA in China. BMC Gastroenterol. 2008;8:49. PMC2584642. 
18. Perez -Perez GI, Olivares AZ, Foo FY, et al. Seroprevalence of Helicobacter pylori in New York 
City populations originating in East Asia. Journal of Urban Health. 2005;82(3):510-516. 
19. U.S. Census Bureau. American  Fact Finder: 2015 American  Community Survey 1 Year  Estimtes, 
Selected Population Profile in the United States (S0201). 2015;  https://factfinder.census.gov/ . 
Accessed  3/21/17. 
20. U .S. Census Bureau. 2006-2010 American Community Survey Selected Population Tables, 
Selected Social Characteristics in the United States (DP02). 2016;  https://factfinder.census.gov/ . 
Accessed  4/24/17. 
21. J ung MY, Holt CL, Ng D, et al. The Chinese and Korean American immigrant experience: a 
mixed -methods examination  of facilitators  and barriers  of colorectal  cancer  screening.  Ethnicity 
& health. 2017:1-20. 
22. Jun J, Nan X. Determinants  of Cancer  Screening Disparities  Among  Asian  Americans:  A 
Systematic Review of Public Health Surveys. J Cancer Educ. 2017. 
23. Thompson CA, Gomez SL, Chan A, et al. Patient and provider characteristics associated with 
colorectal,  breast,  and cervical  cancer  screening  among Asian  Americans.  Cancer epidemiology, 
biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the American Association for Cancer Research, cosponsored by the American Society of Preventive Oncology. 2014;23(11):2208-2217. 
Pmc4221799. 
24. Trinh  QD, Li H, Meyer  CP, et al. Determinants  of cancer  screening  in Asian -Americans.  Cancer 
causes & control : CCC.  2016;27(8):989-998. 
25. Hsu WC, Araneta  MR, Kanaya  AM, Chiang JL, Fujimoto  W. BMI  cut points to identify  at-risk 
Asian Americans for type 2 diabetes screening. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(1):150-158. PMC4392932. 
26. Sentell TL, Tsoh JY, Davis T, Davis J, Braun KL. Low health literacy and cancer screening 
among Chinese Americans in California: a cross- sectional analysi s. BMJ open. 
2015;5(1):e006104. 
27. Lee S, Chae  DH, Jung MY, Chen  L, Juon  HS. Health  Examination Is Not a Priority  for Less 
Acculturated Asian Americans. Journal of racial and ethnic health disparities. 2016. 
28. Chen MS, Jr. Cancer health disparities among Asian Americans: what we do and what we need to 
do. Cancer. 2005;104(12 Suppl):2895-2902. 
29. Chey  WD,  Leontiadis  GI, Howden  CW, Moss SF. ACG Clinical Guideline: Treatment  of 
Helicobacter pylori Infection. The American Journal of Gastroenterology.  2017. 
30. Osterberg L, Blaschke T. Adherence to medication. New England Journal of Medicine.  
2005;353(5):487-497. 
31. Haynes RB, McDonald H, Garg AX, Montague P. Interventions for helping patients to follow prescriptions for medications. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;2(11):7.9-1.4. 
32. Vrijens  B, De Geest  S, Hughes DA, et al. A new taxonomy for describing  and defining adherence 
25 
 to medications. British journal of clinical pharmacology.  2012;73(5):691-705. 
33. Vrijens B, Vincze G, Kristanto P, Urquhart J, Burnier M. Adherence t o prescribed 
antihypertensive drug treatments: longitudinal study of electronically compiled dosing histories. 
Bmj. 2008;336(7653):1114-1117. 
34. Nasseh K, Frazee SG, Visaria J, Vlahiotis A, Tian Y. Cost of medication nonadherence associated with diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. Am J Pharm Benefits.  2012;4(2):e41- 
e47. 
35. Sabaté E. Adherence to long-term therapies:  evidence  for action. World  Health  Organization; 
2003. 
36. Lee M, Kemp  JA, Canning A, Egan  C, Tataronis G, Farraye  FA. A randomized controlled  trial of 
an enhanced patient compliance program for Helicobacter pylori therapy. Arch Intern Med. 
1999;159(19):2312-2316. 
37. O'Connor JPA,  Taneike  I, O'Morain  C. Review:  Improving compliance with Helicobacter  pylori 
eradication therapy: when and how? Therapeutic advances in gastroenterology. 2009;2(5):273- 
279. 
38. O'Connor A, Gisbert  JP, McNamara D, O'Morain  C. Treatment  of Helicobacter  pylori infection 
2010. Helicobacter. 2010;15 Suppl 1:46-52. 
39. Wang AY, Peura DA. The prevalence and incidence of Helicobac ter pylori -associated peptic 
ulcer  disease and upper gastrointestinal  bleeding throughout the world.  Gastrointest  Endosc Clin 
N Am.  2011;21(4):613-635. 
40. Scaccianoce G, Hassan C, Panarese A, Piglionica D, Morini S, Zullo A. Helicobacter pylori eradication with either seven -day or 10- day triple therapies, and with a 10-day sequential 
regimen. Canadian Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology. 2006;20(2):113-117. 
41. Alahdab YO, Kalayci  C. Helicobacter  pylori: management  in 2013. World  journal  of 
gastroenterology. 2014;20(18):5302-5307. 
42. Henry A, Batey RG. Enhancing compliance not a prerequisite for effective eradication of Helicobacter  pylori: the HelP  Study. The American  journal of gastroenterology. 1999;94(3):811- 
815. 
43. Liu X, Cheng H, Gao W, Dong X, Hu F. Efficacy  and safety  of 14-day amoxicillin  and 
furazolidone- based quadruple rescue regimen for eradication of Helicobacter pylori: a 
retrospective study. Zho nghua yi xue za zhi. 2014;94(8):567-571. 
44. Wang  CH, Liao ST, Yang  J, et al. Effects  of daily  telephone- based  re-education before  taking 
medicine on Helicobacter pylori eradication: A prospective single-center study from China. 
World journal of gastroenterology. 2015;21(39):11179-11184. PMC4607915. 
45. Al‐E
 idan F, McElnay  J, Scott  M, McConnell J. Management  of Helicobacter pylori  eradication – 
the influence of structured counselling and follow ‐up. British journal of clinical pharmacol ogy. 
2002;53(2):163-171. 
46. Stevens VJ, Shneidman RJ, Johnson RE, Boles M, Steele PE, Lee NL. Helicobacter pylori 
eradication in dyspeptic primary care patients. The Western journal of medicine.  2002;176(2):92. 
47. Pittman  M, Sunderland A, Broderick A, Barnett  K. Bringing community health  workers into the 
mainstream of US health care. Washington (DC): Institute of Medicine of the National Academies.  2015. 
48. American  Public Health  Association. Support for Community Health  Workers to Increase Health 
Access and to Redu ce Health Inequities. Washington, D.C.:  APHA;2009. 
49. Centers  for Disease Control and Prevention.  Community  Health  Workers and Promotores de 
salud: Critical Connections in Communities. Washington, D.C.: Department of Health and 
Human  Services;2003.  
50. Hou SI, Sealy  DA, Kabiru CW. Closing the disparity  gap: cancer  screening  interventions  among 
Asians-- a systematic literature review. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev.  2011;12(11):3133-3139. 
51. Persell SD, Kaiser D, Dolan NC, et al. Changes in performance after implementation of a multifaceted electronic -health -record -based quality improvement system. Medical care. 
2011;49(2):117-125. 
26 
 52. Jimbo  M, Nease DE, Ruffin MT, Rana  GK. Information technology and cancer  prevention. CA: A 
Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 2006;56(1):26-36. 
53. Hsu L, Bowlus  CL, Stewart  SL, et al. Electronic messages increase hepatitis B  screening  in at- 
risk Asian American patients: a randomized, controlled trial. Digestive diseases and sciences. 
2013;58(3):807-814. PMC3578075. 
54. Williams AB, Mertz K, Wilkins TL. Issue Brief: Medication Adherence and Health IT. Washington, DC: Office  of the National Coordinator for  Health  Information Technology, 
Department of Health a nd Human Services. 2014. 
55. Patel MS, Volpp KG, Small DS, et al. Using active choice within the electronic health record to 
increase physician ordering and patient  completion of high -value  cancer  screening  tests.  Healthc 
(Amst). 2016;4(4):340-345. 
56. Kawamoto K, Anstrom KJ, Anderson JB, et al. Long- Term Impact of an Electronic Health 
Record -Enabled, Team -Based, and Scalable Population Health Strategy Based on the Chronic 
Care Model. AMIA ... Annual Symposium proceedings. AMIA Symposium. 2016;2016:686-695. 
PMC5333318. 
57. A
merican Medical Association. Prevent Diabetes STAT. 2015;  
https://preventdiabetesstat.org/index.html . Accessed  4/25/2017. 
58. O'Connor PJ, Sperl -Hillen  JM, Rush  WA,  et al. Impact  of electronic health  record  clinical 
decision support on diabetes care: a randomized trial. Ann Fam Med. 2011;9(1):12-21. 
PMC3022040. 
59. Chambers EC, Wylie- Rosett J, Blank AE, et al. Increasing Referrals to a YMCA -Based Diabetes 
Prevention Program: Effects of Electronic Referral System Modification and Provider Education 
in Federally Qualified Health Centers. Preventing chronic disease. 2015;12:E189. PMC4651145. 
60. Conn VS, Ruppar TM, Chase J-AD, Enriquez M, Cooper PS. Interventions to improve 
medication  adherence in hypertensive patients:  systematic review  and meta -analysis.  Current 
hypertension reports.  2015;17(12):94. 
61. Blalock SJ. The theoretical basis for practice- relevant medication use research: Patient- 
centered/behavioral  theories.  Research  in Social and Administrative Pharmacy. 2011;7(4):317- 
329. 
62. Rickles NM. A multi -theoretical approach to linking medication adherence levels and the 
comparison of outcomes.  Research  in Social  and Administrative  Pharmacy.  2010;6(1):49-62. 
63. Holmes EA, Hughes DA, Morrison VL. Predicting adherence to medications using health 
psychology theories: a systematic review  of 20 years of empirical  research.  Value  in Health. 
2014;17(8):863-876. 
64. Mueller  C, Haegele R, Heinl  K. Differentiation  and modification of compliance with reference  to 
topical corticoid medication in patients with bronchial asthma. Pneumologie (Stuttgart, 
Germany).  1996;50(3):257-259. 
65. Wöller  W, Kruse  J, Winter  P, Mans EJ,  Alberti  L. Cortisone image  and emotional support by key 
figures in patients with bronchial asthma . Psychotherapy and psychosomatics. 1993;59(3-4):190- 
196. 
66. Wagner EH, Grothaus LC, Sandhu N, et al. Chronic care clinics for diabetes in primary care.  
Diabetes care. 2001;24(4):695-700. 
67. Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Group. Risk factor changes and mortality results: Multiple Risk Factor Intervention trial research group. JAMA.  1982;248:1465-1477. 
68. Five-year findings of the hypertension detection and follow-up program: I. reduction in  mortality 
of persons with high blood pressure, including mild hypertension. JAMA. 1979;242(23):2562- 
2571. 
69. DeBusk  RF, Miller  NH, Superko  HR, et al. A case- management  system  for coronary risk factor 
modification after acute myocardial infarction. Annals of Internal Medicine. 1994;120(9):721- 
729. 
70. Peters A, Davidson M, Ossorio R. Management of patients with diabetes by nurses with support 
of subspecialists. HMO practice/HMO Group.  1995;9(1):8-13. 
27 
 71. U S Department of Health and Human Services. Workflow Assessment for Health IT Toolkit.  
https://healthit.ahrq.gov/health -it-tools-and-resources/workflow- assessment -health -it-toolkit/all - 
workflow-tools . Accessed 5/5/17, 2017. 
72. Ash JS, Sittig  DF, McMullen  CK, Guappone K, Dykstra  R, Carpenter  J. A Rapid  Assessment 
Process for Clinical Informatics Interventions. AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. 
2008;2008:26-30. 
73. Ash JS, Sittig  DF, Wright  A, et al. Clinical  decision  support in  small  community practice settings: 
a case study. Journal of the American Medical  Informatics Association : JAMIA. 2011;18(6):879- 
882. 
74. Collins SA, Gazarian  P, Stade  D, et al. Clinical Workflow Observations to Identify Opportunities 
for Nurse, Physicians and Patients to Share a Patient- centered Plan of Care. AMIA Annual 
Symposium Proceedings.  2014;2014:414-423. 
75. McMullen  CK,  Ash JS, Sittig  DF, et al. Rapid  Assessment  of Clinical  Information Systems in  the 
Healthcare Setting: An Efficient Method for Time -Pressed Evaluation. Methods of information in 
medicine. 2011;50(4):299-307. 
76. McNall M, Foster -Fishman PG. Methods of Rapid Evaluation, Assessment, and Appraisal.  
American Journal of Evaluation. 2007;28(2):151-168. 
77. Unertl KM, Novak LL, Johnson KB, Lorenzi NM. Traversing the many paths of workflow research: developing a conceptual framew ork of workflow terminology through a systematic 
literature review. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2010;17(3):265-273. PMC2995718. 
78. Bernal G, Bonilla J, Bellido C. Ecological validity and cultural sensitivity for outcome research: 
issues for the cultural adaptation  and development of psychosocial treatments with Hispanics. J 
Abnorm Child Psychol. 1995;23(1):67-82. 
79. Kotler  P, Zaltman  G. Social  marketing:  an approach to planned social  change. Journal of 
Marketing 1971;35:3-12. 
80. Pollack H, Wang S, Wyatt L, et al. A comprehensive screening and treatment model for reducing disparities in hepatitis B. Health affairs. 2011;30(10):1974-1983. PMC3333793. 
81. Islam N, Patel S, Brooks- Griffin Q, et al. Understanding Barries and Facilitators to Breast and 
Cervical Cancer Screening among Muslim Women in New York City: Perspectives from Key Informants. SM Journal of Community Medicine. 2017;3(1):1022. NIHMS 858774. 
82. Kwon  S, Patel  S, Zanowiak J, et al. Implementing health  promotion activities  using community- 
engaged approaches in Asian American faith -based organizations in New York City and New 
Jersey. . Translational Behavioral Medicine. 2017. PMC - In Process.  
85. Bake r DW,  Williams  MV, Parker  RM, Gazmararian  JA, Nurss  J. Development of a brief  test to 
measure functional health literacy. Patient education and counseling. 1999;38(1):33-42. 
86. Hays  RD, Bjorner  JB, Revicki  DA, Spritzer  KL, Cella  D. Development of physical  and mental 
health summary scores from the patient- reported outcomes measurement information system 
(PROMIS) global items. Quality of life research : an international journal of quality of life 
aspects of treatment, care and rehabilitation. 2009;18(7):873-880. PMC2724630. 
87. Meinert CL, Tonascia S. ClinicalTrials: Design, Conduct and Analysis. Oxford University Press; 
1986.
 
88. Program Sustainability Assessment Tool Project. St. Louis: Washington University in St. Louis;2013. 
89. Aarons GA. Mental  health  provider attitude s toward  adoption of evidence- based  practice:  the 
Evidence- Based Practice Attitude Scale (EBPAS). Mental health services research. 
2004;6(2):61-74. 1564126. 
90. Aarons GA, McDonald  EJ, Sheehan  AK, Walrath -Greene CM. Confirmatory factor  analysis of 
the Evidence- Based Practice Attitude Scale in a geographically diverse sample of community 
mental health providers. Administration and policy in mental health. 2007;34(5):465-469. 
91. Li R, Simon J, Bodenheimer T, et al. Organizational factors affecting the adoption of diabetes care management processes in physician organizations. Diabetes Care.  2004;27(10):2312-2316. 
92. Scott  T, Mannion R, Davies  H, Marshall  M. The quantitative  measurement  of organizational 
28 
 culture in health care: a review of the available instruments. Health services research. 
2003;38(3):923-945. 1360923. 
93. Vandelanotte C, De Bourdeaudhuij I. Acceptability and feasibility of a computer- tailored 
physical  activity  intervention  using stages of change:  project  FAITH.  Health  education  research. 
2003;18(3):304-317. 
94. Chey  WD,  Wong BC. American  College  of Gastroenterology guideline  on the management  of 
Helicobacter pylori infection. The American journal of gastroenterology. 2007;102(8):1808- 
1825. 
95. Ruiz Y, Matos S, Kapadia S, et al. Lessons learned fr om a community -academic initiative: the 
development of a core competency -based  training for community- academic initiative  community 
health workers. American journal of public health. 2012;102(12):2372-2379. PMC3519306. 
96. Islam  NS, Wyatt  LC, Patel  SD, et al. Evaluation of a community health  worker  pilot intervention 
to improve diabetes management in bangladeshi immigrants with type 2 diabetes in new york 
city. The Diabetes educator. 2013;39(4):478-493. PMC3912744. 
97. Islam NS, Zanowiak JM, Wyatt LC, et al. Diabetes prevention in the New York City Sikh Asian Indian community: a pilot study. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2014;11(5):5462 -5486. 
PMC4053907. 
98. Islam NS, Zanowiak JM, Wyatt LC, et al. A Randomized -Controlled, Pilot Intervention on 
Diabetes Prevention and Healthy  Lifestyles  in the New York  City Korean  Community. Journal of 
community health. 2013. PMC3964609. 
99. Ursua RA, Aguilar DE, Wyatt LC, et al. A community health worker intervention to improve 
management of hypertension among Filipino Americans in New Yo rk and New Jersey: a pilot 
study. Ethnicity & disease. 2014;24(1):67-76. PMC3955003. 
100. Cho A, Chaudhry A, Minsky-Primus L, et al. Follow- up care after a diagnosis of Helicobacter 
pylori infection in an Asian immigrant cohort. J Clin Gastroenterol.  2006;40(1):29-32. 
101. Glasgow RE, Lichtenstein E, Marcus AC. Why don't we see more translation of health promotion research to practice? Rethinking the efficacy -to-effectiveness transition. American journal of 
public health. 2003;93(8):1261-1267. 
102. Blumer  H. Symbolic interactions:  Perspective and method. Englewoods Cliffs,  NJ: Prentice  Hall; 
1969. 
103. Shrout PE, Fleiss JL. Intraclass correlations: uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychol Bull.  
1979;86:420-428. 
104. Scientific  Software  Development.  Scientific  Software  Development's ATLAS -ti, Version  7.0. 
2012;  http://www.atlasti.com/index.html . 
105. Meireles SI, Cristo EB, Carvalho AF, Hirata R, Jr., Pelosof A, Gomes LI, et al. Molecular classifiers for gastric 
cancer and nonmalignant diseases of the gastric mucosa. Cancer Res. 2004;64(4):1255 -65. 
106. Society AC. Cancer Facts and Figures 2019 2019 [Available from: https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer-
org/research/cancer -facts -and- statistics/annua l-cancer -facts -and- figures/2019/cancer -facts-and- figures -2019.pdf . 
2019. 
107. K im GH, Liang PS, Bang SJ, Hwang JH. Screening and surveillance for gastric cancer in the 
United States: Is it needed? Gastrointest Endosc. 2016;84(1):18-28. 
 