Refitting contact lens dropouts into a modern daily disposable 
contact lens  
 
 
Study Protocol & Statisti cal Analysis Plan  
 
NCT  05239494 
  
December, 13
th 2021 
  
Andrew P ucker , OD, Asso ciate Professor , Principal Investigator  
University of Alabama at Birmingham 
Birmingham, AL 35294  
 
Version 7 : 12/13/2021  
 
How does DT1 sphere perform in those who previously dropped out of contact 
lenses due to comfort or dryness?  
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
Chris Lievens, OD, MS, FNAP, FAAO2 
 
Additional Support:  
Katherine Bickle, OD, MS3 
Quentin X. Franklin, BS1 
Michael Christensen, OD, PhD, FAAO2 
Shane Kannarr, OD4 
Catherine Hogan, OD,  FAAO2 
Andrew D. Pucker, OD, PhD, FAAO, FSLS, FBCLA1 
 
Southern College of Optomet ry2 
1245 Madison Ave.  
Memphis, TN 38104  
clievens@sco.edu  
 
 
University of Alabama at Birmingham1 
Birmingham, AL  
Memphis, TN  
 
ProCare Vision Center3 
Granville, OH  
 
Kannarr Eye Care4 
Pittsburgh, KS  
 
 
  
 
 
Version 7 : 12/13/2021  
I. INTRODUCTION & RATIONALE  
 
CL discomfort is a complex phenomenon that has been defined by the Tear Film and Ocular Surface Society in their seminal report on contact lens (CL) discomfort as a condition that results in “episodic or persistent 
adverse ocular sensation related to lens wear, either with or without visual disturbance  resulting from 
reduced compatibility between the CL and the environment, which can lead to decreased wearing time and 
discontinuation of CL wear.”
1 A recent review by Pucker and Tichenor found that CL discomfort was the top 
reason for established CL wears to cease wearing CLs.2 This same review alarmingly found that the frequency 
of CL dropout was about 20% across the many studies aimed at evaluating this condition, which is surprising given the introduction of better soft CL materials and daily disposable CLs over the past 20 plus years.
2  
 Dailies Total1 (DT1), which is a relatively new daily disposable CL , is a commonly used trouble shooting CL for 
patients who have failed with other CLs because DT1 utilizes advanced material technology that is specifically 
aimed at improving CL comfort. While DT1 is commonly used in these struggling patients , the literature 
currently lacks a targeted study aimed at understanding the frequency of success fully  refitting CL dropouts 
into this advanced  CL. Thus , the purpose of this study is to determine the frequency that past CL wearers who 
failed because of dryness or CL discomfort who can comfortable  wear  DT1.  
 
II. SPECIFIC AIM  
 
We plan to accomplish our goal by pursuing the following specific aim and testing the associated hypothes is: 
 Aim:  
 
Determine the frequency of past CL wearers who failed because dryness  or CL discomfort who  can 
comfortably wear  DT1. Hypothesis 1: At least 50% of past CL wearers can comfortabl y wear  DT1 at one 
month  (Positive Visual Analog Scale Score  (VAS)  based upon +50/-50 VAS scale  with 0 as neutral ).  
 
Exploratory Outcomes  
 
A Likert questionnaire will be used to determine the following patient- reported outcomes  at 1 and 6 
months : 1. Likelihood of continuing to wear DT1, 2. Overall satisfaction while wearing DT1, Overall vision 
while wearing DT1, 3. End of day comfort while wearing DT1. The SPEED questionaries will  also be used to 
determine the frequency  of DT1 wears who can comfortable wear DT1 (scores ≤ 3).3   
 
III. STUDY DESIGN  
 Participants  
 This 6-month , three -visit clinical study will be conducted at the University of Alabama at Birmingham 
(Birmingham, AL, USA) , the Southern College of Optometry (Memphis, TN), and ProCare Vision Center 
(Granville, OH). One month will be the primary outcome timepoint  because Young et al. found that most 
participants who dropped out of CLs in their study dropped out by 1 month (23% dropout) .
4 Participants  will 
also be called at 6 -months like in Young et al.’s study to determine the ultimate CL success frequency. This 6-
month  survey will be an exploratory outcome that will supported by the investigators (not Alcon).  Participants  
will be recruited via clinic records, email, and fliers.  Participant s will be pre screened with an IRB approved  
phone script prior to the study visit to help determine if they qualify for the study . The reason why all 
potential participants  dropped out of CLs will be recorded even if they are not included in the study. Adult, 18 - 
Version 7 : 12/13/2021  
to 40-year -old, past CL wearers who have best corrected 20/20 visual acuity or better  will be recruited. 
Participants  will be required to have worn CLs for at least one year in the past. Participants  over the age of 40 
years will be excluded to avoid presbyopia -related  vision issues. All participant s will be required to have 
dropped out of CLs within the past two years  because of discomfort  or dryness.  This determination will be 
made by listing  Young et al.’s list of reasons for dropping out of CLs and asking the participant s to indicate 
their top reason for dropping out of CLs: 1. Discomfort  or Dryness , 2. General Poor Vision, 3. Poor Reading 
Vision, 4. Difficulty with Handling, 5. Advised by Practitioner, 6. Inconvenient, 7. Eyes were Red, 8. Lost 
Interest, 9. Too Costly, 10. Reaction to Care Produc ts, 11. Lost Lenses, 12. Other .4 Participants will be 
considered a CL dropout if they have not worn CLs in the past 3 months. Participants will be required to have 
scores of ≤ 3 on the SPEED questionaries (no significant dry eye symptoms) .3 Participant s will be required to be 
able to wear DT1 Sphere  (astigmatism better than 0.75 D OD/OS) . Participants  will be required to provide a 
glasses prescription that is less than 3 years old. Participants  will be excluded if they  are past rigid  CL wearers, 
have a past history of being diagnosed with dry eye or ocular allergies, have known systemic health conditions that are thought to alter tear film physiology, have a history of viral eye disease, have a history of ocular 
surgery, have a history of severe ocular trauma, have a history of corneal dystrophies or degenerations , have 
active ocular infection or inflammation, are currently using isotretinoin -derivatives  or ocular medications,  or if 
they are pregnant or breast feeding.
5  
 
Sample Size  
 This pilot study is proposing a sample of 6 0 participants  (20/site)  to estimate the initial frequency that 
participants  can comfortably  wear DT1 at 1 month. This sample size was selected because it is a feasible number 
of participants that can be recruited while also providing enough data to determine if at least 50% of participants  
can comfortable wear DT1 CLs. These should also be enough participants to evaluate exploratory patient 
reported outcomes  such as the likelihood of continuing DT1 after completing the study . An additional 5  
participants  per site are being requested in case someone fails the glasses prescription requirements for this 
study. Additional  participants  will only be recruited if needed.  
 Surveys and Clinical Tests  
 Visit 1 : Baseline  
 
1. Participant  History, Eligibility, Informed Consent:  Participants  will be asked to repeat the IRB approved 
screening survey at the study visit to verify that they are still eligible for the study.  All participants  will be 
screened with  the SPEED  questionnaire to understand their initial eye comfort  (scores ≤3 required) .6 The SPEED 
is being selected because it has been validated in both CL and non -CL wearers.  All relevant patient demographics 
will be collected  via a questionnaire developed by the investigators. Non -eligible participants  will be dismissed 
at this time or rescheduled depending upon the reason for ineligibility. Eligible participants  will be enrolled, 
consented, and requested to sign a privacy document.  
 
2. Visual Acuity  with Spectacles : Visual acuity will be measured with a Bailey -Lovie high -contrast chart.  
 
3. Manifest Refraction: The investigator will determine the participants ’ refractive error with a phoropter, and 
binocular balance will be performed if best- corrected visual acuity is equal in between eyes. No more than 1.00 
D of sphere will be added beyond the initial blur balance starting point.  
 
4. Slit -Lamp Biomicroscopy: The investigator will use a slit -lamp biomicroscope to document normal and/or 
remarkable findings of the anterior eye structures: eyelashes (blepharitis), eyelids, conjunctiva, and cornea.  
Version 7 : 12/13/2021  
 
5. CL Fitting:  Participants will be fit in DT1 s phere  CLs. The CLs will be evaluated for centration, movement, 
coverage, and CL power adjustments will only be made if they improve Snellen visual acuity.  
 
Visit 2: 1 Week  
 
1. Stannard Patient Evaluation of Eye Dryness (SPEED): The SPEED questionnaire will be completed.  
 
2. Visual Acuity with CLs: Visual acuity will be measured with a Bailey -Lovie high -contrast chart.  
 
3. Slit -Lamp Biomicroscopy:  The investigator will use a slit -lamp biomicroscope to document normal and/or 
remarkable findings of the anterior eye structures: eyelashes (blepharitis), eyelids, conjunctiva, and cornea.  
 
4. CL Evaluation:  The CLs will be evaluated for centration, movement, and coverage, and lens power 
adjustments will only be made if they improve Snellen visual acuity .  
 
Visit 3: 1 Month (Primary Endpoint)  
 
1. Stannard Patient Evaluation of Eye Dryness (SPEED): The SPEED questionnaire will be completed.  
 
2. Visual Analog Scale (VAS): The VAS will be completed.  
 
3. Investigator Survey : An exploratory questionnaire that probes topics such as vision, dryness, comfortable 
wear time , and willingness to continue wearing the contact lenses  will be completed .  
 
4. Visual Acuity with CLs: Visual acuity will be measured with a Bailey -Lovie high -contrast chart.  
 
5. Slit -Lamp Biomicroscopy:  The investigator will use a slit -lamp biomicroscope to document normal and/or 
remarkable findings of the anterior eye structures: eyelashes (blepharitis), eyelids, conjunctiva, and cornea.  
 
6. CL Evaluation:  The CLs will be evaluated for centration, movement, and coverage, and lens power 
adjustments will only be made if they improve Snellen visual acuity.  
 
7. Study Completion:  The participants  will be compensated for their time, and they will be released  from the 
clinical segment of the study.  If participants like  the CLs, they will be given a prescription for the CLs, though 
they will be required to buy their own CLs.  The participants will also be educated that they will be called in 6 
months to understand their wearing experience  if they decide to continue wearing DT1 CLs .  
 Data Analysis  
 All data will be analyzed with Stata/IC 15 (StataCorp LLC; TX, USA). The frequency of participants who have comfortable VAS scores will be calculated at both the 1 -month (primary outcome) and 6 -month visits 
(exploratory outcome) . The frequency of each Likert question and the SPEED will also be calculated.  
 Training of Study Personnel  
 Prior to enrolling any participants  all examiners will participate in a training session developed by Andrew D. 
Pucker, OD, PhD. This full investigator meeting will ensure that all study investigators are performing the 
Version 7 : 12/13/2021  
procedures in the same manner. Data from each investigator’s first participant  will also be monitored for quality 
control by the study’s coordinator before the investigator is allowed to see additional participants .  
 
IV. Study Timeline  
 
  2021  2021  2021  2022  2022  2022  2022  2022  2022  2022  
  Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May  Jun Jul 
Activity       
Contracting             
IRB Preparation                 
Data Collection                 
Data Analysis            
Final Study Report            
*An initial analysis of the 1- month data will be conducted by April 2022 while the 6 -month data analysis will 
not occur until July  2022. The investigator’s commitment to Alcon will be completed with the 1 -month analysis.  
 V. Publication Plans  
 
An abstract describing the primary outcome  will be submitted in May 2022 to Academy 2022 San Diego , and a 
manuscript  on the same topic will be submitted to Contact Lens & Anterior Eye  after the Academy 2022 San 
Diego . The a bstract will be  submitted to the Academy first because the Academy requires that abstract 
materials have not been presented/submitted elsewhere .   
 
VI. Conclusions  
 
This project will describe the frequency of  past CL wearers who can comfortable  wear  DT1. These data are 
important because they  could provide credence for fitting struggling soft CL patients into DT1 , which could help 
curb the frequency of CL dropout and help grow the CL market.  
   
VII. References  
 
1. Nichols JJ, Willcox MD, Bron AJ, et al. The TFOS International Workshop on Contact Lens Discomfort: 
executive summary. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci  2013;54:TFOS7 -TFOS13.  
2. Pucker AD, Tichenor AA. A Review of Contact Lens Dropout. Clin Optom (Auckl)  2020;12:85- 94. 
3. Asiedu K, Kyei S, Mensah SN, Ocansey S, Abu LS, Kyere EA. Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI) Versus 
the Standard Patient Evaluation of Eye Dryness (SPEED): A Study of a Nonclinical Sample. Cornea  
2016;35:175 -180.  
4. Young G, Veys J, Pritchard N, Coleman S. A multi- centre study of lapsed contact lens wearers. 
Ophthalmic Physiol Opt  2002;22:516 -527.  
5. Sullivan BD, Crews LA, Sonmez B, et al. Clinical utility of objective tests for dry eye disease: variability over time and implications for clinical trials and disease management. Cornea  2012;31:1000 -1008.  
6. Pucker AD, Dougherty BE, Jones -Jordan LA, Kwan JT, Kunnen CME, Srinivasan S. Psychometric Analysis 
of the SPEED Questionnaire and CLDEQ -8. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci  2018;59:3307- 3313.  
 