 
 
Protocol:  Bioequivalence of Crushed and Whole Genvoya Tablets 
(Elvitegravir/Cobicistat/Emtricitabine/Tenofovir Alafenamide Fumarate) ________  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date: 1/17/2019  
 
 
1 
 Protocol Title :  Bioequivalence of Crushed and Whole Genvoya Tablets 
(Elvi tegravir/Cobicistat/Emtricitabine/Tenofovir Alafenamide  Fumarate ) 
 
 
Co-Principal Investigator s: Craig W. Hendrix, MD  
 
 
 
Study  Site:    Johns Hopkins University   
 
 
Study Sponsor:   Gilead Sciences, Inc.  
 
 
Protocol Version:   2.0 
 
 
Date:     January 17, 201 9 
 
2 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Page 
PROTOCOL TEAM ROSTER        3 
SCHEMA           4   
1 INTRODUCTION         5   
1.1 Background         5 
1.2 Study Drugs : Clinical Pharmacology and Safety    5 
2 RATIONALE          7 
3 HYPOTHESIS AND STUDY OBJECTIVES     7 
 3.1 Hypothesis         7 
 3.2 Primary Objective        8 
 3.3 Secondary Objective        8 
4 STUDY DESIGN          8   
5 STUDY DRUGS, ADMINISTRATION, AND DURATION   9 
6 STUDY POPULATION        10 
7 SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF STUDY PARTICIPANTS  10 
 7.1 Inclusion Criteria        10 
 7.2 Exclusion Criteria        10 
8  CONCOMITANT AND PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS    11 
9 CLINICAL AND LABORATORY EVALUATIONS    11 
 9.1 Study Schedule        11 
 9.2 Definitions for Study Schedule      11 
10 TOXICITY MANAGEMENT       15 
11 CRITERIA FOR TREATME NT DISCONTINUATION    15   
12 CRITERIA FOR PREMATURE STUDY DISCONTINU ATION   16 
13 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS      16  
14 HUMAN SUBJECTS        17 
 14.1 IRB and Informed Consent       17 
 14.2 Subject Confidentiality       18 
 14.3 Definition of Adverse Events       18 
 14.4 Reporting of Adverse Events       19 
 14.5 Steps to Minimize the Risks       19 
 14.6 Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research     19 
 14.7 Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained     19 
 14.8 Inclusion of Women, Minorities, and Children    19  
15 REFERENCES         20 
16  APPENDIX          21  
 
3 
  
 
PROTOCOL TEAM ROSTER  
 
Co-Principal Investigator s 
 
Adriana Andrade, MD, M.P.H. FACP  
National Institute o Health (NIH)  
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases (NAID)  
5601 Fishers Lane, BG 5601FL, RM 9E42  
Rickville , MD 20852  
Phone: ( 301) 761 -7362  
Email: adriana.andrade@nih.gov  
 
Craig Hendrix, MD  
Johns Hopkins University  
600 North Wolfe Street , Blalock 569   
Baltimore, MD 21287  
Phone: (410) 955 -9707  
Fax: (410) 955 -9708  
Email: chendrix@jhmi.edu  
 
Co-Investigators  
 
Edward Fuchs, PA -C 
The Johns Hopkins University  
School of Medicine  
Division of Clinical Pharmacology  
600 N Wolfe St , Blalock 569  
Phone:  (410) 614 -8762   
Fax: (410)955 -9708  
Email: ejfuchs@jhmi.edu  
 
Ethel Weld, MD  
Johns Hopkins University   
1830 East Monument Street,  
Baltimore, MD 21205  
Phone: (410) 502 -2326  
Fax: (410) 955 -9708  
Email: eweld@jhmi.edu   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Mark M arzinke, PhD  
Johns Hopkins University  
4940 Eastern Avenue; Mason F Lord 
Building Center Tower, Room 603  
Phone: 410 -550-9702  
Email: mmarzin1@jhmi.edu  
 
 
Protocol  Pharmacist  
 
Andrea Weiss, RPh  
Investigational Drug Service, Osler 100  
Johns Hopkins Hospital  
600 N. Wolfe St.  
Baltimore, MD  21287  
Phone: (410) 955 -4505  
Fax: (410) 614 -8074  
Email: aweiss@jhmi.edu  
 
Study Coordinators  
 
Jennifer Breakey, RN , MPH, CCRP  
Division of Clinical Pharmacology  
600 N. Wolfe Street, Blalock 569 
Baltimore, MD  21287  
Phone: (410) 955 -5370  
Fax: (410)  955 -9708  
email: jbreake1@jhmi.edu  
 
Danielle Signer  
Division of Clinical Pharmacology  
600 N. Wolfe Street, Blalock 569  
Baltimore, MD 21287  
Phone: (443) 287 -7156 
Fax: (410)  955-9708  
email: dsigner1@jhmi.edu  
  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 SCHEMA  
 
 
Table  1: Pharmacokinetic Sampling Schedule  
 
 
 Rationale  Genvoya, a  once -daily single fixed -dose combination tablet for treatment of HIV-infection , consists 
of two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) , emtricitabine (FTC) and tenofovir 
(TFV) alafenamide fumarate (TAF), the integrase  strand transfer  inhibitor (InSTI) elvitegravir 
(EVG), and the boosting agent cobicistat (COBI). It is unknown whether Genvoya, taken as a 
crushed/dissolve d tablet, is bioequivalent to when taken as a whole tablet. This is crucial 
information since a substantial number of HIV -infected individuals suffer from pill aversion that 
could lead to non -adherence and treatment failure.  
Design  Within -subject, fixed -order, two -period, open label study to determine the  bioequivalence of oral 
single dose of whole and crushed/dissolved  tablets of Genvoya in healthy adult male and female 
research participants administered under direct observation.    
Population  Up to 20  adult male and female healthy research participants will be enrolled to complete 12 . 
Intervention  Whole Tablet Period : Single observed oral dose of  Genvoya whole  tablet  
Crushed/dissolved  Tablet Period : Single observed oral dose of Genvoya  crushed/dissolve d tablet  
Outcome 
Measures  Primary :  To investigate the bioequivalence of oral single whole tablet and crushed/dissolved  tablet 
of Genvoya  by characterizing the plasma AUC 0-∞ and C max of EVG, COBI, FTA, TAF, and T FV in 
plasma, after single doses of whole tablet and crushed/dissolved  tablet in healthy male and female 
adult research participants.  
Secondary : To compare other pharmacokinetic parameters of oral single whole tabl et and 
crushed/dissolved  tablet of Genvoya  by characterizing the plasma T max and terminal elimination 
half-life of EVG, COBI, FTA, TAF, and TFV  after single doses of whole tablet and 
crushed/dissolved  tablet in healthy male and female adult research partic ipant . 
Procedures  Screening : Potential research participants provide written informed consent and undergo evaluation 
of inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
Whole Tablet Period  (3 days) : Research partic ipants will swallow, under direct observation, a 
single dose of a whole  Genvoya tablet, followed by plasma sampling for  72 hours as indicated in 
Table  1 below .  
Safety Visit:  Participants will return approximately 7 days after the whole -tablet dosing for clinical 
and laboratory safety assessment  visit. 
Washout : A minimum of 14  will elapse between the two Genvoya dose s. 
Crushed/dissolved  Tablet Period  (3 days) : Research p articipants will swallow, under direct 
observation, a single dose of a crushed/dissolved  Genvoya  tablet , followed by plasma sampling 
for 72 hours, as indicated in Table  1 below . 
Final Safety Visit : Participants will return approximately 7 days after the crushed/dissolved -tablet 
dosing for a final clinical and laboratory safety assessment  visit.  
* Adverse events will be monitored at all study vis its and graded using the DAIDS Adverse Events 
Grading Table (Version 2.1, July 2017) as outlined in the protocol.  
Sampling 
Hour  Pre-
dose  0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0 1.5 2 3 4 5 6 10 14 24 48 72 
EVG  x    
x  
x x x x x x x x x x 
COBI  x  
x  
x  
x x x  x x x x x  
FTC  x  
x  
x  
x x x  x x x x x x 
TAF  x x x x x x x x x  x      
TFV  x x x x x x x x x  x x  
x x x 
 
5 
 1     INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 Background  
 
Genvoya , a fixed -dose combination of the two non -nucleosides reverse transcrip tase inhibitors (NRTIs) 
emtricitabine (FTC) and tenofovir (TFV) alafenamide  fumarate  (TAF), with the integrase strand transfer 
inhibitor (InSTI ) elvitegravir (EVG) and the EVG -boosting agent cobicistat (COBI), is FDA approved for 
the treatment of HIV-infec ted patients (1).  
 
Despite the availability of Genvoya , allowing for a single tablet fixed -dose combination and once -daily 
dosing, a substantial number of individuals living with HIV suffer from pill aversion, dysphagia, 
odynophagia, or problems swallowing  their oral regimens - all of which can contribute to non -adherence 
(2). These observations are especially important because non -adherence to antiretroviral ( ARV ) 
medications is highly prevalent and associated with decreased survival (3).  Non-adherence has  been 
estimated at 55% in North American pooled cohorts, and is a vital public health concern, as it leads to 
treatment failure and transmission of drug -resistant virus (4 -6). 
 
Many clinical scenarios make the administration of crushed/dissolved  tablets de sirable as a potential 
strategy to overcome pill aversion. However, there is a theoretical concern that the systemic absorption of 
the active ingredients of tablets may be altered by crushing the pills. In fact, pharmacokinetic and 
bioequivalence data are lacking for most ARV fixed -dose combinations used in the treatment of HIV -
infected patients. It is therefore of substantial practical and clinical interest to know whether ARV  
combinations such as Genvoya  can be taken in crushed/dissolved  form with bioequi valence to whole tablet 
form.   
 
A recent study reported the bioavailability results from crushing and splitting the single fixed -dose 
formulation tablet containing darunavir  (DRV) , cobicistat  (COBI) , emtricitabine  (FTC) , and TAF ( 7). This 
was an open -label , randomized, cross -over study in 30 HIV healthy research participants , using a single 
dose of this fixed dose formulation as whole tablet, crushed/dissolved  tablet , and halved tablet. Plasma 
concentrations for each method of administration were comparable  for DRV, FTC, and COBI. Although 
TAF was bioequivalent for the whole v ersus  split tablet , the crushed/dissolved  tablet resulted in 20% 
reduced TAF AUC.  Therefore, further studies are needed to confirm these results. Also, it is crucial to 
conduct a bioequ ivalence study with the Genvoya tablet, since this fixed -dose formulation includes EVG, a 
different ARV class than DRV in the previous bioavailability study  (7). 
 
The national treatment guidelines recommend that treatment -naive HIV-infected patients receiv e an initial 
combination regimen with InSTI-based therapy  (8). Thus, I nSTIs are a relevant class of ARV drugs for the 
treatment of HIV infection, and showing whether these medications can be taken in a crushed/dissolved  
tablet form can be a lifesaving inte rvention for individuals who cannot tolerate ingesting a whole tablet 
formulation.  
 
In this short pharmacokinetic study we will investigate whether an oral single -dose of whole tablets of 
Genvoya  is bioequivalent to a crushed/dissolved  form of this medica tion in healthy research participants .   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
  
 
1.2  STUDY DRUGS : CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY AND SAFETY  
 
Genvoya (EVG/COBI/FTC/TAF)  
 
Genvoya is a once -daily single fixed -dose combination tablet for treatment of HIV-infection . One tablet  
consists of two NRTIs , FTC 200 mg and TAF  10 mg , the I nSTI EVG  150 mg , and the EVG -boosting agent 
COBI 150 mg (1). The FDA recommended dosage of Genvoya  in patients  ≥12 years old is one tablet daily 
taken with food  (1). Genvoya should not be used in patients with a creatinine cle arance ( CrCl ) <30 mL/min 
(1). EVG and COBI are  highly bound to plasma proteins  (1).  
  
Safety.  The most common adverse effects with  Genvoya  are diarrhea, nausea, fatigue, and headaches  (1). 
Most of these adverse events are self -limited and resolve spontane ously. COBI is known to inhibit 
creatinine secretion that leads to an increase in serum creatinine , and a corresponding reduction in GFR and 
creatinine clearance although actual GFR is not affected (1). In addition, more patients treated with 
Genvoya  had L DL levels >190 mg/dL compared to  Stribild , 5% and 2%, respectively  (1).  
 
Cardiac electrophysiology studies showed that EVG and TAF did not prolong or affect the PR and QT/QTc 
intervals, respectively , while  COBI prolonged the PR interval in one study  (1). However, the dose of COBI 
in the Genvoya  tablet is lower than doses evaluated in cardiac electrophysiology study. Therefore, it is 
unlikely that treatment with Genvoya will lead to clinically important prolongation of the PR interval (1). 
The effect of the  combination regimen Genvoya  or FTC on the QT interval is unknown.  Genvoya  has been 
giving to healthy research participants  in a number of studies with minimal reported toxicity (1). It is also 
important to underscore that most of the side effects associat ed with Genvoya occur with chronic use of this 
ARV medication and , thus, less likely to occur with the short -term term dosing proposed in this 
bioavailability study.  
 
Genvoya is a category B drug for use during pregnancy (1). No adverse developmental effe cts were 
observed in animal studies when the components of Genvoya  were administered separately during the 
period of organogenesis (1). TAF use in women during pregnancy has not been evaluated, while EVG, 
COBI, and FTC use during pregnancy ha s been evaluat ed in a limited number of women  (1). Current data 
showed no birth defects reported for COBI or EVG and no difference in the overall risk of major birth 
defects for FTC compared with a U.S. reference population (1).  It is unknown if COBI, EVG, and TAF are 
present in human breast milk; FTC has been shown to be present in human breast milk (1).  
 
Clinical Pharmacology . The PK parameters of individual components of Genvoya are listed in Table 2. 
All PK parameter data are taken from the GenvoyaTM package insert for EVF, COBI, FTC, and TAF. Data 
for TFV, which results from the conversion of TAF, is taken from the VemlidyTM package insert with 
adjustment of PK parameters for 10 mg dose of TAF in Genvoya vs. 25 mg in Vemlidy, assuming dose 
proportionality (C max, AUC 0-∞, and C trough) and the Genvoya package insert (TFV half -life only which 
differs significantly from TFV half -life when administered as TDF).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
  
 
Table 2.  Summary of Genvoya constituent drugs pharmacokinetic parameters  after oral administration in 
HIV-infected adults . Mean (SD).  
 
Parameter  Units  EVG COBI FTC TAF TFV (from TAF)  
Dose  mg 150 150 200 10 NA 
Cmax mg/mL  1.7 (0.4)  1.1 (0.4)  1.9 (0.5)  0.16 (0.08)  0.012  
AUC0-∞ mg/hr/mL  23.0 (7.5)  8.3 (3.8)  12.7 (4.5)  0.21 (0.15)  0.16  
Ctrough  mg/mL  0.45 (0.2 6) 0.05 (0.13)  0.14 (0.25)  NA 0.04  
Half-life hours  12.9  3.5 10 0.51  32 
 
 
COBI and EVG are  metabolized by CYP3A4 enzyme ; therefore , concomitant use of these two drugs with 
CYP3A4 inhibitors could substantially increase their plasma concentration  (1). COBI  is also metabolized 
by CYP2D6. C YP3A4 inducers on the other hand, lower COBI and EVG plasma concentration s which may 
lead to loss of therapeutic effect of Genvoya and development of treatment failure and viral resistance (1). 
COBI is also an inhibitor of CYP3A4 and CYP 2D6 in addition to drug transporters such as breast cancer 
resistance protein (BCRP), p-glycoprotein (P -gp), and organic anion transporting peptide (OATP) 1B1 and 
1B3 (1). Therefore, co -administration of  Genvoya with CYP3A4 , CYP2D6 , P-gp, BCR P, OATP1B1 or 
OATP1B3 substrates  can significantly increase their plasma concentrations.  
 
EVG , a CYP2C9 inducer , can lower plasma concentrations of substrates  metabolized through this pathway  
(1). TAF is a weak inhibitor of CYP3A in vitro  but not  an inhib itor or inducer of CYP3A in vivo ;  TAF is 
also a substrate of P -gp, BCRP, OATP1B1 and OATP1B3  (1). Therefore, inhibitors of these drug 
transporters may increase the absorption of TAF. Conversely , drugs that induce the activity of these drug 
transporters could lead to a reduc tion TAF absorption  and decrease TAF plasma concentrations  (1). FTC is 
renally eliminated and does not undergo biotransform ation through the cytochrome P450 pathway  (1). 
Coadministration of Genvoya  with drugs that can affect renal functi on can lead to a reduction of renal 
elimination of FTC and consequently an increase in FTC concentrations and potential adverse events . Other 
mechanism of drug interactions with the components of Genvoya besides drug transporters and hepatic 
drug metaboliz ing enzymes, include diminished absorption when EVG is coadministered with drugs 
containing polyvalent cations (e.g., Mg, Al, Fe, or Ca ; 1).  
 
2 RATIONALE  
 
Despite the availability of  Genvoya, a single tablet once-daily fixed -dose formulation , a substanti al number 
of individuals living with  HIV infection still have difficulty swallowing whole tablets  of ARV 
combinations . Therefore, crushed/dissolved  tablet  oral formulations  are highly desirable as a potential 
strategy to overcome pill aversion. However, th ere is a theoretical concern that the systemic absorption of 
the active ingredients of the whole tablet  formulation  may be altered by crushing the  tablets . We propose a 
study in healthy adult women and men research participants  to determine w hether  Genvoya  in 
crushed/dissolved  form is bioequivalen t with the whole tablet form.   
 
The FDA recommended dosage of Genvoya is one tablet daily for the treatment of HIV infection  (1). Since 
participants in this bioequivalence study will be dosed with Genvoya for only one dose on two occasions , 
we will only enroll healthy HIV -uninfected individuals in order to prevent the development of potential 
 
8 
 viral resistance that could occur with this short -term drug exposure. In addition, healthy research 
participants  are less lik ely to be using other medications t hat could affect the metabolism, absorption or 
elimination of the co mponents of Genvoya and consequently interfere with the proposed study endpoints.  
 
Genvoya  was selected for this bioavailability study because this fixe d combination I nSTI-based therapy is 
included in the n ational treatment guidelines as a first line therapy for the treatment of HIV infection  (8). 
Therefore, Genvoya is frequently prescribed for treatment -naïve patient s initiating ART.  
 
3 HYPOTHESIS and S TUDY OBJECTIVE  
 
3.1 Hypothes is  
 
3.1.2    Genvoya crushed/dissolved  tablet will be bioequivalent to the whole tablet.  
 
3.2. Primary Objective  
 
3.2.1  To investigate the bioequivalence of oral single whole tablet and crushed/dissolved  tablet of 
Genvoya in healthy research partic ipants  by characterizing the plasma  AUC0-∞ and Cmax of 
EVG, COBI, FT C, TAV, and TF V after single doses of a whole  and crushed/dissolved  
tablet of this fixed -dose ARV combination in healthy adult research partic ipants .  
 
3.3 Secondary Objective  
 
3.3.1  To compare other pharmacokinetic parameters  of oral single whole tablet and 
crushed/dissolved  tablet of Genvoya in healthy adult research partic ipants , Tmax, and 
terminal elimination half -life, in plasma of EVG, COBI, FT C, TAF, and TF V.  
 
4 STUDY DESIGN  
 
The proposed bioequivalence  study will have two pharmacokinetic observation periods:   
 
Whole Tablet Period : Research participant s will be asked to swallow a single whole  Genvoya 
tablet  under direct observation . The first 72-hour pharmacokin etic sampling period for each of the 
ARV component s of Genv oya will occur as outlined in Table 3. Participants will return for a safety 
visit for clinical and laboratory assessment s seven days after whole  tablet dosing . A minimum 14 
day washout period  will take place between the whole tablet dosing and the crushed /dissolved  tablet 
dosing.  
 
Crushed/Dissolved  Tablet Period : Research p articipants will be asked to swallow a single 
crushed/dissolved  Genvoya tablet  under direct observation . The second and final Genvoya  
pharmacokinetic  sampling w ill occur as outlined in Table 3.  
 
Pharmacokinetic Sampling . Plasma sampling for estimating pharmacokinetic parameters were 
selected to optimize information content of each sample for each drug  (and TFV metabolite of TAF) 
for robust estimates of T max, Cmax, AUC 0-∞, and terminal el imination half -life. These are based on 
prior observations of T max and half -life.   
 
 
9 
  
 
 
Table 3. Pharmacokinetic sampling schedule  
 
The proposed pharmacokinetic sampling visits will be conducted at the Drug Development Unit 
(DDU) in the Division of Clinical Pharmacology at th e Johns Hopkins Hospital. The DDU staff has 
extensive experience conducting pharmacokinetic studies in healthy research participants . The DDU 
will provide study coordinators and other administrative research support, and recruit participants 
for this study .   
 
Plasma samples will be processed and analyzed  at the C linical Pharmacology Analytical Laboratory 
(CPAL) within the Division of Clinical Pharmacology . Genvoya tablets will be donated by Gilead 
and will be stored and dispensed by the Johns Hopkins Inves tigational Pharmacy. Approximately 
8ml of blood  will be collected in each dosing period,  on the time points outlined in Table  3. The 
plasma concentrations of EVG, COBI, FTC TFV, and TAF  will be quantified  using validated  liquid 
chromatographic -tandem mass spectrometric (LC -MS/MS)  method s (UPLC -MS/MS). Assay 
validation report s are peer -reviewed and approved by the DAIDS -sponsored Clinical Pharmacology 
Quality Assurance program.   
 
Safety Assessments . Safety will be assessed by monitoring physical exa mination s, vital signs, and 
laboratory and clinical adverse events . Safety laboratory tests will be performed at the two safety 
visits post dose with whole and crushed/dissolved  Genvoya tablets. Laboratory tests will include 
hematology and chemistry . A negative  HIV-1/2 Antigen/Antibody (Ag/Ab) screening test  and 
negative hepatitis B surface antigen test in addition to chemistry,  and hematology  results  as 
specified in the inclusion criteria section are required to meet study eligibility criteria.    
 
 
5 STUDY DRUGS , ADMINISTRATION AND DURATION   
 
The protocol -specified ARV regimens are: 
 
• Whole Tablet Period : Single observed oral dose of Genvoya whole tablet (EVG 150mg/COBI 
150mg/FTC  200mg/TAF 10mg)  under direct observation .  
 
• Crushed/Dissolved  Tablet Period : Single obs erved oral dose of Genvoya  crushed/dissolved  
tablet (EVG 150mg/COBI 150mg/FTC 200mg/TAF 10mg)  under direct observation .  
 
Genvoya will be administered with a light meal. Crushed/dissolved  Genvoya tablet solution will be Sampling 
Hour  Pre-
dose  0.25  0.5 0.75  1.0 1.5 2 3 4 5 6 10 14 24 48 72 
EVG  x    
x  
x x x x x x x x x x 
COBI  x  
x  
x  
x x x  x x x x x  
FTC x  
x  
x  
x x x  x x x x x x 
TAF x x x x x x x x x  x      
TFV x x x x x x x x x  x x  
x x x 
 
10 
 prepared at the Johns Hopkins Invest igational Pharmacy .   
 
Genvoya tablets will be donated by Gilead Sciences and will be dispensed by the Johns Hopkins 
Investigational Pharmacy . The Johns Hopkins Investigational Pharmacy will also maintain complete 
records of all study medications. All unus ed study medications must be returned to the Johns 
Hopkins Investigational Pharmacy after the study is completed or terminated. Unused or returned 
study medications will be destroyed.  
 
6 STUDY POPULATION   
 
Up to twenty male and female health research par ticipants  will be enrolled in this study  to assure 
twelve individuals complete the trial . All participants w ill meet inclusion /exclusion  criteria as 
outlined in this protocol.  Healthy research participants  will be recruited by the Johns Hopkins DDU  
staff.  
 
7 SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF STUDY PARTICIPANTS  
 
7.1 Inclusion Criteria   
 
7.1.1 Healthy adults  ≥18 years of age.  
7.1.2 Negative HIV -1/2 Ag/Ab serology documented within 30 days prior to study entry.  
7.1.3 Negative Hepatitis B surface antigen withi n 30 days prior to study entry.  
7.1.4 Ability and willingness of subject to provide a signed informed consent and compl y 
with study requirements.  
7.1.5 Negative  POCT qualitative urine pregnancy test  (female participants only) .  
7.1.6 All subjects must not participate purposely in a conception process (e.g., active 
attempt to impregnate, sperm donation, or in vitro fertilization). If participating in 
sexual activity that could lead to pregnancy subjects must take every precaution to 
avoid risk of pregnancy by using a reliable contraception for the duration of the study  
therapy (e.g., condoms, hormonal, barrier).  
7.1.7 Laboratory values and physical examination as judged by the principal investigator  to 
be safe to participate  including normal renal function .  
7.1.8 Good peripheral venous access  for proposed pharmacokinetic sampling .  
7.1.9 Willingness and ability to take oral medications.  
  
7.2 Exclusio n Criteria  
 
7.2.1 History of chronic or acute medical condition s that in the opinion of the investigator 
would jeopardize safety of subjects participating in this study.  
7.2.2 Known or suspected hypersensitivity to  the components of Genvoya . 
7.2.3 Currently taking or  having taken oral PrEP or PEP (e.g. Truvada®) within 30 days of 
study entry , or anticipated use of PrEP/PEP during study participation  
7.2.4 Use of prescription or over -the-counter medications, including agents containing 
polyvalent cations (e.g., Mg, Al, Fe, o r Ca), or any other drugs that in the opinion of 
the investigator could interfere with the pharmaco kinetics  of any of the ARV 
components of Genvoya within 2 weeks  prior to either study dose.  
7.2.5 Pregnant or breast feeding .  
 
11 
 7.2.6 Active drug or alcohol use or depen dence that, in the opinion of the investigator, 
would interfere with adherence to study requirements.  
7.2.7 Hospitalization or therapy for serious illness within 30 days prior to study entry as 
judged by the investigator.  
7.2.8 Participation in any investigational d rug study within 30 days prior to study entry  that 
in the opinion of the investigator would preclude study participation . 
7.2.9 Taking any medication listed in the package insert that is contraindicated with 
Genvoya.  
7.2.10  Any other condition or prior therapy that, in  the opinion of the investigator, would 
preclude informed consent, make study participation unsafe, make the individual 
unsuitable for the study or unable to comply with the study requirements. Such 
conditions may include, but are not limited to, current o r recent history of severe, 
progressive, or uncontrolled substance abuse, or renal, hepatic, hematological, 
gastrointestinal, endocrine, pulmonary, neurological, or cerebral disease.  
 
8 CONCOMITANT AND PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS  
 
Use of any licensed drugs during  the study is prohibited unless medically required for the safety of 
the subjects , and requires prior approval  by the study investigators. If a concomitant medication is 
needed and approved by the study investigators, the package insert will be reviewed to  ensure that 
the team has the most current information on drug interactions. Concomitant use of h erbal s, dietary 
supplements, nutritional supplements , or any other complementary and alternative medicine 
compounds containing polyvalent cations (e.g., Mg, Al , Fe, or Ca) is not allowed from the 14 days  
prior to ,  and 3 days following each study dose . Investigational medications are also prohibited.   
 
9 CLINICAL AND LABORATORY EVALUATIONS  
 
Study Schedule  
 
The study visits are described below as to their timing,  procedures, and sample collections and 
summarized in Table 3 Schedule of Events.    
 
9.2 Definitions for Study Schedule 
 
9.2.1 Screening (Visit 1)  
 
Screening will be scheduled at the Johns Hopkins DDU and must occur prior to the subject 
taking any study me dication. At the beginning of the screening visit, subjects will be asked 
to read and sign the informed consent approved by the Johns Hopkins IRB, and will undergo 
screening laboratory and clinical evaluation . Eligibility of study participation will be 
determined by screening evaluations. Screening evaluations to determine eligibility must be 
completed within 30 days prior to study entry and  administration of study drugs.  
 
The following assessment and procedures will be performed at screening visit:  
 
• Medi cal/Medications history  
• Physical examination (including vital signs, weight and height)  
 
12 
 • HIV-1/2 Ag/Ab serology and H epatitis B surface antigen  testing  
• POCT qualitative urine p regnancy test (female participants only)  
• CBC with differential  
• Complete Metaboli c Panel (sodium, potassium, chloride, carbon dioxide, glucose, urea 
nitrogen, creatinine, calcium, total protein albumin , total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase , 
AST, ALT ) 
• Serum Phosphorus  
• Estimated  creatinine clearance (Cockcroft -Gault Formula)  
 
Medical h istory should include current or recent use of illicit drugs, alcohol, and tobacco;  
any prescription medications within the last 30 days; all diagnoses active within the 
preceding 30 days; past medical history; and current contraception method if participa nts are 
engaging in sexual activity .  
 
The medication history sh ould consist of the following: all prescription, nonprescription 
medications, alternative therapies,  vitamins  and dietary supplements taken within 30 days of 
entry , including actual or estimat ed start and stop dates. Following entry, all prescription and 
nonprescription medications taken since the last clinic visit should be recorded . 
 
Weight will be measured and recorded on the source document at screening to calculate 
creatinine clearance at entry,  at each dosing  visit, and at the final safety visit . Height will be 
measured and recorded once at screening.  
 
Blood pressure, temperature, and pulse  rate will be collected at all visits and recorded on the 
source documents.  
 
Complete physical exam ination is required at screening. The complete physical exam does 
not include genital, breast, and rectal examinations.  
  
9.2.2 Day 1 (Visits 2 and 7) Genvoya Dosing Under Direct Observation followed by 
pharmacokinetic sampling.  
  
Participants  who satisfy  the inclusion criteria will be asked to return to the DDU on Day 1.  
Individuals  will be given a single oral dose of Genvoya whole tablet  (Whole Tablet Period) 
or a crushed/dissolved  Genvoya tablet mixed in water ( crushed/dissolved  Tablet Period)  
under di rect observation. They will undergo pharmacokinetic sampling at the DDU for the 
components of Genvoya as outlined in Table 2 (Pharmacokinetic sampling schedule ) and 
Table 3  (Schedule of Events).  Approximately 8 mL will be collected at all pharmacokinetic 
time po ints. Serum creatinine will be collected once, pre -dose, for estimated creatinine 
clearance.   Female participants will have a POCT qualitative urine pregnancy test prior to 
dosing and negative test results are required for participants to continue wi th dosing/the 
study visit.  Any positive POCT qualitative urine pregnancy test results will be confirmed 
with a serum quantitative pregnancy test.  
 
At entry, all signs , symptoms , and diagnoses  within 30 days prior to entry will be recorded , 
including actua l and estimated dates of onset and resolution. After entry, all new diagnoses , 
 
13 
 signs and symptoms  will be recorded  at the visit they are reported and should  include status , 
date of onsent, date of discovery  and date of resolution , if applicable . 
 
For the W holeTablet Period, s ubjects will be given a single oral dose of a whole Genvoya 
tablet under direct observation . Participants will  be asked to return to the DDU 
approximately 7 days after receiving the whole tablet dose , in order to complete the first 
study safety evaluation. Participants will be required to  undergo a minimum 14-day washout 
period  following  receipt of the Genvoya whole tablet.   
 
For the Crushed/Dissolved  Tablet Period , subjects will be given a single oral dose of a 
crushed/dissolved  Genvoya  tablet under direct observation. The solution of 
crushed/dissolved  Genvoya tabled mixed in water will be prepared at the Johns Hopkins 
Investigational Drug Pharmacy . Participants will  be asked to return to the DDU 
approximately 7 days after receiving the crushed/dissolved  tablet dose, in order to complete 
the final study safety evaluation.  
 
14 
 Table 3 . Schedule of Events  
1Screening within 30 days of entry  
2Serum creatinine only  
3Creatinine Clearance estimated by Cockcroft -Gault formula  
4A targeted physical exam will only be comple ted if clinically indicatedEvaluations  1Screening  Whole Tablet Period2 Safety  
Visit  Crushed/Dissolved  Tablet Period2 Safety 
Visit  
Visit 1  Visit 2  Visit 3  Visit 4  Visit 5  Visit 6  Visit 7  Visit  8 Visit 9  Visit 10  Visit 11  
Day -30 Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 8 Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 8 
Informed Consent  X           
Vital Signs (BP, HR, Temp)  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Weight  X X     X    X 
Height  X           
HIV-1/2 Ag/Ab  X           
HBsAg  X           
CBC  w/ Diff  X          X 
Complete Metabolic Panel  X X2    X X2    X 
Serum Phosphorus  X     X     X 
POCT Qualitative Urine HCG 
(female participants only)  X X     X     
3Estimated Creatinine Clearance  X X     X    X 
Medical /Medication Hist ory X           
Physical Exam  X           
Adverse Event Assessment   X X X X X X X X X X 
Concomitant Medications   X X X X X X X X X X 
Targeted Physical Exam4  X X X X X X X X X X 
Observed whole dose Genvoya   X          
Observed crushed/dissolved  
dose Genvoya        X     
Plasma Pharmacokinetics5  X X X X  X X X X  
 
15 
  
5Pharmacokinetic  sampling time points pre-dose and 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2, 3,  4, 5, 6, 10, 14, 24, 48, and 72 hours after each dose .  There is a 
+/- 5 min window for 0.25hr to 1.5hr PK  specimen collection and a +/ - 15 min window for 2hr to 14hr PK specimen collection.  Windows for 
24, 48 and 72 hr PK specimen collection outlined in section 9.2.3 -9.2.5.  
 
9.2.3  Day 2 (Visits 3 and 8) – 24 hour PK sampling  
  
Participants will return to the clinic for a 24 + 1 hour pharmacokine tic blood sample. They 
will be asked about any new or continuing adverse events and concomitant medications. A 
targeted physical examination will be performed if any adverse event is reported.  
 
9.2.4  Day 3 (Visits 4 and 9) – 48 hour PK sampling  
 
Participan ts will return to the clinic for a 48 + 2 hours pharmacokinetic blood sample. They 
will be asked about any new or continuing  adverse events and concomitant medications. A 
targeted physical examination will be performed if any adverse event is reported.  
 
9.2.5 Day 4 (Visits 5 and 10) – 72 hour PK sampling  
 
Participants will return to the clinic for a 72 + 4 hours pharmacokinetic blood sample. They 
will be asked about any new or continuing  adverse events and concomitant medications. A 
targeted physical examin ation will be performed if any adverse event is reported.  
 
9.2.6 Day 8 (Visits 6 and 11) - Safety Visit    
 
Subjects will return to the DDU  7 days + 3 days following the direct observed dose of 
Genvoya for a safety study visit. Subjects will undergo clinica l and laboratory evaluations  as 
outlined in the schedule of events . A targeted physical examination is to be driven by any 
signs or symptoms previously identified that the subject has experienced since the last visit, 
or newly occurring that the subject ha s experienced since the previous visit. A target ed 
physical examination is not necessary if the subject does not have new symptoms. In the 
absence of new symptoms, a target physical examination may still be require to document 
resolution of previous findin gs on physical examination.  
 
Study subjects will be reminded that they must not participate in a conception process. 
Participants will also be advised regarding HIV prevention during the study.  
 
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study accord ing to the DAIDS Table for 
Grading the Severity of Adult and Pediatric Adverse Events . Participants experiencing grade 
≥3 toxicity that is deemed by the investigator as associated with Genvoya will be  
discontinued from the study. These subjects will be followed until resolution, return to 
baseline values, stabilization, or an adequate explanation  can be given for their condition. 
They will complete the last safety evaluation visit outlined in the schedule of events. 
Patients experiencing grades 1 or 2 toxicity will continue in the study at the discretion of the 
investigator.  
 
 
16 
 At visit 6, participants wil l be scheduled to return to the DDU to start the Crushed/Dissolved  
Tablet Period of the study.   
 
The final safety evaluation visit is also the premature study drug discontinuation visit. They 
will undergo clinical and laboratory assessments as outlined in  the schedule of events.  
 
9.2.7  Evaluations for Subjects Who Do Not Start Study Drugs  
 
 No follow up evaluations are required for study subjects who do not start study drugs.  
 
9.2.8   Completion of Protocol  
 
A subject is considered to have completed the study if h e/she completed the two study 
periods for whole and crushed/dissolved  Genvoya plasma pharmacokinetic sampling.  
 
9.2.9  Study Drug Modifications  
 
Dose modifications/reductions/interruptions of study medications to manage toxicity are not 
allowed in this study. Subjects requiring dose modifications/reductions/interruptions for the 
management of toxicities at any time during the study will be taken off study.  
 
10 TOXICITY MANAGEMENT  
 
Dose modifications/reductions/interruptions of study medications to manage toxicity are not 
allowed in this study. Subjects requiring dose modifications/reductions/interruptions for the 
management of toxicities at any time during the study will be taken off study  and complete the 
safety evaluation.  Adverse e vents will be graded according to the  DAIDS Table for Grading the 
Severity of Adult and Pediatric Adverse Events .  
 
• Grade 1 Toxicities  
For all Grade 1 toxicities study participants may continue  on study at the discretion of the s tudy 
investigator and will be followed ca refully.   
 
• Grade 2 Toxicities  
For all Grade 2 toxicities the participant may  continue  on study  at the discretion of the site 
investigator .  
 
• Grade ≥3 Toxicity  
If a participant  has a Grade  3 or greater toxicity attributed to the study drug , the participant will not 
receive any further Genvoya dosing . These individuals  will be followed until resolution, 
stabilization, return to baseline values or an ad equate explanation  can be given for their condition. 
They will complete the evaluations scheduled for the safety visit. Additional clinic visits and 
evaluations might be necessary as medically indicated.   
 
 
17 
 
11 CRITERIA FOR DISCONTINU ING FURTHER GENVOYA DOS ING  
 
• Requirement of concomitant medication that is judged by the site investigator to interfere with 
study continuation.  
• Request by the subject to withdraw.  
• Clinical reasons believed life threatening by the investigator, even if not addressed in the toxic ity 
management of the protocol.  
• Subject judged by the investigator to be at significant risk of failing to comply with the 
provisions of the protocol as to cause harm to self or seriously interfere with the validity of the 
study results.  
• Drug toxicity as d efined in Section 10.  
• At the discretion of the investigator, regulatory agencies, or pharmaceutical sponsor.  
• Failure by the subject to take study medications as instructed.   
• Failure to complete a pharmacokinetic sampling visit within the allowable timefr ame.  
 
12 CRITERIA FOR PREMATURE STUDY DISCONTINUATION  
 
• Request by the study subjects to withdraw . 
• Drug toxicity as defined in Section 10. 
• Request of the primary care provider if s/he is no longer in the best interest of the subject . 
• Subject judged by the  investigator to be at significant risk for falling to comply with the 
provisions of the protocol as to cause harm to self or seriously interfere with the validity of the 
study results.  
• Imprisonment or the compulsory detention for treatment of either psych iatric or physical illness . 
• At the discretion of the investigator, regulatory agencies, or pharmaceutical sponsor.  
• Toxicities as outlined in Section 10 of the protocol.  
 
13 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS   
 
An equivalence approach with no -effect 
boundaries of 80 to 125% will be 
employed, in accordance with  the FDA 
guidance on bioequivalence studies , 
which define bioequivalence as “the 
absence of a significant difference in 
the rate and extent to which the active 
moiety becomes available at the site of 
action  when administered at the same 
molar dose under similar conditions  
(11).  
In order to test the primary hypothesis, 
log-transformed AUC 0-∞ and Cmax after 
a single dose for crushed/dissolved  Table 4 
 
18 
 versus whole tablets will be compared. The adjusted mean difference s will be estimated and their 
90% confidence intervals calculated. In the case of AUC 0-∞ and Cmax, the estimated differences and 
confidence limits will be exponentiated in order to compare ratios between tablet forms.  
Statistical Methods   
The sample size was calculated according to the formulas for a multiplicative model (12). Table 4 
includes sample size calculations for this proposed study (13). If the mean C max ratio or AUC ratio 
is 1, a sample size of 5 subjects produces a two -sided 90% confidence inte rval (0.952, 1.048) (i.e., a 
distance from the  mean to the limits that is equal to 0.048, when the estimated standard deviation is 
0.050). A sample size of 10 subjects produces a two -sided 90% confidence interval (0.855, 1.145) if 
the mean C max ratio or AU C ratio is 1, and the estimated standard deviation is 0.25. Assuming a 
dropout rate of 10%, a sample size of 12 subjects will be required to provide 90% power to 
demonstrate the bioequivalence of Cmax with 90% confidence intervals (CI) of 80% and 125%.  
 
13.1 Data Management  
 
The investigator will maintain and securely store complete, accurate, and current study records 
throughout the study .  Pharmacokinetic  data will be entered into Excel files and imported into  
WinNonlin for analysis. Non-compartmental PK  will be performed for all ARVs. C max and AUC will be 
compared across study arms consistent with FDA bioequivalence guidance . Laboratory data will be 
received electronically from the clinical  laboratory. Laboratory data will be reviewed in printed format f or 
clinically significant lab abnormalities with the paper copy serving as the source document . Clinical data 
will be collected on pap er source documents with data b eing entered into a web -based password -secure 
database with an audit trail (e.g. REDCap).   Data for ineligible subjects will be retained for purposes 
of improving recruitment strategies and to help understand why potential participants are not 
eligible to participate.  
13.2 Accrual  
 
The team expects to accrue 2-3 subjects per month. Expected time  to reach full accrual of 12 
evaluable participants, is 6-9 months.  
 
14 HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
Education in the protection of human research participants has been met by certified completion of 
the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Web -based Research C ompliance course, Human 
Subjects Research Training, by the study staff.  
 
14.1 IRB and Informed Consent  
 
The protocol and informed consent document and any subsequent modifications will be reviewed 
and approved by the JHU IRB. Written informed consent wil l be obtained by the study coordinators 
at the DDU unit during the screening visit. The purpose of the study, the procedures to be followed, 
risks, and benefits of participation will be explained. Subjects will be given as much time as they 
need to read, a sk questions, and receive satisfactory answers about the consent form. A subject must 
 
19 
 understand and give written consent to participate in the study. Comprehension of the consent form 
will be assessed by querying the patient about the study. A copy of the  signed informed consent will 
be given to the participant, and the original retained by the investigator as part of the study.   
 
14.2 Subject Confidentiality  
 
All research materials will be obtained by the investigators strictly for research purposes. Ea ch 
subject will be assigned a confidential study number. Data  will be stored in a database on IBM PC 
compatible computers using only the confidential study number, without reference to participant’s 
name. Access to subject study identification codes will b e restricted to the principal investigator and 
study staff and upon request, to the JHU IRB or other regulatory agencies in compliance with 
HIPAA regulations. Data collected from the study containing PHI, will be stored on a secure 
password protected netwo rk accessible only to the study staff.   
 
 
14.3 Definition of Adverse Events  
 
The safety of all participants enrolled in this study will be monitored throughout the study. Safety 
monitoring will include history and physical examination, with vital signs, adverse event reporting, 
and laboratory evaluations. In addition, participants will be instructed to notify the study staff of any 
problems that occur between visits and, if necessary, will be evaluated by the investigator or study 
staff at an unscheduled interim visit.  
 
An adverse event is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation 
subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship 
with this treatment. An adverse e vent can therefore be any unfavorable  and unintended sign (including 
an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
(investigational) product, whether or not related to the medicinal (investigational)  product. For the 
purposes of this protocol, all adverse events will be collected from the time of informed consent, but only 
those occurring following exposure to a dose of Genvoya will be analyzed.  
 
Other  adverse event  Definitions: The following definit ions of terms guided by the International 
Conference on Harmonization and the US Code of Federal Regulations apply to this section:  
 
• Unexpected Adverse Event: An event in which the specificity or severity is not consistent with 
the current investigator’s brochure, consent form, or other risk information. “Unexpected”, as 
used in this definition, refers to an adverse drug experience that has not been previously 
observed.  
 
• Related Adverse Event: Any event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the  adverse 
experience may have been caused by the study drug but there is insufficient information to 
determine the likelihood of this possibility.   
 
• Serious Adverse Event: Includes death, a life -threatening adverse drug experience, inpatient 
hospitalizatio n or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant 
 
20 
 disability/incapacity, or any medical event that requires treatment to prevent one of the medical 
outcomes listed above.  
 
• Life-threatening, for the purpose of reporting adverse eve nts, refers to an event in which the 
patient was, in the view of the initial reporter, at immediate risk of death at the time of the event 
as it occurred (i.e., it does not include a n event that, had it occurred in a more serious form, 
might have caused de ath).  
 
14.4 Reporting of Adverse Events  
 
All events will be reported to the JHU IRB  and to other regulatory agencies as needed . Serious 
adverse other than death and immediately lifer threatening events will be reported within 10 
business days after sponso r initial r eceipt of the information . Death and immediately lifer 
threatening events will be reported within 3 business days Non serious adverse events will be 
reported to the JHU IRB in the annual review report.  
 
14.5 Steps to Minimize the Risks  
 
Subjec ts will be evaluated as indicated in the schedule of events , or more f requently if medically 
indicated. If clinically indicated, d irected physical examination, vital signs  andsafety laboratory tests  
will be performed during outpatient visits. Additional la boratory tests may be undertaken for a 
participant , if medically indicated. Subjects experiencing toxicity will be followed until resolution, 
return to baseline values, stabilization, or an adequate explanation can be give n for their condition.  
 
Genvoya i s a FDA approved medication for the treatment of HIV infection. This fixed combination 
of ARV drugs is known to be well tolerated. This is a short duration study with only two doses of 
Genvoya. Side effects observed  with Genvoya are usually associated with  long term administration 
of this ARV  medication . Participants in this study will be healthy research participants  that will be 
given only two doses of Genvoya . Therefore, the short duration of this study and short medication 
exposure in health research pa rticipants  makes it less l ikely that participants will experience 
clinically important adverse events.  
 
14.6 Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research  
 
There are no benefits for the participants  enrolled in this study.  
 
14.7 Importance of the Knowledge  to be Gained  
 
This study will determine whether crushed/dissolved  Genvoya tablet is bioequivalent to the whole tablet  
formulation. Confirming b ioequivalence between these two tablet forms w ill provide HIV -infected 
subjects with the option of using the crushed/dissolved  Genvoya tablet if they have difficulty 
swallowing the whole table t formulation.  
 
 
 
21 
  
14.8 Inclusion of Women, Minorities, and Children   
 
This bioequivalence study will focus on  adult men and women healthy research participants . All 
efforts will be made to enroll minorities in this study.  
 
14.9 Compensation  
 
This study will be conducted at no cost to the participant.  Participants will be compensated up to 
$900 to complete the study  and p arking validation will be provided for the long Day 1 PK study 
visits, if applicable.  There are no financial penalties for not completing the study. All costs for the 
study will be covered for by the study.  
 
 
22 
 15 REFERENCES  
 
1. Genvoya [Package Insert]. Foster City, CA: Gilead Sciences, Inc; 2015 .  
2. Golub SA, Indyk D, Wainberg ML. Reframing HIV adherence as part of the experience of illness. 
Soc Work Health Care. 2006;42(3 -4):167 -88. 
3. Bangsberg DR, Perry S, Charlebois ED, Clark RA, Roberston M, Zolopa AR, Moss A. Non -
adherence to highly active antiretrovi ral therapy predicts progression to AIDS. AIDS. 
2001;15(9):1181 -1183.  
4. García de Olalla P, Knobel H, Carmona A, Guelar A, López -Colomés JL, Caylà JA. Impact of 
adherence and highly active antiretroviral therapy on survival in HIV -infected patients. J Acq uir 
Immune Defic Syndr. 2002; 30(1):105 -110. 
5.  Paterson DL, Swindells S, Mohr J, Brester M, Vergis EN, Squier C, Wagener MM, Singh N. 
Adherence to protease inhibitor therapy and outcomes in patients with HIV infection. Ann Intern 
Med.2000; 133(1):21 -30. 
6. Mills EJ, Nachega JB, Buchan I, Orbinski J, Attaran A, Singh S, Rachlis B, Wu P, Cooper C, 
Thabane L, et al. Adherence to antiretroviral therapy in Sub -Saharan Africa and North America: a 
meta -analysis. JAMA 2006, 296(6):679 -690. 
7. Brown K et al. Relat ive bioavailability of darunavir/cobicistat/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide 
(D/C/F/TAF) single -tablet regimen when administered as a whole, split, or crushed tablet. 16th 
European AIDS Conference (EACS 2017), 25 –27 October 2017, Milan. Oral abstract PS 8/3. 
8. Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolesce nts. Guidelines for the Use of 
Antiretroviral Agents in Adults and Adolescents Living with HIV. Department of Health and Human 
Services. Available at  http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/lvguidelines/AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf .  
Stribild [Package Insert]. Foster Ci ty, CA: Gilead Sciences, Inc; 201 6. 
9. Sax PE, Wohl D, Yin MT, Post F, DeJesus E, Saag M, Pozniak A, Thompson M, Podzamczer D, 
Molina JM, Oka S, Koenig E, Trottier B, Andrade -Villanueva  J, Crofoot G, Custodio JM, Plummer 
A, Zhong L, Cao H, Martin H, Callebaut C, Cheng AK, Fordyce MW, McCallister S; Tenofovir 
alafenamide versus tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, coformulated with elvitegravir, cobicistat, and 
emtricitabine, for initial treatm ent of HIV -1 infection: two randomi zed, double -blind, phase 3, non -
inferiority trials. Lancet 2015; 385:2606.  
10. Wohl D , Oka S , Clumeck N , Clarke A , Brinson C , Stephens J , Tashima K , Arribas JR , Rashbaum 
B, Cheret A , Brunetta J , Mussini C , Tebas P , Sax PE , Cheng A , Zhong L , Callebaut C , Das M , 
Fordyce M ; GS-US-2,92-01040111 and Study Team .A randomized, double -blind comparison of 
tenofovir alafenamide (TAF) vs. tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF), each coformulated with 
elvitegravir,  cobicistat, and emtricitabine (E/C/F) for initial HIV -1 treatment: week 96 results. J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2016 January 29 (epub).   
11. Chow, SC, Liu JP.  2000 . Design and analysis of bioavailability and bioequivalence studies, 2nd ed., 
revised and ex panded. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, NY.  
12. Guidance for Industry. Bioavailability and Bioequivalence Studies Submitted in NDAs or INDs 
General Considerations. 2014. 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidances/ucm389
370.pdf  
13. Hahn, G. J. and Meeker, W.Q. 1991. Statistical Intervals. John Wiley & Sons. New York.
 
23 
 APPENDIX   
 
Table S1. Estimated fractio nal change of sequential samples relative to T max during rise before  and decay after  Cmax. 
 
Drugs  PK 
Parameters  Sampling Hour  Samples relative to T max 
 
Half-
life Tmax  0.25  0.5 0.75  1 1.5 2 3 4 5 6 10 14 24 48 72 Before  After  Half-lives 
After  
EVG  12.9  4    
0.25   
0.50  0.75  Tmax 0.06  0.06  0.24  0.24  0.71  2.63  2.63  3 7 5.6 
COBI  3.5 3  
0.17   
0.25  
0.67  Tmax 0.22   
0.49  1.21  1.21  6.25  114.93  . 3 6 13.7  
FTC 10 3  
0.17   
0.25  
0.67  Tmax 0.07   
0.15  0.32  0.32  1.00  4.28  4.28  3 7 7.2 
TAF 0.51  1 0.25  0.50  0.75  Tmax 0.97 0.97  2.89  2.89  2.89  14.15  . . . . . 3 6 11.8  
TFV 32 1.5 0.17  0.33  0.50  0.67  Tmax 0.01  0.02  0.02   
0.04  0.09  . 0.35  0.68  0.68  4 8 2.3 
 