Ability of Partial Inverse Agonist, Iomazenil, 
to Block Ethanol Effects in Humans
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
June 10, 2022
ver. 6/10/2022 ABILITY OF PARTIAL INVERSE AGONIST, IOMAZENIL, TO BLOCK ETHANOL EFFECTS IN 
HUMANS  
 Principal Investigator : Deepak Cyril D’Souza, MD  
 Objective:  The main objective of this study is to evaluate whether iomazenil can attenuate the 
affective and cognitive effects of alcohol.  
 Background:  The pathological  use of alcohol  is a major  public  health challenge facing  VHA.  
Among soldiers  returning  from Iraq and Afghanistan,  alcoholism  is one of the most  common  initial 
psychiatric  disorders.  There is a need to develop effective  treatments  for alcohol  intoxication  and 
alcoholism.  The stimulation of extrasynaptic  GABA A receptors  by ethanol  contributes  
substantially  to its effects  at doses  associated with human   intoxication.  Therefore,  drugs  that 
could block  ethanol  actions  at GABA A receptors  might  play a unique  role in the treatment  of 
alcohol  intoxication and alcoholism.  Preclinical  studies  suggest  that benzodiazepine inverse 
agonists,  but not benzodiazepine antagonists,  attenuate  the effects  of ethanol  on many  levels.  
They  attenuate  ethanol -stimulated  Cl- influx  thereby  affecting  the rewarding,  sedating,  ataxic, and 
amnestic  effects  of ethanol,  the discriminative  stimulus  effects  of ethanol,  operant  behavior  
motivated by ethanol  and ethanol  self- administration.  However,  this has not yet been shown  in 
humans.  This project  is evaluating the benzodiazepine partial  inverse  agonist,  iomazenil,  as an 
agent  that could reverse alcohol's  effects  on subjective intoxication,  alcohol’s  effects  on driving  
using a driving  simulator  and on measures  of electrophysiology  in the laboratory  in healthy  
subjects.  
  Research Methodology :  We hypothesize that:  the GABA A benzodiazepine  partial  inverse agonist,  
iomazenil,  will attenuate several  measures  of ethanol  intoxication in healthy  human  subjects.  In a 
double- blind, placebo- controlled fashion, counterbalanced, within- subjects design, participants will 
receive an intravenous (IV) infusion of placebo or active ethanol (target BrAc=100mg%) followed by placebo or active iomazenil (3.7 µg/kg) administered intravenously via a separate IV.  Subjects 
will undergo four test days. Subjects will receive the following drug combinations: (1) active ethanol 
and active iomazenil; (2) active ethanol and placebo iomazenil; (3) placebo ethanol and active iomazenil; and (4) placebo ethanol and placebo iomazenil.  Measures  of intoxication  will be 
collected before,  and several  times  during and after drug administration.  Automobile driving  will be 
assessed  using a driving  simulator.  Cognitive  function will be assessed using  the visual  novelty  
oddball paradigm. EEG  will be recorded during the driving  simulator  and novelty  oddball tasks, 
allowing  for the analysis  of ERP components  related to making errors  (error- related negativity,  ERN; 
driving  simulator)  and target  (P3b)  
   
Innovation and Impact : Although  inverse agonists  have been  shown to attenuate several  aspects  
of ethanol  in animals,  this has not yet been demonstrated  in humans.  The innovative elements  
of the study  are:1) the use of the only BZ inverse agonist  probe available  for use in humans  – 
one that was developed at this center  and to our knowledge is not available elsewhere for use at 
pharmacological doses,  2) the use of event - related potential  and event -related oscillations,  3) 
the use of simulated driving,  a functional  measure  of ethanol  effects, and driving  error -related 
potentials,  4) the use of eyeblink  conditioning as a biomarker  of alcohol’s  effects  on cerebellar  
function.  This study  may provide insights  into the neurobiology  through  which  iomazenil  
attenuates  features  of ethanol  intoxication  in humans.  In so doing,  this project  may help to 
advance the exploration of benzodiazepine  inverse agonists  as ethanol  “antidotes”  and possible 
treatments  for pathological  alcohol  use. Characterizing the interplay  of iomazenil -ethanol  
interactions  on several  overlapping measures  will contribute  to the rational  development  of 
agents  similar  to iomazenil  as antidotes  or pharmacotherapies  for alcoholism.  
 