 
 
  
 
 
Protocol Abstract Page  Protocol 2005-0224 
July 10, 2017  
Abstract Page 1  
 
 
 
 
A Phase  II Evaluation  of Avastin® in Combination  with Docetaxel  and 
Carboplatin  as Chemotherapy  in Patients  with Metastatic  Non-Small Cell 
Lung  Cancer  
2005 -0224  
 
 
 
Core Protocol Information 
 
  
  
  
  
Full Title:  A Phase II Evaluation of Avastin® in Combination with Docetaxel and Carboplatin 
as Chemotherapy in Patients with Metastatic Non -Small Cell Lung Cancer  
Protocol Phase:  Phase II  
Version Status:  Terminated  07/27/2017  
Version:  22 
Document Status:  Final  
 
Abstract  
 
 
Objectives:  
 
Primary  
 
The primary endpoint of this trial is to estimate progression- free survival,  defined as the time from study 
enrollment to disease progression or death as an indicator of the activity of the Avastin® regimen.  
 
Secondary  
 
• Assessment of overall survival  
• Assessment of disease control rate (complete response + partial response + stable disease)  
• Evaluation of the safety and toxicity profile of this triple- agent regimen 
• To correlate the above primary and secondary objectives with biomarkers and immunohistochemistry 
from tissue samples (optional)  
 
 
Rationale: (Be as concise as possible)  
 
In this Phase II trial, the biologic agent Avastin® is combined with cytotoxic chemotherapy, attacking 
against the factors that lead to the development of tumor blood supply and tumor cell proliferation in 
NSCLC. Avastin® directly binds to VEGF and inhibits from binding to endothelial cells and in turn blocks blood vessel growth.  
 
The common 21- day dosing regimen has been studied and is used for docetaxel and carboplatin.  Due to  

Protocol 2005 -0224  
July 10, 2017  
Abstract Page 2  
 
the fact that there are not to be overlapping toxicities or pharmacodynamic interactions with the study 
drug Avastin as well as secondarily for ease of delivery and monitoring, it will be given along with the 
other two drugs.  The treatments will be repeated every 21 days as another cycle with disease evaluation 
after every 2 cycles in order to monitor for need for continuation of therapy and endpoints closely.  
 
 
Eligibility: (List All Criteria)  
 
Inclusion: 
1) Men and women, at least 18 years old, with histologically confirmed, advanced stage IIIB or IV 
NSCLC for whom no curative options exist and for whom docetaxel and carboplatin is a reasonable 
treatment option;  
 
2) At least 1 target lesion that is unidimensionally measurable as defined by the Response Evaluation 
Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) and has not been previously irradiated;  
 
3) Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status of 0 or 1, (determined within 2 weeks 
prior to receiving study medication;  
 
4) Ability to understand and adhere to the protocol requirements, and give informed consent  
 
5) Use of effective means of contraception (men and women) in subjects of child- bearing potential. 
Child -bearing potential is defined as follows: A woman of childbearing potential is a sexually mature 
woman who has not undergone a hysterectomy or who has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 12 consecutive months (i.e., who has had menses at any time in the preceding 12 consecutive months).  
Exclusion:  
1) Patients who have had docetaxel in nonradiosensitizing therapy  
 
2) Patients who have received prior full dose systemic chemotherapy for NSCLC (ie neoadjuvant, 
adjuvant, or metastatic) within the last 6 months.  
 
3) ECOG status of 2 or greater  
 
4) Screening clinical laboratory values:*ANC of <1,500/µL *Platelet count of <75,000/µL * INR >/= 1.5  
*T bilirubin elevation above normal (MDACC upper normal limit is 1.0 mg/dL) *Serum creatinine of >2.0 
mg/dL *Hemoglobin of <9 mg/dL (may be transfused or receive epoetin alfa [e.g., Epogen®] to maintain 
or exceed this level) *The pt is ineligible if: 1.alk phos>5xULN; 2.AST or ALT >5xULN; 3.alk phos >1xULN 
but </= 2.5xULN AND AST or ALT >1.5xULN but </=5xULN;4.alk phos >2.5xULN but </=5xULN AND 
AST or ALT > 1xULN but</= 1.5xULN; 5.alk phos >2.5xULN but</=5xULN AND AST or ALT >1.5xULN 
but </=5xULN  
 
5) Inability to comply with study and/or follow -up proc edures  
 
6) History of other disease, active infection, metabolic dysfunction , physical examination finding, or 
clinical laboratory finding which is uncontrolled requiring medical intervention giving reasonable suspicion 
of a disease or condition that contrai ndicates the use of an investigational drug or that might affect the 
interpretation of the results of the study or render the subject at high risk from treatment complications.  
 
7) Current, recent (within 4 weeks of the first infusion of this study), or planned participation in an 
experimental drug study other than a bevacizumab cancer study  
 
8) Prior exposure to anti -VEGF therapy  
 
9) Blood pressure of > 140/90 mmHg as documented in two consecutive blood pressure readings  
Protocol 2005 -0224  
July 10, 2017  
Abstract Page 3  
 
within 4 hours  
 
10) Any prior history of hypertensive crisis or hypertensive encephalopathy  
 
11) New York Heart Association (NYHA) Grade II or greater congestive heart failure  
 
12) History of myocardial infarction or uns table angina within 6 months  
 
13) History of stroke or transient ischemic attack within 6 months  
 
14) Significant vascular disease (e.g., aortic aneurysm, aortic dissection)  
 
15) Evidence of bleeding diathesis or coagulopathy  
 
16) Presence of central nervous system or brain metastases at any time 
 
17) Major surgical procedure, open biopsy, or significant traumatic injury within 28 days prior to Day 0, 
anticipation of need for major surgical procedure during the course of the study  
 
18) Minor surgical procedures, fine needle aspirations or core biopsies within 7 days prior to Day 0  
 
19) Pregnant (positive pregnancy test) or lactating  
 
20) Proteinuria at screening as demonstrated by either: Urine protein:creatinine (UPC) ratio > 1.0 at 
screening OR Urine dipstick for proteinuria > 2+ (patients discovered to have > 2+ proteinuria on dipstick 
urinalysis at baseline should undergo a 24 hour urine collection and must demonstrate < 1g of protein in 
24 hours to be eligible).  
 
21) History of abdominal fistula, gastrointestinal perforation, or int ra-abdominal abscess within 6 
months prior to Day 0 
 
22) Serious, non- healing wound, ulcer, or bone fracture  
 
23) Lung carcinoma of squamous cell histology or any histology in close proximity to a major vessel, 
cavitation.  
 
24) History of hemoptysis (bright red blood of 1/2 teaspoon or more)  
 
25) Full dose anitcoagulation, chronic use of Aspirin (>325 mg/day) or NSAIDs  
 
26) Inability to comply with study and/or follow -up procedures  
Is there an age limit?  Yes 
 
Why?  Please explain:  
A diagnosis of NSCLC is exceedingly uncommon at  ages 18 and below.  
 
 
Treatment/Study Plan:  
 
This is a single center Phase II open- labeled single- arm nonrandomized study of  Avastin®  in 
combination with docetaxel and carboplatin as first line systemic chemotherapy for metastatic non small 
cell lung canc er.  Patients will receive Carboplatin (AUC 6) IV with Docetaxel (75 mg/m^2) IV with 
Avastin®  (15 mg/kg) IV every 3 weeks.  (Patients will receive standard premedication with 
dexamethasone before docetaxel infusion.)  After 2 cycles, patients will be rest aged.  If there is evidence 
of progression, they will be taken off study.  If, however, there is either response or stable disease, they 
will be continued on the regimen just described for 2 more cycles, followed again by restaging studies to  
Protocol 2005 -0224  
July 10, 2017  
Abstract Page 4  
 
evaluate for progression versus stable or responsive disease.  This will continue the triplet regimen for a 
maximum of up to 6 cycles.  Patients who are stable or still responding may continue Avastin® until 
progression. If 3 or more patients experience a grade >/= 3 drug- related adverse event, then dose 
modification will be considered.  
 
 
Estimated number of patients enrolled will be 50 total.  Estimated rate of accrual will be 5 patients per 
month for a total of 50 patients in 10 months, and each to be followed for 12 months minimum as 
possible.  
 
Disease Group:  Lung 
 
Treatment Agent:  Avastin, Carboplatin, Docetaxel  
 
 
Statistical Considerations:  
 
The primary objective of this single- arm, phase II clinical trial is to evaluate the efficacy of carboplatin, 
docetaxel, and Avastin® in the treatment of patients with metastatic non- small cell lung cancer who have 
not received prior systemic chemotherapy.  The primary endpoint is progression- free survival.  Up to 50 
patients will be accrued in approximately 10 months; each patient will be followed for at least 12 months.  

Protocol 2005 -0224  
July 10, 2017  
Abstract Page 5  
 
Total study duration should be less than 24 months. Assuming a one- sided type I error rate of 10%, we 
have at least 81% power to detect an increase in median survival from a historic al estimate of 4.5 months 
to 6.3 months.  
 
 
Planned Efficacy Evaluations, Variables, and Analysis  
 
The primary endpoint of this study is the estimation of  progression- free survival, defined as the time from 
enrollment to disease progression or death.  Secondary endpoints include the assessment of overall 
survival, disease control rate (complete response + partial response + stable disease) and the evaluation 
of the safety profile of this triple- agent regimen.  Survival distributions will be summarized using the 
method of Kaplan and Meier.  Comparisons with historical controls  of survival distributions by patient 
subgroups will be tested using the log rank test.  Multivariable models of PFS and OS will be analyzed 
using the Cox (proportional hazards) regressio n model.  
 
 
Continuous variables will be summarized using the mean (s.d.) and median (range).  Categorical 
variables will be summarized in frequency tables.  Graphical summaries will be emphasized for describing the distribution of variables.  The Pearson cor relation, or its non- parametric analogue, the 
Spearman correlation, will be used to assess linear correlations among variables.  Scatter plots and other 
powerful bi -variate plots will be used to characterize association among variables.  
 
 
Protocol Monitorin g: 
 
Who is monitoring the day -to-day implementation and performance of this study, i.e., Good Clinical 
Practice? 
 
 
Data Monitoring Committee:  
 
Is this study randomized or blinded?  No 
 
 
Patient/Participant Evaluation: (Pretreatment and Interim Testing)  
 
Pre-Treatment Evaluations:  
 
Unless otherwise specified, the following evaluations must be performed within four weeks prior to each 
patient's on- study (initial Avastin® treatment) date:  
• Pregnancy test (serum or urine) for women of childbearing potential (w ithin 2 weeks of treatment).  
• Medical history and documentation of the rationale for treatment of the patient's disease with 
Avastin  
• Physical examination, including vital signs (blood pressure), performance status and tumor 
assessment.  
• Baseline staging exams (i.e. chest x -ray, CT, brain MRI)  
• Urine protein:creatinine ratio or urine dipstick (and 24 hour collection if indicated)  
• Hematology (within 2 weeks of treatment): complete blood count (CBC) with differential and platelet 
count.  
• Serum Chemistries: sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium, glucose, BUN, creatinine, uric acid, 
total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, LDH, total protein, albumin, SGOT(AST), and SGPT (ALT).  
• PT, PTT, and/or INR (within 2 weeks of treatment)  
• (Optional ) Tumor biops y for biomarker analysis  
Protocol 2005 -0224  
July 10, 2017  
Abstract Page 6  
 
Evaluations During Treatment (See Timetable below)  
Blood pressure monitoring every 3 weeks, prior to each Avastin® dose 
Urine protein approximately every 2 cycles (with every other dose)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biosafety:  
 
Does this study involve the use of Recombinant DNA Technology?  No 
 
Does this study involve the use of organisms that are infectious to humans?  No 
 
Does this study include any products manufactured or produced at MD Anderson  No 
Cancer Center? 
  
 
Radiation Safety:  
 
Does this study involve the use of radioisotopes?  No 

Protocol 2005 -0224  
July 10, 2017  
Abstract Page 7  
 
Does this protocol include the administration of a radioactive drug to human research  No 
subjects intended to obtain basic information regarding the metabolism (including  
kinetics, distribution, an d localization) of the drug or regarding human physiology, 
pathophysiology, or biochemistry, but not intended for immediate therapeutic, 
diagnostic, or similar purposes or to determine the safety and effectiveness of the drug 
in humans for such purposes (i .e. to carry out a clinical trial)? 
 
 
 
Where Will Study Be Conducted:  
 
B) MDACC + Community Programs (CCOP/Network) 
 
The study will be conducted at MDACC and its affiliated County Hospital, Lyndon Baines Johnson 
General Hospital via the Clinical Trials Out reach Program (CTOP) program.  
 
 
Is this an M. D. Anderson Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program  
(CTEP) Protocol?  No 
 
 
Estimated Accrual:  
 
Total Accrual at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center:  Total accrual will be 50 participants.  
Estimated monthly accrual at M.D. Anderson:  It is estimated that accrual will be 5 participants per month.  
Total accrual will be:  50 participants  
   
 
Basis of Study:  
 
This protocol is performed on an Outpatient  basis.  
  
 
Length of Stay: (What is the length & frequency of hospitalization)  
 
N/A 
 
 
Return Visits: (How often must participants come to MDACC)  
 
Patients will return to the clinic every 21 days.  
 
 
Home Care: (Specify what (if any) treatment may be given at home)  
 
N/A 
 
 
Public Display of Protocol on the Office of Protocol Research Web  Site:  
 
The Office of Protocol Research maintains a website (www.clinicaltrials.org) 
listing protocols actively accruing patients. No information is given about drug 
dose or  Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
schedule. Would you like this protocol listed on this website?  
 
If this protocol has a corporate sponsor, we also need to get the sponsor's written 
approval to post the trial on  the website. Shall OPR send a letter requesting this 
permission to your sponsor?  
  
 
 
 
Yes Protocol 2005-0224 
July 10, 2017 
Abstract Page 8  
 
 
 
Prior protocol at M. D. Anderso n: 
 
List the protocol number for the last clinical treatment/behavioral protocol on which you were the Principal 
Investigator that accrued patients at M. D. Anderson.  2003- 0424  
 
 
 
Space Requirements for Clinical Trials:  
 
Will implementing this protocol require additional space (clinical, office, departmental)? No 
 
Additional Space will not be made available in the future.  
 
 
Sponsorship and Support Information:  
 
 
Does the Study have a Sponsor?   Yes 
 
Name of Sponsor or Supporter:   Genentech, Inc.  
 
Does the Sponsor Provide Funding for  
the conduct of the study?  
 
Is this Protocol listed on any Federal 
Grant or Foundation Funding  
Application?   
Yes 
No 
 
Grant Number:   N/A 
 
Does the Sponsor supply drug(s) or  
device(s)?  
 N 
 
 
  
Does this protocol  require an IND?  No 
 
Please check  the items  below  to verify  that the following  information is correct:  
The data will not be provided to the FDA or to an outside source.  
The data will not be used to expand the label or change the advertising for the drug.  
There will be no substantial change in the dosag e, drug, or route of administration or other factor 
that will significantly increase the risk to the patient.  
Protocol 2005 -0224  
July 10, 2017  
Abstract Page 9  
 
Does this protocol  use a "Combination"  of drugs or other  therapies  (Drug,  Radiation or 
Surgical  Therapy)  or Diagnostic  Procedures  that pose  a significant  risk to the patient?  
No 
 
If this protocol  includes an FDA Approved Therapy,  please list the disease,  dose  and 
route  of administration:  
 
Approved Use Proposed Use in this Protocol  
 
Disease:  Avastin:  Metastatic  Colorectal,  
Non-small cell lung cancer  
Docetaxel:Breast  Cancer,  Head  
& Neck  Cancer,  Metastatic  
Prostate  Cancer,  Non-small  cell 
lung cancer  
Carboplatin:Ovarian Cancer  
 
Dose:  Avastin:15mg/kg IV infusion  
Docetaxel:75mg/m(2)  
Carboplatin:  AUC of 6 
 
Route of Administration:   Avastin:IV  
Docetaxel:IV  
Carboplatin:IV   
Avastin,  Docetaxel,  and 
Carboplatin:Metastatic  Non-small  
cell lung cancer  
 
 
  
 
 
Avastin:15mg/kg IV infusion  
Docetaxel:75mg/m(2)  
Carboplatin:  AUC of 6 
 
Avastin:IV  
Docetaxel:IV  
Carboplatin:IV  
 
 
Rationale  For Planned Therapy:  
In this Phase  II trial, the biologic  agent  Avastin  is combined with cytotoxic  chemotherapy,  
attacking against  the factors  that lead to the development  of tumor  blood supply  and tumor  cell 
proliferation  in NSCLC.  Avastin  directly  binds  to VEGF  and inhibits  from binding  to endothelial  
cells and in turn blocks  blood vessel  growth.  
 
The common 21-day dosing  regimen  has been studied and is used for docetaxel  and 
carboplatin.  Due to the fact that there  are not to be overlapping  toxicities  or pharmacodynamic  
interactions  with the study  drug Avastin  as well as secondarily  for ease  of delivery  and 
monitoring,  it will be given  along  with the other  two drugs.  The treatments  will be repeated  
every  21 days  as another  cycle  with disease evaluation after every  2 cycles  in order  to monitor  
for need for continuation of therapy  and endpoints  closely.  
 
For FDA approved drugs 
www.fda.gov/cder/da/da.htm  
 
For the FDA Investigational  New Drug  (IND)  Exemption Rationale  
www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_03/21cfr312_03.html  
Then select  312.2 
 
For FDA approved biological  therapies  
www.fda.gov/cber/  
 
 
Device:  
Protocol 2005 -0224  
July 10, 2017  
Abstract Page 10  
 
Is this protocol  testing  a new device  or a device in a new application?  No 
 
For a list of significant/non- significant  risk devices  
www.fda.gov/oc/ohrt/irbs/devices.html  