 1 HFHS - 13-03:  A NEOADJUVANT PHASE II  STUDY OF CHEMO -RADIOTHERAPY 
IN PATIENTS WITH RESECTABLE AND BORDERLINE RESECTABLE 
PANCREA TIC CANCER  
 
 
Study Team  
Principal Investigator/Hematology Oncology  
Gazala Khan, MD  
Henry Ford Hospital  
2799 West Grand Blvd  
Detroi t, MI  
 
Participating Sites  
Henry Ford Hospital , Detroit, MI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Protocol version 2.0 03/11/2013  
 
Eligible patients with resecta ble and borderline resectable pancreatic cancer will be accrued onto protocol  
therapy , which would include a neo -adjuvant phase follow ed by surgical resection.  
                   
 
SCHEMA  
 
                              Resectable  and Borderline R esectable Pancreatic Cancer  
Pre-study: Determine e ligibility, baseline CT scan, surgical  evaluation, Ca19-9 
Sign Informed Consent  
 
2 cycles – FOLFOX6  (1 month ) 
 
Gemcitabine/ RT (5-6 weeks)  
 
Rest period 2 weeks  
 
Re-staging evaluation (CT scan to be done during the 2 weeks of rest)                           
 
Surgery  (To be performed no later than 6 weeks after completion of chemo -radiation)  
 
*Note:  If patient has evidence of distant disease progression at any restaging CT they will 
be removed from protocol treatment  
 3  
TABLE OF CO NTENTS                                                                                                      Page  
 
SCHEMA  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  2 
 
1. INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  4 
 
2. OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  6 
 
3. PATIENT SELECTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 6 
 
3.1 Conditions for Patient Eligibility   ................................ ................................ ............  6 
3.2 Conditions for Patient Ineligibility  ................................ ................................ ...........  7 
3.3 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  ................................ ................................ .........  8 
 
4. REGISTRATION PROCEDUR ES ................................ ................................ ..................  8 
 
5. TREATMENT PLAN ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 8 
 
6. DOSING DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS  ................................ .............................  14 
  
7. ADVERSE EVENT  REPORTING  ................................ ................................ ................  18 
 
8. PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION  ................................ ................................ ...... 19 
 
8.1   5FU................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  19 
8.2   Oxaliplatin  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  19 
8.3   Leucovorin  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  .20 
8.4   Gemcitabine………………………………………………………… …………………. 21                               
 
9. STUDY CALENDAR  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 22 
 
10. MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  ................................ ................................ ....................  23 
 
11. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS ................................ ................................ ............  25 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  25 
 
APPENDI X………………………………………………………… ….………… ...……… ..28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 1. INTRODUCTION  
 
Pancreatic  Cancer  
 
There were an estimated 37,680 new cases of pancr eatic cancer in the US in 2008 making it 
the 10th most common cancer. The estimated number of deaths, however, was 34,290 
which places pancrea tic cancer 4th among deaths caused by cancer1.  A practical sta ging 
system for pancreatic cancer based on the approach to treatment separates patients into four 
categories: 1) resectable, 2) locally adv anced unresectable, 3) metastatic disease, and 4) 
borderline resectable.  
 
Resectable D isease  
 
A small min ority of patients fall into the category of resectable disease. Surgical treatment 
is most often the initial treatment  and is offer ed with curative intent.  Howeve r, median 
survival with surgery alone is only 13 -20 months.  Following resection, patients be nefit 
from the addition of adjuvant radiation and/or chemotherapy2-4.  Even in this most 
favorable group of patients, however, the 5 year survival is less than 30% in single 
institution series5, 6.  A large  majority of patients treated with surgery, with or without 
adjuvant therapy, progress  with hepatic metastases.  
 
       Advanced Metastatic D isease  
 
Patients present ing with evidence of distant metastasis at diagnosis are offered treatment  
with palliative chemotherapy.  Gemcitabine has dominated  systemic therapy for pancrea tic 
cancer for most of the past decade. A pivotal study randomized 126 patients with advanced, 
symptomatic pancrea tic cancer to either weekly gemcitabine  1000 mg/m2 over 30 minutes 
or weekly bolus 5FU 600 mg/m2 using clinical benefit response (CBR) as the primary 
endpoint9. The study found CBR more commonly in the gemcitabine treated patients 
(23.8% vs 4.8%, P=0.00 2).  Gemcitabine also led to improved median survival (5.6 vs. 4.4 
months) and 1 year survival (18% vs. 2%) as compared to 5FU. Tumor response was 
infrequent in both arms ( 5.4% gemcitabine vs. 0% 5FU).  While gemcitabine as a single 
agent in advanced pancr eatic cancer has utility, enthusiasm is  muted considering the 
limited benefit it provides.  The recent ACCORD trial evaluated g emcitabine vs. 
FOLFIRINOX (5FU, oxaliplatin and i rinotecan) and determined that FOLFIRINOX was 
superior to gemcitabine in the tre atment of metastatic disease, both in terms of overall 
survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS). This pivotal trial has led to the 
acceptance of FOLFIRINOX as a standard in the first line treatment of metastatic 
pancreatic cancer28. It is notewort hy, however, that the toxicity caused by FOLFIRINO X 
was three times greater than g emcitabine.  The role of i rinotecan in the treatment of 
metastatic pancreatic cancer is unclear. A Phase II series suggests that the survival benefit 
with FOLFOX alone is very  similar to that seen with FOLFIRINOX in the ACCORD 
trial29. Hence  it is also reasonab le to consider treatment with FOLFOX alone in the 
metastatic setting. Several trials addressing this important question are ongoing.  
 
 
 5 Borderline Resectable D isease  
 
Patients with disease that falls somewhere between the first two categories, resectable and 
localized but unresectable, are designated as having borderline resectable disease.  While 
not clearly unresectable, if surgery is the initial treatment, there is a hig h likelihood of an 
R1 or R2 resection with subsequent local recurrence10-12.  Consequently, it is reasonable to 
provide chemotherapy and/or radiation with the intent of increasing the likelihood of a 
subsequent mar gin negative resection.   
 
Historically, the rate of successful resection in borderline resectable pancreatic cancer 
following neoadjuvant treatment is in the range of 30%13-15.  The variable reported rates of 
successful resection can be attributed to the variable definition of borderline resectable 
disease, different approaches to combining chemotherapy with radiation, and the surgeon’s 
willingness and ability to perform vascular resection +/ - reconstruction.  As c ompared to 
R0 resection rates in resectable disease with up front surgery (60 -80%),  in recent studies 
investigating neoadjuvant therapies in resectable and borderline resectable disease, R0 
resection rates have generally  been reported  in the range of 90 %, suggesting an 
improvement in successful R0 resection rates following preoperative treatment 13, 14, 16, 17 . 
Additionally, i n locally advanced borderline or unresectable disease, down staging  with 
chemotherapy an d radiation permitting resection yields  post-surgery  survival similar to that 
achieved in upfront resectable disease17.  This suggests a significant benefit of neoadjuvant 
therapy , which  aides in obtaining an R0 resection in borderline resectable disease.   
 
There is currently  no standard therapy approach for borderline resectable pancrea tic cancer.  
The purpose of this study is to improve outcomes in patients with borderline resectable and 
resectable disease utilizing a planned course of neoadjuvant therapy,  consisting of 
chemo radiation, in order to optimize successful R0 resection rates and local disease 
control , and combination chemotherapy to optimize control of distant  disease . 
 
Optimization of L ocal Disease Control Using C hemoradiation  
 
In order to optimize local control o f disease in borderline pancreatic cancer, 
chemoradiation can be given neoadjuvantly.  Chemoradiatio n for pancreatic cancer has 
historically incorporated 5 -fluorouracil .  Gemcitabine has greater systemic efficacy than 5 -
fluorouracil in pancre atic cancer an d is a potent radiosensitizer.  Therefore, gemcitabine  
has been evaluated in combination with radiation therapy using conformal radiation 
techniques .  Early studies using gemcitabine with radiation were hampered by limitations 
in radiation and or gemcitabi ne dose based on regional toxicity and poor distant disease 
control due to suboptimal doses of gemcitabine24, 25.  However recent trials have 
demonstrated gemcitabine as a more potent radio -sensitizer with a more a cceptable toxicity 
profile .  Locoregional toxicity has been addressed by limiting the radiation field to the 
primary  tumor alone and titrating the radiation dose 26,27.   
 
Neoadjuvant T herapy  
 
In resectable and borderline resectable  pancreatic cancer, surg ery is most often the initial 
 6 treatment.  The adequacy of that resection is questionable, however, in that a significant 
minority of patients have positive margins and some patients have incomplete resection (R 2 
resections)18, 19.  Median survivals in patients with R1 or R2 resections are no different than 
that observed with non -operative therapy.  Patients  deemed to have borderline resectable 
disease are at even higher risk for a margin positive resection if treate d initially with 
surgery.  A reasonable strategy to address this problem is neoadjuvant therapy to try to 
increase  successful  resectability12.  Compared with adjuvant therapy, neoadjuvant therapy 
has the potential advantage of an improved tolerance of combined modality treatment 
preoperatively, and a greater proportion of patients receiving all components of 
multimodality therapy completed over a shorter time interval.  As many as 30% of resected  
patients fail to re ceive post -operative adjuvant therapy because of inadequate recovery 
from surgery or patient refusal.  Treatment delays following surgery may impact efficacy 
of adjuvant treatment.  In the ESPAC adjuvant trial, the median time to initiation of post 
operati ve chemotherapy was 46 days and for combined modality treatment 61 days4.  
Neoadjuvant treatment provides a more timely systemic therapy.  Finally, patients that 
progress during neoadjuvant therapy have biologicall y aggressive disease and are spared  a 
major operation which provides little benefit.   
 
One of the potential downsides of neo -adjuvant treatment is: theoretical concerns of disease 
progression during treatment. However this has not been proved in clinical trials.  
 
Summary and Rationale f or T his Study:  
 
Considering the aggressive biology of pancreatic cancer, and the relatively limited survival 
with the current standard, which is surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy, we hereby 
propose this clinical tri al to evaluate the safety a nd effectiveness of a novel neo adjuvant 
treatment strategy incorporating FOLFOX chemotherapy in combination with chemo -radiation 
with gemcitabine . 
2. OBJECTIVES  
Primary Objective:  
1a. To evaluate frequency of ach ieving R0 resecti on in patients with  resectable  and borderline   
resectable  pancreatic cancer treated with a neoadjuvant regimen of FOLFOX followed by 
RT concurrent with gemcitabine chemotherapy at standard dosing .  
 Secondary Objectives:  
 
  2a. To determine overall surviv al and progression -free survival as a function of time fro m 
study enrollment.  
2b. To evaluate tolerability and toxicity of the protocol treatment . 
 
2c.  To evaluate radiographic  primary tumor  response rate using modified RECIST criteria  
 
3. PATIENT SELECT ION:  
 
3.1  Conditions for Patient E ligibility : 
 7  
3.1.1  Patients must have histologically or cytologically confi rmed pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head or body  
 
                  3.1.2  Patients must have radiographically -confirmed surgically re sectable (or) 
borderline resectable disease at study entry staged at T1 -3, N0 -1 and M0 
(see Appendix B for NCCN criteria for determining resectability status ,  
borderline is at the discretion of the surgeon ). Surgical resectability will be 
assessed by a surgeon experienced in pancreatic surgery  in conjunction with 
a radiologist specializing in radiographic pancreatic imaging . 
                
                  3.1.3 Age >18 years  
 
3.1.4 Life expectancy of greater than 6 months  in the opinion of the investiga tor, 
excluding the pancreatic cancer . 
 
3.1.5 ECOG performance status <1 (see Appendix A).  
 
3.1.6 Required laboratory data:  
 
- absolute neutrophil count  >1,500/mcL  
- platelets       >100,000/mcL  
- total bilirubin      < 2mg/dl  
- AST(SGOT)/ALT(SGPT)   <5 X ins titutional upper limit of normal  
- Creatinine       <2.0 mg/dl  
-    Negative β -HCG for females  
-    Mg                                            >LLN  institutional lower  limit of normal  
-   Calcium                                     > LLN  institutional low er limit of normal  
-   Sodium                                      > LLN  institutional low er limit of normal  
-   Potassium                                  > LLN  institutional low er limit of normal  
-   CA 19 -9 
 
 
   3.1.7    Disease assessment by CT scan within 4 weeks  of study entry  
 
3.1.8 Ability to understand and the wi llingness to sign a written informed consent 
document.  
 
3.2  Conditions for Patient I neligibility : 
 
3.2.1  Patients may not be receiving any other investigational agents.  
 
3.2.2 Patients with metastatic disease are excluded from this clinical trial  
 
3.2.3 History of a llergic reactions attributed to 5FU, oxaliplatin and gemcitabine  
 
 8 3.2.4 No prior chemotherapy or radiation therapy for pancreatic cancer . Previous 
chemotherapy or radiation therapy for other malignancies is permitted.   
 
3.2.5 Patients with uncontrolled hypocalce mia, hypomagnesemia, hyponatremia, 
hypophosphatemia or hypokalemia defined as less than the lower limit of 
normal for the institution, despite adequate electrolyte supplementation are 
excluded from this study.  
 
3.2.6 Uncontrolled  serious  intercurrent illne ss including, but not limited to, 
ongoing or serious active infection  requiring IV antibiotics for over 30 days,  
symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac 
arrhythmia other than chronic, stable atrial fibrillation, or psychiatr ic 
illness/social situations that would limit compliance with study 
requirements.  
 
3.2.7 Pregnant or breastfeeding women are excluded from this study.  
 
3.2.8 Known HIV-positive patients are ineligible . 
 
                  3.2.9  Patients with unresectable disease  are excluded from the protocol. (see 
Appendix  B for NCCN criteria for determining resectability status). 
Surgical resectability must be confirmed by a surgeon experienced in 
pancreatic surgery . 
       
               3.2.1 0 Patients with pancreatic  tail lesions will be excluded  
 
3.3  Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
Both men and women and members of all races and ethnic groups are eligible for 
this trial.  
 
 
4.0 REGISTRATION PROCEDURES  
 
Patient registration can occur only after evaluation for eligibil ity is complete, eligibility 
criteria have  been met, and the study site has Institutional Review Board approval. Patients 
must have signed  and dated all  applicable consents and authorization forms.  To register a 
patient  to this study,   the signed and date d eligibility checklist , along  with any necessary 
supporting document ation,  and the signed patient consent form will  be forwarded to the 
responsible data manager.   To complete the registration process, the data manager will 
assign a patient study number , in sequential order of consent,  register the patient to the 
study , and contact the treating investigator and responsible research nurse to confirm 
registration.  
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN  
 
 9 5.1  Chemotherapeutic Agent Administration  
 
Treat ment will be administered  on an outpatient basis.  Appropriate dose 
modifications for 5FU, oxaliplatin and gemcitabine are described in Section 6.  No 
investigational or commercial agents or therapies other than those described below 
may be administered with the intent to treat th e patient's malignancy.    
 
5.2 FOLFOX  
 
A cycle of treatment is 14 days. 2 cycles are intended prior to combined modality 
treatment, although this may be modified based on patient tolerance and toxicity 
experienced.  
 
Starting dose levels are as follow s: 
  
Oxaliplatin 85mg/m2 infused intravenously over 120 minutes on day 1.  
Leucovorin 400mg/m2  infused  intravenously over 90 minutes on day 1.  
5FU 400mg/m2 as a bolus intravenous injection following leucovorin on day 
1. 
5FU 2,400mg/m2 infused intravenously a s a continuous infusion over 46 
hours following the bolus 5FU, beginning on day 1.  
 
A second cycle of treatment may begin when ANC ≥ 1,000/mm3, platelets ≥ 
75,000/ mm3 and all other treatment related toxicity has resolved to ≤ grade 1.  
 
Dose adjustments for toxicities  may be found in Section 6 . 
 
5.3 Gemcitabine during Radiation Therapy  
 
Combined modality trea tment will begin 2 weeks  (plus or minus 2  days)  after  the 
last FOLFOX administration , provided  the ANC ≥ 1,000/mm3, platelets ≥ 100 ,000/ 
mm3 and all other treatment -related toxicity has resolved to ≤ grade 1.   
 
Gemcitabine 1000mg/m2 will be infused over 30 minutes on days 1, 8, 22, and 29 
during the 5 -week course of radiation treatment.  
 
Dose adjustments for gemcitabine due to toxi city are detailed i n section 6  and will 
be based on complete blood coun ts (done within 24 hours of starting the treatment ), 
and non -hematologic toxicities experienced in the preceding week(s). If 
gemcitabine treatment is held for toxicity, radiation therapy will also be held  and 
both treatments resumed when resolution of toxicity permits.   
 
5.4       RADIATION THERAPY   
 
Treatment Assignment : 
 10  
All subjects will receive 45.0 Gy to the  Clinical  Tumor Volume  (CTV) and 50.4 Gy 
to the Gross  Tumor Volume  (GTV ) using Intensity Modul ated Radiation Therapy 
(IMRT ). 
 
 
Physical Factors : 
 
All subjects will undergo radiographic imaging required for radiation treatment 
planning purposes using a CT scanner.  Digitally reconstructed radiographs from 
the CT will simulate the patient geometry du ring radiation treatment , including the 
localization and immobilization methods.  A virtual treatment planning procedure is 
used to design treatment fields mathematically from the CT images.  
 
Field Arrangement : 
 
IMRT  will be used to cover the primary or pl anning target volume (PTV), provided 
that the normal tissue constraints described below are met.  
 
Beam Shaping : 
 
A multileaf collimation system will be used to comply with field margin and normal 
tissue dose requirements.  
 
Treatment Equipment : 
 
Treatment w ill be administered on an isocentrically mounted megavoltage linear 
accelerator with photon en ergy ≥ 6 MV.  Typically, the source -to-axis distance 
(SAD) will be 100 cm.  IMRT will be delivered using dynamic MLC technique.  
 
Target Volumes : 
 
The PTV will be defined with CT -based treatment planning.  Simulation of the 
clinical target volume (CTV) will  be determined with intravenous bolus contrast 
administration given during CT and pre -CT oral contrast.  GTV is the gross tumor 
volume.  CTV (clinical tumor volume) will include GTV and surrounding nodal 
areas.  PTV1 (planning tumor volume 1) is defined as  CTV plus 1.0 - 1.5 cm 
margins in all directions. PTV2 (planning tumor volume 2) is defined as the GTV 
plus 1.0 - 1.5 cm margins in all directions.  
 
Radiation Dose : 
 
The prescription point will be designated at the intersection of the multiple beams.  
The PTV1 will receive a total cumulative target dose of 45 Gy delivered in 25 
fractions at a daily fractional dose of 1.8 Gy.  Following this, the PTV2 will receive 
a boost dose of 5.4 Gy in 3 fractions at a daily fractionated dose of 1.8 Gy.  The 
 11 total dose t o the GTV will be 50.4 Gy.  
 
 
 
Beam Verification : 
 
Beam verification films of each treatment field will be obtained during the first 
treatment until satisfactory.  Thereafter, beam verification films will be obtained 
every week and at the time of any field modification.  Daily KV -KV imaging ma y 
be used at the discretion of the treatin g physician. S tandard IMRT QA procedures 
developed at our institution will be performed, including monitor units verification, 
intensity map verification, as well as point dose measurements.  
 
Dosimetry : 
 
The uniformity requirement will be +/ - 5% of the total dose at the prescription point 
within the planning target volume.  
 
Critical Normal Structures :  QUANTEC Dose Constraint Parameters will be used  
as follows:  
 
Kidneys (unilater al): <75% to get 20 Gy  
Kidneys (bilateral): mean dose< 15 Gy  
<55% to get 12 Gy  
<32% to get 20 Gy  
<30% to get 23 Gy  
<20% to get 28 Gy  
Spine: dose shall be limited to 45 Gy.  of the volume of the liver  
Liver: mean dose< 28 Cy, <70% to get 30 Gy  
 
Radiation Treatment Modifications : 
 
Radiation therapy will be withheld if ANC drops below 500/μL or if the platelet count is 
less than 50,000/μL.  Treatment will be reinstituted when hematologic toxicity has 
improved to below grade 3 level.  
Radiation will be withheld for 2 - 5 days or until symptoms resolve if severe nausea & 
vomiting occurs that does not resolve with antiemetics.  
 
5.5       Surgical Resection:  
Operative and surgical resection evaluation will be done at initial diagnosis as well 
as within 6 weeks after the completion of neoa djuvant treatment.  
To determine resectability, radiologic computer tomography (CT) imaging, 
preferably a pancreas protocol CT, will be utilized to identify:  
 12 1.  Absence of tumor extension to the adjacent visceral arteries (SMA, celiac, 
hepatic).  Intact ti ssue plan between the tumor and the Superior Mesenteric 
Artery (SMA) /Common Hepatic Artery Interface;  
2.  A patent Superior Mesenteric Vein/ Portal Vein (SMPV) confluence , and the 
absence of tumor -induced unilateral shift or narrowing of any aspect of the SMPV 
confluence ; 
3.  Absence of extrapancreatic disease ; 
The surgical procedure performed will be that required for a complete resection , 
and this will be based on the discretion of the operating surgeon.  
 
Information regarding any surgical therapy perfor med will be recorded including: 
type of surgery performed, type of vascular reconstruction performed , if any, extent 
of resection R0, R1 (or) R2 resection, duration of the operation, length of post -
operative hospital stay, complications , and need for re -admission within 30 days 
following surgical resection.  Surgical resection will be performed for resectable 
pancreatic cancer as determined by the NCCN guidelines. All resection cases will be 
reviewed at Henry Ford Hospital ’s  Multi -disciplinary GI Tumor Boar d.  
 
 DETAILS ON SURGICAL RESECTION  
 
1. Pancreaticoduodenectomy with retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy will be performed 
for patients with ductal adenocarcinoma of the head of the pancreas.   
This will  be assessed prior to the operation with high -quality 3 -D imaging of the 
pancreas and associated mesenteric vessels for optimal categorization of tumors.  
Tumors will be considered resectable based on the following:  
- No distant metastases  
- No radiographic evidence of SMV and portal vein abutment, distortion, 
tumor  thrombus, or venous encasement  
- Clear fat planes around the celiac axis, hepatic artery, and SMA.   
- **Those with venous involvement of the SMV/porta l vein, namely tumor 
abutment, encasement, or short segment venous occlusion will be 
considered borderline r esectable  
- **Gastroduodenal artery encasement up to the hepatic arter y with either 
short segment encasement or direct abutment of the hepatic artery, without 
extension to the celiac axis will be considered borderline resectable  
- **Tumor abutment of the SMA n ot to exceed >180 degrees of the 
circumference of the vessel wall will be considered borderline resectable  
 
2.  Recent evidence suggest s that the optimal number of lymph nodes to be examined 
following standard pancreaticoduodenectomy should be greater than  or equal to 15 
(Tomlinson JS, Jain S, Bentrem DJ, Sekeris EG, Maggard MA,  
Hines OJ, et al.Accuracy of staging node -negative pancreas  
cancer: a potential quality measure. Arch Surg. 2007;142:767 –23; 
 13 discussion 73 –4.)  Cooperat ion between both the operating  surgeon and the surgical 
pathologist should ensure analysis of sufficient number of lymph nodes.  
 
3.  If, at the time of operation, vascular resection is required, vein resection and  
reconstruction will be performed if th ere is short segment invasion of t he portal vein or 
PV/SMV confluence, providing adequate inflow and outflow veins are present .   
 
4.  Whipple specimens will be inked, examined, and reported in conformity with 
College of American Pathologists (CAP) or AJCC .  Examination of the pancreatic 
margin, and bile duct margin will be assessed.  In addition, it will be critical to examine 
the retroperitoneal margin as well as the SMA margin to accurately determine the 
resection status.   
 
Safe achievement of an R0 margin is the main surgical obj ective s of the 
pancreaticoduodenectomy.  The SMA margin is the most important driver of this 
outcome . 
 
5.6       Duration of Therapy   
                  In the absence of treatment delays due to adverse events, treatment may continue with 
chemo -radiotherapy as pr eviously outlined  prior to proceeding with surgical resection  
 
5.7        Duration of Follow Up  
 
Patients will be followed for 1 year after completion of neoadjuvant  therapy  or until 
removal (or) termination from study , or until death, whichever occurs first . Patients 
removed from study for unacceptable adverse events will be followed until resolution 
or stabilization  of the adverse event. Patients w ill be seen in follow -up every 3  ± 1 
months for 1 year from completion of protocol therapy.   At each interval v isit, 
surveillance CT scan s will be performed to assess local recurrence or metastatic 
disease.  If patients choose to receive the adjuvant chemotherapy elsewhere other th an 
the treating institution, a 3  month follow -up evaluation in the different institut ion is 
permissible. The data from the 3  month follow -up visit will be captured by the data 
managers and provided to the study principal investigator. Toxicity notations and 
disease status will be recorded. If it is not possible to coordinate a  follow -up ev aluation 
at 3 ± 1 months, then a follow -up phone call will be made to the patient by the treating 
physician , or clinical trials office designee,  in lieu of a visit.  
 
5.8 Criteria for Removal from Neoadjuvant  Study   
 
Patients will be removed from this study w hen any of the following criteria are met :  
 
                   - Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of treatment ; 
 
                   - Unacceptable adverse events(s) ;  
 
                   - Pregnancy ;  
 
 14         - Patient decides to withdraw from the study ;  
 
        - General or specific changes in the patient's condition  which render the patient  
          unsuitable for further treatment , in the judgment of the investigator ;  
 
- Patients with unresectable  disease , noted on laparoto my (or) laparoscopic evaluation  
following completion of neoadjuvant  therapy , will be removed from the protocol ; 
 
        - Patients who develop documented metastatic disease at any point during the trial 
          period . 
  
The reason for removal from study  and the date the patient was removed must be 
documented in the Case Report Form.  
 
5.9        Adjuvant Therapy following Surgical Resection   
 
All patients who are enrolled in this study are eligible to receive adjuvant 
chemotherapy based on the discretion of their primary oncologist . These patients will 
be followed on protocol and details of their adjuvant therapy will be recorded . 
 
6.  DOSING DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS  
 
This study will utilize the CTCAE (NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events)  version 4 .0 for toxicity and Serious Adverse Event (SAE) reporting.  
 
6.1 General Considerations – FOLFOX treatment  
 
a. The second  cycle of treatment may begin when the ANC is ≥ 1, 000/mcl, the 
platelet  count is ≥ 75,000/mcl, and any treatment -related GI toxicity has 
resolved to ≤  Grade 1.  
 
b.  If the initiation of the second  cycle  of treatment is delayed for  > 4 weeks  from 
date due , secondary to toxicity , the patient will be  removed from protocol 
treatment.  
 
c. Doses will not be modified for cholangitis attributable to b iliary 
obstruction/stent occlusion unless this occurs in the setting of > grade 3 
neutropenia.  
 
d. There are no dose reductions for leucovorin.  Dose reductions for the other 
agents in the FOLFOX combination are as follows:  
 
 
AGENT  INITIAL 
DOSE  Level -1 Leve l -2 Level -3 
5-FU Bolus  400 mg/m2 200 mg/m2 0 0 
 15 Oxaliplatin  85 mg/m2 70 mg/m2 60 mg/m2 50 mg/m2 
5-FU infusion                2400 mg/m2              2000 mg/m2          1600 mg/m2  1200 mg/m2  
   
Note: laboratory abnormalities that are not directly at tributable to treatment (i.e., 
hyperglycemia) or not clinically relevant (i.e., lymphopenia) do not require 
modification of dosing.  
 
Efforts to attribute toxicity experienced to a single component or some 
combination of the cytotoxic agents will be made b y treating investigator and 
doses of the responsible agent(s) modified according to that judgment. Dose 
adjustments for toxicity will be described in the clinical record.  
 
Once doses are reduced for toxicity, they will not be subsequently increased.  
 
An agent(s) may be discontinued (i.e., oxaliplatin for neuropathy or 
hypersensitivity) and protocol therapy continue with remaining agents.  
 
An a gent(s) or FOLFOX combination therapy will be  discontinued if more than 
2 dose reductions for toxicity are needed .  
 
6.2 Supportive Care  
 
White blood cell colony stimulating factors may be administered as primary 
prophylaxis following each FOLFOX administration.  
 
6.3 Dose Modifications  
 
a. Dose modifications for toxicities during FOLFOX  
 
i. Hematologic Toxicities  
 
 Dose Modificat ion 
ANC <1000/mm3  
and/or  
Platelets < 75,000/mm3  Hold all chem otherapy and re -evaluate weekly.  
When to xicity resolves , treatment will be continued 
with one dose level  reduction  of oxaliplatin and 
bolus 5FU.  
Platelets > 75,000/mm3 -< 
99,000/mm3  Reduce oxali platin one dose level      
Febrile Neutropenia  If a patient experiences neutropenic fever at any  
point in the treatment cycle, chemotherapy will be 
delayed until ANC > 1,000 /mm3  and antibiotic 
treatment of the event , if required,  is completed. 
When treatme nt resumes,  reduce agents  oxaliplatin 
 16 and infusional 5FU if grade III or IV diarrhea and/or 
stomatitis > are part of the adverse event profile , by 
one dose level  
    *Note:  There are  no dose reductions for anemia or lymphopenia      
 
ii. Diarrhea  
 
Grade  Dose Modification  
3-4 Hold all chemotherapy.  When diarrhea resolves to 
<Grade 1, chemotherapy may be resumed with a 
reduction in 5FU -bolus and 5FU infusion by one 
dose level.   
*Note: No dose reductions of oxaliplatin for diarrhea.   
 
   iii. Mucositis  
 
Grad e Dose Modification  
3-4 Hold all chemotherapy.  If mucositis resolves to 
<Grade 1, chemotherapy may be resumed with 
reduction in 5FU -bolus and infusion by one dose 
level.   
*Note: No dose reductions of oxaliplatin for mucositis.   
 
iiii Neuropathy  
 
Grade  Dose Modification  
3-4 Hold oxaliplatin.  If neuropathy resolves to <Grade 
2, oxaliplatin  may be resumed with reduction  of 
two dose levels or discontinued.   
*Note: No dose reductions for 5 -FU for neuropathy.   
 
b. Other non -hematologic toxicities a ttributable to 5 -FU and/or oxaliplatin . 
 
For all other ≥ Grade 3 non -hematologic toxicities attributable to treatment and 
not described above, hold all  protocol treatment and monitor toxicity at least 
weekly. If toxicity resolves to ≤  Grade 1 within 4 weeks, treatment m ay resume 
with 5 -FU and oxaliplatin at one lower dose level.  
 
c. Dose modifications for toxicities during combined modality therapy (RT/Gemcitabine)  
 
Agent  Initial Dose  Level -1 Level -2 
Gemcitabine* 750 mg/m2 600 mg/m2 500 mg/m2 
 
*Note: all infusions of Gemcitabine and RT may be gin when the ANC is ≥ 
1,000/m m3, the platelet  count is ≥ 100,000/m m3, and any treatment -related 
toxicity to FOLFOX is resolved to ≤  Grade 1.  
 17  
During combined modality treatment, gemcitabine will be given days 1, 8, 22 
and 29.  
 
During gemcitabine/RT  the dose of gemcitabine for days 8 and 29  will be 
based on toxicities experienced as follows:  
 
i. Hematologic toxicity  
 
 Dose Modification  
ANC ≥ 1,000 /mm3 and 
platelets ≥ 75,000/mm3  Full dose due will be given  
 
ANC of 500 - 999/mm3 
and/or platelets of 50,000 to 
74,999/mm3  50% of  the gemcitabine dose due will be given      
ANC < 500/mm3 or 
platelets < 50,000/mm3  Gemcitabine treatment and radiation therapy will 
be held. Combined modality treatment will resume 
upon recovery to values permitting chemotherapy 
with one  dose level reduction of gemcitabine  
 
* Note:  dose adjustments of gemcitabine will be made based on  the 
ANC and platelet counts taken within 24 hours of the start of  therapy.  
 
During combined gemcitabine/RT , dose of gemcitabine for day 22  will be 
based o n toxicities experienced as follows:  
 
ii. Hematologic toxicity  
 
 Dose Modification  
ANC ≥ 1,000 /mm3 and 
platelets ≥ 75,000/mm3  Full dose due will be given  
 
ANC of 500 - 999/mm3 
and/or platelets of 50,000 to 
74,999/mm3  75% of  the gemcitabine dose due will be given . If 
gemcitabine is dose reduced on this day, this dose 
will be dose due on day 29 and starting dose of 
post-combined modality therapy.  
    
ANC < 500/mm3 or 
platelets < 50,000/mm3  Gemcitabine treatment  and radiation therapy will 
be held. Combined mo dality treatment will resume 
upon recovery to values permitting chemotherapy 
with one dose level reduction of gemcitabine  
 
* Note:  dose adjustments of gemcitabine will be made based on  the 
ANC and platelet counts taken within 24 hours  of starting therapy . 
 
   
 18  
 
 
 
iii. Non-hematologic toxicity -Any organ system   
 
Grade  Dose Modification  
> Grade 3  Hold al l chemotherapy.  If gemcitabine is held, 
radiation therapy will also be held while appropriate  
physical, laboratory, radiologic assessments are 
undertaken to de fine cause and direct supportive 
therapy. Treatment may be resumed upon recovery 
to toxicity < grade 2 at the discretion of the 
physician investigator.  
 
*Note: Dose adjustments of chemotherapy will be made  following 
assessment of non -hematologic toxicity on the day of therapy.  
 
If combined modality therapy is interrupted, when resumed, chemotherapy will be 
given on the first day of the next week of radiation therapy with  gemcitabine dose 
reduced one level to complete the treatment cycle. A maximum of four doses of 
chemotherapy will be given during the course of radiation therapy.  
 
d. General Guidelines  
  
A cycle of FOLFOX treatment is 14 days.   A second cycle of FOLFOX treatment may 
begin when ANC ≥ 1,000/mm3, platelets ≥ 100,000/ mm3 and all other treatment related 
toxicity has resolved to ≤ grade 1.  
 
FOLFOX t reatment may be delayed for up to 2 weeks , after which time the second  cycle 
of treatment will be dropped and n ot made up if conditions for treatment are not met.  The 
patient may then be continued on to the combined modality treatment, once toxicities are 
resolved to grade 0 or 1.  
 
Protocol therapy may be shortened and patient may go directly to surgery following 
combined modality therapy in a scen ario where toxicities and/or response and resectability 
suggest surgery is in the best interest of the patient.  
 
 
7.    ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING:   
 
This study will utilize the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for  Adverse Ev ents (CTCAE) 
version 4.0 for reporting of adverse events (AEs).  
Serious Adverse E vents (SAE) and adverse events will be carefully recorded, and SAEs will be 
reported to Henry Ford Hospital’s IRB  if they meet the IRB’s  SAE reporting criteria.  
 
Definition o f an AE : Any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory  
 19 finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medical treatment or  
procedure regardless of whether it is considered related to the medical treatment or p rocedure  
(attribution of unrelated, unlikely, possible, probable, or definite).  
 
Definition of an SAE: Any adverse experience occurring during any part of protocol treatment 
and 30 days after that results in any of the following outcomes:  
• Death;  
• A life -threatening adverse drug experience;  
•  Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization;  
• A persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
• A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
• Important medical events that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require  
hospitalization may be considered an SAE, when, based upon medical judgment, they 
may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent 
one of the  outcomes listed in the definition. Any pregnancy, in cluding a male patient’s 
impregnation of his  partner, occurring on study must be reported to the IRB  as a 
medically significant event.  
 
SAEs (more than 30 days after last treatment) attributed to the protocol treatment (possible,  
probable, or definite) sho uld be reported to the IRB  if the reporting criteria is met . 
 
 
8. PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION  
 
8.1      5-Fluorouracil (5 -FU) 
 
 Please refer to the FDA -approved package insert for additional information.  
 
a. Description – 5-FU is an antimetabolite considered to act p rimarily as an inhibitor 
of thymidylate  synthase.   
 
b. Pharmaceutical Data – Kinetics: After IV injection, it is distributed widely 
throughout the tissues of the  body and diffuses readily across the blood -brain 
barrier. The mean half -life of elimination from plasma is 16 minutes. Drug is 
primarily metabolized by the liver .  Formulation: 5 -FU is a colorless to faint yellow 
solution supplied in 10 ml single  use vials. Each 10 ml contains 500 mg 
fluorouracil. The pH is adjusted to  approximately 9.2 with sodium hy droxide.  
 
c.  Administration – Intravenous.  
 
d. Storage and Stability - : Store unopen vials at room temperature and protect from  
light.  
 
e. Supplier – 5-FU is commercially available.  
 
 
 20 8.2    Oxaliplatin  
 
 Please refer to the FDA -approved package insert for additiona l information.  
 
a. Description – Oxaliplatin (cis -[(1R,2R )-1,2-cyclohexanediamine - N,N ] [oxalate(2 -
)- O,O ] is an organoplatinum complex in which the platinum atom is complexed 
with 1,2 -diaminocyclohexane with an oxalate ligand as a leaving group. Oxaliplat in 
undergoes nonenzymatic conversion in physiologic solutions to active derivatives 
by displacement of the labile oxalat e ligand.  Several reactive speci es are formed 
including the monoaquo and diaquo DACH platinum which covalently bind with 
macromolecules .  Crosslinks are formed between adjacent guanine N7 positions. 
These crosslinks inhibit DNA replication, transcription and repair.  Reactive 
oxaliplatin derivatives are present as a fraction of unbound platinum in plasma 
ultrafiltrate.  The decline of pla tinum levels following oxaliplatin administration is 
triphasic, characterized by two short distribution phases (t1/2(alpha) 0.43 hrs, t1/2 
(beta) 16.8 hrs) and a long terminal phase (t1/2 (gamma) 391 hrs).  At the end of a 2 
hour infusion approximately 15%  of the administered platinum is present in the 
systemic circulation with the remaining 85% rapidly distributed into tissues or 
eliminated in urine.  The major route of elimination is renal excretion and the renal 
clearance of ultrafilterable platinum is s ignificantly correlated with GFR.   
 
b. Pharmaceutical Data – Oxaliplatin is supplied as a sterile, preservative free, aqueous 
solution in clear glass single -use vials containing 50 mg, 100 mg or 200 mg of 
oxaliplatin at a concentration of 5 mg/ml. The solutio n must be further diluted in 
250-500 ml 5% dextrose for injection and is stable up to 24 hours under 
refrigeration or for 6 hours at room temperature. Needles or IV infusion sets 
containing aluminum must not be used.   
 
c. Administration – Intravenous.  
 
d. Storag e and Stability – Store  lyophilized powder under normal lighting conditions 
at 25o C.  Store aqueous solution at 25o C; excursions permitted to 15 -30o C. Do not 
freeze and protect from light (keep in original outer carton).  
 
e. Supplier – Oxaliplatin is comme rcially available  
 
8.3 Leucovorin  
 
 Please refer to the FDA -approved package insert for additional information.  
 
a. Description – Leucovorin is a mixture of the diastereoisomers of 5 -formyl 
derivative of tetrahydrofolic acid. The active component is the ( -)-L-isomer known 
as Citrovorum factor.  
 
b. Pharmaceutical Data – Kinetics: Leucovorin is rapidly absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract after oral administration and enters the general body pool of 
 21 reduced folates. Serum folate half -disappearance time is around 3 .5 hours. Oral 
tablets yielded areas under the serum folate concentration -time curves (AUCs) that 
were 12% greater than equal amounts of leucovorin given intramuscularly and 
equal to the same amounts given intravenously. After IV administration, peak 
conce ntration was at 10 minutes. Terminal half -life of its active metabolite, 5 -
methyl derivative, was 6.2 hours. IM administration revealed similar terminal half -
life. Formulation: Leucovorin is provided in vials containing 
cryodessicated/leucovorin calcium po wder which is reconstituted in sterile diluent.  
 
c. Administration – Intravenous  
 
d. Storage and Stability – Store dry powder, reconstituted solution and tablets at 
controlled room temperature. Protect from light. When reconstituted with 
Bacteriostatic Water fo r Injection, the resulting solution must be used within seven 
days. If reconstituted with Sterile Water for Injection, use immediately and discard 
any unused portion. Because of the benzyl alcohol contained in Bacteriostatic 
Water for Injection, when doses  greater than 10 mg/m2 are administered, Sterile 
Water for Injection should be used.  
 
e. Supplier – Leucovorin  is commercially available.  
 
8.4     Gemcitabine  
 
 Please refer to the FDA -approved package insert for additional information.  
 
a. Description – Gemcit abine hydrochloride (2’,2’ -difluoro -2’deoxycytidine) is a 
deoxycytidine analog with structural and metabolic similarities to cytarabine. 
Gemcitabine is metabolized intracellularly by nucleoside kinases to active di - and 
triphosphate nucleosides.  The activ e nucleosides interfere with ribonucleotide 
reductase and compete with dCTP for incorporation into DNA, respectively, 
resulting in inhibition of DNA synthesis. Gemcitabine pharmacokinetics are linear 
and are described by a two compartment model.  Half -life varies with age, gender, 
and infusion length; for a short infusion it is generally less than 70 minutes.  Nearly 
all of an administered dose is recovered in the urine as active drug (<10%) or 
inactive uracil metabolite.  The maximum plasma concentrations of the inactive 
metabolite are achieved 30 minutes after discontinuation of the infusions, and the 
metabolite is excreted in the urine without undergoing further biotransformation.  
The metabolite does not accumulate with weekly dosing, but its elimination  is 
dependent on renal excretion, and could accumulate with decreased renal function.  
 
b. Pharmaceutical Data – Gemcitabine is supplied as a lyophilized powder in sterile 
vials containing 200 mg or 1 g of gemcitabine as the hydrochloride salt, with 
mannitol a nd sodium acetate.  Gemcitabine is reconstituted with 0.9% sodium 
chloride without preservatives and used within 24 hours.  
 
c. Administration – Intravenous infusion over 30 minutes on days 1, 8, 22 and 29  
 22  
d. Storage and Stability – Store at controlled room temp erature.  
 
e. Supplier – Gemcitabine is commercially available  
 
9.    STUDY CALENDAR  
 
Baseline evaluations are to be conducted within 2 week s prior to start of protocol therapy.  
Scans and x -rays must be done within 4 weeks prior to  start of therapy.   
 
     
Pre- 
Study   
Pre-
Cycles 
1-2  
Re-Eval (Pre 
chemo/XRT)   
Weekly 
during  
Chemo / 
XRT   
Re-Eval 
(Post 
chemo/XRT)   
Surgery   
Post Surgery  and 
Follow up Q 3 
months from  the 
end of 
neoadjuvent 
treatment   
 
Protocol Window      
  
  
  
 
         
Performance Status   
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
  
X 
 
History/Physical   
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
  
X 
 
CBC,diff, pltsa  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
  
X 
 
Biochemical profileb 
MG, Calcium   
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
  
X 
 
Ca 19 -9  
X  
  
X  
  
X  
  
X 
 
Urine/serum pregnancyc  
X  
  
   
  
  
 
 
CT chest/abdomen  
X  
    
X  
  
X 
 
Tumor Me asurement   
X  
    
X  
  
 
 
Assessment by radiation 
oncologist   
X   
   
  
  
 
Assessment by surgeon        X              X    
 
Surgery     
   
  
D  
 
 
Radiation    
  
  
B  
  
  
 
5FU, Oxaliplatin , 
Leucovorin   
A   
   
 
Gemcitabine    
  
 C  
  
  
 
Toxicity Evaluatio n   
X  
X  
X  
X  
  
X 
 
a within 24 hours prior to chemotherapy administration , at re -evaluation visits and per post 
treatment followup  
b comprehensive biochemical profile  to include albumin, alkaline phosphatase, ALT or AST, 
glucose, total bilirubin, creati nine, MG , Ca++  and electrolytes  
c in women of child bearing potential only  
 Formatted:  Italian  (Italy)
 23 A  FOLF OX section 5.2  
B  RT section 5.3  
C  Gemcitabine section 5.4  
D  Surgical exploration/resection section 5.10  
 
Post therapy follow -up at 3 month intervals through 1 year post c ompletion of neoadjuv ant 
therapy . All times are approximate.  
 
 
 
 
10. MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  
 
10.1 Primary Tumor Response  
 
Diagnostic imaging and RECIST criteria will be used to evaluate and record 
response of the primary tumor as defined below.  
 
Complete Respons e (CR):  Disappearance of measurable and evaluable disease 
without the appearance of any new lesions.  
 
Partial Response (PR):  At least 30% decrease in the LD of the primary lesion 
without the appearance of any new lesions.  
 
Progression (PD):  At least 20% in crease in the LD of the primary lesion or the 
appear ance of one or more new lesions  
 
Stable Disease (SD):  Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient 
increase to qualify for PD.  
 
 
10.2 Surgical Data  
 
 The following information regarding any surgical therapy will be recorded : 
 
Operation performed  
             Standard Whipple (pancreaticoduodenectomy)  
            Pyloric -preserving Whipple  
             Total Pancreatectomy  
  Distal /Subtotal Pancreatectomy  
  Laparoscopic/Robotic Distal Panc reatectomy  
  Biliary Bypass  
  GastroJejunostomy  
  Laparoscopy or Laparotomy, abort  
 
Any of above with vascular resection and reconstruction  
 24   V1 (patch)  
  V1a (venorraphy no patch)  
  V2 (primary, SV ligation)  
  V3 (graft, SV ligation)  
  V4 (primary, no SV ligation)  
  V5 (graft, no SV ligation)  
  V6 (splenorenal shunt)  
  IVC (any)  
  Common Hepatic Artery (any)  
  Right Hepatic Artery (any)  
  Left Hepatic Artery (any)  
  Other:  
  
 Extent of Visceral Extension:  
  Colon, stomach, adrenal, other  
 
 Metastatic Dis ease 
  Liver, Peritoneum, other  
 
Exploratory laparotomy (no resection)  
  With gastric bypass  
  With biliary bypass  
  With both  
 
Duration of operation, Blood loss, blood product transfused, #units 
 transfused, and complications/notable events.   
 
Pathologic  findings : Tumor size, grade, nodal status , lymphovascular 
 invasion, perineural invasion , microscopic assessment of margins, including 
 retroperitoneal margin  (R0 vs R1 vs. R 2 ). 
 
• RO Resection:   Complete resection with no microsco pic residual tumor (margi ns 
microscopically negative according to the pathologist).   
• R1 Resection:   Complete resection with no grossly visible tumor as defined by the 
surgeon, but microscopic cancer may be left behind (margins are microscopically 
positive according to the patholog ist).   
• R2 Resection:   Partial resection, with grossly visible tumor left behind.   
 
 
Length of stay, need for re -admission within 30 days of discharge . 
 
10.3 Assessment of Pathologic Response  
 
The surgical pathology slides will be reviewed at the Department of Pathology, 
 25 Henry Ford Hospital .  All histologic slides from surgical resections will be 
reviewe d by a single pathologist and assessment of therapeutic response will be 
graded using a system previously described by Eva ns et al as per the table 
below . 
 
Grade   Histologic Appearance  
I Characteristic cytologic changes of malignancy are 
present, but very little (<10%)  or no tumor cell 
destruction is evident   
II In addition to characteristic cytologic changes of 
malignancy, 10% -90% of tumor cells are destroyed   
IIa Destruction of 10% -50% of tumor cells  
IIb Destruction of 51% -90% of tumor cells  
III  Few (<10%) viable -appearing tumor cells are present   
IIIM Sizable pools of mucin are present  
IV No viable tumor cells are present   
IVM  Acellular pools of muci n are present   
 
 
     
11.  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Planned Data Analysis  
 
Primary Objective :  The proportion of patients who achieve R0 resection will be estimated, 
along with a 95% confidence interval for that proportion.  
 
Secondary Objectives : 2a  Kapl an-Meier survival estimates will be made for progression -free 
survival and for overall survival.  
2b  Tolerabilitiy and toxicity will be assessed by estimating the proportion of patients with 
dose limiting toxicities, and 95% confidence intervals for those proportions.  
2c  The proportions of patients with CR, PR, PD or SD will be estimated along with 95% 
confidence intervals.  
 
Justification of Sample Size  
 
With a total sample size of 20, the 95% confidence interval width will be equal to 0.22 if the 
proport ion is ~0.5.  For proportions greater or less then 0.5, the confidence interval width will 
be narrower.  For instance, for a proportion around 0.2, the confidence interval width will be 
0.175.  
 
12.             BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
1. Jemal A, Sieg el R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2008. CA Cancer J Clin 2008;58:71 -
 26 96. 
2. Further evidence of effective adjuvant combined radiation and chemotherapy following 
curative resection of pancreatic cancer. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Cancer 
1987;5 9:2006 -10. 
3. Klinkenbijl JH, Jeekel J, Sahmoud T, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and 5 -fluorouracil 
after curative resection of cancer of the pancreas and periampullary region: phase III trial of the 
EORTC gastrointestinal tract cancer cooperative group. An n Surg 1999;230:776 -82; discussion 
82-4. 
4. Neoptolemos JP, Stocken DD, Friess H, et al. A randomized trial of chemoradiotherapy 
and chemotherapy after resection of pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;350:1200 -10. 
5. Spitz FR, Abbruzzese JL, Lee JE, et al . Preoperative and postoperative chemoradiation 
strategies in patients treated with pancreaticoduodenectomy for adenocarcinoma of the 
pancreas. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:928 -37. 
6. Yeo CJ, Abrams RA, Grochow LB, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma: postoperative adjuvant chemoradiation improves survival. A prospective, 
single -institution experience. Ann Surg 1997;225:621 -33; discussion 33 -6. 
7. Treatment of locally unresectable carcinoma of the pancreas: comparison of combined -
modality t herapy (chemotherapy plus radiotherapy) to chemotherapy alone. Gastrointestinal 
Tumor Study Group. J Natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:751 -5. 
8. Moertel CG, Frytak S, Hahn RG, et al. Therapy of locally unresectable pancreatic 
carcinoma: a randomized comparison of h igh dose (6000 rads) radiation alone, moderate dose 
radiation (4000 rads + 5 -fluorouracil), and high dose radiation + 5 -fluorouracil: The 
Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Cancer 1981;48:1705 -10. 
9. Burris HA, 3rd, Moore MJ, Andersen J, et al. Improvemen ts in survival and clinical 
benefit with gemcitabine as first -line therapy for patients with advanced pancreas cancer: a 
randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2403 -13. 
10. Millikan KW, Deziel DJ, Silverstein JC, et al. Prognostic factors associated with 
resectable adenocarcinoma of the head of the pancreas. Am Surg 1999;65:618 -23; discussion 
23-4. 
11. Neoptolemos JP, Stocken DD, Dunn JA, et al. Influence of resection margins on 
survival for patients with pancreatic cancer treated by adjuvant chemoradiation  and/or 
chemotherapy in the ESPAC -1 randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg 2001;234:758 -68. 
12. Pingpank JF, Hoffman JP, Ross EA, et al. Effect of preoperative c hemoradiotherapy on 
surgical margin status of resected adenocarcinoma of the head of the pancreas. J Gastrointest 
Surg 2001;5:121 -30. 
13. Katz MH, Pisters PW, Evans DB, et al. Borderline resectable pancreatic cancer: the 
importance of this emerging stage o f disease. J Am Coll Surg 2008;206:833 -46; discussion 46 -
8. 
14. Small W, Jr., Berlin J, Freedman GM, et al. Full -dose gemcitabine with concurrent 
radiation therapy in patients with nonmetastatic pancreatic cancer: a multicenter phase II trial. J 
Clin Oncol  2008;26:942 -7. 
15. Springett GM, Hoffe SE. Borderline resectable pancreatic cancer: on the edge of 
survival. Cancer Control 2008;15:295 -307. 
16. Brown KM, Siripurapu V, Davidson M, et al. Chemoradiation followed by 
chemotherapy before resection for border line pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Am J Surg 
2008;195:318 -21. Formatted:  Dutch  (Netherlands)
Formatted:  Danish
 27 17. Morganti AG, Massaccesi M, La Torre G, et al. A systematic review of resectability 
and survival after concurrent chemoradiation in primarily unresectable pancreatic cancer. Ann 
Surg Oncol;17:19 4-205. 
18. Ahmad NA, Lewis JD, Ginsberg GG, et al. Long term survival after pancreatic 
resection for pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Am J Gastroenterol 2001;96:2609 -15. 
19. Sohn TA, Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, et al. Resected adenocarcinoma of the pancreas -616 
patients : results, outcomes, and prognostic indicators. J Gastrointest Surg 2000;4:567 -79. 
20. Ammori JB, Colletti LM, Zalupski MM, et al. Surgical resection following radiation 
therapy with concurrent gemcitabine in patients with previously unresectable adenocarc inoma 
of the pancreas. J Gastrointest Surg 2003;7:766 -72. 
21. Kim EJ, Ben -Josef E, Griffith KA, et al. Phase II trial of neoadjuvant full dose 
gemcitabine, oxaliplatin and radiation (RT) in patients with resectable (R) or borderline 
resectable (BR) pancrea tic cancer. In: ASCO GI 2011 Symposium; 2011.  
22. Talamonti MS, Small W, Jr., Mulcahy MF, et al. A multi -institutional phase II trial of 
preoperative full -dose gemcitabine and concurrent radiation for patients with potentially 
resectable pancreatic carcino ma. Ann Surg Oncol 2006;13:150 -8. 
23. Breslin TM, Hess KR, Harbison DB, et al. Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for 
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: treatment variables and survival duration. Ann Surg Oncol 
2001;8:123 -32. 
24. McGinn CJ, Zalupski MM, Shureiqi I , et al. Phase I trial of radiation dose escalation 
with concurrent weekly full -dose gemcitabine in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. J 
Clin Oncol 2001;19:4202 -8. 
25. Murphy JD, Adusumilli S, Griffith KA, et al. Full -dose gemcitabine and concurrent  
radiotherapy for unresectable pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2007;68:801 -8. 
26. Lawrence TS, Chang EY, Hahn TM, Hertel LW, Shewach DS. Radiosensitization of 
pancreatic cancer cells by 2',2' -difluoro -2'-deoxycytidine. Int J Radiat Oncol Bi ol Phys 
1996;34:867 -72. 
27. Abbruzzese JL, Grunewald R, Weeks EA, et al. A phase I clinical, plasma, and cellular 
pharmacology study of gemcitabine. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:491 -8. 
28. Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, et al. Randomized phase III trial comparing 
FOLFIRINOX (F: 5FU/leucovorin [LV], irinotecan [I], and oxaliplatin [O]) versus 
gemcitabine (G) as first -line treatment for metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma (MPA): 
Preplanned interim analysis results of the PRODIGE 4/ACCORD 11 trial. Journal of Clinica l 
Oncology 2010;28:4010.  
29. FOLFOX -6 combination as the first -line treatment of locally advanced and/or metastatic 
pancreatic cancer . Am J Clin Oncol. 2007;30(1):15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 28  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.             APPENDIX  
 
 
 
APPENDIX A  
 
ECOG PERFORMANCE STAT US 
Grade  ECOG  
0 Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction  
1 Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work 
of a light or sedentary nature, e.g., light house work, office work  
2 Ambulatory and capable of all selfcare but unable to carry out any work activities. Up 
and about more than 50% of waking hours  
3 Capable of only limited selfcare, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking 
hours  
4 Completely disabled. Cannot carry  on any selfcare. Totally confined to bed or chair  
5 Dead  
 
 
 
 
 29  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B  
 
 30 
 
 