Page  1 of 21 Title 
Computer -Based  Alcohol  Reduction  Intervention  for Alcohol -Using  HIV/HCV  Co-Infected  Russian  Women  in 
Clinical  Care:  Study  Protocol  for a Randomi sed Controlled  Trial 
 
Trial  registration :  ClinicalTrials.gov,  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] . Registered  5 December  2017,  
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document  date:  February  1, 2021  
Page  2 of 21 Abstract  
Background : Russia  has a high prevalence  of (human  immunodeficiency  virus)  HIV infections . In 2018,  over 
one million  persons  were  living  with HIV (PLWH);  over a third were  women.  A high proportion  of HIV-infected  
women  are co-infected  with Hepatitis  C virus  (HCV) , and many  consume  alcohol,  which  adversely  affects  
HIV and HCV  treatment  and prognosis.  Despite  the triple  epidemics  of alcohol  use, HIV and HCV,  and the 
need  for interventions  to reduce  alcohol  use among  HIV/HCV  co-infected  women,  evidence -based  alcohol  
reduction  interventions  for this vulnerable  population  are limited.  To address  this gap, we developed  a 
clinical  trial to evaluate  the efficacy  of a computer -based  intervention  to reduce  alcohol  consumption  among  
HIV/HCV  co-infected  women  in clinical  care.   
 
Methods : In this two-arm parallel  randomized  clinical  trial, we propose  to evaluate  the efficacy  of a culturally -
adapted  alcohol  reduction  intervention  delivered  via a computer  for HIV/HCV  co-infected  Russian  women.  
The study  population  consists  of women  21-45 years  old with confirmed  HIV/HCV  co-infection  who currently  
use alcohol.  Intervention  efficacy  is assessed  by a novel  alcohol  biomarker,  ethyl  glucuronide  (EtG) , and 
biomarkers  of HIV and HCV  disease  progression.  Women  are randomized  to trial conditions  in a 1:1 
allocation  ratio,  using  a computer -generated  algorithm  to develop  the assignment  sequence  and 
concealment  of allocation  techniques  to minimize  assignment  bias.  Women  are randomized  to either:  (1) 
standard -of-care,  clinician -delivered  MET,  plus a computer -based  MET  intervention , or (2) standard -of-care 
plus clinician -delivered  motivational  enhancement  therapy  (MET) . We will use an intent -to-treat analysis  and 
logistic  and linear  generalized  estimating  equations  to evaluate  intervention  efficacy,  relative  to the standard -
of-care,  in enhancing  the proportion  of women  with a laboratory -confirmed  negative  EtG at each  research  
study  visit over the 9-month  follow -up period.  Additional  analyses  will evaluate  intervention  effec ts on HIV 
(viral  load and CD4+  levels)  and HCV  markers  of disease  progression  (FibroScan).  
 
Discussion : The proposed  trial design  and analysis  provides  an appropriate  conceptual  and methodological  
framework  to assess  the efficacy  of the computer -based  intervention.  We propose  to recruit  200 participants.    
The intervention,  if efficacious,  may be an efficient  and cost-effective  alcohol  reduction  strategy  that is 
scalable  and can be readily  disseminated  and integrated  into clinical  care in Russia  to reduce  women’s  
alcohol  consumption  and enhance  HIV/HCV  prognosis.  
 
 
Keywords  
HIV, Hepatitis  C virus,  HIV/HCV  co-infection,  Russia,  women,  service  integration,  alcohol  reduction  
intervention,  computer -delivered  alcohol  intervention , randomised  control led trial  
 
  
Page  3 of 21 Introduction  
 
Background  and rationale  
The human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV) and hepatitis  C virus  (HCV)  epidemics  are interrelated  with 
increasing  prevalence  in Russia.  As of 2018,  over one million  persons  were  living  with HIV (PLWH)  in the 
Russian  Federation  (Russia).2 Women  made  up 37% of new HIV diagnoses,  almost  tripling  the 2006  
prevalence  rate.2  
 
The severity  of the HIV epidemic  is compounded  by the intersecting  HCV  epidemic.  Eastern  Europe  has the 
largest  proportion  of PLWH  with serological  evidence  of HCV  infection  (27%).3 The prevalence  of HIV/HCV  
co-infection  is markedly  higher  among  individuals  with a history  of injection  drug use (PWID).  A recent  review  
estimated  an HCV  prevalence  of 69% among  PWID  compared  to 4.6%  among  PLWH  without  a history  of 
injection  drug use in Russia.4 Among  HIV-infected  women  in Saint  Petersburg,  Russia,  a study  by our group  
observed  that 57.1%  were  HCV  co-infected.5 Behaviours  related  to injection  drug use, such  as needle  
sharing,  have  contributed  to the rapid  spread  of HIV/HCV  co-infection  among  PWID  globally,6 including  in 
Saint  Petersburg,  Russia.7-9  
 
Alcohol  use poses  a significant  and persistent  health  threat  to women  living  with HIV/HCV  co-infection.  
Despite  substantial  reductions  in alcohol  use over the past two decades,10 problem  alcohol  use is prevalent  
in Russia  and adversely  impacts  the treatment  and prognosis  of women  living  with HIV/HCV  by accelerating  
HIV and HCV  progression.11 A recent  meta -analysis  estimated  that 55% [95%  confidence  interval  (CI): 16%-
88%]  of Russian  participants  engaged  in heavy  episodic  drinking  and 58% (95%  CI: 49%-67%)  met 
diagnostic  criteria  for alcohol  use disorder.12 A World  Health  Organization  study  estimated  that among  
Russian  women,  43.7%  of those  who drank  were  heavy  episodic  drinkers  compared  to 19.9%  in Europe  as a 
whole.13 A recent  study  among  PLWH  in Saint  Petersburg  found  that, overall,  45.3%  of women  reported  
drinking  in the past week . Of those , 21.6%  reported  at least  one heavy  episodic  drinking  episode  (4 or more  
drinks).14 
 
Among  HIV/HCV  co-infected  individuals,  alcohol  use may also lead to various  adverse  health  outcomes.  
HIV/HCV  co-infected  individuals  develop  liver disease  earlier  and are diagnosed  with more  severe  liver 
disease  than those  who are HIV mono -infected.15-17 Excessive  alcohol  consumption  is a significant  
contributor  to liver-related  mortality  among  persons  with HIV/HCV  co-infection.18 The adverse  impact  of 
alcohol  use may be worse  for women,  who are more  prone  to rapid  fibrosis  progression  and cirrhosis  than 
men.19 In addition  to direct  health  complications,  alcohol  may heighten  health  risks to PLWH  by interacting  
with antiretroviral  (ARV)  therapy.  For example,  alcohol  and ARV interactions  may contribute  to hepatoxicity  
and liver disease,15,17 which  may be accelerated  by co-morbid  HCV  infection.20 Furthermore,  a history  of 
alcohol  use may impede  persons  with HIV/HCV  co-infection  from benefiting  from the new generation  of HCV  
treatments,  such  as direct acting  anti-HCV  drugs .21 Current  recommendations  are for individuals  with 
HIV/HCV  co-infection  to abstain  from alcohol  use given  that safe drinking  levels  have  not been  defined  for 
Page  4 of 21 this population.22 There  is conflicting  evidence  concerning  the health  effects  of moderate  alcohol  
consumption  among  HCV  mono -infected  and HCV/HIV  co-infected  persons,  with some  studies  finding  that 
even  moderate  amounts  of alcohol  may accelerate  disease  progression,  while  other  studies  identify  no such  
association.23,24 
 
Despite  the need  for interventions  to reduce  alcohol  use among  HIV/HCV  co-infected  women,  few evidence -
based  interventions  are available .25,26 A recent  review  of interventions  to reduce  alcohol  consumption  among  
PLWH  identified  limited  evidence  that interventions  reduced  binge  drinking  frequency,  alcohol  use disorders,  
or alcohol  dependence  symptoms.25 Furthermore,  most  of the interventions  did not target  alcohol  use 
exclusively,  but addressed  other  high-risk behaviours  (e.g.,  reducing  sexual  risk behaviours ) or focus ed on 
substance  use more  broadly.  In addition,  the majority  of interventions  were  conducted  in the U.S.;  to our 
knowledge,  none  were  implemented  and evaluated  in Russia.25 
 
In this two-arm parallel  randomized  clinical  trial, we propose  to evaluate  the efficacy  of a brief,  culturally -
adapted,  computer -delivered  alcohol  reduction  intervention  for Russian  women  with HIV/HCV  co-infection.  
The intervention  includes  modules  utilizing  cognitive  behavioural  and motivational  enhancement  principles  to 
reduce  alcohol  consumption.  Brief interventions  based  on cognitive  behavioural  therapy  that include  
personalized  feedback  about  alcohol  use, the establishment  of personal  drinking  goals , and tracking  of goal 
progress  coupled  with behavioural  strategies  to reduce  alcohol  use are efficacious.27,28 
 
The proposed  intervention  will be brief and delivered  via a computer -platform.  Computer -delivered  alcohol  
reduction  interventions  effectively  lower  problematic  alcohol  use, albeit  with small  effect  sizes29,30 and may 
be more  cost-effective  and feasible  to integrate  into clinical  care settings  than existing  interventions  delivered  
by experienced , trained  clinical  providers.  A mounting  body  of evidence  points  to the promise  of integrating  
treatment  for alcohol  use within  comprehensive  HIV-care services.31 If efficacious,  our intervention  may be a 
scalable  and cost-effective  strategy  to reduce  alcohol  use among  women  with HIV/HCV  co-infection  within  
the framework  of comprehensive  HIV care,  in line with current  strategies  to strengthen  HIV-care delivery.  
 
Objectives  
The study  objectives  are: 
1. To evaluate  the efficacy  of a standard -of-care,  clinician -delivered  MET,  plus a computer -based  MET  
intervention , relative  to the standard  of care plus clinician -delivered  MET  condition,  in enhancing  the 
proportion  of HIV/HCV  co-infected  women  detected  with laboratory -confirmed  negative  alcohol  
biomarker  over a 9-month  follow -up period.  
2. To evaluate  the efficacy  of a computer -based  MET  intervention  condition,  relative  to the standard  of 
care plus clinician -delivered  MET  condition,  in reducing  HIV/HCV  co-infected  women’s  HIV and HCV  
biomarkers  of disease  progression  over a 9-month  follow -up period.  
 
Trial  design  
Page  5 of 21 The proposed  study  is a parallel  two-arm randomized  control  trial to evaluate  the efficacy  of a culturally -
adapted  computer -based  alcohol  reduction  intervention  for HIV/HCV  co-infected  Russian  women  in clinical  
care.   
 
Following  receipt  of informed  consent  and enrolment  in the study,  200 women  are randomized  to one of two 
conditions  following  a 1:1 allocation  ratio:  (1) standard -of-care, the clinician -delivered  MET , plus the adapted  
computer -based  intervention  condition  (n=100),  or (2) the standard -of-care plus clinician -delivered  MET  
(n=100).   
 
Data  are collected  at baseline,  before  randomization,  and at 3-, 6- and 9-month  follow -up during  scheduled  
research  visits  via self-report  surveys.  In addition,  biological  markers  are collected  at baseline  and at each  
follow -up assessment  to obtain  objective  and quantifiable  measures  of alcohol  use and HIV and HCV  
disease  status . The proposed  trial design  provides  an appropriate  conceptual  and methodological  framework  
to determine  the intervention’s  efficacy  in reducing  alcohol  use and HIV and HCV  disease  progression  (see 
Figure  1). 
 
Methods:  Participants,  interventions  and outcomes  
Study  setting  
The intervention  is implemented  in HIV clinical  care facilities  in Saint  Petersburg,  Russia.  Saint  Petersburg  is 
the second  largest  city in Russia,  with a population  of approximately  5 million . It has a high concentration  of 
PWID , a critical  risk behaviour  associated  with HIV/HCV  acquisition.7 An estimated  40,000  PLWH  live in 
Saint  Petersburg,  with about  2000  new cases  diagnosed  annually.32 There  is a high prevalence  of HCV  
infection  among  Russian  PLWH.5 The current  study  includes  women  seeking  HIV care at two clinical  care 
sites. Both sites offer comprehensive  HIV care,  including  mental  health  care,  for HIV-infected  women.  
 
Eligibility  criteria  
Eligible  participants  must:  1) be women  ages  21-45 years;  2) have  chart -documented  HIV and HCV  
infection;  3) be currently  prescribed  ARV therapy;  4) have  a positive  point -of-care ethyl  glucuronide  (EtG)  or 
self-report  alcohol  use in the past 30 days.  Women  who are medically,  cognitively,  or psychologically  
incapable  of study  participation,  as assessed  by a research  clinician,  are excluded,  as those  who do not 
provide  written  informed  consent  to participate.  
 
Who  will take informed  consent?  
A research  staff member  explains  the study,  reviews  the consent  form with participants,  and answers  any 
questions  before  women  provide  written  consent  to participate  in the study.  All eligible  participants  must  
complete  consent  procedures  before  enrolment  and randomi sation.  Measures  are being  implemented  to 
protect  study  participants.  Study  staff are instructed  to highlight  confidentiality  and assure  participants  that 
their responses  would  not be shared  with clinic  staff or adversely  affect  service  provision.   
 
Page  6 of 21  
Compensation  
Participants  receive  a 1000 -ruble  (~16 United  States  Dollars,  USD ) valued  gift card at baseline  and at the 9-
month  follow -up visit and a 500-ruble  (~8 USD)  valued  gift card for each  completed  intermediary  
assessments  (3- and 6-month  research  visits).  
 
Additional  consent  provisions  for collection  and use of participant  data and 
biological  specimens  
The consent  form explains  to participants  that de-identified  data will be part of a general  dataset  that may be 
shared  with other  researchers.  In terms  of biological  specimens,  the consent  form explains  that if participants  
choose  to join the study,  they will be donating  their samples  and study  information.  If they withdraw  from the 
study,  data and samples  collected  may still be used  for this study.  Participants  are informed  that study  
records  can be opened  by court  order  and may be provided  in response  to a subpoena  or a request  for the 
production  of documents.  Further  study  records  may be shared  with regulatory  authorities,  such  as the IRB, 
government  agencies  and study  funders.  
 
Interventions  
Explanation  for the choice  of comparators  
This trial compares  the efficacy  of clinician -delivered  alcohol  reduction  MET  counselling  to a computer -
delivered  MET -based  alcohol  use reduction  intervention . We hypothesize  that the computer -delivered  
intervention  may be less costly , less demanding  on human  resources  and more  feasible  to integrate  into 
clinical  care than the current  standard -of-care, with comparable  results.  
 
Intervention  description  
 
Standard -of-care condition  plus clinician -delivered  MET  plus computer -based  MET  counseling  
 
Women  in the intervention  condition  receive  a brief computer -based  intervention  to reduce  alcohol  use 
guided  by cognitive  behavioural  principles.  The computerized  intervention  includes  modules  to: (a) provide  
an overview  of the intervention  and information  regarding  the impact  of alcohol  use on disease  progression;  
(b) assess  current  levels  of drinking  and provide  feedback  on alcohol  use; (c) set alcohol  reduction  goals  and 
enhance  motivation  to modify  drinking  behaviours ; (d) address  challenges  associated  with achieving  drinking  
goals;  and (e) provide  strategies  to reduce  alcohol  use. The computerized  intervention  was adapted  to be 
culturally  appropriate  and incorporates  vignettes  to illustrate  intervention  content.  After  each  computer -based  
session,  a study  clinician  meets  with participants  to establish  drinking  goals  and discuss  strategies  to 
achieve  these  goals  during  a brief one-on-one motivational  enhancement  session.  Participants  randomized  
to the intervention  condition  also continue  to receive  the standard  of care for alcohol  use provided  in the 
clinic  plus clinician -delivered  MET . 
 
Page  7 of 21 Standard -of-care condition  plus clinician -delivered  MET  
 
Women  receiving  treatment  for HIV/HCV  at the two clinical  care sites are routinely  asked  about  their alcohol  
and other  substance  use and counselled  using  MET  approaches  to avoid  alcohol  and other  substances  by 
clinical  staff.  When  the treating  clinician  deems  it appropriate,  women  are referred  to community -based  care 
for substance  use treatment.  In addition,  all women  receive  an educational  brochure  with information  
describing  the adverse  effects  of alcohol  use for persons  with HIV/HCV  co-infection  and a list of community -
based  resources  to seek  further  help.   
 
Criteria  for discontinuing  or modifying  allocated  interventions  
A staff psychiatrist  assesses  women’s  mental  health  as part of routine  care and as requested  by a treating  
clinician  and refers  women  diagnosed  with alcohol  dependence  to substance  use treatment . The psychiatrist  
may recommend  discontinuing  participation  in the trial if a participant  is deemed  psychologically  incapable  of 
continued  participation.  
 
Strategies  to improve  adherence  to interventions  
The intervention  consists  of taking  a brief computer -based  program;  therefore,  the key strategy  to promote  
adherence  is the outreach  efforts  to invite  women  back  to the clinic  to complete  the first and follow -up 
sessions.  To improve  adherence,  research  staff will call participants  to schedule  visits,  using  the contact  
information  on file at the clinical  sites.   
 
Relevant  concomitant  care permitted  or prohibited  during  the trial 
All routine  treatment  procedures  for women  in care for HIV and HCV , as deemed  appropriate  by the patient’s  
treating  clinicians,  are permitted  during  the trial. 
 
Provisions  for post -trial care 
Trial participation  does  not present  more  than minimal  risk to subjects  beyond  those  encountered  as part of 
routine  care.  Therefore,  no special  provisions  for post-trial care were  included.  
 
Outcomes  
Biomarkers  (EtG and phosphatidylethanol,  PEth)  are used  to assess  the efficacy  of the intervention  on 
alcohol  use patterns  and two associated  health  outcomes,  HIV and HCV,  as described  below.   
 
The primary  outcome  measure  used  to evaluate  the efficacy  of the adapted  computer -based  alcohol  
reduction  intervention  condition  plus the clinician -delivered  MET , relative  to the standard  of care plus 
clinician -delivered  MET  condition  alone , will be the proportion  of women  who test EtG negative  at each  of the 
follow -up assessments  over 9-month s. 
 
Page  8 of 21 HIV disease  progression  is evaluated  based  on changes  in HIV viral load and CD4+  count  over the 9-month  
follow -up period  in the intervention  arm relative  to the control  arm. HCV  disease  progression  is assessed  
using  two non-invasive  biomarkers  collected  routinely  as part of ongoing  HCV  care.  The first is FibroTest  
which  uses  six different  biomarkers  (α2-macroglobulin,  haptoglobin,  γ-glutamyl  transpeptidase , 
apolipoprotein  A1, alanine  transaminase,  and total bilirubin)  to generate  a score  that is correlated  with the 
degree  of liver damage.33 The second  is FibroScan , a specialized  ultrasound  that measure s the degree  of 
fibrosis  and steatosis  in the liver,  providing  objective  and quantifiable  measures  of HCV -associated  liver 
damage .34 The procedure  is painless  and performed  at point -of-care.  
 
Sample  size 
The sample  size of 200 women  (1:1 allocation  ratio)  was arrived  at based  on a power  analysis.  The most  
conservative  hypothesis  compares  differences  between  trial conditions  in the proportion  of participants  
detected  with a negative  EtG test over the 9-month  follow -up. EtG was selected  for the power  analysis  
because  it is a sensitive  biological  test of alcohol  use and has a broad  alcohol detection  window  (5 days).  
The power  calculations  for the negative  EtG test were  based on our previous  pilot study  in which  30% of 
HIV/HCV -infected  Russian  wom en were  identified  with a negative  alcohol  use biomarker .35 Our study  is 
power ed to detect  a small  effect  (delta  = -0.2; odds  ratio = 0.3) in the number  of women  testing  EtG negative  
under  a repeated  measures  logistic  regression  analysis  framework,  assuming  an intra-cluster  correlation  of 
0.10 and 10% loss-to-follow -up. Analyses  were  conducted  in Stata  15.1 (Stata  Corporation  LP, College  
Station,  TX). 
 
Recruitment   
Recruitment  is conducted  at two affiliated  clinical  sites that provide  comprehensive  HIV care.  The study  
coordinator  in Russia,  a medical  doctor  with specialization  in infectious  diseases,  reviews  medical  records  to 
assess  potential  eligibility.  A clinician  at each  clinic  then invites  participants  to the study  and schedules  a 
follow -up visit with a research  staff member.   
 
Assignment  of interventions:  allocation  
Sequence  generation   
A computer  algorithm  is used  to generate  a random  allocation  sequence  prior to the study  initiation.   
 
Concealment  mechanism   
We use concealment  of allocation  techniques  to promote  unbiased  randomization.36 Predetermined  
allocations  are sequentially  numbered.  
 
Implementation   
Page  9 of 21 The random  allocation  sequence  is generated  in the U.S. and shared  with Russian  staff to implement.  Only 
the Russian -based  study  coordinator  has the list of allocations  generated  in the U.S. and informs  other  
researchers  of the allocation  following  participant  screening  and enrolment . 
 
Assignment  of interventions:  Blinding  
Who  will be blinded   
Because  the intervention  entails  completing  a computer -based  program , neither  providers  nor participants  
are blinded  to the intervention  assignment;  however,  the statisticians  conducting  the efficacy  analyses  will be 
blinded  to allocation . Research  members  in Russia  will assign  a code  to each  of the two arms,  which will be 
undisclosed  to U.S.-based  data analysts.  
 
Procedure  for unblinding  if needed   
The design  is an open  label , so unblinding  will not occur.  
 
Data  collection  and management  
Plans  for assessment  and collection  of outcomes   
Data  for efficacy  assessment  is collected  at baseline  and 3-, 6- and 9-months  post-intervention  initiation  
using  multiple  data-capture  modalities.  Participants  complete  a brief self-report  survey  assessing  basic  
demographics,  and history  of alcohol  and other  substance  use. In addition  to basic  demographics,  such  as 
age, education  and income,  the brief survey  includes  validated  self-report  measures  of alcohol  use (e.g.,  
alcohol  use frequency  and quantity , and heavy  episodic  drinking ).37 The trained  attending  clinicians,  one at 
each  clinic,  collect  two biomarkers:  1) a urine  sample  from each  woman  at each  study  visit for EtG analysis , 
which  assess es recent  alcohol  use; and 2) a dried  blood  spot at the 9-month  follow -up for PEth  analysis,  
which  measures  alcohol  use over the past 21-days.  A research  staff member  abstracts  via medical  record  
review  the following  data:  (a) length  of HIV and HCV  infection,  (b) HIV viral load,  (c) cluster  of differentiation  
4 cells (CD4+ ) count,  (d) FibroTest  score  (based  on liver function  biomarkers,  such  as apolipoprotein  A1, 
alanine  transaminase,  and total bilirubin,  etc.),  (e) prescribed  ARV regime,  and (f) HCV  treatment.  Research  
staff consisted  of clinicians  experienced  in the care of PLWH  who received  training  on implementation  of 
study  procedures,  including  on EtG administration  at point -of-care.   
 
EtG is an ethanol  metabolite  widely  used  to detect  any alcohol  consumption  in the past 24 hours.38 When  
measured  in urine  at point -of-care,  it is estimated  to have  a sensitivity  of 100%  and a specificity  of 97%.39 
PEth  is a well-established  marker  of past 3-week  alcohol  use,40 including  among  PLWH.41,42  Among  PLWH,  
the sensitivity  for any detectable  PEth  has been  estimated  at 88% and the specificity  at 89%.42 Collecting  
three  different  alcohol  use measures  –EtG, PEth , and self-reported  use– will allow  us to triage  the 
information  and assess  measurement  errors  and reporting  biases.  Fibro Test is a scoring system  based  on 
Page  10 of 21 biochemical  markers  to evaluate  the stage  of fibrosis  among  patients  with HCV  and is considered  a safe,  
non-invasive  alternative  to liver biopsy .43,44 FibroTest  has satisfactory  predictive  validity  of fibrosis  staging,  
with Areas  Under  the Curve  ranging  from 73% to 80% depending  on liver disease  progression  compared  to 
biopsy  results .44 
 
Plans  to promote  participant  retention  and complete  follow -up  
Based  on a previous  trial in this population45 and on pilot work  during  adaptation  of the comput erized  
intervention,  we expect  loss-to-follow -up to be minimal  and not to exceed  10%.  Factors  to improve  
intervention  adherence  and prevent  loss-to-follow -up over the 9-month  follow -up period  are that all research  
personnel  and clinical  staff are highly  qualified  and trained  in working  with PLWH;  that most  patients  have  a 
trusting  relationship  with study  clinicians;  and that all research  staff is from Saint  Petersburg.  In addition,  staff 
will call participants  to schedule  subsequent  research  visits.  Participants’  contact  information  is on file at the 
clinical  care sites.  
 
Data  management   
In accordance  with the National  Institutes  of Health  (NIH)  requirements,  the clinical  trial established  a data 
and safety  monitoring  plan to ensure  participant s’ privacy  and confidentiality  during  the trial and as part of 
data collection  and storage.  The plan is overseen  by a four-member  committee  composed  of the principal  
investigators  and a study  coordinator  in Russia.   
 
The data safety and monitoring plan stipulates that a ll records pertaining to the study and all original and 
electronic data files are to be securely stored off -site, in a locked metal file cabinet, accessible only to one of 
the Russian -based principal investigators . This is also true for completed and signed consent forms. To 
ensure participants’ safety and the data’s validity and integrity, only staff with extensive experience in the 
area of HI V/HCV treatment will be hired. All research  staff will receive  training on  data collection , 
management and storage  procedures ( including of survey data and biomarkers ), maintaining  confidentiality , 
and research ethics.  On an ongoing basis, the Russian -based study coordinator will review the data to 
ensure data quality, including checking the range of values, and identifying any inconsistencies in the data. 
No names or other identifying information appears on data documents or in data files. Pen and pencil 
surveys will also contain no identifiers. Only designated staff  will have access to the data at each site. 
Presentations and publications will not disclose the name s of the clinical sites where the research was 
implemented . When the final dataset is made publicl y available, data will not contain identifying information.  
 
The data safety and monitoring plan stipulate s the following data management procedures, as described in 
this protocol: data entry is the responsibility of the study coordinator , who enter s all data onto an Excel 
worksheet. The Excel worksheet includes screening information but not randomi sation information, which is 
kept in a separate password -protected file. Research personnel at two sites in Russia are in charge of 
screening procedures and  administering the paper -based surveys and of collecting the bioma rkers for 
analysis  after randomization . The study coordinator is responsible for  assigning allocations based on trial 
Page  11 of 21 condition assignments  generated in the U.S. All surveys and biomarkers are marked with a  trial identification 
number, assigned by the study coordinator, to ensure anonymity. One person at each study site is 
responsible for  personally delivering the surveys and the biomarkers to the study coordinator. The study 
coordinator extracts information from the paper -based surveys, from medical records , and from lab reports to 
populate the database. The coding used on the general dataset for data entry is based on th e survey: each 
survey item include s numeric codes, and these are used for data entry. The de -identified general database 
will be password protected and shared periodically with researchers in the U.S. for a range of data value 
checks.  
 
 
Confidentiality {27}  
All data collected during the study will be kept strictly confidential and only accessed by research staff, 
unless requested by the research sites’  IRB members  or by the sponsor. Participants are assigned  a trial 
identification number. Only the study coordinator has the list linking identifying information with the 
identification number; this list is password -protected and stored on her personal computer, also password -
protected. The de -identified dataset will be available to the rest of the research staff,  and after analyses and 
publication of primary findings will be made available to other researchers upon request.  
 
Plans  for collection,  laboratory  evaluation  and storage  of biological  specimens  for 
genetic  or molecular  analysis  in this trial/future  use {33} 
At baseline  and each  follow -up assessment,  women  provide  a urine  sample,  which  is analysed  for EtG at the 
[redacted].  The limit of detection  is >500  nanograms/millilitre  (ng/mL ). In addition,  at the 9-month  follow -up, 
clinicians  collect  dried  blood  spot samples,  which  will be analysed  for PEth  using  U.S. Drug  Testing  
Laboratory  standardized  procedures  (USDTL,  Des Plaines,  IL). The PEth  samples  are analysed  at the 
[redacted]  in Irkutsk,  Russia.  The limit of detection  is 8 ng/mL;  any result  above  this threshold  is considered  
positive  for alcohol  consumption  within  the last 21 days.  Urine  samples  will be disposed  of immediately  
following  analysis  at point -of-care. The dried  blood  spot cards  will be labelled  with a participant  number  to 
protect  the participants’  identity  and stored  at -30 degrees  Celsius  at the main  clinical  site until shipped  to 
Irkutsk  for processing.  These  biological  specimens  will be destroyed  after processing.  
 
Statistical  methods  
Statistical  methods  for primary  and secondary  outcomes  {20a}  
We will use an intent -to-treat analysis  and logistic  and linear  generalized  estimating  equations  to evaluate  
intervention  efficacy,  relative  to the standard -of-care,  in enhancing  the proportion  of women  with a 
laboratory -confirmed  negative  EtG over the follow -up period,  thus assessing  whether  there  was a significant  
reduction  in alcohol  use in the intervention  group,  compared  to the control  group.  Given  that there  is no 
consensus  regarding  safe levels  of alcohol  use among  HIV/HCV -infected  individuals46,47 and current  
Page  12 of 21 recommendations  are to abstain  from alcohol  use,48 a key outcome  is the proportion  of women  who test EtG 
negative  (<500 ng/mL)  over the 9-month  follow -up in each  trial condition.  To triage  results  with self-reported  
patterns  of alcohol  use patterns  and EtG, we will also use a novel  alcohol  use biomarker,  PEth  collected  
once  at follow -up. We will conduct  multilevel  regression  analyses  to account  for clustering  effects  at the two 
clinical  sites,  and between - and within -subject  variation.  Following  the conventions  in most  trials,  we will 
model  treatment  differences  as a fixed -effect  and use random  effects  for modelling  the clustering  effects  of 
cohort  and repeated  measures  data.  
 
We will utilize  a similar  analysis  to assess  whether  the intervention  resulted  in differences  in liver disease  
progression  by evaluating  changes  in indirect  serum  markers  of liver function  based  on mean  FibroTest  
scores  and direct  biomarker  of disease  progression,  FibroScan,  and whether  the intervention  affected  HIV 
disease  progre ssion  by assessing  changes  in mean  viral load and CD4+  levels  between  the two conditions.  
 
Oversight  and monitoring  
Composition  of the coordinating  centre  and trial steering  committee  {5d} 
 
A five-member  steering  committee  was formed , composed  of the principal  investigators  in the U.S. (RJD,  
JLB) and in Russia  (NB, VR) and the Russian -based  study  coordinator  (EB).  The committee’s  role is to 
assess  progress  and ensure  quality  and compliance  with recruitment  and study  procedures.  The committee  
meets  virtually  monthly  to evaluate  project  progress,  review  modifications,  and monitor  compliance  with 
guidelines  from the relevant  institutional  ethics  committees  and The Office  for Human  Research  Protections  
of the U.S. Department  of Health  and Human  Services.  VR supervises  the trial operations  in Russia.  EB is 
the project  coordinator  and oversees  all aspects  of screening,  recruitment,  consent,  and study  protocols  
implementation  at the two study  sites.  EB and LVG are in charge  of the identification,  screening  of potential  
participants  and recruitment.  NBK,  a psychiatrist  with expertise  in treating  patients  with chronic  infectious  
diseases,  interviews  and administers  the survey  to participants . EB and LVG are in charge  of collecting  the 
biomarkers.  The Russian  team  (NB, VR, EB, LVG and NKB)  hold coordination  meetings  weekly.   
 
Composition  of the data monitoring  committee,  its role and reporting  structure  {21a}  
 
The data monitoring  committee  is composed  of EB, JLB and AC. The role of the committee  is to conduct  
quarterly  data checks  to identify  potential  errors . In addition,  the committee  routinely  assess es if proper  
procedures  are in place  to ensure  that data remain  confidential  and that there  are no data breaches.  If any 
problems  are identified,  the data monitoring  committee  informs  members  of the trial steering  committee,  who 
depending  on the type of problem,  file a report  to the respective  IRBs  and/or  the sponsor.  The committee  is 
independent  of the sponsor  and none  of the members  have  competing  interests  to declare.   
 
Adverse  event  reporting  and harms  {22} 
Page  13 of 21 A system  for monitoring  and reporting  adverse  events  was established . All research  team  members  were  
trained  on recognizing  and documenting  any unusual  events  or circumstances  that may occur  during  data 
collection.  Researchers  will record  their observations  on comment  cards  that will be reviewed  by the study  
coordinator.  Should  a serious  adverse  event  occur,  the study  coordinator  will immediately  inform  the 
principal  investigators  who,  in turn, will immediately  notify  New York University’s  Institutional  Review  Board  
(IRB) . If an adverse  event  appears  to be research -related,  it will be reported  to the Office  for Human  
Research  Protections  of the U.S. Department  of Health  and Human  Services  and the funding  institution  
project  officer,  along  with summaries  of discussions  concerning  the event.  The funding  institution  project  
officer  will be informed  of any IRB action  taken  concerning  any adverse  event.  Research  staff will be 
monitored  closely  by the principal  investigators  and the study  coordinator.  Staff deficit s will be addressed  via 
additional  training,  close  monitoring  for proficiency,  and if not adhering  to established  protocols  and 
procedures,  will be terminated.   
 
Frequency  and plans  for auditing  trial conduct  {23} 
The principal  investigators  will conduct  semi -annual  field visits  to assess  that procedures  are being  
implemented  as planned  at all sites.  These  audits  are independent  of the sponsor  and will entail  observation  
of data collection  efforts.  The trial steering  committee  meets  monthly  to assess  progress.  Any issues  
identified  during  semi -annual  field visits  or during  weekly  meeting s of the Russian -based  field team  will be 
immediately  reported  to the trial steering  committee  for a full investigation.  In addition,  members  of the data 
monitoring  committee  will meet  every  six-months  to conduct  data checks.  Ad hoc emergency  meetings  of the 
committee  will be called  if a data breach  or data errors  are identified.  
 
Plans  for communicating  important  protocol  amendments  to relevant  parties  (e.g., 
trial participants,  ethical  committees)  {25} 
Changes  to the proposed  protocol  will require  a re-submission  to the IRB of both institutions  and updates  to 
the trial registry.  If changes  to the protocol  are different  from what  was explain  to participants  during  consent,  
participants  will be duly informed  of the modifications  and re-consented  by research  staff before  continuing  in 
the study.   
 
Dissemination  plans  {31a}  
Trial results  will be shared  in peer-reviewed , open -access  publications  and at national  and international  
research  and policy  conferences.  The final data set will be available  through  an open  access  data repository.  
 
Discussion  
If efficacious  in reducing  alcohol  use, this brief computer -delivered  intervention  for alcohol  using  HIV/HCV  
co-infected  women  in Russia  would  have  several  advantages.  First,  the computer -based  platform  affords  
Page  14 of 21 participants  greater  confidentiality,  thus encouraging  participants  to set realistic  goals  without  perceiving  
pressure  from healthcare  providers.  The digital  platform  offers  greater  flexibility  of administration,  for 
example,  participants  can go through  the program  at their own pace.  Importantly,  the participants’  ability  to 
replay  segments  of the intervention  as needed  may reinforce  risk reduction  by enhancing  learning  and 
alcohol  reduction  messages.  
 
The proposed  intervention  is novel  in several  ways.  First,  it is delivered  through  a computer -based  platform.  
Computer -delivered  alcohol  reduction  interventions  effectively  reduce  problematic  alcohol  use, albeit  with 
small  effect  sizes,29,30 and may be more  cost-effective  than existing  interventions  delivered  by experienced  
clinical  providers.  A computer -based  platform  offering  a brief intervention  is less labour - and cost-intensive  
than traditional  interventions  and has the potential  to be more  feasible  for integration  into the clinical  care 
setting.  Third,  the study  collects  two alcohol  use biomarkers  to assess  intervention  efficacy,  rather  than 
relying  on self-report,  which  is prone  to reporting  biases.  Data  from a previous  study  with this population  
indicated  that alcohol  use was often  underreported.49 It will also utilize  objective  markers  of liver function  and 
HIV and HCV  disease  progression.   
 
As the HIV and HCV  epidemics  continue  to grow,  increasing  the number  of people  in care,  the computerized  
intervention  program  may allow  for more  patients  to receive  critical  messages  related  to alcohol  use while  
reducing  the burden  on trained  healthcare  providers  in an already  heavily  demanding  clinical  care setting.  A 
computer -based  intervention  may be as or more  efficacious  (the objective  of this trial is to assess  efficacy  
relative  to the standard  of care)  than other  service  delivery  modalities  but less labour  intensive  and less 
costly  to implement  and sustain.  Because  of the ubiquity  and affordability  of Wi-Fi and portable  technology  in 
clinical  care settings  in Russia  and the limited  demand  of the intervention  on healthcare  providers’  time,  this 
computer -based  intervention  may be a feasible  and cost-effective  option  for scale -up and dissemination  to 
other  HIV centres  in Russia,  and even  to different  clinical  settings  where  alcohol  use may be problematic,  
such  as at obstetrician -gynaecologist  clinics  and maternity  hospitals.  If efficacious,  the intervention  may be a 
feasible  and cost-effective  way to reach  women  with problematic  drinking  patterns  at point -of-care and to 
integrate  an alcohol  use intervention  into comprehensive  HIV-delivery  services.  
 
Trial  status  
All women  have  completed  the baseline  assessment  and we are currently  working  on scheduling  women  for 
follow -up assessments . The protocol  is version  number  6, dated  October  29, 2019.  Recruitment  began  in 
January  2018  and was completed  in October  2019.  The protocol  was submitted  after the end of recruitment  
but before  the end of the last patient  visit. No significant  modifications  were  made  to the protocol  following  
the end of recruitment.  
 
 
Abbreviations  
Page  15 of 21 ARV antiretroviral  
CI confidence  interval  
CD4+  cluster  of differentiation  4 cells 
EtG ethyl  glucuronide  
HCV   hepatitis  C virus  
HHS   U.S. Department  of Health  and Human  Services  
HIV human  immunodeficiency  syndrome  
ICPSR   Inter-University  Consortium  for Political  and Social  Research  
IRB  institutional  review  board  
ng/mL  nanograms/ millilitre  
NIH National  Institutes  of Health  
NYU  New York University  
OHRP  Office  for Human  Research  Protections  
PEth  phosphatidylethanol  
PLWH  person  living  with HIV/AIDS  
PWID  person  who injects  drugs  
USD  United  States  Dollars  
USDTL  U.S. Drug  Testing  Laboratory  standardized  procedures  
 
Declarations  
Acknowledgements  
Not applicable . 
 
Authors’ contributions  {31b}  
RJD,  JLB are the US-based  principal  investigators  who conceived  the study  and led the proposal  and 
protocol  development , and were  responsible  for quality  assurance  and oversight . VR and NB led protocol  
development  and implementation,  as well as quality  assurance  in Russia . 
EB was the Russian  project  coordinator,  monitoring  data collection , and in charge  of patient  follow -up. 
LVG and NBK are the clinicians  in contact  with patients  and in charge  of collecting  data  
AC, NR, and JMS supported  protocol  implementation  and U.S.-based  coordination  support  
Page  16 of 21 AC wrote  the first draft of the manuscript.  RJD and JLB edited  and made  substantial  contributions  to the 
manuscript.  
All authors  read and approved  the final manuscript.  
 
Funding  {4} 
Research  reported  in this publication  was supported  by the National  Institute  on Alcohol  Abuse  and 
Alcoholism  of the National  Institutes  of Health  under  Award  Number  R01AA025882  (MPI:  RJD,  JLB) and by 
a grant  17-54-30014  from the Russian  Foundation  for Basic  Research  (PI: SP). 
 
The funding  body  had no role in the study’s  design ; collection,  analysis,  and interpretation  of data; or in 
writing  the manuscript . 
 
Availability  of data and material s {29} 
We will deposit  the final data set and codebook  with the Inter-University  Consortium  for Political  and Social  
Research  (ICPSR)  located  at the University  of 
Michigan.  ICPSR  confidentiality  requirements  will be followed  
(http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/irb/index.html).  ICPSR  will make  the data permanently  available  to over 
700 academic  member  institutions,  permitting  other  researchers  to conduct  secondary  analyses  using  the 
data set. Data  availability  will be announced  on the ICPSR  website.   
 
Ethics  approval  and consent  to participate  {24} 
The institutional  review  boards  of New York University  (number  IRB-FY2019 -2519)  and Saint  Petersburg  
State  University  (number  02-186) approved  all study  protocols.  Written  informed  consent  to participate  is 
obtained  from all participants.  
 
 
Consent  for publication  {32} 
Not applicable . 
 
Competing  interests  {28} 
The authors  declare  that they have  no competing  interests . 
 
References  
 
1. Kaplan LM, Greenfield TK, Karriker -Jaffe KK.  Examination of associations between early life 
victimisation and alcohol’s harm from others. Drug and Alcohol Review. 2018;2(37).  
2. UNAIDS. Country: Russian Federation 2019 [Available from: 
https://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/russianfederation . 
Page  17 of 21 3. World Health Organization. Global Hepatitis Report 2017. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017.  
4. Maistat L, Kravchenko N, Reddy A. Hepatitis C in Eastern Europe and Central Asia: a survey of 
epidemiology, treatment access and civil society activity in eleven countries. Hepatol Med Policy. 2017;2:9.  
5. Brown JL, DiClemente RJ, Sales JM, Rose ES, Safonova P, Levina OS, et al. Substance Use 
Patterns of HIV -Infected Russian Women with and Without Hepatitis C Virus Co -infection. AIDS Behav. 
2016;20(10):2398 -407. 
6. Degenhardt L, Peacock A, Colledge S, Leung J, Grebely J, Vickerman P, et al. Global prevalence of 
injecting drug use and sociodemographic characteristics and prevalence of HIV, HBV, and HCV in people 
who inject drugs: a multistage systematic review. The  Lancet Global Health. 2017;5(12):e1192 -e207.  
7. Meylakhs P, Friedman SR, Meylakhs A, Mateu -Gelabert P, Ompad DC, Alieva A, et al. A New 
Generation of Drug Users in St. Petersburg, Russia? HIV, HCV, and Overdose Risks in a Mixed -Methods 
Pilot Study of Young Hard Drug Users. AIDS Behav. 2019;23(12):335 0-65. 
8. Tsui JI, Ko SC, Krupitsky E, Lioznov D, Chaisson CE, Gnatienko N, et al. Insights on the Russian 
HCV Care Cascade: Minimal HCV Treatment for HIV/HCV Co -infected PWID in St. Petersburg. Hepatol Med 
Policy. 2016;1:13.  
9. Abdala N, White E, Toussova OV. Comparing sexual risks and patterns of alcohol and drug use 
between injection drug users (IDUs) and non -IDUs who report sexual partnerships with IDUs in St. 
Petersburg, Russia. BMC Public Health. 2010;10:676.  
10. World Health Organization. Alcohol policy impact case study. The effects of alcohol control 
measures on mortality and life expectancy in the Russian Federation. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office 
for Europe; 2019.  
11. Brown JL, DeMartini KS, Sales JM, Swartzendruber AL, DiClemente RJ. Interventions to reduce 
alcohol use among HIV -infected Individuals: A review and critique of the Literature. Current HIV/AIDS 
reports. 2013;10(356 -370).  
12. Lan CW, Scott -Sheldon LA, Carey KB, Johnson BT, Carey MP. Prevalence of alcohol use, sexual 
risk behavior, and HIV among Russians in high -risk settings: a systematic review and meta -analysis . Int J 
Behav Med. 2017;24(2):180 -90. 
13. World Health Organization. Global status report on alcohol and health 2018. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2018. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018.  
14. Amirkhanian  YA, Kelly  JA, Tarima  SS. Prevalence of alcohol use and factors associated with 
problem drinking in social networks of people living with  HIV infection in St. Petersburg, Russia. AIDS 
Education and Prevention. 2019;31(4):380 -93. 
15. Barve S, Kapoor R, Moghe A, Ramirez JA, Eaton JW, Gobejishvili L, et al. Focus on the liver: 
alcohol use, highly active antiretroviral therapy, and liver disease in HIV -infected patients. Alcohol Res 
Health. 2010;33(3):229 -236. 
16. Poynard T, Mathurin P , Lai C , Guyader D, Poupon R, Tainturier M -H, et al. A comparison of fibrosis 
progression in chronic liver diseases. (0168 -8278 (Print)).  
17. Fuster D, Sanvisens A, Bolao F, Rivas I, Tor J, Muga R. Alcohol use disorder and its impact on 
chronic hepatitis C virus and human immunodeficiency virus infections. World Journal of Hepatology. 
2016;8(31):1295 -308. 
18. Salmon -Ceron D, Lewden C, Morlat P, Bévilacqua S, Jougla E, Bonnet F, et al. Liver disease as a 
major cause of death among HIV infected patients: role of hepatitis C and B viruses and alcohol. Journal Of 
Hepatology. 2005;42(6):799 -805. 
19. Ohashi K, Pimienta M, Seki E. Alcoholic liver disease: A current molecular and clinical perspective. 
Liver Research. 2018;2(4):161 -72. 
20. Fuster D, Cheng DM, Quinn EK, Nunes D, Saitz R, Samet JH, et al. Chronic hepatitis C virus 
infection is associated with all -cause and liver -related mortality in a cohort of HIV -infected patients with 
alcohol problems. Addiction. 2014;109(1):62 -70. 
21. Maughan A, Sadigh K, Angulo -Diaz V, Mandimika C, Villanueva M, Lim JK, et al. Contemporary 
HCV pangenotypic DAA treatment protocols are exclusionary to real world HIV -HCV co -infected patients. 
BMC Infect Dis. 2019;19(1):378.  
22. European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines: Management of 
alcohol -related liver disease. Journal of Hepatology. 2018;69:154 –81. 
23. Kelly EM, Dodge JL, Bacchetti P, Sarkar M, French AL, Tien PC, et al. Moderate alcohol use is not 
associated with fibrosis progression  in Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Hepatitis C Virus –coinfected women: 
a prospective cohort study . Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2017;65(12):2050 -6. 
24. Hézode C, Lonjon I, Roudot -Thoraval F, Pawlotsky JM, Zafrani ES, Dhumeaux D. Impact of 
moderate alcohol consumption on histological activity and fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C, and 
specific influence of steatosis: a prospective study. Alimenta ry Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 
2003;17(8):1031 -7. 
Page  18 of 21 25. Brown JL, DeMartini KS, Sales JM, Swartzendruber AL, DiClemente RJ. Interventions to reduce 
alcohol use among HIV -infected Individuals: A review and critique of the literature. Current HIV/AIDS reports. 
2013;10:356 -70. 
26. Brown JL, Diclemente RJ. Secondary HIV prevention: novel intervention approaches to impact 
populations most at risk. Current HIV/AIDS reports. 2011;8(4):269 -76. 
27. Riper H, van Straten A, Keuken M, Smit F, Schippers G, Cuijpers P. Curbing problem drinking with 
personalized -feedback interventions: A meta -analysis. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 
2009;36(3):247 -55. 
28. McGinn LK, Sanderson WC. What allows cognitive behavioral therapy to be brief: Overview, 
efficacy, and crucial factors facilitating brief treatment. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice. 
2001;8(1):23 -37. 
29. Kaner EF, Beyer FR, Garnett C, Crane D, Brown J, Muirhead C, et al. Personalised digital 
interventions for reducing hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption in community -dwelling populations. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;9:CD011479.  
30. Sundstrom C, Blankers M, Khadjesari Z. Computer -Based Interventions for Problematic Alcohol 
Use: a Review of Systematic Reviews. Int J Behav Med. 2017;24(5):646 -58. 
31. Edelman EJ, Maisto SA, Hansen NB, Cutter CJ, Dziura J, Deng Y, et al. Integrated stepped alcohol 
treatment for patients with HIV and alcohol use disorder: a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet HIV. 
2019;6(8):e509 -e17. 
32. UNAIDS. Preventing and treating HIV in Saint Petersburg. UNAIDS; 2018.  
33. Yakoob R, Bozom IA, Thandassery RB, Rahman MOA, Derbala MF, Mohannadi MJA, et al. 
Noninvasive biomarkers FibroTest and ActiTest versus liver biopsy in chronic hepatitis C patients: the Middle 
East experience. Annals of gastroenterology. 2015;28(2):265 -70. 
34. Wilder J, Patel K. The clinical utility of FibroScan(®) as a noninvasive diagnostic test for liver 
disease. Medical devices (Auckland, NZ). 2014;7:107 -14. 
35. Littlefield AK, Brown JL, DiClemente RJ, Safonova P, Sales JM, Rose ES, et al. Phosphatidylethanol 
(PEth) as a Biomarker of Alcohol Consumption in HIV -Infected Young Russian Women: Comparison to Self -
Report Assessments of Alcohol Use. AIDS Behav. 2017; 21(7):1938 -49. 
36. Schulz KF, Grimes DA. Blinding in randomised trials: Hiding who got what. Lancet. 2002;359:696 -
700. 
37. Balachova T, Sobell LC, Agrawal S, Isurina G, Tsvetkova L, Volkova E, et al. Evaluating alcohol use 
among Russian women at risk for an alcohol -exposed pregnancy: A comparison of three measures of 
alcohol use. Journal of Ethnicity in Substance Abuse. 20 18;17(3):324 -34. 
38. Andresen -Streichert H, Muller A, Glahn A, Skopp G, Sterneck M. Alcohol Biomarkers in Clinical and 
Forensic Contexts. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018;115(18):309 -15. 
39. Leickly E, Skalisky J, McPherson S, Orr MF, McDonell MG. High Agreement Between Benchtop and 
Point -of-Care Dipcard Tests for Ethyl Glucuronide. Therapeutic drug monitoring. 2017;39(4):461 -2. 
40. Viel G, Boscolo -Berto R, Cecchetto G, Fais P, Nalesso A, Ferrara SD. Phosphatidylethanol in blood 
as a marker of chronic alcohol use: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Int J Mol Sci. 
2012;13(11):14788 -812. 
41. Hahn JA, Anton RF, Javors MA. The Formation, Elimination, Interpretation, and Future Research 
Needs of Phosphatidylethanol for Research Studies and Clinical Practice. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 
2016;40(11):2292 -5. 
42. Hahn JA, Dobkin LM, Mayanja B, Emenyonu NI, Kigozi IM, Shiboski S, et al. Phosphatidylethanol 
(PEth) as a biomarker of alcohol consumption in HIV -positive patients in sub -Saharan Africa. Alcohol Clin 
Exp Res. 2012;36(5):854 -62. 
43. Shaheen AA, Wan AF, Myers RP. FibroTest and FibroScan for the prediction of hepatitis C -related 
fibrosis: a systematic review of diagnostic test accuracy. Am J Gastroenterol. 2007;102(11):2589 -600. 
44. Halfon P, Bourliere M, Deydier R, Botta -Fridlund D, Renou C, Tran A, et al. Independent Prospective 
Multicenter Validation of Biochemical Markers (Fibrotest –Actitest) for the Prediction of Liver Fibrosis and 
Activity in Patients with Chronic Hepatitis C: The Fibropaca Study. Official journal of the American College of 
Gastroenterology | ACG. 2006;101(3).  
45. Brown JL, DiClemente RJ, Sales JM, Rose ES, Gause NK, Safonova P, et al. Alcohol Use, Partner 
Characteristics, and Condom Use Among HIV -Infected Russian Women: An Event -Level Study. J Stud 
Alcohol Drugs. 2016;77(6):968 –73. 
46. Noonan A, Kavanagh P, Sweeney B. Drug users' failure to modify alcohol consumption in response 
to hepatitis C. Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine. 2009;26(1):27 -31. 
47. Watson B, Conigrave KM, Wallace CJ, Whitfield JB, Wurst F, Haber PS. Hazardous alcohol 
consumption and other barriers to antiviral treatment among hepatitis C positive people receiving opioid 
maintenance treatment. Drug and Alcohol Review. 2007;26:231 -9. 
Page  19 of 21 48. Neuman MG, Monteiro M, Rehm J. Drug Interactions Between Psychoactive Substances and 
Antiretroviral Therapy in Individuals Infected With Human Immunodeficiency and Hepatitis Viruses. 
Substance Use & Misuse. 2006;41(10 -12):1395 -463. 
49. Littlefield AK, Brown JL, DiClemente RJ, Safonova P, Sales JM, Rose ES, et al. Phosphatidylethanol 
(PEth) as a Biomarker of Alcohol Consumption in HIV -Infected Young Russian Women: Comparison to Self -
Report Assessments of Alcohol Use. AIDS Behav. 2017;21(7):1938 -49. 
 
Page  20 of 21 FIGURE  1. Trial flow diagram  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Primary  Clinical  Sites: North -West  District  
AIDS  Center  and affiliated  clinic   
Consent  Eligible  Patients    
Baseline  Assessment : 
1) Self-Report  Survey  
2) Biological  Specimen  Collection:  POC  EtG (urine)  
3) Medical  Chart  Review:  ARV regimen,  HIV viral load,  CD4+  count,  HCV  
treatment,  FibroTest  score  (liver  function:  ALT,  bilirubin,  etc.),  FibroScan  
 Eligible   
Computer  Randomization  to Trial  Conditions  (N=200)  
 Screening  Visit  
- Chart  review:  HIV/HCV  co-infection,  
female,  21-45 years  old, prescribed  ART 
- Alcohol  use: Biologically  confirmed  POC  
EtG positive  (>500ng/mL ) or any self-
reported  past-month  alcohol  use 
- Interview  with psychologist : no 
neurological  or mental  health  impairment  
 
3-, 6- & 9-month  follow -up assessment s: 
1) Self-Report  Survey  
2) Biological  Specimen  Collection:  POC  EtG (urine)  
3) Medical  Chart  Review:  ARV regimen,  HIV viral load,  CD4+  count,  HCV  
treatment,  FibroTest  score  (liver  function:  ALT,  bilirubin,  etc.),  FibroScan  (last one 
at 9-month  follow -up only)  
 Intervention  Condition  (n=100):  
1) Intervention  session:   
• Brief computer -based intervention  
• Psychological counseling (Patient -tailored)  
• Facilitated r eferral ( e.g., community -based alcohol treatment)  
• Information brochure with list of resources  
2) Brief  telephone  booster  session  
3) Repeated  intervention  session:  3 & 6-month  follow -up 
 Control  Condition  (n=100) : 
1) Standard of Care:  
• Psychological counseling (Patient -tailored)  
• Facilitated r eferral ( e.g., community -based alcohol 
treatment)  
• Information brochure with list of resources  
 Not Eligible:  
- One or more  
eligibility  
criterion  not met 
 
Page  21 of 21 Figure 2 .  Standard Protocol Items; Recommendations for Interventional Trials (SPIRIT) 
schedule of enrolment , interventions, and assessments  
 
 Enrolment  Allocation  Post -allocation  
 T0 T0 T1 T2 T3 
ENROLMENT:       
Eligibility  screen  X     
Informed  consent   X     
Allocation   X    
INTERVENTIONS:       
Standard  of care   X   
Computer  based  
intervention    X X X 
ASSESSMENTS:       
Socio -
demographic  data X     
ETG X  X X X 
PEth     X X 
FibroScan  X  X X X 
HIV viral load X  X X X 
CD4+  count  X  X X X 
Self-reported  
alcohol  use X  X X X 
ARV  regime  X  X X X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 