IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-18-1049 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2021  
Page 1 of 8   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluating the Efficacy of Dextromethorphan/Quinidine in Treating Irritability in 
Huntington's Disease  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 1/28/2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-18-1049 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2021  
Page 2 of 8   
STUDY PROTOCOL  
Protocol  Title:  Evaluating the efficacy of dextromethorphan/quinidine in treating  Irritability 
in Huntington's  disease  
Principal  Investigator: Erin Furr Stimming,  MD 
 
Co-Investigators:  Natalia Pessoa Rocha, PhD; Shivika Chandra, MD; Joohi Jimenez -Shahed, MD 
(Baylor College of Medicine); and William G. Ondo, MD (Houston  Methodist)  
Study  Coordinator:  Brittany Duncan; Jamie  Sims  
 
Population: Include sample size, gender, age, general health status, geographic  location  
Number  of Sites:  Single site (Baylor College of Medicine and Houston Methodist will refer 
patients to UTHealth as the primary study site. All study procedures will be 
conducted at  UTHealth)  
Study  Duration:  One year  
 
Subject  Duration:  13 weeks  
 
 
 
General Information  
Huntington’s  disease  (HD)  is a devastating inherited  neurologic  disease  that encompasses  motor,  cognitive 
and psychiatric symptoms, the latter often being the most troublesome leading to frequent 
hospitalizations and premature nursing home placement. Common neuropsychiatric symptoms include depression, irritability, impulsivity, and apathy and often precede the onset of motor symptoms. Irritability in HD frequently leads to aggressive behavior and emotional outbursts that can be harmful to both the patient and their caregiver. There are currently no medications approved specifically to treat irritability in HD. The current available treatments are off– label and  imperfect.  
We are proposing a clinical trial using dextromethorphan/quinidine (DM/Q), Nuedexta, a medication 
approved by the FDA in 2010 to treat pseudobulbar affect or exaggerated emotional exp ression 
incongruent to mood due to an underlying brain disorder. DM/Q has recently been studied in patients with Alzheimer's disease who had clinically meaningful agitation and was found to significantly improve 
agitation. Additional evidence suggesting a potential effect of DM/Q for agitation comes from controlled 
clinical trial data in nondemented patients with pseudobulbar affect, case descriptions, and anecdotal 
reports of improvement in patients with dementia and symptoms suggestive of agitation.  
We plan to enroll 20 adults  with  HD and irritability.  We are proposing a crossover  trial design  which  means 
that half the patients  (10 individuals)  will be given  the study  drug (DM/Q) and half will be give placebo  for 
4 weeks, after which the reverse will occur. This study design will optimize our study results with a relatively small number of  patients.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-18-1049 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2021  
Page 3 of 8  Background Information 
Huntington’s  disease  (HD)  is a devastating inherited  neurologic  disease  that encompasses  motor,  cognitive 
and psychiatric symptoms, the latter often being the most troublesome leading to frequent 
hospitalizations and premature nursing home placement. Common neuropsychiatric symptoms include depression, irritability, impulsivity, and apathy and often precede the onset of motor symptoms. Irritability in HD frequently leads to aggressive behavior and emotional outbursts that can be harmful to both the patient and their  caregiver.  
There are currently no medications approved specifically to treat irritability in HD. The current available 
treatments are off– label and imperfect. Multiple classes of medications have been studied to treat the 
neuropsychiatric symptoms of HD with varying levels of efficacy and evidence.  
We are proposing a clinical trial using de xtromethorphan/quinidine (DM/Q), Nuedexta, a medication 
approved by the FDA in 2010 to treat pseudobulbar affect or exaggerated emotional expression 
incongruent to mood due to an underlying brain disorder. DM/Q has recently been studied in patients 
with Al zheimer's disease who had clinically meaningful agitation and was found to significantly improve 
agitation. Additional evidence suggesting a potential effect of DM/Q for agitation comes from controlled 
clinical trial data in nondemented patients with pseud obulbar affect, published case descriptions, and 
anecdotal reports of improvement in patients with dementia and symptoms suggestive of agitation.  
We plan  to enroll 20 adults  with  HD and irritability.  We are proposing a crossover  trial design  which  means 
that half the patients  (10 individuals)  will be given  the study  drug (DM/Q) and half will be give placebo  for 
4 weeks, after which the reverse will occur. This study design will allow us to optimize our study results with a relatively small number of patients.  
There is an urgent need to identify improved medications to treat irritability in HD. The current 
med ications available to treat the neuropsychiatric symptoms in HD often have unwanted side effects. 
Irritability in HD can lead to aggressive behavior which can result in injury to the patient and/or caregiver and even incarceration. An effective medication to address this significant disruptive and destructive behavioral  symptom  that can destroy  patient/caregiver relationships  and negatively  impact  quality  of life 
is imperative. We hypothesize that dextromethorphan/quinidine (Nuedexta) will decrease irritabi lity in 
individuals with HD and minimize aggression and  outbursts.  
 
Objectives  
To prove efficacy and safety of dextromethorphan/quinidine 20mg/10mg (DM/Q 20mg/10mg) in patients 
with irritability due to Huntington’s disease  
Specific Aim 1: To determine the effectiveness of DM/Q 20mg/10mg (one capsule BID for 4 weeks) in 
addressing irritability in individuals with HD.  
Specific Aim 2: To assess the motor response to DM/Q 20mg/10mg (one capsule BID for 4 weeks after 
one week of QD dosing both before and after t he 4 weeks of BID and one week of washout) using the 
motor portion of the UHDRS 99’ total motor score (TMS) and the chorea subscale (TCS).  
Specific Aim 3: To evaluate the impact that DM/Q 20mg/10mg (one capsule BID for 4 weeks) has on 
functional independen ce using the Total Functional Capacity (TFC) and the Independence scale.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-18-1049 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2021  
Page 4 of 8  Study Design  
A randomized, double blind, placebo -controlled, crossover, proof of concept study. Investigator Initiated 
trial (IIT).  
Expected duration of study: One year. 
DURATION OF TREATMENT  
- A total of 13  weeks:  
- First treatment group: DM/Q 20mg/10mg one capsule once daily or placebo for 1 week, followed by 
DM/Q 20mg /10 mg or placebo twice daily for subsequent 4  weeks;  
- First  tapering  and washout:  DM/Q  20mg/10mg  or placebo  once  daily  for 7days  followed  by a washout 
phase of 1  week;  
- Second treatment group (crossover): DM/Q 20mg/10mg or Placebo once daily for 1 week, followed 
by placebo or DM/Q 20mg/10mg twice daily for 4  weeks;  
- Second tapering placebo or DM/Q 20mg/10mg once daily for 7  days.  
 
 
The figure below illustrates how you will crossover from one treatment to another:  
 
 
PRIMARY OUTCOME MEASURE(S):  
To assess irritability  in response  to of DM/Q  20mg/10mg  compared  to placebo  on irritability  as quantified 
by the Irritability  Scale,  where  the informant  is a friend  or family  member  familiar with  the daily  activities 
of the subject after four weeks of treatment with the study drug or  placebo.  
The primary efficacy parameter is the Irritability scale treatment adjusted for baseline. For this scale,  we 
define the clinically significant improvement as 4 points change of the mean score from the baseline, i.e., 
we expect to see a reduction of 4 points with a standard deviation of 3 in the treatment group while no change in the placebo group. Considering a possible period effect in this crossover design due to the 
selfreported scale, to be conservative we use two -sample two -side t test for the sample size 
determination.  
 
 
SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURE(S):  
- The following secondary variables will be  analyzed:  
- Irritability as quantified by the change the total  score;  
- Change of behavioral symptoms (UHDRS, HADS, NPI -  Q), 

IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-18-1049 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2021  
Page 5 of 8  - Change in the motor symptoms (TCS within the TMS);   Change  in   functional   independence (TFC).  
ANALYSIS CONSIDERATIONS:  
The primary  outcome  is the irritability  scale  and the secondary  outcomes  in this primary  objective  include 
PBA-s, CGI -S, CGI -I, NPI focusing on the agitation/aggression domain. For the irritability scale, we define 
the clinically significant improvement as 4 points change of the mean score from the baseline, i.e., we 
expect  to see a reduction  of 4 point s with  a standard  deviation  of 3 in the treatment  group  while  no change 
in the placebo  group.  
 
Study Population 
This study  will include  20 individuals  with  verified  HD mutation.  Considering  a possible  period  effect  in this 
crossover design due to the self -reported scale, to be conservative we use two -sample two -side t test for 
the sample size determination. To detect the above difference, we need 20 subjects in total to achieve 
80%  power  at an alpha  level  of 0.05.  Consi dering a 10%  dropout  rate,  we will enroll  22 subjects.  With  such 
a sample size, we will be able to detect a minimum effect size of 1.3 in other behavioral symptoms and outcomes in the secondary objectives (i.e., chorea, patient’s global  functioning).  
Recru itment strategy:  
At the clinical appointment, HD gene carriers (genetically confirmed by CAG repeat prolongation >36) 
presenting with clinically significant irritability as described per the patient and/or the caregiver/family member  will be invited  to participate  in this study.  Dr. Joohi  Jimenez- Shahed  (Baylor  College  of Medicine) 
and Dr. William G. Ondo (Houston Methodist) will refer potential patients to UTHealth as the primary study site. All study procedures will be conducted at  UTHealth.  
Inclusion Criteria:  
- Verified HD mutation carriers aged 18 to 75  years;  
- Irritable as diagnosed by the Irritability Scale with a score >  14; 
- Stable concomitant medication (no change of medication during last 30 days prior to  inclusion);  
- Written informed consent by prospective study participant before conduct of any trial -related 
procedure.  Participant  must  be able  to make  an informed  decision  of whether  or not to participate  in 
the study.  
Exclusion criteria:  
- Hypersensitivity to dextromethorphan (e.g., rash, hives), quinine, mefloquine, quinidine, or 
dextromethorphan/quinidine  with  a history  of thrombocytopenia,  hepatitis,  bone  marrow  depression 
or lupus -like syndrome induced by these  drugs;  
- Pregnant or nursing women;  
- Active suicidality based on the answer “yes” in questions 4 and 5 of the Columbia- Suicide Severity 
Rating Scale (baseline  version);  
- Woman of childbearing potential, not using highly effective methods of contraception such as oral, topical or inject ed contraception, IUD, contraceptive vaginal ring, or double barrier method such as 
diaphragm and condom with spermicide) or not surgically sterile (via hysterectomy, ovarectomy or bilateral tubal ligation) or not at least one year post -menopausal;  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-18-1049 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2021  
Page 6 of 8  - Male not using an acceptable barrier method for  contraception;  
- Presence  of any medically  not controllable  disease  (e.g.  uncontrolled  arterial  hypertension  or diabetes 
mellitus);  
- Clinically  significant  renal (calculated  creatinine  clearance  < 30 ml/min)  or hepatic  dysfunction;   
Patients with pre -existing hepatic disease;  
- Individuals with a history or complete heart block, QTc prolongation or tornadoes de pointes, or at 
high risk of complete AV  block;  
- Family history of congenital QT  prolongation;  
- History of unexplained syncope within the past  year;  
- Use of drugs containing q uinidine, quinine, or  mefloquine;  
- Individuals currently taking strong CYP3A4 inhibitors or tetrabenazine;  
- Use of certain antidepressants known as monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOis) or tricyclic antidepressants  (TCAs);  
- Use of certain heart rhythm medications --amiodarone, flecainide, procainamide,  propafenone;  
- Use of first -generation  antipsychotics;  
- Use of  tamoxifen;  
- Presence or history of seizures or diagnosed  epilepsy;  
- Severe cognitive disorders defined as a score < 18 on the  MOCA;  
- Clinically relevant abnormal findings in the ECG, the vitals, in the physical examination or laboratory values  at screening that could  interfere  with  the objectives  of the study  or the safety  of the subject  as 
judged by the  investigator;  
- Participation in another investigative drug trial within 2  months;  
- Subjects  who  are unlikely  to be compliant  and attend  scheduled  clinic  visits  as required  as determined 
by the  Investigator.  
 
Study Procedures  
 
This study will request a total of 4 visits and 2 phone interviews, as described below:  
VISITS  Visit 1 
Screening visit  Visit 2 Baseline 
visit  Phone 
Interview 1  Visit 3 
(Crossover)  Phone 
Interview 2  Visit 4  
Week  Week -1 Week 0  Week 3  Week 6  Week 10  Week 13  
Informed consent  X      
Inclusion and 
exclusion criteria  X X     
Randomization   X     
Medical History  X      
Physical Examination  X   X  X 
Concomitant 
medication   
X  
X X  
X X  
X 
Vital signs, ECG  X   X  X 
Labs X   X   
Pregnancy test  X X  X  X 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-18-1049 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2021  
Page 7 of 8  CAG -repeats  X      
Adverse Events    X X X X 
IS X X  X  X 
C-SSRS  X X  X  X 
UHDRS 99’   X  X  X 
UHDRS TFC   X  X  X 
HADS   X  X  X 
NPI -Q  X  X  X 
PBA-S  X  X  X 
MoCA  X X  X  X 
CGI  X  X  X 
1. Laboratory examinations (haematology, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis) at screening visit, week 6 (at the end of the first  arm of the study 
and just prior to crossover) and week 13 (at the end of the study).  
2. Dispensing  and collection  of study  drug  at baseline  visit,  Day 0 first dosing;  Dosing  from  day 1 to day 7: DM/Q  20/10  /placebo (1 capsule) 
once daily for one week, then BID for 4 weeks, then QD for one week. One week washout before  crossing -over.  
3. A phone interview will be conducted at weeks 3 and 10 at which time questions about any adverse effects will be  asked.  
4. A serum pregnancy test will be performed at the screening visit and a urine pregnancy test during the subsequent in person visits.  
5. ECG and vital  signs examination  will be performed  at Screening,  Visit  3 and visit 4, and at any other  time  if judged necessar y for medical 
reasons by the treating  physician.  
 
 
A comprehensive description of data collection at each visit or phone interview can be found at the 
CRF/Data Collection Form attached to this protocol.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
Dextromethorphan/quinidine is an FDA -approved medication (NUEDEXTA).  
Expecte d adverse  reactions:  The most  common  adverse  reactions  (incidence  of ≥3%  and two-fold greater 
than placebo) in patients taking NUEDEXTA are diarrhea, dizziness, cough, vomiting, asthenia, peripheral 
edema, urinary tract infection, influenza, increased gamma- glutamyltransferase, and  flatulence.  
Warnings and precautions:  
*Thrombocytopenia and Other Hypersensitivity Reactions: Quinidine can cause immune -mediated 
thrombocytopenia that can be severe or fatal. Non -specific symptoms, such as lightheadedness, chills, 
fever, nausea, and vomiting, can precede or occur with thrombocytopenia.  
*Hepatotox icity: Hepatitis, including granulomatous hepatitis, has been reported in patients receiving 
quinidine, generally during the first few weeks of therapy.  
*Cardiac Effects: NUEDEXTA causes dose -dependent QTc prolongation. QT prolongation can cause 
torsades d e pointes –type ventricular tachycardia, with the risk increasing as the degree of prolongation 
increases. Some risk factors include use with CYP3A4 inhibitors or drugs that prolong QT interval, 
electrolyte abnormalities, bradycardia, or left ventricular hy pertrophy or dysfunction. If patients taking 
NUEDEXTA experience symptoms that could indicate the occurrence of cardiac arrhythmias (eg, syncope 
or palpitations), NUEDEXTA will be discontinued, and the patient further evaluated.  
Concomitant Use of CYP2D6 S ubstrates: NUEDEXTA inhibits CYP2D6 and may interact with other drugs 
metabolized by CYP2D6.  
Dizziness: NUEDEXTA may cause dizziness. Take precautions to reduce the risk of falls.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-18-1049 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2021  
Page 8 of 8  Serotonin  Syndrome:  Use of NUEDEXTA  with  selective serotonin  reuptake  inhibitors  (SSRIs)  increases  the 
risk of “serotonin  syndrome.”  
*NUEDEXTA will be discontinued immediately if any of these occur.  
 
 
Measures in place to minimize the risks listed above:  
1. Participants  will be asked  to report  any experienced  adverse  reactions  to the study  staff immediately;  
2. Screening for adverse reactions will be performed  periodically;  
3. ECG and vital signs  examination  will be performed  at the screening visit,  visit 3 (at the end of the first 
arm of the study and ju st prior to crossover) and week 13 (at the end of the study).  
4. Laboratory  examinations  (haematology,  clinical chemistry,  and urinalysis)  will be performed  on visit 1 
(screening visit), visit 3 (at the end of the first arm of the study and just prior to crossover) and week 
13 (at the end of the study).  
5. A phone interview will be conducted at weeks 3 and 10 at which time questions about any adverse effects will be  asked.  
The study investigators will be responsible for safety monitoring, which will be performed by periodic 
data review. Any unanticipated pro blem, including adverse events and protocol deviations will be 
reported in the CRF.  
 
Statistics  
For the data analysis, descriptive statistics will be provided for measures at each visit. For the primary 
objective,  we will apply  linear mixed  effects  model  for the repeatedly  measured  irritability  scale  and other 
outcomes  to account  for the within -subject  correlation.  The independent  variables  include  the treatment 
group, sequence, period, and the baseline values. For the missing data, if missing is random, we  will 
analyze the data as it is. Otherwise, we will follow Ibrahim and Molenberghs’ book on longitudinal study 
for data analysis. The analysis for the secondary aims will be similar. For safety analysis, descriptive 
statistics  will be provided  for all adverse  events.  We will stop  the study  if there is evidence  to support  rate 
of one type of adverse events more than 30% in all participants. The stopping rules are based on exact 
lower 95% Blyth -Still- Casella confidence bounds. If the number of cases of on e type of adverse event 
exceed the specified stopping rules: ≥ 7 in 10 patients or ≥ 11 in 20 patients, then patient accrual will be 
paused pending a review by the Safety Monitoring Committee. A significance level of 0.05 will be  used.  
Ethics  
Approval  to conduct  this trial will be sought  from  the Institutional  Review Board  (IRB)  for the University  of 
Texas Health Science Center at Houston. Baylor College of Medicine and the Methodist Hospital IRB 
reciprocity will be  requested.  
The University of Texas -Housto n has its own IRB and Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects 
(CPHS).  There are two classifications  of adverse  events:  adverse  event (AE) or serious  adverse  event  (SAE). 
AE information will be documented throughout the study. The study team will record all AEs on the 
Adverse  Event  case  report  form.  AEs will be monitored  until  they  are adequately  resolved  or explained  as 
mentioned  previously.  
The trial will be perfor med in accordance with the protocol, International Conference on Harmonization 
Good Clinical Practice Guidelines, and applicable local regulatory requirements and laws.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-18-1049 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2021  
Page 9 of 8  The informed consent form will be in compliance with the International Conf erence on Harmonization 
GCP, local regulatory requirements, and legal requirements. Informed consent must be obtained prior to 
performance of any protocol specific procedures. Consent will be obtained by a qualified member of the study  team,  in a private  room  and in accordance  with  local and federal  regulations.  Participants  will receive 
a detailed explanation about the study protocol and the associated risks and benefits. The written 
informed consent will be used in this trial, and any changes made during the course of the trial will be 
approved by our local IRB before  use. 
The investigator  will ensure  that each  trial subject  is fully  informed  about  the nature  and objectives  of the 
trial and possible risks associated with  participation.  
 
Data handling and record keeping  
- Case report forms will not contain  identifiers.  
- Key linking codes to identifiers will be stored securely and separately from study  data.  
- Source documents and othe r regulatory documents containing identifiers will be kept securely in 
locked cabinet with access  control.  
 
Publication Plan  
- All data  will be summarized  and analyzed  by the University  of Texas  Health  Science  Center  at Houston 
by a PhD level  statistician  with  NIH funding supported  by the Neurology  department.  The Investigator 
will prepare a clinical narrative which will include at least a description of the study methods, results, 
implications, and safety profile. The Principal Investigator an d collaborators will prepare an abstract 
submission to appropriate national and international scientific meetings and a manuscript for 
submission to a peer -reviewed journal. Authorship will be based on guidelines issued by the editors 
of medical scientific  journals, and will require active input into protocol design or manuscript 
preparation.  The order  of authors  will be determined  by mutual  agreement.  Negative  publication  bias 
is a significant problem in modern medical research; the results of this trial w ill be published, after 
manuscript approval by all  parties.  
- We plan to publish/disseminate the results even if the results are negative as even a “negative” trial can be helpful in the management of individuals with HD and the evaluation for future therape utic 
agents.  
- We plan to implement the use of this medication as needed if we have favorable results as this drug is already FDA approved. We will consider moving forward with modifying the indication for the medication and future studies pending the study  results.  
- If needed, future funding will be sought through the NINDS/NIH and/or nonprofit organizations that 
fund HD related  research.  
- Clinically significant results will be returned to research  subjects.  