  A STRATEGY TO IMPROVE SUCCESS OF TREATMENT DISCONTINUATION IN BUPRENORPHINE RESPONDERS   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]    New York State Psychiatric Institute - Columbia University Department of Psychiatry  Institutional Review Board  Protocol # 7522 Version April 2, 2019  
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 1 of 30
Protocol Title:
A Strategy to Improve Success of Treatment Discontinuation in  
Buprenorphine Responders
Protocol Number:
7522
First Approval:
07/14/2017
Expiration Date:
07/09/2019Version Date:
04/02/2019
Clinic:
Substance Treatment And Research Services (STARS)
Contact Principal Investigator:
Adam Bisaga,  MD
Email: amb107@columbia.edu
Telephone: 646-774-6155Research Chief:
Frances Levin,  MD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am proposing an  amendment only to an  existing protocol
Division & Personnel
Division
What Division/Department does the  PI belong  to?
SUBSTANCE USEWithin the division/department, what Center  or group are you affiliated with, if  any? 
SUBSTANCE TREATMENT AND RESEARCH  SERVICES
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
None
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 2 of 30
Amendment
Describe the change(s) being made  
1.We are also requesting to collect blood,  urine  and saliva at Baseline, after randomization (3 weeks  after 
1st injection  of XR-NTX,  or 1 week after  completing  bup taper), during  post randomization month 2 ( 1 
week after 2nd XR-NTX injection, or  4 weeks after completion of bup taper), and at end  of study  to be 
examined for biomarkers.
Provide the rationale for the change(s)  
Additional study aim.          
Comment on the  extent to  which the proposed  change(s)  alter  or affect risks/benefits  to subjects 
NoneComment on if the  proposed change(s)  require a  modification to the Consent Form (CF)
yes
Procedures
To create the protocol summary form,  first indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Psychiatric Assessment
   Collection of Biological  Specimens
   Medication Trial
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Medically and Psychiatrically  Healthy  Subjects
   Adults
   Adults  over 50
   Individuals with HIV/AIDS
   Substance Users
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?NoIs the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
YesSelect the number of external  sources of funding that  will be applicable to  this study
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 3 of 30
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  of the grant/contract the same  as the PI of the IRB protocol? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract application is a pending review or a funding decisionSource of FundingFederalInstitute/AgencyNational Institute  on Health
Grant NameA Strategy  to Improve Success of Treatment  
Grant Number1R21DA042243Select one of the followingSingle SiteBusiness OfficeRFMHDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
YesSubcontracted?ToName institution(s)Columbia University
Study Location
Indicate if the  research  is/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
   Other Columbia University Medical  Center  Facilities
This protocol  describes research conducted  by the  PI at other facilities/locations
No
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
The current  guidelines for buprenorphine (BUP)  treatment advocate an open  ended,  long-term maintenance 
approach. However, many  individuals initiating  treatment  with BUP, particularly youth  and those with  brief 
history of prescription opioids  abuse, expect a short treatment episode and are disappointed that treatment 
extends and may even be  indefinite. As such, many  patients  that responded favorably to  treatment  intend  to 
discontinue medication, whether by deciding  unilaterally to  stop it, or by a  route  of physician-directed BUP 
taper. However, it is  not known what is a  best strategy to assure a successful BUP discontinuation without 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 4 of 30
the risk of relapse. 
We propose an open--label  randomized outpatient  trial to evaluate feasibility and
efficacy of rapid buprenorphine (BUP)  discontinuation followed by brief course of treatment with long-
-acting naltrexone (XR--NTX) and to compare  it to the standard method of gradual BUP taper.
Individuals with opioid use disorder (OUD) (N=60) who have successfully completed  at least 6 months of 
buprenorphine treatment  and do not wish to remain  in a long--term buprenorphine maintenance program 
will be recruited.  The first phase  includes a 4--week  period of stabilization on buprenorphine 2--8  mg at the 
research clinic to assure that patients are stable, compliant, and  free from illicit  opioids.  Participants  that 
meet the above criteria will  be randomized 1:1 to: 1) buprenorphine discontinuation and outpatient transition  
to XR--NTX with 3 monthly  injections,  or 2) buprenorphine discontinuation using a  gradual 5-week long 
taper. In both groups participants will  receive weekly relapse prevention therapy and will be  monitored for  
the duration of the trial, which is  25 weeks  post randomization. 
The primary outcome will be  the percent  of patients  successfully transitioned off buprenorphine and 
abstinent from any opioids at the 25--week trial  endpoint. Secondary outcomes will include measures  of 
opioid withdrawal,  mood, anxiety and sleep  problems,  abstinence  from  other substances, time to relapse or  
dropout, and  adverse  effects. We  hypothesize  that more patients  will successfully discontinue buprenorphine 
in the group  that received XR--NTX.  
This proposed  exploratory trial will be  able  to inform the design of future research  and clinical work.  
 
 
Background, Significance  and Rationale
Background, Significance and RationaleThe number  of individuals with Opioid Use Disorder  (OUD) continues to  rise with more than  2.5 million  
affected, along with substantial morbidity and  mortality. Maintenance treatment with  the opioid partial 
agonist buprenorphine or buprenorphine/naloxone (BUP)  is becoming  a treatment  of choice in the  primary  
care setting. As many  patients who had good treatment response desire  to discontinue the  medication  there 
is a need  for evidence on the best strategy  to accomplish that. We propose to  evaluate whether  an addition of 
a short course of a long--acting, injectable  naltrexone  (XR--NTX) improves the chances  of successful  BUP  
discontinuation and  transition to sustained abstinence off all  opioids.
The current  guidelines for BUP treatment advocate an  open ended, long--term  maintenance approach.
However, many individuals initiating treatment with BUP  expect a time--limited and  short treatment,  a
“detoxification--like” experience  rather than  “methadone--like  maintenance treatment,” and are 
disappointed that treatment is protracted and may  even be indefinite. This  is especially relevant for youth  
and those with brief history of addiction to prescription opioids. More  than 60% of patients maintained on 
BUP or methadone expressed interest in discontinuing medication in  the near future and more than 70% 
have previously tried  that (Winstock et al., 2011). It  is not known how  many patients with  a positive 
treatment response  are interested in stopping BUP but more than half of such patient may eventually  drop 
out of treatment (Fiellin et  al., 2008). It is not well understood to  what extent withdrawal--like symptoms 
play a role in  relapse and  how  the addition of a brief course of naltrexone may influence the severity of 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 5 of 30
withdrawal and the success of BUP  discontinuation. To  our knowledge  none  of these  questions have been  
evaluated experimentally and we  believe  that it may  have a
significant impact on the field  considering that up to 1 million  patients are treated with BUP every year.
 
Benefits of and challenges associated with buprenorphine discontinuation
Determining when and how individuals can  be safely  tapered from BUP  using a “planned approach” has 
several potential  benefits. First, patients may feel encouraged that they may be  able to discontinue treatment 
in the near future and  therefore will be  less likely to discontinue it unilaterally. Second,  patients who  do not 
need to be maintained on BUP indefinitely and are taken off it, will have lower risk of medication--related adverse effects and have lower treatment cost. Third,  in areas  of the  country where BUP  providers have 
reached the limits  of prescribing  for 100 patients, and patients on waiting  lists for treatment remain at  
serious risk for overdose and other  adverse consequences of use, safely transitioning patients off BUP would 
enable more  patients to access treatment. Finally, a number of fee--for--service  Medicaid plans  have  
implemented lifetime limits on prescriptions  for BUP, ranging from 12 to  36 months (Rinaldo and Rinaldo, 
2013), and a strategy that  can shorten BUP treatment without compromising outcome may help patients in 
those states.
 
The main challenge to BUP discontinuation is that many patients experience significant  and protracted
discomfort, withdrawal--like symptoms with increase in craving  as well  as mood anxiety and sleep 
disruptions (Dunn et al.,  2015). These  symptoms emerge even as the dose is being gradually reduced.  As a  
result, many will abandon the attempt at discontinuation and resume BUP maintenance. If the patient stops medication on  their own, and cannot  easily resume  treatment, they may relapse to  illicit opioids. Therefore, 
the question of how to discontinue treatment in patients who favorably responded to  BUP is of high 
significance to the  field as it may address  several important questions with  clinical relevance.
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
The primary outcome will be  the percent  of patients  successfully transitioned off buprenorphine
and abstinent from any opioids at the 25--week  trial endpoint.
 
Secondary outcomes will include measures of opioid withdrawal,  mood,  anxiety and sleep problems, 
abstinence from other substances,  time  to relapse or dropout, and adverse  effects.
 
Additionally we  will examine in biofluid derived extracellular vesicle content for the existence of 
biomarkers related to naltrexone  treatment.   
 
We hypothesize that  more patients will successfully discontinue buprenorphine in
the group that  received XR--NTX.
Description of Subject Population
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 6 of 30
Sample #1
Specify subject  population
Adults ages  18-60 currently treated  with buprenorphine for opioid use disorder 
Number of completers  required to accomplish study aims
50Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
60Age range of subject  population
18-60
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
Both males and females will be recruited. All eligible subjects are accepted; however, past experience withrecruitment for  other studies in this population suggests  that that the sample will  be 75% male, 60%
Caucasian, 30% Hispanic or  Latino,  and 10% Black  or African-American.
Description of subject populationAdults ages  18-60 currently treated  with buprenorphine for opioid use disorder
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
All potential participants will be evaluated  at the BSU clinic  at the New York State  Psychiatric  Institute.
How and by whom  will subjects be approached  and/or recruited? 
All patients will  be seen by one of our psychiatrists  or Master's level therapist   for a  screening  evaluation 
and mental status  examination as  part of routine admission  procedures  or BSU clinic . Patients  who  appear 
to meet criteria are told about the study and offered  further evaluation. Final informed consent for the study 
will be obtained  after full psychiatric and medical workup  is complete.  The physicians listed above work  
regular weekly shifts,  know the protocol well,  and are able  to explain study consent to the participant. 
Procedures for training  staff physicians in each protocol and consent form include initial presentations by 
the Principal Investigator at weekly staff meetings,  and weekly  discussion of inclusion/exclusion  criteria and 
study eligibility for  each  screening participant.
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
Once approved by the  IRB, advertisements for study will be placed on the subway and in local newspapers 
and radio  stations.  Additionally, prospective participants are recruited  by word  of mouth and through liaison 
to other  local clinical  services.
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
NoDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 7 of 30
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
No
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name the subject group/sub sampleAll participantsCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
Inclusion Criteria:• A documented history of treatment with buprenorphine or buprenorphine/naloxone  for at least 6 months 
with sustained abstinence  from illicit opioids for at least 3 months.  Participants  must  be maintained  on daily 
dose of buprenorphine  in the 2--8 mg range.(MINI interview  by therapist, Clinical interview by psychiatrist, 
consultation with  previous  prescriber or the verification patients's  self-report with  the prescribing records 
(PMP) with  patient's permission)
• Aged 18 to 60 years (Clinical  interview)
• In otherwise good health based  on complete medical history,  physical examination, vital signs
measurement, ECG, and  laboratory  tests  (hematology, blood  chemistry, urinalysis) within normal
ranges (Medical  history and physical examination by psychiatrist or NP, laboratory tests  (serum Chem-20 
and CBC,  urinalysis), ECG)
• Seeking buprenorphine discontinuation and willing to  accept randomization to either  taper from
buprenorphine or injection naltrexone (clinical interview)• Able to give  written informed  consent  to participate in the study
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain them
1. Lifetime history  of DSM-5 diagnosis of schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder,  or bipolar disorder
(MINI interview by therapist,  Clinical  interview by psychiatrist)
2. Current DSM-5 criteria for any other  psychiatric  disorder that  in the investigator’s judgment is unstable,  
would be disrupted by the  study  medication,  or is likely to  require pharmacotherapy or psychotherapy 
during the study period. Concurrent treatment  with other  psychotropic medication is not exclusionary, as 
long as participants  have been stable on their  current dose  for at least 3 months.
( MINI  interview by therapist,  Clinical  interview and  mental status  exam by psychiatrist, contact with 
collateral information as needed and  available)
3. Individuals who meet DSM-5  criteria  for any  substance use disorders - severe,  other  than opioid and  
nicotine use disorder. Physiological dependence on alcohol or sedative-hypnotics is exclusionary.(MINI interview by therapist,  Clinical  interview by psychiatrist)
4. A recent history of binge-use of alcohol  or sedative-hypnotics (using large amounts in a short time to 
severe intoxication  or blackouts).
(Clinical interview by psychiatrist)5. Pregnancy,  lactation,  or failure  to use adequate  contraceptive  method in  female  patients who  are currently 
engaging in sexual activity  with men.
( Clinical interview by psychiatrist, physical  examination and medical history  by psychiatrist or NP, urine 
pregnancy test, serum HCG)
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 8 of 30
6. Unstable medical conditions, such as AIDS, cancer,  uncontrolled  hypertension (blood pressure > 140/90), 
uncontrolled diabetes, pulmonary  hypertension  or heart disease.
(Medical history  and physical examination by psychiatrist or NP, laboratory  tests  (serum Chem-20 and  
CBC, urinalysis), ECG)7. Legally mandated  to participate in a substance  use disorder treatment program.
( Participant self-report, Clinical interview by psychiatrist)
8. Current or recent history of significant violent  or suicidal behavior,  risk for  suicide  or homicide (MINI 
interview by therapist, Clinical interview by psychiatrist) 
9. History of  accidental opioid overdose  in the  last three years or any other significant history of overdose 
following detoxification within  past 10 years defined as an episode of opioid-induced unconsciousness, 
whether or  not medical  treatment was sought or received.
( MINI  interview by therapist,  Clinical  interview by psychiatrist)
10. Elevated liver function tests (AST and ALT  > 3 times the upper limit of normal)
( Laboratory  tests -serum Chem-20)
11. Known history of allergy, intolerance, or  hypersensitivity to  naltrexone  or any  other study
medications( Participant self-report, Clinical interview by psychiatrist)
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent NoWaiver of parental consent No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
NoDescribe procedures  used  to obtain consent  during  the screening  process 
Potential participants will sign a consent  form  prior to  initiating the screening process. Following  review of 
screening informed consent, an evaluation team  consisting  of a Masters- or Doctoral-level  research 
psychologist and psychiatrist  meets with potential participants.  The baseline evaluation includes a full 
battery of  self-report measures, a structured psychiatric evaluation  (MINI interview), Hamilton depression 
scale, a physical  examination, and laboratory assessments. Medical screening  and laboratory  work,  include 
vital signs, a physical examination, ECG, serum  chemistry,  liver function tests,  complete  blood count, and 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 9 of 30
urinalysis obtained by study personnel.  Pregnancy tests will be conducted for women.
Describe Study Consent ProceduresAfter the screening evaluation, the study physician will review the study  inclusion/exclusion criteria to 
determine if the participant is eligible  for the study based on the screening materials. If  the 
participant is eligible for the study, they will be given  the consent form to read, and  review with  the 
consenting physician. The study  consent will only be signed after all of the participant's  questions are 
asked, and after  all the risks and  benefits are  explained to and understood by the  participant. Study 
related procedures will only be initiated after the consent  form  is signed  by both the participant  and 
consenting physician. Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Form
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Bisaga, Adam, MDBlevins, DerekBrezing, Christina, MDKidd, JeremyLevin, Frances, MD
Luo, Sean, MDMariani, John, MDNaqvi, Nasir, MDShulman, Matisyahu, MDVaezazizi, LeilaWai, Jonathan, MDType in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this study
This is  an open-label  randomized outpatient  trial to compare the safety and efficacy of two methods of  
transitioning patients off BUP.  Opioid-dependent individuals who have  successfully completed at least 6 
months of BUP treatment and do not wish to remain in  a long-term BUP maintenance will be  screened  for 
enrollment. 
 
In the first stage (led-in phase) participants will be maintained on their usual dose of BUP  (2-8 mg)  at the 
research clinic for 1 month to assure  that they are stable, compliant, and  free from illicit  opioids.  Following 
that, participants will be randomly  assigned to begin treatment with  one of two regimens: 1) rapid BUP 
discontinuation and  transition to XR-NTX, or 2) 5-week long BUP taper. Participants  randomized to  XR-
NTX will receive a total of 3 injections.  In both groups,  participants  will receive weekly individual therapy 
and monitoring  for 3 months post-randomization.  During  months  4-6 participants will be seen twice  
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 10 of 30
monthly for therapy and monitoring. The  primary outcome will be a binary indicator of discontinuation 
success, the percent of patients  successfully  transitioned off BUP and abstinent from opioids at the end of 
the trial, 25 weeks after  randomization. We hypothesize that success rate will be greater  in patients that 
received treatment with XR-NTX.
 Setting and Screening: This study will be conducted at the BSU clinic at NYSPI where  we have previously 
carried out recruitment and treatment  of opioid-dependent subjects using similar methodology. A 
combination of radio, print, and Internet advertising will be  directed  at prospective participants in the New 
York metropolitan area. Screening procedures are standardized for clinical trials  including a telephone 
interview, the MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview, psychiatric evaluation, medical  history,  
physical and laboratory  examination. The research psychiatrist will offer eligible individuals participation in 
the study and will obtain  informed consent.
 Randomization. We predict  that 50 participants (out of 60 enrolled) will complete  lead-in phase successfully 
and will be available for  randomization. The 1:1 randomization will be  stratified by the BUP maintenance 
dose (4 mg/d vs. greater than 4 mg/d) and the type  of the  primary  drug (prescription  opioids vs.  heroin) 
distributing these potential  prognostic factors equally between groups to  ensure
comparable representation. The  randomization sequence will be carried out by a research pharmacist, 
balanced in random blocks to protect  allocation  concealment.
 
Regimen 1 will  include a rapid Monday  to Friday oral naltrexone-induction procedure: last dose of BUP on  
Sat, Sun-Mon  0 mg, Tue 1 mg, Wed 3 mg, Thu 6 mg dose of oral  NTX  respectively. On Friday, a final  25 
mg dose of  oral NTX  will be given followed  by an injection of XR-NTX (Vivitrol; 380 mg  IM). All doses  
of oral NTX  will be given in a single or  split  doses depending on patients’ tolerability of  the protocol.  
Throughout the induction  adjuvant medications will be  administered  on standing basis: clonidine 0.1 mg 
qid, clonazepam  0.5 mg qid, and zolpidem 10 mg HS.  Additional injections  of XR-NTX will be 
administered 4 and 8 weeks after  the first injections to participants  who provide an opioid-negative urine or 
pass a naloxone challenge test.  
 
Procedures for Missed Doses of Long-acting Naltrexone:Missing a  scheduled Vivitrol injection is
the most important  threat to the success  of long-acting naltrexone maintenance. In the event of a
patient missing a  scheduled injection,  the clinic  staff  will immediately attempt to  contact the patient to  re-
establish commitment  to the naltrexone treatment and reschedule the injection within a 48-hour period, or as 
soon as possible thereafter, based on clinical judgement( i.e., after  a clinical assessment and  naloxone 
challenge if indicated). If  the patient cannot  attend the treatment clinic within that time-frame, or cannot be 
located, the treatment  team will use previously obtained locator information in an effort to locate the patient 
through emergency contacts and  get him/her in for a  clinic visit. If opioid use occurs in combination  with  a 
missed Vivitrol injection, a naloxone  challenge  will be administered to  confirm that  the next long-acting 
naltrexone injection will  be safely  tolerated. 
Regimen 2 will  include a 5-week BUP  taper from the maintenance dose of 8, 6, 4, or 2mg (wk  1: 6, 5, 3 
2mg/d, wk 2: 4, 4 or 2 mg/d, wk 3: 3, 3 or 2 mgd/, wk 4:  2 mg/d, wk  5: 1 mg/d). A  buprenorphine/naloxone  
generic product will  be used.  Participants  will be offered adjuvant medications, which will be  administered 
on standing basis: clonidine  0.1 mg qid,  clonazepam 0.5  mg qid, and  zolpidem 10 mg HS. Additional 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 11 of 30
injections of XR-NTX  will be administered 4 and 8 weeks after the first  injections to  participants who 
provide an opioid-negative urine or pass  a naloxone challenge test.
 
Participants in both regimens will be seen  in the clinic for 25 weeks  for  follow-up  after randomization,  
which will include  both the week induction  onto Vivitrol in Regimen 1 and the 5 week buprenorphine taper 
in Regimen 2.
 
We will collect 4ml of  saliva, 50ml of urine, and  4, 6-7ml  blood  from  subjects at baseline,  after  
randomization (3 weeks  after 1st injection of XR-NTX, or  1 week after completing bup taper), during  
post randomization  month 2 (  1 week after 2nd XR-NTX injection, or 4 weeks  after completion of bup 
taper), and at end of study  to be examined for biomarkers. From  these we will isolate extracellular 
vesicle-containing pellets  and evaluate their  contents using advanced -OMICs analyses, in order to 
identify molecular signatures that  differ across subjects before  and after ending treatment with 
buprenorphine.
 
Study blinding.  All participants will receive open-label medication  as this is an effectiveness trial of two 
different regimens for  managing patients discontinuing BUP treatment, tested as they would be  used  in 
community-based clinical  treatment.
 Psychotherapy platform. Following study enrollment, all participants will be offered  weekly  therapy,  
delivered by a therapist, that will follow the  Community Reinforcement Approach:  CRA (Budney and  
Higgins, 2000). CRA  is a skills oriented  treatment that emphasizes  building a lifestyle which  increases the  
opportunities for alternative reinforcers to drug use. CRA has been  a central  component of the behavioral 
treatment program developed by our group to improve the efficacy  of naltrexone based treatments for OUD 
(Nunes et al., 2006; Rothenberg et  al., 2002; Sullivan et al.,  2015) and  we have  extensive experience 
implementing this  flexible  treatment protocol and  assuring treatment fidelity. We will offer the following 
modules: Building and enhancing social support network; Social  skills  and relationship enhancement 
training; Management of  mood and emotions; Increasing pleasant  activities; Job-seeking skills;  and 
Termination (Rothenberg et al., 2002). We will also  incorporate a contingency reinforcement  schedule to 
reinforce clinic visits to increase frequency  of outcomes collection. As patients progress in treatment, we  
will support patient-directed recovery plan  focusing on individual’s strengths to  build meaningful and 
satisfying life and  we will proactively link patients  to recovery support resources. We have  been 
implementing evidence-based therapy in our clinic  for close  to 20 years and we have established procedures 
for therapist training, supervision, and treatment  fidelity assurance  (e.g. recording of therapy sessions).
 Outpatient Study Visits and Assessments will occur weekly during  the period of  BUP  maintenance and 
taper to ensure adherence and to monitor for  abstinence. Study  visits  will take  place  daily  during XR-NTX 
induction and weekly following injection  naltrexone or BUP  taper in  both regimens for the remainder of the 
study period.  Once  per week  participants  will meet with  a therapist and complete study assessments. They 
will have scheduled meetings with a  study psychiatrist  weekly  to inquire about medication effects and any  
changes in their medical/psychological condition following  medication  discontinuation.  
 Evaluation of Depression and Anxiety  symptoms:  Participants who meet  criteria  for a Mood  Disorder 
(MDD) of  mild  to moderate severity  or an  Anxiety Disorder will be  followed closely during detoxification  
and subsequently.  Mood and anxiety will be assessed  both in therapy sessions and during  MD visits. If  a 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 12 of 30
patient demonstrates significant symptoms  which persist following detoxification, we will offer the 
participant the option of beginning an antidepressant  or an  anti-anxiety  treatment if  deemed  clinically 
warranted. Managing controlled substances: Currently  the study is run under the NYS Controlled Substance license  # 
0400081 held by the  NYS  OMH and the  DEA Researcher Registration # PN0093461 held by the NYSPI 
Pharmacy Department. Dr. Bisaga has  obtained his own  NYS  Controlled Substance license and  a federal  
DEA research license. . The drug stock of controlled substances for each project will be ordered,  maintained 
and prepared under  the Institutional registration  at the NYSPI Pharmacy  (OMH/NYS  Controlled Substance 
license # 0400081). 
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Criteria for Early Discontinuation  
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation
Drop out  criteria  during the study period include:
 
1) Development  of serious psychiatric symptoms as indicated by the Clinical Global Impression (CGI)
improvement score of  6 (much worse than baseline) or greater  for 2 consecutive  weeks or psychiatric  or 
medical deterioration that  cannot be managed safely in the context outpatient treatment offered at the study 
(in cases  where the  investigator determines that the participant needs  immediate  study discontinuation).
 
2) If the  participant's continued opioid  or other drug use places him/her at risk for self-destructive behavior  
or other harm as indicated by a CGI improvement  score of 6 or more (much  worse  than baseline)  for 2 
consecutive weeks. In cases where the investigator determines that  the participant needs  immediate  study 
discontinuation for  continued opioid or other  drug use, participants will be provided with  referrals.
 
3) Development  of serious medical condition(s) that may or may not be  related to  study participation
as assessed by weekly visits with the psychiatrist, vital sign measurements, and weekly weight-ins.
 
4) If the  participant becomes pregnant  as assessed  by monthly  urine  pregnancy testing
 
5) Ongoing  non--adherence with recommended clinical visits, absence from study visits for 21 days.
 
Patients who are  exited  from  the trial for any  reason will be offered  continued  treatment in  the community 
unless a higher level of  care is indicated  (inpatient or residential treatment),  or the patient  requests treatment 
elsewhere, in which care  help with arranging  referrals will be  offered. A clinic  staff member, with  physician 
backup, is available 24 hours per day  by phone in case of emergency. 
 
Participants may  be removed from the trial if  they repeatedly miss scheduled  appointments or clinical
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 13 of 30
worsening necessitates more intensive treatment  (drop out criteria are  defined  above).  Subjects who
develop serious  psychiatric symptomatology (e.g.,  psychosis, suicidal  ideation,  severe depressive
symptoms) during the study period will be  dropped  from the study and appropriate clinical referrals will
be made. A patient who's  continued opioid use places them at risk for self-destructive behavior or
otherwise places them  at significant risk will be discontinued from the study. This  would include,  but not be 
limited to,  patients  who become unconscious  after using, engage in  destructive or violent behavior while 
intoxicated, report driving  while  intoxicated,  or develop medical complications from their  opioid use. In  all 
cases where subjects are discontinued from  the study, the clinical research staff will assume clinical  
responsibility for the  subjects until clinical  referrals are operational.
In case that the  patient  is removed from the  research  trial for medical reasons,  or is requesting
withdrawal from the study, he/she will be  retained in open treatment for the remaining study period.
Upon removal of  a patient from the trial due  to clinical deterioration, the patient will be referred for
appropriate follow-up treatment, in most instances  either intensive outpatient or residential  treatment.
The PI or a study psychiatrist is available  24 hours/day by phone and/or beeper in case of emergency.
 
 
If a patient is  discontinued from the  study, or decides  to withdraw,  or relapses  during  study the participation,  
the patient will  get treated with buprenorphine  until they are  linked  with  a referral for continuing  
buprenorphine treatment.  Participants will receive a one-week supply of buprenorphine at a time during  the 
transition process.   
 
 
Blood and other Biological Samples
Please create or insert  a table describing  the proposed collection  of blood or other biological specimens
Urine samples will be collected  at every  visit, and we will use onsite testing  to provide immediate feedback 
on opiate use to the participant and the  treatment team. Blood  chemistry will be  obtained  at baseline and end 
of study (week  25). Urine  Pregnancy tests will be obtained at baseline,  at once monthly  (or prior  to 
administration of XR-NTX).
 
We will collect 4ml of  saliva, 50ml of urine, and  4, 6-7ml  blood  from  subjects at Baseline, after 
randomization (3 weeks  after 1st injection of XR-NTX, or  1 week after completing bup taper), during  
post randomization  month 2 (  1 week after 2nd XR-NTX injection, or 4 weeks  after completion of bup 
taper), and at end of study  to be examined for biomarkers. From  these we will isolate extracellular 
vesicle-containing pellets  and evaluate their  contents using advanced -OMICs analyses, in order to 
identify molecular signatures that  differ across subjects before  and after ending treatment with 
buprenorphine.
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 14 of 30
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
Physiological Measures
Medical History  and Physical Exam: A comprehensive medical history  and physical examination will be 
performed during the screening process. All potential participants will be offered the opportunity  to be 
referred to receive free  HIV risk reduction  education,  as well as HIV  testing  and counseling.
 
Pregnancy Testing: Serum pregnancy testing will be performed on all females during screening and urine
pregnancy tests will be  performed at baseline and monthly afterwards.
 
Serum laboratory  examination: Complete blood count, electrolyte, and liver  function tests will be 
performed during the screening process and  at the end of study.
 
Urinalysis: Laboratory urinalysis (glucose, protein, ketones, pH,  specific  gravity,  and microscopic analysis) 
will be performed  during the screening process and at the end  of study.
 
Urine Toxicology: Urine samples will be collected under directly--observed conditions  during screening 
and at each study visit.  To provide  immediate feedback to  the participant, the  Abuscreen On--Trak system 
(Roche Diagnostics) will be used to identify  opiates (morphine, oxycodone, buprenorphine,  methadone). In  
addition, the sample will  be analyzed for substances  of abuse,  including THC, alcohol,  opioids, cocaine, 
benzodiazepines, amphetamines,  and barbiturates.
Vital Signs: Temperature, pulse, and  blood pressure will be measured at every study visit for data collection 
and safety monitoring purposes. Height and  weight will be measured and baseline body mass index (BMI) 
calculated during screening. Weight will be recorded  and monitored at  each visit throughout the study 
period.
Interviews
Clinical Global  Impression Scale--Observer  (CGI): The CGI Severity and  CGI Improvement scales 
(Guy, 1976) will  be used to measure the overall  clinical status  of the participant as well as change from 
baseline in symptom  severity, functional  impairment, and psychiatric symptoms. The CGI Improvement  
scale will be used to determine whether a participant  needs  to be discontinued from  the study  and provided 
with an appropriate  clinical referral.
Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM--D):  This is the standard clinician--rated instrument used to  assess
depressive symptoms in clinical trials to assess baseline severity and changes associated  with  treatment. We 
use a 25--item, structured  interview version (SIGH--D--DES)  that incorporates the reverse vegetative 
symptoms of  the atypical subtype of major depressive  disorder  (Williams, 1988),  but permits calculation  of 
the standard 17-- and  21--item scores imbedded in the  scale. In addition to  mood symptoms,  the HAM--D 
has items that measure  anxiety, irritability, and insomnia, which are symptoms of interest  for this study. The 
HAM--D will be  performed at baseline  and twice  per month thereafter throughout the  trial.
Hamilton Anxiety Scale  (HAM--A): The HAM--A is a standard clinician--rated instrument used to assess 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 15 of 30
the severity of anxiety symptoms (Maier et al., 1988). The scale consists of 14 items, measuring  both 
psychic anxiety and somatic anxiety.  The HAM--A  will be  preformed  at baseline and and  twice per month 
thereafter throughout the trial.
The MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) (Sheehan et  al., 1998) will be  performed  
during screening  as part of a complete psychiatric diagnostic assessment.
Structured Medication Count Interview is a Timeline Follow--Back assessment of study medicationcompliance accounting for each  dose of prescribed  study  medication  during the study period. Structured pill 
count interviews  will be conducted weekly.
 
Systematic Assessment for Treatment and Emergent Events (SAFTEE):  The SAFTEE as modified for 
Project COMBINE  (Johnson  et al.,  2005) will be performed weekly, and twice-monthly  during  study 
months 4-6  to identify any adverse  symptoms.  If participants report experiencing adverse symptoms since 
the previous visit,  the research nurse  will record  the symptom as well as the date of onset, severity,  and 
resolution (if applicable) and research psychiatrist will  review it at least weekly and more frequently if 
symptoms are present.
Timeline Follow--Back  (TLFB): The Timeline  Followback method  (Litten and Allen, 1992) will gather 
self-- reported opioid use data  for each day during the month prior to study enrollment  and each day during 
the study period. The TLFB confirmed  by urine  toxicology will  be the primary outcome measure of 
psychoactive substance use and will be  performed at every study visit.
Therapist Contact Log (TCL): The  number  and duration of treatment sessions will be documented  by the 
therapist on a  contact  log.
End of Study Form (ESF):  At study completion  or the point of termination  for patients who  relapse or 
drop out, the research psychiatrist fills out an  End of Study Form, which  indicates whether or  not a patient  
completed 25  weeks of  treatment, the date  of termination,  the number of weeks of treatment completed  from 
randomization to termination, and reasons  for early  termination, including documented relapse to  opiates,  
resumption of buprenorphine maintenance,  psychiatric  worsening, medical worsening, or lost  to follow--up.
 
Self--Report
Clinical Global  Impression--Self (CGI--S): The CGI--Self is a two--item scale that asks  the subject to  rate 
his or her current  level of  symptoms and estimate  changes from  baseline  (Guy,  1976). The  CGI--S will 
serve as  the primary self--reported  measure  of overall functioning.
Medical Outcomes Study—Sleep Scale (MOS--SS):  The MOS--SM is a 12--item measure for 
characterizing the  quality  of sleep (Hays  et al., 2005). Opioid withdrawal,  both  acute and protracted is 
characterized by insomnia and other sleep  disturbances. The MOS--SM  will be  the primary outcome of 
sleep quality and length and will be  collected at each visit.
Craving Scales-- Self:  A visual analog  scales is used for patients to rate the intensity of craving for opiates 
experienced since the  previous visit (Bisaga et al., 2011).
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 16 of 30
Spielberger State--Trait Anxiety Test (SSTAT)-- Self: The SSTAT  is a well--validated measure of 
anxiety consisting of two self--rated subscales, one rating Trait anxiety  and the other  State  anxiety 
(Spielberger et  al., 1970).
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)--  Self: The BDI is a 21--item self--report questionnaire. It has been used 
in many studies and  validly and reliably  assesses depression in  many patient  groups including substance 
abusers (Beck et al.,  1996) and it will be collected weekly, and twice-monthly during study months  4-6.
Subjective Opiate  Withdrawal Scale (SOWS)-- Self: The SOWS is a 19--item self--report scale reliably 
eliciting severity of common physical  and mental symptoms  of opiate withdrawal, and  also yielding a total  
withdrawal severity score (Handelsman et al., 1987).  It will be used to examine  occurrence  of symptoms 
resembling opiate withdrawal during naltrexone maintenance and will be  collected at each  visit.
Locator Form-- Self: In order  to facilitate the  location of drop--outs for follow--up evaluation, a standard 
location form  will be administered at baseline and updated monthly.  This indicates names, addresses and 
phone numbers of family members  and close friends likely to know  patients' whereabouts  along with  
permission to contact them in the future.
 
 
Please attach copies, unless  standard  instruments are used
Off label and investigational use of drugs/devices
Choose from the following that will be applicable to your study 
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?YesMaximum duration  of delay to any treatment  
A delay of  up to 2 weeks is possible prior to enrollment.
Maximum duration  of delay to standard care or treatment of known  efficacy
Up to two weeks.Treatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
Discharge and aftercare  planning and implementation will be incorporated into the study. A  Discharge Plan 
will be completed by a clinician and approved by a study physician prior  to the End  of Study  visit. After the 
End of Study, participants  will continue in a follow-up phase with  once weekly  clinic  visits  with their 
therapist for up to  one month in order  to facilitate  transition and  permit overlap with another treatment 
program for aftercare. Discussion of treatment recommendations as well  as risks and benefits  of accepting  
and refusing referrals will take place and will be documented.  
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 17 of 30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 18 of 30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 19 of 30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternativesThe major alternatives for long-term treatment of opiate dependence are  "drug-free"  treatment  on either an
outpatient or residential  basis,  or agonist  maintenance with methadone or buprenorphine, all available by
referral. Other options available in the  community include either hospital-based detoxification (often 
agonist-assisted) to a  "drug-free" state, which  is available to  the patients by referral, or outpatient methadone 
detoxification, which  is available at some methadone clinics. Regardless of treatment,  the risk of relapse to 
illicit opiate use is very high once  the detoxification is completed without medication-based relapse 
prevention treatment. XR-naltrexone is FDA-approved for relapse prevention treatment  of opiate
dependence.During the initial informed consent process,  patients will be  informed about alternative treatments and their 
availability, and that they  are free to choose  among the options, at baseline or  at any  time during the study.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
Side Effects, Risks, and Interactions of BuprenorphineBuprenorphine has  been associated with adverse effects typical of opioid agonist drugs (e.g. sedation,
constipation, insomnia, headache, nausea), although  as a partial  agonist such effects  are typically less
pronounced than they would be with a  full agonist. The most common adverse  event associated with the
sublingual administration is oral  hypoesthesia. Other  adverse  events  were  constipation, headache,  
intoxication, disturbance in attention, palpitations, insomnia,  sweating,  and blurred  vision. Buprenorphine 
by itself has  little tendency to suppress respiration and is associated with  a low risk of overdose, a safety 
advantage. However, there is a risk of overdose if buprenorphine is  combined  with  sedative drugs  such as 
benzodiazepines or alcohol, analogous to the risk of combining such sedating  medications  with  a full 
agonist like methadone. As a partial agonist, buprenorphine can precipitate an acute opioid withdrawal reaction if taken within 12--18 hours of another short--acting full opioid agonist, or  within 48--72 hours of a 
longer--acting full opioid such as methadone.Discontinuation of buprenorphine is associated  with opioid withdrawal  symptoms  ranging from mild-
-moderate to more severe reactions. Study physicians have extensive  experience,  in both research  and 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 20 of 30
clinical settings,  in administering buprenorphine  and in the management of opioid withdrawal symptoms. 
The use of  buprenorphine is also associated with the risk of using the medication for the purposes of 
intoxication. In the present study we will use  buprenorphine/naloxone combination product, which has 
lower abuse liability. If  sublingual buprenorphine is  used parenterally, there is a risk of precipitated  opioid 
withdrawal. Such  an event, if  it were to occur, would be short--lived and  not life threatening.  Participants 
will be warned of this risk and advised not to  use the medication in this  manner. If it is determined  that 
patients have been abusing  their buprenorphine in such a  manner, they will be declared to have failed BUP 
discontinuation, and  a new treatment plan  will be developed by the patient’s clinical team, with  possibilities 
including transfer to naltrexone or methadone maintenance. To minimize  the risk of diversion, medication 
will be dispensed for short time intervals  (1--2  weeks of medication at a time).
Buprenorphine is metabolized principally by CYP3A4. Co--administration of other CYP3A4 inhibitors  (e.g. 
anti-- retrovirals  efavirenz, delavirdine, atazanavir or atazanavir/ritonavir;; the anti--fungal agent 
ketoconazole;; antibiotics erythromycin  or clarithromycin) may cause  an increase in systemic  levels of 
buprenorphine, although  this does not usually  have clinically significant effects. When  a patient being 
prescribed buprenorphine  is also receiving other medications, the  prescribing  physician will check for 
potential interactions ahead of  time and monitor during treatment.
 
Side Effects of Extended--Release (XR),  Injectable  Naltrexone
The most common side effect associated with injectable naltrexone is injection site reaction.  XR-naltrexone 
is administered as a gluteal  intramuscular  injection  and injection site reactions,  mostly pain, and occur in  
approximately 5% of patients in opioid treatment studies. These reactions are  generally mild and include 
pain, tenderness, indurations, bruising, pruritus and swelling. Generally  these  reactions last 1--3 days. Rare 
skin reactions at the site of the  injection have  been  reported, including sterile abscesses, which may relate to 
inadvertent injection into  fatty tissue, rather than  muscle. Patients  will be informed of this risk, and baseline 
physical evaluation will include  examination  of the  buttock for excessive adiposity. If a  patient is examined 
by a physician and found to have an abscess,  necrosis, cellulitis or extensive swelling, an appropriate 
surgical referral  will be  made.
Naltrexone has been associated with reversible  hepatocellular injury indicated by elevated liver enzymes 
when administered at doses substantially greater  than the 380 mg im per month, dose recommended for 
relapse prevention treatment of opiate dependence and proposed for the present  study. When used in 
therecommended dose range in opiate--dependent patients, this risk is remote  (Brahen et al., 1988;; Brewer 
and Wong, 2004). Naltrexone is therefore contraindicated  in patients with  acute  hepatitis  or liver failure,  and 
such patients are excluded from the study. Patients with hepatic enzyme levels greater  than three times the 
upper imit of normal are excluded. Injectable  naltrexone achieves  higher blood levels than oral naltrexone 
initially, but these should  remain lower than  levels associated with hepatitis. If naltrexone--induced hepatitis 
were to occur in the  setting of long--acting preparation, where the naltrexone would be only very slowly 
eliminated, this would prolong  exposure to the offending agent. However, the experience with injectable  
naltrexone also suggests it is safe. In our studies with extended--release naltrexone several  patients 
experienced elevation  in liver enzymes, which were determined  to be related to  hepatitis C. In the proposed 
study we will use a  long--acting, injectable  preparation of naltrexone (Vivitrol  380 mg).
Several recent reports have documented that naltrexone pose significantly lower risk of hepatotoxicity  than  
previously suspected, even  among  alcohol--  and opioid--dependent persons  including those with  HCV 
and/or HIV  infection (Lucey et  al., 2008;; Mitchell et al., 2012;; Tetrault  et al., 2012;; Vagenas et al., 2014). 
These reports were  used  to support decision taken by FDA in  July of 2013 to remove the Boxed Warning on 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 21 of 30
the hepatotoxicity. Other adverse events seen most frequently in association with XR--naltrexone  treatment 
for opioid dependence include nasopharingitis, insomnia  and toothache (Vivitrol;; Package Insert).  
During the outpatient phase of the  study,  if a patient misses scheduled injection of Vivitrol and  resumes 
regular opiate  use, then receiving injectable  naltrexone will precipitate  opiate  withdrawal,  which may be 
quite severe in proportion  to the time since  the last injection and the level of opiate dependence.  The 
physician will  evaluate the patient and  perform  a naloxone challenge  test to  determine whether or not  
naltrexone can be safely resumed. If the  naloxone  challenge is positive  (withdrawal is precipitated), then the 
patient will be  removed  from the study and offered another treatment option such as agonist maintenance 
(buprenorphine or methadone) according to clinical judgment and  the patient’s  preferences.
Self--administration of large doses of opiates  may over--ride the blockade  produced by naltrexone resulting 
in opiate overdosage  with its  attendant  risks including respiratory depression and death.  Patients will be 
warned of  the severe  danger of using opiates, including trying to  over--ride  the blockade. Also  patients who 
have topped naltrexone and resume  opiates will not be tolerant initially,  so that the quantities  of opiates self-
- administered prior to treatment, when  they were tolerant, may be  quite dangerous in the non--tolerant  state. 
Patients will be  warned of this. Patients who self--administer opiates to the  point of somnolence or stupor 
will be removed from the  trial and referred to inpatient detoxification. In the event of a  medical  emergency 
requiring opiate analgesia,  a patient  on naltrexone will require higher doses  of opiates  than normally  
administered. Patients  will be informed  of this  and will be given a naltrexone medication card to carry  in 
their wallet.
 
 Risks of  the Rapid Naltrexone Induction Procedure:
In this procedure withdrawal is then precipitated  through administration of oral naltrexone and treated with 
clonidine (an  alpha--2--adrenergic receptor agonist which reduces  sympathetic nervous  system output 
produced by opiate withdrawal), clonazepam (a  benzodiazepine which  reduces the anxiety and dysphoria 
and permits sleep) and  other adjunctive  medications. In the proposed protocol the risk of severe withdrawal 
has been  minimized by starting naltrexone  at the very low dose. Opiate withdrawal  causes agitation, 
elevated pulse and blood pressure  and other signs of sympathetic arousal,  and sometimes confusion. 
Clonidine may  produce somnolence or hypotension. Clonazepam commonly may produce somnolence. The 
procedure is contraindicated  in patients  with unstable medical  problems or histories of hypersensitivity to 
any of the medications used, and  these are exclusions  in the proposed study. The procedure  is conducted in 
the outpatient  setting that permits monitoring of patients for up to 8 hours daily to  permit close monitoring 
of vital  signs and  mental status.
PregnancyBuprenorphine and naltrexone are Pregnancy category C agents, although the safety of buprenorphine in pregnancy has been supported in clinical trials (Jones et al., 2010). Female participants  will be  required to  
use adequate  methods of  birth control (condom  with spermicide, diaphragm with spermicide,  birth control 
pills) to be included  in the study and will be strongly encouraged  to use more effective methods like a  
subdermal implant,  IUD, or a depot  contraceptive  injection. Serum pregnancy tests will be  evaluated at 
baseline and  urine for  pregnancy will be tested  as clinically indicated  during  treatment according to  standard 
clinical procedures. If a  female patient does  become  pregnant  she will be  withdrawn from study  medication  
and offered continuing treatment with methadone or buprenorphine, which remains the current treatment of choice for pregnant  opioid dependent  patients.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 22 of 30
 Randomization to  injection naltrexone or buprenorphine taper
The implications of  random assignment to treatment  conditions will be  discussed  with  patients. One of the  
treatments could be more or less effective for a given patient. The alternative choices of continuingbuprenorphine maintenance outside of the study or injection naltrexone,  detoxification  and counseling 
without medication  (so called “drug--free”  treatment), will be  discussed with  patients, as well as options  of 
pursuing such treatments at other treatment  programs  available to  the patients  in the New York  area.  These  
will be discussed with patients at the time of consent, and revisited if  Relapse occurs. Patients will also be 
informed, and reminded that the study is voluntary and that  they can  opt for any of these options  at any  
point during the  study.
AssessmentsThe structured interviews, rating scales,  and questionnaires should add  no physical risk. However, because 
many of the  interviews and assessments  are time--consuming to  complete and involve  topics  of a sensitive 
nature, some  people have found them to be physically or emotionally tiring. Patients  are informed  prior to  
study entry that they  can refuse to answer  any questions and  that they can request  to stop at any time. If a 
participant becomes agitated during any of the interviews or  assessments, he  or she will be provided with 
therapeutic assistance.
Blood TestsBlood drawing may  cause slight discomfort at  site of needle  entry, resulting in  a small  bruise.
 
 
Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
MonitoringAny study of medication  efficacy  carries risk. However, the investigators  have conducted a series of studies 
administering medications to patients with opioid use disorder.  Further, Dr. Bisaga has specifically 
conducted a study at the  clinic in which the outpatient method of rapid naltrexone induction  was developed. 
Other clinic  physicians have extensive experience in administering oral and injectable  naltrexone to opioid-
-dependent patients  as well as experience providing treatment with buprenorphine. Patients  are seen  weekly 
by a physician until month 4, and  twice-monthly  during months 4-6 for evaluation  of medication and  
side effects, medication compliance therapy,  or dose  adjustments or adverse effects, and  for evaluation of 
safety and emergence  of any safety related issues (e.g. pregnancy, clinical worsening including serious 
medical or  psychiatric conditions, or worsening of substance use).  Adverse Events and Serious Adverse 
Events will be carefully monitored during the  study.
 
Relapse during outpatient naltrexone induction
During the detoxification  phase of the study, particularly during  washout  day and during  first few days 
when naltrexone is introduced if a  patient  resumes regular opiate  use, then taking  naltrexone,  particularly 
naltrexone injection, may precipitate  opiate  withdrawal, which may be severe.  Patients will be warned  not to 
take the naltrexone if they  resumed any level of opiate use, and opiate abstinence will be confirmed by urine 
toxicology prior to administering the next daily  dose of  naltrexone.
 
Psychiatric Monitoring and Removal from  Study
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 23 of 30
Participants’ mental and  physical status is monitored weekly  until  study  month 4, and  twice  monthly 
during study months  4-6 by the physician. The  psychiatrist will assess appropriateness for continuation in 
the research study on a continuous basis, and will remove  from  the trial patients  with significant clinical 
deterioration or noncompliance of a type  that could be dangerous.  Although unlikely, it is possible  that 
patients may become  psychotic or depressed, requiring discontinuation of study medication, and possibly 
psychiatric intervention.  The weekly  monitoring of patients, along with  ongoing  evaluations with  structured  
assessments, such as the  Hamilton Depression  Scale,  should allow us  to detect these psychiatric 
disturbances early and  intervene appropriately.
 
Although a patient  might potentially attempt to overdose with buprenorphine, individuals who are at 
significant risk for  suicidality will be excluded. Further, buprenorphine is a  partial agonist and has a ceiling 
effect on respiratory depression; overdoses  involving sublingual  buprenorphine are  rare and typically 
involve taking of toxic amounts of alcohol  or benzodiazepines in combination with  buprenorphine. Patients 
will be provided  with a 1--2 weeks  supply  of buprenorphine/naloxone throughout the study.
 
Criteria for  removal from the study will include:  include:
1) Development  of serious psychiatric symptoms as indicated by the Clinical Global Impression (CGI)  
improvement score of  6 (much worse than baseline) or greater  for 2 consecutive  weeks or psychiatric or 
medical deterioration that  cannot be managed safely in the context outpatient treatment offered at the study 
(in cases  where the  investigator determines that the participant needs  immediate  study discontinuation).
2) If the  participant's continued opioid  or other drug use places him/her at risk for self-destructive behavior  
or other harm as indicated by a CGI improvement  score of 6 or more (much  worse  than baseline)  for 2 
consecutive weeks. In cases where the investigator determines that  the participant needs  immediate  study 
discontinuation for  continued opioid or other  drug use, participants will be provided with  referrals.
3) Development  of serious medical condition(s) that may or may not be  related to  study participation  as 
assessed by weekly visits  with the psychiatrist, vital sign measurements, and weekly weight-ins.
4) If the  participant becomes pregnant  as assessed  by monthly  urine  pregnancy testing.
5) Ongoing  non--adherence with recommended clinical visits, absence from study visits for 21 days.
 
Patients who are  exited  from  the trial for any  reason will be offered  continued  treatment in  the community 
unless a higher level of  care is indicated  (inpatient or residential treatment),  or the patient  requests treatment 
elsewhere, in which care  help with arranging  referrals will be  offered. A clinic  staff member, with  physician 
backup, is available 24 hours per day  by phone in case of emergency.
 
 
Patient Education
All patients will  be informed through the consent process and consent form and  discussions  with the 
research psychiatrist of the possible side  effects and risks enumerated above. In addition, at weekly  visits the 
research nurse or psychiatrist will query  about side effects and treatment emergent symptoms.  Patients will 
be warned that risks, as yet unknown, may  occur  when combining study medication with opioids  or with  
other street drugs or alcohol. Patients will give informed consent before entering the study. Patients  are 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 24 of 30
instructed to call us if any untoward  effects occur and  are given the phone number of our 24--hour 
answering service. One of the study--  affiliated  physicians is on call 24 hours per day to answer questions 
and handle clinical emergencies.
 
Significant Other ContactUpon entry to the  study, the participant is informed that, if  s/he agrees, the staff  would prefer to have the
contact information of  someone who knows them well, to  periodically assess how  they are  doing or to  aid in 
case of emergency. Providing this information  is not contingent on participating in  the study. The 
participant, if he  or she agrees, will then inform  the individual that they may be contacted  by the study staff. 
Only after the participant has informed the  individual about the possible  contact by the staff  will the contact 
information be  provided and the  consent  form addendum be signed.
 
Adverse Events and Serious Adverse  Events are carefully monitored during medication studies. The
physician queries the patient and log side effects and  other treatment  emergent events during the past  week, 
recording their severity, what action  was taken, and whether they are continuing or resolved.  NIDA/VA 
Serious Adverse Event Form and NIDA Serious Adverse Event Tracking and Reporting System (SAETRS, on line)  is used whenever a serious adverse event  occurs. The research  physician  evaluates  the patient, 
completes this form  detailing the event, and reports  the event immediately to  both  Investigators’ IRBs and 
to NIDA. SAETRS is  a web--based application that helps collect,  track,  store, analyze and report serious 
adverse events (SAETRS).
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
Confidentiality
Patients will be  asked  to divulge information,  such as their  drug  use or legal, psychiatric or medical 
problems, which are sensitive and  could have  adverse social consequences if released. This would include 
information released to insurance companies,  family members, or made public in any way. Patient records 
are kept in locked files  and released only with the  patient's consent. We  will obtain a Federal Certificate  of 
Confidentiality to further safeguard  the confidentiality of the participants  enrolled in  the trial.  The 
Certificate of  Confidentiality will allow investigators  and others with access to research  records  to refuse to 
disclose information  that could identify subjects  in any civil, criminal, administrative,  legislative,  or other 
proceeding, whether at  the Federal,  State, or  local level. Contact with family members or significant others 
will only be with the  patient's express  consent. All computer data  are stored  without names  or other uncoded 
identification.
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
Yes, we will apply  for the Certificate of Confidentiality
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Direct Benefits to Subjects
The potential  benefits to patients are  cessation of BUP use and  achievement of abstinent,  opioid--free  status
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 25 of 30
following successful stabilization off BUP, as well as improvements in daily  functioning. Further, the 
knowledge gained from  this study will contribute to the  effort  of finding medication strategies to treat  OUD. 
The risks listed above are reasonable in this context.  Individual patients may benefit from the treatment they 
receive in  the context of the trial. Given the  limited efficacy and  implementation  to date of XR--NTX for 
patients with OUD, the  development of additional pharmacotherapy  options  would be of great  public health 
benefit. We  believe that measures described above to minimize risks for  participants make the balance 
between risk to participants and the potential benefit  to participants and others  reasonable.
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
YesPlease describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
Contingency Management  and Subject Compensation: Subjects will be encouraged to come for
the clinical evaluations and for CBT sessions as described in  this protocol. To  minimize missed
sessions, they will be reimbursed for transportation  expenses, for providing data, and for time
spent in completing study assessments in accordance with local  site's IRB policies. Contingency
management procedures which have been shown to successfully improve  many  behaviors
ranging from medication  compliance to adherence to protocol activities will be  applied  to this
study. Subjects will earn chances at each visit to draw vouchers from a  prize-bowl.  A subject must
complete all visit  requirements to be able to draw vouchers at  the end  of a visit. If study medication is 
discontinued due to adverse events, subject  will continue to draw vouchers  based on the schedule below as  
long as they continue all other visit requirements  are completed. Participants will earn  one draw for  each 
consecutive visit made, with  a bonus 3 draws for every  3 consecutive weeks . If a participant misses a  visit,  
their draws  are reset. Each draw has a probabilistic chance of yielding one  of four outcomes; an  encouraging 
statement (e.g. ‘good job’), a  small prize  valued  at $2.50,  a large prize valued at $20, or a  jumbo prize 
valued at $100.  The probability of  each particular  outcome is fixed for every draw  and is based on the 
relative number  of slips  for each prize category  in the prize bowl. Using Petry et al.s (2005) framework each 
prize bowl  will have 500 prize slips.  250 slips will be an encouraging statement (50% of the total slips), 209 
will be for small prizes (41.8%), 40 slips  will be for  large prizes (8%),  and 10 slips will be the jumbo prize 
(0.2%). Patients will earn 1 additional  draw for every consecutive week of abstinence (all urine samples for 
a treatment week test negative).  The increasing number of earned draws  during the protocol follows the 
escalating incentive structure employed in other  CM based treatments (Higgins et al., 1993).  During the 
treatment (contingency management) subjects can earn up to  340 draws  from the prize bowl if 
demonstrating 100% attendance during the  25 weeks of the protocol. Total earnings will vary depending 
on attendance.  With an expected earning  of $2.85 per  draw  the maximum  potential  earnings for the CM for 
25 weeks is  $969.  However, actual observed earnings will be significantly less than the potential  maximum 
due to attrition and missed visits.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 26 of 30
References
ReferencesBeck, A.T., Steer, R.A., Brown, G.K., 1996. BDI=II Beck  Depression  Inventory Manual. The           
Psychological Corp. Harcourt Brace & Company, San  Antonio,  TX.
 
Bisaga, A., Sullivan, M.A., Cheng, W.Y.,  Carpenter,  K.M., Mariani, J.J., Levin, F.R., Raby, W.N., Nunes,  
E.V., 2011.  A placebo controlled trial of memantine as an adjunct to oral naltrexone  for opioid dependence. 
Drug Alcohol Depend 119, e23--29.
 
Bisaga, A., Sullivan, M.A., Glass, A., Mishlen, K., Carpenter, K.M., Mariani,  J.J., Levin, F.R., Nunes, E.V.,  
2014. A placebo--controlled trial of  memantine  as an  adjunct to  injectable  extended--release  naltrexone for  
opioid dependence.  J Subst Abuse Treat 46, 546--552.
 
Bisaga, A., Sullivan, M.A., Glass, A., Mishlen, K., Pavlicova, M.,  Haney, M., Raby, W.N., Levin,  F.R.,
Carpenter, K.M., Mariani, J.J., Nunes, E.V., 2015. The effects of dronabinol during detoxification  and
the initiation of treatment with extended release  naltrexone. Drug  Alcohol Depend 154, 38--45.
 
Brahen, L.S., Capone, T.J., Capone,  D.M., 1988. Naltrexone: lack  of effect  on hepatic enzymes. J Clin
Pharmacol 28, 64--70. Brewer, C.,  Wong,  V.S.,  2004. Naltrexone: report of lack of hepatotoxicity in acute 
viral hepatitis, with a review of the literature. Addict  Biol 9, 81--87.
 
Brooks, A.C., Comer, S.D., Sullivan, M.A., Bisaga, A., Carpenter, K.M., Raby,  W.M., Yu, E.,  O'Brien, 
C.P., Nunes,  E.V., 2010. Long--acting injectable versus  oral naltrexone maintenance therapy  with
psychosocial intervention for heroin  dependence: a quasi--experiment. J  Clin Psychiatry 71, 1371--1378.
 
Budney, A.J., Higgins, S.T., 2000. A community reinforcement plus voucher approach: treating cocaine
addiction. . National Institute on Drug Abuse, Betheda,  MD.
 
Carpenter, K.M., Jiang, H.,  Sullivan, M.A., Bisaga, A., Comer, S.D., Raby,  W.N., Brooks, A.C., Nunes, 
E.V., 2009.  Betting on change: modeling transitional probabilities to guide  therapy  development  for opioid 
dependence. Psychol Addict Behav 23, 47--55.
 
Comer, S.D., Sullivan, M.A., Yu, E., Rothenberg, J.L., Kleber,  H.D., Kampman,  K., Dackis, C.,  O'Brien,  
C.P., 2006. Injectable, sustained--release naltrexone  for the treatment of opioid dependence: a randomized,  
placebo--controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 63, 210--218.
 
Dakwar, E.,  Kleber, H.D., 2015. Naltrexone--facilitated buprenorphine discontinuation: a feasibility trial. J 
Subst Abuse Treat 53, 60--63.
 
Dunn, K.E.,  Sigmon, S.C., Strain,  E.C., Heil, S.H., Higgins, S.T., 2011. The association between outpatient 
buprenorphine detoxification duration and clinical treatment outcomes: a review. Drug Alcohol Depend 119, 1--9.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 27 of 30
Dunn, K.E.,  Saulsgiver, K.A.,  Miller,  M.E., Nuzzo, P.A., Sigmon, S.C.,  2015. Characterizing opioid 
withdrawal during double--blind  buprenorphine detoxification.  Drug Alcohol Depend 151, 47--55.
 
Fiellin, D.A., Moore, B.A., Sullivan, L.E., Becker,  W.C., Pantalon,  M.V., Chawarski, M.C., Barry, D.T.,
O'Connor, P.G., Schottenfeld, R.S.,  2008. Long--term treatment  with buprenorphine/naloxone in primary
care: results at  2--5 years. Am  J Addict  17, 116--120.
 
Guy, W., 1976.  ECDEU  assessment manual for psychopharmacology. U.S. Department  of Health,  
Education, and Welfare,  Publication ADM 76--338 -- National Institute of  Mental  Health, Rockville, MD.
 
Handelsman, L., Cochrane, K.J., Aronson, M.J., Ness,  R., Rubinstein,  K.J., Kanof, P.D., 1987. Two new 
rating scales for  opiate withdrawal. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 13, 293--308.
 
Hays, R.D., Martin,  S.A., Sesti, A.M., Spritzer, K.L., 2005. Psychometric properties of the Medical  
Outcomes Study Sleep  measure. Sleep Med 6, 41--44.
 
Johnson, B.A., Ait--Daoud, N., Roache, J.D., 2005. The COMBINE SAFTEE: a structured  instrument for  
collecting adverse events adapted for clinical studies in the alcoholism field.  J Stud Alcohol Suppl, 157-- 
167;; discussion 140.
 
Jones, H.E.,  Kaltenbach,  K., Heil, S.H., Stine, S.M.,  Coyle, M.G., Arria, A.M., O'Grady, K.E., Selby, P., 
Martin, P.R.,  Fischer, G., 2010. Neonatal abstinence syndrome after methadone or buprenorphine exposure. 
N Engl J Med 363, 2320--2331.
 
Kakko, J.,  Svanborg, K.D.,  Kreek, M.J., Heilig, M., 2003.  1--year retention and social  function after
buprenorphine--assisted relapse prevention  treatment for heroin dependence in  Sweden:  a randomised,
placebo--controlled trial. Lancet 361, 662--668. 
 
 
Krupitsky, E., Nunes,  E.V.,  Ling,  W., Gastfriend,  D.R.,  Memisoglu, A., Silverman, B.L.,  2013. Injectable 
extended--release naltrexone (XR--NTX) for opioid dependence: long--term safety and effectiveness.  
Addiction 108, 1628--1637.
Krupitsky, E., Nunes,  E.V.,  Ling,  W., Illeperuma,  A., Gastfriend, D.R.,  Silverman, B.L.,  2011. Injectable
extended--release naltrexone for opioid dependence: a double--blind, placebo--controlled,  multicentre
randomised trial. Lancet 377, 1506--1513.
 
Lenne, M., Lintzeris, N., Breen, C., Harris, S., Hawken, L.,  Mattick, R., Ritter, A., 2001. Withdrawal from 
methadone maintenance treatment: prognosis and participant perspectives.  Aust  N Z J Public Health 25, 
121--125.
Lesscher, H.M.B., Bailey,  A., Burbach,  P.H., van Ree, J.M., Kitchen, I., Gerrits, M.A., 2003. Receptor-
-selective changes in μ--,  δ-- and κ--opioid receptors after chronic naltrexone treatment in mice. Eur J
Neuroscience 17, 1006--1012.
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 28 of 30
Litten, R.Z., Allen, J.P., 1992. Measuring alcohol consumption: Psychosocial and biochemical methods. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.
Lucey, M.R., Silverman,  B.L., Illeperuma,  A., O'Brien, C.P.,  2008. Hepatic safety of once--monthly 
injectable extended--release naltrexone administered to actively drinking alcoholics. Alcohol Clin Exp Res  
32, 498-- 504.
Madden, A., Lea, T., Bath, N., Winstock,  A.R., 2008.  Satisfaction guaranteed? What clients on methadone 
and buprenorphine  think about their treatment. Drug  Alcohol  Rev 27, 671--678.
Maier, W., Buller, R., Philipp, M.,  Heuser, I., 1988. The Hamilton Anxiety Scale:  reliability, validity and
sensitivity to change in anxiety  and depressive disorders.  Journal of affective disorders 14, 61--68.
Mannelli, P., Wu,  L.T.,  Peindl,  K.S.,  Swartz, M.S.,  Woody, G.E., 2014. Extended  release  naltrexone  
injection is  performed  in the majority of opioid dependent patients receiving outpatient  induction:  a very 
low dose  naltrexone and buprenorphine open label trial. Drug Alcohol Depend 138, 83--88.
McLellan, A.T., Alterman,  A.I., Woody, G.E., Metzger, D.,  1992. A quantitative measure of substance 
abuse treatments: The Treatment Services Review.  J Nerv Ment Dis 180, 100--109.
Mitchell, M.C., Memisoglu, A., Silverman, B.L., 2012. Hepatic  safety of injectable extended--release 
naltrexone in patients  with chronic  hepatitis  C and HIV  infection. J  Stud Alcohol Drugs 73, 991--997.
Nunes, E.V.,  Rothenberg, J.L., Sullivan, M.A., Carpenter, K.M.,  Kleber,  H.D., 2006. Behavioral therapy to 
augment oral  naltrexone for  opioid  dependence: a ceiling on effectiveness? Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 32, 
503--517.
Raby, W.N., Carpenter, K.M., Rothenberg, J., Brooks, A.C., Jiang, H.,  Sullivan, M., Bisaga,  A., Comer, S., 
Nunes, E.V.,  2009. Intermittent marijuana use is associated with  improved  retention in naltrexone
treatment for opiate--dependence. Am J Addict 18, 301--308.
Rinaldo, S.G., Rinaldo, D.W., 2013. Availability without Accessibility? State Medicaid Coverage andAuthorization Requirements for Opioid Dependence Medications., Report prepared  for the American
Society of  Addiction Medicine, San Francisco, CA.
Rothenberg, J.L., Sullivan, M.A., Church,  S.H.,  Seracini, A., Collins,  E., Kleber, H.D., Nunes, E.V., 2002. 
Behavioral naltrexone therapy:  an integrated treatment for opiate dependence.  J Subst Abuse Treat 23, 351-
-360.
Sheehan, D.V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan,  K.H., Amorim,  P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., Hergueta, T.,  Baker,  R., 
Dunbar, G.C., 1998. The  Mini--International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and 
validation of a structured  diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM--IV and ICD--10. J Clin Psychiatry 59 
Suppl 20, 22--33;;quiz 34--57.
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 29 of 30
Sigmon, S.C., Bisaga,  A., Nunes, E.V., O'Connor, P.G., Kosten, T., Woody,  G., 2012. Opioid  detoxification 
and naltrexone induction strategies:  recommendations for clinical practice. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse  38, 
187--199.
Sigmon, S.C., Dunn, K.E., Saulsgiver,  K., Patrick, M.E., Badger, G.J., Heil, S.H., Brooklyn, J.R.,  Higgins, 
S.T., 2013.  A randomized, double--blind evaluation  of buprenorphine taper duration in  primary prescription 
opioid abusers. JAMA psychiatry 70, 1347--1354.
Spielberger, C.D., Gorsuch, R.L., Lushene, R.E., 1970.  STAI--  Manual  for the State--Trait Anxiety 
Inventory. Consulting Psychologists Press, Palo Alto, CA.
 
Stancliff, S., Myers, J.E., Steiner, S.,  Drucker,  E., 2002. Beliefs about methadone in an inner--city 
methadone clinic. J Urban Health 79, 571--578.
Sullivan, M.A., Bisaga, A., Carpenter,  K., Mishlen, K., Glass, A., Mariani, J.J., Nunes,  E.V.,  2014. Long-
-acting injectable naltrexone induction:  A randomized  trial of outpatient detoxification with  naltrexone 
versus buprenorphine.  College on Problems of Drug Dependence 76th Annual Scientific Meeting, San Juan, 
PR.
Sullivan, M.A., Bisaga, A., Glass, A., Mishlen, K., Pavlicova, M.,  Carpenter,  K.M., Mariani, J.J., Levin, 
F.R., Nunes,  E.V., 2015. Opioid use and dropout in patients receiving  oral naltrexone with  or without single 
administration of injection naltrexone. Drug  Alcohol Depend 147, 122--129.
Sullivan, M.A., Bisaga, A., Mariani, J.J.,  Glass, A., Levin, F.R.,  Comer, S.D., Nunes,  E.V., 2013. 
Naltrexone treatment  for opioid dependence: Does its effectiveness depend on testing the blockade? Drug 
Alcohol Depend.
Sullivan, M.A., Carpenter,  K., Manubay,  J.M.,  Kurtz, J., Nunes, E.V., 2009. Behavioral Depot Naltrexone  
Therapy for Heroin Dependence: A Randomized  Controlled Trial., 71st Annual Scientific Meeting College 
on Problems of Drug  Dependence, Reno, NV.
Sullivan, M.A., Garawi,  F., Bisaga,  A., Comer, S.D., Carpenter, K., Raby, W.N., Anen, S.J., Brooks,  A.C., 
Jiang, H.,  Akerele,  E., Nunes, E.V., 2007. Management of relapse in naltrexone  maintenance  for heroin 
dependence. Drug Alcohol Depend 91, 289--292.
Sullivan, M.A., Rothenberg, J.L., Vosburg, S.K., Church, S.H., Feldman,  S.J., Epstein, E.M., Kleber, H.D., 
Nunes, E.V.,  2006. Predictors of retention  in naltrexone maintenance for opioid dependence: analysis of a 
stage I trial.  Am J  Addict 15, 150--159.
Tetrault, J.M., Tate, J.P., McGinnis,  K.A., Goulet, J.L., Sullivan, L.E., Bryant, K.,  Justice, A.C., Fiellin, 
D.A., Veterans  Aging Cohort Study, T., 2012. Hepatic safety and antiretroviral effectiveness in  HIV-
-infected patients receiving naltrexone.  Alcohol Clin Exp  Res 36, 318--324.
Vagenas, P., Di Paola,  A., Herme,  M., Lincoln,  T., Skiest, D.J., Altice, F.L., Springer, S.A.,  2014. An  
Protocol Summary  Form
7522
Bisaga, Adam
Page 30 of 30
evaluation of  hepatic  enzyme elevations  among HIV--infected released prisoners enrolled in two 
randomized placebo--controlled trials  of extended release naltrexone. J Subst Abuse Treat 47, 35--40.
Williams, J.B., 1988. A structured interview guide  for the Hamilton Depression Rating  Scale. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 45, 742--747.
Winstock, A.R., Lintzeris,  N., Lea, T., 2011. "Should I stay or should I go?" Coming off methadone and
buprenorphine treatment.  Int J Drug Policy 22, 77--81.
Zan, G.Y., Wang, Q., Wang,  Y.J.,  Liu,  Y., Hang, A., Shu, X.H., Liu, J.G., 2015. Antagonism of kappa 
opioid receptor in the  nucleus accumbens prevents  the depressive--like behaviors following prolonged
morphine abstinence. Behav Brain Res 291, 334--341.
 
Uploads
Upload the entire grant application(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)DISCO CF  UNBolded  04.02.19.pdf
Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)DISCO CF  Bolded 04.02.19.pdf
Upload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
7522 hippa.pdfUpload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	1	NEW YORK STATE PSYCHIATRIC INSTITUTE COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHIATRY  Informed Consent for Participation in Research   A Strategy to Improve Success of Treatment Discontinuation in Buprenorphine Responders   I. Purpose and Overview   You are invited to participate in a research study because you are diagnosed with opioid use disorder, have been successfully treated with buprenorphine and would like to stop taking buprenorphine. The main purpose of this research study is to evaluate two methods of buprenorphine discontinuation: a standard method of a graduated taper compared to a rapid discontinuation and transition onto Vivitrol.  This study is funded by a grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA).  Vivitrol is a long-acting injection that contains enough naltrexone to last up to one month; it is approved by the FDA for preventing relapse in those with opioid use disorder. It works by blocking the effects of opioids and reducing cravings, but is not a controlled substance and has no opioid-like effect itself. You are being asked to participate in this study because you are currently prescribed buprenorphine and meet other study entry criteria. If you are not eligible, you will be assisted in finding free or low-cost treatment services near your home. If you are eligible for the study, you will receive your current dose of buprenorphine for one month, and will be randomized to either a five-week gradual taper off buprenorphine, or a week long rapid taper followed by an injection of Vivitrol. You will receive individual therapy for 25 weeks, and if you have been randomized to receive Vivitrol, you will receive two additional injections.  This study will also look at biomarkers, which are biological molecules found in blood, which can be used to see how well the body responds to treatment for opioid use disorder.   II. Voluntary   Participation in this research study is voluntary. If you decide not to participate, or if you later decide to stop participating, you will not lose any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. A decision not to participate or withdraw your participation will not affect your current or future treatment at the New York State Psychiatric Institute or Columbia University Medical Center. You will be notified of significant new findings that may relate to your willingness to continue to participate.    III. Alternative Treatments/Alternatives to Participation   You do not need to participate in this research study to receive treatment for your opioid use disorder or to receive treatment with Vivitrol or buprenorphine. Other treatments are  available, including methadone maintenance, buprenorphine maintenance, inpatient or other outpatient detoxification programs, and "drug-free" treatments including outpatient counseling or residential or therapeutic community treatment.   IV. Procedures  Screening 
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	2	The study begins with a screening visit. The medical examinations and laboratory tests for screening may be done on one day or over multiple days. You and the study doctor will arrange those times. If you agree to be in this study, you will sign this form before any study procedures are done. In order to participate in the study you must first have a psychiatric and medical screening, which will include questions about your drug use, health, and other problems you may be having. Depending on the results of that, you may also have a cardiogram (a test to measure the electrical activity of your heart), blood tests, a physical exam, and a urine toxicology screen. After the initial screening visit(s), you will be told whether you may be eligible for this research treatment study. The screening process may take between a few days to a few weeks depending on the frequency of your visits. If you are not eligible, or if you are not interested in taking part in the research treatment, then the clinician will assist you in finding treatment for your problems elsewhere. If you are eligible for the study, you will come to the clinic once a week to receive your current dose of buprenorphine and for monitoring. At the end of this month you will be randomly assigned to one of two regimens of stopping buprenorphine: (Regimen 1) rapid discontinuation of buprenorphine followed by treatment with Vivitrol or (Regimen 2) a gradual taper off of buprenorphine.   Regimen 1: Rapid Discontinuation + Vivitrol  You will begin your outpatient visits to the clinic at the beginning of the week, and you will be asked to come to the clinic daily (5 visits, at least one hour each day) during this first week, in order to receive medications, naltrexone and other medications to reduce the discomfort of withdrawal from opioids. At each outpatient visit, you will need to provide an observed urine sample, which will be tested for opiates as well as other drugs.  You will have your blood pressure, heart rate, and rate of breathing checked by our staff.  The anti-withdrawal medication you will receive include: clonidine (a medicine used to treat high blood pressure), clonazepam (for anxiety), prochlorperazine (anti-nausea drug), and zolpidem or trazodone (for insomnia). If you experience significant withdrawal while at the clinic, you will be strongly encouraged to remain at the clinic for observation, and you may receive additional doses of medications.   If you are assigned to Regimen 1, you will be asked to stop taking buprenorphine and you will start taking medications to prevent withdrawal. Two days after the last dose of buprenorphine you will start taking naltrexone by mouth, first taking very low doses. If you do use buprenorphine or another opioid drug during this period, you may receive a naloxone challenge to determine whether it is safe to continue with the rest of the dosing schedule.  At the end of the first week, you will receive an intramuscular injection of Vivitrol, a long-acting form of naltrexone that lasts in your system for 3-4 weeks.  You will be asked to stay at the clinic for at least one hour after receiving this injection, for clinical observation.  While at the clinic, you will have the opportunity to rest in a private room fitted with lounge chairs, adjustable lighting, and an entertainment system. Light snacks and sports drinks such as Gatorade will be available to keep you comfortable.  It is important to drink plenty of fluids. Clinical staff will determine any changes to your medication necessary for your well-being. The clinic staff will advise you on ways to minimize withdrawal symptoms, and you will also meet daily with a therapist who will provide you with counseling.   You will be free to leave the clinic each day once you have received all necessary medication doses and have been evaluated for medical stability by the clinic nurse and/or psychiatrist. If you experience fatigue or medication side effects, car transportation home will be provided to you. After you have received Vivitrol, you will continue to come to the clinic once a week to meet with a therapist and psychiatrist for 3 months, and twice-monthly during treatment months 4-6. You will also receive two additional injections of Vivitrol 4 
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	3	and 8 week after the first injection.   Regimen 2: Gradual Taper  If you are assigned to Regimen 2, you will continue receiving buprenorphine on a weekly basis for five weeks, with the dose of buprenorphine gradually decreasing to minimize any possible withdrawal. At the end of the taper buprenorphine will be stopped.  During this time we ask that you come to the clinic once a week so that staff can assess for withdrawal symptoms and so you can meet with a therapist and psychiatrist. After you have been tapered off buprenorphine you will continue to come to the clinic once a week to meet with a therapist and psychiatrist for 3 months, and twice-monthly during treatment months 4-6.  Outpatient Treatment After stopping buprenorphine, you will continue to be monitored and receive counseling, regardless of the regimen you were assigned to. Your visits to the clinic should take between 30 and 60 minutes to meet with a counselor and research psychiatrist. These sessions will help you to work on your treatment goals and remain abstinent. During each visit, you will fill out several questionnaires and answer questions about your alcohol use and other drug use. You will also have your vital signs monitored at every visit. If during the course of treatment you resume taking opioids (buprenorphine, heroin or other opioids) and are unable to give an opioid-free urine, you will be provided with referrals to alternative treatment programs. If you use opioids during the study but are able to receive your next Vivitrol injection you will continue in the program.   Approximately one tablespoon of blood will be drawn at the beginning and end of the study to check your liver enzymes. Additionally approximately six tablespoons blood, saliva and urine will be collected at the beginning and 3 times throughout the study to check for biochemical markers. You will be asked to give supervised urine at every visit to the program throughout the study. The urine samples are tested for drugs, and the purpose of this is to help monitor your progress. Results of the urine are discussed at counseling sessions. At the beginning, if your liver enzymes are elevated, we may test your blood to determine whether you have been infected with viral hepatitis (Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C). We are required by law to report positive hepatitis test results to the Department of Health.  If you are a woman, approximately one tablespoon of blood will be drawn to check for pregnancy before starting treatment. Also, since pregnant women may not participate in this research, women must practice an effective method of birth control until the end of the study. You will have a pregnancy urine test monthly.   If you suffer from depression or anxiety, you will have the opportunity to receive therapy to address those symptoms. You will also be seeing a psychiatrist who can evaluate your symptoms and may be offered the option of taking an antidepressant or anti-anxiety medication.   End of Study At the end of Week 25 you will be asked to meet for an hour with the psychiatrist to answer questions, have another physical examination and blood test, complete questionnaires, and receive referrals for further treatment as part of an aftercare plan outside the clinic. This follow-up care could entail treatment at local drug-treatment clinics, other hospital-based treatment programs, or with private medical practitioners or therapists. After the study is completed, you will have the option to meet with your therapist weekly for up to a month until you have transitioned into the follow-up treatment.   If you remain abstinent throughout the study, we strongly encourage you to continue treatment after study completion, and will work with you to help find another treatment provider. If you find difficult to remain 
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	4	abstinent (e.g., have strong cravings) we will offer you an additional month of medication (Vivitrol injection or 30-day supply of buprenorphine) and we will provide you with referrals for Vivitrol, buprenorphine, methadone, and behavioral treatment options. You should know that when you are provided with referrals, both injection and oral forms of naltrexone are available in the community, as well as forms of therapy similar to, as well as more intensive than, the behavioral therapy offered in this study. In the event that you decide to discontinue from the study, or are withdrawn from the study, you will be treated with buprenorphine until you have been transitioned to another buprenorphine treatment program or provider.   The doctors conducting this research study are also responsible for your clinical care. If during the course of the study, you have a medical emergency or require urgent medical care, the research medical staff will consult with your treating physician(s) regarding any information relevant to your medical care. In the event of an emergency or if you have questions while in the study, you can reach the clinic at (646)774-6174 during regular business hours.   V. Risks and Inconveniences   You are entering this study because you have been doing well on buprenorphine, but would like to stop taking it. A significant risk of stopping medication like buprenorphine is that you may relapse to use of opioids. Relapse is dangerous in several ways including risk of overdose. If you change your mind at any point and want to resume buprenorphine, you should let the study staff know and buprenorphine can be resumed. As you are reducing the medication, or once you have stopped the medication, if you begin to experience cravings or to use opioids, it is important to seek help right away -i.e. let the study staff know right away, since medication like buprenorphine can be restarted and can protect you.   Another serious risk of study participation is that after stopping buprenorphine you will lose tolerance to opioids and therefore the effects of heroin or another opioid on the body becomes much more potent at a lower dosage. This means that resuming use of opioids after detoxifying could cause you to overdose, stop breathing and die. If you complete the detoxification and receive injectable naltrexone monthly, it will help protect you against death due to opioid overdose by blocking the effects of the drug. However, if you stop taking naltrexone, restarting opioids could result in accidental overdose and/or death.   Opioid detoxification carries a moderately high risk of relapse and overdose if you use a significant amount of opioids after losing tolerance. We seek to minimize these risks by monitoring you closely with urine drug tests and asking about any opioid use. If you do relapse, you will be given referrals for methadone or buprenorphine maintenance, or inpatient detoxification and follow-up treatment. There may be a delay of up to 2 weeks after your first screening clinic visit and before treatment begins.   Naltrexone You will be given naltrexone while your body is still dependent on opioids, which can induce withdrawal symptoms. We will use very low doses of naltrexone at the beginning of treatment to minimize the severity of withdrawal and prepare your body for naltrexone injection. The withdrawal symptoms are treated with clonidine, clonazepam, trazodone, prochlorperazine and zolpidem, but despite their use you may experience significant discomfort. The side effects of these medications may include insomnia or possible sleepiness, lowered blood pressure which may produce dizziness or a tendency to feel faint, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, muscle and abdominal cramping, irritability, anxiety, and an allergic reaction involving a narrowing of the airways in the lungs, similar to what people with asthma sometimes develop.  
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	5	 Once you have been stabilized on naltrexone it generally has few side effects. However, it can cause irritation to the liver or may occasionally cause or contribute to depressive symptoms. Additional side effects may include difficulty sleeping, anxiety, nervousness, abdominal pain/cramps, nausea and/or vomiting, low energy, joint muscle pain, or headaches. It is important to note that these symptoms may represent persisting withdrawal symptoms, and the psychiatrist who is monitoring you can prescribe medications to reduce the discomfort.   If you take small amounts of heroin or other opioids while on naltrexone, you should feel no opioid-like effects. However, it is possible to overpower naltrexone if you take large amounts of heroin or other opioids. Also, if you miss your Vivitrol injection, it is possible that you may be much more sensitive to opioids. This means that amounts of heroin or other opioids that you used to take routinely could cause you to overdose, stop breathing and die.  Naltrexone does not block the effects of other drugs such as cocaine, tranquilizers, or alcohol, and it does not reduce the risks when using these substances, such as getting drunk or high.  You should be aware that you may be more sensitive to the effects of heroin and other opioids upon completion of this study, and therefore would be at a greater risk for overdose. This increased sensitivity to opiates means that doses of heroin or other opiates that you used to take before entering treatment could be enough to cause you to stop breathing and die. Fentanyl and carfentanil are powerful synthetic opioids that can be added to heroin without your knowledge and this addition would further increase your risk of overdose.   Naloxone Challenge Test  If you use opioids prior to receiving the Vivitrol injection, you may be given a naloxone challenge test to determine whether or not you are dependent on opioids. We may administer up to 0.8 mg naloxone intramuscularly (by injection), which – if you have recently used opioids -can produce a number of withdrawal symptoms. You may experience symptoms such as: sweating, restlessness, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache, anxiety, nausea, vomiting dizziness, runny nose, yawning, muscle aches, or tremors. We will monitor your reactions to naloxone for up to 45 min.    Vivitrol  Risks of Vivitrol are possible irritation (e.g., redness, swelling, possible scarring) or infection at the injection site. Injection site reactions have ranged from a small, painless area of hardness to pain, itching, redness, and swelling. These reactions have typically resolved spontaneously over a period of 1-3 weeks. Of the 1,000 naltrexone injections we have administered, three to date caused site swelling and an open sore to develop, which became infected and required a minor surgical procedure, antibiotic treatment and wound care. The wound healed completely over a period of approximately 3 months, but resulted in a scar.  Another study risk is that naltrexone may impair the functioning of your liver. Short-term increase of liver enzymes can occur, but this is usually reversible. This effect on your liver will resolve after naltrexone leaves your body. In addition, administration of naltrexone may increase blood sugar levels, which may produce symptoms such as dizziness, increased breathing, dehydration, and seizures. If you experience any of these symptoms, it is important that you tell the investigator immediately.   In rare cases, patients who received injectable naltrexone reported developing a form of allergic pneumonia, experiencing shortness of breath. If you have trouble breathing, it is important that you let us know right 
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	6	away. In patients treated with the naltrexone injection, we have also observed hives, an allergic reaction of the skin with redness and itching. If you develop any of these symptoms it is important to let us know.   If you miss your visit to receive Vivitrol, and/or take opioids, you should come to the clinic immediately. There, you will be evaluated to determine if it is safe to restart the naltrexone. You may be asked to take an intramuscular injection of naloxone. If your body has become dependent on opioids, this dose will produce withdrawal symptoms lasting less than one hour. You may refuse the naloxone challenge but must be able to provide an opioid-negative urine or reconsider the challenge within 72 hours in order to determine whether you can safely restart naltrexone. If at this point, you are found to be dependent on opioids and unable to restart naltrexone, you will be provided with referrals to alternative treatment programs.  It is very important that you tell your study physician about any other medications you are taking (either prescription or non-prescription) before beginning naltrexone. It is also very important that, during the course of the study, you tell your research psychiatrist about any other medications you are prescribed or plan to take to avoid possible adverse reactions.   Buprenorphine  When lowering daily doses of buprenorphine, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as difficulty sleeping, anxiety, nervousness, abdominal pain/cramps, nausea and/or vomiting, low energy, joint muscle pain, headaches, or runny nose. You may also experience a rapid and sudden onset of withdrawal symptoms if you crush your take-home buprenorphine pills and inject or snort them. These symptoms would be very uncomfortable but short-lived and not life threatening. If this occurs, your psychiatrist would evaluate you and provide you with referrals to alternative treatment.   Opioid medications, like buprenorphine, can interact with medicines, such as antidepressants and migraine medicines, meant to increase the effects of serotonin, a chemical in the brain. This interaction causes a serious response in the brain called serotonin syndrome. If you are taking an opioid along with a medicine that increases serotonin and develop symptoms such as agitation, hallucinations, rapid heart rate, fever, excessive sweating, shivering or shaking, muscle twitching or stiffness, trouble with coordination, and/or nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea, you should seek medical attention immediately. These symptoms generally start within several hours to a few days of taking an opioid with a medicine that increases the effects of serotonin in the brain, but symptoms may occur later, especially after either medication is increased in dose.   Taking opioids may lead to a rare, but serious condition where not enough of the hormone called cortisol is produced, particularly during stressful conditions when cortisol is usually produced. Consult your study doctor or seek medical attention (ensure that you communicate that you are participating in a clinical trial) if you experience symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, fatigue, weakness, dizziness, or low blood pressure. Long-term use of opioid pain medications may lead to decreased sex hormones. Inform your study doctor if you experience signs or symptoms of low libido, impotence, erectile dysfunction, lack of menstruation, or infertility.  Comfort Medications You will be given comfort medications to help manage your withdrawal during the detoxification. When you are taking the comfort medications (clonidine, clonazepam, prochlorperazine, and zolpidem), you should use caution when driving a vehicle or operating appliances or machinery. Only the most common risks of each comfort medication are highlighted below, so if you would like to learn more about the medications or their side effects, please ask your study doctor who can provide you with the Patient Information Sheets. These medications may cause some side effects such as sleepiness, lowered blood pressure (which may produce 
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	7	dizziness or a tendency to feel faint), or upset stomach.   Other Risks (For females) Both the detoxification procedure and outpatient naltrexone treatment may pose risk to a fetus. You will have a pregnancy test before beginning treatment and monthly thereafter to determine that you are not pregnant. You will be asked to use adequate birth control throughout your treatment such as: (a) any form of hormonal contraception such as Depo-Provera, daily oral contraceptive, transdermal patch or Nuva ring, (b) intra-uterine devices, (c) sterilization, or (d) double barrier contraception, which is a combination of any two of the following methods: condoms, spermicide, diaphragm.  The only risk to the blood-drawing procedures used in this study is the possibility that slight discomfort and/or a small bruise or, rarely, a local infection may develop at the site of the needle puncture. This seldom occurs. If taking any medication orally, it is being dispensed to you in packages that are not childproof. Extra precautions need to be taken to keep the oral medication away from children.   You will be carefully monitored throughout your participation to minimize the chance of any serious adverse side effects. We will provide you with any significant new findings that may develop during the course of the study, which may relate to your willingness to continue study participation. If you suspect that you might be pregnant, you must inform the study team immediately.   VI. Benefits   You may benefit directly from the treatment you receive with reduction in drug use and improvement in problems related to your drug use. The findings of the study may help doctors know more about how to treat opioid dependence and help others with this problem.   VII. Confidentiality   We will do everything we can to keep others from learning about your participation in the research. Your private information or biospecimens will only be used for the purposes of this research study, and will not be distributed to another investigator for future research studies. Any biospecimens that are collected as part of this research will not be used for commercial profit. To further help us protect your privacy, the investigators will obtain a Confidentiality Certificate from the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). With this Certificate, the investigators cannot be forced (for example, by court subpoena) to disclose information that may identify you in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings. Disclosure will be necessary, however, upon request of DHHS for the purpose of audit or evaluation. A Certificate of Confidentiality does not prevent you or a member of your family from voluntarily releasing information about yourself or your involvement in this research. Note however, that if an insurer, employer or other outside party, learns of your participation, and obtains your consent to receive research information, then the investigator may not use the Certificate of Confidentiality to withhold this information. This means that you and your family must also actively protect your own privacy. Finally, the Certificate does not prevent the researchers from reporting suspected or known neglect or sexual or physical abuse of a child, or threatened violence to self or others. Such information will be reported to the appropriate authorities.   Records will be available to research staff, and to Federal, State and Institutional regulatory personnel (who may review records as part of routine audits). Your name and other personal identifying information will be 
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	8	stored in an electronically secure database at New York Psychiatric Institute. Signed consent forms and other forms containing identifying information will be kept in a locked file, and all interviews, assessments, etc. will be coded with initials and numbers. Electronic data are also coded and are stored on computers that are password protected. A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.   VIII. Study Compensation   During the study, you will receive $10 in cash to help pay for your transportation costs. You will have the chance to earn prizes for attending consecutive study visits. Each study visit will result in a draw from the prize bowl. Each draw has a chance of getting one of four outcomes: an encouraging statement (e.g. ‘good job’), a small prize valued at $2.50, a large prize valued at $20, or a jumbo prize valued at $100. The chance of winning a jumbo prize us (0.2 %), the large prize (8%), the small prize (42%), and 50% of the time you will get an encouraging statement. You will accumulate an additional draw for each consecutive visit made. If you miss a visit your draws will be reset. The maximum amount over 25 weeks you may potentially earn for attending all study visits is approximately $969 in cash prizes, and $190 in cash for transportation costs.   We are required by law to report your earnings to the IRS. Therefore, your Social Security Number and amount earned will be reported, and you will receive the appropriate IRS form at the end of the year in which you were paid. Please note that payment for this study may affect your eligibility for Medicaid and other city and state support services. No information about which study you participated in will be provided to the IRS.   IX. In Case of Injury   Federal regulations require that we inform participants about our institution’s policy with regard to compensation and payment for treatment of research-related injuries. Please be aware that:  1. The New York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University, Research  Foundation for Mental Hygiene, and New York Presbyterian Hospital will furnish that emergency medical care determined to be necessary by the medical staff of this hospital.  2. You will be responsible for the cost of such care, either personally or through your medical insurance or other form of medical coverage.  3. No monetary compensation for wages lost as a result of injury will be paid to you by the New York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University, Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene, or by New York Presbyterian Hospital.  4. By signing this consent form, you are not waiving any of your legal rights to seek compensation through the courts.            
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	9	X. Questions   The investigators will answer to the best of their abilities any questions you may have now or in the future about the study procedures or about your response to the procedures. You should contact the Principal Investigator, Dr. Adam Bisaga, at (646)744-6155 if you have any questions. If a medical emergency occurs at night or over the weekend, you should go to the nearest hospital emergency room and have them call (914)419-8921.If you have any questions about your rights as a research participant, want feedback, or have a complaint, you may call the NYSPI Institutional Review Board (IRB). An IRB is a committee that protects the rights of human subjects in research studies). You may call the IRB Main Office at (646) 774-7155 during regular office hours.      XI. Documentation of Consent for Screening  I voluntarily agree to participate in the screening for the research study described above.   Print name : ________________________________________________  (Participant)  Signed: __________________________________________Date: _________________  I have discussed the proposed research with this participant including the risks, benefits, and alternatives to participation (including the alternative of not participating in the research). The participant has had an opportunity to ask questions and in my opinion is capable of freely consenting to participate in this research.   Print name: _______________________________________________  (Person Designated to Obtain Consent)   Signed: ___________________________ Date: __________________    Consent for Future Contact You permit the Opioid Treatment Research Program staff to contact you in the future.  Print name : ________________________________________________  (Participant)  Signed: __________________________________________Date: _________________        
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	10	   XII. Documentation of Study Consent   I voluntarily agree to participate in the research study described above.   Print name: ________________________________________________  (Participant)  Signed: ______________________________________Date: ______________________    I have discussed the proposed research with this participant including the risks, benefits, and alternatives to participation (including the alternative of not participating in the research). The participant has had an opportunity to ask questions and in my opinion is capable of freely consenting to participate in this research.    Print name: _______________________________________________  (Person Designated to Obtain Consent)    Signed: ___________________________ Date: ________________                       
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	11	   ADDENDUM 1 CONSENT FOR SIGNIFICANT OTHER CONTACT It may be important for the staff at the clinic to discuss your problems with a close family member or friend to assess how you are doing, to help contact you if you miss a visit, or in case of an emergency. By signing this page, you consent to allow the staff to contact the following person(s) to discuss your case throughout the course of your treatment. You may refuse to grant this permission, and it will not affect your eligibility for treatment in this study.  Name:_______________________________________Relationship:__________________ Address:____________________________________________________________ Phone Numbers:______________________________________________________ Name:_______________________________________Relationship:__________________ Address:____________________________________________________________ Phone Numbers:______________________________________________________ Name:______________________________________________________________   Significant other contact information refused:____  Participant Signature:_______________________ Date____________   Investigator Signature:_______________________ Date____________  	
BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	1	NEW YORK STATE PSYCHIATRIC INSTITUTE COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHIATRY  Informed Consent for Participation in Research   A Strategy to Improve Success of Treatment Discontinuation in Buprenorphine Responders   I. Purpose and Overview   You are invited to participate in a research study because you are diagnosed with opioid use disorder, have been successfully treated with buprenorphine and would like to stop taking buprenorphine. The main purpose of this research study is to evaluate two methods of buprenorphine discontinuation: a standard method of a graduated taper compared to a rapid discontinuation and transition onto Vivitrol.  This study is funded by a grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA).  Vivitrol is a long-acting injection that contains enough naltrexone to last up to one month; it is approved by the FDA for preventing relapse in those with opioid use disorder. It works by blocking the effects of opioids and reducing cravings, but is not a controlled substance and has no opioid-like effect itself. You are being asked to participate in this study because you are currently prescribed buprenorphine and meet other study entry criteria. If you are not eligible, you will be assisted in finding free or low-cost treatment services near your home. If you are eligible for the study, you will receive your current dose of buprenorphine for one month, and will be randomized to either a five-week gradual taper off buprenorphine, or a week long rapid taper followed by an injection of Vivitrol. You will receive individual therapy for 25 weeks, and if you have been randomized to receive Vivitrol, you will receive two additional injections.  This study will also look at biomarkers, which are biological molecules found in blood, which can be used to see how well the body responds to treatment for opioid use disorder.   II. Voluntary   Participation in this research study is voluntary. If you decide not to participate, or if you later decide to stop participating, you will not lose any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. A decision not to participate or withdraw your participation will not affect your current or future treatment at the New York State Psychiatric Institute or Columbia University Medical Center. You will be notified of significant new findings that may relate to your willingness to continue to participate.    III. Alternative Treatments/Alternatives to Participation   You do not need to participate in this research study to receive treatment for your opioid use disorder or to receive treatment with Vivitrol or buprenorphine. Other treatments are  available, including methadone maintenance, buprenorphine maintenance, inpatient or other outpatient detoxification programs, and "drug-free" treatments including outpatient counseling or residential or therapeutic community treatment.     

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	2	IV. Procedures  Screening The study begins with a screening visit. The medical examinations and laboratory tests for screening may be done on one day or over multiple days. You and the study doctor will arrange those times. If you agree to be in this study, you will sign this form before any study procedures are done. In order to participate in the study you must first have a psychiatric and medical screening, which will include questions about your drug use, health, and other problems you may be having. Depending on the results of that, you may also have a cardiogram (a test to measure the electrical activity of your heart), blood tests, a physical exam, and a urine toxicology screen. After the initial screening visit(s), you will be told whether you may be eligible for this research treatment study. The screening process may take between a few days to a few weeks depending on the frequency of your visits. If you are not eligible, or if you are not interested in taking part in the research treatment, then the clinician will assist you in finding treatment for your problems elsewhere. If you are eligible for the study, you will come to the clinic once a week to receive your current dose of buprenorphine and for monitoring. At the end of this month you will be randomly assigned to one of two regimens of stopping buprenorphine: (Regimen 1) rapid discontinuation of buprenorphine followed by treatment with Vivitrol or (Regimen 2) a gradual taper off of buprenorphine.   Regimen 1: Rapid Discontinuation + Vivitrol  You will begin your outpatient visits to the clinic at the beginning of the week, and you will be asked to come to the clinic daily (5 visits, at least one hour each day) during this first week, in order to receive medications, naltrexone and other medications to reduce the discomfort of withdrawal from opioids. At each outpatient visit, you will need to provide an observed urine sample, which will be tested for opiates as well as other drugs.  You will have your blood pressure, heart rate, and rate of breathing checked by our staff.  The anti-withdrawal medication you will receive include: clonidine (a medicine used to treat high blood pressure), clonazepam (for anxiety), prochlorperazine (anti-nausea drug), and zolpidem or trazodone (for insomnia). If you experience significant withdrawal while at the clinic, you will be strongly encouraged to remain at the clinic for observation, and you may receive additional doses of medications.   If you are assigned to Regimen 1, you will be asked to stop taking buprenorphine and you will start taking medications to prevent withdrawal. Two days after the last dose of buprenorphine you will start taking naltrexone by mouth, first taking very low doses. If you do use buprenorphine or another opioid drug during this period, you may receive a naloxone challenge to determine whether it is safe to continue with the rest of the dosing schedule.  At the end of the first week, you will receive an intramuscular injection of Vivitrol, a long-acting form of naltrexone that lasts in your system for 3-4 weeks.  You will be asked to stay at the clinic for at least one hour after receiving this injection, for clinical observation.  While at the clinic, you will have the opportunity to rest in a private room fitted with lounge chairs, adjustable lighting, and an entertainment system. Light snacks and sports drinks such as Gatorade will be available to keep you comfortable.  It is important to drink plenty of fluids. Clinical staff will determine any changes to your medication necessary for your well-being. The clinic staff will advise you on ways to minimize withdrawal symptoms, and you will also meet daily with a therapist who will provide you with counseling.   You will be free to leave the clinic each day once you have received all necessary medication doses and have been evaluated for medical stability by the clinic nurse and/or psychiatrist. If you experience fatigue or 

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	3	medication side effects, car transportation home will be provided to you. After you have received Vivitrol, you will continue to come to the clinic once a week to meet with a therapist and psychiatrist for 3 months, and twice-monthly during treatment months 4-6. You will also receive two additional injections of Vivitrol 4 and 8 week after the first injection.   Regimen 2: Gradual Taper  If you are assigned to Regimen 2, you will continue receiving buprenorphine on a weekly basis for five weeks, with the dose of buprenorphine gradually decreasing to minimize any possible withdrawal. At the end of the taper buprenorphine will be stopped.  During this time we ask that you come to the clinic once a week so that staff can assess for withdrawal symptoms and so you can meet with a therapist and psychiatrist. After you have been tapered off buprenorphine you will continue to come to the clinic once a week to meet with a therapist and psychiatrist for 3 months, and twice-monthly during treatment months 4-6.  Outpatient Treatment After stopping buprenorphine, you will continue to be monitored and receive counseling, regardless of the regimen you were assigned to. Your visits to the clinic should take between 30 and 60 minutes to meet with a counselor and research psychiatrist. These sessions will help you to work on your treatment goals and remain abstinent. During each visit, you will fill out several questionnaires and answer questions about your alcohol use and other drug use. You will also have your vital signs monitored at every visit. If during the course of treatment you resume taking opioids (buprenorphine, heroin or other opioids) and are unable to give an opioid-free urine, you will be provided with referrals to alternative treatment programs. If you use opioids during the study but are able to receive your next Vivitrol injection you will continue in the program.   Approximately one tablespoon of blood will be drawn at the beginning and end of the study to check your liver enzymes. Additionally approximately six tablespoons blood, saliva and urine will be collected at the beginning and 3 times throughout the study to check for biochemical markers. You will be asked to give supervised urine at every visit to the program throughout the study. The urine samples are tested for drugs, and the purpose of this is to help monitor your progress. Results of the urine are discussed at counseling sessions. At the beginning, if your liver enzymes are elevated, we may test your blood to determine whether you have been infected with viral hepatitis (Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C). We are required by law to report positive hepatitis test results to the Department of Health.  If you are a woman, approximately one tablespoon of blood will be drawn to check for pregnancy before starting treatment. Also, since pregnant women may not participate in this research, women must practice an effective method of birth control until the end of the study. You will have a pregnancy urine test monthly.   If you suffer from depression or anxiety, you will have the opportunity to receive therapy to address those symptoms. You will also be seeing a psychiatrist who can evaluate your symptoms and may be offered the option of taking an antidepressant or anti-anxiety medication.   End of Study At the end of Week 25 you will be asked to meet for an hour with the psychiatrist to answer questions, have another physical examination and blood test, complete questionnaires, and receive referrals for further treatment as part of an aftercare plan outside the clinic. This follow-up care could entail treatment at local drug-treatment clinics, other hospital-based treatment programs, or with private medical practitioners or therapists. After the study is completed, you will have the option to meet with your therapist weekly for up to a month until you have transitioned into the follow-up treatment.   

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	4	If you remain abstinent throughout the study, we strongly encourage you to continue treatment after study completion, and will work with you to help find another treatment provider. If you find difficult to remain abstinent (e.g., have strong cravings) we will offer you an additional month of medication (Vivitrol injection or 30-day supply of buprenorphine) and we will provide you with referrals for Vivitrol, buprenorphine, methadone, and behavioral treatment options. You should know that when you are provided with referrals, both injection and oral forms of naltrexone are available in the community, as well as forms of therapy similar to, as well as more intensive than, the behavioral therapy offered in this study. In the event that you decide to discontinue from the study, or are withdrawn from the study, you will be treated with buprenorphine until you have been transitioned to another buprenorphine treatment program or provider.   The doctors conducting this research study are also responsible for your clinical care. If during the course of the study, you have a medical emergency or require urgent medical care, the research medical staff will consult with your treating physician(s) regarding any information relevant to your medical care. In the event of an emergency or if you have questions while in the study, you can reach the clinic at (646)774-6174 during regular business hours.   V. Risks and Inconveniences   You are entering this study because you have been doing well on buprenorphine, but would like to stop taking it. A significant risk of stopping medication like buprenorphine is that you may relapse to use of opioids. Relapse is dangerous in several ways including risk of overdose. If you change your mind at any point and want to resume buprenorphine, you should let the study staff know and buprenorphine can be resumed. As you are reducing the medication, or once you have stopped the medication, if you begin to experience cravings or to use opioids, it is important to seek help right away -i.e. let the study staff know right away, since medication like buprenorphine can be restarted and can protect you.   Another serious risk of study participation is that after stopping buprenorphine you will lose tolerance to opioids and therefore the effects of heroin or another opioid on the body becomes much more potent at a lower dosage. This means that resuming use of opioids after detoxifying could cause you to overdose, stop breathing and die. If you complete the detoxification and receive injectable naltrexone monthly, it will help protect you against death due to opioid overdose by blocking the effects of the drug. However, if you stop taking naltrexone, restarting opioids could result in accidental overdose and/or death.   Opioid detoxification carries a moderately high risk of relapse and overdose if you use a significant amount of opioids after losing tolerance. We seek to minimize these risks by monitoring you closely with urine drug tests and asking about any opioid use. If you do relapse, you will be given referrals for methadone or buprenorphine maintenance, or inpatient detoxification and follow-up treatment. There may be a delay of up to 2 weeks after your first screening clinic visit and before treatment begins.   Naltrexone You will be given naltrexone while your body is still dependent on opioids, which can induce withdrawal symptoms. We will use very low doses of naltrexone at the beginning of treatment to minimize the severity of withdrawal and prepare your body for naltrexone injection. The withdrawal symptoms are treated with clonidine, clonazepam, trazodone, prochlorperazine and zolpidem, but despite their use you may experience significant discomfort. The side effects of these medications may include insomnia or possible sleepiness, lowered blood pressure which may produce dizziness or a tendency to feel faint, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	5	muscle and abdominal cramping, irritability, anxiety, and an allergic reaction involving a narrowing of the airways in the lungs, similar to what people with asthma sometimes develop.   Once you have been stabilized on naltrexone it generally has few side effects. However, it can cause irritation to the liver or may occasionally cause or contribute to depressive symptoms. Additional side effects may include difficulty sleeping, anxiety, nervousness, abdominal pain/cramps, nausea and/or vomiting, low energy, joint muscle pain, or headaches. It is important to note that these symptoms may represent persisting withdrawal symptoms, and the psychiatrist who is monitoring you can prescribe medications to reduce the discomfort.   If you take small amounts of heroin or other opioids while on naltrexone, you should feel no opioid-like effects. However, it is possible to overpower naltrexone if you take large amounts of heroin or other opioids. Also, if you miss your Vivitrol injection, it is possible that you may be much more sensitive to opioids. This means that amounts of heroin or other opioids that you used to take routinely could cause you to overdose, stop breathing and die.  Naltrexone does not block the effects of other drugs such as cocaine, tranquilizers, or alcohol, and it does not reduce the risks when using these substances, such as getting drunk or high.  You should be aware that you may be more sensitive to the effects of heroin and other opioids upon completion of this study, and therefore would be at a greater risk for overdose. This increased sensitivity to opiates means that doses of heroin or other opiates that you used to take before entering treatment could be enough to cause you to stop breathing and die. Fentanyl and carfentanil are powerful synthetic opioids that can be added to heroin without your knowledge and this addition would further increase your risk of overdose.   Naloxone Challenge Test  If you use opioids prior to receiving the Vivitrol injection, you may be given a naloxone challenge test to determine whether or not you are dependent on opioids. We may administer up to 0.8 mg naloxone intramuscularly (by injection), which – if you have recently used opioids -can produce a number of withdrawal symptoms. You may experience symptoms such as: sweating, restlessness, stomach pain, diarrhea, headache, anxiety, nausea, vomiting dizziness, runny nose, yawning, muscle aches, or tremors. We will monitor your reactions to naloxone for up to 45 min.    Vivitrol  Risks of Vivitrol are possible irritation (e.g., redness, swelling, possible scarring) or infection at the injection site. Injection site reactions have ranged from a small, painless area of hardness to pain, itching, redness, and swelling. These reactions have typically resolved spontaneously over a period of 1-3 weeks. Of the 1,000 naltrexone injections we have administered, three to date caused site swelling and an open sore to develop, which became infected and required a minor surgical procedure, antibiotic treatment and wound care. The wound healed completely over a period of approximately 3 months, but resulted in a scar.  Another study risk is that naltrexone may impair the functioning of your liver. Short-term increase of liver enzymes can occur, but this is usually reversible. This effect on your liver will resolve after naltrexone leaves your body. In addition, administration of naltrexone may increase blood sugar levels, which may produce symptoms such as dizziness, increased breathing, dehydration, and seizures. If you experience any of these symptoms, it is important that you tell the investigator immediately.   

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	6	In rare cases, patients who received injectable naltrexone reported developing a form of allergic pneumonia, experiencing shortness of breath. If you have trouble breathing, it is important that you let us know right away. In patients treated with the naltrexone injection, we have also observed hives, an allergic reaction of the skin with redness and itching. If you develop any of these symptoms it is important to let us know.   If you miss your visit to receive Vivitrol, and/or take opioids, you should come to the clinic immediately. There, you will be evaluated to determine if it is safe to restart the naltrexone. You may be asked to take an intramuscular injection of naloxone. If your body has become dependent on opioids, this dose will produce withdrawal symptoms lasting less than one hour. You may refuse the naloxone challenge but must be able to provide an opioid-negative urine or reconsider the challenge within 72 hours in order to determine whether you can safely restart naltrexone. If at this point, you are found to be dependent on opioids and unable to restart naltrexone, you will be provided with referrals to alternative treatment programs.  It is very important that you tell your study physician about any other medications you are taking (either prescription or non-prescription) before beginning naltrexone. It is also very important that, during the course of the study, you tell your research psychiatrist about any other medications you are prescribed or plan to take to avoid possible adverse reactions.   Buprenorphine  When lowering daily doses of buprenorphine, you may experience withdrawal symptoms such as difficulty sleeping, anxiety, nervousness, abdominal pain/cramps, nausea and/or vomiting, low energy, joint muscle pain, headaches, or runny nose. You may also experience a rapid and sudden onset of withdrawal symptoms if you crush your take-home buprenorphine pills and inject or snort them. These symptoms would be very uncomfortable but short-lived and not life threatening. If this occurs, your psychiatrist would evaluate you and provide you with referrals to alternative treatment.   Opioid medications, like buprenorphine, can interact with medicines, such as antidepressants and migraine medicines, meant to increase the effects of serotonin, a chemical in the brain. This interaction causes a serious response in the brain called serotonin syndrome. If you are taking an opioid along with a medicine that increases serotonin and develop symptoms such as agitation, hallucinations, rapid heart rate, fever, excessive sweating, shivering or shaking, muscle twitching or stiffness, trouble with coordination, and/or nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea, you should seek medical attention immediately. These symptoms generally start within several hours to a few days of taking an opioid with a medicine that increases the effects of serotonin in the brain, but symptoms may occur later, especially after either medication is increased in dose.   Taking opioids may lead to a rare, but serious condition where not enough of the hormone called cortisol is produced, particularly during stressful conditions when cortisol is usually produced. Consult your study doctor or seek medical attention (ensure that you communicate that you are participating in a clinical trial) if you experience symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, fatigue, weakness, dizziness, or low blood pressure. Long-term use of opioid pain medications may lead to decreased sex hormones. Inform your study doctor if you experience signs or symptoms of low libido, impotence, erectile dysfunction, lack of menstruation, or infertility.  Comfort Medications You will be given comfort medications to help manage your withdrawal during the detoxification. When you are taking the comfort medications (clonidine, clonazepam, prochlorperazine, and zolpidem), you should use caution when driving a vehicle or operating appliances or machinery. Only the most common risks of each comfort medication are highlighted below, so if you would like to learn more about the medications or their 

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	7	side effects, please ask your study doctor who can provide you with the Patient Information Sheets. These medications may cause some side effects such as sleepiness, lowered blood pressure (which may produce dizziness or a tendency to feel faint), or upset stomach.   Other Risks (For females) Both the detoxification procedure and outpatient naltrexone treatment may pose risk to a fetus. You will have a pregnancy test before beginning treatment and monthly thereafter to determine that you are not pregnant. You will be asked to use adequate birth control throughout your treatment such as: (a) any form of hormonal contraception such as Depo-Provera, daily oral contraceptive, transdermal patch or Nuva ring, (b) intra-uterine devices, (c) sterilization, or (d) double barrier contraception, which is a combination of any two of the following methods: condoms, spermicide, diaphragm.  The only risk to the blood-drawing procedures used in this study is the possibility that slight discomfort and/or a small bruise or, rarely, a local infection may develop at the site of the needle puncture. This seldom occurs. If taking any medication orally, it is being dispensed to you in packages that are not childproof. Extra precautions need to be taken to keep the oral medication away from children.   You will be carefully monitored throughout your participation to minimize the chance of any serious adverse side effects. We will provide you with any significant new findings that may develop during the course of the study, which may relate to your willingness to continue study participation. If you suspect that you might be pregnant, you must inform the study team immediately.   VI. Benefits   You may benefit directly from the treatment you receive with reduction in drug use and improvement in problems related to your drug use. The findings of the study may help doctors know more about how to treat opioid dependence and help others with this problem.   VII. Confidentiality   We will do everything we can to keep others from learning about your participation in the research. Your private information or biospecimens will only be used for the purposes of this research study, and will not be distributed to another investigator for future research studies. Any biospecimens that are collected as part of this research will not be used for commercial profit. To further help us protect your privacy, the investigators will obtain a Confidentiality Certificate from the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). With this Certificate, the investigators cannot be forced (for example, by court subpoena) to disclose information that may identify you in any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceedings. Disclosure will be necessary, however, upon request of DHHS for the purpose of audit or evaluation. A Certificate of Confidentiality does not prevent you or a member of your family from voluntarily releasing information about yourself or your involvement in this research. Note however, that if an insurer, employer or other outside party, learns of your participation, and obtains your consent to receive research information, then the investigator may not use the Certificate of Confidentiality to withhold this information. This means that you and your family must also actively protect your own privacy. Finally, the Certificate does not prevent the researchers from reporting suspected or known neglect or sexual or physical abuse of a child, or threatened violence to self or others. Such information will be reported to the appropriate authorities.   

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	8	Records will be available to research staff, and to Federal, State and Institutional regulatory personnel (who may review records as part of routine audits). Your name and other personal identifying information will be stored in an electronically secure database at New York Psychiatric Institute. Signed consent forms and other forms containing identifying information will be kept in a locked file, and all interviews, assessments, etc. will be coded with initials and numbers. Electronic data are also coded and are stored on computers that are password protected. A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.   VIII. Study Compensation   During the study, you will receive $10 in cash to help pay for your transportation costs. You will have the chance to earn prizes for attending consecutive study visits. Each study visit will result in a draw from the prize bowl. Each draw has a chance of getting one of four outcomes: an encouraging statement (e.g. ‘good job’), a small prize valued at $2.50, a large prize valued at $20, or a jumbo prize valued at $100. The chance of winning a jumbo prize us (0.2 %), the large prize (8%), the small prize (42%), and 50% of the time you will get an encouraging statement. You will accumulate an additional draw for each consecutive visit made. If you miss a visit your draws will be reset. The maximum amount over 25 weeks you may potentially earn for attending all study visits is approximately $969 in cash prizes, and $190 in cash for transportation costs.   We are required by law to report your earnings to the IRS. Therefore, your Social Security Number and amount earned will be reported, and you will receive the appropriate IRS form at the end of the year in which you were paid. Please note that payment for this study may affect your eligibility for Medicaid and other city and state support services. No information about which study you participated in will be provided to the IRS.   IX. In Case of Injury   Federal regulations require that we inform participants about our institution’s policy with regard to compensation and payment for treatment of research-related injuries. Please be aware that:  1. The New York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University, Research  Foundation for Mental Hygiene, and New York Presbyterian Hospital will furnish that emergency medical care determined to be necessary by the medical staff of this hospital.  2. You will be responsible for the cost of such care, either personally or through your medical insurance or other form of medical coverage.  3. No monetary compensation for wages lost as a result of injury will be paid to you by the New York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University, Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene, or by New York Presbyterian Hospital.  4. By signing this consent form, you are not waiving any of your legal rights to seek compensation through the courts.          

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	9	  X. Questions   The investigators will answer to the best of their abilities any questions you may have now or in the future about the study procedures or about your response to the procedures. You should contact the Principal Investigator, Dr. Adam Bisaga, at (646)744-6155 if you have any questions. If a medical emergency occurs at night or over the weekend, you should go to the nearest hospital emergency room and have them call (914)419-8921.If you have any questions about your rights as a research participant, want feedback, or have a complaint, you may call the NYSPI Institutional Review Board (IRB). An IRB is a committee that protects the rights of human subjects in research studies). You may call the IRB Main Office at (646) 774-7155 during regular office hours.      XI. Documentation of Consent for Screening  I voluntarily agree to participate in the screening for the research study described above.   Print name : ________________________________________________  (Participant)  Signed: __________________________________________Date: _________________  I have discussed the proposed research with this participant including the risks, benefits, and alternatives to participation (including the alternative of not participating in the research). The participant has had an opportunity to ask questions and in my opinion is capable of freely consenting to participate in this research.   Print name: _______________________________________________  (Person Designated to Obtain Consent)   Signed: ___________________________ Date: __________________    Consent for Future Contact You permit the Opioid Treatment Research Program staff to contact you in the future.  Print name : ________________________________________________  (Participant)  Signed: __________________________________________Date: _________________      

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	10	     XII. Documentation of Study Consent   I voluntarily agree to participate in the research study described above.   Print name: ________________________________________________  (Participant)  Signed: ______________________________________Date: ______________________    I have discussed the proposed research with this participant including the risks, benefits, and alternatives to participation (including the alternative of not participating in the research). The participant has had an opportunity to ask questions and in my opinion is capable of freely consenting to participate in this research.    Print name: _______________________________________________  (Person Designated to Obtain Consent)    Signed: ___________________________ Date: ________________                     

BUP DISCO Version 04.02.19 
	11	     ADDENDUM 1 CONSENT FOR SIGNIFICANT OTHER CONTACT It may be important for the staff at the clinic to discuss your problems with a close family member or friend to assess how you are doing, to help contact you if you miss a visit, or in case of an emergency. By signing this page, you consent to allow the staff to contact the following person(s) to discuss your case throughout the course of your treatment. You may refuse to grant this permission, and it will not affect your eligibility for treatment in this study.  Name:_______________________________________Relationship:__________________ Address:____________________________________________________________ Phone Numbers:______________________________________________________ Name:_______________________________________Relationship:__________________ Address:____________________________________________________________ Phone Numbers:______________________________________________________ Name:______________________________________________________________   Significant other contact information refused:____  Participant Signature:_______________________ Date____________   Investigator Signature:_______________________ Date____________  	

Form #PP2: HIPAA Authorization for Research 4.14.14 New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI)  
Authorization to Use or Disclose Health Information  during a Research Study  
Protocol Number:  Principal Investigator:  
Name o
f Study:  
Bef
ore researchers can use or share any identifiable health information  (“Health Information ”) about you  as part of the 
above stud
y (t
he “Research”), the New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) is required to obtain your authorization. Y ou agree  
to allow the following individuals and entities to use and disclose H ealth Information  about you as described below:  
• New York S
tate
 Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) , your doctors and other health care providers,  if any, and
• The Prin
cipal Inv
estigator and  his/her staff (together “Researchers”).   Researchers may include staff of NYSPI, the New  York
State Office of Mental Health (OMH), Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene, Inc. (RFMH), and Columbia University (CU) ,
provided such staff is a part of  the study, and
• Providers of service s for the Research at CU, NYSPI and/or RFMH,  such as MRI or PET,  or  Central  Reference Laboratories 
(NKI), if indicated in the consent form.
1. The Hea
lth Information that may be used and /or disclosed for this Research includes:
All i
nformation collected during the Research as told to you in the Informed Consent Form .   
Health  Information in your  clinical research record which include s the resul ts of  physical exam s, medical and 
psychiatric hi
story, laboratory or diagnostic tests, or H ealth Information relating to a particular condition that is related  to 
the Research.  
Additional information may include:  
2. The Hea
lth Information listed above may be  disclosed to:
Researchers  and their staff at the following organizations involved wi th this Research : 
The S
ponsor of t
he Research , 
and it
s agents and contractors (together, “Sponsor”); and  
Repr esentatives of regulatory and government  agencies, institutional review boards, representatives of the Researchers 
and their institutions to the level needed  to carry out their responsibilities  related to the conduct of the research .   
Private laboratories and other persons and organizations that analyze your health information in connection with 
this study 
Othe
r (family members or significant others, study buddies,  outside agencies  etc.)  Specify:  
3. By giv
ing permission to release your  Health Information as described  above, you  unders tan d that your  Health
Information may be
 disclosed to individuals or entities which  are not required to comply with the federal and state privacy laws
which govern the use and disclosure of personal Health Information  by NYSPI.    This means that on ce your  Health
Laboratory Corporation of America 
✔
✔
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
✔
✔
✔
A Strategy to Improve Success of Treatment Discontinuation in Buprenorphine Responders 
Adam Bisaga M.D.
7522 
Form #PP2: HIPAA Authorization for Research 4.1.14  Information  has been disclosed to a third party which does not have to  follow these laws (e.g., a drug company or the Sponsor  
of the Research), it may no longer be protected  under the HIPAA or NYS Mental Hygiene Law requirements but is  subject to the 
terms of the consent form and may be subject to other state or federal privacy laws or regulations .  
4. P
lease note that:
• You do not have to sign this Authorization  form, but if you do not, you may not be able to participate in the study or
receive study related care .  You may change your mind at any time and for any reason. If you do so, you  may  no
l
onger be
 all
owed to participate in the study.  I f you withdraw  this Authorization the  research staff and  the Sponsor, if this
is sponsored research, may still use or disclose Health  Information  containing identifying information they already have
collected about  you as needed  to maintain the reliability of the research.   Any reques t to withdraw this  Authorization
must  be made in writ
ing to  (enter name and contact inf ormation  below):
• W
hile the Research is going on , you may not be allowed to review the Health Information in your clinical research
record that has been created or collected by NYSPI .   When this research has been completed  you may be allowed to  see
t
his information.  If it is needed  for your care, your H ealth Inform ation will be given  to you or your  Doctor .
5. T
hi
s Authori
zation does not have an end date.
6. Y
ou will be given a copy of this form after you have signed it.
I
 agree to the use and disc losure of Health Information about me as described above:  
__
________________________________________                _____________________  
Signature of Participant / Legal Representative    Date  
________
____________
__________________  
Printed Name of Participant  
__
____________________________________  
Relationship of Legal Representative to Participant (if applicable) 
We also ask you or your legal representative to initial the statements below:  
I
 have received a copy of the NYSPI/OMH  Notice of Privacy Practices. 
Adam Bisaga, MD, NYSPI, 1051 Riverside Dr. Unit 66 New York, NY 10032