Continuou s Ward Monitoring  with the GE Portrait 
Mobile M onitoring Solution:  the COSMOS trial 
A pilot study  
June 1 6, 2022 
Version 16  
 
Daniel I. Sessler, M.D. and Colleagues  
Department of OUTCOMES RESEARCH  
Cleveland Clinic  
Principal Investigator  
Daniel I. Sessler, MD., Michael Cudahy Professor and Chair, Department of OUTCOMES 
RESEARCH , Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.  9500 Euclid Ave 
— P77, Cleveland, OH 44195; Visiting investigator, Population Health Research Institute, 
Ontario, Canada . Work: 216 -444-4900, Mobile: 216 -870-2620, Email: DS@OR.org .  
 
Steering  Committee  
1. Daniel I. Sessler MD.  
2. Edward J. Mascha, PhD, Full Staff Biostatistician, Departments of Quantitative 
Health Sciences and  OUTCOMES RESEARCH , Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.  
3. Kurt Ruetzler, MD , Associate Professor, Departments of General Anesthesiology 
and OUTCOMES RESEARCH , Cleveland Clinic Main Campus, Cleveland, OH.  
4. Alparslan, Turan, MD , Professor, Departments of General Anesthesiology and 
OUTCOMES RESEARCH , Cleveland Clinic Main Campus, Cleveland, OH.  
5. Kamal Maheshwari, MD, MPH , Associate Professor, Departments of General 
Anesthesiology and OUTCOMES RESEARCH , Cleveland Clinic Main Campus , 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH . 
6. Andrea Kurz, MD , Professor, Department s of General Anesthesiology and  
OUTCOMES RESEARCH ; Vice-chair for Research, Anesthesiology Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH . 
7. Herman Kessler, MD , Professor, Department of Colorectal Surgery, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, OH . 
8. Lorraine Novosel , PhD . Nurse Scientist , Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH . 
  
 2 Background  
When patients having major surgery reach the post -anaesthesia care unit, families 
naturally assume that they have survived the most dangerous part of the perioperative 
experience.  Their assumption is wrong. Mortality in the 30 days after surgery is more than 
100 times higher than intraoperative mortality.1,2 In fact, if the month after surgery were 
considered a disease, it would be the third leading cause of death in the United States.3  
Most 30 -day postoperative mortality occurs during the initial hospitalization, that 
is, under direct medical care in our highest -level facilities. The most common causes of 
30-day postoperative mortality are major bleeding which cannot easily be prevented, and 
cardiopulmonary complications which possibly can be.4 Respiratory complications are 
also common — and are of special interest because nearly all are preventable.  
Ward respiratory compromise  
The reported incidence of ward respiratory compromise is 0.3% to 3.4% when 
defined by interventions such as naloxone administration,3,6,7 but is 21% when defined by 
prolonged oxygen desaturation and 41% when defined by bradypnea episodes.6,8  
We quantified hypoxemia on the surgical wards using blinded continuous 
saturation monitoring (n=833). Postoperative hypoxemia was common, serious, and 
prolonged ( Fig. 1). For example, 20% of patients demonstrated an average of 10  minutes 
of saturation <90% per hour over their entire hospitalization  (Fig. 2). And soberingly, 90% 
of serious hypoxemic episodes (saturation <90% for ≥1 full hour) were completely missed 
by nurses conducting routine vital sign monitoring at four -hour intervals.5  
  
Figs.  1 and 2.  Continuous blinded  saturation monitoring in 850 patients recovering from non -cardiac 
surgery. The figure on the left shows that by the second postoperative day, more than 10% of all 
saturation measurements were <905. The figure on the right shows that desaturation was commo n, 
profound, and prolonged. For example, 10% of patients had a continuous hour of saturation ≤85%. 
Nursing vital sign monitoring at 4 -hour intervals missed more than 90% of these episodes.5 
 

 3 We recently finished PRediction of Opioid -induced respiratory Depression In 
patients monitored by capnoGraphY (PRODIGY), a prospective, observational study of 
continuous capnography and oximetry conducted in the United States, Europe, and Asia.6 
Monitor alerts and data were blinded. Respiratory compromise episodes were defined by 
respiratory rate ≤5 bpm for ≥3 minutes; oxygen saturation ≤85% for ≥3  minutes; end -tidal 
carbon dioxide ≤15 or ≥60 mmHg for ≥3 minutes; apnea episode lasting >30 seconds; or 
any respi ratory Opioid -Related Adverse Events (rORADE). One or more respiratory 
compromise episodes were detected in 615 (46%) of 1,336 patients over the initial 24 
postoperative hours.  
Various risk factors for developing respiratory depression  have been reported for 
post-surgical patients including sleep apnea, obesity, snoring, old age, post -surgery, 
increased opioid dose requirement, concomitant use of other sedating medications, 
comorbidities like preexisting pulmonary or cardiac disease,  use o  patient -controlled 
opioid analgesia,  and smoking.1,4,7,16,17 Nonetheless, postoperative respiratory events 
remain difficult to predict. For example, we have shown that STOP -BANG scores (a 
measure of obstructive sleep apnea risk) are not associated with the amount of 
postoperative oxygen desaturation ( Fig. 3).7 Similarly, risk was not reduced by using 
short -acting opioids in patient controlled analgesia systems ( Fig. 4).8  
 
 
Fig. 3 (left) . STOP -BANG scores (a measure of obstructive sleep apnea risk) are not associated with 
the amount of postoperative oxygen desaturation.7 Fig. 4 (right) . Hypoxemia risk was not reduced by 
using short -acting opioids in patient -controlled analgesia systems.8 
 
In PRODIGY there was some relationship between baseline and procedural 
characteristics, but respiratory events could not be reliably predicted, with area under the 
receiver -operating characteristics curve of only 0.7. Available information thus indicates 
that it is difficult to reliably predict which postoperative inpatients will desaturate, or the 
severity of their hypoxemia. A corollary is that all patients need to be continuously 
monitored to reliably detect respiratory compromise early enough to interve ne effectively 
and presumably prevent serious complications .  

 4 The role of opioids  
Opioid analgesia remains the primary pharmacologic intervention for managing 
pain in hospitalized patients.19 However, up to 80% of patients who received opioid 
analgesics experience Opioid -Related Adverse Drug Events (ORADEs).4 The Joint 
Commission on Hospital Accreditation identifies improper patient monitoring as one of the 
main causes of ORADEs.1,5 
Opioid -induced respiratory depression is traditionally defined using surrogate 
measures, such as hypoventilation with or without oxygen desaturation, and is often a 
diagnosis of exclusion10 and is probably much under -estimated.11,12 Opioid -related 
adverse event s, including respiratory depression, are associated with increased length of 
stay (mean five additional days), readmission (15 .8% vs 9 .4% in patients without events), 
and cost (mean increase $10,000).13  
Preventing respiratory complications  
The general care floor is a low acuity inpatient environment. However, nearly half 
of all in -hospital cardiorespiratory events occur on the general care floor, often with 
catastrophic outcomes.14,15 A national registry identified 44,551 acute respiratory events 
in United States hospitals, with an associated in -hospital mortality of nearly 40%.15 Early 
recognition of respiratory compromise through continuous respiratory monitoring on the 
general care floor  has been advocated to reduce morbidity and mortality.16,17 
Respiratory compromise precedes respiratory depression, respiratory failure, and 
death. Early interventions probably prevent or mitigate decompensation10. Detection of a 
patient’s respiratory compromise status before progression can help avert unwarranted 
outcomes and the possible need for critical care. Despite this, there are no universally 
accepted guidelines to direct effective and safe assessment and monitoring practices for 
postoperative patients.  
The earliest warning of respiratory failure may be subtle changes in vital signs 6 -8 
hours before critical cardiac and respiratory decompensation ensues.18 Intermittent ward  
monitoring often misses these early patterns or infers incorrect patterns, which are key to 
preventing catastrophic events. For example, vital sign monitoring at 4 -hour intervals 
misses  >90% episodes of prolonged hypoxemia.11 Similarly, in a closed claims analysis 
of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, most of more than 357 opioid -related 
respiratory  events  were deemed preventable  with adequate monitoring and timely 
responses.19 Because most postoperative respiratory compromise is due to opioids, it is 
difficult to predict which patients will have respiratory events.8  
Pulse oximetry alone can lead to inaccurate assessment of patients’ condition, 
especially when supplemental oxygen is needed: the Anesthesia Patient Safety 
Foundation recommended the use of continuous electronic monitoring of oxygenation and 
ventilation  for all patients given postoperative opioids.11  
 5 Taenzer and colleagues evaluated continuous ward saturation monitoring with 
pager notification to nurses. They report ed that continuous monitoring reduced emergent 
rescue events (median [95% CI]) from 3.4  [2, 5] to 1.2 [0, 5] per 1,000 patients and 
reduced ICU transfers from 5 [4, 7] to 3 [1, 4] per 1,000 patients.20 However, the before -
and-after design is subject to time -dependent confounding, regression to the mean, and 
the Hawthorne effect.21,22 Ochroch and colleagues conducted a randomized trial of 
continuous ward saturation monitoring (n=1,219), but did not find that monitoring resulted 
in a reduction in ICU transfers (6.7% monitoring versus 8.5% control).23 We note that ICU 
transfer may not be the optimal outcome since continuous monitoring might detect 
patients who would benefit from ICU care earlier than otherwise, and that initiating ICU 
care early could reduce serious complications such as myocardial inj ury or respiratory 
disasters. Despite their limitations, both studies suggest that continuous saturation 
monitoring may be helpful.  
Beyond “failure to rescue”  
Ward monitoring has hardly changed over last half -century, although there have 
been major changes in hospital populations. Substantive changes include: 1)  ambulatory 
surgery is routine for relatively healthy patients, with 60% of all surgery in the United 
States now done on an out -patient basis; 2)  it is now common to perform large operations 
in elderly and frail patients; and, 3)  even when patients are admitted after surgery, the 
duration of hospitalization is usually short. Ward patients are therefore muc h sicker now 
than previously.  
In a series of studies, we have shown that conventional intermittent ward vital sign 
monitoring misses most hypoxemia, hypotension, and hypertension. Furthermore, we 
cannot reliably predict which patients will develop respiratory complications or when they  
will occur. Continuous ward monitoring is therefore the only approach likely to identify 
instability before it becomes critical or even irreversible.  
Cardiopulmonary events do not occur in isolation. Tachycardia and hypoxemia 
commonly co -exist and often culminate in hypotension which is strongly associated with 
myocardial injury and death.24,25 As might thus be expected, it is well established that vital 
signs deteriorate 6 –12 hours before cardiac and respiratory arrests occur26-28 — which is 
the basis for having hospital rapid -response teams which undoubtedly save lives.29 The 
difficulty is that rapid response teams largely prevent further damage after patients 
experience critical events; patients would be better served if we could detect deterioration 
early and therefore prevent  critical episodes.  
Life-threatening ward complications including cardiocirculatory and respiratory 
failure are usually preceded by abnormalities in vital signs that occur minutes to hours 
earlier.30,31 Recognition of even subtle changes in basic vital signs may allow clinical 
deterioration to be identified well before serious adverse events occur. Continuous vital 
sign monitoring may therefore prompt clinical interventions that prevent complications, or  
at least moderate their severity.  
 6 There are already battery -powered, untethered ward systems that continuously 
monitor a combination of physiologic variables, such as blood pressure, 
electrocardiogram, heart rate, oxygen saturation, respiratory rate, body position, activity, 
and location.32,33 New biosensor material and digital developments will allow further 
miniaturization of measurement systems, and non -invasive continuous measurement of 
other physiological variables.34 Continuous monitoring is likely to facilitate rapid detection 
of abnormalities and trigger clinical interventions.29  
Silber and colleagues reported in 1992 that critical events occurred at comparable 
rates in hospitals with good and poor outcomes,35 an observation that has subsequently 
been confirmed.36 This led to the concept of “failure to rescue,” the theory being that the 
best hospitals intervened earlier and more effectively than others, thus improving 
outcomes.  
The difficulty, of course, is that “failure to rescue” applies after patients experience 
a critical event. Far better would be to prevent  critical events. Or to put this another way, 
we need to move beyond failure to rescue, and instead intervene before  critical events – 
rather than trying to pick up the pieces afterwards. Continuous ward monitoring and the 
associated data handling systems may well allow clinicians to intervene before critical 
events — thereby potentially saving lives.37-40  
We plan a pilot study to evaluate patient tolerance of the GE Portrait Mobile 
Monitoring Solution, along with appropriate alert thresholds, and clinical utility . The 
system is a novel battery -powered untethered monitor for continuous monitoring of 
oxygen saturation, respiratory rate, and pulse  rate that is designed for use by patients on 
surgical wards. The initial phase will evaluate patient tolerance, with clinicians and 
patients blinded to monitor data. Results will be used to evaluate the frequency of 
respiratory events and pulse rate abnormalities. These data will be used to design clinical 
alert settings , based on various durations at various thresholds (e.g.,  saturation <85% for 
>1 minute). Our main goal will be to identify clinically meaningful vital sign abnormalities 
with a minimum of false alerts. Secondarily, we will evaluate the frequency and duration 
of abnormalities, and the fraction that are detected clinically.   
In the second phase of the pilot, clinicians will be unblinded to the GE Portrait 
monitors, and alerts provided based on the durations and threshold identified in the initial 
part of the pilot. The primary outcomes will be clinician tolerance and the extent to which 
clinicians believe that vital sign trending and  alerts provided useful information rather than 
distraction. Specifically, we will assess the fraction of alerts that clinicians deemed 
meaningful, and the fraction that resulted in clinical interventions. In the third phase of the 
pilot, the durations and thresholds for saturation, respiratory rate, and pulse rate that 
trigger alerts will be adjusted based on results from the second phase.  
Data obtained in the proposed pilot  cohort  will guide design of a future robust  
randomized trial comparing clinical interventions and serious complications with blinded 
versus unblinded continuous ward monitoring.   
 
 7 Specific Aims  
Initial phase  
The general goals of the initial phase are to collect initial data to evaluate the 
frequency and nature of vital sign abnormalities, individually and as a composite, while 
also socializing the Portrait monitor with clinicians. Blinded data collected in thi s phase 
will be recorded for subsequent  analysis and used to design alarm thresholds that will 
identify clinically meaningful events with few "false alarms." The tentative goal will be an 
average of  several alerts per day per monitored patient. Clinicians will be completely 
blinded during this phase.  
Primary Aim.  Collect  blinded data to e valuate the frequency and duration of vital sign 
abnormalities detected by the GE Portrait monitor, and the fraction that are detected 
clinically  and the extent to which they overlap .  
Secondary Aim 1.  Design clinically meaningful alerts based on the data collected and 
abnormalities detected while avoiding false alerts. 
Secondary Aim  2. Determine the frequency of the alerts , using criteria  determined in 
Aim 1.  
Secondary  Aim 3. Determine the fraction of potentially serious vital sign abnormalities 
detected by GE Portrait monitoring that are  also detected by clinicians using routine  every 
four-hour monitoring  and vice versa .  
  
Second phase  
In the second phase, patients will be randomized to blinded or unblinded GE Portrait 
monitoring. We will determine whether unblinded monitoring reduces the cumulative 
duration of vital sign abnormalities. We will also assess the extent to which clinicians find 
alerts to be useful versus distracting.  
Primary Aim.  Determine whether  patients with  unblinded continuous ward monitoring 
with the GE Portrait Mobile Monitoring Solution experience less time with vital sign 
abnormalities as defined in the initial phase of the study. Specifically, we will test the 
primary hypothesis that the cumulative duration of vital sign abnormalities (using criteria 
determined in Phase  1) is shorte r with unblinded than blinded GE Portrait monitoring  in 
patients recovering from major noncardiac surgery .  
Secondary Aim.  Evaluate the extent to which clinicians believe that alerts from the GE 
Portrait monitor are clinically meaningful.  
 
Third phase  
In this phase, we will refine the alert thresholds developed Phase  1 if necessary. Again, 
we will estimate the extent to which  unblinded monitoring reduces the cumulative duration 
 8 of vital sign abnormalities. And on an exploratory basis, we will determine whether 
unblinded monitoring reduces a composite of interventions for vital sign abnormalities. 
These results will provide guidance for a future full trial with "hard" outcomes.   
Primary Aim. Determine whether unblinded continuous ward monitoring with the GE 
Portrait Mobile Monitoring Solution reduces  vital sign abnormalities. Specifically, we will 
test the primary hypothesis that the cumulative duration of vital sign abnormalities (using 
criteria refined in Phase  2) is shorter with unblinded than blinded GE Portrait monitoring 
in patients recovering f rom major noncardiac surgery.   
Exploratory Aim 1. Determine  whether  continuous ward  saturation, ventilation, and 
pulse rate  monitoring reduces  a collapsed  composite of  substantive  respiratory 
interventions . Components of the composite will be:  
o Naloxone administration;  
o Insertion of oral or nasal airways;  
o Non-invasive ventilatory support including for bag and mask 
ventilation;  
o Rapid Response Team activation;  
o Unplanned ICU transfer;  
o Unplanned intubation;  
o CPR ; 
o Death . 
 
 
Methods  
We anticipate enrolling patients  cared for  in 2-4 designated surgical wards  at the 
Cleveland Clinic Main Campus . The study will be restricted to designated wards because 
active nursing engagement and training will be required. Ward assignments are largely 
determined by bed availability and therefore cannot be reliably predicted preoperatively. 
Consent will therefor e be obtained shortly after patients are admitted to one of the 
participating wards.  A screening log will be maintained.  
There will be no restriction on sex, race, or ethnicity; all qualifying patients will be 
asked to consider the study . Our prospective cohort study  will be conducted with all 
necessary regulatory approvals and will be registered on ClinicalTrials.gov. A full 
statistical analysis plan will be developed before any data are evaluated. Reporting will 
be consistent with the CONSORT guidelines. The project will be managed by a Steering  
Committee consisting of study leaders who are not involved in day -to-day enrollment and 
data acquisition.  
We plan to enroll between 100 patients in the first phase , 150  patients in the 
second phase , and 250 in the third phase . We expect that  patient enrollment for  each will 
last between 2 and 4  months.  Data analysis for each phase and consideration of 
thresholds will likely require several months between phases 1 and 2, and between 
 9 phases 2 and 3. Data cleaning and analysis for phase 3 will require at least several 
months.   
Subject selection  
Consenting patients will be eligible  if they:  
1. Are admitted to one of the wards equipped with the GE Portrait Mobile Monitoring 
Solution ; 
2. Are ≥18 years old;  
3. Are designated American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status 1 -4; 
4. Had major noncardiac surgery lasting at least 1.5  hours;  
5. Are e xpected to remain hospitalized at least two postoperative night s; 
6. Had general anesthesia with or without  neuraxial anesthesia . 
Patients will be ineligible  if they:  
1. Have language, vision, or hearing impairments that may compromise continuous 
monitoring;  
2. Are designated Do Not Resuscitate, hospice, or receiving end of life care; 
3. Have previously participated in the study . 
4. Patients who have “ Implantable Minute Ventilation Rate Responsive 
Pacemakers ” 
 
Protocol  
In all cases, good judgement will predominate. Clinicians should always act in their 
patients’ best interests, irrespective of th is protocol.   
Patients will be enrolled postoperatively after admission to a surgical ward. 
Consequently, anesthetic management will not be controlled. Postoperative analgesia will 
be entirely at clinical discretion and can include field, plane, and nerve blocks. No asp ect 
of clinical care is prescribed  by this protocol.  
All patients will have normal vital sign assessments by nurses at 4 -hour intervals  
per Cleveland Clinic routine , and more often as clinically indicated.  Clinicians may make 
any interventions they believe necessary.  Thus, no patients will be denied routine 
monitoring and management.  Participating  patients will  have continuous pulse oximetry , 
ventilation,  and heart  rate monitoring in addition to all routine vital signs  as tolerated for 
72 postoperative hours using the GE Portrait ward monitoring solution (Fig . 5, 
Appendix  1). Clinicians will be carefully trained not to rely on measurements from the GE 
Portrait, and to always confirm concerning values with conventional monitors and physical 
assessment. Details of network communication are provided in Appendix 2 .  
 10 Fig. 5. Patient connections for the GE 
Portrait Mobile Monitoring Solution  
continuous ward saturation, ventilation, 
and heart rate system.  
1. Computer  
2. Monitoring network  
3. Core services software  
4. Charger  
5. Hub 
6. Sensor batteries  
7. Respiration sensor  
8. Saturation sensor  
9. Second saturation sensor  
10. Alert  unit 
 
  
  
 The patient units are powered by small rechargeable batteries that last at least 24 
hours. Investigators will swap depleted batteries for fully charged ones daily. Data from 
the patient module will be transmitted to a small hub in each patient’s room using  MBAN 
(similar to Bluetooth) proprietary secure communication. The hub normally rests in a 
charging dock, and can be taken with patients if they care to leave their rooms. The hub 
retransmits monitor data in real time via the hospital’s secure “internal” W i-Fi system to 
display screens in clinical areas and to the Department of Outcomes Research, which is 
a double -locked card -key controlled location restricted to Departmental investigators.  
During the initial phase of the study, all monitoring will be clinician -blinded.  That is, 
recorded for post hoc analysis. During the subsequent phases of the study, patients will 
be randomly assigned to unblinded versus blinded monitoring. In both cases, information 
from the GE Portrait Monitor will be recorded, but will be available to clinicians only when 
patient s are assigned to unblinded monitoring. Randomization will be based on computer -
generated codes, in random blocks of 4 -8 patients, without strati fication. A web -based 
system will be accessed by investigators after consent is obtained. Allocation will 
therefore be concealed as long as practical.    
Measurements  
Baseline demographic and morphometric characteristics will be recorded, 
including height, weight, and sex. Elements of the STOP -BANG  sleep apnea  
questionnaire will be recorded.7,41,42 Cardiopulmonary risks will be recorded, including 
hypertension requiring treatment, diabetes requiring oral medications or insulin, history of 
previous myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, current smoking  status, and pack -years of smoking history. Cardiovascular and 
pulmonary medications will be similarly recorded by category, including beta blockers, 

 11 angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, calcium channel 
blockers, statins, bronchodilators, and inhaled steroids.  
Baseline laboratory values (within 30 days before surgery) will be recorded on an 
as-available basis, including albumin, BNP, NT -ProBNP,  troponin,  and FEV1. Results of 
sleep studies will be recorded.  
Anesthesia will be characterized as general, neuraxial, or combined. Use of 
peripheral  plane and  nerve blocks will also be recorded. Routine anesthetic variables will 
be recorded including  time-weighted average  volatile anesthetic partial pressure, fluid 
type and volume, estimated blood loss, and transfusions.  Postoperative opioids will be 
converted to morphine sulphate equivalents (Appendix  3).43 On an as -available basis, we 
will record hemoglobin and troponin concentrations obtained during the initial four 
postoperative days.  
Outcome definitions  
Initial phase  
Primary Aim . As in previous studies,5,44 we will present vital sign abnormalities  as 
continuous functions of duration and severity of vital sign abnormalities. An advantage of 
this approach is that we do not need to pre -define thresholds and will instead present 
various  combinations of durations and thresholds for bradycardia, tachycardia, saturation, 
and respiratory rate. See Figure  2 as an example for saturation.  
However, to evaluate clinical detection of vital sign abnormalities we need to define 
thresholds. We will consider the following thresholds and continuous durations to be 
clinically meaningful: A) saturation <90% for 30  minutes; B) heart  rate >110 beats/min  for 
30 minutes;  C heart rate  <40 beats/min  for 15  minutes;  D) respiratory rate < 6/minute for 
30 minutes or <3/minute for 10 minutes; and, E) respiratory rate >20 for 30  minutes. 
Because physiological signals are inherently noisy, all values will be electronically 
smoothed to some degree, but raw data summaries will be used as a cross -check (see 
Data Analysis for details).   
Secondary Aim 2 . Continuous ward monitoring  with the GE Portrait Mobile 
Monitoring Solution  detects a composite of vital sign abnormalities more often than 
routine nursing vital signs at 4 -hour intervals in noncardiac surgical patients over the initial 
72 postoperative hours in the surgical ward while hospitalized. Components of the 
composite wil l be: A)  saturation  <85% for ≥60  seconds,5 B) pulse  rate >130 beats/min  for 
30 secs ,45 C) pulse rate  <40 beats/min  for 30 secs,46 D) low respiratory rate <4/minute for 
30 secs E) high respiratory rate >25 for 120 secs, and, F) apnea >120 secs . 
Phases 2 and 3  
An investigator will ask the relevant clinician (usually a nurse) to rate each alert as 
clinically meaningful or not.  Specifically, clinicians will be asked to rate alerts as “critical,” 
“important,” “informative,” or “false or distracting.”  The terms  will intentionally not be 
further defined,  thereby  allowing caregiver s to determine  themselves  the extent to which  
 12 a given  alert was helpful or not. Caregivers will be queried in person shortly after each 
alert, typically within 15 minutes.  The thresholds, determined in the initial phase, will be 
set to generate an average of  about  2 alerts per patient per day — and therefore will not 
be onerous for clinicians.    
We will also evaluate the  following i nterventions in our composite:  1) drugs that 
slow or speed heart rate ; 2) administration of bronchodilators ; 3) initiating or increasing 
oxygen administration  (increment in oxygen concentration, flow rate, or administration 
mode); 4)  mask, CPAP or high -flow oxygen (e.g.,  60 L/min) respiratory support ; 
5) nursing requests for physician evaluation; 6)  activation of a Rapid Response Team; 
7) intubation; 8)  cardiopulmonary arrest; and, 8)  transfer to a monitored ward or crit ical 
care unit . Investigators, in consultation with clinicians, will determine which interventions 
were made, and whether they were prompted by GE Portrait alerts.  
Data management  
Study  data will be entered into a custom secure Redcap database that will be 
maintained on secure Cleveland Clinic servers and backed up to remote sites nightly. The 
system will record who accessed the randomization system and when it was accessed. 
The database  will include appropriate logic and range checks, and track all changes.  
Most data will be obtained directly from the GE Portrait monitor and electronic 
records. Other values will be entered manually directly entered into Redcap from source 
documents or initially recorded on case report forms for subsequent transfer to Redcap.  
Data analysis  
Pulse oximetry data are difficult to analyze due to the high degree of variability in 
saturation that occurs within each patient. We will thus use an approach similar to our 
previous analysis.5 On one hand, patients might experience frequent, short episodes of 
more severe hypoxemia, while on the other hand, average SpO 2 may linger within slightly 
abnormal or dangerous territory for hours. The latter is difficult to ascertain from the raw 
SpO 2 data. We will therefore consider both raw and smoothed (or filtered) SpO 2 data.  
For the raw data, we will conduct two analyses: First,  to assess the overall 
exposure to hypoxemia for each patient, we will summarize the distribution of number of 
hypoxic minutes per hour of monitoring using incidence curves. Various thresholds 
defining hypoxemia will be used to generate the incidence curve s. Second,  we will use 
quantile regression47 to characterize the median, quartiles, 10th and 90th percentiles, and 
5th and 95th percentiles of the distribution of SpO 2 across patients as a function of 
postoperative time. Nonlinearities in these quantile curves will be taken into account by 
incorporating restricted cubic splines for the time variable in the quantile regression 
models.  
For the analyses of filtered SpO 2 data, we will smooth each individual patient’s 
SpO 2-versus -time profile using a Gaussian kernel smoother (i.e., the smoothed estimate 
of SpO 2 for a specific time point will be a weighted average of the surrounding SpO 2 
 13 values, where the weights will be determined according to a Gaussian distribution 
centered at that time point with an inter -quartile range of 3 hours). Using the smoothed 
profiles, we will then estimate the incidence of hypoxic episodes of varying duration  under 
a range of SpO 2 thresholds characterizing hypoxemia.  
Phase I  
Primary Aim.  Collect blinded data to evaluate the frequency and duration of vital sign 
abnormalities detected by the GE Portrait monitor, the fraction that are detected clinically, 
and the overlap between them. We will use descriptive statistics such as median 
[quarti les] and mean (SD) to summarize clinical detection of vital sign abnormalities using 
the definitions given in Outcome Definitions using both the raw data and also using the 
data smoothing techniques described above.  Raw data summaries will be h elpful so that 
truly extreme values are not routinely “smoothed away” in the algorithms described in 
Data Analysis.  
Secondary Aim 1.  We will design clinically meaningful alerts based on the data collected 
and abnormalities detected, while avoiding false alerts. This will involve estimating 
sensitivity and specificity for detecting true abnormalit ies across the range of possible 
alert cut -points and choosing cut -points which maximize both sensitivity and specificity.  
Accuracy , along with  positive and negative predictive value s, will be reported.  All 
estimates will be reported with confidence intervals.   
Secondary Aim  2. We will determine the optimal frequency of the alerts, using criteria 
determined in Secondary Aim  1. This will be largely  descriptive, but will involve a tradeoff 
between increasing the frequency of alerts and the corresponding loss to sensitivity and 
specificity.  
Secondary  Aim 3. We will estimate the proportion and corresponding confidence interval 
of potentially serious vital sign abnormalities detected by GE Portrait monitoring that are 
also detected by clinicians using routine every four -hour monitoring, and vice versa.  
Phase II  
Primary Aim. We will assess the treatment effect of unblinded continuous ward 
monitoring versus blinded monitoring on the cumulative duration of the various vital sign 
abnormalities using parametric (e.g., s -sample t -test) or non -parametric (e.g., Wilcoxon -
Mann -Whitney  test), as appropriate.  
Secondary Aim.  In the unblinded group we will evaluate the fraction of  alerts from the 
GE Portrait monitor that clinicians designate dichotomously as  clinically meaningful . 
Results will be presented as a percentage with 95% confidence intervals.  
 
Phase III  
Primary Aim.  We will test whether and estimate the extent to which unblinded continuous 
ward monitoring with the GE Portrait Mobile Monitoring Solution reduces the time with 
 14 vital sign abnormalities as defined in the initial phase of the study using statistical methods 
similar to those described in the primary aim for Phase II above.  
Exploratory Aim 1 . We will assess whether and the extent to which unblinded continuous 
ward monitoring of saturation, ventilation, and pulse rate monitoring reduces a collapsed 
composite of substantive respiratory interventions as described in specific aims using a 
Chi-Square test and estimating the relative risk and its confidence interval. As a 
secondary analysis we will assess the treatment effect using  a distinct effects generalized 
estimating equation (GEE) model which estimates a separate treatment ef fect for each 
component and then averages them (average relative effect method, ARE).48 49 This 
method prevents components with higher frequency, which also may be less severe, from 
driving the treatment effect results . It simultaneously accounts for the correlation across 
components, and allows assessment of the treatment -by-component interaction. Finally, 
we will estimate the common effect (or “global”) treatment effect across the components 
in a GE model estimating a sin gle effect.   
 
Sample Size Considerations  
We plan for 100 patients in the first phase, 150 in phase 2 , and 250 in phase  3. When 
comparing groups on continuous outcomes for Phases 1, 2 and 3, respectively, we will 
have 90% power at the 0.05 significance level to detec t a difference in means of 0.66, 
0.53 and 0.41 . When comparing groups on binary outcomes such as the collapsed 
composite outcome in Phase III we will have 90% power at the 0.05 significance level  to 
detect relative risks of 0.10, 0.30 or 0.4 5 or stronger given corresponding control group 
incidences of 0.10, 0.20 or 0.30.   
Limitations  
Active participation and engagement from ward clinicians will be essential, 
including nurses, hospitalists, anesthesiologist  members of the  acute pain team, and 
surgeons. To that end, key personnel from each specialty are co -investigators and have 
agreed to champion the project, including the Associate Chief Nursing Officer for Nursing 
Research and a senior member  of a relevant surgical department. Thus,  while 
considerable effort will be required, we anticipate high engagement from participating 
clinicians.  
Our experience with four other  continuous ward monitoring systems is that most 
patients tolerate monitoring well, but there are inevitably patients who drop out of 
monitoring studies. And even  for those who remain in a study, there are often  gaps of 
varying duration.  Our experience is that paying patients, even a trivial amount, much 
improves cooperation with monitoring. The GE Portrait system is untethered and small, 
and therefore should be relatively well tolerated.   
Clinical interventions are multifactorial and usually based on many factors. It will 
thus not always be possible to reliably attribute a particular intervention to a GE Portrait 
alert. Nonetheless, by personally asking clinicians in real time, we will reasonably be able 
 15 to estimate whether the GE Portrait alert was the initial prompt for further evaluation and 
eventual treatment.  
 
Human Subjects Protection  
In all cases, good judgement will predominate. Clinicians should always act in their 
patients’ best interests, irrespective of th is protocol.   
The study will be conducted with IRB approval and written patient consent. The 
study will be restricted to designated wards because active nursing engagement and 
training will be required.  Furthermore, the GE monitoring system will only be available in 
selected wards.     
The study  will be guided by a  Steering  Committee that will review enrollment, 
protocol compliance, data quality,  and adverse events. Safety will be evaluated  after each 
pilot phase , and more often if deemed necessary.  
Patients will be paid $1/hour of successful monitoring time, to a maximum of 72 
postoperative hours. Our intent is to pay patients for monitoring time, even if unsuccessful 
because of technical difficulties, but not for periods when they electively remove or disable 
the monitors. Payment will be made by check about 8 weeks after discharge.  
The GE Portrait ward monitoring system is not yet FDA cleared. We thus request 
a non -significant -risk device exemption from the IRB. The basis for our request is:  
1) The device itself is battery powered, external, and presumably inherently risk -
free. Detailed documentation of  design and process control, and electrical 
safety is provided in Appendix 1; 
2) Clinical staff will never make clinical decision based on values from the GE 
Portrait monitor. Any potential abnormalities will be confirmed with convention 
monitors and clinical examinations. To the extent that alerts are unfounded, 
they will disrupt nurses but not harm patients. Based on the initial blinded 
portion of the proposed pilot, alert thresholds will be designed to occur no more 
often than an average of twice per day per patient.  
3) True alerts (confirmed with conventional monitors) will potentially improve care 
by allowing clinicians to intervene and perhaps prevent serious 
cardiorespiratory complications.  
4) Continuous monitoring data will be transmitted with a secure proprietary 
communication algorithm (similar to Bluetooth) to a hub in patient rooms, and 
from there to the Clinic’s internal secure Wi -Fi system. Connections to the 
Clinic’s data system will be made with full approval from the responsible HIPAA 
data security team. Ward monitoring data will thus be as secure as other clinical 
data.  
The major risk to patients will be discomfort from wearing the GE Portrait Mobile 
Monitoring Solution . However, the level of discomfort will be slight since the system 
consists of a small light -weight battery powered unit and several “stick -on” pads. Of 
 16 course , patients will always have the prerogative to remove the system themselves 
should it become burdensome.  
Nurses will be key participants  in the study, and their responses to alerts are 
important outcomes.  (We consider them  to be  co-investigators.)  Specifically, they will 
have the option to respond to alerts from the GE Portrait system, and their responses will 
be recorded. We will also ask them to rate the utility of the alerts. Specific alerts thresholds 
will be based on the results of the initial phase of the study and will be designed to not 
exceed an average of 2 alerts per patient per day. Use of the moni tors will thus minimally 
disturb nurses even if all  alerts are considered distractions — which seems highly unlikely . 
No record of nurse  identification  will be kept. That is, nurse  responses will be completely 
unlinked to individuals.   
Data will be analyzed by statisticians in the Department of Outcomes Research 
and resulting  manuscripts will be written by investigators. De -identified data will be shared 
with GE  at the end of study for future research, product development , and marketing 
purposes .  
 
  
 17 References  
 1. Li G, Warner M, Lang BH, Huang L, Sun LS: Epidemiology of anesthesia -
related mortality in the United States, 1999 -2005. Anesthesiology 2009; 110: 759 -65 
 2. Pearse RM, Moreno RP, Bauer P, Pelosi P, Metnitz P, Spies C, Vallet B, 
Vincent JL, Hoeft A, Rhodes A, European Surgical Outcomes Study group for the Trials 
groups of the European Society of Intensive Care M, the European Society of A: Mortality 
after surgery in Europe: a 7 day cohort study. Lance t 2012; 380: 1059 -65 
 3. Bartels K, Karhausen J, Clambey ET, Grenz A, Eltzschig HK: Perioperative 
organ injury. Anesthesiology 2013; 119: 1474 -89 
 4. Devereaux PJ, Sessler DI: Cardiac complications in patients undergoing 
major noncardiac surgery. N Engl J Med 2015; 373: 2258 -69 
 5. Sun Z, Sessler DI, Dalton JE, Devereaux PJ, Shahinyan A, Naylor AJ, 
Hutcherson MT, Finnegan PS, Tandon V, Darvish -Kazem S, Chugh S, Alzayer H, Kurz 
A: Postoperative hypoxemia is common and persistent: A prospective blinded 
observational study. Anesth A nalg 2015; 121: 709 -15 
 6. Khanna AK, Bergese SD, Jungquist CR, Morimatsu H, Uezono S, Lee S, Ti 
LK, Urman RD, McIntyre R, Tornero C, Dahan A, Saager L, Weingarten TN, Wittmann M, 
Auckley D, Brazzi L, Le Guen M, Soto R, Schramm F, Ayad S, Kaw R, Di Stefano P, 
Sessler DI, Uribe A , Moll V, Dempsey SJ, Buhre W, Overdyk FJ: Prediction of opioid -
induced respiratory depression on inpatient wards using continuous capnography and 
oximetry: An international prospective, observational trial. Anesth Analg 2020; 131: 1012 -
24 
 7. Khanna AK, Sessler DI, Sun Z, Naylor AJ, You J, Hesler BD, Kurz A, 
Devereaux PJ, Saager L: Using the STOP -BANG questionnaire to predict hypoxaemia in 
patients recovering from noncardiac surgery: a prospective cohort analysis. Br J Anaesth 
2016; 116: 63 2-40 
 8. Belcher AW, Khanna AK, Leung S, Naylor AJ, Hutcherson MT, Nguyen BM, 
Makarova N, Sessler DI, Devereaux PJ, Saager L: Long -acting patient -controlled opioids 
are not associated with more postoperative hypoxemia than short -acting patient -
controlled opioid s after noncardiac surgery: A cohort analysis. Anesth Analg 2016; 123: 
1471 -9 
 9. Izrailtyan I, Qiu J, Overdyk FJ, Erslon M, Gan TJ: Risk factors for 
cardiopulmonary and respiratory arrest in medical and surgical hospital patients on opioid 
analgesics and sedatives. PLoS One 2018; 13: e0194553  
 10. Dahan A, Aarts L, Smith TW: Incidence, reversal, and prevention of opioid -
induced respiratory depression. Anesthesiology 2010; 112: 226 -38 
 11. Sun Z, Sessler DI, Dalton JE, Devereaux PJ, Shahinyan A, Naylor AJ, 
Hutcherson MT, Finnegan PS, Tandon V, Darvish -Kazem S, Chugh S, Alzayer H, Kurz 
A: Postoperative Hypoxemia Is Common and Persistent: A Prospective Blinded 
Observational Study. Anesth Analg 2015; 121: 709 -15 
 12. Cashman JN, Dolin SJ: Respiratory and haemodynamic effects of acute 
postoperative pain management: evidence from published data. British Journal of 
Anaesthesia 2004; 93: 212 -23 
 18  13. Oderda GM, Gan TJ, Johnson BH, Robinson SB: Effect of opioid -related 
adverse events on outcomes in selected surgical patients. J Pain Palliat Care 
Pharmacother 2013; 27: 62 -70 
 14. Khanna AK, Overdyk FJ, Greening C, Di Stefano P, Buhre WF: Respiratory 
depression in low acuity hospital settings -Seeking answers from the PRODIGY trial. J Crit 
Care 2018; 47: 80 -7 
 15. Andersen LW, Berg KM, Chase M, Cocchi MN, Massaro J, Donnino MW, 
American Heart Association's Get With The Guidelines -Resuscitation I: Acute respiratory 
compromise on inpatient wards in the United States: Incidence, outcomes, and factors 
associated wi th in-hospital mortality. Resuscitation 2016; 105: 123 -9 
 16. Jarzyna D, Jungquist CR, Pasero C, Willens JS, Nisbet A, Oakes L, 
Dempsey SJ, Santangelo D, Polomano RC: American Society for Pain Management 
Nursing guidelines on monitoring for opioid -induced sedation and respiratory depression. 
Pain Manag Nurs 2011 ; 12: 118 -45 e10  
 17. DeVita MA, Smith GB, Adam SK, Adams -Pizarro I, Buist M, Bellomo R, 
Bonello R, Cerchiari E, Farlow B, Goldsmith D, Haskell H, Hillman K, Howell M, Hravnak 
M, Hunt EA, Hvarfner A, Kellett J, Lighthall GK, Lippert A, Lippert FK, Mahroof R, Myers 
JS, Rose n M, Reynolds S, Rotondi A, Rubulotta F, Winters B: "Identifying the hospitalised 
patient in crisis" - a consensus conference on the afferent limb of rapid response systems. 
Resuscitation 2010; 81: 375 -82 
 18. Vetro J, Natarajan DK, Mercer I, Buckmaster JN, Heland M, Hart GK, 
Bellomo R, Jones DA: Antecedents to cardiac arrests in a hospital equipped with a 
medical emergency team. Critical Care and Resuscitation 2011; 13: 162 -6 
 19. Lee LA, Caplan RA, Stephens LS, Posner KL, Terman GW, Voepel -Lewis 
T, Domino KB: Postoperative opioid -induced respiratory depression: a closed claims 
analysis. Anesthesiology 2015; 122: 659 -65 
 20. Taenzer AH, Pyke JB, McGrath SP, Blike GT: Impact of pulse oximetry 
surveillance on rescue events and intensive care unit transfers: a before -and-after 
concurrence study. Anesthesiology 2010; 112: 282 -7 
 21. Sessler DI, Imrey PB: Clinical research methodology 1: study designs and 
methodologic sources of error. Anesth Analg 2015; 121: 1034 -42 
 22. Sessler DI, Imrey PB: Clinical research methodology 2: observational 
clinical research. Anesth Analg 2015; 121: 1043 -51 
 23. Ochroch EA, Russell MW, Hanson WC, 3rd, Devine GA, Cucchiara AJ, 
Weiner MG, Schwartz SJ: The impact of continuous pulse oximetry monitoring on 
intensive care unit admissions from a postsurgical care floor. Anesth Analg 2006; 102: 
868-75 
 24. Walsh M, Devereaux PJ, Garg AX, Kurz A, Turan A, Rodseth RN, Cywinski 
J, Thabane L, Sessler DI: Relationship between intraoperative mean arterial pressure and 
clinical outcomes after noncardiac surgery: Toward an empirical definition of hypotension. 
Anesthesiology 2013; 119: 507 -15 
 25. Mascha EJ, Yang D, Weiss S, Sessler DI: Intraoperative mean arterial 
pressure variability and 30 -day mortality in patients having noncardiac surgery. 
Anesthesiology 2015; 123: 79 -91 
 19  26. Vetro J, Natarajan DK, Mercer I, Buckmaster JN, Heland M, Hart GK, 
Bellomo R, Jones DA: Antecedents to cardiac arrests in a hospital equipped with a 
medical emergency team. Crit Care Resusc 2011; 13: 162 -6 
 27. Hillman KM, Bristow PJ, Chey T, Daffurn K, Jacques T, Norman SL, Bishop 
GF, Simmons G: Duration of life -threatening antecedents prior to intensive care 
admission. Intensive Care Med 2002; 28: 1629 -34 
 28. Schein RM, Hazday N, Pena M, Ruben BH, Sprung CL: Clinical 
antecedents to in -hospital cardiopulmonary arrest. Chest 1990; 98: 1388 -92 
 29. DeVita MA, Smith GB, Adam SK, Adams -Pizarro I, Buist M, Bellomo R, 
Bonello R, Cerchiari E, Farlow B, Goldsmith D, Haskell H, Hillman K, Howell M, Hravnak 
M, Hunt EA, Hvarfner A, Kellett J, Lighthall GK, Lippert A, Lippert FK, Mahroof R, Myers 
JS, Rosen M, Reynolds S, Rotondi A, Rubulotta F, Winters B: "Identifying the hospitalised 
patient in crisis" --a consensus conference on the afferent limb of rapid response systems. 
Resuscitation 2010; 81: 375 -82 
 30. Jones D, Mitchell I, Hillman K, Story D: Defining clinical deterioration. 
Resuscitation 2013; 84: 1029 -34 
 31. Buist MD, Jarmolowski E, Burton PR, Bernard SA, Waxman BP, Anderson 
J: Recognising clinical instability in hospital patients before cardiac arrest or unplanned 
admission to intensive care. A pilot study in a tertiary -care hospital. Med J Aust 1999; 
171: 22 -5 
 32. McGillion MH, Duceppe E, Allan K, Marcucci M, Yang S, Johnson AP, Ross -
Howe S, Peter E, Scott T, Ouellette C, Henry S, Le Manach Y, Pare G, Downey B, Carroll 
SL, Mills J, Turner A, Clyne W, Dvirnik N, Mierdel S, Poole L, Nelson M, Harvey V, Good 
A, Pe ttit S, Sanchez K, Harsha P, Mohajer D, Ponnambalam S, Bhavnani S, Lamy A, 
Whitlock R, Devereaux PJ: Postoperative Remote Automated Monitoring: Need for and 
State of the Science. Can J Cardiol 2018; 34: 850 -62 
 33. Michard F, Sessler DI: Ward monitoring 3.0. Br J Anaesth 2018; 121: 999 -
1001  
 34. Boland CS, Khan U, Ryan G, Barwich S, Charifou R, Harvey A, Backes C, 
Li Z, Ferreira MS, Mobius ME, Young RJ, Coleman JN: Sensitive electromechanical 
sensors using viscoelastic graphene -polymer nanocomposites. Science 2016; 354: 1257 -
60 
 35. Silber JH, Williams SV, Krakauer H, Schwartz JS: Hospital and patient 
characteristics associated with death after surgery. A study of adverse occurrence and 
failure to rescue. Med Care 1992; 30: 615 -29 
 36. Ahmad T, Bouwman RA, Grigoras I, Aldecoa C, Hofer C, Hoeft A, Holt P, 
Fleisher LA, Buhre W, Pearse RM: Use of failure -to-rescue to identify international 
variation in postoperative care in low -, middle - and high -income countries: a 7 -day cohort 
study of elective surgery. Br J Anaesth 2017; 119: 258 -66 
 37. Sessler DI, Saugel B: Beyond 'failure to rescue': the time has come for 
continuous ward monitoring (editorial). Br J Anaesth 2019; 122: 304 -6 
 38. Michard F, Bellomo R, Taenzer A: The rise of ward monitoring: opportunities 
and challenges for critical care specialists. Intensive Care Med 2018  
 39. Michard F, Sessler DI: Ward monitoring 3.0 (editorial). Br J Anaesth 2018; 
121: 999 -1001  
 20  40. Michard F, Sessler DI, Saugel B: Non -invasive arterial pressure monitoring 
revisited. Intensive Care Med 2018; 44: 2213 -5 
 41. Nagappa M, Liao P, Wong J, Auckley D, Ramachandran SK, Memtsoudis 
S, Mokhlesi B, Chung F: Validation of the STOP -Bang Questionnaire as a Screening Tool 
for Obstructive Sleep Apnea among Different Populations: A Systematic Review and 
Meta -Analysis. PLo S One 2015; 10: e0143697  
 42. Nagappa M, Patra J, Wong J, Subramani Y, Singh M, Ho G, Wong DT, 
Chung F: Association of STOP -Bang Questionnaire as a Screening Tool for Sleep Apnea 
and Postoperative Complications: A Systematic Review and Bayesian Meta -analysis of 
Prospective and Ret rospective Cohort Studies. Anesth Analg 2017; 125: 1301 -8 
 43. Turan A, Atim A, Dalton JE, Keeyapaj W, Chu W, Bernstein E, Fu A, Jae 
Ho L, Saager L, Sessler DI: Preoperative angiotensin -converting enzyme inhibitor use is 
not associated with increased postoperative pain and opioid use. Clin J Pain 2013; 29: 
1050 -6 
 44. Turan A, Chang C, Cohen B, Saasouh W, Essber H, Yang D, Ma C, 
Hovsepyan K, Khanna AK, Vitale J, Shah A, Ruetzler K, Maheshwari K, Sessler DI: 
Incidence, severity, and detection of blood pressure perturbations after abdominal 
surgery: A prospective bli nded observational study. Anesthesiology 2019; 130: 550 -9 
 45. Ruetzler K, Yilmaz HO, Turan A, Zimmerman NM, Mao G, Hung MH, Kurz 
A, Sessler DI: Intra -operative tachycardia is not associated with a composite of 
myocardial injury and mortality after noncardiac surgery: A retrospective cohort analysis. 
Eur J Anaest hesiol 2019; 36: 105 -13 
 46. Devereaux PJ, Yang H, Yusuf S, Guyatt G, Leslie K, Villar JC, Xavier D, 
Chrolavicius S, Greenspan L, Pogue J, Pais P, Liu L, Xu S, Malaga G, Avezum A, Chan 
M, Montori VM, Jacka M, Choi P: Effects of extended -release metoprolol succinate in 
patients un dergoing non -cardiac surgery (POISE trial): a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet 2008; 371: 1839 -47 
 47. Koenker R, Bassett G, Jr.: Regression Quantiles. Econometrica 1978; 46: 
33-50 
 48. Mascha EJ, Imrey PB: Factors affecting power of tests for multiple binary 
outcomes. Statistics in Medicine 2010; 29: 2890 -904 
 49. Mascha EJ, Sessler DI: Design and Analysis of Binary -event Composite 
Endpoint Studies: Guidelines for Anesthesia Research. Anesthesia & Analgesia 2011; 
112: 1461 -71 
 50. Chludzinski A, Irani C, Mascha EJ, Kurz A, Devereaux PJ, Sessler DI: 
Protocol understanding and anxiety in perioperative clinical trial patients approached for 
consent on the day of surgery. Mayo Clin Proc 2013; 88: 446 -54 
  
 21 Appendix 1  
Design and safety specifications for the GE continuous ward monitoring system.  
Appendix 2  
Details of network connection and data handling.  
Appendix 3  
Opioid conversions43  
Drug  Route  Dose   
Morphine  IV  10 mg  
Fentanyl  IV 100 µg  
Fentanyl  100 µg patch  100 µg  
Hydrocodone  PO  30 mg  
Hydromorphone  IV  1.5 mg  
Hydromorphone  PO  7 mg 
Meperidine  IV  75 mg 
Oxycodone  PO  20 mg 
Oxycodone/ 
Acetaminophen 5/325  PO  6 tabs 
Hydrocodone/ 
Acetaminophen 5/500  PO  6 tabs 
Tramadol  PO 150 mg 
Propoxyphene / 
Acetaminophen  130 PO  1 tab 
IV = intravenous , PO = oral . 
 
 
 