1 
 
 
 
The Stanford Parkinson’s Disease Plasma Study (SPDP)   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
CLINICAL PROTOCOL  
07/23/2018  
Helen Bronte -Stewart, Principal Investigator  
Stanford University  
Stanford, California 94305  
  
2 
 
1. Protocol Title  
 
The Stanford Parkinson’s Disease Plasma (SPDP)  Study:  Intravenous ly-Administered Plasma From Young Donors for 
Treatment of Moderate Parkinson ’s Diseas e 
 
Principal Inves tigator / Protocol Director:  Helen Bronte -Stewart MD MSE   
Sponsor:       Donation (anonymous)  
 
2. Purpose of the Study  
The purpose of this study is to demonstrate that plasma infusions  can be performed  safely  in patients with Parkinson’s 
Disease (PD) .  Secondary outcomes will include behavioral and laboratory data that will support the next study that will inquire 
whether young plasma infusions improve or slow the progression of cognitive, mood and/or motor impairment and rate markers of  
the disease .  
 
3.  Background & Significance  
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurode generative disease that affects over 1.6 million people in the United States and whose 
incidence increases with age, affecting over 1% of people over the age of 65. The neuropathological processes involved in PD are 
widespread throughout the brain, and are  reflected in a constellation of motor, cognitive, mood and other non -motor symptoms. 
Treatments to date have largely focused on dopamine replacement strategies or deep brain stimulation,  both symptomatic 
treatments.  
As neurodegenerative diseases progress, there are major changes throughout the body and brain. These changes are 
transmitted in the body via the circulatory system between organs, tissues and cells. Recent findings from multiple laborator ies have 
shown that infusions of young plasma into aging rodents can have beneficial effects on cognitive functions , as well as on some 
biomarkers of aging . This  suggest s that the circulating components of plasma can improve  cognitive and disease -relevant symptoms 
(Villeda et  al, 2011; Villeda et al, 2014). This has motivated the field to treat multiple disorders with blood products and their 
constituent active components.  
The established safety of blood transfusions allows us to  test whether infusion of young plasma can ease the neurological 
symptoms in human subjects with neurodegenerative diseases. A study that is ongoing at Stanford, in the department of Neurolo gy 
and Neurological Sciences, is testing whether infusions of young plasma can ameliorate the cognitive impairment  in patients with 
Alzheimer ’s disease (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). To date , this has been well -tolerated by the subjects, without major 
adverse effects.  
We propose to test the  safety and  efficacy of transfusing young plasma in to PD patients , in order  to establish its effects  on 
motor and cognitive functions  in patients in a Phase 1 study. The successful completion of this study will inform the  design of future , 
3 
 
larger and multicenter studies with the goal to determine whether infusions of young plasma can ameliorate the neurodegenerative 
symptoms and underlying pathophysiology in Parkinson’s disease.  
 
 
 
4. Selection of Subjects  
• The goal number of subjects completing the study  is 15 
•  Subjects will sign an informed consent approved by the Stanford IRB  
 
 Inclusion criteria  
o Subjects are to be between the ages of 50 – 80. 
o A diagnos is of clinically probable or established Parkinson’s Disease (MDS criteria)  
o Subject must be on a stable dose of dopaminergic medication and/or DBS parameters for at least 4 weeks prior to screening 
and for the duration of the study  
o Must have Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA) score between 23 -28, and have cognitive complain ts 
o Subject must be competent to sign consent  
o Subject must be willing to commit to being available for  twice  weekly infusions and testing for 4 consecutive weeks  and for 
testing one month later . 
o The a vailability of a study partner who knows the patient well and is willing to acco mpany the subject to all trial visits, to 
participate in ques tionna ires and to complete daily journal assessments . Note: optional partner participation if participant is 
able to consent and travel by self.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
o The participation in any other interventional therapeutic clinical trial during the study  
o The inability to travel to Stanford  
o Inability to walk  without assistance in the off or on medication state  
o Must not exceed a Hoehn and Yahr score of 4  
o The clinically  determined presence of dementia  
o A clinical suspicion/diagnosis of MSA, PSP LBD, ET  
o Subject’s p regnanc y or likelihood of pregnancy within the next 6 months.  
o Subject’s p ositive test results  for Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C or HIV at screening 
o Any other cond ition or situation that the inves tigator believes may interfere with the safety of the subject or the intent and 
conduc t of the study 
o Subject’s medical history of: 
o Stroke 
4 
 
o Anaphy laxis 
o Gout - may cause an increase in uric acid  
o Prior adve rse reaction to any human blood produc t 
o Any history of a blood coagu lation disorder or hype rcoagu lability 
o Conges tive heart failure 
o Uncontrolled hypertension  
o Renal failure 
o Prior intolerance to intravenou s fluids 
o Recen t history of uncon trolled atrial fibrillation 
o IgA deficiency (by history) 
• Subject’s r elation to medications or other treatments: 
o Any concu rrent use of an anticoagu lant therapy. Antiplatelet drugs (e.g., aspirin or clopidogrel) are accep table. 
o The use of Inosine, which may alter urate  levels  
o Concu rrent participation in another interventional  treatment trial for Parkinson ’s disease . If there was prior 
participation, the last dose of the inves tigational agen t must have been at least 6 months prior to Screening. 
o Treatment with any human blood produc t, including intravenou s immunog lobulin, during the 6 months prior to 
Screening or during the trial. 
o Concu rrent daily treatment with benzod iazep ines, typical or atypical antipsycho tics, long-acting opioids, or other 
medications that, in the inves tigator’s opinion, interfere with cogn ition. Intermittent treatment with short-acting 
benzod iazep ines or atypical antipsycho tics may be permitted, provided that no dose is administered within the 72 
hours preced ing any cogn itive assess ment. 
Ineligible Subjects  
Ineligible subjects will be notified of their ineligibility. Ineligible subjects will be asked if their information could be kept on files 
in the event of being qualified to participate in future studies. If subjects do not want their information on file, all data collected 
will be destroyed. Only participating subjects will be used for analysis.  
 
5. Design & Procedures  
We will evaluate a dose of one  Plasma unit transfusion twice  per week (obtained from male subjects between the ages of 18-25) for 
four weeks in 15 study subjects with PD .  The study will be open -label  and an end point at eight weeks  after the first week of 
transfusions.  
The plasma will  come from Stanford’s Blood Center (SBC) , not an external company.  The Plasma product will be stored in the SBC, 
later transported to Stanford Transfusion Services  before infusions.  Infusions will take place in a Stanford Infusion Center.  The 
primary objective of the study is to assess the s afety and tolerability of twice weekly plasma transfusions . The secondar y objectives 
are to assess the effect of twice weekly plasma transfusions  in subjects with PD on motor function : United Parkinson’s Disease 
Rating Scale (UPDRS) , objective kinematic measure s, cognitive function (detailed neuropsychological battery ), and th e Montreal 
5 
 
Cognitive Assessment ( MoCA) as well as assessing plasma biomarker s through blood laboratory work.  
• Donors must be: 
▪ Male- To minimize transfusion risks, only young male plasma will be  
 used since female plasma has been linked to the possibility of  
 Transfusion -Related Acute Lung I njury (TRALI), linked to  
 immune cells carried by women who have been pregnant  
o Between the ages of 18-25 
• Targeted availability of plasma within 2 weeks of completion of ABO /Rh typing. 
 
Protocol  
 
o Initial  screening  to evaluate the subject’s candidacy based on the  inclusion/exclusion criteria 
o Health history and review of systems will be conducted  
o Medication review  
o Physical and neurological examinations :  the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Unified Parkinson’s 
Disease Rating Scale ( UPDRS III  and IV ), and quantitative kinematics  (physical) : rapid Wrist Flex Extension 
(rWFE), Quantitative DigitoGraphy (QDG), Stepping in Place (SIP), and analysis of gai t (GaitRite) ON and 
OFF medication  (2 day visit) , Freezing of Gait Q uestionnaire (FOG -Q), Stepping In P lace questionnaire 
(SIP-Q)  
*Subject will be asked to bring their own dosage of short acting Parkinson’s Disease medicine to take after 
kinematic testing  (Carbidopa / Levodopa ) for OFF MEDS visit.  
 **When subject has signed consent and has been enrolled, notify the blood bank and transfusion service 
to order the plasma units.  
 
o EKG 
 
•  Baseline Assess ment (may occur  immediately follow Screening, or occu r on another day within 2 weeks  of the 
first plasma trans fusion ) of the following will be conducted  
o Neurocognitive assessments : Trail Making Test  A& B, Digit Symbol  Test, Animal Naming Test , Phonemic Fluency 
(FAS), Matrix Reasoning, Block Design, Cogstate  Maze Learning  Test (Cog State)  
o Neuropsych iatric assess ments: Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI ), Beck  Depression Inventory (BDI ), Parkinson’s  
Disease Quality of Life Scale  (PDQ -39) 
o Blood draw: 12 mL blood for central bank ing (these samples will be de -identified  prior to further analysis and 
will be coded with a sample number , time of day and date of blood draw . 
o Blood Labs:  metabolic and hematologic pane ls, Prothrombin Time (PT), Partial Prothrombin Time(PTT), 
Human Immunode ficiency Virus screen, Hepatitis B screen, Hepatitis C screen, IL6, uric acid,  Apolipoprotein -
6 
 
A1, direct bilirubin , homocysteine, ferritin, TNF, HIV Ag/Ab screen, ABO/Rh Typing and verification prior to first 
test agent administration  
 
• Plasma Transfusion s (starting within 2 weeks of Baseline Assess ment) 
o Administer test agen t twice weekly for 4 weeks (see transfusion  protocol below)  
o Concomitant m edication review 
o Adverse event/tolerability review , Flow Sheet -recording of vitals  
o Adverse events  review per transfusion  center protocol  
 
• Interim Assess ment (on the week of  last transfusion ) 
o Motor/Physical (ON and OFF  medication) - UPDRS III/ IV, SIP, rWFE, QDG, GaitRite/FW, SIP -Q, FOG -Q 
Neurocognitive assessments : Trail Making Test A& B, Digit Symbol Test, Animal Naming Test, Phonemic Fluency 
(FAS), Matrix Reasoning, Block Design, CogS tate Maze Learning Test (Cog State) , ON medication  
o Neuropsych iatric assess ments: Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI ), PDQ -39, ON 
medication  
o Blood Draw (Lab collect)  
o Blood draw: Metabolic and Hematologic Panels, inflammation set  
 
 
• Final Assess ment (4 weeks after last tranfusion ) 
o Motor/Physical (ON and OFF  medication) - UPDRS III/ IV, SIP, rWFE, QDG, GaitRite/FW, SIP -Q, FOG -Q 
o Neuropsychiatric assessments (BDI, BAI , PDQ -39), ON medication  
o Neuro cognitive  assessments Trail Making Test A& B, Digit Symbol Test, Animal Naming Test, Phonemic Fluency 
(FAS), Matr ix Reasoning, Block Design, CogS tate Maze Learning Test (Cog State) , ON medication  
o Blood Labs : Metabolic and Hematologic Panels, inflammation set,  
o Blood Draw: 12 mL blood for central banking  
 
• Transfusion  Protocol 
o Perform the transfusion acco rding to the most current “Blood and Blood Componen t Administration” 
guidelines at Stanford Hospital & Clinic; in brief: 
▪ Check and record pre-transfusion base line vital signs (temperature and blood pressu re) within 1 hour prior to 
transfusion. 
▪ Obtain IV acces s 
▪ Infuse test agen t at 1-2 ml/min for the first 15 minutes while obse rving the subject  closely for any adve rse 
reaction. 
7 
 
▪ Record the vital signs at 15 min. 
▪ If vital signs are normal or unchanged , then increase infusion rate to as fast as tolerated, or approximately 
250-300 ml/hour. 
▪ Continue to monitor the subject  for signs/symptoms of adve rse reaction during the entire infusion. 
▪ For any suspec ted transfusion reaction, report immediately to the Principal Inves tigator, Dr. Helen 
Bronte -Stewart,  or designated on-call study phys ician, Melanie Lising , and follow the detailed “Blood and 
Blood Componen t Administration” guidelines. 
▪ Record vital signs 15 min after completion of the infusion 
▪ The subject  shou ld remain at the infusion facility unde r nursing supe rvision throughou t the entire transfusion 
procedu re until 30 minutes after completion of the infusion. If post-transfusion vital signs are normal and there 
is no sign or symptom of an adve rse reaction, then the subject  t is free to go. Instructions will be provided to 
the subject  and study partner abou t whom to contact and what to do in an emergency , if a delayed transfusion 
reaction is suspec ted. 
• Retain a ~1 ml sample of the test agen t in the unit after infusion. 
 
 
6. Subject Recruitment and Compensation  
Subjects will be recruited through Stanford’s Clinic , The Michael J. Fox Foundat ion trial finder , listings in Clinicaltrial.gov , from 
previous experiments , and by personal interest in the study. Subjects recruited from previous experiments will have consented 
to be contacted for future experiments. P otential subjects will need to meet all inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion 
criteria. A reimbursement budget of $200 per subject will cover parki ng and travel related expenses.  
 
7. Consent Process  
Prior to introducing a consent form, the subject will  receive a thorough description  of the purpose of the study , the design of 
the study , potential risks and discomforts throughout and after the study , as well as the benefits (if any direct benefits) of 
participating of this study . After being informed, the subject will be presented with the consent form delineating  previously 
stated information about the parti cipation of this study . The subject undergoing the trial will be responsible for giving consent.  
 
8. Subject’s Capacity to Give Legally Effective Consent:  
Upon the inability to provide consent, diminished capacity will be assessed by a series of cognitive assessments to provide a  
clear position on whether subject has enough cognitive capacity to participate in this study. Cognitive assessments will be 
admini stered prior to starting the study.  
 
9. Study Interventions:  
8 
 
Implanted devices included but not limited to birth control methods, heart pacers, brain stimulators, etc. may intervene with the 
study . Subject will be asked if they have any implanted devices during prescreening.  
 
10.  Risk/Benefit Assessment:  
Blood products carry risks of virus, hepatitis and HIV infection.  Acute transfusion reactions could include such signs and 
symptoms as  the following, divided into classes to denote the level of severity.  
*Class 1:  
• Urticaria (a type of rash)  
• Hives  
Class 2:  
• Fever  
• Chills  
• Nausea  
Class 3:  
• Low Hematocrit (which refers to the percentage of whole blood that is made up of red blood cells) without  evidence of 
bleeding  
• High bilirubin fever (meaning there is a higher level of waste that hasn’t been filtered out as it usually is when red blood 
cells breakdown).  
Class 4:  
• Oliguria (a reduction in the amount of urine being passed)  
• Bleeding  
• Hemoglobinemia  (an excess of hemoglobin in the blood plasma)  
• Hemoglobinuria (hemoglobin —the oxygen -transporting protein in blood —is at abnormally high levels)  
• Transfusion associated circulatory overload  
• shock  
NOTE: * Class 1 reactions are to be expected and considered within normal range for this study  
 
 
The subject  will be observed during each transfusion for signs and symptoms of acute hemolytic reaction (i.e., chills, fever, low 
back pain, flushing, tachycardia, tachypnea, hypotension, red urine, shock, cardiac arrest). The subject  will also be monitored 
9 
 
during th e transfusion to minimize risk for potential infiltration or fluid overload due to rapid infusion of red blood cells (RBCs)  or 
blood components.  
Subjects with severe anemia and congestive heart failure are sensitive to circulatory  
 overload.  
The subject m ay also experience delayed transfusion reactions several hours to several days (delayed hemolytic reaction) 
after the transfusion is completed. Such reactions can include a febrile or pulmonary reaction (up to 6 hours) that may be 
associated with the blood  administration.   
 
Risks may include but not limited to transfusion reactions , bruising and/or soreness of arm in involved area, fatigue, boredom, 
and restlessness. To reduce the potential of any risks, subjects will be routinely asked for feedback on their current state.  
Some risks, such as arm bruising and soreness will be minimized by administration of pr ocedure conducted  only by qualified 
individuals. In the event of special precautions to be taken, such as the case of use of vulnerable populations (cognitively 
impaired adults), cognitive assessments before each session will be conducted to ensure the sub jects ability to communicate 
any discomforts throughout the study.  
 
• All adverse reactions  reported after the start of the transfusions  will be documented during trial.  
• Transfusion reaction is an adverse event of a special interest, and any subject who expe riences a transfusion reaction, 
in the opinion of the Transfusion Service  or Dr. Bronte -Stewart and Dr. Lising , will not be allowed to receive any further 
infusion.  
• In the event of discontinuation of infusions due to a transfusion reaction or other seriou s adverse event , a safety 
and efficacy follow -up assessments will tak e place 1 week after the last trans fusion . 
 
11. Cost to the Subject:  
 
There will be no cost for the subjects; the subject will not be expected to pay for research participation.  
 
12.  Data Analysis & Statistical Considerations:  
 
Endpo ints include  
▪ Primary Outcome Measure:  
10 
 
• Number of subjects with adverse events as a measure of safety and tolerability, and number of subjects who comply 
with the research protocol as a measure of feasibility.  
 
▪ Secondary Outcome Measures:  
 
• Change on the UPDRS III / IV off medication  
• Change in gait speed  
• Change in quantitative kinematics, FOG -Q 
• Change on the Parkinson’s  Disease Quality of Life Scale  (PDQ -39) 
• Change on the Beck Anxiety Inventory  (BAI) 
• Change on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI ) 
• Change in Trail Making Test A& B, Digit Symbol Test, Animal Naming Test, Phonemic Fluency (FAS), Matrix 
Reasoning, Block Design and  Cogstate Maze Learning Test (Cog State)  
• Change in plasma biomarkers  
 
13. Data & Safety Monitoring  
Safety concerns regarding subject data include loss of subject data and disclosure of identification of participants. All 
electronically connected data will be securely stored in Stanford Medicine  Box with Protected Health Information (PH I) & 
Personally Identifiable Information (PII) protection. Persons with access to this information include the Primary Investigato r, 
research coordinator, and research team collecting data. Frequency of data monitoring will be as needed for data processing . 
 
To ensure the subject’s data and physical safety, continuous safety monitoring will occur throughout the study by the Safety 
Review Committee. The Safety Re view Committee will include an on-call Neurologist s, Dr. Helen Bronte -Stewart, Dr. Melanie  
Lising , Psychologist Gayle Deutch, Sharon Sha  and Neil Shah .   
 
For any AEs outside of Stanford facility, the subject must call the research assistant at (650)723 -6709. The research assistant 
will report AE to primary investigator and Dr. Lising. The subject wil l be told to seek medical assistance in nearest Emergency 
Department by them.  
 
Research assistant will then need to file a SafeReport of the incident & document occurrence . 
 
14. Privacy, Data Storage & Confidentiality  
Subject  confidentiality will be protected  by electronically storing information using PHI and PII in Stanford Medicine  Box. 
Persons with access to this information include the Primary Investigator, research coordinator, and research team collecting 
11 
 
data. Frequency of data monitoring will be as ne eded for data processing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
12 
 
Table 1  
 Screening  
 Baseline  
 Transfusions  
to start within 2 weeks after the baseline - 2 transfusions per week  Outcome visits  
Same week of last transfusion  Post Eval  
1 month after last transfusion  
Visit  1 
ON 
MEDS  2 
OFF 
MEDS*  3 4 
Week  
1 5 6 
Week 
2 7 8 
Week  
3 9 10 
Week  
4 11 12 
ON MEDS  
day after 
last 
transfusio
n 13 
OFF 
MEDS*  
day after 
visit 12  14 
ON 
MEDS  
Four 
weeks 
after 
Visit 12  15 
OFF 
MEDS * 
Day after 
visit 13  
Informed consent  X               
Medication 
review  X               
Health History  X               
Physical Exam  X               
Neurological 
exam  X               
UPDRS III  X X          X X X X 
UPDRS IV  X           X  X  
EKG  X              
MOCA  X               
SIP X X          X X X X 
SIP-Q X X          X X X X 
FOG -Q  X           X  X 
rWFE  X X          X X X X 
QGD  X X          X X X X 
GaitRite/ FW  X X          X X X X 
13 
 
Trail s A and B    X         X  X  
Digit Symbol  Test    X         X  X  
Animal Naming 
Test    X         X  X  
Phonemic Fluency 
(FAS)    X         X  X  
WASI -II Block 
Design    X         X  X  
CogState - Maze 
Learning    X         X  X  
Matrix Reasoning    X         X  X  
Beck Anxiety 
Inventory    X         X  X  
Beck Depression 
Inventory    X         X  X  
PDQ -39   X         X  X  
Blood draw  
(research collect)    X          X   X   
Blood Labs    X         X  X  
Concomitant Med 
Review    X X  X  X  X      
Adverse Events/ 
Tolerability     X X X X X X X X     
Flow Sheet     X X X X X X X X     
Transfusion     X X X X X X X X     
 