Integration of Evidence -based Alcohol Intervention into HIV 
Care (ARCH- IRA) 
 
 
Study Protocol  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
  
May 23, 2019 
  
Karen Cropsey, Psy.D , Professor , Principal Investigator  
University of Alabama at Birmingham 
Birmingham, AL 35294 
 
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 1  
 
 
Integration of Evidence -based Alcohol Intervention into HIV Care (ARCH- IRA)  
 
Study Protocol  
 
Version  5 
 May 2019  
             
 
 Send Questions or Comments to:  
Sarah Dougherty sarahdougherty@uabmc.edu
  
Michael Mugavero  mmugavero@uabmc.edu  
Karen Cropsey kcropsey@uabmc.ed u 
 
 

Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 2 STUDY  OBJECTIVES     
 
Aim 1:  Examine effects of algorithm -guided alcohol treatment on alcohol consumption and alcohol use disorder 
(AUD ) symptoms.  
Hypothesis 1A: Patients who are treated using algorithm -guided alcohol treatment will decrease 
drinking quantity and or frequency compar ed to pre -algorithm levels.   
Hypothesis 1B. Patients who are treated using algorithm -guided treatment will decrease current AUD 
symptoms compared to pre -algorithm symptoms levels.  
 
Aim 2:  Examine effects of algorithm -guided alcohol treatment on retention  in HIV care and HIV- related 
outcomes.  
Hypothesis 2A. Patients treated using algorithm -guided treatment will increase adherence to clinic visits 
and HIV medications compared to pre -algorithm levels.   
Hypothesis 2B.  Patients who receive algorithm -guided treatment will have improved HIV biomarkers 
(e.g., CD4 and viral load ( VL)).  Hypothesis 2C .  There will be a positive relationship between VL and 
alcohol consumption measured by self -report and PeTH  level.  
 
Aim 3:  Examine effects of algorithm -guided alcoh ol treatment on comorbid conditions (e.g., depression, anxiety,  
hepatitis C virus coinfection  (HCV) , and other drug use disorders).   
Hypothesis 3A: Persons living with HIV ( PLWH ) with co -morbid depression and anxiety receiving 
algorithm –guided treatment w ill have better alcohol, mental health and HIV treatment outcomes 
compared to similar individuals in  Standard of Care ( SC).  
Hypothesis 3B: PLWH with comorbid HCV receiving algorithm –guided treatment will have improved FIB4 
results and reduced likelihood of HCV recurrence compared to persons in SC. Hypothesis 3C: Other drug 
use will decrease among those receiving algorithm -guided treatment vs SC.  
 
Aim 4:  Characterize provider- , staff-, patient -, and clinic -level facilitators and barriers to integration of 
algorithm -guided alcohol treatment. We will examine the impact of factors such as provider knowledge and 
confidence, geographic setting, and clinic characteristics such as size, staffing patterns (e.g., number and type of 
staff, providers, etc.), average number of annual visits by patients, amount of Ryan White funding, and average appointment time.  
   
 
         
 
  
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 3 STUDY  ACTIVITIES   
 
I. Study Population  
About 756 participants will be recruited from 4 participating study sites (UAB, UW, UCSD , and JHU ) over a 
2-year enrollment period. The approximate number of participants enrolled at UAB would be 259, UW 
would be 115, UCSD would be 232, and JHU would be 150. Sites may over enroll i f needed.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Age 18 years or older  
2. Engaged in HIV care at one of the CNICS sites and enrolled in CNICS  
3. The most recent AUDIT -C score ≥ 3 or 4 for women  / ≥4 or 5 for  men  and MINI ≥1, or AUDIT score  ≥5 
for women and ≥6 for men . For patients  who identify as t ransgender , the female  scoring cut off for 
AUDIT -C/AUDIT will be used.  
4. English speaking  
5. Able and willing to provide informed consent  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Non -English speaking;  
2. Suicidal ideation as measured by answering item #9 of  PHQ 9 “almost every day ” which trigger s the 
CNICS suicidal ideation pager  alert. This is from most recent PRO (same as AUDIT -C and AUDIT scores). 
Having answered PHQ9 with “almost every day” on prior PHQ -9 item #9 in the di stant past does not 
meet exclusion criteria.  
3. Unable to provide informed consent.   
4. Provider refusal  
 
II. Screening 
Patients who are eligible to tak e the CNICS PRO on the same day as their Primary Care Provider (PCP) visit 
will be s creened for the ARCH IRA stu dy base d on the inclusion criteria mentioned above. The CNICS PRO 
will indicate if the patient is eligible/ineligible for the study.  
  
A. AUDIT and AUDIT -C Eligibility Information  
The ARCH -IRA study will use the  most recent AUDIT- C or AUDIT score  to determine continued eligibility .  
A lower cutoff was selected to be more  inclusive and maximize recruitment  of potentially eligib le 
participants .  This choice is justified as people often under -report bad or socially undesirable behaviors 
such as risky sex, drug, and alcohol use.  
 
 
 
 
     
  Women  / Transgender  Men  
AUDIT -C ≥3 or 4 and MINI ≥1 ≥4 or 5 and MINI ≥1 
AUDIT  ≥5 ≥6 
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 4 Example of continued eligibility :  
Jane scored a 4  on the AUDIT -C and a 2 on the MINI on her PRO. After a page was received 
(please see page XXX  for more information on pages), ARCH -IRA study staff approaches Jane in 
clinic. Jane decided to postpone enrollment until her next clinic visit in 6 months. Jane will need 
to complete a new PRO at her clinic visit in 6 months.  
• If she does not complete a PRO during her clinic visit, the ARCH- IRA study staff can still 
approach for enrollment into ARCH- IRA.  
• If she does complete a PRO during her clinic visit and she her new AUDIT -C score is a 2, 
then Jane is no longer considered eligible for ARCH -IRA and stu dy staff will not 
approach.  
• If she does complete a PRO during her clinic visit and she her new AUDIT -C score is a 6 
and study staff received a new Peedy page, then Jane can be approached again for 
enrollment.  
 
III. Randomization  
Randomization will be programmed into the CNICS PRO platform. Controls will not be approached for any study activity. Study staff will receive pages for only intervention participants. Randomization process occurs before the consenting takes place. It is a 5:1 assignment for interventi on and controls. Intervention 
vs. control status will be tracked in the PRO platform.  
 
IV. Peedy alerts  
If a patient meets the eligibility criteria ( page XXX ) for ARCH -IRA, a Peedy alert is generated  through the 
CNICS PRO platform, which is developed and run by the UW team. A Peedy alert can come through as a page and/or an email to the appropriate study staff. Each page and/or email sent will include the following:  patient’s ticket number (ticket gen erated through CNICS, valid only 48 hours) ; the PRO session 
number; and the  version of Peedy the patient is eligible for (please refer to page XXX for more information 
on the different versions of Peedy) .  
 
A. UAB  
Study staff will approach eligible patients in clinic after receiv ing the Peedy alert . Staff will follow the 
ARCH -IRA recruitment script ( Appendix 3 ) when approaching in clinic.  
 
B. UW The UW will use the same script and approach as UAB and will document status including refusals and reasons in the tracking log/PRO platform. (** Note at UW: there is likely not a handoff between two staff 
members as described above for UAB but instead the same staff member will proceed with the consent 
process if the participant is willing. ) 
 
C. UCSD  
TBD 
 D. JHU 
TBD 
    
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 5 V. Enrollment  and Informed Consent  
Informed  consent will be obtained  from the patient prior to participation in any study -related activities . 
Only trained study personnel with appropriate Human Subjects training will review and explain  the 
consent form and study participation with potential enrollees. Study staff will ensure that the participant 
understands that their consent is voluntary to a void coercion. Patients will be approached in private rooms 
or designated study space for informed consent procedures by trained study staff. ARCH -IRA study staff at 
all sites will follow their site’s IRB guidance for obtaining informed consent.  
VI. Interventions  
A. Peedy video versions  
i. Visit 1  
For visit 1, participants can be eligible for Peedy Prime or Peedy Pharma. Peedy Prime is for 
participants  who report heavy or binge drinking on the AUDIT -C but do not meet Alcohol 
Use Disorder (AUD) criteria based on the MINI. Peedy Pharmacotherapy  (aka Peedy Pharma)  
is for participants  who meet criteria for AUD at visit 1 or have a PHQ 5 > 5 or PHQ9 > 10. A 
Peedy satisfaction survey will automatically follow all of the video versions . 
ii. Visit 2  
For visit 2, participants  can be eligible for Peedy Prize, Peedy  Problem, or Peedy Adherence.  
Peedy Prize  is for participants  who have reduced their drinking from Visit 1  to low -risk limits. 
Peedy Problem  is for participants who received Peedy Prime on Visit 1 and continue to 
report risky drinking. Peedy Adherence is for participants  who received Peedy Pharma 
during Visit 1  and are still reporting risky drinking. A Peedy s atisfaction survey will 
automatically follow all of the video versions . 
 
B. Text Messages  
During visit 1, all participants are eligible to receive text messages that reinforce content from the 
intervention. Please explain that the texts do not contain any personal information and none of the content can be traced back to the participant, but the texts do suggest ways to cut down on alcohol.  
 
For participants who opt -in to receive the text messages, study staff will refer to steps #6 -10 under 
“Logging into Peedy” on page XX.  It is critical to enter the correct phone number to ensure that 
participants receive the texts and guarantee that the intervention is linked to the correct cellphone.  
 
For participants who do not opt -in to receive text messages, study staff should ask for a reason(s) as to 
why and document that reason in the local study log. Possible reasons for participants to refuse text 
messages: 
I don't have a cell phone  
I don’t want to receive any text messages  
I don’t want to use my data/minutes  
I am concerned text messages will be seen by others  
I don’t think text messages about my alco hol will help me with my drinking  
I don’t like to receive text messages  
I don’t carry my phone with me and would not get texts on time  
I don’t believe I need help with my drinking  
Other: _______________________  
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 6 C. CBT4CBT  
i. Visit 1  
During visit 1, participants who have PHQ5 ≥ 5 and/or PHQ9 ≥ 10 or have AUD on MINI would also 
would become eligible to receive CBT4CBT ( Appendix 1 Algorithm 1 ). A unique CBT4CBT study ID 
would be assigned for each participant through CBT4CBT database.  Study staff would be able to 
track each participant on their completion of CBT4CBT modules.  
 
Patient care coordinator (PCC) and/or study staff will introduce CBT4CBT with participants (please see example introduction script below). The study staff and/ or PCC will show the participant how to 
login to CB4CBT modules and provide each participant a unique username and password. The study staff or PCC will also provide a sheet with the link and login information, worksheets and some 
instructions to the participant (Appendix XX ). The study staff and/ or PCC  will follow -up by phone 
with the participants after about a week to check in and see if they have any issues with completing the CBT4CBT modules. Study staff should use an IRB -approved (if applicable) phone script when 
calling participants. (*Note: please check with your site’s IRB to see if you need to have an IRB -
approved phone script or not.)  
 
Example CBT4CBT introduction script:  
“As part of your treatment, we are giving you access to a computerized treatment program that you can do at home: CBT4CBT. This program uses cognitive behavioral strategies to help you manage cravings to drink and provides effective strategies to reduce or quit drinking. Cognitive behavioral therapy is an effective therapy technique that allows you to examine high risk situations for drinking and by identifying your thoughts, allows you to counter that thought or develop a new way to think about the problem. Thinking about a problem differently often 
influences how you feel, and your subsequent behavior. CBT4CBT has  7 modules about different 
high risk situations and different strategies for how to think about these situations differently so 
that you can make the changes to your drinking. While CBT is traditionally delivered one -on-one 
by a trained therapist, this program uses these same strategies and techniques to teach you the skills you need, all at your own pace and in the privacy of your home. The other great thing about it is that you can go back and review as many times as you want any of the modules.  It is also interactive, so the computer program will ask you questions about high risk situations and 
strategies along the way so you will not just be listening to someone talking; you will be learning and applying how to use these techniques. Do you have any ques tions?”  
Answer any questions that come up, then  “Let’s get you started.”  
 
ii. Visit 2  
Before visit 2, study staff/PCC should check the CBT4CBT progress of participants from the monthly 
email the UAB Coordinator sends out. If the participant has not logged in or made much progress 
despite being reminded during the phone call, the study staff/PCC should review login instructions and barriers to completion.  Responses should be coded as:  
Unable to access a computer  
Unable to login  
Did not want to do it  
Did not find it helpful  
Too time intensive/long  
I don’t think I need help with my drinking  
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 7 Other, please specify  
 
In instances where PCC cannot meet the participant in clinic, PCC will call participant and follow up 
on progress of  CBT4CBT. PCC will make about 6 attempts in a month’s time to reach participant. This 
will be documented in the tracking log maintained separately at each site.  
iii. Generating CBT4CBT Reports  
Monthly, the UAB Coordinator will download a report from CBT4CBT and  share it with the 
ARCH -IRA team during the monthly study call.  
Go to: app.cbt4cbt.com/admin  
Enter user name: uabmcD0  
Password: BU6007  
Click Reports, select start and end date and click ‘generate’.  
 
D. Alcohol Pharmacotherapy (APT) 
During visit 1, participants who have scored AUD on MINI would become eligible to receive Alcohol 
Pharmacotherapy ( APT). 
 
Providers/PCC/study staff can call/page Pete S. Lane/ Karen Cropsey in case they have questions on medications.  
 
Information for Pete S. Lane:  
 Pager: 205 -888-6664   
 phone number 205 -975-3101 
 Email: pslane@uabmc.edu  Information for Karen Cropsey:  
 Phone: 205 -975-4204  
 Cell: 205 -514-2025  
 Email: kcropsey@uabmc.edu  
 
In instances where you cannot reach them by phone and need to leave a VM.   
VM to leave : Hi this is ‘XYZ’, I have a question on ARCH IRA participant who is in the clinic/ or not in 
the clinic (use as appropriate). Please call back at ‘phone number’.  
 
Paging instructions:  
• Go to https://www.paging.uab.edu/   
• Enter the last 4 digits of the pager number or name in the box and click search. You will see name and pager number that pops up.  
• Click the pager number which is bold and green and a screen will come up saying enter your message and send button.  You can only enter 80 characters for message.  
• Enter message and click hit send.  
• Message to send : Question on ARCH IRA participant. Call back on ‘phone number’. 
 
i. UAB  
Study staff/PCC will use  the APT algorithm ( Appendix 1 Algorithm 2) and the EMR to determine 
which medication  to recommend to the provider. S tudy staff /PCC  will communicate with 
participant’s provider  in clinic and/or send a message through the EMR  and recommend a drug 
from the APT list.  These recommendations will be done based on APT algorithm plus 
consultation with PI (Karen Cropsey) of the study/addiction specialist (Dr. Pete S Lane) on case -
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 8 by-case  basis via email or phone communication.  Template scripts of these recommendations 
can be found in Appendix XX .  
 
If APT is prescribed to the participant, study staff/ PCC will communicate with participant about 
the side effects of the recommended drug (des cribed in Appendix 2 under medication list) and 
make sure that the participant understands to call study staff/ PCC and clinical care team in case 
s/he experiences any side effects.  In addition, study staff/ PCC will follow up with participants in 
one week t o see how they are doing  on their medication . Attempts will be made up to one 
month following receipt of medication. Study staff/PCC will call twice per week in attempting to 
reach the participant. If participant reports a side effect, the study staff/ PCC will inform the 
participant’s clinical care team using message center in the Cerner. The provider will determine the course of action to be taken (e.g., continue, reduce dose, and discontinue medication). Pete S. Lane/ Karen Cropsey will be available for p rovider to consult about medication.  
 
ii. UW 
A similar set of procedures will be used for most of these steps at the UW.  
 
Providers will receive a notification for patients eligible for APT:  
XX is participating in the ARCH- IRA study and reported at -risk alcohol use on the clinical 
assessment. Based on XX’s risk, he is eligible and would likely benefit from Alcohol 
Pharmacotherapy (APT). Naltrexone is most often recommended for APT unless the patient has acute hepatitis or liver failure (LFTs>5x ULN) or is currently using prescribed or illicit opioids. The dose of naltrexone is 50 mg PO per day.  We have attached an APT medication 
algorithm and list of medications and doses for your information. We hope this information 
is useful to you and that you consider whether prescribing APT would be of benefit to 
George.   
 
At UW, this message can be sent through Epic with algorithm attached or printed and handed directly to provider. The assessment of appropriateness of specific APT choices based on LFTs or opiate use will be assessed by and at the discretion of the patient provider. The PCC will contact 
participants as above and address issues with participant regarding access, receipt of, and other issues with APT but side effects will be deferred to clinical staff.  
 iii. UCSD  
TBD 
 iv. JHU 
TBD 
 E. Dried Blood Spots  
Blood spots will be done  after consent  on the  same  day the participant takes the CNICS PRO (visit 1)  and 
at ~4 -6 months (visit 2).  If participant postpones blood spot on the same day of PRO, participants may 
not have option to come later for a blood spot. These blood spots will be created using 0.5 ml of blood and will be used to measure phosphatidylethanol (PeTH) levels.  
 
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 9 Blood s pots will be processed by USDTL (United States Drug Testing Laboratories, Inc) located in Des 
Plaines, IL. Sites will send the list of supplies they need to order for creating blood spot cards to UAB. 
Tracey Manley at UAB will assist with processing the orders (PO# 2055670). A supply order form will be completed at UAB and sent to USDTL via email (supplies@usdtl.com) or Fax (847.375.0775).  
 Blood spot cards will be shipped to USDTL in batches (10 or more spot cards). Sites will complete the drug sample submission form provided by USDTL and send it along with the spot card batches and save a copy for themselves at their site.  
 
i. UAB  
A 2ml plastic tube will be added to the CNICS blood draw at the UAB 1917 clinic lab. This blood will then be transported by lab s taff to the vaccine clinic on 3rd floor of the 1917 clinic where 
the spot cards will be created and stored by the phlebotomy staff members.   Spot cards will then be sent to the lab for processing in batches. Preferably, batches must be in 10 or greater 
and packing instructions and materials will be provided by USDLT. REPO #, ARCH study id, Date 
and Time will be on the labels on the samples that will be shipped to the lab. All results will be 
accessed using web portal with unique login credentials assigned to study staff.  
 
ii. UW 
Study staff will notify Linsday  Legg (CFAR Research Nurse Coordinator) of UW PEEDY participants 
who complete the PRO that day. The patient will be notified that this is an opportunity to enrich 
the results from this study in terms of how to help patients with HIV who drink alcohol for a n 
additional ancillary study and that they will receive $5.00 if they agree to the finger prick.  
 
iii. UCSD  
TBD 
 
iv. JHU 
TBD 
 F. Logging into Peedy  
1. Go to: https://www.interva -online.mobi/UAB/login.jsp
  
2. Log-in: enter username/password and click “Login.”  (If you do not have a login, please contact Heidi 
Hutton)  
3. Under “Package” s elect the appropriate Peedy version  to be administered using the drop -down 
arrow.  (*Note: For Peedy Pharma, please select “2_V1 : Peedy Pharma”)  
4. Once you select the package, other text fields will appear (Participant ID, First Name, Last Name, Staff Initials, etc.). The only field required is the Staff Initials.  
5. Under  “Type,” “Real” will be the default selection. If you are testing the system, then change this 
field to  “Practice ” using the drop down box.  If the participant agrees to the text messages, please 
continue to #6. If the participant does not agree to the text messages, please skip #X -X. (Please refer 
to page XX  for more inf ormation on text messages)  
6. Under “Phone number” type in the participants phone number starting with 1. Do NOT include any dashes.  
7. Under “Opt -In Frequency”,  select the frequency of the text messages. (*Note: Frequency can only 
be 2, 3, or 4 times per week even though other options are listed)  
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 10  8. Under  “Opt-in days ”, uncheck  the boxes for the days that the participant will NOT  receive text 
messages.  Leave checked  the days that the participant WILL  receive text messages.  
9. Under  “Opt-in times ”, uncheck  the boxes for the times that the participant will NOT  receive text 
messages.  Leave checked  the times that the participant WILL  receive text messages.  
10. Under  “Your time zone ”, select the appropriate time zone.   
11. Click “Login.”  
12. The Peedy ID (5 -digit number also known as the Participant ID) will appear on the next page. Write 
down the Peedy  ID on a piece of paper  and click “Next.” 
13. Under “Study ID #Entry 1”, you will enter in the Peedy ID that you just wrote down. Click “Submit.”  
14. Under “Study ID #Entry 2”,  you will enter in the same Peedy ID from “Study ID #Entry 1.” Click 
“Submit.”  
15. Select the gender  of the participant.  
16. On the next page, select the study site you are located at .  
17. On the next page, you will select if the participant is eligible for CBT or not. (For more information 
on CBT, please refer to page XX ) 
18. The program will now launch.  
 
G. Visit 3  
Visit 3 is a normal CNICS PRO during the participant’s PCP appointment at each site. No further intervention.  
 
VII. Documenting in CNICS  
After the initial Peedy alert is generated for a patient, an “ARCH -IRA Study Information” section will appear 
in the patient’s CNICS patient page. This section is to document that patient’s ARCH -IRA study status. 
Regardless of what happened with the alert, you will need to update this section for ARCH -IRA.  
There are 4 events under “Protocol History” that you can choose from:  
Eligible – not approached  
Postponed consent  
Approached refused, not okay to re -approach 
Consented   
After selecting the event that best fits your situation, click “Add New Event” in order for  it to save.  
 After consenting a participant for ARCH- IRA and after updating the Protocol History to show “Consented,” a new 
drop -down will appear for Visit 1. After the participant either completes all or some of Visit 1 or refuses to 
complete Visit 1, y ou will update the “Protocol History” with the following options:  
Visit 1 drop -down options:  
Withdrawn  
Viewed video 1 Peedy Prime  Viewed video 1 Peedy Pharma  
Refused video 1  
Refused CBT4CBT  
Refused Pharmacotherapy  
Completed Visit 1  
 
Visit 2 drop -down options:  
Withdrawn  
Eligible – not approached  (Video 2) 
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 11  Postpone Video 2  
Viewed video 2  Peedy Adherence  
Viewed video 2  Peedy P roblem  
Viewed video 2 Peedy Prize  
Refused video 2  
Refused CBT4CBT  
Refused Pharmacotherapy  
Completed Visit 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 12  APPENDIX  1 
 
Algorithm 1. Overall study algorithm  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 13   
Algorithm 2. APT algorithm  
  
Yes 
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 14  APPENDIX 2  
APT –Medication List  
 
  Name  Method  Dosage  Side Effects  
Campral 
(acamprosate ) Tablet  Two 333mg tablets 
3x/day with or 
without food.  Some patients may require a lower dose.   Common side effects:  abdominal pain, appetite change, 
change in sexual desire, diarrhea, dry mouth, gas, itchy skin, nausea, nervousness, prickling or tingling  sens ation, skin rash, trouble sleeping, vomiting, 
weakness, weight gain or loss  
 More serious side effects:  chest pain, joint pain, 
pounding or fast heartbeat, symptoms of depression, and t houghts or acts of self -harm     
 
Other:  Does not help with alcohol wi thdrawal  
Disulfiram 
(antabuse)  Tablet  250mg or 500mg 2 
or 3x/day   Common side effects:  skin rash, mild headaches, 
metallic taste, mild weakness, dizziness, swollen tongue  
 
More serious side effects:  allergic reactions (swelling of 
lips, face) and hives, shortness of breath, seizure, 
tiredness,  yellowing of skin or eyes, dark urine, appetite 
changes, dizziness, vomiting, weakness, severe diarrhea 
 
Other:  Produces unpleasant effects if you drink alcohol 
while taking it   
Vivitrol (PO 
naltrexone)  Tablet  50 mg 1x/day with 
food  Common side effects:  nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, 
diarrhea, constipation, loss of appetite, headache, 
dizziness, anxiety, nervousness, irritability, tearfulness, difficulty sleeping, increased or decreased energy, drowsine ss, muscle or joint pain, rash  
 More serious side effects:  confusion, hallucinations, 
blurred vision, severe vomiting and/or diarrhea  
 
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 15  Opioid list as prescribed in Cerner at UAB  
 
Opiates  
acetaminophen/butalbital/caffeine/codeine  
acetaminophen -codeine                     
acetaminophen -HYDROcodone                 
acetaminophen -oxycodone                   
acetaminophen -tramadol                    
APAP/butalbital/caffeine/codeine          
APAP/caffeine/dihydrocodeine              
aspirin/butalbital/caffeine/codeine  
aspirin -oxycodone                         
bupivacaine -fentanyl 200 mL               
bupivacaine -fentanyl 250 mL               
bupivacaine -HYDROmorphone 250 mL          
buprenorphine                             
buprenorphine -naloxone                    
butorphanol                               
chlorpheniramine/hydrocodone/phenylephri  
chlorpheniramine/hydrocodone/phenylephrine  
chlorpheniramine -hydrocodone              
codeine                                   
codeine/guaifenesin/PSE                   
codeine/guaiFENesin/pseudoephedrine  
codeine/phenylephrine/promethazine        
codeine -guaifenesin                       
codeine -promethazine                      
dexbrompheniramine/hydrocodone/phenyleph  
dexbrompheniramine/hydrocodone/phenylephrine  
dihydrocodeine/guaiFENesin/phenylephrine  
diphenhydramine/hydrocodone/phenylephrine  
fentanyl                                  
fentanyl 1  
fentanyl 1,000 mcg [0.5 mcg/kg/hr] + dex  
fentaNYL 2  
fentaNYL  2,500 mcg [100 mcg/hr] + empty  
fentaNYL 2,500 mcg [100 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 50 mL  
fentanyl 2,500 mcg [200 mcg/hr] + empty  
fentaNYL 2,500 mcg [25 mcg/hr] + empty s  
fentaNYL 2,500 mcg [25 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 50 mL  
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 16  fentaNYL 2,500 mcg [50 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 50 mL  
fentanyl 2,500 mcg [75 mcg/hr] + empty s  
fentanyl 2,500 mcg [75 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 50 mL  
fentanyl 2500 mcg + empty sterile contai  
fentaNYL 5  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [1 mcg/hr] + empty st  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [1 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 100 mL  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [10 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 100 mL  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [100 mcg/hr] + empty  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [100 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 100 mL  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [150 mcg/hr] + empty  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [150 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 100 mL  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [200 mcg/hr] + empty  
fentaNYL 5,000 mc g [200 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 100 mL  
fentanyl 5,000 mcg [25 mcg/hr] + empty s  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [25 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 100 mL  
fentanyl 5,000 mcg [50 mcg/hr] + empty s  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [50 mcg/hr]  + empty sterile container for IV fluids 100 mL  
fentanyl 5,000 mcg [75 mcg/hr] + empty s  
fentanyl 5,000 mcg [75 mcg/hr] + empty sterile container for IV fluids 100 mL  
fentanyl 5000 mcg [50 mcg/hr] + dextrose  
fentanyl -ropivacaine 250 mL  
guaifenesin/hyd rocodone/phenylephrine     
guaifenesin -hydrocodone                   
homatropine -hydrocodone                   
HYDROcodone  
HYDROcodone/phenylephrine/pyrilamine  
hydrocodone -ibuprofen                     
hydrocodone -pseudoephedrine               
HYDROmorphone                             
ibuprofen -oxycodone                       
meperidine                                
meperidine -promethazine                   
methadone                                 
morphine                                  
morphine 250 mg [1 mg/hr] + Diluent for  
morphine 250 mg [2 mg/hr] + Diluent for  
morphine 30 mg [2 mg/hr] + Diluent for P  
morphine -naltrexone                       
nalbuphine                                
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 17  opium                                     
oxyc odone                                 
oxymorphone                               
tapentadol                                
traMADol                                  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [100 mcg/hr] + Diluent for Premix 100 mL  
fentaNYL 5,000 mcg [150 mcg/hr]  + Diluent for Premix 100 mL  
fentaNYL 5000 mcg [150 mcg/hr] + Diluent for Premix 100 mL  
guaiFENesin/HYDROcodone/pseudoephedrine  
Paregoric Liquid                          
Acetaminophen; Tramadol                                       
acetaminophen -hydroco done                                     
buprenorphine  
codeine syrup 5mg/ml                                          
Duragesic patch                                               
HYDROCO/APAP  
hydrocodon 10/500                                             
Hydrocodone  
hydrocodone 10mg                                              
Hydrocodone 10mg - 325 mg  
loratab  
Lortab                                                       
Lortab 7.5 mg                                                 
methadone  
methadone 100 mg daily                                        
morphine                                                      
morphine sulfate                                              
ms contin 300mg every 8 h                                     
Norco                                                         
Norco 7.5mg/325mg                                             
Norco oral four times a  
Opium Tincture                                                
Paregoric Liquid  
percocet does unknown                                         
Suboxone Troche  
tramadol 325mg -37.5mg tid                                     
Tussionex  
Tussionex tablets                                             
Virtussin  
Hydrocodone -Apap 10/500mg every 4hr prn  
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 18  lortab                                                                                                                                                  
Morphine -sul er 60 mg 3 tabs BID  
tylenol #4 taken as 
needed                                                                                                                              
 
 
 
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 19  Medications Containing  Alcohol
 

Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 20  
 

Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 21  APPENDIX 3  
In Person ARCH Recruitment Script:  
After your standard introduction…  
 
Based on your answers on the computer/iP ad survey you just took, I wanted to talk to you about a 
research study you might be eligible for today. 
 
The study involves watching a 15 -20 minute video about alcohol and how it can affect HIV.   There also 
are add itional components of alcohol intervention that may be available during the study; you can 
make decisions about how much you would like to do.  
 
For patients who watched Peedy video in round 1 
 
While you may have seen a video in the past about your alcohol use, this is a new study that has some 
additional interventions that may help you with your drinking. 
 
 “Are you interested in participating in this study? 
 
If participant responds ‘Yes’  notify recruitment staff to come and proceed with consent process.  
 
If participant responds ‘No’ , notify recruitment staff and provide as much detail regarding refusal as you 
can.  Patients who refuse to participate will be informed that this is not a requirement for their care and 
that their relationship with the 1917 Clinic will not be affected in any way.  Ask patient “may we contact 
you again”.  If you receive a definite “NO”,  communicate this to study staff and we will not approach this 
patient in the future. Study staff will make a note of this in the tracking logs and  record reasons of 
decline on the tracking log. The following are the options available for decline: 
 Already did Peedy before  
 Not interested  
 I don’t want to change  
 Don’t have time  
 Unable to understand/speak English  
 I don’t trust research studies  
I don’t feel well enough today to do it  
I need to get my partner’s permission first  
Getting support from other sources  
I don’t have an alcohol problem Other reason not listed  
 
      
 
  
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 22   
APPENDIX 4  
 
ARCH IRA Getting Started and Troubleshooting Guide  
 
 
Link:  http://www.cbt4cbt.com/   
 
User name:        
 
Password:         
 
Getting Started  
To begin, you will log on to the link above, go to portal for clients, enter  your login credentials - username and password 
provided to you.  There will be a video for you to watch in order to check that the videos are working with your device and 
that sound is playing.  If everything is working, click “Continue to Main Site” once.  Read the next page and click “Continue to Main Site” again.  From there, begin the first topic, called “Recognize the Triggers” by clicking on it from the top of th e 
page.  
 The first video that plays will be a quick guide to using the program.  If you have any trouble, you can return to this video to review it.  
 The program is made up of a combination of videos to watch and activities to complete, as well as some text messages that will be sent to your phone over the course of the program.  Please pay cl ose attention to the videos and to any instructions for 
the activities.  
 You can use the ‘worksheets’ provided to you for the activities listed in the modules.  
 
Troubleshooting Guide  
The video or activity is not loading. (There is a black box where the vi deo should be.)  
Try refreshing the page when something does not load.  You can do this by either using your browser’s refresh button or the “Restart Page” button below the video or activity.  Sometimes, an entire topic will have trouble loading.  If this h appens, 
click on the “Restart Topic” button and try again.  
 
The video looks like it has loaded, but nothing is happening.  
On some devices, you have to click or tap on the video to get it to start.  If it does not start afterwards, click on the “Restart 
Page” button and try again.  
 
How do I go to the next page? 
Within each module, you can move forwards or backwards using the small, blue arrows in the bottom left corner.  
 
I have finished a topic.  How do I go to the next one?  
When you have finished a topic, c lick on the “Back to Topics Selection page” link at the top of the page.  From there, you 
can choose the next topic from the middle of the page, or from the “Recommended Order” list on the left of the page.  
 
I am not sure what to do for this activity.  
For each activity, a short explanation will play before you begin.  If you missed this explanation or would like to hear it 
again, click on the “Restart Page” button at the bottom of the page.  
 The program has me watch the same video several times.  
While there  are many videos in the program that are similar, there are small differences between each one.  These differences 
may include changes to what people say, how they behave in different situations, or what they are thinking.  Pay close 
attention to these dif ferences, as they are usually there to show how changing your behaviors can change the situation.  
  
 
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 23  Appendix 5  
APT s cripts template at UAB for these recommendations will be:  
Message to Fellow/Nurse Practitioner  CC Attending, Michael Mugavero, Pete S Lane, Karen Cropsey, in 
IMPACT Message Center: INTERVENTION PARTICIPANTS  
  
If Naltrexone Prescription  
 
Subject: ARCH IRA study  
Pt enrolled to ARCH IRA study: U01 AA020802 -  Alcohol Research Consortium on HIV – Intervention 
Research Consortium  
Enrolled on  xx/xx/xxxx, with a AUDIT/AUDIT C score of XX  
Patient name scored >=4 on MINI on CNICS PRO (date xx/xx/xxxx) and is eligible for the CBT4CBT 
(Computer Based Training for Cognitive Therapy) and APT intervention components. Based on study 
algorithm and cons ultation with Dr. Pete S. Lane/ Dr. Karen Cropsey we recommend a prescription of 
tablet naltrexone 50 mg 1x/day with food. There were no chronic or current opioids listed and no LFTs 
>5xULN on medical record for this patient (checked on date: xx/xx/xxxx). We have also confirmed with participant about illicit opioid use since naltrexone may interact with opioids.  ARCH IRA study staff: Name  
 
OR 
 Subject: ARCH IRA study  
Pt enrolled to ARCH IRA study: U01 AA020802 -  Alcohol Research Consortium on HIV – Interv ention 
Research Consortium  
Enrolled on xx/xx/xxxx, with a AUDIT/AUDIT C score of XX  
Patient name scored >=4 on MINI on CNICS PRO (date xx/xx/xxxx) and is eligible for the CBT4CBT 
(Computer Based Training for Cognitive Therapy) and APT intervention compon ents. Based on study we 
recommend a prescription of tablet naltrexone 50 mg 1x/day with food. There were no chronic or 
current opioids listed and no LFTs >5xULN on medical record for this patient (checked on date: xx/xx/xxxx). We have also confirmed with p articipant about illicit opioid use since naltrexone may 
interact with opioids.  ARCH IRA study staff: Name  
 
If Acomprosate Prescription  
 
Subject: ARCH IRA study  
Pt enrolled to ARCH IRA study: U01 AA020802 -  Alcohol Research Consortium on HIV – Intervention 
Research Consortium  
Enrolled on xx/xx/xxxx, with a AUDIT/AUDIT C score of XX  
Patient name scored >=4 on MINI on CNICS PRO (date xx/xx/xxxx) and is eligible for the CBT4CBT 
(Computer Based Training for Cognitive Therapy) and APT intervention components. Based on study 
algorithm and consultation with Dr. Pete S. Lane/ Dr. Karen Cropsey we recommend a prescription of tablet acomprosate Two 333m g tablets 3x/day with or without food. The CrClearance was not <30 on 
medical record for this patient (checked on date: xx/xx/xxxx).  
ARCH IRA study staff: Name  
 
OR 
Version Date:    5/23/2019  Page 24   
Subject: ARCH IRA study  
Pt enrolled to ARCH IRA study: U01 AA020802 -  Alcohol Research Co nsortium on HIV – Intervention 
Research Consortium  
Enrolled on xx/xx/xxxx, with a AUDIT/AUDIT C score of XX  
Patient name scored >=4 on MINI on CNICS PRO (date xx/xx/xxxx) and is eligible for the CBT4CBT 
(Computer Based Training for Cognitive Therapy) and  APT intervention components. Based on study 
algorithm we recommend a prescription of tablet acomprosate Two 333mg tablets 3x/day with or 
without food. The CrClearance was not <30 on medical record for this patient (checked on date: xx/xx/xxxx).  
ARCH IRA study staff: Name  
 
If Disulfiram Prescription  
 
Subject: ARCH IRA study  
Pt enrolled to ARCH IRA study: U01 AA020802 -  Alcohol Research Consortium on HIV – Intervention 
Research Consortium  
Enrolled on xx/xx/xxxx, with a AUDIT/AUDIT C score of XX  
Patient n ame scored >=4 on MINI on CNICS PRO (date xx/xx/xxxx) and is eligible for the CBT4CBT 
(Computer Based Training for Cognitive Therapy) and APT intervention components. Based on study algorithm and consultation with Dr. Pete S. Lane/ Dr. Karen Cropsey we rec ommend a prescription of 
tablet disulfiram 250mg or 500mg 2 or 3x/day. There were no active prescriptions of ritonavir, tipinavir, metronidazole or any med containing alcohol on medical record for this patient (checked on date: xx/xx/xxxx).  
ARCH IRA study  staff: Name  
 OR 
 Subject: ARCH IRA study  
Pt enrolled to ARCH IRA study: U01 AA020802 -  Alcohol Research Consortium on HIV – Intervention 
Research Consortium  
Enrolled on xx/xx/xxxx, with a AUDIT/AUDIT C score of XX  
Patient name scored >=4  on MINI on CNICS PRO (date xx/xx/xxxx) and is eligible for the CBT4CBT 
(Computer Based Training for Cognitive Therapy) and APT intervention components. Based on study 
algorithm we recommend a prescription of tablet disulfiram 250mg or 500mg 2 or 3x/day. T here were 
no active prescriptions of ritonavir, tipinavir, metronidazole or any med containing alcohol on medical 
record for this patient (checked on date: xx/xx/xxxx).  
ARCH IRA study staff: Name  