SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 1 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21  
Multi -level Intervention to Reduce Pregnancy Risk Among Adolescents:  A 
Feasibility Trial in the Emergency Department  
NCT 04744155  
12Apr 2022  
  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 2 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Multi -level Intervention to Reduce Pregnancy Risk Among Adolescents:  A 
Feasibility Trial in the Emergency Department  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Melissa Miller, MD., MS -Cr, Associate  Professor of Pediatrics  
Department of Emergency Care  
816-234-3665  
mmiller@cmh.edu  
 
CMH Co -Investigator s: 
 Kathy Goggin, PhD  
 Vincent Staggs, PhD  
 Stephani Stancil, PhD  
 
Other Co -Investigators:  
Cynthia Mollen, MD (CHOP)  
Elizabeth Miller MD, PhD (Pittsburgh)  
 
VERSION NUMBER /DATE : 
Version 8 April , 202 2 
 
REVISION HISTORY . 
 
Revision 
# Version Date  Summary of Changes  Consent 
Change?  
1 11-3-20 Removal of Phase 1 - Addition of APPs to study, 
consent updates, REDCap screening tools, and 
medication listed  yes 
2 4-2-21 Allow the option is in -person or remote 
recruiting, allow pediatricians to participate as 
intervention providers, removal of employment 
time period criteria, update to wards of the state 
verbiage  and inclusion/exclusion criteria  no 
3 07-02-21 Removal of Provider Limit, updated verbiage 
for training payment for providers,  yes 
4 12-06-21 Clarifying adolescent exclusion criteria to 
include teens on contraception for medical 
purposes.   no 
5 01-17-22 Compensation updates:  
1. Adolescents: Increase two gift card amounts:   
• Post-intervention/ enrollment : $25 to 
$75   
• 30 days: $30 to $50  Yes 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 3 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21  
This would increase the total amount possible 
for teens in group 1 to $225 and those in group 2 
to $195.  
 
2. Study clinicians: Addition of gift car ds: 
• Site 1: Provide training materials and 
$15 gift card to clinicians for 
participating in a short, self -paced 
session to cover additional 
counseling tips. This is in lieu of 
hosting in -person session where 
refreshments would be provided  
• Site 2: Provide $10 gift card to study 
clinician each time they deliver a 
study counseling session as gratitude 
for the extra time and effort to 
perform study -related tasks during 
the pandemic.  
 
 
6 04-08-22 Compensation Update:  
 
For both sites (CMH and CHOP),  the 
providers who provide counseling will be 
offered a $25 gift card payment if they 
choose to participate in a "semi structured 
interview," about how their 
thoughts/comments about the feasibility 
study. This language has been added to the 
end of both the  CMH and CHOP verbal 
consent for the provide rs. All providers who 
are currently on the study or who were at 
any point of the study will be notified of 
these changes, as we would love any 
feedback about the study, if they choose to 
complete the semi -structu red interview. 
These providers will be notified either in 
person or via a Microsoft Teams meeting if 
needed (to accommodate their schedules) . Yes (For 
OPP 
verbal 
consent 
only)  
 
  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 4 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 Table of Contents  
1.0 Study Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  5 
2.0 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  7 
3.0 Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  7 
4.0 Study Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 8 
5.0 Study Intervention/Investigational Agent  ................................ ................................  9 
6.0 Procedures Involved ................................ ................  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
7.0 Data and Specimen Banking  ................................ ................................ ..................  15 
8.0 Genetic Analysis Information  ................................ ................................ ................  15 
9.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  ................................ ................................ ...........  15 
10.0  Study Timelines  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 15 
11.0  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ............  15 
12.0  Vulnerable Populations  ................................ ................................ ..........................  17 
13.0  Local Number of Subjects  ................................ ................................ .....................  17 
14.0  Screening and Recruitment Methods  ................................ ................................ ..... 17 
15.0  Reimbursement, Payment and Tangible Property provided to subjects  .........  Error! 
Bookmark not defined.  
16.0  Withdrawal of Subjects  ................................ ................................ ..........................  20 
17.0  Risks to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 21 
18.0  Potential Benefits to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  21 
19.0  Investigator Assessment of Risk/Benefits Ratio . ................................ ...................  22 
20.0  Data Management and Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ .. 22 
21.0  Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  ..........................  23 
22.0  Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  ................................ ..........  23 
23.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ................................ ...........................  24 
24.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  24 
25.0  Permission/Assent/Consent Process  ................................ ................................ ...... 24 
26.0  Process to Document Permission/Assent/Consent ................................ .................  25 
27.0  Setting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  25 
28.0  Resources Available ................................ ................................ ...............................  25 
29.0  Multi -Site Research  ................................ ................................ ...............................  26 
30.0  International Research  ................................ ................................ ...........................  26 
 
  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 5 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 1.0 Study Summary  
 
Study Title  Multi -level Intervention to Reduce Pregn ancy Risk Among 
Adolescents:  A Feasibility Trial in the Emergency 
Department  
Study Design  Randomized Clinical Trial  
This project will involve human subjects in a clinical trial 
conducted at Children’s Mercy (CM) and the Children’s 
Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). We will train advanced 
practice practitioners to deliver the contraception 
intervention to adolescents and b oth practitioners and 
adolescents will complete surveys after the intervention. 
After recruitment for the intervention is completed, we will 
conduct interviews with key stakeholders at each institution. 
CM will be the primary site and CHOP will ultimately seek 
reliance on our IRB.  
Primary Objective  Conduct a randomized clinical trial to evaluate intervention 
feasibility constructs: acceptability, demand, 
implementation, practicality, adaptation, integration, 
expansion, and limited -efficacy.  
Secondary 
Obje ctive(s)  NA 
Research 
Intervention(s)/ 
Investigational 
Agent(s)  We will evaluate our novel approach to increase access to 
contraception comparing our multi -level intervention (MLI) 
to enhanced standard of care (eSOC). All adolescents receive 
the MI -enhanc ed counseling and clinic referral. Those 
randomized to MLI will be offered immediate, ED -based 
contraception (i.e., oral pill, transdermal patch, vaginal ring, 
injection, subdermal implant) in addition to receive a warm 
referral  (provider helping to schedu le follow -up 
appointment)  to follow -up on selected method (or to initiate 
in clinic, if preferred). Per usual care, eSOC participants may 
obtain contraception only at the referral.  
IND/IDE #  NA 
Study Population  Adolescents:  Females (assigned at birth) aged 15 -18 years 
who report past/anticipated intercourse with a male, do not 
desire pregnancy, and are not using hormonal 
contraception/copper IUD.  
Personnel:  Study providers including advanced practice 
practitioners  (APPs) and pediatricians , adolescent medicine 
specialists, and nursing/administrative leaders.  
Sample Size  Adolescents:  98 (49 CMH/49  CHOP ) 
Personnel:  study providers  = 30 (15 CMH/15 CHOP ); other 
organizational personnel  (OOP )  = 30 (15 CMH/15CHOP ) 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 6 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 Study Duration for 
Individual 
Participants  Adolescents:  6 months  
Personnel: Study provider s will participate for the duration 
of training and adolescent recruitment; other personnel are 
involved only once in the study (about 60 -90 minutes).  
Study Specific 
Abbreviations / 
Definitions  MLI = multi -level intervention  
eSOC = enhanced standard of care  
IUD = intrauterine device  
ED = emergency department  
APP = advanced practice practitioner  
OOP = other organizational personnel  
EMR = electronic medical record  
CHOP=Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia  
CM= Children ’s Mercy  
 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 7 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 2.0 Objectives  
Evaluate intervention feasibility constructs: acceptability, demand implementation, 
practicality, adaptation, integration, expansion, and limited -efficacy.  We will 
conduct a small  randomized trial to assess feasibility and use mixed -methodology to 
explore contextual factors at the patient, provider, and system levels. In evaluating 
limited -efficacy, we compare two arms (MLI vs. eSOC) to determine size of effect rates 
on contracepti on initiation.  
Hypothesis 1.1:  The intervention will be deemed feasible by stakeholders: adolescents 
and organizational personnel (i.e., study provider s, adolescent medicine specialists,  
hospital  nursing and administrative leaders).  
Hypothesis 1.2:  Adolesc ents in the MLI arm will have greater contraception initiation 
rates relative to the eSOC arm at 30 days after the index ED visit.  
 
3.0 Background  
Unintended adolescent pregnancy is a major public health problem linked to pregnancy -
induced hypertension, low birthweight, and prematurity .1-2 In addition, adolescent 
pregnancies cost an estimated $9.4 billion annually.3-4 Though declining, U.S. rates 
remain among the highest in the developed world.5-7 Highly effective methods exist, but 
adolescents  face unique, multi -level barriers to contraceptive access and use. 3-4 Thus, the 
vast majority of pregnancies are due to contraceptive non -use or inco rrect use.5 Many, 
especially minority and uninsured youth, do not attend health maintenance visits;6 among 
those who do , 36 seconds is spent discussing sexuality and contraceptive use is not 
routinely assessed.6 Multi -level interventions to increase access  to contraceptive 
counseling and all contraceptive types are desperately needed .7 
As adolescent access to affordable, confidential contraceptive care has worsened in recent 
years, one approach to increase access is to utilize non -traditional settings, such  as 
Emergency Departments (EDs).7 The Society for Academic Medicine recognizes the ED 
as an “effective site for preventive care,” evidenced by organizational conferences, 
consensus statements, and specialized training opportunities to reduce disparities 
stemming from social determinants of health.8-11 Adolescents make 19 million ED visits 
annually, commonly for non -urgent or reproductive complaints; for many, this may be 
their only contact with a provider.12-14 Adolescents in the ED frequently report 
unprot ected intercourse.25,40 The pregnancy risk index (PRI), an estimate of pregnancy 
risk in the subsequent 12 months,  for adolescent females in two EDs was more than three 
times greater than the national average.15-16 Lacking a primary provider was associated  
with higher PRI scores. While the need for reproductive  care is evident,17,18  the majority 
of ED -based studies have focused on screening for sexually transmitted infections (STIs) 
including HIV19-20 and a few, primarily single -site studies have reported o n acceptability 
of hypothetical reproductive care.21,22-26 Among the few addressing pregnancy 
prevention, most focused on emergency contraception or increasing clinic referral, with 
mixed results.27,28-31 A small open trial provided counseling and clinic referral for those 
wanting to initiate contraception. Only 22% completed the referral and one was found to 
be pregnant at her first clinic visit.32 Lack of transportation was the most common reason 
for not  completing referral. Because interventions to address multi -level barriers and 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 8 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 increase contraception access  are sorely needed, we aim to evaluate the feasibility of a 
novel ED -based intervention, utilizing a mixed methods approach.  
Scientific Premise:  Many adolescents in the ED are at high -risk of pregnancy yet 
accepting of reproductive intervention; however, no work describes best practices for 
ED-based contraceptive provision. Thus, we propose a randomized trial  to evaluate MLI, 
which includes ED -based contraceptive initiation (i.e., oral pill, transdermal patch, 
vaginal ring, injection, or subdermal implant) vs. eSOC, for adolescents in two EDs 
utilizing medical p rovider s in a collaborative care model. Thus, we use a rigorous 
framework from Bowen et al.  to evaluate feasibility constructs (see Table 1 for construct 
definitions) among adolescents and organizational personnel (i.e., medical  provider s, 
adolescent medicine specialists, ED nursing and administrative leaders) in two unique 
EDs.33 
 
4.0 Study Endpoin ts 
 
The primary endpoint will be the determination of feasibility. Methods for establishing 
feasibility vary  and include  levels of acceptability, satisfaction, or usefulness. Drawing on 
similar published criteria,  the intervention will be  deemed feasible i f the average score 
across all items  is ≥ 3 on closed -ended survey items for adolescents, provider s, and O OPs 
(Table 1).    
 
Secondary endpoints will include the following:   
• The completion of a referral for any contraceptive care as assessed through EMR 
review or follow -up phone calls .  
• The initiation of contraception as assessed through EMR review or follow -up 
phone calls .   
• Saturation of themes  from qualitative interviews that have been coded and 
analyzed .   
 
Hypotheses 1.1 and 1.2 : To establish feasibi lity, we assess multiple constructs via 
survey items among all stakeholders (Table 1).  
Hypotheses 1.2 : We will determine referral completion and date for contraception 
initiation (Time 0) via participant contact and review of study/medical records  at 
thirty days after the index visit . 
Table 1: Mixed -Methodology Feasibility Assessment with Adolescent and 
Personnel Stakeholders  
Construct  Source  Index 
Visit:  
Post -
intervent
ion Time 
from 
Index 
Visit  Time from 
Initiation (Time 
0) 
30 
Days * 3 
mos* 6 mos* 
Acceptability - How do stakeholders 
react to the intervention?  Adolescent  S  S  S S 
Providers  S     SSI 
Other personnel        S, SSI  
Demand - To what extent is the 
innovation likely to be used?  Providers        S, SSI  
Other personnel        S, SSI 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 9 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 Study /Medical  
Record*        SMRR  
Implementation - To what extent can 
the intervention be implemented as 
planned  (including intervention 
fidelity) ? Providers  S     SSI 
Other personnel        S, SSI  
Study /Medical  
Record*  SMRR  SMRR     
Practicality - What factors make 
intervention delivery challenging or 
facilitate delivery?  Providers  S     S, SSI  
Other personnel        S, SSI  
Study/Medical 
Record*        SMRR  
Adaptation – How does model 
perform in new setting?  Providers     SSI 
Study /Medical  
Record *    SMRR  
Integration - To what extent can 
model be integrated within the 
system?  Providers        S, SSI  
Other personnel        S, SSI  
Expansion - To what extent can 
model be expanded to provide 
service?  Providers        S, SSI  
Other personnel        S, SSI  
Study /Medical  
Record*        SMR R 
Limited efficacy testing - What are 
rates of contraception 
initiation/ continuation and  referral 
completion?  Adolescent    S S S 
Study/Medical 
Record*  SMRR     SMRR  
Legend:  S=Survey, SSI=  Semi -Structured Interview, S MRR= Study /Medical Record Review  *=+/- 10 days  
 *Additional assessments include proportion enrolled, drug interaction or contraindications, intervention 
fidelity and duration, length of stay (participants vs. non -participants), rates of contraception 
initiation/continuation/ referral completion, cost estimates  
 
Data Sources: Sources include: surveys (via Research Electronic Data Capture – 
REDCap), semi -structured interviews, medical records, and study records (i.e., 
recruitment logs, interview transcripts , Providers /investigator field notes) (Table  1) 
 
5.0 Study Intervention/Inves tigational Agent  
5.1 The study intervention is the implementation of Emergency 
Department -based contraceptive counseling. A provider will 
provide this confidential, comprehensive, 10 -15-minute counseling. 
The counseling will assess patients’ preferences regard ing different 
methods, knowledge about methods, personal motivations, and 
environmental factors that may influence contraceptive use, such as 
partner preference.  After counseling is complete, enrolled subjects 
that have been randomized into the MLI group will have the 
opportunity to accept birth control and a referral for follow -up care.   
  
For Emergency Contraception  
Plan B (also called levonorgestrel) is taken by mouth by a woman to prevent 
pregnancy after she has already had unprotected sex. It is available over -the-
counter for any person to buy. Plan B has no serious or lasting side -effects and 
leaves the body withi n a few days. Some women (fewer than one in five) have 
mild and short -term side -effects, including irregular bleeding from the vagina, 
belly pain, being tired, nausea (feeling like you might throw up).  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 10 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21  
For hormonal contraception  
Many formulations of horm onal contraception exist including those with estrogen 
and progesterone combined (e.g., Sprintec, Ortho -Evra , Yaz ).  The most common 
side effects from combination hormonal contraception are mild and include: 
irregular vaginal bleeding, breast tenderness, n ausea, and mood changes. Serious 
adverse events may occur. Older women who smoke are at increased risk of 
myocardial infarction or stroke. There is no increased risk of myocardial 
infarction or stroke among healthy nonsmoking women who use the pill. Blood 
clots in the legs and elsewhere are slightly more frequent with contraceptive use, 
but the risk is very low, and lower than the increased risk of clotting that occurs 
with pregnancy. There is no increased risk of birth defects in babies born to 
women who h ave taken hormonal contraception while pregnant, but a woman 
should not use hormonal contraception if she is pregnant.  
Medroxyprogesterone acetate: The most common side effects from DMPA are 
mild and include: irregular menstrual cycles, cessation of menstr ual periods, 
headache, and weight gain. Serious adverse events may occur. Use of DMPA may 
cause loss of bone mineral density, which may lead to an increased risk of 
developing osteoporosis. The decrease in bone calcium is most concerning if the 
patient has  bone disease, family history of osteoporosis, or anorexia nervosa. 
Older women who smoke are at increased risk of myocardial infarction or stroke. 
There is no increased risk of myocardial infarction or stroke among healthy 
nonsmoking women who use the pil l. Blood clots in the legs and elsewhere are 
slightly more frequent with contraceptives, but the risk is very low, and lower 
than the increased risk of clotting that occurs with pregnancy. There is no 
increased risk of birth defects in babies born to women  who have taken hormonal 
contraception while pregnant, but a woman should not use hormonal 
contraception if she is pregnant.  
Ortho Evra and Xulane (Norelgestromin/ethinyl estradiol) is birth control patch 
that works by stopping ovulation. It may also chang e cervical mucus to prevent 
the sperm from reaching the egg and change the lining of the uterus to prevent a 
fertilized egg from implanting in the uterus. Side effects can include: breast 
tenderness or enlargement; headache; menstrual cramps; mild fluid re tention or 
weight gain; mild skin irritation at the application site; nausea; stomach pain, 
cramps, or bloating; vaginal spotting or breakthrough bleeding; vomiting.  
NuvaRing (ethinyl estradiol and etonogestrel) is a birth control vaginal ring that 
contain s female hormones that stop ovulation (the release of an egg from an 
ovary). This medicine also causes changes in the cervical mucus and uterine 
lining, making it harder for sperm to reach the uterus and harder for a fertilized 
egg to attach to the uterus.  Side effects may include: headache; vaginal irritation 
or discharge, cervical pain; menstrual cramps; mood changes, decreased sex 
drive; nausea, vomiting, stomach pain; breast pain or tenderness; acne; or weight 
gain.  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 11 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 The most common side effects from subdermal implants include changes in 
menstrual bleeding patterns; headaches; vaginitis; weight gain; acne; breast pain; 
viral infection such as sore throats or flu -like symptoms; stomach pain; painful 
periods; mood swings , nervousness, or depressed mood; back pain; nausea; 
dizziness; pain and pain at the site of insertion .  
For Non -Hormonal Contraception  
Common side effects for non -hormonal contraception (Copper IUD, Phexxi) 
include irritation, dryness and/or allergic reac tions.   
 
Risk of emotional distress: Participants may experience increased stress over the 
sensitive survey questions. However, we feel this risk is minimal and we have 
included information in the consent process that reminds participants that they are 
not required to answer questions that make them feel uncomfortable. In the 
emergency department, there are always advocates available for patients and 
families, if needed, including health care providers, social workers, and patient 
advocates. In this study setting, if a participant expresses a concern or need that is 
outside of the scope of this project (e.g., sexual assault), we will refer those 
participants back to their ED treating team, as is our standard practice. During the 
consent process, we will inf orm participants that most of the information they 
share during the study will be kept confidential except in rare cases where their 
safety is at risk or mandated reporting is in effect  
5.2 To decrease risk of serious adverse events, we will follow 
regulations  and recommendations in accordance with the Food and 
Drug Administration. We will prescribe the dosage regimen which 
contains the least amount of estrogen and progesterone that is 
compatible with a low failure rate and the needs of the individual 
patient. We will screen participants for predisposing conditions 
and duration of previous DMPA use. Women with these conditions 
should not use hormonal contraceptives: women with stroke or 
blood clot, circulation problems (especially if caused by diabetes), 
a hormo ne-related cancer such as breast or uterine cancer, 
abnormal vaginal bleeding, liver disease or liver cancer, severe 
high blood pressure, migraine headaches, or a heart valve disorder. 
Further, DMPA should not be used as a long -term method (i.e., 
longer th an 2 years) unless other methods are considered 
inadequate.  
5.3 Participants will be advised of all potential adverse events and 
instructed to seek care if symptoms develop or they have concern 
about such an event. In the case of illness or injury resulting fr om 
this study, treatment is available at CM or CHOP , and can be 
provided at the usual charge. Participants may also see care at the 
hospital -affiliated Title X Clinic, which provides reproductive care 
at reduced cost.  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 12 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21  
6.0 Procedures Involved  
 
We propose a ran domized trial of our contraceptive counseling intervention (MLI 
vs. eSOC) with mixed methods feasibility evaluation at patient, provider, and 
system levels. Feasibility constructs are: acceptability, demand, implementation, 
practicality, adaptation, integr ation, expansion, and limited -efficacy.  
Using an electronic board that tracks patient data in real time, the research study 
staff will identify and enroll adolescent participants  (N=98)  before they meet with 
a provider . Due to possible COVID precautions, research staff will have the 
capability of recruiting patients remotely.  Consenting and the study visit will take 
place on the same day of enrollment  during the patients ED visit .  If necessary, a 
member of the research team may call into the patient room via Microsoft Teams 
or CMH office phones to contact the patient up to five times.  Follow up surveys 
at thirty -days, three months, and six months are administered via REDCap and 
may be sent through Twilio or e -mail.  Mem bers of the research team may also 
call participants up to five times to administer the surveys verbally using either 
Microsoft Teams or CMH phones.   
We will use a care model demonstrated as best practice in clinic -based settings36 
and train provider s using adapted materials publicly available (e.g., slide decks, 
written materials).37-40 Adaptations are needed for vulnerable adolescent 
populations that are mindful of coercion and will include use of brief Motivational 
Interviewing (MI) strateg ies to facilitate autonomy and focus on patient 
preference. MI training for providers will focus on these skills: open questions, 
reflective listening, and pulling for change talk.41-45 Provider s will receive nine 
hours of training (e.g., prescribing, adol escent -centered counseling, technology) 
and demonstrate competency (mean fidelity score ≥3, appendix  1) prior to 
continued recruitment.  
As adolescents mature along different trajectories, we plan open -ended questions 
to ask about intention, experiences (se lf/referents), and contraceptive qualities. 
Given that many in our ED reported relationship abuse, we will use a trauma -
informed approach (i.e., realize, recognize, respond, resist re -traumatization) to 
foster collaboration, explore safety, and offer harm reduction strategies.48-49 We 
will help  participants 1) map information onto values and lifestyle, and 2) 
anticipate and  solve problems, including identification of a trusted adult. We will 
address risk  misperceptions  use visual aids, and counsel dual pro tection with 
condoms. Based  on our work and others, providers  will provide  10-15 minutes for 
counseling; this is easily integrated into most ED visits .  Counseling sessions will 
occur after patients have  completed triaging, without interrupting  the evaluation 
of standard of care services.   
Providers  will also have access to educational material, which can be distributed 
to adolescents randomized in MLI arm.  These documents include the following:  
FDA Approved factsheets (Ring, Pill, Patch, Mini Pi ll, Progestin IUD, Implant, 
Non-Hormonal Gel, Emergency Contraception, and Depo), Switching Birth 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 13 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 Control, IUD Facts, Implant Facts, Contraception Choices, and CMH Clinic 
Hours and Locations.  The contraception handouts that are being provided will 
help to  provide further clarifications regarding medication effectiveness, 
adherence instructions, as well as medication side effects.   
C6eii. Adolescent Randomization and Treatment:  Randomization will be in a 1:1 
ratio. Due to potential influence of previous co ntraception use on uptake, we will 
use block randomization with randomly selected blocks of 4 or 8 to balance 
allocation of those with previous use equally between arms.48  Dr. Staggs will 
create the master randomization list for both Children’s Mercy and Children’s 
Hospital of Philadelphia , placing each assignment in a sealed envelope numbered 
sequentially from 001.54 Participant IDs will be assigned beginning with 001. 
After consent, a research assistant will open the corresponding envelope to carry 
out the arm assignment, notifying the providers before  counseling is completed.  
All participants receive contraceptive counseling. Per evidence -based 
guidelines,52-53 MLI participants  can receive contraception (one injection, three -
month  supply of pill/patch/ring, or subdermal implant) in the ED , or prescription 
for another method if desired . If a patient in this group desires another method 
that is not being covered by the study, patient will be made aware of their 
responsibility to cove r the cost of the medication either out of pocket, or by using 
their own insurance.  Due to credentialing and staffing constraints, intrauterine 
devices will only be available at referral clinics.   MLI participants who want to 
initiate contraception must complete a urine pregnancy test , which must be 
negative. MLI participants who initiate contraception will be given a take home 
pregnancy test that is to be completed two weeks after enrollment.   eSOC 
participants  will have the opportunity of being  referr ed to a follow -up 
appointment to discuss  and begin  contraception.   Subjects in this group will not 
begin contraception in the Emergency Department  or given a prescription .  All 
participants will be referred to an adolescent gynecologist, hospital -affiliated 
adolescent clinic, or Title X clinic for additional care and to initiate or follow -up 
on contraception.  
MLI participants  will have a “warm transfer” to follow -up on or initiate, if 
preferred, selected method. Warm transfers occur with the assistance of a  provider 
scheduling the follow -up appointment.  Doing this in such a way  should help to 
minimize barriers with navigating the healthcare system.  The provider  will share 
detailed clinic information including hours of operation  and contact the receiving 
site. We will assist with scheduling (sending multiple reminders) and 
transportation . eSOC participants  will be given printed information on clinics.  
C6eiii. Inte rvention Fidelity:  Counseling sessions  will be audio -recorded and 
reviewed periodically  to ensure for fidelity to content and use of MI strategies 
using a tool adapted from our previous work and the CHOICE Project, a clinic -
based intervention efficacious f or increasing contraception uptake in family -
planning clinics .54-55 We will provide feedback to individual AP Ps if mean fidelity 
score ≤ 3.   
6.1  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 14 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 Prior to adolescent patients being enrolled, provider s will be enrolled to 
participate in the study.  Providers  will be trained on motivational 
interviewing practices, contraception methods, as well as medication 
ordering practices.   
Research team staff will screen potential study candidates via electronic 
tracking board.  The research team will approach patients to ensure that 
they meet qualifications  for the study.  If qualifications are meet, the 
research team will provide consent/assent to the patient , conduct a pre -
counseling survey, then notify a study provider  of study status.  Once the 
subject has been enrolled, the study provider  will provide contraception 
counseling , while incorporating motivational interviewing techniques. 
Counseling sessions will be audio recorded and analyzed periodically for 
fideli ty. At the completion of counseling, the study provider  will offer the 
participant various contraception options and incorporate warm -referral 
practices to encourage follow -up at a local health clinic.  The subject and 
provider will complete the Adolescent  Post-Counseling Survey  via 
REDCap  at the end of their initial enrollment .  
Immediately after the initial enrollment  and at thirty -days post 
intervention , the research team staff will conduct a medical chart review .  
At thirty days, three months and six months post -intervention,  a follow -up 
survey will be sent to the participant.  OOP  and provider staff will 
participate in semi -structured interviews that can be completed either in -
person, virtually, or via telephone  at 6-months to evaluate the feasibi lity of 
the study.    
 
6.2  
To help ensure the safety and validity of this study, we will ensure that 
provider  staff are properly trained prior to enrollment.  Training sessions 
will cover interviewing techniques, contraception, and ordering practices.   
Member s of the study team will also review audio recordings periodically 
for intervention fidelity.   
6.3  
Prior to approaching a n adolescent  participant, research team members 
will view the medical chart to ensure eligibility.  Team members will look 
for the following, date of birth, custody status, and current contraception 
usage.  In the post-intervention  medical chart review, team members w ill 
look to see if a follow -up visit had been completed, and it so, if any 
services were obtained.  
Surveys from adolescent participants will assess  attitudes towards 
contraception, pregnancy prevention methods, perceived risk  of 
contraception , and barriers to follow -up care . 
6.4   
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 15 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 Enrolled adolescents  will receive follow -up surveys at 30 -days, 3 -months, 
and 6 -months after their initial enrollment at their ED visit .  The questions 
asked will assess subjects’ attitudes towards contr aception methods, 
access to care, and contraception efficacy.  Enrolled patients may 
complete the survey over the phone with a member of the research team .  
A link may also be sent via text messaging using Twilio  or other approved 
messaging system  or to their email address.   
7.0 Data and Specimen Banking   
 No data or specimens will be retained or banked used for future use.  
 
8.0 Genetic Analysis Information  NA 
 
 
9.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  NA 
 
 
10.0 Study Timelines  
 
Timeline  
 Year 1  Year 2  
Prepare study materials  X        
Provide all Provider  training and booster   X  X     
Recruit adolescents    X X X    
Complete adolescent follow -up (electronic 
medical record/surveys)     X X X X  
Conduct semi -structured interviews      X X   
Perform data analysis and write 
manuscripts      X X X X 
 
We will conduct training for our study providers.   We anticipate that adolescent 
recruitment will begin around month 6. We anticipate reaching our enrollment goals 
within 6 months, as described in the recruitment plan. We plan for adolescent follow -up 
into year 2. Semi -structured interviews will begin after all adolescents have been enrolled 
and qualitative data analysis begins as soon as the first interviews are completed.  
Duration of individual subjec t’s participation  
Adolescents:  6 months  
Personnel: Study provider s will participate for the duration of training and adolescent 
recruitment; other personnel are involved only once in the study (about 60 -90 minutes).  
 
11.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 16 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 Study AP Ps  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Work in the Emergency Department  
2. Are interested in participating in study procedures  
Exclusion Criteria  
      1.   Because they often lack organizational familiarity and may be temporarily      
 working in the ED, providers in training will be excluded.   
      2.   AP provider who were otherwise eligible, but have declined to participate in 
 training activit ies.  
 
Adolescents  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Females aged 15 -18 years who are at risk of pregnancy, defined as those who 1) 
report previous sexual activity  or intent to be sexually active with a male partner 
in the next few months, 2) do not desire pregnancy within the next year, and 3) 
are not currently using hormonal contraception or copper IUD.   
2. Eligible individuals must be comfortable speaking in Englis h 
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Females who are currently using hormonal contraception or the copper 
intrauterine device  
2. Females who report current pregnancy or have positive urine pregnancy test  
3. Patient has a developmental delay limiting participation  
4. Patients is presenting in the ED after sexual assault  
5. Patient is too ill to be screened  
6. Minor adolescent who is ward of the state is eligible to enroll for the study but 
may not be eligible for Nexplanon insertion (if desired) unless proper parental or 
legal guardian permission is obtained (Nexplanon insertion is not available 
without parental or legal guardian permission due to hospital guidelines.   Without 
the proper consent, wards of the state may opt for another form of contraception)  
7. Patients who receive contraceptive medications as part of their Emergency 
Department clinical care (e.g., treatment for heav y menses).  
 
Other Organizational Personnel  
Inclusion Criteria  
1.  Employed at CM or CHOP with experience or expertise in hospital adm inistration, 
adolescent medicine, or clinical care  
2.  Are interested in participating in study procedures  
Exclusion Criteria  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 17 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21       1 .   Provider /staff  who were otherwise eligible, but have declined to participate in 
training activities.  
 
12.0 Vulnerable Populations  
 
We will make it clear during the Provider  consent process that participation is entirely 
voluntary. The decision to participate or not will not affect their current or future 
relationship with C M or CHOP . If a provider decides to participate, they may withdraw 
from the study at any time without affecting their employment status. They may skip any 
questions they do not feel comfortable answerin g. Drs. Miller and Mollen have 
established relationships with ED Provider s and have collaborated on similar projects in 
the past.  
 
To participate in this research study,  adolescent  participants must be between the 
ages of 15 -18 years of age .  Local state c ontraception laws enable s adolescents  to 
have capabilities to make decisions regarding their own contraception care.  
Because of this , the research team is requesting a waiver of parent al permission in 
order to help maintain confidentiality for patients . Adolescents will be provided as 
much time as they want to make their decision .  
13.0 Local Number of Subjects  
 
13.1 There will be up to  98 total  adolescent  participants we expect to 
enroll between  each site.  49 subject participants will enroll from  
CM and CHOP .   
Up to 30 other professional participants will be eligible to enroll in 
the study.   
13.2 Screening for adolescent participants will take place via electronic 
tracking board.  Using that, study  staff will have the capability of 
selecting viable subjects who meets the qualifications of the study.  
Once approached, potential subjects have the option of refusing to 
continue participation in the study.    
14.0 Screening and Recruitment Methods  
 
Adolescen t subjects will be recruited from the Emergency Departments of 
Children’s Mer cy Adele Hall and Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 
Emergency Departments.  Research staff will evaluate for potential patients via 
electronic tracking boards.  Recruitment for adolescent  subjects will take place  
while patients are within the Emergency Department .  Once a subject is deemed 
potential eligible, research staff will approach a patient to ensure eligibility, 
provide inf ormed consent, and continue with study procedures. Patients will be 
approached after they have become admitted in the Emergency Department 
from triage.  Parents and patients will be told basic information regarding 
research at Children’s Mercy, and parents  will be asked to step out of the room 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 18 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 to further discuss details of the study.  If any parent refuses to step out of the 
room, the research team will not be allowed to continue in their recruitment 
efforts for that patient. Once a patient decides that the y would like to continue 
with screening for the study, they can also decide if they would like to have 
their parent to participate in the study.  If a patient refuses to participate, basic 
demographics including age and race a s well as their reasoning for r efusal  will 
be tracked in the REDCap Refusal survey .  The research team will also track the 
participant and language preference.  Understanding this information will 
generate a better understanding a patient needs for future research studies.  This 
informa tion will be used for data analysis purposes.   
Study providers  and O OP will be recruited via word of mouth , email , workplace 
OOP Recruitment e -mail and flyer .   
A screening log will be used to maintain records for screening and eligibility 
purposes.  The screening log will maintain minimal PHI such as the patients  
age. 
Adolescent subjects will be approached once for recruitment.  
Study provider s and other personnel may receive more than one commu nication  
about study participation as we will use email and workplace announcements 
and postings to facilitate recruitment.  
We are requesting a Waiver of HIPAA Authorization based on the following:  
1) Description of the PHI for which use or access is necessar y for recruitment: 
see PHI chart below  
2) The use or disclosure of PHI involves no more than minimal risk to the 
privacy of individuals based upon the following:  
a. Plan to protect PHI from improper use and disclosure:  All PHI will be 
accessible by the study team.  All storage units will be password protected 
(Cerner and REDCap)  and devices will be stored in locked cabinets within 
the research team office.  
b. Plan to destroy PHI at the earliest opportunity, unless there is a he alth or 
research justification for retaining the PHI:  Study related PHI will be 
maintained throughout the completion of enrollment and data analysis.  
Information will later be kept and destroyed in accordance with Children’s 
Mercy records retention requir ements.  
c. Assurance that PHI will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or 
entity:   PHI will only be accessed by study team personnel and Good 
Clinical Practice guidelines will be followed in order to ensure that 
information will not be disclosed to  unauthorized persons.  
3) Reason why the research cannot practicably be conducted without the waiver:   
Without the waiver, obtaining parental consent compromises validity of 
responses from subjects, as well as patient rights to privacy regarding 
reproductive health services.   
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 19 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 4) Reason why the research cannot practicably be conducted without access to 
and use of the PHI:   This study requires the research team to notate and access 
qualifying information such as age, personal health information, and date of 
birth.  
 
*PHI chart:  
1. Name/Initials    Accessed only    Recorded  
2. All elements of date (except year) directly 
related to an individual (e.g., date of birth, 
admission date, discharge date, date of death)    Accessed only    Recorded  
3. Medical record number    Accessed only    Recorded  
4. Account number    Accessed only    Recorded  
5. Health plan identification number    Accessed only    Recorded  
6. Social Security Number    Accessed only    Recorded  
7. Device identifiers and serial number    Accessed only    Recorded  
8. Certificate/License number    Accessed only    Recorded  
9. Telephone number    Accessed only    Recorded  
10. Fax number    Accessed only    Recorded  
11. Email addresses    Accessed only    Recorded  
12. Web addresses (URLs); Internet IP addresses    Accessed only    Recorded  
13. Street address, city, county, precinct, zip 
code or equivalent geographical codes    Accessed only    Recorded  
14. Full face photographic images and any 
comparable images    Accessed only    Recorded  
15. Biometric identifiers, including finger and 
voice print    Accessed only    Recorded  
16. Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, 
including license plate number    Accessed only    Recorded  
17. Any other unique identifying number, 
characteristic or code that may help identify 
individual participants including their initials 
(e.g., student or employee ID number)    Accessed only    Recorded  
18. Elements of date, including year, for persons 
90 years or older    Accessed only    Recorded  
 
We will be collecting minimal PHI for data collection purposes.  This information will be 
recorded on a screening log and submitted in REDCap at the end of the screening day.  
REDCap will be used to collect all identifiable information and only accessible to 
members of the research team.  The screening logs will be locked in a secured location 
only accessible by the research team and destroyed at the end of the study.   
Without the waiver, parents/guardians may have access to confidential 
information with may compromise the integrity of the study.  Requesting this, will 
provide the opportunity to proceed with study procedures, while remaining 
HIPPA compliant.   
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 20 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 15.0 Reimbursem ent, Payment and Tangible Property provided to 
subjects  
 
Study providers  will be compensated their normal hourly rate for completing study 
related training activities.  A one time electronic gift card of $15.00 would be given to 
CMH clinicians for participa ting in a short, self -paced session to cover additional 
counseling tips.  Clinicians at CHOP will be provided a $10 gift card each time they 
deliver a study counseling session for their effort to perform study specific tasks during 
the pandemic. Compensatio n for participation will be considered taxable income.  OOPs 
will not be compensated.  For both sites (CMH and CHOP), the providers who 
provide counseling will be offered a $25 gift card payment if they choose to 
participate in a "semi structured interview, " about how their thoughts/comments 
about the feasibility study. This language has been added to the end of both the 
CMH and CHOP verbal consent for the providers.  
 
 Study related training activities  Additional Gift Card  
Site 1: CMH 
Clinicians  normal hourly rate  $15 for the additional counseling session  
(one-time)  
Site 2: CHOP 
Clinicians  normal hourly rate  $10 for each study  counseling session 
delivered  
 
 
 
Adolescents : Payment will be received on a gift card .  After the completion of each study 
point , adolescent subjects will receive additional payments  as indicated in the table 
below.  
 
 
 Post 
Intervention / 
Enrollment  2-wks 
pregnancy test  
(Group 1 
only)  30-Days  3-months  6-months  Maximum 
compensation  
Group 1  $75 $30 $50 $30 $40 $225  
Group 2  $75 ---- $50 $30 $40 $195  
 
 
16.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 21 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 All subjects may withdraw from the research study at any time .  If they would like 
to withdraw, they are asked to notify any member of the research team 
immediately.   
If an adolescent, study provider , or OOP  withdraws from the study, an y data 
collected will be kept and dei dentified for analysis purposes.   
17.0 Risks to Subjects  
 
Providers /OOP : Risks to study providers /OOPs  will likely be minimal as they are 
receiving contraceptiv e training and completing brief surveys to share their perceptions. 
There is minimal risk of loss of confidentiality which will be explained during consent.  
 
Adolescents: Using the various birth control methods can cause minimal side 
effects that are listed in Section 5 of th is document  and will be described during 
the consent process .  We will follow best  practice guidelines for administering 
and prescribing medication s. 
Risks to participants are anticipated to be minimal . ED patients with severe illness 
or who experienced sexual assault will be excluded from this study to minimize 
the physical and emotional harm to study participants. Counseling sessions will be 
administered by trained provider s in a confidential setting to avoid emotional 
discomfort to participants when discussing sensitive matters. There is minor risk 
of variance of counseling content, but this will be avoided by extensive training 
that will be provided to the provider s by an adolescent family planning e xpert at 
each site. Counseling sessions will be continuously reviewed for quality. 
Additionally, there is minor risk of unauthorized disclosure of confidential 
information, which will be made known to participants and will be minimized by 
the research team ’s efforts to ensure confidentiality. Every effort will be made to 
keep data coded. All recruitment materials (e.g., signed consent forms) and 
information linking unique identification numbers to participant names will be 
stored in password -protected elect ronic files within REDCap. Only Dr. Miller  and 
designated study staff will have access to these files. Risks are greatly reduced by 
using secure files, storing data on secure computers, and coding of data. Patients 
may choose not to participate.  
As with an y study involving collection of data, there is a possibility of breach of 
confidentiality of data.  There is also a risk to confidentiality when using the 
internet or a mobile network.  Corresponding through email and text messaging is 
not a secure method of sending information and others may be able to access the 
information sent.  Every precaution will be taken to secure participants’ personal 
information .   
18.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
 
Study providers may benefit from additional training in contraception counseling.  
Adolescent participants may benefit from learning about birth control methods 
and ways to reduce their risk of unintended pregnancy.  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 22 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 Findings of this study could contribute to a reduction in unintended pregnancies 
among adolescen ts. The data obtained through this study may be used to inform 
new guidelines for adolescent -centered contraceptive services, which could offer 
benefit s for adolescents in the future . The minimal risks of participation are 
reasonable in relation to these g eneralizable benefits.  
19.0 Investigator Assessment of Risk /Benefits  Ratio : (IRB makes the 
final determination)  Based upon your response in Sections 17.0 and 18.0, 
please provide your assessment of risk and benefits  in below table . 
 
 
Select as applicable:  Pediatric Risk Category:  
x Category 1  Research not involving greater than minimal risk  
(45 CFR §46.404 and 21 CFR §50.51)    
Select if applicable:  Adult Risk Category:  
☒ Not Greater than Minimal Risk  
☐ Greater than Minimal Risk  
 
As there is no more than minimal risk to study participation, and potential for minimal 
direct benefits and significant indirect benefits, we feel that the benefit outweighs the risk 
of participation.  
 
20.0 Data Management and Confidentiality  
 
Participants will be  informed that their participation in all aspects of the proposed study is 
entirely voluntary, and that they are free to withdraw at any time. Strict measures will be 
taken to ensure participant privacy and confidentiality. All data will be coded and then 
stored in the secure REDCap database, and all participants will be assigned a unique 
identification number. The master list linking identification numbers to identifying 
information will be stored separately from the study database. All personally identifi able 
information will be kept strictly confidential and stored in an encrypted document, on a 
dedicated research server only accessible by Dr. Miller and the designated study staff. 
Contact information for the study team will be included on consent forms t o allow 
participants to ask questions or raise concerns about the study. Should any specific 
concerns arise, the study team would intervene to address problems including, if needed, 
a change or discontinuation of study procedures. The mentor team and site IRB’s will be 
informed of any concerns, and the IRB and NIH will be informed of any adverse events.  
 
Secure Storage of Data  
Records to be kept and Secure Storage of Data:  Survey development, data collection and 
handling will be conducted through Children’ s Mercy’s REDCap Research software.  
The Redcap database is protected by Gazzang's zNcrypt product . zNcrypt transparently 
encrypts and secures data at rest without any changes to your applications or database and 
ensures there is minimal performance lag in  the encryption or decryption process. 
Advanced key management and process -based access controls enable organizations to 
meet compliance regulations and ensure unauthorized parties or malicious actors never 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 23 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 gain access to the encrypted data. zNcrypt meets compliance for HIPAA, PCI -DSS, 
FISMA, EU Data Protection, and more.  
Data will be exported from REDCap to statistical programs for analysis (i.e. SAS, SPSS, 
Excel.) All data will be securely stored on password -protected servers.  
 
20.1 A Certificate of Confidentiality has been granted for this study 
because it is funded by the NIH  
20.2 Audio data for study provider  interviews will be periodically  
checked to ensure fidelity of the study.   
Study data and information will be kept according to CM Record 
Retention guidelines.   
21.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
We will convene a Data Safety Monitoring Board comprised of experts in 
adolescent reproductive health , health services research, and public health that are 
not connected to this project or to our Institutions. The Board will meet regularly  
to monitor participant safety and assess study progress and  will be available to 
meet on an ad hoc basis if an immediate safety concern arises.  
22.0 Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Study staff will take  greatest  measures to protect the privacy of research subjects.  
All data collected will be deidentified for data analysis purposes.  Participants will 
be assigned a  study number. Surveys will be completed confidentially and will 
not contain identifying information. Contact information will be recorded 
separately, via a separate REDCap data collection tool.   PHI to be accessed and 
recorded will include  medical record number, date of birth, address, and phone 
number.   
All data will be managed in accordance with hospital institutional review board 
and HIPAA requirements to ensure confidentiality and protection of research 
participants. The Investigator an d other site personnel will not use such data and 
records for any purpose other than for conducting the study.   Human subject’s 
names will be kept on a password protected database and will be linked only with 
a study identification number for this research .  There are no patient identifiers 
recorded in the research record. All computer entry and networking programs will 
be done using study identification only.  All data will be entered into a computer 
that is password protected.  Clinical information will n ot be released without 
written permission of the subject, except as necessary for monitoring by IRB, the 
FDA, the OHRP, the Sponsor, or the Sponsor’s designee.  Data will be stored in a 
locked office of the investigators and maintained for a minimum of thr ee years 
after the completion of the study.  
The consent for the study will encompass the contraceptive counseling and 
follow -up call or text and medical record review to assess the primary and 
secondary outcomes. All participants will be given the opportun ity to ask 
questions and decline participation. Completed consent documentation will be 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 24 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 signed and dated by the designated study staff, and a copy will be provided to the 
participant.  
23.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
 
Provider /OOP: Research -relate d injury would be highly unlikely and there will be no 
compensation for research -related injury. If study providers feel they need to receive 
care, they will need to obtain it on their own.  
 
Adolescents: Being in this study involves no more than minimal ri sk, therefore we 
do not require compensation for research -related injuries.   
 
Economic Burden to Subjects  
 
Training for providers  will be provided free of cost  and there should be no additional 
economic burden to study providers . 
A 3-month supply of non-LARC  study related medications , plus 1 etonogrstrel 
implan t for adolescents  in the MLI  will be provided free of charge.  Urine 
pregnancy testing will be provided free of charge if not already included in usual 
ED care for adolescents.  
Adolescents must provide their own transportation for any  medical follow -up 
visits that may be needed .  If an adolescent decides to begin a method of 
contraception, follow -up care may be sought at a local Title X clinic or an y 
medical facility  preferred by the adole scent and a dolescents will be responsible 
for any ou t-of-pocket expenses which may be incurred .    
24.0 Permission/Assent/Consent Process  
Providers : A study team member will obtain provider s’ verbal  informed consent 
for study procedures.  
 
OOP: A study team member will obtain verbal consent for study procedures (i.e., 
semi -structured interview).  
 
Adolescent: If eligible, a study team member will obtain  the adolescent patient’s 
informed consent  if they are 18 years of age or assent if they are less than 18 
years of age  for the study procedures. HIPAA Authorization will be obtained as 
part of the consent procedures. Study team members will verify with the clinical 
care team that the patient has t he capacity to consent /assent .  
For both sites, subjects who are 18 years old will provide written consent and 
HIPAA authorization for their own participation. For all minors, we will request a 
waiver of parental permission and waiver of HIPAA authorizatio n and the minor 
will provide assent for their own participation. Minors may elect to have their 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 25 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 parent or legal guardian involved in the consent process, if desired. All parents of 
minor patients who are present in the ED will receive an information sheet that is 
available in English and Spanish about the study and have the opportunity to state 
that they would not like for their child  to participate in the  study prior to 
participant assent procedures.  Though the parent information sheet will be 
available in  English or Spanish, only English -Speaking patients will be recruited 
for the intervention.  
A waiver of parental permission is requested for participants under 18 years of 
age as this study is no more than minimal risk and could not be practicably carried  
out without a waiver. Finally, the waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the 
rights and welfare of the subjects. Given that teen subjects may not want to 
involve their parent in a study about their reproductive health, it would not be 
reasonable to require permission from a parent or legal guardian to discuss study 
information with the minor, and mechanisms are in place to protect the children. 
The adolescents will be asked to provide assent. We will follow best practice 
guidelines established for  adolescent participation in sexual health research. For 
any adolescent who desires placement of a subdermal contraceptive implant, we 
will follow established clinical practice at each site and obtain written consent 
from the procedure from the participant  (if aged 18 years) or a guardian (for 
minor participants).  
Process to Document Permission/Assent/Consent  
Staff at each site will follow institutional standards for documentation. 
Documentation will be stored i n a secured setting only accessible to s tudy staff.   
25.0 Setting  
Research will take place within Children’s Mercy Adele Hall campus and the 
Children’s Hospital of Phila delphia . Most of the study procedures will be 
conducted in the emergency department.  
26.0 Resources Available  
 
Providers : Study team members and leaders will be readily available by email and in -
person to resolve any issues that arise. The leadership teams representing the ED 
Providers also support this project and are available to provide assistance if needed.  
 
Adolescents : Participants are not required to answer questions that make them feel 
uncomfortable. In the emergency department, there are always advocates available for 
patients and families, if needed, including health care providers, social workers, and 
patient advo cates. In this study setting, if a participant expresses a concern or need that is 
outside of the scope of this project (e.g., sexual assault), we will refer those participants 
back to their ED treating team, as is our standard practice. During the consent  process, we 
will inform participants that most of the information they share during the study will be 
kept confidential except in rare cases where their safety is at risk or mandated reporting is 
in effect . 
 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 26 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 27.0 Multi -Site Research  
Drs. Miller and Mollen have a detailed plan for study oversite that was reviewed and 
approved by the NIH. Communi cation between study sites will take place via conference 
calls and emails.  Regular conference calls will take place to discuss study updates, 
discuss any pot ential barriers and concerns and discuss other study logistics.  Our 
estimated recruitment plan is detailed in the table below.  
 
 CMH  CHOP  Total  
Providers  Approximately  
30 Approximately  
30 60 
Adolescents  49 49 98 
Other personnel  15 15 30 
Total  74 74 158 
   
 
28.0 International Research  NA 
 
  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 27 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 References  
1. Madden T, Mullersman JL, Omvig KJ, Secura GM, Peipert JF. Structured 
contraceptive counseling provided by the Contraceptive CHOICE Project. 
Contraception. 2013 Aug 31;88(2):243 -9. 
2. Miller MK, Champassak S, Goggin K, Kelly P, Dowd MD, Mollen CJ, Humiston 
SG, Linebarger J, Apodaca T. Brief behavioral intervention to improve 
adolescent sexual health: a feasibility study in the Emergency Department. 
Pediatric emergency care. 2016 Jan 1;32(1):17 -9. 
3. Walton MA, Chermack ST, Shope JT, Bingham CR, Zimmerman MA, Blow FC, 
Cunningham RM. Effects of a brief intervention for reducing violence and 
alcohol misuse among adolescents: a randomized controlled trial. Jama. 2010 
Aug 4;304(5):527 -35. 
4. Walton MA, Cherma ck ST, Blow FC, Ehrlich PF, Barry KL, Booth BM, 
Cunningham RM. Components of brief alcohol interventions for youth in the 
emergency department. Substance abuse. 2015 Jul 3;36(3):339 -49. 
5. Musacchio NS, Gehani S, Garofalo R. Emergency department management of  
adolescents with urinary complaints: missed opportunities. Journal of 
Adolescent Health. 2009 Jan 1;44(1):81 -3. 
6. Miller MK, Mollen CJ, O’Malley D, Owens RL, Maliszewski GA, Goggin K, et al. 
Providing adolescent sexual health care in the pediatric emergency  department: 
views of health care providers. Pediatr Emerg Care.  2014 Feb;30(2):84.  
7. Miller MK, Mollen CJ. Critical Access to Care: Bringing Contraception to 
Adolescents in Nontraditional Settings. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2017 Dec 
1;61(6):667 -8. 
8. Bowen  DJ, Kreuter M, Spring B, Cofta -Woerpel L, Linnan L, Weiner D, Bakken 
S, Kaplan CP, Squiers L, Fabrizio C, Fernandez M. How we design feasibility 
studies. American journal of preventive medicine. 2009 May 31;36(5):452 -7. 
9. Augustine JJ. More Advanced Practice  Providers Working in Emergency 
Departments. Accessed on February 22, 2019 at 
https://www.acepnow.com/article/advanced -practice -providers -working -
emergency -departments/2/  
10. Rhodes KV, Gordon JA, Lowe RA, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine 
Public Health and Education Task Force Preventive Services Work Group. 
Preventive care in the emergency department, part I: clinical preventive 
services —are they relevant to emergency medicine?. Academic Emergency 
Medicine. 2000 Sep;7(9):1036 -41. 
11. Bernstein SL, Haukoos J S. Public health, prevention, and emergency medicine: 
a critical juxtaposition. Academic Emergency Medicine. 2008 Feb;15(2):190 -3. 
12. Bernstein E, Goldrank LR, Kellerman AL, Hargarten SW, Jui J, Fish SS, 
Herbert BH, Flores C, Caravati ME, Krishel S, Stevens C D. A public health 
approach to emergency medicine: preparing for the twenty ‐first century. 
Academic Emergency Medicine. 1994 May;1(3):277 -86. 
13. Alexander AB, Ott MA. A Social Emergency Medicine Approach to the 
Implementation of Sexual and Reproductive Health Interventions in the 
Emergency Department. Academic Emergency Medicine. 2018 Sep 17.  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 28 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 14. EMRA Fellowship Guide. Accessed on February 27, 2019 at 
https://www.emra.org/books/fellowship -guide -book/20 -population -health -and-
social -emergency -medicine/  
15. Kost K, Henshaw S, U.S. Teenage pregnancies, births and abortions, 2010: 
National and state trends by age, race and ethnicity, 2014, New York: 
Guttmacher Institute, http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/USTPtrends10.pdf. 
Accessed February 9, 2018.  
16. Finer LB, Zolna MR. Declines in unintended pregnancy in the United States, 
2008 -2011. N Engl J Med 2016; 374:843 -852. 
17. Finer LB, Henshaw SK. Disparit ies in rates of unintended pregnancy in the 
United States, 1994 and 2001. Perspectives on sexual and reproductive health. 
2006 Jun 1;38(2):90 -6. 
18. Hasstedt K, Boonstra HD. Taking Stock of Year One of the Trump 
Administration’s Harmful Agenda Against Reproduc tive Health and Rights, New 
York: Guttmacher Institute 2018. 
https://www.guttmacher.org/article/2018/01/taking -stock -year-one-trump -
administrations -harmful -agenda -against -reproductive; accessed May 15, 2018.  
19. Sonfield A, Hasstedt K, Gold RB. Moving Forward:  Family Planning in the Era 
of Health Reform, New York: Guttmacher Institute, 2014. 
https://www.guttmacher.org/report/moving -forward -family -planning -era-health-
reform ; accessed March 1, 2019.  
20. Adams SH, Newacheck PW, Park MJ, Brindis CD, Irwin CE. (2007). Health 
insurance across vulnerable ages: patterns and disparities from adolescence to 
the early 30s. Pediatrics . 2007; 119(5):e1033 -e1039.  
21. Ziv A, Boulet JR, Slap GB. Emergency department utilization by US 
adolescents. Pediatrics. 1998;101:987 -994. 
22. Chernick L, Kharbanda EO, Santelli J, Dyan P. Identifying adolescents at high 
risk of pregnancy in a pediatric emergency department. J Adol Health 2012; 
51:171 -178. 
23. Solomon M, Badolato GM, Chernick LS, Trent ME, Chamberlain JM, Goyal MK. 
Examining the role of the pediatric emergency department in reducing 
unintended adolescent pregnancy. J Peds. 2017;189:196 -200. 
24. Miller MK, Dowd MD, Hornberger L, Sherman AK.  Acceptab ility of sexual 
health discussion and testing in the pediatric acute care setting. Pediatr Emerg 
Care. 2013;29(5):592 -7.  
25. Miller MK, Pickett ML, Leisner KL, Humiston SG .  Sexual health behaviors, 
preferences for care, and use of health services among adole scents in pediatric 
emergency departments. Ped Emerg Care . 2013;29(8):907 -11. 
26. Miller MK, Randell KA, Barral R, Sherman AK, Miller E. Factors associated with 
interest in same -day contraception initiation among females in the pediatric 
emergency department. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2016 Feb 1;58(2):154 -9. 
27. Secura GM, Allsworth JE, Madden T, Mullersman JL, Peipert JF. The 
Contraceptive CHOICE Project: reducing barriers to long -acting reversible 
contraception. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. 20 10 Aug 
1;203(2):115 -e1. 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 29 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 28. Mestad R, Secura G, Allsworth JE, Madden T, Zhao Q, Peipert JF. Acceptance 
of long -acting reversible contraceptive methods by adolescent participants in 
the Contraceptive CHOICE Project. Contraception. 2011 Nov 1;84(5):493 -8. 
29. Collin s LM, Murphy SA, Strecher V. The multiphase optimization strategy 
(MOST) and the sequential multiple assignment randomized trial (SMART): 
new methods for more potent eHealth interventions. American journal of 
preventive medicine. 2007 May 1;32(5):S112 -8. 
30. Dean SV, Mason EM, Howson CP, Lassi ZS, Imam AM, Bhutta ZA. Born Too 
Soon: Care before and between pregnancy to prevent preterm births: from 
evidence to action. Reproductive health. 2013 Nov;10(1):S3.  
31. Khashan AS, Baker PN, Kenny LC. Preterm birth and reduced birthweight in 
first and second teenage pregnancies: a register -based cohort study.  BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth . 2010;10:36. Published 2010 Jul 9. doi:10.1186/1471 -
2393 -10-36 
32. Hoffman SD, Maynard RA. (2008).  Kids having kids: Economic costs and social 
consequences of teen pregnancy  (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Urban Institute 
Press.  
33. The National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy. 
(2013).  Counting it up: The public costs of teen childbearing: key data . 
Washington, DC: The National Campaign t o Prevent Teen and Unplanned 
Pregnancy.  
34. Hall KS, Moreau C, Trussell J. Determinants of and disparities in reproductive 
health service use among adolescent and young adult women in the United 
States, 2002 –2008. American Journal of Public Health. 2012 Feb;10 2(2):359 -
67. 
35. Newacheck PW, Hung YY, Park MJ, Brindis CD, Irwin CE. Disparities in 
adolescent health and health care: does socioeconomic status matter?  Health  
Serv Res. 2003;38(5):1235 -52. 
36. Irwin CE, Adams SH, Park MJ, Newacheck PW. Preventive care for 
adolescents: few get visits and fewer get services. Pediatrics. 2009 Apr 
1;123(4):e565 -72. 
37. Alexander SC, Christ SL, Fortenberry JD, Pollak KI, Østbye T, Bravender T, 
Shields CG. Identifying types of sex conversations in adolescent health 
maintenance visits. Se xual health. 2015;13(1):22 -8. 
38. Decker MJ, Berglas NF, Brindis CD. A call to action: developing and 
strengthening new strategies to promote adolescent sexual health. Societies. 
2015 Oct 5;5(4):686 -712. 
39. Wilson KM, Klein JD. Adolescents who use the emergency d epartment as their 
usual source of care. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 2000 Apr 
1;154(4):361 -5. 
40. Fine LC, Mollen CJ. A pilot study to assess candidacy for emergency 
contraception and interest in sexual health education in a pediatric emergen cy 
department population. Pediatric emergency care. 2010 Jun 1;26(6):413 -6. 
41. Mehta SD, Hall J, Lyss SB, Skolnik PR, Pealer LN, Kharasch S. Adult and 
Pediatric Emergency Department Sexually Transmitted Disease and HIV 
Screening: Programmatic Overview and Outcomes. Acad Emerg Med. 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 30 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 2007;14(3):250 -258. 
42. Goyal MK, Teach SJ, Badolato GM, Trent M, Chamberlain JM. Universal 
screening for sexually transmitted infections among asymptomatic adolescents 
in an urban emergency department: high acceptance but low prevalence of 
infections. J Pediatr 2016; 171:128 -32.  
43. Ahmad FA, Jeffe DB, Plax K, Collins KK, Schechtman KB, Doerhoff DE, et al. 
Computerized self -interviews improve Chlamydia and gonorrhea testing among 
youth in the emergency department. Ann Emerg Med.  2014 Oct 31;64(4):376 -
84 
44. Silva A, Glick NR, Lyss SB , Hutchinson AB , Gift TL , Pealer LN , Broussard D , 
Whitman S . Implementing an HIV and Sexually Transmitted Disease Screening 
Program in an Emergency Department.  Ann Emerg Med. 2007;49(5):564 -72. 
45. Reed JL, Punches BE, Taylor RG, Macaluso M, Alessandrini EA, Kahn JA. A 
Qualitative analysis of adolescent and caregiver acceptability of universa lly 
offered gonorrhea and chlamydia screening in the pediatric emergency 
department. Ann Emerg Med 2017; 70(6):787 -796. 
46. Chernick LS, Schnall R, Higgins T, Stockwell MS, Castaño PM, Santelli J, 
Dayan PS. Barriers to and enablers of contraceptive use among a dolescent 
females and their interest in an emergency department based intervention. 
Contraception. 2015 Mar 1;91(3):217 -25. 
47. Chernick LS, Schnall R, Stockwell MS, Castaño PM, Higgins T, Westhoff C, 
Santelli J, Dayan PS. Adolescent female text messaging pref erences to prevent 
pregnancy after an emergency department visit: A qualitative analysis. Journal 
of medical Internet research. 2016 Sep;18(9).  
48. Mollen CJ, Miller MK, Hayes KL, Barg FK. Developing emergency department -
based education about emergency contraception: adolescent preferences. 
Acad Emerg Med . 2013;20(11):1164 -70.  
49. Chernick LS, Westhoff C, Ray M, Garcia M, Garth J, Santelli J, Dayan PS. 
Enhancing referral of sexually active adolescent females from the emergency 
department to family planning. Journal of Women's Health. 2015 Apr 
1;24(4):324 -8. 
50. Chernick LS, Stockwell MS, Wu M, Castaño PM, Schnall R, Westhoff CL, 
Santelli J, Dayan PS. Texting to Increase Contraceptive Initiation Among 
Adolescents in the Emergency Department. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2017 
Dec 1;61(6):786 -90. 
51. Hoehn EF, Hoefgen H, Chernick LS, Dyas J, Krantz L, Zhang N, Reed JL. A 
Pediatric Emergency Department Intervention t o Increase Contraception 
Initiation Among Adolescents. Academic Emergency Medicine. 2018 Sep 8.  
52. Newton AS, Dong K, Mabood N, Ata N, Ali S, Gokiert R, Vandermeer B, 
Tjosvold L, Hartling L, Wild TC. Brief emergency department interventions for 
youth who use alcohol and other drugs: a systematic review. Pediatric 
emergency care. 2013 May 1;29(5):673 -84. 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 31 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 53. Trent M, Chung SE, Burke M, Walker A, Ellen JM. Results of a randomized 
controlled trial of a brief behavioral intervention for pelvic inflammatory disease 
in adolescents. Journal of pediatric and adolescent gynecology. 2010 Apr 
1;23(2):96 -101. 
54. Dehlendorf C, Krajewski C, Borrero S. Contraceptive counseling: best practices 
to ensure quality communication and enable effective contraceptive use. 
Clinical obstetrics  and gynecology. 2014 Dec;57(4):659.  
55. Dehlendorf C, Fox E, Sobel L, Borrero S. Patient -centered contraceptive 
counseling: evidence to inform practice. Current Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Reports. 2016 Mar 1;5(1):55 -63. 
56. Jaccard J, Levitz N. Counseling adolesce nts about contraception: towards the 
development of an evidence -based protocol for contraceptive counselors. 
Journal of Adolescent Health. 2013 Apr 1;52(4):S6 -13. 
57. Simmons KB, Rodriguez MI. Reducing unintended pregnancy through provider 
training. The Lancet . 2015 Aug 8;386(9993):514 -6. 
58. Potter J, Koyama A, Coles MS. Addressing the challenges of clinician training 
for long -acting reversible contraception. JAMA pediatrics. 2015 Feb 
1;169(2):103 -4. 
59. Greenberg KB, Makino KK, Coles MS. Factors associated with provi sion of 
long-acting reversible contraception among adolescent health care providers. 
Journal of Adolescent Health. 2013 Mar 1;52(3):372 -4. 
60. Madden T. Long -acting removable contraceptives prevent teen pregnancy. 
Journal of Adolescent Health. 2013 Mar 1;52(3) :255-6. 
61. Braverman PK, Adelman WP, Alderman EM, Breuner CC, Levine DA, Marcell 
AV, O’Brien RF. Contraception for adolescents. Pediatrics. 2014 Oct 
1;134(4):e1244 -56. 
62. Miller MK, Plantz DM, Dowd DM, Mollen CJ, Reed JL, Vaughn L, et al. Pediatric 
emergency health care providers’ knowledge, attitudes, and experiences 
regarding emergency contraception. Acad Emerg Med.  2011;18(6):605 -12. 
63. Goyal M, Zhao H, Mollen C. Exploring emergency contraception knowledge, 
prescription practices, and barriers to prescription for adolescents in the 
emergency department. Pediatrics . 2009;123(3):765 -70. 
64. Harper CC, Rocca CH, Thompson KM, Morfesis J, Goodman S, Darney PD, 
Westhoff CL, Speidel JJ . Reductions in pregnancy rates in the USA with long -
acting reversible contraception: a cluster randomised trial. The Lancet. 2015 
Aug 8;386(9993):562 -8. 
65. Peipert JF, Madden T, Allsworth JE, Secura GM. Preventing unintended 
pregnancies by providing no -cost contraception. Obstetrics and gynecology. 
2012 Dec;120(6):1291.  
66. Miller WR, Rollnick S. (2013). Motivational Interviewing: Helping People 
Change  (3rd ed). New York: Guilford.   
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 32 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 67. Ingersoll KS, Ceperich SD, Nettleman MD, Karanda K, Brocksen S, Johnson 
BA. Redu cing alcohol exposed pregnancy risk in college women: Initial 
outcomes of a clinical trial of a motivational intervention. J Substance Abuse 
Treatment . 2005; 29:173 –180.  
68. Monti PM, Colby SM, Barnett NP, Spirito A, Rohsenow DJ, Myers M, Woolard 
R, Lewander W. Brief intervention for harm reduction with alcohol -positive older 
adolescents in a hospital emergency department. Journal of consulting and 
clinical psychology. 1999 Dec;67(6):989.  
69. Tylee A, Haller DM, Graham T, Churchill R, Sanci LA. Youth -friendly prim ary-
care services: how are we doing and what more needs to be done?. The 
Lancet. 2007 May 5;369(9572):1565 -73. 
70. Goyal M, McCutcheon M, Hayes K, Mollen C. Sexual history documentation in 
adolescent emergency department patients. Pediatrics. 2011 Jul 1;128(1):86 -
91. 
71. Goyal M, Hersh A, Luan X, Localio R, Trent M, Zaoutis T. Are emergency 
departments appropriately treating adolescent pelvic inflammatory disease?. 
JAMA pediatrics. 2013 Jul 1;167(7):672 -3. 
72. Goyal M, Hersh A, Luan X, Mollen C, Localio R, Tren t M, Zaoutis T. Frequency 
of pregnancy testing among adolescent emergency department visits. 
Academic Emergency Medicine. 2013 Aug 1;20(8):816 -21. 
73. Brown S, Cohen E, Jordan B, Shannon D, Shields WC, Williams L. Choosing a 
Birth Control Method. Association o f Reproductive Health Professionals. 2011. 
http://www.arhp.org/Publications -and-Resources/Quick -Reference -Guide -for-
Clinicians/choosing/Initiation -Hormonal -Contraceptives . 
74. Westhoff C, Heartwell S, Edwards S, Zieman M, Cushman L, Robilotto C, 
Stuart G, Morroni C, Kalmuss D, Quick Start Study Group. Initiation of oral 
contraceptives using a quick start compared with a  conventional start: a 
randomized controlled trial. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2007 Jun 1;109(6):1270 -
6. 
75. Diedrich JT, Klein DA, Peipert JF. Long -acting reversible contraception in 
adolescents: A systematic review and meta -analysis. American Journal of 
Obstet rics & Gynecology. 2017 Apr 1;216(4):364 -e1. 
76. Tocce KM, Sheeder JL, Teal SB. Rapid repeat pregnancy in adolescents: do 
immediate postpartum contraceptive implants make a difference?. American 
Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2012 Jun 1;206(6):481 -e1. 
77. Rosenstock JR, Peipert JF, Madden T, Zhao Q, Secura GM. Continuation of 
reversible contraception in teenagers and young women. Obstetrics and 
gynecology. 2012 Dec;120(6):1298.  
78. Obijuru L, Bumpus S, Auinger P, Baldwin CD. Etonogestrel implants in 
adolescents: E xperience, satisfaction, and continuation. Journal of Adolescent 
Health. 2016 Mar 1;58(3):284 -9. 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 33 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 79. Raine TR, Foster -Rosales A, Upadhyay UD, Boyer CB, Brown BA, Sokoloff A, 
Harper CC. One -year contraceptive continuation and pregnancy in adolescent 
girls and w omen initiating hormonal contraceptives. Obstetrics and gynecology. 
2011 Feb;117(2 Pt 1):363.  
80. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2020. 
https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics -objectives/topic/family -
planning/objectives; Acc essed December 12, 2017.  
81. National Institutes of Health. NICHD Research Priorities; 
https://www.nichd.nih.gov/grantscontracts/research -areas/priorities; Accessed 
January 4, 2018.  
82. Miller MK, Dowd MD, Harrison CJ, Mollen CJ, Selvarangan R, Humiston SG. 
Prevalence of three sexually transmitted infections in a pediatric emergency 
department. Pediatric emergency care. 2015 Feb;31(2):107.  
83. Mollen CJ, Miller MK, Hayes KL, Barg FK. Developing emergency department -
based education about emergency contraception: a dolescent preferences. 
Acad Emerg Med . 2013;20(11):1164 -70. 
84. Mollen CJ, Lavelle JM, Hawkins LA, Ambrose C, Rudy BJ. Description of a 
novel emergency department based HIV screening program for adolescents. 
AIDS Patient Care and STDs 2008; 22(6): 505 -511. 
85. Robin L, Dittus P, Whitaker D, Crosby R, Ethier K, Mezoff J, Miller K, and 
Pappas -Deluca K. Behavioral interventions to reduce incidence of HIV, STD, 
and pregnancy among adolescents: a decade in review. Journal of Adolescent 
Health. 2004;34(1) :3-26. 
86. Ajzen I. From intentions to actions: a theory of planned behavior. Action -
Control: From Cognition to Behavior . Springer Publishing Company. 1985:11 –
39.  
87. Jemmott JB 3rd , Jemmott LS , Fong GT . Abstinence and safer sex HIV risk -
reduction interventions for African American adolescents: a randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA . 1998;279(19):1529 -36.  
88. Weeks K, Levy SR, Zhu C, Perhats C, Handler A, Fly BR. Impact of a school -
based AIDS prevention program on young adolescents' self -efficacy skills. 
Health Educ Res . 1995;10:329 -344.  
89. Kirby DB , Laris BA , Rolleri LA . Sex and HIV education programs: their impact 
on sexual behaviors of y oung people throughout the world. J Adolesc Health . 
2007;40(3):206 -17. 
90. DiClemente RJ, Salazar LF, Crosby RA. A review of STD/HIV preventive 
interventions for adolescents: sustaining effects using an ecological approach. 
Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2007; 32.8:888 -906. 
91. Schwartländer B, Stover J, Hallett T, Atun R, Avila C, Gouws E, Bartos M, Ghys 
PD, Opuni M, Barr D, Alsallaq R, Bollinger L, Freitas M, Garnett G, Holmes C, 
Legins K, Pillay Y, Stanciole AE, McClure M, Hirnschall G, Laga M, Padian N. 
Towards an improved investment approach for an effective response to 
HIV/AIDS . The Lancet  2011;377(9782):2031 -2041.  
92. Buhi ER, Goodson P. Predictors of adolescent sexual behavior and intention: A 
theory -guided systematic review. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2007 Jan 
1;40(1):4 -21. 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 34 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 93. DiClemente RJ, Salazar LF, Crosby RA, Rosenthal SL. P revention and control 
of sexually transmitted infections among adolescents: the importance of a 
socio -ecological perspective —a commentary. Public health. 2005 Sep 
1;119(9):825 -36. 
94. Bair-Merritt MH, Mollen CJ, Yau PL, Fein JA. Health care providers' opinions  on 
intimate partner violence resources and screening in a pediatric emergency 
department. Pediatric emergency care. 2006 Mar 1;22(3):150 -3. 
95. Larc First. Contraceptive Counseling. http://www.larcfirst .com/counseling.html . 
Accessed on May 15, 2018.  
96. Association of Reproductive Professionals. Professional Education. 
http://www.arhp.org/Professional -Education . Accessed on May 15, 2018.  
97. Physicians f or Reproductive Health. Cultural Competency and Adolescent 
Health. https://prh.org/arshep -ppts/#best -practices . Accessed on May 15, 2018.  
98. Goggin K, Gerkovich MM, Williams KB, Banderas JW, Catley D, Berkley -Patton J, 
Wagner JG, Stanford J, Neville S, Kumar VK, Bamberger DM, Clough LA. A RCT 
examining the efficacy of motivational counseling with observed therapy for ART 
adherence. AIDS and Behavior. 2013;17(6):1992 -2001. PMCID: PMC3672512  
99. Catley D, Goggin K, Harris KJ, et al. A randomized trial of Motivational Interviewing: 
Cessation induction among smokers with low desire to quit. Am J Prev Med . 
2015;50(5):573 -83. PMCID: PMC4841713  
100. Goggin K , Bradley -Ewing, A, Myers AL, Lee BR, Hurley, EA,  Delay KB, 
Schlachter S, Ramphal A, Pina K, Yu D, Weltmer K Linnemayr S, Butler CC, & 
Newland JG. (2018). “Let’s talk about antibiotics”: A randomized trial of a higher 
vs. lower intensity patient -provider communication interventions to reduce 
antibiotic m isuse in pediatric ambulatory clinics. BMJ Open  
101. Bruce J, Bruce A, Lynch S, Strober L, O’Bryan S, Sobotka D, Thelen J, Ness A, 
Glusman M, Goggin K, Bradley -Ewing A, Catley D. A pilot study to improve adherence 
among MS patients who discontinue treatment aga inst medical advice. J Behav Med . 
2016;39(2):276 -87. PMID: 26563147  
102. Berlin EA, Fowkes WC. Teaching framework for cross -cultural care: Application in 
Family Practice. West J Med. 1983;139(6):934 –938.  
103. Schladale, J. A Trauma Informed Approach for Adolescent Sexual Health. 
2012. http://resourcesforresolvingviolence.com/wp -content/uploads/A -Trauma -
Informed -Approach -for-Adolescent -Sexual -Health.pdf. Accessed on May 15, 
2018.  
104. Manlove J, Ikramullah E, Mincie li L, Holcombe E, Danish S. Trends in sexual 
experience, contraceptive use, and teenage childbearing: 1992 –2002. Journal 
of Adolescent Health. 2009 May 31;44(5):413 -23. 
105. Martinez G, Copen CE, Abma JC. Teenagers in the United States: sexual 
activity, contrac eptive use, and childbearing, 2006 -2010 national survey of 
family growth. Vital and Health Statistics. Series 23, Data from the National 
Survey of Family Growth. 2011 Oct(31):1 -35. 
106. Finer LB, Philbin JM. Sexual initiation, contraceptive use, and pregnancy 
among young adolescents. Pediatrics. 2013 May 1;131(5):886 -91. 
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 35 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 107. Uschner, D., Schindler, D., Hilgers, R., & Heussen, N. (2018). randomizeR: An 
R Package for the Assessment and Implementation of Randomization in 
Clinical Trials. Journal of Statistical Software , 85(8), 1 - 22. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.18637/jss.v085.i08  
108. Curtis KM, Jatlaoui TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. Selected Practice 
Recommendations for Contraceptive Use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 
2016;65(No. RR -4):1–66. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr6504a1 .  
109. Reproductive Health Access Project. Quick Start Algorithm. 
https://www.reproductiveaccess.org/wp -
content/uploads/2014/12/QuickstartAlgorithm.pdf . Acces sed on May 15, 2018.  
110. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research 
electronic data capture (REDCap) —a metadata -driven methodology and 
workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. 
Journal of biomedical  informatics. 2009 Apr 1;42(2):377 -81. 
111. Ross JA, L. WW. Contraceptive Use, Intention to Use and Unmet Need During 
the Extended Postpartum Period. International Perspectives on Sexual and 
Reproductive Health. 2001;27(1):20 -27. 
112. Brückner H, Martin A, Bearman P S. Ambivalence and pregnancy: adolescents' 
attitudes, contraceptive use and pregnancy. Perspectives on sexual and 
reproductive health. 2004 Nov 1;36(6):248 -57. 
113. National Center for Health Statistics. National Survey of Family Growth, 2013 -
2015. 2016; https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nsfg/ . Accessed January 15, 2017.  
114. Levinson RA. Contraceptive self -efficacy: a perspective on teenage girls’ 
contraceptive behavior. J Sex Res. 1986;22:347 -369. 
115. Weisman CS, Maccannon DS, Hen derson JT, Shortridge E, Orso CL. 
Contraceptive counseling in managed care: preventing unintended pregnancy 
in adults. Womens Health Issues. 2002;12(2):79 -95. 
116. Whitaker DJ, Miller KS, May DC, Levin ML. Teenage partners' communication 
about sexual risk and condom use: the importance of parent -teenager 
discussions. Family planning perspectives. 1999 May 1:117 -21. 
117. Rosenstock JR, Peipert JF, Madden T, Zhao Q, Secura GM. Continuation of 
reversible contraception in teenagers and young women. Obstetrics and 
gynecology. 2012 Dec;120(6):1298.  
118. Corbin J, Strauss A. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and 
Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage; 2008.  
119. Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How many interviews are enough?: An 
experiment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods 2006;18:59.  
120. Hsieh HF, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual 
Health Res. 2005;15:1277 -1288.  
121. Silverma n D. Interpreting Qualitative Data: Methods for Analysing Talk, Text 
and Interaction. London, Great Britain: SAGE publications; 1993.  
122. Ulin PR, Robinson ET, Tolley EE, McNeil ET. Qualitative Methods: A Field 
Guide for Applied Research in Sexual and Reproduc tive Health. 1 ed. Research 
Triangle Park; North Carolina: Family Health International; 2002.  
SHORT TITLE: Reducing Pregnancy in the ED  
 Page 36 of 36 Version 3 dated 07.02.21 123. Suffoletto B , Akers A, McGinnis KA, Calabria J, Wiesenfeld HC , Clark DB. A 
sex risk reduction text -message program for young adult females discharged 
from the emergency department. J Adolesc Health. 2013;53(3):387 -93.  
124. Calderon Y , Cowan E , Nickerson J , Mathew S , Fettig J , Rosenberg M , Brusalis 
C, Chou K , Leider J , Bauman L . Educational effectiveness of an HIV pretest 
video for adolescents: a randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics . 
2011;127(5):911 -6.  
125. Nollen NL , Hutcheson T , Carlson S , Rapoff M , Goggin K , Mayfield C , Ellerbeck 
E. Development and functionality of a handheld computer program to improve 
fruit and vegetable intake among low -income youth. Health Educ Res . 
2013;28(2):249 -64.  
 