September 3rd, 2020   
 
 
Prospective randomized controlled trial describing the recurrence rate of 
adenomas in sessile or flat colonic lesions 15mm or larger receiving post-
resection site treatment with snare tip soft coagulation or argon plasma 
coagulation  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 1 of 13 
 
  Prospective randomized controlled trial describing the recurrence rate of 
adenomas in sessile or flat colonic lesions 15mm or larger receiving post -
resection site treatment with snare tip soft coagulation or argon plasma 
coagulation  
 
Dr. Douglas Rex 
India na University Hospital  
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 
Sub-Investigators :  
     
Dr. Nikhil Kumta  
The Mount Sinai Hospital  
New York, New York 10029  
 
Dr. David Greenwald The Mount Sinai Hospital  
New York, New York 10029  
 Dr. Christopher DiMaio  
The Mount Sinai Hospital  
New York, New York 10029  
 Dr. Jerome D. Waye 
The Mount Sinai Hospital  
New York, New York 10029  
 
Dr. Satish Nagula  
The Mount Sinai Hospital  
New York, New York 10029  
 Dr. Habeeb Salameh  
The Mount Sinai Hospital  
New York, New York 10029  
 
Dr. Mouen Khashab  
The Johns Hopkins Hospital  
Baltimore, Maryland 21287  
 
Dr. Kia Vosoughi  
The Johns Hopkins Hospital  
Baltimore, Maryland 21287  
 Dr. Yervant Ichkhanian  
The Johns Hopkins Hospital  
Baltimore, Maryland 21287  
 Dr. Stuart Gordon  
Dartmouth- Hitchcock Medical Center  
Lebanon, New Hampshire 03756  
 Dr. Gregory B. Haber  
NYU Langone Medical Center  
New York, New York 10016  
 Dr. Muhammad Hasan  
AdventHealth Orlando  
Orlando, FL 32803  
 Dr. Amit Rastogi The University of Kansas Medical Center  
Kansas City, KS 66160  
 Dr. Firas Al -Kawas  
Sibley Memorial Hospital  
Washington, D.C. 20016  
 Dr. Matthew Moyer  
Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center  
Hershey, PA 17033  
 Dr. John M. Levenick  
Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center  
Hershey, PA 17033  
 
Dr. Abraham Mathew  
Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center  
Hershey, PA 17033  
 
Dr. Charles Dye  
Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center  
Hershey, PA 17033  
 Dr. Hadie Razjouyan  
Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center  
Hershey, PA 17033  
     
 
   
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 2 of 13 
 
  Table of Contents:  Study Schema  
1.0 Background  & Rationale  
2.0 Objective(s)  
2.1 Primary Objective  
2.2 Secondary Objective  
2.3 Tertiary/Exploratory/Correlative Objectives  
3.0 Outcome Measures  
3.1 Primary Outcome Measures  
3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
3.3 Tertiary/ Exploratory/ Correlative Outcome Measures  
4.0 Eligibility Criteria  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Study Design  
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
7.0 Study Procedures  
8.0 Study Calendar  
9.0 Reportable Events  
10.0 Data Safety Monitoring 
11.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
12.0 Statistical Considerations  
13.0 Data Management  
14.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
15.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
16.0 References  
17.0 Appendix  
  Abbreviations  
 
AE Adverse Event  
CRF  Case Report Form  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
eCRF  Electronic Case Report Forms  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
PI Principal Investigator  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event  
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan  
US United States  
    
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 3 of 13 
 
  1.0 Background  & Rationale  
Endoscopic resection of large benign lesions is the preferred treatment over surgical resection.  
Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) is associated with a lower risk and cost compared to surgical treatment.  However, it is important that patients undergo en doscopic follow -up after 
piecemeal EMR in approximately 6 months because there is an approximately 25% risk of recurrence of adenoma polyps 
1. 
   
A randomized controlled trial in only 24 patients showed a significant reduction of the recurrence rate by treatment of the normal appearing perimeter of the EMR defect using  the 
argon plasma coagulator 
2. A recent non -randomized trial suggested a substantial reduction by 
treatment of the perimeter with the snare tip in the soft coagulation mode  3.   
 In this study we are proposing a randomized controlled trial to test Argon Plasma Coagulation (APC) versus Snare Tip Soft Coagulation (STSC) vs no treatment.  In a previous trial of APC, the recurrence rate of  the control arm was very high at 67%. With only 24 patients in the study 
the actual benefits of APC remain uncertain.  The previous study using STSC was a non-randomized trial.  In this trial we hope to provide definitive evidence regarding the efficacy of APC and STSC vs control.
 
 
2.0 Objective(s)  
2.1 Primary Objective  
To investigate the efficacy of APC or STSC in reducing the recurrence rate at the first follow -up after polypectomy of large colon polyps  
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 4 of 13 
 
  Hypothesis:  
APC or STSC treatment of the perimeter of the EMR defect will reduce the 
recurrence rate of adenomas when compared to our control of no treatment.  
 
2.2 Secondary Objective  
Time it takes to apply each respective treatment (APC or STSC)  
Number of complications for each randomization arm. Examples include bleeding, perforation, pain or post polypectomy syndrome. 
Cost analysis detailing the effectiveness of the treatment versus the cost of each 
therapeutic device (argon probe vs. snare).
 
 
3.0 Outcome Measures /Endpoint s 
3.1 Primary Outcome Measures  
Primary outcome is the recurrence rate of adenomas at the site of any qualifying, previously resected lesions at the first  follow -up colonoscopy. At the first  follow -
up the endoscopist will view the polypectomy scar with a  high definition 
colonoscope under  white light and NBI for any suspicious polyp tissue. The scar 
will be biopsied. All polyps noted as recurrent by the endoscopist at colonoscopy and/or by the pathologist based on histopathology will be considered a recurrent polyp. 
 
3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
Time it takes to apply each treatment will be recorded by a research assistant during the index procedure using a stop watch. During the colonoscopy the 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 5 of 13 
 
  treatment time will be recorded as the time, after initial polyp resection, that the 
randomized treatment instrument comes into view until before clips are applied. Complications will be assessed during the follow-up call simply by asking the patients if they experienced any adverse events. We will use the following definitions to ascertain complications:
 
Bleeding : severe bleeding event that required hospitalization, a blood transfusion, 
a colonoscopy, surgery, or any other invasive intervention to control bleeding, and 
that occurred after the patient left the endoscopy unit and within 30 days after 
completion of the colonoscopy Perforation : 
 iatrogenic full thickness defect in the colon wall diagnosed within 
two weeks of the procedure Pain: 
Any pain perceived by the patient after they left the endoscopy unit and 
within 30 days after completion of the colonoscopy Post 
polypectomy syndrome: Abdominal pain, fever, leukocytosis and peritoneal 
inflammation in the abse nce of perforation within two weeks of the procedure 
Our cost analysis will then take all of these endpoints into account to report which method we found to be more affective. As stated, this will be based on the instrument cost, treatment time, polyp recurrence, and reported complications.
 
 
4.0 Eligibility Criteria  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
• 25 years and older 
• Ability to provide informed consent 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 6 of 13 
 
  • Undergoing colonoscopy for  screening, surveillance, diagnostic reasons, or 
removal of a lesion  
 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
• Pedunculated lesions  
• Inflammatory bowel disease  
• Inability to provide informed consent  
• Lesions less than 15mm in largest dimension 
 
5.0 Study Design  and procedures  
A member of the research team will approach a potential subject to discuss participation in the 
study, including background of the proposed study, inclusion and exclusion criteria, benefits and 
risks of the procedures and follow -up. If this is of  interest to the subject, the informed consent  
document will be discussed and presented. The subject must sign the consent form prior to 
enrollment. This form will have prior  approval of the study site's Institutional Review Board 
(IRB). Failure to obtain informed consent renders the subject ineligible  for the study. 
 Patients who have provided informed consented and are scheduled to undergo endoscopic 
mucosal resection (EMR) of lesions 15mm and larger will be enrolled in the study. During the 
procedure randomization will be performed by approved study staff  once the colonoscopist  
confirms the eligibility (at least one sessile polyp greater than 15 mm in the largest dimension 
measured by the snare size). The three arms of randomization are STSC (80 W, Effect 5) vs APC 
(preferred settings) vs No Treatment of the perimeter of the EMR  site. The randomization list, 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 7 of 13 
 
  which will include 6 45 randomized treatments, will be generated by our biostatistics department 
by George Eckert. These selections will then be printed and placed into sealed envelopes 
pertaining to the patient numbers and wi ll be opened following confirmation that the patient is 
study eligible.  Randomization will occur on a per procedure basis.
 
 All randomized subjects will receive a 30 -day post procedure follow -up phone call (+ 7  days)  
and be scheduled, as per the standard of care, to receive a standard follow -up colonoscopy 
procedure after  the initial procedure. The follow -up window for the primary endpoint has been 
extended beyond 6 months due to procedure delays caused by the COVID -19 pandemic. We will 
measure the rate of  recurrence by endoscopic visualization of the EMR site at the first  follow -up 
using endoscopic magnification and electronic chromoendoscopy, as well as systematic biopsy of the scars. Additionally we will look for the presence of scarring and any clips re tained.
 
 
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
All colonos copies in the study will be performed  by Dr. Douglas Rex or one of the Sub-
Investigators listed above.  Patients will be 25 and older and will be randomized to one of the aforementioned arms of the study. Blindi ng of the PI will be maintained until the end of the 
polypectomy procedure at the primary procedure. Further blinding is not possible due to the nature of the study.  
 Screen failure: any patient enrolled in the study but not randomized because of not satisfying polyp size or other exclusion criteria discovered during the procedure.  
 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 8 of 13 
 
   
7.0 Study Calendar  
Index procedure will be the day of colonoscopy where one of the intervention arms or the control 
arm is administered. Patients will receive a follow-up phone call at 30 -days (+ 7  days) to 
ascertain any complications as previously described. Patients will also receive a follow -up 
colonoscopy (standard of care for large polyp removal) where the polypectomy site is observed for any recurrence.  
 Index procedure Follow -up phone 
call Follow-up colonoscopy 
Day 1  Day 30 + 7  days Approximately Day 180  
Study 
Procedures  Colonoscopy with one 
of the intervention arms 
or control Phone call to 
ascertain 
complications  Colonoscopy to observe 
for recurrence at 
polypectomy site 
 Lost to follow- up: All patients who are randomized to one of the interventions but fail to 
complete the required follow-up colonoscopy. Failure to contact at 30 days will not be considered lost to follow-up (complications information in such cases will be deemed acceptable if collected at the first  follow-up but an accurate accounting of the number of such patients will 
be kept and reported to the DSMB).  
8.0 Reportable Events  
All adverse events meeting prompt reporting criteria will be reported to the IRB within 5 business days of the study team becoming aware of the event. An adverse event meeting prompt 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 9 of 13 
 
  reporting criteria for this study is defined as any event assessed by the PI, or appropriately 
trained and qualified designee, as (1) unexpected, (2) related or possibly related to study participation, AND (3) suggesting that the research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm than was previously known. The period for assessing AE’s will be from the point of inserting the colonoscope until 30 days after the index colonoscopy.  
 
9.0 Data Safety Monitoring  
See Data and Safety Monitoring Board Charter for information about DSMB. Briefly, the data safety monitoring board comprises 4 members : Charles J. Kahi MD (Indiana University), 
Huiping XU PhD (Indiana Universtiy), Cyrus Pira ka MD (Henry Ford Hospital), and Joseph B. 
Elmunzer MD  (Chair) , (Medical University of South Carolina ). None of the board members are 
involved with the current study in any capacity. Additionally, Dr. Rex's research team will provide him up to date information regarding the status of patients and any reportable events.  
 The data collected at sites other than  IU will be de -identified before being sent to us.
 Each site 
will enter their data in to a secure web application (REDCap), which will then be accessed at the 
primary site. Only de -identified data from external sites will be added to the database (no HIPAA  
identifiers will be collected from external sites besides procedure dates and de- identified images 
of study lesions). Any other communication that is not patient related will be done over email or phone. 
Variables that will be transmitted from the other s ite include:  
• Information from the procedure to remove the large polyp 
 This includes information about meeting inclusion/exclusion criteria, procedure 
date, randomization envelope number/randomization treatment, age, gender, race, 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 10 of 13 
 
  ethnicity, whether a fellow was involved in the procedure (and which parts of 
procedure, if appl icable), procedure times, study polyp characteristics, de -
identified study lesion images, resection times, information about the resection such as snare/ injection fluid usage and number of resected pieces, treatment times, other additional treatments used , clipping times, number/type of clips used, 
type of colonoscope used, Boston Bowel Preparation Score, whether fibrosis was present, whether there were any prior attempts at resection, information about 
procedural complications (if any), and study polyp pa thology results  
• Information from the 30 day follow up call  
 This includes information about whether the follow -up phone call was made 
successfully, date subject was reached by phone, and whether patient reported 
experiencing adverse events (and if so, infor mation about the adverse event).  
 Information from the first follow -up procedure  
 This includes information about the previous EMR site, date of follow -up 
procedure, pathology results from residual or recurrent polyp tissue found at previous EMR site (if applicable), and  pathology results from biopsies obtained 
from previous EMR site  
 
10.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
Any subject who wishes to withdraw from this investigation on his/her own accord and for 
whatever reason is entitled to do so without obligation and prejudice to further treatment. In addition, the Investigator may decide for reasons of medical prudence, to withdraw a subject. In either event, the Investigator will clearly document the date and reason(s) for the subject’s 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 11 of 13 
 
  withdrawal from this inv estigation in the CRF and should indicate whether or not he considers it 
was related to the study interventions.
 
 
11.0 Statistical Considerations  
Assuming a 25% recurrence rate of the control arm, and a reduction to 10% in both of the 
treatment arms, we estimate that a sample size of 115 subjects per arm will be needed to demonstrate that APC and STSC are superior to no treatment for reduction of re currence rate 
after EMR, based on 80% power and a two- sided 5% significance level for comparison of 
independent proportions with one interim analysis.  The no treatment arm will be used as our control. In order to account for drop- outs, an extra 35 patient s will be enrolled into the study to 
ensure sufficient data will be included in the analysis.  Therefore, a sample size of 380 subjects will be enrolled in this study. 
 
 Once a polyp has been identified and its size fits within the targeted range, each sub ject will be 
randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio using a computer generated randomization sequence. Enrollment into the study will be competitive with the possibility for each site ou tside of IU to randomize up to 
100 patients. Not all 645 randomization numbers ge nerated will be used in the study. Instead 
each external site will continue to enroll until a total of 380 patients have been randomized study- wide with a potential to randomize up to 10 0 patients. Randomization numbers will be 
assigned as follows: IU will be assigned numbers 001 – 095 and 496 -  526; AdventHealth 
Orlando will be assigned 096 – 145 and 446 -  470; The Johns Hopkins Hospital will be assigned 
numbers 146 – 195; Dartmouth- Hitchcock Medical Center will be assigned numbers 196 – 245; 
NYU Langone M edical Center will assigned numbers 246 – 295 and 471 -  495; the Mount Sinai 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 12 of 13 
 
  Hospital will be assigned 296 – 345, Sibley Memorial Hospital will be assigned 346 – 395, the 
University of Kansas Medical Center will be assigned 396 – 445, and Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center will be assigned 546 -  595. The proportion of subjects with 
recurrence will be compared between study arms using chi -square tests. The number of 
complications will be compared among treatment arms using negative binomial r egression. 
Treatment times and costs will be compared between the APC and STSC arms using Wilcoxon Rank Sum tests. A 5% significance level will be used for all tests. 
 
Interim analysis and stopping rule:  
The interim analysis will be conducted after half of  the subjects have completed the study, using 
an O’Brien -Fleming spending function with alpha levels 0.003 and 0.049 at the interim and final 
analyses. Any results will be considered significant at a p- value of <=0.003 at the interim 
analysis and the DSMB will make a decision about stopping the study based on those results.  
 
12.0 Statistical Data Management  
Primary data will be collected via case report forms. All paper charts pertaining to the patient will be kept under lock and key in coordinators office away from the endoscopy area. Each site will enter their data in to a secure web application (REDCap). V irtual data will be stored on an 
internal network drive with encryption and password security. Only approved personnel by the IRB will have access to the file storage.  This file will also not have any identifiable patient information.  A study log with the identifiable information will be kept in a separate folder to enable the investigators to assist in any research audit. No procedural data except the date of examination w ill be entered into this log.  
 
IRB#: 1805411306  
 
 
Version Date: September 3rd, 2020  Page 13 of 13 
 
  The storage location on IU servers will be backed u p automatically and continuously. Quality 
assurance steps will include  built in range checks for a ge, procedure duration, lesion size, total 
resection time, treatment time, clipping time on REDCap and remote study site visits after 
completion of the study by 190 patients.    Remote study site visit:  
Before interim analysis and after completion of the study by 190 patients, 10% of case report 
forms from each site will be verified with the site’s electronic medical system information via a 
video based call from the central data site (IU). Any patterns of systematic errors will trigger the verification of all case report forms for that particular site.  
13.0 References  
1. Zhan T, Hielscher T, Hahn F, et al. Risk Factors for Local Recurrence of Large, Flat 
Colorectal Polyps after Endoscopic Muc osal Resection. Digestion 2016;93:311- 7. 
2. Brooker JC, Saunders BP, Shah SG, et al. Treatment with argon plasma coagulation reduces recurrence after piecemeal resection of large sessile colonic polyps: a 
randomized trial and recommendations. Gastrointest Endosc 2002;55:371- 5. 
3. Tate DJ, Bahin FF, Desomer L, et al. Cold- forceps avulsion with adjuvant snare -tip soft 
coagulation (CAST) is an effective and safe strategy for the management of non- lifting 
large laterally spreading colonic lesions. Endoscopy 2018;50:52- 62. 
 