 
Research Participant Consent Form  
For the research study entitled:  
The Effect of Theraworx  Relief on night -time cramps and spasms symptoms including quality of life, 
depression and sleep quality  
 
I. Purpose of the research study  
Robert Topp, RN, PhD is a professor in the School of Nursing and Health Professions at the University of 
San Diego. You are invited to participate in a research study he is conducting. The purpose of this study is 
to determine  the effect of Theraworx  Relie f, a foam you apply to your skin, on the frequency and severity 
of night -time cramps and spasms symptoms, including quality of life, depression and sleep quality.   
 
II. What you will be asked to do  
If you decide to be in this study, you will be asked to:  
Complete 5 questionnaires at the beginning of the study.  One of these questionnaires will ask you about 
your health habits, medical conditions and medications you take.  You will also be asked to complete a 
questionnaire about the presence and severity of  night time cramps and spasms symptoms you experience.  
Other questionnaires will ask you about your quality of life, depression and sleep quality.  These 
questionnaires will take about 30 minutes to complete.   Once you have filled out these questionnaire s and 
have been accepted to participate in the study,  you will be asked to complete  a 14-day no treatment period 
during  which  time you will be asked to engage in your usual activities and treatments.  Each morning 
during this 14 -day no treatment period you  are asked to complete a Compliance and Symptom Log on 
which you will explain the incidence and severity of cramps and spasms you had during the previous 
night and any therapies you used to treat these cramps and spasms.  This log will take 1 -2 minutes to 
complete each morning.  At the end of this 14 -day no treatment period you will be asked to return to the 
Sport and Spine Rehab (SSR) and  complete the same questionnaires (except for the health questions) you 
completed at the beginning of the study and to r eturn your Compliance and Symptom Log.  Once you 
have completed these questionnaires during your second visit , you will be randomly assigned to one of 
two study groups by selecting 1 of 50 shuffled envelopes.  Within 25 of these envelopes a card will 
indic ate “Foam A” and the remaining 25 envelopes will contain a card indicating “Foam B.”  After 
selecting and opening the envelope you will receive two 3 ounce foam dispensers corresponding with the 
treatment you’ve been assigned by the card in the envelope (F oam A of Foam B).  One of the foams will 
contain Theraworx/[pH]uel (treatment) and the other will contain a physiologically inert substance 
(placebo control).  Neither you nor the research staff will know the contents of the foam you receive until 
the enti re study is completed.  You will be asked to engage in your usual activities and treatments for the 
next 14 days.  Every evening, for the next 14 evenings after receiving the foam, before retiring for bed, 
you are asked to apply the topical foam to the sur face of both of your legs and feet using a total of 16 
pumps from the product dispenser.   If during the  evening you experience a cramp  or spasm you are asked 
to apply 2 pumps of the foam to the affected area.  Each morning following the 14 evenings in which you 
apply the foam to your legs you are asked to again complete the Compliance and Symptom Log.  
Following 14 consecutive days of ap plying the foam to your legs in the evening you are asked to return to 
SSR with your completed Compliance and Symptom Log.  During this final visit you will be asked to 
again complete the same questionnaires that you completed during your second visit to SSR.  
Your participation in this study will take a total of 3 hours.  
 
III. Foreseeable risks or discomforts  
Sometimes when people are asked to think about their feelings, they feel sad or anxious. If you would like 
to talk to someone about your feelings at any time, you can call toll -free, 24 hours a day:  
San Diego Mental Health Hotline at 1 -800-479-3339  
 
IV. Benefits  
While there may be no direct benefit to you from participating in this study, the indirect benefit of 
participating will be knowing that you helped researchers better understand the effect of topical foams on 
persons with night time leg cramps and spasms.   
 
V. Alternatives  
Your alternatives to participating in this study include receiving the standard care for night -time leg 
cramps or spasms, which consists of medications prescribed by your physician.   
 
VI. Confidentiality  
Any information provided and/or identifying records will remain confidential and kept in a locked file 
and/or password -protected computer file in the researcher’s office for  a minimum of five years. All data 
collected from you will be coded with a number or pseudonym (fake name). Your real name will not be 
used. The results of this research project may be made public and information quoted in professional 
journals and meeting s, but information from this study will only be reported as a group, and not 
individually.  
 
VII. Compensation  
If you participate in the study, the researcher will give you $25 for completing each of the first two visits 
to SSR.  You will be given an additional $100 for completing the final data collection visit at SSR. You 
will receive this compensation even if you decide not to comple te the all of the questionnaires .   
 
 
VIII. Voluntary Nature of this Research  
Participation in  this study is entirely voluntary. You do not have to do this, and you can refuse to answer 
any question or quit at any time. Deciding not to participate or not answering any of the questions will 
have no effect on any benefits you’re entitled to, like you r health care, or your employment or grades. 
You can withdraw from this study at any time without penalty.  
X. Contact Information  
If you have any questions about this research, you may contact either:  
Robert Topp, Principal Investigator  
rtopp@sandiego.edu  
(619) 260 -4778  
 
Jena Slaski , Director of Research Sport and Spine Rehab Clinical Research Foundation  
jslaski@ssrehab.com  
(301) 251 -2777 x 838  
 
I have read and understand this form, and consent to the research it describes to me. I have 
received a copy of this consent form for my records.  
 
 
Signature of Participant      Date  
 
 
Name of Participant  (Printed ) 
 
 
Signature of Investigator  