TITLE:  
Randomized Comparative Evaluation of Midline Catheters for 
Thrombophlebitis  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Approval date: 04/30/2019  
Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan
 
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
Randomized Comparative  Evaluation of  Midline Catheters for thrombophlebitis 
 
Introduction   
  
Establishment and maintenance of  intravenous (IV)  access  are core processes in  
providing  medical  care for hospitalized  patients. For patients requiring extended 
duration of  therapy, the peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) Team is  often 
consulted for patient assessment and vascular  access  device placement at  many 
hospitals. PICCs are central catheters that  are placed  via peripheral vein under  
ultrasound  guidance  and may be used  for patients with  difficult  venous  access  for 
long-term central or  peripheral infusion therapies  as well as central venous  pressure  
monitoring in a critical care setting. Although PICCs provide a great option for some 
patients, these  catheters have known complications including catheter- related  
bloodstream infection, catheter-related venous  thrombosis, malfunction,  
and high  cost. Midline catheters represent  a potentially attr active alternative to   
PICCs for peripheral  infusions. These catheters have been utilized since  the mid  
1980s  but  fell out of  favor  in the early 1990s  due to reports of  acute life threatening 
hypersensit ivity reactions. In the last  few years, midlines  have made a resurgence in 
the market and are FDA cleared  for use in patients requiring intermediate  to long- 
term infusion therapies. Advances  in midline catheters offer the potential for reduced 
complications. As midlines  have increased in popularity and new midlines  have been 
introduced  into the market,  it is  necessary to better  understand complication profiles 
of various  midline catheters, as it is  likely that  all c atheters are not created  equal. 
Specifically, the incidence  of symptomatic catheter-related thrombosis is  of interest. 
While this complication has been researched extensively for PICCs with  an incidence of  
1.8 – 8.4%, data  on this complication for midlines  represents  a gap  in the literature. 
One recent  publication cited a 4.5%  rate  of all symptomatic catheter-related venous  
thrombosis (combined  superficial venous  thrombosis (SVT) and deep venous  
thrombosis (DVT))  in patients with  midline catheters. Another  study found  a catheter-
related  venous  thrombosis rate  of 2.5%  when limiting  measured outcomes to 
occurrence of  DVT . Internal  retrospective  
data  at our  institution suggests a rate  closer  to 1 2-15% for all symptomatic catheter-
related  venous  thrombosis (SVT and DVT). Some midline catheters are coated to 
provide protection against  cathete r-related venous  thrombosis and/or catheter-
related bloodstream infection. The  theoretical  benefit (s) of these  catheters need  
further validation  in human subjects.  
  
Objective   
  
We aim to understand the difference  in symptomatic catheter-related upper extremity 
venous  thrombosis (CR-UEVT) comparing the Teleflex Arrowg+ard Blue Advance 4.5  F 
single lumen midline catheter to the AngioDynamics  BioFlo 4 F single lumen midline 
catheter. Both catheters are inserted using a modified  seldinger  technique (MST). The  
AngioDynamics  product  has Endexo technology with  claims  of reduced platelet  
aggregation and favorable thrombus accumulation profile. The  Teleflex catheter is  a 
chlorhexidine coated device that  claims  to be both  antithrombogenic and 
antimicrobial.  
 IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
Specific Aim 1:  To compare  incidence of  symptomatic CR-UEVT between the 
AngioDynamics  Bioflo midline catheter and the Teleflex Arrowg+ard Blue Advance 
midline catheter.  
  
For Aim 1, we will measure  incidence of  all symptomatic CR-UEVT inclusive of    
superficial thrombophlebitis (SVT) and deep venous  thrombosis (DVT) confirmed  by 
upper extremity venous  doppler evaluatio n, to assess whether  Arrowg+ard midline 
catheters offer a reduction in the incidence of  symptomatic CR-UEVT.                
  
Specific Aim 2:  To compare  incidence of  catheter-related bloodstream infection 
between the AngioDynamics  BioFlo midline catheter to the Teleflex Arrowg+ard Blue 
Advance midline catheter.  
  
For Aim 2, we will identify cases  of infection per  the laboratory confirmed  bloodstream 
infection criteria published by the Center  for Disease Control  (CDC), to assess whether 
Arrowg+ard Blue Advanced  midline catheters offer reduction in catheter-related 
bloodstream infection.  
  
Alternatively, for Aim 1 and Aim 2, to further examine the incidence  of overall  
complications in the light  of the differing catheter dwell  times, catheter days data  
(including multiple  insertions of  midline catheters per  patient in the s tudy period) will 
be analyzed.  
  
Specific Aim 3:  To compare  catheter survival  rate data  between the AngioDynamics   
BioFlo midline catheter and the Teleflex Arrowg+ard Blue Advance midline catheter.  
  
For Aim 3, an improved survival  of Arrowg+ard Blue Advanced  midline catheters will 
be evaluated by functionality  of catheter for intravenous therapy prior to patient 
discharge.  The  event  is failure of  functionality identified during  follow -up assessment 
during  hospitalization. Duration of  dwell  and functional  failure of  the  catheter will be 
employed to estimate catheter survival.   
  
Study Design   
  
We propose a prospective  single-site, parallel, two-arm,  randomized  investigation  to 
assess catheter-related symptomatic UEVT, catheter-related bloodstream infection, 
and  functionality of  two single lumen midline catheters:  AngioDynamics  BioFlo 4 F 
and Teleflex Arrowg+ard Blue Advance 4.5  F. The  resea rch protocol  was  approved   
by the Institutional  Review  Board of  Beaumont Research Institute. Written informed   
consent  will be obtained  from all participants.  
  
All inpatients 18  years  of age and older  that  require midline catheter placement by  
the bedside vascular  access  team will be eligible participants. Patients  will be excluded 
if: Do not meet  inclusion  criteria 2. Multiple lumens  required  3. Alternative diameter  of 
catheter used  4. If already  enrolled once prior 5. Withdraw voluntarily from the study 
6. Are  receiving oral, intravenous, or  subcutaneous treatment  dose anticoagulation 
(prophylaxis with  anticoagulant is  permissible).
IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
  
Research staff of  Beaumont Health Institute will allocate  two midline catheters to 
eligible participants according to a pre-generated randomized  list at  a 1:1 ratio in block 
randomization to AngioDynamics  BioFlo or  Teleflex Arrowg+ard Blue Advanced  
midline catheters. Participant  enrollment will take place from November  
2018 until patient recruit ment is  complete. Demographic and health-related  
information will be obtained  from electronic medical records during  enrolled period at  
William Beaumont Hospital.  
  
  
Practitioner  Participation/Training  
  
Advanced  Practice Providers within the bedside PICC/Midline  service  at the Royal  
Oak  campus  are eligible to place catheters for this study. A cohort of  fifteen providers 
are possible volunteers to be trained to place catheters for this study.  Placing  catheters 
for this study is  not required  and will be carried out on a strictly voluntary basis. All 
advanced practice providers  are credentialed  in placing PICCs and midlines  by 
institutional policy and have greater  than one year of  experience in these  procedures. 
None  of the providers  have previous experience with  the Teleflex Arrowg+ard Blue 
Advance midline catheter. The  clinical  team from Teleflex will be expected to develop  
an educational/training pathway for providers  to achieve proficienc y prior to subject 
recruitment. A possible training/credentialing pathway  may consist of: 1 hour  didactic  
training followed by phantom training on a vein block and required  successful 
placement of  2-4  catheters on real patients.  
  
Initial  Assessment    
  
After  written informed  consent  is obtained, investigators  will carry out additional 
evaluation at  the bedside. The  research  team will capture  and save images of  vessel 
depth and vessel diameter  in short axis  using the Sonosite  S1 ultrasound  equipment. 
Ultrasound guidance  will be used  for the initial  assessment and procedure. The  high  
frequency linear array transducer  will be used  for all procedures. Inserters will 
evaluate the vessel for valves, thrombosis, trajectory, and collapsibility per  routine 
care. If the vein is  appropriate for cannulation, the practitioner will continue with   
the procedure. Pos t-cannulation and post securement, functionality is  confirmed   
with  blood sampling (10  cc) and  flush without  resistance.   
  
The research  team also will document practitioner details, the vascular  access  device 
(VAD) used, the time  of VAD  placement, number  of attempts, need  for a rescue inserter, 
the vein that  was  cannulated , depth and diameter  of the vein, and the indication for 
VAD  placement.  An attempt is  defined as each time the needle punctures the skin. Data  
will be collected  from the  electronic medical record  and  
includes:  age, gender, BMI, vital  signs, relevant past medical  history.  Specific medical 
history of  interest  includes:  1. VTE 2. Cancer  (within past 6 months) 3. Hypercoaguable 
state  4. Current pregnancy/up  to 8 weeks postpartum 5. Major  surgery/major trauma 
within past 4 weeks 6. Estrogen supplementation 7. Long  
IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
travel > 6 hours  within past 4 weeks 8. Inflammatory Conditions (IBD, SLE) 9. 
Immobilization >72 hours 10. Other. Indication for catheter placement will also be 
recorded:  1. DIVA 2. Antibiotics  3. Incompatible  Medications 4.  Other   
  
 Follow-up Assessment   
  
Investigators will perform a follow-up assessment on all catheters within 24  hours   
of insertion and then  daily for the life of  the VAD. Generally all  follow-up evaluations  
will occur  between 8 am and 10  am. At each follow-up interval, the researcher will 
document the time of  evaluation and assessment of  functionality as well as  review the 
patient chart for signs  and symptoms of  catheter-related bloodstream infection and 
document the presence of  localized site infection.  A catheter is  functional  if the 
investigator is  able to withdraw 3-5 ml of  blood or  if the VAD  flushes  without  
resistance with  5 mL of  saline. Even  if the line is  actively  infusing upon evaluation, the 
investigator will stop  the infusion and assess for functionality  by drawing  blood and 
flushing.  Data  specific to blood sampling will be collected  daily. If the catheter was  
identified to have failed during  follow -up assessment the date and time of   
failure and the reason for failure will be documented. If the catheter failed or  was  
removed prior to the follow-up assessment then the VAD  failure time and the 
assessment of  failure and reason for line removal  will be obtained  through chart 
review. For all failed catheters, re-insertion attempt data  will be tracked through the 
medical  record  in the nursing section for venous  lines and need  for reinsertion of   
the midline or  escalation to a PICC, or  CVC w ill be noted. If the patient is discharged  
prior to the time  of follow-up assessment then the time  of discharge will be 
documented  and the VAD  will be presumed functional  until time of  discharge unless  
otherwise noted in the chart.   
 
Some patients may leave the hospital with  the midline in place for additional 
intravenous therapies. If the patient is  discharged  with  the midline, the research  team 
will discuss the infusion plan  with  the care management team.  Patients  will also be 
provided  detailed contact  information of  the Vascular Access Team (standard  practice) 
at the time of  hospital discharge in case any questions  or complications arise. If the 
patient develops  any concerning signs  or symptoms for the venous  thromboembolism, 
the Vascular Access Team will instruct the patient to return to  the outpatient clinic for 
an evaluation with  a member of  the Vascular Access Team, schedule  an urgent 
appointment with  the medical  doctor, or  check  into the Emergency  Department for 
further evaluation. The  research  team will document imaging results from these  
encounters. All  patients will receive follow-up phone call assessments by the research  
team.  Patient  disposition options include: discharge home/residence or  to a skilled  
nursing facility or  transfer  to another hospital. If the patient is  discharged  home, 
infusion and catheter care occurs via  home  care or  at an infusion center. For patients 
discharged  to a skilled  nursing facility, catheter care and infusion is  managed  by 
nursing staff at  these  centers. These patients will continue to be followed in the post-
hospital setting, specifically to assess for the complication of  thrombosis. The  research  
staff will follow-up via telephone  call with  staff managing the infusion within 48  -72  
hours  of discharge and weekly including the last  day of  therapy to inquire about  the 
VAD  site and function of  the catheter and document any complications/results  to 
radiographic imaging. Once therapy is  completed and the catheter is  removed, the 
research  team will follow  up with  the patient or  designated  legally authorized 
representative/next of  kin via phone to inquire about the access  site at  30 days post IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
line removal. All  patients will receive the 30  day follow-up phone contact. Patients  will 
specifically be asked if they developed redness, swelling, or  pain at  the catheter 
insertion site and had radiographic evaluation for a blood clot  or pulmonary embolism. 
If the patient has a concern, the research  team will forward the concern to Dr. Bahl  and 
Emily  Diloreto for further evaluation per  routine.  
 
 
SVT  and DVT rates will be calculated  based on upper extremity proven diagnosis  of 
SVT  and/or DVT in symptomatic cases. Researchers will review all study subject 
records  in EPIC, the electronic medical  records system,  and screen enrolled subject 
data  for all upper extremity venous  Doppler  examinations.  Radiology interpretations 
will be reviewed for findings consistent  with  CR-UEVT. This review will occur  thirty 
days post patient discharge. Symptoms and rationale  for imaging will be documented. 
This information will be obtained  by reviewing the order/provider documentation in 
EPIC. If the patient is  diagnosed with  thrombophlebitis, the location of  the thrombus 
will also be documented. 
IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
Infection rate  will be tracked using confirmed  catheter-related blood stream infection 
data  from the surveillance team within the epidemiology department. The  team 
utilizes the CDC  definition of  laboratory-confirmed blood-stream infection (LCBSI). See 
Appendix A for LCBSI definitions and pathway for diagnosis.  
 
The medication administration record  will be queried for all medications  given 
through each catheter. Vesicants  that  are generally given via central line or  considered 
caustic to the vessel will be noted in both  groups. Number of  doses will be recorded. 
See Appendix B for full  list of  non-neoplastic vesicants.  We will al so collect  data  on 
patients that  received  alteplase  for occlusion. We will specifically evaluate the 
relationship  of alteplase  use and how it relates  to catheter-related thrombosis, 
catheter-related bloodstream infection, and functionality of  catheter.   
  
 
Sample Size  and Statistical  Analysis    
 
Sample Size:  For this randomly allocated, two group experiment, the primary outcome 
was  complication profile  in terms  of thrombophlebitis. Under  Aim 1, based on the 
preliminary analysis  using approximately  13 months of  data  at William Beaumont 
Hospital, it suggested the incidence  of thrombosis between 12-15%  from  
1,200 insertions of  AngioDynamics  BioFlo midline catheters with  the diagnosis of   
symptomatic thrombosis. We established a one-sided  Fisher ’s exact  two- 
proportions test with  a type I error  α = 0.05. In terms  of results from previous study 
[1], sample  size was  designed to have a power of  80% fo r detecting  a 11% lower in the 
incidence  of thrombosis using  Teleflex Arrowg+ard Blue Advanced  midline catheters. 
Based on these  criteria, 212 participants will be randomly allocated to 2 study groups 
(106 per  group). This sample  size included a 20% buffer  to account  for potential 
sample  loss. For Aim 3, this sample  size has a power of  0.85 to detect a hazard ratio  of 
1.5 for failure of  functionality association with  AngioDynamics   
BioFlo midline catheters, based on a log rank test with  a 0.05 one-sided  significant  
level and median time of  midline catheter introduction  into a vein of  10 days [1].  All 
above calculations  were made using the power software PASS 16.  
 
Statistical  Analysis: For Aim 1 and Aim 2, we will use descriptive statistics (frequency, 
percent) to summarize the inciden ce of  complication profile  in terms  of thrombosis 
and infection between these  two groups. For Aim 1, a logistic regression model  will be 
built to examine the association between midline catheters and the presence of  
thrombosis, adjusting for participant characteristics. The  odds ra tio  
(OR) associated  midline catheters on thrombosis will be estimated. For Aim 2, we  
will further create cases  of bloodstream infection per  1000 catheter-days,  
IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
accounting for catheter dwell  times. A Poisson regression model  will be employed to 
assess the relative risk  (RR) of  AngioDynamics  BioFlo and Teleflex Arrowg+ard Blue 
Advanced  midline catheters on the presence of  infection within any observed catheter 
dwell  time, adjusting for participant characteristics. P-values  of less than  
0.05 will be considered statistically  significant . In addition, for Aim 3, we will create  
data  with  the first  episode of  function failure of  catheter on IV treatment. To  adjust for 
any difference  in participant characteristics, Cox  proportional  hazar d models  will be 
built. We will evaluate the proportional  hazard assumption for each fixed  covariate of  
participant characteristics by the log baseline  cumulative hazard plot,  
Schonfeld  residual  plot, and the inter action between the covariate and function time of  
midline catheters. If the assumption is  violated,  a stratified Cox  proportional  hazard 
model  will be built. Hazard ratio (HR) of  two midline catheters for function  
failure will be reported.    
 
 
 
 
Site   
  
William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak (RO) campus  is a 1,100 bed major academic 
and referral  center with  Level  1 adult trauma and Level  2 pediatric  trauma status. A 
major teaching facility, Beaumont, Royal Oak  has 55  residency and fellowship  
programs  with  454 residents  and fellows. Beaumont is  the exclusive clinical  partner 
for the Oakland University  William Beaumont School  of Medicine. The  Beaumont 
Research Institute  was  established more than 30  year ago at  Royal Oak  and offers  
research  support services  to clinical  investigators.  
  
 
Primary Investigator   
 
I have specialized training in emergency ultrasound  and completed fellowship in the 
field  in 2008. Since that  time, I  have served  as Director  of Emergency  Ultrasound for 
Emergency  Medicine. I also serve as the Medical Director  for the hospital vascular  
access  team.  Additionally,  I have a specific interest  in ultrasound-guided vascular  
access  with  several peer -reviewed publications and national presentations  in this  
area.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
References:  
   
Lisova K et al. The  incidence  of symptomatic upper limb  venous  thrombosis associated  
with  midline catheter: Prospective observation. Journal of  Vascular Access. 2018. Epub 
ahead of  print.  
  
Klungboonkrong et al. Predictors of  deep vein thrombosis associated  with  midline 
venous  catheter in hospitalized  patients:  a single-institute experience. Journal of  
Vascular and Interventional  Radiology 2015. 26(2) S146.  
 
Gorski L et al. Development  of an evidence-based list of  noncytotoxic vesicant  
medications  and solutions.  J Infus Nurs. 2017;40(1)26 -40  
 
National  Healthcare Safety Network  (NHSN) Patient  Safety Component  Manual. Center  
for Disease Control. Chapter  4. 2018  
 
https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/pdfs/pscmanual/pcsmanual_current.pdf   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
Appendix A 
 
 
IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019
04.19.2019 V 3.0 
Appendix B  
  
IRB NUMBER: 2018-379
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/30/2019