1 
 Partners Human Research Committee  
Detailed Protocol  
 
TITLE:  Understanding and Improving Health Insurance Coverage among Long -Term 
Follow -Up Study Cohort Participants  
PI: Elyse R. Park, PhD, MPH   
GRANT NUMBER:  RSGI -18-135-01 - CPHPS  
VERSION DATE :  5/20/22  
I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
a. Historical Background  
Childhood Survivor s are a growing population in need of medical surveillance.  
Children diagnosed with cancer have experienced improved survival rates over time, 
with more than three -fourths becoming long -term survivors.1 However, survivors of 
childhood cancer often face new and continued health care challenges and require 
ongoing c are to monitor and treat long -term effects of their cancer and treatment 
throughout adulthood. Ongoing medical treatment and surveillance, with access to 
quality healthcare and coverage, are critical.    
Although quality health insurance coverage is critica l to this population, it has 
been complex to obtain. Given their ongoing health care needs, obtaining and 
navigating health insurance coverage is vital to ensure access to needed survivorship 
care. However, this can be difficult for individuals with pre -existing conditions such as a 
cancer diagnosis, who have historically faced denials of coverage, steep premiums, or 
“job lock” that keeps them from changing jobs for fear of losing coverage.2,3 At the same 
time, childhood survivor s have had higher rates of uninsurance, unmet health care 
needs, and burdensome costs.4-10 These survivors are also less likely than siblings to 
be employed, married, and have a higher household income.11-13 Dr. Park found that 
childhood survivors and sibl ings had similar rates of coverage, yet they differed by types 
of coverage and experiences obtaining coverage.4 Uninsured survivors in particular 
were more likely to experience financial burdens from medical care that affected their 
care utilization.  
Healt h care reform offers opportunities for childhood survivors to obtain quality 
coverage. The ACA14 was signed into law in 2010 and is intended to increase access to 
affordable, quality health care. ACA policies offer considerable opportunities for 
population s with pre -existing conditions like childhood survivor s to obtain coverage and 
improve access to needed care. Dr. Park and colleagues delineated the implications of 
specific ACA provisions for insurance coverage for childhood survivors.15 
2 
  
Although the ACA  has increased coverage rates, uninsurance and 
underinsurance may remain a problem for childhood survivor s. The ACA and other 
unprecedented changes to the health care landscape offer both opportunities and risk to 
childhood survivor s regarding insurance adequacy and underinsurance. From Dr. Park’s 
2011 -2012 CCSS (Childhood Cancer Survivor Study) health insurance survey we found 
that childhood survivors lacked awareness about the ACA16 and had concerns that the 
ACA would increase thei r costs and threaten their quality and continuity of coverage.5, 
16,17  While the ACA requires coverage with no out -of-pocket costs for preventive 
services with “A” or “B” U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) ratings, these 
guidelines are not based  on survivor -specific preventive guidelines and, as such, may 
not cover personalized screening recommendations.18 
 
Limitations in health insurance literacy can make choosing and using health 
insurance challenging.  With the complex and confusing array of ev olving insurance 
designs, being able to understand and navigate insurance benefits is crucial for 
survivor s to obtain the health care they need. However, many people have inadequate 
understanding of available insurance benefits and resources, and have limi ted health 
insurance literacy (i.e. perceived knowledge, ability, and confidence to make informed 
decisions about choosing and using health insurance ).19 Vulnerable populations, such 
as those with low income and poorer health, are more likely to have limit ed health 
insurance literacy.20-22 Understanding specific insurance benefits and larger ACA 
policies may help survivors maximize coverage and prevent unmet need and 
burdensome costs.  
 
Patient navigation interventions help patients overcome health care barr iers. 
Patient navigation is a patient advocacy approach that was introduced in 1990, by Dr. 
Harold Freeman, to decrease high rates of breast cancer death among Black women in 
Harlem.28 Patient navigation aims to reduce cancer disparities and negative health 
outcomes among vulnerable patient populations. Patient navigators were envisioned as 
proactive patient advocates who provided logistic and emotional support to promote 
patients’ acce ss to timely care.  
 
Existing navigator programs offer limited assistance with understanding and 
managing health insurance benefits and costs. The US healthcare system is 
complex. Even with reform under the ACA, understanding insurance options remains 
comp licated and a source of frustration for consumers.24 While addressing insurance 
barriers to accessing care may be a component of some navigator programs, navigators 
focused specifically on helping patients understand and use their insurance benefits are 
rare. Navigator services mandated by the ACA in health insurance exchanges are 
available to help consumers choose and enroll in coverage, but their reach does not 
extend beyond enrollment. Many exchange enrollees have sought navigation services 
post-enrollme nt to help understand their new insurance plans, but such post -enrollment 
services are unavailable.25 At the same time, cost -sharing under the ACA will continue 
to increase as coverage was not stabilized by Congress via payments to insurers to 
3 
 reduce costs  for consumers. Survivors in particular are going to need comprehensive 
assistance with insurance in future years.  
 
b. Previous Studies  
Childhood survivors and health insurance . In 2005 Dr. Park published findings in the 
Journal of Clinical Oncology  demonstrating that CCSS survivors, compared to siblings, 
were significantly more likely to be uninsured and have difficulties obtaining health 
insurance.4 In 2009 -2010 she conducted in -depth interviews with a subset of CCSS 
survivors2,5 and with Drs. Kirc hhoff, Donelan, and Kuhlthau found that survivors had low 
coverage expectations, had difficulties understanding how to utilize their coverage, and 
inevitably worried about future health care costs. This team surveyed a randomly 
selected sample of CCSS part icipants and siblings about their health insurance 
coverage and perspectives about the ACA.26,27 Survivors  were significantly less likely to 
have employer -sponsored coverage (79.4% vs. 86.0%; p=0.04) and more likely to be 
covered by Medicaid/State (12.3% v s. 4.4%; p=0.002). 15.4% of survivors vs. 1.6% of 
siblings had recently been denied insurance (p<0.001). Survivors were more likely to 
borrow money to pay medical expenses (17.3% vs. 9.0% siblings; p=0.002) and not fill a 
prescription due to cost (15.7% vs . 9.0% siblings; p=0.02). Only  27.3% of survivors and 
26.2% of siblings reported familiarity with the ACA.  Concerns about the ACA included 
costs, decreased access to quality coverage, and employment. The majority of 
survivors, across different types of in surances, indicated strong interest in an insurance 
education program.  
 
Recent study team reports of childhood survivors’ underinsurance and its effects 
on financial burden and health care utilization . Dr. Kuhlthau led analyses describing 
patterns of health insurance coverage and care accessibility and affordability in an NHIS 
sample of adult childhood cancer survivors compared to adults without cancer during 
2010 -2014. Significantly more childhood survivors reported  being uninsured, delaying 
medical care (24.7% vs 13.0%), needing but not getting medical care (20.0% vs 10.0%), 
and having trouble paying medical bills (40.3% vs 19.7%), compared to controls 
(ps<0.0001).28 In 2017, Dr. Park and the study team published fi ndings in JAMA Internal 
Medicine and JCO documenting that, compared to siblings, childhood survivors were 
significantly more likely to endorse indications  of being underinsured, including being 
84% more likely to borrow money because of medical expenses, 8 0%more likely to 
worry about being unable to pay for a needed treatment, and 74% more likely to worry 
they wouldn’t be able to afford to fill a prescription. In addition, childhood survivors were 
more likely to report spending a higher percentage of their income on out -of-pocket 
medical costs. Survivors reported spending almost more than $1000 annual out -of-
pocket costs compared to siblings. A higher percentage of income spent on out -of-
pocket medical costs was significantly associated with survivors’ probl ems paying 
medical bills (OR, 8.9; 95% CI, 4.4 to 18.0); deferring care for a medical problem (OR, 
3.0; 95% CI, 1.6 to 5.9); skipping a test, treatment, or follow -up (OR, 2.1; 95% CI, 1.1 to 
4.0); and thoughts of filing for bankruptcy (OR, 6.6; 95% CI, 3.0  to 14.3).29,30   
 
Intervention and program development with childhood cancer survivors .  Dr. Park 
has studied the health behaviors and perceptions of childhood cancer survivors.31-34 
4 
 She directed an NCI -funded trial to decrease smoking rates among 796 CCSS  smokers 
that was found to be efficacious.31 She published a qualitative paper that had shaped 
the intervention,33 as well as a process evaluation paper which examined intervention 
characteristics associated with cessation success.32 Dr. Park also has extensive 
experience conducting qualitative research to inform survivorship program 
development.35-38 Dr. Kirchhoff is  leading the development and testing of a childhood 
cancer survivor transition program with a focus on the provision of survivorship care 
plans for patients and families.39 
 
Health insurance and individuals with chronic conditions . Dr. Kuhlthau has 
extensi ve experience studying health insurance issues for individuals with chronic 
conditions, including Medicaid populations and groups with high expenditures.40-51 She 
has also studied unmet need, a commonly used measure of underinsurance.52-54 She 
conducted wo rk on the private health insurance and work -life benefit systems for 
children with chronic conditions55,56 which resulted in guides for employers, families, and 
state employees. Dr. Galbraith’s work has demonstrated that children and families with 
chronic conditions are vulnerable to health insurance designs with high levels of cost -
sharing and may reduce use of needed care due to cost.57-59 Dr. Kirchhoff published on 
coverage gaps, financial burden, and medical costs, and their impact on access to care 
among childhood, adolescent and young adult cancer patients and survivors.60-62 
 
Effects of new insurance designs and health reform policies.  Dr. Galbraith led one 
of the first studies of health insurance exchange plans, which documented problems for 
exchange  enrollees with financial burden and unexpected costs;63 this study also 
identified challenges with understanding and choosing plans for families, many of whom 
wished for greater assistance navigating plan options.23 Dr. Galbraith has conducted 
studies of unmet health care need and financial burden among children and families 
with chronic conditions in high -deductible and other insurance plans.59, 64 -66 She has 
examined the impact of increased cost -sharing on health care decision making and use 
of recommend ed health care services.67-72 She is conducting a trial to evaluate how a 
price transparency tool can help high -deductible plan enrollees manage costs.  
 
Peer counselor and navigator -based interventions.  Dr. Park directed a smoking 
cessation trial, in collaboration with the Long -Term Follow -Up (LTFU) study at St. Jude 
Children’s Research Hospital , in which she trained childhood cancer survivors to be 
smoking cessation peer counselors and deliver a phone -based intervention.32 Dr. 
Galbraith conducted a randomized trial of a patient navigator intervention to reduce 
readmissions for high -risk patients  discharged from a safety -net hospital.72,73 Dr. 
Donelan has conducted extensive survey research examining patie nt barriers to cancer 
screening and follow -up and physician referral communication with patients.74-77 She 
examined the effectiveness of a patient navigation program in improving minority 
patients’ follow -up of an abnormal mammogram.  
 
 
c. Rationale of Propose d Research  
 
5 
 Health care reform under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) offers 
considerable opportunities for childhood cancer survivors to obtain coverage and 
improve access to needed care.  However, in the general population, many peopl e have 
low understanding of available insurance benefits and resources, and have limited 
health insurance literacy (i.e. perceived knowledge, ability, and confidence to make 
informed decisions about choosing and using health insurance). Misperceptions abou t 
which services require  out-of-pocket costs may lead some enrollees to avoid services 
that are in fact exempt from cost sharing. Even with coverage protections from the ACA, 
barriers to obtaining quality coverage (e.g., in states without  Medicaid expansion ) and 
accessing needed care may remain for childhood survivors. Understanding and 
navigating insurance benefits is crucial for cancer survivors to obtain the health care 
they need. In this new post -reform landscape, the degree to  which c overage and costs 
have changed for childhood cancer survivors is stil l largely unknown.  
 
d. Study Site Roles  
 
The sites in this study, MGH, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, and the University 
of Utah will each have different, complementary roles. The Partners IRB will be the IRB 
of record for this study, and the collaborating IRBs of St. Jude and the Univers ity of 
Utah will CEDE review to the Partners IRB. Site and IRB roles are described below.  
 
MGH Site Roles  
As the IRB of record and lead site for this study, MGH will be responsible for the 
development and regulation of all study -related materials, docume nts, assessments, 
and interventions. For Phase 1 of the study, MGH will be specifically responsible for the 
facilitation of advisory board and participant focus group interviews, and the qualitative 
analysis this data. Utilizing the data garnered from thes e interviews, MGH will further 
develop and tailor the intervention content (though MGH will work with collaborators on 
this aspect of the study, MGH will lead in the development and final submission of this 
piece).  
 
For Phase 2 of the study, MGH will be responsible for the delivery of the intervention 
content. Through the platform of MGH telehealth  (Zoom) , approximately 40 intervention 
arm participants (recruitment processes are described below) will receive brief health 
insurance educational sessions by a health insurance navigator. MGH will be 
responsible for the training and supervision of the navigator.  
 
For Phase 3 of the study, MGH will be responsible for the facilitation and analysis of exit 
interviews conducted with the Phase 2 intervention arm pa rticipants (MGH will not be 
conducting the exit interviews. See University of Utah Phase 3 roles for more 
information).  
 
St. Jude Site Roles  
As one of the collaborating sites for this study, St. Jude will be responsible for all 
recruitment activities. St . Jude Children’s Research Hospital is the site of the Long -Term 
Follow -up Study (LTFU), and study participants will be exclusively recruited from the 
6 
 eligible members of this cohort. St. Jude will be responsible for recruiting, randomly 
selecting, and con senting participants for the focus group interviews, the open pilot of 
the study intervention, and the pilot randomized trial. Once recruited and consented, St. 
Jude will securely send relevant participant information to the study staff at the 
University o f Utah and MGH.  
 
University of Utah Site Roles  
 As one of the collaborating sites for this study, the University of Utah will be responsible 
for all participant assessments during the study. During Phase 1 of the study, after 
receipt of participant inform ation from St. Jude, the University of Utah will coordinate 
with MGH to set up and schedule participant focus groups. For the open pilot of the 
study, St. Jude will distribute baseline and follow up surveys to participants and will lead 
all quantitative an alyses of these assessments. Lastly, the University of Utah will 
schedule and facilitate exit interviews with all open pilot participants and will securely 
send qualitative data to MGH for analysis. The University of Utah will also be 
responsible for remun eration of subjects during all phases of the study.  
 
For Phase 2 of the study, the University of Utah study roles mirror those of Phase 1, 
with the distribution of baseline and follow -up surveys to participants, and the collection 
and analysis of said dat a.  
 
For Phase 3 of the study, the University of Utah and MGH will coordinate to schedule 
exit interviews with the Phase 2 intervention arm participants.  
 
II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Aim 1:  To develop a psychoeducational health insurance navigation program 
(HINP).  
A1a: To qualitatively assess LTFU participants’  report s of 1) barriers to accessing 
and using quality health insurance 2) resources to support health insurance access and 
use,  3) navigation program content , 4) intervention structure and dose,  5) program 
delivery, 6) program acceptability, 7) aspects of coverage that are not well understood  
A1b: Aim 1b: To qualitatively assess approximately   3 advisory board s’ and 
approximately 10 individual  experts’ feedback 1) barriers, 2) resources, 3) content, 4) 
intervention structure and dose , 5) delivery and 6) selection criteria  A1c: To pilot the 
intervention with LTFU participants  (approximate n=10).  
 
Aim 2: To conduct a videoconferencing -based  pilot randomized trial  of the HINP  
(n= approximately 80) . 
A2a: To assess the feasibility  (number of eligibles enrolled and sessions 
completed) and acceptability (satisfaction, perceived support) of participant s undergoing 
the HINP.  
A2b: At 3-month post -program follow -up, to assess the efficacy of the HINP to 
assist participant s with accessing and utilizing coverage and managing costs.  Primary 
7 
 outcomes are 1) health insurance literacy and 2) financial distress related to medical 
costs  
A2b Hypothesis : The HINP, compared to enhanced usual care, will improve 
participants’  health insurance literacy and decrease financial distress.  
 
Aim 3: To refine the HINP program for future use.  
A3a: To explore HINP intervention arm participants’ 1) satisfaction with the 
intervention, 2) recommendations for modifications on delivery modality, and 3) 
recommendations for intervention topics and content modifications.   
 
Study Design  Overview : The proposed study will take place in 3 phases and will 
involve a total of approximately 122 participants  recruited from the Long -Term  Follow -
Up (LTFU)  study  cohort (See Section III below) -  
 
• In Phase 1 we will develop a psychoeducational health insurance navigation 
program (HINP) through participant  input and a series of advisory board 
meetings  and individual interviews . We will also refine the program by recruiting 
a small group of LTFU study cohort members for an open pilot of the 
intervention.  
• In Phase 2 we will pilot the feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary efficacy of 
the videoconferencing -based HINP  with LTFU study cohort members .  
• In Phase 3 we will further refine the program  through study participant  feedback . 
 
Below we describe the  activities for the  three study phases . Detail on participant 
enrollment and consent procedures for all three phases is included in Section IV.  
 
Phase 1  
Participant  Focus Groups  
Four focus group interviews ( approximately n=8 per grou p) will be conducted with 
randomly selected LTFU study  participant s (see Participant Focus Group Interview 
Guide ); selection will be stratified according to Medicaid expansion status (Y/N) , which 
we will determine based on participant demographic information  from the LTFU data 
records . LFTU  participant s from the original and expansion cohort will be eligible and 
conse nted (Please refer to Sections III and IV for information on subject selection and 
consent procedures) ; we will assure inclusion of men and women.  Groups will last 
about 60 minutes,  and may be conducted through Zoom , a HIPAA compliant  
videoconferencing platform (see Maintaining Confidentiality in Section VII) or in-person . 
Participants will be provided $50 remuneration  by the University of Utah . Groups will be 
co-facilitated by co-investigators via a semi -structured interview guide  (See  Participant 
Focus Group Guide) . The interviews will be recorded.  
 
Advisory Board Input on HINP  
Three  advisory board meetings  will be conducted, specifically, with n ational oncology 
clinicians and researchers  and Boston -based experts . These groups will be co -
facilitated by investigators  via a semi -structured interview guide  that contain s the 
following domains : 1) barriers , 2) resources , 3) content , 4) intervention structure and 
8 
 dose, 5) delivery and 6) selection criteria  (See Advisory  Interview  Board Guide ). 
Advisory board meetings  will also be conducted through Zoom Videoconferencing , via 
phone , or in person. The advisory board focus groups will be recorded  and used for 
quality improvement purposes of the HINP.  
 
Expert Individual Interviews  
We will conduct approximately 10 30-minute individual  interviews with experts at the 
intersection of health insurance, navigation, cancer, and survivorship. Experts will 
include clinicians, oncology social workers, and health insurance specialists. Intervie ws 
will be recorded and used for tailoring and improvement of the HINP . Individual 
interviews will be facilitated by investigators using a semi -structured interview guide 
containing the same domains as the advisory board interviews. These interviews will 
also be conducted through Zoom  Videoconferencing  via phone , or in-person.  
 
For both Advisory Board and Expert interviews,  we will assent experts for participation  
in the interviews (See Advisory Board Interview Guide)   
 
Qualitative Analyses to Inform HINP Development  
For qualitative analyses of focus group , advisory board meetings , and individual 
interviews , all data will be analyzed by MGH and Utah study staff using NVivo 
qualitative software. Content analyses will be conducted including a  structural thematic 
framewor k, categories, and coding plan. For focus group data, a coding framework will 
be developed for themes and codes according to participant s’ feedback  on 1) barriers to 
accessing and using health insurance  2) resources to support health insurance access 
and use ,  3) navigation program conten t, 4) intervention structure and dose,  5) program 
delivery, 6) program acceptability, 7) aspects of coverage that are not well understood 
(See Participant Interview Guide)  For advisory board and individual interview feedback, 
a coding framework will be develope d for themes and codes according to the  domains 
of: 1) barriers , 2) resources , 3) content , 4) intervention structure and dose, 5) delivery 
and 6) selection criteria . To ensure coding reliability, coding discrepancies for 
participant focus groups will be resolved through discussion and comparison of raw 
data. Coding will continue until a high level of reliability (Kappa= >0.80) is established. 
Co-investigators will provide an expert review of the results. For expert and advisory 
board interviews, a Rapid Analysis method will be used.   
 
Open Pilot with Participant s  
With feedback from the focus groups , advisory boards , and individual interviews , results 
will be interpreted, summarized, and finalized; the investigators will refine the HINP . 
Then, approximately 5-10 participants will be randomly selected to participate as pilot 
subjects  (Please see Sections III and IV for information on subject selection and 
consen ting procedures).  Aspects of the study that will be piloted  includ e the surveys , 
intervention , and  exit interview.  Participants will be remunerated  $20 for  the completion 
of a baseline survey ,a follow -up survey  and the exit interview by  the University of Utah . 
Final intervention and survey modific ations will be made.  
 
Phase 2  
9 
 Pilot Trial Design  
We will recruit and randomize approximately 80 LTFU participants  to a health insurance 
navigation intervention or to enhanced usual care  (Please see Sections III and IV for 
information on subject selection and consenting procedures ). We have selected this 
sample size of approximately 40 per arm to enable evaluation of feasibility and 
acceptability goals as well as explore meaningful differences in the outcomes.78 Surveys 
will be conducted at baseline and 3 -month post program completion follow -up via 
REDCap  or mail . All participants will be asked to complete a follow -up survey 
approximately  3-month s after  the HINP intervention period (in other words  
approximately  5-months post pilot trial enrollment). ). After completion of the follow -up 
survey, HINP participants will be contacted for an exit interview  (see Phase 3 below) . 
Participants will be remunerated  $20 for each survey and the exit interview  by the 
University of Utah  
 
Study  Arms  
 
Enhanced Usual Care  
Enhanced usual care will consist of a mailed or online copy of a health insurance 
resource guide.  
 
Navigation Intervention  
The intervention will be delivered via synchronous videoconferencing  (real-time delivery 
and communication between the navigator and the participant)  by a trained patient  
navigator  (See Intervention Fidelity in Section VI)  and will consist of 4 , 30-minute 
sessions  delivered every week,  over the span of one month  (for intervention 
development purposes, the pilot sessions will occur every week, over the course of one 
month) . The navigation intervention  group will also  receive  a mailed copy of the  
brochure .  
 
Proposed Navigation Intervention Structure and Content   
The program will be delivered via videoconferencing by a  navigator  over a 1-month  
period. Accordingly, patient navigation is delivered until the desired endpoint is 
achieved; we propose that this will be accomplished with 4 navigation sessions  (See 
Table 1: Proposed HINP Intervention) . The proposed program content was informed by: 
1) aforementioned research identifying childhood survivors’ difficulties with accessing 
and utilizing one’s coverage and managing costs, 2) CCSS health insurance survey, 
and 3) ACA provisions that are relevant to survivor s (e.g., prevention services exempted 
from cost sharing, sources of available coverage and eligibility, benefits policies that 
have cost -related implications like OOP costs, and essential health benefits such as 
prescription medications. Based on advisory board and individual interview feedback , 
the content and tailoring of information will be modified.  
 
Table 1: Proposed HINP Intervention  
Session One: Learning About Survivorship Healthcare Needs  
Sessions Two: Learning About Your Plan in Relation to Policy  
Session Three: Navigating One's Own  Plan 
10 
 Session Four: Managing Care Costs 
 
 
Phase 3  
Exit Interviews  
For HINP participants after the follow -up survey, the study co -investigators  will conduct  
in-depth interviews (see Participant Exit Interview Guide) via videoconferencing with the 
40 intervention participants to assess survivors’ 1) satisfaction with the intervention, 2)  
recommendations for modifications on overall session topics and intervention content 
(e.g., physician communica tion, cost management strategies).   and 3)  
recommendations for modifications on delivery modality (e.g., number and length of 
sessions, videoconferencing delivery) . These will last about 20 minutes and  participants 
will be remunerated $20 for their time  by the University of Utah . The exit interviews will 
be recorded.  
 
Exit interview data will be transcribed and analyzed using NVivo  qualitative 
software. Content analyses will be conducted and co -investi gators will  provide an 
expert review.  
 
III. SUBJECT SELECTION  
Participants : Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
LTFU study staff at St. Judy Children’s Research Hospital keep updated participant 
contact records for this study, which allows for participants to be approached for 
additional research studies. For Phases 1 and 2,  the LTFU study staff will recruit a total  
of approximately 122 participants  from the Long -Term Follow -Up Study  cohort .  
Phase 1 will involve recruitment of 32 participant s for four focus groups and 
approximately 5 -10 participant s for the open pilot. Phase 1 participants will not be 
eligible for P hase 2 participation.  For the focus group activities of this  Phase, 
participants will be randomly selected stratified according to whether they reside in a 
state with or without Medicaid expansion , which LFTU staff will determine based on 
participant addresses available from the LTFU data records.  
Phase 2 will involve recruitment of 80 randomly -selected participant s for the pilot 
randomized trial. Participants will be randomly selected stratified according to whether 
they reside in a state with or without Medicaid expansion , which LFTU staff will 
determine based on participant addresses available from the LTFU data records.  
Phase 3 participants will be recruited from the Intervention Arm of Phase 2 
(approximately n=40).  
For both Phases, w e will exclude participants who : (1)  do not have health insurance, 
(2) are under the age of 18, ( 3) are unable to give informed consent due to psychiatric 
or cognitive impairment as determined in consultation with study PI, patient navigator, or 
oncology social worker, and (4)  do not have access to an smartphone , computer or 
tablet with internet access. Importantly, we will closely document and monitor the 
11 
 numbers of individuals who are unable to participate given th is final  criterion, as it will 
further inform the feasibility of this intervention  modality . 
 
Sources of Subjects and Recruitment Methods  
The Long -Term Follow -Up Study  (LTFU)  is an NIH -funded multi -institutional study of 
individuals who were diagnosed before 21 years of age with leukemia, CNS 
malignancies, Hodgkin's disease, non -Hodgkin's lymphoma, Wilm’s tumor, 
neurob lastoma, soft tissue sarcom a, bone cancer or serious illness who  survived at 
least five years  after diagnosis . Eligible participants for the LTFU were identified through 
medical records and clinic lists at participating centers in the U.S., yielding a 
retrospectively ascertained coh ort of adult childhood survivors with ongoing, longitudinal 
follow -up. The LTFU  includes individuals  diagnosed with cancer or serious illness 
between 1970 -1999 , recruited from over 25 pediatric oncology  institutions in North 
America.  Eligible participants  for our study include 21,841 LTFU participants  who are 
still alive and have available contact information.  
IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT   
Methods of Enrollment  
Prospective participants  for each phase of the study from  the LTFU study  cohort will be 
identified via LTFU records and recruited and consented at the CCSS Coordinating 
Center at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital  (Supporting Facility for the LTFU)  by 
LTFU  staff. Prospective p articipants will receive an invitation to the study  through email 
and mail  (See LTFU Focus Group,  Open Pilot , and Pilot Intervention  Recruitment 
Letters ). CCSS participants have consented to be contacted by the study and agreed to 
email communication by vo luntarily providing us with their email address. St. Jude 
employs a system called Emma to administer and deliver email campaigns. Emma 
(myemma.com ) is a secure email marketing platform that allows for multi -level 
campaigns with all or segments  of our participants.   It allows for contact management, 
simple HTML template design with piping and logical integration, tracking of email 
campaign receipts, errors, and opt -outs, and drilling down to review participant level 
activity   If eligible and int erested, prospective participants will read over an enclosed 
Research Consent Form, which they will have the option to either fill out via an online 
DatStat  survey link  (the system that St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital uses for 
LTFU consenting procedu res, see Data Management in V. Study Procedures ) or to fill 
out the hard copy of the form and mail it back to LTFU staff at St. Jude Children’s 
Research Hospital . Additionally, participants may also be recruited through telephone , 
with outreach being done by CCSS Coordinating Center , and a  mailed version of the 
recruitment letter might be  sent out,  with instructions be ing provided for how to access 
the online consent portal. Potential participan ts will also be able to get more information 
about the study via a St. Jude website (which will also have a link to the online consent 
form).  Following consent,  the assignment of  a unique study identification number to 
each participant,  and randomization i nto intervention vs. control arms  for Phase 2 , 
participant information will be sent securely to Dr. Kirchhoff  via SharePoint , an 
encrypted system used to transfer data . Dr. Kirchhoff’s team will lead the focus group 
scheduling  and survey facilitation, while both MGH and University of Utah study staff will 
12 
 coordinate the navigation intervention . The study interventionist may contact  consented 
participan ts via telephone an d email in to schedule intervention sessions.  
 
Informed Consent  
For the pa rticipant  focus groups , open pilot,  and pilot trial, informed consent will be 
facilitated by LTFU study staff using an IRB approved consent form  for each piece of 
the study  (See Focus Group, Open Pilot, and Pilot Intervention Consent Forms . The 
consent form will describe the study in detail, including the purpose of the research, 
clinical procedures, risks and discomforts, benefits, reimbursements , and alternatives to 
participation. Confidentiality, the right of each subject to request further information, and 
the right of each subject to withdraw from the study  at any time , is fully detailed in each 
consent form. Patients will be informed via the consent form that they can freely choose 
not to participate.  We will exclude participants who, as determined by the study PI or 
navigator, are unable to give consent due to psychiatric or cognitive impairment. There 
will be two separate consenting procedur es for Phase 1 of the study. One consenting 
procedure will be for the focus group participants (n=32), and one consenting procedure 
will be for the open pilot participants (n=10). For Phase 2 of the study, there will be a 
single consent form for the pilot randomized trial participants (n=80). The intervention 
arm participants of Phase 2 (n=40) constitute the Phase 3 participants, so they will be 
consented for Phase 3 during the Phase 2 consent process.  There will be separate 
consent forms that correspond to  the described procedures.   
 
 
Intervention  Assignment and Randomization  
 
Pilot Trial   
The CCSS Coordinating Center  LTFU study staff will randomly select 80 participants 
among the LTFU  cohort (original and expanded together). To do this, CCSS will use 
stratified random sampling, where we will divide the sample of LTFU participants into 
two groups: residing in a Medicaid expansion state or not. Random samples will then be 
selected from e ach of the two strata until 80 participants are consented and enrolled. 
The 80 selected participants will be randomized to either enhanced usual care (n=40), 
or the health insurance navigation intervention (n=40).  After obtaining informed consent, 
particip ant information will be sent securely to Dr. Kirchhoff via SharePoint, an 
encrypted system used to transfer data. Dr.  Kirchhoff’s team will lead the pilot trial  
procedures . 
V. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 Recruitment and 
consent  Scheduling  
activity  Procedures  Data - qualitative  Data – 
quantitative  
Phase 1       
Focus 
groups  LTFU staff  
identifies 
Medicaid vs. not 
Medicaid  from 
LTFU records ; Kirchhoff  team 
receive s 
consented list 
from LTFU  via 
SharePoint ; they 
set up FG time MGH runs FG via 
Zoom ; records 
and transcribes 
the data  Per grant -
Content analyses 
will be conducted 
by Drs. Park and None collected  
13 
 Randomly selects  
and consents  
Goal: 4 FG x 8 
people -> 32 or so 
participant s working with MGH 
team  to schedule  the research 
assistant  
 
Open 
pilot LTFU staff  
randomly selects  
& consents 
participant s 
Goal : 5-10 
participants  Kirchhoff  team 
receive d 
consented list 
from LTFU  via 
SharePoint; 
Kirchhoff  team set 
up sessions with 
navigator  Kirchhoff team 
collects baseline 
and FU surveys  
via REDCap  
 Dr. Park and or/ 
study navigator 
and research 
assistant will 
conduct analyses   Per grant - Dr. 
Kirchhoff will lead 
the analyses  of 
surveys ; will 
receive additional 
data from LTFU 
study as needed 
(demographics, 
etc) via 
Share Point 
Phase 2       
Pilot LTFU staff  
identifies 
Medicaid vs. not 
Medicaid  from 
LTFU records; 
Randomly  
selects; 
Randomizes 
Participant s after 
they consent  
Goal : 80 
participants  Kirchhoff  team 
receive s 
consented list 
from LTFU via 
Sharepoint;  
Kirchhoff  team set 
up sessions with 
navigator  Kirchhoff team 
collects baseline 
and FU surveys  
via REDCap  None collected  Per grant - Dr. 
Kirchhoff will lead 
the analyses  of 
surveys ; will 
receive additional 
data from LTFU 
study as needed 
(demographics, 
etc) via 
Sharepoint  
Phase 3       
Exit 
interviews  No new 
recruitment  Kirchhoff team will 
help schedule the 
interviews  Exit interview s run 
by Utah  team  Content analyses 
will be conducted 
by Drs. Park and 
Galbraith  None collected  
 
 
Data Management, Collection , and Transfer  
 
Recruitment  
During the recruitment periods of each phase of the study, St. Jude will track and obtain 
consent through DatStat, which allows researchers to configure online mobile 
responsive web surveys with tailored logic checks and requirements, data pre -
populating a nd piping, and portal access for quick reporting, analytics, and 
downloads.  The system is HIPAA compliant and fully validated for 21 CFR Part 11 . 
Once participants are consented to the study, the ir information will be sent to Dr. 
Kirchhoff and her team at  the Huntsman Cancer Institute at the University of Utah via 
SharePoint. SharePoint is a secure file sharing service supported by the Huntsman 
Cancer Institute that is encrypted and HIPAA certified. It is password protected and Dr. 
14 
 Kirchhoff's SharePoint f ile sharing can only be accessed by other investigators through 
invitation to ensure data privacy.  
 
Quantitative  Data  
For the pilot trial, Dr. Kirchhoff’s staff at the Huntsman Cancer Institute at the University 
of Utah will oversee  the scheduling participants and will ensur e the  completion of the 
baseline survey and follow -up surveys  for both Phase 1 and 2 of the study . Survey d ata 
will be collected via a secure web -based portal ( REDCap ). REDCap  is maintained by 
the bioinformatics shared  resource at the Huntsman Cancer Institute where Dr. 
Kirchhoff is an investigator. As such, she has access to survey and database support 
for REDCap  for all data collection activities. Data transmissions will occur between Dr. 
Kirchhoff and the CCSS Coordi nating Center and Statistics and Data Center via 
SharePoint to facilitate data access from the  LTFU  baseline and follow up surveys for 
inclusion in the statistical analysis (https://ccss.stjude.org/documents/original -cohort -
questionnaires). Dr. Kirchhoff w ill lead the pilot study  survey  data management and 
analyses, and transmit analytic data to MGH using  SharePoint . Data will be managed 
and cleaned by Dr. Kirchhoff’s data manager and overseen by Dr. Kirchhoff.  
 
Focus Group and Exit Interview Qualitative Data  
Once the focus groups are scheduled by Dr. Kirchhoff’s team, the data collection efforts 
will be led via MGH’s Zoom  program.  The Phase 1 participant qualitative data will be 
collected and stored within MGH. Data will be collected by Dr. Park’s team at 
Massachusetts General Hospital using recording devices. Audio recording files will be 
saved and uploaded into NVIVO software on Shared File Areas in the Partners network, 
which will only be accessible to IRB -approved study staff.  NVIVO files will be sent 
securely via Partners Secure File Transfer or via SharePoint, which has been approved 
for use in this study.  The Phase 3 qualitative data in the form of exit interviews will 
follow procedures  detailed in  Phase 1.  
 
Advisory Board and Expert Interview Qualitative Data  
After expert and advisory board interviews have taken place via Zoom, audio recordings 
will be stored on Shared File Areas in the Partners Network. Audio recordings will be 
direc tly uploaded into NVIVO and sent securely to study staff at the University of Utah 
for analysis.  
 
 
 
Intervention Arm Components  
Of the approximately 80 participants  recruited for Phase 2 of the study, 40 will be 
randomized to enhanced usual care, and 40 will be randomized to the health insurance 
navigation intervention. As described above, the interventi on arm will involve 4 sessions 
delivered by a navigator.   
 
Intervention Fidelity  
15 
 The patient navigator (PN) will undergo training by the Co -investigators and pilot 
sessions . The NCI, with support from the ACS, established the Patient Navigation 
Research Program (PNRP) to implement and evaluate patient navigator programs. The 
PNRP developed a navigation performance checklist with 3 quality indicators of 
care:79,80 1) participant interaction (e.g., established rapport), 2) care management 
(assessed  subjects ’ understanding), and 3) intervention delivery (e.g., relevant 
information provided on insur ance options, cost savings). Study investigators  will review 
15% of patient navigation encounters using these quality indicator criteria.  
 
Assessments  
 
Phase 1 Asses sments  
During the Open Pilot of the i ntervention, participants  will com plete a baseline survey  
and a 3-month post -program follow up survey. Participants will be remunerated  $20 for 
the completion of each survey  by the University of Utah . LTFU  extracted  medical record 
data will provide information on cancer diagnosis, age at diagnosis, years since 
diagnosis, and type of treatment. The open pilot will also involve an exit interview, which 
is described in further detail below.  
 
Phase 2 Assessment s  
During the pilot trial, participants will com plete a baseline survey , a 3-month post -
program follo w up survey . LTFU  extracted  medical record data will provide information 
on cancer diagnosis, age at diagnosis, years since diagnosis, and type of treatmen t. 
 
Phase 3 Assessments  
After the completion of the follow -up su rvey, investigators  will conduct In-depth exit 
interviews with the 40 intervention arm participants to assess participant s’ 1) satisfaction 
with the intervention, 2) recommendations for modifications on overall session topics 
and intervention content (e.g., physician communication, cost management 
strategies) and 3)  recommendations for modifications on delivery modality (e.g. , number 
and length of sessions, videoconferencing delivery)  . Participants will be remunerated 
$20 for their time  by the University of Utah .  
 
VI. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
Analysis Plan 
 
Qualitative Data  
For qualitative analyses of  participant  focus group s advisory board meetings , individual 
expert interviews,  and exit interviews , all data will be analyzed by MGH and University 
of Utah study staff using NVivo qualitative software.  For qualitative analysis of advisory 
board and indiv idual expert interviews, audio files will be uploaded into NVIVO software 
and analyzed using a Rapid Analysis method.  Content analyses for the participant focus 
groups an exit interviews will be conducted including a structural thematic framework, 
categori es, and coding plan. For focus group data, a coding framework will be 
developed . To ensure coding reliability, coding discrepancies will be resolved through 
16 
 discussion and comparison of raw data. Coding will continue until a high level of 
reliability (Kapp a= >0.80) is established. Co -investigators will provide an expert review 
of the results.   
 
Focus Group Data : A coding framework will be developed for themes and codes 
according to participant s’ feedback 1) barriers to accessing and using health insurance  
2) resources to support health insurance access and use, 3) navigation program 
content 4) intervention structure and dose, 5) program delivery, 6) program acceptability, 
7) aspects of coverage that are not well understood  
Advisory Board and Individual Interview Data:  A coding framework will be developed for 
themes and codes according to the  advisory board feedback on  1) barriers , 2) 
resources , 3) content , 4) intervention structure and dose, 5) delivery and 6) selection 
criteria  
 
Exit Inte rview Data: A coding framework will be developed  for themes and codes 
according to participants’ feedback on 1) satisfaction with the intervention, 2)  
recommendations for modifications on overall session topics and intervention content 
(e.g., physician com munication, cost management strategies).  and 3)  recommendations 
for modifications on delivery modality (e.g., number and length of sessions, 
videoconferencing delivery)   
 
Quantitative Data  
For quantitative data, Dr. Kirchhoff’s team at HCI will conduct the analyses with input 
from Dr. Park and her study team, and the LTFU  study team. As discussed in 
Participants, we will sample by Medicaid expansion vs. non -expansion states. All 
analyses will be weighted using inv erse sampling probabilities so that results are 
representative of the overall LTFU  study  cohort.   
 
At baseline, all pilot participants will complete a baseline. The HINP navigator will use 
each participant’s baseline survey responses to personalize and individualize sessions.  
At the 3 -month post -program follow -up, participants will complete the P hase 1  survey 
Outcome questions,  which will be asked within the 5-month time frame period after trial 
enrollment. Participants will also be asked questions below about feasibility and 
acceptability.  
 
We will use descriptive statistics to report on the following endpoints: intervention 
feasibility (percent of participant s enrolled), acceptability (satisfaction, perceived 
support) and efficacy (e.g., ACA familiarity, health insurance literacy, intention to adhere 
to recommended survivorship care, provider communica tion, and coverage status). 
Descriptive statistics will examine group differences at baseline; any imbalances will be 
adjusted. We will use chi square and independent t -tests to compare end -of-intervention 
changes in preliminary efficacy outcomes between the two groups. Although a 3 -month 
post intervention  follow -up period is brief, we will also conduct exploratory comparisons 
with other study outcomes to see if trends change in the expected direction. We wi ll 
compare pre/end -of-treatment, within groups, with paired t -tests. In addition, we will use 
bivariate statistics to examine sociodemographic and cancer -related factors (type of 
17 
 diagnosis, age at diagnosis, years since diagnosis, cancer treatment, chronic  
conditions81, cancer treatment (e.g., cranial radiation yes/no, anthracycline  exposure 
yes/no) associated with feasibility, acceptability and preliminary efficacy outcomes.  
 
Outcomes  
Primary Outcomes: Feasibility and Acceptability.   
1. Feasibility : Number of eligible enrolle es and number of sessions completed. 2. 
Acceptabilit y: 4-point scales of satisfaction with navigation services (To what extent has 
this program met your needs? Did you get the kind of health insurance assistance that 
you wanted? H ow helpful has this program been for you?) and perceived support 
(emotional/informational scale of the Medical Outcomes Study social support survey, an 
8-item scale widely used with cancer patients).82-86 
 
Secondary Outcomes:  Efficacy.  
 The ACS’s National Patient Navigator Leadership Summit recommend patient -
navigation outcome measures, which included: perceived knowledge, perceived 
confidence in overcoming barriers to care, and satisfaction with patient navigation 
services. Accordingly, we will measure: 1) health insurance literacy,  2) financial distress 
related to medical costs . 
3) familiarity with healthcare reform policies, 4) insurance status  (among those insured 
at study enrollment) , and 5) discussion with providers about health care costs63 and 
preventive services among those having a visit during this interval (2 -item y/n 
questions).  
Measures  
To evaluate the pilot, we will use a mixed methods data collection approach, using both 
quantitative survey items and open -ended questions .87 Most st udy measures will come 
from survey questions repeated from the 2011 -2012 CCSS health insurance survey 
(see Appendix); some new questions will be added and are indicated as such. Survey 
development included a qualitative study conducted with a sample of LTFU 
participants ,5 modifications and inclusions of national survey questions87-92 and a 
cognitive testing phase. Using data collected previously by the overall LTFU via 
abstraction of medical records,  data will be used to provide information on cancer 
diagno sis, age at diagnosis, and cancer treatment.  These data will be provided to Dr. 
Kirchhoff’s team via SharePoint , an encrypted system used to transfer data . Data from 
the LTFU  surveys will provide information on sociodemographic and medical history 
since ca ncer treatment, and presence of a medical late effects and chronic health 
conditions including second cancers. The measures will include the following:   
 
Participant  Characteristic  Measures  (see study surveys)  
Characteristics:  Age, Gender, Education, Race/Ethnicity, Partnership/Marital Statu s 
Enabling Characteristics : State  of Residence , Familiarity with ACA Policies  
18 
 Health Insurance Literacy : Confidence in Understanding of Terms (e.g. Coinsurance), 
Confidence in Choosing, Comparing, and Using Insurance, Household and Personal 
Income  
Need: Cancer Diagnosis, Age at Diagnosis, Years Since Diagnosis, Treatment Type , 
Recurrence of Primary Cancer,  Second Malignancy, Other Chronic Conditions .  
Outcome Measures  
Insurance Coverage:  Insurance Status, Difficulty or Denial in Obtaining Coverage due to 
Health History (within past 2 years), Difficulty Finding and Choosing a Plan   
Underinsurance:  Not Takin g a New Job in Order to Keep Health Insurance, Difficulty 
Finding a Provider who Accepts Insurance/ Not Able to Obtain an Appointment as 
Needed, Unmet Healthcare Need Due to Cost, Provider Visits in Past Year, or Out of 
Pocket Healthcare Costs, Out of Pock et Healthcare Costs/Premium Costs, Problems 
Due to Medical Expenses, Worry Related to Medical Costs  
Coverage -Related Variables : Current Coverage and Coverage History  
VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
Psychological Risks 
Individuals may find it stressful to answer questions about their experiences with health 
insurance coverage and care. The risks associated with these discussions are minimal, 
and do not rise above the level of harm encountered during daily activities.  
The potential risks to subject include: 1) Discussing health insurance coverage and care 
and participating in a program to discuss these issues  with the navigator  and the patient 
navigator has the potential for increasing  psychological vulnerability.  
These r isks will be described by the patient navigator and be clearly outlined in the 
consent form. Pa rticipants  will be encouraged to discuss any concerns with the patient 
navigator. In the event of a psychiatric emergency, confidentiality may be suspended. If 
the patient navigator notes  severe distress, Dr. Park will contact the participant to  
assess for safety  and report concerns  as soon as possible  to the LTFU  PI, Dr. Greg 
Armstrong, and the LTFU  Project Director, Dr. Aaron McDonald , at St. Jude Children’s 
Research Hospital. Participants will be informed of the limits of confidentiality at the 
beginning of the study.   
Procedures for Minimizing Risk 
Every effort will be made to minimize the study burden. The time commitment will be 
explained to all participants prior to the focus groups and pilot trial study consent. Every 
effort will be made to minimize the length and maximize the convenience or the pilot 
surveys completion.  
 
Maintaining Confidentiality  
19 
 There is a low risk that protec ted health information could be impermissibly disclosed or 
that the confidentiality of patient information may be breached. Stringent guidelines are 
established in order to assure the confidentiality of study subjects. A unique study 
identification number will serve as the primary identifier for study participants. Personal 
identifiers will not be part of the computerized data record. Names and addresses will 
be maintained in a password protected restricted data file accessible only to the 
principal investi gator, study coordinator and designated personnel within the Data 
Coordinating Center. A hard copy of names and corresponding study ID numbers will be 
kept in a locked file cabinet within the CCSS Coordinating Center. The computerized file 
will only be use d for generation of correspondence with the study subject. Personal 
identifiers will be removed from all survey  booklets following completion of initial editing 
and scanning. Similarly, names will be removed from all LTFU abstracted information . 
Study participants are informed of the potential risks and benefits regarding the security 
of their personal information.  MGH TeleHealth enables connection through virtual 
HIPAA -compliant videoconferencing technology including: phone, video, text, email, 
mobile applications and remote monitoring. These virtual visits are conducted via a 
Zoom videoconference platform . Zoom ha s been approved for use in this study by RISO 
review.  
 
VII. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
The consent form for the overall LTFU  study enrollment clearly states that there may be 
no direct benefit to the participants from study participation. For the pilot trial phas e of 
the proposed study, participants in both groups will be given information that could 
improve their ability to access affordable coverage. Participants in the intervention 
group will also receive navigation support, for up to 4 phone -delivered sessions . As an 
alternative to the intervention , participants may explore health insurance support options 
at their current primary ca re center.  
 
IX. M ONITORING  AND  QUALITY  ASSURANCE  
 
Training of all Study Personnel in the Responsible Conduct of  Human Studies  
Prior to recruiting subjects or handling study data, all study personnel will be required to 
pass an NIH -approved  course that reviews regulatory and informational documents on 
human subject protection and the responsible  conduct of human studies. In  addition, all 
study personnel will sign a statement of commitment to the protection  of the rights and 
welfare of human subjects participating in research. In addition, all study staff must 
complete  and submit Conflict of Interest (COI) Disclosure forms to their respective 
institutions.  
 
Data Monitoring Plan  
Survey d ata will be collected via Dr. Kirchhoff’s team at the Huntsman Cancer Institute . 
Data will be collected via mailed /phone -based  survey and through a secure web -based 
portal  (REDCap ). Data transmissions will be conducted between the CCSS coordinating 
20 
 center and statistical center with Dr. Kirchhoff to generate the participant sample and to 
facilitate data access from the LTFU  basel ine and follow up surveys. While the majority 
of surveys will be done via web using REDCap , we will allow participants to complete 
the baseline and follow -up surveys through mail or phone to improve participation. To 
ensure security, p articipant data colle cted using paper and pencil reco rds will be stored 
in a locked filing cabinet in a  locked room  at the Huntsman Cancer Institute  at the 
University of Utah ; electronic participant tracking databases will be stored on a secure 
server accessible only by IRB -approved members of Dr. Kirchhoff’s study staff. Data 
collected on paper and pencil forms or through phone -based surveys will be thoroughly 
cleaned and entered into the electronic REDCap  database with a 10% check; 
discrepancies will be resolved by Dr. Kirc hhoff. Dr. Kirchhoff will lead the pilot study  
data management and analyses, and transmit analytic data to MGH using the Hartwell 
Center's FTA protocol (located at http://fta.stjude.org), which is a web -based interface 
with a secure 128 -bit encrypted web con nection. Only study staff will have access to the 
study data on Shared File Areas. Data quality (including sessions participated in for the 
intervention group, data missingness, and recruitment rates) will be monitored monthly. 
Interim data analysis will b e conducted throughout the trial and results wi ll be reported 
in the annual  ACS progress report.  
 
Adverse Events Reporting  
Serious adverse events will be reported to Drs. Park and McDonald  (LTFU  PI) 
immediately. Dr. Park will be  responsible for the reporting of any adverse events to the 
Massachusetts General Hospital Institutional Review Board. The MGH IRB requires that 
serious adverse events are to be reported to the IRB as soon as possible, but  no later 
than 10 working days from the date on which the investigator became aware of the 
event. Non -serious adverse events are to be reported within 20 working days. The St. 
Jude IRB reviews reports of unanticipated events involving risks to participants  and 
others. The level and rapidity of review will depend upon factors such as the 
seriousness of the event.  
 
 
X. REFERENCES  
 
1. Robison LL, Hudson MM. Survivors of childhood and adolescent cancer: Life -
long risks and responsibilities. Nat Rev Cancer 14:61 -70, 2014  
 
2. Kirchhoff AC, Kuhlthau K, Pajolek H, Leisenring W, Armstrong GT, Robison, LL 
Park ER Employer -sponsored health insurance coverage limitations: results from 
the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study, 2013, Support Care Cancer  
 
3. Kirchhoff AC, Nipp R , Warner EL, et al. “Job Lock” Among Long -term Survivors 
of Childhood CancerA Report From the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. JAMA 
Oncol. Published online October 19, 2017. doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.3372.  
 
4. Park ER, Li FP, Liu Y, et al. Health insurance c overage in survivors of childhood 
cancer: The Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. J Clin Oncol 23:9187 -9197, 2005  
21 
  
5. Park ER, Kirchhoff AC, Zallen JP, et al. Childhood Cancer Survivor Study 
participants' perceptions and knowledge of health insurance coverage: 
Implications for the Affordable Care Act. J Cancer Surviv 6:251 -259, 2012  
 
6. Oeffinger KC, Mertens AC, Hudson MM, et al. Health Care of Young Adult 
Survivors of Childhood Cancer: A Report from the Childhood Cancer Survivor 
Study. Annals of Family Medicine. 20 04;2(1):61 -70. doi:10.1370/afm.26.  
 
7. Yeazel MW, Oeffinger KC, Gurney JG, Mertens AC, Hudson MM, Emmons KM, 
Chen H, Robison LL. The cancer screening practices of adult survivors of 
childhood cancer: a report from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. Cancer. 
2004 Feb 1; 100(3): 631 -640. 
 
8. Casillas J, Castellino  SM, Hudson MM, et al. Impact of Insurance Type on 
Survivor -Focused and General Preventive Health Care Utilization in Adult 
Survivors of Childhood Cancer: The Childhood Cancer Survivor Study 
(CCSS).Cancer. 2011;117(9):1966 -1975. doi:10.1002/cncr.25688.  
 
9. Keegan TH, Tao L, DeRouen MC, Wu XC, Prasad P, Lynch CF, Shnorhavorian 
M, Zebrack BJ, Chu R, Harlan LC, Smith AW, Parsons HM, AYA HOPE Study 
Collaborative Group. Medical care in adolescents and young adult cancer 
survivors: what are the biggest access -relate d barriers? J Cancer Surviv. 2014 
Jun; 8(2): 282 -292. 
 
10. Kirchhoff AC, Lyles CR, Fluchel M, Wright J, Leisenring W. Limitations in health 
care access and utilization among long -term survivors of adolescent and young 
adult cancer. Cancer. 2012; 118(23): 5964 -5972  
 
11. Pang JW, Friedman DL, Whitton JA, et al. Employment status among adult 
survivors in the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. Pediatr Blood Cancer 50:104 -
110, 2008  
 
12. Janson C, Leisenring W, Cox C, et al. Predictors of marriage and divorce in adult 
survivor s of childhood cancers: A report from the Childhood Cancer Survivor 
Study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 18:2626 -2635, 2009  
 
13. Kirchhoff AC, Leisenring W, Krull KR, et al. Unemployment among adult 
survivors of childhood cancer: A report from the Childhood  Cancer Survivor 
Study. Med Care 48:1015 -1025, 2010  
 
14. Public Law 111 -148, Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW -111publ148/pdf/PLAW -111publ 148.pdf   
22 
  
15. Mueller EL, Park ER, Davis MM. What the Affordable Care Act means for 
survivors of pediatric cancer. J Clin Oncol 32:615 -617, 2014  
 
16. Park ER, Kirchhoff AC, Perez GK, Leisenring W, Weissman JS, Donelan K, 
Mertens AC, Reschovsky JD, Armstrong GT, Ro bison LL, Franklin M, Hyland KA, 
Diller LR, Recklitis CJ, Kuhlthau KA. Childhood Cancer Survivor Study 
Participants' Perceptions and Understanding of the Affordable Care Act. Journal 
of Clinical Oncology.2015 March 01; 33(7): 764 -772. 
 
17. Warner EL, Park ER, Stroup A, Kinney AY, Kirchhoff AC. Childhood Cancer 
Survivors' Familiarity With and Opinions of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act. Journal of Oncology Practice. 2013 September 01; 9(5): 246 -250 
 
18. Davidoff, A. J., et al. (2015). The Affordable C are Act and Expanded Insurance 
Eligibility Among Nonelderly Adult Cancer Survivors. J Natl Cancer Inst. 
2015;107(9).  
 
19. Paez, K.A., Mallery, C.J., Noel, H., Pugliese, C., McSorely, V.E., Lucado, J.L., & 
Ganachari, D. (2014). Development of the Health Insuran ce Literacy Measure 
(HILM): Conceptualizing and Measuring Consumer Ability to Choose and Use 
Private Health Insurance. Journal of Health Communication. 2014;19(sup2): 225 -
239 
 
20. Landier W, Bhatia S, Eshelman DA, et al: Development of risk -based guidelines 
for pediatric cancer survivors: The Children's Oncology Group long -term follow -
up guidelines from the children's oncology group late effects committee and 
nursing discipline. J Clin Oncol 22:4979 -4990, 2004  
 
21. Long SK, Goin  D. Large Racial and Ethnic Differences in Health Insurance 
Literacy Signal Need for Targeted Education and Outreach 2014. 
http://hrms.urban.org/briefs/literacy -by-race.html. Accessed Dec 2, 2014.  
 
22. McCormack L, Bann C, Uhrig J, Berkman N, Rudd R. Health In surance Literacy 
of Older Adults. Journal of Consumer Affairs. Summer2009 2009;43(2):223 -248. 
23. Sinaiko AD, Ross -Degnan D, Soumerai SB, Lieu T, Galbraith A. The experience 
of Massachusetts shows that consumers will need help in navigating insurance 
exchanges . Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32(1):78 -86. 
 
24. Housten AJ, Furtado K, Kaphingst KA, et al. Stakeholders’ perceptions of ways 
to support decisions about health insurance marketplace enrollment: a qualitative 
study. BMC Health Services Research. 2016;16:634. do i:10.1186/s12913 -016-
1890 -8. 
23 
  
25. Pratt -Chapman M, Simon MA, Patterson A, Risendal BC, Patierno S. 
SURVIVORSHIP NAVIGATION OUTCOME MEASURES: A report from the ACS 
Patient Navigation Working Group on Survivorship Navigation. Cancer. 
2011;117(15 0):3575 -3584. do i:10.1002/cncr.26261.  
 
26. Mulrooney DA, Yeazel MW, Kawashima T, et al. Cardiac outcomes in a cohort of 
adult survivors of childhood and adolescent cancer: Retrospective analysis of the 
childhood  
 cancer survivor study cohort. BMJ. 2009;339:b4606.  
 
27. Park ER, Ki rchhoff AC, Perez GK, Leisenring W, Weissman JS, Donelan K, 
Hyland K, Armstrong GT, Robison LL, Kuhlthau KA. Childhood cancer survivor 
study participants’ experiences with health insurance coverage. Society of 
Behavioral Medicine 36th Annual Meeting. 2015.  
 
28. Kuhlthau K, Nipp RD, Shui A, et al. Health Insurance Coverage, Care 
Accessibility, and Affordability for Adult Survivors of Childhood Cancer: A Cross -
Sectional Study of a Nationally Representative Database.Journal of Cancer 
Surv.10(6): 969 -971, 2016.  
 
29. Park ER, Kirchhoff AC, Nipp RD, et al. Assessing Health Insurance Coverage 
Characteristics and Impact on Health Care Cost, Worry, and Access: A Report 
From the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. JAMA Intern Med. 
2017;177(12):1855 –1858. doi:10.1001/jamainternm ed.2017.5047  
 
30. Nipp RD, Kirchoff AC, Fair D, et al. Financial Burden in Survivors of Childhood 
Cancer: A Report from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. Journal of Clinical 
Oncology 35(30):3474 -3481, 2017.  
 
31. Emmons KM, Puleo E, Park E, Gritz ER, Butterfiel d RM, Weeks JC, et al. Peer -
delivered smoking counseling for childhood cancer survivors increases rate of 
cessation: the partnership for health study. J Clin Oncol 2005; 23, 6516 -23. 
 
32. Park ER, Puleo E, Butterfield RM, Zorn M, Mertens AC, Gritz ER, et al. A  
process evaluation of a telephone -based peer -delivered smoking cessation 
intervention for adult survivors of childhood cancer: the partnership for health 
study. Prev Med 2006; 42, 435 -42. 
 
33. Park EB, Emmons KM, Malloy NW, Seifer E. A qualitative exploration  of health 
perceptions and behaviors among adult survivors of childhood cancers. J Cancer 
Educ 2002; 17, 211 -5. 
 
24 
 34. Butterfield RM, Park ER, Puleo E, Mertens A, Gritz ER, Li FP, et al. Multiple risk 
behaviors among smokers in the Childhood Cancer Survivors St udy cohort. 
Psycho -Oncology 2004; 13, 619 -629. 
35. Duffey -Lind EC, O'holleran E, Healey M, Vettese M, Diller L, Park ER. 
Transitioning to survivorship: a pilot study. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs 2006; 23, 335 -
43. 
 
36. Earle CC, Park ER, Lai B, Weeks JC, Ayanian JZ, Block S. Identifying potential 
indicators of the quality of end -of-life cancer care from administrative data. J Clin 
Oncol 2003; 21, 1133 -8. 
 
37. Wescott PH, Reifler EJ, Sepucha K, Park ER. Breast cancer treatmen t decision 
making: Does the sisterhood of breast cancer transcend culture? Research in the 
Sociology of Health Care: Health Care Services, Racial and Ethnic Minorities and 
Underserved Populations 2005; 23.  
 
38. Bober SL, Park ER, Schmookler T, Medeiros, Nancar row C, Diller L. Perceptions 
of breast cancer risk and cancer screening: a qualitative study of young, female 
Hodgkin's disease survivors. J Cancer Educ 2007; 22, 42 -6. 
 
39. Warner EL, Wu Y, Hacking CC, Wright J, Spraker -Perlman HL, Gardner E, 
Kirchhoff AC. Im proving quality of pediatric cancer survivor care: Providers’ 
support of and experience with survivor care plans.. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 
2014; suppl 30; abstr 190.  
 
40. Perrin JM, Ettner SL, Mclaughlin TJ, Gortmaker SL, Bloom SR, Kuhlthau K. State 
variations in supplemental security income enrollment for children and 
adolescents. Am J Public Health 1998; 88, 928 -31. 
 
41. Kuhlthau K, Perrin JM, Ettner SL, Mclaughlin TJ, Gortmaker SL. High -
expenditure children with Supplemental Security Income. Pediatrics 199 8; 102, 
610-5. 
 
42. Perrin JM, Kuhlthau K, Ettner SL, Mclaughlin TJ, Gortmaker SL. Previous 
medicaid status of children newly enrolled in SSI. Health Care Financial Review 
1998; 19, 117 -127. 
 
43. Perrin JM, Kuhlthau K, Mclaughlin TJ, Ettner SL, Gortmaker SL. Chang ing 
patterns of conditions among children receiving Supplemental Security Income 
disability benefits. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1999; 153, 80 -4. 
 
25 
 44. Ettner SL, Kuhlthau K, Mclaughlin TJ, Perrin JM, Gortmaker SL. Impact of 
expanding SSI on Medicaid expenditures  of disabled children. Health Care 
Financ Rev 2000; 21, 185 -201. 
 
45. Kuhlthau K, Ferris TG, Beal AC, Gortmaker SL, Perrin J.M. Who cares for 
medicaid -enrolled children with chronic conditions? Pediatrics 2001; 108, 906 -12. 
 
46. Cooper WO. & Kuhlthau K. Evaluating  medicaid managed care programs for 
children. Ambul Pediatr 2001; 1, 112 -6. 
 
47. Perrin JM, Kuhlthau KA, Gortmaker SL, Beal AC, Ferris TG. Generalist and 
subspecialist care for children with chronic conditions. Ambul Pediatr 2002; 2, 
462-9. 
48. Kuhlthau K, Ferris TG, Iezzoni LI. Risk adjustment for pediatric quality indicators. 
Pediatrics 2004; 113, 210 -6. 
 
49. Kuhlthau K, Nyman RM, Ferris TG, Beal AC, Perrin JM. Correlates of use of 
specialty care. Pediatrics 2004; 113, e249 -55. 
 
50. Kuhlthau K, Ferris TG, Davis RB, Perrin JM, Iezzoni LI. Pharmacy -and diagnosis -
based risk adjustment for children with Medicaid. Med Care 2005; 43, 1155 -9. 
 
51. Kuhlthau K, Hill, KS, Fluet C, Yucel RM, Meara, E. Correlates of therapy use and 
expenditures in children in the United States. Deve lopmental 
Neurorehabilitation,2008; 11(2):115 -23.  
 
52. Hill KS, Freeman LC, Yucel RM, Kuhlthau KA. Unmet Need among Children with 
Special Health Care Needs in Massachusetts. Matern Child Health J 2007  
 
53. Tang M, Hill KS, Perrin JM, Bourdeau AA, Kuhlthau K. Medi caid managed care 
and the unmet need for mental health care among children with special health 
care needs. Health Services Research, 2008 Jun; 43(3): 882 –900. 
 
54. Gnanasekaran S, Arauz A, Yucel R, Hill KS, Kuhlthau K. State policy 
environment and delayed or f orgone care among children with special health 
care needs. Maternal and Child Health Journal, 2008; 12(6):739 -46.  
 
55. Perrin JM, Fluet C, Kuhlthau KA, Anderson B, Wells N, Epstein S et al. Benefits 
for employees with children with ADHD: findings from the Col laborative 
Employee Benefit Study. J Dev Behav Pediatr 2005; 26, 3 -8 
 
26 
 56. Perrin JM, Fluet CF, Honberg L, Anderson B, Wells N, Epstein S et al. Benefits 
for employees with children with special needs: findings from the collaborative 
employee benefit study. Hea lth Aff (Millwood) 2007; 26, 1096 -103. 
 
57. Fung V, Graetz I, Galbraith A, et al. Financial barriers to care among low -income 
children with asthma: Health care reform implications. JAMA Pediatrics. 
2014;168(7):649 -56 
 
58. Galbraith AA, Ross -Degnan D, Soumerai SB, et al. Nearly half of families in high -
deductible health plans whose members have chronic conditions face substantial 
financial burden. Health Aff (Millwood).  
 
59. Galbraith AA, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, et al. Delayed and forgone care for 
families with chro nic conditions in high -deductible health plans. J Gen Intern 
Med. 2012;27(9):1105 -11. PMID: 22249829  
 
60. Smits -Seemann RR, Kaul S, Hersh A, Fluchel M, Boucher K, Kirchhoff AC. Gaps 
in Insurance for pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Oncol ogy 
Practice. 2016; 12(2): 175 -176.  
61. Warner EL, Kirchhoff AC, Nam G, Fluchel G. (2014). The financial burden of 
pediatric cancer for patients and their families. Journal of Oncology Practice. 
October 14.  
 
62. Kirchhoff AC, Lyles CR, Fluchel M, Wright J, Leisen ring W. Limitations in Health 
Care Access and Utilization among Adolescent and Young Adult Long -Term 
Cancer Survivors in the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Dataset. 
Cancer. 2012;118(23): 5964 -72.  
 
63. Galbraith AA, Sinaiko  AD, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, Dutta -Linn MM, Lieu 
TA. Some Families Who Purchased Health Coverage Through The 
Massachusetts Connector Wound Up With High Financial Burdens. Health Aff 
(Millwood). Apr 17 2013;32(5):974 -983. 
 
64. Galbraith AA, Ross -Degnan D, S oumerai SB, Rosenthal MB, Gay C, Lieu TA. 
Nearly Half of Families In High -Deductible Health Plans Whose Members Have 
Chronic Conditions Face Substantial Financial Burden. Health Affairs. 
2011;30(2):322 -31. 
 
65. Penfold RB, Kullgren JT, Miroshnik I, Galbraith A A, Hinrichsen VL, Lieu TA.  
Reliability of a patient survey assessing cost -related changes in health care use 
among high deductible health plan enrollees.  BMC Health Services Research 
2011, 11:133. PMCID: PMC3116474  
 
27 
 66. Wisk LE, Gangnon R, Vanness DJ, Galbra ith AA, Mullahy J, Witt WP. 
Development of a Novel, Objective Measure of Health Care -Related Financial 
Burden for U.S. Families with Children. Health Services Research. 2014 Oct 18 
[Epub ahead of print]  
 
67. Galbraith AA, Ross -Degnan D, Soumerai S, Miroshnik I , Wharam F, Kleinman K., 
Lieu, TA.  High -Deductible Health Plans: Are Vulnerable Families Enrolled? 
Pediatrics. 2009;123:e589 -e594. PMCID: PMC2683628  
 
68. Galbraith AA, Ross -Degnan D, Soumerai SB, Abrams AM, Kleinman K, 
Rosenthal MB, Wharam JF, Adams A, Mirosh nik I, Lieu TA.  Use of Well -Child 
Visits in High -Deductible Health Plans.  Am J Manag Care.  2010;16(11):833 -40. 
PMCID: PMC3984915  
 
69. Lieu TA, Solomon JL, Sabin JE, Kullgren JT, Hinrichsen VL, Galbraith AA.  
Consumer awareness and strategies among families with high -deductible health 
plans. J Gen Intern Med. 2010 Mar;25(3):249 -54. PMCID: PMC2839340  
 
70. Wharam JF, Landon BE, Galbraith AA, Kleinman KP, Soumerai SB, Ross -
Degnan D. Emergency department use and subsequent hospitalizations among 
members of a high -deductible health plan. JAMA. 2007:297:1093 -1102.  
 
71. Wharam JF, Galbraith AA, Kleinman KP, Soumerai SS, Ross -Degnan D, Landon 
BE.  Cancer Screening among Members of a High -Deductible Health Plan.  Ann 
Intern Med.  2008; 148: 647 -655. 
72. Balaban RB, Galbraith AA, Burns ME, Vialle -Valentin CE, Larochelle MR, Ross -
Degnan D. A Patient Navigator Intervention to Reduce Hospital Readmissions 
among High -Risk Safety -Net Patients: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Gen 
Intern Med. Jan 24 2015.  
 
73. Burns ME, Galbraith AA, Ross -Degnan D, Balaban RB. Feasibility and evaluation 
of a pilot community health worker intervention to reduce hospital readmissions. 
Int J Qual Health Care. Aug 2014;26(4):358 -365. 
 
74. Ho W, Broughton DE, Donelan K, Gazelle GS, Hur C. Analysis of barriers to and 
patients' preferences for CT colonography for colorectal cancer screening in a 
nonadherent urban population. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2010 Aug; 195 (2):393 -7. 
 
75. Donelan K, Mailhot JR, Dutwin D, Barnicle K, Oo SA, Hobrecker K, Percac -Lima 
S, Chabner BA. Patient p erspectives of clinical care and patient navigation in 
follow -up of abnormal mammography. J Gen Intern Med. 2011 Feb; 26(2):116 -
22. Epub 2010 Jul 7.  
 
28 
 76. Donelan K, Rao SR, Rogers RS, Mailhot JR, Galvin R. Experience with health 
coach -mediated physician refer ral in an employed insured population. J Gen 
Intern Med. 2010  Oct; 25(10):1071 -7. Epub 2010 Jun 16.  
 
77. Zuckerman KE, Cai X, Perrin JM, Donelan K.  Incomplete specialty referral 
among children in community health centers.  J Pediatr. 2011 Jan; 158(1):142 -8. 
 
78. Leon AC, Davis LL, Kraemer HC. The Role and Interpretation of Pilot Studies in 
Clinical Research. J P sychiatr Res. 2011 May ; 45(5): 626 –629. 
 
79. Freund KM, Battaglia TA, Calhoun E, Dudley DJ, Fiscella K, Paskett E, Raich 
PC, Roetzheim RG, Patient Navigation Research Program Group. National 
Cancer Institute Patient Navigation Research Program: methods, proto col, and 
measures. Cancer. 2008 Dec 15; 113(12): 3391 -3399.  
 
80. Calhoun EA, Whitley EM, Esparza A, Ness E, Greene A, Garcia R, Valverde PA. 
A National Patient Navigator Training Program. Health Promotion Practice. 2010 
March 01; 11(2): 205 -215. 
 
81. Oeffinger KC,  Mertens AC, Sklar CA, et al. Chronic health conditions in adult 
survivors of childhood cancer. N Engl J Med 355:1572 -1582, 2006  
 
82. Sherbourne CD, Stewart AL. The MOS social support survey. Soc Sci Med. 
1991; 32(6): 705 -714.  
 
83. Kornblith AB, Dowell JM, Herndo n JE,2nd, Engelman BJ, Bauer -Wu S, Small EJ, 
Morrison VA, Atkins J, Cohen HJ, Holland JC. Telephone monitoring of distress 
in patients aged 65 years or older with advanced stage cancer: a cancer and 
leukemia group B study. Cancer. 2006 Dec 1; 107(11): 2706 -2714.  
84. Naughton MJ, Herndon JE,2nd, Shumaker SA, Miller AA, Kornblith AB, Chao D, 
Holland J. The health -related quality of life and survival of small -cell lung cancer 
patients: results of a companion study to CALGB 9033. Qual Life Res. 2002 May; 
11(3): 23 5-248.  
 
85. Queenan JA, Feldman -Stewart D, Brundage M, Groome PA. Social support and 
quality of life of prostate cancer patients after radiotherapy treatment. Eur J 
Cancer Care (Engl). 2009 Jun 22.  
 
86. Bagley N, Jones DK, Jost TS. Predicting the Fallout from Ki ng v. Burwell – 
Exchanges and the ACA. NEJM 2015;372(2):101 -104 
 
87. Johnson R.B., Onwuegbuzie, A. J. Mixed methods research: a paradigm whose 
time has come. Educational Researcher 2004; 33, 14 -26. 
29 
  
88. CDC/National Center for Health Statistics: National Health In terview Survey 
(NHIS). http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm  
 
89. Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative: National Survey of Children 
with Special Health Care Needs, 2012. http://www.childhealthdata.org/learn/NS -
CSHCN  
 
90. Agency for Healthcare Research a nd Quality, US Department of Health and 
Human Services: Medical expenditure panel survey (MEPS), 2009. 
http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/  
 
91. Center for Studying Health System Change (HSC): Community tracking study 
(CTS) and health tracking surveys. http://www.hschange.org/index.cgi?data=12  
 
92. The Commonwealth Fund: Kaiser/Commonwealth 1997 National Survey of 
Health Insurance, 1997. 
http://www.co mmonwealthfund.org/publications/surveys/1996/kaiser -
commonwealth -1997 -national -survey -of-health -insurance  
 
 