 
1 w COMIRB  Protocol   
COLORADO  MULTIPLE  INSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW  BOARD  
CAMPUS  BOX  F-490    TELEPHONE:   303-724-1055   Fax:  303-724-0990  
 
 
 
Protocol  #: 17-0857  
Project  Title:   Early  Intervention  for Complicated  Parapneumonic  Effusion:  Ran-
domized  Controlled  Trial  for Fibrinolytic  Therapy  vs. VATs  Decortica-
tion     
Principal  Investigator:  Pieracci  
Version  Date:   7/30/2019    
 
 
I. Hypotheses  and  Specific  Aims  
Early  VATS  decortication  in patients  with  complicated  parapneumonic  ef-
fusion  unable  to be drained  by image  thoracostomy  tube  reduces  hospi-
talization  time  and is more  cost  effective  than  fibrinolytic  therapy.  
 
Specific  aims:  
1: Standardize  a method  for identifying  patients  with  complicated  parap-
neumonic  effusions  that  require  a secondary  intervention  to clear  infec-
tion  from  pleural  space  
 
2: Contrast  outcomes  in patients  who  undergo  early  VATS  decortication  
vs. fibrinolytic  therapy  for complicated  parapneumonic  effusion  
 
3: Contrast  the cost  of early  VATS  decortication  vs. fibrin olytic  therapy  for 
complicated  parapneumonic  effusion  
 
4: Contrast  the complications  associated  with  early  VATS  decortication  
vs. fibrinolytic  therapy  for complicated  parapneumonic  effusion  
 
5: Assess  patient’s  coagulation  status  while  undergoing  each  inte rvention  
 
II. Background  and  Significance  
 
Introduction  
The treatment  of parapneumonic  infections  (infection  in the pleural  space)  at 
the Denver  Health  Medical  Center  is not standardized,  and timing  for advanced  in-
terventions  such  as fibrinolytic  therapy  or surgical  decortication  remain  unclear.   
The definitive  treatment  strategy  in these  patients  may  be sub-optimal,  and lead  to 
prolonged  hospitalization  and morbidity.   This  is concerning  as the mortality  rate  of 
 
2 community  acquired  pneumonia  triples  in the presence  of a parapneumonic  process  
(5-15%)  and can reach  over  25%  if it becomes  bilateral (1).  Prompt  recognition  of 
pleural  space  infections  is essential  for reducing  morbidity  and mortality.   This  is at-
tributable  to the progression  of the disease  from  a simple  fluid  collection  amenable  
to pleural  space  drainage,  to necrotizing  empyema  requiring  thoracotomy  decortica-
tion  and open  drainage.  The keys  to management  of parapneumonic  effusions  are 
early  diagn osis,  appropriate  therapeutic  intervention,  and recognition  of failure  of 
conservative  management.   We propose  that  a standardized  pathway  for identifying  
and treating  parapneumonic  effusions  will be an important  quality  improvement.   A 
key gap in the literature  remains  if patients  with  parapneumonic  infections  that  can-
not be drained  with  a chest  tube  should  undergo  a trial  in intrapleural  fibrinolytic  
therapy,  or if they  should  go directly  to video  assisted  thoracic  surgery  (VATS)  for 
decortication  of all infectious  material.  
 
Physiology  of Pleural  Space  Fluid  Shifts  
 
  Appreciation  of the pleural  space  physiology  helps  conceptually  understand  
the progression  of pleural  space  disease.  This  is an active  region  of fluid  exchange  
due to the leaky  pleural  membr ane and negative  pressure  of the pleural  space (2). 
The fluid  originates  predominantly  from  the parietal  capillaries  because  of hydro-
static  pressure,  augmented  by the negative  pressure  of the pleural  space.  Less  fluid  
is produced  by the visceral  pleura  because  the hydrostatic  pressure  is atte nuated  by 
pulmonary  venous  drainage.  However,  the visceral  surface  will add more  pleural  
fluid  with  increased  pulmonary  interstitial  pressure.  A small  volume  of fluid  is nor-
mal in the pleural  space,  but healthy  individuals  should  have  less than  4 mm  of de-
pendent  pleural  fluid  on decubitus  ultrasound. (3) 
 Clearance  of fluid  from  the pleural  space  is accomplished  by lymphatics.   The 
visceral  mesothelium  of the pleural  space  is intricately  connected  to the lung paren-
chyma,  whereas  the parietal  layer  is more  loosely  connected  to the thoracic  struc-
tures  separated  by a variable  fatty  layer.  The parietal  pleura  has specialized  areas  
known  as stoma,  and an extensive  lymphatic  network  exists  below  which  is the pre-
dominant  route  of fluid  resorption  located  at the dependent  portion  of the chest  cav-
ity(4). Under  normal  conditions,  it is estimated  that  each  pleural  cavity  generates  
0.2 to 0.4 mL/kg  per hour.  The capacity  for pleural  fluid  absorption  is thought  to ex-
ceed  500 mL of fluid  from  each  cavity  with  an intact  lymphatic  system.  Overall,  the 
accumulation  of pleural  fluid  is the result  of a dynamic  system  of fluid  production  
and absorption.  Pathology  of the pleural  space  tends  to shift  extra  fluid  into  the re-
gion  from  increased  oncotic  drive  due to increa sed particulate,  increased  permeabil-
ity of the pleural  membrane,  and decreased  lymphatic  clearance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3  Evolution  of Pleural  Space  Infection  to Empyema  
 
Complicated  parapneumonic  effusions,  and ultimately  empyema,  develop  in 
three  conceptual  phases (5, 6). The early  phase  is a sterile  effusion  caused  by paren-
chymal  inflammation  that  activates  mesothelial  cells  and enhances  capillary  perme-
ability,  termed  exudative  (days  2–5). This  is thought  to be driven  by proinflamma-
tory  cytokines,  including  interleukin  8 and tumor  necrosis  factor -[alpha]. (6) Ulti-
mately,  the volume  of fluid  traversing  into  the pleural  cavity  exceeds  the capacity  to 
reabsorb  the fluid  and an effusion  develops.  The second  phase  is termed  fibropuru-
lent,  which  is initiated  by bacterial  infection  (days  5–10).  At this point,  the immune  
system  is activated  and the once  hypocoagulable  environment  is chan ged dramati-
cally.  
 Bacterial  and neutrophil  activity  acidify  the fluid,  consume  glucose,  increase  
protein  content,  and release  lactate  dehydrogenase  (LDH)  from  cellular  apoptosis  
and necrosis.  The environment  now  becomes  hypercoagulable  because  of the inte-
grated  responses  of the innate  immune  and coagulation  systems. (7, 8) These  find-
ings  are directly  relevant  to the evolution  of complicated  effusions  because  the exu-
berant  fibrin  deposition  is a concerted  effort  to control  progressive  infection.  The fi-
nal state  of a complicated  effusion  is referred  to as the organization  phase  (days  10–
21).  Fibroblasts  migrate  into  the pleural  space  and create  a dense  fibrotic  lining  of 
the visceral  and parietal  surfaces.  This  phase  is thought  to be driven  by regenerative  
cytokines,  for example,  transforming  growth  factor -[beta]  and platelet -derived  
growth  factor  released  primarily  from  activated  mesothelial  cells. (9) The net result  
is a progressive  rind  that encases  the lung,  reducing  ventilatory  capacity  and se-
questering  bacteria.   
 
 Risk  Factors  and Bacteriology  of Pleural  Space  Infection  
 
 There  are over  a million  patients  hospitalized  for pneumonia  a year  and 10%  
of these  patients  will develop  a pleural  space  infection (10) . Patients  who  present  to 
the hospital  with  pneumonia  have  an increased  risk for pleural  space  infection  if 
they  have  a history  of IV drug use and alcohol  abuse (11) , age less than  60(12) , and 
male  gender (13).  Nosocomial  pneumonia  have  a higher  rate  of pleural  space  infec-
tion  and have  reported  needs  for operative  intervention  in up to a third  of pa-
tients (14) . The incidence  of pleural  infection  in trauma  patients  with  thoracic  inju-
ries is around  3%. (15)  Risk  factors  for developing  a post -traumatic  empyema  in-
clude  multiple  rib fractures,  thoracostomy  tube  placed  in the emergency  depart-
ment,  and underlying  pulmonary  contusion.   Another  risk factor  is placement  by 
non-surgical  specialty  (16) . This  has clinical  significance  as a retained  post -trau-
matic  hemothorax  has the highest  risk for empyema,  with  an infection  rate  of over  
25% (17) .   
 A Gram  stain  and culture  of the pleural  fluid  is often  beneficial  in directing  
management  in pleural  space  infection,  although  20%  to 40%  of the time,  there  is no 
reported  identifiable  pathogen. (12,  18, 19). However,  the patient’s  history  is often  
helpful  when  directing  empiric  antibiosis  while  waiting  for gram  stains  and cultures  
to finalize.    In empyema  associate d with  community -acquired  pneumonia,  the most  
 
4 common  pathogen  Streptococcus  milleri  (32%),  whereas  if hospital  acquired,  it was  
methicillin -resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus  (28%).  Patient  characteristics,  including  
diabetes,  alcoholism,  age older  than  60 years, and trauma  are associated  with  more  
anaerobic  and resistant  gram -positive  organisms. (20)  Hospital -acquired  empyema  
is reported  to have  a fourfold  greater  risk  of death  compared  with  community  ac-
quired. (12)   S. milleri  is a commonly  identified  pathogen  in patients  who  have  un-
dergone  surgical  intervention  of the chest  or upper  digestive  tract  and often  require  
decortication. (21)  Because  of the differences  in bacteriology  of pleural  space  infec-
tions  an adequate  history  of patients  with  parapneumonic  processes  (community  vs. 
hospital  acquired  pneumonia,  vs. chest  space  intervention)  is essential  for guiding  
early  antibiosis. (22)  Of note,  although  most  antibiotics  penetrate  the pleura  well,  
aminoglycosides  may  be inactivated  at a lower  ph.(23)   
 
 Diagnosis  of Pleural  Space  Infection   
 
Radiographic  identification  of an effusion  in a patient  with  a systemic  inflam-
matory  response  syndrome  (SIRS)  does  not necessarily  correlate  with  a pleural  
space  infection.   Only  1 in 4 patients  with  an effusion  associated  with  a CAP  ulti-
mately  require  drainage  of the pleural  space. (1) The next  step  in management  of an 
effusion  is quantifying  the volume  of fluid.   The standard  method  to estimate  the 
amount  of pleural  fluid  has been  the lateral  decubitus  chest  x-ray(24) . Recent  com-
parative  studies  indicate  that  ultrasound  is a more  reliable  method  to quantitate  a 
pleural  effusion  (24-26). As previously  mentioned,  an effusion  measured  up to 4 mm  
is considered  normal. (3) Clinical  studies  by Light  et al.(10)  indicated  that  infections  
involving  an effusion  of less than  10 mm  will resolve  with  antibiotics  alone,  and this 
has been  supported  by subsequent  series. (27,  28).  Therefore  patients  with  large  ef-
fusions  on upright  films  or CT images  should  proceed  to drainage  of the pleural  
space  with  a chest  tube.   Patient  with  smaller  effusions  should  have  a bedside  esti-
mate  of the volume  of fluid  in their  chest  with ultrasound,  and those  with  fluid  levels  
less than  10 mm  in height  are likely  to have  resolution  of their  symptoms  with  anti-
biotic  therapy  alone.   
If the decision  is made  to perform  a thoracentesis  of the pleural  space,  the 
fluid  removed  should  undergo  evaluation  for an active  infection.   Gross  purulence  
(empyema)  at the time  of thoracentesis  is unusual  but constitutes  an indication  for 
prompt  video -assisted  thoracoscopic  surgery  (VATS)  decortication. (5) In all other  
circumstances,  the pleural  fluid  should  be submitted  for laboratory  analysis.  The 
traditional  technique  to distinction  an exudative  versus  transudative  effusion  is via 
Light’s  criteria:  protein  greater  than  0.5 serum,  LDH  greater  than  0.6 serum,  or LDH  
greater  than  two-thirds  normal  serum. (29)  However,  the most  cost-effective  means  
to analyze  this is to measure  the pH of the pleural  fluid  using  a standard  blood  gas 
analyzer,  available  in most  intensive  care  units.  A pH less than  7.2 is the threshold,  
although  less than  7.3 is considered  high  risk.  (30-32) An exception  is a Proteus  in-
fection  where  the pH may  exceed  7.4 because  of ammonia  production. (6) An alter-
native  diagnosti c criterion  is a pleural  fluid  glucose  less than  60 mg/dL  when  infec-
tion  is suspected. (6) Because  the evolution  of an empyema  may  extend  for days  to 
weeks  and the early  phase  is a sterile  effusion,  a repeat  diagnostic  thoracentesis  
 
5 should  be done  in any patient  with  a persistent  unexplained  SIRS  and unilateral  
pleural  effusion. (5) 
 
Early  Management  of Pleural  Space  Infection   
 
 Those  patients  with  fluid  tested  in the chest  space  concerning  for pleural  in-
fection  require  empiric  antibiotic  treatment  to cover  suspected  pathogens  in addi-
tion  to tube  thoracostomy  drainage.   The exception  is in patients  with  gross  puru-
lence  aspirated  from  the pleural  space  that  should  under  go prompt  operative  de-
cortication.  The optimal  size  of the chest  tube  remains  debated, (33,  34) but a 18F 
seems  effective  in removing  this hypercoaguable  fluid.  This  is a grade  B recommen-
dation.  These  smaller  chest  tubes  are associated  with less chest  wall  pain  than  blunt  
dissection –inserted  tubes,  without  compromise  in clinical  outcome.  The position  of 
the chest  tube,  however,  is important. (34)  The tube  should  be placed  in the poste-
rior (dependent)  pleural  space  and not within  a pulmonary  fissure.  We have  ob-
served  that  the typical  “trauma” chest  tube  introduced  through  the fifth  intercostal  
space  (ICS),  at the mid–axillary  line,  favors  fissure  placement.  Consequen tly, we rec-
ommend  ultrasonography -guided  tube  insertion  via the sixth  intercostal  space.  But 
this is based  on our unpublished  experience.  A Gram  stain  and culture  of the pleural  
fluid  should  be obtained  at the time  of tube  thoracostomy  to differentiate  the organ-
ism,  although  as previously  mentioned  up to 40%  if the time  no pathogen  may  be 
found.  More  recent  techniques  such  as countercurrent  electrophoresis,  latex  aggluti-
nation,  or bacterial  DNA  detection  by polymerase  chain  reaction  could  in theory  im-
prove  pathogen  identification,  but are not currently  standard  of care  in the clinical  
setting. (30)    
 After  tube  placement  vigilant  follow  up of chest  tube  output  and changes  in 
radiographic  appearance  are critical.   Pleural  collections  persisting  for more  than  24 
hours  warrant  prompt  computed  tomographic  (CT)  imaging  for evaluation  of the 
entire  thoracic  space .(9, 29).  Delay  in diagnosis  of an undrained  simple  fluid  collec-
tion  allows  progression  to a complex  multilocular  process  and the final  organization  
stage. (35)  As Sahn  and Light (28)  stated  in 1989,  “the  sun should  never  set on a 
parapneumonic  effusion”; early  diagnosis  and treatment  of complicated  pleural  in-
fection  is essential  for optimal  outcomes.  CT images  are crucial  for the next  step  in 
the management  of pleural  space  infections  that  have  not resolved  with  tube  drain-
age as this dictates  operative  versus  fibrinolytic  therapy.  
 
 Fibrinolysis  Therapy  for Treating  Pleural  Space  Infections  
 
The rationale  for obtaining  a CT scan  24 hours  after  failure  of appropriate  
tube  drainage  for a pleural  infection  is for recognition  of a persistent  pleural  collec-
tion trapped  via thin  fibrin  septa.   This  fibrin  deposition  likely  had an initial  protec-
tive role.  The prehistoric  horseshoe  crab  uses  a unique  protease,  Factor  C, to initiate  
coagulation  in the presence  of endotoxin,  trapping  and killing  pathogens (36) . This  
has been  extrapolated  to animal  models,  in which  it has been  demonstrated  that  
anti-fibrinolysis  is protective  in gram -negative  infection (37) .  However  excessive  fi-
brin  deposition  maybe  pathologic  and impaired  fibrinolysis  has recently  been  
 
6 described  ventilated  patients (38) .  It has become  increasingly  apparent  that  the ma-
jority  of patients  with  sepsis (39)  or sustaining  significant  injury (40)  have  resistance  
to fibrinolytic  activity  and prone  to developing  organ  failure  from  what  is believed  
to be micro  vascular  fibrin  deposition.  This  translates  to the pleural  space,  where  fi-
brin  deposition  is appreciated  during  inflammation  and infection. (41)  This  early  fi-
brin  deposition  may  help  contain  the pathogen  with  impending  progressive  infec-
tion.   Pathologic  fibrin  deposition  occurs  when  the body  is unable  to clear  the patho-
gen and the speta  become  thickened,  rendering  chest  tube  drai nage  ineffective.   The 
proposed  therapeutic  option  is to medically  breakdown  these  fibrin  depositions  by 
up regulating  the fibrinolytic  system.   
The first  report  of fibrinolytic  therapy  in the pleural  space  was  by Tillett  and 
Sherry (42)  in 1949.  They  infused  purified  hemolytic  streptococcal  concentrates,  
presumed  to contain  streptokinase  and deoxyribonuclease  (DNase).  Although  ap-
parently  safe,  there  was  no documented  improvement  in patient  outcome  during  the 
ensuing  60 years.  The first  randomized  trial,  by Davies  et al.(43)  in 1997,  demon-
strated  radiographic  improvement  in 24 patients  but no discernible  clinical  benefit.  
This  was  followed  by a number  of underpowered  randomized  studies  in Europe,  
suggesting  that  urokin ase demonstrated  a therapeutic  value. (44,  45) These  conflict-
ing results  led to the MIST  I study (46)  involving  52 hospitals  in the United  Kingdom  
with  412  randomized  patients.  The data  indicated  that  72 hours  of streptokinase  
treatment  resulted  in no improvement  in mortality,  rate  of surgery,  or length  of stay  
and was  associated  with  an increased  rate  of serious  adverse  events.  This  study  was  
criticized  for including  a heterogeneous  mix of patients  with  different  comorbidities  
and different  stages  of pleural  disease. (47)  A subsequent  Cochrane  review  in 
2008 (48)  noted  that  there  was  a discordance  between  earlier  studies  and the MIST  I 
data  and concluded  that  fibrinolytics  should  be used  selectively  because  there  has 
not been  a proven  benef it in high -quality  trials;  however,  the authors  acknowledged  
that  there  may  be certain  subgroups  of patients  who  benefit  from  this therapy.  Clini-
cal studies  in other  arenas  indicated  that  tissue  plasminogen  activator  (tPA)  was  a 
more  effective  and safer  agent than  streptokinase  or urokinase  as a fibrinolytic  
agent. (49)  Other  studies  suggested  that  the addition  of DNase  to streptokinase  im-
proves  evacuation  of an empyema. (50,  51) Subsequently , MIST  II, using  tPA with  or 
without  DNase,  has been  completed. (52)  Unfortunately,  this study  (n = 210;  four  
study  groups)  was  only  powered  sufficiently  to evaluate  radiographic  changes.   But 
consistent  with  MIST  I, tPA showed  no benefit  over  any fibrinolytic  treatme nt. The 
combination  of tPA and DNase,  however,  was  beneficial  in both  the primary  end 
point  (radiographic  clearance)  and secondary  end points  (need  for thoracotomy,  
hospital  length  of stay).  The authors  responsibly  conclude,  “Our  study  shows  that  
combinati on intrapleural  t-PA and DNAse  therapy  improves  the drainage  of pleural  
fluid  in patients  with  pleural  infection…  This  combined  treatment  may  therefore  be 
useful  in patients  in whom  standard  medical  management  has failed  and thoracic  
surgery  is not a treat ment  option.  However,  appropriate  trials  are needed  to accu-
rately  define  the treatment  effects.”  
Thus,  the debate  continues  regarding  the role  of fibrinolytics  in the manage-
ment  of pleural  collections.  Most  intensivists  have  observed  effective  eradication  of 
early  empyema  in some  patients  but agree  that  the appropriate  population  remains  
 
7 ill defined.  On the basis  of the pathophysiology  of empyema  and the morbidity  of 
thoracotomy  for delayed  intervention,  most  think  that  fibrinolytic  treatment  should  
be atte mpted  for early  empyema  with  simple  collections  separated  by thin  septa  
documented  by CT scan  if tube  thoracotomy  drainage  fails.  Image -guided  direct  in-
fusion  of fibrinolytics  into  the collection  is superior  to delivery  via the failed  chest  
tube.  The preci se agent,  dosage,  and timing  of infusion  remain  to be analyzed;  the 
combination  of tPA and DNase  seems  to be the most  effective  regimen  at this 
time. (52)  Large  case  series  have  emerged  since  the publication  of MIST  II.  Piccolo  et 
al(53)  reported  a three -year  experience  using  the MIST  II protocol  (5mg  DNase  and 
10mg  tPA BID for up to six dose s) in 10 different  centers.   Inclusion  criteria  were  pa-
tients  with  a pleural  PH < 7.2 and clinical  evidence  of infection.   The majority  of 
these  patients  were  male  (69%)  had CAP  (97%),  middle  aged  (median  56 yrs.),  and 
received  2 days  of therapy.   Of the 107 patients  included  in the analysis  93%  had 
successful  fibrinolytic/DNAse  to avoid  surgery.   Of note  23%  of patients  had in-
creased  pain  associated  with  infusion  and required  additional  analgesic  medication,  
which  should  be taken  into  consideration  when  starting  therapy.   A smaller  case  se-
ries from  Mehta  et al.(54)  evaluating  55 patients  using  once  a day therapy  for 3 days  
had similarly  positive  results  with  93%  of patients  not requiring  surgical  interven-
tion.  They  also  appreciated  that  15%  of patients  required  additional  analgesics  dur-
ing treatments.   
 
Surgical  Decortication  
 
There  are no randomized  control  trials  evaluating  VATs  vs. fibrinolytic  ther-
apy in adults.   However  in adolescents  a small  trial  demonstrated  equivalency  in fi-
brinolytic  therapy  and VATS  in clearing  infection,  but the surgical  intervention  
group  had 3 fewer  days  with  a chest  tube  and 3 fewer  hospital  days (55) .  This  is im-
portant  to take  into  the context  of the patient’s  physiologic  status.   There  is a need  
for a prospective  randomized  control  trial  to determine  if VATS  or fibrinolytic  ther-
apy is the optimal  treatment  of patients  with  complicated  parapneumonic  effusions  
who  are physically  fit to undergo  surgery.  In addition  there  are also  patents  that  
should  proceed  to decortica tion  and avoid  attempts  at fibrinolysis  therapy.  Multiloc-
ulated  empyema  with  an established  pleural  peel  evident  on CT scanning  should  un-
dergo  prompt  VATS. (48)  Although  “medical” VATS  using  local  anesthesia  has been  
reported, (56)  the standard  procedure  is lateral  decubitus  positioning  with  dual  lung  
ventilation  to facilitate  comprehensive  evaluation  of the involved  pleural  cavity  and 
systematic  decortication.  A key maneuver  is to enter  the pleural  space  without  in-
juring  the underlying  lung  because  of extensive  pleural  adhesions.  An initial  incision  
in the upper  thorax,  where  the empyema  is least  developed,  is usually  the safest  
strategy.  In most  cases,  we have  used  the existing  chest  tube  site to free  the lung  for 
placement  of the initial  port.  With  the thorascope  in position  and the lung  at least  
partially  deflated,  additional  working  ports  are added  under  direct  vision. The sites  
for these  ports  are chosen  to match  the chest  wall  entrance  of the chest  tubes  after  
VATS.  
 The objectives  of VATS  are to unroof  all loculated  collections,  including  those  
in the fissures,  and to free  the lung  of the visceral  pleural  fibrous  encasement.  
 
8 Usually,  the decortication  is initiated  in the upper  lobe,  where  the process  is more  
limited,  and ultimately,  the fibrous  debris  is removed  as much  as possible  from  the 
lung  surface  to enable  re-expansion.  Dissection  must  be done  carefully  on the medi-
astinal  side  to avoid  injury  to the phrenic  nerve  and pulmonary  vasculature.  Simi-
larly,  clearing  the diaphragm  must  be done  cautiously  to avoid  perforation.  In fact,  
the diaphragm  does  not need  to be systematically  debrided  as long  as the lower  lobe  
is freed.  After  extensive  decortication,  the thorax  is usually  drained  with  three  rela-
tively  large  chest  tubes  (28F)  to facilitate  removal  of debris  and blood  associated  
with  the procedure.  The most  inferior  tube  is usually  an angled  tube  positioned  in 
the posterior  dependent  recess  of the chest.  
In the event  of a dense  fibrous  peel  that  precludes  clearance  via VATS,  a lim-
ited  lateral  muscle -sparing  thoracotomy  (“mini  thoracotomy”)  is performed  to ac-
complish  decortication.  Transecting  the posterior  rib facilitates  exposure  of the fi-
brous  cavity.  Advanced  empyemas  often  require  scalpel  incision  to free  the lung  for 
re-expansion;  inspection  of the lung  with  periodic  re-inflation  should  be done  to 
avoid  extensive  pulmonary  parenchymal  air leaks.  In the unusual  case  of a chronic  
empyema,  a standard  posterolateral  thoracotomy  is required.  Often,  the safest  ap-
proach  is to develop  an extrapleural  plane  and directly  enter  the empyema  cavity  
before  any further  thoracic  dissection  is done.  After  these  extensive  decort ications,  
the thorax  is drained  with  three  relatively  large  chest  tubes  (28F),  and the most  in-
ferior  tube  is usually  an angled  tube  positioned  in the posterior  dependent  recess  of 
the chest.  Occasionally,  these  tubes  are simply  transected  to provide  extern al drain-
age for outpatient  management  of extended  processes.  
Treatment  of an advanced  process  caused  by a necrotic  infected  lung  with  as-
sociated  major  air leaks  in a severely  immunocompromised  patient  warrants  open  
thoracic  drainage.  The Eloesser  flap,  thoracic  cavity  marsupialization  via segmental  
rib resection  and suturing  the skin  to the underlying  parietal  surface,  has been  the 
standard  for these  complicated  cases .(57)  But recently,  simple  open  drainage  with  
suturing  the skin  margin  to the chest  wall,  thoracostomy,  and the application  of a 
vacu um-assisted  wound  closure  has been  popularized. (58,  59) Ultimately,  some  of 
these  wounds  will heal  by secondary  intention,  and the remaining  can be closed  
with  thoracomyoplasty. (60)  
 
Significance  
 
Infection  of the pleural  space  is a morbid  condition  requiring  prompt  inter-
vention.   The keys  to optimal  care  in these  patients  are 1) early  identification  2) an-
tibiotics  and 3) clearance  of infection  from  the pleural  space.  When  a chest  tube  has 
incompletely  drained  the pleural  space  within  24 hours  CT imaging  to better  charac-
teriz e the pleural  space  is essential.  The Western  Trauma  Association  has published  
a critical  decision  algorithm  for determining  which  patients  should  proceed  to de-
cortication  versus  fibrinolytic  therapy (61) .  It is important  to note  that  there  have  
been  no randomized  trials  in adults  comparing  early  VATs  to fibrinolytic  therapy  in 
patients  who  can tolerate  surgery.   Future  studies  are warranted  to address  this gap 
in knowledge,  as pediatric  literature  supports  early  decortication  may  be more  cost  
effective  and beneficial  to the patient.  Failure  to appropriately  treat  pleural  space  
 
9 infection  resulting  in empyema  results  in highly  morbid  open  operations  requiring  
prolonged  hospitalization  and lengthy  recovery.     
 
 
 
III. Preliminary  Studies/Progress  Report:   
 
 We have  previous  completed  a retrospective  study  at Denver  Health  evaluating  
Strep  Milleri  associated  pleural  infection s(62) . Over  the 70-month  period  evaluated,  
39 patients  had S Milleri  infections  of the pleural  space;  26 (67%)  patients  under-
went  operative  intervention.  The majority  (72%)  were  men  with  a mean  age of 46 
(range  22 to 63);  the underlying  etiology  in those  patients  requiring  operation  was  
pneumonia  (26 patients ; 67%),  trauma  (9 patients;  23%),  postoperative  infection  (2 
patients),  foreign  body  ingestion  (1 patient),  and malignancy  (1 patient).  The aver-
age duration  of chest  tube  drainage  prior  to operation  was  4.4 days  (95%  confi-
dence  interval  [CI] 2.6 to 6.2)  and antibiotic  treatment  was  6.0 days  (95%  CI 3.8 to 
8.2).  Thirteen  patients  (50%)  underwent  video -assisted  thoracoscopic  surgery  
(VATS)  and 13 patients  required  thoracotomy.  VATS  was  performed  more  often  
when  operative  intervention  occurred  early  (average  hospital  day 6.2)  compared  to 
initial  thoracotomy  or conversion  from  VATS  to thoracotomy  (average  hospital  day 
9.8).  Hospital  length  of stay  was  less in the operative  group  (average  24 days;  95%  
CI 17 to 31) than  in the non-operative  group  (34 days;  95%  CI 19 to 49),  discharge  
to home  was  greater  in the operative  group  (77%  vs. 16%),  and mortality  was  less 
in operative  group  (0%  vs. 23%).  
 
While  this data  was  published  before  the routine  use of antibiotics,  it demonstrates  
key aspects  of the current  proposed  study;  1) decreasing  time  to surgical  consulta-
tion  and chest  tube  placement  2) early  operative  intervention  when  indicated  allow-
ing for minimally  invasive  surgery  3) decreased  hospitalization  time  in patients  
when  operative  intervention  is performed.   This study  only  included  patients  with  
Strep  Milleri,  which  in regards  to historic  literature  represents  1/3rd of all pleural  
space  infections.    
 
IV. Research  Methods  
 
A.  Outcome  Measure(s):    
Primary:  Length  of stay  (determined  by when  treating  team  deems  medically  fit for 
discharge,  and excludes  extended  stay  for social  work  related  issues)  
 Secondary:  ICU free  days  
          Ventilator  free  days  
           Days  with  chest  tube  in place  after  intervention  
          Total  cost  - post  intervention  
   Pain  scores  
   Chest  tube  drainage  post  intervention  
   Incentive  spirometry  volume  post  intervention  for 5 days  
   Days  to wean  off supplemental  oxygen  
 
10    Days  to resolution  of fever  
   Days  of antibiotic  therapy  after  intervention  
   Days  to normalization  of WBC  
   Change  in TEG  variables  after  initiating  intervention   
 Covariates:  Age,  BMI,  Diabetes,  Duration  of symptoms,  Steroid  use 
 Adverse  events:  Air leak,  bleeding  requiring  transfusion,  need  for additional  
chest  tube,  and need  for secondary  operation/intervention,  mortality  
 
 
B. Description  of Population  to be Enrolled:    
Adults  >18 admitted  with  pleural  effusion  diagnosed  by chest  x-ray or computed  to-
mography,  that  undergo  thoracentesis  or chest  tube  drainage  by any service.   
 
If the patient  has a pleural  fluid  PH < 7.3, the patient  will be screened  for potential  
study  enrollment.   If the patient  does  not have  any exclusion  criteria  (listed  below)  
the patient  will be followed  for study  enrollment.  If there  is a persistent  effusion  24 
hours  after  chest  tube  insertion,  diagnosed  by morning  chest  X ray, and no exclusion  
criteria  identified,  the patient  may  then  undergo  CT scan  to characterize  the effu-
sion.  If CT scan  is done  and confirms  a loculated  fluid  collection  or if an additional  
CXR  is grossly  abnormal,  despite  chest  tube  drainage,  these  patients  will then  be ap-
proached  for consent  and randomized  to either  bedside  fibrinolytic  therapy  through  
their  chest  tube  versus  operative  VATS  decortication.  The patients  that  undergo  
VATS  decorti cation,  will subsequently  be transferred  to the surgery  service  for the 
remainder  of their  hospital  stay.   
Exclusion:   
- Intrathoracic  malignancy    
- Any  existing  malignancy  causing  malignant  effusion   
- Prehospital  pulmonary  symptoms  over  14 days  prior  to admission  
- Prior  instrumentation  of the chest  during  same  admission   
- Malignant  cells  from  initial  pleural  fluid  sample  
- End  stage  liver  disease   (Child’s  B or greater)  
- Coagulopathy  
  - Unable  to tolerate  surgical  procedure  
  - Frank  purulent  drainag e (needs  OR regardless)  
  - Recent  surgery  of abdomen  or thorax  precluding  the use of tPA 
  - Pre-existing  and permanent  neurologic  impairment  
 
C. Study  Design  and  Research  Methods   
 
This  study  is a proposed  pragmatic  prospective  randomized  open  label  clinical  trial  
to treat  patients  with  complicated  parapneumonic  effusion.   Complicated  parapneu-
monic  effusion  is defined  as fluid  collection  in the pleural  space  with  a fluid  pH<7.3.    
 
 
 
 
 
11  
Standard  of Care  Procedure  prior  to study  eligibility:  
Patients  with parapneumonic  effusions  identified  on chest  x-ray or CT will be admit-
ted to the medicine  service  and started  on the appropriate  therapy.   The medi-
cine/pulmonary  service  will then  perform  a thoracentesis  or place  a chest  tube  in 
patients  that  there  is a concern  for an infectious  process.   Pleural  fluid  sampling  will 
undergo  pH testing,  and those  patients  with  a low pleural  pH (pH <7.3)  will continue  
to be observed  over  the next  24 hours.  Those  patients  who  have  persistent  fluid  col-
lections  >24 hours  from  chest  tube  placement  identified  by a morning  chest  X ray, 
will undergo  a CT scan  of the chest  to further  characterize  the pleural  space.  These  
eligible  patients  will be approached  by a study  team  member  for study  consent  to 
enroll  and randomized  into  a treatment  group  (Fibrinolytic  therapy  vs. early  VATS  
Decortication).    
 
Study  Procedures:  
Eligible  patients  will be screened  for study  participation  and after  consenting  will be 
randomized  to early  surgical  decortication  via VATs  versus  fibrinolytic  therapy  (FT) 
based  off of the current  MIST  II protocol,  currently  utilized  at Denver  Health.   Should  
the patient  be randomized  into  the FT group,  initiation  of fibrinolytic  therapy  will 
start  within  24 hours  of CT scan,.  Conversely,  if the patient  is randomized  into the 
surgery  group,  VATS  decortication  will occur  as soon  as the operating  room  is avail-
able.   The fibrinolytic  therapy  will be delivered  by a member  of the treatment  team  
per current  standard  of care  for 3 days.   Removal  of chest  tubes  is dependent  on the 
mutual  agreement  of both  the surgical  and pulmonary  attending  involved  with  the 
patients  care.   Per standard  clinical  care,  labs  will be collected  daily  (determined  by 
the medical  team,  but usually  include  complete  blood  count  and basic  metabolic  
panel).  In addition  to the standard  of care  labs,  pleural  fluid  will be collected  for 
study  purposes  and extra  blood  samples  will be collected  for thrombelastography  
(TEG)  analysis.  TEG  assesses  changes  in clot strength  in both  plasma  and pleural  
samples  by measu ring  proteins  related  to coagulation  with  proteomic  analysis.    
Thrombo  Therapeutics,  Inc. is not involved  in this study.  tPA-challenged  TEG  assay  
is used  for research  purposes  only.  The data  from  this test is not accessible  for the 
clinical  care  providers  and does  not affect  the patient  care.  We are using  this assay  
to study  the clot sensitivity  and as a marker  for massive  blood  transfusion.  The re-
sults  of tPA-challenged  TEG  assay  will not be used  for any clinical  decision  or re-
search  subject  assignment.  At the moment  there  is no plan  to submit  tPA-challenged  
TEG  data  to the FDA. This  study  blood  and pleural  fluid  will be drawn  by the phlebot-
omy  service  or medical  team  member  (nurse  or physician  to draw  pleural  fluid)  and 
will be collected  by a prof essional  research  assistant  (PRA)  trained  in both  running  
the TEG  assay  and in processing  of blood  for plasma  analysis.  Blood  and pleural  fluid  
samples  will be 3.5ml  each.   
 
Study  blood  will be drawn  prior  the intervention  and then  for 3 sequential  days  af-
ter (for a total  of 4 draws).   This  blood  will be assayed  by TEG  with  and without  the 
t-PA challenge.   This  modified  TEG  assay  (t-PA challenge)  is completed  by taking  
500 microliters  of patient  blood  out of the citrated  tube  and adding  it to a pre made  
 
12 glass container  with  lypohylized  t-PA.  This  blood  is mixed  with  a defined  concentra-
tion  of t-PA is then  added  to a TEG  cup for analysis.   This  will quantify  the patient’s  
systemic  blood  to fibrinolysis  resistance.   In addition  to the blood  draws,  pleural  
fluid will be drawn  from  the patient’s  chest  tube  in the morning  prior  to the inter-
vention,  and then  after  the intervention  for 3 days  (same  days  that  blood  samples  
are obtained,  for a total  of 4 pleural  fluid  samples).   Pleural  fluid  samples  will only  
be drawn from  chest  tubes  already  in place.   In the event  the chest  tube  is removed  
prior  to 3 days  post -intervention  pleural  fluid  samples  will be unattainable.   The 
pleural  fluid  would  otherwise  be discarded  as human  waste.  We will also  conduct  a 
novel  assay  to determine  if the pleural  space  content  is fibrinolytic  resistant.   This  
will be accomplished  by an ex vivo  diluting  of the patient’s  blood  (from  the collected  
citrated  tube)  by 25%  with  normal  saline  and conducting  a t-PA challenge  versus  a 
25%  dilution  of the patient’s  blood  (from  the collected  citrated  tube)  with  their  
pleural  fluid.   The relative  differences  in the lysis  at 30 minutes  between  these  two 
assays  will give  a crude  estimate  of fibrinolytic  inhibition.   Remaining  blood  after  
TEG  analysis  will be spun  down  to plasma  and flash  frozen  for future  measurements,  
such  as elastase  activity  and a targeted  cohort  for proteins  related  to coagulation  
with  proteomic  analysis.   These  results  paired  with  proteomic  analysis  will enable  
correlations  between  fibrinolysis  resistance  and relative  protein  concentrations  to 
identify  potential  mechanistic  culprits  driving  fibrinolysis  resistance.  This  study  
blood  will be collected  by PRA  (drawn  by the nurse  and handed  off to thePRA)  
trained  in both  running  the TEG  assay  and in processing  blood  for plasma  analysis.    
 
 
13 Data  collection  will be done  prospectively  by a member  of the research  team.   Data  
will be stored  in a secure  excel  sheet  accessible  only  to the study  team  members.    
Randomization  
   
 
Intervention  
VATS  decortication  
Vs. 
tPA and DNASE  per MISTII  protocol  
 
 
 
D.   Description,  Risks  and  Justification  of Procedures  and  Data  Collection  
Tools:  
 
The adverse  events  of the standard  of care  fibrinolytic  therapy  include  pain,  fever,  
bleeding,  and failure  to effectively  clear  infection  from  the pleural  space  requiring  

 
14 surgery,  which  tend  to be higher  risk due to disease  progression.   The VATS  decorti-
cation  is a slightly  more  invasive  procedure,  as it requires  general  anesthesia  and 
single  lung  ventilation.   Complications  from  surgery  include  injury  to lung  causing  
an air leak,  bleeding,  pain,  and need  for conversion  to an open  operation.  The VATS  
surgery  uses  small  holes  in the thoracic  cavity  that  are similar  in diameter  to a chest  
tube.   This  requires  1 or 2 additional  holes  in the chest  cavity  compared  to the pa-
tients  who  already  have  one chest  tube  receiving  fibrinolytic  therapy.   The benefits  
of VATS  over  fibrinolytic  therapy  are reduction  in chest  tube  time  and overall  reduc-
tion  in hospitalization  time.   In children  VATS  reduced  the requirement  of a chest  
tube  by 3 days  and associated  with  hospital  discharge  3 days  earlier  with  resolution  
of symptoms  3 days  earlier.   This  is logical  as the chest  is cleared  of all infected  ma-
terial  with  the VATS  operation,  while fibrinolysis  is dependent  on the medication  
breaking  down  all of the loculated  fluid  collections.   The second  benefit  may  be a re-
duction  in cost  to the patient,  and improvement  in resource  utilization  of the hospi-
tal.  Three  days  of hospitalization  out weighs  the cost  of the operating  room.   All 
clinical  outcomes  will be monitored  by a research  team  member  who  will be collect-
ing blood  on a daily  basis  for 3 days  post  intervention  and inputting  data  into  a RED  
CAP  data  bank  designed  for the study.   As this study  is associated  with  an operative  
arm  a data  safety  monitoring  board  (DSMB)  will be created  to assess  patient  out-
comes  after  enrollment  of 10 patients  or once  a year,  even  if enrollment  has not in-
creased  by 10.  This  will not include  an interim  analysis  on primary  outcome,  as this 
will decrease  power  and necessitate  additional  patients  for enrollment.   We antici-
pate  that  roughly  2 patients  per month  will be eligible  for enrollment  in this study  
and would  expect  completion  of the study  within  18 mont hs.   
 
 
 
E.   Potential  Scientific  Problems:    
 
This  study  is established  as a pragmatic  study  as it is anticipated  that  some  patients  
would  prefer  conservative  fibrinolytic  therapy  to surgery.   We have  adjusted  for this 
in our power  calculation  (see  below ).  In addition  the timing  of availability  of the op-
erating  room  staff  is not predictable.   There  may  be a delay  in taking  the patient  to 
the operating  room.   The importance  of performing  this study  is that  it is perceived  
that  fibrinolytic  therapy  should  be the standard  of care  for treating  these  patients.    
However,  pediatric  literature  supports  that  optimal  care  of these  patients  may  be an 
early  surgical  intervention.   This  is similar  to an operative  intervention  for appendi-
citis.   While  it is possible  to treat  patients  with  appendicitis  with  antibiotics  and 
avoid  surgery,  it results  in longer  hospitalizations,  in addition  if medical  treatment  
fails  the appendical  perforation  can result  in life threatening  sepsis  and require  sur-
gery  or additional  procedur es.  This  parallels  complicated  parapneumonic  infec-
tions,  in which  surgery  can be avoided,  but result  in prolonged  hospitalization  and if 
fibrinolytic  therapy  fails,  surgery  becomes  a riskier  endeavor.    
 
F.   Data  Analysis  Plan:    
 
 
15 Power  analysis  
 Using  the pediatric  literature  assume  effect  size  of reduction  in 3 days  of hos-
pitalization  requirement  with  variability  of 2.3 days  with  alpha  of 0.05  and 1:1 
group  allocation  would  require  12 patients  per arm  (24 total)  to power  the study  to 
80%.   Anticipating  up to 30%  of patients  may  decline  surgery  we would  seek  to en-
roll 17 patients  per arm.   Will  conduct  an analysis  based  on intention  to treat  (in-
cluded  patients  who  declined  surgery)  in addition  the treatment  the patients  re-
ceived.  
 
 
 
 
Statistical  analysis  will be performed  using  SPSS  22 software  (Microsoft,  Armonk,  
NY).  Normally  distributed  data  will be described  as mean  and standard  deviation  
and non-normally  distributed  data  were  described  as the median  value  with  the 25th 
to 75th percentile  values  (IQR).   Outcomes  will be contrasted  between  intervention  
arms  with  a T test (normal  distribution)  or Mann  Whitney  U test (non  normal  distri-
bution)  for continuous  variables  or chi square  analysis  for dichotomous  outcomes.   
Kaplan -Meier  plot will be generated  to identify  the timing  of chest  tube  removal  
from  intervention,  and time  to hospital  discharge  from  intervention.   
 
 
G.  Summarize  Knowledge  to be Gained:   
 
Complicated  parapneumonic  effusions  are life-threatening  infections  
that  are progressive  and if mistreated  can result  in prolonged  hospitali-
zation  and open  thoracic  surgery.   The optimal  care  of adult  patients  re-
mains  controversial,  and there  may  be a role  for early  operative  inter-
vention  versus  conservative  fibrinolytic  therapy.   VATS  is a minimally  in-
vasive  procedure  that  allows  complete  removal  of all infected  material  
from  the chest  cavity.   We believe  that  the benefit  of a quicker  recovery  
and definitive  management  of this disease  process  with  VATS  outweighs  

 
16 the risk of undergoi ng surgery  and may  be superior  to fibrinolytic  ther-
apy is at risk of incompletely  removing  infected  material.   This  study  is 
also  a quality  improvement  project  to standardize  the identification  of 
patients  at risk of complicated  parapneumonic  processes  to guide  the 
medical  service  to early  diagnosis  and interventions  the manage  this 
process  with  guidance  for when  to initiate  advance  therapy  in regard  to 
fibrinolytic  therapy  versus  operative  intervention.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H. References:   
 
 
 
1. Hasley  PB, Albaum  MN,  Li YH, Fuhrman  CR, Britton  CA, Marrie  TJ, Singer  DE, 
Coley  CM, Kapoor  WN,  Fine  MJ. Do pulmonary  radiographic  findings  at presentation  
predict  mortality  in patients  with  community -acquired  pneumonia?  Archives  of in-
ternal  medicine.  1996;156(19):2206 -12. 
2. McCauley  L, Dean  N. Pneumonia  and empyema:  causal,  casual  or unknown.  J 
Thorac  Dis. 2015;7(6):992 -8. 
3. Kocijancic  I, Kocijancic  K, Cufer  T. Imaging  of pleural  fluid  in healthy  individ-
uals.  Clin  Radiol.  2004;59(9):826 -9. 
4. Mordant  P, Arame  A, Legras  A, Le Pimpec  Barthes  F, Riquet  M. [Pleural  lym-
phatics  and effusions].  Rev Pneumol  Clin.  2013;69(3):175 -80. 
 
17 5. Christie  NA. Management  of pleural  space:  effusions  and empyema.  The Sur-
gical  clinics  of North  America.  2010;90(5):919 -34. 
6. Rahman  NM,  Chapman  SJ, Davies  RJ. The approach  to the patient  with  a 
parapneumonic  effusion.  Clinics  in chest  medicine.  2006;27(2):253 -66. 
7. Delvaeye  M, Conway  EM. Coagulation  and innate  immune  responses:  can we 
view  them  separately?  Blood.  2009;114(12):2367 -74. 
8. Massberg  S, Grahl  L, von Bruehl  ML, Manukyan  D, Pfeiler  S, Goosmann  C, 
Brinkmann  V, Lorenz  M, Bidzhekov  K, Khandagale  AB, et al. Reciprocal  coupling  of 
coagulation  and innate  immunity  via neutrophil  serine  proteases.  Nature  medicine.  
2010;16(8):887 -96. 
9. Koegelenberg  CF, Diacon  AH, Bolliger  CT. Parapneumonic  pleural  effusion  
and empyema.  Respiration.  2008;75(3):241 -50. 
10. Light  RW,  Girard  WM,  Jenkinson  SG, George  RB. Parapneumonic  effusions.  
Am J Med.  1980;69(4):507 -12. 
11. Chalmers  JD, Singanayagam  A, Murray  MP, Scally  C, Fawzi  A, Hill AT. Risk  fac-
tors  for complicated  parapneumonic  effusion  and empyema  on presentation  to hos-
pital  with  community -acquired  pneumonia.  Thorax.  2009;64(7):5 92-7. 
12. Falguera  M, Carratala  J, Bielsa  S, Garcia -Vidal  C, Ruiz -Gonzalez  A, Chica  I, 
Gudiol  F, Porcel  JM. Predictive  factors,  microbiology  and outcome  of patients  with  
parapneumonic  effusion.  The European  respiratory  journal.  2011;38(5):1173 -9. 
13. Zablo ckis  R, Petruskeviciene  R, Nargela  RV. [Causes  and risk factors  of pleu-
ral empyema  and complicated  parapneumonic  pleural  effusion].  Medicina  (Kaunas).  
2010;46(2):113 -9. 
14. Behnia  M, Logan  SC, Fallen  L, Catalano  P. Nosocomial  and ventilator -associ-
ated  pneu monia  in a community  hospital  intensive  care  unit:  a retrospective  review  
and analysis.  BMC  Res Notes.  2014;7:232.  
15. Eren  S, Esme  H, Sehitogullari  A, Durkan  A. The risk factors  and management  
of posttraumatic  empyema  in trauma  patients.  Injury.  2008;39(1 ):44 -9. 
16. Ball CG, Lord  J, Laupland  KB, Gmora  S, Mulloy  RH, Ng AK, Schieman  C, Kirk-
patrick  AW.  Chest  tube  complications:  how  well  are we training  our residents?  Ca-
nadian  journal  of surgery  Journal  canadien  de chirurgie.  2007;50(6):450 -8. 
17. DuBose  J, Inaba K, Okoye  O, Demetriades  D, Scalea  T, O'Connor  J, Menaker  J, 
Morales  C, Shiflett  T, Brown  C, et al. Development  of posttraumatic  empyema  in pa-
tients  with  retained  hemothorax:  results  of a prospective,  observational  AAST  study.  
The journal  of trauma  and acute  care  surgery.  2012;73(3):752 -7. 
18. Tsang  KY, Leung  WS, Chan  VL, Lin AW,  Chu  CM. Complicated  parapneumonic  
effusion  and empyema  thoracis:  microbiology  and predictors  of adverse  outcomes.  
Hong  Kong  Med  J. 2007;13(3):178 -86. 
19. Maskell  NA, Batt  S, Hed ley EL, Davies  CW,  Gillespie  SH, Davies  RJ. The bacteri-
ology  of pleural  infection  by genetic  and standard  methods  and its mortality  signifi-
cance.  American  journal  of respiratory  and critical  care  medicine.  2006;174(7):817 -
23. 
20. Chen  KY, Hsueh  PR, Liaw  YS, Yang  PC, Luh KT. A 10-year  experience  with  
bacteriology  of acute  thoracic  empyema:  emphasis  on Klebsiella  pneumoniae  in pa-
tients  with  diabetes  mellitus.  Chest.  2000;117(6):1685 -9. 
 
18 21. Porta  G, Rodriguez -Carballeira  M, Gomez  L, Salavert  M, Freixas  N, Xerc avins  
M, Garau  J. Thoracic  infection  caused  by Streptococcus  milleri.  The European  respir-
atory  journal.  1998;12(2):357 -62. 
22. Meyer  CN, Rosenlund  S, Nielsen  J, Friis -Moller  A. Bacteriological  aetiology  
and antimicrobial  treatment  of pleural  empyema.  Scand inavian  journal  of infectious  
diseases.  2011;43(3):165 -9. 
23. Vaudaux  P, Waldvogel  FA. Gentamicin  inactivation  in purulent  exudates:  role  
of cell lysis.  The Journal  of infectious  diseases.  1980;142(4):586 -93. 
24. Brixey  AG, Luo Y, Skouras  V, Awdankiewicz  A, Light  RW.  The efficacy  of chest  
radiographs  in detecting  parapneumonic  effusions.  Respirology.  2011;16(6):1000 -4. 
25. Heffner  JE, Klein  JS, Hampson  C. Diagnostic  utility  and clinical  application  of 
imaging  for pleural  space  infections.  Chest.  2010;137(2) :467 -79. 
26. Vignon  P, Chastagner  C, Berkane  V, Chardac  E, Francois  B, Normand  S, Bonni-
vard  M, Clavel  M, Pichon  N, Preux  PM, et al. Quantitative  assessment  of pleural  effu-
sion  in critically  ill patients  by means  of ultrasonography.  Critical  care  medicine.  
2005;33(8):1757 -63. 
27. Kocijancic  I, Tercelj  M, Vidmar  K, Jereb  M. The value  of inspiratory -expiratory  
lateral  decubitus  views  in the diagnosis  of small  pleural  effusions.  Clin  Radiol.  
1999;54(9):595 -7. 
28. Sahn  SA, Light  RW.  The sun should  never  set on a parapneumonic  effusion.  
Chest.  1989;95(5):945 -7. 
29. Light  RW.  Clinical  practice.  Pleural  effusion.  The New  England  journal  of 
medicine.  2002;346(25):1971 -7. 
30. Davies  HE, Davies  RJ, Davies  CW,  Group  BTSPDG.  Management  of pleural  in-
fection  in adults:  British  Thoracic  Society  Pleural  Disease  Guideline  2010.  Thorax.  
2010;65  Suppl  2:ii41 -53. 
31. Porcel  JM. Pleural  fluid  tests  to identify  complicated  parapneumonic  effu-
sions.  Curr  Opin  Pulm  Med.  2010;16(4):357 -61. 
32. Potts  DE, Levin  DC, Sahn  SA. Pleural  fluid  pH in parapneumonic  effusions.  
Chest.  1976;70(03):328 -31. 
33. Rahman  NM,  Maskell  NA, Davies  CW,  Hedley  EL, Nunn  AJ, Gleeson  FV, Davies  
RJ. The relationship  between  chest  tube  size  and clinical  outcome  in pleural  infec-
tion.  Chest.  2010;137(3):53 6-43. 
34. Fysh  ET, Smith  NA, Lee YC. Optimal  chest  drain  size:  the rise of the small -
bore  pleural  catheter.  Semin  Respir  Crit Care  Med.  2010;31(6):760 -8. 
35. Sahn  SA. Diagnosis  and management  of parapneumonic  effusions  and empy-
ema.  Clinical  infectious  dise ases  : an official  publication  of the Infectious  Diseases  
Society  of America.  2007;45(11):1480 -6. 
36. Ding  JL, Ho B. Endotoxin  detection --from  limulus  amebocyte  lysate  to recom-
binant  factor  C. Subcell  Biochem.  2010;53:187 -208.  
37. Luo D, Szaba  FM, Kummer  LW, Plow  EF, Mackman  N, Gailani  D, Smiley  ST. 
Protective  roles  for fibrin,  tissue  factor,  plasminogen  activator  inhibitor -1, and 
thrombin  activatable  fibrinolysis  inhibitor,  but not factor  XI, during  defense  against  
the gram -negative  bacterium  Yersinia  ente rocolitica.  Journal  of immunology.  
2011;187(4):1866 -76. 
 
19 38. El Solh  AA, Schultz  M. Decreased  alveolar  fibrinolysis  in patients  with  ventila-
tor-associated  pneumonia:  a species -specific  event.  Anesthesiology.  
2007;107(4):677.  
39. Panigada  M, Zacchetti  L, L'Acqua  C, Cressoni  M, Anzoletti  MB, Bader  R, Protti  
A, Consonni  D, D'Angelo  A, Gattinoni  L. Assessment  of Fibrinolysis  in Sepsis  Patients  
with  Urokinase  Modified  Thromboelastography.  PloS  one.  2015;10(8):e0136463.  
40. Moore  HB, Moore  EE, Gonz alez  E, Chapman  MP, Chin  TL, Silliman  CC, 
Banerjee  A, Sauaia  A. Hyperfibrinolysis,  physiologic  fibrinolysis,  and fibrinolysis  
shutdown:  the spectrum  of postinjury  fibrinolysis  and relevance  to antifibrinolytic  
therapy.  The journal  of trauma  and acute  care  surgery.  2014;77(6):811 -7; discus-
sion  7. 
41. Lin FC, Chen  YC, Chen  FJ, Chang  SC. Cytokines  and fibrinolytic  enzymes  in tu-
berculous  and parapneumonic  effusions.  Clin  Immunol.  2005;116(2):166 -73. 
42. Tillett  WS, Sherry  S. The Effect  in Patients  of Streptococ cal Fibrinolysin  
(Streptokinase)  and Streptococcal  Desoxyribonuclease  on Fibrinous,  Purulent,  and 
Sanguinous  Pleural  Exudations.  The Journal  of clinical  investigation.  
1949;28(1):173 -90. 
43. Davies  RJ, Traill  ZC, Gleeson  FV. Randomised  controlled  trial  of intrapleural  
streptokinase  in community  acquired  pleural  infection.  Thorax.  1997;52(5):416 -21. 
44. Bouros  D, Schiza  S, Tzanakis  N, Chalkiadakis  G, Drositis  J, Siafakas  N. Intra-
pleural  urokinase  versus  normal  saline  in the treatment  of complicated  parapneu-
monic  effusions  and empyema.  A randomized,  double -blind  study.  American  journal  
of respiratory  and critical  care  medicine.  1999;159(1):37 -42. 
45. Tuncozgur  B, Ustunsoy  H, Sivrikoz  MC, Dikensoy  O, Topal  M, Sanli  M, Elbeyli  
L. Intrapleural  urokinase  in the management  of parapneumonic  empyema:  a ran-
domised  controlled  trial.  Int J Clin  Pract.  2001;55(10):658 -60. 
46. Maskell  NA, Davies  CW,  Nunn  AJ, Hedley  EL, Gleeson  FV, Miller  R, Gabe  R, 
Rees  GL, Peto  TE, Woodhead  MA, et al. U.K.  Controlled  trial  of intrapleural  streptoki-
nase  for pleural  infection.  The New  England  journal  of medicine.  2005;352(9):865 -
74. 
47. Heffner  JE. Multicenter  trials  of treatment  for empyema --after  all these  years.  
The New  England  journal  of medicine.  2005;352(9):926 -8. 
48. Cameron  R, Davies  HR. Intra -pleural  fibrinolytic  therapy  versus  conservative  
management  in the treatment  of adult  parapneumonic  effusions  and empyema.  The 
Cochrane  database  of systematic  reviews.  2008(2):CD002312.  
49. Gervais  DA, Levis  DA, Hahn  PF, Uppot  RN, Arellano  RS, Mueller  PR. Adjunc-
tive intrapleural  tissue  plasminogen  activator  administered  via chest  tubes  placed  
with  imaging  guidance:  effectiveness  and risk for hemorrhage.  Radiology.  
2008;246(3):956 -63. 
50. Simpson  G, Roomes  D, Heron  M. Effects  of streptokinase  and deoxyribonucle-
ase on viscosity  of human  surgical  and empyema  pus.  Chest.  2000;117(6):1728 -33. 
51. Sherry  S, Tillett  WS, Christensen  LR. Presence  and significance  of desoxyri-
bose  nucleoprotein  in the purulent  pleural  exudates  of patients.  Proceedings  of the 
Society  for Experimental  Biology  and Medicine  Society  for Experimental  Biology  and 
Medicine.  1948;68(1):179 -84. 
 
20 52. Rahman  NM,  Maskell  NA, West  A, Teoh  R, Arnold  A, Mackinlay  C, Peckham  D, 
Davies  CW,  Ali N, Kinnear  W, et al. Intrapleural  use of tissue  plasminogen  activator  
and DNase  in pleural  infection.  The New  England  journal  of medicine.  
2011;365(6):518 -26. 
53. Piccolo  F, Pitman  N, Bhatnagar  R, Popowicz  N, Smith  NA, Brockway  B, Nickels  
R, Burke  AJ, Wong  CA, McCartney  R, et al. Intrapleural  tissue  plasmi nogen  activator  
and deoxyribonuclease  for pleural  infection.  An effective  and safe  alternative  to sur-
gery.  Ann  Am Thorac  Soc.  2014;11(9):1419 -25. 
54. Mehta  HJ, Biswas  A, Penley  AM,  Cope  J, Barnes  M, Jantz  MA.  Management  of 
Intrapleural  Sepsis  with  Once  Daily Use of Tissue  Plasminogen  Activator  and Deoxy-
ribonuclease.  Respiration.  2016.  
55. Cobanoglu  U, Sayir  F, Bilici  S, Melek  M. Comparison  of the methods  of fibri-
nolysis  by tube  thoracostomy  and thoracoscopic  decortication  in children  with  stage  
II and III empyema:  a prospective  randomized  study.  Pediatr  Rep.  2011;3(4):e29.  
56. Katlic  MR,  Facktor  MA.  Video -assisted  thoracic  surgery  utilizing  local  anes-
thesia  and sedation:  384  consecutive  cases.  Ann  Thorac  Surg.  2010;90(1):240 -5. 
57. Deslauriers  J, Jacques  LF, Gregoire  J. Role  of Eloesser  flap and thoracoplasty  
in the third  millennium.  Chest  Surg  Clin  N Am.  2002;12(3):605 -23. 
58. Palmen  M, van Breugel  HN, Geskes  GG, van Belle  A, Swennen  JM, 
Drijkoningen  AH, van der Hulst  RR, Maessen  JG. Open  window  thoracostomy  treat-
ment  of empyema  is accelerated  by vacuum -assisted  closure.  Ann  Thorac  Surg.  
2009;88(4):1131 -6. 
59. Haghshenasskashani  A, Rahnavardi  M, Yan TD, McCaughan  BC. Intrathoracic  
application  of a vacuum -assisted  closure  device  in managing  pleural  space  infection  
after  lung  resection:  is it an option?  Interact  Cardiovasc  Thorac  Surg.  
2011;13(2):168 -74. 
60. Walsh  MD,  Bruno  AD, Onaitis  MW,  Erdmann  D, Wolfe  WG,  Toloza  EM, Levin  
LS. The role  of intrathoracic  free  flaps  for chronic  empyema.  Ann  Thorac  Surg.  
2011;91(3):865 -8. 
61. Moore  HB, Moore  EE, Burlew  CC, Moore  FA, Coimbra  R, Davis  JW, Sperry  JL, 
McIntyre  RC, Biffl  WL.  Western  Trauma  Association  critical  decisions  in trauma:  
management  of parapneumonic  effusion.  The journal  of trauma  and acute  care  sur-
gery.  2012;73(6):1372 -9. 
62. Ripley  RT, Cothren  CC, Moore  EE, Long  J, Johnson  JL, Haenel  JB. Streptococcus  
milleri  infections  of the pleural  space:  operative  management  predominates.  Ameri-
can journal  of surgery.  2006;192(6):817 -21. 