National 
Cardiogenic Shock Initiative 
Version 3.0 
July, 2018 

NCSI – Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
2 
 National Cardiogenic Shock Initiative 
(NCSI, National CSI) 
 
 
STUDY SPONSOR: 
 
 
Henry Ford Health System 
2799 W. Grand Blvd. 
Center for Structural Heart Disease - CFP # 439 
Detroit, Michigan 48202 
(313) 916-8708 
NationalCSI@hfhs.org 
 
 
PRINCIPLE INVESTIGATOR: 
William W. O’Neill, MD, FACC, FSCAI 
Henry Ford Health System 
2799 W. Grand Blvd. 
Center for Structural Heart Disease - CFP # 439 
Detroit, Michigan 48202 
(313) 916-8708 
 
 
  

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
3 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
    Page  
 ● Introduction   4 
 ● Research Procedures   6 
 ● Quality Metrics   6 
 ● Population and Eligibility   7 
 ● Risks/Benefits/Alternatives   8 
 ● Data Management   9 
 ● Access to Patient Information   10 
 ● Analysis and Publication of Data   10 
 ● Appendix 1: NSCI Treatment Algorithm (Standard Care)   12 
 ● Appendix 2: Adoption of the NCSI Treatment Algorithm & Joining the NCSI   16 
 ● Appendix 3: Case Report Form (CRF)   18 
 ● Appendix 4: Patient Exclusion Form  (PEF)   24 
 ● Appendix 5: 30 Day Month Follow -up Form   26 
 ● Appendix 6: 1 Year Follow -up Form   27 
 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
4 
 Introduction  
Acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock (AMICS) is a deadly 
condition with a historical in-hospital survival of only 50%1-3. To date, the only therapy proven 
to benefit patients in AMICS using data from randomized control trials has been early 
mechanical reperfusion3. Accordingly, current American and European guidelines confer a class 
IB indication for reperfusion therapy in the setting of AMICS4. Unfortunately, little progress has 
been made on improving survival with subsequent therapies, including intra-aortic balloon pump 
counter-pulsation (IABP) 5. This lack of progress is worrisome since the incidence of AMICS 
appears to be increasing6-7. 
With the FDA approval of Impella (Abiomed, Danvers, MA) in AMICS, a powerful new 
tool has become available for hemodynamic support. Impella is a transcatheter axial flow pump, 
delivered percutaneous, with the ability to provide 2.5 to 4.0 liters/minute of forward flow.  The 
device should provide sufficient forward cardiac flow to support vital organs in the majority of 
patients who present with AMICS.  Since Impella is the only percutaneous temporary ventricular 
support device approved as safe and effective for use in AMICS, the use of the device has 
steadily grown8. Unfortunately, there is little data available to providers as to the best practice 
patterns associated with the delivery and use of Impella in AMICS. In fact, a retrospective 
analysis of 15,259 patients treated with an Impella between 2009 and 2017 revealed a wide 
variety of outcomes associated with the use of Impella in AMICS, with approximately one third 
of hospitals having a survival rate of 25%, another third of hospitals having a survival rate of 
50%
, and yet another third of hospitals having a survival rate of 75%.  
   
I
n the summer of 2016, cardiologists from four highly competitive healthcare systems in 
southeast Michigan came together in an attempt to increase survival in patients who present with 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
5 
 AMICS. Leaders from each healthcare system debated and discussed key elements in the 
improvement of care for patients who present with AMICS.  Using the most up- to-date research, 
a treatment algorithm for AMICS was developed and subsequently implemented as a quality 
improvement initiative throughout southeast Michigan. Patient information was gathered by each 
of the sites and collected in a retrospective registry. Outcomes and results were shared during 
quarterly meetings and concluded with a 41-patient pilot feasibility study. This initial pilot study 
revealed a 76% survival to discharge, a significant improvement compared to prior historical 
controls9.  
Give
n the promising outcomes, leaders from around the world have implemented the 
treatment algorithm in their local clinical practices with similar results. We have therefore 
launched the National Cardiogenic Shock Initiative (NCSI). The aim of the NCSI is to bring 
tog
ether experienced centers across the nation who are experts in mechanical reperfusion 
therapies and have a large experience with the use of mechanical circulatory support devices to 
systematize care in AMICS. Our goal is to dramatically decrease the duration patients remain in 
cardiogenic shock and attempt to decrease total usage and duration of vasopressors and 
ionotropic agents. We aim to further demonstrate that rapid delivery of mechanical circulatory 
support will improve hemodynamics, reverse the spiraling neuro-hormonal cascade associated 
with cardiogenic shock, allowing clinicians to decrease use of vasopressors and inotropic agents 
and ultimately improve survival.   
Healthcare systems that have agreed to adopt the NCSI treatment algorithm are being 
asked to participate in this prospective registry so that patient outcomes can be analyzed (see 
Appendix 2). Participating investigators will be asked to voluntarily provide data from patients 
completing the treatment algorithm to be included in the NCSI Registry.  
 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
6 
 Research Procedures 
           After a patient has been treated according to the NCSI treatment algorithm at the discretion 
of their physician (see Appendix 1), they will be approached prior to discharge and asked to 
participate in NCSI registry, including obtaining permission to allowing coordinators to conduct a 1-
month and 1-year follow-up. This data collection can occur via follow up phone call, electronic chart 
review, or any other method that complies with the site’s SOPs . If the patient is discharged prior to 
obtaining consent, consent form and explanation of the study can be mailed to the patient for their 
signature and return. If more than one (1) year has passed, all data may be obtained retrospectively.   
 
If consent is provided, then the following data will be collected (see case report form - Appendix 3): 
Re
trospective Data (from their medical records) 
 Me dical history 
 Admission characteristics 
 P rocedure dates and times 
 Procedure characteristics 
 Diagnostic values 
 Post-procedure information 
Prospective Data (from follow-up) (see Appendix 5 and Appendix 6) 
 Morta lity at 1 month from AMICS 
 Mortality at 12 months from AMICS 
From this data, the following Quality Metrics will be tracked: 
 Discharge survival 
 Duration of shock- to- support times 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
7 
  Use  of Impella Support pre-PCI 
 Use  of right heart catheter for hemodynamic monitoring 
 Attainment of T IMI III flow post reperfusion  
 Attainment of Cardiac power > 0.6 watts after completion of therapy 
 Reduction or elimination of vasopressors and inotropic agents.  
 
Population and Eligibility Criteria 
Due to the heterogeneous cohort of patients who present with AMICS, we have defined a 
specific subset of patients from whom outcomes are to be collected. Approximately 500 adult 
pa
tients will be approached to participate in the registry at approximately 75 sites in the United 
States.  The duration of hospital participation in this research study is anticipated to be 
approximately 3 years. 
 
Registry Inclusion Criteria 
1. S ymptoms of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) with ECG and/or biomarker evidence of 
S-T elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) or non-S-T elevation myocardial infarction 
(NSTEMI) 
2. Cardiogenic shock is defined as the presence of at least two of the following:  
a. Hypotension (systolic blood pressure ≤90 mm Hg, or inotropes/vasopressors to 
maintain systolic blood pressure ≥90 mmHg) 
b. S igns of end organ hypoperfusion (cool extremities, oliguria or anuria, or elevated 
lactate levels) 
c. Hemodynamic criteria represented by a cardiac index of <2.2 L/min/m2 or a 
cardiac power output ≤0.6 watts. 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
8 
 3. P atient is supported with an Impella  
4. Patient undergoes PCI 
Registry Exclusion Criteria 
1. Evide nce of Anoxic Brain Injury 
2. Unw itnessed out of hospital cardiac arrest or any cardiac arrest in which return of 
spontaneous circulation (ROSC) is not achieved within 30 minutes 
3. I ABP placed prior to Impella  
4. Septic, anaphylactic, hemorrhagic, and neurologic causes of shock 
5. Non -ischemic causes of shock/hypotension (pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax, 
myocarditis, tamponade, etc.) 
6. Ac tive bleeding for which mechanical circulatory support is contraindicated  
7. R ecent major surgery for which mechanical circulatory support is contraindicated 
8. Me chanical complications of AMI (acute ventricular septal defect (VSD) or acute 
papillary muscle rupture) 
9. Known left ventricular thrombus for which mechanical circulatory support is 
contraindicated 
10. Mechanical aortic prosthetic valve 
11. Contraindication to intravenous systemic anticoagulation 
 
Risks/Benefits of and Alternatives to Patient Participation 
This is not a treatment study. This is a single-arm prospective registry that captures data 
generated during procedures which are considered standard of care using FDA-approved 
technology. There are no risks other than breach of confidentiality. To mitigate this risk, patient 
identifiers are not being captured, and all data will be stored in a secure REDCap database 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
9 
 (please see below). There are no benefits in participation other than the scientific knowledge 
gained, and the only alternative to participation is not participating. 
 
Data Management 
 Data collected by the participating sites will be stored and managed in a secure REDCap 
stud
y database hosted through the Henry Ford Health System Department of Public Health 
Sciences in Detroit, Michigan. REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, web-
based application designed to support data capture for research studies. A specific database was 
created solely for NCSI in September 2017. The REDCap database that was custom-built for this 
study includes only the specific data fields that pertain to the data points being collected in the 
study, which are present on the case report form (CRF) (see Appendix 3).  
For patients who present to affiliated hospitals with AMICGS but are excluded from 
entry into the registry, a Patient Exclusion Form will be sent to track the reasons for exclusion 
(see Appendix 4). 
The CRFs and Patient Exclusion Forms from an individual site will be transmitted to the 
lead site, Henry Ford Hospital, via secure email and accessed only on hospital-approved, 
password-protected computers and stored on a password-protected and encrypted OneDrive 
sy
stem by Microsoft. Access to the OneDrive system and the REDCap database will be managed 
at the lead site by the NCSI coordinator and the investigators of the study via hospital-approved, 
pa
ssword-protected computers inside locked offices in Henry Ford Hospital.  
  
 
 
 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
10 
 Access to Patient Information 
 The following will have access to the de-identified patient medical information, and any 
ne
cessary research contracts and Data Use Agreements will be completed for each participating 
sit
e. 
Henry Ford Hospital –  Detroit, Michigan: 
 The NCSI team:  
o P I  
o Co-Investigator 
o NCS I Coordinator 
o R esearch Nurse 
o R esearch Assistant 
o Da ta Coordinator 
 S tatistician, based at Henry Ford Hospital 
 
 
Analysis and Publication of Data 
There will be planned interim analysis of the data for the purpose of presentation as well as a 
final analysis and submission for publication of all data at the end of the study enrollment 
and follow-up. 
 
 
 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
11 
 References 
 
1. Goldberg, R. J., Makam, R. C. P., Yarzebski, J., McManus, D. D., Lessard, D., & Gore, J. M. (2016). 
Decade-Long Trends (2001–2011) in the Incidence and Hospital Death Rates Associated with the In-
Hospital Development of Cardiogenic Shock after Acute Myocardial Infarction. Circulation: 
Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes , 9( 2), 117- 125. 
 
2. Kolte D, Khera S, Aronow WS, Mujib M, Palaniswamy C, Sule S, Jain D, Gotsis W, Ahmed A, Frishman 
WH, Fonarow GC. Trends in incidence, management, and outcomes of cardiogenic shock complicating ST-
elevation myocardial infarction in the United States. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Jan 13;3(1):e000590 
 
3. Hochman, J. S., Sleeper, L. A., White, H. D., Dzavik, V., Wong, S. C., Menon, V., & Boland, J. (2001). 
One-year survival following early revascularization for cardiogenic shock. JAMA , 285(2), 190- 192. 
 
4. B
ainey, K. R., & Armstrong, P. W. (2016). Transatlantic Comparison of ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial 
Infarction Guidelines: Insights From the United States and Europe. Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology , 67( 2), 216-229. 
 
5. Thiele H., Zeymer U., Neumann F.J., et al.(2012) Intraaortic balloon support for myocardial infarction with 
cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med 367:1287–1296 
 
6. Center for Medicare and Medicaid database, MEDPAR FY14 
 
7. Killip, T., & Kimball, J. T. (1967). Treatment of myocardial infarction in a coronary care unit: a two year 
experience with 250 patients. The American journal of cardiology , 20(4), 457- 464. 
 
8. Stre
tch R, Sauer C.M., Yuh D.D., Bonde P.(2014) National trends in the utilization of short-term 
mechanical circulatory support: incidence, outcomes, and cost analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol 64:1407–1415. 
 
9. William O'Neill, Mir Basir, Simon Dixon, Kirit Patel, Theodore Schreiber, Steven Almany. Feasibility of 
Early Mechanical Support During Mechanical Reperfusion of Acute Myocardial Infarct Cardiogenic Shock 
JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions Mar 2017, 10 (6) 624-625 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
12 
 APPENDIX 1 
NSCI Treatment Algorithm 
 
1. Conf irmation of AMI Shock  
The diagnosis of AMI is confirmed by electrocardiographic changes indicative of new or 
presumed new ischemia (new ST-T wave changes), detection of elevated cardiac biomarkers or 
angiographic findings of an infarct related artery on coronary angiogram in the presence of 
ischemic symptoms.   
Cardiogenic shock is defined as the presence of at least two of the following:  
1. Hypotension (systolic blood pressure ≤90 mm Hg, or inotropes/vasopressors to 
maintain systolic blood pressure ≥90 mmHg) 
2. S igns of end organ hypoperfusion (cool extremities, oliguria or anuria, or elevated 
lactate levels) 
3. He modynamic criteria represented by a cardiac index of <2.2 L/min/m2 or a cardiac 
powe
r output ≤0.6 watts. 
2. Ac cess, Baseline Invasive Hemodynamics 
Due to the heterogeneous cohort of patients who present with AMICS, any diagnostic 
steps to ensur
e the presence of AMI or CS are left to the discretion of the primary operator (ie: 
ti
ming of right heart catheterization, coronary angiogram and placement of MCS). We do 
re
commend obtaining femoral access to ensure adequate vessel size for MCS. If a right heart 
c
atheterization has not been performed prior to MCS placement we recommend measuring a 
LVE
DP prior to placement of MCS.  In the event a LVEDP ≤15 mmHg,  an alternate diagnosis 
shoul
d be suspected and right heart catheterization should be performed prior to MCS to confirm 
pre
sence of cardiogenic shock.  Following placement of large-bore access and administration of 
s
ystemic anticoagulation an Impella catheter will be inserted and manipulated to obtain maximum 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
13 
 forward flow. Right heart catheterization (RHC) will be performed for calculation of cardiac 
power output (CPO), SVR and PCWP/RA ratio and pulmonary artery pulsatility index (PAPi), 
during the index procedure. 
3. In tervention 
 PCI of the culprit lesion(s) should be performed, per national recommendations. We 
re
commend against non-culprit PCI unless flow is impaired in the involved artery (ie. less than 
T
IMI 3 flow and excluding chronic total occlusions); however the ultimate decision of multi-
vessel PCI lies with primary operator. PCI can be performed with thrombectomy if a heavy 
thrombus burden is present. Once appropriately sized stents have been implanted angiography 
will be performed to assess TIMI flow. If TIMI III flow is not present, intracoronary vasodilatory 
should be administered at the discretion of the primary operator.  
 Prior to discharge from the cath lab, a formal neurovascular check should be performed 
for assessment of Impella-related limb ischemia. This can be performed either by an in-depth 
physical examination, peripheral angiogram, or lower extremities doppler studies. If signs of 
li
mb ischemia are noted, the peel-away sheath should be removed (if not already done so) with 
reassessment.  If limb ischemia persists, antegrade access should be performed to provide distal 
lower extremity blood flow.  
4. P ost-PCI Hemodynamics 
 After the intervention is completed, right heart pressures, cardiac output, and CPO will be 
obtained. If CPO is > 0.6, no further intervention is required. If CPO is < 0.6, right heart pressure 
will be reviewed to identify evidence of right ventricular failure if present (PAPi < 0.9).  
 If evidence of right ventricular failure are present (PAPi < 0.9), or if the Impella is 
suctioning,  operators should consider right ventricular support with commercially available 
devices (Impella or Tandem Heart). Irrespective of CPO, evidence of RV shock is a warning not 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
14 
 to increase alpha agonists. These agents dramatically increase pulmonary vascular resistance 
(PVR) at a time of minimal RV reserve and can cause a lethal spiral as increasing doses of alpha 
agonists to maintain arterial pressure leads to decrease forward RV flow and worsens 
hypotension.  
 If CPO < 0.6 persists and RV shock is not the cause, consideration for the placement of 
an Impella 5.0 or a durable left ventricular assist device (LVAD) should be considered.  
5. We aning and Explantation 
Impella devices should only be considered for explantation once the following criteria 
have been met:  
1. W eaning of all inotropes and vasopressors 
2. C PO > 0.6 watts without vasopressors or inotropes, and  
3. P APi > 0.9.  
6. S afety and Monitoring 
 Cautious attention should be paid to the infrequent yet serious complication of limb 
ischemia with the use of large bore sheaths and devices. Detailed neurovascular checks should be 
performed while on Impella support. Use of antegrade sheaths to provide flow to the affected 
limb is strongly recommended in such cases.  Prophylactic use antegrade access may also be 
considered, especially in patients who will likely require >24 hours of support.  Although rare 
hemolysis can also occur, daily hemoglobin level should be obtained while on support.  If there 
are signs of hematuria, Impella positioning should be checked via echocardiography.  
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
15 
  
 

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
16 
 APPENDIX 2 
Adoption of the NCSI Treatment Algorithm & Joining the NCSI 
 
Adoption to the NCSI treatment algorithm is completely voluntary. Deviation from the 
treatment algorithm can occur without consultation of the primary investigators at the discretion 
of the primary operator.  All AMICS patients, including those with treatment algorithm 
deviation, can be included in the NCSI registry as there is no formal, nationally accepted or 
standardized protocol or treatment algorithm for treatment of AMICS.  Operators and hospitals 
are encouraged to review the pilot study data and treatment algorithm to determine if they wish 
to adopt the NCSI treatment algorithm as their standard of care for the treatment of AMICS.  
Multi-hospital collaboration is considered a cornerstone to the success of the NCSI. We are 
reaching out nationally and encouraging hospitals to work together to collect data and 
demonstrate the success of regional shock protocols and/or treatment algorithms. Hospitals 
joining the NCSI group voluntarily agree to share data, post-discharge, including demographics, 
procedural characteristics and outcomes as detailed in the case report form. Data is de-identified 
and HIPAA-compliant. Data generated from the index procedure admission to discharge (or 
death, if prior to discharge) will be collected retrospectively and de-identified. Prior to discharge, 
surviving
 patients will be asked to consent to the collection of data at 30 days and 1 year post-
index procedure. This data collection can occur via follow up phone call, electronic chart review, 
or any other method that complies with the site’s SOPs.  
To f
ormally join and affiliate with NCSI, we request the minimum following requirements of 
the interested hospitals: 
1. Implantation of >10 Impella per year (for any indication) 
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
17 
 2. Adoption of the  NCSI treatment algorithm as standard of care for patients who present 
with AMICS 
3. I dentification of a local Primary Investigator (PI) to coordinate data collection 
After the above requirements are met, a hospital may request to join NCSI through Henry Ford 
Hospital’s NCSI website (www.henryford.com/cardiogenicshock). The hospital site will be 
contacted and interviewed by a member of the NCSI team. Once a hospital is accepted to join 
NCS
I, a formal data-use agreement between the institution and Henry Ford Hospital must be 
completed. 
 
 
  
NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
18 
 APPENDIX 3 
Case Report Form 
 
 

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
19 
  
 
 
 
 
 

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
20 
  
 
 
  

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
21 
  
 
 

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
22 
  
 
 

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
23 
  
 
 

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
24 
 APPENDIX 4 
Patient Exclusion Form 
 

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
25 
  
 

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
26 
 APPENDIX 5 
30 Day Follow- Up Form 
 

NCSI –  Protocol – (v3.0) – July, 2018 
27 
 APPENDIX 6 
1 Year Follow-Up Form 
 
 
