  
 
 
A Prospective  Blinded  Within-Subject  Randomized Controlled Clinical Study 
to Investigate the Safety and Effectiveness of RECELL for Repigmentation of 
Stable Vitiligo Lesions  
 
Investigational Plan 
Study Number:   CTP00 9 
Device:    RECELL® Autologous Cell Harvesting Device 
Study Type:   Pivotal Study 
Date  / Revision :   July 8, 2021 / Rev 4 
Sponsor:    AVITA Medical  
28159 Avenue Stanford, Suite 220 
Valencia, CA 91355   
     
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR’S STATEMENT  
This statement is to certify that I have received the above -referenced investigational plan, which 
has been approved for initiation at my investigational site by the Institutional Review Board . As 
Principal Investigator, I will ensure that all personnel who have been delegated responsibilities for 
this study will be trained on the investigational plan and associated responsibilities prior to study 
participation.  I agree to conduct this clinical study in compliance with the investigational plan and 
applicable requirements of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (21 CFR Parts, 50, 54, 56, 812 
and 45 CFR Part 46). 
 
Print Name : _______________________________________  
                  Principal Investigator                   
 
Signature: _______________________________________ _ Date: _______________  
                                     Principal Inves tigator  
  
  1.0 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
Title  A Prospective Blinded  Within -Subject Randomized Controlled Clinical Study to 
Investigate the Safety and Effectiveness of RECELL for Repigmentation of Stable 
Vitiligo Lesions  
Protocol No.  CTP00 9 
Phase of Study  Pivotal  Study  
Proposed Indication  
for Use  The RECELL® Autologous Cell Harvesting Device  is intended for use at the 
patient’s point -of-care for the safe and rapid preparation of Spray- On Skin™ Cells 
from a small sample  of a patient’s own skin. The cell suspension prepared using 
the RECELL System is suitable for application to a prepared treatment area for 
repigmentation of stable vitiligo lesions.  
Primary Objective  To evaluate the application of Spray -On Skin™ Cells, prepared using the 
RECELL® Device, for safe and effective repigmentation of ablated stable vitiligo 
lesions.  
Study Population  Pivotal Cohort  
The pivotal cohort  will consist  of no fewer than 23 subjects . This study utilizes an 
adaptive design with an interim analysis planned for the purposes of sample size 
re-estimation ( to achieve adequate conditional power). The re will be a  maximum 
of 46 subjects  in the pivotal cohort.  
 
Roll-in Cohort  
Up to two  roll-in cohort patients may be randomized  at each investigational site for 
purposes of ensuring proficiency with the investigational device and study 
procedures prior to advancing to enrollment in the pivotal cohort . Any subject 
randomized prior to Rev 3 of the investigational plan  will be considered  a roll-in 
cohort subject . All roll- in subjects must meet the same eligibility criteria , will 
undergo the same study procedures and follow -up assessment s as the pivotal cohort 
subjects; however, data from the rol l-in cohort of subjects will be analyzed 
separately from the pivotal cohort.  A maximum of 35 subjects  total r oll-in cohort 
subjects (including those  randomized  prior to Rev 3) are anticipated in addition to 
the planned pivotal cohort subjects.  Subjects in the roll- in cohort  may not re -enroll 
in the pivotal cohort.  
 
There will be a  maximum of 81 subjects  from both cohorts .  
Number of Trial Centers  The study will be executed  at no more than 15 centers  in the United States . 
Clinical 
Justification/Clinical 
Benefit  The RECELL® Autologous Cell Harvesting Device has been safely and effectively 
used to prepare and apply cell suspension that includes pigment -producing cells 
(melanocytes) for treatment of burn wounds. Patients without func tional 
melanocytes and who are candidates for application of skin cells to depigmented 
areas of skin may benefit from point of care use of the RECELL Device.  
Investigational Treatment  Skin cell suspension at 1:20 expansion ratio (donor area  : recipient area), prepared 
using the RECELL System, will be applied to an ablated (de -epithelialized) area of 
depigmentation, followed by targeted phototherapy using NB -UVB.   
Control  Each subject will serve as their own Control, with a depigmented area receiving no 
RECELL treatment  but receiving the same targeted NB -UVB as the investigational 
treatment area.  

  
  Study Design  This is a prospective blinded randomized within -subject controlled study to 
evaluate the clinical performance of RECELL for repigmentation of stable, 
depigmented lesions in subjects 18 years or greater. The trial will evaluate matched 
pairs of  stable depigmented study areas . After identification of two study areas, one 
study area will be randomly assigned to RECELL, and the other will serve as the Control . 
 Follow -up visits during the effectiveness period will be at Weeks 1, 4, 12 and 24 
post-treatment  followed by a durability period that will include follow -up visits at 
Weeks 36 and 52  post-treatment. Acute healing, pigmentation, and compliance 
with phototherapy will be evaluated. Treatment -related and serious adverse events 
will be documented throughout the duration of the s tudy.  For all study subjects and 
visits, study areas will be documented using standardized digital photography.  
 
Pigmentation of all study areas  will be determined via centralized image 
interpretation by an expert dermatological panel blinded to treatment allocation (i.e., Central Review Committee, CRC)  to decrease variability.  In addition to the 
CRC, an assessment of pigmentation and study area Vitiligo Area Scoring Index 
(VASI) will be performed  by the investigator for each study area . To assess 
durability of responding RECELL -treated study areas at Week 52, the investigator 
and the CRC will confirm that ≥ 80% of the pigmentation remains relative to the 
subject’s Week 24 photograph . 
 
Patient reported outcomes will be captured using the Vitiligo Noticeability Scale (VNS), Patient Global Impression of Change -Vitiligo (PaGIC -V), and a subject 
global treatment success assessment.   
 
After completion of the Week 24 (non-responders)  or Week 52  (responders) visit, 
the subject may be given the option for RECELL treatment of their depigmented 
study area(s).  
Primary Effectiveness 
Endpoint  The primary effectiveness endpoint is the proportion  of Responders  for RECELL -
treated areas versus Control at Week 24. Responders are defined as study areas 
achieving ≥ 80% pigmentation  as determined by the Central Review Committee . 
Secondary Effectiveness 
Endpoints  1. Central Review Committee categorization of repigmentation (0-25%, 26 -50%, 
51-79% and 80- 100%)  at Week 24  
2. Central Review Committee assessment of color matching for the study areas 
at Week  24  
Tertiary (Exploratory) 
Measures  1. Subject and investigator global treatment success and donor site satisfaction   
2. Subject -reported Vitiligo Noticeability Score vs baseline (based on 
photographs)  
3. Investigator assessment of pigmentation responder (≥  80% pigmentation) for 
the study areas at Week  24 
4. Investigator assessment  of repigmentation category (ordinal data) for the study 
areas  
5. CRC and investigator assessment of pigmentation for the study areas at Weeks 36 and 52  
6. Investigator study  area VASI scores, change from baseline  
7. Investigator assessment of color matching for the study areas  
8. CRC assessment of color matching for the study areas at Weeks 36 and 52  
9. Patient Global Impression of Change -Vitiligo  (PaGIC -V)  
10. Repigmentation durability at Week 52 as assessed by the investigator  and CRC  

 
  Safety Evaluations  Safety will be evaluated in terms of healing and scar outcomes, and treatment -
related adverse events . 
 
Safety variables that will be evaluated at the study areas and donor sites:  
1. Incomplete healing (<100%) at Week 4  
2. Infection  
3. Koebnerization  
4. Donor and recipient site s car requiring surgical  treatment  
5. Milia  requiring medical intervention  
6. Other treatment -related and serious adverse events  
Inclusion Criteria  
 Subjects must meet all the following criteria to be eligible:  
1. Focal, segmental or generalized  (i.e., nonsegmental)  stable vitiligo , defined as 
no new depigmented areas nor any depigmented areas  that have expanded  in 
size within the preceding 12 months , regardless of whether the areas are 
intended to be used as study areas.  
1a.  Photo documentation (current and at least 12 months prior ) of the patient’s  
depigmented areas have been evaluated as stable by an independent  Screening 
Committee . 
2. The patient has not undergone topical treatment (e.g., steroids , tacrolimus ) for 
the study areas  within the past 90 days.  
3. The patient has not undergone phototherapy (e.g., NB -UVB)  for the study 
areas  within the past 90 days . 
4. The patient is a candidate for surgical intervention of a depigmented area, 
defined as a patient who has previously been compliant with but has not 
satisfactorily responded to  both: 
a. topical therapy  and  
b. a minimum of 3 months of photo therapy.  
5. The patient must have two study areas available for treatment that:  
a. are of similar size (±50%) , 
b. are between 16cm2 and 456cm2 (contiguous) , 
c. are similarly sun exposed , 
d. have the same extent of leukotrichia, and  
e. are judged clinically as ≥90% depigmented (by area).   
6. The patient is 18 years of age  or older . 
7. The patient is willing and able to comply with post -treatment at -home 
phototherapy and all follow -up evaluations required by the study protocol.  
8. The patient agrees to abstain from any other treatment of the study areas for 
the duration of his/her participation in the study ( 52 weeks).  
9. The patient agrees to abstain from enrollment in any other interventional 
clinical tria l for the duration of his/her participation in the study ( 52 weeks).  
10. In the opinion of the investigator, the patient must be able to:  
a. Understand the full nature and purpose of the study, including possible risks and adverse events,  
b. Understand instructions,  and  
c. Provide voluntary written informed consent.  

  
  Exclusion Criteria  Subjects who meet any of the following criteria are not eligible:  
1. The study areas selected have  concomitant  dermatologic conditions other than 
vitiligo . 
2. The study area selected for treatment includes  the lips, eyelids,  plantar surface 
of feet, palmar surface of hands, fingertips, wrists, ankles, elbows, or knees . 
3. The patient is unable to undergo the treatment a rea preparation . 
4. Patients who are pregnant . 
5. Patients with any of the following: 
a. universalis vitiligo , 
b. depigmented areas over >30 % of their body surface area ,  
c. depigmented lips and fingertips  (lip-tip vitiligo ), or 
d. > 3 depigmented fingertips, defined as depigmentation of the dorsal 
aspect of the fingertip  from the distal interphalangeal joint to the tip 
of the digit.  
6. Patients with recent h istory (within previous 12 months ) of: 
a. Koebnerization ,  
b. confetti- like, or  
c. trichrome lesions . 
7. Patients with a history of  keloid formation. 
8. Patients who have used a tanning salon in the past 60 days . 
9. The patient has other concurrent conditions that in the opinion of the 
investigator may compromise patient safety or study objectives . 
10. Current use of medications (e.g. , anticoagulants such as heparin or warfarin)  
that in the investigator’s opinion may compromise patient safety or trial 
objectives . 
11. The patient has a known hypersensitivity to trypsin or compound sodium lactate for irrigation (Hartmann’s) solution . 
12. Life expectancy is less than 1 year . 
Study -specific procedure 
highlights  • Two depigmented study  areas will be outlined and labeled (A and B) . 
• Randomization to assign area A or B to RECELL will be performed in the EDC . 
• Donor skin will be harvested under local anesthetic sufficient to prepare suspension for both the recipient and donor sites.  
• The RECELL -assign ed study area will be ablated  to a sufficient depth to  
remove the epidermis and expose the papillary derm is. 
• Spray -On Skin™ Cells  will be applied to the RECELL -assigned study area 
using a 1:20 expansion ratio.  
• Standardized dressings will be applied  to the RECELL -treated study area and 
donor site.  
•  NB-UVB phototherapy  will 
commence on both study areas after dressings are no longer in place.   

  
  Screening Committee (SC)  Post-consent and p rior to randomization , investigational  sites must submit 
photographic evidence (with date stamp or other evid ence of date of image 
acquisition) of stable vitiligo for each subject  that in cludes:  
1) Current photos  of the subject’s depigmented areas obtained during 
screening   
2) Current photos  of the subject’s dorsal hands displaying all fingertips 
obtained during screening   
3) Historic photos ≥ 12 months prior of the subject’s depigmented areas   
 
The independent SC will consist of a minimum of 3 board- certified dermatologists . 
Each patient being considered for treatment will have the photographic evidence 
outlined above  in addition to other relevant medical history reviewed by a minimum 
of 3 committee members. Two (2) of 3  members  must concur the photographs are 
of stable vitiligo  prior  to the investigational site proceeding with randomization and 
treatment.  The SC wil l be blinded to which investigational site the photogr aphs 
originated from.  
Central Review Committee  
(CRC)  Three independent board -certified dermatologists (Central Review Committee, 
CRC) will be selected based on specific selection criteria for the purpose of providing blinded adjudication to determine whether successful  repigmentation of 
the study  areas  (≥ 80%) have been achieved  and if not
, then to determine 
categorization of r epigmentation. The CRC will be blinded to the study site, 
treatment assignment, and the investigator ’s determination of repigmentation for 
each study area. The adjudicated results will be used in the primary analysis.  
 
The CRC will be governed under a charter that will be approved by the committee, and that will contain the guidance and rules under which they will review and adjudicate data. Assessments of repigmentation at 24 weeks  post- treatment 
(relative to baseline) will be assessed by all three members of the C RC. If two C RC 
members agree, adjudication of that subject ’s timepoint will be deemed complete. 
If there are any discordant cases (i.e., agreement not achieved between two C RC 
members), the committee will review the case together  with the majority ruling (2/3 
CRC members in agreement) serving as the final adjudication . The  CRC members 
will record their review independently. Panel assessments will be conducted  
consistent with consensus guidance published by the Vitiligo Global Issues 
Consensus Group (VGICG) for the  evaluation  of patients with  vitiligo using a 
reference atlas developed by the VGICG depicting vitiligo repigmentation patterns 
and color match.  

  
  Statistical considerations  The sample size for this trial was determined based on the primary effectiveness 
endpoint of responders at 24 weeks. The trial is designed to tes t if RECELL 
treatment using an expansion ratio of 1:20 is superior to  Control.  An alpha level of 
0.025 is utilized for hypothesis testing. The trial will incorporate an unblinded 
interim analysis for purposes of sample size re -estimation after approximately half 
the planned subjects reach 24 weeks. The interim analysis will be conducted 
according to the promising zone method of Mehta and Pocock (2011), allowing for up to twice the original planned sample size.  
 Assuming 5% responders  in Control and 60 % responders for RECELL, 20 subjects 
yields 90% power, one -sided 0. 025 level of significance  to demonstrate RECELL 
superiority versus Control . This assumes a 10% superiority margin relative to 
Control .  
 Anticipating 10% los t to follow -up, 23 subjects are planned. An  interim analysis 
for purposes of sample size re -estimation will occur when 11 subjects have 24-
week follow -up data.  The sample size may be increased based on the results of this 
interim analysis to a maximum of 46  subjects.  
 
Note  that it is possible that, depending on rate of subject accrual,  the interim 
analysis of 24 -week data may n ot occur until after 23 subjects have already been 
enrolled.  
 
  
