Case 1917    Page 1    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STUDY NUMBER:  CASE 1917 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov Number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Protocol Date : 05/24 /2018 
 
STUDY TITLE:  Targeting TET2 mutations in Myelodysplastic Syndromes and Acute Myeloid 
Leukemia with Azacitidine and Ascorbic Acid 
    
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Aziz Nazha, MD 
Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic  
Tel: 216-445-0320     
E
-mail: nazhaa@ccf.org 
 
CO-PI:           Ja rosla w Maciejewski, M.D., Ph.D. 
Taussig Cancer Institute R/40, Cleveland Clinic  
10201 Carnegie Ave , Cleveland, Ohio  
Tel 216-445-5962; Fax 216-636-2495  
E
-mail: maciejj@ccf.org  
 
CO-PI:           Mikkael A Sekeres, MD, MS 
Ta
ussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic  
10201 Carnegie Ave , Cleveland, Ohio  
Tel 216-445-5962; Fax 216-636-2495  
E
-mail: sekerem@ccf.org  
 
CO-PI:           Benjamin Tomlinson, MD 
             University Hospital Cleveland Medical Center 
           Tel: 216-286-9185 
 
          E-mail: be njamin.tomlinson@uhhospitals.org  
 
SPONSOR:    Case Comprehensive Cancer Center     
   
SUPPORT/FUNDING:  Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology  
 
SUPPLIED AGEN TS:  Azacitidine, Ascorbic Acid  

Case 1917    Page 2    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  AMENDMENT SUMMARY: Original Protocol: 10/13/2017 
 Amendment 1, Protocol Version 2: 11/20/2017 
 Ame
ndment 2, Protocol Version 3 : 05/24/2018 
 
P
ROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Protocol 
Number/Title  Case 1917: Targeting TET2 mutations in Myelodysplastic 
Syndromes  and Acute Myeloid Leukemia  with Azacitidine and 
Asco rbic Acid  
Study Phase  II 
Brief 
Background/Rationale  
 
 
 Ten eleven translocation 2 ( TET2 ) mutations are among the most 
common genomic alterations in myeloid malignancies. Somatic 
mutations in TET2  can be identified in 25 -30% of patients with 
myelodysplast ic syndromes (MDS) and 50 -60% of patients with 
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), an overlapping 
MDS/myeloprolifrative neoplasm (MPN) disorder , and 15 -20% 
of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) . Moreover, 
somatic mutations in TET2 gene were ide ntified in healthy 
individuals. The presence of these mutations increases with age 
and can increase the risk of these individuals to develop 
hematologic malignancies and all -cause mortality. Because 
synthetic lethal approaches cannot be applied for the the rapy of 
TET2MUT and because TET2  gene is very pleomorphic, 
identification of targeted therapies for patients with TET2  
mutations remains challenging.  
 
The dioxygenase TET2 forms hydroxyl radicals that hydroxylate 
methyl groups on DNA to remove them. Thus,  indirectly TET2 
functions as a DNA demethylase that ultimately affects gene 
expression. Consequently, mutations in TET2 result in increased 
methylation of tumor suppressor genes and also possibly cytidine 
deamination leading to C>T transitions at CpG site s. To split O 2, 
TET2 needs 3 electrons, 2 from a -ketoglutarate (aKG) and 1 from 
ascorbic acid. Ascorbic acid is therefore an activator of TET2.  
Indeed, in preliminary results with purified TET2, ascorbic acid 
increased the enzymatic activity of mutant TET2 indicating that 
ascorbic acid supplementation may increase the efficiency of 
dioxygenation but this increase was only seen in cells with 
heterozygous mutations. Further, in vitro studies have shown that 
high dose ascorbic acid with plasma concentration o f 1000 
μmol/L is toxic to some cancer cells but not normal cells.  
Although trials with oral ascorbic acid in mid 1970s did not show 
any benefit of it in cancer patients, recent trials have shown that 
the addition of high dose IV ascorbic acid to chemother apy is 
well tolerated, nontoxic, and may improve responses to therapy 
in some patients  and can also improve symptoms .  
Case 1917    Page 3    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
Azacitidine (AZA), decitabine (DAC), and lenalidomide 
are the only FDA approved drugs  in MDS. Treatment with AZA 
and DAC improves cytopenias and prolongs survival in patients 
with MDS, though only 30 -35% of patients respond to therapy. 
Studies have shown that MDS patients with TET2  mutations have 
a higher response rate to AZA. In a study o f 82 patients with 
MDS and oligoblastic AML (20 -30% BM blasts) treated with 
AZA, TET2  mutations were found in 15% of the patients. 
Patients with TET2  mutations had a higher response to AZA 
compared to wild type patients (82% vs 45%, p = 0.04, 
respectively) . In a larger retrospective study, samples from 213 
patients with MDS were sequenced prior to their treatment with 
hypomethylating agents (HMAs) for the presence of 40 recurrent 
gene mutations. TET2  mutations with variant allelic frequency 
(VAF) >10% were associated with a significantly higher overall 
response rate (ORR) compared with WT (60% vs. 43%; OR, 
1.99; 95%CI, 1.05 -3.80,  P=0.036). Further, mice with 
transplanted TET2 -null hematopoietic cells exhibit decrease in 
white blood counts when they are treat ed with AZA compared to 
vehicle . In another in vitro study , adding vitamin C at 
physiological levels to low doses azacitidine showed synergistic 
inhibition of cancer -cell proliferation and increased apoptosis. 
This synergistic effect is likely the result o f both passive DNA 
demethylation by DNMTi and active conversion of 5 -
methylcytosine (5mC) to 5 -hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) by 
TET enzymes at LTR regions of endogenous retrovirus, because 
vitamin C acts as a cofactor for TET proteins. In addition, TET2 
knockout reduces the synergy between the two compounds.  
Taken together, we hypothesize that the combination of standard 
dose AZA with oral dose of ascorbic acid will improve overall 
response rate (ORR) in MDS and AML patients with TET2  
mutations.  
Primary Obj ective  Primary Endpoint(s)  
To estimate the overall response rate (ORR) of the combination 
of standard dose azacitidine and oral dose of ascorbic acid in 
patients with MDS, MDS/MPN  overlap, and AML  with TET2  
mutations  
Secondary 
Objective(s)  Secondary Endp oint(s)  
1. The safety profile of the combination in the targeted 
patient population  
2. Response duration  
3. Overall survival of the treated population (compared to 
matched historical cohort of patients treated with single 
agent Azacitidine)  
4. The identification of b iomarkers that predict response to 
Case 1917    Page 4    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  the combination  
Correlative 
Objective(s)  
 Correlative Endpoint(s)  
Identify gnomonic biomarkers for response . Evaluate methylation 
profile and after treatment to determine its relation with response.   
Sample Size  28 
Disease 
sites/Conditions  Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS), MDS/MPN syndromes , and 
AML  
Interventions  Azacitidine 75 mg/m2, SC / IV  day (1 -7) every 28 days cycle  
 Ascorbic acid 1 g PO  every  day (daily) for every  28 days cycle  
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS  
 
CCCC  Case C omprehensive Cancer Center  
CRF  Case Report Form  
DCRU  Dahm’s Clinical Research Unit  
DSTC  Data Safety  and Toxicity Committee  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
PRMC  Protocol Review and Monitoring Committee  
SOC  Standard of Care  
CCF  Cleveland Clinic Foundation  
UH University Hospitals  
MDS  Myelodysplastic Syndromes  
CMML  Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia  
MPN  Myeloprolifrative Neoplasm  
AML  Acute Myeloid Leukemia  
DNA  Deoxyribonucleic acid  
AZA  Azaci tidine  
DAC  Decitabine  
FDA  The Food and Drug Administration  
HMA s Hypomethylating Agents  
VAF  Variant Allelic Frequency  
ORR  Overall Response Rate  
TET2  Ten eleven translocation 2  
5mC  5-methylcytosine  
5hmC  5-hydroxymethylcytosine  
SC Subcutaneous  
CALGB  Cancer and Leukemia Group B  
NCI National Cancer Institute  
AA Ascorbic Acid  
Case 1917    Page 5    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
 
 PO Orally  
Sp Specificity protein  
SVCT -2 Sodium  -dependent Ascorbic Acid  transporter 2  
EGCG  Epigallocatechin -3-gallate  
ETP  Extended Treatment Period  
EOT  End of Treatment  
CR Complete Remission  
PR Partial Remission  
HI Hematologic Improvement  
IWG  International Working Group  
WHO  World Health Organization  
APL  Acute promyelocytic leukemia  
CNS  Central Nervous System  
PI Principal Investigator  
WBC  White Blood Cell  
CSF Colony -Stimulating Factor  
CTC AE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
AE Adverse Event  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event  
Co-I Co-Investigator  
DSMP  Data and Safety Monitorin g Plan  
PRBC  Packed Red Blood Cell  
ALT  Alanine transaminase  
AST  Aspartate aminotransferase  
ESA  erythropoiesis -stimulating agent  
ECOG  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group  
RBC  Red Blood Cells  
CRi Complete Response (CR) with  
incomplete hematologic recove ry 
CRp Complete Response (CR) with  
incomplete platelets  
IEC Independent Ethics Committee  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and  
Accountability Act of 1996  
OR Odds Ratio  
CI Confidence Intervals  
EOS  End of Study  
BUN  Blood Urea Nitrogen  
MCV  Mean Corpuscular Volume  
MCHC  Mean Cell Hemoglobin Concentration  
TP Treating Physician  

Case 1917    Page 6    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1.0  INTRODUCTION   
1.1 Background   
1.2  Name/description of Azacitidine 
1.3  Name/description of High dose Ascorbic Acid  
1.4  Rationale   
1.5 Background and rationale of correlative studies 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES 
2.1 Primary Objective  
2.2  Secondary Objective(s) 
2.3 Exploratory Objectives(s) 
2.4 Correlative Objective(s) 
 
3.0 STUDY DESI GN 
3.1 Study design 
3.2 Number of Subjects 
3.3 Replacement of Subjects 
3.4 Expected Duration of Treatment and Subject Participation   
 
4.0  SUBJECT SELECTION 
4.1 Inclusion Criteria 
4.2  Exclusion Criteria 
4.3 Inclusion of Women and Minorities 
 
5.0 REGISTRATION  
 
 
6.0  TREATMENT PLAN 
6.1 Treatment Regimen Overview  
6.2 Phase I Dose Escalation  
6.3  Definition of Dose Limiting Toxicity 
6.4 General Concomitant Medications and Supportive Care Guidelines 
6.5 Criteria for Removal from Study 
6.6 Duration of Follow- Up 
 
7.0 DOSE DELAYS / DOSE MODIFICATIONS 
 
8.0 ADVERSE EVENTS AND POTENTIAL RISKS 
8.1  Agent Adverse events 
8.2 Definitions 
8.3 Serious Adverse Event Report Form 
8.4 Reporting Procedures for Serious Adverse Event  
8.5 Serious Adverse Events and OnCoreTM    
8.6 Data Safety Toxicity Committee 
8.7 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
Case 1917    Page 7    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
9.0 PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION  
9.1 Investigational Agent(s)  
9.2 Commercial Agent(s) 
 
10.0 EXPLORATORY/CORRELATIVE  
10.1  Collection of Samples 
  
 
11.0 STUDY PARAMETERS AND CALENDAR 
11.1 Study Parameters 
11.2 Calendar 
 
12.0 MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  choose appropriate measurement of effect; i.e. 
RECIST (solid tumors) / hematologic diseases / other response measurement 
 
13.0 RECORDS TO BE KEPT/REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS 
13.1 Data Reporting 
13.2 Regulatory Considerations  
 
 
14.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
REFERENCES  
  
AP
PENDICES  
The investigator may choose from the following commonly used appendices and modify per 
protocol specifications. The investigator must supply additional appendices as needed including 
questionnaires and surveys.  
  
 APPENDIX I: ECOG / Karnofsky Performance Status Criteria  
 
 APPENDIX II: Cycle 1 Subject Diary (pill, injectable, etc.) 
 
 APPENDIX III: Cycle 2+ Subject Diary (pill, injectable, etc.) 
  
 APPENDIX IV: Study Design Time Point Definitions 
 
APPENDIX V: Response Criteria for extended treatment 
 
APPENDIX VI: Clinical Laboratory Parameters 
 
APPENDIX VII: WHO Classification 
 
APPENDIX VIII: Protocol Amendment Summaries 
 
 
Case 1917    Page 8    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
Case 1917    Page 9    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  1.0 Introduction  
 
1.1 B ackground of Study Disease  
 
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are clonal hematopoietic stem-cell disorders characterized 
by ineffective hematopoiesis, peripheral-blood cytopenias, and increased tendency to progress to 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 1. The median age of patients with MDS is approximately 70 
years2. This patient population is frequently affected by other comorbid conditions, a factor that 
often influences treatment decisions3. Treatment of MDS is based on prognostic factors that 
predict survival and progression to AML. The most widely used prognostic system for 
therapeutic decision-making is still the International Prognostic Scoring System3. This system 
stratifies patients into the following four groups: low, intermediate-1, intermediate-2, and high 
risk. Risk is based on number of cytopenias, percentage of bone marrow blasts, and karyotype. 
Low risk and intermediate-1 risk are usually grouped together as lower-risk disease, whereas 
intermediate-2 risk and high risk are grouped together as higher-risk disease3. Recently, genome 
sequencing technologies such as whole genome sequencing, whole exome sequencing, and next-
generation targeted deep sequencing have identified several recurrent somatic mutations that 
play an important role in the disease pathophysiology and prognosis4, 5.  
The discovery of new somatic mutations and the newly attained ability to use mutational 
screens as a diagnostic tool opened new opportunities for the development of new targeted 
ther
apies. Ten eleven translocation 2 ( TET2 ) gene mutations are among the most common 
genomic alterations in myeloid malignancies4, 5. Somatic mutations in TET2 can be identified in 
25-30% of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), 50-60% of patients with chronic 
m
yelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) an overlapping MDS/myeloprolifrative neoplasm (MPN) 
disorder, and 15-20% of patients with AML4-6. The TET2 g ene is very polymorphic, with 
hundreds of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of unknown clinical impact, but with some 
variants that may be pathogenically important. Similarly, somatic mutations affect all portions of 
the ge
ne, and can be missense or truncating, homo-, hemi- and heterozygous. While the majority 
of T
ET2 mutations are ancestral, they can also be subclonal, implicating the clonal architecture in 
the consequences of TET2 lesions. Further, somatic mutations in TET2 gene were identified in 
healthy individuals7, 8. The presence of these mutations increases with age and can increase their 
Case 1917    Page 10    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  risk of developing hematologic malignancies and death7, 8. TET2 protein is one of the three 
proteins in TET family that are conserved dioxygenases that catalyzes the conversion of 5-
methyl-cytosine (5-mc) to 5-hydroxymethyl-cytosine (5-hmc) and promotes DNA methylation. 
Diox
ygenases function of TET2 enzyme requires a -ketoglutarate (αKG), oxygen, and Fe (II ) 
whic
h is enhanced with the presence of ascorbic acid. Ascorbic acid interact with the catalytic 
domain of
 TET2 enzymes which may promote their folding and recycling of Fe (II) 10. Further, in 
mouse models, ascorbic acid can promote rapid and global increase in 5-hmc followed by DNA 
de
methylation for many promoter genes, a change that are TET2 dependent10. Ascorbic acid is 
ther
efore an activator of TET2. Indeed, in preliminary results with purified TET2, ascorbic acid 
increased the enzymatic activity of WT TET2 and partially overcome the effects of the mixture 
of WT and mutant TET2 ( TET2mut) indicating that ascorbic acid supplementation may increase 
the e
fficiency of dioxygenation and ultimately TET2 activity.  
TET2 belongs to a family of Fe2+ and α-ketoglutarate (αKG) dependent TET (TET1, 
TET2
 and TET3) DNA-dioxygenases that catalyze the oxidation of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), this to 5-formylcytosine (5fC), and this to 5-carboxylcytosine 
(5c
aC). Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C) is a known enhancer of TET2 activity. We and others have 
shown that Vitmine C enhances the basal TET activity. Higher TET activity results in DNA 
demethylation either actively, by base excision repair of fC and caC, or passively, via replication, 
due to DNA methyltransferase’s inability to recognize/read hmC. The resulting DNA 
demethylation increases gene transcription of context dependent differentiation promoting genes. 
To access the level of TET2, we screened several cell lines with different TET2 genotype using 
Cosmic ( https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cell_lines/cbrowse/all ) and cancer cell encyclopedia 
(https://portals.broadinstitute.org/ccle ) see Table 1. To confirm the expression level or protein in 
each cells we grew them to 70-80% confluence in indicated cell culture conditions. The cells 
were harvested and western blot analysis were performed on the nuclear fraction utilizing highly 
specific TET2 antibodies. The data is presented in Fig. 1 A and quantification in Fig. 1B . CMK, 
a TET2+/+ cell line  established from the peripheral blood of a 10-month-old boy with down's 
syndrome and acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AML M7) at relapse, showed highest level of 
TET2 while HEL cells have a moderate level of TET2 and carries a mono allelic missense 
mutation in catalytic domain and SIGM5 a TET2-/- cell established from the bone marrow of a 

Case 1917    Page 11    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  63-year-old man with acute myeloid leukemia of monocytic origin (AML FAB M5a) at 
diag
nosis shows no TET2 protein expression in western blot analysis.  To ascertain the role of 
ascorbic acid (Vitamin C) in epigenetic modifications, TET2 mutant and wild type MDS and 
MDS/AML we used these three cells. CMK, HEL and SIGM5 cells were propagated as 
described previously. Cells were treated at 300,000 cells/ml (sub confluent) for 12 hours with 
100 µM of  Vitamin C and the genomic DNA were extracted as described previously and 100 ng 
of DNA was spotted on PVDF membrane and cross-linked using UV crosslinking, blocked using 
BSA and probed with 5hmC and 5mC specific antibodies respectively. The spot analysis was 
performed on a Biorad ChemiDoc™ MP Imaging System. The data presented in Fig 2 is 
representative of three independent experiments. Consistent with the TET2 status, the ratio of 
5hmC/5mC was maximum in CMK followed by HEL and SIGM5. Thus we conclude that the 
effect of vitamin C will be similar for mono- and bi-allelic mutant MDS. Based on this data that 
wa
s generated in our lab, we wanted to amend the protocol to include patients with any TET2 
mutations.   
 
 
 
Figure 1A:  Western blot analysis results/ F igure 1B : Western blot analysis quantification  
 
Case 1917    Page 12    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  
 
Figure 2: Results of three independent TET2 status experiments 
Azacitidine, decitabine, and lenalidomide are the only FDA approved drugs in MDS. 
Treatment with AZA and DAC improves cytopenias and prolongs survival in patients with MDS, 
though only 30-40% of patients respond to therapy3. Azacitidine was approved in USA based on 
phase III clinical trial that compared azacitidine to best supportive care. Overall response rate to 
azacitidine was 34% with significant delay in AML transformation but no overall survival 
be
nefit. In a phase III clinical trial conducted in Europe, azacitidine was compared to 
c
onventional care arm that included best supportive care, low dose cytarabine, and intensive 
chemotherapy11. The median OS for patients treated with azacitidine was 24.5 months compared 
to 15 m
onths for patients treated with best supportive care (HR .58, p = .00001) 11. 
Studies have shown that MDS patients with TET2  mutations have a higher response rate 
to AZ
A. In a study of 82 patients with MDS and oligoblastic AML (20-30% BM blasts) treated 
with AZA, TET2  mutations were found in 15% of the patients. Patients with T ET2 mutations had 
a
 higher response to AZA compared to wild type patients (82% vs 45%, p = 0.04, respectively) 
12. In a larger retrospective study, samples from 213 patients with MDS were sequenced prior to 
their treatment with hypomethylating agents (HMAs) for the presence of 40 recurrent gene 
mutations13. TET2  mutations with variant allelic frequency (VAF) >10% were associated with a 
significantly higher overall response rate (ORR) compared with WT (60% vs. 43%; OR, 1.99; 
Case 1917    Page 13    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  95%CI, 1.05 -3.80,  P=0.036) 13. Further, mice with transplanted TET2 -null hematopoietic cells 
exhibit decrease in white blood counts when they are treated with AZA compared to vehicle.  
Recent in vitro study have shown that the ad dition of Ascorbic Acid  at physiological 
levels to low doses of azacitidine is synergistic and can increase the inhibition of cancer -cell 
proliferation and increased apoptosis14. This synergistic was related to both passive DNA 
demethylation by DNMTi and a ctive conversion of 5- meth ylcytosine (5mC) to 5 -
hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) by TET2 enzymes14. More importantly, TET2 knockout reduces 
the synergy between the two compounds.  Further, evidence to suggest that treatment with 
mul
tiagent combination can be be neficial and feasible in patients with MDS/MPN syndromes 
was also shown in a study of the combination of (thalidomide, arsenic trioxide, dexamethasone, 
and ascorbic acid [TADA]  15. With a median on -study follow -up of 5.7 months, 21 patients 
(75%) completed  the entire 12 -w eek course of therapy, and 6 patients (29%) responded to 
TADA  15. With a median extended follow -up of 24.1 months for 15 evaluable patients, the 
median progression -free survival was 14.4 months, and the median overall survival was 21.4 
mont hs. 
Taken together, the combination of standard dose AZA with ascorbic acid represent a 
rational, combination that may improve overall response rate (ORR) in MDS and AML patients 
with TET2  mutations.  
 
1.2 Name and Description of Azacitidine 
 
Az
acitidine, a ring analog of the pyrimidine nucleoside cytidine, has effects on cell 
differentiation, gene expression, and DNA synthesis and metabolism. Since the early 1970s, 
azacitidine has been investigated in the US for the treatment of acute leukemia. Clinical trials 
have focused primarily on patients with disease refractory to conventional chemotherapy. These 
investigations indicated azacitidine has activity in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML). Clinical trials subsequently have been conducted to evaluate the effects of azacitidine in 
a variety of other malignant and hematologic disorders, including solid tumors, 
hemoglobinopathies (thalassemia and sickle cell anemia), and myelodysplastic syndromes 
(MDS).  
Toxicology studies have been conducted in mice, rats, dogs, and Rhesus monkeys. Most 
Case 1917    Page 14    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  of the studies were performed during the 1970s and early 1980s according to existing guidelines 
and standards in place during that period. The nonclinical studies identified the bone marrow, 
liver, kidneys, and lymphoid tissues (spleen, lymph nodes) as the main target organs of toxicity. 
In single-dose studies, the lethal dose of azacitidine after intravenous (IV) administration in 
mice, rats, and dogs was approximately 250 mg/m2. Repeated daily dosing appears to increase 
the toxicity of azacitidine. The genotoxicity of azacitidine is consistent with that of other 
nucleoside analogs that interact with nucleic acids. Likewise, similar to other agents with 
cytostatic properties, azacitidine was embryotoxic and reduced the reproductive performance in 
mi
ce and rats. It is important to note that animal study data is superseded in many respects by the 
extensive clinical safety data collected in the last two decades.  
Limited azacitidine pharmacokinetic data are currently available. Based on plasma 
concentrations of total radioactivity (which represent parent drug plus circulating metabolites), 
azacitidine is rapidly absorbed when given subcutaneously (SC), with maximum plasma 
concentrations found 0.5 to 2 hours after dosing. Azacitidine and/or its by-products are rapidly 
cleared by the kidneys. The half-lives and percent radioactivity recovered in urine are similar for 
the IV and SC routes of administration.  
The effects of renal or hepatic impairment, gender, age, and race on the pharmacokinetics 
of azacitidine have not been studied. In 1985, the Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) 
study investigators began clinical trials with azacitidine in MDS patients under the auspices of 
the National Cancer Institute (NCI). Results from the three studies conducted by the CALGB 
(Protocols 8421, 8921, and 9221) have been published. The first two CALGB studies (Protocol 
8421 and Protocol 8921) were uncontrolled Phase 2 investigations. The most recent CALGB 
study (Protocol 9221) was a Phase 3 investigation that compared azacitidine to supportive care 
alone. The azacitidine dose investigated in the CALGB studies was 75 mg/m2/day for 7 days, 
repeated on a 28-day cycle. Azacitidine was administered by continuous IV infusion in the first 
study (Protocol 8421), and by SC injection in the two studies that followed. The dose was 
adjusted based on toxicity and clinical response. In the Phase 3 investigation (Protocol 9221), 
azacitidine produced higher response rates than supportive care alone. In addition, azacitidine 
prolonged the time to transformation to AML or death.  
Case 1917    Page 15    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  The efficacy of azacitidine to treat MDS also was evaluated in 7 open-label studies 
conducted outside the CALGB protocols. The dosage regimen used in 6 of these studies was 75 
mg/m2 given daily for 7 days every 3-4 weeks by SC injection in 4 studies, SC or IV in 1 study, 
and the route was not specified in the last study. The dosage regimen used in the seventh study 
was 5-35 mg/m2/day given by continuous IV infusion for 14 days. The lowest response rate was 
found
 in this seventh study, which suggests the mechanism of 5-azacitidine’s activity requires 
repeated administration of a minimally effective dose to achieve improvement in hematologic 
parameters.  
As with other antimetabolites, bone marrow suppression (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia) 
is a common adverse event associated with azacitidine. However, myelosuppression generally 
occurs more often and with greater severity at doses higher than those used to treat MDS. 
Gastrointestinal toxicity (i.e., nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea) can limit the dose of azacitidine in 
any patient population. Infrequent adverse effects include neuromuscular aches, generalized 
weakness, renal tubular acidosis, and liver enzyme abnormalities. Erythema and burning at the 
injection site can occur following SC administration, which usually resolves within 24-72 hours.  
1.3 Name and Description of Ascorbic Acid 
 
Asc
orbic acid is a water-soluble vitamin. Ascorbic acid has few strictly pharmacological actions. 
Administration in amounts greatly in excess of physiologic requirements causes no demonstrable 
effects. The vitamin is an essential coenzyme for collagen formation, tissue repair and synthesis 
of lipids and proteins. It acts both as a reducing agent and as an antioxidant and is necessary for 
many physiologic functions, e.g., metabolism of iron and folic acid, resistance to infection, and 
preservation of blood vessel integrity. Signs and symptoms of early AA deficiency include 
mala
ise, irritability, and arthralgia, hyperkeratosis of hair follicles, nosebleed, and petechial 
hemorrhages. Prolonged deficiency leads to clinical scurvy.  
Ascorbic acid is normally present in both plasma and cells. The absorbed vitamin is 
ubiquitous in all body tissues 16. The highest concentrations are found in glandular tissue, the 
lowe
st in muscle and stored fat. Ascorbic acid is partially destroyed and partially excreted by the 
body. There is a renal threshold for AA; the vitamin is excreted by the kidney in large amounts 
Case 1917    Page 16    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  only when the plasma concentration exceeds this threshold, which is approximately 1.4 mg/100 
mL16. When the body is saturated with ascorbic acid, the plasma concentration will be about the 
same as that of the renal threshold; if further amounts are then administered, most of it escapes 
into the urine. When body tissues are not saturated and plasma concentration is low, 
administration of ascorbic acid results in little or no renal excretion16.  
A ma
jor route of metabolism of ascorbic acid involves its conversion to urinary oxalate, 
presumably through intermediate formation of its oxidized product, dehydro-ascorbic acid.  In a 
study of healthy volunteers at the NIH, an in-hospital depletion-repletion study was conducted. 
Seven healthy volunteers were hospitalized for 4-6 months and consumed a diet c ontaining <5 
mg of AA daily16. Steady-state plasma and tissue concentrations were determined at seven daily 
doses of vitamin C from 30 to 2500 mg. AA steady-state plasma concentrations as a function of 
dose displayed sigmoid kinetics. Complete plasma saturation with AA occurred at 1000 mg PO  
da
ily16.   
Nume
rous studies have demonstrated that pharmacological  doses  of a scorbic acid  (0.1–
100 mM) decrease cell proliferation  in a variety of cancer cell lines 17, 22. Specifically, decreases 
in cell proliferation after ascorbic acid treatment have been reported for p rostate , pancreatic, 
he
patocellular , colon , mesothelioma , a nd neuroblastoma  cell lines. The potential mechanisms 
through which treatment with high-dose ascorbic acid may exert its effects on cancer cells have 
been extensively investigated. Several studies have demonstrated that the i n vitro  direct c ytotoxic  
effect of ascorbic acid on various types of cancer cells is mediated through a chemical  reaction 
that g
enerates hydrogen peroxide 17,22. Treating colon cancer cells with 2 mM to 3 mM of 
asc
orbic acid resulted in down regulation of specificity protein (Sp) tra nscription  factors and Sp-
regulated genes  involved in cancer pro gression . One study suggested that Ascorbic Acid-
mediated prostate cancer cell death may occur through activation of an autophagy  pathway. 
Diff
erences in chemosensitivity  to Ascorbic Acid treatment in bre ast cancer cell lines may 
de
pend on expression of the sodium  -dependent A scorbic Acid  transporter 2 (SVCT-2) 22. 
Research has suggested that pharmacological doses of ascorbic acid enhance the effects of 
arsenic trioxide  on ovarian cancer  cells gemcitabine on pancreatic cancer cells, and combination 
tre
atment of gemcitabine  and epigallocatechin-3-gallate  (EGCG) on mesothelioma cells.  

Case 1917    Page 17    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  Ascorbic Acid has also been investigated in clinical trials. One study reported three case 
reports of cancer patients who received IV ascorbic acid as their main therapy  18. During ascorbic 
acid therapy, the patients used additional treatments, including vit amins , minerals , a nd 
botanicals . According to the authors, the cases were reviewed in accordance with the NCI Best 
Case Series guidelines. Histopathologic  examination suggested poor pro gnoses  for these patients, 
but they had long survival times after being treated with IV ascorbic ac id 18. Ascorbic Acid was 
given at doses ranging from 15 g to 65 g, initially once or twice a week for several months; two 
patients then received it less frequently for 1 to 4 years. Two studies demonstrated that IV 
ascorbic acid treatment resulted in improved quality of life  and decreases in cancer-related side 
effects  in cancer patients 18. Studies have shown that ascorbic acid can be safely administered to 
healthy volunteers or cancer patients at doses up to 1.5 g/ kg and with sc reening  to eliminate 
tre
ating individuals with risk factors  for tox icity  (e.g., glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
de
ficiency , renal diseases, or urolithiasis). These studies have also found that plasma  
concentrations of ascorbic acid are higher with IV administration  than with oral administration 
a
nd are maintained for more than 4 hours 18.  
Asc
orbic Acid was also investigated in combination with other cancer treatments. A 
phase I  study published in 2012 examined the safety and e fficacy  of combining IV ascorbic acid 
with gemcitabine  and erlotinib  in stage IV pancreatic cancer  patients 19. F ourteen subjects 
entered the study and planned to receive IV gemcitabine (1,000 mg /m2 over 30 minutes, once a 
we
ek for 7 weeks), oral erlotinib (100 mg daily for 8 weeks), and IV ascorbic acid (50 
g/infusion , 75 g/infusion, or 100 g/infusion 3 times per week for 8 weeks). Minimal adverse 
effects  were reported for ascorbic acid treatment19.  Five subjects received fewer than 18 of the 
planned 24 ascorbic acid infusions and thus did not have follow-up imaging  to assess response. 
Thr
ee of those patients had clinically determined progressive disease  19. All of the other nine 
patients had repeat imaging to assess tumor size, and each met the criteria for having stable 
disease . A 2013 phase I clinical study  evaluated the safety of combining pharmacological 
a
scorbic acid with gemcitabine in treating stage IV pancreatic cancer patients 20. Dur ing each 4-
week cycle, patients received gemcitabine weekly for 3 weeks (1,000 mg/m2 over 30 minutes) 
and twice weekly ascorbic acid infusions for 4 weeks (15 g over 30 minutes during the first 
week, followed by weekly escalations in dose until plasma levels reached at least 350 mg/dL [20 
mM]) 20. Among nine patients, mean progression-free survival  was 26 weeks and ove rall 

Case 1917    Page 18    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  survival  was 12 months 20. The  combination treatment was well tolerated, and no significant 
adverse events were reported. In 2014, a phase I/IIA  clinical trial evaluated the toxicities of 
c
ombining IV ascorbic acid with carboplatin  and pa clitaxel  in stag e III  /IV ovarian cancer . 
Twenty-seven patients were randomly assigned to receive either chemotherapy  alone or 
chemotherapy and IV ascorbic acid concurrently 21. Chemotherapy was given for 6 months, and 
IV ascorbic acid was given for 12 months. The addition of IV ascorbic acid was associated with 
reduced chemotherapy-related toxicities. Trials of high-dose IV ascorbic acid with other drugs  
a
re ongoing 21. A number of studies have included IV ascorbic acid treatment (1,000 mg) with 
arsenic trioxide  regimens , with m ixed results. The combination therapies were well tolerated and 
suggested beneficial effects in multiple myeloma patients, although the specific contribution of 
a
scorbic acid could not be determined. However, similar combination regimens resulted in 
severe side effects and disease progression  in patients with a cute myeloid leukemia , refractory  
meta
static  colorectal cancer , a nd metastatic melanoma  21. 
 
2.0  Objectives 
 
2.1       Primary Objective  
 
To estimate the overall response rate (ORR) of the combination of standard dose azacitidine and 
ascorbic acid in patients with MDS, AML, and MDS/MPN overlap with TET2  mutations. 
 
2.2       Secondary Objective(s) 
 
To e
valuate the following: 
1. The safety profile of the combination of azacitidine and ascorbic acid in the targeted 
patient population. 
2. The  response duration for study patients.  
3. The overall survival of the treated population (compared to matched historical cohort of 
pa
tients treated with single agent Azacitidine) 
4. The  identification of genomic biomarkers that may predict response to the combination 
tre
atment. 

Case 1917    Page 19    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  5. E valuation of changes in methylation prior and during therapy  
 
3.0 Study Design 
 
This i
s an open-label, phase II study that will be conducted at Cleveland Clinic, Taussig Cancer 
Institute.  
Azacitidine will be administered intravenously or subcutaneously at a fixed dose of 
75mg
/m2/day for 7 consecutive days, (allowing for weekends, and holidays) of each 28-day 
c
ycle. Ascorbic acid will be administered orally daily at 1 g/day three days prior to start 
a
zacitidine and then continues daily for a total of 28 days of each 28 day cycle.  
3.1 Number of Subjects 
 
Appr
oximately 28  patients will be enrolled in this trial.  
 
3.2  Expected Duration of Treatment and Subject Participation 
 
Upon 
signing consent, patients will be enrolled onto the study. Patients will undergo a screening 
period. The screening period is defined as the time period between the signing of the consent to 
the day the patient receives the first dose of study drug. During this period the patient will be 
assessed to determine if the patient meets all inclusion and exclusion criteria to be eligible for the 
stud
y (Appendix IV). 
 The treatment period is defined as the time between first day of study drug dosage (Day -
3) to C6D28. At this time the patient will be assessed and eligible to move into the Extended 
Tr
eatment Period (ETP). The extended treatment period is defined as C7D1 to the patient meets 
EOT criteria (Section 6: Table 1; Appendix IV) 
 
 Study treatment is defined as the treatment period and if applicable the extended 
treatment period (Appendix IV). Study drug will be continued during the duration of the study 
treatment unless patients exhibit any EOT criteria (Section 6: Table 1; Appendix IV).   
 
Case 1917    Page 20    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   Treatment should be continued for at least 6 cycles in the absence of toxicities that 
require discontinuation and/or any EOT criteria (Section 6: Table 1; Appendix IV). After 6 
c
ycles of treatment, a bone marrow biopsy and aspiration will be obtained to evaluate response. 
If patient has achieved either of the below response criteria (Appendix IV) based on their disease 
diag
nosis patient will be eligible continue onto the extended treatment period (ETP). The patient 
is eligible to remain on treatment during the ETP until disease progression or patient meets EOT 
criteria (Section 6: Table 1; Appendix IV ). 
  
R
esponse Criteria for extended treatment eligibility 
 c omplete remission, partial remission, or hematologic improvement (CR/PR/HI) per IWG 
2006 criteria for patients with MDS 
 (CR /PR/marrow CR) per IWG 2003 criteria for patients with AML 
 I f the response is stable disease and the investigator determines the patient is gaining 
clinical benefit, patient may continue on treatment until progression. 
 
 At the point in which the patient meets the any EOT criteria (Section 6) the patient will 
enter into the follow up period to follow for survival status. The patient will be followed for up 
to 1 year and/or death, which ever were to occur first. End of study (EOS) is defined as the time 
the patient completes 1 year of survival follow up and/or patient’s death, whichever were to 
occur first. 
 
4.1 Subject Selection 
 
4.2 In clusion Criteria  
 
Subjects must meet all of the following inclusion criteria to be eligible for enrollment:  
 
4.2.1 Patients must have a confirmed TET2  mutations identified by next generation targeted 
deep sequencing.  
 
Case 1917    Page 21    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  4.2.2 P atients must have MDS, or MDS/MPN overlap defined by 2016  WHO criteria. Both 
newly diagnosed or previously treated MDS or MDS/MPN patients are eligible as long as 
the patient has never received prior treatment with azacitidine or decitabine. 
 
4.2.3 P atients with Leukemic/blast phase transformation MPN.  
 
4.2.4 P atient with AML according to 2016 WHO criteria (excluding APL [AML-M3]). 
 
4.2.4.1 Ne
wly diagnosed patients who are ineligible or declined to receive intensive 
c
hemotherapy after discussion of risks and benefits of that approach or patients with 
primary refractory/relapsed AML. 
 
4.2.4.2 Patients with active central nervous system (CNS) leukemia eligible at the discretion of 
treating physician. 
 
4.2.4.3
 Relapse/Refractory is defined as at least 1 course of treatment for AML excluding any 
patients treated with azacitidine or decitabine. 
 
4.2.4.3.1 Patients should be off any prior treatment or line of therapy for 2 weeks prior to start 
study with the exception of hydrea (Hydroxyurea). 
 
4.2.5 P rior therapy with hydroxyurea, biological or targeted therapy (e.g. flt3 inhibitors, other 
kinase inhibitors) or hematopoietic growth factors is allowed.  
 
4.2.6 Age >18 years. 
 
4.2.7 ECOG performance status < 3. 
 
4.2.8 Patients must have normal organ and marrow function as defined at the discretion of the 
treating physician and PI. 
Case 1917    Page 22    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  4.2.9 W omen of childbearing potential must have a negative serum or urine pregnancy     test 
withi
n 10-14 days prior to enrollment. 
 
4.2.10
 Patients must have the ability to understand and the willingness to sign a written 
informed consent document. 
 
4.2.11 Patient must be willing to comply with all aspects of the protocol including completing 
the drug diary. 
 
4.2.12 Patient must discontinue any and all use of multivitamin and/or vitamin c medication 24 
hours before first dose of Ascorbic Acid. 
 
4.2 E xclusion Criteria 
 
The presence of any of the following will exclude a subject from study enrollment: 
 
4.2.1 An y prior treatment with azacitidine or decitabine. 
 
4.2.2 P atients diagnosed with APL, AML- M3. 
 
4.2.3 P atients receiving other active treatment for their myeloid malignancy including 
investigational agents with the exception of hydrea for WBC control.  
 
4.2.4 Nursing or pregnant women.  
 
4.2.5 Hist ory of allergic reactions to either azacitidine or ascorbic acid. 
 
4.2.6 P atients with uncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to ongoing or 
active infection, symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac 
arrhythmia, or psychiatric illness/social situations that would limit compliance with study 
requirements.  
Case 1917    Page 23    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
4.2.7 P atients with higher risk of bleeding (deemed by the treating physician) or on 
anticoagulation. 
 
4.2.8 P atients who are unwilling or unable to comply with all study requirements. 
 
4.3 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
Me
n, women  and members of all races and ethnic groups are eligible and encouraged to 
participate in this trial. 
 
5.0
 Registration 
 
All subjects who have been consented are to be registered in the OnCore™ Database. For those 
subjects who are consented, but not enrolled, the reason for exclusion be recorded. 
 
All 
subjects will be registered through Cleveland Clinic and will be provided a study number by 
contacting the study coordinator once the patient signs the consent.  
 
 
6.0  Treatment Plan 
 
6.1 Treatment Regimen Overview 
 
All azacitidine courses will be given at Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Institute or an affiliate 
hospital approved to treat patients. 
 
6.1.1  Azacitidine 
 
Case 1917    Page 24    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  Azacitidine will be administered intravenously or subcutaneously at a fixed dose of 
75mg/m2/day for 7 consecutive days, allowing interruptions for weekends and holidays within 
each 28-day cycle. No dose modifications will be permitted during the treatment period. 
 
6.1.2 Ascorbic Acid 
 
Asc
orbic acid will be administered orally daily at 1 g/day three days prior to start azacitidine and 
then continues daily for a total of 28 days of each 28 day cycle. No dose modifications will be 
permitted during the treatment period. 
 
6.2 Treatment Duration 
 
The length of the treatment will vary per patient. The typical treatment period will be 6 months 
for the course of the required treatment. If the patient is eligible to continue treatment during the 
ETP, the patient is able to receive treatment until the patient meets one or more of the EOT 
criteria. 
 
6.3 General Concomitant Medications and Supportive Care Guidelin es 
 
P
atients should be off any prior treatment or line of therapy for 2 weeks prior to start study with 
the exception of hydrea.  
Necessary supportive measures for optimal medical care will be given throughout the 
treatment as determined by the treating physician and the patient’s medical need. No 
concomitant chemotherapy, immunotherapy, or therapy with monoclonal antibodies will be 
allowed during the study with the exception of hydroxyurea or corticosteroids for control of 
blood counts. 
Use of a colony-stimulating factor or combinations thereof (e.g. G-CSF, GM-CSF, or 
erythropoietin) are at the discretion of the treating physician and is permitted if judged in the 
patient’s best medical interest. 
Case 1917    Page 25    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  Prophylactic antibiotics, antifungals, and antiviral agents (e.g. levofloxacin, itraconazole, 
valacyclovir, etc.) are recommended; however, the use of these or other drugs will be left to the 
treating physician’s discretion. 
 
6.4 Criteria for Removal from Study Treatment (EOT) 
 
I
n the absence of treatment delays due to adverse events, treatment may continue for 6 cycles or 
be
 extended after 6 cycles unless l one of the following criteria applies: 
 
End of Treatment Criteria  
 Disease progression defined as no response after 6 months of treatment or loss of 
response dur ing treatment as defined in section 12  
 Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of treatment  
 The investigator and/or treating  physician considers  it to be in the best interest of the 
subject to permanently discontinue study treatment  
o This includes if the treatment is deemed to be of excessive toxicity to the 
patient by the treating physician  
 Patient decision to withdraw from treatment (partial consent) or from the study (full 
consent)  
 Pregnancy during the course of the study for a child -bearing participant  
 Death  
 Unacceptable adverse events defined as following:  
o Unacceptable treatment related toxicity, NCI CTC AE version 4.0 Grade 3 or 4 
that fails to recover to baseline or < Grade 3 in the absence of treatment within 
4 weeks  
o Any toxicity or  other issue that causes a delay of study drug administration by 
more than 4 weeks  
 
Table 1: End of Treatment Criteria 
 
6.5 Duration of Follow Up 
 
The clinical course of each adverse event will be followed until resolution, stabilization, or until 
it has been determined that the study treatment or participation is not the cause.  
Serious adverse events that are still ongoing at the end of the study period will necessitate 
follow-up to determine the final outcome. Any serious adverse event that occurs after the study 
period and is considered to be possibly related to the study treatment or study participation will 
be recorded and reported immediately. 
Case 1917    Page 26    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  Following completion of active treatment (EOT) and while still on study (Follow up) , 
patients will be followed for survival as of standard of care for up to 1 year. This follow up can 
e
ither be done as a visit to the study doctor’s clinic or via telephone call to the patient.  
 
7.0  Dose Delays/Dose Modifications 
 
P
atients will receive a course of their treatment every 4weeks, but not exceeding more 8 weeks 
between treatment courses (4 weeks of treatment + a window of 4 weeks between cycles). 
Patients should receive their second course of therapy without interruption, regardless of their 
degree of myelosuppression. After the first two courses of therapy, the interval between 
subseque
nt cycles of Azacitidine therapy could be prolonged (with a maximum of 4 weeks 
prolongation between each 28 day cycle) at the discretion of the investigator. During any dose  
de
lays of Azacitidine, Ascorpic Acid therapy should not be delayed. Subsequent cycles can be 
given prior to baseline peripheral blood count recovery if considered to be in the best interest for 
the patient and after discussion with the principal investigator and the discussion documented in 
the patient’s medical record.  
No do se modification to azacitidine or ascorbic acid can occur during the treatment 
course.  
 
8.0 P otential Risks and Adverse events 
 
8.1 Potential Risks 
 
8.1.1 Azacitidine 
 
 
COMMON, SOME MAY BE SER IOUS  
In 100 people receiving azacitidine  more than 20 and up to 100 may have:  
Case 1917    Page 27    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  COMMON, SOME MAY BE SER IOUS  
In 100 people receiving azacitidine  more than 20 and up to 100 may have:  
 Fever  
 Fatigue  
 Headache  
 Nausea  
 Vomiting  
 Diarrhea  
 Constipation  
 Loss of appetite  
 Bruising  
 Low blood cell counts  
 Weakness  
 Joint pain  
 Shivering  
 Cough  
 Difficulty Breathing  
 
OCCASIONA L, SOME MAY BE SERIOUS  
In 100 people receiving azacitidine from 4 to 20 may have:  
 Chest pain  
 Pale skin  
 Swelling (such as in arms and legs)  
 Abnormal heart sound  
 Fast heart beat  
 Low blood pressure  
 High blood pressure  
 Fainting  
 Dizziness  
 Anxiety  
 Depression  
 Difficulty sleeping  
 Lack of energy  
 Numbness  
 Pain 
 Skin hives and /or rash  
 Dry skin and /or itching  
 Sweating  
 Low blood levels of potassium  
 Weight loss  
 Abdominal pain, tenderness, and/or swelling  
 Mouth blisters  
 Upset stomach  
 Hemorrhoid bleeding  
 Difficulty swall owing  
 Sore or painful throat  
Case 1917    Page 28    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  OCCASIONA L, SOME MAY BE SERIOUS  
In 100 people receiving azacitidine from 4 to 20 may have:  
 Difficult and/or painful urination  
 Blood in urine  
 Pain 
 Stuffy and/or runny nose  
 Wheezing  
 Lymph node swelling  
 Infection  
 Hair loss  
 
RARE, AND SERIOUS  
In 100 people receiving azacitidine 3 or fewer may have:  
 Irregular heartbeat  
 Heart failure  
 Stoppage of heart and lung function  
 Bleeding in and/or around the brain  
 Seizure  
 Skin condition with fever and skin lesions  
 Abnormal Blood acid/base balance (possible organ damage)  
 Dehydration  
 Inflammation of the gallbladder  
 Terry or coffee gr ound -like blood in the stool  
 Enlarged spleen  
 Liver failure  
 Kidney failure, even requiring dialysis  
 Build -up of bodily waste products in the blood  
 Coughing up blood  
 Lung inflammation (possible difficulty breathing)  
 Allergic reaction, which may be life -threa tening  
 Body -wide inflammation  
 Breakdown products of the cancer cells entering the blood stream  
 
Azacitidine may cause you to develop another type of cancer such as leukemia, a type of blood 
cancer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.1.2 Ascorbic Acid 
Case 1917    Page 29    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
 
COMMON, SOME MAY BE SERIOU S 
In 100 people receiving ascorbic acid more than 20 and up to 100 may have:  
 Fatigue  
 Headache  
 Nausea  
 Vomiting  
 Diarrhea  
 Constipation  
 Loss of appetite  
 Bruising  
 Low blood cell counts  
 Weakness  
 Joint pain  
 Shivering  
 Cough  
 Difficulty Breathing  
 
OCCASIONAL, SOME  MAY BE SERIOUS  
In 100 people receiving ascorbic acid from 4 to 20 may have:  
 Pale skin  
 Swelling (such as in arms and legs)  
 Abnormal heart sound  
 Fast heart beat  
 Low blood pressure  
 High blood pressure  
 Fainting  
 Dizziness  
 Anxiety  
 Depression  
 Lack of energy  
 Num bness  
 Pain 
 Skin hives and /or rash  
 Dry skin and /or itching  
 Sweating  
 
RARE, AND SERIOUS  
In 100 people receiving ascorbic acid 3 or fewer may have:  
 Kidney stones  
 Kidney failure  
 Bleeding that could be life threatening  
 Loss of blood due to hemolysis (a proc ess where red cell gets destructed)  
 
 
Case 1917    Page 30    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  8.2 Definitions  
 
8.2.1      Adver
se Event   
 
An adverse event  (AE) is any unfavorable or unintended event, physical or psychological, 
associated with a research study, which causes harm or injury to a research participant as a result 
of the participant’s involvement in a research study. The event can include abnormal laboratory 
findings, symptoms, or disease associated with the research study. The event does not necessarily 
have to have a causal relationship with the research, any risk associated with the research, the 
research intervention, or the research assessments.  
Adverse events may be the result of the interventions and interactions used in the research; 
the collection of identifiable private information in the research; an underlying disease, disorder, 
or condition of the subject; and/or other circumstances unrelated to the research or any 
underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the subject.  
Abnormal laboratory results will be assessed in real time by the physicians. Treatment for 
any clinically significant values will be completed in real documented in the physician’s note . 
Documentation for the assessment and treatment will be provided in the physician’s note as 
source documentation.  
Clinical staff (i.e. nurses, clinical research coordinators) can be delegated to evaluate and 
assess all adverse events, with the exception of determining relationship to study treatment. 
These assessments will require documented review by either the treating physician or P I. 
 
8.2.2   Serious Adverse Events  
 
A serious adverse event (SAE)  is any adverse experience occurring at any dose that results in 
any of the following outcomes:  
 R esults in death.   
 Is a life-threatening  adverse experience.  The term life-threatening in the definition 
of serious refers to an adverse event in which the subject was at risk of death at the 
time of the event.  It does not refer to an adverse event which hypothetically might 
have caused death if it were more severe.  
Case 1917    Page 31    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   R equires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization .  
Any adverse event leading to hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization will be 
considered as Serious, UNLESS at least one of the following expectations is met:  
o The  admission results in a hospital stay of less than 24 hours OR  
o The  admission is pre-planned (e.g., elective or scheduled surgery arranged 
prior to the start of the study) OR  
o The  admission is not associated with an adverse event (e.g., social 
hospitalization for purposes of respite care.  
However it should be noted that invasive treatment during any hospitalization may fulfill 
the criteria of “medically important” and as such may be reportable as a serious adverse 
event dependent on clinical judgment.  In addition where local regulatory authorities 
specifically require a more stringent definition, the local regulation takes precedent.  
 R esults in persistent or significant disability/incapacity .  The definition of 
disability is a substantial disruption of a person’s ability to conduct normal life’s 
functions. 
 I s a congenital anomaly/birth defect .  
 I s an important medical event .  Important medical events that may not result death, 
be life-threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse 
experience when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the 
subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
outcomes listed in this definition.  Examples of such medical events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood 
disease or disorders, or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or 
the development of drug dependency or drug abuse. The development of a new 
cancer is always considered an important medical event. 
 
8.2.3 Adverse Event Evaluation  
 
The
 investigator or designee is responsible for ensuring that all adverse events (both serious and 
non-serious) observed by the clinical team or reported by the subject, which occur after the 
Case 1917    Page 32    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  subject has signed the informed consent are fully recorded in the subject’s medical records. 
Source documentation must be available to support all adverse events.  
 
The investigator or sub-investigator (treating physician if applicable) or delegated staff will 
provide the following for all adverse events (both serious and non-serious): 
 Eve nt term (as per CTCAE 4.1) 
 De scription of the event 
 Da te of onset and resolution 
 E xpectedness of the toxicity 
 Grade of toxicity  
 At tribution of relatedness to the investigational agent- (this must be assigned by an 
investigator, sub-investigator, or treating physician) 
 Action taken as a result of the event, including but not limited to; no changes, dose 
interrupted, reduced, discontinued, etc. or action taken with regard to the event, i.e. no 
action, received conmed or other intervention, etc. 
 Outcome of event 
An expected adverse event  is an event previously known or anticipated to result from 
participation in the research study or any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the 
subject. The event is usually listed in the Investigator Brochure, consent form or research 
protocol.  
An unexpected adverse event is an adverse event not previously known or anticipated to result 
from the research study or any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the subject.  
Attribution  is the relationship between an adverse event or serious adverse event and the study 
drug.  Attribution of any adverse event can only be assessed by the PI and/or Co- I. Attribution 
will be assigned as follows: 
 Definite – The AE is clearly related to the study drug. 
 Probable –  The AE is likely related to the study drug. 
 Possible – The AE may be related to the study drug. 
 Unlikely – The AE is doubtfully related to the study drug. 
 Unrelated – The AE is clearly NOT  related to the study drug. 
 
Case 1917    Page 33    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  Protocol must specify if attribution is required for individual components of the treatment 
regimen or the treatment regimen as a whole. 
 
8.3  SAE Report Form 
 
S
AEs will be recorded on the FDA Form 3500A (MedWatch) and Study SAE coversheet but 
should only be reported as instructed below.  The electronic FDA SAE reporting forms should 
not be used.   
 
8.4  Reporting Procedures for Serious Adverse Events 
 
F
or the purposes of safety reporting, all adverse events will be reported that occur during 
treatment and through 30 days after the final dose of study drug. Adverse events, both serious 
and non-serious, and deaths that occur during this period will be recorded in the source 
documents. All SAEs should be monitored until they are resolved or are clearly determined to be 
due to a subject’s stable or chronic condition or intercurrent illness(es). Related AEs will be 
followed until resolution to baseline or grade 1 or stabilization.  
 
8.4.1 SAE Reporting Requirements 
 
 Participating investigators (all sites) must report all serious adverse events to the Lead 
Site Principal Investigator (e.g. Sponsor-Investigator) within 24 hours  of discovery or 
notification of the event. The participating investigator must also provide follow-up 
information on the SAE until final resolution.  
 The  Lead Site  Principal Investigator will review the SAE and report the event to the 
FDA, external collaborator(s), and IRB as applicable. 
 It is the Sponsor-Investigator’s responsibility (e.g. lead site PI) to ensure that ALL 
serious adverse events that occur on the study (e.g. ALL SAEs that occur at each 
e
nrolling institution) are reported to all participating sites. 
 
Institutional Review Board Reporting Requirements: 
Case 1917    Page 34    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   I nvestigative sites will report adverse events to their respective IRB according to the local 
IRB’s policies and procedures in reporting adverse events.  
 
8.5 SAEs and OnCore 
 
 All SAEs will be entered into OnCore.   
 A copy of the SAE form(s) submitted to the sponsor-investigator is also uploaded into 
OnCore. 
8.6  Data Safety and Toxicity Committee 
 
I
t is the responsibility of each site PI to ensure that ALL SAEs occurring on this trial (internal or 
external) are reported to the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center’s Data and Safety Toxicity 
Committee. This submission is simultaneous with their submission to the sponsor and/or other 
regulatory bodies.  
  
8.7 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) 
 
This protocol will adhere to the policies of the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plan in accordance with NCI guidelines.  
 
9.0 PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION  
 
A 
list of the adverse events and potential risks associated with the investigational or commercial 
agents administered in this study can be found in Section 8.1.  
 
9.1 In
vestigational Agents 
 
9.1.1  Na me of Agent Azacitidine 
 
Other Names:   Vidaza 
Case 1917    Page 35    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
Product description:  Azacitidine is FDA approved and commercially available.  
 
Preparation for Intravenous Administration: Reconstitute the appropriate number of 
a
zacitidine vials to achieve the desired dose. Reconstitute each vial with 10 mL sterile water for 
injection. Vigorously shake or roll the  vial until all solids are dissolved. The resulting solution 
will
 contain azacitidine 10mg/mL. The solution should be clear. Parenteral drug product should 
be inspected visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration, whenever 
solution and container permit.  
Withdraw the required amount of azacitidine solution to deliver the desired dose and inject into a 
50-100 mL infusion bag of either 0.9% Sodium Chloride Infusion or Lactated Ringer’s Infusion.  
Az
acitidine is incompatible with 5% Dextrose solutions, Hespan, or solutions that contain 
bicarbonate. These solutions have the potential to increase the rate of degradation of azacitidine 
and should therefore be avoided.  
Intravenous Administration : Azacitidine solution is administered intravenously. Administer 
the total dose over a period of 10-40 minutes. The administration must be completed within 1 
hour of reconstitution of the azacitidine vial.  
Solution Stability : Azacitidine reconstituted for intravenous administration may be stored at 
25°C (77°F), but administration must be completed within 1 hour of reconstitution. If 
reconstituted azacitidine comes into contact with the skin, immediately and thoroughly wash 
with soap and water. If it comes into contact with mucous membranes, flush thoroughly with 
water.  Reconstituted azacitidine may be stored for up to 1 hour at 25°C (77°F) or for up to 8 
hours between 2 and 8°C (36 and 46°F). The azacitidine suspension is single-use and does not 
contain any preservatives. Unused portions of each vial should be discarded properly. Do not 
sa
ve any unused portions for later administration. It is recommended that 5-azacitidine in 
solution is administered as soon as possible.  
Storage:  Store reconstituted vials at 25o C (77o F); excursions permitted to 15o-30o C (59o-86o 
F) (See USP Controlled Room Temperature). There is no need to protect azacitidine from 
Case 1917    Page 36    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  exposure to light.  
Preparation for Subcutaneous Administration: Reconstitute VIDAZA aseptically with 4 mL 
sterile water for injection. Inject the diluent slowly into the vial. Vigorously shake or roll the vial 
until a uniform suspension is achieved. The suspension will be cloudy. The resulting suspension 
will contain azacitidine 25 mg/mL. Do not filter the suspension after reconstitution. Doing so 
could remove the active substance. 
Preparation for Immediate Subcutaneous Administration:  Doses greater than 4 mL should 
be
 divided equally into 2 syringes. The product may be held at room temperature for up to 1 
hour, but must be administered within 1 hour after reconstitution. 
Preparation for Delayed Subcutaneous Administration: The reconstituted product may be 
kept in the vial or drawn into a syringe. Doses greater than 4 mL should be divided equally into 2 
syringes. The product must be refrigerated immediately. When VIDAZA is reconstituted using 
water for injection that has not been refrigerated, the reconstituted product may be held under 
refrigerated conditions (2ºC - 8ºC, 36ºF - 46ºF) for up to 8 hours. When VIDAZA is 
re
constituted using refrigerated (2ºC - 8ºC, 36ºF - 46ºF) water for injection, the reconstituted 
produ
ct may be stored under refrigerated conditions (2ºC - 8ºC, 36ºF - 46ºF) for up to 22 hours. 
Af
ter removal from refrigerated conditions, the suspension may be allowed to equilibrate to 
room temperature for up to 30 minutes prior to administration. 
9.1.2  Na me of Agent Ascorbic Acid 
 
Other Names:   Vitamin C, 1000 mg   
 
Product description:  Ascorbic Acid is a tablet of 1000 mg  Patient is to take  one tablet once a 
day.   
Product Description  
USP-Verified Dietary Supplement. Recommended by pharmacists. Antioxidant - Helps boost the 
immune system. Vitamin C helps neutralize free radicals and helps iron get absorbed in the body. 
UPS has tested and verified ingredients, potency and manufacturing process. USP sets official 
Case 1917    Page 37    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  standards for dietary supplements. No artificial colors. No artificial flavors. No preservatives. No 
chemical solvents, yeast or gluten. (These statements have not been evaluated by the Food and 
Drug Administration. This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure or prevent any 
disease).  
Brand : Nature Made  
This Nature Made product provides vitamin C, a versatile and essential vitamin critical for the 
proper functioning of our immune system. In addition, vitamin C helps manufacture certain 
nerve-transmitting substances and hormones while helping absorb and utilize other nutrients, 
such as vitamin E and iron. Vitamin C also makes collagen, which holds connective tissues 
together in skin, bone, teeth, and other parts of the body.  
Vitamin C is an important and powerful antioxidant that works in the aqueous (water) 
environments of the body, such as the lungs and lens of the eye. Its primary antioxidant partners 
are vitamin E and the carotenes (such as beta-carotene), but it also works with the antioxidant 
enzymes. Vitamin C regenerates oxidized vitamin E and restores the antioxidant potential of 
vitamin E in the body.  
Vitamin C is recommended as part of a daily regimen for women's and men's health, longevity, 
heart strength, and immunity.  
 No artificial colors  
 No artificial flavors  
 No preservatives  
 No chemical solvents, yeast or gluten. Recommended By Pharmacists.  
 USP Standards plus Nature Made's Pure Ingredients guarantee optimum quality. 
Guaranteed purity, potency and dissolution.  
Safety Warning  
Do not use if imprinted seal under cap is broken or missing. 
Case 1917    Page 38    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  Ingredients 
Cellulose Gel, Hypromellose, Croscarmellose Sodium, Stearic Acid, Magnesium Stearate, 
Silicon Dioxide, Polyethylene Glycol, Vitamin C 
Directions 
Suggested Use: Take one tablet daily with a meal. Keep bottle tightly closed. Store in a cool, dry 
plac
e, out of reach of children. 
10.0 EXPLORATORY or CORRELATIVE STUDIES 
 
A blood sa
mple will be obtained for a next generation targeted deep sequencing genomic panel 
of 170 gene mutations prior to start treatment. Quantification of 5hmc and 5mc in patient’s 
de
rived mononuclear cells will be obtained during the screening period and on C6D15 to 
evaluate for changes in methylation. We will use the ELISA, dot-blot and mass spec assay to 
measure the level of 5hmC, a signature for TET2 activity in HSPCs and 5mC an indicator of the 
lack of TET2 activity in patient derived PBMCs (Peripheral blood mononuclear cells) and bone 
mar
row cells. For this purpose total genomic DNA from whole cell nuclear lysates (PBMCs or 
Bone marrow) or from the nuclear lysate of CD34+ cells will be extracted and used for ELISA 
a
ssay using a known standard curve. The mass spec will be performed on the samples after 
digesting with NaOH (Ref: Nature 468, 839–843) and separated and quantified by LCMS-MS 
(Re
f: Mo Cell; Volume 64, Issue 5, 1 December 2016, Pages 913–925) utilizing X-bridge 
re
verse phase column. Recombinant TET2 protein will be used to prepare the standard reaction 
mixture for 5hmC determination and comparison to the patient samples.  
 
All samples obtained will shipped to and stored at The Cleveland Clinic. Samples will 
remain at the Cleveland Clinic to be used for research purposes for this study as well as for 
future research projects approved by the IRB. 
 
10.1 Collection of Samples 
 
Case 1917    Page 39    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  10 ML of whole blood or bone marrow aspirate whichever available will be collected in extra lab 
tube. Details and instructions about the collection, processing, and shipping will be explain in the 
Lab Manual. All samples should be delivered and/or shipped to: 
 
Attn: Elise Lemelle, Cassie Hirsch, and/or Amy Graham 
 
Principal Research Technologists 
Translational Hematology and Oncology  
Cleveland Clinic, LC – NE6 – 250 
9620 C
arnegie Ave. 
Cleveland, OH 44195 
 Phone: (216) 444-0256 
 
11.0  STUDY PARAMETERS AND CALENDAR  
 
11.1 Study Parameters 
 
11.1.1 Screening Evaluation (Consent signing to Day -4) & Baseline period (Day -17 to day -3) 
 
1. A complete history and physical examination within 30  days prior to study entry.   
2. A whole  blood sample (10 ML) that will be used for next generation targeted deep 
se
quencing of genes that are common in myeloid malignancies   
3. He matology exam (Appendix VI)  
4. S erum Chemistry (Appendix VI) 
5. Bone marrow biopsy and aspiration with conventional cytogenetic analysis within 30 
da
ys prior to start the study. 10 ML of whole blood or bone marrow aspirate whichever 
available will be collected in extra lab tube. 
6. Doc umentation of transfusion frequency (PRBC and platelets only ) prior  to first cycle 
and prior to each additional cycle 
Case 1917    Page 40    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  7. Doc umentation of all medication including multivitamins and other over the counter 
medications 
8. Dates of multivitamin/vitamin C discontinuation must be documented and occur before 
first dose of study drug. Pre-study laboratory tests must be obtained within 14 days of 
registration.  
9. MDS Response Assessment, assessed by the treating physician 
Treatment Period ( Day -3 to C6D28) 
1. He matology exams (Appendix VI) at the start of each cycle (day 1) and the last day of 
cycle 6 (C 6D28)  
2. Serum Chemis try (Appendix VI), including Creatinine, bilirubin, ALT or AST at the start 
of e
ach cycle (day 1) 
3. B one marrow aspirate and/or biopsy to confirm response, to be performed at the end of 
cycle 6. 10 ML of whole blood or bone marrow aspirate whichever available will be 
c
ollected in extra lab tube. All bone marrows samples are to be stored at Cleveland Clinic  
4. C onventional cytogenetics to be performed at the end of cycle 6 
5. Doc umentation of frequency of transfusions (only PRBC and Platelets) prior to start of 
each new cycle. 
6. Documentation in the medical record of any grade 2 or higher adverse events at each 
visit. For guidelines on SAE Reporting and AE entry for Case Report  
7. Doc umentation of any prior administration of growth factors and ESA prior to start of 
each cycle  
8. A  10 ML blood sample that will be used for next generation targeted deep sequencing of 
g
enes that are common in myeloid malignancies  
Case 1917    Page 41    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  9. P hysical exam and ECOG performance status occurring at the end of each cycle 
10. Vital signs occulting at each visit 
11. Pregnancy test if applicable 
12. MDS Response Assessment, assessed by the treating physician occurring at the end of 
cycle 6 or EOT, whichever occurs first. 
13. Methylation panel only occurring in Cycle 1 
14.
 Azacitidine will be administered intravenously or subcutaneously at a fixed dose of 
75mg/m2/day for 7 consecutive days, (allowing interruptions for weekends, and holidays, 
of each 28-day cycle ). 
15. Ascorbic acid will be administered orally daily at 1 g/day three days prior to start 
azacitidine and then continues daily for a total of 28 days of each 28 days cycle. 
Extended Treatment Period  (Cycles 7+) 
1. Doc umentation of frequency of transfusions (only PRBC and Platelets) prior to start of 
each new cycle 
2. Doc umentation in the medical record of any grade 3 or higher adverse events at each 
visit. For guidelines on SAE Reporting and AE entry for Case Report  
3. P hysical exams and ECOG performance status occurring at the end of each cycle 
4. Vital S igns at each visit 
5. Hematology exams (Appendix VI) at the start of each cycle (day 1)  
6. S erum Chemistry ( Appendix VI), including Creatinine, bilirubin, ALT or AST at the start 
of each cycle (day 1).   
7.  Azacitidine will be administered intravenously or subcutaneously at a fixed dose of 
75mg
/m2/day for 7 consecutive days, (allowing interruptions for weekends, and holidays ) 
Case 1917    Page 42    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  of each 28-day cycle 
8. Asc orbic acid will be administered orally daily at 1 g/day for a total of 28 days of each 28 
days cycle. 
End of Treatm ent (EOT)   
1. Doc umentation of frequency of transfusions (only PRBC and Platelets) prior to start of 
each new cycle 
2. Doc umentation in the medical record of any grade 3 or higher adverse events at each 
visit. For guidelines on SAE Reporting and AE entry for Case Report  
3. ECOG pe rformance  
4. He matology exams (Appendix VI)  
5. S erum Chemistry (Appendix VI), including Creatinine, bilirubin, ALT or AST  
16. Optional bone marrow aspirate and/or biopsy to confirm response, to be performed at the 
end of cycle 6. All bone marrows samples are to be stored at Cleveland Clinic  
Case 1917    Page 43    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  
 
11.2 Calendar  
 
Period  Screening  
Period 
(Day -17 to 
Day -3) Treatment Period  Extended 
Treatment 
Period 
Cycles  End Of 
Treat -
ment  
(EOT)  Follow 
upk 
  Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Cycle 4  Cycle 5  Cycle 6   
Day  -3 1 7c 14n 1 7c 1 7c 1 7c 1 7c 1 7c 28g 1 7c   
Administration of Azacitidine    X Xb  X Xb X Xb X Xb X Xb X Xb  X Xb   
Ascorbic Acid  
Dispensement   Xa    X  X  X  X  X   X    
disease history and pr ior therapies  X                    
Record RBC/ platelets transfusion  X X    X  X  X  X  X  X X    
History and physical examdm X X    X  X  X  X  X  X X   Xj 
Vital signsd X X X X  X X X X X X X X X X X X X  Xj 
ECOG performance statusem X X    X  X  X  X  X  X X  X 
 
Hematologyd m X X    X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Xj 
Serum Chemistryd m X X    X  X  X  X  X  X X  X  
Pregnancy test  X               X    
 
Disease response assessmentf X               X X  X 
 
Bone marrow biopsy and 
aspirationL X               Xh 
  Xi 
 
Mutational analysis blood draw/L Xl               X    
 
Methylation profile blood drawL X  X X X               
 
                     
Drug Diary Accountability   X    X  X  X  X  X  X X    
Survival Follow up                     Xk 
Record ad verse eventsm   X  
 
 
Case 1917    Page 44    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018 A: For Cycle 1 only, patient will begin treatment with Ascorbic Acid 3 days prior to initial treatment of Azacitidine 
B: Azacitidine administration has a +/- 3 day window to account for breaks in treatment for weekends, and holidays 
C
: Day 7 has a +/- 3 day window to account for breaks in treatment for weekends, holidays, and institutional standards 
D: S
ee Appendix VI for required tests  
E: See Appendix I for performance status grading 
F: See Section for 12.0 for MDS/AML response assessment criteria 
G: If patient is eligible for the extended treatment period, and moving forward on the next cycle without a dosing delay, the C6D28 
visit can serve as the visit of C7D1. If the patient is not eligible for the extended treatment period the patient’s C6D28 visit can serve 
a
s the EOT visit. 
H: The cycle 6 bone marrow biopsy can occur up to 14 days (C6D14) prior to the C6D28 visit. 
I: EOT bone marrow biopsy is optional per discretion of the treating physician 
J
: These tests in follow up are optional pending discretion of the treating physician 
K: S
urvival Follow Up will occur bimonthly (60 days +/- 7 days) for a duration of 1 year from patient’s EOT visit. 
L
: 10 ML of whole blood or bone marrow aspirate whichever available will be collected in extra lab tube for these tests. 
M: If these procedures require a physician visit, these can occur 3 calendar days prior to the day 1 of that cycle (window of – 3 days). 
N: C
ycle 1 Day 14 has a +/- 1 day window to account if the day falls on a holiday or weekend. 
 
 
 
 
Case 1917    Page 45    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  12.0  MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  
The response criteria recommended by the MDS International Working Group 2006. Responses 
must be verified, documented, and signed at cycle 6 in the local medical record by the local PI. 
(Patients are considered non evaluable if they have received less than 2 courses of treatment, 
unless there is clear disease progression.)  
Definitions: 
Responses for MDS patients: 
Complete Response (CR):  Bone marrow: ≤ 5% myeloblasts with normal maturation of all cell 
lines; persistent dysplasia will be noted. Peripheral blood:  Hgb ≥ 11 g/dL  P latelets ≥ 100 × 
109/L Neutrophils ≥ 1.0 × 109/L, Blasts 0%  
Partial response (PR): All CR criteria if abnormal before treatment except: bone marrow blasts 
decreased by ≥ 50% over pretreatment but still > 5%  
M
arrow CR: Blasts ≤ 5% and decrease by ≥ 50% from baseline (baseline blasts should be 
above 5% to be eligible for marrow CR )   
Hematologic Improvement (HI): (responses must last at least 8 weeks)  Erythroid response 
[HI-E; (if pretreatment Hgb < 11 g/dL)]; Hgb increase by ≥ 1.5 g/dL; Relevant reduction of units 
of RBC transfusions by an absolute number of at least 4 RBC transfusions/8 weeks compared 
with the pretreatment transfusion number in the previous 8 weeks. Only RBC transfusions given 
for an  Hgb of ≤ 9.0 g/dL pretreatment will count in the RBC transfusion response evaluation.  
Platelet response [HI-P; ((if pretreatment Platelet count < 100 x 109 /L)]: Absolute increase of ≥ 
30 × 109/L for patients starting with > 20 × 109/L platelets, or increase from < 20 × 109/L to > 
20 × 109/L and by at least 100%.   
Ne
utrophil response [HI-N; (pretreatment, ANC < 1.0 × 109/L)]: At least 100% increase and an 
absolute increase > 0.5 × 109/L  
Case 1917    Page 46    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  Progression/Relapse after hematological improvement : ≥1 of the following: ≥50% decrement 
fr
om maximum response levels in granulocytes or platelets; ↓ in Hgb by ≥1.5 g/dL; transfusion 
dependence   
Stable Disease: Not satisfying criteria for Complete Remission, Partial Response, Marrow CR, 
Hematologic Improvement or Progression/Relapse.  
Responses for AML patients: 
Complete Response (CR):  Bone marrow: ≤ 5% myeloblasts with normal maturation of all cell 
lines, ANC >/= 1.0 X 109/L, platelet count >/= 100 X 109/L, no detectable Auer rods and no 
e
xtramedulary leukemia. 
Complete Response (CR) with incomplete hematologic recovery (CRi): R esponses as in CR 
but ANC < 1.0 X 109/ L. 
Complete Response (CR) with incomplete platelets recovery (CRp): Responses as in CR but 
platelets < 100 X 109/ L. 
Partial response (PR): All CR criteria if abnormal before treatment except: bone marrow blasts 
decreased by ≥ 50% over pretreatment but still > 5%. 
 
13.0 DATA REPORTING / REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Adverse event lists, guidelines, and instructions for AE reporting can be found in Section 8.0 
(Adverse Events: List and Reporting Requirements). 
 
13.1 Dat a Reporting  
The OnCore™ Database will be utilized, as required by the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
to provide data collection for both accrual entry and trial data management. OnCore™ is a 
Clinical Trials Management System housed on secure servers maintained at Case Western 
Reserve University. OnCore™. Access to data through OnCore™ is restricted by user accounts 
and assigned roles. Once logged into the OnCore™ system with a user ID and password, 
Case 1917    Page 47    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  OnCore™ defines roles for each user which limits access to appropriate data. User information 
and password can be obtained by contacting the OnCore™ Administrator at OnCore-
registration@case.edu . OnCore™ is designed with the capability for study setup, activation, 
tracking, reporting, data monitoring and review, and eligibility verification. This study will 
uti
lize electronic Case Report Form completion in the OnCore™ database. A calendar of events 
and required forms are available in OnCore™. 
 
13.2 Re gulatory Considerations 
The study will be conducted in compliance with ICH guidelines and with all applicable federal 
(including 21 CFR parts 56 & 50), state or local laws. 
13.2.1 Written Informed consent  
Provision of written informed consent must be obtained prior to any study-related procedures. 
The Principal Investigator will ensure that the subject is given full and adequate oral and written 
information about the nature, purpose, possible risks and benefits of the study as well as the 
subject’s financial responsibility. Subjects must also be notified that they are free to discontinue 
from the study at any time. The subject should be given the opportunity to ask questions and be 
allowed time to consider the information provided.  
The original, signed written Informed Consent Form must be kept with the Research Chart in 
conformance with the institution’s standard operating procedures. A copy of the signed written 
Informed Consent Form must be given to the subject. Additionally, documentation of the 
consenting process should be located in the research chart. 
13.2.2 Subject Data Protection 
In accordance with the Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), a 
subject must sign an authorization to release medical information to the sponsor and/or allow the 
sponsor, a regulatory authority, or Institutional Review Board access to subject’s medical 
information that includes all hospital records relevant to the study, including subjects’ medical 
history.  
 
13.2.3  Retention of records 

Case 1917    Page 48    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  The Principal Investigator of The Case Comprehensive Cancer Center supervises the retention of 
all documentation of adverse events, records of study drug receipt and dispensation, and all IRB 
correspondence for as long as needed to comply with local, national and international 
regulations. No records will be destroyed until the Principal Investigator confirms destruction is 
permitted.  
 
13.2.4  Audits and inspections  
Authorized representatives of the sponsor, a regulatory authority, an Independent Ethics 
Committee (IEC) or an Institutional Review Board (IRB) may visit the site to perform audits or 
inspections, including source data verification. The purpose of an audit or inspection is to 
systematically and independently examine all study-related activities and documents to 
determine whether these activities were conducted, and data were recorded, analysed, and 
accurately reported according to the protocol, Good Clinical Practice (GCP), guidelines of the 
International Conference on Harmonization (ICH), and any applicable regulatory requirements.  
For multi-center studies, participating sites must inform the sponsor-investigator of pending 
audits.  
 
14.0    STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Def
inition of primary outcome/endpoint: A binary indicator of overall response, defined as 
a
chieving CR, PR, or HI) per 2006 IWG criteria for MDS and MDS/MPN overlap and (CR, 
C
Rp, CRi, or PR) per 2003 IWG criteria for AML after 6 cycles of treatment 
Definition of secondary outcomes/endpoints:  
1.Inc idence of adverse events of the combination defined by CTCAE 4.1 criteria.  
Toxicity will be any drug related Grade 3 or 4 toxicity.   
2.Response duration to the combination recorded from start of treatment to progression 
3.Overall survival measured from start of treatment to death or last follow up  
S
ample size justification and study design:  The study sample size was determined using 
Minimax Simon's two-stage design (Simon, 1989. The null hypothesis that the true response rate 
is 0.3 will be tested against a one-sided alternative that the true response rate is 0.5. In the first 
stage, 12 patients will be accrued. If there are 3 or fewer responses, the study will be stopped. 
Otherwise, 16 additional patients will be accrued for a total of 28. The null hypothesis will be 
Case 1917    Page 49    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  rejected if 11 or more responses are observed in 28 patients. This design yields a type I error rate 
of 0.1
 and a power of 0.8 when the true response rate is 0.5. 
Analysis plan : Descriptive statistics will be used for the primary endpoint and secondary 
endpoints 1,2, and 3. Overall survival will be estimated with Kaplan Meier method and will be 
compared to the survival of a historical cohort of MDS patients treated at our institution with 
single agent Azacitidine between 2006-2012 using a one- sampl e log rank test.   A Cochran-
Ma
ntel-Haenszel test will be used to test for differences in response rate by mutational status 
controlling for treatment. Unadjusted and adjusted logistic regression models were used to 
predict response to therapy. Models will be adjusted for covariates including age, sex, and other 
prognostic factors. The odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) will be estimated for 
the risk group (mutated) and compared with the reference group (WT). 
  
Case 1917    Page 50    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  REFERENCES  
 
 
REFERENCES  
1. Te fferi A, Vardiman JW. Myelodysplastic syndromes. The New England journal of 
medicine 2009;361:1872-85. 
2. S ekeres MA. Epidemiology, natural history, and practice patterns of patients with 
myelodysplastic syndromes in 2010. Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer 
Ne
twork : JNCCN 2011;9:57-63.  
3. Ga rcia-Manero G. Prognosis of myelodysplastic syndromes. Hematology / the Education 
Program of the American Society of Hematology American Society of Hematology 
Education Program 2010;2010:330-7. 
4. B ejar R, Stevenson K, Abdel-Wahab O, et al. Clinical effect of point mutations in 
myelodysplastic syndromes. The New England journal of medicine. 2011; 364(26): 2496-
506. 
5. Ha ferlach T, Nagata Y, Grossmann V, et al. Landscape of genetic lesions in 944 patients 
with myelodysplastic syndromes. Leukemia. 2014; 28(2): 241-7. 
6. Mull ighan CG: TET2 mutations in myelodysplasia and myeloid malignancies. Nat Genet 
41:766-767, 2009 
7. Ge novese G, Kahler AK, Handsaker RE, et al: Clonal hematopoiesis and blood-cancer 
risk inferred from blood DNA sequence. N Engl J Med 371:2477-87, 2014 
8. J aiswal S, Fontanillas P, Flannick J, et al: Age-related clonal hematopoiesis associated 
with adverse outcomes. N Engl J Med 371:2488-98, 2014 
9. S olary E, Bernard OA, Tefferi A, et al: The Ten-Eleven Translocation-2 (TET2) gene in 
he
matopoiesis and hematopoietic diseases. Leukemia 28:485-96, 2014 
10.
 Yin R, Mao SQ, Zhao B, et al: Ascorbic acid enhances Tet-mediated 5-methylcytosine 
oxidation and promotes DNA demethylation in mammals. J Am Chem Soc 135:10396-
403, 2013 
11.
 Fenaux P, Mufti GJ, Hellstrom-Lindberg E, et al. Efficacy of azacitidine compared with 
that of conventional care regimens in the treatment of higher-risk myelodysplastic 
Case 1917    Page 51    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  syndromes: a randomised, open-label, phase III study. The Lancet Oncology 
2009;10:223-32. 
12.
 Itzykson R, Kosmider O, Cluzeau T, et al: Impact of TET2 mutations on response rate to 
azacitidine in myelodysplastic syndromes and low blast count acute myeloid leukemias. 
Leukemia 25:1147-52, 2011 
13. Bejar R, Lord A, Stevenson K, et al. TET2 mutations predict response to 
hypomethylating agents in myelodysplastic syndrome patients. Blood 2014;124:2705-12. 
14.
 Liu M, Ohtani H, Zhou W, et al. Vitamin C increases viral mimicry induced by 5-aza- 2′-
deoxycytidine. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  2016; 11 3 (37): 10238-
44. 
15.
 Bejanyan N, Tiu RV, Raza A, et al. A phase 2 trial of combination therapy with 
thalidomide, arsenic trioxide, dexamethasone, and ascorbic acid (TADA) in patients with 
overlap myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms (MDS/MPN) or primary 
myelofibrosis (PMF). Cancer  2012; 118(16): 3968-76. 
16.
 Levine M, Conry-Cantilena C, Wang Y, et al. Vitamin C pharmacokinetics in healthy 
volunteers: evidence for a recommended dietary allowance. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  1996; 93(8): 3704-9. 
17.
 Cameron E, Pauling L. Supplemental ascorbate in the supportive treatment of cancer: 
Prolongation of survival times in terminal human cancer. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  1976; 73(10): 3685- 9. 
18.
 Padayatty SJ, Riordan HD, Hewitt SM, Katz A, Hoffer LJ, Levine M. Intravenously 
administered vitamin C as cancer therapy: three cases. CMAJ : Canadian Medical 
Association journal = journal de l'Association medicale canadienne  2006; 174(7) : 937-
42. 
19.
 Monti DA, Mitchell E, Bazzan AJ, et al. Phase I evaluation of intravenous ascorbic acid 
in combination with gemcitabine and erlotinib in patients with metastatic pancreatic 
cancer. PloS one  2012; 7(1) : e29794. 
20. Welsh JL, Wagner BA, van't Erve TJ, et al. Pharmacological ascorbate with gemcitabine 
for the control of metastatic and node-positive pancreatic cancer (PACMAN): results 
fr
om a phase I clinical trial. Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology  2013; 71(3) : 765-
75. 
Case 1917    Page 52    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  21. Ma Y, Chapman J, Levine M, Polireddy K, Drisko J, Chen Q. High-dose parenteral 
ascorbate enhanced chemosensitivity of ovarian cancer and reduced toxicity of 
chemotherapy. Science translational medicine  2014; 6(222): 222ra18. 
22. Chen Q, Espey MG, Krishna MC, et al: Pharmacologic ascorbic acid concentrations 
selectively kill cancer cells: action as a pro-drug to deliver hydrogen peroxide to tissues. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:13604-9, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case 1917    Page 53    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  APPENDIX I 
 
PERFORMANCE STATUS CRITERIA 
 
ECOG Performance Status Scale  Karnofsky Performance Scale  
Grade  Description  Percent  Description  
 
0  
Normal activity. Full active , able to 
carry on all pre -disease performance 
without restriction.   
100 
 Normal, no complaints, no 
evidence of disease.  
 
90 Able to carry on normal activity; 
minor signs or symptoms of 
disease.  
 
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory. Restricted 
in physically st renuous activity, but 
ambulatory and able to carry out work 
of a light or sedentary nature (e.g., 
light housework, office work).   
80 Normal activity with effort; some 
signs or symptoms of disease.  
 
70 Cares for self, unable to carry on 
normal activity o r to do active 
work.  
 
2 In bed < 50% of the time.  
Ambulatory and capable of all self -
care, but unable to carry out any work 
activities. Up and about more than 
50% if waking hours.   
60 Requires occasional assistance, 
but is able to care for most of 
his/h er needs.  
 
50 Requires considerable assistance 
and frequent medical care.  
 
3 In bed > 50% of the time.  Capable of 
only limited self -care, confined to bed 
or chair more than 50% of waking 
hours.   
40 
 Disabled, requires special care 
and assistance.  
 
30 
 Severely disabled, hospitalization 
indicated.  Death not imminent.  
 
4 100% bedridden.  Completely 
disabled.  Cannot carry on any self -
care. Totally confined to bed or chair.   
20 Very sick, hospitalization 
indicated. Death not imminent.  
 
10 Moribun d, fatal processes 
progressing rapidly.  
5 Dead.  0 Dead  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case 1917    Page 54    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  APPENDIX II 
 
CYCLE 1 SUBJECT PILL DIARY 
 
Subject Name ________________________Protocol #________________ Subject Study ID __________   
Cyc
le #: _______            Month #: _______                                   
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE SUBJECT:  
   1.  You will take 1 tablet  of 1000  mg of Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C) pills  each day. Take the tablets wit h food  
   2.  Record the date, the number of tablets you took, and what time you took them.  
   3.  If you have any comments please record them in the “Comments” column below.  
   4.  Please bring your pill bottle and this form to your physician when you come for your next appointment.   
   5.  Please sign your name at the bottom of the diary.  
Date  Day Time   # of 1000 mg Ascorbic Acid  
(Vitamin C)  pills and time 
taken  Comments  
 -3    
 -2    
 -1    
 1    
 2    
 3    
 4    
 5    
 6    
 7    
 8    
 9    
 10    
 11    
 12    
 13    
 14    
 15    
 16    
 17    
 18    
 19    
 20    
 21    
 22    
 23    
 24    
 25    
 26    
 27    
 28    
Subject’s Signature:  ________________________________________ Date:  ___________  
 
 
Case 1917    Page 55    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  APPENDIX III 
 
 CYCLE 2 + SUBJECT PILL DIARY 
 
S
ubject Name ________________________Protocol #________________ Subject Study ID __________   
Cyc
le #: _______            Month #: _______                                   
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE SUBJECT:  
   1.  You will take 1 tablet of 1000 mg of Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C) pills each day. Take the tablets with food  
   2.  Record the date, the number of tablets you took, and what time you took them.  
   3.  If you have any comments please record them in the “Comments” column below.  
   4.  Please bring your pill bottle and this form to your physician when you come for your next  appointment.   
   5.  Please sign your name at the bottom of the diary.  
Date  Day Time   # of 1000 mg Ascorbic Acid 
(Vitamin C)  pills and time 
taken  Comments  
 1    
 2    
 3    
 4    
 5    
 6    
 7    
 8    
 9    
 10    
 11    
 12    
 13    
 14    
 15    
 16    
 17    
 18    
 19    
 20    
 21    
 22    
 23    
 24    
 25    
 26    
 27    
 28    
Subject’s Signature:  ________________________________________ Date:  ___________  
Case 1917    Page 56    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
APPENDIX IV: STUDY DESIGN TIME POINT DEFINTIONS 
 
Study  Time Points  Definitions  
Screening  Screening will occur from the time of the 
consent until day -4 
Baseline/Enrollment  Days -17b to Day -3c 
Treatment Period  Day 1c to C6D28 or patient meets end of 
treatment criteria before completing 6 cycles  
Extended T reatment Period (ETP)  The extended treatment period is defined as 
C7D1 to the patient meets EOT criteria  
Study Treatment  The treatment period and if applicable the 
extended treatment period  
End of Treatment (EOT)  The day patient meets the defined EOT cri teria 
(Table 1) and discontinues study treatment.  
Follow up  Patient will be followed  bimonthly (60 days 
+/- 7 days) for a duration of 1 year after study  
End of Study  (EOS)  The time the patient completes 1 year of 
survival follow up and/or patient’s deat h, 
whichever were to occur first.  
A: Day 1 is defined as first dose of Azacitidine  
B: Day -17 is defined as 14 days prior to first dose of study Drug (Day -3) 
C: Day -3 is defined as day of Study Drug   
 
  
APPENDIX V: RESPONSE CRITERIA FOR EXTENDED TREATMENT 
 
Response Criteria for extended treatment eligibility 
 c omplete remission, partial remission, or hematologic improvement (CR/PR/HI) per IWG 
2006 criteria for patients with MDS 
 (CR /PR/marrow CR) per IWG 2003 criteria for patients with AML 
 I f the response is stable disease and the investigator determines the patient is gaining 
clinical benefit, patient may continue on treatment until progression. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case 1917    Page 57    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
APPENDIX VI: CLINICAL LABORATORY PARAMETERS 
 
Hematology  Serum Chemistry  Vitals  Physical Exam  Bone M arrow Biopsy & 
Aspiration  
Red blood cell count  Sodium  Temp  Height (only at 
C1D1)  Marrow blast percent  
Hemoglobin  Potassium  Pulse  Weight  Marrow Cellularity  
Hematocrit  Chloride  Resp   Auer Rods  
White blood cell 
count  Bicarbonate  Blood 
Pressure   Dysplasia  
Neutrophil  BUN  SpO2 *  Cytogenetics  
Platelets  Glucose (non -
fasting)     
Blasts percent  Albumin     
MCV  AST     
MCHC  ALT     
Eosinophils  Serum creatinine     
Basophils  Protein     
Monocytes   Calcium     
Lymphocyte  Bilirubin     
 Alkaline 
phosphate     
 This test should only occur at Screening visit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case 1917    Page 58    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  APPENDIX VII : WHO classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia  
Arber et al, 2016  
 
WHO myeloid neoplasm and acute leukemia classification  
Myeloproliferative  neoplasm s (MPN)  
 Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML),  BCR -ABL1+ 
 Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL)  
 Polycythemia vera (PV)  
 Primary myelofibrosis (PMF)  
  PMF, prefibrotic/early stage  
  PMF, overt fibrotic stage  
 Essential thrombocythemia (ET)  
 Chronic eosinophilic leu kemia, not otherwise specified (NOS)  
 MPN, unclassifiable  
Mastocytosis  
Myeloid/lymphoid  neoplasms  with  eosinophilia  and rearrangement  
of PDGFRA , PDGFRB , orFGFR1,  or with  PCM1 -JAK2  
 Myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with  PDGFRA  rearrangement  
 Myeloid/lymphoid  neoplasms with  PDGFRB  rearrangement  
 Myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with  FGFR1  rearrangement  
 Provisional  entity:  Myeloid/lymphoid  neoplasms  with PCM1 -JAK2  
Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative  neoplasms  (MDS/MPN)  
 Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)  
 Atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (aCML),  BCR -ABL1− 
 Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML)  
 MDS/MPN with ring sideroblasts and thrombocytosis (MDS/MPN -RS-T) 
Case 1917    Page 59    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  WHO myeloid neoplasm and acute leukemia classification  
 MDS/MPN, unclassifiable  
Myelodysplastic  syndromes  (MDS)  
 MDS with single lineage dysplasia  
 MDS with ring sideroblasts (MDS -RS) 
  MDS -RS and single lineage dysplasia  
  MDS -RS and multilineage dysplasia  
 MDS with multilineage dysplasia  
 MDS with excess blasts  
 MDS with isolated del(5q)  
 MDS, unclassifiable  
 Provisional  entity:  Refractory  cytopenia  of childhood  
Myeloid neoplasms with germ line predisposition  
Acute  myeloid  leukemia  (AML)  and related  neoplasms  
 AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities  
  AML with t(8;21)(q22;q22.1); RUNX1 -RUNX1T1  
  AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13. 1;q22); CBFB -MYH11  
  APL with  PML -RARA  
  AML with t(9;11)(p21.3;q23.3); MLLT3 -KMT2A  
  AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34.1); DEK -NUP214  
  AML with inv(3)(q21.3q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21.3;q26.2);  GATA2 , MECOM  
  AML (megakaryoblastic) with t(1;22)(p13.3;q13.3); RBM15 -MKL1  
  Provisional  entity:  AML  with BCR -ABL1  
  AML with mutated  NPM1  
  AML with biallelic mutations of  CEBPA  
Case 1917    Page 60    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018  WHO myeloid neoplasm and acute leukemia classification  
  Provisional  entity:  AML  with mutated  RUNX1  
 AML with myelodysplasia -related changes  
 Therapy -related myeloid neoplasms  
 AML, NOS  
  AML with mi nimal differentiation  
  AML without maturation  
  AML with maturation  
  Acute myelomonocytic leukemia  
  Acute monoblastic/monocytic leukemia  
  Pure erythroid leukemia  
  Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia  
  Acute basophilic leukemia  
  Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis  
 Myeloid sarcoma  
 Myeloid proliferations related to Down syndrome  
  Transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM)  
  Myeloid leukemia associated with Down syndrome  
Blastic  plasmacytoid  dendritic  cell neoplasm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case 1917    Page 61    Protocol Version 3 .0 
 Version date: 05/24/2018   
APPENDIX VIII: PROTOCOL AMENDMENT SUMMARIES  
 
Amendment Number/Version Number/Date: Amendment 1, protocol version 2, 11/ 20/2017  
Section #/page  Description of change (s)  
Preparation for 
Intravenous 
Administration, pg 32  Corrected Chloride Injection or Lactated Ringer’s Inje ction to Chloride 
Infusion or Lactated Ringer’s Infusion.  
Investigational 
Agents, pg 32  Added option to deliver Azacitidine to patients subcutaneously due to the 
national IV bag shortage.  
Investigational 
Agents, pg 33  Corrected the dosages amount for the  ascorbic acid as well as the amount of 
tablets.  
Screen test procedures  Removed Vitamin C level testing  
CLINICAL 
LABORATORY 
PARAMETERS, pg 
53 Clarified that SpO2 testing should only occur at screening visit  
Appendix IV, pg 54  Clarified days to align wit h study calendar  
Study Calendar  Provided a 3 day window for each day 1 visit requiring a physician visit  
 
Amendment Number/ Version Number/Date: Amendment 2, protocol version 3 , 05/24/2018  
Section #/page  Description of change (s)  
Clinical Trials.gov 
num ber, pg 1  Added Clinical Trials.gov Number  
Protocol Date and 
Protocol version 
number  Updated the protocol date and version number throughout the entire 
protocol.  
Eligibility Criteria, pg 
20  Updated the eligibility criteria from heterozygous TET2 mutatio ns, to 
include all TET2 mutations  
Background of Study 
Disease, pg 10 -11 Updated rationale as to why the eligibility criteria is changing from 
heterozygous TET2 mutations, to include all TET2 mutations  
Study Calendar, pg 
43/44  Adding Cycle  1 Day 14 has a +/ - 1 day window to account if the day 
falls on a holiday or weekend.  
 