Retapamulin Protocol  - Version 1.0  
January 27, 2012  
 
1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retapamulin for Reducing MRSA Nasal Carriage  
Study Protocol  
January 27, 2012  
ClinicalTrials.gov ID : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retapamulin Protocol  - Version 1.0  
January 27, 2012  
 
2 
 
I. BACKGROUND  
Methicillin -Resistant Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA or also known as “mer -sa”) is bacteria 
(germ) that can be found living on the body, especially in the nose.  MRSA infections are 
common among people who have weak immune systems and are in hospitals, nursing homes, 
and other hea lth care centers.  Infections can appear around surgical wounds or invasive 
devices, like catheters or implanted feeding tubes. Rates of infection in hospitals, especially 
intensive care units, are rising throughout t he world.   Though most MRSA infections are not 
serious, some can be life -threatening. Many public health experts are alarmed by the spread of 
antibiotic -resistant bacterial strains like MRSA, which are also known as "super bugs."    
Currently, prevention fo r MRSA is restricted to education for the public and patients who harbor 
MRSA. Currently, some physicians will attempt to rid MRSA from the body to prevent later 
infection using special soaps and medicines. Use of these strategies is variable since no 
definitive guidance exists for their use. Currently, one of the medications to eradicate MRSA 
from its most common body reservoir, the nose, is a drug known as mupirocin. Mupirocin is an 
ointment approved for MRSA removal. However, in recent years, resistance to mupirocin is 
rising among MRSA strains. A second drug, retapamulin has been shown in the laboratory to be 
highly active against all MRSA strains, even mupirocin resistant ones. While retapamulin is FDA 
approved for use in open wounds and skin infections , it is not currently approved for use in the 
nose. The purpose of this study is to evaluate whether retapamulin (an FDA approved topical 
ointment for treatment of staphylococcus) which is commonly used to treat MRSA wound 
infections, may work in clearing MRSA from the noses of people who have MRSA types that are 
resistant to mupirocin.  The route of administration that will be investigated is to apply the 
ointment via the nasal passage twice daily for up to 5 days.  The effects of retapamulin will be 
compa red to placebo (inactive similar ointment) in a randomized placebo controlled double -
blinded trial.  
 
II. INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT  
Altabax (retapamulin) has been FDA approved since April 2007 for use in the topical treatment 
of impetigo due to susceptible s trains of Staphylococcus aureus  or Streptococcus pyogenes , the 
two most common types of bacteria in this kind of infection.  
Altabax (retapamulin) is a semisynthetic pleuromutilin antibiotic. 
The chemical name of retapamulin  is acetic acid, [[(3 -exo)-8-
methyl -8-azabicyclo[3.2.1]oct -3-yl]thio] -, 
(3aS,4R,5S,6S,8R,9R,9aR,10R) -6-ethenyldecahydro -5-
hydroxy -4,6,9,10 -tetramethyl -1-oxo-3a,9propano -3aH-
cyclopentacycloocten -8-yl ester.  Retapamulin, a white to pale -
yellow crystalline s olid, has a molecular formula of C 30H47NO 4S, 
and a molecular weight of 517.78.  
Altabax (retapamulin) has not been withdrawn from investigation or marketing in the United 
States or any other country for any reason related to safety or effectiveness.  
Retapamulin Protocol  - Version 1.0  
January 27, 2012  
 
3 
 III. PURPOSE & OBJECTIVES  
The purpose of this study is to evaluate altabax (retapamulin) as an investigational agent for 
decolonizing MRSA carriers with high -level resistance to mupirocin. Mupirocin resistance is 
increasingly common and there is no approved sub stitute topical agent for decolonization of the 
MRSA nasal reservoir.   
Objectives  
1. Evaluate the proportion of patients treated with retapamulin vs placebo who clear nasal 
carriage with a mupirocin -resistant strain of MRSA  
2. Evaluate the time to MRSA clearance among patients treated with retapamulin vs 
placebo for nasal carriage with a mupirocin -resistant strain of MRSA (one treatment 
course or two)  
3. Evaluate side effects reported with nasal administration of retapamulin compa red to 
placebo  
 
IV. STUDY DESIGN  
This is a randomized placebo -controlled double -blind study of nasal decolonization with 
retapamulin vs. placebo for the eradication of MRSA nasal carriage among adult carriers with 
mupirocin resistant strains.  Randomization  of eligible patients will be stratified by participants 
with low -level (MIC 8 -256) and high -level mupirocin resistant (MIC >256) strains.  
Eligible subjects will be randomized to 1% retapamulin or placebo ointment intra -nasally twice a 
day for 5 days (D1 -5) with follow up bilateral nares swab one week following completion of 
therapy (~D12) to assess clearance. If follow up swabs are positive for MRSA, subjects will be 
given a second course of the same agent (retapamulin or placebo) to begin one week followi ng 
swab collection (~D19 -23) so that up to two decolonization attempts will be made. A final set of 
bilateral nares swabs will be obtained from all subjects six weeks from the completion of initial 
treatment (~D47).  
Overview for Study Participants  
Consent  Date  Swab nares, complete survey  
Day 0  Swab confirms mupirocin -resistant MRSA, provide 5 -day protocol 
(retapamulin vs placebo)  
Day 1  Initiate 5 -day protocol (retapamulin vs placebo)  
Day 12  Follow Up Visit 1, complete survey, swab nares  
 If nares from day 12 still shows MRSA, repeat 5 -day protocol  
Day 47  Follow Up Visit 2, complete survey, swab nares  
 
Retapamulin Protocol  - Version 1.0  
January 27, 2012  
 
4 
 Consenting subjects will be given retapamulin or a placebo. Additionally, all subjects will be 
given an education material to follow standard -of-care fo r patients harboring MRSA. At the time 
of recruitment, all subjects will complete a detailed survey administered by trained members of 
research team. This survey will include questions related to comorbidities and presence of 
wounds or central lines. Subje ct follow up will include repeat bilateral nares swabs and follow up 
surveys related to compliance with the assigned regimen and will occur either during a home 
visit (or facility visit if the patient is admitted to a hospital or nursing home at the time o f the 
required visit) or at the University of California Irvine (UCI) Institute for Clinical and Translational 
Science (ICTS), a Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA) site.   
 
V. OUTCOMES  
Primary outcome will be successful nares decolonization at  the end of the follow up period 
(D47). The members of the research team will  also detail the sequence of clearance or re -
colonization based upo n the two follow up nares swabs with and without re -treatment by 
assigned protocol. We will define  any adverse e vents, which are expected to be related to local 
irritation in a small percent of subjects (1.4% reported site irritation when applied to lesions, as 
per package insert). As a potential corollary, use of the nasal product mupirocin, which is FDA 
approved f or intranasal use for MRSA clearance resulted in <1% of patients in clinical trials 
withdrawing due to adverse events. With mupirocin, the most frequently reported adverse 
events were as follows: rhinitis (1.0%), taste perversion (0.8%), and pharyngitis (0 .5%).  
 
VI. DURATION OF INDIVIDUAL SUBJECTS EXPOSURE TO DRUG  
Eligible subjects who are randomized to 1% retapamulin intra -nasally will be directed to apply it 
twice a day for 5 days. For those that fail to clear MRSA by their first follow up visit, a secon d 
course directing application of retapamulin twice a day for an additional 5 days will be provided 
to allow up to two decolonization attempts to be made.  
 
VII. DESCRIPTION OF THE OBSERVATIONS AND MEASUREMENTS TO BE 
MADE TO FULFILL THE STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
At the time of recruitment, all subjects will complete a detailed enrollment survey administered 
by trained research staff. This survey will include enrollment information (demographic, contact), 
questions related to self care, home hygiene practices, high  contact sports or other activities, 
comorbidities, and presence of wounds or central lines. They will also have a nasal swab 
performed to confirm the presence of MRSA carriage with a strain resistant to mupirocin. Once 
swab cultures confirm the presence o f MRSA resistant to mupirocin, subjects will be 
randomized to receive 5 -days of either placebo or retapamulin with the first treatment day being 
Day 1. Subject follow up will include repeat bilateral nares swabs (Day 12 (range 9 -15), Day 47 
(range 37 -57) a nd follow up surveys related to compliance and experience (side 
effects/concerns) with the assigned regimen and will occur either during a home visit (or facility 
Retapamulin Protocol  - Version 1.0  
January 27, 2012  
 
5 
 visit if the patient is admitted to a hospital or nursing home at the time of the required vi sit) or at 
the University of California Irvine (UCI) Institute for Clinical and Translational Science (ICTS).  
All study subjects will have subject enrollment and follow -up data maintained in a secure 
electronic database that only authorized members of the  study team will have access to.  
 
VIII. MEASURES TAKEN TO MONITOR THE EFFECTS OF THE DRUG IN HUMAN  
SUBJECTS AND TO MINMIZE RISK  
 
This topical agent is already FDA approved for application to the skin. The novel use requested 
here is application to the nas al mucosa. An FDA IND has been received for its use in this study 
as a nasal product. Previous studies with retapamulin on abraded skin failed to show sufficient 
absorption to raise concerns about the drug itself or interaction with systemic agents (see 
package insert). Thus, in this, there will be no direct testing of the systemic levels of this drug.  
To determine if retapamulin is effective in reducing MRSA clearance, serial bilateral nares 
swabs will be taken to confirm MRSA mupirocin resistance and to a ssess persistence of MRSA 
carriage during this study. A toll free number and 24/7 pager that will be answered by the study 
team will be available to subjects for the reporting of any side effects. In addition, a survey 
assessing compliance and side effects /concerns with the assigned regimen will be performed 
during all follow up visits.  
 
IX. RECRUITMENT METHODS   
The recruitment process will be initiated by study staff who  have experience recruiting 
patients into clinical trials and are familiar with the protocol and the consenting process . This 
study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of intra -nasal retapamulin for decolonization of 
mupirocin -resistant MRSA carriers will be conducted in our California regional trial 
environment where patients will be recruited through one of the following methods:  
1) Subjects previously enrolled in  a randomized clinical trial  (Clinicaltrials.gov ID: 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ) found to have low -level (M IC 8-256) or high level (MIC >256 mcg/ml) mupirocin -
resistant MRSA strains at the end of their follow up period will form one source of recruitment 
into the retapamulin study. Willing subjects would consent to a current screening MRSA swab at 
the time of r ecruitment to confirm the presence of a mupirocin resistant isolate. Patients will be 
randomized within strata of low level and high level mupirocin -resistant strains.  
2) Patients with MRSA isolates processed for mupirocin resistance at the University of C alifornia 
Irvine Medical Center clinical microbiology laboratory  will also be eligible for recruitment if 
harbored MRSA strains show low level or high level resistance. Patients will be similarly 
randomized based upon strata of low level and high lev el mup irocin -resistant strains.  
To ensure that a subject has the option to speak with a physician at the end of the consent 
process, a study doctor will be available via pager or phone to answer any questions or 
concerns a subject might have prior to finalizing consent.  
Retapamulin Protocol  - Version 1.0  
January 27, 2012  
 
6 
 Review and approval of this human protocol will be conducted by the UCI Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) Human Subjects Review Committee.  Subjects must be able to understand and 
sign an informed consent form. Consent forms must comply with U.S. r egulations (U.S. 21 CFR 
50) and ICH guidelines to be eligible for this trial.  All study materials, including consent forms 
will be provided in the patient’s primary language.  In addition, each subject will be given a copy 
of the consent form, the Experim ental Subjects’ Bill of Rights, and HIPAA Release form, all of 
which will be explained to the subject.  
 
X. INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA   
Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Adult, at least 18 years of age or older  
2. MRSA carrier of a mupirocin resistant strain  
3. Must be able to provide consent  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 
1. Known allergy to retapamulin  
2. Inability to use an intranasal product (e.g. recent nasal surgery, anatomic defects)  
3. Pregnant or breastfeeding  
 
Children (under the age of 18 years old) will be excluded since post -carriage MRSA risks have 
not been studied among those <18 years old and there is insufficient data to estimate the effect 
or potential benefit in this age group. This also translates to an inability to calculate power or 
sample size needs to answer the ques tions in this trial for children <18.  
In addition, there are several reasons to believe that the risk in children <18 will be different 
from those in adults. First, and most importantly, they have a much lower frequency of risk 
factors for MRSA disease, i ncluding comorbidities, medical devices and procedures. Second, 
their risk of MRSA carriage has been found to be lower than in adults. Third, children 
experience a much higher proportion of disease due to community -associated MRSA infection 
(and strains) v ersus healthcare associated infections (and strains). These differences suggest 
that the mechanisms for MRSA acquisition may be different in children compared to adults. 
Fourth, children also experience much more skin and soft tissue disease and less of ot her types 
of infections, again suggesting substantial differences in children and adults that would support 
a separate trial in this age group. For all these reasons, we will exclude children under the age 
of 18.  
Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding wil l be excluded from the study.  Retapamulin is 
Pregnancy Category B drug, defined by the FDA as an agent in which animal reproduction 
studies have failed to show a risk to the fetus. The effects of retapamulin on fertility or a human 
fetus are not known, ho wever absorption is deemed so minimal that pharmacokinetic studies 
were not deemed necessary by the FDA.  Animal studies have been performed and have not 
shown concerns; however since animal studies are not always predictive of human response, 
Retapamulin Protocol  - Version 1.0  
January 27, 2012  
 
7 
 retapamulin should only be used on pregnant women if clinically necessary. Despite minimal 
absorption, as a precautionary measure, we will not be recruiting patients known to be pregnant 
or breastfeeding into this study. In addition, we will recommend abstinence or co ntraception for 
those who wish to participate. However, since the current FDA approved usage of retapamulin 
on open wounds does not require a pregnancy test nor contraception, we will only recommend, 
but not require, that all subjects abstain from sexual a ctivity or use birth control while taking 
study product.  
 
XI. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
Subjects are informed of the risks and side effects that are known to possibly occur due to 
Retapamulin and procedures involved during this study. Subjects are also instruc ted to contact 
their study doctor or a member of the study team immediately if they experience any problems 
during the course of the study. All subjects will be closely monitored throughout the study and 
may be asked to come into UC Irvine for an unschedul ed visit, at the discretion of the lead 
researcher. In addition, all subject data will be de -indentified with a key -code and only the study 
team and authorized individuals involved with the study will have access to the code.  All 
measures will be taken by  the study team to protect the confidentiality of every subject’s 
personal health information.  
 
XII. ADVERSE EVENTS AND UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS  
All adverse events will be tracked until resolved or participation in the study has ended,  
whichever  comes first. All serious adverse events will be tracked until resolved. In accordance  
with UCI IRB’s guidelines, all adverse events and unanticipated problems will be reported per  
policy. There will be a Data Safety Advisory Committee to oversee the number and composition 
of adverse events, and assess any need for intervention or discontinuation of study protocols  
 
Study coordinators will be available from 8am -5pm via a toll -free phone number. Should a 
subject  require immediate assistance after hours (5pm – 8am) or on weekends, the Senior 
Project  Coordinator and Supervisor will be available via pager. The Senior Project Coordinator 
and Supervisor can assist the subject with any questions and concerns and can promptly put 
them in  contact with study inve stigators as needed. In addition, study staff will query for adverse 
events or  other unanticipated problems via phone calls and during scheduled follow up visits. If 
adverse  events are identified, subjects may be referred for a phone conversation or in per son 
visit with a  nurse of physician at ICTS. If an adverse event is serious, the subject is instructed to 
contact 911  or go to the nearest Emergency Department for immediate care.  
 
 
XIII. PARTICIPANT COMPENSATION AND REIMBURSEMENT  
 
Subjects will be require d to have two follow -up visits at 2 weeks and 6 weeks from  
randomization. Subjects will be compensated $25 for the first follow -up visit and $25 for the  
Retapamulin Protocol  - Version 1.0  
January 27, 2012  
 
8 
 second follow -up visit with cash payment. Total payment for participation in this study is $50. If  
subjects cannot attend the follow -up visits, recruiters will drive to their location and perform the  
follow -up procedures there.  If subjects decide to withdraw from the study or are withdrawn by 
the study team, they will  receive compensation for the visits tha t they have completed.  
 