05/10/18   
 
 
 
 
 
Prospective Randomized  controlled  trial of High -Definition White -
light colonoscopy  versus  High -Definition White -light colonoscopy  
with  Endocuff  Vision  for endpoints of procedural times  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
   Prospective Randomized  controlled  trial of High -Definition White -
light colonoscopy  versus  High -Definition White -light colonoscopy  
with  Endocuff  Vision  for endpoints of procedural times  
 
 
Primary Investigator:    Dr. Douglas Rex,  
Indiana University Hospital  
Indianapolis, IN 46202 
 
 
Introduction:  
Endocuff Vision ( Olympus) is a disposable device that has 8 independently moving soft 
flexible arms arranged in a single row. The device comes in several sizes and can fit the tips of 
most commonly used colonoscope s. During intubation, the arms fall flat to the body of the 
scope as not to impede forward motion. Endocuff Vision is an FDA approved device that fits 
over the end of a colonoscope  and has flexible soft fingers that project from the sides.  These 
fingers can be used to pull back the folds  in the colon and expose mucosa on the proximal 
sides.  A number of studies indicate that Endocuff improves the adenoma detection rate  
(ADR)  during  colonoscopy.  In a non- randomized retrospective evaluation, Endocuff resulted 
in better detection, faster insertion, and faster inspection (1).  
 
Our aim in this study is to show in a prospective randomized trial Endocuff Vision could 
improve insertion be cause during loop withdrawal the cuff tends to stabilize the position of the 
tip, preventing its backward movement and speeding loop removal.  Similarly, during inspection, 
the main goal is to evaluate the proximal sides of folds and flexures.  The process  is made easier 
and quicker by the device. Third, during polypectomy, Endocuff Vision helps to stabilize the 
position and the scope tip.   
 
Methods:  
This will be a prospective,  randomized  controlled  study.   Subjects  referred  for screening  or 
surveillance  colonoscopy  will be prospectively  enrolled.  They  will be  randomized  to one of 
two arms, i.e High  Definition  colonoscopy or High  Definition  colonoscopy with Endocuff 
Vision . 
 
A member  of the research  team  will approach  a potential  subject  to discuss  participation  in the 
study,  including  background of the proposed study,  inclusion  and exclusion  criteria,  benefits  
and risks  of the procedures  and follow -up. If this is of  interest  to the subject,  the informed 
consent  form  is discussed  and presented.  The subject  must  sign  the consent  form  prior  to 
enrollment. This form will have prior  approval  of the study  site's  Institutional  Review  Board  
(IRB).  Failure  to obtain  informed consent  renders  the subject  ineligible  for the study  
 
 
    
Objectives : 
Primary objectives  of the study are:  
 To compare the insertion time, inspection time, the total time per polypectomy, and the 
total procedure time during High Definition colonoscopy with Endocuff Vision versus 
standard High Definition colonoscopy . 
 
Secondary objectives:  
 
 To compare the number of adenomas detected per subject with High Definition 
Endocuff Vision compared to Standard High Definition colonoscopy.  
 
 To compare the detection  rates  for polyp  subtypes  (including  advanced    adenomas,  
serrated  polyps, right  sided  adenomas,  etc) for High Definition Endocuff Vision 
compared to Standard High Definition colonoscopy.  
 
Primary End-point :  
 
 The inspection  time will be shorter  because the proximal sides of the folds are more 
quickly ex posed with Endocuff  Vision compared to standard colonoscope alone because 
of the ability of the Endocuff Vision to stabilize the position of the colonoscope tip 
during loop withdrawal, thus preventing its backward movement and speeding loop 
removal.  
 
 
Criteria:  
All colonoscopies in the study will be performed by a qualified professional. Patients will be 40 
and older and will be randomized to receive colonoscopy with or without the Endocuff.  Data 
collected will include the type of scope used (adult versus pediatric), age, gender, indication, 
history of prior abdominal surgery and type, identification of diverticulosis classified as mild 
moderate or severe, insertion time, total procedural time, total withdrawal time, inspection time 
(with drawal time minus anytime suctioning, cleaning, and diagnostic biopsy or therapeutic 
procedure), and polypectomy time for each polyp removed. For each polyp, we will record the 
location, size, shape, and pathology.  
 
Inclusion  criteria  
 
• Referral  for screening  or surveillance  colonoscopy  
• Ability  to provide  informed consent  
• 40 years and older  
 
Exclusion criteria  
 
    
• Prior  history  of colon  cancer  
• History of inflammatory bowel disease  
• Prior  surgical  resection  of any part of the colon 
• Use of anti-platelet agents  or anticoagulants  that precludes  the removal  of polyps  
during  the procedure  
• History  of polyposis syndrome  or HNPCC  
• Inability  to give  informed  consent  
• Family history of colon cancer in a first degree relative < 60 years or two first degree 
relatives with colorectal cancer  
 
 
 
Statistical Ana lysis and Sample Size: 
 
• Normally  distributed  continuous  variables  will be summarized  using  means  and 
standard deviations  while  non-normally  distributed  continuous  variables  will be 
summarized  using  medians  and ranges.  
 
• The primary endpoints for the study will be the  inspection time  and insertion  time, , the 
total time per polypectomy, and the total procedure time . 
 
• The secondary endpoints will be total time per polypectomy, total procedure times, and adenomas 
detected.  
 
 
• All colonoscopies in the study will be performed by a qualified professional . Patients will 
be 40 and older and will be randomized to receive colonoscopy with or without the 
Endocuff .  Data collected will include the type of scope used (adult versus pediatric), age, 
gender, indication, history of prior abdominal surgery and type, identification of 
diverticulosis ( classified as mild moderate or severe) , insertion time, total procedural  time, 
total withdrawal time, inspection time (withdrawal time minus anytime suctioning, 
cleaning, and diagnostic biopsy or therapeutic procedure), and polypectomy time for each 
polyp removed. For each polyp, we will record the location, size, shape, and pathology.  
 
There will be a sample size of 200 subjects enrolled in  this study . 100 randomized into two 
groups. With the sample size of 100 per group, the study will have 80% power to detect a 1 
minute difference in the inspection time between the two groups. The inspection and insertion 
times will be compared using a two -sided two sample t -test, 5% significance level, and standard 
deviation of 2.5 minutes. 
The data will be analyzed and the statistics performed by persons in the biostatistics department.  
 
 
   Safety Risks to the patient and Data integrity:  
All paper charts pertaining to the patient will be kept under lock and key in coordinators office 
away from the endoscopy area. The data entry will be performed into an excel file which will 
be stored on an internal network drive with encryption and password security. Data 
management will include double data entry and regular back- up of the data.  Only approved 
personnel by the IRB will have access to the file storage.  This file will also not have any 
identif iable information.  A study log with the identifiable information will be kept in a 
separate folder to enable the investigators to assist in any research audit. No procedural data 
except the date of examination will be entered into this log.  
 
Any subject who wishes to withdraw from this investigation on his/her own accord and for 
whatever reason is entitled to do so without obligation and prejudice to further treatment. In 
addition, the Investigator may decide for reasons of medical prudence, to withdraw a  subject. In 
either event, the Investigator will clearly document the date and reason(s) for the subject’s 
withdrawal from this investigation in the CRF and should indicate whether or not he considers it 
was related to the study interventions. 
 
References:  
(1). ZP Tsiamoulos et al. Gastrointest Endosc. 2017 Apr 13. Impact of a New Distal Attachment 
on Colonoscopy Performance in an Academic Screening Center  