Version Number: 1 .1  
Date:  0 7/09/2019  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PI: Salvatore  Scali 
Study  Title:  Short -Term Dietary Protein Restriction 
Modulation of Skeletal Muscle Bioenergetics and 
Innate Immunity  
IRB number:  IRB20190098  
NCT#:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol  
 
Version Number: 1 .1  
Date:  0 7/09/2019  
 1. Study Protocol : Short -Term Dietary Protein Restriction Modulation of Skeletal Muscle 
Bioenergetics and Innate Immunity  
 
2. Investigator Info:  
Principal Investigator  
Salvatore Scali, MD  
Division of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy  
Department of Surgery  
University of Florida College of Medicine  
(352) 376 -1611  
salvatore.scali@surgery.ufl.edu  
 
3. Abstract.   
 
Modulation of a patient’s diet, specifically via short -term dietary protein restriction, can impact 
changes in cell energetics and dampen the normal subclinical inflammatory state.  These 
changes can provide benchmarks for future research focused on using nutritional interventions 
aimed at improving the probability of a successful outcome following open aortic aneurysm 
surgery.  We will condu ct a short term dietary restriction study  to characterize these changes in 
a normal control cohort .  Knowledge gained from these experiments will be used  in comparison  
to patients undergoing major  surgery  during a future study , as well as to identify the o ptimal 
time points for samp le collection  in our surgical population.  These changes will be characterized 
by looking at inflammatory cells in the blood, proteins excreted in the urine, changes in 
microbiome signature of the stool  and oral mucosal bacteria , as well as changes in skeletal 
muscle energetics derived from small  biopsies.  
 
4. Background  
Our group is interested in developing a robust prospective translational research effort that 
focuses on patients undergoing open abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) re pair since they have 
some of the highest rates of postoperative morbidity and mortality compared to other elective 
non-cardiac surgical patients.  The underlying biologic basis of frailty in AAA patients that makes 
some subjects more vulnerable to postoper ative complications is poorly understood.  Short -
term dietary protein restriction (stDPR) is a cost -effective, easily applied intervention that has 
strong pre -clinical data supporting efficacy in reducing surgical stress responses .  Moreover, 
recent data s upports the feasibility and safety of using stDPR to reduce adverse outcomes after 
cardiac surgery.  These seminal observations offer a unique opportunity for application to other 
high -risk surgical patient populations known to have significant post -operat ive adverse event 
rates.  Before initiating a clinical trial in AAA subjects, we need to characterize observations in 
healthy control, non -surgical subjects who are exposed to stDPR.  Therefore, this pilot study is 
Version Number: 1 .1  
Date:  0 7/09/2019  
 designed to explore the ability of stDPR to impact the sub -clinical inflammatory milieu and 
skeletal muscle bioenergetics in a cohort of healthy, non -surgical patients.   
 
5. Aim: Examine the baseline and ear ly changes in muscle energetics, micr obiome, and 
cell-mediated inflammation in healthy control patients receiving short -term dietary 
protein restriction.   
 
6. Research Plan  
 
Overview: Using targeted assays of mitochondrial energetics, 10X genomics, and the 
microbiome, we will assess changes in skeletal  muscle bioenergetics and the leukocyte 
transcriptome induced by a prescribed 96-hour protein restriction diet, tracking the impact of 
these changes on the dynamic response patterns of these parameters in healthy control 
patients.  
 
Study Time points  Summary  
  Days -7 to -1 Baseline/ Day 0  Day 2  Day 4  Day 7  Day 14  
Consent  x           
Paffenbarger IQ  x           
IPR Study IQ    x x x x x 
Stool Kit Distribution  x  x  x       
Diet Kit Dist ribution   x x    
Blood    x x x x x 
Urine    x x x x x 
Feces    x   x x   
Cheek Swab    x x x x x 
Muscle Biopsy    x   x x   
Meal Logger        Days 5 thru 14  
 
 
Health Questionnaires : We will collect height and weight information to be utilized in the die t 
equation , as well  as 2 questionnaires. The first is a  physical activity Paffenbarger questionnaire  
which is used for the diet equation (see below) and a n IPR study questionnaire to track energy 
level, mental awareness, and digestive issues.  
Diet Modification :  Subjects will follow a 4 day  protein restricted diet using Scandishake® mixed 
with almond milk which will be provided.  They may also drink water.  No food, other 
beverages, or alcohol may be consumed. The amount of diet to be consumed will be calculated 
for each patient  based upon r esting energy expenditures  plus additional energy needs using the 
Paffenberger IQ . REE = 9.99 x weight (KG) + 6.25 x height  (cm)  - 4.92 x age + 166 x sex (males, 1; 
females, 0) - 161.   Patients will receive the study diet (ScandiShake® [any of 4 flavors] m ixed 
Version Number: 1 .1  
Date:  0 7/09/2019  
 with almond milk ), calculated  individually for a total daily volume to achieve 30% caloric 
restriction and 70% protein restriction.  These will be consumed by the study subjects at home 
in an unrestricted manner, in that they may be consumed at any poi nt of time in the day.  
Blood Collection and Cell Isolation  and 10X Barcoding and RNA Sequencing . A 20 ml blood 
sample will be obtained via venipuncture before (Day 0), during (Day 2) and after completion of 
the 4 day  protein restricted diet (Days 4, 7 and 14) for a total of 5 samples.  These will be 
collected by Dr. Scali in the vascular clinic or vascular lab at the VA. Peripheral blood monocytes 
and neutrophils are isolated using a modified Ficoll method which can i solate both cell types.  
These samples are then subjected to bar coding with 10X reagents, followed by library 
preparation and RNA sequencing at approximately 30 million reads per sample (2 x 150 PE). 
Analysis of data will be primarily performed using 10X proprietary software, Cell Ranger, which 
is a set of analysis pipelines that process Chromium single -cell RNA -seq output to align reads, 
generate feature -barcode matrices and perform clustering and gene expression analysis. Cell 
Ranger includes four pipeli nes relevant to single -cell gene expression experiments.  
 
Skeletal Muscle Mitochondrial Phenotyping : Collection of 3 tissue sample s from the  thigh; 
before and after the protein restrictive diet on Day 0, Day 4 and Day 7  will occur .  
We will utilize a minimally invasive microbiopsy technique (skin puncture) to obtain skeletal 
muscle biopsies of the vastus lateralis muscle.  These will be collected by Dr. Scali in the vascular 
clinic at the VA.  Multiple aspects of mitochondrial function (basal and ADP -stimulated respiratory 
kinetics under multiple substrate combinations, H2O2 production and emitting potential , 
mitochondrial Ca2+ retention capacity)  will be assessed in duplicate on permeabilized fiber 
bundles from freshly obtained muscle b iopsy samples.  The permeabilized fiber approach permits 
in situ  study of mitochondrial function in real -time, retains the native reticular network structure 
of mitochondria in muscle, and requires very little tissue per protocol (~1.5 mg wet weight).  All 
mitochondrial functional analyses are completed  in real time within 2 -3 h.  Fibers are then freeze 
dried overnight, weighed, rehydrated, and freeze fractured for determination of citrate synthase 
activity.  All data are expressed per dry weight and/or mitochondrial content .  
 
Microbiome Sample Processi ng: Three  stool samples will be collected on Day 0, Day 4,  and Day 
7. Stool collection kits and instructions will be given to patients at their screening visit.  Patients 
will collect their feces in a toilet insert (similar to an upside down hat) and will take a walnut 
sized scoop of this feces using a provided tube/scooper  and insert it in the collection container 
and bag .  Stool samples may be collected at home within  24 hour s of the clinic visit  or during  
clinic visits on Day 0, 4 and 7.  In addition, a  swab of cheek saliva will be collected using a sterile 
swab and placed into a provided sterile tube. DNA will be extracted from these samples using 
DNeasy PowerLyzer PowerSoil  Kit (Qiagen) and will be quantified using spectrophotometry. 
Amplification of 16S rRNA will be performed to create amplicons, after which PCR will be used 
to add adapters and dual -index barcodes to the amplicon target. These libraries will be pooled 
toget her for sequencing by Illumina MiSeq. Reads will be assigned to operational taxonomic 
units, which will enable us to identify phyla, classes, families, and genera in each sample. The 
MiSeq run output is approximately >20 million reads and can generate suff icient reads for 
metagenomic surveys.  
Version Number: 1 .1  
Date:  0 7/09/2019  
  
Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) for bacterial species at each time point will be determined 
for all patients. Both alpha -diversity (overall diversity) and beta -diversity (composition of 
species) measurements will b e obtained from these OTUs. Mann -Whitney tests will be used to 
compare alpha diversity in patients who developed post -operative complications to those who 
did not. One -way analysis of variation (ANOVA) or Kruskal -Wallis tests will similarly be 
conducted to  compare beta -diversity 21. Heatmaps with clustering for relative abundance of 
species at the genus level will be created for all samples and pairwise differences between pre -
operative and post -operative samples  will be identified. The response will be measured as a 
change from baseline, and the baseline response will be included as a covariate in the 
subsequent multivariate analysis. In addition to this, we will perform principal component 
analysis (PCA) to crea te a mixed multivariate model with the intent of combining laboratory 
values for IL -10, LXA 4, TNF -α, and annexin -1 with OTUs.  
 
Urine sample processing for ketones : Collection of 5 urine samples will occur on Day 0, 2, 4, 7 
and 14 . Urine will be collected in a cup and approximately 1 ml of urine will be stored for later 
analysis. While on diet and immediately following completion of the diet, ketones are a marker 
for diet compliance, as well as urinalysis will attempt  to understand t he physiologic impact of 
the diet on renal function can occur through processing for serum ketones (that get generated 
on diet).  Commercially available assays can quickly evaluate these parameters which will 
further assist in determining the time -dependen t, physiologic effects of this nutritional 
intervention in healthy control subjects.  
 
De-identified biologic samples will be stored in refrigerator/freezers within the PI’s designated 
research space for the duration of the study.  Unused samples will be di scarded in the 
appropriate safety disposal container.  
 
Mealogger App  – This is a free app available on smartphones in which patients take a picture of 
the meals they ingest to approximate their normal food intake following the study. This will 
begin day 5 and will complete on day 14 of the study.   During clinic visits, the patients will open 
the app so that study coordinators can record information about what foods consumed and the 
caloric/protein content patients exposed themselves too after completion of the study diet.  
This information will be recorded with the other study data in a de -identified manor.  
 
Subject Selection  
A. Inclusion criteria:  
• Healthy volunteers between 18 and 70 years of age  
B. Exclusion criteria:  
• Age less than 18 years.  
• The presence of any significant medical condition that might significantly 
confound the collection of biological data in the study including cancer, diabetes, 
IBD, Advanced Renal Disease, Nut Allergy  
• Unwilling to follow protocol  
Version Number: 1 .1  
Date:  0 7/09/2019  
 • Participation in another in terventional clinical trial.  
• Prisoners, pregnan cy, or direct employees of the investigative team.  
 
 
 
Subject Enrollment  
 
We anticipate enrolling 10 patients  for up to a year following study initiation.  Patients who 
express interest in learning more about the study will meet wi th a member of the study staff 
who will describe the study, review the informed consent form, give them a copy of the 
informed consent to read and answer any questions. Potential participants will be allowed to 
take a copy of the consent form , as well as written information about the study if they so 
desire. When possible, signing of the consent shall occur at least one day prior to diet initiation  
to allow adequate time for patient to make consideration without any stress. Any que stions will 
be answered by the Principal Investigator or other study team members.  
 
Compensation  
 
The study payment and time schedule:  
 
 Baseline Visit    (1 -1.5 hours)      $100.00  
 Day 2 Visit         (30 -40 minutes)      $ 50.00  
 Day 4 Visit         ( 1 hour)                                                                  $100.00  
 Day 7 Visit          (1 hour)       $100.00  
 Day 14 Visit        (1 -1.5 hours)      $150.00  
        Total                                                                                                                 $500.00  
 
 
Statistical Analysis  This will be performed in a blinded fashion  (no patient  identifiers)  by the UF 
Surgery Department Statistical Support Group . 
 7. Possible Discomforts and Risks:  
 
Microbiopsy:   There is a small risk of muscle damage, infection, or prolonged bleeding but these 
are very  rare. Subjects may experience muscle soreness and bruising at the biopsy site.  No 
sutures are required to heal the puncture but they will be left with a small scar at the puncture  
site.  
Blood draw:   The risks of drawing blood from a vein include discomfor t at the site of puncture; 
possible bruising and swelling around the puncture site; rarely an infection; and, uncommonly, 
faintness from the procedure.  
Version Number: 1 .1  
Date:  0 7/09/2019  
 Protein Restrictive Diet:   Subjects  may experience a change in bowel habits, constipation, loose 
stool and cramping  and possible weight loss .  Subjects  may experience a change in energy level 
during the 4 days of the protein restricted diet.  
 8. Possible Benefits:  
 
Participation in this research will not provide any additional benefits to the subjects.  Our hope 
is that discoveries from this study will eventually lead to a better understanding of how 
nutritional interventions may improve the probab ility of successful outcomes following open 
AAA surgery.  
 9. Conflict of Interest:  
No conflict of interest exists for this project . 
 
 
References  
 
1. Mitchell JR, Beckman JA, Nguyen LL, Ozaki CK. Reducing elective vascular surgery perioperative risk 
with brief preoperative dietary restriction. Surgery . 2013;153:594 -598  
2. Mauro CR, Tao M, Yu P, Trevino -Villerreal JH, Longchamp A, Kristal BS, Ozaki CK, Mitchell JR. 
Preoperative dietary restriction reduces intimal hyperplasia and protects from ischemia -reperfusion 
injury. J Vasc Surg . 2016;63:500 -509 e501  
3. Varendi K, Airavaara M, Anttila J, Vose S, Plan ken A, Saarma M, Mitchell JR, Andressoo JO. Short -term 
preoperative dietary restriction is neuroprotective in a rat focal stroke model. PLoS One . 2014;9:e93911  
4. Grundmann F, Muller RU, Reppenhorst A, Hulswitt L, Spath MR, Kubacki T, Scherner M, Faust M,  
Becker I, Wahlers T, Schermer B, Benzing T, Burst V. Preoperative short -term calorie restriction for 
prevention of acute kidney injury after cardiac surgery: A randomized, controlled, open -label, pilot trial. 
J Am Heart Assoc . 2018;7  
5. Norman PE, Jamroz ik K, Lawrence -Brown MM, Le MT, Spencer CA, Tuohy RJ, Parsons RW, Dickinson 
JA. Population based randomised controlled trial on impact of screening on mortality from abdominal 
aortic aneurysm. BMJ . 2004;329:1259  
6. Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, Bakal CW, Creager MA, Halperin JL, Hiratzka LF, Murphy WR, Olin JW, 
Puschett JB, Rosenfield KA, Sacks D, Stanley JC, Taylor LM, Jr., White CJ, White J, White RA, Antman EM, 
Smith SC, Jr., Adams CD, Anderson JL, Faxon DP, Fuster V, Gibbons RJ, Hunt SA, Jacobs AK,  Nishimura R, 
Ornato JP, Page RL, Riegel B. Acc/aha 2005 practice guidelines for the management of patients with 
peripheral arterial disease (lower extremity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): A collaborative 
report from the american association fo r vascular surgery/society for vascular surgery, society for 
cardiovascular angiography and interventions, society for vascular medicine and biology, society of 
interventional radiology, and the acc/aha task force on practice guidelines (writing committee to 
develop guidelines for the management of patients with peripheral arterial disease): Endorsed by the 
Version Number: 1 .1  
Date:  0 7/09/2019  
 american association of cardiovascular and pulmonary rehabilitation; national heart, lung, and blood 
institute; society for vascular nursing; transatlan tic inter -society consensus; and vascular disease 
foundation. Circulation . 2006;113:e463 -654  
7. Fedarko NS. The biology of aging and frailty. Clin Geriatr Med . 2011;27:27 -37  
8. van Vliet MH, Horlings HM, van de Vijver MJ, Reinders MJ, Wessels LF. Integra tion of clinical and gene 
expression data has a synergetic effect on predicting breast cancer outcome. PLoS One . 2012;7:e40358  
9. Vanzant EL, Hilton RE, Lopez CM, Zhang J, Ungaro RF, Gentile LF, Szpila BE, Maier RV, Cuschieri J, 
Bihorac A, Leeuwenburgh C,  Moore FA, Baker HV, Moldawer LL, Brakenridge SC, Efron PA. Advanced age 
is associated with worsened outcomes and a unique genomic response in severely injured patients with 
hemorrhagic shock. Crit Care . 2015;19:77  
10. Jickling GC, Stamova B, Ander BP, Zh an X, Liu D, Sison SM, Verro P, Sharp FR. Prediction of 
cardioembolic, arterial, and lacunar causes of cryptogenic stroke by gene expression and infarct 
location. Stroke . 2012;43:2036 -2041  
11. Rehfuss JP, DeSart KM, Rozowsky JM, O'Malley KA, Moldawer LL, Baker HV, Wang Y, Wu R, Nelson 
PR, Berceli SA. Hyperacute monocyte gene response patterns are associated with lower extremity vein 
bypass graft failure. Circ Genom Precis Med . 2018;11:e001970  
12. Warren HS, Elson CM, Hayden DL, Schoenfeld DA, Cobb JP, Mai er RV, Moldawer LL, Moore EE, 
Harbrecht BG, Pelak K, Cuschieri J, Herndon DN, Jeschke MG, Finnerty CC, Brownstein BH, Hennessy L, 
Mason PH, Tompkins RG. A genomic score prognostic of outcome in trauma patients. Mol Med . 
2009;15:220 -227  
13. Wycherley TP, B rinkworth GD, Noakes M, Buckley JD, Clifton PM. Effect of caloric restriction with 
and without exercise training on oxidative stress and endothelial function in obese subjects with type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes, obesity & metabolism . 2008;10:1062 -1073  
14. Mau ro CR, Tao M, Yu P, Trevino -Villerreal JH, Longchamp A, Kristal BS, Ozaki CK, Mitchell JR. 
Preoperative dietary restriction reduces intimal hyperplasia and protects from ischemia -reperfusion 
injury. J Vasc Surg . 2014  
15. Townsend JR, Hoffman JR, Fragala M S, Oliveira LP, Jajtner AR, Fukuda DH, Stout JR. A microbiopsy 
method for immunohistological and morphological analysis: A pilot study. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 
2016;48:331 -335  
16. Anderson EJ, Kypson AP, Rodriguez E, Anderson CA, Lehr EJ, Neufer PD. Substra te-specific 
derangements in mitochondrial metabolism and redox balance in the atrium of the type 2 diabetic 
human heart. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:1891 -1898  
17. Anderson EJ, Lustig ME, Boyle KE, Woodlief TL, Kane DA, Lin CT, Price JW, 3rd, Kang L, Rabino vitch 
PS, Szeto HH, Houmard JA, Cortright RN, Wasserman DH, Neufer PD. Mitochondrial h2o2 emission and 
cellular redox state link excess fat intake to insulin resistance in both rodents and humans. J Clin Invest . 
2009;119:573 -581  
18. Fisher -Wellman KH, Web er TM, Cathey BL, Brophy PM, Gilliam LA, Kane CL, Maples JM, Gavin TP, 
Houmard JA, Neufer PD. Mitochondrial respiratory capacity and content are normal in young insulin -
resistant obese humans. Diabetes . 2013  
19. Perry CG, Kane DA, Lin CT, Kozy R, Cathey B L, Lark DS, Kane CL, Brophy PM, Gavin TP, Anderson EJ, 
Neufer PD. Inhibiting myosin -atpase reveals a dynamic range of mitochondrial respiratory control in 
skeletal muscle. Biochem J . 2011;437:215 -222  
20. Larsen S, Nielsen J, Hansen CN, Nielsen LB, Wibrand  F, Stride N, Schroder HD, Boushel R, Helge JW, 
Dela F, Hey -Mogensen M. Biomarkers of mitochondrial content in skeletal muscle of healthy young 
human subjects. J Physiol . 2012;590:3349 -3360 