 
 
Status  Page  
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL  14-485 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closed  to New Accrual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closure Date: May 8, 2017  
 
 
 
 
No new subjects may be  enrolled in the study as  described  above. 
Any que stions  regarding this closure should be direc ted to the 
study’ s Principal Investigator  
 
 
 
 
Total  Study-Wide Enrollment Goal: 25 dyads  
Greater  than 25% of the overall study accrual will be at DF/ HCC:  
Yes  
No 
Total  DF/HCC  Estimated Enrollment Goal:  25 dyads Adult Age Range: 18+ Pediatric  Age Range: 2-17   
Will all subjects be recru ited from pediatric  clinics? Yes No   
 Office f or Human Research Studies  
 
DANA -FARBER  / HARVARD  CAN CER CENTER   
Protoc ol Front  Sheet  DFCI Pro tocol No.: 14-485 
1. PROTOCOL INFOR MATION 
 
Title:  Use Feasi bility of the iThermonitor  in Pediatric  Patients on Myelosupp ressive  Therapies for Acute Leu kemia and other Childhood  Cancers  
Phase:  Feasibilit y/Pilot  Spon sor Study Number: 
2. DF/HCC STUDY CONTACT INFOR MATION 
Prima ry Study Contact: Amanda  Centi Email:  acenti @partners.org  Phon e: 617 724 2158  
INVESTI GATORS:  (List only those under  DFCI IRB, i.e., from institutions  listed  in Section  6 below)  
Overall PI: Stephen  Agboola  MD, MPH Phon e: 617-643-0291 Institut ion(s): MGH 
Site Responsible PI:  Phon e:  Institut ion(s):  
3. DRUG  / DEVICE  INFORMATION  N/A: 
Drug (s), Biologic(s): Device(s) Name: iTher monitor  
Provided by: 
IND Exempt: ‐or‐ 
IND#:  Holder  Type: [pull  down]  
IND Holder Name: Provided by: Raiing  Medical Company 
IDE Exempt:  ‐or‐ 
IDE #: Holder  Type: [pull  down]  
IDE Holder  Name: 
 
4. PROTOCOL COORDINATION,  FUNDING, MODE 
Regu latory Sponsor:  Funding/Support (check  all that apply): 
DF/HCC  Investigator  Indust ry: Raiing  Medical  Compa ny 
Federal  Organization:  
CTEP  Study: No Grant  #: 
Internal  Funding: 
Non-Federal: 
Othe r: 
 
Proto col Involves (check  all that apply as listed  in the protocol  document,  even  if not part of the research but is mandated by the protocol document) : 
Chemoth erapy 
Immunothe rapy Hormone  Therapy 
Vaccine  Medical  Record  Review  
Questionnaires /Surveys/Intervi ews 
Surge ry 
Bone  Marrow/Stem Cell Transpl ant Data  Reposito ry 
Exercise/Ph ysical Therapy  Radiological  Exams  
Required  Biopsy Study 
Cell Based  Therapy 
Gene  Transf er (use of recombin ant DNA)  
Radiation  Therapy Genetic  Studies  
Human  Material Banking  
Human  Material Collection  Human  Embryonic Stem  Cell 
Quali ty of Life 
Othe r: use of study device  
5. SUBJECT POPULATION  (also  applies to medical  record review  and specimen  collection  studies) 
 
 
 
 
If enrol ling both adults and pediatric  subjects, anticipated perc ent of pediatric  subjects: 50% (1/2 of each dyads) 
Retro spective Medical  Record  Reviews only (Please  provide date range): from to 
 
6. DF/HCC PARTICIPANTS  UNDER DFCI IRB (check  all that apply)  
Beth Israel  Deaconess  Medical  Center  (BIDMC)  Beth Israel  Deaconess  Medical  Center  – Needh am (BIDM C-Needham) 
Boston  Children’s  Hospital  (BCH)  Dana -Farber/New Hampshire  Oncology -Hema tology (DFCI  @ NHOH) 
Brigham  and Women’s  Hospital  (BWH)   Dana -Farber at Steward  St. Elizabeth’s  Medical  Center  (DFCI  @ SEMC) 
Dana -Farber Cancer Institute  (DFCI)  Dana -Farber at Milford  Regional  Cancer  Center (DFCI  @ MRC C) 
Massachusetts  General Hospital  (MGH) Mass  General/ North Shore Cancer Cent er (MGH @ NSC C) 
Mass  General  at Emerson  Hospi tal – Bethke  (MGH  @ EH) 
New England  Cancer  Specialists  (NECS)  
DF/BWCC  in Clinical  Affiliation  with South  Shore  Hospital  (DFCI  @ SSH)  
 
7. NON-DF/HCC PARTICIPANTS UNDER DFCI IRB (check all that apply) 
 
Cape  Cod Healt hcare (CCH) 
Lowell General  Hospital  (LGH) 
New Hampshire  Oncolo gy-Hema tology-P.A. (NHOH) 
Newton-Wellesley  Hospital  (NWH) Broad  Institute  
Lawrence  & Memorial  Cancer  Center  in affiliation  with Dana-Farber 
Communi ty Cancer  Care (LMCCC) 
 
8. DF/HCC INITIAT ED STUDIES  ONLY  - INSTIT UTIONAL PARTICIPANTS  UNDER OTHER  IRB (N/A: ) 
 
DF/H CC Multi-Center  Protocols: (list institu tion/location)  DF/PCC  Network Affiliates: (list institution/locati on) 
 
 
Version:  01.08.16  
Log Sheet 
 
 
Protocol Numb er: 14-485 
 
Approval Date:   03/09/2015  (IRB meeting date when protoco l/consent 
approved or  conditionally approved) 
 
Activation Date:   04/16/2015    (Date when protocol o pen to patient entry) 
 
Approval signatures are on file in the Office for Human  Research Studies, tel. 617-632-3029.  
 
Date  
Posted  Revised Sections  IRB 
Appro val 
Date  OHRS 
Version 
Date  
07/06/15  Conse nt Form, Protocol, Front Sheet, Appendix table of 
contents, Appendix 1.4, Appendix 3.1, Appendix 3.3, 
Appendix 4.1, Appendix 5.2, Appendix 6.0 replaced due 
to Amendment #2 05/01/15  06/30/15  
01/08/16  Conse nt Form replaced due to Amendment #5 01/06/16  01/07/16  
Date  
Posted  Revised Sections IRB Approval 
Date Oncore  
Version Date 
03/07/16  Study renewal/Consent Form footer replaced due to 
Continuing Review #1 (Note: 6 month approval only 
from d ate of IRB Review) 02/08/16  03/07/16  
03/16/16  Protocol, Consent Form and Front Sheet replaced due 
to Amendment #7 02/18/16  03/15/16  
05/31/16  Permanent Site Closure to New Accrual: DFCI site 
closing to accrual; Site PI no longer wishes to 
participate in the study (effective date:04/18/16; 
Amendment #9) 04/19/16  N/A 
05/31/16  Protocol, Local Appendices, Consent Form and Front 
Sheet replaced due to Amendment #10 05/06/16  05/31/16  
07/06/16  Study renewal/Consent Form footer replaced due to 
Continuing Review #2 07/06/16  07/06/16  
05/08/17  Permanent Closure to New Accrual: Objective(s)/ 
Accrual Met (effective date: 5/8/2017;  Amendment #11) 5/8/2017  N/A 
06/21/17  Study renewal due to Continuing Review # 3 
(Note: Consent form removed due to Data Analysis 
only phase) 06/15/17  N/a 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 1 
 
 
 
 
 
Recruitment   
 Solicit participation of  pediatric oncology team at  the M GH Cancer Centers  
 
 Potential subjects identified from the MGH Cancer Centers   
 
 
 
Enrollment   
 Study staff  meets with subject/caregiver for  consent  
 
 Enrollment procedure s, baseline d ata collection and initial set -up  
During 
the 
study   Subjects continue ca re as usual  
 
 Use the iThermonitor   
 
Close - 
out  
 Complete final questionnaires and other closeout procedures  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 2  Use Feasibility  of the iThermonitor  in Pediatric  Patients  on Myelosuppressive  Therapies  for 
Acute  Leukemia  and other  Childhood  Cancers  
 
Stephen  Agboola,  M.D. , M.P.H.  
 
Detailed  IRB protocol  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 3  Table of  Contents  
 
 
1.0 Introduction  
1.1 Overview  
1.2 Background  and Rationale  
 
 
2.0 Objectives  
2.1 Hypothesis  
2.2 Primary &  Secondary Aims  
2.21 Primary aim  
2.22 Secondary aims  
 
 
3.0 Research Subject Selection  
3.1 Inclusion/Ex clusion Criteria  
 
 
4.0 Research Subject Entry  
4.1 Recruitment and Enrollment  
 
 
5.0 Study Design and Methods  
5.1 Design /Study Type  
5.2 Selection of  Instruments  
5.3 Description of  Intervention  
5.4 Data Collection  
5.5 Risks and Privacy Concerns  
5.6 Description of  Study Process  
5.61 Enrollment visit  
5.62 Registration Procedures  
5.63 During the Study  
5.64 Closeout Visit  
5.65 Instrument Administration  
5.66Intervention Administration  
5.67 Special Concerns  
5.68 Remuneration  
5.7 Advers e Reactions and Their Management  
5.71 Repo rting Adverse or Unanticipated E vents 
5.72 Anticipated Rea ctions  
5.73 Reaction Management  
 
 
6.0 Statistical Analy sis 
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 4  6.1 Primary and Sec ondary Endpoints  
6.2 Sample Size and Statistical Power  
6.3 Stratification Factors  
6.4 Stratification Facto rs and their Impact  on Design  
6.5 Early stopping rules  
6.6 Unevaluable/ineli gible participants  
6.7 Analysis Plan  
6.8 Handling of  missing data  
 
 
7.0 References  
 
 
8.0 Appendices  
1.1  Premarket notification 501(k) summary  
 
1.2  Biocompatibility statement  
 
1.3  Tech specs  
 
1.4  Quick user guide  
 
 
 
 
2.1  Letter for  participation to  provider  
 
2.2  Enrollment notification to  provider  
 
 
 
 
3.1  Phone script  
 
3.2 Appointment reminder  
 
3.3 Parent recruitment letter  
 
 
 
 
4.1 Close -out questionnaire  
 
4.2  GAD -7 
 
4.3 Enrollment questionnaire  
 
 
 
 
5.1 Eligibili ty checklist  
 
5.2 Daily event monitoring log  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 5  6.0 iThermonitor  Informational  Material  
 
6.1 Partners  Broadcast  Ad 
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 6  1.0 Introduction  
 
 
1.1 Overview  
 
 
This is a pilot study to  evaluate the use feasibility  of the iThermoni tor, a continuous 
temperature monitoring device, as a clinical support and patient self -management tool in the 
management of  pediatrics patients on myelosuppressi ve therapies  for acute leukemia and 
other childhood can cers. 
 
 
1.2 Background and Rationale  
 
 
Since 1975, the incidence rate  of childhood cancers has been steadily increa sing by an 
average of  0.6% every year .1 Based on 2014 data, it is estimated that  1 in 285 children will be 
diagnosed with  cancer  before age 20 years .1 Cancer is also expected to  be the cause of  death 
in about 1,960 children in 2014 making it the s econd leading cau se of death in children. 1 This 
rise in c ancer rates corresponds with increa sed rates of  four childhood cancers:  acute 
lymphocytic leukemia, acute myeloid leu kemia, non -Hodgkin lymphoma, and testicular g erm 
cell tumors.1 
Specificall y, acute lymphocytic l eukemia is the m ost common childhood can cer, 
accounting for  26% and 80% of  all cancers and leukemia respectively in children aged 0 - 
14years .1 Due to  improvement in treatment strateg ies, the 5 -year survival rate has increased  
from 57% in 1975 to  about 90% in 2009 .1 In general, the treatment of  ALL is in three phases 
over 2 -3years: remission induction, consolidation and maintenance. Patients who relapse may 
be eligible for  stem  cell transplantation. Pat ients undergoing treatment for  acute leukemia are 
particularly prone to  profound ne utropenia due to intensive che motherapy during the induction 
phase .2This neutropenic state  is expected to  last about 10 days during intensive phase of 
treatment .2 Similarly, patients undergoing allogeneic stem  cell transplantation and other 
myelosuppressive therapies ar e also at  high risk for  neutropenia.  
Neutropenia predisposes patients to  significant risk for  infectious complications which 
increases morbidity and mortality.2 Usually,  fever is the first  clinical sign of  the inflammatory 
response to  the infective process; and early detection is  an indication for  empiric antimicrobial 
therapy and further evaluation to  determine risk for  sepsis. Today, broad -spectrum 
antimicrobial therapy at  the first detection of  fever has helped significantly decreased the  
mortality associated with neutropenia in the intensive phase  of chemotherapy .2 
Therefore, early detection of  fever,  through regular temperature  monitoring, in a neutropenic 
patient is critical to  improved clini cal outcome.  Vigilan ce on the part of  care pr oviders and care 
givers is crucial to  early detection. Traditionall y, this is simply done through episodic oral or 
axillary monitoring of  temperature. In  this study,  we propose to  test the use feasibility of  an 
innovati ve device that  continuou sly monitors body temperature as a clini cal decision support 
tool in pediatric patients undergoing myelosuppressive therapies for  acute leukemias and other 
childhood cancers.  
 
 
The iThermonitor, a FDA class II  device, is a high accuracy device that  continuously 
capture s body temperature and automatically delivers the data wi relessly (via blue tooth or wi - 
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 7  fi) to mobile devices or for  cloud storage. It  has the capacity to  store 10 days worth of  recorded 
temperature data.  The device can be used to effortlessly monitor patients on a continuous 
basis during the intensive phase  of chemotherapy as opposed to  the usual episodic oral or 
axillary measurements. It is  also able to  generate and deliver  out-of-range temperature alerts 
on a mobile appli cation for  care givers or providers. It  also provides  care providers an 
opportunity  to remotely monit or their patien ts’ temperature in the immediate period after 
discharge from the hospital. The refore,  we hypothesize that  the iThermonitor can serve as a 
feasible clinical de cision support in the manage ment of  pediatric patients undergoing in tensive 
treatments for  acute leukemia and other childhood cancers. The device has n’t been previously 
tested for  use in pedia tric patients and finding from  this study could  generate useful data for 
future stud ies. 
 
 
Proposed  Study  
This study will be implemented as a pilot study to  test the use feasibility of  the iThermonitor as a 
clinical de cision support for  continuous temperature monitoring in a dyad of  25 pediatrics  patients, 
(aged 2yrs – 17yrs) on myelosuppressive therapies for  acute leukemia and other childhood 
cancers at  the MGH Pediatric  Hematology and Oncology group and their caregivers. The 
iThermoni tor will be used by patients and their caregi vers for  14 days o f data collection. There will 
be up to  be two study visits: study enrollm ent and study closeout. Participan ts will be given the 
option to  complete study closeout online via RedCap.  REDCap is  a secure, web -based application 
for building and managing on line  surveys. The RED Cap version offers  a more convenient means 
for survey administration and e liminates the need for  an in -person closeout visit. Should the 
participant choose this  option, a m ember of  the study staff  will email a link to  the RedCap  survey 
via RedCap’s secure email system.  
We have chosen to  implement this study as a feasi bility study because our goal is to  determine if 
continuous  temperature  monitoring  by the iThermonitor can work in home sett ings. This is in 
keeping wi th the definition for  feasibility  studies proposed by the National Institute  for Health 
Research Evaluation,  Trials  and Studies  Coordinating Centre (NETSCC), which states  that 
“feasibility studies are pieces of  research d one before a main study in order to  answer the 
question ‘ can it work?’ ”3 Bowen et  al further suggests that  they could be used to  answer the  
questions – “does it work and will it work?” and  that they are used to  determine whether an 
intervention is appropria te for further testing .4 Based on the paper by Bowen et  al describing the 
diverse types of  feasibility studies  funded by the N ational Cancer Institute,  this study meets the 
criteria for  conducting feasibility studies. According to  them,  one of  the indications for  a feasibility 
study is when “there are few previously publi shed studies or existing data using a specific 
intervention technique” .4 To our knowledge,  we are not aware  of any previous  research exploring 
continuous  temperature  monitoring  in pediat ric oncology  patients on myelosuppressive therapies.  
Therefore, findings from this  study have the potential to  advance knowledge about the 
management of  fever in pediatric pat ients on myelosuppressive therapies.  
 
2.0 Objectives  
 
2.1 Hypothesis  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 8  We hypothesize that  at least 80% of  study subjects will be able to  successfully  use the 
iThermoni tor to continuously mon itor their body temperature. A  subject must  be able to  view 
temperature data on the provided iPad mini at  least 80% of  the time in the study to  be 
considered successful. “Time in the study” here is defined as the number of  days the subject 
spends in the study which is expected to  be 14 days.  
 
 
 
 
2.2 Primary and Seconda ry aims:  
 
2.21 The primary aim of  this trial is to  assess the use feasibility of  the iThermonitor as a clinic al 
decision support tool in the management of  patients on myelosup pressive therapies for  acute 
leukemia and other child hood ca ncers.  We will consider the iThermonitor as a feasible clinical 
decision support tool if it successfully captu res body temperature d ata, transmit and displ ays 
the data on the iPad mini in at  least 80% of  the study subjects. We wi ll also a ssess the ability  
of the device to  alert the careg iver if the temperature falls ou tside of  pre-set range which is 
defined for  all patients as temperature  less than or equal to  96 and greater than or equal to  
100. 
 
2.22 Secondary outcomes:  
 
 Usability, acceptability and satisfaction  with the iThermonitor.  
 
 Caregiver engagement with the iThermonitor.  
 
 Effect  of the study  on caregiver anxiety.  
 
3.0 Research Subject Selection  
 
Pediatric patients undergoing myelosuppressive therapies f or acute leukemias and other 
childhood cancers at  the Massachusetts General Hos pital Cancer Center and their caregivers will 
be eligible to  participate in this study.  Eligible patients and their careg ivers will be enrolled  to 
participate in this study as a dyad.  
 
3.1 Inclusion/Ex clusion  
 
All male and female patients, regardless of  ethnic ity, are candida tes for  enrollment in this study if 
they meet all of  the inclusion and exclu sion criteria listed below.  
 
3.1a Inclusion criteria - Child:  
 
  Pediatrics patients aged 2 -17 years undergoing  myel osuppressi ve therapies  for acute 
leukemias  and other childhood cancers.  
 
  If applicable, willingn ess of  the patient to  shave axillary (armpit) hair.  
 
 Ability of  patient (if old enough) to  read and speak En glish 
 
  Has a caregiver, ≥ 18 years of  age that  is will ing to  participate in the study  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 9  3.1b Inclusion criteria  – Caregiver/Parent:  
 
  Caregivers  (parents or  legal guardians) must  give informed consent  
 
  Ability of  caregiver to  read and speak Engli sh 
 
3.1b Justification of  inclusi on criteria:  
 
 The iThermonitor is recommended for  use only in children aged 2 years and above.  
 
 Shaving is recommended for  older children who have attained puberty because the 
device wo rks best when in conta ct with flat  and smooth skin.  
 
 Participati on of caregivers is needed beca use they will be required to  monitor 
temperature data on the provided iPad mini and also to  help an swer questions 
pertaining to the usability of  the iThermonitor.  
 
 Fluency in English is required because the study mater ials will be administe red only 
in English.  
 
 No study procedure will be performed without  informed consent from the parents or 
legal guardians of  patients.  
 
3.1c Exclu sion criteria  
 
 Patients wi th history of  allergy to  hydrogel d ressing or ongoing skin  diseases.  
 
 Patients wi th ongoing febrile illne ss or documented infectious disease.  
 
3.1d Justification for  exclusion criteria  
 
 We are excluding patients with history  of allergy to  hydrogel  dressi ng or skin diseases to 
limit the possibilities of adverse skin reaction s. 
 
 We are excluding pati ents with ongoing febrile ill ness or docu mented infectious  disease  
to decrease the chances of  study-related adverse effects.  
 
4.0 Research Subject Ent ry 
 
4.1 Recruitment and Enrollment  
All pediatric patients undergoing myelosuppressive therapies  for acute leukemias and other child hood 
cancers at  Massachusetts General  Hospital Cancer C enter and t heir caregi vers will be considered 
potential candidates for  this pilot study.  Recruit ment information will be posted through the following 
online channels: Partner’s Healthcare and MGH research broadca st email services (Appendix6.1). 
These broadcasts are sent out to  members enrolled in the broadcast at  either Partners Healthcare or 
MGH.  Additionally, the investigat ors will work  direc tly with pediatric oncol ogists at the MGH Cancer 
Center  to recruit their patien ts for this study.  The hematology -oncology team,  led by Dr. Howard 
Weinstein at  Massachusetts General Hospi tal Cancer Center will help identi fy potential subjects for  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 10  the study.  Identified candidates  could either be on hospital admiss ion for  chemotherapy or  have an 
upcoming clinic visit for  chemotherapy.  
For identified candidates  with upcoming ho spitalization  or clinic visit  for chemotherapy, the 
research team will se nd out letters and study consent forms prior to  the hospital visit. The let ters will 
briefly describe the study and the s tudy commitments. The letter will explain that  a research assistant 
(RA) will be  approaching the cand idate and caregiver during their upcoming hospital vi sit for 
chemotherapy. The letter will clearly e xplain to the patient that  if s/he does not wish to  be approac hed 
by study staff,  s/he should call the study line and i nform the research team.  If we do not hear from 
patients after  one we ek of sending the recru itment  letter, study staff  will conta ct them by phone to tell 
them more about the study and answer any quest ions they may have about their participation. 
Additi onally, study staff  will leave the study informational flyers (appendix 6.0) in the pedi atric 
oncol ogy clinics so that  oncologis ts will be a ble to introduce the study to  their patients and their 
families. This group of  patients w ho are directly informed about the s tudy by their oncolo gists will not 
be sent recruitment letters.  
During the clinic visit, the research assistant will provide the patient with  further detail 
regarding the study.  If the patient is interested, the RA will  aim to  enroll the patient during the clinic 
visit or a day before hospital d ischarge for  those on hospitalization.  For those patients that  are 
already on hospital a dmission, the  oncolo gist will introduce the study s taff to the patient and 
caregiver. Before commencing study related  activity, the study staff  will inform patients and their 
caregivers about the study and give them a con sent form for  them to  review and consider  
participati ng in the study.  Study staff  will return after  about 30 m ins – one hour to  confirm their 
willingness or  unwillin gness  to participate in the study.  
For the interested patient -caregiver dyad, the research assistant will aim to enroll them in the  
study at  the clinic vi sit or one day prior to  hospi tal discharge by going th rough  the consent form with 
the subject and caregivers to  ensure adequate comprehension of  study protocol. After,  explaining 
study details and procedures, subjects and their careg ivers will be  given sufficient time to  review the 
consent form and will be encour aged to  ask questions. P atients who fulfill the  eligibility criteria and 
their caregivers will be  enrolled t ogether  as a dyad  after the parents/legal gua rdians’ con sents to  their 
participation. The parents/legal g uardians will sign two copies of  the consent form – one for  the 
subject and the other for  the stu dy team.  However, patients aged to  10 -17 years will al so be required 
to confirm their willingness to  participate in the study by signing the assent box.  All enrollment 
procedure s, includi ng the informed consent process,  will be done by research assistants. While 
enrollment procedures  will occur during the cli nic visit for  chemotherapy or pr ior to hospital dischar ge, 
patients will  not begin to  use the iThermoni tor until they get back home.  We will also make it clear  
that participation in this study does not pre clude participation in other research studies.  
 
 
If for any reasons some patients or their caregivers needs more t ime to  consider participating 
in the study,  we will l eave them a copy of  the consent form so that  they can further review the study 
details. No patient -caregiver dy ad will be coerced into participati ng. We will emphasize that 
participation is volunta ry and their  non-participation will not affect  their treatment.  They will be as ked 
to contact the study staff  by phone if they do  decide to  participate. After  the informed consent 
process, the RA will then perform  all other enrollment procedures.  
 
 
5.0 Study Design and Materials  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 11 5.1 Study Design: This study wi ll be implemen ted as a pilot study to  evaluate the use feasibility   
 of the iThermonitor as a clini cal decision support tool for  the continuous temperature 
monitoring in pediatrics patients (on myelosupp ressive therapies for  acute leukemia and 
other childhood can cers at  the MGH Cancer Cen ter) and their caregivers over a 2 -week 
study period upon the start  of device use. This  will en sure that  14 days of  data is collect ed. 
Apart from the enrollment and closeout procedures that  will be oc cur in the hospital  
settings, all other procedures will be performed at  home. The iThermonitor will only be used 
by the patient -caregiver dyad at  home for  14 days of  data collec tion (startin g from the next 
day post -chemotherapy) to  monitor the pat ient’s temperature. For hospitali zed patients,  
their 14 days will start  from the first  day after  hospital discharge.  
 
5.2 Selection of  instrume nts: 
 
 An enroll ment survey that  will gather information regarding the dyad’s demographic 
info and their technology use (Appendix 4.3)  
 
 This study will use u sability and satisfaction questionnaires specifically designed for 
this study.  (Appendix 4.1)  
 
 We will al so assess caregiver  anxiety with the Generalized A nxiety Disorder  
Questionnaire (GAD -7) (Appendix 4.2).  
 
5.3 Description of  intervention:  
 
The iThermonitor is an electronic device that  continuou sly monitors body temperature and 
connects to  a receiver (iPad mini) via Bluetooth to  display body temperature data in real 
time.  The iThermonitor is attached to  the sk in by a hydrogel dressing which can be 
changed as needed.  It captures  data even without connection to  a receiver and it can 
establish connection to  a paired receiver de vice (the iPa d mini) within a range of  three 
meters.  The provided iPad mi ni will be pre -loaded with the iThermonitor app which will be 
used to  pair the receiver with the iThermonitor device. If  a caregiver prefers to  use their 
own smart device su ch as an iPad, iPad mini or iPhone,  study s taff will install the 
iThermoni tor app to  the caregiver’s device for  the durat ion of  the study.  The iThermonitor 
monitors body temperature every four seconds and is able to  store 10 days’ worth of  data 
that can be offloaded as soon a s it establishes connection with a receiver. It  is able to 
measure temperature in the  range of  25-45 degrees Celsius. Users are able to  set 
temperature limits at  which ale rts for which out -of-range temperature can go off.  Howe ver, 
for this study,  the range  will be fixed at  less than or equal to  96°F and greater than or equal 
to 100°F as recommended by the pediatric oncology te am at MGH.  This alert can be audio 
or visual and will be displayed  on the receiver. In  the event of  an out -of-range temperature 
alert, we will encoura ge subjects/caregivers to  confirm the alert with their usual methods of 
temperature monitoring or personal thermometers before notifying their care providers. In 
the case of  a true fever,  we will empha size during the enrollment visit that  
subjects/caregivers should continue to  monitor patients’ temperature through usual care 
methods and also to  follow usual care pro tocols in managing fever  as recommended by 
their care providers. If  the out -of-range temperature alert is not confirmed by the ir usual  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 12 temperature monitoring methods, we would encou rage them  to disregard the alert and log it   
 as a false alarm.  
 
Caregivers  who have smartphones can also v iew their children’s temperature data on their 
personal smartphones (in addition to  the iPad mini  provided) if they wish. To  be able to  
view temperature data on their  smartphones, caregivers will have to  download the 
iThermoni tor from the  Apple App and Google Play  stores.  The iThermonitor app is 
available for  iPhone and A ndroid users and the re is no cost  to downloading it on their 
phones. U ser manuals to  guide use will be given to  all subjects. (Appendices 1.4,)  
 
5.4 Data Collection  
 
 The use feasibility data wi ll be collected by a daily event  monitoring log designed  
specifically for  this study which will be recorded manually by subjects everyday 
throughout the study period.  
 
  Data collected by the iThermonitor is automatically uploaded to  a paired receiver 
within a range of  five meters for  cloud s torage.  These data  will be downl oaded on a 
weekly ba sis and stored in the Partners Healthcare network of  computer files 
available to  only the IRB  approved study staff  at the Partners Connected Heal th 
Innovation. Partners Connected Health Innovation is an established leader in the 
creation and implementation of  effective hea lthcare delivery strategies supported by 
patient -centric technology.  At PCHI, we leverage information technology – mobile 
phones and apps, remote monitoring tools, personal health trackers,  sensors, 
compu ters and netwo rked devices – to help providers and patients manage chronic 
conditions, maintain health and welln ess, and improve adherence,  engagement and 
clinical ou tcomes.  
 
 We will collect information about the participant’s type of  cancer, stage of  disease 
and treatment regimens from a review  of the electronic  medical records.  
 
 Enrollment, usability and satisfaction data will be collec ted by questionnaires 
desig ned specific ally for  this study.  
 
Outcome data will be stored in computer network files that are accessible only to  IRB 
approved study staff.  Outcome data will be linked to  each subject by a uniq ue number, 
which will not have any identifying informat ion. All data collected will be analyzed at  the end 
of the study period.  
 
A summary of  data points to  be assessed in this study is summarized in the table below:  
 
Assessments  At entry  During  
the study  Close out (+/- 
5days)  
Enrollment  questionnaires  X   
Temperature measure ments via device  X X  
Daily event monitoring log   X X 
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 13  
  
Number of  out-of-range temperature episodes  
detected   X  
Usability and satisfaction  questionnaires and other  
closeout surveys    X 
GAD -7 X  X 
 
5.5 Risks and Privacy Concerns:  
We do not foresee any significant  risks for  subjects/car egivers:  
 
 
 Participan ts will conti nue to  receive usual t reatments  including h aving their temperature 
monitored by their clinical team and caregi vers according to  standard care protocols.  
 Participan ts are free to  leave the study at  any point without restriction.  
 While we do not expect the iThermonitor to  fail, the risk invol ved revolves around failure to 
appropriately notify subject/caregiver of  a true fever episode or the generation of  a false out - 
of-range temperature alert. The refore, we will emphasi ze that  subjects/caregivers should  
continue to  monitor their temperature as recommended  by their care prov iders. In  the event of 
an out -of-range temperature alert, we will encourage  subject s/caregivers to  confirm the out -of- 
range temperature with their personal thermomet ers before notifying their care providers.  
 Although subjects/caregivers are asked to  complete  questionnaires at  the start and at  the end 
of the study they will be instruc ted that  they can choose not to  answer any question(s) they do 
not wish to  answer.  
 The study team members responsible for  completing chart reviews  to gather the required 
information will be CI TI certified and well -versed in HIPAA  requir ements.  These team  
members will be trained and famil iarized wi th the process of  obtaining the required data points 
and will minimize viewing of  any non-essential information.  
 
 
 
Data security and privacy will be maintained through:  
 
 Separation of  participant names from all  study data will be  done through the use of  unique 
identifiers. Only Study ID numbers will be  used on the iThermonitor Applicati on. 
 
 The record review will be done by  IRB approved study staff  and will be focused only at 
collecting pre -specified informati on namely, te mperature  data while on hospitalization, type 
and stage of  cancer and treatment regimens.  
 
 Any information transferred via the internet will be done using 128 bit SSL encryption.  
 
 Virus and password protected facilities within  the Partners  Healthcare network of  computers 
will be provided for  the research team.  
 
 To safegu ard confide ntiality, access to  all collected data will be limited to  only the IRB 
approved study staff.  Study subjects will be referred to  by a unique study number and not  
by name.  
 
 All communications via telepho ne or other media with subject s/caregivers will be stored in 
their study file.  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 14  
  At the end of  the study,  all identifiable information will be  destroyed and the study data will 
be maintained for  at least two years after the completion of  the study.  
 
 Only de -identified outcomes data will be shared wi th study sponsors at  the end of  the study.  
 
 Identifiable information will not be used or disclosed except as required by law, for 
authorized oversight  of researc h, or for  other research for  which the use and disclo sure 
would be permitted.  
 
 
5.6 Description of  Study Process:  
 
Each subj ect/ caregiver dyad will participate in this pilot study for 2 weeks starting from the 
next day after  the onset of  chemotherapy. There are two study visits involved:  
 
5.61 Enrollment visit:  
 
This will take place during the clinic v isit for  chemotherapy or on the day before 
discharge for  hospitalized patients.  
 
  Enrollment into the study by signing the informed consent form.  This will be d one 
before performing any study procedures.  
 
  Rescreeni ng to confirm eligi bility as described above. A  screeni ng checklist will be 
provided to  guide the RA.  
 
  Complete all enrollme nt surveys. Caregivers will be req uired to  complete the GAD -7 
 
  The research assistant will explain and de monstrate how to  use the iThermonitor 
and also leave subjects with user manuals. (Appendices 1.4,)  
 
  Subjects who wish to  use their own smartphones, in addition to  the provided study 
iPad mi nis, will be instructed to  download the  iThermonitor’s app on the app store.  
 
  Finally, study staff  will empha size that the iThermonitor is not a replacement for 
usual temperature monitoring protocols  and wi ll instruct participants to  continue to 
receive medical care from their physicians as usual.  
 
5.62 Regis tration Procedures  
General Guidelines for DF/HCC and DF/PCC Institu tions 
 
Institutions will register eligi ble pa rticipants with the DF/HCC Quality Assurance Office  for Clinical  
Trials (QACT)  centr al registration system.  
 
 
An investi gator will c onfirm eligib ility criteria and a member of  the s tudy team will compl ete the QACT  
protocol -specific eligibility checkli st. 
 
Registration Process for DF/HCC and DF/PCC Institutions  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 15  
 The QACT  registration staff  is accessible on Monday through Friday, from 8:00 AM to  5:00 PM 
Eastern Standard Time.  
 
 
 
 
The registration procedures are as follows:  
 
 Obtain written informed consent from the part icipant prior to  the perf ormance of  any protocol 
specific procedures or  assessments.  
 
 
 
 Complete the QACT  protocol -specific eligibi lity checklist using the eli gibility a ssessment  
documented in the participant’s med ical record and/or research chart.  To be eligible for 
registration to the protocol, the  partici pant must meet all i nclusion and exclusion 
criterion as described in the protocol and reflected on the eli gibility  checklist.  
 
 
 
 Fax the eligibility checklist (s) and all pages of  the consent f orm(s)  to the QACT  at 617-632- 
2295. For Phase I  protocols, attach participant  dose level assign ment confirmation from the 
sponsor.  
 
 
 
 The QACT  Registrar will (a) review the eligi bility checklist, (b) register the participant on the 
protocol, and (c) randomize the participant when applicable.  
 
 
 
 An email confirmation of  the registration and/or randomization w ill be sent to  the Overall PI, 
study coordinator(s) from the Lead Site,  treating  investigator and registering person 
immediately following the reg istration and/or randomization.  
 
 
5.63 During the study:  
 
  If the study team does not receive data f rom the iThermonitor by the second day 
after study enrollment, study staff  will follow -up (telepho ne call) with subjects to 
ensure that  they are able to  correctly set -up the device. We will en courage 
participants  to continue to  receive med ical treatment and adhere to  other 
managem ent protocols as recommended by  their physicians as usu al. We will 
emphasize that  the iThermonitor does not replace usual temperature monitoring 
protocols.  
 
  Use the iThermonitor everyday to  monitor the patient’s tempe rature  continuou sly 
until final study closeout.  
 
  Complete the event monitoring log every  day. 
 
  In the event of  a hospital admission during the  study  period, the  hospitalized subject 
will stop using the device. If  the subject has contributed  less than 50% of  data (i.e. 
used the device for  less than 7 days) prior to  hospitali zation, they wil l be dro pped 
from the study and a nother subject will be recruited to  make up the enrollm ent 
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 16  
 target.  However, subjects who have contributed at  least 50% of  data prior to  
hospitaliza tion will stop using the device but  will be included in final analyses.  
 
5.64 Close  out visit: 
 
  This visit will occur 2 weeks post -chemotherapy. If  possible, subjects will sch edule 
their final study visit at  the enrollment visit. Study staff  will also se nd an appoin tment 
reminder letter in the mail 3 days prior to  the scheduled visit. They will also receive a 
reminder phone call to  confirm the appoint ment a day before the f inal study visit. If 
participants  would like, they can complete close -out surveys onli ne via RedCap and 
return study devices during their next doct or visit or via a provided  pre-paid FedEx 
envelope.  
 
Participan ts will:  
 
  Complete all close -out surveys  
 
  Return the provided iPad mini de vices. 
 
  Be instructed to  continue their medical care as usual.  
 
5.65 Instrument administration  
 
All study questionnaires will be administered by research assistants.  
 
5.66 Intervention ad ministration  
 
At enrollment, study staff  will demonstrate how the device works to  subjects. They 
will also be available to  answer questions or help subjects trouble shoot their 
devices.  Subjects will receive us er manuals to  guide th em for subsequent set -up 
and use.  (Appe ndices 1.4,)  They will be e ncouraged to  use the iThermonitor to 
monitor the patient’s body temperature continuously for  the 2 -weeks study period.  
 
5.67 Special Concerns  
 
One special concern in this study is that  the intervention  may increase the sensitivity 
of detection of  fever which may prompt ca regivers to  alerts care providers  and hence 
increase the reporting of  fever.  We will instruct  caregivers to  confirm out -of-range 
temperature alerts with standard thermometers before notifying their care providers. 
We will e mphasize th at this intervention do es not replace their usual care protocols.  
 
5.68 Remuneration  
 
Each pati ent-caregiver dyad will receive a Partners -issued check of  $100 after 
completing the final study visit and retur ning the study iPad mini. The check will be 
mailed at  the end of  the study.  No additional remunerat ion or reimbursement will be 
provided.  
 
5.7 Adverse Rea ctions and their Management:  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 17  
 There is minimal chance for  adverse effects  directly from this study.  However, because the  
iThermoni tor is attached to  the skin a hydrogel  dressing patch, we cannot rule out the 
possi bility of  a skin reaction to  the adhesive surface of  the device. After  discharge from the 
hospital, we will instruct caregivers to  continue monitoring patients as recommended by 
their care providers. While we do not expect the iThermonitor to  fail, we will emphasize that 
caregivers are to  continue all standa rd protocols care for  each patient.  
 
5.71 Repo rting Adverse or Unanticipated E vents 
 
The Investigator will ensure that  all adve rse events AEs  that occur during the study 
period are well documented and repo rted timely to  the IRB.  
 
Documentation of  AEs includes: date and time of  onset and resolu tion of  AE, 
intensity, frequency, seriousness,  related interventions, and outcome. The 
Investigator will also evaluate the probability of  a causal relations hip of the AE  to the 
study intervention as being: “definite, p robable, possible,  unlikely, or unrelated.” 
Intensity of  adverse events will be  graded as mild, moderate, or  severe according to 
the followi ng criteria:  
 
Mild: symptoms that  are easily tolerated and transient in nature with minimal or no 
impairment of  normal activity  
 
Moderate:  symptoms  that are poorly tolerated, are sustained, and interfere with 
normal activity  
 
Severe: symptoms that  are incapacitating and render the subject unable to  work or 
participate in many or all usual a ctivities  
 
All AEs  will be reported to  the IRB  according to  the IRB’s  requirements, regardless of 
causality.  
 
5.72 Anticipated Rea ctions  
 
We do not anticipate any adverse reaction con sequent to  participating in this study.  This 
study is not invasive and does not presc ribe medications nor recommend new treatment 
protocols. The iThermonitor only helps to  timely detect the onset of  out-of-range  
temperature.  Participants will be  advised to  contact their physicia ns if they experience 
any problems with their medications or medical illness  
 
5.73 Reaction Management  
 
Should an AE  be en countered, the first  step in  the process, after  any actions  required 
for patient stabili zation, will be to  record the event on the adverse event reporting log 
and also notify the pr incipal investigator.  The event will be clas sified base on the 
relatedne ss, severity and whether it is an anticipated or not.  The AE  will be reported 
and managed based on relatedness  to the use of  the iThermonitor, seriousne ss and 
whether it was antici pated or  unanticipated.  The princi pal investi gator will in turn 
notify the IRB  and the  subject’s physici an.  All AEs  will be monitored un til resolution  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 18  
 or until, in the investiga tor’s judgment, they are stable.  If an emergency situation 
should oc cur, appropriate medical emergency measures should be taken to  stabilize 
the subject.  
 
 
 
 
6.0 Statistical  Analysis 
 
This study will be implemented as a  pilot study to  evaluate the use feasibi lity of  the iTh ermonitor 
as a clinical decision support tool for  continuous  temperature monitoring in a dyad of  25 pediatrics  
patients (aged 2 -17yrs) on mye losuppressive therapies for  acute leukemia and other child hood 
cancers at  the MGH Cancer Center and their caregivers over a 2 -week study period.  
 
6.1 Primary and secondary endpoints  
 
6.1a Primary outcome measurement: use feasi bility of  the iThermonitor will be  assessed by 
ability of  the device to  successfully cap ture, transmit and display the patient’s body 
temperature data on the study iPad mini. To  limit recall bias, subjects will be required to  log 
(Appen dix 5) the abil ity to  view the temperature data on the iPad mini once a day for  the entire  
duration of  the study.  The device  will be d eemed a feasible contin uous temperature monitoring 
tool if at  least 80% of  study subjects are ab le to successfully use the  iThermonitor to monitor 
their body temperature. A  subje ct must  be able to  view tempe rature data on the provided iPad 
mini at  least 80% of  the time  in the study to  be considered successful.  “Time in the study” here 
is defined as the number of  days  the subject spends in the study which is expected to  be two 
weeks.  
 
6.1b Secondary outcomes: secondary outcomes which will be as sessed at  the end of  the study 
include:  
 
i. Usability, acceptability and satisfact ion with the iThermonitor.  This will be 
assessed by questionnaires specifically designed for  this study.  We will be 
assessing ease of  use, acceptabilit y, connection and use problems like the 
device falling off  the skin, usefulness of  out-of-range tempe rature alerts and 
adverse reactions. We  will also assess to  see if the device helps to  build 
caregiver self -efficacy skills in caring for  the patient.  
 
ii. Caregiver engagem ent with the  iThermonit or. This will be assess ed by time to 
first measurement and upload from the  time of  discharge and also by the 
frequency of  logins to  the iThermonitor app.  
 
iii. Caregiver  anxiety  will be assess ed using the GAD -7 questionn aire. 
 
6.2 Sample size and statistical power or  precision ass ociated with the sample size: The 
length of  time required to  accrue an adequate number of  subjects to  the study should be 
indicated.  
 
We will be able to  estimate a feasibility succ ess rate of  80% to  within a 95% confidence 
interval of  +/- 16% with a sample size of  25 evaluable patients. This is in keeping with a  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 19  
 recommendation of  sample size of  at least 24 subjects for  feasibility studies .5 Therefore, 
a dyad of  25 pediatric patients and their caregiv ers will be enrolled in the study.  Based on 
estimates from the Partners Healthcare Research Patient Data Registry, about 101 
pediatrics patients with hematologic malignan cies alone were seen in 2013 at  the MGH 
Cancer Center. We envisage that  we would  be able to  accrue enough subjects over 12 
months after  the enrollment of  the first subject. 
 
6.3 Stratification factors  and intervent ion allocation plan for  random ized studies  
 
This is not a randomized trial and we wi ll not be stratify ing on any variable.  
 
6.4 Stratification factors  and their impact on design  
 
None.  
 
6.5 Early stopping rules,  if appropriate  
 
None.  
 
6.6 Unevaluable/ineli gible participants  
 
Our aim is to  evaluate how the device is used  in home settings. Therefore, subjects who 
become hospitali zed will stop us ing the device. If  the hospitalized  subject  has contributed 
less than 5 0% of  data (i.e.  used the device for  less than 7 days) prior to  hospitalization, 
they will be  dropped from the study and an other subject will be recruited to  make up the 
enrollment target.  However, subjects who ha ve contributed at  least 50% of  data prior to 
hospitaliza tion will stop using the device but wi ll be included in final analyses. We estimate 
that less than 20% of  subjects  enrolled in the study might be inevaluable.  
 
6.7 Analysis plan  
 
Data colle cted will be verified before analysis,  which will be done with Data Analysis and 
Statistical Software: STA TA, version 13 with an alpha of  0.05 set  a priori. All participants  will 
be followed up for  two weeks and we will summarize their baseline demographic and 
technology  use characteristics.  
 
To address the primary aim, the feasi bility success rate will be c alculated as the number of 
evaluable patients who meet the c riteria for  ‘success’ (per sect ion 6.1)  divided by the total 
number of  evaluable patients.  A 95% confidence interval will be calculated on this  proportion. 
If the upper limit of  the 95% confidence interval is less than 80%, then we will consider the 
iThermoni tor not to  be a feasible  clinical de cision support tool.  
 
Descriptive analyses will be performed on all baseline data. Endpoints for  all stu dy outcomes 
are defined in section 6.1 above.  All continuous variables will be computed as means with 
standard deviations, median and ranges while c ategorical variables will be computed as 
frequency distributions and percentages. The binomi al test  of propo rtion will be used to  our 
dichotom ous outcome of  successfully using  the iThermonitor. Paired t -test will be used to  
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 20  
 analyze p re- and post - GAD -7 scores measured as a continuous variable.  All other outcome 
variables will be summarized wi th descriptive statistics.  
 
6.8 Handling of  missing data in the analysis  
 
We have adopted simple data collection techniques to  limit missing data for  this trial.  Since 
this is largely exploratory work with descriptive  statistics,  a complete case analysis approach 
will be adopted for  this study.  . 
 
7.0 References  
 
1.  American Cancer Society. Cancer facts  & figures 2014. Atlanta:  American  Cancer Society;  
2014.  
 
2.  Neuburger S,  Maschmeyer  G. Update on management of  infections in cancer and stem  cell 
transplant patients. Ann Hematol. 2006 Jun;85(6):345 -56. 
 
3.  National Institute  for Health Research.  Feasibility studies, in NIHR NET SCC glossary. 
http://www.nets.nihr.ac.uk/glossary/feasibili ty-studies  
4.  Bowen, Deborah J.,  et al. "How  we design feasibility studies." American journal of preventive 
medi cine 36.5 (2009): 452 -457. 
 
5.  Julious SA.  Sample size of  12 per group r ule of thumb for  a pilot study.  Pharm Stat  
2005;4:287 -291 
Protocol Version 1.8 15 April , 2016  
Page 21  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.0 Appendices  
 
Appendix  1: Device  
 
1.1 Premarket  notificati on 501(k)  summary  
 
1.2 Biocompatibility  statement  
 
1.3 Device  Technical  specifications  
 
1.4 Quick  Manual  for Parents  
 
 
 
 
Appendix  2: Provider  contact  
 
2.1 iTherm  letter  to oncologists  
 
2.2 Enrollment  notification  
 
 
 
 
Appendix  3: Parent  contact  
 
3.1 Parent  Telephone  Script 
 
3.2 iThermonitor_appt_reminder  
 
3.3 Parent  Recruitment  Letter  
 
 
 
 
Appendix  4: Study  instruments  
 
4.1 iThermonitor  Closeout  Survey  
 
4.2 GAD -7 
 
4.3 Enrollment  survey  
 
 
 
 
Appendix  5: Inclusion  Criteria  
 
5.1 iTherm  Eligibility  Checkl ist 
Protocol  Version  1.8 15 April,  2016  
Page  22  
 5.2  Daily  Event  Monitoring  Log 
 
 
 
 
Appendix  6: Promotional  Material  
 
6.0  iThermonitor  Informational  Material  
 
6.1  Partners  Broadcast  Ad 
 
 Appendix Table of Contents  
 
Use Feasibility of the  iThermonitor  in Pediatric  Patients on Myelosuppressive  Therapies for  
Acute  Leukemia  and other  Childhood Cancers  
 
 
 
Appendix  1: Devi ce 
 
1.1 Premarket not ification 5 01(k) summary  
 
1.2 Biocompatibility  statem ent 
 
1.3 Device Te chnical specifications  
 
1.4 Quick  Manual for Parents  
 
 
 
Appendix  2: Provider contact  
 
2.1 iTherm letter to oncologists  
 
2.2 Enrollment  notification  
 
 
 
Appendix  3: Parent contact 
 
3.1 Parent Phone  Script  
 
3.2 iThermonitor appt reminder  
 
3.3 Parent Re cruitment Letter  
 
 
 
Appendix  4: Study instruments  
 
4.1 iThermonitor Closeout  Survey  
 
4.2 GAD ‐7 
 
4.3 Enrollment  survey 
 
 
 
Appendix  5: Inclusion  Criteria  
 
5.1 iTherm Eligibility  Checklist  
 
5.2 Daily Event  Monitoring  
 
 
 
Appendix  6: Informational Material  
 
6.0 iThermonitor Informational  Material  
   Premarket  Notificatio n 51 O(k) Submission   Sectio n  3 5 10 Summary    
3-1  
  
 
JUL   0 8  2014 
 
 
 
Section  3  510(k)  Summary  
 
 
 
This 5 IO(k)  Summary  of SIO(k)  safety  and effectiveness  information  is being  submitted  in accordance  with 
requirements  ofSMDA  1990  and Title  21, CFR -Section  807.92.  
 
The assigned  510(k)  Number:  K132761  
 
 
I.  Prepared  Date:  Aug.  26, 2013  
 
 
2. Sponsor  Identification  
 
 
Raiing  Medical  Company  
21 Huoju  St, Beijing,  China  
 
 
Establishment  Registration  Number:  30 I 0052175  
 
 
Mr. WuWei  
Title:  General  Engineer 
Email:  tjww@raiing.com 
Tel: 86-10-64118658  
' Fax: 86-10-80115555  ext. 776445  
Raiing  Medical  Company  
21 Huoju  St, Beijing,  China  
 
 
3. Submission  Correspondent  
 
 
Mr. Wu Wei 
Title:  General  Engineer 
Email:  tjww@raiing.com 
Tel: 86-10-64118658  
Fax: 86-10-80115555  ext. 776445  
Raiing  Medical  Company  
21 Huoju  St, Beijing,  China  
3-2    Premarket  ·Notificatio n 51 O(k) Submission   Sectio n  3 510 Summary     
  
 
 
 
 
4.  Proposed  Device  Identification  
 
 
PrOposed  Device  Name:  Wireless  Thermometer  
Proposed  Device  Common  Name:  Thermometer  
 
 
Regulatory  Information:  
Classification  Name:  Clinical  Electronic  Thermometer; 
Classification:  II; 
Product  Code:  FLL;  
Regulation  Number:  21 CFR  880.2910; 
Review  Panel:  General  Hospital;  
 
Intended  Use Statement:  
The Wireless  Theimometer  is/a  battery -operated  electronic  device  with intended  use of measuring  and 
· monitoring  human  armpit  temperaturcontinuously  via wireless  signal  transmission  of the measuring 
result .·This  system  is reusable  and intended  for armpit  temperature  monitoring  for persons  over two years 
old. 
 
5. Predicate  Device  Identification  
 
 
510(k)  Number:  Kl21696  
Predicate  Device  Name:  Wireless  Thermometer  WTM -BT30 -l 
Manufacturer:  Raling  Medical  Company  
 
 
 
6.  Device  Description  
 
 
The wireless  thermometer,  WT701,  which  is the combination  device  of thermometer  and Bluetooth 
communication  unit intended  to be worn  at axilla .to m nitor  the annpit  temperature  continuously.  
 
For the monitoring  operation,  switch  the thermometer  on and stick  the thermometer  in the user's  
. 1 
axilla.  The thermometer  will  make  a Bluetooth  connection  between  the thermometer  and the receiver  
 
·automatically  (User  should  setup  Bluetooth  properly  on  receiver).  Then  the  thermometer   starts  to 
measures  the body  temperature  by means  of testing  the NTC  resistor's  resistance  value  and calculates  the 
body  temperature  every  4 seconds  continuously  and sends  the temperature  data to the receiver  through  
3-3    Premarket  Notificatio n 51 O(k) Submission   Sectio n  3 510 Summary     
  
 
 
 
Bluetooth  connection.  
 
 
The wireless  thermometer  uses a CR2032  battery  for operation.  When  the battery  is low, internal  circuit 
will detect  the low battery  condition  automatically  and send  "low  battery"  signal  through  Bluetooth 
communication  unit to receiver.  
 
 
 
7.    Non-Clinical  Test Conclusion  
 
 
Non-clinical  tests  were  conducted  to verifY  that the proposed  device  met all design  specifications  as was 
Substantially  Equivalent  (SE)  to the predicate  device.  The test· results  demonstrated  that the proposed 
device  complies  with the  following  standards:  
 
IEC60601 -1:2005   Medical  electrical  equipment   Part  1:  General   requirements   for  basic  safety  and 
essential  performance  
IEC 60601 -1-2:2007  Medical  electrical  equipment -  Part 1-2: General  requirements  for basic  safety  and 
essential  performance - Collateral  standard:  Electromagnetic  compatibility -  Requirements  and tests  
FCC  Part 15 Subpart  C test FCC  Part 15.247  
ASTM   Elll2 -00:  2006    Standard    Specification    for   Electronic    Thermometer    for   Intermittent  
Determination  of Patient  Temperature.  
EN 12470 -4: 2000+AI:2009  Clinical  thermometers  Part-4: performance  of electrical  thermomet -'rs  for 
 
continuous  measurement.  
And the proposed  device  also conducted  the performance  test, which  include  Dimension  Test,  Weight  
Test,  and accuracy  transmission  test under  a complex  electromagnetic  environment.  
 
 
 
8.    Substantially  Equivalent  (SE) Conclusion  
 
 
The  following  table  compares  the  DEVICE  to  the  predicate  device  with  respect  to  intended  use, 
technological  characteristics  and principles  of operation,  etc. 
 
 
Table  3-1 Comparison  of Technology  Characteristics  
 
ITEM Proposed  Device  
WT701  Predicate  Device  
K121696  
Product  Code FLL FLL 
Regulation  No. 880.2910  880.2910  
Class Class  II Class  II 
3-4    Premarket   Notificatio n 510(k)  Submission   Sectio n  3 510 Summary     
 c  
 
- 
The    Wireless  Thermometer  is    a The   Wireless   
 
Thennometer,  model  
battery -operated   electronic  device   WTM -B530 -J,   is  a  battery -operated  
with  intended  use  of  measuring  and  elected   electronic  device  with 
monitoring  human  an"Il.pit  temperature  intended   use of measuring  and 
continuously  via wireless  signal   monitoring  human  armpit  temperature  
Intended  Use transmission  of the measuring  result.  continuously  via wireless  signal  
' This  system  is reusable  and  intended   transmission  of the measuring  result.  
for armpit  temperature  monitoring  f?r This    system     is reusable    and    is 
persons  over two years  old. intended  for armpit   temperature  
monitoring  for persons  over  two years  
old. 
Display  Unit Specification   iOS device  Display  . LED  and iOS device  Display  
Working  voltage   DC3V   DC3.7V  
Battery   The button  battery  3.0 V, 2 IOmAh  Internal  3.7V,  IOOmAh  Li Battery  
Measurement  range  25 ·c-45 ·c ,2s ·c-45 ·c 
Accuracy  ±o.o5  ·c(35 ·c-38.5 'CJ  ±O.I'C  
±O.I'C(25'C -34.99'C  and 
38.5I'C -45'C ) 
Temperature  unit ·c or 'F  ·c or 'F 
Signal  transmission   
Wireless  2.4G  Bluetooth  BLE   Wireless  2.4G  Bluetooth  3:0 
Receiver   iPhone 4S,  iPhone 5,  iPad(3rd iPod  touch  4,  iPhone  4,  iPhone  4S, 
generation),  iPad(4th iPad,  iPad 2, The new iPad 
generation),  iPad mini,  iPod 
touch(5th  generation ) 
Valid  transmission  distance  Up to 5 meters   Upto  5 meters   . 
Operating Temperature!  5'C-40 'C 5'C-40. 'C 
Operating  Humidity    15-85%   15-85%  
 
Based  on the compafison  and analysis  abov,  the proposed  device  is determined  to be Substantially  
Equivalent  (SE) to the predicate  device.  
 
 
 
  
 
DEPARTMENT  OF  IlEA LTil & IIUMAN  SERVICES  Public  lleahh  Scr\'iCc 
 
 
Food  and Dntg  Administration  
10903  New  Hampshire  Avenue  
Document  Control  Center - W066·G609  
Silver  Spring. MD 20993 -0002 
 
 
 
July 8. 2014  
 
 
Raiing  Medical  Company  
Mr. Wei Wu 
General  Engineer 
No.I I   Huatong  Rd 
Beijing  
CHINA  
 
 
 
Re: Kl32761  
Trade/Device  Name:  Wireless  Thermometer,  Model  WT70  I 
Regulation  Number:  21 CFR 880.2910  
Regulation  Name:  Clinical  electronic  thermometer  
Regulatory  Class:  Class  II 
Product  Code:  FLL 
Dated:  June 3, 2014  
Received:  June 6, 2014  
 
 
 
Dear  Mr. Wu: 
 
We have  reviewed  your Section  51 O(k) premarket  notification  of intent  to market  the device 
referenced  above  and have  determined  the device  is substantially  equivalent  (for the indications 
for usc stated  in the enclosure)  to legally  marketed  predicate  devices  marketed  in interstate 
commerce  prior to May 28, 1976,  the enactment  date of the  Medical  Device  Amendments,  or to 
devices  that have  been  reclassified  in accordance  with the provisions  of the  Federal  Food,  Drug, 
and Cosmetic  Act (Act)  that do not require  approval  of a premarket  approval  application  (PMA). 
You may,  therefore,  market  the device,  subject  to the geneml  controls  provisions  of the  Act. 
The general  controls  provisions  of the  Act include  requirements  for annual  registration,  listing  of 
devices,  good  manufacturing  practice,  labeling,  and prohibitions  against  misbranding  and 
adulteration.  Please  note:  CDRH  does not evaluate  information  related  to contract  liability 
warranties.  We remind  you. however,  that device  labeling  must  be truthful  and not misleading.  
 
If your device  is classified  (sec above)  into either  class  II (Special  Controls)  or class  Ill (PMA),  it 
may be subject  to additional  controls.  Existing  major  regulations  affecting  your device  can be 
found  in the Code  of Federal  Regulations,  Title  21, Parts  800 to 898. In addition,  fDA may 
publish  lt1rthcr  announcements  concerning  your device  in the federal  Register.  
 
 Page 2- Mr. Wu 
 
 
Please  be advised  that FDA's issuance  of a substantial  equivalence  determination  does not mean 
that FDA  has made  a determination  that your device  complies  with other  requirements  of the Act 
or any Federal  statutes  and regulations  administered  by other  Federal  agencies.  You must  
comply  with all the Act's  requirements,  including,  but not limited  to: registration and listing  (21 
CFR Part 807);  labeling  (21 CFR  Part 80 I); medical  device  reporting (reporting  of medical 
device -related adverse  events)  (21 CFR 803);  good  manufacturing  practice  requirements  as set 
forth in the quality  systems  (QS)  regulation  (21 CFR Part 820);  and if applicable,  the electronic 
product  radiation  control  provisions  (Sections  531-542 of the Act);  21 CFR  I 000-1050.  
 
If you desire  specific  advice  for your  device  on our labeling  regulation  (21 CFR Part 801},  please 
contact  the Division  of Industry  and Consumer  Education  at its toll-free number  (800)  638-2041 
or (30 I) 796-7100  or at its Internet  address 
http://www.fda.gov/MedicaiDevices/ResourcesforYoullndustry/default.htm . Also,  please  note 
the regulation  entitled,  "Misbranding  by reference  to premarket  notification"  (21 CFR  Part 
807.97).  For questions  regarding  the reporting  of adverse  events  under  the MDR  regulation  (21 
CFR Part 803),  please  go to 
http://www.fda.gov/MedicaiDevices/Safetv!ReportaProblem/default.htm  for the CDRH's  Office  
of Surveillance  and Biometrics/Division  ofPostmarket  Surveillance.  
 
You may obtain  other  general  information  on your responsibilities  under  the Act from the 
Division  oflndustry  and Consumer  Education  at its toll-free number  (800)  638-2041  or (301)  
796-7100  or at its Internet  address 
http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/ResourcesforYou!Jndustry/default.htm.  
 
Sincerely  yours,  
 
MaryS.  Runner  -5 
 
Erin I. Keith,  M.S. 
Director  
Division  of Anesthesiology,  General  Hospital,  
Respiratory,  Infection  Control  and Dental  Devices  
Office  of Device  Evaluation  
Center  for Devices  and Radiological  Health  
 
 
 
Enclosure  
 
 
 
 DEPARTMENT  OF HEALTH  AND HUMAN  SERVICES 
Food  and Drug Administration  
Indications  for Use Form  Approved:  OMB  No. 0910.0120  
Expiration  Date:  January  31, 2017  
See PRA Statement below.  
 
510(k)  Number  (if known)  
KJ32761  
 
Device  Name  
Wireless  Thermometer,  Model  WT701  
 
 
 
Indications  for Use (Describo)  
The Wireless  Thermometer  is a battery -operated  electronic  device  with intended  use of measuring  
and monitoring  human  annpit temperature  continuously  via wireless  signal  transmission  of the measuring 
result.  This system  is reusable  and intended  for armpit  temperature  monitoring  for persons  over two years 
old. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type  of Use (Select  one or both,  as applicable)  
D Prescliption  Use (Part  21 CFR 801 Subpart  D) l:8l  Over -The-Counter  Use (21 CFR 801 Subpart  C) 
PLEASE  DO NOT  WRITE  BELOW  THIS  LINE - CONTINUE  ON A SEPARATE  PAGE  IF NEEDED.  
FOR  FDA USE ONLY 
Concurrence  of Center  tor Devices  and Radiologica lHealth  (CDRH)  (Signatural  
 
Digitally  signed  by Richard  C. Chapman  -S 
Date:  2014.07.08  11:26:01  -04'00'  
 
 
This section  appnes  only to requirements  of the Paperworl<  Reduction  Act of 1995.  
*DO NOT  SEND  YOUR  COMPLETED  FORM  TO THE PRA STAFF  EMAIL  ADDRESS  BELOW.*  
The burden  time for this collection  of information  is estimated  to average  79 hours  per response , including  the 
time to review  instructions.  search  existing  data sources,  gather  and maintain  the data needed  and complete 
and review  the collection  of information.  Send  comments  regarding  this burden  estimate  or any other  aspect  
of this information  collection,  including  suggestions  for reducing  this burden , to: 
Department  of Health  and Human  Services  
Food  and Drug  Administration  
Office  of Chief Information  Officer  
Paperworl<  Reduction  Act (PRA)  Staff 
PRAStaff@fda.hhs.gov  
"An agency may not conduct  or sponsor,  and a person  is not requirad  to raspond  to. a collection  of 
information  unless  It displays  a currently valid OMB  number .• 
 
 
FORM FDA 3881(1114)                                                  Page  1 of 1 
 
 Premarket Notificati on 510(k) Submission Exhibit #8 Biocompatibility 
  Statement   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit  #8 Biocompatibility  Statement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E8- 1 
 
 Premarket  Notification  51 O(k) Subm ission     C\hibit #8 Biocompaubilit)  
                                                                            Statement                                                                                
 
 
 
Biocompatibility  Statement  
 
 
 
The  material  of Double  coated  medical  tape and  Shell,  is identical  to that 
of  the  wireless  thermometer  as  it was  approved  in  k 121696  in Oct.   II, 
2012,  in formulation,  and  processing,  and  no other  chemicals  have  been 
added   (e.g.,   plasticizers,  filers,   color   additives,  cleaning  agents,  mold 
release  agents,  etc.). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authorized  Signature  
 
Wu Wei 
 
General  Engineer  
 
Raiing  Medical  Company  
 
Aug.  26, 20 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 .8-1 
 
  
 Premarket Notification 510(k)  Submission    Section 9 Biocompatibility   
 
 
 
 
Section 9 Biocompatibility 
 
 
 
1.    Patient-­Contact Material Identification 
 
 
The patient-­contact components and materials are presented as follows: 
 
 
Table 9-­1 Patient Contact Material Identification 
 
Components Material Contact Level Contact Duration 
Double coated 
medical tape Medical Tape Surface Short-­term (<24h) 
Shell ABS Surface Short-­term (<24h) 
 
NOTE:  The  contact  level  and  contact  duration  are  determined  according  to  Annex  A  of  ISO 
1099 3-­1:20 09 Biological evaluation of medical devices — Part 1 Evaluation and testing within a risk 
manag ement process. 
 
2.    Biocompatibility 
 
The patient contact material(s) of the proposed device as identified is(are) identical device to that(those) 
of the legally marketed device, wireless thermometer , as cleared in K121696  at date Oct. 11, 201 2. 
Biocompatibility Statement is provided in Exhibit #8 Biocompatibility Statement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-­1 
 
 3M Health  Care   3M Center  
Skin and Wound  Care Division   St. Paul,  Minnesota  55144 -1000 
651-733-1110 
 
 
 
 1 
 
 
 
May 23, 2012 
 
 
Dear  Valued 3M Custo mer: 
 
This letter  is in response to your requ est for co mpositi on information on the products  listed  below. 
You request ed information  regarding the following 3M products:  
3M™ Spunlace Nonwoven Tape 2476 and 2476P 
 
3M Skin and Wou nd Care  Division does not a dd animal deriv ed materials  or tissues  to these products 
during manufacture. We are not aware that the suppliers  for the ingredients used to make these products 
add or use  animal deriv ed materials  or tiss ues during their operations.  Since the products do not  contain 
any animal derived material  they are compliant  with US and EU regulations for Bovine Spongiform 
Encephalopathy (BSE) or  Transmissible  Spong iform  Encephalopat hy (TSE) control. 
 
This information was prepared based  on the best knowledge  and understanding of the Skin and Wound  
Care  Division  and, in part, on other information provided by 3M sup pliers. 
 
In the  event  any product  listed  above  is proven  not to conform  with 3M's certifica tion, then to the extent 
permitted by law,  3M's entire liability and Buyer's exclusive  remedy, will be at 3M's option either: (i) 
replace ment of Product  with a confor ming product,  or (ii)  refund of the purchase  price  paid by Buyer  for 
each non-confor ming Produ ct, within  a reason able time after written  notification  of sa id non-confor mance 
and return of said  Prod uct to 3M.   3M shall not under any circu mstances  be liable for direct, incidenta l, 
special,  or consequential  damages (includ ing but not limited to loss  of prof its, revenue, or bus iness) related 
to or arising  out of t his certificati on, including, the use, misuse or inability to use the Product. Unless stated  
otherwise  in writin g, the forego ing language cannot be waived,  modifie d, or suppleme nted in any manner  
whatsoever.  
 
If you have other related questions or need  further  information  you may contact  me at 651-733-0257. 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Tammy John son 
3M Skin and Wound Care  Division  
Prod uct Responsibility 
3M C ompany 
3M Ce nter, Bldg. 275-5W-06 
St. Paul, MN., 55144-1000 
e-mail: tljohnson1@mmm .com 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Preliminary  Technical  Informati on Sheet  
Product  Number  #2476P  [formerly MSX-6935B] 
3MTM  Single  Coated  Nonwoven  Medical  Silicone  Adhesive  Tape  on Premium  Liner 
Effective:   March  2013  
Supersedes  all previous  versions  
 
Proposed  Features  and Benefits:  
-  Hypoaller genic Silicone  Pressure  Sensiti ve Adhesive   -  No Natural  Rubber  Latex 
-  Flexible,  Conformable  -  EtO Sterilization  Compatible  Only 
-  Excellent  Initial  Skin Adhesion   -  Premium Clear  Polypropylene  Liner 
 
Current  Composition:  
Tape  Caliper  14.6 mil [0.37  mm] single -coated  Film Tape  on Clear  Polyester  Liner  
Backing 10.6 mil [0.27  mm] White Polyest er Spunlace  Nonwoven/Film  Laminate 
Adhesive  4 mil [0.10  mm] Medical  Grade  Gentle  3M Silicone  Adhesive  
Release  Liner 3.5 mil [0.09mm]  Clear  Polypropylene  Film, one side Fluoropoly mer Release  
 
Preliminary  Properties+: 
Adhesion  to Stainless  Steel,  180q Peel 4.5 oz/inch  [128 gms/25.4  mm] [1.25  N/25.4  mm] 
Typical  Liner  Release,  180q Peel 10 gm/inch  width  [10 gms/25.4  mm width]  
Moisture  Vapor  Transmis sion Rate,  MVTR  800 gms/sq m/24hrs  
+ 3M test methods are available  upon  request.  
1 Preliminary  results based  on limited run data.  Subject  to change.  
 
Proposed  Roll Desc ription: Tape  supplied  on 3 inch (76 mm) diameter cores.  
Length,  Maximum  100 yds [91.4  meters]  
Width,  Maximum  12 inches  (30.5  cm) 
 
 
Packaging  and Recommended  Storage:  
Product  as supplied  in original  packaging  will maintain  stated  properties  for a period  of two years 
from date stamped on shipping  container  when stored  at temperatures of 50-80qF (10-27qC) and 
relative humidity betwe en 40-60 percent. 
 
 
Note:  Product  should  be stored  in the original  packaging  out of direct  sunlight  or high-intensity 
indoor  lighting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please  see reverse  side for import ant product,  safety  and warranty  informatio n. 
 
 
 
 
© 3M 2013 All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
 
 
 Product  and Safety Information: User is solely responsible  for deter mining the suitability  of 3M samples and products  for the intended  use including  any 
necessary  safety  or toxicity  asses sment. 3M will provide  Material Safety Data  Shee ts and results of toxicity  testing  upon  request.  In every  case before  using  any 
product  in full scale production  users  should  conduct  their own tests to deter mine to their own satisfaction  whether  the produ ct is of acceptable  quality  and is 
suitable  for their particular  purposes  under  their own operating  conditions.  
Notice : Nothing  contained  herein  shall  be const rued to imply the nonexis tence of any relevant  patents  or to constitute  a permission,  induce ment or 
recommendation s to practic e any inventio n cove red by any patent, without  authority  from the owners  of this patent.  
 
Warranty  Information  
All statements,  technical  information  and recommendations  herein  are based on tests 3M believes to be reliable,  but the accura cy or completeness  thereof is not 
guaranteed.  3M warrants  only that products  will meet 3M’s  specificat ions at the time of shipment to the customer. 3M does not offer any other warranty and does 
not warrant  the perfor mance,  safety  or such other  characteristics  of Products  in combination  with other  materials.  3M specifica lly DOES NOT warrant Products 
for any intended  or unintended  uses (whether  or not foreseeable);  for compatibility  or suitab ility with other  components  or compat ibility  with any methods  of 
manufacture  or conversion.  The foregoing  warranty  is made in lieu of all other  warranties,  expressed or implied , includin g the implied  warranties  of 
merchantabili ty, fitness for a particul ar purpose  and freed om from non-infring ement. 
 
Limitation of Remedies: If products  are proven  not to meet 3M’s  specifications,  the sole and exclusive  remedy availab le and 3M’s  only obligation  shall  be, at 
3M’s  option,  to replace  such quantity of Products  which are proven  out of specif ication  or to refund  the purchase  price  paid for Produ cts. 
 
Limitations  of Liabilities:  The remedies  provided  herein  are exclusive  remedies  against  3M for any alleged  or actual  noncon formance to specifications  or defect 
or other failure in product s or for 3M’s performance of its supply  obligations.  Under  no circumstances  is 3M liable  for any direct, indirect,  incidental,  special  or 
consequential  damages (including  lost profits)  in any way relate d to the product unde r any theory  of law including,  but not limited to, negligence  and strict 
liability.  
Ordering  Information  
Call us at Customer Service to place an  order: 800-742-1994  (U.S.).  Visit  our we bsite: www. 3M.com/medic alspeci alties for product and 
services information,  news  about confe rences we will  be attending, new product h ighlights  or to make  a direct inq uiry. 
To have a sales representative contact you, to request samples or clinical and  safety summaries, ple ase contact us at 3M HELPL INE 800 -228- 
3957  (U.S.)  or for international  inquiries,  please contact your local count ry represent ative.  Our 3M Medical  Specialties  subsidiary contacts are 
listed below.  
International  Locations  
 
Argentina  
3M Argentina  S.A.C.I.F.I.A. 
Tel.: 54-11-4339 -2400 
Fax: 54-11-4339-2640  
 
Australia  
3M Health  Care 
Tel: 1 300 363 878 
Fax: 1 800 060 888 
 
Belgi um 
3M Belgi um N.V./S.A. 
Tel: 32-2-722-5111 
Fax: 32-2-720-0225 
 
Brazil 
3M do Brasil  Ltda. 
Tel: 55-19-3838 -6661 
Fax: 55-19-3838-7449  
 
Canada  
3M Canada  
Tel: 800 364-3577 
Fax: 800 341-4630 
 
Chile  
3M Chile  S.A. 
Tel: (56-2) 41030 00 
Fax: (56-2) 4103 400 
 
China  
3M China  Ltd. 
Tel: 86-21-6275 -3535 
Fax: 86-21-5208-2205  
 
Colombia 
3M Colombia S.A. 
Tel: 57-1 41016 66 
Fax: 57-1 4161677 
 
Czech  Republic  
3M Cesko  s.r.o.  
Tel: +420 -261 380 111 
Fax: +420 -261 380 110 
 
Denmark 
3M a/s  
Dominican  Republic 
3M Dominicana  
Tel: (809) 530-6560 X499 
Fax: (809) 530-2960 
 
Finland Suomen 
3M Oy Tel.: 358-9-
52-521 
Fax: 358-9-512-29-44 
 
France 
Laboratoires  3M Santé  
Tel:  33-1-3031 -8376 
Fax: 33-1-3031 -8378 
 
Germany 
3M Medica  
Tel: 49 2131 14 40 00 
Fax: 49 2131 14 49 99 
 
Hong Kong 
3M Hong Kong Ltd. 
Tel: (852) 2806 6111 
Fax: (852) 2234 6044 
 
Hungary  
3M Hungária  Kft. 
Tel: (36-1) 270-7777 
Fax: (36-1) 320-0951  
 
India  
3M India  Ltd. 
Tel: +91-80-2223 1414 
Fax: +91-80-22231431  
 
Indonesia  
PT 3M Indonesia  
Tel: (62-21) 520 3401 
Fax: (62-21) 520 3106  
 
Israel  
3M Israel Ltd. 
Tel: 972-9-9615 000 
Fax: 972-9-9615050 
 
Italy  
3M Italia  SPA   
Japan  
3M Health  Care  Ltd. 
Tel: 81-3-3709 -8289 
Fax: 81-3-3709 -8754 
 
Kazakhstan  
3M Representation  Office  
Tel: +7 3272  509 944 
Fax: +7 3272 509 573 
 
Korea  
3M Korea Ltd. 
Tel: 82-2-3771 -4286 
Fax: 82-2-786-2825 
 
Malays ia 
3M Mala ysia Sdn. Bhd. 
Tel:  6-03-7806 2888 
Fax: 6-03-7806 2902 
 
Mexico  
3M México,  S.A. de C.V. 
Tel:  +52-55-5270 -0400 
Fax: +52-55-5270 -0433  
 
Middle  East  
3M Gulf Ltd. 
Tel: 971-4-3670 -777 
Fax: 971-4-3670-699 
 
The Netherlands  
3M Nederland  B.V. 
Tel: 31-715-450-450 
Fax: 31-715-450-212 
 
New Zealand  
3M New Zealand  
Tel: 64-9-477 4040 
Fax: 64-9-477 6692 
 
Peru  
3M Peru S.A. 
Tel: 511-224-2728 
Fax: 511-224-3171 
 
Philippines  
3M Philippines   
Poland  
3M Polan d Sp.z o.o. 
Tel: (48 22) 739 60 00 
Fax: (48 22) 739 60 01 
 
Portugal  
3M Portugal  
Tel: 351-21-3134500 
Fax: 351-21-3134680 
 
Russia  
3M Russia  
Tel: 7 (495) 784-74-74 
Fax: 7 (495) 784-74-75 
 
Singapore  
3M Technologies  (S) Pte. Ltd. 
Tel:  65-6450 -8866 
Fax: 65-6455 -2130 
 
Sri Lanka 
3M Lanka (Pvt.) Ltd. 
Tel: (94) 11 2785 701 
Fax: (94) 11 4410083-4 
 
Spain  
3M España , S.A. 
Tel: 34-91-321-6000 
Fax: 34-91-321-6002 
 
Sweden  
3M Svenska  AB 
Tel: +46-8-92 21 00 
Fax: +46-8-92 24 22 
 
Switzerland  & Eastern  Europe  
3M (Schweiz) AG 
Tel: +41 44 724 92 44 
Fax: +41 44 724 94 80 
 
 
   
3M Medical Speci alties  
Thailand  
3M Thailand  Ltd. 
Tel: (66)2  260 8577  Ext.175 
Fax: (66)2 261 7535 
 
Taiwan 
3M Taiwan Ltd. 
Tel: 886-2-2704 -9011 
Fax: 886-2-2706-0355  
 
Turkey  
3M Turkey 
Tel: 9 (0212 ) 3507777 
Fax: 9 (0212 ) 2821742  
 
Ukraine  
3M Ukraine 
Tel: +380  44 490 57 77 
Fax: +380 44 490 57 75 
 
United  Kingd om & Ireland  
3M Health  Care  Ltd. 
Tel: 44-1509 -611-611 
Fax: 44-1509 -237-288 
 
Venezuela 
3M Manu facturera  Venezuela  
Tel: 58-241-83919 11 
Fax: 58-241-8391928 
 
Viet Nam 
3M Viet Nam Ltd. 
Tel:  84 8 64098 6 
Fax: 84 8 641024 
Tel:  45-43-48-0100 
Fax: 45-43-96-8596 Tel: +39 2 7035 -2406 
Fax: +39 2 7035 -2484 Tel: (632) 81337 81 to 95 
Fax: (632) 8145 873 to 74 3M Center,  Building  275-5W-05 
St. Paul, MN 55144-1000 USA 
Tel.: 800 228-3957 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL  SPECIFICATIONS  
 
 
Product  name  
Wireless  Thermom eter Valid  transmission  distance  
Up to 5 meters 
 
Model  
WT701  Temperature  unit 
·c or 'F 
 
Size 
51.9mmx31.6mmx 6.5mm  Measurement  range  
25'(-45'( 
 
Weight  
6g (witho ut battery) 
 
Battery  
CR2025  Accuracy  
±O.OS'C (35'C-38SC ) 
±O.l"C (25'C-34.99' C and 38.51' C-45'C) 
 
Receiver  
iPhon e 4s+,iPad 3+, 
iPad mini+,iPad Air,iPod touch  5+ 
Andr oid Devices  
(with 4.3+ system  and Bluetoot h 4.0;for more  details 
about  Android support,please  see our website} 
 
Battery  life 
120 days  a t 8 hours per day 
Note:  frequent  synchronization  of data 
may deplete power  more  quickly 
 
Operating  conditions  
Temper ature: s·c - 40'C  
Humidity:15% - 85% 
Barometric pressure:  86kPa - 106kPa  
Appe ndix 1.4 User  Manual  – to be sent home with  subjects   
  
 
 
Appe ndix 1.4 User  Manual  – to be sent home with  subjects   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 iTherm onitor Ins truction Guide  
 
Preparation of th e iTherm onitor  
 
 Remove  the cover  of the patch. The patch is the sticky adhesive.  
   Face  the temperature  sensor  up and stick  the other  side with the button  to 
the patch.  Make  sure  the device is in the center  of the stick er. 
 The iThe rmonitor  should be aligned vertically  with  the patch  
 
 
 
 
 
Sensor  facing up 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wearing  the iThe rmonitor  
 
 Lift the child’s  arm naturally.  
 Paste  the device facing  vertically  into the armpit.  Try to get the device  as 
close  to the most  inner  part of the armpit.  
 Make  sure  that the device  is laying  flat and smooth  against  the skin 
Appe ndix 1.4 User  Manual  – to be sent home with  subjects   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
within  10 feet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 If the connection  is lost, the sensor  will continue  recording  and storing 
temperature  data  for maximum  10 days.  The data  will be automatically 
sync ed with iPad once the connection  is back.  
 
Changing  the batt ery 
 
Your  device will com e with  a battery  installed. This battery  should  last throughout 
the two‐week study.  If you believe  the battery  has died,  plea se follow  the 
instructions below to install the replac ement  battery, which  was given  to you at 
enrollment.  
 
 Use the battery  tool and rotate  clockwise  to open.  
 Remove  the old battery.  
 Insert  the new  battery  (+) side up. 
 Replace  battery  cover  and rotate counterclockwise  to close.  
 
 
Appe ndix 1.4 User  Manual  – to be sent home with  subjects   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
+ side up 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you wan t to download  on your own  iOS device, please  use the following  link:  
 
http://doc.raiing.com/enterprise/m gh.html  
 
 
 
 
Using  and  maintaining  the iThermonitor  
 
 Charge  the iPad  regularly  and keep  the iThermonitor  app open.  Do not log 
out of the app.  
 
 Make  sure  the Bluetooth  is in the on position.  
 
• If you have a Wi‐Fi connection  in your  home, connect  the iPad to the 
Wi‐Fi to allow  the iThermonit or to sync  for data  collection.  
 
 DO NOT  change  settings  of the iPad  or the iTher monitor app.  
 
 DO NOT  get the iThermonitor  wet (shower,  bath  swimming, etc).  
 
 DO NOT  wear  the iThermonit or at one side for more  than  24 consecu tive 
hours.  Change sides  everyday  to wear  it for continuous  monitoring.  
 
 If your  child  feels  unwell  (uncomfortable  or aller gic) when  using the patch, 
replace  it with  another  type of adhe sive dressing based  on your doct or’s 
advice.  A fully‐covered  patch  larger  than  76mm×62mm  should be used.  
 
 Do not reuse the patches. If a patch  is already  folded over,  a new  patch  is 
required.  
Appe ndix 1.4 User  Manual  – to be sent home with  subjects   
  
 
 Shave  armpits  in advance. Make  sure  the area  of skin in contact  with  the 
patch  is flat and smooth. 
 
 For the most  accurate  results,  make  sure  the iThermonitor  has been  at 
room  temperature  for at least  5 minut es before  using  it. 
Appendix  1.4 User  Manual - to be sent home  with subjects   
  
Appendix  1.4 User  Manual - to be sent home  with subjects   
  
Appe ndix 2.1: Letter  to oncologists  requesting  patient referrals   
  
 
Dear  Dr.  , 
I am writing to share  detai ls about  an upcoming study being conducted  by Partners  Healthcare  Connected  
Health Innovation,  a resear ch division  of Massachusetts General  Hospital,  in collaboration  with the  MGH 
Cancer  Center  and the Dana  Farber  Cancer  Institute’s Pediatric  Oncology  department. Stephen  Agboola,  MD, 
MPH  is the  PI on this project. The  primary  aim of this study (DFCI  Protocol  14‐485) is to assess the  feasibility 
of the  iThermonitor  device  as a clinical support  tool in the managem ent of pediatric patients und ergoing 
myelosuppressive  therapies.  The iThermonitor  is an  electronic  device  that continu ously measures  the 
wearer’s  body temperature.  It is secured  to the  skin via hydrogel dressing. Full technical details of the  device 
and its functi onality  are included  below.  
 
A total of 25  dyads will be  enrolled  in this study.  Dyads will include one  pediatric  cancer  patient  and his/her 
caregiver.  The caregiver  will be  asked  to use the  iTherm onitor  device  for a period  of 2 weeks  to moni tor the 
child’s body temperature.  Upon  registering  and creati ng an account  on the iThermonitor  mobile  application, 
the device  will be  paired  with  a wirelessly  enabled  iPad  Mini or  Smartphone receiver  which  should  be within  
3 meters  of each other. Upper  and lower  temper ature limits can  be set on the device to alert  users  when  
temperatures  are outside  of pre ‐set rang e. However,  for this study, t he range  will be fixed  at less than  or 
equal to 96 and greater  than or  equal to  100 as recommended  by the  pediatric  oncology team  at MGH. If you 
would  like to review  a more  detailed  description  of the  protocol,  please  let me know and  I’ll be happy to 
share  that with  you.  
 
There  will be  2 study visits (enrollment  and closeout)  and patient/car egiver  dyads will receive  a total of $100 
for their  participation.  The eligibility crit eria are as follows:  
‐ Pediatric  patient Aged  2‐ 17 years  
‐ Engl ish spea king patient/ caregiver  (18 yrs or older)  
‐ Undergoing myelosuppressive  therapies for  acute  leukemia or other  childhood  cancers.  
‐ If applicable, willingness of  the patie nt to shave  axillary (armpit) hair.  
We are exclu ding patients who may  have:  
a history of allergy  to hydrogel dressi ng or ongoing s kin diseases,  patients with ongoing febrile il lness  or 
documented  infectious disease. We  are contacting  you to request  your help  identi fying and referring  eligible  
patients for  this study. Upon  physician ap proval,  study staff will approach  parents or  legal guardians of 
eligible  patients about  recruiting  them  and their  childr en for this study. Participation  in this study  will not 
interfere  with  their  treatments nor does it preclude participation  in other  research  studies.  
Please  let me know  if you  have any quest ions. 
Thank  you for your conside ration.  
 
Stephen  Agboola,  MD, MPH 
Principal Investigator  
Center  for Connected  Health,  
25 New  Chardon  St., Suite  300 
Boston,  MA 02114  
Phone:  617. 643.02 91 
SAgb oola@p artners.org  
 
Lisa Diller,  MD 
Principal Investigator  
Dana  Building,  Dana Farber  Cancer  Institute  
44 Binney St.  
Boston,  MA 02115  
617.6 32.56 42 
LDiller@partners.org  
Appendix 2.2: Enroll ment noti fication letter to provider   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dear Colleague,  
 
I am writing to inform  you that your patient  name, DO B, is now participating in the 
iTher monitor device study. Your patient’s caregiver consented on behalf of  patient name 
to enroll in a research study being condu cted by the Partners Center for Connected  
Health, a research division of M assachusetts General Hospital.  
 
The 2 -week study is a use feasibility pilot of the iTher monitor device, which 
continuously  measures  body  temperature. During your patient ’s enrollment in this study, 
s/he will wear this device and his/her consenting caregiver will be a ble to use the de vice 
to det ect fever in the child.  
 
This study does not interfere with your patient’s medical care, and s/he should continue 
to receive usual medical  care throughout the study.  
 
If you have any new infor mation that may jeopardize your patient’s clinical condition due 
to his/her continued participation in this trial, please do not hesitate to share your  
concerns  with me. 
 
If you would  like additional  infor mation  about  this study,  please  call or email me at 617- 
643-0291 or SAgboola@ mgh.harvard.edu  
 
Thank you.  
 
Stephen Agboola, MD, MPH 
Princi pal Investi gator 
Center for Connected Health,  
25 New Ch ardon St., Suite 300  
Boston, MA 02114  
 
Phone: 617.643.0291  
SAgboola@partners.org  
Appe ndix 3.1: Parent  phone script   
  
 
Screener’s  Name _   Date:    
 
Section 1: Introdu ction 
 
Hello,  my name  is  , and I am calling  from  Partners  Connected  Health Innovation/Massachusetts  
General  Hospital.  May  I speak  with  Mr./Mrs./Miss   _? 
 
[If the person  is unavailab le, ask for a good time  to call back  and or leave  a name and number for them 
to call you.]  
 
[If the person  is available  to speak]  
 
We are conducting a study  to assess  the use of a monitoring  device,  the iThermonitor,  as a tool for 
parents  caring for kids undergoing  mye losuppressive  therapies.  We believe your child may  be an eligible 
candid ate for this study  and I would  like to tell you about  the stud y. 
 
The iThermonitor  device is a thermometer that,  when worn  on the skin,  can measure  body temperatu re 
conti nuously.  The device takes  the wearer’s  temperature  every  4 seconds  and uploads  this data to a 
mobile  application  on a smart device – like a smartphone.  The device can then alert parents when  a 
child’s  temperature  goes  above a certain limit or below a certa in limit.  The visit involves  2 study  visits  at 
the MGH or DFCI.  The study  lasts  for 2‐weeks  and during this time, we’ll  ask your child to wear  the 
iThermonitor  device  every  day.  You could receive  up to $100  for your partic ipation  in the study.  
 
Would  you like to hear  more about  this study?  
 
[If No]:  Okay,  thank you for speaking  with  me today.  Have  a nice day. 
[If Yes]:  Great, l’d be happy to tell you a little more  about  the study. 
Section 2: Study  Descript ion 
So during our first visit,  we’ll  first review  the cons ent form toge ther. The consent  form  is a really 
important  docum ent that will explain  all of the study  details  to you. If, after  reviewing  this consent  form, 
you want  to particip ate in this study,  we’ll sign the consent  form  toge ther and that will officially  begin 
your  partic ipation  in this study.  
 
Once  the consent  form  has been signed,  we’ll  have  you fill out a couple  surveys;  then,  the research 
assistant  will give you the iThermonitor device  and show you how  it works.  If you  have  a sm artphone, 
we’ll  show  you how  to download  the iThermonitor  app so you can receive  alerts  from  the device.  If you 
do not have  a smartpho ne, you can use a study ‐issue d iPad  mini  during your  child’s  enrollm ent in this 
study.  
 
During  the study,  we’ll  ask you to have  your  child wea r the iThe rmonitor  device  daily.  You should  change 
the location  of the device  every  day.  So you can take it off to give your  child a bath and then  put the 
device  back  on. Anytime  your child is wearing  the device,  the devi ce will be checking your  child’s  
Appe ndix 3.1: Parent  phone script   
  
 
temperature.  The app will alert  you when your  child has a fever  and when  his/her  temperature  is too 
low.  
 
We’ll  ask you to have  your  child  wear  the device for 2‐weeks.  At the end of this time,  we’ll have you 
come  back  into MGH or DFCI  for a close‐out visit.  During  this visit,  we’ll  ask you to fill out some  surveys 
about  how  you liked  using  the devi ce. At the end of the study  you’ll  receive  a $100 check for your 
particip ation in the study.  If you’ve  been using  a stud y‐issued  iPad  mini,  you’ll  be asked  to return  this 
device  and the iThermonitor  before  your check can be issued.  
 
Please  note  we will have  to ask for your  social  security  number  or tax ID num ber in order  to issue the 
$100  check. 
 
Before  we conti nue do you have any ques tions?  [Answer  any questions]  
 
Are you interested in participating in the study?  
 
[If No]:  Okay,  thank you for your  time. 
 
[If Yes]:  Great, when  would  you be available  to meet? 
Do you have  any final  questions?  [Answer questions] 
Thank  you for taking the time to speak  with  me and for your  interest in this study.  I look  forward  to 
meet ing with you on [Dat e, time,  locati on]. Have  a nice day.  
Appe ndix 3.2: Appoi ntment reminder  letter to pare nts  
  
 
 
 
 
[Date]  
 
 
 
 
Dear    , 
 
Thank  you for your  participation in the iThermonitor  study.  This is a friendly  reminder  that your final 
study  visit is scheduled  for the following  time:  
 
Date:     
Time:      
Location:        
 
Take  along:  smartphone/provided iPad Mini  
 
At this study  visit,  we’ll  ask you to complete  some  surveys  about  your  exper ience using  the iThe rmonit or 
device.  You will receive  a $100  check for compl eting the study.  If you  have  been using  a stud y‐provided 
iPod  Touch,  you will only  receive  this check upon  returning  the iPod Touch.  
 
Please  feel free to cont act us with  any questions  or concerns  at [### ‐###‐####]. We look  forward to 
seeing  you!  
 
Best  Regards  
 
 
 
 
Study  Staff 
iThermonitor  Study 
 
 Appendix  3a: Recrui tment Letter  to Patient  
 
Date  
 
 
Dear [Parent Na me], 
 
 
We are contacting you because yo ur child, [CHILD  NAME], is currently undergoing che motherapy.  This 
letter is to tell you about a research study being conducted by Partners Connected Health Innovation, a 
research division of Partners HealthCare and Massachus etts General H ospital. This research stu dy is being 
conducted at the MGH Pediatric Oncology depart ment as well as the Dana Farber Cancer Institute’s 
Pediatric Oncology depart ment. The Principle Investi gator on this study is Stephen Agboola, MD, MPH. I 
think this study may be of interest to you.  
 
 
The goal of the study is to assess t he use of a monitoring device, the i Thermonitor, as a tool for parents 
caring for kids undergoing myelosuppressive therapies. The iTher monitor device is a ther mometer that,  
when worn on the skin, can measure body te mperature continuously. The device can then alert parents when 
a child’s temperature goes outside of a set te mperature range. We hope to show that the iThermonitor device 
is successful in a ho me setting at continuou sly monitoring your child’s temperature.  
 
 
The study involves 2 study visits at your child’ s pediatric oncology cli nic at the Massachusetts General 
Hospital or Dana Farber Cancer Ins titute. The visits will last no longer than 1 -hour. The study lasts for 2 - 
weeks and during this ti me, we’ll ask your child to  wear the iTher monitor d evice every day . You could 
receive up to $100 (Partners -issued chec k) for your partici pation in the study.  
 
 
Taking part in this research study  completely is voluntary and you can  end your participation when you so 
desire.  
 
 
The study phone nu mber is ### -###-####. Please  call this  number if you have any questions about the 
study. The line is open Monday -Friday 9a m-5pm. You can also call this nu mber to  tell us if you are not 
interested in participating in this study. If we do not hear from you after one  week of sending thi s letter, a 
member of our research team  will atte mpt to contact you by phone to tell you more about the study and 
answer any questions you may have. We look forward to speaking with you soon.  
Thank you for your consideration. 
Sincerely,  
 
Your MGH/DFCI provider  
Append ix 4.1 
iThermonitor Closeout Questionnaire Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Closeout Survey April 2 
, 2015.  Page 1 of 5  
  
 
 
Thank  you participa ting in the  iThermonitor  study. Please a nswer the following 
questions about  your experience using the device to monitor  your child’s 
temperature.  
 
 
 
1.  The foll owing are st atements about  your experien ce using t he iThermonitor.  
Please rate h ow much the fo llowing sta tements concerning the iThermonitor  
are true f or you. (Please circle the n umber of your answer): 
 
 
 
Definitely  
NOT true  A little 
bit 
true  
Mostly 
true  
Definitely 
true 
 
1) Overall, I am satisfied with how easy it 
was to use  the device  1 2 3 4 
 
2) It was easy learning to  use the device  1 2 3 4 
 
3) I felt comf ortable usi ng the device  1 2 3 4 
 
4) I was able to easily monitor  my ch ild’s 
temperatu re by using this device  1 2 3 4 
 
5) I feel more  confident  monitoring my  
child’s temperature by using the device  1 2 3 4 
 
6) The device  was helpf ul in starting  
discuss ions about  my child’s h ealth 
with my doc tor 
 
7) Using the device makes me feel  more 
connec ted to my c are team  
 
8) I found the  mobile ap plication very 
useful in monitoring my child’s 
temperatu re 
 
9) I found the  out-of-range tempera ture 
alert function very useful when  my 
child’s temperature was out  of range  1 2 3 4 
 
 
 
1 2 3 4 
 
 
 
1 2 3 4 
 
 
 
 
1 2 3 4 
 
10) I would recommend iThermonitor to a  
friend or  family member  1 2 3 4 
 
11) The iThermonitor  stayed on my child’s 
body for  most days  during the s tudy. Yes No 
Append ix 4.1 
iThermonitor Closeout Questionnaire Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Closeout Survey April 2 
, 2015.  Page 2 of 5  
  
 
 
12) I was able to view my chil d’s 
temperatu re data on the provid ed iPad 
mini for  most days  during the s tudy.  
 
Yes No 
 
 
 
2.  Did you view your child’s  temperature on the iThe rmonitor  app? 
(Please  circle one of these opti ons) 
a. Yes 
b. No 
c. Prefer not  to answer  
 
 
3.  Did you u se another  device other  than the  provided iPad mini  to monitor 
your child ’s tempera ture? ( Please circle one of these  options)  
a. Yes 
b. No 
c. Prefer not  to answer  
 
 
 
4.  How often did you vi ew the m easurements? (Please  circle one of these 
options)  
a.  Hourly  
b. 2 -hourly 
c. 4 -hourly 
d.  Daily 
e.  2-3 times  per week 
f. Once a week  
g.  never  
h.  other:                                     
 
5. Was vi ewing measurements on the app useful  in being able to be tter manage 
your child ’s health? (Please cir cle one of these option s) 
a. Yes 
b. No 
c. Prefer not  to answer  
 
6. Did vi ewing measurements on the app help you become more  inter ested in 
your child ’s health? (Please cir cle one of these option s) 
a. Yes 
b. No 
c. Prefer not  to answer  
Append ix 4.1 
iThermonitor Closeout Questionnaire Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Closeout Survey April 2 
, 2015.  Page 3 of 5  
  
 
 
 
7. Did you discuss the iThermonitor  device with others?  
(Please  circle one of these opti ons) 
a. Yes 
b. No 
c. Prefer not  to answer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Did you discuss the iThermonitor  device with your doctor?  
(Please  circle one of these opti ons) 
a. Yes 
b. No 
c. Prefer not  to answer  
 
 
9. If you were given the choice would you like to continue us ing the iT hermonitor 
device to monitor  your child’s  health?  
(Please  circle one of these opti ons) 
a. Yes 
b. No 
c. Prefer not  to answer  
 
 
10. If the  iThermonitor were f or sale in  a store, would you b uy it? 
(Please  circle all that  apply)  
a. Yes, f or my c hild. 
b. No 
c. Prefer not  to answer  
d. Yes, f or someone else (please  tell us who):     
Append ix 4.1 
iThermonitor Closeout Questionnaire Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Closeout Survey April 2 
, 2015.  Page 4 of 5  
  
 
 
11. How much do  you like  the compone nts of the i Thermonitor  system  below? 
(Please ci rcle the nu mber of your answer)  
 
Not at 
all A little  
bit I like it Very 
much  
 
 
a)  Contin uous temperatu re monitoring  0 1 2 3 
 
 
b)  Viewing measureme nts on the app 0 1 2 3 
 
 
c)  Alerts wh en measurements are  out of 
range  0 1 2 3 
 
 
 
d)  Other (please specify ):  
0 1 2 3 
 
 
 
 
12. Did you experience problems using the iThermonitor?  
(Please  circle one of these opti ons) 
a. Yes 
b. No* 
c. Prefer not  to answer  * 
*[If No or “Prefer  not to answer” , skip to question 14 ] 
 
 
 
13. What  problems d id you ex perience?  
(Please ci rcle all that apply ) 
a. Problems keeping the device on my child ’s body 
b. Problems linki ng the device w ith my smartphones 
c. Problems with the iThermonitor  battery  
d. Problems setting out -of-range temperature alerts 
e. Other problems:     
Append ix 4.1 
iThermonitor Closeout Questionnaire Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Closeout Survey April 2 
, 2015.  Page 5 of 5  
  
 
 
14. Please explain in  detail  the nature of  the problem(s)  you experienc ed as 
marked above:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. What  else would  you want added to the iThermonitor  system  to help  to you 
better  monitor  your child’s h ealth?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16. Did the  iThermon itor alert you when your child’s  temperat ure was of out -of- 
range during the st udy period?  
a)  Yes 
b) No 
c)  Prefer  not to answer  
 
*[If No or “Prefer  not to answer” , skip to question 17 ] 
 
17. How many times did the iT hermonitor detect  out-of-range temperatures? (If 
multiple times,  please indicate n umber)  
a)  Once 
b)  Twice  
c)  3  times  
d)  Other:   times  
 
18. We u nderstand that this q uestionnaire m ay not fully capture your 
experien ces partici pating in  this stu dy.  Would  you be intere sted in sp eaking  with 
a research  staff about  your experiences in this res earch stu dy? 
a)  Yes 
b)  No 
 
Your  answers are i mportant  to us. Please take a m oment  to check that  you have 
answered  all of the questions. Thank  you for taking  the time  to complete  this 
questionnaire!  
 
 Appendix  4.2 GAD -7 
 
 
Subject  ID:    
Visit:    
Date:     
 
 
GAD -7 
 
 
Over the last 2 weeks,how often have you  Not  Several More than  Near ly 
been  bothered  by the following problems?  at all  days 
 
(Use "I/' to indicate your answer) hal f the 
days every day 
 
 
1. Feeling  nervous,anxious or on edge   0  2  3 
 
 
2.  Not being  able to stop or contr ol worrying 0  2  3 
 
 
3. Worrying too much  about  different  things 0  2  3 
 
 
4. Trou ble relaxing  0  2  3 
 
 
5. Being  so restless that it is hard to sit still 0  2  3 
 
 
6. Beco ming easily annoyed or irritable 0  2  3 
 
 
7. Feeling  afraid as if something  awful  0  2  3 
might  happen  
 
 
(For office codin g: Total Score T  = +  +  _)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developed by Drs.Robert L. Spitzer. Janet B.W. Williams, Kurt Kroenke and colleagues,with an 
educationalgrant from Pfizer Inc. No permission required to reproduce,translate, display or 
distribute. 
iThermonitor  Enrollment  Questionnaire  Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Enroll ment survey V1 Nov ember 6, 2014   
  
There are three sections in this form – A, B and C. Section A contains questions 
about  your child. Sections B and C contains  questions for the caregiver.  
 
 
 
 
Section A: Child -specific information  
 
Please answer the follow ing qu estions about your  child. 
 
 
1. What is your child’s age?    (Years) or   (Mont hs) 
 
2. What is  your child’s gender?  
(Circle the n umber of your  answ er.) 
 
1 Male  
 
2 Female  
 
 
3. Is your child  Hispanic or  Latino?  
(Circle the n umber of your  answ er.) 
 
1 Yes 
 
2 No 
 
 
4. Which o ne or more of the  following would  you say is your child’s race?  
(Circle the n umber of your  answ ers, more than one may apply.) 
 
1 American Ind ian or Al aska Native  
 
2 Asian  
 
3 Black or African Amer ican 
 
4 Native H awaiian or oth er Pacific Is lander 
 
5 White  
 
6 Other, ple ase specify:     
 
 
Section B: Caregiver -specific information  
 
Please answer the follow ing qu estions about yourse lf. 
 
 
1. What is your age?     (Write  in nu mber of ye ars.) 
 
2. What is your gender?  
(Circle the n umber of your  answ er.) 
 
1 Male  
 
2 Female  
 
 
3. What is  your marital status?  
(Circle the n umber of your  answ er.) 
iThermonitor  Enrollment  Questionnaire  Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Enroll ment survey V1 Nov ember 6, 2014   
  
1 Married 
 
2 Living with p artner 
 
3 Divorced or separated  
 
4 Widowed 
 
5 Single, never  been m arried 
 
 
5. What is the  highest g rade at sc hool or  years in college that  you ha ve com pleted?  
(Circle the n umber of your  answ er.) 
 
1 1st – 8th gra de 
 
2 9th – 11th grade  
 
3 12th gr ade, completed h igh school, or  GED  
 
4 1 to 3 years of college  
 
5 4 or m ore years of  college 
 
 
6. Are you Hispanic or Lat ino? 
(Circle the n umber of your  answ er.) 
 
1 Yes 
 
2 No 
 
 
7. Which o ne or more of the  following would  you say is your race?  
(Circle the n umber of your  answ ers, more than one may apply.) 
 
1 American Ind ian or Al aska Native  
 
2 Asian  
 
3 Black or African Amer ican 
 
4 Native H awaiian or oth er Pacific Is lander 
 
5 White  
 
6 Other, ple ase specify:     
 
 
8. What is your curre nt employment status?  
(Circle the n umber of your  answ er.) 
 
1 Employed ful l-time (i ncludes self-employment)  
 
2 Employed p art-time (i ncludes self -employment)  
 
3 Unemployed  
 
4 Homemaker  
 
5 Student  
 
6 Retired 
 
7 Disabl ed 
 
8 Other, ple ase specify:     
iThermonitor  Enrollment  Questionnaire  Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Enroll ment survey V1 Nov ember 6, 2014   
  
 
 
Section C: Technology  Ownership and Use  
 
 
1. Do you ever go online to acc ess the Inter net or  World Wide Web, 
or to send and recei ve email?  (Circ le the nu mber of your  answer.)  
 
1 Yes 
 
2 No  [skip to que stion 4]  
 
 
 
2. When  you use the Inter net, do  you access it thro ugh… 
(For each ite m, please circle the nu mber for yo ur answer. 
You may answer  “YES”  to more than o ne question .) 
  
Yes  
No 
 
a. A regul ar dial-up tele phone line.  
1  
2 
 
b. Broa dband such as DSL,  cable or FiO S.  
1  
2 
 
c.  A cellul ar network (e.g., smartp hone, 3G/4G)   
1  
2 
 
d. A wirel ess network (Wi -Fi)  
1  
2 
 
 
3. Have you ever used the Inter net to do  any of the foll owing things? 
(For each ite m, please circle the nu mber for yo ur answer .) 
  
Yes  
No 
 
a. Send or rece ive email.   
1  
2 
 
b. Send or rece ive instant m essag es or chat 
online.   
1  
2 
 
c.  Upload pictures to s hare with others.   
1  
2 
 
e. Look for heal th or med ical informati on online.  
1  
2 
 
f.  Track weight, diet or exerc ise routine.   
1  
2 
 
g. Track any other health i ndicators like bl ood 
pressure, sl eep patter ns, headaches, e tc.  
1  
2 
 
h. Check your bank account bala nce or do any 
online banking.  
1  
2 
 
i.   Use a  social netw orking service l ike 
Facebook or MySpace.   
1  
2 
iThermonitor  Enrollment  Questionnaire  Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Enroll ment survey V1 Nov ember 6, 2014   
  
4. Do you h ave any of the foll owing de vices?  
(For each ite m, please circle the nu mber for yo ur answer .) 
  
Yes  
No 
 
a. A landline te lephone.  
1  
2 
 
b. A desk top computer.   
1  
2 
 
c.  A laptop co mputer or netbook.  
1  
2 
 
d. A tablet com puter like an iPad.   
1  
2 
 
 
5. Have you ever used  your cell phone or smartp hone to do a ny of the  following things? 
(For each ite m, please circle the nu mber for yo ur answer .) 
  
Yes  
No 
 
a. Send or rece ive email.   
1  
2 
 
b. Send or rece ive text messag es.  
1  
2 
 
c.  Take a  picture to sh are wi th others.   
1  
2 
 
d. Access the I nternet.   
1  
2 
 
e. Look for heal th or med ical informati on online.  
1  
2 
 
f.  Track weight, diet or exerc ise routine.   
1  
2 
 
g. Track any other health i ndicators like bl ood 
pressure, sl eep patter ns, headaches, e tc.  
1  
2 
 
h. Check your bank account bala nce or do any 
online banking.  
1  
2 
 
i.   Use a s ocial netw orking service l ike 
Facebook or MySpace.   
1  
2 
iThermonitor  Enrollment  Questionnaire  Study ID:      
Date:       
iTher monitor Enroll ment survey V1 Nov ember 6, 2014   
  
 
 
6. How much do you agree or disagr ee with each of the foll owing stateme nts? 
(For each ite m, please circle the nu mber for yo ur answer .) 
  
Strongly 
agree   
Som ewhat 
agree   
Som ewhat 
disagree   
Strongly 
disagree  
 
a. I am willing to try new technology.   
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
b. I plan to make great er use of technol ogy in 
the future to mana ge my health.   
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
c.  I generally f eel confi dent using new 
technology.   
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
d. I generally f eel confi dent that I can use new 
technology to  manage my  medical c ondition.  
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
e. I worry a bout s ecurity issu es of se nding 
health infor mation by the Internet.   
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
f.  It is ea sy for me to follow  instructions and  set 
up new tec hnology.   
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
g. I have no difficulty setting up com puters  or 
Internet modem s.  
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
h. Learning how to use n ew tec hnology is easy 
for me.   
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
i.   New tec hnology can be useful in ke eping me 
healthy.   
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
j.   I find using new techno logy to be a waste of 
time.  
1  
2  
3  
4 
 
 Subj ect Eligibility C riteria Che cklist 
 
All subjects enrolled must meet  eligibility criter ia bas ed on the inclu sion/exclus ion criteria  detailed in  the 
application  and app roved by the IRB. 
 
I. Study Information 
 
Protocol Title: iThermonitor study Protocol Number: 14-485 
Principal Investigator: Stephen Agboola, MD, MPH 
II. Subje ct Information:  
 
Subject Na me/ID:  
Gender: Male  Female 
 
III. Inclusion /Exclusion  Criteria  
 
Inclusion Cr iteria 
(From IRB ap proved protocol)  
Yes  
No Supporting 
Documentation* 
1. Dyad consis ts of a pediatric  patient  aged  2-17 
years undergoing  myelosuppressive  therapies  for 
acute  leuke mia and other  childh ood cancers.    
 
2.   Dyad also includes  a careg iver, ≥ 18 years of age 
that is willing  to participate  in the study.     
3.   Abili ty of caregiver  and or patient  (if old 
enough)  to read and speak  English.     
4.   If applicable,  willingness  of the patient  to shave  
axillary  (armpit)  hair.    
5.   Caregiver  (parent  or legal  guardian)  must give 
infor med consent for dyad participation.     
 
Exclusion Cr iteria  
(From IRB ap proved protocol)  
1.   Patient has  a history of allergy  to hydrogel dressing or 
ongoing skin diseases     
2.   Patie nts with o ngoing fe brile illness or  documented 
infectious  disease.    
 
*All su bject files must include sup porting documentation to confirm  subject eli gibility.  The method of confirmation 
can include, but is n ot limited to, laborat ory test res ults, ra diology test resu lts, sub ject self -report, and medical re cord 
review. 
IV. Statement  of Eligibility  
 
This subject is  [ eligible / ineligible ] for partici pation in the study. 
Signature:   Date:  
Printed  Name:   
 
 
 
v. March 2006 
Partners  Human Research  Quality  Improvement  Program  
 
 Subject ID:    Date of Enrollment:    
 
iThermonitor Daily  Event Monitoring Log  
 
Please  indicate  Yes or No for each  column  everyday  during  the study.  
 
 
 
Day The iTherm onitor 
stayed on the bo dy for 
most of the  day I was  able  to  view  the 
tempe rature data on the 
iPad  mini 
 Yes No Yes No 
1     
2     
3     
4     
5     
6     
7     
8     
9     
10     
11     
12     
13     
14     
 
Caregiver  Signatur e   Date   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Is your 
child (age 2 - 17 yrs) Study  
undergoing  chemotherapy?  
Do you need  to monitor  your child’s 
temperature  as part of your follow  up care?  
 
If you are over the age of 18, you 
and your child may be eligible to 
 
participate in a s tudy to test a ne w, small 
continuous  temperature-monitoring 
device. 
 
• You will be asked to use the new 
device in your home along with your 
standa rd treatment for 2 weeks in an 
effort to see how it  works in a home 
setting.  
 
 • Compens ation is provided in recognition of your time and 
willingness to participate. 
 
Ask your doctor for more information and to see if 
you qualify! 
 
Contact - Amanda Centi at acenti@partners.org for more 
details  
 
This study is being conducted by Partners HealthCare, Connected Health 
Innovation in conjunction with the MGH and DFCI Pediatric Oncology 
Groups. 
 
 A Pilot stu dy to evaluate the use feasibility of a continuous temperat ure monit oring device 
for pediatric patients on myelosu ppressive therapies for childhood cancers.  
 
 
Is your child (age 2 - 17 yrs) undergoing che motherapy?  Do you need to  monitor your child’s 
temperature as part of your follow up care?  
 
We are enrolling pediatric patients (ages 2 -17) undergoing myelosuppressive therapies for 
childhood cancers. You and your child may be eligible to participant in  a study to test a new, 
small conti nuous te mperature -monitoring de vice. You will be asked to use the new device in 
your ho me along with your standard treat ment for 2  weeks in an effort to see how it works in a 
home setti ng. There will be up to be two study visits: study enroll ment a nd study clo seout.  
 
Compensation of $100 will be provided upon completion of the study.  
 
Please  contact 617 -726-6831 or e mail iTher moStudy@partners.org  and ask about the 
iTher monitor study!  