 
 
 
A Randomized,  Double -blind,  Placebo -controlled,  Phase  III Trial of 
Coenzyme  Q10 in Gulf War Illness  
 
NCT 02865460  
February 19, 2020  
 
1  Approv al:  Miami VA Health care System IRB 2/19/2020  
 
 
Background  and Rationale  
As many  as a third of the 700,000  US troops  deployed  to the Middle  East during  the 1990 -1991  Gulf War are 
currently  ill with a multi -symptom  illness  termed  Gulf War illness  (GWI).  Investigators  have  been  investigating  the 
cause  and potential  treatments  of the illness  or its symptoms  for two decades,  but to date there  have  been  no 
successful  Phase  III trials,  and no established  treatments  beyond  palliation  of individual  symptoms  and behavioral 
aids to coping  with chronic  illness.  There  have  been  significant  advances  in our understanding of  the illness  through 
strong epidemiology, clinical, and  basic science  studies. However, studies  revealed  problems  with detoxification 
pathways  and clinicians  report  high levels  of drug intolerance  in the population,  reducing  therapeutic  options.  Gulf 
War veterans  exper ienced  environmental  exposures  that are known  to be oxidative  stressors  which  have  contributed 
to cell injury,  resulting  in OS-induced  mitochondrial  dysfunction,  findings  also supported  in pathogenesis  studies.  This 
suggested  interventions  that would  support  mitochondrial  function  and prevent or  repair active  oxidative stress 
mediators  and led to exploratory  studies  using interventions that  target  these  areas.  These  early  intervention  studies 
included  a Phase  I/II clinical  trial of Coenzyme  Q10 (CoQ10)  by Dr. Beatrice  Golomb  and her team  at the VA in San 
Diego,  CA. In a double  blind,  placebo  controlled  crossover  study  of CoQ10,  46 veterans  with GWI who met both the 
Kansas  and CDC  case  definition  were  treated  with 100mg  or 300mg  of a high bioavailability  CoQ10  (ubiquinone) 
product  or placebo.  They  found  a significant  improvement  in men with GWI vs. placebo  using  their selected  primary 
outcome  variable,  the general  self-rated  health  (GSRH),  in a sex-stratified  analysis.  
Resul ts revealed  that women  did not see the same  degree  of improvement  and failed  to see significant 
change,  though  the sample  size was small  (7 female  veterans).  The GSRH  showed  no significant  benefit  in the 
combined -sex sample.  The 100 mg product  saw a bigger  improvement,  thought  to be secondary  to the activating 
effects  of the nighttime  dose  of the 300mg  split dose  product  when  given  as a bedtime  dose,  interfering  with quality 
of sleep.  Physical  function  (summary  performance  score,  SPS)  improved  on Q100  vs. placebo.  A rise in CoQ10 
levels  approached  significance  as a predictor  of improvement  in GSRH  and significantly  predicted  SPS 
improvement.  Among  20 symptoms  each  present  in half or  more  of the enrolled  veterans,  direction -of-difference  on 
Q100  vs. placebo  was favorable  for all except  sleep  problems;  with several  symptoms  individually  significant 
(Golomb,  et al., 2014).  Significance  for these  symptoms,  despite  the small  sample,  underscores  large  effect  sizes, 
and an apparent  relation  of key outcomes  to CoQ10  change  increases  prospects  for causality.  The authors  
concluded  that Q100  conferred  benefit  to physical  function  and symptoms  in veterans  with Gulf War illness and 
that examination  in a larger  sample  is warranted;  and that findings  from this study  could  inform  the conduct  of a 
larger  trial. The VA GWI Research  Advisory  Committee  encouraged  the research  service  to consider  conducting 
Phase  III studies  for any pilot treatment  trials that showed  initial positive  effects  on the symptoms of  GWI in Gulf War 
Veterans.  Since  few treatment  studies  to date have  shown  positive  results,  initiating  a Phase  III treatment  trial of 
CoQ10  at this time is of the utmost  importance  to providing  some  relief  to ailing  GW Veterans  who currently  have 
very few  treatment options.  
 
Relevant  Literature  on CoQ10  Mechanism  of action  
In an excellent  review  by Than,  et al. (2001),  a strong  case  was made  for the use of CoQ10  in cardiovascular  disease 
and illnesses  of low cellular  energy  states.  Coenzyme  Q10,  a lipid-soluble  benzoquinone  with a 10 isoprenyl  unit side 
chain,  is structurally  similar  to vitamin  K (Greenburg  et al., 1990).  Coenzyme  Q is distinguished  by the number  of 
isoprenoid  subu nits in the side-chains . The most  common  Coenzyme  Q in human  mitochondria  is Q10. Q refers  to the 
quinone  head  and 10 refers  to the number  of isoprene  repeats  in the tail. 
The biosynthesis  of the compound  is complex, with  the isoprenyl  side chain  deriving  from mevalonate,  the 
benzoquinone ring structure  from tyrosine, and  condensation of these  structures through  polyprenyl  transferase  
2  enzyme  activity  (Olsen,  et al., 1983).  The primary  regulation  of CoQ10  biosynthesis  is the 3-hydroxy -methylglutaryl 
coenzyme  A (HMG -CoA)  reductase  reaction,  similar  to that seen  in cholesterol  synthesis.  Coenzyme  Q10 is an 
essential  component  in the synthesis  of ATP and exhibits  both antioxidant  and membrane -stabilizing  properties.  
Present  in the inner  mitochondrial  membrane,  it serves  as an electron  transport  carrier  during  the processes  of 
respiration  and oxidative  phosphorylation,  and it has involvement  in the manufacture  of ATP.  Coenzyme  Q10 directly 
regulates  NADH  and succinate  dehydrogenase,  enabling  reversible  reactions  between  these  enzymes  in the 
mitochondrial  electron  transport  chain  (Folkers  et al, 1993;  Greenburg  et al, 1990).  Coenzyme  Q10 also may prevent 
the depletion  of metabolites  necessary  for the resynthesis  of ATP (Greenburg  et al., 1990).  The compound  must  be 
reduced  to ubiquinol  to wield  its antioxidative  function,  and supplementation  may inhibit  lipid oxidizability.  During 
supplementation  with CoQ10,  the level of lipid peroxidation  decreased  in healthy  subjects,  yet levels  of another 
antioxidant,  vitamin  E, remained  constant  (Weber  et al., 1994;  Alleva,  et al., 1995).  Coenzyme  Q10 exerts  a sparing 
effect  on vitamin  E and perhaps  more  efficiently  prevents  lipid peroxidation  by inhibiting  both its initiation  and 
propagation,  whereas  vitamin  E inhibits  only propagation  (Ermster  et al., 1993).  The membrane -stabilizing  properties  of 
CoQ10  emerge  from the reduction  of free radicals  that may cause  damage  to structural  proteins  and lipids  found  in 
membranes.  
Other  important  activities  may include  stabilization  of calcium -dependent  slow channels,  inhibition  of 
intracellular  phospholipases,  and alteration  of prostaglandin  metabolism  (Greenberg  et al. 1990).  The positive 
inotropic  effect  of CoQ10  is reported  to be similar  to the effects  of digoxin  (Murray  et al., 1996).  Coenzyme  Q10 was 
also recognized  to have  an effect  on gene  expression  that might  account  for its effects  on overall  tissue  metabolism 
and inflammation.  (Groneberg  et al., 2005;  Schmeizer  et al., 2008 ). This  is relevant,  considering  the observation  of a 
reduced  cardiac  output  in GWI subjects  a finding  more  severe  in those  with comorbid  PTSD  (Peckerman  et al., 2003).  
 
Pharmacokinetics of  CoQ10  
A pharmacokinetic  study  showed  oral administration  of CoQ10  30 mg in healthy  subjects  can significantly  increase 
the mean  peak  blood  level to about  1 µg/ml  within  an average  of 6 hours,  with a second  peak  occurring  again  at 24 
hours  after dosing  (Lucker,  1984).  These  findings  corroborate  those  of studies  in the existing  pharmacokinetic 
literature  that examined  higher  dose  (Tomono,  et al., 1986;  Yuzuhiro,  et al., 1983).  The increase  observed  in plasma 
CoQ10  levels  24 hours  after dosing  may suggest  enterohepatic  recycling  (Tomono  et al., 1986).  Maximum 
concentrations  achieved  from the administration  of 30-mg doses  either  as a meal  or capsule  in healthy  subjects  did 
not differ  significantly  (Lucker,  1984).  Administration  of 100  mg 3 times/day  achieved  a mean  steady -state  level that 
was estimated  at 5.4 µg/mL,  which  may be up to 7 times  higher  than endogenous  levels of CoQ10  (Murray,1996). 
The plasma  half-life is approximately  34 hours  and is indicative  of the low clearance  rate from plasma  and would 
support  once  a day dosing  strategies  (Overvad,  1999;  Greenberg,  1990).  
On deposition  in the liver, exogenous  CoQ10  is packaged  into low-density  lipoprotein  and very low-density 
lipoprotein  fractions  of cholesterol  and highly  concentrates  in tissues  of the  heart,  liver, and  kidneys  (Weis,  1994). 
The slow absorption  of CoQ10  from the gastrointestin al tract can be attributed  to the coenzyme's  high molecular 
weight  and low water  solubility.  Coenzyme  Q10 is a lipophilic  molecule  and therefore  can display  variability  in 
absorption  depending on  the formulation. In  a trial comparing different  formulations  that included combinations  of 
polysorbate, lecithin, or  soybean oil,  results  indicated highest bioavailability  with the soybean  oil-only formulation 
(Weis,  1994).  Preparations  of CoQ10  that contain  lipid vehicles,  such  as vegetable  oil and vitamin  E, increase 
solubility  and yield more  efficient  absorption  rates  than that of the purified  coenzyme  alone  (Chopra,  1995).  The 
extent  of hepatic  metabolism is  unknown, and  the excretion  of CoQ10  is mainly  through  the biliary  tract,  with over 
60% of an  oral dose  recovered  unchanged  in the feces  (Greenberg,  1994).  
The available  information  would  argue  for an oil based  CoQ10  supplement,  in either  the reduced  form 
(ubiquinol)  or precursor  (ubiquinone).  Because  Dr. Golomb’s  study  of CoQ10  in higher  doses  (300 mg bid) saw a 
loss of efficacy  with bid dosing,  thought  to be a result  of increased  evening  energy  and reduced  sleep  (personal 
communication),  and because  they saw the best responses  in those  with the biggest  change  from baseline  CoQ10 
plasma  levels,  we would  propose  a daily morning  dosing  strategy  with the more  highly  bioavailable  formulation, 
ubiquinol,  in a dose  substantial  enough  to have  proven  health  impact  in other  conditions  of low cellular  energy  and 
chronic o xidative stress.  
3  The role of CoQ10  in chronic  illnesses  and symptom  management:  The role of CoQ10  can be rationalized  in 
numerous  conditions  based  on its involvement  in the mitochondrial  electron  transport  chain  leading  to synthesis  of 
adenosine  5´-triphosphate  (ATP)  and on its possession  of antioxidant  and membrane -stabilizing  properties  The 
health  benefits  of CoQ10  have  been  recognized  in the medical  literature  to ameliorate  symptoms  experienced  by 
Gulf War veterans  with GWI such  as headaches,  muscle  pain,  or weakness  and cognitive  symptoms. CoQ10  has 
shown  benefits  for medical  conditions  such  as congestive  heart  failure,  essential  hypertension,  stable  angina, 
doxorubicin  cardiotoxicity, ventricular arrhythmias,  cardiomyopathy, breast  cancer,  acquired  immunodeficiency 
syndrome,  diabetes,  muscular  dystrophy,  and periodontal  disease  and as prophylaxis  for heart  surgery,  with differing 
degrees  of efficacy  (Jellin  et al., 1993) . Furthermore,  the existence  of deficient  endogenous  levels  of CoQ10  is 
associated  with a variety  of these  disorders  and is particularly  well documented  in heart  failure.  A deficiency  of 
CoQ10  appears  to be directly  related  to severity  of symptoms  and disease  (Mortenson,  1993).  Either  an increased 
requirement  or a decreased  production  of CoQ10  with advancing  age contributes  to a reduction  of the endogenous 
level of this pro-vitamin.  Low endogenous  levels  of CoQ10  can also be the result  of inadequate  nutritional  intake,  a 
genetic  defect  in biosynthesis,  or a depletion  of vitamins,  trace  elements,  or other  precursors  necessary  for CoQ10 
biosynthesis  (Murray,  1996;  Greenberg,  1990).  The CoQ10  levels  in GWI have  not been  reported  except  in the 
Golomb  study,  which  showed  highly  variable  baseline  levels.  While  an analysis  was not provided  on response  as it 
related  to baseline  levels,  degree  of change  from baseline  seemed  predictive  of best responders  (personal 
communication).  
Migraines  are a common  feature  of GWI,  and there  is some  evidence  that migraines  may be a 
mitochondrial  disorder  (Markley,  2012).  Supplementation  of CoQ10  appears  to give relief  from 
migraines,  as suggested  by a study  where  patients  who experience  migraines  took 150 mg Co Q10 
daily for three  months  and demonstrated  a 50-percent  reduction  in number  of days  with migraine  headache. 
(Rozen  et al., 2002).  Coenzyme  Q10 was superior  to placebo  for attack -frequency,  headache -days and days 
with nausea  in another  randomized  controlled  trial (Sandor  et al., 2005 ). A study  of patients  with 
cardiovascular disease  highlighted  the anti-inflammatory  and antioxidant properties of CoQ10.  In a 
randomized,  placebo -controlled  trial of coronary  artery  disease  patients,  study  results  revealed  that following  
use of CoQ10,  antioxidant  enzymes  activities  were  significantly  higher,  and markers  of inflammation were  
significantly  lower (Lee  et al., 2013).  
In another  study,  patients  with fibromyalgia  participated  in a Phase  II randomized,  double -blind,  placebo - 
controlled  trial where  CoQ10  supplementation  induced  a recovery  of inflammation,  antioxidant  
enzymes, mitochondrial biogenesis and AMPK (5' adenosine monophosphate -activated protein  kinase) gene 
expression  levels.  The study participants  demonstrated  a reduction  in pain,  tender  points,  fatigue,  
and morning tiredness.  The investigators concluded that  CoQ10  may have a potential  therapeutic effect in  fibromyalgia 
and may indicate  new potential  molecular  targets  for the therapy  of this disease  (Cordero  et al., 2013).  Further  support 
of CoQ10  supplementation  to increase  antioxidant  enzyme  activity,  reduce  oxidative  stress,  and improve  symptoms  of 
fatigue  and depression  was demonstrated in a study  of patients  diagnosed  with multiple  sclerosis (Sanoobar et  al., 
2013).  
The use of CoQ10  on the treatment  of neurodegenerative  diseases  such as Parkinson’s  and Huntington’s 
that focus  on symptoms  reveal  disappointing  results  in recent  studies  (Lin and W ang,2014).  Clinical  trials  of 
CoQ10  for Huntington’s  disease  and ALS patients  did not show  positive  results  (Kaufman  et al., 2009;  Mestre  et 
al., 2009)  A large  multicenter  study  of escalating  high dose  up to 2400  mg CoQ10  for patients  with Parkinson’s 
disease  saw no difference  in their progression  rates  symptom  or scores,  although  the treatment  was well 
tolerated  without  significant  side effects.  (Parkinson’s  Study  Group  QE3 Investigators,  2014).  In terms  of the 
effects  of CoQ10  on cognitive  performance,  several  recent  animal  studies  indicate  benefits  that encourage 
further  research  on human  subjects.  The beneficial  effects  of CoQ10  were  demonstrated  in a recent  study  of rats 
against organophosphate -induced cognitive impairments  and h ippocampal  neuronal degeneration (Binukumar et 
al., 2012),  in a GWI animal  model.  In another  study  of mice  to evaluate  the effect  of CoQ10  on the role of 
mitochondrial  functions  in cognitive  impairment,  the study  results  indicate  that CoQ10  improves  cognitive  decline 
in post-menopausal  state  by modulating  mitochondrial  functions  and oxidative  stress  (Sandhir  et al., 2014).  
Improvements  in cognitive  performance  were  indicated  in a mouse  model  of Alzheimer’s  disease  that showed 
that CoQ10  also reduces  oxidative  stress  and amyloid  pathology  (Dumont  et al., 2011).  Poorer  cognition  was 
correlated  with lower  levels  of CoQ10  in the parietal  cortex  in a study  of aged  dogs  (Martin  et al., 2011).  
4  Recognizing  the antioxidant  properties  of CoQ10  and its role in proper  mitochondrial  function,  these  studies 
support  further  research of CoQ10’s  role in cognitive health.  
 
Safety  and Tolerability  and Dosage  
Excellent  safety  and tolerability  is a common  feature  of CoQ10  clinical  trials  results  across  multiple  disease  states, 
formulations,  and dose  ranges  from 50 to 3600  mg daily.  The most  common  adverse  effects  are gastrointestinal  in 
nature  and can include  nausea,  epigastric  pain,  diarrhea,  heartburn,  and appetite  suppression.  However,  the 
prevalence  of these  adverse  effects  was less than 1% in reported  studies  (Jelin,  1999).  Gastrointestinal  effects  of 
CoQ10  may be lessened  with a dosage  reduction  or may subside  with continued  therapy. Asymptomatic  elevations  in 
serum  lactate  dehydrogenase  and hepatic  enzymes  were  observed  and may occur  with oral dosages  of CoQ10  in 
excess  of 300 mg/day;  however,  cases  of serious  hepatotoxicity  have  not been  reported  (Greenberg,  1990; 
Micromedix,  2014).  In congestive  heart  failure  studies,  clinical  relapse  was noted  on withdrawal  of CoQ10,  whereas 
reinstatement  of therapy  resulted  in improvement  (Mortenson,  1990;  Mortenson,  1985).  We selected  a formulation 
that has been  used  in prior clinical  trials in other  disease  states  and have published  safety  data,  bioavailability  data as 
well as efficacy  data (Chandran  et al., 2012; Sanmukhani  et al., 2014;  Kizhakkedath  et al., 2013; Kern,  2011).  Based 
on the literature  review  of treatment  responses  in other  illnesses  and Dr. Golomb’s  experience  we will use ubiquinol 
200 mg (the equivalent  of ubiquinone  600mg)  as a morning  dose,  to avoid  evening  side effects  of sleeplessness  and 
to optimize  its bioavailability,  after a 2 month  loading  dose  of 400 mg to restore  any deficiency  states.  
 
FDA Approvals  
We requested  a pre-IND meeting with  the FDA.  As we anticipated  the FDA waived  the need  for a full IND review. 
The nutraceutical  CoQ10  is widely  used,  and the target  of treatment  focuses  on a reduction  in symptom  severity. 
CoQ10  is a nutraceutical  that has been  evaluated  by the United  States  Food  and Drug  Administration  and approved 
as being  classified  as “GRAS”  (generally  recognized  as safe),  available  in this country  without  prescription  at the 
doses being studied.  
 
Study  Objectives  and Specific  Aims  
In this study, we  will assess  the clinical  efficacy  and safety  of CoQ10  (ubiquinol) in  200 veterans  with GWI,  in a classic 
double -blind,  randomized,  placebo -controlled  trial, with 100 participants  per treatment  arm of the study.  Subjects  will 
be recruited  at four geographically  different  sites.  
 
Objectives:  
1. To determine  the efficacy  of CoQ10  in GWI related  symptom  control;  
2. To evaluate  putative  biomarkers  for their ability  to predict  severity  and response  to therapy;  
3. To test the utility  of measures  of illness  severity  and function  as outcome  variables  in GWI.  
 
Specific  Aims:  
1. Perform  a randomized,  double  blind,  placebo  control,  Phase  III study  comparing  CoQ10  (ubiquinol)  (200 mg q 
am) to placebo,  with a 6 month  intervention  and assessment  of safety,  efficacy  and biomarker  response  to therapy;  
2. Perform  biomarker  studies  before  and after 2, 4, and 6 months  of therapy,  with blood  and saliva  collections  and 
laboratory  assessments of oxidative stress  and mitochondrial  function, CoQ10  levels, cytokine, neuropeptide, 
hormone and cell population studies;  
3. Assess  the domains  of illness  and illness  severity and  evaluate  the utility  of the  selected  instruments  for future 
clinical trials use in GWI.  
 
The primary  objective  is to assess  efficacy.  The primary  endpoint will be the SF36  physical  subscore,  selected  for 
its sensitivity  to the impact  of this illness.  We will assess  a number  of secondary  outcome  variables,  as there  are few 
large  longitudinal  studies in  GWI and this study  can provide  data on the best instruments  to utilize  in the clinical  trials 
setting,  covering  the key domains  of the illness.  Therefore,  the secondary  endpoint  instruments  will include 
objective  measures  of activity  and cognitive  function,  the Conners  CPT-3, Brief Visual  Memory  Test,  and the 
California  Verbal  Learning  Test-I, as well as self-report  instruments  to include  the SF36  mental  and total scores,  the 
Health  Symptom  Checklist  (HSC)  adapted  for severity  and frequency  scoring,  the Multidimensional  Fatigue  
5  Inventory, Checklist  Individual  Strength  (CIS),  Cognitive  Difficulties  Scale,  Pittsburgh  Sleep  Inventory,  and Brief Pain  
Inventory.  Each  of these  instruments  are well established  assessment  tools  that are validated  in complex  medical 
illnesses.  The HSC  is unique  to GWI but  is quite  similar  to the instrument  validated  in ME/CFS,  the DePaul 
Symptom  Survey  (Jason  et al 2010).  The HSC  is a list of 34 frequently  reported  health  and mental  health  symptoms 
rated  as how often  in the past 30 days  the symptoms  were  experienced.  Symptoms  from 9  body  systems  are 
assessed  (cardiac,  pulmonary,  dermatological,  gastrointestinal,  genitourinary,  musculoskeletal, neurological,  and 
psychological).  The HSC classification  method  was developed  by VA Boston  investigators  and has been  used  in the 
longitudinally  following  2,949  member  Ft. Devens,  MA Gulf War veteran  cohort  to assess  self-reported  health 
symptoms  incrementally  over the  past 24 years  (Proctor et  al., 1998;  Wolfe  et al., 1998).  It was originally  adapted 
from the 20-item health  symptom  checklist  of Bartone  et al., (1989).  Biomarkers , identified  in our earlier  GWI 
studies,  will also serve  as secondary  outcome  variables  to better  design  future  clinical  trials with  surrogate  markers 
(Whistler  et al., 2009;  Broderick  et al.; 2011;  Broderick,  et al., 2012;  Broderick,  et al., 2013).  We have  reported  that 
SF36  measures  for physical  function,  physical  limit, pain,  and vitality  cluster  together  and were  linked  to IL-1α, IL-2 
and IL-5 levels.  MFI indicators  were  more  diffuse  in their association  with reduced  motivation,  for example,  standing 
apart  and correlating  positively  with changes  in IL-4, 12 and IL-10. SF36  general  score  also stood  apart  and 
correlated  negatively  with levels  of IL-10. Of the 6 cytokines  that remained  in the sub-network,  IL-10 had the 
broadest  effects  on severity  with direct  connections  to 6 symptom  constructs  including  SF36  social  function  which 
itself supported  a cluster  of 10 symptoms.  We propose  to include  a cytokine  multiplex  assay  to assess  pro- 
inflammatory,  TH1,  Th2, Th17  and anti-inflammatory  cytokines  as putative  biomarkers  in GWI.  We will also assay 
CoQ10  levels,  oxidative  stress  and other  mitochondrial  measures.  Two other  objective  domains  of illness  will be 
assessed.  Activity  measurement  using  the FitBit  will be utilized  as an objective  marker  of activity  and an indirect 
measure  of sleep  efficiency.  This measurement  can also be used  to assess  relapse  after activity  rates  by looking  for 
rest pattern  responses  after bursts  of sustained  activity.  Secondary  outcomes  will include  measures  from a 
previously  validated  assessment  of cognitive  function  in GW veterans  (Sullivan  et al., 2003).  
 
Research  Design  and Methods  
 
Study  Design  and Population . The proposed  project utilizes a  multi-site, Phase  III double  blind, placebo  controlled 
design  of CoQ10  in a total of 200  1991  Gulf War veterans  at four VA clinical  study  sites:  Miami  (n=50  veterans), 
Boston  (n=50  veterans),  Bronx  (n=50  veterans),  and Minneapolis  (n=50  veterans)  recruited  from among veterans 
attending  VA GW clinics  The study  includes  a large  number  of GWI cases  to enhance  the study’s  power  to evaluate 
GWI subgroups  of potential  importance  (e.g. subgroups  associated  with illness  severity,  exposure  history,  and 
gender).  The Phase  III placebo  control  clinical  trial will be design ed as a 6-month  intervention  in a group  A to group  
up B comparison.  With this study  design  we will compare  groups  A and B, in addition  response  rate across  3 
assessment  times  and/or  recovery  from any adverse  events  will be studied.  Dosing  will reflect  the standard  dosing 
used  in illnesses  that presume  mitochondrial  dysfunction  or oxidative  stress  mechanisms  for relevant  and 
associated  conditions  we are using  a nutraceuticals  (ubiquinol)  w i t h established  safety  profiles  at doses  that 
exceed  the proposed  treatment  range,  and efficacy  profiles established  in other  diseases.  
 
Study  Surveys  and Questionnaires  
The Structured  Clinical  Interview for  the DSM -IV Axis  I Disorders  (SCID -I) (First,  et al.,  1996):  Computer 
driven  interview  format  assessment  to diagnose  current  and lifetime  DSM -IV Axis 1 psychiatric  disorders.  These 
include  mood,  anxiety,  psychotic,  substance  abuse,  eating  and somatoform  disorders.  (Staff  administered,  staff 
trained  by Dr. Krengel  and Sullivan’s  group,  Boston  VAMC/BU)  In this Phase  III study,  there  will be a broad  panel 
of variables  measured.  These  will include  the GWI Health  Symptom  Checklist  (HSC),  a list of the domains 
noted  in the GWI case  definitions  (previously  determined  by factor  analysis),  with a visual  analog  severity  scale, 
including  current,  worst  day and best day scales  which  we have  further  adapted  to include  frequency  of symptom. 
Further  emphasis  on the domains  of GWI will include  measures  of biomarker  studies.  Multidimensional  Fatigue 
Inventory  (MFI)  (Smets,  et al, 1995).  The Pittsburgh  sleep  inventory  (short  form)  measuring  quality  of sleep, 
patient  assessment  of Pain  (by a 10-cm visual  analog  scale,  in which  0 = no pain and 10 = the worst  pain 
possible),  (Note  that the PE also includes  a quantitative  tender  point  evaluation),  Medical  Outcomes  Study  36- 
item short -form  health  survey  (SF-36) (Ware  and Sherborne,  1992):  This instrument  is a general  indicator  of 
6  health  status  (function and  well-being) with physical  and emotional  subscales.  The SF-36 assesses  health -related 
quality  of life in 8 areas:  1.) Limitations  in physical  activities  because  of health  problems;  2.) Limitations  in social 
activities  because  of physica l problems;  3.) Limitations  in usual  role activities  because  of physical  health 
problems;  4.) Bodily  pain;  5.) General  mental  health;  6.) Limitations  in usual  role activities  because  of emotional 
problems;  7.) Vitality  (energy  and fatigue);  and 8.) General  health  perceptions.  For the Gynecologic 
Questionnaire , female  subjects  are asked  to complete  this questionnaire  to assess  routine  gynecologic 
parameters  and time of assessment  as it relates  to menstrual  cycle.  In our operationalization,  we sync the first on 
site (T0) assessment  with estrous  phase  in menstruating  subjects.  Ham -D, Ham -A (Hamilton,  1959)  measuring 
depression  and anxiety;  Davidson  Trauma  Scale  (Davidson  et al, 1997)  is designed  to assess  symptoms  of 
PTSD  in three  clusters:  intrusion,  avoidance,  and hyperarousal.  While  not exclusion  criteria  unless  hospitalized  for 
PTSD  in the prior 3 years,  this information  is collected  to establish  subpopulations  and inform  the understanding  of 
results.  Gulf War Exposures  Questionnaire  includes  questions  regarding  military  service  and career  and 
experiences  in the Persian  Gulf region.  Cognitive  function  will be assessed,  as described  in Table  2. Another 
objective  measure,  the activity  monitor,  Fitbit  counts  steps,  stairs,  heart  rate, periods  of inactivity,  that can 
tabulate  this indirect  measure  of hours  of sleep,  restless  periods  of sleep,  awake  periods  during  sleep,  and naps. 
For the purpose  of this study,  it will be worn  on the wrist continuously  for 28 weeks.  It does  not need  to be 
removed  during  water  exposure  (swimming,  showering,  etc.),  and will be given  to the participant  as a gift for 
participating  in the study.  In earlier  studies  using  actigraph,  non-adherence  due to forgetfulness  after bathing 
compromisted  the results.  The Fitbit  data has near 100%  compliance  in current  studies  (Klimas,  personal 
communication)  and has the advantage  of continuously  updating  the data in Wi-Fi environments,  reducing  the risk 
of lost  data due to lost devices.  Participants  will also keep  a sleep  and activity  diary  as a validation  step.  
Autonomic  nervous  system  measures include  measurement  of blood  pressure  and heart  rate in laying  and 
standing  positions.  Subjects  are recumbent  for 30 minutes  and stand  for five minutes  and ten minutes.  Blood 
pressure  and heart  rate are measured  at lying and after five and ten minutes  of standing.  For the virtual  platform, 
autonomic  measures,  pressure  point,  lymph  node  and physical  exam  will not be performed  and laboratory  tests will 
be combined  for the screening  and baseline  visits.  During  the screening  visit, (after  signed  consent  is received),  the 
tests  will include  all baseline  tests  and the exclusion  tests.  The Coordinator  will instruct  the virtual  participant  on 
use of a  personal blood pressure  monitor.  
 
 
Table  1. Assessment  Platform  and Timeline  
 
Laboratory  
Variables  Screening  
on-site T0 
on-site 4 wk 
on-line 8 wk 
on-site 12 wk 
on-line 16 wk 
on-site 20 wk 
on-line 24 wk 
on-site 28 wk 
on- 
line 
CBC with diff          
CMP   
         
U/A  
         
Cortisol  series           
 
 
measures           
HPG axis          
HPT axis          
CoQ10           
Exclusion  HIV, Hep 
B, C, RA, CBC,  RF, 
LFTS,  CRP,  HbA1c   
         
Stored  sample  for 
biomarker  studies           

7   
Self-Report  Variables  on- 
site on- 
site on- 
line on- 
site on- 
line on- 
site on- 
line on- 
site on- 
line 
MFI          
Sx checklist           
Pain          
Pittsburgh  Sleep           
SF 36          
HAM  A          
HAM  D          
Davidson  Trauma           
SCID           
Gyn Questionnaire           
 
 
 
Objective  Clinical 
Measures  on- 
site on- 
site on 
- on- 
site on- 
lin on- 
site on- 
line on 
- on- 
line 
Cognitive  Testing    
   
   
   
  
Fitbit  Activity  
measurement   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
The cognitive  test battery  to be used  assesses  the functional  domains  of sustained  attention, 
psychomotor  function,  visual  memory  and verbal  memory.  The battery  includes  tests  shown  to have  
high specificity and  sensitivity  for detecting  changes  in cognitive  function  between  veterans  with and 
without  Gulf War Illness.  Sustained  attention  is measured  by the number  of errors  on a test of 
continuous  performance (CPT),  a computer -assisted  test from Conners  et al., 2013.  This instrument  is 
widely  used  in the field of occupational  health, and  represents  adaptations of traditional  cognitive 
instruments  for computerized stimulus  presentation  and recording  of responses.  The Conners  CPT-3 
has reliable  psychometric properties and  has demonstrated validity  in epidemiological  and laboratory 
studies. Psychomotor functioning  is assessed  by reaction  time on the CPT test. Previous  studies  of Gulf 
War veterans  have docu mented  changes  in perceptual  motor  functions  and motor  speed  (Proctor  et al., 
2006;  Toomey  et al., 2009; Chao et al., 2010).  
Treatment -seeking  GWVs  have  had difficulty  in the areas  of acquisition  and retrieval  (Sullivan  et al., 
2003).  Therefore,  we will examine  verbal  and nonverbal  memory  with the use of the Brief Visual  Memory 
Test (BVMT;  Benedict,  1996)  and the California  Verbal  Learning  Test-II (CVLT -II) and an alternate  version 
(Delis  et al., 2000)  that measures  total recall  trials  1 to 5 (raw score)  and long-delay  free recall  (raw score). 
For the virtual  platform,  the BVMT  will not be performed,  as it must  be administered  in person.  
The advantage  of these  memory  tests  is that they have  multiple  alternate  but psychometrically 
comparable  versions  that can be used  during  the different  follow -up sessions,  thus reducing  practice 
effects.  Differences  in cognitive  measures  will be considered  secondary  outcome  measures  in this 
CoQ10  treatment  trial. A description  of the  cognitive  domains,  the complete  cognitive  test battery,  and 
the study  instruments  and procedures  is presented  in Table 2.  

8  Table  2. Cognitive  Test Battery  
Test Name  Description  Outcome  
I. Tests  of Attention,  Vigilance  and Tracking  
Conners  Continuous  Performance 
Test (CPT -3; Conners  et al., 2013)  Target  letter  embedded  in series  of 
distractors; to assess sustained 
attention  and reaction time.  Reaction 
Time 
Total 
Omission  II. Tests  of Verbal  and Visual  Memory   
California  Verbal  Learning  Test 
(CVLT -II; Delis et al., 2000)  List of 16  nouns  from 4 categories 
presented  over multiple  learning trials 
with recall  after interference;  assesses 
memory  and learning strategies.  Total  Trials 
1-5 Long 
Delay  
Brief Visual  Memory  Test 
(Benedict, 1996)  Drawing  test of 6 geometric  figures; 
measures visual memory recall.  Total  recall 
and 
placement  
score.  
 
Selection  of CoQ10  product  study  medication  and composition  of placebo  
The decision  to use the reduced  form of CoQ10  (ubiquinol) over  the oxidized  form (ubiquinone)  was 
based  on the following  factors:  (1) Ubiquinol  accounts  for approximately  95% of the total CoQ10 
plasma  concentration;  (2) Ubiquinol  is responsible  for the antioxidant  activity  in the mitochondria  and 
lipid membranes;  (3) Ubiquinol  has a higher  oral bioavailability  than ubiquinone  resulting  in higher 
plasma  concentrations.  The active  formulation  will be soft gelatin  capsules  containing  200 mg of 
CoQ10  (ubiquinol)  emulsified  with diglycerol  monooleate,  rapeseed  oil, soy lecithin,  and beeswax 
and the matching  placebo  formulation  will be soft gelatin  capsules  containing  all the above 
ingredients  excluding  CoQ10.  We will  be administering  one 400 mg ubiquinol  capsules  for 2 months 
followed  by 200 mg per  day for the remaining 4  months  of the clinical  trial. The active  and placebo  soft 
gelatin  capsules  will l be provided  by Kaneka  Nutrients,  an FDA registered,  NSF International  and 
Natural  Products  Association (NPA)  Good  Manufacturing Practices  (GMP) certified  facility  that 
manufactures  United  States  Pharmacopeia  (USP)  compliant  supplements.  The purity  and stability  of 
the CoQ10  soft gelatin  capsules  will be monitored  by the VA CSP CRPCC  Laboratory  following  USP 
standards.  
 
Pre-Enrollment  Screening : Case  definition:  In our prior work  and in Beatrice  Golomb’ s  work  using 
CoQ10  in GWI,  we have  used  concurrent  CDC  and Kansas  case definitions  (Steele, 2000;  Fukuda  et 
al., 1998).  The more  rigorous  Kansas  case  definition  captures  at least  a third of the deployed 
veterans  from the first Gulf War (Research  Advisory  Committee  Report,  2014,  page  18), and the 
CDC  captures  about 10%  more.  The key difference  between  the two is the factor  analysis  based 
Kansas  definition  weighted  severity  and frequency  of symptoms.  The Kansas  definition  requires 
deployment  to the theater  of operations  between  August  8, 1990  and July 31, 1991  with multiple  and 
moderately  severe  symptoms  (> 6 months)  in at least  3 of 6 symptom  domains;  excluding  serious 
medical/psychiatric  diagnoses  that account  for symptoms  or preclude  accurate  symptom  reporting.  
The 6 domains  are fatigue/sleep  problems;  somatic  pain symptoms;  neuro/cognitive/mood 
symptoms;  gastrointestinal  symptoms;  respiratory  symptoms,  and skin symptoms.  The exclusion 
criteria  as modified  by Steele  in 2014  allow  for common  comorbid  conditions.  
 
Due to the aging  of the Gulf War I cohort,  we will adjust  the restrictions  of the exclusion  criteria 
imposed  by the Kansas  case  definition  to allow  for recruitment  of veterans  who are diagnosed  with 
specific  well-controlled, chronic  conditions  that may be typical  of an  aging  population.  We will defer  to 
the clinician  at each  site to decide  whether  the conditions  meet  the relaxed  Kansas  exclusions,  
9  according  to specific  guidelines.  This change  follows  the principles  recommended  by experts  and 
funded  Investigators  in Gulf War Illness  research.  
 
The relaxed  Kansas  exclusions  include  the following:  
1) Allowance  for normal  illnesses  of aging,  if the conditions  are treated  and are in demonstrable 
stable  and normal  ranges  at the time of screening  and assessment.  
2) Allowance  of stable  comorbid  conditions  include  PTSD,  MDD,  and mild TBI that have 
not required  hospitalization  in the 2 years  prior to recruitment.  Severe  TBI is excluded.  
 
The changes  to the entry  criteria  include:1)  Diabetes —include  if blood  sugar  controlled  over the past 
2 years;  2) Heart  disease  (stable  hypertension  is acceptable) —if not had condition  in the past 2 
years;  3) Arthritis —depending  on type:  include  for osteoarthritis  and exclude  for rheumatoid 
arthritis;4)Seizure  disorder —include  if not treated  or not had any seizures  in the past 2 years;  5) 
Cancer —include  if not treated  in the past 3 years;  6) Skin cancer —include  if Stage  1 or treated  by 
excision  only; 7) Liver  disease —include  if not had condition  in the past 2 years;  8) Kidney  disease — 
include  if not  had this condition  in the past 2 years.  
 
Entry  Criteria  
We will study  200 veterans  with GWI,  100 in each  group  (intervention  or placebo).  The inclusion 
criteria  will follow  the case definition  by Steele  (Kansas  Case  Definition  described ) but will be 
expanded  to accept  veterans  as eligible  participants  who possess  specific,  well-controlled  chronic 
conditions.  All subjects  will be between  35 and 70 years  old, in good  health  by medical  history  prior 
to 1990,  and currently  have  no exclusionary  diagnoses  that could  reasonably  explain  the symptoms 
of their fatiguing  illness  and their severity, using  the exclusion  criteria  best described  in the paper 
by Reeves  et al. 2003,  which  clarifies exclusionary  conditions  for complex  multisymptom  illness 
and agrees  with Steele’s  recent  unpublished  modification.  This includes  exclusion  of major 
depression  with psychotic  or melancholic  features , schizophrenia,  bipolar  disorder,  delusional 
disorders,  dementias  of any  type and no hospitalization  in the past 2 years  for alcoholism or  drug 
abuse.  Medical  conditions  excluded  include  organ  failure,  defined  rheumatologic  inflammatory 
disorders,  chronic  active  infections  such as  HIV, hepatitis  B and C, transplant,  and primary  sleep 
disor ders.  Medications  that could  potentially  impact  immune  function  will be excluded  (e.g., 
steroids,  immunosuppressives; as  well as nutraceuticals that are formulated  to impact 
mitochondrial  function  or oxidative  stress).  Morphine  derivatives  that are used  daily will be 
disqualifiers  in in this study.  PRN  use of less  strong  pain medications  is one of the  variables  that 
can be studied,  thus medications such  as tramadol  or codeine can  be monitored  for frequency  of 
use as an indication  of CoQ10’s impact  on chronic  pain. Common  multivitamin preparations  will 
be allowed  if taken  without  change  throughout  the protocol.  Known  allergy  to CoQ10  and/or 
inactive  ingredients  of active  and placebo  soft gelatin  capsules  or current  use of Coumadin  (given 
the vitamin  K structural  similarity  of CoQ10)  will also be excluded.  In the event  a subject  tests 
positive  for an infectious  disease  or medical  condition  at the screening  visit, he/she  will be 
counseled  and referred  to the appropriate  service  within  the Veterans  Administration  Medical 
Center  (VAMC)  or to their primary  health  care provider.  All reportable  diseases  will be reported  as 
required  by hospital  and state  guidelines.  If our psychological  exams  indicate  that the participant 
is at risk from a mental  health  perspective,  the individual  will be referred  for further  care. Subjects 
need  to not take the supplement  CoQ10  (ubiquinone  or ubiquinol)  for at least  3 months  before 
study  entry;  as well as other  nutraceuticals  formulated  to impact  mitochondrial  function.  They 
agree  to leave  any other  supplements  unchanged  in their regimen  throughout  the course  of the 6 
month intervention.  
 
The clinical  and laboratory  testing is  performed  without  knowledge  of the subjects’  group 
membership,  the group  A vs B true condition will remain blinded  throughout  the study  until its 
conclusion.  There  are two treatment  conditions:  CoQ10  (ubiquinol) 400mg for  2 months  followed  
10  by 200mg  maintenance  for 4 months and  placebo  taken  once a  day in the morning with  food.  The 
subject  schedule  includes  5 on-site assessments.  On-site assessments  include  the screening  visit 
with informed consent, the drug initiation visit, an 8 week visit and the 16 and 24 -week visits.  In 
addition, there  is a web based  self-report assessment  given every  4 weeks  throughout the 
treatment  period  and at 4 weeks  after completion  of the study  drug.  A member  of the research  team 
may contact  the participant by  phone to remind him or her to complete the  surveys on the 
computer.  Subjects  will also utilize  an activity  monitor  (FitBit) device  to assess  activity  and sleep 
throughout the  study  period through 7  months. (Assessments, see Table  1.) 
 
The CSR&D  Data Monitoring Committee  (DMC) and  the local VA pharmacist will  have  the authority 
to break the blind and recommend stopping the study should one  group have evidence of adverse 
effects or significant efficacy in group A or B that would ethically require t he blind to be broken. 
Further  details  regarding  the interim  efficacy  analysis  and formal  efficacy  stopping  rules  are provided 
in the statistical section below. There will be no formal stopping rules for safety; the DMC may 
recommend  stopping  the study  for any concerns  they feel jeopardize  the safety  of patients  in the trial 
regardless of resulting p -values. The research pharmacist will also have access to an electronic 
emergency  unblinding  system  developed  by the CSP Pharmacy  Center  should  an individual  subject 
event require the blind be broken to access appropriate car e (e.g., a toxic reaction to a product 
requiring treatment). This decision would follow institutional guidelines, following a discussion with 
the treating  clinician.  All subjects  will have  a physical  examination,  medical  history,  and will be given 
a battery  of psychometric questionnaires.  
 
Recruitment  Process  and Informed  Consent  
Gulf War veterans  will be recruited  at all four VA clinical  sites: Miami, Boston, Bronx,  and 
Minneapolis.  Miami VA study staff also will recruit participants using a virtual platform. Subject 
recruitment will  be the responsibility  of the clinical  research  staff and each  VA site investigator. 
Subjects  are recruited  by several  methods:  discussions  with their physician  in the GWI clinic,;  in 
response  to brochures  that are  handed  out by study  staff at  veteran  events in  the community; 
directed  to our research  personnel  by their primary  care providers  who are made  aware  of our work 
in CME  lectures  or seminars; through  the use of social  media  as described  by Dr. 
Golomb’ s  group  in a recent  paper  (Erickson  2013);  and through  direct  contact  with veterans  who 
have  been  assessed  through  the VA registry,  using  a phone  screen  (scripted)  contact.  Prior  to 
enrollment in  the study, all  subjects will be  fully informed  about  the nature  of the  study  and sign 
an informed  consent  document.  The initial  contact  will include  a description  of the study  protocol 
including  surveys,  cognitive  assessments,  blood  draws  (approximately  ½ cup),  time required,  and 
reimbursement for their time and effort.  
 
Informed  consent  will be obtained  by the study  investigator  or by an IRB-approved  delegate  after a 
screening  interview,  but prior to the initiation  of any study  procedures.  Subjects  will be given  a local 
telephone  number  and will have  an opportunity  to ask questions  about  the procedures.  They  will be 
informed  that their decision  to or not to  participate  will have  no bearing  on their medical  care and 
that, if they  choose  to participate,  they may withdraw  at any  time without loss  of VA  benefits  to 
which they  are entitled.  There  is no coercion; potential subjects  are given  the opportunity  to ask 
questions,  take home  materials  that accurately  reflect  the study  protocol,  and volunteer  or not 
without  impacting  their  relationship  with providers.  For the virtual  platform,  Miami  VA research  staff 
will mail 2 copies of the  informed  consent to  the prospective participant. Once  the signed  copy  is 
received,  the Miami VA research  staff will contact  the participant to  initiate study  procedures. A 
consent  form will  be mailed  to a potential  participant only  if he/she  is interested  in the study. If the 
individual  does  not return  a signed  consent  form to the Coordinator,  the individual  will demonstrate 
that he/she  has opted  to not participate  in the study.  Subjects  are compensated  for their travel  and 
effort in small part.  
11  After  a screening visit,  they are compensated $125  for assessment  at Basel ine and 3 follow -up 
visits  that involve  relatively  lengthy  self-report  instruments,  a physical  exam,  a cognitive 
assessment  fitting,  given  an activity  meter  with instructions  and a blood  draw.  This initial  visit 
requires  3-4 hours  to complete.  They  return  for additional  visits  that focus  on cognitive  testing  and 
a brief physical  exam  at month  2, 4, and 6. For the virtual  platform,  Miami  VA research  staff will ask 
the participant  to complete  the cognitive  testing  online  at baseline,  2, 4, and 6. At these  visits,  the 
Miami  VA Nurse  Coordinator  will ask the same  health  status  and medication  questions  via 
telephone,  in place  of the physical  exam  procedures.  At the 6-month  visit, the Nurse  Coordinator 
will complete  the end of study  procedures  and ask the participant  to return  any unused  medications 
to the Miami VA via mail.  
 
During the consent procedure, subjects will be informed that genetic testing will be performed and 
that samples of blood will be stored at the Miami VAMC research laboratory  for la ter analyses.  We 
will notify subjects that names and addresses will be kept and can be linked to their identification 
numbers  for later contact and to  allow  subjects access to laboratory  data that may  be useful in  their 
clinical care. On completion of the  study, samples and clinical  data will  be de -identified and 
biorepository samples to be used in future studies requiring informed consent will include genetic 
testing.  Informed  consent documents will  be submitted  to the individual  VAMC  IRB for approval  and 
oversight. After giving informed consent, subjects will be scheduled for clinical assessment at the 
participating VAMC or via telephone interview with the Miami VA research team using the virtual 
platform. Those me eting the study requirements will then be randomized in a 1:1 manner to the 
treatment or  control  (placebo)  condition;  randomization  will be stratified  by study  center  and gender. 
The CSP Pharmacy  Center  will use an electronic  randomization  and drug assignment  system similar 
to the system  used  for most  CSP studies,  based  on the program  developed  by this study’s  statistician. 
The research pharmacy will work with the local study coordinators to dispense study drug and 
placebos.  In order  to reduce  variat ion in the data,  all laboratory  testing  will be done  at the Miami  VAMC. 
Samples will be sent via overnight express. For the virtual platform, samples will be drawn and 
packed by phlebotomists at Quest Laboratories in the participant’s local area  and shippe d via 
overnight express for analysis at the Miami VAMC.  
 
Gulf War Registry  recruitment  
It is critical  that the recruitment projected  in this study  be on timeline, in order  to complete  the study 
in the 3 year timeframe. Prior clinical trials studies have suffered  from difficulties with recruitment, 
often because the per site recruitment targets were ambitious, access to the study population 
limited, or  studies were understaffed. For that reason,  we ha ve paid attention to  all of these  issues, 
performing this study across 4 sites with established track records of successful recruitment. In 
addition, we have included a national recruiter  working from the national and regional registry, 
contacting potentia l subjects and performing scripted screening interviews to refer to the study.  A 
similar  strategy  was recently  employed  by the Synergy  trial, fully recruiting  and completing  a similarly 
powered  (number  of subjects)/number of sites study in just 18 months. Thus, the study population 
will be drawn from  established GWI populations from 4 VAs with a track record of successful 
recruitment  for clinical studies.  
 
The PI, Dr. Klimas, will  seek a  DUA  to access  the national  Gulf War Registry  list. After  gaining 
access,  the Registry  Recruiter  will mail an introductory  letter  to the GW veteran.  Upon  response, 
the Registry  Recruiter  will call the veteran  by telephone  to discuss  the study  eligibility  and then will 
mail eligible veterans  a study  packet  containing information  about  the study  and directions  to the 
study  site. The Registry  Recruiter  will coordinate  scheduling an  appointment and  travel 
arrangements,  if necessary.  After  reporting  to the clinic  site, veterans  will be asked  for consent  to 
participate,  after being  fully informed  about  the study,  including  risks and human  subjects’ 
protections.  
12  Screening  and assessment  procedures  
Prior to enrollment  in the study,  subjects  will undergo  a screening  visit. Subjects  will be conse nted 
and screened  for exclusion  criteria  and symptoms.  For the virtual  platform,  the Nurse  Coordinator 
will conduct the  screening via telephone.  
 
Procedure  if Psychiatric  Problem  is Discovered  During  Assessment  
1. If the Research  Coordinator  or Principal  Investigator  assesses  a risk to the participant,  she 
will walk with the  participant  to the Miami VA ER  for evaluation of suicidal ideation.  The 
research team will follow  the plan  submitted with the original amendment (see  attached).  
If the  Research  Coordinator or PI assesses  a risk during the telephone  interview  on the 
virtual  platform,  the call will be transferred  to the VA Suicide  Prevention  hotline  according  to 
procedures outlin ed in the Psychological Safety Plan.  
2. In the case  where  a participant  displays  a psychiatric  problem  that is known  to his or her 
clinician as noted in CPRS, then  the research  coordinator will place a note  in the study 
file specifying that the  patient was excluded  from this research  study.  
3. If the  test results  indicate  a psychiatric problem  that is not noted in CPRS, the research 
coordinator  will assess  the urgency  of the situation  while  the potential  partici pant is in the 
clinic.  
a. If the  patient’s behavior/mental health status is deemed  to be emergent or urgent,  the 
research  coordinator will walk the patient to  the ER at the  Miami VA  for immediate 
treatment and  will stay with the  patient until services are  rendered. The Miami VA  ER 
and/or  After -Hours  Mental  Health  Staff will conduct  an assessment  and management  of 
distressed  veterans who need assistance  during the assessment or call after hours.  
b. If the  psychiatric problem is non -urgent, the  research coordinator will make  a note in 
the research  study  file and will place  a note in CPRS  indicating  a referral  for follow -up 
with the patient’s primary care physician at the VA. If the patient does not have a 
primary  care physician  at the VA, the research  team  member  will arrange  for one to be 
assigned. The Research  Coordinator will be responsible to follow  up with the  patient 
in order  to provide  continuity  of care  as needed  and to confirm  that the patient  follows 
up with the primary care physician.  
 
Screening  labs 
Screening  labs as outlined  will be shipped  to the Miami  lab. This will include  a history  and physical 
exam; blood  tests directed at detecting conditions,  which would explain  the severity  of the illness 
and thus be exclusionary ( e.g. untreated hypothyroidism, severe liver disease, anemia etc.). 
Additional  blood  tests  that are being  evaluated to bet ter understand  the illness or develop  the data 
needed  to prove their utility  as surrogates  for severity  of illness. Blood volume at any  one visit will 
not exceed 120 ml (8 tablespoons). Risk of blood draw includes local bruising and  vasovagal 
responses  to phlebotomy (fainting). In the on -site initiation visit as well as the week 8,16, and 24 
week  visits, the  subject  will have  a brief physi cal exam  emphasizing  vital signs,  autonomic  function 
(lying and  10 minute  stand BP and P), and trigger  point assessment. For the virtual platform, the 
subject will not have this brief physical  exam.  
 
For the virtual  platform,  the Miami  VA research  team  will ship collection  boxes  directly  to the 
participant.  Laboratory  tests will be combined  for the screening  and baseline  visits.  During  the 
screening  visit, (after  signed  consent  is received),  the tests  will include  all baseline  tests  and 
the exclusion  tests. Samples  will be drawn and packed  by phlebotomists at  Quest 
Laboratories in the participant’s local  area and shipped  via overnight express  to Miami VA.  
 
The subject  will be given  a web link to  the REDCap  platform  of self-administered  questionnaires  to 
be completed  within  48 hours  prior to the drug initiation  visit. Scoring  will follow  standardized  scales.  
13  During  the screening  visit, the subject  will be taught  the proper  technique  for using  the activity 
monitor,  assign  and practice  the web login  for the REDCap  based  platform  by performing  the core 
assessments  on the computer  in the office,  assisted  by research  staff as needed,  and perform  the 
studies  that require  a face-to-face interaction  (SCID).  The SCID  will be performed  by telephone  for 
the virtual  platform.  They  also complete  the following  standardized  scales  either  at home  on a 
weblink  within  4 days  of each  scheduled  assessment  or on site (cognitive  testing  is always  on site). 
All subjects  wear an  activity  monitor  from the first assessment  throughout  the 6-month  period,  which 
links in any wireless  environment  to update  the activity  / sleep  data files. For the virtual  platform,  all 
assessments  will be completed  via the telephone  interview  format  or via online  surveys  in the 
REDCap  platform.  The research  staff will  mail the Fitbit directly  to the subject’s  home,  after the 
screening  interview  and satisfactory  completion  of the laboratory  tests  and assessment  forms  that 
confirm eligibility.  
 
Medication  review:  review  for exclusionary  meds,  document  all medications  and over the 
counter supplements.  
 
Screening  blood  draw:  TSH,  ANA,  RF, CMP,  CBC,  ESR,  HIV serology,  Hep and Hep C, CRP, 
Hemoglobin  A1c for screening  purposes.  Females  will also have  a pregnancy  test. The focus  is 
on exclusionary  conditions.  A sample  also will be drawn  for the biorepository.  
 
Informed  Consent  for Screening  
The research staff members who conduct the screening  will administer informed consent prior to 
the initiation  of testing. An introductory informed consent  script that  informs  study participants 
about  the study, their  rights, the  randomization of groups  to receive  the study  medication  or the 
placebo,  study -related  laboratory  tests, cognitive test procedures,  and the surveys on  the REDCap 
database.  This document will  be read to participants before  beginning the screening tests. A 
separate document  will be recorded  for each  potential  participant. After  guiding the  potential 
participant  through  the informed  consent  topics,  the interviewer will  ask the  participant  to sign the 
written  consent and  will g ive a copy  to the participant. For the virtual platform, Miami VA research 
staff will mail 2 copies of the informed  consent  to the prospective  participant.  Once  the signed 
copy  is received,  the Miami  VA research staff will contact the participant to initia te study 
procedures.  A consent  form will be mailed  to a potential  participant  only if he/she  is interested  in the 
study. If the  individual does not  return a signed consent  form to the Coordinator,  the individual  will 
demonstrate  that he/she  has opted  to not participate in the study.  
 
After the informed consent process,  it will be verified and documented whether the participant 
meets  the inclusion/exclusion  criteria  for the study.  The interview  will terminate  if it is determined 
that the participant is ineligible. Only once informed consent has been obtained  from the study 
subject will the  subject be  considered to  be enrolled in the study. The list of subjects will  reside  on 
the respective VA  medical  center  network drive and will be secure d in compliance with  all VA 
confidentiality  an d information  security requirements  in the  investigator’s file for  each study. For 
the virtual platform, no  data,  except  that which  is necessary for  scheduling  will be collected  prior 
to receiving  the signed  informed  consent.at  the Miami  VA. This information  will include  that the 
prospective participant has  a primary care clinician and receives services at a specific VA medical 
center.  The Coordinator  will document  this information  during  the prescreen  telephone  contact  and 
will not mail an informed consent to a veteran who does not have a primary care clinician. All 
participants will be required to be enrolled at the VA, regardless of whether they are recruited to 
participate in on -site visits or in tel ephone visits using the virtual platform. Should the veteran 
experience psychological distress during the study visits, he or she will be referred for services at 
the VA medical center.  
14  Enrollment  
Potential  participants  will be considered  to be enrolled  in the study  upon  meeting  eligibility 
criteria,  completion  of written  informed  consent,  satisfactory  completion  of screening  laboratory 
tests.  No data,  except  that which  is necessary  for scheduling  will be collected  prior to informed 
consent . 
 
Laboratory  Specimens  and Evaluations  
During the course of this study, clinical laboratory specimens will be collected for research 
purposes.  In order to determine eligibility for study participation, the subject will be consented and 
a screening lab test will be performed to make a diagnostic determination regarding GWI status 
and to evaluate  the presence or absence of  exclusionary medical cond itions. For the virtual 
platform,  the Miami VA  research  team  will ship collection  boxes  directly  to the participant. Samples 
will be drawn and  packed  by phlebotomists  at Quest  Laboratories  in the participant’s  local area 
and shipped  via overnight express  for analysis at the Miami VAMC. The  health  assessment also 
will consist  of a medical  history,  physical  examination,  and laboratory  testing  listed  in Table  1. 
 
Protocol  for Blood  Samples. At each  of the clinical  sites,  blood  samples  will be obtained  from 
each  subject  for the tests  shown  in Table  1 as well as the  study  sample  storage  for batched 
assays.  
 
Appropriate  samples  for CBC, CMP, and  U/A are sent to the Miami  Lab. Whole  blood  samples  are 
collected  from the patients,  according  to the outline  shown  in Table  3. The blood  samples  are to 
be collected  in afternoon  and shipped  by overnight  carrier  to the lab at the Miami  VA Medical 
Center.  Salivary  samples  will be collected  4 times  over 24 hours  and stored  frozen  at the sites,  to 
be shipped on  dry ice in batches to Miami VA.  
 
Table  3. Blood  Samples  each  onsite  visit 
 Serum  Plasma  PBMC  
Tubes 
Total:  64 ml one 10 ml red top 
(siliconized)  two 7 ml purple  top 
EDTA  four10  ml green 
tops (sodium  
 
Types  of samples  and storage  requirements  
1. Peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells are separated  from blood  and cryopreserved  according 
required  protocol.  Viability  and cell count  is determined  and aliquots  are placed  in freezer 
vials and  stored  in liquid nitrogen  or at -800C as required  by protocol.  
2. Plasma  is separated  from the cellular  component  of blood  by centrifugation  and stored 
in required  aliquots  at -800C. 
3. Serum  is separated  from the clot by centrifugation  and stored  in required  aliquots  at -400C. 
 
Monitoring  of freezers  All mechanical  freezers  are connected  to emergency  outlets.  If a freezer 
goes  down,  an alarm  goes  off in the building engineering section  and lab personnel  are 
immediately  notified.  In addition,  the lab personnel  check  the interior  temperature  each  day and 
record  it on a chart  attached  to the freezer  door.  If the building  power  is disrupted,  the freezers  are 
automatically  connected  to the emergency  generator  system.  Liquid  nitrogen  freezers  are 
checked  each  day. The level of liquid  nitrogen  is measured  and adjusted  if needed.  A liquid 
nitrogen  storage  tank is  available  in the freezer  room.  The storage  tank is  replaced  each  month.  
 
Laboratory  Measurements  (Measured  at T0, 16w, and T24 w) 
1. CoQ10  in plasma:  The method  of Tang  and Miles  (2012)  will be used  to measure  reduced 
(ubiquinol)  and oxidized  (ubiquinone)  CoQ10.  Plasma  is extracted  with 1-propanol.  After 
centrifugation,  the 1-propanol  supernatant  is directly  injected  into HPLC  and monitored  at a dual- 
15  electrode . This method meets  regulatory  requirements  for clinical  laboratories, and  has been 
proven  reliable  for analysis  of clinical  and research  samples  for clinical  trials.  CoQ10  screening 
will take place  at the 8 week visit.  
2. Hormone  studies:  Hypothalamic -pituit ary-thyroid  (HPT)  axis.  Thyroid  status  is assessed 
using  a chemiluminescent  method  (TSH,  free T3, free T4), Hypothalamic  Pituitary  Gonadal  axis 
will be measured  using  ELISA  methods  measuring  testosterone  (free),  FSH,  LH and estrogen. 
Cortisol  will be measured  using a  24 hour salivary  collection  with 4 time points  to assess  circadian 
rhythm.  The measures  will be evaluated  at baseline  and to evaluate  response  to treatment.  
3. Safety  and screening  labs: CBC,  CMP  and urinalysis will  be performed  at every  time point  as a 
safety  screen:  HIV, Hep B, C, Rheumatoid  factor,  Antinuclear  antibody,  CBC,  CRP,  and HbA1c,  and 
LFTS  will be drawn  at screening to  rule out exclusionary  illnesses.  
 
Laboratories  Performing  Evaluations  
The clinical  laboratories  under  the direction  of Dr.  Mary  Ann Fletcher and  Dr. Nancy  Klimas  at the 
Miami  VA will be used  for medical  laboratory  testing.  Local  VA laboratories  will pack,  and ship blood 
and saliva  tests  and will discard  any residual  samples.  All research  specimens  will be processed  at 
the Miami VA.  
 
Laboratory  Storage  
Biological  samples  and laboratory  data will be stored  at the Miami  VA Healthcare  System,  (Miami, 
FL) and  related  clinical  data will be stored  on a secure  server.  All samples  will be processed  and 
maintained  according to  documented  SOPs  that follow  generally  accepted  good  laboratory  practices 
in order  to assure  sample  quality, integrity  and long-term stability.  
 
All clinical  data for consenting subjects  will be stored indefinitely  under conditions protecting PHI.  In 
the event that a  subject  withdraws consent, Dr. Klimas will be informed of their Subject ID  and their 
clinical  information  will be expunged  from the database,  and biological  samples  will be destroy ed. 
 
Data Analysis Plan  
Statistical  considerations  
General  Statistical  Approach:  Patients  will be randomized  in a 1:1 manner  to Coq10  or placebo; 
randomization will  be stratified  by study  center  and gender.  This study  includes  a comprehensive 
survey  of patient  status  using  a broad  set of clinical  assessments  and laboratory  assays  designed 
to assess  the response  to treatment  Unless otherwise  specified,  two-sided  P < 0.05 will be 
considered  statistically  significant.  Statistical  analyses  will be carried  out using  SAS Version  9.4 or 
higher.  
a) Baseline:  Differences  in continuous  baseline  variables  will be compared  by a two-sample  t 
test. The Mann -Whitney  U test will be used  in the case  of non-normal  distribution.  For baseline 
categorical variables, Fisher's  exact test will be used.  
b) Evaluating  the efficacy  of CoQ10  in GWI: The primary  analysis  is to compare  treatment  groups 
on change  from baseline  SF-36 physical  function  score over  time (6 monthly  time points  from 
Week 4 to  W eek 24)  in a repeated  measures setting  using a  final two-sided  0.049  level of 
significance  (a 0.049  level is being used  at the end of the study  instead  of 0.05  to account  for the 
interim  analysis  further  described  below).  This will be carried  out using a  mixed  model  (MM) 
analysis  of variance  (ANOVA)  with effects  for treatment,  time,  baseline  physical  function  score  and 
the randomization  strata  of study  center  and gender.  The within -patient  correlation  structure  will be 
assumed  to be unstructured.  If this analysis  shows  a significant  treatment  difference  across  time or 
a significant  treatment -by-time interaction,  comparisons  across  treatment  conditions  also will be 
carried  out separately  at each  time point  using  a Bonferroni  alpha -adjustment  (significance  level at 
each  time point  = 0.049  divided  by 6, the number  of planned  post-baseline  time points)  to account 
for the multiple  comparisons.  Data  will be analyzed  as an intention -to-treat model; i.e.,  all 
16  randomized  subjects  will be included  using available  data (i.e., a patient  does  not have  to provide 
data through  the end of the  study  to be included  in the analysis;  this is  the strength  of the MM 
ANOVA  approach).  A secondary  supportive  analyses will  be carried  out where  missing physical 
function  data at each  time point  are first imputed  via monotone  multiple  linear  regression 
imputation, under  the assumption  the missing data  mechanism  is missing at  random  prior to 
carrying  out the mixed  model  analysis.  The imputation  regression  model  at each  time point  will 
include  randomized  treatment,  measures  of the primary  outcome  at earlier  time points  and 
baseline  covariates  that will be specified  in the final detailed  statistical  plan.  Fifty imputed  datasets 
will be created,  and the MM ANOVA  will be run on each  data set; the 50 MM ANOVA  results will 
then be combined  across  the data sets using PROC  MIANALYZE  in SAS  to obtain  one overall 
assessment of treatment difference on  the imputed data.  
c) Sample  size justification  and power  analysis:  In this study  population,  we rely on the literature 
of Phase  III studies  of other  inflammatory  states  to determine  assumptions  required  for sample  size 
calculations.  Our primary  clinical  outcome  variable  is physical  function  of the  SF36  measured  over 
time (approximately  monthly  from week 4  through  week 24; i.e.,  6 measurements  over time).  Our 
current  data suggests  a coefficient  of variation  (CV) of approximately  0.40 for physical  function  at a 
given  time point.  Assuming  this and assuming  a relative  increase  in SF36  of at least  21% for Coq10 
over placebo  at each  time point,  then there  is a 0.525  treatment  effect size  at each  time point.  
Under  this effect  size, power is  at least  95% to detect  a treatment  difference  over time using  an 
evaluable  group  sample  size of n=90  subjects  at a two-sided  0.049  level of significance  regardless 
of the within - patient  correlation  between  time points.  To account  for approximately  10% attrition, 
100 subjects  per group  will be randomized.  Such  an evaluable  sample  size will also allow  at least 
80% power  to detect  a relative  increase  t of 21% separately  at each  time point  after using  a 
Bonferroni  multiple  comparison  adjustment  across  the six time points.  
d) Subgroup  analysis  on the primary  endpoint:  Treatments  will be compared  within  each  gender. 
The purpose of this analysis is not to show a statistically significant Coq10 effect on the p rimary 
endpoint  within  each  gender  (due to potential  lack of power;  e.g., if there  are 25 evaluable  women  in 
each  treatment  group,  power  ranges  from approximately  50% to 95% depending  on the within -patient 
correlation between time points under the effect size assumptions used in the primary power 
calculation),  but rather  to investigate  consistency  of treatment  difference  across  genders.  In addition, 
treatment -by-gender interaction will be asse ssed in a mixed model repeated measures model that 
includes the  main effects in  the primary analysis and a term  for treatment -by-gender interaction; an 
interaction  p-value  <0.15  will be considered  as possibility  indicating lack of  consistency in  treatment 
effect  across  gender.  Similar  analyses  will be conducted  to assess  consistency  of results  across  study 
centers.  
e) Other  clinical  efficacy  end points  will look at  each  of the  self-report  assessment  measures 
across  the domains  of fatigue,  pain,  sleep,  and the SF36  subscales  of function  and severity.  Objective 
measures  include  laboratory  data that could  reasonably  be considered  a surrogate  for illness  severity 
(e.g., measures  of immune  activation, inflammation,  cell function,  and NPY),  a focus  of several  of 
our prior  publications  (Fletcher  2002,  2009,  2010;  Maher  2007;  Broderick  2009,  2010).  Other  
objective measures  include  cognitive  assessments  and the activity  monitor  data which  will be 
measured  at each  assessment  point  at the beginning  of the study  and on the 24th week  of treatment.  
These  will all be  analyzed  in a similar  manner  as the primary  endpoint.  We will also look at the effect  
of duration  of study  drug exposure  on a case  by case  basis  if there  are individuals  who fail to 
complete  24 weeks  of study  drug,  and will also look at the change  in CoQ10  levels  as a predictor  of 
response.  These endpoints  are considered  exploratory  and no adjustment  of significance  level for 
the multiple comparisons will be applied.  
f) Safety  Endpoints:  The primary  safety  variable  is the incidence  of treatment  emergent  adverse 
events  (TEAEs).  A TEAE  is an event  that emerges,  or a pre-existing  event  that worsens,  any time 
after initiation  of first study  treatment.  Adverse  events  will be coded  by using the  most  recent 
released  version  of MedDRA  at the time of study  start.  The incidence  of TEAEs  will be presented 
overall  and by MedDRA  system  organ  class  and preferred  term.  TEAEs  will also be presented  by 
17  severity  (mild,  moderate,  or severe).  Patients  experiencing  more  than one occurrence  of the same 
preferred  term or system  organ  class  will be categorized  under  the maximum  severity  experienced 
for that preferred  term or system  organ  class.  Similar analyses  of TEAEs will  be conducted  by 
relationship  to drug.  Patients  experiencing  more  than one occurrence  of the same  preferred  term or 
system  organ  class  will be categorized under  the most related  category  experienced  for that 
preferred  term or system  organ  class.  This will be repeated  for serious  TEAEs.  Descriptive 
statistics  (sample  size, mean  and median,  quartiles,  minimum  and maximum)  of laboratory  values  will 
be presented  for each  visit in  which  they were collected.  Similarly, descriptive  statistics  from the 
change  from baseline  to each  visit will  be presented.  Box plots  of the changes  from baseline  will be 
presented across visits.  
g) Evaluation  of blinding:  Each  subject  and investigator will  be asked  at the end of their 
follow -up to guess  whether  they believe  the subject was  randomized  to active  treatment  or 
sham  group.  Frequencies  of correct  and incorrect  responses  will be provided  separately 
for subjects and for investigators.  
 
Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan 
Risk management  and Emergency  Response:  
This study  has been  assigned  for administrative  and scientific  oversight  to the Clinical  Services 
Research  and Development  Data  Monitoring  Committee  (DMC)  to Dr. Domenic  Reda  and his staff 
based  at the Hines  VAMC.  They  will monitor  the study  for safety,  efficacy,  and progress.  Study 
participants  will be asked  to self-monitor  and report  to study  personnel  any episodes  of symptoms. 
Adverse  reactions  will be reported  to the Project  Manager  (Ms. Cohen)  who will communicate  with 
Dr. Klimas,  the local IRB, and the DMC.  While  other  trials  have  not seen  serious  adverse  reactions, 
standard  protocols  are in place,  with moderate  to severe  reactions  r e p o r t ed to both the IRB and 
the DMC  All unanticipated  problems  involving  risk to subjects  or others,  serious  adverse  events, 
and all subject  deaths  associated  with the protocol  will be reported.  Comments  will be recorded  on 
the outcomes  of the  event or  problem.  In the case  of a serious  adverse  event,  an assessment will 
be made on the relationship to the participation in the study. All reports determined by the 
investigators or DMC to be possibly or definitely rela ted to study participation and reports of 
events resulting in serious adverse events will be promptly forwarded to the VACO ORD.  
 
Should  a systemic  allergic  reaction  occur,  subjects  are advised  to call 911, and take an 
antihistamine  while  awaiting  response.  The most  common  complaint with ubiquinol  is GI 
upset  and diarrhea.  This is handled  by taking  the medication  with food and if necessary  with 
dose  adjustment  to 50%.  All of the VA medical  centers  have  a VA Emergency  room  that is 
available  24/7 if for some  reason  the study  physician or  back  up is not available.  
 
Veterans  are the study  population  and are cared  for by the VA health  care system,  which  will assume 
the costs  of study  related  injuries.  Women  of childbearing  years  are asked  to take measures  to avoid 
pregnancy  during  the study. Barrier  methods  or better  are sufficient.  
 
Psychological  Safety  Plan 
We aim to ensure  the safety  of psychological  study  participants.  Specific  objectives  of this safety 
plan are to ensure that:  
 
1. Participants  requesting  assistance  receive  prompt  response  from mental  health 
professionals who are knowledgeable safety risk assessment  
2. The study  team responds when participant’s affect or behavior raises concerns ( e.g., 
expressions  of extreme  distress),  even  if the participant  him or herself  does  not request 
help.  
18  The study  team will check the  on-line questionnaire HAM -D Question #3  regarding suicidality  and 
will alert Dr. Klimas. Dr.  Klimas will call the participant by  telephone  to assess  the situation. If 
necessary, she will transfer the  participant to  the national  VA Suicide  Prevention Hotline. She  will 
give the veteran the  toll free number for the  national VA Suicide Prevention Hotline (1 -800-273- 
TALK  (8255)) so that veterans,  regardless of proximity  to the  Miami VA Healthcare System, can 
receive  assistance  in case  of emergency.  The hotline  directs  veterans  to a VA professional  who can 
immediately  address  their crisis  situation.  The local Suicide Prevention Coordinator then  provides 
follow -up and assurance  that these veterans in crisis receive on -going care.  The study  team will 
record and  report to the IRB any  incidents they  are made  aware of in which a participant  calls the 
suicide prevention  hotline. During the  on-site assessment, if the  Research  Coordinator  or Principal 
Investigator  assesses  a risk to the participant,  she will walk with  the participant  to the Miami  VA ER. 
 
Because  the study  is based at the  Miami VA, the  study  team will take  additional  measures  to 
inform  the Miami  VA mental  health  after-hours  and ER staff about  this study. Specifically, we  will 
distribute  an information  letter  describing  the study  and listing  the contact  information  for the study 
PI and Research Coordinator.  
 
Risk Assessment  Personnel  
Professionals assessing  potential  risk in participants include Research  Coordinator, Princi pal 
Investigator,  VA Suicide  Prevention  Hotline  staff,  Miami  VA ER and after-hours  mental  health  staff. 
The Research  Coordinator and  Principal  Investigator  will assess risk in participants during 
administration of the  structured  clinical interview, completion of questionnaires or when 
participants  request  that a  member  of the  study  team contact  them  during regular business  hours 
because  of distress.  The Princ ipal Investigator will assess risk in participants in situations where 
the Research Coordinator identifies a  potential need  for intervention.  The VA Suicide Prevention 
Hotline will conduct assessments  among veterans who call the hotline.  The Miami VA ER  and 
After -Hours  Mental  Health  Staff will  conduct  assessment  and management  of distressed  veterans 
who call after hours.  The Research  Coordinator will be responsible for managing communication 
among  these  professionals  to provide  continuity  of care  as needed  and report  any adverse  events 
among participants to the IRB.  
 
Safety  
Coenzyme  Q10,  (ubiquinol) is  widely  used  as an overly  the counter  supplement  and is considered 
to be safe by the FDA, with  rare reports  of side  effects.  We will be monitoring  for symptoms  that 
suggest allergic  reactions  (rash,  stomach  upset)  or any other  medication  related  side effect.  It is 
hoped  that the medications  will improve  your energy  levels. Should  this happen,  there  is a 
possibility  that it will  interfere  with sleep.  If this occurs,  we will assess  the benefit  of reducing  the 
dose. Dosing  schedules  will be reviewed  at the investigators  meeting  before  study  initiation, and 
standard  operating  procedures  to handle  any perceived  drug intolerance  such  as GI side effects  will 
be addressed  by the clinicians.  Typically,  a dose  modification,  reducing  the dose  by half for a week 
then increasing back to  the target  range  over 2  weeks  can be employed  to determine  if the 
presumptive  associated  side effect  recurs.  In the final analysis, we  will review  blood  levels  to 
determine if drug levels predict  response  or adverse  reaction.  
 
Adverse  reactions  of drug intolerance  will be categorized  by severity,  body  system,  and number  of 
events  per individual  studied. Serious  reactions  will be reported  promptly  to the IRB and CSR&D 
Data  Monitoring Committee  (DMC). Study  personnel, including  the PI, who also is the Director  of 
the GWI clinic, will  be available  by telephone  24/7 and in clinic  during  routine  hours.  The Miami 
VAMC  Emergency  Department  will serve  as back  up should  a serious  adverse  reaction  occur  when 
personnel are not available.  
19  Risks/  Benefits  Assessments  for Ubiquinol  
Both ubiquinone  and ubiquinol  have  been  used  extensively  in clinical  trials and in clinical  settings. 
Whether  efficacious  or not, one remarkable  observation  is the reassuring  safety  profile  of both 
preparations.  Ubiquinone  has been  used  in dosages  up to 4,500  mg per day in frail populations 
(Parkinson’s)  and has seen  positive  results  at the dosages  proposed  in this study  in congestive 
heart  failure  and in illnesses  known  to be secondary  to mitochondrial  disorders  (reviewed  in Kern 
2011, Kizhahkkedath 2013).  
The most  common  adverse  effects  are gastrointestinal  in nature  and can include  nausea,  epigastric 
pain,  diarrhea,  heartburn,  and appetite  suppression.  However,  the prevalence  of these  adverse 
effects  was less than 1% in reported  studies  (Jelin,  1999).  Gastrointestinal  effects  of CoQ10  may be 
lessened  with a dosage  reduction  or may subside  with continued  therapy.  Asymptomatic  elevations  in 
s er um lactate  dehydrogenase  and hepatic  enzymes  were  observed  and may occur  with oral 
dosages  of CoQ10  in excess  of 300 mg/day;  however,  cases  of serious  hepatotoxicity  have  not been 
reported  (Greenberg,  1990;  Micromedix,  2014).  If female  veterans  are pregnant,  are breastfeeding,  or 
become  pregnant,  ubiquinol  might  involve  risks to the embryo  or fetus,  which  are currently 
unforeseeable.  For this reason,  you will be required  to take a pregnancy  test in the beginning  of the 
study  and use adequate  protection  to prevent  pregnancy.  There  is the possibility  that ubiquinol  may 
interfere  with sleep  and may lower  blood  pressure.  For participants  who commonly  have  very low 
blood  pressure,  they should  check  blood  pressure  carefully.  For the virtual  platform, if the  clinician 
learns that  the potential participant has  a history  of low  blood pressure,  then the participant will be 
excluded  from the virtual  study  option.  In congestive  heart  failure  studies,  clinical  relapse  was noted 
on withdrawal  of CoQ10,  whereas  reinstatement  of therapy  resulted  in improvement  (Mortenson, 
1990;  Mortenson,  1985).  We selected  a formulation  that has been  used  in prior clinical  trials  in other 
disease  states  and have  safety  data,  bioavailability  data as well as efficacy  data published  (Chandran 
et al., 2012; Sanmukhani  et al., 2014;  Kizhakkedath  et al., 2013;  Kern,  2011).  Based  on the literature 
review  of treatment  respon ses in other  illnesses  and Dr. Golomb’ s  experience,  and conversations 
with Kaneka  Nutrients  (the primary  source  of ubiquinol  in the USA)  we will use ubiquinol  200 mg (the 
equivalent  of ubiquinone  600mg)  after a 2 month  “loading”  of 400 mg to correct  deficiency  states.  It 
will be given  as a morning  dose,  with food,  to avoid  evening  side effects  of sleeplessness  and to 
optimize its bioavailability.  
Adequacy  of Protection  Against  Risk 
Minimal  risk is expected  to be incurred  by research  participants,  according  to the safety  records  of 
the selected  compound,  an oil-based  Ubiquinol  soft gel. Ubiquinol  has established  safety  profiles  at 
doses  that exceed  the proposed  treatment  range  and efficacy  profiles  established  in other  diseases. 
The blood  draws  in the study  pose  the risk of  fainting  from vaso-vagal  reactions,  local bruising,  and 
discomfort.  Minimization  of risk includes  having  blood  drawn  only by experienced  Registered  Nurse 
or MD personnel.  
 
Although  the risks to the study  participants  are no greater  than daily activity, the  cognitive  tests may 
cause  discomfort.  However,  interviewers will  be instructed  and trained  to identify  potential  problems 
and to tailor  the testing  as appropriate  so as to minimize  that risk. Throughout  the testing,  the 
research  staff will remind  participants  of the goal of the testing,  allowing  short  breaks  when 
necessary.  For the survey  component,  the risks are no greater  than daily activity.  Psychological  risk 
associated  with self-disclosure  is handled  by having  interviewers  who are trained  psychologically  in 
order  to provide  appropriate  interaction  and counseling.  If any  adverse  reactions  occur  during  the 
interview,  Dr. Klimas  will be available.  For this study,  there  is a risk of loss of confidentiality.  For the 
survey  component,  the data that will be accessed  through  the REDCap  platform  will be de-identified, 
with the identifiers  remaining  embedded in  the database  system.  Unique  participant  ID numbers  will 
be assigned  to survey  data and will be inputted  into the database  on a secure,  password -protected,  
20  encrypted  computer  and entered  into a secure  database.  
Potential  benefits : 
It is our hope  the subjects  in the proposed  clinical  interventions  will see clinical  benefit.  As this is 
the first time these  treatments  have  been  used  in so large  a GWI population,  it is not assumed,  and 
the duration  of benefit  is also not predictable.  Subjects  in both arms  of the study  have  the benefit  of 
a thorough  evaluation,  careful  management,  access  to lab results  not normally  performed  in the 
course  of routine  care (cytokines,  immune  studies  and genomic  studies),  and will gain a better 
understanding  of their illness.  Ubiquinol  is also associated  with a reduction  of the oxidized  form of 
cholesterol  (LDL)  which  will be measured,  another  potential  benefit.  in the experience  of our team 
study  volunteers  have  a sense  of satisfaction  in helping  others  through  their participation,  an 
intangible, but a benefit.  
 
 
Monitoring  Plan:  
A data safety  and monitoring  plan will be implemented  to ensure  that there  are no changes  in the 
benefit/risk  ratio during  the study  and that confidentiality  of research  data is maintained.  The Principal 
Investigator, Co -Investigators,  and research  staff will  be responsible  for data safety  and monitoring.  
All data obtained  in the course  of the study  will be confidential.  All participants  will be informed  of 
their confidentiality  rights  at the time informed  consent  is administered.  Data  collection  and 
management  will be conducted  in strict accordance  with the policies  and procedures  set forth by the 
VA Research  & Development  Office  Data  Security  and Privacy  Policy.  
 
All study  subjects  will be assigned  a study  ID number  by the research  staff at their respective VA 
medical  center  at the time of enrollment  in the study.  Subjects  will be identified  by that number 
during  the course  of the study  and data analysis.  REDCap  survey  data will be entered  as coded 
numerical  values  linked  only to that subject’s  study  ID number.  Windows  integrated  security  will be 
used  for all computer  access  by the research  staff.  At each  VA medical  center,  all PCs, laptops,  
workstations  and remote  devices  will be secured  with a password -protected  screensaver,  wherever 
possible,  and set to deactivate  after being  left unattended  for 15 minutes  or more,  or by logging -off 
when  the equipment  will be unattended  for an extended  period.  User  and role permissions  will be 
defined  at the computer,  file, directory,  server  and database  level to ensure  data security.  All 
research  records  will be maintained in accordance with the Veterans Health  Administration  (VHA) 
Records  Control  Schedule.  Paper  records  will be disposed  of using  methods  deemed  appropriate  by 
the respective  VA medical  center  Privacy  Officer,  and all electronic  data will be sanitized  using 
methods  rendered appropriate by  the VA ISO.  
 
The project  team  will meet weekly  until the analysis  commences  to discuss  the study  (e.g.,  study 
goals, progress,  modifications, documentation,  recruitment,  retention,  and data analysis), and 
address  any issues  or concerns  at the time.  The discussion  will include  issues  pertaining  to data 
integrity,  the assurance  of patient  confidentiality,  and any needed  changes  will be instituted 
immediately  to assure  optimal  subject  protection.  Breaches  of confidentiality  will be brought  to the 
attention  of the appropriate  persons  immediately  as will any proposed  changes  to the data safety  and 
monitoring plan.  
 
These  meetings  will be overseen  by the site PI at each  medical  center.  Minutes  will be kept for these 
meetings  and will be on file. In addition,  the site PI and Dr. Klimas  may review  study  documentation 
and/or  consent  forms  to ensure  that subject’s  confidentiality  is maintained.  Any instances  of protocol 
deviations,  breaches  of confidentiality,  adverse  events  or other  problems  will be reported  adverse 
effects  will be reported  immediately  using  the standard  forms  and/or  procedures  set forth by the IRB. 
Each  VA site has an interim  reporting  requirement  of all  moderate  to severe  events  to alert the site 
PI, with appropriate  tracking  logs and forms.  All sites will be asked  to share  the VA Tracking  Log for 
21  Reportable  and Non-Reportable  Events  and to follow  the report  of protocol  deviations,  violations, 
and/or  Noncompliance  with Dr. Klimas  and the Project  Manager,  Devra  Cohen,  at the time of their 
scheduled  IRB Continuing  Review. In  addition,  all site PIs will report  unanticipated  serious  adverse 
events  (U-SAE),  unanticipated  problems  (UAP)  involving risks  to participants  and others  to Dr. 
Klimas  and Ms. Cohen  in a timely  manner. Research  coordinators  may review  study  documentation 
to ensure  that subject’s confidentiality  is maintained.  
 
Any paper  notes  on the forms  will be collected  and stored  in a locked  file cabinet  in an office  within 
the respective  VA medical  centers  and staff will be responsible  for their respondent  confidentiality. 
The input  from all individual  surveys  will be consolidated  into an aggregated  summary  and no 
specific  comments  in the surveys  will be attributed  to an individual.  Electronic  data from the surveys 
will be kept on  a secure,  password -protected,  encrypted  VA computer  and entered  into a secure 
database  behind  VA firewalls.  Unique  participant  ID numbers  will be assigned  to the survey  data and 
will be inputted  into the database. A  crosswalk  linking  individual  information  to unique  ID will be kept 
in a separate  location  in a password -protected  file on a VA secure  server,  to which  only investigators 
and analysts  assigned  to this project  and listed  on the research  staff form will have  access.  A study 
investigator will  review  all files for consistency, accuracy  and completeness  and de- identification.  
Physical and  electronic  records will  be kept according to  the respective VA medical  center’s 
guidelines.  
 
Data  Handling  
Confidentiality  and sharing  of data from human  subjects:  All database  functionality  will be designed  in 
strict  compliance  with Health  Insurance  Portability  and Accountability  Act (HIPAA)  standards  in the 
U.S. and the Privacy  of Information  Act in Canada.  All data collected  about  participants  will be treated 
as highly  confidential.  To protect  study  subjects  from confidentiality  risks,  the data will be entered  and 
stored  on REDCap/  MySQL  database  hosted  at Boston  University  servers  with a comprehensive 
software  security  system  to limit access  of data to authorized  personnel  only.  Access  to specific  data 
will be defined  in each  research  personnel’s  user profile  and established  based  on that individual’s  
role in  the project.  All paper records  containing identifying information  (including  the subject  contact 
list and linking  codes)  will be kept in locked  files in locked  offices  at the site VA. The study  identifier 
(ID) number  will be included  on all records;  these  identification  methods  are consistent  with HIPAA 
guidelines.  Only de-identified  data including  genetic/genomic  data will be sent to the Computation 
Science  Core  team.  Current  or future  results  from procedures  described  in this proposal  could 
provide  information  about  participant  susceptibility  to certain  ailments  or conditions.  Should  any 
results  of immunological  or standard  screening  tests  performed  in this study  demonstrate  clinically 
relevant  abnormalities,  that information  will be communicated  to the participant’s  attending  physician 
in accordance  with local laws and the IRB medical  ethics  approvals  in effect.  Genetic/  genomic  data 
will not be shared  beyond  authorized  members  of this research  consortium.  Results  of the  study  will 
be shared  with the participants  but will be reported  in such  a manner  that individual  participants 
cannot be identified.  
 
Data  infrastructure  
The core component  of the project’s  data management and  data storage  infrastructure is the 
Research  Electronic  Data  Capture  (REDCap)  environment,  an existing  web- based  relational 
database  developed  specifically  by Vanderbilt  University  for clinical  research  and a v a i l a b l e to the 
general  research  community.  REDCap  is a secure,  web-based  application  for building  and 
managing  online  databases  that are based  on PHP webserver  + JavaScript  programming  languages 
and uses  a MySQL  database  engine  for data storage  and manipulation.  The standard  REDCap 
MySQL  database  is built around  five components:  i) a metadata  table  describ ing the database 
configuration  (data  field types  and naming  used  for automatic  creation  of separate  data storage 
table);  ii) a data transaction  log used  to store  all information  about  data changes  and exports;  iii) a 
document  storage  table  used  to store  consent  forms,  and analysis  code  as well as analysis results  
22  exported  from applications  such  as SAS,  SPSS, R,  MatLab,  Stata,  Excel,  and others; iv)  a user 
privileges  table  containing  details  of access  rights  and expiration  settings;  and v) a set of flat data 
tables  used  to store  all collected  data (typically  one record  [row]) per  sample  with all  associated  data 
fields  stored  in columns).  REDCap  accomplishes  key functions  through  the use of a single  study  
metadata table  referenced  by presentation -level operational  modules.  This abstract  meta -data 
programming  model  allows  research  teams  to autonomously  develop  study -related  databases  in 
an efficient  manner  as an easily  maintainable  resource  for multiple  concurrent  studies  [Nadkarni  et 
al., 2000].  The REDCap  initiative  is driven  by a user consortium  composed  of 396 active 
institutional  partners  in 46 countries.  Use of this environment  is fully supported  by a dedicated  team 
of database  architects  located  at Vanderbilt  University.  NSU  is a full member  of this software 
consortium.  
 
Data  Identifiers  
Each  study  participant will  be assigned  a unique  code  number  from which  they can be identified. 
Personal  identifiers  such  as name,  address,  and date of birth will not be used  on any study  collection 
sheets  except  for the study  contact  sheet.  This identifiable  information  is collected  for patient  tracking 
and safety  purposes.  The electronic  information  from the contact  sheet  will be stored  separately  f r o 
m the main  study  database  in a password -protected  file at the  site on  a VA computer  behind  a VA 
firewall. Any  paper  versions  of the  contact  sheet  will be stored  in locked  file cabinets  separate  from 
other  study  data and accessible  only by authorized  study  staff.  In study  databases,  all data  will be 
coded with the  unique  study  identifier  for each  participant and  stored  in a de-identified manner.  
 
Data  Collection  and Quality Assurance  
The research  coordinators  at each  study  site will be responsible  for managing  the local study  data. 
After  a patient  consents  to participate  in the study,  the site clinical  research  assistant will  create  a 
patient  casebook,  which  will contain  the consent  forms, all  relevant  source  documents,  and any 
other  information  pertinent  to the study.  The completed  summary  study  forms  will be uploaded 
electronically  to REDCap  for cleaning  and processing  into an electronic  data document  allowing  for 
real-time data quality  assurance  and analysis.  This will  allow  clinical  research assistants  to enter  the 
source  document  data directly  into a study  database  and thus manage  their patient’s  study  activity, 
handle  data clarifications,  and correct  patient  data in real-time.  The data will be entered by site 
research  assistants  remotely  through  electronic  case report  forms. Extensive data  checks, including 
missing  values,  out-of-range  entries,  and consistency  between  variables,  both within  and across 
forms,  will be built into  the system  developed  for this project.  There  will be two levels  of checking.  
The first level will be done  at the time the data is entered  into the case  report  form.  These  checks 
will automatically  appear  on the screen  at the time of entry.  After  submission  of the form into the 
database,  second -level checks  against  other  data already  captured  for that patient will  be done.  
 
Data  Confidentiality,  Security,  and Disposition  
The database  will not contain  information  that can directly  identify  the study  subject  (such  as name, 
address,  etc.).  Study  participants will  be identified  by a code  number  and not their personal 
identifiers  on all study  collection  sheets  except  the study  contact  sheet.  The electronic  information 
from the contact  sheets  is stored  separately  from the main  study  database  in a password -protected 
file. Any paper  versions  of the contact  sheets  are stored  in locked  file cabinets  separate  from other 
study  data and accessible  only by authorized  study  staff.  Contact  form information  will be entered 
into the electronic  system  as password -protected  files. Study  data will be coded  with a unique  study 
identifier  for each  participant and  stored  in a de-identified  manner.  Identifiable  information  will be 
collected  for patie nt tracking and  safety  purposes.  All private  information  will be  kept on  an 
encrypted,  password -protected  server  to which  a small  number  of people  will have  access.  All staff 
involved  in the research  project will  have  completed  the appropriate  IRB trainings.  Access  to the 
Cross -walk file linking  the participant's  identifiers  and their study  data will be restricted  to the clinical 
VA sites.  While  the study  is on-going,  the data capture  systems  will utilize  state -of-the-art 
23  technologies  in order to  protect  the data during  transmission  through  web upload. Data  will be 
stored indefinitely after study completion.  
 
References  
Alleva  R, Tomasetti  M, Battino  M, et al. The roles  of coenzyme  Q10 and vitamin  E on the peroxidation 
of human  low density  lipoprotein  subfra ctions.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci USA 1995;92:9388 - 91. 
 
Baggio  E, Gandini  R, Plancher AC, et  al. Italian  multicenter  study  on the safety  and efficacy  of 
coenzyme  Q10 as adjunctive  therapy  in heart  failure. Mol  Aspects  Med 1994;15(suppl): S287 -94. 
 
Bargossi  AM, Grossi  G, Fiorella  PL, et  al. Exogenous  CoQ10  supplementation  prevents  plasma 
ubiquinone  reduction  induced  by HMG -CoA reductase  inhibitors.  Mol Aspects  Med 
1994;15(suppl):S187 -93. 
 
Bartone  PT, Ursano  RJ, Wright  KM, Ingraham  LH. The impact  of a military  air disaster  on the health 
of assistance  workers.  A prospective  study.  J Nerv  Ment Dis  1989;  177: 317-28. 
 
Beal MF, Oakes  D, Shoulson  I, et.al.  A randomized  clinical  trial of high-dosage  coenzyme  Q10 in 
early  Parkinson  disease:  no evidence  of benefit.  JAMA  Neurol. 2014  May;71(5):543 -52. 
 
Benjamini,  Y, Hochberg,  Y: Controlling  the false  discovery  rate: a practical  and powerful  approach  to 
multiple  testing. J. R. Statist. Soc. B  (1995); 57(1):  289-300. 
 
Benedict,  RHB,  Schretlen,  D, Groninger,  L, Dobraski,  M, Shpritz,  B. Revision  of the Brief Visuospatial 
Memory  Test:  Studies  of normal  performance,  reliability, and  validity. Psychological  Assessment,  Vol 
8(2), Jun 1996, 145 -153. 
 
Binukumar  BK, Gupta  N, Sunkaria  A, Kandimalla  R, Wani  WY, Sharma  DR, Bal A, Gill KD. 
Protective  efficacy  of coenzyme  Q10 against  DDVP -induced  cognitive  impairments  and 
neurodegeneration  in rats. Neurotox  Res. 2012 May;21(4):345 -57. 
 
Broderick  G1, Kreitz  A, Fuite  J, Fletcher  MA, Vernon  SD, Klimas  N. A pilot study  of immune  network 
remodeling  under challenge  in Gulf War Illness.  Brain  Behav  Immun.  2011  Feb;25(2):302 -13 
 
Broderick  G, Fletcher  MA, Gallagher  M, Barnes  Z, Vernon  SD, Klimas  NG. Exploring  the diagnostic 
potential  of immune  biomarker  coexpression  in Gulf War Illness.  Methods  Mol Biol. 2012;934:145 - 
64. doi: 10.1007/978 -1-62703 -071-7_8. 
 
Broderick  G1, Ben-Hamo  R, Vashishtha  S, Efroni  S, Nathanson  L, Barnes  Z, Fletcher  MA, Klimas  N. 
Altered  immune  pathway  activity  under exercise  challenge  in Gulf War Illness: an  exploratory 
analysis.  Brain  Behav  Immun.  2013  Feb;28:159 -69. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.11.007.  Epub  2012  Nov 
29. 
 
Birnbaum  Y, Hale SL, Kloner  RA. The effect  of coenzyme  Q10 on infarct  size in a rabbit  model  of 
ischemia/reperfusion. Cardiovasc Res 1996;32:861 -8. 
 
Chopra  RK, Goldman  R, Sinatra  ST, et al. Relative bioavailability  of coenzyme  Q10 formulations  in 
human subjects.  Int J Vitam Nutr Res 1998;68:109 -13. 
 
Cordero  MD, ,  Alcocer -Gomez,  E,de Miguel, M, et  al: Can  Coenzyme  Q Improve  Clinical  and 
Molecular Parameters  in Fibromyalgia? Antioxid.  Redox  Signaling. Antioxid  Redox  Signal. 2013  Oct 
20;19(12):1356 -6. 
24   
Delis,  DC, Kramer,  JH, Kaplan,  E, Ober,  BA. Manual  for the California  Verbal  Learning  Test,  (2nd 
ed.)The  Psychological Corporation, San Antonio,  TX, 2000.  
Digiesi  V, Cantini  F, Brodbeck  B. Effect  of coenzyme  Q10 on essential  arterial  hypertension. Curr 
Ther Res 1990;47:841 -5. 
 
Digiesi  V, Cantini  F, Oradei  A, et al. Coenzyme  Q10 in essential  hypertension.  Mol Aspects  Med 
1994;15(suppl):S257 -63. 
 
Dumont  M, Kipiani  K, Yu F, W ille E, Katz M, et al. Coenzyme  Q10 decreases  amyloid  pathology  and 
improves  behavior in  a transgenic  mouse  model  of Alzheimer's  disease.  J Alzheimers  Dis. 
2011;27(1):211 -23. 
 
Ernster  L, Forsmark -Andrée  P. Ubiquinol:  an endogenous  antioxidant in  aerobic  organisms. Clin 
Invest 1993;71:S60 -5. 
 
First,  MB, Spitzer,  RL, Gibbon,  M. & W illiams,  JB, The Structured  Clinical  Interview  for the DSM -IV 
Axis I Disorders (SCID) 1996.  
 
Folkers  K, Drzewoski  J, Richardson  PC, et al. Bioenergetics  in clinical  medicine.  XVI. Reduction  of 
hypertension  in patients  by therapy  with coenzyme  Q10. Res  Commun  Chem  Patl Pharmacol 
1981;31:129 -40. 
 
Folkers  K, Littaru  GP, Yamagami  T, eds. Biomedical  and clinical  aspects  of coenzyme  Q, vol. 6. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1991:339 -48. 
 
Folkers  K. Heart  Failure  is a dominant  deficiency  of coenzyme  Q10 and challenges  for future  clinical 
research on CoQ10. Clin Invest 1993;71(suppl  8):S51 -4. 
 
Fukuda  K, Nisenbaum R, Stewart G,  Thompson  WW,  Robin L,  Washko RM, Noah DL, Barrett DH, 
Randall  B, Herwaldt BL,  Mawle  AC, Reeves  WC. (1998)  Chronic  multisymptom  illness affecting Air 
Force veterans of the  Gulf War. JAMA 280: 981 -988. 
 
Garrido -Maraver,  J, Cordero, MD, Oropesa -Avila,  M, et al. Clinical  applications  of coenzyme  Q10. 
Frontiers  in Bioscience  19, 619-633, January,  2014.  Ghirlanda  B, Oradei  A, Manto  A, et al. Evidence 
of plasma  CoQ10  reductase  inhibitors:  a double  blind,  placebo -controlled  study.  J Clin Pharmacol 
1993;33:226 -9. 
 
Golomb  BA, Allison  M, Koperski  S, Koslik HJ,  Devaraj  S, Ritchie  JB. Coenzyme  Q10 benefits 
symptoms  in Gulf War veterans:  results  of a randomized  double -blind study,  Neural  Comput.  2014 
Nov;26(11):2 594-2651.  
 
Greenberg S,  Frishman  WH. Co-enzyme  Q10:  a new drug for cardiovascular disease. J  Clin 
Pharmacol 1990;30:596 -608. 
 
Groneberg,  DA, Kindermann,  B, Althammer,M,  et al.. Coenzyme  Q10 affects  expression  of genes 
involved  in cell signalling,  metabolism  and transport  in human  CaCo -2 cells.  Int J Biochem  Cell Biol 
2005,37(6), 1208 -18. 
 
Hiasa  Y, Ishida  T, Maeda  T, et al. Effects  of coenzyme  Q10 in patients  with stable  angina  pectoris.  In: 
Folkers  K, Yamamura  Y, eds. Biomedical  and clinical  aspects  of coenzyme  Q, vol.  4. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier Science, 1984:291 -301. 
25  Hofman -Bang  C, Rehnquist  N, Swedberg  K, et al. Coenzyme  Q10 as an adjunctive  in the treatment 
of chronic  congestive  heart  failure.  J Cardiac  Failure  1995;1:101 -7. 
 
Ishiyama  T, Morita  Y, Toyama  S, et al. A clinical  study  of the effect  of coenzyme  Q10 on congestive 
heart failure. Jap Heart J 1976;17:32 -42. 
 
Iwamoto  Y, Yamaguchi  T, Folkers  K, et al. Deficiency  of coenzyme  Q10 in hypertensive  rats and 
reduction  of deficiency  by treatment  with coenzyme  Q10.  Biochem  Biophys  Res Commun 
1974;58:743 -8. 
Jason  LA, Evans  M, Porter  N, Brown  M, Brown  AA, Hunnell  J, Friedberg  F. The development  of a 
revised  Canadian  myalgic  encephalomyelitis  chronic  fatigue  syndrome  case  definition.  American 
Journal  of Biochemistry  and Biotechnology.  2010;6:120 –135. doi: 10.3844/ajbbsp.2010.120.135.  
 
Jellin  JM, Batz  F, Hitchens  K. Coenzyme  Q10.  Pharmacist's  letter/prescriber's  letter:  natural 
medicines  comprehensive  database.  Stockton,  CA: Therapeutic  Research  Center,  1999:271 -3. 
 
Judy  WV, Hall JH, Toth PD, et al. Double -blind -double -crossover  study  of coenzyme  Q10 in heart 
failure.  In: Folkers  K, Yamamura  Y, eds. Biomedical  and clinical  aspects  of coenzyme  Q, vol. 5. 
Amsterdam:  Elsevier  Science  Publishers  BV, 1986:315 -23 
 
Kamikawa  T, Kobayashi  A, Yamashita  T, et al. Effects  of coenzyme  Q10 on exercise  tolerance  in 
chronic stable angina pectoris. Am J  Cardiol  1985;56:247 -51. 
 
Kaufmann  P, Thompson  JL, Levy  G, Buchsbaum  R, et  al. QALS  Study  Group  Phase  II trial of 
CoQ10  for ALS finds insufficient  evidence to  justify  phase  III. Ann Neurol.  2009  Aug;66(2):235 -44. 
 
Khatta  M, Alexander  BS, Krichten  CM, et al. The effect  of coenzyme  Q10 in patients  with 
congestive  heart  failure.  Ann Intern  Med 2000;132:636 -40. 
 
Kishi  T, Kishi  H, Watanabe  T, et al. Bioenergetics  in clinical  medicine.  XI. Studies  on coenzyme  Q 
and diabetes mellitus. J Med 1976;7:307 -21. 
 
Landbo  C, Almdal  TP. Interaction  between  warfarin  and coenzyme  Q10 [English  abstr].  Ugeskr 
Laeger 1998;160: 3226 -7. the GWI field.  
 
Langsjoen  PH, Vadhanavikit  S, Folkers  K. Effective  treatment  of coenzyme  Q10 of patients  with 
chronic  myocardial  disease. Drugs  Exp Clin Res 1985;11(8):577 -9. 
 
Langsjoen  PH, Folkers  K, Lyson  K, et al. Effective  and safe therapy  with coenzyme  Q10 for 
cardiomyopathy. Klin  Wochenschr 1988;66:583 -90. 
 
Langsjoen  PH, Langsjoen  PH, Folkers  K. Long -term efficacy  and safety  of coenzyme  Q10 therapy 
for idiopathic  dilated  cardiomyopathy. Am  J Cardiol  1990;65:521 -3. 
 
Langsjoen  PH, Vadhanavikit S,  Folkers  K. Response  of patients  in classes  III and IV of 
cardiomyopathy  to therapy  in a blind  and crossover  trial with coenzyme  Q10.  Proc Natl Acad  Sci U S 
A 1985;82:4240 -4. 
 
Langsjoen  P, Langsjoen  P, Willis R, et  al. Treatment  of essential  hypertension  with coenzyme  Q10. 
Mol Aspects Med 1994;15(suppl):S262 -72. 
26  Lampertico  M, Comis  S. Italilan  multicenter  study  on the efficacy  and safety  of coenzyme  Q10 as 
adjuvant therapy  in heart  failure. Clin  Invest 1993;71(suppl  8):S129 -33. 
 
Lee BJ,  Tseng YF, Yen  CH, L in PT Effects  of coenzyme Q10  supplementation (300  mg/day) on 
antioxidation and anti -inflammation in coronary artery disease patients during statins therapy: a 
randomized, placebo -controlled  trial. Nutr  J. 2013  Nov 6;12(1):142.  
 
Levien  TL, Baker  DE. Coenzyme  Q10.  Pharmacist's  letter.  Stockton,  CA: Therapeutic  Research 
Center, 1998;14(2):8 -9. 
 
Lucker  PW, Wetzelsberger  N, Hennings  G,et al. Pharmacokinetics  of coenzyme  ubidecarenone  in 
healthy  volunteers.  In: Folkers  K, Yamamura  Y, eds. Biomedical  and clinical  aspects  of coenzyme 
Q, vol. 4. Amsterdam:  Elsevier  Science  Publishers,  1984:143 -51. Markley: HG,  CoEnzyme  Q10 and 
riboflavin:  the mitochondrial  connection.  Headache  2002,  52 Suppl  2, 81-7. 
 
Martin  SB, Cenini  G, Barone  E, et al. Coenzyme  Q10 and cognition  in atorvastatin  treated  dogs. 
Neurosci Lett. 2011 Aug 26;501(2):92 -5. 
 
Mazzola  C, Guffanti  EE, Vaccarella  A, et al. Non-invasive  assessment  of coenzyme  Q10 in patients 
with chronic  stable  effort  angina  and moderate  heart  failure.  Curr Ther Res 1987;41:923 -32. 
 
Mestre  T, Ferreira  J, Coelho MM, Rosa  M, Sampaio  C Therapeutic  interventions  for 
disease  progression  in Huntington's  disease.  Cochrane  Database  Syst Rev. 2009  JUl8 
Micromedex.  Healthcare  series.  Ubidecarenone.  Englewood,  CO: Micromedex,  Inc., 2014. 
Morisco  C, Trimarco  B, Condorelli  M. Effect  of coenzyme  Q10 in patients  with congestive 
heart  
failure:  a long term multi-center  randomized  study.  Clin Invest  1993;71:134 -6. 
 
Morisco  C, Nappi  A, Argenziano  L, et al. Noninvasive  evaluation  of cardiac  hemodynamics  during 
exercise in patients with chronic heart failure: effects of short -term coenzyme Q10 treatment.  
Mol Aspects Med 1994;15:155 -63. 
 
Mortensen  SA, Vadhanavikit S,  Muratsu  K, et al. Coenzyme  Q10: clinical  benefits with biochemical 
correlates  suggesting  a scientific  breakthrough  in the management  of chronic  heart  failure.  Int J 
Tissue Reac 1990;XII(3):155 -62. 
 
Mortensen  SA, Vadhanavikit S,  Baandrug U,  et al. Long -term coenzyme  Q10 therapy:  a major 
advance  in the management  of resistant  myocardial  failure. Drugs  Exp Clin Res 1985;11:581 -93. 
 
Mortensen  SA. Perspectives  on therapy  of cardiovascular  diseases  with coenzyme  Q10 
(ubiquinone). Clin Invest 1993;71:116 -23. 
 
Mortensen  SA, Leth A, Agner  E, et al. Dose -related  decrease  of serum  coenzyme  Q10 
during  treatment  with HMG -CoA reductase  inhibitors.  Mol Aspects  Med 1997;18(suppl): 
S137 -44. 
Murray  M. Encyclopedia  of nutritional  supplements. Rocklin,  CA: Prima,  1996:296 -308. 
Olsen  RE, Rudney  H. Biosynthesis  of ubiquinone.  Vitam  Horm  1983;40:1 -43. 
27  Overvad  K, Diamant  B, Holm  L, et al. Coenzyme  Q10 in health  and disease.  Eur J Clin 
Nutr 1999;53:764 -70. 
 
Peckerman  A, Dahl K, Chemitiganti  R,et al. Effects  of posttraumatic  stress  disorder  on cardiovascular 
stress  responses  in Gulf War veterans  with fatiguing  illness.  Auton  Neurosci.  2003  Oct 31;108(1 - 
2):63 - 72. 
 
Pogessi  L, Galanti  G, Comeglio  M, et al. Effect  of coenzyme  Q10 in left ventricular  function  in 
patients  with dilative  cardiomyopathy. Curr  Ther Res 1991;49:878 -86. 
 
Proctor  SP, Heeren  T, White RF, et  al. Health  status  of Persian  Gulf War veterans: self - 
reported  symptoms, environmental  exposures  and the effect of stress.  Int J Epidemiol 1998; 
27: 1000 -10.\ 
 
Reeves  WC, Lloyd  A, Vernon  SD, Klimas  N, Jason  LA, Bleijenberg  G, Evengard  B, White  PD, 
Nisenbaum  R, Unger  ER, .Identification  of ambiguities  in the 1994  chronic  fatigue  syndrome 
research  case definition  and recommendations  for resolution.BMC Health  Serv Res. 2003  Dec 
31;3(1):25  
 
Rossi  E, Lombardo  A, Testa  M, et al. Coenzyme  Q10 in ischemic  cardiomyopathy.  In: Folkers  K, 
Littaru  GP, Yamagami  T, eds. Biomedical  and clinical  aspects  of coenzyme  Q, vol. 6. Amsterdam:  
Elsevier  Science  Publishers,  1991:321 -6. 
 
Rozen,  TD, Oshinsky,  ML, Gebeline,  CA, et al.: Open  label  trial of coenzyme  Q10 as a migraine 
preventive. Cephalalgia 2002, 22(2), 137 -41. 
 
Sándor  PS, Di Clemente  L, Coppola  G, et al. Efficacy  of coenzyme  Q10 in migraine  prophylaxis: 
a randomized  controlled  trial. Neurology. 2005  Feb 22;64(4):713 -5. 
 
Sandhir  R, Sethi  N, Aggarwal  A, Khera  A. Coenzyme  Q10 treatment  ameliorates  cognitive  deficits  by 
modulating  mitochondrial  functions  in surgically  induced  menopause.  Neurochem  Int. 2014  Jul;74:16 - 
23. 
 
Sanoobar  M, Dehghan  P, Khalili  M, Azimi  A, Seifar  F. Coenzyme  Q10 as a treatment  for fatigue  and 
depression  in multiple  sclerosis  patients:  A double  blind  randomized  clinical  trial.Nutr  Neurosci.  2015 
Jan 20.  
 
Schardt  F, Welzel  D, Scheiss  W, et al. Effect  of coenzyme  Q10 on ischemia -induced  ST-segment 
depression:  a double -blind,  placebo -controlled  crossover  study.  In: Folkers  K, Yamamura  Y, eds. 
Biomedical  and clinical  aspects  of coenzyme  Q, vol. 5.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier  Science  Publishers  BV, 
1986:358 -94. 
 
Scheirer  CJ, Ray WS, Hare  N. The analysis  of ranked  data derived  from completely  randomized 
factorial designs. Biometrics 1976; 32: 429 -434. 
 
Schmelzer, C,  Lindner,I,  Rimbach,  G, Niklowitz, P,  Menke,  T, Doring:  Functions  of coenzyme  Q10 
in inflammation  and gene  expression. Biofactors  2008, 32(1 -4), 179-83. 
 
Serra  G, Lissoni  F, Piemonti  C, et al. Evaluation  of coenzyme  Q10 in patients  with moderate  heart 
failure  and chronic  stable  effort  angina.  In: Folkers  K, Littaru  GP, Yamagami  T, eds. Biomedical 
and clinical  aspects  of coenzyme  Q, vol.  6. Amsterdam:  Elsevier  Science  Publishers,  1991:327 -38. 
28  Singh  RB, Niaz MA, Rastogi  SS, et al. Effect  of hydrosoluble  coenzyme  Q10 on blood  pressure  and 
insulin  resistance  in hypertensive  patients  with coronary  artery  disease.  J Hum  Hypertens 
1999;13:203 -8. 
 
Spigset  O. Reduced  effect  of warfarin  caused  by ubidecarenone.  Lancet  1994;344:1372 -3. 
Steele  L. Prevalence  and patterns  of Gulf War illness  in Kansas  veterans:  association  of 
symptoms  with characteristics  of person,  place,  and time of military  service.  Am J Epidemiol. 
2000;152:992 - 1002.  
 
Storey  JD, Tibshirani  R. Statistical  significance  for genomewide  studies.  Proc NatlAcadSci U  S A. 
2003 Aug 5;100(16):9440 -5. 
 
Sullivan  S, Krengel  M, Proctor  S, Devine  S, Heeren  T, White  R. Cognitive  Functioning  in 
Treatment - Seeking  Gulf War Veterans: Pyridostigmine  Bromide  Use and PTSD. 2003  J 
Psychopathol Beh Assess, 25: No. 2.  
 
Tang,  PH, Miles,  MV. Measurement  of oxidized  and reduced  coenzyme  Q in biological  fluids, 
cells,  and tissues:  an HPLC -EC method.  Methods  Mol Biol. 2012;837:149 -68. 
 
Tomono  Y, Hasegawa  J, Seki T, et al. Pharmacokinetic  study  of deuterium -labelled  coenzyme 
Q10 in man.  Int J Clin Pharm Ther  Toxicol 1986;24:536 -42. 
 
Tran,  MT, Mitchell,  TM, Kennedy,  DT, Giles,  JT. Role of Coenzyme  Q10 in Chronic  Heart  Failure, 
Angina, and Hypertension Pharmacotherapy. 2001;21(7).  
 
Trivedi  M, Shah  J, Hodgson  N, Byun  HM, Deth  R. Morphine  induces  redox -based  changes  in global 
DNA methylation and  retrotransposon  transcription by  inhibition of excitatory  amino acid transporter 
type 3-mediated  cysteine  uptake. Mol  Pharmacol.  2014  May;85(5):747 -57. 
 
Yuzuhira  T, Takada  M, Katayama  K. Transport  of C14 coenzyme  Q10 from the liver to other  tissues 
after intravenous  administration  to guinea  pigs.  Biochimica  Biophysica  Acta 1983;759:286 -91. 
 
Watson  PS, Scalia  GM, Galbraith  A, et al. Lack  of effect  of coenzyme  Q on left ventricular  function  in 
patients with  congestive  heart  failure.  J Am Coll Cardiol  1999;33:1549 -52. 
 
Watts  GF, Bastelluccio  C, Rice -Evans  C, et al. Plasma  coenzyme  Q (ubiquinone) concentrations  in 
patients  treated  with simvastatin. J  Clin Pathol  1993;46:1055 -7. 
 
Weber  C, Jakobsen  TS, Mortensen  SA, et al. Antioxidative  effect  of dietary  coenzyme  Q10 in human 
blood plasma. Int J Vitam Nutr Res 1994;64:311 -15. 
 
Weber  C, Jakobsen  TS, Mortensen  SA, et al. Effect  of dietary  coenzyme  Q10 as an antioxidant  in 
human plasma. Mol Aspects Med 1994;15(suppl):S9  
 
Weber  C, Bysted  A, Hølmer  H. Intestinal  absorption  of coenzyme  Q10 administered  in a meal  or as 
capsules to  healthy  subjects. Nutr Res  1997;17:941 -5. 
 
Weis  M, Mortensen  SA, Rassing  MR, et al. Bioavailability  of four oral coenzyme  Q10 formulations  in 
healthy volunteers. Mol Aspects Med  
 
Whistler  T, Fletcher  MA, Lonergan  W, Zeng  XR, Lin JM, Laperriere  A, Vernon  SD, Klimas  NG. 
29  Impaired  immune  function  in Gulf War Illness.  BMC  Med Genomics.  2009  Mar 5;2:12.  doi: 
10.1186/1755 -8794 -2-12. 
 
Wolfe  J, Proctor  SP, Davis  JD, Borgos  MS,Friedman  MJ. Health  symptoms  reported  by Persian  Gulf 
War veterans  two years  after return.  Am J  Ind Med 1998; 33:  104-13. 
 
Yamagami  T, Takagi  M, Akagami  H, et al. Effect  of coenzyme  Q10 on essential  hypertension: a 
double -blind controlled  study. In:  Folkers  K, Yamamura  Y, eds. Biomedical  and clinical  aspects  of 
coenzyme  Q, vol. 5.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier Science  Publishers  BV, 1986:337 -43. 
 
Yamagami  T, Shibata  N, Folkers  K. Bioenergetics  in clinical  medicine: studies  on coenzyme  Q10 
and essential  hypertension. Res  Commun  Chem  Pathol  Pharmacol  1975;11:273 -88. 
 
Yamagami  T, Iwamoto  Y, Folkers  K, et al. Deficiency  of activity  of succinate  dehydrogenase - 
coenzyme  Q10 reductase  in leukocytes  from patients  with essential  hypertension.  Int J Vitam  Nutr 
Res 1974;44:404 -14. 
 
 