Encouraging Blood Donation in Patients With a Blood Type in Short Supply  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
April 27, 202 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Brief summary  
As of November 2021, partly due to the COVID -19 pandemic, there has been a months -long 
national shortage of several types of blood in the U.S. (O -Pos, O -Neg, A -Neg, B -Neg, and AB -
Neg), which has extended to a local blood shortage within the Geisinger footp rint encompassing 
central and northeast Pennsylvania. The broad aim of this healthcare operations quality 
improvement project is to determine whether a message indicating that a patient's own blood 
type is in short supply increases the likelihood that they  will donate, compared to a message 
that mentions a blood shortage without referencing the patient's blood type, or no message at 
all. Scientists in Geisinger's Behavioral Insights Team (BIT), part of Geisinger's Steele Institute 
for Health Innovation, wil l collaborate with Miller -Keystone, where Geisinger refers patients who 
wish to donate blood and from whom Geisinger receives blood for clinical purposes. Patients 
with one of the needed blood types will be randomized to receive 1) a message about a blood 
shortage that does not specify the blood types in short supply or their own blood type (no -blood -
type message), 2) the same message modified slightly to specify the recipient's blood type, and 
to mention that their blood type is in short supply (blood -type message), or 3) no message 
beyond normal system messages (shortage control group). A second no -contact control group 
of patients without any of the needed blood types will also be observed (no -shortage control 
group). Both the blood -type and no -blood -type messages are informed by behavioral science, 
emphasizing supply needs in local hospitals and providing community -relevant examples of why 
someone might need blood (e.g., farming or industrial accidents). With respect to the blood -type 
message, informing t he recipient that they have one of the needed blood types may additionally 
increase their perception that they are in a semi -unique position to help someone in need as 
compared to a more general message that may suffer from a diffusion of responsibility ef fect. 
The BIT will compare how many patients in each group choose to donate blood. They 
hypothesize that: 1) patients who receive either message will be more likely to donate than 
patients who receive no message; and 2) patients who receive the blood -type message will be 
more likely to donate than those who receive the no -blood -type message.  
 
Project status  
 
The team had originally planned to enroll 20,000 patients per arm, and 80,000 patients total. 
However, the study team decided to stop the study with ju st under 15,000 patients per arm due 
to logistical constraints.  
 
Specifically, reaching the target sample size would have required us to enroll many patients who 
live far from existing Miller -Keystone donation sites and far from the Danville and Bloomsburg  
areas where Miller -Keystone often runs blood drives. Due to staffing shortages, it was not 
feasible to set up the additional blood drives that would have been required to enroll these 
patients and reach the original target sample size.  
 
As of 4/25/2022, e nrollment is complete with eligible patients that live near an existing Miller -
Keystone donation site or near Danville or Bloomsburg, where Miller -Keystone ran blood drives 
for patients in the study. The final sample includes total of 59,093 patients.  
 
The team has extracted primary -outcome data for the first group of participants enrolled. The 
data were extracted in order to set up a data pulling and sharing protocol with Miller -Keystone. 
However, these initial data have not yet been analyzed, and data fo r patients enrolled 
subsequently have not yet been extracted. Additionally, data collection for some participants is 
ongoing. We plan to extract the remaining primary outcome data all at once on or after 
6/6/2022, 6 weeks following the final message send d ate (4/25/2022).  
 
With the final sample size of at least 14,772  patients per arm, we will have 80% power to detect 
an increase in donation rates from 1% to 1.35% between any two study arms , a 35% difference, 
with a two -tailed alpha of .05 . With our origin al planned sample size of 80,000 patients  (~20,000 
per arm) , we would have had power to detect a smaller increase, from 1% to 1.3% .  
 
 
Sample and randomization  
The sample includes Geisinger patients who have a blood type recorded in their electronic 
health record, are age 18 or older, and do not have a low hemoglobin test result (<12.5) 
recorded in the 3 months before the patient list was extracted.  
 
For logisti cal purposes, we are running this study in several phases. We have already begun the 
study in patients living within 20 miles of Miller -Keystone’s Pittston Donor Center based on their 
home ZIP code recorded in their electronic health record. In collaborati on with Miller -Keystone, 
we will create a plan for expanding the study to other geographic areas within Geisinger’s 
service area.  
 
For each geographic location where we run the study, we will first identify all patients from our 
list who meet our inclusion  criteria above. Then, patients who have a blood type in need (A -, B-, 
AB-, O-, O+) will be randomized into the 3 shortage blood -type groups.  
 
A randomly -selected group of patients without a needed blood type will be selected from the 
patient list within t hat geographic area for a fourth No-shortage control  group of the same size 
as each of the shortage groups listed above.  
 
In order to encourage donation in as many patients with needed blood types as possible, we 
plan to send messages to those in the shor tage control group at a delay (after the primary 
outcome time frame has passed). The patients in this group will also be randomized to receive 
either the no -blood -type or the blood -type message.  
 
 
 
 
Planned analyses  
 
Primary outcome  
 
Number of Participants Who Attended a Donation Appointment  
 
Attended a donation appointment within 6 weeks of their message send date, regardless 
of whether they donated. This outcome includes patients who were unable to donate for 
any reason (e.g., low hemoglobin) or patients who showed up to the appointment but 
decided to leave before donating.  
 
[Time Frame: Within 6 weeks of the final message send date]  
 
Question 1:  Are patients who receive either message more likely to donate compared with 
patients who do not rec eive a message?  
 
Analysis 1: We will test the hypothesis that patients who receive a message donate at higher 
rates than patients who do not receive a message by running an OLS regression with a binary 
predictor variable indicating whether or not patients were sent a message.  
 
Questio n 2: Is blood donation higher in patients who receive a message that includes their 
blood type and mentions that their blood type is in need compared with a message that does not 
mention their blood type?  
 
Analysis 2:  We will test the hypothesis that patie nts who receive the blood -type message will be 
more likely to donate than those who receive the no -blood -type message by running an OLS 
regression with a binary predictor variable indicating whether patients were sent the blood -type 
message or the no -blood -type message . 
 
Notes about timeframes and analysis  
Messages sent to patients within a geographic location will be divided into separate message 
dates so as not to overwhelm appointment scheduling at Miller -Keystone. Timeframes listed 
above refer to the a mount of time elapsed from the send date for a given patient. For instance, 
the primary outcome timeframe is 6 weeks; thus, for the purposes of this study, a patient will be 
counted as having donated if they donated blood within 6 weeks of their message se nd date.  
 
Patients in both control groups will be divided into separate message dates, each assigned to 
one of the message -date groups for the experimental arms. Each control group will be 
monitored for appointments and donations during a date range that i s aligned with the date 
range for its corresponding experimental group.  
 
All analyses will exclude patients who scheduled their appointment prior to their message send 
date.  
 
Sensitivity analyses and robustness checks  
The analyses above will be run using a  time frame of 6 weeks from the message send date. 
However, as a robustness check, we will rerun Analysis 2  on the subset of patients who open 
the messages, using a time frame of 6 weeks from the date each individual patient opened their 
message.  
 
We will run an additional robustness check including only patients who scheduled an 
appointment within the 2 weeks following their message send date.  
 
As another robustness check, we will remove all patients who live within 20 miles of Danville, 
PA, as these patie nts are likely to be health care workers. They are therefore more likely to 
already know their blood type and/or to know their blood type is in short supply.  
 
Recent work suggests that OLS regressions are appropriate in randomized experiments with 
binary o utcome variables such as ours (Gomilla, 2021). However, as a robustness check, we 
will also run the regressions described above as logistic regressions instead of OLS 
regressions.  
 
Secondary outcomes  
 
We will use the approaches described in Analyses 1 and 2 above to evaluate the impact of the 
intervention on the secondary outcome measures listed in the pre -registration:  
 
1. Number of Participants Who Successfully Donated Blood  
 
Attended a donation appointment within 6 weeks of their message send date and 
successfully donated, excluding patients who were turned away from or left their 
appointment without donating.  
 
[Time Frame: Within 6 weeks of the final message send date]  
 
2. Number of Participants Who Scheduled a Blood Donation Appointment  
 
Scheduled an app ointment within 2 weeks of their message send date.  
 
[Time Frame: Within 2 weeks of the final message send date]  
 
3. Number of Participants Who Scheduled a Blood Donation Appointment  
 
Scheduled an appointment within 6 weeks of their message send date.  
 
[Time  Frame: Within 6 weeks of the final message send date]  
 
 
 
Additional exploratory analyses  
 
1. Household members  
 
Patients who donate after receiving messages may also encourage members of their 
household to donate. We will run a negative binomial regression t o test whether the 
number of donors residing at the same address as each target patient varies as a 
function of experimental group, whether the target patient donated or not, and the 
interaction between these variables.  
 
2. First time donors vs. repeat donors  
 
We will evaluate whether message effectiveness differs based on whether the patient 
has previously donated blood at Miller -Keystone. To this end, we will run an OLS 
regression model, testing whether donations vary as a function of experimental group, a 
bivariate indicator for whether or not the patient has previously donated blood, and the 
interaction between these variables.  
 
3. Geographic location  
 
Patients in certain geographic regions may be more receptive to our messages than 
others. We will test for di fferential effectiveness as a function of geographic region by 
running an OLS regression including a dummy coded predictor variable coding for 
geographic region (as defined by our separate outreach campaigns). We will test for an 
interaction between region  and experimental group on donation behavior. If the 
interaction is significant, we will run post -hoc comparisons to probe for differences in the 
efficacy of our interventions separately by geographic region. If the interaction is not 
significant but the m ain effect of region is, we will run post -hoc tests on this main effect 
to understand how donation behavior differs by region.  
 
Importantly, our messages are being sent on different dates in geographic regions (with 
some overlap), and blood donation patter ns vary across the year. To control for variation 
in blood donation, we will attempt to determine standard donation rates across time, and 
to include this variable as a covariate in our analysis.  
 
4. Time to donation  
 
We will run regression models to test whe ther either intervention message influenced the 
timing (time elapsed since the message was sent) of donations.  
 
5. Type of donation  
 
We will test whether there are differences in donation type (particularly whole blood and 
red blood cell donations) as a funct ion of experimental group.  
 
6. Demographics  
 
We will run regression models to test for main effects of several demographic factors on 
donation behavior, along with interactions between these factors and message group. 
These demographic factors include binned age (18-24, 25 -34, 35 -44,45 -54, 65+), sex, 
race, ethnicity, line of insurance (as a proxy for socioeconomic status), and Charlson 
Comorbidity.  