 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Treatment  of Trauma -Related  Anger  in OEF/OIF/OND  Veterans  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Study Protocol  
 
 
Version 11/28/18  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  
 
 
 
 
 
Principal  Investigator:  Tracie Shea,  Ph.D . 
 
Department: Mental  Health and Behavioral  Sciences  Service (MHBSS)  
 
Study  Title:  Treatment  of Trauma -Related  Anger  in OEF/OIF/OND  Veterans  
Funding  Source (Sponsor):  VA RR&D  
Full Protocol  Version Date:  11/28/18  
 
Key Personnel:  
 
Tracie  Shea,  Ph.D.   
Staff  Psychologist  VAMC  
Professor  
Department  of Psychiatry  and 
Human  Behavior,  Brown  University  
Jennifer  Lambert,  
Ph.D.  PTSD  Clinic 
Acting  Chief  VAMC  
Clinical  Assistant  Professor  
Department  of Psychiatry  and 
Human  Behavior,  Brown  University   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Location of  Study:  
All assessment  and intervention sessions  will be conducted at the Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center  
in Providence,  Rhode  Island.  
Time  Required  to Complete  the Research:  
The project  start  date  is 08/01/2014 and the study  will continue  until  07/31/2018 . Department  of Veterans  Affairs  Internal  Review  Board  
Research  Protocol  
Content  Requirements  for Full Committee  Review  
2  
1. Purpose  
Building  on findings  from  our randomized  pilot  study,  the specific  aim of the current  
proposal  is to conduct  an adequately  powered  randomized  clinical  trial  designed  to test 
the effectiveness  of a manualized  cognitive  behavioral  intervention  (CBI)  for the 
treatment  of anger  problems  in OEF/OIF/OND  veterans,  compared  to a manualized  
supportive therapy  intervention  (SI) control  condition.  Our study  will expand  on 
preliminary  evidence  of the efficacy  of this intervention  in improving  multiple  measures  
of anger  outcome  including  risk for impairment  in family,  social,  and occupational  
functioning.  The study  will supplement  current  research  on anger  problems  in combat -
exposed  veterans,  which  has focused  primarily  on Vietnam  Veteran  samples  and has 
been  conducted  decades  after  return  from  the war -zone.  The longer  term  significance  of 
this project  lies in the potential  for adapting  the CBI anger  intervention  for use in VA 
hospitals  nationwide.  Future  dissemination  of this approach  can result  in high  public  
health  significance  by decreasing  adverse  anger  consequences  for Veterans,  including  
risk for divorce,  domestic  violence,  job loss  and instability.  
 
The overall  objective  is to conduct  a randomized  clinical  trial  with  120  Veterans  who  
were  exposed  to one or more  DSM -5 criterion  A traumatic  events  during  their  
deployment.  We will address  the following  specific  aims  and hypotheses:  
 
(1) To investigate  the efficacy  of CBI on primary  measures  of anger  
treatment  outcome.  We hypothesize  that:  
a) Compared  to SI, CBI will be associated  with  significantly  larger  reductions  
in anger  and aggressive  behaviors  at post -treatment  and at 3 and 6 month  
follow -ups.  
 
(2) To investigate  the efficacy  of CBI on secondary  measures  of anger  
treatment  outcome.  We hypothesize  that:  
a) Compared  to SI, CBI will be associated  with  significantly  more  
improvement  in social  functioning,  occupational  functioning,  quality  of 
life, and PTSD  symptoms  at post -treatment  and at 3 and 6 month  follow -
ups.  
 
(3) To examine  mechanisms  of action  of CBI.  We hypothesize  that:  
a) Change  in arousal,  cognitive,  and behavioral  domains  of anger  will 
mediate  outcome  for anger  and functioning  in the CBI condition.  
 
(4) To examine  the effectiveness  of CBI  for those  with and  without PTSD. 
We hypothesize  that:  
a) CBI will be superior  to SI on primary  and secondary  outcome  measures  
(aims  1 and 2) for those  with and  without  PTSD.  
 
2. Background,  Significance,  and  Rationale  
Anger  Problems  in Military  Personnel  and Veterans:  Poorly  controlled  anger  is a common  
3  
problem  with  often  devastating  effects  in veterans  who  have  served  in a warzone.  As 
early  as World  War  II, anger  and aggression  were  identified  as common  responses  to 
combat  stress  1, 2, and the association  between  combat  experience  and symptoms  of 
anger  and hostility  has repeatedly  been  demonstrated  in empirical  research  3, 4, 5. 
Findings  from  the National  Vietnam  Veterans  Readjustment  Survey4 showed  that  
Vietnam  veterans  exposed  to high  levels  of war  stress  expressed  higher  levels  of hostility  
and committed  more  violent  acts  compared  to Vietnam  era (non  theatre)  veterans,  
civilians,  and theatre  veterans  exposed  to lower  levels of war  stress.  Excessive  anger  and 
difficulty  managing  anger  were  also  shown  to increase  risk for divorce,  domestic  
violence,  job loss and instability,  and other  serious  impairments  in family,  social,  and 
occupational  functioning  4. 
 
Anger  problems  have  also  been  documented  in veterans  who  served  in the first  Gulf  war,  
with  up to 40%  reporting  moderate  to extreme  levels  of irritability  at a six-month  follow - 
up 6. Most  relevant  to the proposed  study,  emerging  evidence  indicates  that  anger  and 
aggression  are likely  to be problems  for a significant  proportion  of veterans  of Iraq  
(Operation  Iraqi  Freedom,  OIF;  Operation  New  Dawn,  OND)  and Afghanistan  (Operation  
Enduring  Freedom,  OEF).  Our data  (described  in preliminary  studies)  show  that  nearly  
half of National  Guard  and Reserve  personnel  reported  anger  or irritability  of moderate  
or worse  severity  following  return  from  deployment.  A survey  of reintegration  problems  
among  754 OEF/OIF  combat  veterans  receiving  VA Medical  care,  showed  that  anger  was  
the most  commonly  reported  problem,  with  57%  reporting  increased  problems  in 
controlling  anger  7. In a sample  comprised  of 117 OEF  and OIF combat  veterans  
presenting  to a VA Deployment  Health  Clinic,  39%  reported  at least  one act of 
aggression  such as destroying  property  (15%),  threatening  physical  violence  (21%)  
and/or  physical  fights  (10%)  within  the past  four  months  8. 
 
Anger  and aggression  are strongly  associated  with  PTSD  9, 10, and rates  of anger  problems  
tend  to be higher  in trauma -exposed  veterans  with  PTSD  compared  to those  without  4, 11. 
Nonetheless,  serious  anger  problems  are also  elevated  in trauma  exposed  veterans  
without  a diagnosis  of PTSD  4, 8, 12. Anger  has also  been  shown  to predict  the 
development  of PTSD13, 14, 15 across  a variety  of trauma  populations,  and among  those  
with  PTSD,  anger  is associated  with  poorer  treatment  outcome  16, 17. Finally,  anger  is a 
prominent  concern  for veterans  seeking  treatment 18, 19, and for their  partners  18. 
 
Treatments  for Anger  Problems : There  is a considerable  amount  of evidence  supporting   
the effects  of cognitive -behavioral  treatment  (CBT)  of anger,  and several  meta -analyses  
summarizing  this research  20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Beck  & Fernandez21 completed  a meta -analysis  of 
studies  that  used  cognitive -behavioral  interventions.  They  reported  a mean  weighted  
effect  size of .70 based  on 50 studies  incorporating  1640  participants.  The studies  
included  a   wide  range  of populations,  with  the majority  including  children  or 
adolescents  (50%),  inmates  (14%),  and college  students  (14%).  In addition  to the 
heterogeneous  samples,  limitation  of this meta -analysis  is that  effect  sizes  from  studies  
using between -and within  group  designs  were  pooled.  DiGiuseppe  and Tafrate22 
conducted  a meta -analysis  of 57 studies  of adult  samples  examining  a range  of 
intervention  types  for treating  anger  problems  in adults.  Although  the types  of sample  
4  
included  were  not described,  the reference  list suggests  a high  proportion  of studies  with  
cardiac  or hypertensive  samples,  abusive  parents,  inmates,  and college  students.  The 
majority  of intervention  types  would  be considered  CBT  approaches  (e.g.  stress  
inoculation  training,  cognitive  restructuring,  
relaxation,  systematic  desensitization,  behavioral  skills  training,  and combined  
approaches).  They  reported  an overall  effect  size of .71 averaged  across  a wide  range  of 
outcomes,  with  moderate  to large  improvements  on anger  self-report,  aggressive  
behavior,  positive  non-angry  behaviors,  attitudes  and cognitions,  type - A behavior,  and 
physiological  measures.  Averag e effect  sizes  were  .71 for anger  and 1.12  for aggression,  
and treatment  gains  were  maintained  at follow -up for the subset  of studies  including  
follow -up assessments.  They  also  reported  that  the use of treatment  manuals  and 
integrity  checks  produced  higher  effect  sizes,  and that  treatments  provided  on an 
individual  basis  were  associated  with  higher  average  effect  sizes  (1.16)  than  those  
delivered  on a group  basis  (.68).  
The most  recent  meta -analysis  by Del Vecchio & O’Leary23 was  more  restrictive  in study  
selection.  They  included  studies  of adults  only,  and required  subjects  to have  a score  in 
the clinical  range  on a standardized  measure,  random  assignment,  a control  group  
(including  no treatment,  minimal  treatment,  wait -list, or other  defined  by the 
investigator),  and at least  5 subjects  in each  cell.  The average  effect  size for CBT  (18 
studies)  was  .68, and for Cognitive  Therapy  (7 studies)  was  .82. Seventy -three  percent  of 
the studies  in this review  focused  on college  student  samples,  however,  limiting  
generalizability  to more  typical  clinical  samples.  Thus,  the research  on non-veteran  
samples  is promising  in terms  of the potential  of cognitive  behavioral  treatments  for 
anger  problems,  but given  the nature  of the samples  studied,  generalizability  to veteran  
samples  is unknown.  
 
Research  on Treatments  for Anger  in Military  Personnel  and Veterans:  Much  less is 
known  about  the efficacy  of such  treatments  for anger  problems  in military  personnel  
following  exposure  to war  zone  trauma.  There  is one published  study  to date  involving  
the use of Nova co’s intervention  with  veterans25. Vietnam  combat  veterans  with  chronic  
PTSD  and severe  problems  with  anger  and aggressive  behavior  received  12-sessions  of 
treatment  provided  on an individual  basis,  in addition  to routine  care.  Despite  a small  
sample  (total  of 15 in anger  treatment  and control  condition  completing  treatment),  they  
found  significant  effects  for the anger  treatment  (relative  to a control  group  receiving  
routine  care)  for multiple  self-report  measures  of anger  reactions  and anger  control.  The 
significant  differences  in anger  control  were  maintained  at an 18-month  follow -up 25. 
These  preliminary  findings  are promising,  particularly  given  the chronic  and severe  
nature  of the symptoms  in the individuals  studied  and the general  treatment  
refractoriness  in the population  as a whole.  
 
Two  studies  examined  cognitive  behavioral  treatments  for veterans  in open  trials.  One  
included  four  sessions  delivered  in a group  format  in a military/occupational  setting  to a 
sample  of 91 participants  including  active  duty  military  members  (82%),  civilian  
employees,  and spouses  of military  members  (9%  of each) 26. The other  study  27 included  
5  
a sample  of 51 male  veterans,  most  of whom  (72%)  served  in the Vietnam  war.  Both  
studies  showed  statistically  significant  pre to post  treatment  decreases  on state  and trait  
anger  scales,  but in the absence  of a control  group,  it is not possible  to rule  out other  
factors  that  may  account  for these  findings.  
Most  recently,  Morland  and colleagues  8 conducted  a noninferiority  trial  to determine  
whether  delivery  of a 12 session  group  based  cognitive  behavioral  anger  management  
treatment  by videoconferencing  was  as effective  as an in-person  group  for male  veterans  
with  PTSD.  The sample  included  primarily  Vietnam  Veterans  (76%).  Both  groups  were  
associated  with  significant  and comparable  reductions  in anger  symptoms,  leading  to the 
conclusion  that  video -conferencing  is an effective  and feasible  way  to deliver  treatment  
for anger  problems.  As with  the open  trials,  a limitation  of this study  in terms  of 
establishing  efficacy  is that  the absence  of a control  condition  precludes  conclusions  
regarding  the specific  effects  of the cognitive  behavioral  interventions  in both  conditions,  
as distinct  from  the benefits  of common  factors  such  as group  support,  mobilization  of 
hope,  and contact  with  therapists.  
 
To summarize,  problems  with  anger  are common  and have  serious  adverse  consequences  
in military  personnel  and veterans  who  have  served  in warzones.  Early  indications  are 
that the current  cohort  of OEF/OIF  veterans  is no exception.  Although  promising  findings  
for cognitive  behavioral  treatments  have  been  reported,  to date  there  is not a single    
adequately  powered  randomized  trial designed  to test the efficacy  of an anger  treatment  
compared  to an active  control  condition  in veterans.  Furthermore,  research  on anger  
treatment  for veterans  has relied  on self-report  measures,  and there  are no studies  to 
date  including  the use of a blinded  structured  interview  to assess  outcome.  The 
limitations  of existing  studies  of anger  treatment  in veterans  was highlighted  in a recent  
review29 that was  published  as part  of a series  of articles  commenting  on the updated  
VA/DOD  guidelines  for management  of PTSD:  “Given  the lack  of rigorou s research  
studies  evaluating anger  interventions  with  this [veterans  with  PTSD]  population,  
additional  research  in this area  is sorely  needed.  This  research  should  involve  the use of 
randomized  controlled  studies  to evaluation  anger  management  strategies  and should  
include  measures  that  assess  both  anger  and aggression”  (Taft et al., 2012,  p. 783).  
 
Furthermore,  research  on anger  treatment  for veterans  has relied  on self-report  
measures,  and there  are no studies  to date  including  the use of a blinded  structured  
interview  to assess  outcome.  The limitations  of existing  studies  of anger  treatment  in 
veterans  was  highlighted  in a recent  review  (Taft  et al., 2012)  that  was  published  as part  
of a series  of articles  commenting  on the updated  VA/DOD  guidelines  for management  
of PTSD:  “Given  the lack  of rigorous  research  studies  evaluating  anger  interventions  
with  this [veterans  with  PTSD]  population,  additional  research  in this area  is sorely  
needed.  This  research  should  involve  the use of randomized  controlled  studies  to 
evaluation  anger  management  strategies  and should  include  measures  that assess both 
anger  and aggression”  (Taft  et al., 2012,  p. 783).  
 
To determine  whether  there  are current  or completed  studies  of anger  treatment  in 
veterans,  we searched  lists  of funded  research  on grants.gov.  We also  searched  the 
6  
funded  grants  list for  VA HSR&D,  and for all VA funded  MIRECs.  We did not find  any 
currently  funded  studies  examining  treatment  for anger  in veterans.  Completed  studies  
listed  included  the Morland  study  described  above,  and a pilot  study  of a cognitive  
behavioral  group  therapy  for male  veterans  with  a history  of intimate  partner  violence.  
We have  collaborated  with  the PI (Dr. Casey  Taft)  of the pilot  study  in a DoD  funded  
clinical  trial  of the same  treatment  which  is nearing  completion.  Recruitment  for that  
study  is open  to veterans  of all eras  with IPV,  and has drawn  heavily  from  the court  
system.  It is not restricted  to OEF/OIF/OND  veterans,  and does  not address  anger  
problems  outside  of those  that  have  already  resulted  in domestic  violence.  We also  
contacted  the Office  of Mental  Health  (Dr. Karlin)  to inquire  whether  there  are any 
clinical  initiatives  with  a focus  on anger  treatment,  and were  informed  that  there  are no 
current  or planned  initiatives  on this topic  at this time.  
 
Models  of War  Related  Anger : Why  are problems  with  anger  so prominent  in veterans  
who  have  served  in war  zones?  One  explanation  is that  higher  levels  of arousal  and 
hypervigilance  following  repeated  exposure  to life threatening  situations  result  in a lower  
threshold  for anger  reactions.  Second,  military  training  focuses  on responding  to threat  
with  aggression,  and response  to threat  with  aggression  is associated  with  the powerful  
reinforcement  of survival  in combat  experiences.  Novaco  and Chemtob11 proposed  a 
model  for the relationship  between  anger  and trauma  that  incorporates  the adaptive  
value  of anger  and aggression  in life threatening  situations.  Their model  also builds  
upon Novaco’s  earlier  model  that  conceptualizes  anger  as the result  of the cognitive  
processing  of environmental  circumstances,  physiological  arousal,  and behavioral  
reactions,  which  interact  with  each  other  and with  environmental  circumstances  30. This  
three -domain  framework  was  subsequently  integrated  with  Chemto b et al.’s25 
information  processing  model  of dysregulation.  They  describe  a “survival  mode”  of 
functioning  involving over - activation  of cognitive  structures  that  facilitate  a response  to 
life threatening  situations.  
Once  triggered,  the “survival  mode” preempts  all other cognitive  processing  including  a 
loss  of self-monitoring.  Additional characteristics associated  with “survival mode”  
include  specific  cognitive  biases  such  as a tendency  to react  more  quickly  by requiring  
less evidence  of threat  to engage  action  and decreasing  capacity  to regulate  arousal  level  
25. 
These  processes  explain  the dysregulation,  or inability  to adaptively  regulate  behavioral  
responses  to threat,  and the persisting  response  of excessive  anger  and aggression  in 
situations  perceived  as threatening,  even  in the absence  of real  threat.  Thus,  a response  
that  is highly  adaptive  during  combat  becomes  maladaptive  with  the loss of the ability  to 
regulate  the intensity  and expression  of anger  appropriate  to the current  social  and 
environmental  conditions  11. Thus  key elements  of poorly  controlled  anger  include  
cognitive  processing  characterized  by overestimates  of threat,  high  levels  of arousal,  and 
inability  to regulate  the intensity  of emotion  and behavioral  response.  
 
Summary  of Significance : Given  the frequency,  severity,  and chronicity  of anger  problems  
in combat -exposed  veterans,  there  is a critical  need  for further  research  to establish  
optimal  interventions  using  larger  samples  and adequate  control  groups.  Since  cognitive  
7  
behavioral  interventions  require  more  intensive  training  and experience  than  supportive  
therapy  approaches,  it is important  to determine  whether  such  treatmen ts exceed  the 
effects  of a positive  therapeutic  relationship,  therapist  support,  and an opportunity  to 
talk about  problems.  Furthermore,  the research  to date  has focused  primarily  on 
Vietnam  Veteran  samples  and has been  conducted  decades  after  return  from  the war -
zone.  For these  veterans,  no treatment  was  available  until  many  years  after  anger  had 
negatively  impacted  relationships,  jobs,  and health.  Potential  advantages  of earlier  
intervention,  before  the secondary  consequences  of anger  problems  are established,  
highlight  the significance  of testing  interventions  in military  personnel  and veterans  
earlier  on after  their  deployments.  The goal  is to prevent  anger -related  problems  
following  deployment  from  becoming  entrenched  and chronic,  that  is, before  these  
problems  take  their  toll on social  and occupational  functioning,  quality  of life, and 
physical  health.  
 
Promising  findings  from  our pilot  work  suggest  that  the adapted  cognitive  behavioral  
intervention  has the potential  to effectively  treat  anger  problems  in this new  cohort  of 
veterans.  If shown  to be effective  in a fully  powered  clinical  trial, with  subsequent  
dissemination  this intervention  may  result  in a significant  reduction  in the negative  
consequences  associated  with  ongoing  anger -related  problems  and the extensive  
personal  and societal  costs  of these  consequences.  
 
3. Preliminary  Studies  
Veteran  PTSD  Risk  Factors  Study : We recruited  a sample  of National  Guard  and Reserve  
Veterans  following  their  return  from  deployment  in Iraq  or Afghanistan  for a study  of risk 
factors  for and early  longitudinal  course  of PTSD.  Participants  were  recruited  at post - 
deployment  health  screenings  and re-screenings.  The Clinician  Administered  PTSD  Scale  
(CAPS)  was  used  to assess  PTSD  symptoms.  A portion  of the initial  sample  of 238  
participants  was  re-assessed  as funding  allowed,  including  215  at 6 months  and 169 at 12 
months  post -return.  (The  smaller  sample  at 12 months  was  due primarily  to not having  
funds  to continue  the follow -up as opposed  to attrition).  Although  only  10.5%  met  
criteria  for PTSD  at the first  month  post -return,  PTSD  symptoms  were  common.  
Hyperarousal  symptoms  were  the most  frequent,  with  percent  of individual  symptoms  
ranging  from  21%  to 55%  at the first  month  post  return,  in contrast  to re-experiencing  
symptoms  (range  9% to 17%)  and numbing/avoidance  symptoms  (2%  to 21%)  (figure  
1). Among  the hyperarousal  symptoms  (see  figure  2), hypervigilance  and anger  were  the 
two most  common  symptoms  at all time  points  assessed.  Even  at 12 months  post -return,  
38%  of participants  still met  the CAPS  anger  symptom  criteria.  
 
Examination  of the associations  between  PTSD  symptom  cluster  scores  and measures  of 
functioning  and distress  showed  that  while  symptoms  of numbing  and avoidance  were  
the strongest  predictors  of impairment in  interpersonal  and social  functioning,  
hyperarousal  symptoms  were  the strongest  predictors  of overall  severity  and distress  31. 
When  individual  symptoms  were  examined  in relationship  to measures  of functional  
impairment,  anger  was  the strongest  predictor  of impairment  in overall  adjustment  
(Global  Assessment  of Functioning  Score)  and social  functioning  31. Thus,  with  the 
8  
exception  of hypervigilanc e, anger  was  the most  frequent  symptom  of PTSD  at all three  
time  points,  and was  the strongest  predictor  of impairment  in social  and overall  
functioning.  
 
Pilot  study  of CBI:  We completed  a treatment  study  designed  to adapt  the cognitive - 
behavioral  intervention  (CBI)  for the treatment  of anger  to specific  needs  of military  
personnel  returning  from  Iraq  and Afghanistan,  and to conduct  a randomized  pilot  study  
to examine  feasibility,  acceptability,  and preliminary  evidence  of efficacy  of the adapted  
intervention  in this population  32. The first  phase  involved  adapting  the manual,  
administering  the adapted  CBI to 12 participants,  and piloting  a supportive  intervention  
(SI) to two participants.  The SI manual  was  an adapted  version  of the Present  Centered  
Therapy  (PCT)  that  the Dr. Shea  adapted  as a control  condition  for a Cooperative  Studies  
Program  #494  “Treatment  of PTSD  in Women Veterans”.  Our experience  in Phase  I led 
to further  revisions  of both  manuals.  The goal  of the second  phase  was  to conduct  a 
randomized  pilot  study  of male  and female  participants  assigned  to receive  either  CBI or 
SI. 
 
Table  3: Between  groups  differences  at post -treatment  adjusting  for pre-
treatment  scores  (ANCOVA)  and  effect  sizes  
 
Variable  F P Effect  Size  
STAXI -2 
Anger  Expression  Index  
Expression  In 
Expression  Out 
Control  In 
Control  Out  
7.6 
9.9 
24.0  
5.7 
6.0  
.019  
.004  
<.001  
.034  
.031   
1.12  
1.13  
0.98  
1.08  
1.22  
OAS -M 
Aggression  
Total   
4.28  
4.55   
.059  
.053   
0.78  
0.82  
Outcomes  Questionnaire  
Interpersonal  Relations  
Symptom  Distress  
Social  Role   
6.24  
1.40  
5.81   
.028  
.260  
.033   
1.24  
0.59  
1.20  
 
Despite  the small  sample  size,  CBI was  statistically  superior  to SI in reducing  anger  
problems  on the primary  outcome  measures.  CBI showed  significantly  more  
improvement  than  SI (p < .05)  on the STAXI -2 expression  and control  scales  and the 
anger  expression  index.  The OAS -M was  administered  by trained  interviewers  who  
were  blind  to treatment  condition.  Differences  on the aggression  scale  score  and the 
total  OAS -M score  were  close  to significance  (p < .06).  On the self-report  Outcomes  
Questionnaire,  CBI improved  significantly  more  than  SI on two of the three  scales.  
Between  group  effect  sizes  reflecting  the greater  improvement  for CBI compared  to SI 
were  large,  ranging  from  .78 to 1.24.  
 
9  
4. Research  Design  and  Methods  
 
A. Overview  
The goal  of this proposal  is to investigate  the effectiveness  of CBI in treating  anger  
problems  in OEF/OIF/OND  veterans.  This  is consistent  with  the goal  of the RR&D  
Deployment  Health  Research  (OEF/OIF)  Funding  Opportunity  (RX-11-016)  to increase  
research  addressing  the health  care  needs  of Veterans  returning  from  Afghanistan  and 
Iraq,  including  studies  that  seek  to increase  participation  in family  and social  
activities,  maintain  employment,  and improve  overall  quality  of life. 
B. Participants  
The sample  will consist  of 120  OEF/OIF/OND  male  and female  veterans  who  were  
exposed  to one or more  DSM -5 criterion  A traumatic  events  during  their  deployment,  
and are experiencing  excessive  irritability  and/or  outbursts  of anger  and at least  two 
additional  hyperarousal  symptoms  of PTSD  (i.e.,  difficulty  falling  or staying  asleep,  
difficulty  concentrating,  hypervigilance,  exaggerated  startle  response).  
 
Inclusion/exclusion  criteria  
The inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  are based  on an attempt  to be as unrestrictive  as 
possible  while  ensuring  the safety  of participants  and maintaining  the internal  validity  of 
the study.  In order  to be included,  participants  must:  
 
• be male  or female  current  or former  members of the military  (active  duty,  
National  Guard  or Reserve)  
• have  served  in OEF,  OIF,  or OND  
• have  experienced  trauma  during  deployment  
• report  clinically  significant  anger  as measured  by the CAPS -5 anger  criterion  
(rating of 2 or higher on the item describing experiencing persistent negative 
mood states, with anger being one of the intense emotions experienced, and/or 
the item involving problemat ic expression of anger/irritability in behavior ) report  
a minimum  of two additional  symptoms  from  the PTSD  hyperarousal   symptom  
cluster  
• be interested  in receiving  treatment  for anger  
• consent  to be randomized  
• not receive  other  active  PTSD  or Cognitive -Behavioral  treatment , or any 
individual  or group  treatment  focused  on problems  with  anger  management  
during  the intervention  phase  
• not have  had new  psychotropic  medication  or dosage  changes  with  the prior  
4 weeks.  
 
Potential  participants  will be excluded  for any of the following  reasons:  
• the presence of a severe substance or alcohol use disorder in the last 3 months   
• current  psychotic  symptoms  (in the last 3 months)  
• current  mania  or manic episode with in the last 3 months  
• current  suicidal  or homicidal  ideation  requiring  hospitalization  
10  
• any severe  cognitive  impairment  or history  of Organic  Mental  Disorder  
 
Considerations  in determining  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  
All of our listed  exclusion  criteria  are designed  to exclude  those  who  would  need  
alternative  treatment  or would  be unlikely  to benefit  from  the proposed  treatment.  In 
terms  of inclusion  criteria,  several  require  further  comment.  First,  although  we originally  
proposed  excluding  women,  we have  taken  the reviewers  recommendation  to reconsider  
this decision  and will include  both  men  and women.  Although  research  has shown  that  
females  tend  to have  lower  levels  of physical  aggression  than  males  33, reviews  have  
suggested  that  sex differences  for verbal  aggression  are generally  much  smaller 34. Given  
that  there  are increasing  numbers  of female  veterans  with  exposure  to warzone  trauma  
(as well  as military  sexual  assault),  many  of whom  are likely  to have  problems  with  
anger,  it will be important  to have  effective  treatments  for both  genders.  We will balance  
randomization  and examine  possible  differences  in outcome  by sex, and include  sex as a 
covariate  in analyses  if needed.  
 
A second  important  consideration  was  whether  to restrict  the sample  to those  with  a 
PTSD  diagnosis.  Many  studies  report  more  severe  anger  problems  in veterans  with  PTSD  
than  in those  without,  and it is possible  that  anger  problems  differ  in other  ways  in those  
with  and without  PTSD.  Further,  two of the existing  treatment  studies  of anger  in 
veterans  required  PTSD  diagnoses.  On the other  hand,  significant  anger  problems  are 
also  common  in combat  exposed  veterans  without  a PTSD  diagnosis  12, 8, and not 
requiring  a PTSD  diagnosis  will make  the findings  relevant  to a larger  proportion  of 
returning  veterans.  We decided  not to require  a PTSD  diagnosis  for inclusion,  but we will 
require  exposure  to trauma  during  deployment,  and the presence  of at least  three  
hyperarousal  symptoms  (one  being  anger  and irritability).  This  requirement  is 
consistent  with  the conceptualization  of anger  as linked  to hyperarousal  in veterans  
exposed  to war -zone  life threat.  We will include  presence  of a PTSD  diagnosis  as a 
balancing  factor  in urn randomization  and will conduct  exploratory  analyses  to examine  
whether  treatment  effects  are the same  for participants  with  and without  a PTSD  
diagnosis.  
 
We will exclude  participants  with  severe  cognitive  impairment  who  would  be unable  to 
readily  understand  the concepts.  If such  impairment  is suspected,  a mental  status  exam  
will be conducted.  Veterans  with  mild  traumatic  brain  injury  (mTBI)  will not be excluded  
as the typical  level  of cognitive  impairment  associated  with  mTBI  is not sufficiently  
severe  to interfere  with  treatment  implementation.  
 
C. Recruitment  procedures  
Participants  will be recruited  from  a range  of sources.  The primary  recruitment  source  
will be the Providence  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center,  including  the OEF/OIF  specialty  
primary  care  clinic,  the Returning  Veterans  Outreach  Program  (REVOC),  and the PTSD  
Clinic.  In FY 2011,  1261  unique  OEF/OIF/OND  veterans  were  seen  in these  clinics,  with  
10 to 15 new  consults  per week  across  the two programs.  Dr. Shea  is on the staff  of the 
PTSD  clinic,  and Dr. Lambert  is the director  of the REVOC  clinic  and acting  director  of 
the PTSD  clinic.  
11  
 
The Providence  VAMC  has established  a new  women’s  specialty clinic  in primary  care,  
which  is housed  in a new  building  adjacent  to our offices  as well  as the PTSD and 
Returning  Veterans  Clinics.  We will draw  upon  these  resources  as well  as the additional  
outreach  methods  described  to recruit  OEF/OIF/OND  women  veterans.  
 
Study  participants  will also  be recruited  through  outreach  efforts  to military  family  
organizations,  community -based  troop  support  organizations,  veteran  organizations,  as 
well  as to the active  military  community.  Additional  outreach  efforts  will include  making  
presentations  at military  reintegration  events,  such  as Yellow  Ribbon  post -mobilization  
weekend  retreats,  posting  fliers  at military  bases  and in the community,  as well  as 
making  presentations  to interested  community  groups.  Potential participants will also 
be recruited with the assistance of our study recruiter, Paul Darcy, who will seek to 
engage Veterans in study treatment from the community, Veterans’ court, and other VA 
facilities (e.g., Vet Center s). Veterans who express interest in participating in the study 
will be asked t o contact study staff directly or to sign a form giving permission for the 
study staff to contact them.  
 
Study advertisements will also be posted on the official PVAMC online posting sites (i.e. 
the PVAMC Twitter and PVAMC Facebook pages) according to the  guidance of the 
PVAMC Public Affairs Officer. All advertisements will be reviewed and approved by the 
PVAMC IRB prior to release . 
Screening  and  Informed  Consent  Procedures  
Potential  participants  who  are referred  through  one of the sources  described  above  or 
who  contact  study  personnel  directly  will enter  the screening  phase. Where  possible,  the 
medical  record  will be examined  to determine  if war  era (i.e. OEF,  OIF,  OND)  criterion  is 
met,  and whether  diagnostic  exclusion  criteria  (e.g.  current  severe substance  use 
disorder , mania  or psychotic  symptoms)  are present.  
 
Potential  participants  will have  telephone  contact  with  a study  interviewer  who  will 
provide  information  that  will enable  potential  participants  to decide  whether  they  want  
to be considered  for the study  (i.e.,  purpose  of the study,  the two intervention  conditions,  
use of random  assignment,  time  commitment  required  for both  treatment  and 
assessment,  and schedule  of payments).  Those  who  are interested  will obtain  an 
appointment  with the  interviewer.  
 
During  the next  stage  of screening,  interviewers  will review  the Informed  Consent  forms  
to explain  the study  in greater  detail.  The participant  will be fully  informed  of the nature  
and extent  of study  participation,  the objectives of the study,  and the two interventions  
to which  they  may  be randomly  assigned.  Participants  also  will be informed  of the fee 
payment  structure  that  applies  to the follow -up assessments  they  will complete  
following  the treatment  phase.  Interviewers  will be trained  to ensure  that  all 
participants  comprehend  the nature  of the study  and the wording  of the consent  form,  
and will provide  a copy  of the forms  for potential  participants  to take  home.  
 
12  
After  reviewing  the consent  form,  the interviewer  will ask if the participant is interested 
in proceeding with the next phase of screening to determine if s/he meets all study 
inclusion/exclusion criteria. If s/he is willing to proceed   s/he will also  be asked  to sign  a 
HIPAA  authorization  form.  We will ask participants  if they  are willing  to have  a 
significant  other  complete  anger  outcome  measures  for the purpose  of providing  an 
additional  perspective  on amount  and types  of change  following  treatment  (as described  
below).  If the participant  agrees,  s/he  will be asked  for permission  to contact  the 
nominated  individual  as part  of the consent  process.  Although  encouraged,  identification  
of collaterals  will not be required  for inclusion  in the study.  
 
In the final  stage  of screening,  interviewers  will complete  interviews  to establish  inclusion  
and exclusion  criteria.  The Structured  Clinical  Interview  for the DSM -V (SCID)  will be 
administered  to assess  for the presence  of current  (in the last 3 months)  psychosis,  mania, 
or a substance  use disorder . The Clinician -Administered  PTSD  Scale  (CAPS)  37 will be used  to 
establish  recent  exposure  to a traumatic  stressor.  The CAPS  includes  a lifetime  trauma  
checklist  and questions  about  stressor  exposure,  which  will be used  to ensure  that  
participants  meet  the DSM -5 criterion  of stressor  exposure  that  is required  for diagnosis  
and for inclusion  in the study.  This  checklist  will be supplemented  with  additional  questions  
inquiring  about  common  stressors  associated  with  current  hazardous  deployments.  The 
trauma  checklists  will provide  descriptive  information  about  participants  at study  entry.  
After  establishing  that  the potential  participant  has experienced  at least  one combat -related  
criterion  A stressor,  the interviewer  will skip  to section  E (hyperarousal)  to assess  for the 
presence  of trauma -related  anger  and arousal.  Inclusion  criteria  for the study  involve  
endorsement  of at least  two arousal  symptoms,  in addition to  experiencing  persistent 
negative mood states, with anger being one of the intense emotions experienced, and/or the 
item problematic expression of anger/irritability in behavior . If the participant  does  not rule  
out based  on these  measures,  the interviewer  will administer  the remainder  of the CAPS  
interview  and SCID  and the remaining  questionnaires  and interviews  of the assessment  
battery.  
 
In addition  to documenting  that  inclusion  and exclusion  are met,  a screening  form  
completed  at this point  records  referral  source,  all prior  deployments,  and date  of return  
from  most  recent  deployment.  
 
D. Assessment  
D. 1. Screening,  Diagnostic  and  Sample  Characterization  Measures  
Structured  Clinical  Interview  for DSM -IV (SCID),  patient  version . The DSM -5 version  of the 
SCID35 will be used  during  screening  to establish  exclusion  diagnoses  (substance  use 
disorders , psychosis,  and mania).  It will also  provide  assessment  of non -excluded  Axis  I 
disorders,  which  will be examined  for possible  effects  on treatment  outcome,  and used  as 
covariates  in the outcome  analyses  as needed.  
 
Clinician  Administered  PTSD  Scale  (CAPS) : The CAPS  36 (updated  for DSM -5) will be 
administered  at screening  to assess  the DSM -5 diagnostic  criteria  for PTSD.  It will also  be 
used  at post -treatment  and follow -up as a secondary  measure  of outcome . The CAPS  has 
excellent  reliability  and validity36, 37 and is widely  used  in PTSD  treatment  research.  Each  
13  
one of the DSM -5 PTSD symptoms  is rated  on a 0-4 (low  to high)  scale  to determine 
symptom severity . The cutoff  used to establish  the presence  of an individual  symptom  is a 
score of 2 or greater . In addition,  overall  PTSD  severity  is computed  by summing  the 
totals  for all items.  
 
Hoge  Combat  Experiences  Scale:  This  scale  is included  as a measure  of trauma  exposure  in 
the warzone  because  it was  developed  specifically  to assess  trauma  exposure  in the Iraq  
and Afghanistan  theatres  38. As such  it includes  items  more  specific  to these  wars  (e.g.  IEDs,  
searching  homes).  Items  assess  frequency  of being  in serious  danger,  number  of firefights,  
injury  including  head  injury,  and frequency  of exposure  to 13 combat  and other  trauma  
events  rated  on a scale  from  0 (never)  to 4 (10 or more  times).  
Childhood  Trauma  Questionnaire : The CTQ  is a self-report  measure  developed  to 
retrospectively  assess  experiences  of abuse  and neglect  in childhood,  as well  as aspects  of 
the child -rearing  environment.  It consists  of 53 items  rated  on a 5-point  Likert  scale,  and 
has evidence  of good  internal  consistency  and test-retest  reliability  39. 
 
Brief  Symptom  Inventory : The Brief  Symptom  Inventory  (BSI)  is a 53-item  version  of the 
Symptom  Checklist  90- Revised.  It includes  9 symptom  scales  and global  measures  of 
symptom  severity  and psychological  distress40. 
 
Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality -2 (SNAP -2): The Schedule for 
Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality -2 (SNAP -2) is a 390 -item self -report measure of 
personality. It includes 12 trait scales assessing maladaptive personality and three 
temperament scales of Negative Temperament, positive Temperament and Disinhibition 
assessing higher order personality domains. It has been shown to demonstrate  good 
reliability and validity41, 42.  
 
Brief Addiction Monitor . The Use subscale of the Brief Addiction Monitor will be used to 
assess for frequency of alcohol and substance use within the past month at baseline and 
follow up asse ssments. This measure has been shown to be valid and reliable in prior 
research43.  
 
D. 2. Primary  Outcome  Measures:  Anger  and  Aggression  
Two  measures  will serve  as the primary  outcome  measures  for anger:  the Anger  
Expression  Index  (AXI)  from  the State -Trait  Anger  Inventory -244 and the Aggression  
Scale  score  from  the Overt  Aggression  Scale -Modified45. 
 
STAXI -2: The STAXI -2 46 is a revision  of Spielberger’s  State -Trait  Anger Expression  
Inventory  (STAXI),  expanded  from  44 to 57 items  on the basis  of over  a decade  of 
research.  It is a self-report  questionnaire  consisting  of six scales  and an Anger  
Expression  Index  (AX).  Scales  include  State  Anger,  which  measures  the intensity  of 
current  angry  feelings;  Trait  Anger,  which  measures  the frequency  of angry  feelings  over  
time;  Anger  Expression -Out,  which  measures  how  often  angry  feelings  are expressed  in 
verbally  or physical  aggressive  behavior;  Anger  Expression -In, which  measures  how  
often  angry  feelings  are experienced  but not expressed;  Anger  Control -Out,  which  
14  
measures  how  often  a person  controls  the outward  expression  of angry  feelings;  and 
Anger  Expression -In, which  measures  how  often  a person  tries  to control  angry  feelings  
by calming  down.  The Anger  Expression  Index  is an overall  measure  of the expression  
and control  of anger  based  on responses  to the two anger  expression  and the two anger  
control  subscales.  The original  STAXI  and the STAXI -2 have  been  widely  used  in 
treatment  studies,  including  veteran  samples  25, 27, 28 and has substantial  psychometric  
evidence,  including  convergent  and discriminant  validity,  and sensitivity  to change45. 
 
OAS -M: The OAS -M is a 25-item  clinician -administered,  semi -structured  interview  with    
nine  subscales  45, 47 . It was  designed  to evaluate  various  manifestations  of aggressive  
behaviors  in outpatients,  including  the severity,  type,  and frequency  of aggressive  
behavior.  The scale  assesses  three  overall  domains:  Aggression  (Verbal  Aggression,  
Aggression  Against  Objects,  Aggression  Against  Others,  and Aggression  Against  Self),  
Irritability  (Global  Irritability  and Subjective  Irritability),  and Suicidality  (Suicidal  
Tendencies,  Intent  of Attempt,  and Lethality  of Attempt). Only  the Aggression  and 
Irritability  subsc ales  will be used  in the current  study.  The two Irritability  subscales  are 
rated  on Likert -type  scales  from  0 = none  at all to 5 = extreme.  The Aggression  scale  uses  a 
different  format  in which  each  specific  behavior  is scored  separately  by frequency  and 
then multiplied  by assigned  weights.  For each  Aggression  subscale,  seven  specific  
behaviors  are listed  in order  of severity  and then  weighted  by their  respective  rank.  The 
weighted  frequencies  are summed  to form  each  subscale  score.  Subscale  scores  are then  
multiplied  by their  own  assigned  weight:  Verbal  Aggression  by 1, Aggression  Against  
Objects  by 2, and Aggression  Against  Others  and Self each  by 3.  Weighted  subscales  are 
added  to obtain  a final  scale  score  for Aggression.  Evidence  for inter -rater  and test-retest  
reliability  has been  documented  for the OAS -M, with  intraclass  correlations  (ICCs)  of .91 
and greater  for inter -rater,  and ICCs  of .46 to .54 for test-retest  reliability,  and the OAS -M 
has demonstrated  sensitivity  to pharmacotherapy -induced  changes  in aggression   47, 48. 
The time  frame  of the OAS -M is restricted  to the past  week.  The OAS -M will be 
administered  by interviewers  blinded  to treatment  condition.  
 
Anger  Consequences  Scale  (ACQ) : The ACQ  is a brief  self-report  measure  developed  to 
assess  the frequency  of negative  anger -related  behavioral  consequences.  Internal  
consistencies  of .75 to .91 were  reported  on the original  42 item  version;  the revised  
version  shortened  the measure  to 33 items  based  on factor  analysis   49. This  scale  
includes  items  not covered  by the other  anger  measures,  including  for example,  trouble  
with  the law,  driving  recklessly,  getting  into  an accident,  damaging  relationships,  etc. 
 
Dimensions  of Anger  Response  (DAR) : The DAR,  developed  by Novaco50 is a 7-item  self- 
report  measure  of anger  reactions.  A more  recent  report  on the psychometrics  of the DAR  
showed  it to be unidimensional,  reliable,  and sensitive  to change  over  time  50, 51. The DAR  
will be administered  at each  session.  
 
D. 3. Collateral  Assessments  
Data  from  collaterals  can provide  an important  additional  perspective  on treatment  
outcome.  We will ask participants  if they  are willing  to have  a significant  other  complete  
15  
anger  outcome  measures  for the purpose  of providing  an additional  perspective  on 
amount  and types  of change  following  treatment.  For each  participant  who  agrees,  we 
will ask him  or her to identify  the person  or persons  with  whom  they  spend  the most  
time,  and/or  have  sufficient  interactions  to be familiar  with the participant’s  typical 
behavior.  A minimum of  5 hours  of contact  a week will  be required  to qualify  as a 
collateral  reporter.  If there  are multiple  possible  candidates,  we will ask the participant  to 
identify  the one who  they  believe  would  be the best  able  to provide  a valid  assessment  of 
their  anger.  Participants  may  take  up to two days  to consider  the request  and to discuss  
with  the potential  collateral.  If the participant  agrees,  s/he  will be asked  for permission  to 
contact  the nominated  individual  as part  of the consent  process.  Although  encouraged,  
identification  of collaterals  will not be required  for inclusion  in the study.  Collaterals  will 
be fully  informed  of the study  requirements  and if they  are willing  to participate,  will be 
asked  to sign  informed  consent.  Collaterals  will also  be provided  with  the Notice  of VHA  
Privacy  Practices.  They  will be asked  to complete  the STAXI -II (excluding  the state  anger  
scale),  the Sheehan Disability Scale,  and the Overt  Aggression  Scale  interview  at pre- and 
posttreatment.  These  measures  will be adapted  from  first  to third  person  for this 
purpose.  We will record  demographic  information,  the nature  of the relationship  (e.g.  
spouse,  family  member,  friend)  and the average  number  of hours  of contact  per week  
with  the participant . At post -treatment, we will also administer a collateral version of to 
the Patient Satisfaction form.  
D. 4. Secondary  Outcome  Measures:  Functioning  and  Quality  of Life 
Longitudinal  Interval  Follow -Up Evaluation:  Psychosocial  functioning  scales  from  the 
clinician  administered  Longitudinal  Interval  Follow -up Evaluation52 will provide  
assessment  of functioning  in areas  of work  (employment,  household,  or student),  familial  
and nonfamilial  interpersonal  relationships,  recreation,  and global  social  adjustment  on 
separate  6 to 8-point  scales.  Ratings  will be based  on the past  month.  The psychosocial  
functioning  ratings  have  been  found  to be of generally  high  reliability 52, 53. 
 
Outcomes  Questionnaire : Functioning  will also  be assessed  by the self-report  Outcomes  
Questionnaire  (OQ)  which  was  developed  as a psychotherapy  outcome  measure  54. The 
OQ includes  three  subscales:  symptom  distress,  interpersonal  relations,  and social  role  
functioning.  Test -retest  coefficients  in the mid  .70s  and .80s  and internal  consistency  in 
the low .90s  provide  evidence  for reliability.  Concurrent  validity  has been  demonstrated  
in relation  to other  measures,  the OQ has been  shown  to be fairly  stable  in untreated  
individuals  and sensitive  to change  in those  individuals  in treatment  55. 
 
World Health Organization Quality of Life (WHOQOL -BREF):  The World Health Organization 
Quality of Life (WHOQOL -BREF), is 26 item self -report measure used to assess quality of 
life in multiple domains (i.e., physical, psychological, social, and environment ). 
Psychometric properties suggest that the measure is valid and reliable across cultures and 
nations56.  
 
 
D. 5. Mediators  of Outcome  
Novaco  Anger  Scale  (NAS) : The three  subscales  of the NAS  (cognitive,  arousal,  and 
16  
behavioral)  will be examined  as possible  mediators  of CBI treatment  outcome.  The revised  
version  of these  scales  includes  48 items  measuring  impairment  in the three  components  
of Novaco’s  model  57, 58. As described  further  below, the  intervention  in the current  study,  
adapted  from Novaco’s stress  inoculation anger control  treatment,  includes  strategies  to 
address  each  of these  components.  The published  manual  for the NAS -PI57, 58 reports  
findings  of high  levels  of internal  consistency  across  a number  of normal  and psychiatric  
samples.  Of particular  relevance  to the population  to be addressed  in this study  is the 
data  provided  by Chemtob  and colleagues  on 114  Vietnam  veterans  which  yielded  alpha  
coefficients  of 0.97  and 0.96  for the NAS  and PI, respectively  25. 
D. 6. Additional  measures  
Treatment  Satisfaction : a brief  4 item  measure  adapted  from  the Treatment  Satisfaction  
Form  used  in the NIMH  Treatment  of Depression  Collaborative  Research  Program  will be 
used  to assess  satisfaction  with  treatment.  
 
Treatment  Utilization:  The Longitudinal  Interval  Follow -Up Assessment  (LIFE)  treatment  
section  provides  continuous  recording  of mental  health  and medical  treatments  52. For 
the latter,  number  of hospitalizations,  days  spent  in hospital,  and number  of outpatient  
visits  for non-mental  health  medical  treatments  are recorded  for the time  period  
covered.  Types  and amounts  of all mental  health  contacts,  including  inpatient  and 
outpatient  treatment,  are recorded  on a monthly  basis.  All psychiatric  medications,  
including  dosages  are recorded  on a weekly  basis  (see  Appendix  4 for list of 
medications).  We will also  assess  all prescribed  non -psychiatric  medications,  over  the 
counter  medications  (including  caffeine),  and herbal  and other  supplements  taken  for 
any reason.  
 
A baseline  version  (LIFE -Base)  assesses  mental  health  treatment  received  prior  to 
entering  the study.  We will adapt  the LIFE -Base  to indicate  whether  prior  treatment  
occurred  before,  during,  or after  deployment,  and also  to assess  whether  prior  treatment  
focused  specifically  on anger  or PTSD.  
 
 
D. 7. Schedule  of Assessments  
The schedule  of assessments  is shown  in Table  1. The CAPS  and the SCID  will be 
administered  during  the screening  process  prior  to randomization  to ensure  that  only  
eligible  participants  are entered  into  the study.  Only  eligible  participants  will complete  the 
full CAPS  and SCID  and other  pre-treatment  measures.  Assessments  will be conducted  at 
pre-treatment,  during  treatment  (after  sessions  4 and 8), end of treatment  (week  12),  and 
at three  and six months  following  completion  of treatment.  We estimate  that  completion  
of the SCID  and the CAPS  will take  2 hours  on average,  and that  the remaining  pre-
treatment  measures  will take  about  2 ½ hours.  The pre-treatment  assessment  will be 
conducted  in 2 sessions.  Mid-treatment  assessments  should  take  about  45 minutes.  We 
estimate  that  post - treatment  and follow -up assessments  will take  about  2 ½ hours  on 
average.  
 
We will aim to complete  the post -treatment  and follow -up assessments  in a single  
17  
session,  providing  breaks  if needed.  If necessary  due to participant  burden,  we will 
schedule  a second  assessment  session.  We will prioritize  the order  of measures  
administered  to ensure  that  in all cases  the anger  outcome  measures  (OAS -M, STAXI -2, 
and ACQ),  and the Outcomes  Questionnaire  are completed . Telephone  assessments  will 
be used  if participants  are unable  to come  in for assessments.  Every  attempt  will be 
made  to perform  post - treatment  and follow -up assessments  within  one week  of their  
scheduled  date.  
 
 
Table 1. Schedule  of Assessments  
 
Domain  Screening  Pre-Tx Sessions  
4 and 8 Post -Tx Follow -up 
(3 and 6 
months)  
Inclusion/exclusion Criteria  
SCID  
CAPS   
X 
X  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
X   
 
X  
Sample  Characterization  
SNAP -2 
CTQ  
Combat  Exposure  
BSI 
BAM (Use subscale)  
 
BAM (Use subscale)  
 
 
   
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  
 
 
 
X 
  
 
 
 
X 
  
 
 
 
X 
X 
Anger  
OAS -M* 
STAXI -2* 
ACQ*  
DAR  (weekly)    
X 
X 
X  
X 
X  
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
Function/QOL  
LIFE psychosoc  
OQ 
Disability Scale  
WHOQOL -BREF    
X 
X 
X 
X   
X 
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
Mediators  
NAS  arousal  
NAS  cognitive  
NAS  behavioral    
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X  
Other  Measures  
Tx Satisfaction  
LIFE Tx section    
 
X   
X 
X  
 
X 
Clinician administered interviews are in italics.  ACQ  = Anger  Consequences  Scale; BAM = Brief 
Addiction Monitor; BSI = Brief  Symptom  Inventory;  CTQ  = Childhood Trauma Questionnaire;  DAR = 
Dimensions of Anger  Scale;  NAS  = Novaco  Anger  Scale;  OAS -M = Overt  Aggression Scale Modified;  OQ = 
Outcomes  Questionnaire;  SNAP -2 = Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality -2nd Edition ; 
STAXI -2 = State  Trait  Anger Inventory -2; WHOQOL -BREF = The World Health Organization Quality of 
Life  
*Collateral  assessments will be administered at  pre- and post -treatment  
 
18  
D. 8. Blinding  of Assessments  
All interviewers  will be blind to participants’  treatment  condition.  Each  of the outcome  
domains  (anger,  functioning/quality  of life)  includes  one blinded  interview.  Prior  to the 
outcome  assessments,  the interviewer  will remind  each  participant  not to reveal  his 
treatment  condition.  At the post -treatment  and follow -up assessments,  interviewers  
will complete  questions  including  whether  they  think  the blind  was  broken,  and to 
which  treatment  condition  they  think  the participant  was  assigned.  
 
D. 9. Standardization  of Assessments  
Interviewer  qualifications  will include  masters  or doctoral  level  training  in psychology  or 
social  work, or bachelor’s  level training combined  with  at least  2 years  of prior  
experience  using  structured  interviews.  Research study staff will provide  training  on the 
SCID  and the CAPS.  This research study staff member has formal  training  and experience  
training  others  on these  interviews.  Dr. Shea  will conduct  training  on the OAS -M. 
Interviewers  will conduct  practice  interviews  and receive  feedback  from  Research Study 
staff and Shea  until  judged  to be calibrated  to an acceptable  standard  of administration.  
 
All of the clinical  interviews  (CAPS,  SCID  and OAS -M) will be recorded.  Ten percent  of 
each  of the interviews  will be randomly  selected  on an ongoing  basis  to monitor  the 
reliability  of the interview  process.  Research study staff  will listen  to the recorded  
interviews  and provide  feedback  to interviewers  in biweekly  meetings  to maintain  
reliability.  Interviewer  ratings  will be compared  with  research study staff’s  ratings  and 
any discrepancies  in ratings  will be discussed.  
 
D. 10. Procedures  to Enhance  Completion  of Assessment  Protocols  
A number  of procedures  will be used  to minimize  the likelihood  that  participants  will fail 
to complete  the schedule  of assessments.  Self-report  measures  will be completed  at the 
time  of the assessment  and reviewed  for completeness  before  the participant  leaves.  We 
will monitor  carefully  for fatigue,  and encourage  breaks  if needed.  We will try to schedule  
assessments  on the same  day as treatment  sessions.  Participants  will be compensated  for 
all assessments.  
 
Permission  will be requested  at the time  of informed  consent  to obtain  the name  and 
phone  number  of a close  relative,  friend,  or other  person  who  is likely  to maintain  contact  
with  the participant,  and to contact  that  person  if attempts  to contact  the participant  are 
unsuccessful.  Post -treatment  and follow -up assessments  will be conducted  in person  at 
appointments  scheduled  for this purpose.  An appointment  for the three -month  follow -up 
assessment  will be made  at termination  of the study  intervention,  and for the six-month  
follow -up at the three -month  interview.  Participants  will receive  a letter  one week  prior  to 
the interview  and a reminder  call a few days  prior.  Participants  who  do not have  
telephones  will be contacted  by mail  and asked to  call for an appointment. Five  contact  
attempts  will be made  before  a participant  is considered  to be unreachable  at that  time  
point.  Participants  who  fail to appear  for a scheduled  assessment  will be contacted  by 
phone,  or mail  when  necessary,  for rescheduling.  If participants  move  away  during  their  
19  
participation  in the study,  or are otherwise  unavailable  for an in-person  interview,  we will 
perform  follow -up assessments  over  the telephone  to avoid  missing  data.  
 
D. 11. Compensation  
Participants  will be compensated  for the time  required  to complete  all assessments.  They  
will be paid  $100 for the pre-treatment  baseline assessment and $60 for the subsequent  
post -treatment  and follow -up assessment periods . 
Participants  who  screen  out on the SCID  or CAPS  or who do not complete the full 
baseline assessment will be paid  $40 (for partial  assessment).  Mid  treatment  
assessments  (after  sessions  4 and 8) will be compensated  at $25.  Collaterals  will be 
compensated  $25 for the pre- and post -treatment  assessments.  Participants can receive 
their compensation in the form of an electronic funds transfer or gift card. Collaterals 
will be compensated with gift cards.  
E. Treatment  
E. 1. Assignment  
Participants  meeting  study  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  will be randomly  assigned  to CBI 
or SI following  completion  of the initial  assessment.  To prevent  unequal  distribution  of 
variables  that  might  be related  to outcome,  we will use the urn randomization  strategy  
described  by Wei59 and Stout60 to help  insure  balance  among  treatment  groups.  Urn 
randomization  is a stratified  randomization  technique,  which  randomly  assigns  patients  
of a given  subgroup  to treatment  conditions,  but systematically  biases  the 
randomization  in favor  of balance  among  the treatment  conditions  on the stratification  
variables.  We have  successfully  used  the urn randomization  procedure  in several  
previous  treatment  outcome  studies,  including  the multi -site Project  MATCH61 and have  
developed  a computer  program  that  conducts  the randomization.  This  program  also  
enables  ongoing  monitoring  of the effectiveness  of our stratification  and randomization  
procedures.  Three  dichotomous  balancing  factors  will be used  in randomization:  gender  
(male  vs female),  and presence of a PTSD  diagnosis  (yes  vs no). 
 
E.2. Cognitive  Behavioral  Intervention  
CBI was  adapted  from  a cognitive  behavioral  treatment  developed  by Raymond  Novaco,  
targeted  at reducing  anger  frequency,  intensity,  and duration,  and at moderating  the 
expression  of anger  50, 57. It includes  training  in self-monitoring,  cognitive  reframing,  
arousal  reduction,  and behavioral  coping.  It also utilizes  a “stress inoculation”  approach,  
which  involves  therapist -guided,  progressive  imaginal  exposure  to provocations  
(including  trauma  triggers)  in session  and in vivo,  in conjunction  with  modeling  and 
rehearsal  of coping  skills.  Adaptations  of the original  treatment  for OEF/OIF  veterans  
included  1) addition  of psychoeducation  using  “Battlemind”,  developed  by researchers  
at Walter  Reed  (consistent  with  Battlemind  principles,  throughout  the treatment,  anger  
is conceptualized  within  the context  of adaptive  function  in the warzone  that  becomes  
nonadaptive  at home);  2) additional  emphasis  on arousal  reduction  through  relaxation  
training;  3) including  the option  of a session  involving  a spouse  or family  member  
focused  on psychoeducation;  and revisions  of the manual  organization  to facilitate  
therapist  delivery.  Key elements  of CBI include:  
20  
 
• Psychoeducation  about  responses  to trauma,  particularly  following  deployment  in 
a war -zone,  trauma -related  anger  difficulties,  stress,  and aggression  
• Arousal  reduction,  including  diaphragmatic  breathing,  and guided  imagery  training  
• Cognitive  restructuring  of anger  schemas  (identification  and modification  of 
beliefs  and interpretations)  
• Behavioral  coping  strategies  (training  in communication,  assertiveness,  
and strategic  withdrawal)  
• Inoculation  training  (practicing  the cognitive,  arousal  regulatory,  and behavioral  
coping  skills  while  visualizing  progressively  more  intense  anger -arousing  scenes  
from  personal  hierarchies).  
E.3. Supportive  Intervention  Control  
The Supportive  Inter vention  adapted  for the pilot  study included the same “Battlemind”  
psychoeducation  as the CBI condition.  Following  the psychoeducation  component,  the 
rest  of the intervention  focuses  on providing  support  and using  problem  solving  
strategies  to help  in managing  behavior  and feelings  in current  day-to-day life. 
Cognitive  behavioral  interventions  are excluded.  In addition  to the exclusion  of 
cognitive  or behavioral  strategies,  SI is less structured;  the patient  has more  input  into  
the agenda  of the sessions.  
 
E.4. Therapist  Selection,  Training  and  Supervision  
Therapists  will be Ph.D.  level  psychologists  or masters  level  clinical  social  workers  with  
prior  experience  in cognitive  behavioral  therapy  and prior  experience  treating  PTSD  
patients.  Therapists  will receive  training  in both  interventions.  There  are advantages  and 
disadvantages  to using  the same  or different  therapists  for study  conditions.  The primary  
concern  with  using  the same  therapists  is the possible  effect  of a different  level  of 
enthusiasm  and investment  in the active  treatment  condition,  which  can bias  results.  
However,  bias  can just as easily  occur  when  therapists  are assigned  to deliver  different  
treatment  conditions.  Our experience  in the pilot  study  was  that  therapists  appeared  to be 
equally  comfortable  with  both  conditions,  and ratings  indicated  adherence  to the manual.  
Retention  was  slightly  higher  in the SI condition.  An advantage  of using  the same  therapist  
for both  conditions  is reduction  of between  treatment  variance  associated  with  therapist  
effects.  Another  advantage  is the increased  flexibility  of assigning  study  participants  to 
therapists to facilitate  accommodation  of study  participants’  availability for  appointments.  
 
Initial  training  will be didactic,  involving  two days  of instruction  for CBI,  and one for SI. 
Drs.  Shea  and Lambert  will conduct  the didactic  training  for both  conditions.  Training  
will include  disguised  case  examples  derived  from  the pilot  study  sessions  and role  plays  
of interventions.  Following  the didactic  training,  each  therapist  will have  one CBI training  
case,  with  weekly  supervision  based  on review  of audio  recorded  sessions.  The training 
case  must  complete  a minimum  of 8 sessions  to count.  If the therapist  is judged  to be 
sufficiently  competent,  he or she will be approved  to see study  participants.  This  
judgment  will be based  on mutual  agreement  by Drs.  Shea  and Lambert  who  will 
supervise  therapists,  and on consistent  ratings  of adherence  (75%  of strategies  
21  
implemented  across  sessions  rated).  All therapy  sessions  for study  participants  in both  
conditions  will be recorded.  For the first  two study  cases  for each  therapist,  every  
session  will be reviewed  and feedback  will be provided  weekly.  Supervision  will become  
less frequent  with  subsequent  cases,  although  a minimum  of three  sessions  will be 
reviewed  for each  case  and feedback  provided  as needed.  
 
E.5. Adherence  Monitoring  
Current  standards  in psychosocial  treatment  research  require  monitoring  of therapist  
behavior  and interventions  to ensure  treatment  fidelity  (i.e.,  that  therapists  are 
delivering  the interventions  specified  in the manual  and not using  interventions  that  
are not part  of the treatment).  In the proposed  study,  the first  objective  is particularly  
important  for the Cognitive  Behavioral  Intervention,  and the second  is particularly  
important  for the Supportive  Intervention.  We have  developed  adherence  scales  for 
both  conditions,  and findings  from  our pilot  work  showed  good  adherence  in both  
conditions.  Adherence  ratings  for both  conditions  will be completed  by research study 
staff , and will include  three  sessions  (early,  middle,  and late session)  for each  study  
participant.  Ten early  sessions  will also  be rated  by Dr. Shea  to establish  reliability  with  
research study staff . 
 
F. Design  Considerations  
F.1. Treatment  Format  
The treatment  we are studying  is delivered  in an individual  format.  An alternative  choice  
would  be to test the efficacy  of a group  format,  which  could  be more  cost -effective.  We 
decided  to use an individual  format  for several  reasons.  First,  many  patients  with  anger  
problems  are unwilling to  participate  in group  treatment.  Second,  the logistics  of group  
interventions  can be challenging,  given  the need  to find  a time  that  all potential  group  
members  can make.  This  may  be particularly  for OEF/OIF/OND  veterans  who  often  have  
time  restrictions  due to work  and family.  Further,  in practice  since  groups  are typically  
10 to 12 weeks  long,  new  veterans  often  have  to wait  until  another  group  is available.  
Third,  the intervention  in the proposed  study  includes  an imaginal  exposure  component,  
which  would  be difficult  to implement  in a group  format. Finally,  it is possible  that  
individual  delivery  of anger  treatment  may  be more  effective  than  group  delivery  given  
the greater  amount  of time  and more  intensive  focus  that  is possible  in individual  
treatment.  If CBI is found  to be effective  compared  to SI, the next  step  would  be to 
compare  individual  and group  delivery  of CBI.  
 
 
F.2. Control  Condition  
Selection  of control  groups  for psychosocial  treatments  is complex.  Unlike  medication  
trials,  it is not  possible to derive  true  “placebo”  conditions  that control  for all aspects of  
the treatment  delivery  except  the active  ingredient  (drug).  A variety  of control  conditions  
have  been  used  in behavioral  treatment  research,  but there  is no consensus  regarding  an 
optimal  or standard  control  condition.  There  is increasing  recognition  that  the design  and 
selection  of an optimal  control  condition  depends  upon  the particular  intervention  being  
studied  and the research  question  being  addressed.  One  important  consideration  is how  
22  
much  is known  about  the treatment  being studied . Rounsaville  and Onken62 outline  a 
three  stage  framework  including  an initial  stage  (feasibility,  pilot  studies),  RCTs  / efficacy  
trials,  and effectiveness  studies.  The proposed  study  would  be considered  a stage  2 
efficacy  trial  according  to this model;  for such  trials  non-specific  comparison  designs  have  
been  recommended  63. In addition  to controlling  for passage  of time,  testing,  statistical  
regression  towards  the mean  (all of which  may  be controlled  for by a wait -list control),  a 
non-specific  comparison  condition  controls  for the aspects  of therapy  that  characterize  
most  forms  of therapy  and are distinct  from  the hypothesized  active  mechanisms  of the 
treatment  being  studied.  This  type  of control  allows  for inferences  about  the benefits  of 
the specific  treatment  interventions,  beyond  the benefits  of for example,  meeting  with  a 
therapist,  receiving  attention  and support,  and expectations  of improvement.  The control  
condition  proposed  for the current  study,  which  was  adapted  from  the control  condition  
used  in the CSP clinical  trial testing  the efficacy  of prolonged  exposure  58, was  designed  to 
achieve  this goal.  
 
A treatment  as usual  control  condition  in some  settings  might  serve  the same  purpose,  if 
the “usual treatment” is clearly  defined  and consistently  used,  and does not includ e the  
hypothesized  active  mechanisms  of the treatment  being  studied  In the setting  for the 
proposed  study,  however,  treatment  as usual  is not uniform,  includes  a range  of 
providers,  and could  include  a range  of interventions,  including  medication  only,  group  
therapy,  and/or  individual  therapy  possibly  including  some  aspects  of cognitive  or 
behavioral  interventions.  Because  treatment  as usual  may  vary  in different  settings,  the 
findings  could  have  limited  generalizability.  Even  with  careful  assessment  of type  and 
dose  of any additional  treatment  received  in both  conditions,  we are concerned  that  the 
heterogeneity  of treatment  and the potential  overlap  of some  cognitive  behavioral  
interventions  would  make  it more  difficult  to achieve  the goal  of allowing  inferences  
about  the efficacy  of the specific  cognitive  behavioral  interventions  included  in CBI.  
 
G. Data  Management  and  Analysis  
G.1. Data  Management  
Research study staff  will oversee  data  management  procedures. Study data will be 
collected and managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at the 
Department of Veterans Affairs. REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, 
web -based application designed to support data capture for research stu dies. Through 
REDCap, participants are able to respond to survey items electronically and additionally 
research study staff can manually enter responses. All study  software  and licensing , such 
as SPSS IBM (which will be used for data analyses)  will be mana ged by PVAMC  IT and 
IRM.  For data that is entered manually, the  project  coordinator  will be responsible  for 
initial  editing  and correction  of forms  before  they  are data  entered  by the research  
assistant.  As forms  are entered  into  the master  database,  they  will be checked  against the  
participant  tracking  file to assure  that  all data  that  are gathered  have  been  data  entered.  
The data  will be verified  after  entry  and verification  status  will be tracked  by the 
software.  Validity  checks  will also  be done  as the data  are entered,  and questions  or 
problems  will be resolved  by discussion  between  research study staff and the Interviewer.  
All data  will be received  stripped  of personal  identifiers.  Because  of the sensitive  nature  
23  
of some  of the data  gathered,  a number  of precautions  will be taken  to prevent  disclosure  
of information  to unauthorized  parties:  (1) data sheets  will be stored  in locked  offices  of 
Dr. Tracie Shea (PI) , building  32 of the PVAMC)  (2) data  will be entered  in coded  form,  (3) 
data  will be stored  on a secure  server  behind  the VA firewall  
(\\vhaproapp12 \Research_Protocols \Shea \Anger -R),  (4) data  will be protected  from  
unauthorized  access  by passwords,  (5) information  that  might  potentially  allow  an 
individual  participant  to be identified  will not be allowed  in any publications  or reports  
sent  to individuals  outside  the study,  (6) all employees  who  are to handle  data will  be 
trained  in confidentiality  policies  and procedures,  and (7) all data -related incidents  will 
be reported  to the local  ISO and PO per VA  policy.   Study files will be maintained in 
accordance with the Department of Veterans Affairs Record Control Schedule 10 -1. Data 
protection and precaution measures are further detailed in the Protoc ol Appendix – ISO 
(see page 31).  
 
G.2. Data  Analysis  
All major  variables  will be screened  for inconsistent  or abnormal  values,  and continuous  
measures  will be assessed  for skewness  and outliers.  Transformations  to improve  
normality  may  be applied  to continuous  variables. Missing  data  rates  and patterns  will be 
assessed;  in particular,  missing  data  rates  by treatment  group  will be studied.  Although  
urn randomization  tends  to produce  well -balanced  treatment  samples 59 analyses  will be 
carried  out to determine  any baseline  differences  between  the treatment  groups  on 
demographic  or other  prognostic  variables,  using  chi square  analyses  for discrete  
variables  and ANOVA  for continuous  ones.  If significant  treatment  group  differences  are 
found  on potentially  important  baseline  variables,  these  variables  will be covaried  in 
outcome  analyses.  Data  from  all randomized  study  participants  will be used  to compare  
the outcome  of the two interventions  on an intent -to-treat  basis.  Hypothesis  tests  will be 
two-tailed.  
Participants  will be counted  in the intervention  group  to which  they  were  randomized,  
regardless  of the number  of sessions  they  completed.  We will make  every  attempt  to 
complete  a post -treatment  and 3 and 6 month  follow -up assessments  on any participants  
who  do not complete  treatment. We  will also  conduct  supplementary  analyses  including  
only  those  cases  completing  the full 12 sessions.  
 
Aim  1: Investigate  the effectiveness  of CBI on primary  measures  of outcome  
Hypothesis : Compared  to SI, CBI will be associated  with  significantly  larger  reductions  in 
anger  and aggressive  behaviors  at post -treatment  and at 3 and 6 month  follow -ups.  
 
Aim  2: Investigate  the effectiveness  of CBI on secondary  measures  of outcome  
Hypothesis:  Compared  to SI, CBI will be associated  with  significantly  more  
improvement  in social  functioning,  occupational  functioning,  quality  of life, and PTSD  
symptoms  at post - treatment  and at 3and  6 month  follow -ups.  
 
For aims  1 and 2, we will use hierarchical  linear  modeling  (HLM)  for repeated  measures  
to test for differences  due to treatment  condition,  covarying  for the baseline  score  of the 
dependent  variable65. The primary  significance  test will be the treatment  group  main  
24  
effect  over  time,  though  there will  also  be a test for the time  by treatment  interaction.  
Significant  time  by treatment  interactions  will be followed  up by post  hoc tests  at specific  
assessment  points  by calculating  simple  intercepts,  simple  slopes,  and regions  of 
significance.  Relevant  covariates  will be included  to adjust  for any imbalances  across  
treatment  conditions.  
Missing  data will  be dealt  with  as follows.  HLM  analyses  can include  cases  with  some  time  
points  missing.  In the primary  analysis, we  will include  all cases  with  at least  3 of the 5 
outcome  time  points  (4 & 8 weeks,  posttreatment,  and 3 & 6 months)  non-missing.  Then,  
we will conduct  a sensitivity  analysis  including  all randomized  participants,  in which  any 
missing  outcome  values will  be filled  in with  baseline  scores,  which  is an extreme  
assumption.  Consistency  of results  from  the two approaches  will bolster  the credibility  of 
the primary  analysis.  
 
The primary  dependent  variables  for aim 1 are the STAXI -2 Anger  Expression  Index,  and 
the OAS -M Aggression  Scale  score.  Outcome  on these  measures  is assessed  at 4 and 8-
week  points  during  treatment,  at post -treatment,  and at 3 and 6 months  follow -up 
assessments.  DVs  for aim 2 include  two LIFE  scales  (global  social  and work  functioning),  
the Outcomes  Questionnaire  total  score,  the WHOQOL -BREF   total  score,  and the CAPS  
total  score.  Outcome  on these  measures  is assessed  at post -treatment  and 3 and 6-month  
follow -up assessments . 
 
For aims  1 and 2 the alpha  will be set at .025  to account  for multiple  dependent  variables.  
 
Supplementary  post -treatment  outcome  analyses  will be conducted  using  collateral  
measures  (including  the STAXI -II, Anger  Control  Scale  and Modified  Overt  Aggression  
Interview).  We will calculate  Pearson  correlations  of participant  and collateral  scales  as 
an indication  of agreement.  If outcome  analyses  based  on collateral  measures  are 
consistent  with  analyses  of participant  measures,  this would  bolster  the validity  of the 
participant  outcome  findings.  Divergent  findings  could  be due to multiple  factors  that  
could  influence  the validity  of the participant  and the collateral  reports.  In this case  we 
will conduct  analyses  using  integrated  collateral  and partici pant  scores,  calculated  by 
averaging  the participant  and collateral  responses  to each  item . 
 
Aim  3: (Exploratory)  Examine  hypothesized  mechanisms  of action  of CBI 
Hypothesis:  Change  in arousal,  cognitive,  and behavioral  domains  of anger  will 
mediate  outcome  for anger  and functioning  in the CBI condition.  
 
In order  to examine  the mediating  role  of arousal,  cognition,  and behavior  (NAS  
scales),  we will use arousal,  cognition,  and behavior  at post -treatment  as mediators  of 
the effect  of treatment  in predicting  later  anger  and functioning  at months  3 and 6. 
Therefore,  these  mediation  tests  will be fully  prospective,  as recommended  by Kazdin  
& Nock66, and as exemplified  in prior  mediational  research  done  by Dr. Stout  67. These  
analyses  will covary  for the baseline  scores  of the mediators.  Mediation  of treatment  
effects  through  NAS  scales  will be tested  using  the Sobel  test 69, 70. Simulation  tests  
indicate  that  we will have  more  than  80%  power  to detect  mediation  when  both  paths  
have  small  to medium  effect  sizes  71. 
25  
 
Aim  4: (Exploratory)  Examine  the effectiveness  of CBI for those  with  and without  
PTSD  We will test for an interaction  between  CBI vs. SI and PTSD  status  by 
calculating  simple  slopes.  Since  we will not have  80%  power  to test this interaction,  
we will calculate  treatment  effect  sizes  separately  for the PTSD  and the no-PTSD  
cases.  
 
G.3. Power  Analysis  
Power  for our repeated -measures  design  was  estimated  using  methods  described  by 
Faes  et al.71. We obtained  intervention  effect  sizes  ranging  from  0.78  to 1.12  in our pilot  
study,  but given  the small  sample  and the instability  of effect  sizes  derived from  pilot  
studies  72 we have  conservatively  based  our statistical  power  analysis  for detection  of 
medium  effects.  
We will use a two-sided  alpha  level  of .025  in the primary  and secondary  outcome  
analyses  to correct  for the number  of dependent  variables;  i.e., each  DV will be tested  
individually  with  an alpha  level  of .025,  keeping  the study -wise  alpha  at .05. With  this 
alpha  level  and an estimated  80%  follow -up, a sample  size of 120  will provide  90%  
power  to detect  a medium  effect  size of .60. 
 
H. Time -Line  
We anticipate  the following  time -line for the study:   
 
Months  
0-6 Hiring,  Training,  IRB approvals  
6-33 Recruitment  
6-36 Treatment  
9-39 Follow -Up (3 month)  12-42 Follow -Up (6 month)  
6-43 Data  Entry  and Management  
43-48 Final  Data  Analyses  and Manuscript  
Writing  
 
 
I. Dissemination  and  Future  Plans  
The proposed  study  is a randomized  clinical  trial  of the efficacy  of a cognitive  behavioral  
intervention  (CBI)  for the treatment  of trauma  related  anger  in OEF/OIF  veterans.  Prior  
to the start  of the study,  we will register  with  ClinicalTrials.gov.  This  website  contains  
over  100,000  trials  sponsored  by a variety  of federal  and private  industry  sources,  and 
receives  over  50 million  page  views  per month  and over  65,000  visitors  daily.  
Dissemination  will include  submission  of the study  findings  to a peer -reviewed  journal.  
The findings  will also  be presented  at professional  conferences,  such  as the International  
Society  for the Study  of Traumatic  Stress,  and appropriate  VA and Department  of 
Defense  conferences.  If CBI is found  to be significantly  superior  to the supportive  therapy  
control  (SI),  we will consider  multiple  methods  for further  dissemination.  We will create  
a fact sheet  describing  the intervention  and findings  and circulate  to VA, National  Guard  
and other  military  officials,  and relevant  DOD  programs  such  as the Defense  Centers  of 
Excellence.  The manual  will be made  available  free  of charge.  We could  begin  
dissemination  efforts  by implementing  the treatment  at the Providence  VAMC.  We would  
26  
provide  the manual  and training  to the mental  health  clinicians  in the PTSD  and 
Returning  Veterans  clinics,  and encourage  the use of relevant  self-report  outcome  
measures  to provide  an index  of effectiveness  in a naturalistic  setting.  A proposal  of a 
multi -site study  through  the Cooperative  Studies  Program  would  be considered,  to more  
formally  test the effectiveness  of the intervention  across  multiple  VA settings . 
5. Privacy  and  Confidentiality  
Every  effort will  be taken  to protect  the confidentiality  of the participants  in this study.  All 
information  about  the veteran  that  is gathered  during  the research  (including  recordings)  
will be kept  strictly  confidential.  However,  veterans  will be informed  that  there  is no 
guarantee  that  the information  gathered  during  the research  cannot  be obtained  by legal  
process  or court  order.  Furthermore,  veterans  will be informed  that  complete  
confidentiality  cannot  be promised  to subjects,  particularly  to subjects  who  are military  
personnel,  because  information  bearing  on their  health  may  be required  to be reported  to 
appropriate  medical  or command  authorities.  Additionally,  federal  and non -federal  
monitoring  agencies  such  as the Department  of Veterans  Affairs  may  also  access  the 
veteran’s research records related  to this  study  to monitor  the security of the trial.  All 
data  will be received  stripped  of personal  identifiers.  Measures  will be identified  with  a 
study  ID number  not based  on a personal  identifier.  A cross -index  of names  and ID 
numbers  will be stored  in a separate  locked  location  from  all data.  Data  entry  and 
management  will take  place  in VA offices  in Bldg.  32. Additional  precautions  include:  (1) 
Data  sheets  will be stored  in locked  offices , (2) data  will be entered  in coded  form,  (3) 
data  will be stored  in computer  files  on the secure  Research  Server  in Bldg  32 and 
protected  from  unauthorized  access  by passwords,  (4) information  that  might  potentially  
allow  an individual  participant  to be identified  will not be allowed  in any publications  or 
reports  sent  to individuals  outside  the study,  and (5) all employees  who  are to handle  
data  will be trained  in confidentiality  policies  and procedures.  Records  will be 
maintained  per Veterans  Affairs  Record  Control  Schedule  10-1. 
 
Assessments  and intervention  sessions  will occur  at the Providence  VAMC.  The veterans  
will be informed  that  their  VA medical  records will  note  their  enrollment  in a research  
study  with  a copy  of their  consent  form  attached.  In addition,  their  attendance  at each  AE 
or HEC  session  will be noted  in their  medical  records.  This  will include,  if applicable,  any 
safety  issues  (e.g.,  suicidal  or homicidal  statements  they  made)  and how  these  were  
addressed  in session.  The veteran  will be informed  that  none  of the other  data  from  this 
study  will be included  in their  medical  records,  except  for attendance  at intervention  
sessions.  All study  data,  stripped  of identifying  information,  will be locked  in a file 
cabinet  as described  above.  Records  will be maintained  per Veterans  Affairs  Record  
Control  Schedule  10-1. 
6. Data  Safety  and  Monitoring  
Monitoring  of safety  in the proposed  study  will be the responsibility  of all personnel  on 
the project,  with  primary  responsibility  and supervision  by Dr. Shea.  The Institutional  
Review  Board  at the Providence  VA Medical  Center  will approve  the protocol  and the 
27  
Statement  of Informed  Consent  for the study  and will provide  oversight  of data  and 
safety  issues.  
Separate  review  of the protocol  and consent  form  are made  by the safety  officer  at the VA 
Medical  Center.  The study  protocol  will receive IRB  approval  prior  to soliciting  or 
requesting  consent  from  any participants.  Moreover,  the study  will be reviewed  on an 
annual  basis  by the IRB committee  with  regard  to recruitment  and retention  and annual  
reports  will be made  by the PI to the IRB chair  of the Providence  VA Medical  Center  
regarding  the progress  of the proposed  project,  including  any issues  pertinent  to 
recruitment,  retention,  confidentiality,  and safety  of human  subjects.  Any  incidents  that  
involve  a breach  of this plan  or serious  accident/injury  will be reported  to the IRB chair  at 
the Providence  VA Medical  Center.  As discussed,  potential  risks,  albeit  minimally  likely,  
include  distress  or discomfort  with  questions  regarding  trauma  history.  
Adverse  Event  Reporting  
In the case  of an Adverse  Effect  (AE)  or a Serious  Adverse  Effect  (SAE),  a written  report  of 
the AE or SAE  will be prepared  for the Chair  of the IRB at the Providence  VA Medical  
Center.  Any  such  AEs or SAEs  will be presented  to the full IRB committees. SAEs  will be 
reported  within  24 hours.  Examples  of serious  adverse  effects  include  death,  life- 
threatening  adverse  events,  suicide  attempts,  and inpatient  hospitalization.  The report  of 
such  AEs or SAEs  will include  whether  they  were  expected  or unexpected,  a rating  of 
severity  of the event,  a brief  narrative  summary  of the event,  a determination  of whether  
a causal  relationship  existed  between  the study  procedures  and the event,  whether  the 
informed  consent  should  be changed  as a result  of the event,  and whether  all enrolled  
participants  should  be notified  of the event.  The annual  progress  reports  to the IRB 
require  summary  information  regarding  all AEs and SAEs  occurring  during  that  year . We 
have appointed Thomas O’Toole, MD as our medical  monitor . Dr. O’Toole  is a Providence 
VA Medical Center physician and researcher who works  independent ly from our  research .  
He will be called  upon  to review  all AEs and SAEs,  and to provide  input  regarding  the 
possible  connection  to the study  protocol.  
7. Risks /  Benefits  Assessment  
A. Protection  Against  Risks  
Potential  risks  include  distress  associated  with  discussing  traumatic  or other  disturbing  
events  or emotions,  and breach  of confidentiality.  
Risk:  Emotional  distress  associated  with  discussing  traumatic  or other  upsetting  events  
or emotions.  
Minimization:  Study  participants  will participate  in assessments  and treatment  sessions  
during  which  they  may  identify  and discuss  difficulties  they  are having  with  anger  and 
with  their  adjustment  home  from  a hazardous  deployment.  They  also  may  discuss  
upsetting  events  that  they  experienced  while  deployed. Although  the assessments  are 
28  
unlikely  to be more  upsetting  than  standard  clinical  assessments,  discussion  of these  
experiences  may  make  them  feel uncomfortable.  Should  this happen,  veterans  will be 
informed  that  they  can refuse  to answer  any question  they  wish  or stop  the interview  at 
any time.  Any  participant  verbalizing  or showing  signs  of distress  will be asked  to remain  
in the assessment  or treatment  setting  until  their  distress  is at a manageable  and 
comfortable  level. No participant  judged  to be in danger  of hurting  him/herself  or others  
will be allowed  to leave  the study  setting  unaccompanied.  All study  personnel  who  
interact  with  study  participants  will have  been  professionally  trained  to respond  to 
negative  emotions  if these  should  occur  and to access  emergency  services  if necessary.  
Collateral  participants  will also  be informed  that  they  may  refuse  to answer  any question  
or stop  the interview  at any time. It  is unlikely,  but possible,  that  a collateral  participant     
may  show  signs  of distress.  The same  procedures  will apply  to these  participants,  i.e. if 
distressed  they  will remain  in the assessment  setting  until  their  distress  is at a 
manageable  level.  Dr. Shea  will be available  by phone  or in person  to study  personnel  
during  assessment  and treatment  sessions.  She will be contacted  immediately  if there  are 
any concerns about the participant’s  emotional  state,  or upon any signs  of suicidal  or 
homicidal  risk.  All participants  will be eligible  for emergency  services  including  referral  
to the Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center  interim  care  during  normal  business  hours  or the 
emergency  room  after  hours  and on weekends  and holidays,  and inpatient  
hospitalization.  
 
Additionally,  therapists  will be doctoral  level  psychologists  or masters  level  social  
workers,  and trained  to help  veterans  reduce  and manage  feelings  of intense  anger.  
Assessments  will be conducted  by trained  staff  with  prior  experience  in conducting  
clinical  interviews  in psychiatric  samples.  Veterans  will have  the opportunity  to discuss  
any uncomfortable  feelings  with  the assessment  interviewers  and treatment  providers.  
The veteran  will also be informed  that the therapist and  assessment  interviewer  will 
always  place the veteran’s  well -being  and safety  over  research  considerations.  
Furthermore  the veteran  will be informed  that  should  they  experience  any problems,  they  
should  report  them  to their  therapist  or to the principal  investigator  of this study.  
 
Risk:  Breach  of Confidentiality  
Minimization:  All employees  who  handle  data will  be trained  in confidentiality  policies  
and procedures.  All data  and medical  information  obtained  about  the veteran,  as an 
individual,  will be considered  privileged  and held  in confidence;  the veteran  will not be 
identified  in any presentation  of the results.  Assessments  and treatment  sessions  will 
occur  at the Providence  VAMC.  Veterans  will be informed  that  their  VA medical  records  
will note  their  enrollment  in a research  study  with  a copy  of their  consent  form  attached.  
In addition,  their  attendance  at each  therapy  session  will be noted  in their  medical  
records.  This  will include,  if applicable,  any safety  issues  (e.g.,  suicidal  or homicidal  
statements  they  made)  and how  these  were  addressed  in treatment.  The veteran  will be 
informed  that  none  of the other  data  from  this study  will be included  in their  medical  
records,  except  for attendance  at treatment  sessions.  All study  data,  stripped  of 
identifying  information,  will be locked  in a file cabinet.  Study files will be maintained in 
29  
accordance with the Department of Veterans Affairs Record Control Schedule 10 -1. 
 
All of the study  data  will be coded  without the use of the veteran’s name  and social  
security  number  and will be done  in accordance  with  the law.  Research  information  
about  the veteran  will remain  in Dr. Tracie Shea’s (PI) locked  private  research files  and 
will be available  only  to staff  connected  with  this study  or individuals  involved  in human  
subjects  protection.  It will not be given  to other medical  care  personnel at the  veteran’s  
VA or the Department of  Veterans  Benefits  without  an additional  written  consent  from  
the veteran.  Any  reports  or publications  of this study  will not include  information  that  
could  be used  to identify  the veteran.  
 
Measures  will be identified  with  a study  ID number  not based  on a personal  identifier.  A 
cross -index  of names  and ID numbers  will be stored  in a separate  locked  location  from  all 
data.  Transfer  of data  will include  only  de-identified  data,  and will use encryption  for any 
electronic  transfer.  Additional  precautions  include:  (1) Data  sheets  will be will be stored  
in locked  offices  of Dr. Tracie Shea (PI) , building  32 of the PVAMC , (2) data  will be entered  
in coded  form,  (3) data  will be stored  in computer  files  protected  from  unauthorized  
access  by passwords,  (4) information  that  might  potentially  allow  an individual  
participant  to be identified  will not be allowed  in any publications  or reports  sent  to 
individuals  outside  the study,  and (5) all employees  who  are to handle  data  will be 
trained  in confidentiality  policies  and procedures.  
 
Digital  recordings  will be made  of all treatment  and assessment  sessions.  These  
recordings  will be reviewed  by study  personnel  who  are providing  ongoing  supervision  
to study  therapists  and interviewers,  and by individuals  conducting  reviews  of how  well  
we followed  study  procedures  (adherence  ratings).  These  recordings  will be coded  
without  the use of  the veteran’s  name or  social security number, or  any other 
identifying information.  
Digital  recordings  may  also  be downloaded  into  a file transfer  program  (FTP)  which  is 
password  protected.  Research  staff  will be the only  people  to have  access  to the FTP.   
Study files will be maintained in accordance with the Department of Veterans Affairs 
Record Control Schedule 10 -1. 
B. Potential  Benefits  of the Proposed  Research  to the Subjects  and  Others  
Poorly  controlled  anger  is a common  problem  with  often  devastating  effects  in veterans  
who  have  been  exposed  to trauma  while  they  served  in a warzone.  Additionally,  
individuals  who  have  experienced  trauma  may  continue  to respond  with  excessive  anger  
and aggression  in situations  that  they  perceive  as threatening  (even  in the absence  of life- 
threat)  resulting  in destruction  of property,  threats  of physical  violence  and/or  physical  
fights.  Although  this response  may  have  been  adaptive  during  trauma,  it is maladaptive  
when  individuals  cannot  regulate  the intensity  and expression  of anger  as appropriate  
with  current  socio -environmental  conditions.  There  is empirical  support  for the use of 
Cognitive  Behavioral  Therapy  (CBT)  similar  to what  we propose  in the treatment  of 
other   populations  with  anger,  and preliminary  support  for positive  effects  in veteran  
30  
samples.  
Through  participation  in this study,  the veteran  receives  a comprehensive  psychological  
assessment  and treatment  at no cost.  Additionally,  potential  effects  of the interventions  
could  possibly  lead  to an improvement  in the veterans’  ability  to manage  their anger  and 
adjustment  to being  home  following  deployment.  Furthermore,  it is hoped  that  
information  gained  from  this study  will improve  treatment  for veterans  who  have  served  
in hazardous  deployments,  even  if the veteran  themselves  do not experience  any 
improvement  during  their  participation  in the study.  Given  the published  reports  and our 
own  experience,  the potential  benefits  outweigh  the risks.  
C. Importance  of the Knowledge  to be Gained  
Problems  with  anger  are common  in veterans  who  have  been  deployed  to a warzone,  and 
can lead  to devastating  consequences  in terms  of family,  social,  and occupational  
functioning.  Although  promising  findings  for cognitive  behavioral  treatments  have  been  
reported,  to date  there  is not a single  adequately  powered  randomized  trial  designed  to 
test the efficacy  of an anger  treatment  compared  to an active  control  condition  in 
veterans.  The goal  of the proposed  research  is to determine  if the Cognitive  Behavioral  
Intervention  to be tested  can provide  an effective  treatment  for anger  problems  in 
OEF/OIF  veterans,  and reduce  the toll that these  problems  take  on social  and 
occupational  functioning  and quality  of life. The potential  of the research  to ultimately  
benefit  veterans  with  anger  problems,  and the provision  of comprehensive  assessment  
and treatment  compares  favorably  when  weighted  against  the potential  risks  of 
discomfort  or distress,  which  are expected  to be mild.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL APPENDIX - ISO 
 
All VA sensitive information will be stored on the secure VA server located at: 
\\vhaproapp12 \Research_Protocols \Shea \Anger -R 
 
31  
All data is collected using a study code that does not identify the patient. The cross -link 
matchi ng the patient with the code is  saved in a password -protected file, separate from the 
rest of the data files, on the same secure VA server that only the PI and research staff have 
access to. Paper versions of the assessment will be stored in locked filing cab inets in locked 
offices of Dr. Tracie Shea (PI), in  building 32 of the PVAMC. Additionally, n o VA sensitive 
data will be transmitted outside the VA.  Only VA non -sensitive data will be transmitted 
electronically via internet for discussion during study meetings.   Data collected from this 
study will be used for research purposes.  No patient identifiable information will be 
released or published without written permission unless required to do so by law.  Records 
will be maintained in accordance wit h the Department of Veterans Affairs Record Control 
Schedule 10 -1.   
 
In the event that theft, loss of other unauthorized access of sensitive data or storage devices 
and non -compliance with security controls occur, study staff has been instructed to follow  
the Providence VA Medical Center’s standard operating procedure on incidence reporting.   
 
Transcription records will  be maintained according to RSC 10-1. All digital recordings will 
be uploaded to the server for storage. Once the records are copied and v erified from the 
recording device, the device will be turned into the ISO for final disposition.  
 
Original data files on portable storage media, i.e., CDs, USB Flash Drives, etc, will be 
uploaded to the server for storage. Once the files are copied and ve rified from the 
device/media, the device/media will be turned into  the ISO for final disposition.  
  
Original data collected on non -digital storage media, such as audio tapes, will be 
maintained in accordance with VA RCS -10-01. 
 
We will use  REDCap electroni c data capture tools hosted at the Department of Veterans 
Affairs. REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, web -based application 
designed to support data capture for research studies. Through REDCap, participants are 
able to respond to surve y items electronically and additionally research study staff can 
manually enter responses. All study  software  and licensing, such as SPSS IBM (which will be 
used for data analyses)  will be managed  by PVAMC  IT and IRM.    
 
32  
References  
1. Grinker,  R. R. & Spiegel,  J. J. (1945).  Men  under  stress . In Adjunctive  Treatment -Results  
of Therapy , Philadelphia,  PA, US: Blakiston;  pp 407-424.  
2. Kardiner,  A. & Spiegel,  H. (1947). War  stress  and neurotic  illness , Oxford,  
England:  Hoeber.  
3. Boulanger,  G. (1986). Violence  and Vietnam  veterans.  In: Boulanger,  G. & Kadushin,  
C., eds. The Vietnam  Veteran  redefined:  Fact  and fiction . Hillsdale,  NJ: Erlbaum; pp  
79-90. 
4. Kulka, R.,  Schlenger,  W. E., Fairbank, J. A., Hough,  R. L., Jordan, B.  K., Marmar,  C. R., & 
Weiss,  D. S. (1990).  Trauma  and the Vietnam  War  generation:  report of  findings  from  
the National  Vietnam  Veterans  Readjustment  Study . New  York:  Brunner/Mazel.  
5. Laufer,  K., Yager,  T., Frey -Wouters,  E. & Donnellan,  J. (1981).  Legacies  of Vietnam:  
Comparative  adjustment  of veterans  and their  peers: Vol. 3. Social  and 
psychological  problems  of Vietnam  Veterans  in the aftermath  of the Vietnam  War . 
New  York: Center  for Policy  Research.  
6. Southwick,  S. (1995).  Trauma -related  symptoms  in veterans  of Operation  Desert  
Storm:  a 2-year  follow -up. American  Journal  of Psychiatry, 152:1150 -1155.  
7. Sayer,  N. A., Noorbaloochi,  S., Frazier,  P., Carlson,  K., Gravely,  A., Murdoch,  M. 
(2010).  Reintegration  problems  and treatment  interests  among  Iraq and 
Afghanistan  combat  veterans  receiving  VA medical  care.  Psychiatric  Services , 
61:589 -597.  
8. Jakupcak,  M., Conybeare,  D., Phelps,  L., Hunt,  S., Holmes,  H. A., Felker,  B., & McFall, I. 
E. (2007).  Anger,  hostility, and  aggression  among  Iraq and Afghanistan  war veterans  
reporting  PTSD  and subthreshold  PTSD,  Journal  of Traumatic  Stress , 20(6),  945 -954.  
9. Jakupcak,  M. & Tull,  M.T.  (2005).  Effects  of trauma  exposure  on anger,  aggression,  
and violence  in a nonclinical  sample  of men.  Violence  and Victims , 20:589 –598.  
10. Orth,  U. & Wieland,  E. (2006).  Anger,  hostility,  and posttraumatic  stress  disorder  in 
trauma - exposed  adults:  A meta -analysis.  Journal  of Consulting  and Clinical  
Psychology , 74:698 –706.  
11. Novaco,  R. W. & Chemtob,  C. M. (2002).  Anger  and combat -related posttraumatic  
stress  disorder.  Journal  of Traumatic  Stress,  15:123 -132.  
12. Elbogen,  E. B., Wagner,  H. R., Fuller,  S. R., Calhoun,  P.S.,  Kinneer,  P. M. & Beckham, 
J.C. (2010).  Correlates  of anger  and hostility  in Iraq and Afghanistan War  Veterans.  
American  Journal  of Psychiatry , 167:1051 -1058.  
13. Koenen,  K. C., Stellman,  J. M., Stellman,  S. D. & Sommer,  Jr., J. F. (2003).  Risk 
factors  for the course  of posttraumatic  stress  disorder  among  Vietnam  Veterans:  
A 14-year  follow - up of American Legionnaires.  Journal  of Consulting  and Clinical  
Psychology , 71(6),  980- 986.  
33  
14. Andrews,  B., Brewin,  C. R., Rose,  S. & Kirk,  M. (2000).  Predicting  PTSD  symptoms  in 
victims  of violent crime:  The role of shame,  anger, and childhood  abuse.  Journal of  
Abnormal  Psychology , 109(1),  69-73. 
15. Ehlers,  A., Mayou,  R. A. & Bryant,  B. (1998).  Psychological  predictors  of chronic  
posttraumatic  stress  disorder  after  motor  vehicle  accidents.  Journal  of 
Abnormal  Psychology,  107:508 - 519.  
16. Forbes,  D. (2003).  Comorbidity  as a predictor  of symptom  change  after  treatment  in 
combat -related  posttraumatic  stress  disorder.  Journal  of Nervous  and Mental  
Disease,  191:93 -99. 
17. Foa,  E., Riggs,  D. S., Massie,  E. D. & Yarczower,  M. (1995).  The impact  of fear 
activation  and anger  on the efficacy  of exposure  treatment  for PTSD. Behavior  
Therapy.  26:487 - 499.  
18. Biddle,  D., Elliott,  P., Creamer,  M., Forbes,  D. & Devilly,  G. J. (2002).  Self-
reported  problems:  a comparison  between  PTSD -diagnosed  veterans,  their  
spouses,  and clinicians.  Behaviorial  Research  and Therapy,  40(7):853 -865.  
19. Blum,  M., Kelley,  E. M., Meyer,  K., Carlson,  C. R. & Hodson,  L.(1984).  An assessment  
of the treatment  needs  of Vietnam -era veterans.  Hospital  and Community  
Psychiatry,  35:691 -696.  
20. Tafrate,  R. (1995).  Evaluation  of treatment  strategies  for adult  anger  disorders.  In: 
Kassinove  H., ed. Anger  Disorders:  Definition,  diagnosis, and treatment . London:  
Taylor  and Francis;  pp109 -129.  
21. Beck,  R. & Fernandez,  E. (1998).  Cognitive -behavioral  therapy  in the treatment  of 
anger:  A meta -analysis.  Cognitive  Therapy  and Research,  22(1):63 -74. 
22. DiGiuseppe,  R. & Tafrate,  R. C. (2003).  Anger  treatment  for adults:  A meta -
analytic  review.  Clinical  Psychology  Science  and Practice, 10:70 -84. 
23. Del Vecchio, T. & O’Leary,  K.D. (2004).  Effectiveness  of anger  treatment for  
specific  anger  problems:  a meta -analytic  review.  Clinical  Psychology  Review , 
24:15 -34. 
24. Edmonson,  C. & Conger,  J.C. (1996).  A review  of treatment  efficacy  for individuals  with  
anger  problems:  conceptual,  assessment,  and methodological  issues.  Clinical  
Psychology  Review, 16:251 -275.  
25. Chemtob,  C., Novaco,  R. W., Hamada,  R. S. & Gross, D. M. (1997).  Cognitive -behavioral  
treatment  for severe anger in posttraumatic  stress  disorder.  Journal  of Consulting  and 
Clinical  Psychology,  65:184 -189.  
26. Linkh,  D. & Sonnek,  S. M. (2003).  An application  of cognitive -behavioral anger  
management  training  in a military/occupational  setting:  efficacy  and 
demographic  factors.  Military  Medicine.  168(6):475 -478.  
27. Gerlock,  A. (1994).  Veterans'  responses  to an anger  management  intervention.  Issues  
34  
in Mental  Health  Nursing, 16:393 -408.  
28. Morland,  L. A., Greene,  C. J., Rosen,  C. S., Foy, D., Reilly, P., Shore,  J., He, Q., & Frueh,  
C. (2010).  Telemedicine  for anger  management  therapy  in a rural  population  of 
combat  veterans  with  posttraumatic  stress  disorder: a randomized  noninferiority  
trial.  Journal  of Clinical  Psychiatry , 71:855 -863.  
29. Taft,  C.T.,  Creech,  S.K.,  Kachadourian,  L. (2012).  Assessment  and treatment  of 
posttraumatic  anger  and aggression:  A review.  Journal  of Research  and 
Rehabilitation , 49:777 -778.  
30. Novaco,  R. (1994).  Clinical  problems  of anger  and its assessment  and regulation  
through  a stress  coping  skills  approach.  In: O'Donohue, W., Krasner,  L., ed. Handbook  
of psychological  skills  training:  Clinical  techniques and applications . Boston:  Allyn  & 
Bacon;  pp. 320-338.  
31. Shea,  M.T.  (2010).  Anger  Problems  in Veterans.  Invited  presentation,  Boston  VA 
/National  Center  for PTSD.  
32. Shea,  M. T., Lambert , J.F.,  & Reddy,  M.  (2013). Risk factors for post -deployment 
posttraumatic stress disorder in national guard / reserve service members. Psychiatry 
Research, 2013; 210:1042 -1048.  
33. Yeh,  M.T.,  Coccaro,  E.G.,  Jacobson,  K.C. (2010).  Multivariate  behavior  genetic  analyses  
of aggressive  behavior  subtypes.  Behavior  Genetics , 40:603 -617.  
34. Archer,  J. (2004).  Sex difference  in aggression  in real-world  setting:  a meta -
analytic  review.  Review  General  Psychology , 8:291 -332.  
35. Spitzer,  R., Williams, J. B., Gibbon,  M. & First,  M.B.  (1995).  Structured  Clinical  Interview  
for DSM -IV-Patient  Version  (SCID -P, Version  2.0). Washington,  DC: American  Psychiatric  
Press.  
36. Blake,  D. D., Weathers,  F.W.,  Nagy,  L.M.,  Kaloupek,  D.G.,  Charney,  D.S. & Keane,  T.M.  
Clinician -Administered  PTSD  Scale  for DSM -IV. National  Center  for Posttraumatic  
Stress  Disorder  
37. Weathers,  F., Ruscio,  A. M. & Keane,  T.M.  (1999).  Psychometric  properties  of 
nine  scoring  rules  for the Clinician -Administered  Posttraumatic  Stress  Disorder  
Scale.  Psychological  Assessment,  11:124 -133.  
38. Hoge,  C. W., Castro,  C. A., Messer,  S. C., McGurk, D., Cotting,  D. I. & Koffman, R. L. 
(2004).  Combat  duty  in Iraq and Afghanistan,  mental  health  problems,  and barriers  
to care . New  England  Journal  of Medicine,  351:13–22. 
39. Bernstein,  D. P., Fink,  L., Handelsman,  L., Foote,  J., Lovejoy,  M., Wenzel,  K., & Ruggiero,  
J. (1994).  Initial  reliability  and validity  of a new  retrospective  measure  of child abuse  
and neglect.  American  Journal  of Psychiatry , 151:1132 –1136.Bernstein  et al., 1998 . 
40. Derogatis,  L.R. & Spencer, P.M.  (1992). The Brief  Symptom  Inventory  (BSI)  
Administration  scoring  and procedures  manual -I. Baltimore,  MD:  Clinical  
Psychometric  Research.  
35  
41. Clark, L. A. (1996). Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality. Manual for 
administration, scoring, and interpretation . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press.  
42. Clark, L. A. & Harrison, J. A. (2001). Assessment instruments. In W. J. Livesley (Ed.). 
Handbook of personality disorders  (pp. 277 -306). Guilford Press.  
43. Cacciola, J. S., Aleterman, A. I., DePhilippis, D., Drapkin, M. L., Valadez, C., & Fala, N. 
C., et al.,  (2013). Development and Initial Evaluation of the Brief Addiction Monitor 
(BAM). Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 44, 256 -263.   
44. Spielberger,  C. (1999).  STAXI -2 Stait -Trait  Anger  Expression  Inventory -2 
Professional  Manual . Lutz,  Florida:  Psychological  Assessment  Resources,  Inc. 
45. Coccaro,  E. (2000).  Overt  Aggression  Scale -Modified  (OAS -M). In: Association  AP, ed. 
Handbook  of Psychiatric  Measures . Washington  DC: American  Psychiatric  
Association,  pp. 699-702.  
46. Spielberger,  C. (2000).  State -Trait  Anger  Expression  Inventory  (STAXI). Handbook  of 
Psychiatric  Measures . Washington,  DC: American  Psychiatric  Association,  pp. 702-
706.  
47. Coccaro,  E. (2000).  Overt  Aggression  Scale -Modified  (OAS -M). In: Association  AP, ed. 
Handbook  of Psychiatric  Measures . Washington  DC: American  Psychiatric  
Association,  pp. 699-702.  
48. McCloskey,  M. & Coccaro,  E. F. (2003).  Self-report  and interview  measures  of aggression  
in adults.  In: Coccaro  E, ed. Aggression: Assessment  and treatment  into the 21st  century . 
New  York:  Marcel  Dekker,  pp167 -194.  
49. Dahlen,  E.R. & Martin, R.C. (2006).  Refining  the anger  consequences  questionnaire.  
Personality  and Individual  Differences , 41:1021 -1031.  
50. Novaco,  R. (1975).  Anger  control:  the development  and evaluation  of an 
experimental  treatment . Lexington,  MA:  D.C. Heath.  
51. Forbes,  D., Hawthorne,  G., Elliott,  P., McHugh,  T., Biddle,  D., Creamer,  M. & Novaco,  
R.W.  (2004).  A concise  measure  of anger  in combat -related  posttraumatic  stress  
disorder.  Journal  of Traumatic  Stress , 17:249 -256.  
52. Keller,  M. B., Lavori,  P. W., Friedman,  B., Nielson,  E., Endicott,  J., McDonald -Scott,  P. 
& Andreason,  N. C. (1987).  The Longitudinal  Interval  Follow -up Evaluation.  Archives  
of General  Psychiatry,  44: 540–548.  
53. Warshaw,  M., Keller,  M. B., & Stout,  R. L. (1994).  Reliability  and validity  of the 
Longitudinal  Interval  Follow -up Evaluation  for assessing  outcome  of anxiety  
disorders.  Journal  of Psychiatric  Research,  28:531–545.  
54. Lambert,  M., Hansen,  N. B., Umpress,  V., Lunnen,  K., Okiishi,  J., Birlingame,  G. M., 
& Reisinger,  C. W. (2003).  Administration  and Scoring  Manual  for the Outcome  
Questionnaire : American  Credentialing  Services  LLC. 
55. Lambert,  M., Okiishi,  J. C., Finch,  A. E. & Johnson,  L. D. (2003b).  Outcome assessment:  
36  
From  conceptualization  to implementation.  In: Kazdin  A, ed. Methodological  Issues  & 
Strategies  in Clinical  Research . Washington,  DC: American  Psychological  Association,  
pp 619-635.  
56. Skevington,  S. M.,  Lotfy, M., & O’Connell, K. A. ( 2004 ). The World Health Organization’s 
WHOQOL -BREF quality of life assessment: Psychometric properties and results from 
the international field trial. A report from the WHOQOL Group. Quality of Life Research , 
13, 299 -300.  
57. Novaco,  R. W. & Taylor, J. L. (2004).  Assessment  of anger and  aggression  in 
male  offenders  with  developmental  disabilities.  Psychological  Assessment , 
16:42 -50. 
58. Novaco,  R. (2003).  The Novaco  Anger  Scale  and Provocation  Inventory . Los Angeles,  
CA: Western  Psychological  Services.  
59. Wei,  I. (1978).  Application of  an urn model  to the design  of sequential  controlled  
clinical  trials.  Journal  of the American  Statistical  Association , 73:559 -63. 
60. Stout,  R., Wirtz,  P., Carbonari,  J. P. & Del Boca,  F. (1994).  Ensuring  balanced 
distribution  of prognostic  factors  in treatment  outcome  research.  Journal  of Studies  
on Alcohol.  suppl.  2:70 -75. 
61. Project  MATCH  Research  Group  (1997).  Matching  alcoholism  treatments  to client  
heterogeneity:  Project  MATCH  posttreatment  drinking  outcomes.  Journal  of Studies  
on Alcohol , 58:7.  
62. Rounsaville,  B.J., Caroll,  K.M.,  & Onken,  L.S. (2001).  A stage model of  behavioral  
therapies  research:  getting  started  and moving  on from  stage  I.  Clinical  Psychology  
Science  and Practice , 8:133 -142.  
63. Schnurr,  P.P. (2007).  The rocks  and the hard  places  in psychotherapy  outcome  research.  
Journal  of Traumatic  Stress , 20:779 -792.  
64. Schnurr,  P.P.,  Friedman,  M.J.,  Engel,  C.C.,  Foa,  E.B.,  Shea,  M.T.,  Chow,  B.K.,  Resick,  
P.A, Thurston,  V., Orsillo,  S.M.,  Haug,  R., Turner,  C., & Bernardy,  N. (2007).  
Cognitive  Behavioral  Therapy  for Posttraumatic  Stress  Disorder  in Women.  A 
Randomized  Controlled  Trial.  Journal  of the American  Medical  Association . 
297:820 -830.  
65. Raudenbush,  S. W., & Bryk,  A. S. (2002).  Hierarchical  Linear  Models:  Applications  
and Data  Analysis  Methods  (2nd  ed.).  Thousand  Oaks,  CA: Sage  Publications.  
66. Kazdin,  A. E., & Nock,  M. K. (2003).  Delineating  mechanisms  of change  in child and  
adolescent  therapy:  Methodological  issues  and research  recommendations.  Journal  
of Child  Psychology  and Psychiatry , 44(8),  1116 -1129.  
67. Kelly,  J. F., Stout, R. L., Magill, M.,  Tonigan,  J. S., & Pagano,  M. E. (2011).  Spirituality  in 
recovery:  A lagged meditational  analysis of Alcoholics  Anonymous’  principal  
theoretical  mechanism  of behavior  change.  Alcoholism:  Clinical  and Experimental  
Research , 35(3),  454-463.  
37  
68. MacKinnon,  D. P., Lockwood,  C. M., Hoffman,  J. M., West,  S. G., & Sheets,  V. (2002).  
A comparison  of methods  to test the significance  of the mediated  effect.  
Psychological  Methods,  7, 83-104.  
69. Sobel,  M. E. (1982).  Asymptotic  confidence  intervals  for indirect  effects  in 
structural  equation  models.  In S. Leinhardt  (Ed.),  Sociological  Methodology  (pp. 
290-312).  Washington  DC: American Sociological  Association.  
70. Fritz,  M. S., & MacKinnon,  D. P. (2007).  Required  sample size  to detect  the 
mediated  effect.  Psychological  Science,  18(3), 233-239.  
71. Faes,  C., Molenberghs,  G., Aerts,  M., Verkeke,  G., & Kenward,  M. G. (2009).  The 
effective  sample  size and an alternative  small -sample  degrees -of-freedom  method.  
American  Statistician,  63:389 -399.  
72. Kraemer,  H.C.,  Mintz,  J., Noda,  A., Tinklenberg,  J., Yesavage,  J. A. (2006).  Caution  
regarding  the use of pilot studies  to guide  power  calculations  for study  
proposals.  Archives  of General  Psychiatry  2006  63:484 -489.  