   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
1 
PROTOCOL  
  
Study  Title:  
Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
 
Principal Investigator:  Erica Sharpe, PhD  
Co-Investigator(s) : Ryan Bradley, ND, MPH  
Co-Investigator: Matt Butler, PhD  
Biostatistician: Doug Hanes, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Version #: 1 
Initial Document Approval Date : April 13 th, 2020  
 
A.0 ABSTRACT  
The current COVID -19 pandemic is not only rapidly killing tens of thousands of people, worldwide, 
but it is heightening worry, anxiety, and uncertainty for many human beings , with 45% of adults 
reporting that this pandemic  has affected their mental health (Kaiser Health Tracking Poll, March 
2020) . Frequent updates on the virus from the news, family, friends, soc ial media , etc. may induce 
anxiety, which can lead to difficulty sleeping at night. Poor sleep can decrease immune function 
and thus, possibly  increase risk of poor COVID -19 outcomes, along with a variety of health 
conditions including depression, stroke, and early death . This current virus is not contained by 
political, social, or cultural boundaries, and thus, nearly all humans are, or will be, impacted. There 
is a need for more research into mind/body therapies as alternatives to the standard of care  for 
anxiety and sleep  (often consisting of pharmaceuticals, supplements or behavioral interventions ). 
We have begun to study the effects of Yoga Nidra on these outcomes  by leading focus groups , 
as well as conducting a miniature sleep lab  study  in which we com pared relaxation effects of a 
90-minute  rest period that contained 30 -minutes  of Yoga Nidra vs. lying quietly. Herein, we 
propose the study of a Yoga Nidra practice delivered in real -time, to anyone , with internet access, 
directly before bed, weekly, durin g the global coronavirus pandemic. Classes do not require 
registration and will likely contain a mix of new and repeat attendees each week. We will collect 
data on  anxiety  and sleep  outcomes surrounding each class . Anxiety will be measured directly 
before and after the practice , and sleep data will be collected the day before and after Yoga Nidra . 
A feedback survey will be distributed after the 8 -week course is complete, before the next 8 -week 
session begins. This is a pilot study o f online, live, community yoga practice, and may lead to 
larger, controlled studies in the future.  
 
B.0 SPECIFIC AIMS  
B.1 Specific Aim 1 : Feasibility  
We will explore feasibility of live, online offerings by reporting enrollment numbers (target 
consistent c lass size would be at least 5 people), number of classes each participant 
attends (target: 3 of 8 offered), as well as feedback on accessibility (benefits/challenges 
of using Zoom) and effectiveness (vs. in -person class).  
B.2 Specific Aim 2: Effects of Yoga Nidra on Acute Anxiety  
Acute changes in anxiety  will be monitored using the State Trait Anxiety Index (STAI)  
before and after class each week for each eight -week  session offered through the Canton 
Yoga Loft, on Zoom.  
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
2 
B.3 Specific Aim 3 . Effects of Yoga Nidra on Sleep  
We will assess  impacts of Yoga Nidra on  sleep using  six questions from the Post Sleep 
Questionnaire  (PSQ) . These questions will be distributed at intake (immediately before 
the first practice ) and then in the morning following Yoga Nidra. In subsequent weeks after 
intake, these questions will be asked on Wednesday mornings (before Yoga Nidra) and 
on Thursday mornings (after Yoga Nidra).   
B.4 Exploratory Aim: Compare Agreeability of the P ost Sleep Questionnaire (P SQ) 
to Oura Ring sleep outcomes. Each question from the PSQ has been compared to 
polysomnography (PSG) [1]. We selected six questions that significantly correlate with 
certain sleep outcomes using Spearman correlation coefficients (Q6 (evaluation of sleep), 
with total sleep time (TST) and sleep efficiency (SE); Q7 (sleepiness), with sleep onset 
latency (SOL), TST, and SE; and Q8 (refreshment), with wakefulness after sleep onset 
(WASO)).  A population of 80 people in NYC, currently being monitored, through the Oura 
ring, by their naturopathic doctor, will be invited t o participate in Zoom classes and in this 
study. We will request Oura ring data on sleep, in an effort to determine agreeability 
between Oura outcomes, the PSQ and therefore, to polysomnography (PSG).  
 
C.0 BACKGROUND AND  SIGNIFICANCE  
 
The current pandemic is not only projected to kill tens of thousands in the US alone, but is 
impacting the lives of everyone, as it requires social distancing and increases anxiety and stress 
about health, employment, the economy, and more. C hronic stress increases ri sk for a variety of 
health conditions (e.g.,  depression, obesity, heart disease, and early death) and contributes to 
75-90% of doctor visits [2]. In pre -pandemic  statistics , 73% percent of the US population reported  
regular psychological sy mptoms of stress, and 48% of people  reported  lying awake at night due 
to stress [3, 4] . Therefore unsurprisingly, 40% of the US population report ed sleep deprivation, 
31% and report ed anxiety [5]. These numbers may increase during a global pandemic. Although 
treatments exist for some these functional disorders (sleep, anxiety, etc.) current pharmaceutical 
treatments for sleep, for example, have severe effects on daytime cognitive functioning  and motor 
control, which can contribute to workplace absenteeism, suboptimal performance, motor vehicle 
accidents and increased mortality (hypnotic drugs contribute to 50% of motor vehicle fatalities) 
[6-10]. There is a strong demand, at this moment, for nonpharmaceutical alternatives and for low -
risk, broadly accessible pr actices that can be implemented at home, digitally, if possible.  
Our proposed intervention, Yoga Nidra,  is a scripted and reproducible, guided  meditation  
technique that promotes mental, emotional and physical relaxation while also facilitat ing the 
transit ion between waking and sleeping.  It is estimated that the average person actually sleeps 
during 10 -50% of a Yoga Nidra practice [11]. Studies has shown the practice to enhanc e alpha 
brainwave  power , which is indicative of the process of falling asleep . Our own preliminary work at 
Helfgott supports  both of these statistics in  the practice we developed, in -house  (with an 11% 
increase in alpha power  during Yoga Nidra , and with 78% of participants  sleeping for an average 
of 51% of the practice) . Traditiona lly, Yoga Nidra  has been  used to treat insomnia by practicing 
before bed. Treatment includes basic sleep hygiene [12], and physical postures (c alled asanas) 
before Yoga Nidra, in order to reduce restlessness, pain, stiffness and tension that could prevent 
focus during the practice . In similarity to other meditative and pr ogressive relaxation techniques , 
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
3 
the practice of Yoga Nidra produces significant physical relaxation characterized by inc reased 
parasympathetic response  [13] (also confirmed in our pilot study, which observed a 13% decrease 
in respiration rate during the hour of rest which followed the pra ctice) . Unique to Yoga Nidra, 
however, is the additional release of mental and emotional tensions. During Yoga Nidra, m ental 
tensions  are released by  rotatin g awareness throughout the body, follow ing the mapping of the 
motor homunculus  [11, 14, 15] . By sending a signal from body to brain, following the same pattern 
as this neuronal map, the mind is progressively relaxed  [11]. Emotional release is then evoked 
through systema tic arousal of feeling , sensation and experience, followed by guided 
visualizations.  
The goal of this application  is to collect survey data, indicating the effects of a digital Yoga Nidra 
practice, delivered real -time, before bed (10pm EST), to a group of  students, through Zoom, 
during the COVID -19 pandemic. We will explore effects on momentary anxiousness, as well as 
on sleep. Participants will be consented through REDCap during the Yoga Nidra class, then asked 
to complete an intake form, a sleep question naire (composed of questions from the Post Sleep 
Questionnaire (PSQ)) and a pre/post State Trait Anxiety (STAI)  Index, surrounding the practice. 
Participants will receive an email the next morning, inquiring about their sleep (~2 min survey), 
and again the following week, the morning of the Yoga Nidra class, in order to remind them about 
the weekly class offering and also to collect sleep data for a night  that did n ot include pre-bed 
Yoga Nidra . We will additionally report feasibility measures including enrollment, retention, 
qualitative feedback, and challenges of using the digital platform. Using this data, we will gain 
valuable feasibility data for implementation of this type of mind -body practice using digital 
platforms. We will also gain important data on the effects of this practice on anxiety and sleep, 
when used as part of a pre -bed routine. Data from this trial will supplement our pilot data that 
measured rel axation and meditative effects during  the practice, as well as qualitative feedback on 
perceived experience from focus groups. We will use our data set as a whole to pursue grant 
funding, to further explore this practice in a larger sample size.  
D.0 PERSONNEL AND PRELIMINARY DATA  
 
D.1  Erica Sharpe, PhD  
 Ryan Bradley, ND, MPH  
 Matt Butler, PhD  
 Doug Hanes, PhD  
 
D.2 Preliminary Data: Our recent pilot study showed that in a sample of 18 participants  
reporting mild to moderate insomnia, momentary anxiousness decreased by 20% 
following Yoga Nidra. We also showed that respiration rate  (RR)  decreased by 1.4 breaths 
per minute during the practice of Yoga Nidra, and by 2.1 bpm during an hour rest that 
followed Yoga Nidra . Conversely, RR increased slightly in the control group , which lay 
quietly instead of practicing Yoga Nidra . These e ffects were statistically different between 
groups.  
 
Furthermore, we displayed an 11% increase in alpha brainwave power from the occipital 
lobe. This change in consistent with other studies which report increase in alpha 
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
4 
brainwave power [16] in response to meditation, thus asserting that our practice 
successfully modifies the brain in a similar manner to other successful practice, such as 
mindfulness meditation, and previously studied Yoga Nidra scripts.   
 
We measured sleep in 6 7% of our contr ol group, and 89% of our intervention group  at 
both visits , with 78% (7/9) of  participant s in the Yoga Nidra group actually falling asleep 
during  the Yoga Nidra practice  (average SOL, 9 min), even though they were instructed 
by the recording to stay awake and focus on the meditation. 43% of these participants 
(3/7) did not wake up when the  practice ended, and  all but one of those participants that 
did wake up,  fell back asleep within 10 -minut es, and continued  sleeping into the hour -long 
napping period which followed . 86% of the participants who slept during Yoga Nidra fell 
asleep less than halfway through the 27-min practice , and  average d a total sleep time of 
38 minutes, during the 90 -minute measurement period .  
 
Our focus group data, which is still being analyzed, supports the hypothesis that for many 
individuals, Yoga Nidra can induce  perceived  physical, mental and emotional relaxation, 
as well as produce what participants recalled as sleep or a sleep -like state, that helps to 
clear the mind and decrease tension.   
 
These findings support the hypothesis that Yoga Nidra may be a useful pre -bed te chnique 
for reducing sleep latency and increasing restfulness.  
 
E.0 RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS STUDY FLOW  
 
E.1. Overview : In this preliminary study of digital, real -time, Yoga Nidra classes, we will 
assess acute pre/post changes in anxiety (using the STAI -Y6 survey) and pre/post 
changes in sleep ( using the PSQ following nights with pre -bed Yoga Nidra  vs. nights 
without pre-bed Yoga Nidra). Our sample will broadly include anyone who chooses to sign 
into this class, which is offered through the Canton Yo ga Loft, in Canton, NY  (who has 
moved all of its classes to Zoom, in response to the COVID -19 pandemic ). Participants 
will be informed about the study and will have the opportunity to join and consent using a 
digital consent process within REDCap. During t he 5-10 minutes before the intervention, 
participants will be asked to complete  an intake form and  two questionnaires . Participants 
will then be invited to practice Yoga Nidra, which involves the instructor reading to them 
for roughly 30 -40 minutes.  Follow ing this practice , they will complete one final survey. 
They will then be prompted through email, to complete sleep surveys at two time points in 
the week that follows class. See the intervention schedule below.  
 
Intervention Schedule:   
Yoga Nidra Class via Zoom (Offered through the Canton Yoga Loft, Wednesdays at 10pm 
EST)  
5 minutes:  
• Consent within REDCap  
• Complete Intake Survey  (with Insomnia Severity Index (IS I)) 
• Complete State Trait Anxiety Index (STAI -Y6) and 6 questions from the Post Sleep 
Questionnaire (PSQ)  
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
5 
40 Minutes:  
• Intro: greeting and sharing of one thing we are grateful for  
• Yoga Nidra: listening to the teacher (Erica Sharpe) read a script from the Yoga 
Nidra book  
1 Minute:  
• Complete STAI s urvey  
Sleep Analysis after  Yoga Nidra (next morning, 10am , email prompt from REDCap)  
1-2 minutes:  
• 6 questions from the PSQ  
Sleep Analysis  without  Yoga Nidra  (1-week late r, Wednesday morning, 10am , email 
prompt from REDCap)  
1-2 minutes:  
• 6 questions from the PSQ  
• Reminder that Yoga Nidra is available on Zoom at 10pm  
 
Recordings:  Weekly Yoga Nidra sessions will be recorded and may be made available through 
the NUNM Moodle page for additional participants to access, as a non -live experience. Data 
collected from these participants will be analyzed in comparison to those participants in the live 
Zoom classes.  
 
E.2 Recruitment: Anyone with access to the internet and Zoom, will be allowed to join 
this group class. Recruitment will take place using the Canton Yoga Loft webpage and 
social media pages, as this course is one of their offeri ngs. Where possible,  we may 
choose to advertise using TV , radio,  and other online/digital means offered through our 
marketing department.  
 
E.3 Description of P articipant Population :  
E.3.1 Inclusion Criteria Adult males and females, who speak English and can 
listen to a recording while resting comfortably.  
E.3.2 Exclusion Criteria If a participant does not speak English, or cannot hear, 
they must be excluded from this intervention.  
E.3.3 Considerations: Participants who are unable to lay on their back can 
assume another comfortable position.  
 
E.7 Informed Consent:  At the start of class, the instructor will describe the study to 
attendees, and go over the consent form through Zoom, while allowing time for  
prospective participants to read and sign, digitally. The only identifying piece of information 
we will collect is an email address, so surveys can be sent out as described in the protocol.  
Questions will be answered  by the PI (also the Yoga Nidra instructor)  and necessary 
accommodations will be made during this time  as well.  For their reference, p articipants 
will receive a Dropbox link to a PDF of the Consent Form by email, the next morning , as 
part of the prompt to complete their post -yoga sleep survey.  
 
 E.8 Data Collection and Sources  
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
6 
5.8.1 Confidentiality and Data Storage : All surveys and questionnaires will be 
stored in the encrypted REDCap server, and only email addresses will be 
collected, reducing risk.  
5.8.2 Data Integrity : Every effort will be made to ensure confidentiality, including 
asking participants to refrain from using names,  in discussion; and to keep any 
shared personal health information confidential.  
 
 E.9 Risks and Benefits:  
E.9.1 Risks:  In this study, we only collect email addresses, and no names or other 
identifying information. This session will be recorded in case other participants 
wish to participate remotely. We will crop out any portions of the recording that 
contain student video o r voice. Although we will make every effort to protect 
identity, there is a minimal risk of loss of confidentiality . Yoga Nidra is a mind/body 
meditative practice, which involves mental, physical and emotional release and 
relaxation. Risks may include bringing up possibly upsetting memories, or 
emotions. If suddenly woken, participants  may become startled, dizzy upon 
standing,  and/or disoriented. There could be additional risks that we are unaware 
of at the time of the study. Participants  are encouraged, if they experience any side 
effects while in the study, to contact Erica Sharpe at esharpe@nunm.edu as soon 
as possible.   
E.9.2 Benefits: There is no guarantee that participants will receive any benefit 
from this study. However, participation will help us learn more about Yoga Nidra 
as a possible intervention to address poor sleep and anxiety in adults  and will also 
be useful f or assessing feasibility of this intervention as a whole , and particularly, 
when offered virtually . It is possible to may receive benefit from the practice of 
Yoga Nidra. These practices may have mental, physical and emotional benefits 
including relaxation , emotional release, and mental relaxation.  
E.10 Data  Analysis : Pre and post -practice surveys will be collected and analyzed by the 
PI and the biostatistician .  
 
F.0 Conclusion, Summary and/or Benefits of the Knowledge Gained  
With this study we will gain useful information that will help inform our study design for larger 
studies  on digital execution of mind -body practices, and specifically, digital Yoga Nidra 
delive ry for insomnia and anxiety during the COVID -19 pandemic.  We will also understand 
more about feasibility challenges, such as how participants view online Yoga Nidra vs. face -
to-face, as well as any challenges that arise  from using Zoom for delivery, or whe n practicing 
at home vs. in a studio. Moving forward, we aim to further explore  the effectiveness of Yoga 
Nidra as a self -administered , digital treatment for insomnia  and anxiety.  The mind/body 
practice of Yoga Nidra is a very accessible  technique, with a history of use in reducing sleep 
onset latency  and stress . We propose that this practice can be easily integrated into a sleep 
routine to produce immediate and measurable effects in the general American population.  
Further, we posit that this is a very val uable time to implement such as study, due to the 
tremendous challenge faced by all of humanity, in overcoming the novel coronavirus.  
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
7 
References:  
1. O'Donnell, D., et al., Comparison of subjective and objective assessments of sleep in 
healthy older subjects without sleep complaints.  J Sleep Res, 2009. 18(2): p. 254 -63. 
2. Clinic, M., "Stress: Constant stress puts your health at risk.".  
3. Stress, T.A.I.o. What is Stress . 2018; Available from: https://www.stress.org/daily -life. 
4. Association, A.P., Stress in America: Paying with Our Health . 2015.  
5. (NIMH), N.I.o.M.H. Mental Health Information>Statistics>Prevalence of Any Anxiety 
Disorder Among Adults . 2017; Available from: 
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/any -anxiety -disorder.shtml . 
6. Andersen, L.P., et al., The Safety of Melatonin in Humans.  Clin Drug Investig, 2016. 36(3): 
p. 169 -75. 
7. Kripke, D., Hynotic drug risks of mortality, infection, depression, and cancer: but lack of 
benefit.  F1000Research, 2016.  
8. Kripke, D.F., Chronic hypnotic use: deadly risks, doubtful benefit. REVIEW ARTICLE.  
Sleep Med Rev, 2000. 4(1): p. 5 -20. 
9. Petrov, M.E., et al., Over -the-counter and prescription sleep medication and incident 
stroke: the REasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke study.  J Stroke 
Cerebrovasc Dis, 2014. 23(8): p. 2110 -2116.  
10. Schroeck, J.L., et al., Review of Safety and E fficacy of Sleep Medicines in Older Adults.  
Clin Ther, 2016. 38(11): p. 2340 -2372.  
11. Saraswati, S.S., Yoga Nidra . Sixth ed. Bihar Yoga. 2013, New Delhi, India: Thomson 
Press (India) Limited. 261.  
12. Wilson, K.E., et al., Sleep environments and sleep dur ations in a sample of low -income 
preschool children.  J Clin Sleep Med, 2014. 10(3): p. 299 -305. 
13. Benson, H., J.F. Beary, and M.P. Carol, The Relaxation Response.  Psychiatry, 1974. 
37(1): p. 37 -46. 
14. Kocak, M., et al., Motor homunculus: passive mapping  in healthy volunteers by using 
functional MR imaging --initial results.  Radiology, 2009. 251(2): p. 485 -92. 
15. Salles, L., X. Girones, and J.V. Lafuente, [The motor organization of cerebral cortex and 
the role of the mirror neuron system. Clinical impact for rehabilitation].  Med Clin (Barc), 
2015. 144(1): p. 30 -4. 
16. Ahani, A., et al., Quantitative change of EEG and respiration signals during mindfulness 
meditation.  Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, 2014. 11: p. 87 -87. 
 
  
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
8 
 
1.0 Participant Informed Consent  
 
Title of Study: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
 
Principal Investigator: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
 
Co-Investigators:  Ryan Bradley, ND, MPH; Matt Butler, PhD; Doug Hanes, PhD  
 
An Investigator in the Helfgott Research Institute at NUNM is conducting this research study. The 
study is supported by funding from the R90 Building Research across Inter -Disciplinary Gaps 
(BRIDG)  clinical research training program, hosted at the National University of National 
Medicine, and funded by the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH), 
of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).  
 
2.0 What is the study about?  
This study is being conducted in order to understand feasibility of online community delivery of 
Yoga Nidra, and also to explore its possible effects on stress and sleep during the COVID -19 
pandemic.  
 
3.0 How long will I be in the study?  
Your part in the study  will consist of filling out surveys online for roughly 5 minutes before and 
after Yoga Nidra class, as well as roughly 2 minutes the morning after class, and the morning of 
the next class.  
 
4.0 What will happen in the study?  
Intake:  If you choose to parti cipate, you will be asked to give consent and then complete an intake 
form, and provide your email address, which will be used to deliver two 2 -minute follow up 
surveys.  
 
Yoga Nidra:  You will be invited to participate in a guided meditation practice called  Yoga Nidra. 
You will be asked to lie on your back during this practice, close your eyes, and listen to a voice. 
This practice takes 30 -40 minutes.  
 
Questionnaires:  After intake, you will be invited to complete two surveys before and after Yoga 
Nidra (a survey assessing anxiety will be given directly before and directly following Yoga Nidra, 
and a sleep survey will be administered directly before Yoga Nidra, and also  emailed to you 
tomorrow morning, and again a week from today).  
 
Expectations of you:  Please perform any/all activities you are comfortable with, and complete 
any/all surveys you are comfortable completing. We ask that you give your full attention to the 
practice of Yoga Nidra and answer all surveys honestly. For the rigor of our research study, we 
truly appreciate a willingness to answer all surveys.  
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
9 
 
If you are over 18, and wish to join the study, you must consent by indicating “Yes” below (this is 
a RED Cap checkbox).  
 
Intervention Schedule: This class will be offered weekly, for 8 -weeks at a time.  
Yoga Nidra Class via Zoom (Offered through the Canton Yoga Loft, Wednesdays at 10pm 
EST)  
5 minutes  (before Yoga Nidra) :  
• Consent within REDCap  
• Complete Intake Survey (Demographics and Insomnia Severity Index (ISI))  
• Complete State Trait Anxiety Index (STAI -Y6)  
• Complete 6 questions from the Post Sleep Questionnaire (PSQ)  
40 Minutes  (Yoga Nidra) :  
• Intro: greeting and sharing of one thing we are gra teful for  that day  
• Yoga Nidra: listening to the teacher (Erica Sharpe) read a script from the Yoga 
Nidra book  
1 Minute  (after Yoga Nidra) : 
• Complete STAI survey  
Sleep Analysis after Yoga Nidra (next morning, 10am, email prompt from REDCap)  
1-2 minutes:  
• 6 questions from the PSQ  
Sleep Analysis without  Yoga Nidra (1 -week later, Wednesday morning, 10am, email 
prompt from REDCap)  
1-2 minutes:  
• 6 questions from the PSQ  
• Reminder that Yoga Nidra is available on Zoom at 10pm  
Feedback Survey (following the 8 -week ses sion)  
• Effectiveness and Challenges of the practice through Zoom  
• Optional comments from you  
 
Recordings:  Weekly Yoga Nidra sessions will be recorded and may be made available through 
the NUNM Moodle page for additional participants to access, as a non-live experience. For your 
privacy, we will cut out any portions of this class, before and after the practice,  that include 
participant communication and on -screen interaction.  
 
5.0 What if I have questions?  
If you have questions about the study, you can contact the principal investigator, Erica Sharpe, 
PhD at esharpe@nunm.edu , or our clinical co -investigator, Ryan Bradley, ND, MPH at 
rbradley@nunm.edu . 
 
6.0 Do I have to be in the study?  
You decide if you want to be in the study , and this study is completely voluntary . You can leave 
the study at any time and you do not have to give a reason. If you are an NUNM student or 
employee, deciding not to take part, or deciding to leave will not affect your relationship with 
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
10 
NUNM. As a student in this Yoga Nidra class, d eciding not to participate will not affect your ability 
to participate in Yoga Nidra itself : survey feedback is entirely vo luntary.  
 
7.0 What if I don’t want to be in the study?  
You can choose not to be in the study , and you do not have to give a reason, just indicate “No”, 
below, and then close the window.  
 
8.0 Are there any costs?  
No, all study -related activities are free o f charge.  
 
9.0 Will I be paid for being in the study?  
You will not be paid for being in the study.   
 
10.0 Are there any risks?  
Although we will make every effort to protect identity , there is a minimal risk of loss of 
confidentiality. Yoga Nidra is a mind/body meditative practice, which involves mental, physical 
and emotional release and relaxation. Risks may include bringing up possibly upsetting 
memories, or emotions. If suddenly wo ken, you may become startled, dizzy upon standing, and/or 
disoriented. There could be additional risks that we are unaware of at the time of the study. You 
are encouraged, if you experience any side effects while in the study, to contact Erica Sharpe at 
esharpe@nunm.edu as soon as possible.   
11.0 What if I feel I’ve been hurt by taking part in the study?  
If you feel you have been injured or harmed by taking part in this study, please contact Erica 
Sharpe at esharpe@nunm.edu.  NUNM does not offer to pay the  cost of being treated for harm.  
 
If you feel your rights have been violated or you have been harmed by this study, please contact 
the NUNM Institutional Review Board Chair, Dr. Richard Barrett, at 503 -552-1758.  
 
12.0 Are there any benefits?  
There is no g uarantee that participants will receive any benefit from this study. However, 
participation will help us learn more about Yoga Nidra as a possible intervention to address poor 
sleep and anxiety in adults and will also be useful for assessing feasibility of  this intervention as 
a whole, and particularly, when offered virtually. It is possible to may receive benefit from the 
practice of Yoga Nidra. These practices may have benefits including  physical  relaxation, 
emotional release, and mental relaxation.  
13.0 Your privacy is important  
Your name will not be collected or stored. We will use a study number instead of your name, and 
we will only use your collected email address to deliver surveys to you. We will, with your consent, 
also store your email address in a secure location, in case you wou ld like to be notified about 
other study opportunities. Because we are collecting minimal identifiable information, and storing 
it in an encrypted  and secure digital server  (REDCap)  used for research, there is little chance of 
breach of confidentiality. Your voice and video will be recorded, during our class. However, this 
recording will only be used by study staff, and all video and sound from participants will be cut out 
   
Template  Version 02.02.17  
Protocol  
Study Title: Digital Delivery of Yoga Nidra for Anxiety and Sleep: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Erica Sharpe, PhD  
IRB #: ESRB41320  
Approval Date: April 1 3th, 2020  
11 
before sha ring the Yoga Nidra recording from class with any future students who wish to 
participate in the meditation. Any personal health information you choose to share will be kept 
anonymous to the best of our ability, and we ask that members of our group keep ou r discussion 
confidential. You may decline to answer any of the questions asked.  
 
14.0 Consent  
By checking “Yes” below, you are indicating the following:  
 
- I am over 18 years old  
- I know my rights have not been waived by agreeing to participate in this study . 
- I have had all of my questions answered and/or I know whom to ask if I have more . 
- I have read this form and understand it.  
- I want to join the study.  
- I know I can leave the study at any time and do not have to give a reason.  
 
***After  consenting, please e xpect to receive a copy of th is form  by email, tomorrow 
morning, when you receive your follow -up survey link . Thank you for participating in our 
research study! ** * 
 