TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  Tranexamic Acid Mechanisms and Pharmacokinetics In Traumatic Injury (TAMPITI Trial) Background: Trauma is the leading cause of death in persons younger than 40 years. Hemorrhage is the etiology in 30% of these deaths, and remains the leading cause of potentially preventable mortality (66-80%) [1]. As a result, the prevention of death from hemorrhagic shock has been the subject of intensive research and effort. Death secondary to hemorrhagic shock occurs from both surgical bleeding and coagulopathy.  Acute traumatic coagulopathy is characterized by a hypocoagulable state, where the net balance of coagulation is such that there is low clot forming capacity and strength, which does not allow for adequate hemostasis.  Acute traumatic coagulopathy occurs early in patients who are in shock from hypoperfusion and is not due to coagulation factor consumption or dysfunction because of acidosis, moderate hypothermia, or dilution[2]. However shock (oxygen debt) itself is associated with a coagulopathy that is due to the systemic activation of anticoagulant and fibrinolytic pathways[1, 3]. The protein C pathway is implicated in this process, in addition to fibrinolysis which is mediated by de-inhibition of tPA through PAI-1 consumption[2]. Low levels of PAI-1, with increased plasminogen activator release from the vessel wall contributes to hyperfibrinolysis. It has been suggested that TAFI is the main driver of fibrinolysis inhibition, and that reduction in TAFI activation by the competitive binding of protein C to T-TM is the mechanism for increased fibrinolysis with activation of protein C [1]. Due to the knowledge of increased fibrinolysis promoting a hypocoagulable state in severe trauma, trials have been performed to determine if antifibrinolytics such as tranexamic acid (TXA) could reduce morbidity and mortality by reducing death from hemorrhage[4]. TXA is an antifibrinolytic that inhibits both plasminogen activation and plasmin activity, thus preventing clot break-down rather than promoting new clot formation. TXA occupies the lysine-binding sites on plasminogen, therefore preventing its binding to lysine residues on fibrin. This reduces plasminogen activation to plasmin. Similarly, blockade of lysine-binding sites on circulating plasmin prevents binding to fibrin and thus prevents clot break-down. TXA is excreted largely unchanged in urine and has a half-life of approximately 2 hours in circulation when studied in patients without traumatic injury. Intravenous administration of TXA was approved by the FDA in 1986 for the prevention or reduction of bleeding in patients with hemophilia undergoing dental procedures. The FDA approved use of the oral form of TXA to control heavy menstrual cyclic bleeding in 2009. Despite the extensive and routine use of TXA in many surgical populations and an increasing use in severe trauma patients, TXA does not have an FDA approved indication for patients with traumatic injuries[1].  In 2010, the results of the landmark CRASH-2 (Clinical Randomization of an Antifibrinolytic in Significant Hemorrhage) trial were published, creating widespread international interest [5].  This multicenter, multinational study randomized 20,211 adult trauma patients to either one gram of TXA infused over ten minutes followed by one gram of TXA infused over eight hours versus an equivalent volume of normal saline placebo administered within eight hours of injury.  Inclusion criteria consisted of systolic blood pressure less than 90 mmHg and/or with a heart rate greater than 110 beats per minute, or patients deemed to be at risk of significant hemorrhage.  The primary outcome measure was in-hospital death within four weeks of injury.  Secondary outcomes included thromboembolic events (myocardial infarctions, cerebrovascular accidents, pulmonary emboli, and deep vein thromboses), surgical interventions, blood transfusions, and the total units of blood transfused.  The study found a significant decrease in all-cause mortality (14.5 vs. 16.0%, p=0.0035) and deaths from bleeding (4.9 vs. 5.7%, p=0.0077) in patients receiving TXA compared to placebo.  More recently, data from the Military Application of Tranexamic Acid in Trauma Emergency Resuscitation Study (MATTERs) has been published, providing perspective from a different and likely more severely injured patient population[6].  MATTERs is a retrospective observational study that evaluated data from the Camp Bastion Surgical Hospital in Afghanistan.  Patients were included in the study if they sustained combat-related injury and subsequently received a minimum of one unit of packed red blood cells.  The primary outcome measures were 24 and 48-hour as well as in-hospital mortality (which was inclusive of any mortality occurring within 30 days of injury).  Secondary endpoints included transfusion requirement and correction of coagulopathy based on resolution of extended prothrombin and thromboplastin times between arrival in the emergency department and arrival in the intensive care unit postoperatively.  Overall, 896 consecutive patients were analyzed, with 293 receiving TXA.  Patients receiving TXA were more severely injured than those not receiving the drug (ISS 25.2 vs. 22.5, p<0.001), and a greater proportion presented with severe TBI and admission systolic blood pressure ≤ 90 mmHg.  Patients receiving TXA were given more packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, platelet, and cryoprecipitate transfusions than patients not receiving the drug.  In spite of these admission characteristics, patients receiving 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  TXA had lower overall 48-hour (11.3 vs. 18.9%, p=0.004) as well as in-hospital (17.4 vs. 23.9%, p=0.03) mortality.  Additionally, although more patients who received TXA were hypocoagulable on admission, fewer TXA patients were hypocoagulable on arrival to the ICU, and there was a significant reduction in the proportion of hypocoagulable patients in the TXA group between admission and the ICU. While these data add to the beneficial profile of TXA, MATTERs also reported a greater number of pulmonary emboli (8 vs. 2, p=0.001) and deep vein thromboses (7 vs. 1, p=0.001) in TXA-treated patients. Despite both the CRASH-2 trial and MATTERS studies indicating TXA use reduced the risk of mortality, questions regarding mechanisms of action still remain. Interestingly, in CRASH-2, while improved survival was due to decreased death from hemorrhage, half of the patients did not require blood transfusions or surgical intervention.  This would suggest that correction of coagulopathy was not the only mechanism contributing to improved outcomes in this trial. Figure 1 describes plasmin’s multiple effects to include leukocyte activation and chemokinesis. Given that TXA’s primary effect is purported to be inhibition of plasminogen activation preventing plasmin generation, evaluating monocyte and neutrophil activity and downstream effects in the adaptive immune response in the setting of TXA administration are required. The immune suppressive effects of TXA on immune function have not been thoroughly examined, especially in patients with severe traumatic injury. It is possible that the improved outcomes that have been reported with early administration of TXA in trauma patients are related to its immune suppressive effects. The study of the effects of TXA use on endothelial activation and injury is also important due to the inter-relationship between coagulation and endothelial function. Endothelial injury secondary to local hypoperfusion causes acute traumatic coagulopathy with fibrinolysis.  Therefore a thorough and comprehensive evaluation of the effects of TXA on immune, coagulation, and endothelial parameters is important to allow for a better understanding of the mechanisms of action of this agent.                                Optimal dosing is also unknown for patients with traumatic bleeding. The lack of pharmacokinetic studies in this population contributes to the uncertainty regarding TXA dosing for patients with traumatic injury and 
Figure 1: Trauma and fibrinolysis  
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  hemorrhage. While the CRASH-2 trial utilized a bolus dose followed by an 8-hour infusion, the MATTERS study used multiple IV bolus doses without an 8-hour infusion. The intravenous dosing of TXA for patients with hemophilia with dental bleeding, which is the only FDA approved indication for IV administration, is an IV bolus dose of 10mg/kg every 6 to 8 hours one day prior to surgery. The FDA approved indication for the intravenous form of TXA does not include a continuous infusion dose over 8 hours after a bolus dose.  The common, but off label use of TXA in multiple surgical populations often utilizes an IV bolus dose followed by an 8-hour continuous infusion dose. However, in a trauma patient with potentially limited vascular access, a one-time IV bolus dose would be more practical and may facilitate increased plasma concentration in the immediate time period where hemostatic control is critical. The CRASH-2 trial utilized a total dose of 2mg/kg IV, and the MATTERS study utilized doses that ranged between 1-4 mg/kg IV (personal communication with Dr Joseph J. Debose). Therefore the analysis of multiple bolus doses (within range of current practice) on mechanisms and pharmacokinetics is important and especially relevant to the practical application of TXA.  It is critical for formal and thorough pharmacokinetic analyses to be done in patients with traumatic injury with active bleeding since this population has different physiology than elective surgery patients. The pharmacokinetic analysis of multiple bolus doses in addition to mechanistic, outcomes and safety data will inform the medical community regarding the most appropriate dosing of TXA in the acutely injured, critically ill, trauma patient.  In addition to the potential risk of thrombosis from the use of TXA, seizures have also been recognized as a possible adverse effect. The proposed mechanism for seizures is the structural similarity of TXA to γ-aminobutyric acid, which has a potential to cause neurotoxicity. TXA use in cardiac surgery has been associated with an increased risk of postoperative convulsive seizures. [85] These findings are associated with TXA doses that are well above the 2 and 4-gram IV doses proposed in our trial.  For a typical 70 kg patient, a 4-gram dose of TXA is 57 mg/kg.  A recent study of over 1000 patients requiring cardiac surgery indicated that doses > 100mg/kg or 7 grams IV were associated with an increased risk of early seizure. [85]It is important to recognize that while the risk of early seizure was increased at doses > 100mg/kg the overall incidence of seizure was still very low at 1.3% of patients.  For the typical 70 kg patient in this study that received andose of 4 grams of TXA IV, the probability of seizure was 0.01%, with a narrow 95% CI of (0.006-0.014. [85] A currently unpublished survey of all US trauma centers by our research group that had a 132/187 (71%) response rate, indicated 52% of level one US trauma centers incorporate TXA into their massive transfusion protocols. This data demonstrates that equipoise exists regarding its routine use in this population.  Therefore it is essential and appropriate that prospective randomized control trials are performed to provide evidence regarding its mechanism of action data, pharmacokinetic information, and efficacy and safety data.   Hypotheses:  1. We hypothesize that early TXA use in patients with severe traumatic injuries, reduces a pro-inflammatory state and monocyte activation. To test this hypothesis in 150 patients (50 in each study group), we will determine the effects on immune function measures, at multiple time points, in all three study groups. We expect reduced inflammation, and monocyte activation in TXA treated patients compared to placebo. 2. We hypothesize that the pharmacokinetics of TXA administration are affected by the degree of shock measured by admission lactate, StO2, presence of acute renal failure, and blood products administered in patients with severe traumatic injury. We expect that the degree of shock, renal function, and blood products transfused will affect TXA pharmacokinetics.  3. We hypothesize that early use of TXA is safe and associated with improved outcomes. We expect that the use of TXA at both 2-gram IV and 4-gram IV doses will be safe and will not be associated with an increased risk of thromboembolic events, ARDS, seizures or any adverse events compared to placebo.   Aim 1: To determine the effects of TXA on immune parameters. 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  To evaluate the effects of TXA on immune function parameters we will, in a RCT, analyze samples from 150 patients (50 in each study group), at multiple time points. Parameters are:  a. Cytokines: TNF-α, IL-6, IL-10, and IFN-γ measured at time 0, 6, 24 and 72 hours. b.  Flow cytometric analyses on leukocytes measured at time 0, 6, 24 and 72 hours: CD66+/ROS+ to identify activated polymorphonuclear cells CD4+/CD69+ and CD8+/CD69+ to identify activated lymphocytes CD14+/HLA-DR+ to identify activated monocytes CD4+/Foxp3+ to identify T regulatory cells  Aim 2: To determine the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of multiple TXA dosing regiments. To determine if the pharmacokinetics of TXA administration are affected by the degree of shock measured by admission lactate, StO2, presence of acute renal failure, and blood products administered in patients with severe traumatic injury, we will perform the following analyses in a total of 100 patients within both TXA treated groups (50 patients per TXA treatment group). a. Perform pharmacokinetic analyses b. Compare pharmacokinetic data between patients with varying degrees of shock (lactate and StO2 measures) and according to total amount of blood products transfused in the first 12 hours of injury.   Aim 3: To collect safety and clinical outcomes data on TXA use in patients with traumatic injuries. To measure safety and outcome data in this RCT of 150 patients with severe trauma we will: a. Determine the incidence of thromboembolic events (DVT, MI, PE, Stroke) in all three study groups.  Subjects will be assessed daily by the study team until hospital discharge or up to 30 days, (which ever comes first) after receiving study drug for any signs and symptoms of a thromboembolic event (i.e. shortness of breath, chest pain, extremity swelling, fever of unknown etiology, etc.) In addition, the study team will further ensure the safety of our subjects by screening all subjects at day 7 or hospital discharge (if prior to 7 days) for DVT using duplex ultrasonography.  Stroke, MI, and PE will each be diagnosed clinically according to standard definitions (see appendix at end of document).   b. Determine the incidence of seizures at 24 hours in all three study groups.   c.  Determine the incidence of all adverse events in all three study groups. Adverse events for up to 30 days after study drug administration will be characterized according to severity, relatedness, duration, and resolution.  d. Compare mortality, mechanical ventilation and ICU free days, incidence of multiple organ failure, Acute Kidney Injury (AKI), Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) and sepsis in all three study arms.    Aim 4: To develop a repository of blood samples for future analysis.   These banked samples would be analyzed for measures of coagulation and endothelial function to include but not limited to:  1. Complement: CH50 measured at time 0, 6, 24 and 72 hours  2. Endothelial activation and injury: Soluble Flt-1, soluble E-Selectin, VCAM-1, and PAI-1, Ang1/Ang2, Syndecan 1, Syndecan 2 and vWF measured at time points 0, 1,6, 24 hours.  
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  3. Coagulation and Fibrinolysis:  a. Inhibition of plasmin activity by TXA: D-dimer, PAP, alpha2-antiplasmin, TAFI, clot lysis (ROTEM), measured at times 0, 1, 6, and 24 hours b. Activation and inhibition of fibrinolysis: tPA and PAI-1 measured at times 0, 1, 6, and 24 hours c. Activation of the coagulation system: thrombin generation assays, TAT complexes, antithrombin, fibrinogen, fibrin monomer, fibrinopeptide A and B, Factor XIII, Factor XI, measured at times 0, 1, 6, and 24 hours  Methods: Research Design: A single center, double- blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study will be performed under an IRB approval for exception from informed written consent (with community consultation) and with IND approval from the FDA.  Participants will be randomized into 1 of 3 treatment arms (1:1:1):  TXA 2 gram IV bolus, TXA 4 gram IV bolus, or placebo.  A transfusion guideline will be in place to standardize transfusion practice in this trial.  Study period: The study period is from time of enrollment to hospital discharge or transfer. The study intervention will occur only once upon enrollment in the trial.  Power Analysis: Recent data indicates that in severely injured trauma patients 6.2 ± 0.8% of monocytes express CD14 at 72 hours post injury [86].  We consider a 10% decrease in CD14+/HLA-DR+ monocytes from 6 ± 0.8% to 5.4 ± 0.8% to be potentially clinically relevant. The comparison between the group receiving 2 grams of TXA and placebo is independent of the comparison for the group receiving 4 grams of TXA and placebo.  Therefore, using a a two-tailed α of 0.05 and a (1-β) of 0.90, and a very conservative 20% dropout rate, a total of 47 patients per arm or a total of at least 141 patients will be required.  To account for patients that may have missing data we plan to enroll 50 patients in each study group or a total of 150 patients.  Inclusion criteria:  1.) Patients with traumatic injury that are ordered to receive at least 1 blood product  and/or  2.)  Patients admitted to the Emergency Department with a traumatic injury and require immediate transfer to the operating room  3.) Able to receive the study drug within 2 hours from time of injury Exclusion criteria:  1.) Patients known to be < 18 years of age  2.) Acute MI or stroke  3.) Known inherited coagulation disorders  4.) Known history of thromboembolic events (DVT, PE, MI, Stroke) 5.) Known history of seizures and/or seizure after injury/on admission related to this hospitalization  6.) Suspected or known pregnancy  7.) Known to be  lactating 8.) Suspected or known prisoners  9.) Futile care 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  10.) Known current state of immunosuppression (i.e. on high dose steroids, chemotherapeutics, etc.) 11.) Unknown time of injury           12). Patients wearing an “Opt Out” TAMPITI Study bracelet            13). Known presence of subarachnoid hemorrhage.  Randomization: This study is a placebo controlled (1:1:1), double-blinded, randomized clinical trial of 150 severely injured trauma patients.  Participants will be randomized (1:1:1) to TXA dose 1 (2 gram IV bolus), TXA dose 2 (4 gram IV bolus), and matching volume of Normal Saline placebo using an envelop randomization method.  Study staff will contact the Investigational Drug Services Pharmacy (IDS Pharmacy) to inform them of a study participant and will request that they randomize the subject by opening a random envelope which will secretly assign the participant to one of the 3 randomization assignments.  IDS Pharmacy will dispense the study drug with a label, which will contain a randomization code.  The study team member responsible for overseeing the study drug administration will contact the IDS Pharmacy to verify that the study drug code matches the assigned code for the specific participant to ensure that the right patient gets the right drug. Once study drug is obtained by the pharmacy, it will be administered (blinded) by IV over 10 minutes.    Blinding: Since this is a double-blinded study, all study investigators and team members (with the exception of the study statistician) will be blinded to treatment assignment.  In addition to the statistician, the only individual who will know the study group assignment will be the investigational pharmacist.   The Investigational Pharmacist can reveal the subject’s treatment assignment for safety or treatment concerns.  Accidental and suspected un-blinding will be considered a protocol deviation and will be submitted to the IRB according to Institutional policies and procedures.  Data from subjects who were unblinded will be included in the intent-to-treat analysis. Treatment groups: The three treatment arms will be TXA dose 1 (2 gram IV bolus), TXA dose 2 (4 gram IV bolus), and matching volume of Normal Saline placebo.   Primary outcomes: Primary outcomes include differences in the proportion of activated monocytes among the 3 treatment arms (TXA dose 1, TXA dose, 2, and placebo) from time 0 to time 72 hours.  Secondary outcomes: Secondary outcomes measures include differences in cytokine profiles and leukocyte function parameters, clinical outcomes, and PK analyses between the three study groups (as detailed in Aims 1-4 below). These comparisons will be exploratory and because of the large number of such comparisons, analytic results will be interpreted cautiously.   Patient screening: During the patient recruitment phase of the trial there will be research nurse coordinators in house 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to facilitate constant patient screening and immediate determination of eligibility, initiate the randomization process, ensure blood sample acquisition and processing, and prospective data collection. All research coordinators will carry a trauma pager and will be present in the Emergency room to screen and enroll study patients. An on-call system for additional research laboratory staff will be funded to facilitate trial execution. In order to detect any potential biases, a screening log will be maintained to record the number of eligible patients, the number of patients eligible not randomized, and the reason for their exclusion. This should allow detection of any selection bias. Anticipated cohort and recruitment rate: Trauma Registry data from 2011 report an incidence of 150 patients per year that met eligibility criteria for this trial. These patients have a mean age of 40, ISS of 16, and in hospital mortality of 18%.  Data Collection: The schedule of events details timing of study related procedures, including timing and volume of blood samples being collected (See Appendix C). The 16 ml of blood listed for PK studies is the total volume collected in 24 hours at multiple time points.  Data to be collected on all patients will include epidemiologic data, diagnoses, surgical procedures, blood products (RBC, plasma, platelets, cryoprecipitate), coagulation factor concentrates, concomitant medications, vital signs, clinical labs, AIS/ISS, presence of acute renal failure according to RIFLE criteria [78], and clinical outcomes. The date and time of administration for all medications, blood products and coagulation factor concentrates will be recorded. Storage duration, additive solutions and processing methods used for blood products will also be recorded. Seizure, severe adverse 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  thrombotic events, and all adverse events will be captured from the time of study drug administration until hospital discharge or up to 30 days, (which ever comes first)  although the primary analysis of the risk of seizure and adverse thrombotic events will most likely occur within the first 24 hours and 7 days of the trial respectively.  The risk of seizure secondary to TXA has never been reported to occur after the first 24 hours post TXA administration [76]. Clinical outcomes measured will include mortality at 24 hours, 30 days, and hospital discharge/transfer, ventilator and ICU free days, AKI, incidence of multiple organ failure and sepsis/severe sepsis between TXA treated and placebo study groups. Multiple organ failure will be defined according to the Marshall Score (See Appendix A).  Sepsis and ARDS will be defined according to standard definitions (See Appendix A).  Clinical and safety data will be collected daily until day of hospital discharge or transfer.  Banking of patient samples: All samples collected for banking for future analysis will be frozen at -80 degrees Celsius.  Samples will be cataloged and appropriately labeled.  Protocol Deviations: Patients will be considered adherent to the protocol only if they receive TXA at the appropriate dose or placebo as intended by the randomization process. Patients who receive the wrong TXA dose or TXA instead of placebo or placebo instead of TXA will not be adherent to the protocol and will be classified as protocol deviations. Patients not adherent to protocol will be included in the intent-to-treat analysis but will be excluded from the per-protocol analysis. The decision to withdraw care will not be considered an exclusion criterion, if made after patient entry. These cases will be kept in the ITT analysis. Laboratory Methods: Aim 1: To determine the effects of TXA on immune parameters. To evaluate the effects of TXA on immune function parameters we will, in an RCT, analyze samples from 150 patients (50 in each study group), at multiple time points. Parameters to be measured are:  a. Cytokines: TNF-α, IL-6, IL-10, and IFN-γ measured at time 0, 6, 24 and 72 hours. b. Flow cytometric analyses on leukocytes measured at time 0, 6, 24 and 72 hours: CD66+/ROS+ to identify activated polymorphonuclear cells CD4+/CD69+ and CD8+/CD69+ to identify activated lymphocytes CD14+/HLA-DR+ to identify activated monocytes CD4+/Foxp3+ to identify T regulatory cells  Utilizing 5 mL whole blood samples collected in standard citrate tubes at time 0, 6, 24 and 72 hours later, blood will be centrifuged, and the plasma will be collected and stored at -80C.  This plasma will subsequently be thawed and utilized to perform ELISA-based measurements of the concentration of plasma cytokines, TNF- α, IL-6, IL-10, and IFN- γ.  After harvesting plasma, the Buffy Coat will be gently pipetted and contaminating erythrocytes will be lysed with an ammonium chloride lysis solution. After washing twice with buffer (1% BSA and 1 mM EDTA) and 0.1% sodium azide (NaN3) in HBSS without phenol red, calcium, and magnesium, cells will be resuspended in 4% Hanks’ azide buffer (HBSS without calcium, magnesium, or phenol red, with 4% BSA, 0.1% sodium azide, 0.2% anti-CD16/32, and 1 mM EDTA), and then stained for analysis via flow cytometry utilizing commercially available flow cytometry antibodies as follows. Cells staining CD66+ and ROS+ will identify activated polymorphonuclear cells.  Cells staining CD4+ or CD8+ concurrently with CD69+ will be identified as activated lymphocytes.  Cells staining CD14+ and HLA-DR+ will identify activated monocytes.  Finally, cells staining CD4+ and Foxp3+ will be identified as regulatory T cells.  For intracellular staining of ROS, this will be performed following extracellular staining utilizing commercially available fixation and permeabilization solutions.  Flow cytometric analysis will be completed on a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson).  Each cell population will be evaluated and reported as total positive counts, percentage of total leukocytes.  Additionally, the mean fluorescence intensity for each cell population in each sample will be obtained and reported. Aim 1 Statistical analyses: The outcome measures in this aim are continuous variables that will be measured at multiple longitudinal time points.   
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  Aim 2: To determine the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of multiple TXA dosing regiments. To determine if pharmacokinetics of TXA administration are affected by the degree of shock measured by admission lactate, StO2, presence of acute renal failure, and blood products administered in patients with severe traumatic injury, we will perform the following analyses in a total of 150 patients within both TXA treated groups (50 patients per TXA treatment group).  a. Perform pharmacokinetic analyses b. Compare pharmacokinetic data between patients with varying degrees of shock (lactate and StO2 measures) and adjusting for acute renal failure and total amount of blood products transfused in the first 12 hours of injury.  To facilitate the frequent sampling of patients for this PK analysis, research staff will be present at the clinical site 24 hours a day, 7 days a week with an on-call system for additional research laboratory support when needed. The research staff will follow subjects from admission throughout their hospitalization. To reduce the volume of blood phlebotomized from patients, research nurses will only sample the even or odd number time points from individual patients. For example if a patient is sampled according to even number sampling times, blood will be drawn at time 0, 20 min, 1 hr, 2 hr, 4 hr, 6 hr, 8 hr, and12 hr. A patient sampled on odd number sampling times will have samples drawn at time 0, 10 min, 40 min, 1.5 hr, 3 hr, 6 hr, 10 hr and 24 hr.    Each blood sample will be collected into a standard citrate tube, centrifuged and the supernatant (plasma) will be stored at -80C before analysis. Samples (stripped of any identifiers and only containing the subject’s study number) will later be shipped on dry ice to our collaborating site at Emory for full analysis.  TXA will be extracted from plasma samples using solid phase microextraction, and the concentrations will be measured using tandem liquid chromatography- mass spectrometry [77]. Pharmacokinetic data will be analyzed with NONMEM, using both the first-order and conditional non-Laplacian (with centering) estimation techniques. We will consider two- and three-compartment models, parameterized in terms of both compartment volumes and clearances (distribution and elimination). We will compare a basic model (in which pharmacokinetic parameters were independent of weight) to a model in which the pharmacokinetic parameters will be assumed to be proportional to weight. The optimal model will be selected on the basis of the objective function logarithm of the likelihood of the results) using standard criteria (NONMEM guide). Blood is collected into 2.0 buffered sodium citrate tubes (0.109M-3.2 %), and tubes are inverted 5 times to ensure proper mixing with the anticoagulant. Plasma is separated by centrifugation at 4000x g for 10 minutes at 40C and stored at -800C until analysis.   Aim 2 Statistical Analysis: The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic (henceforth, PK/PD) analysis will be performed using pooled data from the entire study population.  This will be accomplished by nonlinear mixed effects modeling, using the software package NONMEM (version 7.2.0).  The basic features of NONMEM may be best understood by considering a typical PK experiment. In the typical pharmacokinetic experiment, the drug is given to a subject, blood samples are drawn at defined intervals after dosing, the blood concentration is determined as a function of time, and a compartment model is then “fit” to the data to derive pharmacokinetic parameters for individual patients. To understand pharmacokinetic variability among patients, this same approach will be repeated in multiple subjects. One can then simply calculate the mean of the individual pharmacokinetic parameters and also their variances or standard deviations. This approach is called the two-stage method and it is laborious, time consuming, and logistically challenging since it requires enough samples from each patient to determine their individual PK parameters. An alternate approach to determining the pharmacokinetic parameters for multiple patients and then averaging them is to draw a small number of samples from a large number of patients (after drug administration) and then perform what is termed a “mixed-effects” analysis on the pooled data. The difference between the observed and the predicted concentration is attributed to 1) measurement error and 2) the individual variation of the patient’s pharmacokinetic parameters from the mean value for the population.  For any observation, we can define the “likelihood” of the difference of the observed concentration and that predicted by the model. The likelihood is essentially the probability that if the model were true given the present values of the model parameters, the present observations would have been observed. If the observations are quite unlikely for the present model, then the present model is not a very good description of the observations. If the observations are quite likely for the present model, then the present model is most likely a valid explanation of the data.  
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  We will begin our analysis comparing one, two, and three compartment models. The minimization of the objective function (in other words, the maximization of the above expression for the likelihood) is mathematically and computationally complex. We will select as parameters for the PK model the compartment volumes and intra-compartmental and elimination clearances. The one compartment model would be characterized by a single compartment volume and the elimination clearance (two “structural” parameters), the two-compartment model by the central and peripheral compartment volumes, the intra-compartmental clearance, and the elimination clearance (four structural parameters), and comparably for the three-compartment model (which will have six structural parameters). We will compare the minimal objective function for the one, two, and three compartment models. Given that the objective function has a χ2 distribution, one would select a model with an additional parameter only if the objective function improves, i.e., decreases, by more than 3.84 to achieve significance at the p=0.05 level. Thus, we would select as our basic model the two-compartment model only if the objective function improves by more than 7.68 and similarly for selecting a three-compartment model rather than a two-compartment model. In addition to this basic statistical test, we will also reject more complex models if the minimization does not converge with a full covariance matrix (in general we can anticipate that parameters will not only have a variance, but that there will be covariance between parameters). We will also graphically analyze the models by plotting residuals (difference between predicted and observed concentrations) vs. time and predicted concentration to look for systematic (nonrandom) variation. With mixed-effect modeling one can determine empiric (post-hoc) Bayes estimates of individual patient parameters. These are the most probable parameter estimates given the estimate of the mean parameter, the variance of the parameter, and the observed drug concentrations in individual patients. This allows us to compare observed drug concentrations to drug concentrations predicted for the individual patient, as well as the drug concentrations predicted with mean parameters.  We will reject more complex models if they result in a marked increase in residuals or systematic variation in the residuals. In addition to determining the optimal basic model, the first stage of analysis will also require consideration of weight-based pharmacokinetic parameters. It is intuitive that pharmacokinetic parameters will be proportional with body mass in some manner. However, it is well known in PK analysis that if there is insufficient heterogeneity in the body mass of patients in the study group, weight-adjusted parameters lead to no better a fit of the data than non weight-adjusted parameters. After establishing the optimal compartmental model (1, 2, or 3 compartments), we will compare models in which we assume that compartment volumes and clearances are proportional to weight to those in which weight is not a factor.  Following determination of the optimal compartment model and whether we need weight-based modeling, we will explore the role of covariates. We will evaluate as potential covariates age, degree of shock as assessed by admission lactate and StO2, presence of renal failure, and blood products administered using this approach of graphical analysis of the relationship between the covariate and the specific PK parameter and then formal modeling of the parameter as a linear function of the covariate. In summary our PK/PD analysis will entail the following methods and steps 1. Use of pooled data and nonlinear mixed effects modeling using NONMEM 2. Initial analysis using the first-order approximation and estimation algorithm 3. Determination of the optimal compartment model (1, 2, or 3 compartments parameterized in terms of compartment volumes and clearances). 4. Selection of the optimal model using the χ2 distribution of the objective function and also graphical inspection of the residuals for detection of systematic variation. 5. Evaluation of weight-based analysis. 6. Analysis of covariates (age, lactate, StO2, and volume of blood products) by graphical analysis of the relationship between the relevant η and the covariate and then inclusion of the covariate in the formal model and rejection of the covariate as significant based on the χ2 distribution of the objective function. 7. Analysis of pharmacodynamic models using a sigmoid-Emax model and nonlinear mixed effects modeling. Aim 3: To collect safety and clinical outcomes data on TXA use in patients with traumatic injuries. To measure safety and outcome data in this RCT of 150 patients with severe trauma we will: 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  a. Determine the incidence of thromboembolic events (DVT, MI, PE, Stroke) in all three study groups.  Subjects will be assessed daily by the study team (while in the hospital) for up to 30 days after receiving study drug for any signs and symptoms of a thromboembolic event (i.e. shortness of breath, chest pain, extremity swelling, fever of unknown etiology, etc.) In addition, the study team will further ensure the safety of our subjects by screening all subjects at day 7 or hospital discharge (if prior to 7 days) for DVT using duplex ultrasonography.  Stroke, MI, and PE will each be diagnosed clinically according to standard definitions (see appendix A).   b. Determine the incidence of seizures at 24 hours in all three study groups.   c. Determine the incidence of all adverse events in all three study groups. Adverse events will be captured daily while subject remains in the hospital or for up to 30 days, (whichever comes first) and will be characterized according to severity, relatedness, duration, and resolution.  d. Compare mortality, mechanical ventilation and ICU free days, incidence of multiple organ failure, AKI, ARDS and sepsis in all three study arms.   e. Correlate mechanistic data collected with clinical outcomes measured. Seizure, thromboembolic events, and all adverse events will be captured from the time of study drug administration until discharge/transfer from the hospital or for up to 30 days (whichever comes first).  ICU and ventilator free days will be calculated according to a 30-day model.  Aim 3 Statistical Analysis: The incidence of thromboembolic events will be determined at 7 days or on the day of hospital discharge if the hospital stay is less than 7 days.  Incidence of seizures will be determined 24 hours from time of randomization. We expect that approximately 20% of the sample will being diagnosed with a thrombotic event based on previous work in a similar cohort of routinely screened transfused trauma patients by Spinella [28].  Because most of these events will be asymptomatic, we will not be able to determine the specific day on which the event occurred.  Thus, we will be unable to use survival models for this outcome.  Instead, chi square tests will provide tests of the null hypothesis that rates are identical across groups.  These will be followed by logistic regression analyses that adjust for appropriate and a priori determined covariates.  To be conservative, subjects who die before 7 days will be assumed to have had a thrombotic event in our primary analysis.  While there is no published literature on the risk of seizure in a cohort of transfused trauma patients, we estimate that it will occur in approximately 2% of the study population.  Because we will know the day on which this occurred, survival methods will be applied to this variable, with the subject being censored on day 7 or the day of death or hospital discharge when either occurs prior to 7 days.  Log rank tests will be used to compare survival curves across groups and Cox regression analyses will provide an adjustment for covariates.  Secondary outcomes in this aim include mortality, which will be evaluated using the log rank test and Cox regression and the incidence of multiple organ failure and sepsis, which will be assessed using chi square tests and logistic regression.  We will most likely apply Poisson regression models to outcomes such as the number of severe and related adverse events.  However, a final determination of the appropriate method will have to await an evaluation of the pattern and frequency of occurrence of these events. Aim 4: To develop a repository of blood samples for future analysis.   Blood samples will be drawn at time 0, 1, 6, 24, and 72 hours, centrifuged and stored at -80 degrees Celsius.  These banked samples would be analyzed for measures of coagulation and endothelial function to include but not limited to: Complement, CH50 measured at time 0, 6, 24 and 72 hours; Endothelial activation and injury, Soluble Flt-1, soluble E-Selectin, VCAM-1, and PAI-1, Ang1/Ang2, Syndecan 1, Syndecan 2 and vWF measured at time points 0, 1,6, 24 hours. Bank samples for future analysis at times 0, 1, 6, and 24 hours; Inhibition of plasmin activity by TXA: D-dimer, PAP, alpha2-antiplasmin, TAFI, clot lysis (ROTEM), Activation and inhibition of fibrinolysis: tPA and PAI-1, Activation of the coagulation system: thrombin generation assays, TAT complexes, antithrombin, fibrinogen, fibrin monomer, fibrinopeptide A and B, Factor XIII, Factor XI.  
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14   Adverse Events  TXA has been used for decades and possesses a well-established safety profile.  While there have been rare cases of thromboembolic events and seizures potentially associated with high dose (> 100mg/kg) intravenous TXA administration, there is no evidence that the TXA treatment regimens proposed in this trial (maximum 57mg/kg for a 70 kg patient) will be associated with an increased risk of thromboembolic events or seizures.  We will collect data on these events and will report such occurrences to the DSMB according to the DSMP (see Appendix B).  Emergency un-blinding will be immediately available if deemed necessary by the clinical care team, DSMB, or Investigators for the safety or treatment related decisions during the course of the study.  The IDS pharmacist will be able to un-blind in such situations.    Adverse events will be collected daily on all subjects from study drug administration until hospital discharge or up to 30 days, (which ever comes first). Adverse Event Definitions  • Adverse event (AE): is any untoward medical occurrence in a study subject. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign, symptom or disease temporally associated with the use of an investigational product, whether or not considered related to the investigational product.  • Suspected Adverse Reaction: is any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug caused the adverse event. For IND safety reporting reasonable possibility means that there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event.  • Adverse Reaction: any adverse event caused by a drug.    • Serious Adverse Event: an adverse event is considered serious if it results in any of the following outcomes: o Results in death o Considered to be life-threatening o Requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization o Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity o Results in a congenital anomaly or birth defect  • Life-threatening refers to an event in which the subject was at risk of death at the time of the event; it does not include an event that might have caused death if it were more severe. All other events that are considered medically serious by the investigator should also be reported.   Adverse Event Assessment and Reporting  The relationship of the investigational product to the adverse event and severity of the event must be determined using the following classifications: • Relationship to investigational product characterized as: o Unrelated – if there is not a reasonable possibility that the study drug caused the AE. o Unlikely – suggesting that only a remote connection exists between the study drug and the event. o Possible and Probable – suggesting that there exists a reasonable temporal sequence of the AE with the study drug. o  • Severity: The following definitions should be used to determine the severity rating of all AEs: o Mild:  Awareness of signs or symptoms, but these are easily tolerated and are transient and mildly irritating only. There is no loss of time from normal activities, and symptoms do not require medication or a medical evaluation. o Moderate:  Discomfort enough to cause interference with usual activities or require therapeutic intervention, such as concomitant medication. o Severe:  Incapacity with inability to work or do usual activities.  All AEs occurring during the study are to be followed up in accordance with GCP guidelines and will be followed until resolved; or if a chronic condition, until fully characterized.   
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  All Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Drug Reactions (SUSARs) will be subject to expedited reporting. Additionally, post-study SUSARs that occur after the subject has completed a clinical study and are reported by the Investigator to the Sponsor (or an authorized representative) qualify for expedited reporting.  Suspected, unexpected serious adverse drug reactions (SUSARs) will be reported to the FDA, and IRBs within the required timeframes of seven calendar days for SUSARs which are fatal or life-threatening, and fifteen calendar days for all other SUSARs.  Study Drug Discontinuation Rules:  Any thromboembolic event (MI, PE, Ischemic stroke, or symptomatic DVT) or obvious seizure activity while the study drug is being infused will warrant immediate cessation of the study drug administration and a medical safety and DSMB review.    Written IND Safety Reports : A written IND Safety Report (i.e., completed FDA Form 3500 A) will be reported to the responsible new drug review division of the FDA for any observed or volunteered adverse event that is determined to be a serious and unexpected, suspected adverse reaction.  Each IND Safety Report will be prominently labeled, “IND Safety Report”, and a copy will be provided to all participating investigators (if applicable) and sub-investigators.    Written IND Safety Reports will be submitted to the FDA as soon as possible and, in no event, later than 15 calendar days following the Investigator’s receipt of the respective adverse event information and determination that it meets the respective criteria for reporting.  For each written IND Safety Report, the Investigator will identify all previously submitted IND Safety Reports that addressed a similar suspected adverse reaction experience; and will provide an analysis of the significance of newly reported, suspected adverse reaction in light of the previous, similar report(s), or any other relevant information.  Relevant follow-up information to an IND Safety Report will be submitted to the applicable review division of the FDA as soon as the information is available; and will be identified as such (i.e., “Follow-up IND Safety Report”).    If the results of the Investigator’s follow-up investigation show that an adverse event that was initially determined to not require a written IND Safety Report does, in fact, meet the requirements for reporting; the Investigator will submit a written IND Safety Report as soon as possible—but in no event later than 15 calendar days—after the determination was made.  Telephoned IND Safety Reports – Fatal or Life-Threatening Suspected Adverse  Reactions: In addition to the subsequent submission of a written IND Safety Report (i.e., completed FDA Form 3500A), the Investigator will notify the responsible review division of the FDA by telephone or facsimile transmission of any unexpected, fatal or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction.  The telephone or facsimile transmission of applicable IND Safety Reports will be made as soon as possible, but in no event later than 7 calendar days after the Sponsor-Investigator’s receipt of the respective adverse event information and determination that it meets the respective criteria for reporting.  Reporting Adverse Events to the Responsible IRB: In accordance with applicable policies of the Washington University, St Louis Institutional Review Board (IRB), the Sponsor-Investigator will report, to the IRB, any observed or volunteered adverse event that is determined to be: 1) associated with the investigational drug or study treatment(s); 2) serious; and, 3) unexpected.  Adverse event reports will be submitted to the IRB in accordance with the respective IRB procedures.   Applicable adverse events will be reported to the IRB as soon as possible and, in no event, later than 10 calendar days following the sponsor-investigator’s receipt of the respective information.  Adverse events which are 1) associated with the investigational drug or study treatment(s); 2) fatal or life-threatening; and 3) 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  unexpected will be reported to the IRB within 24 hours of the Sponsor-Investigator’s receipt of the respective information.   Follow-up information to a reported adverse event will be submitted to the IRB as soon as the relevant information is available.  If the results of the Sponsor-Investigator’s follow-up investigation show that an adverse event that was initially determined to not require reporting to the IRB does, in fact, meet the requirements for reporting; the Sponsor-Investigator will report the adverse event to the IRB as soon as possible, but in no event later than 10 calendar days, after the determination was made.   Human Protections: This trial will be conducted under the Department of Health and Humans Services 21 CFR 50.24 Exception from Informed Consent for Emergency Research. As such, we will submit this protocol to our local Institutional Review Board for their review and approval in concert with a Community Consultation Proposal (see Appendix D).  The trial Investigators will also submit an IND application to the FDA according to applicable regulation since TXA is not FDA approved for use in trauma patients. All key personnel involved in the design or conduct of the research involving human subjects will receive the required education on the protection of human research participants prior to conducting this study. Patients’ risks of participating in research are kept to a minimum with measures to protect confidentiality and safety monitoring. Benefits outweigh risks as TXA has been shown to improve survival in 2 prior studies and all patients enrolled in this study will have additional assessments performed, including a duplex ultrasound on hospital day 7 or at discharge (whichever comes first), which may identify thrombus formation in this high risk population that otherwise may not have been identified.  In addition, we will disseminate the results of this clinical trial to the community and medical community as soon as possible. Community Consultation: The content of community consultation will inform the communities that informed consent will not be obtained for most (or all) research subjects. Specifically, the goal will be to; inform members of the surrounding communities about all relevant aspects of the study including its risks and expected benefits, hear the perspective of the communities on the proposed research and address questions and concerns, and to provide information about ways in which individuals wishing to be excluded may indicate this preference (i.e. “opt out” bracelets).  The type and frequency of community consultation will; provide opportunities for broad community discussion, ensure that representatives from the community(ies) involved in the research participate in the consultation process, use the most appropriate ways to provide for effective community consultation, and be based on numerous factors, including the size of the community(ies), the languages spoken within those communities, the targeted research population and its heterogeneity.  We will utilize focus groups, clubs/associations that may include members at high risk for trauma with blood loss, and use web-based outreach and surveys as mechanisms to provide community consultation.  Public disclosure methods will include newspaper, posters, internet based message boards, local magazines, etc. as sources. We will supply a mechanism for as many members of the community to “opt out” of participation in this trial (i.e. “opt out” bracelets).  The information collected from community consultation will be compiled and reports completed and made available to trial site IRBs, DoD HRPO, and the FDA.  Please see Appendix D for the complete Community Consultation Proposal. Once WU IRB approval and DoD HRPO approval have been obtained, we will implement the Public Disclosure Plan (attached in Appendix E).   DSMB: A DSMB will be established that will confidentially review interim/cumulative data for evidence of study-related adverse events and for quality, completeness, and timeliness. The DSMB established for the TAMPITI trial will monitor the implementation and safety of this study.  DSMB membership of this advisory committee will consist of experts not involved in the planning or the conduct of TAMPITI and will be established by the Trial Investigators. Trial Investigators will convene the DSMB and provide an executive summary. DSMB membership will be comprised of an, anesthesiologist, emergency department intensivist, a blood bank specialist, and a pediatric hematologist/oncologist. The DSMB Chair will also serve as the Research Monitor.  She will facilitate discussion, integrate differing points of view and move toward consensus on recommendations to be provided to the DoD, FDA and Trial Investigators. The Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) with the full DSMB charter is attached in Appendix B.     
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  Research Monitor: For research determined to be greater than minimal risk, DoDI 3216.02 requires that the IRB approve, by name, an independent research monitor with expertise consonant with the nature of risk(s) identified within the research protocol.  We have appointed Jessica Zenga, MD to the role of the Research Monitor.  Dr. Zenga is a physician within the Department of anesthesia. Her duties will include but may not be limited to the following:   1.  Discussing the research protocol with the investigators; 2.  Be the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) Chair and schedule meetings; 3.  Speak with human subjects to ensure ongoing understanding of study related procedures and their continued interest in participating or withdrawing from study, serving as their advocate; 4.  Shall have authority to stop a research protocol in progress, remove individual human subjects from a research protocol, and take whatever steps are necessary to protect the safety and well-being of human subjects until the IRB can assess the monitor's report; 5.  Shall have the responsibility to promptly report their observations and findings to the IRB or other designated official and the HRPO.   Subject Withdrawal: Subjects will be enrolled into this study under an exception from informed consent  requirement for emergency research. Informed consent will be obtained, when possible, by the subject or legally authorized representative (LAR). The subject and LAR will be advised by the research team of their  right to withdraw from study participation at any time without penalty or adverse affect on their routine medical  care.  However, subjects will be encouraged to comply with all safety evaluations to ensure their safety. If a subject elects to withdraw from the study they will be informed that all data obtained to this point will be  maintained for data analysis purposes but no further study procedures will take place.     Sponsor-Investigator Discontinuation of the Clinical Research Study: Both the Investigator and the DoD reserve the right to terminate the study at any time. Should this be necessary, the procedures will be arranged on an individual study basis after review and consultation with both parties. In terminating the study, the DoD  and the Investigator will ensure that adequate consideration is given to the protection of the subjects’ interests and safety. The WUSL IRB will be notified immediately (verbally and in writing) of this decision as will all study participants.    Record maintenance and retention: The Investigator will maintain all case report forms and all source documents that support the data collected from each subject; and all trial documents, as specified by applicable regulatory requirement(s). The Investigator will take measures to prevent accidental or premature destruction of these documents.  Essential documents must be retained for at least 2 years after the last approval of a marketing application worldwide, or until at least 2 years have elapsed since the formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product. These documents will be retained for a longer period if required by the applicable regulatory requirements. If the responsible Investigator retires, relocates, or for other reasons withdraws from the responsibility of keeping the study records, custody must be transferred to a person who will accept the responsibility.   The Investigator will retain the specified records and reports for up to 2 years after the marketing application is approved for the investigational drug; or, if a marketing application is not submitted or approved for the investigational drug, until 2 years after investigations under the IND have been discontinued and the FDA so notified.  
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  Data Handling:  A Case Report Form (CRF, see Appendix 1) will be completed for each subject enrolled into the clinical study.  The Investigator will review, approve and sign/date each completed CRF; the Investigator’s signature serving as attestation of the Investigator’s responsibility for ensuring that all clinical and laboratory data entered on the CRF are complete, accurate and authentic.    Source Data are the clinical findings and observations, laboratory and test data, and other information contained in Source Documents.  Source Documents are the original records (and certified copies of original records); including, but not limited to, hospital medical records, physician or office charts, physician or nursing notes, subject diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, x-rays, etc.  When applicable, information recorded on the CRF shall match the Source Data recorded on the Source Documents.     Review of Research Records:  Representatives of the Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel & Readiness) are authorized to review research records as part of their responsibility to protect human research volunteers. In the event that a HIPAA authorization is required, include the above as parties to whom private health information may be disclosed.    
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  Appendix A Acute Kidney Injury is defined as an abrupt (within 48 hours) reduction in kidney function based on an elevation in serum creatinine level, a reduction in urine output, the need for renal replacement therapy (dialysis), or a combination of these factors. It is classified in three stages:  STAGE CHANGE IN SERUM CREATININE LEVEL URINE OUTPUT OTHER 1 Increase ≥ 0.3 mg per dL (26.52 μmol per L) or ≥ 1.5- to twofold from baseline < 0.5 mL per kg per hour for more than six hours — 2 Increase > two- to threefold from baseline < 0.5 mL per kg per hour for more than 12 hours — 3 Increase > threefold from baseline or ≥ 4.0 mg per dL (353.60 μmol per L) with an acute rise of at least 0.5 mg per dL (44.20 μmol per L) < 0.3 mL per kg per hour for 24 hours or anuria for 12 hours Renal replacement therapy required  NOTE: Each stage is defined by the change in serum creatinine level, the change in urine output, or the need for renal replacement therapy. Mehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV, et al. Acute Kidney Injury Network: report of an initiative to improve outcomes in acute kidney injury. Crit Care. 2007;11(2):R31.  Stroke defined as by the development of a new neurological deficit identified on clinical examination correlating with CT scan or MRI findings of cerebral infarction in an anatomic location corresponding to the newly identified deficit. Myocardial infarction will be defined by the Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction.  Either of the following criteria meets the diagnosis: Detection of rise and/or fall of cardiac biomarkers (preferably troponin) with at least one value above the 99th percentile of the upper reference limit together with evidence of myocardial ischemia with at least one of the following, symptoms of ischemia, EKG changes indicative of new ischemia (new ST-T changes or new left bundle branch block (LBBB)), development of pathologic Q waves in the EKG, Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality, and identification of an intracoronary thrombus by angiography or autopsy. Pulmonary embolism will be defined by any of the following, computed tomography angiography of the thoracic vasculature demonstrating thrombus in the pulmonary arterial vessels, a ventilation/perfusion scan interpreted as having high probability for pulmonary embolism in the setting of new onset tachycardia or hypoxemia, death with autopsy confirmation of the presence of a pulmonary arterial thrombus or embolus.  Seizure is defined by the development of a new transient or persisting neurologic deficit identified on clinical examination and accompanied by electroencephalographic abnormality in an anatomic location corresponding to the newly identified deficit. Multiple Organ Dysfunction Syndrome (MODS): progressive but potentially reversible physiologic dysfunction of 2 or more organ systems that arises after resuscitation from acute life threatening events.   
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14   
 Sepsis: As defined by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign[70], the definition of sepsis requires a systemic response to infection i.e confirmed infection plus 2 or more of the following criteria:  Temperature > 38 °C or 36 °C,  Heart rate > 90 beats/min, Respiratory rate > 20 breaths/min or PaCO 2 < 32 torr  (< 4.3 kPa),  WBC > 12000 cells/mm 3, < 4000 cells/mm3, or > 10% immature(band) forms.  ARDS: As defined by the Berlin Criteria published in JAMA June 20, 2012, Vol 307, No. 23.   Transfusion guidelines: If class IV shock or physician determination that patient will need massive transfusion (> 10U of RBCs in 6 hours) then the MTP will be initiated that follows all DCR principles as outlined by Spinella to include a 1:1:1 ratio of RBCs:Plasma:Platelets [29].  Cryoprecipitate will be administered if fibrinogen values are < 150 mg/dl.  No factor concentrates such as rFVIIa, prothrombin or fibrinogen concentrates will be administered to patients in this trial.  If a patient does not meet MTP criteria the following indications will be used for the following blood products when the patient has active bleeding: -2 units of RBCs for Hb < 9mg/dl -2 units of plasma for INR> 1.5 -1 unit of apheresis platelets for a platelet count < 100,000 -10 units of cryoprecipitate for fibrinogen concentration < 150mg/dl  DVT prophylaxis Protocol:  Patients will be placed on Lovenox 40 mg SC daily unless renal impairment CrCl of <30mL/min. Patients with renal impairment (CrCl of < 30 mL/min) will receive an alternative prophylaxis at the discretion of the clinical care team. This information will be captured in the case report form.               Table 5: Multiple Organ Dysfunction Score (MODS) Organ System Values MODS Score  Normal Value Ranges 0 1 2 3 4 Haematologic: Platelet Count (x103/mm3 or 109/L) > 120 81-120 51-80 21-50 ≤ 20 > 120 Hepatic: Serum Bilirubin (μmol/L) ≤ 20 21-60 61-120 121-240 > 240 ≤ 20 Renal: Serum Creatinine (μmol/L) ≤ 100 101-200 201-350 351-500 > 500 ≤ 100 Cardiovascular: PAR ≤ 10 10.1-15 15.1-20 21-30 > 30 ≤ 10 Glasgow Coma Score 15 13-14 10-12 7-9 ≤ 6 15 Respiratory: PO2 / FiO2  > 300 226-300 151-225 76-150 ≤ 75 > 300 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14    Appendix B      Data Safety Monitoring Plan:  Patient safety is of paramount importance in this trial and there is an extensive set of procedures in place for monitoring adverse events.  These procedures are as follows: Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) A Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) appointed by Drs. Bochicchio and Spinella, Clinical Principal Investigators of the study, will meet once a month (either by teleconference or face to face when possible) to review the progress of this study (e.g., enrollment, site performance) as well as data on the safety of each arm of the study. Before the study begins, the DSMB (in consultation with the study statistician and the PIs) will decide the content of the reports to be presented to the board. Using guidelines established by the DSMB and the investigators before the study begins, the DSMB may recommend termination of the study if either of the treatment arms (2 gram TXA or 4 gram TXA) is found to be unsafe. Additionally, the DSMB may recommend modifications to the protocol if a correctable safety issue is identified. After each meeting, the DSMB Chair will prepare a letter to the study principal investigators, Drs. Grant Bochicchio and Phillip Spinella, which will describe the safety review that took place at the meeting and that indicates whether or not there are any safety concerns. This letter will be provided to the IRB according to their policies and procedures.   We have appointed an experienced clinician for the study (Dr. Jessica Zenga).  Dr. Zenga will review all adverse events in the study as they occur.  Dr. Zenga will report safety concerns that arise during the trial to the PIs and study team.  Dr. Zenga will lead the DSMB meetings and will discuss any concerns about adverse events. Dr. Zenga has considerable experience with clinical trial safety and is serving on other DSMBs for research trials being conducted in our institution.    Principal Investigators Drs. Bochicchio and Spinella will be informed of the DSMB’s monthly assessment of study performance and safety.   Data Safety Monitor Board Members:   * Dr. Jessica Zenga, Data Safety Monitoring Chair/Research Monitor      Dr. Enyo Ablordeppey      Dr. George Despotis      Dr. Melanie Fields         Events to be Reviewed by DSMB: •  All adverse events (AEs), regardless of relationship to study drug will be reviewed once a month by the DSMB • All SAE's will be reviewed by the PI and Research Monitor within 24 hours of their occurrence.  • All Unexpected ,Serious Adverse Events  (SUA’S) thought to be related to study drug will be reported to the PI and Data Safety Monitor  and IRB immediately. Emergency medical treatment will be provided as necessary   Stopping Rules: Subjects who experience any thromboembolic event (MI, PE, Ischemic stroke, or symptomatic DVT) or obvious seizure activity while the study drug is being infused will warrant immediate cessation of the study drug administration and a medical safety/DSMB review.  The Research Monitor can temporarily place the trial on hold until the DSMB can confer to discuss any study concerns.   
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  Appendix C TAMPITI Schedule of Events Screening Hour0 Baseline  10 Min 20 Min 40 Min 1 HR 1.5 HR 2 HR 3 HR 4 HR 6 HR 8HR 10HR 12HR 24HR 72 HR Day 7f During Hospital Admission Hospital Discharge Informed Consent X                    Demography X                    Medical/Surgical History X                    Inclusion/Exclusion  X                    Physical Exam X               X X X X X Vital Signs  X  X             X X X X X Immune Parametersa  X          X    X X    Pharmacodymanic/ Pharmacokinetic Odd  Scheduleb  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X     Pharmacodymanic/ Pharmacokinetic Even  Scheduleb  X   X  X  X  X X X  X      Repository Samplesc  X     X     X    X X    Study Drug Administration   Xd                  Concomitant Medications X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  X X Adverse Events   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  X Xg Data Capturee X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  X X Clinical Outcomes                X   X X DVT Screen by Duplex                   X   a Cytokines: TNF-α, IL-6, IL-10, and IFN-γ and leukocytes (CD66+/ROS+ ,  CD4+/CD69+ and CD8+/CD69+ , CD14+/HLA-DR+ , CD4+/Foxp3+ ) measured at time 0, 6, 24 and 72 hours.      5mL per  sample for a total of 20mL b 2mL per sample for a total of 16mL  c 15mL per sample for a total of 75mL d Administered within 2 hours from known injury time. Any thromboembolic event (MI, PE, Ischemic stroke, or symptomatic DVT) or obvious seizure activity while the study drug is    being infused will warrant immediate cessation of the study drug administration and a medical safety and DSMB review e Daily assessments for up to 30 days after receiving study drug for any S/S of thromboembolic event (i.e. shortness of breath, chest pain, extremity swelling, fever of unknown etiology, etc. in     addition to collecting data on blood product administration, clinical lab findings, and other relevant clinical data.  f Or hospital discharge whichever occurs first.  g Adverse events will only be collected through day 30 or hospital discharge, whichever occurs first.  
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14   Appendix	D																																																																										TAMPITI			Community	Consultation	Plan	for	additional	protections	associated	with	21	CFR	50.24,	Exception	from	Informed	Consent	(EFIC)	Requirements	for	Emergency	Research	for:		Tranexamic	Acid	Mechanisms	and	Pharmacokinetics	in	Traumatic	Injury	(TAMPITI	TRIAL)		IRB	PROTOCOL	NUMBER:		TBD		Supported	by:	The	Department	of	Defense	DoD	Award:	W81XWH-14-1-0373		FDA	IND#:	TBD			Investigators:	Philip	Spinella,	MD				Grant	Bochicchio,	MD,	MPH												

TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  Introduction		This	proposal	is	intended	to	provide	a	logistical	outline	for	the	implementation	of	the	additional	protections	associated	with	21	CFR	50.24,	Exception	from	Informed	Consent	(EFIC)	Requirements	for	Emergency	Research	in	communities	in	the	St.	Louis	and	surrounding	areas.		The	implementation	of	this	plan	is	pending	review	and	approval	from	the	Washington	University	in	St.	Louis	Human	Research	Protections	Office	and	IRB.				Additional	resources	may	be	requested	to	assist	in	the	review	of	this	plan	and	are	available	upon	request	from	the	Principal	Investigators,	Philip	Spinella,	M.D.	and	Grant	Bochicchio,	MD,	MPH.				Trauma	is	the	leading	cause	of	death	in	persons	younger	than	40	years.	Hemorrhage	is	the	etiology	in	30%	of	these	deaths,	and	remains	the	leading	cause	of	potentially	preventable	mortality	(66-80%)	on	the	battlefield[1].	As	a	result,	the	prevention	of	death	from	hemorrhagic	shock	has	been	the	subject	of	intensive	research,	development	funding	and	effort.	Death	secondary	to	hemorrhagic	shock	occurs	from	both	surgical	bleeding	and	coagulopathy.		Acute	traumatic	coagulopathy	is	characterized	by	a	hypocoagulable	state,	where	the	net	balance	of	coagulation	is	such	that	there	is	low	clot	forming	capacity	and	strength,	which	does	not	allow	for	adequate	hemostasis.		Acute	traumatic	coagulopathy	occurs	early	in	patients	who	are	in	shock	from	hypoperfusion	and	is	not	due	to	coagulation	factor	consumption	or	dysfunction	because	of	acidosis,	moderate	hypothermia,	or	dilution[2].	However	shock	(oxygen	debt)	itself	is	associated	with	a	coagulopathy	that	is	due	to	the	systemic	activation	of	anticoagulant	and	fibrinolytic	pathways[1,	3].	We	have	demonstrated	previously	that	the	protein	C	pathway	is	implicated	in	this	process,	and	that	fibrinolysis	is	mediated	by	de-inhibition	of	tPA	through	PAI-1	consumption[2].	Low	levels	of	PAI-1,	in	combination	with	increased	plasminogen	activator	release	from	the	vessel	wall	contributes	to	hyperfibrinolysis.	It	has	been	suggested	that	TAFI	is	the	main	driver	of	fibrinolysis	inhibition,	and	that	reduction	in	TAFI	activation	by	the	competitive	binding	of	protein	C	to	T-TM	is	the	mechanism	for	increased	fibrinolysis	with	activation	of	protein	C	[1].	Due	to	the	knowledge	of	increased	fibrinolysis	promoting	a	hypocoagulable	state	in	severe	trauma,	trials	have	been	performed	to	determine	if	antifibrinolytics	such	as	tranexamic	acid	(TXA)	could	reduce	morbidity	and	mortality	by	reducing	death	from	hemorrhage[4].	TXA	is	an	antifibrinolytic	that	inhibits	both	plasminogen	activation	and	plasmin	activity,	thus	preventing	clot	break-down	rather	than	promoting	new	clot	formation.	TXA	occupies	the	lysine-binding	sites	on	plasminogen,	therefore	preventing	its	binding	to	lysine	residues	on	fibrin.	This	reduces	plasminogen	activation	to	plasmin.	Similarly,	blockade	of	lysine-binding	sites	on	circulating	plasmin	prevents	binding	to	fibrin	and	thus	prevents	clot	break-down.	TXA	is	excreted	largely	unchanged	in	urine	and	has	a	half-life	of	approximately	2	hours	in	circulation	when	studied	in	patients	without	traumatic	injury.	Intravenous	administration	of	TXA	was	approved	by	the	FDA	in	1986	for	the	prevention	or	reduction	of	bleeding	in	patients	with	hemophilia	undergoing	dental	procedures.	The	FDA	approved	use	of	the	oral	form	of	TXA	to	control	heavy	menstrual	cyclic	bleeding	in	2009.	Despite	the	extensive	use	of	TXA	in	many	elective	surgical	populations	and	an	increasing	use	in	severe	trauma	patients,	TXA	does	not	have	an	FDA	approved	indication	for	patients	with	traumatic	injuries[1].		Unfortunately,	severe trauma patients are unable to participate in the informed consent process.  They	must	be	included	in	this	study	despite	their	inability	to	provide	consent	for	themselves	as	their	trauma	induced	coagulopathy	makes	them	unique.		Nearly	one	in	four	severely	injured	patients	arriving	to	the	ED	experiences	trauma	induced	coagulopathy	and	its	presence	is	associated	with	a	four-fold	increase	in	mortality.(81-83)	The	coagulopathy	of	trauma	occurs	due	to	several	factors	including	hypothermia,	acidosis,	loss	of	clotting	factors	through	hemorrhage	and	hemodilution,	in	addition	to	the	body’s	use	and	subsequent	depletion	of	both	platelets	and	clotting	factors.(79)	Dilutional	coagulopathy	occurs	when	trauma	patients	who	are	bleeding	are	resuscitated	with	fluid	or	blood	products	that	don’t	contain	the	same	clotting	factors	lost	in	the	acutely	hemorrhaged	whole	blood.(80)	Furthermore,	in	the	critically	injured	trauma	patient,	a	complex	series	of	enzymatic	reactions	
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  occur	which	can	cause	the	clotting	cascade	to	become	abnormally	activated,	leading	to	excessive	clot	formation	and	subsequent	breakdown	(fibrinolysis)	out	of	proportion	to	the	injury.(79)	This	abnormal	and	disproportionate	activation	of	the	coagulation	system	quickly	consumes	the	rest	of	the	body’s	clotting	factors,	resulting	in	a	further	lack	of	essential	factors	required	to	achieve	hemorrhage	control.		In	addition,	trauma	patients	may	also	have	a	baseline	coagulopathy	because	of	preexisting	medical	conditions.	For	example,	patients	may	be	on	anticoagulant	therapy	such	as	warfarin	(Coumadin)	or	dabigatran	for	stroke	prevention	in	the	setting	of	atrial	fibrillation.	These	patients	and	those	with	chronic	liver	or	renal	failure	have	an	increased	risk	of	developing	a	truly	life-threatening	coagulopathy	and	hemorrhage	after	trauma.(84)	Therefore,	these	unique	and	critical	physiologic	characteristics	set	trauma	patients	apart	from	routine	and	elective	surgical	patients	and	must	be	evaluated	independently	to	truly	determine	appropriate	dose	treatment	and	outcome,	such	is	planned	in	this	study.			As	a	result,	any	clinical	trial	which	aims	to	prospectively	evaluate	TXA	in	this	population	will	require	an	Investigational	New	Drug	application	(IND)	approval	from	the	FDA	before	being	implemented.			Widespread	interest	in	using	TXA	for	severely	injured	trauma	patients	occurred	immediately	following	the	published	results	in	2010	of	the	landmark	CRASH-2	(Clinical	Randomization	of	an	Antifibrinolytic	in	Significant	Hemorrhage).	[5]	More	recently,	data	from	the	Military	Application	of	Tranexamic	Acid	in	Trauma	Emergency	Resuscitation	Study	(MATTERs)	has	been	published,	providing	perspective	from	a	different	and	likely	more	severely	injured	patient	population[6].		MATTERs	is	a	retrospective	observational	study	that	evaluated	data	from	the	Camp	Bastion	Surgical	Hospital	in	Afghanistan.	Despite	both	the	CRASH-2	trial	and	MATTERS	studies	indicating	TXA	use	reduced	the	risk	of	mortality,	questions	regarding	mechanisms	of	action	and	optimal	dosing	still	remain.		The	CRASH-2	trial	reported	a	reduced	risk	of	death	with	treatment	occurring	within	3	hours	of	injury	but	increased	risk	of	death	from	hemorrhage	if	given	3	hours	after	injury.	The	MATTERs	study	demonstrated	an	unadjusted	increased	risk	of	thromboembolic	events	for	those	treated	with	TXA.		Therefore	the	analysis	of	multiple	bolus	doses	(within	range	of	current	practice)	on	mechanisms	and	pharmacokinetics	is	important	and	especially	relevant	to	the	practical	application	of	TXA	in	austere	military	environments.		It	is	critical	for	formal	and	thorough	pharmacokinetic	analyses	to	be	done	in	patients	with	traumatic	injury	with	active	bleeding	since	this	population	has	very	different	physiology	than	elective	surgery	patients.	The	pharmacokinetic	analysis	of	multiple	bolus	doses	in	addition	to	mechanistic,	outcomes	and	safety	data	will	inform	the	medical	community	regarding	the	most	appropriate	dosing	of	TXA	in	the	acutely	injured,	critically	ill,	trauma	patient.		Research	involving	severely	injured	trauma	patients	presents	an	ethical	dilemma.		We	recognize	that	the	informed	consent	process	is	an	important	mechanism	in	the	protection	of	patient	autonomy	in	the	conduct	of	proper	clinical	research.		However,	the	process	of	informed	consent	cannot	always	be	conducted	prior	to	initiation	of	study	procedures.		In	cases	where	patients	are	incapable	of	participating	in	the	informed	consent	process,	consent	using	a	legally	authorized	representative	(LAR)	has	often	been	substituted,	even	though	the	true	wishes	of	the	patient	are	rarely	known.		This	has	become	an	accepted	practice	in	clinical	research	and	is	often	adequate	for	most	research	studies	proposed.		However,	for	cases	involving		emergency	research,	the	LAR	is	often	not	readily	available.		The	delay	in	obtaining	informed	consent	can	therefore	significantly	impact	the	efficacy	of	an	intervention	and	often	excludes	patients	from	inclusion	in	time-critical	studies.		Therefore,	as	we	have	explained,	new	treatments	for	severely	injured	trauma	patients	must	be	developed	and	failing	to	conduct	research	on	potentially	beneficial	treatments	for	this	population	also	poses	harm.		
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  		APPLICABILITY	OF	EXCEPTION	FROM	INFORMED	CONSENT	REQUIREMENTS	FOR	EMERGENCY	RESEARCH	(EFIC)	TO	THE	TAMPITI	TRIAL	AND	COMPLIANCE	WITH	DHHS	REQUIREMENTS	(21	CFR	50.24	and	DoD	10	USC	980)		The	specific	DHHS	regulations	for	justification	of	research	using	EFIC	process	are	listed	below.		Each	regulation	is	followed	by	an	explanation	of	how	this	study	meets	these	requirements.		1. Human	subjects	are	in	a	life-threatening	situation	that	necessitates	urgent	intervention;		Patients	with	severe	traumatic	injuries	are	in	a	life-threatening	situation	requiring	urgent	intervention		Trauma	is	the	leading	cause	of	death	in	persons	younger	than	40	years.	Hemorrhage	is	the	etiology	in	30%	of	these	deaths,	and	remains	the	leading	cause	of	potentially	preventable	mortality	(66-80%)	on	the	battlefield[1].	As	a	result,	the	prevention	of	death	from	hemorrhagic	shock	has	been	the	subject	of	intensive	research,	development	funding	and	effort.	Death	secondary	to	hemorrhagic	shock	occurs	from	both	surgical	bleeding	and	coagulopathy.		Acute	traumatic	coagulopathy	is	characterized	by	a	hypocoagulable	state,	where	the	net	balance	of	coagulation	is	such	that	there	is	low	clot	forming	capacity	and	strength,	which	does	not	allow	for	adequate	hemostasis.		Acute	traumatic	coagulopathy	occurs	early	in	patients	who	are	in	shock	from	hypoperfusion	and	is	not	due	to	coagulation	factor	consumption	or	dysfunction	because	of	acidosis,	moderate	hypothermia,	or	dilution[2].	However	shock	(oxygen	debt)	itself	is	associated	with	a	coagulopathy	that	is	due	to	the	systemic	activation	of	anticoagulant	and	fibrinolytic	pathways[1,	3].	We	have	demonstrated	previously	that	the	protein	C	pathway	is	implicated	in	this	process,	and	that	fibrinolysis	is	mediated	by	de-inhibition	of	tPA	through	PAI-1	consumption[2].	Low	levels	of	PAI-1,	in	combination	with	increased	plasminogen	activator	release	from	the	vessel	wall	contributes	to	hyperfibrinolysis.	It	has	been	suggested	that	TAFI	is	the	main	driver	of	fibrinolysis	inhibition,	and	that	reduction	in	TAFI	activation	by	the	competitive	binding	of	protein	C	to	T-TM	is	the	mechanism	for	increased	fibrinolysis	with	activation	of	protein	C	[1].		2. Available	treatments	are	unproven	or	unsatisfactory;			Trauma	remains	the	single	greatest	cause	of	mortality	in	individuals	between	the	ages	of	1	and	44,	and	hemorrhage	is	the	leading	preventable	causes	of	death	among	trauma	patients.		Despite	the	enormity	of	the	problem,	scientists	have	not	identified	an	effective	pharmacological	agent	that	improves	outcomes	following	severe	traumatic	injuries	and	hemorrhage.		TXA	appears	to	have	benefit	in	the	prevention	of	deaths	from	hemorrhage	following	trauma,	based	on	prospective	civilian	data	from	CRASH-2	as	well	as	retrospective	military	data	from	MATTERs,	and	has	been	incorporated	into	current	US	Military	clinical	practice	guidelines	for	trauma	and	combat	casualty	care.		Despite	the	probable	benefits,	several	gaps	in	knowledge	exist	with	regard	to	the	optimal	use	of	TXA,	which	is	of	particular	importance	to	military	populations	and	will	be	directly	addressed	through	the	current	study.		Questions	remain	with	regard	to	the	mechanism	of	action	of	TXA	in	trauma.	This	has	not	been	fully	elucidated,	and	the	specific	effects	of	TXA	on	coagulation,	immune	and	endothelial	function	have	not	been	studied	in	depth.		In	addition,	questions	remain	regarding	the	safe	use	of	TXA	both	in	terms	of	post-injury	adverse	events	(thromboembolic	complications,	neurologic	sequelae)	as	well	as	use	in	specific	populations,	namely,	those	patients	with	traumatic	brain	injury	in	the	setting	of	hemorrhage,	a	pattern	frequently	seen	in	theater.		
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  3. Collection	of	valid	scientific	evidence	is	necessary	to	determine	the	safety	and	effectiveness	of	the	intervention;		In 2010, the results of the landmark CRASH-2 (Clinical Randomization of an Antifibrinolytic in Significant Hemorrhage) trial were published, creating widespread international interest [5].  This multicenter, multinational study randomized 20,211 adult trauma patients to either one gram of TXA infused over ten minutes followed by one gram of TXA infused over eight hours versus an equivalent volume of normal saline placebo administered within eight hours of injury.  Inclusion criteria consisted of systolic blood pressure less than 90 mmHg and/or with a heart rate greater than 110 beats per minute, or patients deemed to be at risk of significant hemorrhage.  The primary outcome measure was in-hospital death within four weeks of injury.  Secondary outcomes included thromboembolic events (myocardial infarctions, cerebrovascular accidents, pulmonary emboli, and deep vein thromboses), surgical interventions, blood transfusions, and the total units of blood transfused.  The study found a significant decrease in all-cause mortality (14.5 vs. 16.0%, p=0.0035) and deaths from bleeding (4.9 vs. 5.7%, p=0.0077) in patients receiving TXA compared to placebo.  More recently, data from the Military Application of Tranexamic Acid in Trauma Emergency Resuscitation Study (MATTERs) has been published, providing perspective from a different and likely more severely injured patient population[6].  MATTERs is a retrospective observational study that evaluated data from the Camp Bastion Surgical Hospital in Afghanistan.  Patients were included in the study if they sustained combat-related injury and subsequently received a minimum of one unit of packed red blood cells.  The primary outcome measures were 24 and 48-hour as well as in-hospital mortality (which was inclusive of any mortality occurring within 30 days of injury).  Secondary endpoints included transfusion requirement and correction of coagulopathy based on resolution of extended prothrombin and thromboplastin times between arrival in the emergency department and arrival in the intensive care unit postoperatively.  Overall, 896 consecutive patients were analyzed, with 293 receiving TXA.  Patients receiving TXA were more severely injured than those not receiving the drug (ISS 25.2 vs. 22.5, p<0.001), and a greater proportion presented with severe TBI and admission systolic blood pressure    ≤ 90 mmHg.  Patients receiving TXA were given more packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, platelet, and cryoprecipitate transfusions than patients not receiving the drug.  In spite of these admission characteristics, patients receiving TXA had lower overall 48-hour (11.3 vs. 18.9%, p=0.004) as well as in-hospital (17.4 vs. 23.9%, p=0.03) mortality.  Additionally, although more patients who received TXA were hypocoagulable on admission, fewer TXA patients were hypocoagulable on arrival to the ICU, and there was a significant reduction in the proportion of hypocoagulable patients in the TXA group between admission and the ICU. While these data add to the beneficial profile of TXA, MATTERs also reported a greater number of pulmonary emboli (8 vs. 2, p=0.001) and deep vein thromboses (7 vs. 1, p=0.001) in TXA-treated patients. Despite both the CRASH-2 trial and MATTERS studies indicating TXA use reduced the risk of mortality, questions regarding mechanisms of action and optimal dosing still remain. As a result, an in depth examination on TXA’s mechanisms of action is warranted. Since improved survival and adverse effects in both CRASH-2 and MATTERs related to death from hemorrhage and adverse thrombotic effects, a focused evaluation of the effects of TXA on coagulopathy utilizing tests designed to analyze coagulation with a detailed emphasis on fibrinolysis is essential.  The assays proposed in this trial will offer a comprehensive analysis of potential TXA hemostatic modulation in an effort to gain a more thorough understanding of in vivo effects. Laboratory analysis will range from whole blood assays to quantify the speed and strength clot formation with comparison to fibrinolysis and plasma analysis aimed at establishing the balance of procoagulant to anticoagulant mediators. Investigations at the USAISR laboratory provide further insight in to the multidimensional nature of hemostasis, which involves a balance of mediators. Thus, pharmacological effects must be studied in the context of understanding the in vivo activity of specific mediators. Here we propose to evaluate not only procoagulant and anticoagulant levels, but also effector-inhibitor complexes, thrombin: antithrombin (TAT) and plasmin-antiplasmin complex (PAP), that measure binding and therefore indirectly reflect activity. The CRASH-2 trial reported a reduced risk of death with treatment occurring within 3 hours of injury but 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  increased risk of death from hemorrhage if given 3 hours after injury. The MATTERs study demonstrated an unadjusted increased risk of thromboembolic events for those treated with TXA. In addition, TXA use in cardiac surgery has been associated with an increased risk of postoperative convulsive seizures. This finding appears to be temporally associated with TXA doses that are 2–10 fold higher than those used in CRASH-2.  A proposed mechanism for seizures is the structural similarity of TXA to γ-aminobutyric acid, which has a potential to cause neurotoxicity. Therefore, the collection of safety and clinical outcome data in a RCT of TXA are critical since the CRASH-2 study did not capture detailed information for these outcomes. The CRASH-2 study administered TXA as a 1gram IV bolus dose followed by 1gram infusion over 8 hours. However, in a trauma patient with potentially limited vascular access, a one-time IV bolus dose would be more practical (especially in austere military settings) and may facilitate increased plasma concentration in the immediate time period where hemostatic control is critical. Therefore the analysis of multiple bolus doses (within range of current practice) on mechanisms and pharmacokinetics is important and especially relevant to the practical application of TXA in austere military environments.  It is critical for formal and thorough pharmacokinetic analyses to be done in patients with traumatic injury with active bleeding since this population has different physiology than elective surgery patients. The pharmacokinetic analysis of multiple bolus doses in addition to mechanistic, outcomes and safety data will inform the medical community regarding the most appropriate dosing of TXA in the acutely injured, critically ill, trauma patient. 	4. Obtaining	prospective	informed	consent	is	not	feasible	because	the	subjects	are	not	able	to	give	their	informed	consent	as	a	result	of	their	medical	condition;		• Subjects	are	not	able	to	participate	in	the	informed	consent	process	due	to	the	extent	of	their	injury	(i.e.,	altered	mental	status,	shock,	etc.).						5. The	intervention	must	be	administered	before	consent	can	be	obtained	from	the	subject’s	LAR.		• The	therapeutic	window	for	TXA	administration	is	within	2	hours	of	injury	(documented	by	the	patient’s	EMS	report,	police	report	or	witness	interview),		This	window	was	chosen	based	on	The CRASH-2 trial which reported a reduced risk of death with treatment occurring within 3 hours of injury but increased risk of death from hemorrhage if given 3 hours after injury.  					6. There	is	no	reasonable	way	to	identify	prospectively	individuals	likely	to	become	eligible	for	participation;		• Acute	trauma	patients	cannot	be	identified	prospectively.						7. Participation	in	the	research	holds	out	the	prospect	of	direct	benefit	to	the	subjects;		Subjects	may	benefit	from	participation	in	the	trial	due	to	the	following:		
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  a) Severe	traumatic	injuries	involving	hemorrhage	need	better	interventions	than	are	currently	available.		b) Prospective	civilian	data	from	CRASH-2	as	well	as	retrospective	military	data	from	MATTERs	suggests	a	benefit	of	TXA	administration	in	the	prevention	of	deaths	from	hemorrhage	following	trauma.		c) The	risks	of	the	study	are	reasonable	given	the	safety	of	TXA	as	it	is	FDA	approved	for	other	indications	(i.e.	menorrhagia,	hemophilia,	post	partum	hemorrhage)	and	is	being	used	“off	label”	without	concern	in	elective	orthopedic	patients.		d) All	subjects	will	have	additional	assessments	performed	during	their	participation	in	the	study	which	includes	a	duplex	ultrasound	on	hospital	day	7	or	discharge	(whichever	comes	first)	which	may	identify	thrombus	formation	in	this	high	risk	population	that	otherwise	may	not	have	been	identified.							8. The	clinical	investigation	could	not	practicably	be	carried	out	without	the	waiver:		• The	therapeutic	window	for	the	administration	of	TXA	is	two	hours	post	injury	(see	following	section	for	justification	of	this	window).		Since	severely	injured	trauma	patients	will	be	unable	to	consent	themselves,	attempts	to	find	a	LAR	will	be	made.		If	LAR	is	available,	standard	LAR	consent	procedures	will	be	used.		A	written	consent	form	that	complies	with	the	policies	of	the	Washington	University	IRB	will	be	used	(see	Appendix	A).		In	cases	where	a	LAR	is	not	available,	anyone	who	may	have	accompanied	the	patient	to	the	Hospital	will	be	asked	to	provide	permission	on	behalf	of	the	patient.		If	nobody	is	physically	available	to	provide	permission,	an	attempt	will	be	made	to	contact	a	family	member/friend	based	on	any	information	available	and	permission	over	the	phone	will	be	gathered	when	applicable.		We	will	presumptively	enroll	eligible	patients	using	the	exception	of	informed	consent	process	if	there	isn’t	anyone	available	to	speak	to	on	behalf	of	the	patient.		Attempts	to	locate	the	LAR	will	continue	until	an	appropriate	representative	is	identified	and	consent	to	continue	the	study	can	be	obtained.	All	attempts	and	efforts	will	be	documented	in	the	subject’s	study	file	to	reflect	the	effort	made	to	obtain	proper	informed	consent	as	soon	as	was	possible.					We	are	committed	to	obtaining	consent	from	the	LAR	within	the	protocol	time	window	and	will	document	our	efforts	whenever	the	EFIC	mechanism	is	used	to	enroll	a	patient.		We	will	attempt	to	obtain	consent	in	person,	by	telephone,	fax,	paper,	and	or	any	other	communication	possible	on	every	patient	prior	to	using	EFIC.		We	will	continue	to	seek	consent	from	a	legally-authorized	representative	after	EFIC	has	been	implemented.		The	LAR	will	be	informed	of	the	patient’s	inclusion	into	the	study	and	of	the	details	and	risks	of	the	study.		At	the	time,	the	LAR	will	be	given	the	option	of	allowing	the	patient	to	continue	in	the	study,	or	to	cease	the	subject’s	participation	then	or	at	any	time	throughout	the	course	of	the	study.		An	informed	consent	form	signed	by	the	LAR	will	be	obtained	when	possible.						
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  ADDITIONAL	PROTECTIONS		The	5	additional	protections	associated	with	conducting	a	trial	under	21	CFR	50.24	are	the	following:		1. Community	Consultation	2. Public	Disclosure	before	the	trial	–	including	methods	by	which	patients	can	“opt-out”	or	refuse	participation	in	the	trial	3. Public	Disclosure	after	the	trial	4. Plan	for	contact	of	Legally	Authorized	Representation	(LAR)	or	family	members	or	family	friends	to	seek	informed	consent	for	the	patient’s	participation	in	the	trial	within	the	therapeutic	window	if	feasible	or	after	enrollment	as	soon	as	possible	when	feasible.	5. Formation	of	a	Data	Safety	Monitoring	Board	to	oversee	the	trial		The	plan	for	each	of	these	activities	will	be	discussed	in	detail.		The	regulatory	language	is	included	for	convenience	and	reference	as	well	as	some	test	taken	from	the	FDA	Guidance	document	(April	2013)	that	offers	an	interpretation	of	the	regulations	to	assist	investigators,	sponsors,	and	IRBs.		COMMUNITY	CONSULTATION		The	federal	regulations	for	community	consultation	(21	CFR	50.24)	state:		21	CFR	50.24	(a)(7)	Additional	protections	of	the	rights	and	welfare	of	the	subjects	will	be	provided,	including,	at	least:	(i)	Consultation	(including	where	appropriate,	consultation	carried	out	by	the	IRB)	with	representatives	of	the	communities	in	which	the	clinical	investigation	will	be	conducted	and	from	which	the	subjects	will	be	drawn		The	goals	of	community	consultation	are	the	following:		1. To	ensure	that	all	relevant	communities	have	opportunity	for	input	into	the	IRB’s	decision-making	process	before	initiation	of	the	study		2. To	present	information	so	that	community	members	understand	the	proposed	investigation,	its	risks	&	benefits,	and	to	discuss	that	the	investigation	will	take	place	without	informed	consent.		Community	consultation	does	not	necessarily	imply	that	there	will	be	community	consent	for	the	trial	to	take	place.		If	community	consultation	were	viewed	as	community	consent,	this	would	imply	that	the	information	came	from	a	large	proportion	or	essentially	all	the	members	of	the	community	as	opposed	to	individuals	who	are	thought	to	be	representative	of	the	community.		The	process	is	meant	to	inform	members	of	the	community	about	the	purpose	and	risks	of	the	proposed	study	and	to	solicit	input	and	answer	questions	from	community	members	regarding	the	study.		The	IRB	makes	the	final	determination	as	to	study	approval	based	on	the	information	obtained	from	the	community	consultation.		For	the	purposes	of	EFIC,	the	definition	of	community	is	“the	community	in	which	research	will	take	place,”	which	includes	both	the	geographic	area	where	the	hospital	or	study	site	is	located	and	the	“community	from	which	subjects	will	be	drawn,”	which	include	the	group	of	patients	who	share	particular	characteristics	(i.e.	patients	with	the	disease	of	interest	or	those	“at-risk”	for	the	disease	or	condition	of	interest).	
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  	In	order	to	establish	the	“community”	to	be	included	in	our	community	consultation	plan,	we	obtained	information	from	the	Barnes	Jewish	Hospital	Trauma	Registry	for	the	past	three	years	(2011-2013)	to	identify	the	geographical	locations	contributing	severely	injured	trauma	patients	to	our	ED.				The	following	are	the	top	10	zip	codes	which	provided	severely	injured	trauma	patients	to	our	center:	1. 63136	(Jennings,	MO)	74	patients	2. 63120	(St.	Louis	City,	Pine	Lawn,	and	St.	Louis	County,	MO)	51	patients	3. 63147	(St.	Louis	City,	St.	Louis	County,	MO)	38	patients		4. 63121	(Normandy,	MO)	23	patients	5. 63137	(Bellefontaine	Neighbors,	St.	Louis	City,	Glasgow	Village,	Riverview,	Moline	Acres,	Jennings,	MO)	23	patients	6. 63133	(Hanley	Hills,	Pagedale,	Wellston,	MO)	21	patients	7. 63130	(University	City,	MO)	17	8. 63138	(Spanish	Lake,	MO)	16	9. 63135	(Ferguson,	MO)	16	10. 63134	(Berkeley,	MO)	10	**The	following	zip	codes	provided	9	or	fewer	trauma	patient	admissions:		63123,	63640,							63376,	63628,	63601,	63379,	63129,	63124,	63122		**45	additional	zip	codes	from	the	surrounding	area	contributed	1	trauma	patient												admission	each.			Further	details	regarding	the	above	mentioned	zip	codes	may	be	provided	upon	request.					The	content	of	community	consultation	will	inform	the	communities	that	informed	consent	will	not	be	obtained	for	most	(or	all)	research	subjects.		Specifically,	the	goal	will	be	to:		• Inform	the	communities	about	all	relevant	aspects	of	the	study	including	its	risks	and	expected	benefits	• Hear	the	perspective	of	the	communities	on	the	proposed	research	• Provide	information	about	ways	in	which	individuals	wishing	to	be	excluded	may	indicate	this	preference		The	type	and	frequency	of	community	consultation	will:		• Provide	opportunities	for	broad	community	discussion	• Ensure	that	representatives	from	the	community	(ies)	involved	in	the	research	participate	in	the	consultation	process	• Use	the	most	appropriate	ways	to	provide	for	effective	community	consultation	• Be	based	on	numerous	factors,	including	the	size	of	the	community	(ies),	the	languages	spoken	within	those	communities,	the	targeted	research	population	and	its	heterogeneity		The	following	is	a	list	of	activities	we	plan	to	employ	for	community	consultation:		1. PRESENTATION	TO	AN	EXISTING	GROUP	AT	REGUARLY	SCHEDULED	MEETING		**This	will	occur	as	a	two-step	consultation	process	whereby	we	plan	to	meet	1st	with	key	stakeholders	who	serve	as	“gatekeepers”	to	the	larger	community	they	serve.	Once/if	we	obtain	their	buy	in	and	they	agree	to	provide	access	to	their	constituents	and	other	community	members	who	represent	our	“community”,	we	will	revise	our	Consultation	Plan	to	include	information	regarding	the	specific	
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  meeting	places	and	times	that	will	focus	on	potential	future	subjects	themselves/the	community.		We	will	provide	a	summary	of	the	feedback	we	receive	from	the	key	stake	holders	to	the	IRB	in	an	updated	consultation	plan	prior	to	proceeding	with	Step	2.			The	specific	meetings	we	are	then	able	to	arrange	with	the	key	stakeholders’	assistance	(including	focus	groups)	will	be	considered	Step	2	of	our	two-step	community	consultation	process.				In	this	method	of	community	consultation,	members	of	the	study	team	will	present	the	study	and	lead	discussion	about	the	study	at	a	regularly	scheduled	meeting	of	a	relevant	community	group.	We	have	not	requested	permission	to	attend	the	following	meetings	as	of	yet,	but	plan	to	do	so	if	advised	accordingly	by	the	WU	HRPO.					a) Aldermanic	Full	Board	Meetings	(meet	every	Friday	from	10	am-12	pm)	City	Hall,	St.	Louis,	MO.	(step	1)		b) 	Normandy	City	Council	Meetings	(meet	first	Tuesday	of	each	month	at	7:30	pm)	http://www.cityofnormandy.gov/index.aspx?nid=319		(step	1)			c) Pasadena	Hills	City	Board	Meetings	(meet	the	2nd	Wednesday	of	each	month	at	7	pm)	http://www.cityofnormandy.gov/index.aspc?nid=319	(step	1)			d) Green	Practices	Commission	Meeting	of	University	City	(Scheduled	to	meet	November	13,	2014,	January	8,	February	12,	March	12,	and	April	9,	2015	from	6-7:30	pm),	Herman	Park	Community	Center:	975	Pennsylvania	Ave,	University	City	(step	1)		e) University	City	Council	Meeting	held	the	last	Monday	of	each	month	at	6:30	pm	(step	1)			f) Spanish	Lake	Town	Hall	Meeting	(awaiting	upcoming	scheduled	dates)	(step	1)		g) Ferguson	City	Council	Meetings	(held	the	second	and	fourth	Tuesday	of	each	month)	(step	1)			h) City	Council	Meeting	in	Berkeley	(meets	every	other	Monday	at	7pm)	(step	1)			i) Olivette	City	Council	Meeting	(takes	place	the	last	Tuesday	of	each	month	at	7pm)	(step	1)				2. FOCUS	GROUPS			We	plan	to	arrange	for	several	focus	groups	for	the	purpose	of	discussing	the	TAMPITI	trial.		The	focus	groups	will	be	conducted	at	various	locations	where	the	following	groups	meet	(more	details	and	examples	will	be	provided	below	regarding	additional	scheduled	focus	groups	once	Step	1	of	our	community	consultation	plan	has	taken	place):	a) EMS	providers	in	St.	Louis	City	and	surrounding	counties	(step	1)		b) St.	Louis	police	and	surround	counties	(step	1)		c) Bicycling	Groups	(step	2)		d) St.	Louis	Running	Club	(step	2)		e) Barnes	Jewish	Hospital	Emergency	Department	(step	1)		
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  f) YMCA	of	Greater	St.	Louis	(in	a	variety	of	locations,	i.e.	downtown	location,	Carondelet	Park	Rec	Complex,	South	City	Family	YMCA,	etc.)	(step	2)					3. WEB-BASED				Facebook:	We	plan	to	work	with	BJH	and	WU	to	create	a	Facebook	fan	wall	for	community	members	to	learn	about	the	TAMPITI	(working	with	Joseph	Ebeling	JEbeling@bjc.org	and	Joni	Westerhouse	westerhousej@wustl.edu)			Posts	to	other	group	walls	and	fan	pages	will	be	posted	by	WU	School	of	Medicine	public	affairs	and	BJH	and/or	study	team	members	inviting	community	members	to	visit	the	website	(being	constructed)	to	learn	about	the	trial.		Posts	will	be	placed	on	the	following	group/fan	page	walls	(note	some	groups/fan	pages	have	the	same	name):			Craigslist:	On	the	St.	Louis	site	in	the	community	volunteer	section	we	will	place	a	link	to	our	website	referencing	the	TAMPITI	study.				Twitter:		We	plan	to	coordinate	efforts	with	WU	School	of	Medicine	public	affairs	and	BJH	for	creation	and	maintenance	of	twitter	posts/accounts	(working	with	Joseph	Ebeling	and	Joni	Westerhouse	on	this)				4.	SURVEYS	(data	regarding	participants’	anonymous	demographic	information	and	comments	from	the	community	consultation	activities	will	be	collected	and	will	be	reported	once	complete).		Individual	surveys	(surveymonkey.com)	will	be	used	as	an	additional	way	to	solicit	community	questions	and	views.		This	method	can	be	used	to	reach	individuals	and	wide	variety	of	respondents.		Venues	for	conducting	individual	interviews	with	at-risk	community	members	and	with	the	general	public	included;	meetings	as	detailed	above,	hospital	waiting	areas,	hospital	staff	through	hospital	intranet,	as	a	link	on	the	Wash	U-TAMPITI	website	(being	created	right	now)		Surveys:	• Will	provide	information	about	the	EFIC	regulation	and	the	TAMPITI	trial.	• Will	inform	the	community	member	on	how	to	opt-out	of	the	study.	• Will	collect	information	from	respondents	regarding	their	questions,	concerns,	and	any	additional	feedback	they	want	to	provide.			          
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14     Appendix E     			TAMPITI					Public	Disclosure	Activity	Plan	for	additional	protections	associated	with	21	CFR	50.24,	Exception	from	Informed	Consent	(EFIC)	Requirements	for	Emergency	Research	for:		Tranexamic	Acid	Mechanisms	and	Pharmacokinetics	in	Traumatic	Injury	(TAMPITI	TRIAL)		IRB	PROTOCOL	NUMBER:		TBD		Supported	by:	The	Department	of	Defense	DoD	Award:	W81XWH-14-1-0373		FDA	IND#:	TBD			Investigators:	Philip	Spinella,	MD				Grant	Bochicchio,	MD,	MPH											

TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  		Once	the	WU	IRB	has	reviewed	and	approved	the	TAMPITI	Trial	and	is	satisfied	that	the	Community	Consultation	efforts	are	adequate	and	appropriate,	the	IRB	will	provide	final	approval	for	Public	Disclosure	activities	to	commence.		At	this	point,	we	will	submit	all	WU	IRB	approved	materials	to	the	DoD	HRPO	for	2nd	level	review	and	approval.	Once	the	DoD	HRPO	approves	the	study,	Public	Disclosure	activities	will	take	place	as	outlined	below:						PUBLIC	DISCLOSURE		Public	Disclosure	requirement	of	the	Exception	from	Informed	Consent	(EFIC)	regulations	(21	CFR	50.24)	for	emergency	research,	states:		21	CFR	50.24	(a)(7)Additional	protections	of	the	rights	and	welfare	of	the	subjects	will	be	provided,	including	at	least:		(ii)	Public	disclosure	to	the	communities	in	which	the	clinical	investigation	will	be	conducted	and	from	which	the	subjects	will	be	drawn,	prior	to	initiation	of	the	clinical	investigation,	of	plans	for	the	investigation	and	its	risks	and	expected	benefits;		(iii)	Public	disclosure	of	sufficient	information	following	completion	of	the	clinical	investigation	to	apprise	the	community	and	researchers	of	the	study,	including	the	demographic	characteristics	of	the	research	population,	and	its	results;		Public	disclosure	is	defined	as	the	“dissemination	of	information	about	the	research	sufficient	to	allow	a	reasonable	assumption	that	communities	are	aware	of	the	plans	for	the	investigation,	its	risks	and	expected	benefits	and	the	fact	that	the	study	will	be	conducted”.		It	also	includes	“dissemination	of	information	after	the	investigation	is	completed	so	that	communities	and	scientific	researchers	are	aware	of	the	study’s	results’.		Appropriate	public	disclosure	includes:		• Clear	statement	that	informed	consent	will	not	be	obtained	for	most	subjects	• Information	about	the	test	articles	use	including	a	balanced	description	of	the	risks	and	benefits	• Synopsis	of	the	research	protocol	and	study	design	• How	potential	study	subjects	will	be	identifies	a	• Participating	sites/institutions	• Description	of	attempts	to	contact	LAR	• Suggestions	for	“opting	out”	of	the	study							
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  			We	plan	to	utilize	the	following	activities	to	ensure	public	disclosure:		1. Broadcast	(being	planned)	and	Print	Media	(see	Appendix	for	copies	of	hard	copy)	a. Local	(St.	Louis	and	surrounding	areas)			Public/Town	Hall	Meetings	:	• We	are	arranging	for	a	Town	Hall	Meeting	to	be	conducted	at	Washington	University	School	of	Medicine	(date	TBD):	__________________			Circular	and	Newsletters	(see	Appendix	for	hard	copies	of	material):	• We	plan	to	place	announcements	in	church	bulletins	in	as	many	churches	as	possible	in	the	geographical	areas	contributing	the	most	trauma	patients			• We	plan	to	circulate	a	newsletter	to	Wash	U	and	BJH	employees	with	links	to	our	website	and	survey			• We	plan	to	place	an	announcement	in	the	Spanish	Lake	Quarterly	Newsletter	(next	newsletter	is	for	the	winter	quarter)			• We	plan	to	send	out	an	TAMPITI	announcement	with	a	link	to	our	website	and	survey	to	the	following	organizations:	1. BJH		listserv	via	email	within	the	entire	BJH	System		2. WU	employees	listserv	via	email		3. Express	scripts	4. Boeing	5. Monsanto	6. Anheuser	Busch	7. MoDot	8. IDot	9. Mastercard	10. GM	11. Lou	Fusz	12. Bommarito	13. Purina				Television	(see	Appendix	for	hard	copies	of	material)		Joni	Westerhouse	plans	to	assist	us	with	contacting	local	news	organizations	(KSDK,	KMOV,	etc.)	to	inform	them	about	this	important	clinical	trial	and	will	determine	if	they	are	interested	and	willing	to	interview	Drs.	Spinella	and	Bochicchio.						
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  		b.	Regional	(East	St.	Louis,	Illinois	included)		Study	team	members	plan	to	obtain	permission	from	the	following	businesses	to	hand	out	newsletters	to	patrons	of	the	businesses	who	typically	include	patrons	from	areas	outside	of	St.	Louis,	but	who	may	be	the	target	recipients	of	this	information:	1. St.	Louis	Zoo	2. St.	Louis	Science	Center	3. Six	Flags	4. Scott	Trade	Center	5. Chaifetz	Arena			c. 					National	Media	and	Broadcasts	Not	planned,	but	we	will	determine	national	interest	in	learning	about	the	trial	after	local	media	reports	on	the	trial.					2. Posters		Posters	will	be	designed	to	clearly	describe	the	study	with	contact	information	and	website	and	will	be	placed	in	the	following	areas:		• Bulletin	boards	in	Grocery	Stores	in	the	St.	Louis	Metro	and	surrounding	areas.		Below	is	a	list	of	grocery	stores	within	a	10	mile	radius	surrounding	BJH	(where	most	trauma	victims	come	from).		We	did	not	include	all	grocery	stores	since	there	are	633	listed	in	the	St.	Louis	Yellow	Pages		http://www.yellowpages.com/saint-louis-mo/grocery-stores		o Aldi:	8445	Lucas	and	Hunt	Rd,	St.	Louis,	MO											1315	Aubert	Ave,	St.	Louis,	MO	o Shop	‘n	Save:	9521	Lewis	and	Clark	Blvd,	Moline	Acres,	MO							10805	Old	Halls	Ferry	Rd,	Ferguson,	MO							49	N	Florissant	Rd,	Ferguson,	mO	o Mally	Supermarket:	7445	W	Florissant	Ave,	St.	Louis,	MO	o Dellwood	Market:	1620	Chambers	Rd,	St.	Louis,	MO	o Schnucks:	8037	W.	Florissant	Ave,	St.	Louis,	MO																												3431	Union	Blvd,	St.	Louis,	MO																												6920	Olive	Blvd,	St.	Louis,	MO											4137	N	Grand	Blvd,	St.	Louis,	MO																											1225	S	Florissant	Rd,	St.	Louis,	MO		o Stelmacki’s	Super	Market:	9965	Lewis	and	Clark	Blvd,	St.	Louis,	MO	o Save-A-Lot:	10030	W.	Florissant	Ave,	St.	Louis,	MO											91	N	Oaks	Plaza,	St.	Louis,	MO											8960	Riverview	Blvd,	St.	Louis,	MO	o F&G	Foods:	5932	W.	Florissant	Ave,	St.	Louis,	MO	o Sam’s	Meat	Market	&	More:	9241	W.	Florissant	Ave,	St.	Louis,	MO	o Northway	Supermarket:	5590	W.	Florissant	Ave,	St.	Louis,	MO	o Beverly	Hills	Supermarket:	6714	Natural	Bridge	Rd,	St.	Louis	o E&L	Market:	4973	Emerson	Ave,	St.	Louis,	MO	
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  o Straub’s:	302	N	Kingshighway	,	St.	Louis,	MO									8282	Forsyth	Blvd,	Clayton,	MO		o Six	Stars	Market:	8701	Riverview	Blvd,	St	Louis,	MO	o Yours	Market:	8005	N	Broadway,	St.	Louis,	MO	o TNT:	6711	St.	Louis	Ave,	St.	Louis,	MO	o North	County	Grocery	&	Liquor:	9948	Diamond	Dr,	St.	Louis,	MO		• Posters	will	be	placed	in	the	BJH	Emergency	Department,	general	hospital	waiting	rooms,	out	patient	offices,	medical	school	buildings,	School	of	Pharmacy	and	Goldfarb	School	of	Nursing.			• Posters	will	be	placed	in	liquor	stores,	barber	shops,	salons,	coffee	shops,	and	gas	stations	in	the	St.	Louis	and	surrounding	areas.						TIMELINE	FOR	COMMUNITY	CONSULTATION	AND	PUBLIC	DISCLOSURE	ACTIVITIES			Community	consultation	activities	will	commence	upon	receipt	of	WU	IRB	approval	of	EFIC	plan.	The	DoD	HRPO	has	verbally	advised	us	to	begin	community	consultation	activities	upon	review	and	approval	by	the	WU	IRB.				Public	disclosure	activities	will	be	ongoing	throughout	the	trial,	but	formal	efforts	will	begin	upon	full	WU	IRB	and	DoD	HRPO	approval,	concluding	when	results	of	study	are	disclosed	to	the	public.		Washington	University	IRB	and	the	DoD	HRPO	will	be	kept	informed	of	specific	public	disclosure	activities	that	have	been	performed	with	annual	review	or	more	often	as	needed	and	the	Investigators	and	study	team	will	reassess	increasing	public	disclosure	activities	(with	WU	and	DoD	IRB	approval)	should	the	study	take	longer	to	complete	then	expected.				ANALYSIS	AND	PRESENTATION	OF	RESULTS	FROM	COMMUNITY	CONSULTATION	AND	PUBLIC	DISCLOSURE			We	plan	to	report	the	community	consultation	results	on	our	website	.		No	protected	health	information	will	be	reported.				The	data	being	collected	and	reported	will	contain	the	following	elements:		• Consultation	methodology	used	• Community	type:	geographic	or	condition-specific	• Participants	involved:	number	and	demographics	• Duration,	content,	format	of	information	presented	• Free	text	log	comments,	questions,	and	responses	to	open-ended	questions	• Coding	of	free	text	using	qualitative	research,	methodologies	• Log	of	pre-determined	closed-ended	survey	questions	and	response	if	used	• Log	of	site	customized	closed-ended	survey	questions	and	response	if	used		The	information	collected	on	these	forms	from	community	consultation	will	be	compiled	and	reports	be	made	available	to	the	WU	IRB	and	DoD	HRPO.		Summaries	of	public	disclosure	will	be	reported	to	the	IRB	prior	to	approval,	and	then	at	least	annually	or	upon	request	from	the	IRB.		Composite	reports	of	local	and	national	public	disclosure	at	the	Trial-Level	will	be	provided	to	the	FDA	at	least	annually.	
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  	Appendices:				- TAMPITI	and	EFIC	question/survey	o Individual	(Surveymonkey.com)	TXA_Tampiti		o Group	(Hard	copy	surveys	that	mirror	the	surveymonkey.com	survey)		- Sample	flyer/poster	- Sample	Pamphlet	- Sample	invitations	to	focus	groups	- Letter	to	the	President	of	the	Board	of	Aldermen		- Copy	of	TAMPITI	trial	homepage		                                         
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14    References:  1. Cap, A.P., et al., Tranexamic acid for trauma patients: a critical review of the literature. J Trauma, 2011. 71(1 Suppl): p. S9-14. 2. Brohi, K., et al., Acute traumatic coagulopathy: initiated by hypoperfusion: modulated through the protein C pathway? Ann Surg, 2007. 245(5): p. 812-8. 3. Hess, J.R., et al., The coagulopathy of trauma: a review of mechanisms. J Trauma, 2008. 65(4): p. 748-54. 4. Pusateri, A.E., et al., Tranexamic Acid and Trauma: Current Status and Knowledge Gaps with Recommended Research Priorities. Shock, 2012. 5. collaborators, C.-t., et al., Effects of tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, and blood transfusion in trauma patients with significant haemorrhage (CRASH-2): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet, 2010. 376(9734): p. 23-32. 6. Morrison, J.J., et al., Military Application of Tranexamic Acid in Trauma Emergency Resuscitation (MATTERs) Study. Arch Surg, 2012. 147(2): p. 113-9. 7. Levy, J.H., Antifibrinolytic therapy: new data and new concepts. Lancet, 2010. 376(9734): p. 3-4. 8. Brohi, K., et al., Acute coagulopathy of trauma: hypoperfusion induces systemic anticoagulation and hyperfibrinolysis. J Trauma, 2008. 64(5): p. 1211-7; discussion 1217. 9. Raza, I., et al., The incidence and magnitude of fibrinolytic activation in trauma patients. J Thromb Haemost, 2012. 10. Winfield, R.D., et al., Obese patients show a depressed cytokine profile following severe blunt injury. Shock, 2012. 37(3): p. 253-6. 11. Winfield, R.D., et al., Differences in outcome between obese and nonobese patients following severe blunt trauma are not consistent with an early inflammatory genomic response. Crit Care Med, 2010. 38(1): p. 51-8. 12. Bokesch, P.M., et al., A phase 2 prospective, randomized, double-blind trial comparing the effects of tranexamic acid with ecallantide on blood loss from high-risk cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CONSERV-2 Trial). J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg, 2012. 143(5): p. 1022-9. 13. Levy, J.H., J.M. Bailey, and M. Salmenpera, Pharmacokinetics of aprotinin in preoperative cardiac surgical patients. Anesthesiology, 1994. 80(5): p. 1013-8. 14. Lu, W., et al., Pharmacokinetics of recombinant transgenic antithrombin in volunteers. Anesth Analg, 2000. 90(3): p. 531-4. 15. Abou-Diwan, C., et al., Plasma and cerebral spinal fluid tranexamic acid quantitation in cardiopulmonary bypass patients. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci, 2011. 879(7-8): p. 553-6. 16. Haywood-Watson, R.J., et al., Modulation of syndecan-1 shedding after hemorrhagic shock and resuscitation. PLoS One, 2011. 6(8): p. e23530. 17. Kozar, R.A., et al., Plasma restoration of endothelial glycocalyx in a rodent model of hemorrhagic shock. Anesth Analg, 2011. 112(6): p. 1289-95. 18. Pati, S., et al., Protective effects of fresh frozen plasma on vascular endothelial permeability, coagulation, and resuscitation after hemorrhagic shock are time dependent and diminish between days 0 and 5 after thaw. J Trauma, 2010. 69 Suppl 1: p. S55-63. 19. Letourneau, P.A., et al., Fresh frozen plasma increases adhesion molecule expression on human pulmonary endothelial cells. J Surg Res, 2010. 163(2): p. 317-22. 20. Maegele, M., P.C. Spinella, and H. Schochl, The acute coagulopathy of trauma: mechanisms and tools for risk stratification. Shock, 2012. 38(5): p. 450-8. 21. Cap, A.P., et al., Timing and location of blood product transfusion and outcomes in massively transfused combat casualties. J Trauma Acute Care Surg, 2012. 73(2 Suppl 1): p. S89-94. 22. Spinella, P.C., et al., Fresh whole blood use for hemorrhagic shock: preserving benefit while avoiding complications. Anesth Analg, 2012. 115(4): p. 751-8. 23. Spinella, P.C., et al., Constant challenges and evolution of US military transfusion medicine and blood operations in combat. Transfusion, 2012. 52(5): p. 1146-53. 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  24. Holcomb, J.B., et al., Increased platelet:RBC ratios are associated with improved survival after massive transfusion. J Trauma, 2011. 71(2 Suppl 3): p. S318-28. 25. Cap, A.P. and P.C. Spinella, Severity of head injury is associated with increased risk of coagulopathy in combat casualties. J Trauma, 2011. 71(1 Suppl): p. S78-81. 26. Peiniger, S., et al., Balanced massive transfusion ratios in multiple injury patients with traumatic brain injury. Crit Care, 2011. 15(1): p. R68. 27. Perkins, J.G., et al., Comparison of platelet transfusion as fresh whole blood versus apheresis platelets for massively transfused combat trauma patients (CME). Transfusion, 2011. 51(2): p. 242-52. 28. Spinella, P.C., et al., Duration of red blood cell storage is associated with increased incidence of deep vein thrombosis and in hospital mortality in patients with traumatic injuries. Crit Care, 2009. 13(5): p. R151. 29. Spinella, P.C. and J.B. Holcomb, Resuscitation and transfusion principles for traumatic hemorrhagic shock. Blood Rev, 2009. 23(6): p. 231-40. 30. Spinella, P.C., et al., Warm fresh whole blood is independently associated with improved survival for patients with combat-related traumatic injuries. J Trauma, 2009. 66(4 Suppl): p. S69-76. 31. Holcomb, J.B., et al., Increased plasma and platelet to red blood cell ratios improves outcome in 466 massively transfused civilian trauma patients. Ann Surg, 2008. 248(3): p. 447-58. 32. Spinella, P.C., Warm fresh whole blood transfusion for severe hemorrhage: U.S. military and potential civilian applications. Crit Care Med, 2008. 36(7 Suppl): p. S340-5. 33. Niles, S.E., et al., Increased mortality associated with the early coagulopathy of trauma in combat casualties. J Trauma, 2008. 64(6): p. 1459-63; discussion 1463-5. 34. Spinella, P.C., et al., Effect of plasma and red blood cell transfusions on survival in patients with combat related traumatic injuries. J Trauma, 2008. 64(2 Suppl): p. S69-77; discussion S77-8. 35. Spinella, P.C., et al., The effect of recombinant activated factor VII on mortality in combat-related casualties with severe trauma and massive transfusion. J Trauma, 2008. 64(2): p. 286-93; discussion 293-4. 36. Borgman, M.A., et al., The ratio of blood products transfused affects mortality in patients receiving massive transfusions at a combat support hospital. J Trauma, 2007. 63(4): p. 805-13. 37. Spinella, P.C., et al., Risks associated with fresh whole blood and red blood cell transfusions in a combat support hospital. Crit Care Med, 2007. 35(11): p. 2576-81. 38. Holcomb, J.B., et al., Damage control resuscitation: directly addressing the early coagulopathy of trauma. J Trauma, 2007. 62(2): p. 307-10. 39. Blackbourne, L.H., et al., Military medical revolution: deployed hospital and en route care. J Trauma Acute Care Surg, 2012. 73(6 Suppl 5): p. S378-87. 40. Montgomery, R.K., et al., Enhanced shear-induced platelet aggregation due to low-temperature storage. Transfusion, 2012. 41. Cap, A.P. and J.G. Perkins, Lyophilized platelets: challenges and opportunities. J Trauma, 2011. 70(5 Suppl): p. S59-60. 42. Pidcoke, H.F., et al., Ten-year analysis of transfusion in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom: increased plasma and platelet use correlates with improved survival. J Trauma Acute Care Surg, 2012. 73(6 Suppl 5): p. S445-52. 43. Bochicchio, G., et al., Nosocomial Infections in Elderly Trauma Patients: Incidence and Microbiology. Infections in Medicine, 2002. 19(11): p. 512-516. 44. Bochicchio, G., et al., Use of a modified chitosan dressing in a hypothermic coagulopathic grade V liver injury model. Am J Surg, 2009. 198(5): p. 617-22. 45. Bochicchio, G.V., et al., Acute glucose elevation is highly predictive of infection and outcome in critically injured trauma patients. Ann Surg, 2010. 252(4): p. 597-602. 46. Bochicchio, G.V., et al., Early hyperglycemic control is important in critically injured trauma patients. J Trauma, 2007. 63(6): p. 1353-8; discussion 1358-9. 47. Bochicchio, G.V., et al., Impact of community-acquired infection on acquisition of nosocomial infection, length of stay, and mortality in adult blunt trauma patients. Surg Infect (Larchmt), 2002. 3(1): p. 21-8. 48. Bochicchio, G.V., et al., Impact of nosocomial infections in trauma: does age make a difference? J Trauma, 2001. 50(4): p. 612-7; discussion 617-9. 49. Bochicchio, G.V., M. Joshi, and T. Scalea, Community-acquired infections in the geriatric trauma population. Shock, 2000. 14(3): p. 338-42. 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  50. Bochicchio, G.V., et al., Evaluation of a new hemostatic agent in a porcine grade V liver injury model. Am Surg, 2010. 76(3): p. 317-20. 51. Bochicchio, G.V., et al., Persistent systemic inflammatory response syndrome is predictive of nosocomial infection in trauma. J Trauma, 2002. 53(2): p. 245-50; discussion 250-1. 52. Bochicchio, G.V., et al., Admission preoperative glucose is predictive of morbidity and mortality in trauma patients who require immediate operative intervention. Am Surg, 2005. 71(2): p. 171-4. 53. Bochicchio, G.V., et al., Pilot study of a web-based antibiotic decision management guide. J Am Coll Surg, 2006. 202(3): p. 459-67. 54. Bochicchio, G.V., et al., Persistent hyperglycemia is predictive of outcome in critically ill trauma patients. J Trauma, 2005. 58(5): p. 921-4. 55. Brenner, M., et al., Long-term impact of damage control laparotomy: a prospective study. Arch Surg, 2011. 146(4): p. 395-9. 56. De Castro, G.P., et al., New hemostatic dressing (FAST Dressing) reduces blood loss and improves survival in a grade V liver injury model in noncoagulopathic swine. J Trauma, 2011. 70(6): p. 1408-12. 57. Guzzo, J.L., et al., Prediction of outcomes in trauma: anatomic or physiologic parameters? J Am Coll Surg, 2005. 201(6): p. 891-7. 58. Huskins, W.C., et al., Intervention to reduce transmission of resistant bacteria in intensive care. N Engl J Med, 2011. 364(15): p. 1407-18. 59. Kilbourne, M., et al., Hemostatic efficacy of modified amylopectin powder in a lethal porcine model of extremity arterial injury. Ann Emerg Med, 2009. 53(6): p. 804-10. 60. Kilbourne, M., et al., Novel model of frontal impact closed head injury in the rat. J Neurotrauma, 2009. 26(12): p. 2233-43. 61. Ruben, F.L., et al., Clinical infections in the noninstitutionalized geriatric age group: methods utilized and incidence of infections. The Pittsburgh Good Health Study. Am J Epidemiol, 1995. 141(2): p. 145-57. 62. Scalea, T.M., et al., Tight glycemic control in critically injured trauma patients. Ann Surg, 2007. 246(4): p. 605-10; discussion 610-2. 63. Scalea, T.M., et al., Early aggressive use of fresh frozen plasma does not improve outcome in critically injured trauma patients. Ann Surg, 2008. 248(4): p. 578-84. 64. Simard, J.M., et al., Key role of sulfonylurea receptor 1 in progressive secondary hemorrhage after brain contusion. J Neurotrauma, 2009. 26(12): p. 2257-67. 65. Stansbury, L.G., et al., Controversy in trauma resuscitation: do ratios of plasma to red blood cells matter? Transfus Med Rev, 2009. 23(4): p. 255-65. 66. Stein, D.M., et al., Relationship of serum and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers with intracranial hypertension and cerebral hypoperfusion after severe traumatic brain injury. J Trauma, 2011. 70(5): p. 1096-103. 67. Sutton, E., et al., Long term impact of damage control surgery: a preliminary prospective study. J Trauma, 2006. 61(4): p. 831-4; discussion 835-6. 68. Xiao, Y., et al., Video-based training increases sterile-technique compliance during central venous catheter insertion. Crit Care Med, 2007. 35(5): p. 1302-6. 69. Pidcoke, H.F., et al., Primary hemostatic capacity of whole blood: a comprehensive analysis of pathogen reduction and refrigeration effects over time. Transfusion, 2013. 53(S1): p. 137S-149S. 70. Levy, M.M., et al., Outcomes of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign in intensive care units in the USA and Europe: a prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis, 2012. 12(12): p. 919-24. 71. Casserly, B., et al., Low-dose steroids in adult septic shock: results of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign. Intensive Care Med, 2012. 38(12): p. 1946-54. 72. Dellinger, R., et al., Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International Guidelines for Management of Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2012. Critical Care Medicine, 2013. 41(2): p. 580-637. 73. Karski, J.M., et al., Prevention of bleeding after cardiopulmonary bypass with high-dose tranexamic acid. Double-blind, randomized clinical trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg, 1995. 110(3): p. 835-42. 74. Bernet, F., et al., Reduction of blood loss and transfusion requirements after coronary artery bypass grafting: similar efficacy of tranexamic acid and aprotinin in aspirin-treated patients. J Card Surg, 1999. 14(2): p. 92-7. 75. Wong, B.I., et al., Aprotinin and tranexamic acid for high transfusion risk cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg, 2000. 69(3): p. 808-16. 
TAMPITI Protocol version #0_11.17.14  76. Kalavrouziotis, D., et al., High-dose tranexamic acid is an independent predictor of early seizure after cardiopulmonary bypass. Ann Thorac Surg, 2012. 93(1): p. 148-54. 77. Bojko, B., et al., Determination of tranexamic acid concentration by solid phase microextraction and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry: first step to in vivo analysis. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci, 2011. 879(32): p. 3781-7. 78. Bellomo, R., et al., Acute renal failure - definition, outcome measures, animal models, fluid therapy and information technology needs: the Second International Consensus Conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care, 2004. 8(4): p. R204-12. 79.  Weingart S, Meyers CM. (March 1, 2008.) Thoughts on the resuscitation of the critically ill trauma   patient. EMCrit Blog. Retrieved Feb. 10, 2014, from www.emcrit.org/podcasts/trauma-resus-part-i/. 80.  Ho AM, Karmakar MK, Contardi LH, et al. Excessive use of normal saline in managing traumatized   patients in shock: A preventable contributor to acidosis. J Trauma. 2001;51(1):173–177. 81.  Brohi K, Singh J, Heron M, et al. Acute traumatic coagulopathy. J Trauma. 2003;54(6):1127–1130. 82.  McLeod JB, Lynn M, McKenney MG, et al. Early coagulopathy predicts mortality in trauma. J Trauma.   2003;55(1):39–44. 83.  Maegele M, Lefering R, Yucel N, et al. Early coagulopathy in multiple injury: An analysis from the   German Trauma Registry on 8,724 patients . Injury. 2007;38(3):298–304. 84.  Lewis AM. Trauma triad of death emergency. Nursing. 2000;30(3):62–64. 85.       Kalavrouziotis D, Voisine P, Mohammadi S, et al. High-dose tranexamic acid is an             Independent predictor of early seizure after cardiopulmonary bypassnn Thorac Surg 2012;93:148              –55.   86.       Kirchhoff C1, Biberthaler P, Mutschler WE, et al.Crit Care. 2009;13(3):R88. doi: 10.1186/cc7914. Epub    2009 Jun 11.  