Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  1 of 23  
  
A Double -Masked  Placebo  Controlled  Clinical  Trial of the Postoperative  Opioid  Sparing  
Effects  of Intraoperative  Dexmedetomidine  Infusion  for Thoracic  Surgery  
 
PROTOCOL  FACE  PAGE  FOR  
MSKCC THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC PROTOCOL 
Principal  Investigator/Department:  Alessia  Pedoto,  MD Anesthesiology  
Co-Principal  Investigator  
(s)/Department:  Vivek  Tim Malhotra,  MD 
David  Jones,  MD Anesthesiology  
Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Westchester  
Investigator   (s)/Department:  David  Amar,  MD 
Prasad  Adusumilli,  MD 
Manjit  Bains,  MD 
Matthew  Bott, MD 
 
Kenneth  Cubert,MD  
Anna  Dabo,  MD 
Dawn  Desiderio,  MD 
Robert  Downey,  MD 
 
Amitabh  Gulati,  MD 
Joseph  Hung,  MD 
James  Huang,  MD 
 
James  Isbell,  MD 
Alexandra  Lewis,  MD 
Bernard  Park,  MD 
 
 
Valerie  Rusch,  MD 
Anne  Kolker,  MD 
Alexandra  Lewis,  MD 
Will Marx,  MD 
Daniela  Molena,  MD 
 
Roger  Padilla,  MD 
Vinay  Puttanniah,  MD 
 
Howard Thaler, Ph.D. 
Kay See Tan, Ph.D.  
Gerald  O‟Neill,  Pharm.D.  Anesthesiology  
Surgery  
Surgery  
Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Commack  
Anesthesiology  
Anesthesiology  
Anesthesiology  
Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Basking  Ridge  
Anesthesiology  
Anesthesiology  
Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Commack  
Surgery  
Anesthesiology  
Surgery/Manhattan,  
Commack  and Basking  
Ridge  
Surgery  Anesthesiology  
Anesthesiology  
Anesthesi ology  
Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Westchester  
Anesthesiology  
Anesthesiology  
 
Epidemiology  & Biostatistics  
Epidemiology  & Biostatistics  
Pharmacy  
Consenting  Professional  
(s)/Department:  Vivek  Tim Malhotra,  MD 
Alessia  Pedoto,  MD 
David  Jones,  MD 
 
Prasad  Adusumilli,  MD 
Manjit  Bains,  MD 
Matthew  Bott, MD 
 
Robert  Downey,  MD Anesthesiology  
Anesthesiology  
Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Westchester  
Surgery  
Surgery  
Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Commack  
Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Basking  Ridge  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  2 of 23  
  
 James  Huang,  MD 
 
James  Isbell,  MD 
Daniela  Molena,  MD 
 
Valerie  Rusch,  MD 
Bernard  Park,  MD 
 
 
Denise  Kessel,  NP 
Megan  Abate,  NP 
Jennifer  Aviado -Langer,  NP Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Commack  
Surgery  
Surgery/Manhattan  and 
Westchester  
Surgery  
Surgery/Manhattan,  
Commack  and Basking  
Ridge  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
 
 
Please  Note:  A Consenting Professional  must  have  completed  the mandatory  Human  
Subjects  Education  and Certification  Program . 
 
 
Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  3 of 23  
  
Table  of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEM A ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 4 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  ................................ ................................ ...................  4 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 5 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ ................................ .... 7 
4.1 Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 7 
4.2 Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  7 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  ................................ ................................ ............................  7 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ....................  8 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  8 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 8 
7.0 RECRU ITMENT PLAN ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  9 
8.0 PRETREATMENT EVALUATION ................................ ................................ .........................  10 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN ................................ ................................ ...................  11 
10.0 EVALUATION DUR ING TREATMENT/INTERVENTION ................................ .......................  11 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 13 
12.0 CRITERIA FOR THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE/OUTCOME ASSESS MENT ...........................  15 
13.0 CRITERIA  FOR REM  OVAL  FROM  STUDY  ................................ ................................ ..................  15 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  15 
15.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDUR ES ...15 
15.1  Research  Participant  Registration  ................................ ................................ ..........................  18 
15.2 Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  18 
16.0 DATA  MANAGEMENT ISSUES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 18 
16.1 Quality  Assurance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  19 
16.2 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 19 
17.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS ................................ ................................ ...............  19 
17.1 Privacy ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  20 
17.2 Serious  Adver se Event  (SAE)  Reporting ................................ ................................ ................  20 
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ...................  22 
19.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  22 
20.0 Appendices………………………………………………… ………………………………………...19  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  4 of 23  
 Bolus  Dose:0.4  mcg/kg  
Bolus   
Randomization  
 
Placebo:  
Infusion:  Active  Treatment  
Dexmedetomidine  
Consent  
Placebo   
Record  Data  for 24 
Hours  Post PACU  Arrival   
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEM A 
 
This study  is designed  to assess  whether the sedative  Dexmedetomidine   (PRECEDEX),  
when  used  intraoperatively  only and stopped  at the end of the operative  procedure,   provides  
analgesia  up to 24 hours  following  surgery  as well as fewer  opioid  side effects.  If beneficial,  
the use of Precedex  could  be a component  in the 23 hour surgical  protocols.  
 
 
    
Infusion   Rate:.0.4mcg/  
kg/h  
 
 
 Operation  End 
Discontinue  Infusion.  
Transfer  to PACU    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 OBJECTIVES  AND SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  
 
2.2 Primary  Objective  
 
To determine  if the use of intravenous  dexmedetomidine  intraoperatively  only and stopped  at 
the end of the operative  procedure,  provides  analgesia  for up to 24 hours  following  surgery   
as well as fewer  opioid  side effects.  This will be measured  by total opioid  administered  
postoperatively  in opioid  equivalents  (the equivalent  dose  in intravenous  morphine  as defined  
at the end of section  10.0 below).   The primary  measure  will be total opioid  administered  in 
the first 4 hours.  Data will be collected  up to 24 hours  after arrival  in PACU  or discharge  (if 
sooner).  
 
2.3 Secondary  Objectives  
 
To explore  whether  the use of intravenous  dexmedetomidine  infusion  intraoperatively:  
 
1. Improves  analgesia  as measured  by change  in Pain Numerical  Rating  Scale  (NRS)  
preoperatively  to postoperatively  at rest and with activity  (such  as coughing).  
2. Results  in fewer  cumulative  episodes  of nausea  or antiemetic  doses  and/or  sedation  
as measured  by incidence  of recorded  nausea,  the use of antiemetics  and RASS  
sedation  scores,  respectively.  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  5 of 23  
  
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND RATIONALE  
 
The use of an epidural  catheter  with local  anesthetic  has demonstrated  benefit  in lessening  
certain  opioid  side effects  such as post-operative  ileus[1] by minimizing  systemic  opioid  use 
[2]. For short  stay cases,  use of an epidural  catheter  is not routine  because  the risk of 
placement  may not justify  the short  duration  of benefit.  An alternative  means  of providing  
adequate  analgesia  with minimal  side effects  must be sought.  Without  an epidural  or another  
regional  approach,  opioids  via intravenous  patient  controlled  analgesics  (IV-PCA)  or as 
needed  (prn)  opioid  systemic  analgesics  are the most  common  alternatives.  
 
Selective  α2-adrenoceptor  agonists  such as clonidine  already  have  approved  uses for both 
acute  and chronic  pain when  given  epidurally.  By interrupting  pain signal  transmission  to the 
brain,  α2-adrenoceptor  agonists  produce  analgesia  at presynaptic  and postjunctional  alpha2 - 
adrenoceptors  in the spinal  cord[3]. Activation  of the former  at the locus  coeruleus  results  in 
decreased  norepinephrine  release  in descending  neural  pathways  which  decreases  pain 
transmission  at the spinal  cord. Other  regions  identified  to have  a high density  of α2- 
adrenoceptors  include  the substantia  gelatinosa,  and the intermediolateral  cell column  , sites 
of major  pain signaling [4]. 
 
Dexmedetomidine  is the active  dextro -isomer  of medetomidine  with 8 times  more  specificity  
for α2-adrenoceptors  than clonidine.  It has sympatholytic,  sedative,  and analgesic properties  
but without  significant  respiratory  effects.   Unlike  clonidine,  it may be given  intravenously  to 
achieve  analgesic  effect.   Dexmedetomidine  was approved  in 1999  for short -term use of less 
than 24 hours  as a sedative  in mechanically  ventilated  patients  in the intensive  care unit [5]. 
Sedative  effects  are observed  within 5 minutes  following  intravenous  dexmedetomidine  
administration.  Unlike  other  sedatives  such as midazolam  and propofol,  patients  on 
dexmedetomidine  were  sedated but easily  arousable  without  respiratory  depression[6].   Its 
sedative,  sympatholytic  and pro-respiratory  properties  allow  it to be used  as an adjunct  to 
general  anesthesia  resulting  in lower  anesthetic  doses   (17-50%) with more  rapid  return  to a 
non-anesthetized  state[7].  
 
Used  off-label,  dexmedetomidine  has been  shown  in several  studies  to have  analgesic  
properties  [5-9].   Direct  spinal  action  on α2-adrenoceptors  inhibits the release  of substance   
P, which  also results  in analgesia [10].  Randomized  studies  by Arain  et. al. showed  a 
decrease  of morphine use by 66% for major  intraabdominal  and orthopedic  surgery   
(n=34) [8]. This study  may have  had incomplete  blinding  and involved  continuation  of the 
dexmedetomidine  infusion  in the recovery  room from its initiation  intra-operatively.   In studies  
by Aho and colleagues,  dexmedetomidine  was administered  at low and high bolus  doses  
(no infusion) only postoperatively   (no intraoperative  use) and found  to be analgesic  but also 
sedative [6]. Interestingly,  respiratory  parameters  improved in  the dexmedetomidine  group.  
Wahlander  and colleagues  used  IV dexmedetomidine postoperatively  following  thoracic  lung 
surgery  as an adjunct  to epidural  analgesia [11]. A bolus  and an infusion  were started  
postoperatively  only and showed  opioid  sparing  effect,  but this was also associated  with 
bradycardia  and hypotension.  Lin and colleagues  demonstrated  opioid  sparing  for patients  
undergoing hysterectomies when dexmedetomidine was used in a PCA (patient-controlled 
analgesic  device).  They  did note dexmedetomidine related  side effects  of bradycardia  and 
hypotension  postoperatively  but also reported  decreased morphine  induced  nausea.  All 
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  6 of 23  
  
these  effects  were  most  pronounced  in the initial  4 hours  postoper  atively.  In all these  studies,  
dexmedetomidine  administration  continued  postoperatively  with consequent  hemodynamic  
effects  and sedation  in the recovery  room  as well as analgesia [12]. 
 
Patient‟s  presenting  for thoracic  surgery  often  have  significant  preexisting  lung disease  which  
narrows  the therapeutic  window  between  risk and benefit,  both intraoperatively  and 
postoperatively.  Anesthetics  are adjusted  intraoperatively  to promote  extubation,  while  
postoperative  analgesia  must  be maximized  to prevent  reintubation.  Patients  undergoing  
major  procedures  such as lobectomy  or pneumonectomy  can achieve  both goals  using  an 
epidural  catheter  to minimize  anesthetic  and maximize  analgesia.  Patients  undergoing  
thorascopic  procedures  (VATS) for wedge  resections  or other simpler procedures  (such  as 
mediastinoscopy)   are often  discharged  sooner  (1-2 days) making  the use of an epidural  
catheter  sometimes  impractical.  
 
In this study,  we wish to examine  the effect  of an intraoperative  only infusion  of 
dexmedetomidine  on postoperative  pain and opioid  use for patients  undergoing  Thoracic  
Surgery  providing  residual  analgesia  after the infusion  is terminated.   These  patients  
represent  a population  for whom epidural  may provide  benefit;  but, for  some  surgeries,  the 
risk of epidural  placement  may outweigh  the benefit.  However,  given  that such patients  may 
have  significant  pre-existing  lung disease,  there  is a desire  to minimize  opioid  use and side 
effects.  Specifically,  we wish to examine  if there  is residual  analgesia  postoperatively  from 
dexmedetomidine  if the infusion  ends  in the operating  room.  Residual  analgesia  has been  
demonstrated  where  dexmedetomidine  was used  as an alternate  to Propofol  sedation  for 
Monitored  Anesthetic  Care  in regional  cases [7] but no such examination   has occurred  for 
general  anesthesia  cases.  The infusion  in this study  would  be started  in the operating  room  
by a continuous  intravenous  infusion.   Before  arrival  to the recovery  room,  the infusion  will be 
stopped  in the operating  room.  The goal is to assess  if the intraoperative  dose  of 
dexmedetomidine  will provide  residual  analgesia  in the recovery  room  resulting  in less opioid  
use and fewer  opioid  side effects  and improved  analgesia  avoiding  any delays  in discharge.  
 
No comparable  protocol  of this type has yet to be undertaken  (i.e. with dexmedetomidine  
used  intraoperatively  only).  The advantage  of this study  design  over previous  designs  is the 
intraoperative  use of the drug infusion  only during  the general  anesthetic.  In this way, any 
sedation  resulting  from the drug occurs  during  anesthesia  where  it may potentiate  the 
anesthetic,  blunting  the sympathetic  response,  which  may maximize  the cardio -protective  
effects.  Also,  any potential  bradycardia  and hypotension  from the drug will be identified  and 
treated  in a monitored  setting  with anesthesia  providers  continually  present.   Discontinuation  
of dexmedetomidine  will occur  before  transport  to the recovery  room,  minimizing  ongoing  
side effects  such as sedation,  bradycardia  and hypotension  while  allowing  assessment  of 
potential  ongoing  analgesia.  The average  Length  of Stay over July and August  2011  was 
3.67 days  for 117 patients  VATs  patients.  Given  the institution‟s goal to reduce  some  
surgeries  (such  as VATs)  to 23-hour stays,  in part by maximizing  analgesia  and minimizing  
side effects,  this study  may represent  a component  towards  that end. 
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  7 of 23  
  
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
 
4.1 Design  
 
In this study,  we wish to examine  the analgesic  effect  of intraoperative  dexmedetomidine  use 
on postoperative  pain,  opioid  use, and opioid  related  side effects  for patients  undergoing  
Thoracic  Surgery.   The study  is a double  masked  parallel  design  with patients  randomized  to 
either  an active  agent  (dexmedetomidine)  or a placebo.  The infusion  will be started  in the 
operating  room through  a continuous  infusion.   Before  arrival  in the recovery  room,  the 
infusion  will be stopped  in the operating  room  and all patients  will receive  a dose  of ketorolac  
and IV acetaminophen,  if no contraindications  exist.  In addition,  the surgeon  will infiltrate  the 
wound  with local anesthetic.  On arrival  to the recovery  room,  all patients  will receive  a 
patient -controlled  analgesic  (PCA)  of intravenous  Fentanyl  (or equivalent)  as a rescue  dose  
only,  without  a basal  rate. In addition  all patients  will be given  acetaminophen  as a standing  
order  every  8 hours  and ketorolac  as needed  assuming  no contraindicatio  ns exist.  
 
The goal is to assess  if the intraoperative  dose  of dexmedetomidine  will provide  residual  
analgesia  in the recovery  room  resulting  in less opioid  use, improved  analgesia  and fewer  
opioid  side effects.  Analgesic  use intraoperatively  will be recorded  to assess  any 
confounding  effects  of dose  of intraoperative  opioid  received  on postoperative  analgesia.  
Specifically,  we wish to account  for any post-operative  analgesic  effect  of excess  
intraoperative  opioids  as this will affect  the primary  endpoint.  Postoperative  opioid  use, pain 
scores  and opioid  side effects  (use of antiemetics  and RASS  sedation  scores)  will be 
recorded  to assess  differences  between  active  and placebo  groups.  
 
For details  on the measures  used,  please  see section  10.0.  
 
4.2 Intervention  
 
The study  involves  the use of dexmedetomidine  infusion  intraoperatively  during  thoracic  
surgical  procedures  (not using  an epidural) with discontinuation  in the immediate  
postoperative  period.  A key feature  in this study  is to employ  the drug infusion  
intraoperatively  only. Therefore,  sedation  resulting  from the drug will occur  during  general  
anesthesia,  where  it may potentiate  the anesthetic.  Also,  any potential  bradycardia  and 
hypotension  from the drug will be identified  and treated  in a fully monitored  setting  with 
anesthesia  providers  continually present.  
 
For this study,  the research  pharmacy  will prepare  both the active  and placebo  agent  in a 
syringe  at a fixed concentration.  This will be used  on a syringe  infusion  pump  and dosed  on a 
per kg basis.  The study  dose  of dexmedetomidine  is a continuous  infusion  of 0.4 mcg/kg/hr.  
This  is consistent  with prescribing  recommendations  for ICU sedation  and most  studies  
investigating  dexmedetomidine ‟s use as an analgesic [12]. . Both active  and placebo  agents  
will be dosed  in mls in an identical  fashion.  Before  arrival  in the recovery  room,  the infusion  
will be stopped  in the operating  room.  
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  8 of 23  
  
The active  agent  used  in the study  is dexmedetomidine,  which  is currently  part of the MSK 
formulary.  Dexmedetomidine  is the active  dextro -isomer  of medetomidine  and is about  8 
times  more  specific  for α2-adrenoceptors  than clonidine [10]. Dexmedetomidine  was approved  
in 1999  for short -term use of less than 24 hours.  The agent  is FDA approved  for use for 
sedation  of non-intubated  patients  before and during  surgical  and other procedures  and for 
sedation  of intubated  and mechanically  ventilated  patients  during  treatment  in an intensive  
care unit[10].  It has no current  analgesic  properties,  an endpoint  of this study.  
 
Dexmedetomidine  is rapidly  distributed  to tissues  with a rapid  distribution  phase  half-life of 
approximately  6 minutes  and a large  volume  of distribution[13].  
 
Dexmedetomidine  exhibits  linear  kinetics  in the dosage  range  of 0.2 to 0.7 mcg/kg/hr  when  
administered  by IV infusion  for up to 24 hours.  
 
In subjects  with varying  degrees  of hepatic  impairment  (Child -Pugh  Class  A, B, or C), 
clearance  values  were  lower  than in healthy  subjects.  The mean  clearance  values  for 
subjects  with mild, moderate,  and severe  hepatic  impairment  were  74%,  64%,  and 53% of 
those  observed  in the normal  healthy  subjects,  respectively.  Mean  clearances  for free drug 
were  59%,  51%,  and 32% of those  observed  in the normal  healthy  subjects,  respectively.  
Although  dexmedetomidine  is dosed  to effect,  dosage  reduction  may be necessary  in 
patients  with hepatic  impairment.  Because  of this, evidence  of liver disease  represents  an 
exclusion  criteria.  
 
Pharmacokinetic  values  of dexmedetomidine  were similar  for patients  with a creatinine  
clearance  (CrCl)  < 30 ml/min  as compared  with healthy  subjects,  but the pharmacokinetic  
values  of the metabolites  of dexmedetomidine  have  not been  evaluated  in patients  with 
impaired  renal  function.  As dexmedetomidine  is extensively  metabolized  and most  of the 
metabolites  are excreted  in the urine,  metabolites  may accumulate  upon  long-term infusions  
in patients  with impaired  renal  function.  
 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
 
• Adult  patients  (>=21  years  old) scheduled  for Thoracic  Surgery.  
 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria 
 
• 2nd or 3rd degree  heart  block  as assessed  by preoperative  EKG 
• Use of dexmedetomidine  within  28 days prior to day of surgery  
• Use of long acting  opioids  pre-operatively  28 days prior to day of surgery  
• Current  or past diagnosis  of a Major  Psychiatric  disorder  precluding  adequate  
outcome  responses  such as Schizophrenia,  dementia,  delirium  etc. as recorded  in 
the Pre-Operative  Record.  
• Documentation  of congestive  heart  failure  and Ejection  fraction  < 30%  if recorded  in 
the Pre-Operative  Record.  
• Planned  use of an epidural  for surgery  for post-operative  pain relief  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  9 of 23  
  
• Contraindication  to use of NSAID,  Acetaminophen  or IV opioids.  
• Any known  hypersensitivity  to dexmedetomidine  
• Pregnant or breastfeeding  
• Abnormal  liver function  tests  as related  to the MSK guidelines  for use of IV 
Acetaminophen:  
 
Yes or NO?;  Is ALT greater  than 2 x Upper  Limit of Normal  (> 75 U/L)?  
 
• Abnormal  renal  function  tests as related  to contraindications  to use of IV Ketorolac:  
 
Yes or No?; Is Serum  Creatinine  < 1.5 mg/dl?  
 
7.1 RECRU ITMENT PLAN 
 
This study  will be available  to all patients  seen  at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  
that meet  the eligibility  criteria.  Patients  scheduled  for Thoracic  Surgery  will be identified  for 
potential  inclusion  and recruited  from the Thoracic  Surgery  clinics  or Pre-Surgical  
Testing.  Both men and women  of all races  and ethnic  groups  are eligible  for this trial. 
 
A consenting  professional  (typically  the Thoracic  Surgeon  or Nurse  Practitioner  in 
conjunction  with the RSA)  will discuss  the details  of the study  with the patient  in the pre- 
surgical  clinic.   These  details  include  but are not limited  to the following:  
 
• That the study  involves  research  of an FDA approved  drug (for sedation)  but for an 
unapproved  indication  (pain).  
• That participation  is voluntary  
• An explanation  of the purposes  of the research  are to determine  if this drug has any 
analgesic  effect  and permitting  a decrease  in opioid  side effects  
• The expected  duration  of participation  is at most  24 hours  or until discharge  
• That the patient  will be randomized  to this drug or placebo  and that the randomization  
will be unknown  unless  knowledge  is required.  
• Identification  that only FDA approved  drugs  are being  used  and they are not 
experimental  drugs  awaiting  approval.  
• A description  of any reasonably  foreseeable  risks or discomforts  to the patient  
• A description  of any benefits  to the patient  or to others  which  may reasonably  be 
expected  from the research  
• A disclosure  of appropriate  alternative  procedures  or courses  of treatment,  such as 
not participating  
 
Patients  who expressed  an interest  but did not sign consent  in the pre-surgical clinic  or pre- 
surgical  testing  will be contacted  by phone  on any day prior to surgery.  If appropriate,  a 
consent  discussion  will occur  on the phone  with appropriate  documentation  of that 
discussion.  Signing  of the informed  consent  and any outstanding  questions  will be completed  
just prior to surgery  on the day of surgery.  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  10 of 23  
  
Patients  will be required  to read,  agree  to, and sign an IRB-approved  informed  consent  form 
prior to study  participation.  
 
The goal is to recruit  280 evaluable  patients  total (140 per arm) over 12 months.  Based  on 
the withdrawal  rate, we will need  to recruit  an estimated  335 patients  to meet  our target  of 
evaluable  participants.  
Limited Waiver of Authorization 
 
Potential  research  subjects  will be identified  by a member  of the patient‟s treatment  team,  the 
protocol  investigator,  or research  team  at Memorial  Sloan-Kettering Cancer  Center   
(MSKCC).  If the investigator  is a member of the treatment  team,  s/he will screen  their 
patient‟s medical  records  for suitable  research  study  participants  and discuss  the study  and 
their potential  for enrolling  in the research  study.  Potential  subjects  contacted  by their   
treating  physician  will be referred  to the investigator/research  staff of the study.  
 
The principal  investigator  may also screen  the medical  records  of patients  with whom  they do 
not have  a treatment  relationship  for the limited  purpose  of identifying  patients  who would  be 
eligible  to enroll  in the study  and to record  appropriate  contact  information  in order  to 
approach  these  patients  regarding  the possibility  of enrolling  in the study.   A screening  log  
will be maintained  by the research  team for review  of the progress  and potential  barriers  for 
the study.  
 
 
During  the initial  conversation  between  the investigator/research  staff and the patient,  the 
patient  may be asked  to provide  certain  health  information  that is necessary  to the  
recruitment  and enrollment  process.  The investigator/research  staff may also revie  w portions  
of their medical  records  at MSKCC  in order  to further  assess  eligibility.  They  will use the 
information  provided  by the patient  and/or  medical  record  to confirm  that the patient  is   
eligible  and to contact  the patient  regarding  study  enrollment.  If the patient  turns  out to be 
ineligible  for the research  study,  the research  staff will destroy  all information  collected  on the 
patient  during  the initial  conversation  and medical  records  review,  except  for any information  
that must  be maintained  for screening  log purposes.  
 
In most  cases,  the initial  contact  with the prospective  subject  will be conducted  either  by the 
treatment  team,  investigator  or the research  staff working  in consultation  with the treatment  
team.  The recruitment  process  outlined  presents  no more  than minimal  risk to the privacy  of 
the patients  who are screened  and minimal  PHI will be maintained  as part of a screening  log. 
For these  reasons,  we seek  a (partial)  limited  waiver  of authorization  for the purposes  of (1) 
reviewing  medical  records  to identify  potential  research  subjects  and obtain  information  
relevant  to the enrollment  process;  (2) conversing  with patients  regarding  possible  
enrollment;  (3) handling  of PHI contained  within  those  records  and provided  by the potential  
subjects;  and (4) maintaining  information  in a screening  log of patients  approached  (if 
applicable).  
 
 
8.1 PRETREATMENT EVALUATION 
 
All patients  will be evaluated  by attending  surgeons  in the Thoracic  Service.   Extent  of 
disease  and potential  resectability  will be determined  using  a variety  of cross -sectional  
imaging  and other  studies  that will vary depending  on the underlying  diagnosis.  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  11 of 23  
  
Prior  to operation,  the following  will be performed.  
 
• The patient  will sign informed  consent  for the surgery  
• The patient  will be confirmed  to have  a documented  pre-operative  history  and 
physical  examination  in the EPIC  system.  Current  history  will include  any Psychiatric  
disorder  precluding  adequate  outcome  responses  (based  on investigator  judgment)  
as determined  by the preoperative  Anesthetic  Evaluation  in the EPIC  system.  Patient  
demographics  will be recorded  
• Standard  Preoperative testing,  including  EKG (to determine  any exclusions)  will be 
confirmed  
• Notation  will be made  of any tests  done  as part of pre-operative  clearance  
documenting  ejection  fraction.  
• Serum  pregnancy  test for women  of childbearing  potential  prior to therapy  (to 
determine  any exclusions)  as per the MSK standard  prior to surgery  will be followed.  
• A preoperative  Numerical  Rating  Scale  (NRS)  for pain at rest and with activity  (such  
as coughing)  will be completed  within  4 hours  prior to surgery,  in the pre-surgical 
center  as a baseline.  
• A preoperative  query  for nausea,  vomiting  and a RASS  sedation  score  will be 
completed  within  4 hours  prior to surgery,  in the pre-surgical  center  as a baseline.  
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN 
 
Patients  scheduled  for Thoracic  Surgery  will undergo  no change  in their routine  care or 
preoperative  testing  except  for inclusion  of the study  drug or placebo.  As part of the study,  
the intravenous  infusion  will commence  with the induction  of general  anesthesia.  The 
infusion  should  end during  the commencement  of surgical  closure  , always  prior to arrival  in 
the recovery  room.   All patients  will receive  a dose  of ketorolac  and IV acetaminophen,  
unless  there  is a clinical  consideration  to avoid  dosing  (e.g. concern  of bleeding  
postoperatively  with ketorolac).  In addition,  the surgeon  will perform  intercostal  blocks  as 
standard  practice  (unless  not advisable  clinically).  On arrival  to the recovery  room,  all 
patients  will receive  a patient -controlled  analgesic  (PCA)  of intravenous  Fentanyl  (or 
equivalent)  as a rescue  dose  only,  without  a basal.  In addition  all patients  will be given  
acetaminophen  as a standing  order  every 8 hours  and ketorolac  as needed  assuming  no 
clinical  contraindications  exist.  There  is no plan to take any specimens  as part of this study.  
 
10.1 EVALUATION DUR ING TREATMENT/INTERVENTION 
 
The following  data will be collected  from the Electronic  Medical  Record. 
 
 
Data recorded  intraoperatively:  
• Total  Opioid  Use Intraoperatively  as measured from  the electronic  intraoperative  
record  in the EPIC  system.  
• Average  hourly  % of Agent/MAC  of agent  used  intraoperatively  as measured  from the 
electronic  intraoperative  record  in the EPIC  system.  
• Change  in Heart  Rate (HR) and Mean  Arterial  pressure  (MAP)  measured  from the 
electronic  intraoperative  record  in the EPIC  system.  The HR and MAP reading  just 
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  12 of 23  
  
prior to drug infusion  will be taken  as the baseline.  The absolute  change  in HR and 
MAP from this baseline  will be noted  q5 minutes  and the difference  summed  over the 
duration  of the case.  The final number  will be divided  by the duration  of the case in 
hours.  
• Any clinically  relevant  change  in Heart  Rhythm  as reported  by intraoperative  
anesthetist  in the EPIC  system.  
• Total  doses  in mg or mcg of pressor  agents  used  intraoperatively  during  the study  
drug infusion  period  as noted  from the electronic  intraoperative  record  in the EPIC  
system.  These  include  phenylephrine,  ephedrine,  epinephrine  and atropine.  
• Total  volume  of intravenous  fluids  ( crystalloids  and colloids)  
• Duration  of the operation  as measured from the electronic  intraoperative  record  in the 
EPIC  system.  
 
 
Data  recorded  in the PACU  and on the floor:  
 
• Opioid  use for the first 24 hours  (or until discharge,  if sooner)  as recorded  in the 
hospital  record  (AIF-Analgesic  Infusion  Form)  at a frequency  consistent  with the 
PACU  and hospital  routine.  The PACU  routine  is on admission,  then every  15 min x 2 
hrs then every  30min  x 2 hrs then every  1 hr. The hospital  routine  is every  8 hours.  
• NRS (Numerically  Rating  Scale)  pain scores  as recorded  in the hospital  record  (AIF)  
for the first 24 hours  (or until discharge,  if sooner)  q4hr at rest and with any activity  
(such  as coughing).  The PACU  routine  is on admission,  then every  15 min x 2 hrs 
then every  30min  x 2 hrs then every  1 hr. The hospital  routine  is every  8 hours.  
• Sedation  scores  for the first 24 hours  as recorded  in the hospital  record  (AIF)  post- 
operatively  (or until discharge,  if sooner)  at a frequency  consistent  with the PACU  and 
hospital  routine.  Sedation  scores  are specifically  the Richmond  Agitation  Sedation  
Scale,  an ordinal  value  measuring  from +4(combative)   to -5 (unarousable)  and is the 
hospital  standard.  
• Heart  Rate (HR),  Mean  Arterial  Pressure  (MAP),  Respiratory  Rate (RR) for the first 24 
hours  post-operatively  (or until discharge,  if sooner)  as recorded  in the hospital  record  
at a frequency  consistent  with the PACU  and hospital  routine.  
• Total  volume  of intravenous  fluids  ( crystalloids  and colloids)  
• Incidences  of Hypoxia  (SpO2  < 90%)  as recorded  in the hospital  record  in PACU  
Additional  postoperative data recorded  include : 
• Inability  to  extubate  prior to PACU  as measured  by presence  of endotracheal  tube in 
PACU  and recorded  by PACU  on intake.  
• Need  for re-intubation  in PACU  as determined  by medical  record.  
• Time   to PACU  discharge  (and/or readiness  for discharge,  if different)  as recorded  by 
PACU  
• Time  to first opioid  rescue  as measured  from PCA device  record  (AIF)  
Side effects  to be recorded : 
• Cumulative  incidence  of nausea  recorded  in medical  record  (AIF)   at a frequency  
consistent  with the PACU  and hospital  routine  from arrival  to the PACU  until 24 hours  
later (or until discharge,  if sooner).  
• Cumulative  use of an antiemetic  as recorded  in the hospital  record  from arrival  to the 
PACU  until 24 hours  later (or until discharge,  if sooner).  
. 
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  13 of 23  
  
 
 
When  the patient  is discharged  to the regular  floor,  the above  measures  will be recorded  
according  to the floor routine  (typically  q8hr).  
 
All opioid  doses  will be converted  to the equivalent  dose  of intravenous  morphine  based  on 
standard  MSK guidelines  using  the MSK interactive  converter  
(http://mskweb6.mskcc.org/painservice/meds/conversion_interactive.htm)  
11.1 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
 
The safety  of Dexmedetomidine  was assessed  by the manufacturer.  Those  adverse  
reactions  are listed  below:  
From  the Product  Insert [13]: 
 
“From  the placebo -controlled,  continuous  infusion  trials of Precedex  for sedation  in the 
surgical  intensive  care unit setting  in which  387 patients  received  Precedex  for less than 24 
hours.  The most frequently  observed  treatment -emergent  adverse  events  included  
hypotension,  hypertension,  nausea,  bradycardia, fever,  vomiting,  hypoxia,  tachycardia  and 
anemia”  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  14 of 23  
  
 
 
 
 
Adverse  Event   
Randomized  
Dexmedetomidine  
(N=387)   
Placebo  
(N=379)  
 
Hypotension  28%  13%  
Hypertension  16%  18%  
Nausea  11%  9% 
Bradycardia  7% 3% 
Fever  5% 4% 
Vomiting  4% 6% 
Atrial  Fibrillation  4% 3% 
Hypoxia  4% 4% 
Tachycardia  3% 5% 
Hemorrhage  3% 4% 
Anemia  3% 2% 
Dry Mouth  3% 1% 
Rigors  2% 3% 
Agitation  2% 3% 
Hyperpyrexia  2% 3% 
Pain 2% 2% 
Hyperglycemia  2% 2% 
Acidosis  2% 2% 
Pleural  Effusion  2% 1% 
Oliguria  2% < 1% 
Thirst  2% < 1% 
 
In addition,  the following  events  will be reported  as SAEs:  
• New Arrhythmia  in PACU  (excluding  sinus  tachycardia  and bradycardia  that does  not 
require  treatment  with a continuous  infusion  agent)  
• Reintubation  
• Sedation  requiring use of naloxone  
• Hypotension  requiring  a continuous  infusion  of a Vasopressor  postoperatively  
CTCAE  v4.0 will be used  for toxicity  grading.  
 
11.1 Complications  of Surgery  
 
Patients in both study arms are scheduled to undergo routine Thoracic Surgery which will not vary 
based  on involvement  in this protocol.  The potential  complication  associated  with these  
procedures, such as bleeding  and infection  are the same as those  associated  with these  
procedures  when  done  as part of routine care and will not be collected  or reported  unless  a grade  
3 or higher..  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  15 of 23  
  
 
12.1 CRITERIA FOR THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE/OUTCOME ASSESS MENT 
 
Primary  endpoints  
 
1. Opioid  sparing  as measured by 
a. total opioid  equivalents  used  postoperatively  as measured  by the total opioid  
administered  in approximately  the first 4 hours  and 
Secondary  endpoints  to be measured  include:  
1. Change  in analgesia  as measured  by change  in Pain Numerical  Rating  Scale  (NRS)  
preoperatively  to postoperatively.  Specifically  measured  is pain:  
a. at rest, 
b. with activity  (such  as coughing)   and 
2. Cumulative  episodes  of 
a. nausea,  
b. antiemetic  use and/or  
c. sedation  as measured  by the incidence  of side effects  and sedation  scores,  
respectively  
 
13.1 CRITERIA  FOR  REM  OVAL  FROM  STUDY  
 
Termination  of the Study  Drug is left to the Anesthesiologist  based  upon  the clinical  care of 
the patient.  Reasons  for termination  may or may not include  the following:  
 
• New Arrhythmia  (excluding  sinus  tachycardia  and bradycardia  that does  not require  
treatment  with a continuous  infusion  agent)  
• Suspected  anaphylaxis  
 
Criteria  for censoring  of the patient‟s data include:  
 
• Patient‟s  decision  to withdraw  prior to surgery  
• Conversion to open  thoracotomy  
• Placement  of Epidural  Catheter  prior to end of data collection  
• Removal  of IV PCA drug 
• Failure  to initiate  the infusion.  
• Complete  Inability  to adequately  obtain  any NRS pain scores,  e.g. secondary  to 
mental  status  changes  or death  
 
The rate of removal  will be reported  with the study  results.  Patients  who are removed  from 
the study  intraoperatively  will continued  to be followed  and data analyzed  in an intention -to- 
treat fashion.  
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS  
 
The goal of this randomized,  double -masked  study  is to evaluate  the extent  to which  intra- 
operative  dexmedetomidine  infusion  improves  post-operative analgesia  in patients  
undergoing  Thoracic  Surgery.  We will measure  each  patient‟s analgesic  consumption  
periodic  pain self-assessment  and side-effects  for up to 24 hours.  The primary  outcome  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  16 of 23  
  
measure  will be opioid  consumption  during  the approximate  first four hours  post-anesthesia,  
when  data will be collected  more  frequently,  dosage  will be electronically  recorded  in real 
time and the effect  is expected  to be most  pronounced.   All opioids  will be converted  to 
morphine  equivalents  per standard  conversion  tables  used  at Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  
(http://mskweb6.mskcc.org/painservice/meds/conversion_interactive.htm)  
 
The simplest  measure  will be a comparison  of total opioid  adminis tered  during  that initial  time 
period,  averaged  across  patients  within  each  treatment  arm: dexmedetomidine  infusion  vs. 
null (saline)  infusion.  Opioid  consumption  is widely  accepted  as a “hard  measure”  in pain 
management  studies.  Most  if not all of the opioid  will be delivered  by patient  controlled  
analgesia  (PCA)  during  this time period.  
 
The plan is to study  140 evaluable  patients  per treatment  arm (total  280 evaluable  patients).  
With the current  withdrawal  rate we expect  to recruit  335 patients  in total.   Approximately  50 
potential  eligible  patients  undergo  this procedure  per month.  If we assume  only 25 patients  
per month  are feasible,  the study  will take approximately  14 monthsto  complete.  This sample  
size will be sufficient  to have  80% chance  of having  a statistically  significant  (p<0.05)  result  
between -arms  comparison  for the criterion  outcome,  total opioid  use at 4 hours.  This is 
based  on data from a study  of analgesic  requirements  in similar  patients  14 and the 
assumptions  that the 4-hour cumulative  opioid  consumption  (morphine -equivalents)  is log- 
normally  distributed  and that there  is 32% treatment  effect,  with mean consumption  +/- std 
dev 4.0 +/- 4.0 mg in the control  group  and 2.72 +/- 2.72 mg in the Dexmedetomidine -treated  
group.  Similar  considerations  may apply  to other  outcomes,  such as time to first post- 
anesthesia  opioid  dose.  
 
The primary  analysis  will be a simple  comparison  of average  opioid  consumption  between   
the two randomized  treatment  arms.   Post-operative  analgesic  requirements  may be affected  
by demographic  or clinical  factors  such as patients‟ age, weight,  gender,  American  Society  of 
Anesthesia  Risk score,  length  of operation,  and amount  of intra-operative  analgesic  drugs  
administered.   Randomization  will be stratified  by gender  (male  / female)  and age (<45 / 45  
to 65 / >65).In  addition  to the primary  analysis,  we will perform  an ancillary  analysis  of 
covariance  to adjust  for these  covariates  when  comparing  treatment  arms.   Furthermore,  we 
may apply  data transformation  to more  closely  satisfy  implicit  assumptions  of the General  
Linear  Model  and more  readily  identify  possible  outlying  observations.  
 
We will also perform  more  exploratory  analyses  to data such  as the total opioid  use at 8 
hours  and self-reported  numeric  (numerical  reporting  score)  pain scores,  applying  the 
repeated  measures  model  to the time curve  or trajectory  data per patient  as an efficien  t way 
of summarizing  results.   Side effects  will be reported  as per-patient  means  and standard  
deviations  for each  treatment  group  and compared  using  Student‟s t-test, after applying  data 
transformation  if appropriate.   These  analyses  are exploratory  because  they are of 
secondary  interest  and we do not have  prior data to estimate  statistical  power  
 
Accrual  and withdrawal/dropout  rates  will be reported  with the study  results.  Patients  who 
withdraw  from the study  after randomization  but prior to surgery  (and hence  did not receive  
treatment)  will not be included  in the analyses;  patients  who withdraw  from the study  after 
surgery  will be included  in the study.  In rare cases  in which  patients  receive  an intraoperative  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  17 of 23  
  
treatment  different  from the intended  randomized  treatment  will remain  in the intended  arm 
for analyses.  Patients  with cancelled  surgeries  (and hence  do not have  the primary  outcome)  
will not be included  in the analyses.  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  18 of 23  
  
15.1 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION 
PROCEDURES  
15.2 Research Participant  Registration  
 
Confirm  eligibility  as defined  in the section  entitled  Criteria  for Patient/Subject  Eligibility.  
 
Obtain  informed  consent,  by following  procedures  defined  in section  entitled  Informed  
Consent  Procedures.  
 
During  the registration  process  registering  individuals  will be required  to complete  a protocol  
specific  Eligibility  Checklist.  
 
All participants  must  be registered  through  the Protocol  Participant  Registration  (PPR) Office  
at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center.  PPR is available  Monday  through  Friday  from 
8:30am  – 5:30pm  at 646-735-8000.  Registrations  must  be submitted  via the PPR Electronic  
Registration  System  (http://ppr/ ).  The completed  signature  page  of the written  consent/RA  or 
verbal  script/RA,  a completed  Eligibility  Checklist  and other  relevant  documents  must  be 
uploaded  via the PPR Electronic  Registration  System.  
 
 
 
15.3 Randomization  
 
This is a double  masked  placebo  controlled  randomized  trial.  After eligibility  is established  
and immediately  after consent  is obtained,  patients  will be registered  in the Protocol  
Participant  Registration  (PPR)  system.  Patients  will be randomized  using  the Clinical  
Research  Database  (CRDB)  at the time of registration,  by calling  the MSKCC  PPR office  at 
646-735-8000  between  the hours  of 8:30am  and 5:30pm,  Monday  – Friday.   Randomization  
will be accomplished  by the method  of random  permuted  block,  stratified  by gender  (male   / 
female)  and age (<45 / 45 to 65 / >65).   Since  this is a double  masked  study,  the patients‟ 
treatment  assignments  can be viewed  in the CRDB  only by the hospital  pharmacists  who are 
dispensing  the study  drugs.  The patient‟s randomizatio n status  will also be unblinded  at the 
request  of clinical  personnel  if medical  care warrants  such knowledge  to adequately  treat the 
patient  including  development  of a new arrhythmia  (excluding  sinus  tachycardia  and 
bradycardia  that does  not require  treatment),  use of vasopressor  infusion  intraoperatively  
suspected  anaphylaxis.  
 
16.1 DATA MANAGEMENT ISSUES 
 
A Research  Study  Assistant  (RSA)  will be assigned  to the protocol.  They  will identify  
potential  patients  eligible  for consenting.  They  will also be re sponsible  for collection  of data 
from the EPIC  system  for intraoperative  measures.  They  will also be responsible  for data 
collection  in the PACU  and patient  floor based  on nursing  records  and the CIS system.  
Additional  responsibilities  of the RSA include  project  compliance,  data entry,  data reporting,  
regulatory  monitoring,  identification  of potential  withdrawals,  and SAE reporting.  The data 
recorded  for this study  will be entered  into a secure  database  compliant  with HIPAA  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  19 of 23  
  
regulations.  Any paper  used  to record  data will be scanned  into the EMR.  There  are no 
patient  questionnaires.  
16.2 Quality  Assurance  
 
Weekly  registration  reports  will be generated  to monitor  patient  accruals  and completeness    
of registration  of data.  Routine  data quality  reports  will be generated  to assess  missing  data 
and inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates  and extent  of accuracy  of evaluations  and follow -up will be 
monitored  periodically  throughout  the study  period  and potential  problems  will be brought  to 
the attention  of the Principal  Investigator.  
16.3 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
 
The Data  and Safety  Monitoring  (DSM)  Plans  at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  
were  approved  by the National  Cancer Institute  in September  2001.  The plans  address  the 
new policies  set forth by the NCI in the document  entitled  “Policy  of the National  Cancer  
Institute  for Data and Safety  Monitoring  of Clinical  Trials”  which  can be found  at: 
http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/researchers/dsm/inde  x.html . 
The DSM Plans  at MSKCC  were  established  and are monitored  by the Office  of Clinical  
Research.  The MSKCC  Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plans  can be found  on the MSKCC  
Intranet  at: 
http://msk  web2.msk  cc.org/irb/index.htm  
 
 
There  are several  different  mechanisms  by which  clinical  trials  are monitored  for data,  safety  
and quality.  There  are institutional  processes  in place  for quality  assurance  (e.g.,  protocol  
monitoring,  compliance  and data verification  audits,  therapeutic  response,  and staff 
education  on clinical  research  QA) and departmental  procedures  for quality  control,  plus 
there  are two institutional  committees  that are responsible  for monitoring  the activities  of our 
clinical  trials programs.  The committees:  Data and Safety  Monitoring  Committee  (DSMC)  for 
Phase  I and II clinical  trials,  and the Data and Safety  Monitoring  Board  (DSMB)  for Phase  III 
clinical  trials,  report  to the Center‟s Research  Council  and Institutional  Review  Board 
17.1 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
Participation  in this trial is voluntary.   All patients  will be required  to sign a statement  of 
informed  consent,  which  must  conform  to MSKCC  IRB guidelines.  
 
1. Risks  to the subject  
 
Human  Subjects  Involvement  and Characteristics :  All patients  at MSCKK  who meet  the 
inclusion  criteria  will be eligible.   280 evaluable  patients  will be entered  on this study  but 
based  on the withdrawal  rate, an estimated  335 patients  will be needed  to achieve  that target  
of evaluable  patients;  patients  will be 21 years  of age or older.   Both men and women  of all 
ethnic  groups  are eligible  for this trial.  Pregnant  and breast -feeding  women  are excluded  
from this study.   This protocol  does  not include  children  because  the number  of children  is 
expected  to be limited  for the patient  population  expected  to be accrued  onto this study.  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  20 of 23  
  
Also,  the majority  is already  accessed  by a nationwide  pediatric  cancer  research  network.  
This statement  is based  on exclusion  4b of the NIH Policy  and Guidelines  on the Inclusion  of 
Children  as Participants  in Research  involving  Human  Subjects.  
 
2. Adequacy of protection against risk 
 
Consent  process :  All patients  at MSKCC  who meet  the inclusion  criteria  will be eligible.  
Participation  in the trial is voluntary.   Informed  consent  may be taken  by those  individuals  
described  as Consenting  Professionals.   All patients  will be required  to sign a statement  of 
informed  consent,  which  must  conform  to institutional  IRB guidelines.   The informed  consent  
procedure  is described  in section  18. 
 
Possible  Toxicities/Adverse  Effects :  There  are risks associated  with Precedex  as described  
in section  11.0;  however,  patient  screened  for enrollment  will have  been  deemed  appropriate  
for treatment  independent  of this study.  
 
Cost: The cost of the study  drug/placebo  will be covered  by the study.  All other  costs  will be 
the responsibility  of the patient  since  these  are standard  of care charges.  
 
Alternatives :  The alternative  to this trial would  be Thoracic  Surgery  with standard  of care as 
described  in section  3.0. 
 
Confidentiality :  Every  effort  will be made  to maintain  patient  confidentiality.   Research  and 
hospitals  records  are confidential.   Patients‟ names  and any other  identifying  information  will 
not be used  in reports  or publications  resulting  from this study.   Other  authorized  agencies  
and appropriate  personnel  (e.g.  Qualified  monitors  from MSKCC)  may review  patient  
records  as required.  
 
17.2 Privacy  
MSKCC‟s Privacy  Office  may allow  the use and disclos ure of protected  health  information  
pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  The use and disclosure  of 
protected  health  information  will be limited  to the individuals  described  in the Research  
Authorization  form.  A Research  Authorization  form must  be completed  by the Principal  
Investigator  and approved  by the IRB and Privacy  Board  (IRB/PB).  
 
17.3 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting 
 
An adverse  event  is considered  serious  if it results  in ANY of the following  outcomes:  
• Death 
• A life-threatening adverse event  
• An adverse  event  that results  in inpatient  hospitalization  or prolongation  of existing  
hospitalization  
• A persistent  or significant  incapacity  or substantial  disruption  of the ability  to conduct  
normal  life functions  
• A congenital  anomaly/birth  defect  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  21 of 23  
  
• Important  Medical  Events  (IME)  that may not result  in death,  be life threatening,  or 
require  hospitalization  may be considered  serious  when,  based  upon  medical  judgment,  
they may jeopardize  the patient  or subject  and may require  medical  or surgical  
intervention  to prevent  one of the outcomes  listed  in this definition  
Note: Hospital  admission  for a planned  procedure/disease  treatment  is not considered  an 
SAE.  
 
SAE reporting  is required  as soon  as the participant  signs  consent  .  SAE reporting  is 
required  for 30-days after the participant ‟s last investigational  treatment  or intervention.  Any 
events  that occur  after the 30-day period  and that are at least possibly  related  to protocol  
treatment  must  be reported.  
 
If an SAE requires  submission  to the IRB office  per IRB SOP RR-408 „Reporting  of Serious  
Adverse  Events‟, the SAE report  must  be sent to the IRB within  5 calendar  days  of the event.  
The IRB requires  a Clinical  Research  Database  (CRDB)  SAE report  be submitted  
electronically  to the SAE Office  as follows:  
 
For IND/IDE trials: Reports that include a Grade 5 SAE should be sent to 
saegrade5@mskcc.org .  All other  reports  should  be sent to saemskind@mskcc.org . 
 
For all other  trials:  Reports  that include  a Grade  5 SAE should  be sent to  
saegrade5@mskcc.org .  All other  reports  should  be sent to sae@mskcc.org . 
 
The report  should  contain  the following  information:  
Fields  populated  from CRDB:  
• Subject‟s  initials  
• Medical  record  number  
• Disease/histology  (if applicable)  
• Protocol  number  and title 
Data  needing  to be entered:  
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• The grade  of the event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment  (drug,  device,  or intervention)  
• If the AE was expected  
• The severity  of the AE 
• The intervention  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  
o A explanation  of how the AE was handled  
o A description  of the subject‟s condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains  on the study  
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  22 of 23  
  
• If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
• If the SAE is an Unanticipated  Problem  
 
The PI‟s signature  and the date it was signed  are required  on the completed  report.  
For IND/IDE protocols: 
The CRDB  SAE report  should  be completed  as per above  instructions.   If appropriate,  the 
report  will be forwarded  to the FDA by the SAE staff through  the IND Office  
 
 
18.1 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
 
Before  protocol -specified  procedures  are carried  out, consenting  professionals  will explain   
full details  of the protocol  and study  procedures  as well as the risks involved  to participants  
prior to their inclusion  in the study.  On the day of surgery,  prior to going  to Pre-Surgical  Bed, 
patients  will be approached  by a Consenting  professional  who will fully consent  the patients  
and answer  any questions.  Patients  will have  had the consent  form to review  at home  prior to 
being  fully consented  on the day of surgery,  in order  to ensure  that patients  have  ample  time 
to review  the consent  including  weighing  the risks/benefits.  Participants  will also be informed  
that they are free to withdraw  from the study  at any time.  All participants  must  sign an 
IRB/PB -approved  consent  form indicating  their consent  to participate.  This consent  form 
meets  the requirements  of the Code  of Federal  Regulations  and the Institutional  Review  
Board/Privacy Board  of this Center.  The consent  form will include  the following:  
 
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely  follow -up required.  
3. Alternatives  to the proposed  study.  (This  will include  available  standard  and 
investigational  therapies.  In addition,  patients  will be offered  an option  of supportive  
care for therapeutic  studies.)  
4. The name  of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
5. The right of the participant  to accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  and to 
withdraw  from participation  at any time.  
 
Before  any protocol -specific  procedures  can be carried  out, the consenting  professional  will 
fully explain  the aspects  of patient  privacy  concerning  research  specific  information.  In 
addition  to signing  the IRB Informed  Consent,  all patients  must  agree  to the Research  
Authorization  component  of the informed  consent  form.  
 
Each  participant  and consenting  professional  will sign the consent  form.  The participant  must  
receive  a copy  of the signed  informed  consent  form.  
 
 
 
19.1 REFERENCES  
 
 
1. Liu, S.S. and C.L. Wu, Effect  of postoperative  analgesia  on major postoperative  
complications:  a systematic  update  of the evidence.  Anesth  Analg,  2007.  104(3):  p. 689- 
702. 
Memorial  Sloan Kettering  Cancer  Center  
IRB#:  13-163 A(12)  
Approved:  01-NOV -2016  
Page  23 of 23  
  
2. De Windt,  A.C.,  et al., An opioid -free anaesthetic  using  nerve  blocks  enhances  rapid  
recovery  after minor  hand  surgery  in children.  Eur J Anaesthesiol,  2010.  27(6):  p. 521-5. 
3. Khan,  Z.P., C.N. Ferguson,  and R.M. Jones,  alpha -2 and imidazoline  receptor  agonists.  
Their  pharmacology  and therapeutic  role. Anaesthesia,  1999.  54(2):  p. 146-65. 
4. Chetty,  S.V.,  Dexmedetomidine  for acute  postoperative  pain.  South  Afr J Anaesth  Analg,  
2011.  17(1):  p. 139-140. 
5. Aho, M., et al., Dexmedetomidine  infusion  for maintenance  of anesthesia  in patients  
undergoing  abdominal  hysterectomy.  Anesth  Analg,  1992.  75(6):  p. 940-6. 
6. Aho, M.S.,  et al., Effect  of intravenously  administered  dexmedetomidine  on pain after 
laparoscopic  tubal  ligation.  Anesth  Analg,  1991.  73(2):  p. 112-8. 
7. Arain,  S.R. and T.J. Ebert,  The efficacy,  side effects,  and recovery  characteristics  of 
dexmedetomidine  versus  propofol  when  used for intraoperative  sedation.  Anesth  Analg,  
2002.  95(2):  p. 461-6, table  of contents.  
8. Arain,  S.R.,  et al., The efficacy  of dexmedetomidine  versus  morphine  for postoperative  
analgesia  after major  inpatient  surgery.  Anesth  Analg,  2004.  98(1):  p. 153-8, table  of 
contents.  
9. Lin, T.F., et al., Effect  of combining  dexmedetomidine  and morphine  for intravenous  
patient -controlled  analgesia.  Br J Anaesth,  2009.  102(1):  p. 117-22. 
10. Gerlach,  A.T. and J.F. Dasta,  Dexmedetomidine:  an updated  review.  Ann Pharmacother,  
2007.  41(2):  p. 245-52. 
11. Wahlander,  S., et al., A prospective,  double -blind,  randomized,  placebo -controlled  study  
of dexmedetomidine  as an adjunct  to epidural  analgesia  after thoracic  surgery.  J 
Cardiothorac  NRSc  Anesth,  2005.  19(5):  p. 630-5. 
12. Tan, J.A. and K.M. Ho, Use of dexmedetomidine  as a sedative  and analgesic  agent  in 
critically  ill adult  patients:  a meta -analysis.  Intensive  Care  Med,  2010.  36(6):  p. 926-39. 
13. Hospira.  Precedex  Prescribing  Information . [Web  Page]   [cited  2011  4/4/2011];  Available  
from:   http://www.precedex.com/wp -content/uploads/2010/11/Precedex_PI.pdf.  
14. A. Ziser,  J.M. Messick,  D.R. Schroeder,  M.S. Allen:  Requirements  For Postoperative  
Analgesics  In Patients  Undergoing  Video -assisted  Thoracic  Surgery.  The Internet  Journal  
of Anesthesiology . 1999  Volume  3 Number  2. DOI: 10.5580/2735  - See more  at: 
http://www.ispub.com/journal/the -internet -journal -of-anesthesiology/volume -3-number - 
2/requirements -for-postoperative -analgesics -in-patients -undergoing -video -assisted - 
thoracic-surgery.html#sthash.3JCef51J.m8FJ8udk.dpuf 
 
20.0 AppendicesAppendix AStudy Cover Summary Sheet 