MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 1 of 25  
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
Protocol Number: MI -CP204  
 
An Open-label, Phase 1/2 Study of MEDI-551, a Humanized 
Monoclonal Antibody Directed Against CD19, in Adult Subjects 
With Relapsed or Refractory Advanced B-Cell Malignancies  
 
 
 
 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 2 of 25 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1 INTRODUCTION .................................................. .................................................... 3  
2 BACKGROUND .................................................... .................................................... 3  
2.1 Study Overview ................................................ ................................................ 4  
2.2 Randomization and Blinding .................................... ......................................... 9  
2.3 Schedule of Study Procedures .................................. ....................................... 10  
2.4 Sample Size Considerations .................................... ........................................ 10  
3 STATISTICAL METHODS ........................................... ........................................... 11  
3.1 General Considerations ........................................ ........................................... 11  
3.2 Subject Populations ........................................... .............................................. 12  
3.3 Subject Disposition ........................................... .............................................. 12  
3.4 Baseline Characteristics ...................................... ............................................ 13  
3.5 Study Drug Exposure ........................................... ........................................... 14  
3.6 MTD or OBD/Highest Protocol-Defined Dose ...................... .......................... 16  
3.7 Safety Assessments ............................................ ............................................. 16  
3.8 Efficacy Assessments .......................................... ............................................ 18  
3.9 Pharmacokinetic Assessments ................................... ...................................... 22  
3.10  Assessment of Effect on Circulating Lymphocyte Populations .... .................... 22  
3.11  Immunogenecity Assessments .................................... ..................................... 23  
3.12  Exploratory Summaries ......................................... .......................................... 23  
4 INTERIM SAFETY ANALYSES ....................................... ...................................... 24  
5 REFERENCES .................................................... ..................................................... 24  
 
LIST OF IN-TEXT TABLES 
Table 2.4-1  True Underlying DLT Rate at a Given Dose Level................. ........... 10  
Table 3.8-1  Definition and censoring information for DOR .................. ............... 20  
Table 3.8-2  Definition and censoring information for TTP .................. ................ 21  
Table 3.8-3  Definition and censoring information for PFS .................. ................. 22  
 
 
 
  
 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 3 of 25 1 INTRODUCTION 
This document describes the statistical methodology and summari es for Study MI-CP204, an 
investigation of MEDI-551 in adult subjects with relapsed or re fractory advanced B-cell 
malignancies.  As background information, an overview of the st udy design is provided.  The 
main portion of this document details the statistical summaries  relating to each study 
objective and describes the general conventions and definitions  that will be used.   
In addition, a set of table templates and specifications will b e provided in a statistical 
programming plan to complement this document.   
2 BACKGROUND 
Cluster of Differentiation (CD) antigen 19 (CD19) is a B-cell-r estricted transmembrane 
protein member of the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily encoded b y the CD19 gene (Cooper 
et al, 2004). CD19 expression in B-cell leukemias and lymphomas  is widespread. CD19 is 
expressed in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), acute lymphocy tic leukemia (ALL), and 
B-cell non-Hodgkin ’s lymphoma (NHL) (Uckun et al, 1988; D’Arena et al, 2000; Gina ldi et 
al, 1998; Anderson et al, 1984).  
Treatment of B-cell CLL and NHL, the largest groups of hematolo gic malignancies, relies 
primarily on a combination of chemotherapy and biotherapy based  on the monoclonal 
antibody rituximab, directed against CD20 (Robak, 2007). While many patients achieve 
long-lasting remissions with this combination in both CLL and N HL, patients whose disease 
progresses after treatment with rituximab and/or commonly used chemotherapies have few 
effective options (Robak, 2007; Coiffier, September 2005; Coiff ier, March 2005). With each 
subsequent treatment, the duration of remission usually becomes  shorter and, eventually, 
most CLL and NHL patients die from their disease (Hennessy et a l, 2004). Therefore patients 
who have relapsed or refractory NHL or CLL that is no longer re sponsive to rituximab or 
chemotherapy have an unmet medical need. The broad expression p rofile of CD19 on B-cell 
malignancies, including ALL, CLL, and NHL, makes this an attrac tive target both for 
patients in whom therapy with rituximab has failed and as a pot ential first-line treatment 
(Uckun et al, 1988). In multiple myeloma (MM), patients who are  not candidates for a stem 
cell transplant (SCT) can achieve durable remissions with first -line chemotherapeutic 
regimens (San Miguel et al, 2008), but nearly all patients will  eventually experience relapse 
and require subsequent therapy (Richardson et al, 2003). As wit h other B-cell malignancies, 
in MM, therapy with subsequent lines has a lower effectiveness and shorter duration 
(Richardson et al, 2003). MM patients who have received multipl e lines of therapy likely 
have higher percentages of CD19-expressing cells (Matsui et al,  2008) and, because this may 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 4 of 25 represent a stem cell population that is resistant to available  chemotherapies, these patients 
have an unmet medical need. 
MEDI-551 is a humanized Immunoglobulin G (IgG)1 kappa monoclona l antibody (MAb) 
directed against human CD19. MEDI-551 efficiently depletes bloo d and tissue B cells in 
human CD19 transgenic (huCD19 Tg) mice and has antitumor activi ty in severe combined 
immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse models of human B cell leukemia, lymphoma and MM. 
MEDI-551 does not bind CD20, and thus activity of MEDI-551 shou ld be independent of 
activity of rituximab or other CD20-targeted therapies. MEDI-55 1 is expected to selectively 
target B cells, with antitumor activity in a variety of B-cell- derived malignancies. More 
details on the clinical experience with MEDI-551 can be found i n the Section 1.4 of the 
protocol. 
2.1 Study Overview 
This is a Phase 1/2, multicenter, international, open-label, do se-escalation and expanded 
cohort study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and potentia l antitumor activity of MEDI-551 
as single agent or in combination with rituximab in adult subje cts with advanced B cell 
malignancies. The study design of Arm A comprises a dose-escala tion phase followed by a 
dose-expansion phase in subjects with advanced B-cell malignanc ies receiving single-agent 
MEDI-551. This study arm included participants from 5 to 30 inv estigational sites in the 
United States (US), Canada, and European Union (EU). As of Vers ion 10.0 of the protocol, 
the study design also includes dose escalation and expansion in  subjects with CLL receiving 
single-agent MEDI-551 (Arm B), and dose escalation and expansio n in subjects with 
aggressive lymphoma receiving MEDI-551 combined with rituximab (Arm C). As of Version 
11.0 of the protocol, the study design also includes subjects w ith any anti-CD20-refractory 
aggressive lymphoma receiving single-agent MEDI-551 (Arm D). Ar ms B, C, and D will 
include participants from 20 investigational sites in the US an d 10 to 15 sites in the EU. 
Arm A Enrollment in the dose-escalation and expansion phases of Arm A  is complete. Protocol 
Version 4.0 was amended to make the study population for dose-e scalation inclusive of 
subjects with FL, multiple myeloma (MM), CLL, or DLBCL. Dose es calation in Arm A 
began in subjects with FL or MM per protocol Versions 1.0 throu gh 4.0. Subjects were 
enrolled into the first 2 cohorts under these versions of the p rotocol. Starting with Version 
5.0 of the protocol, enrollment in dose-escalation Cohorts 3 an d higher was open to subjects 
with the following advanced B-cell malignancies: FL, MM, CLL, o r DLBCL. Subjects in 
Cohorts 1 and 2 were to continue to follow the protocol Version  4.0 dose schedule of 0.5 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 5 of 25 mg/kg (Cohort 1) or 1 mg/kg (Cohort 2) MEDI-551 administered in travenously (IV) once 
every week in 4-week cycles. Subjects enrolled in Cohorts 3 and  higher received 2, 4, 8, or 
12 mg/kg MEDI-551 (Cohorts 3 to 6, respectively) IV once per we ek on Days 1 and 8 of 
Cycle 1 (loading doses) and then once every 28 days at the star t of each subsequent cycle. As 
per Cohorts 1 and 2, dosing in Cohorts 3 and higher followed a standard 3+3 dose-escalation 
scheme. Subjects in Arm A were not to receive a MEDI-551 dose g reater than 12 mg/kg. No 
intra-subject dose escalation was allowed. 
Arm B 
Based on evaluation of the PK data in CLL subjects (n = 26) fro m Arm A, there appeared to 
be lack of full exposure and numerically lower response rate co mpared to non-CLL subjects 
using the current monthly dosing regimen at the highest dose ev aluated (ie, 12 mg/kg). This 
arm of the study will evaluate further dose escalation in CLL s ubjects utilizing a new 
schema, designed to saturate the potential B-cell sink, achieve  full exposure, and maximize 
clinical activity, by employing weekly dosing of MEDI-551 for 4  weeks during Cycle 1 and 
then monthly dosing on Day 1 of each subsequent 28-day cycle to  determine the MTD or the 
highest protocol-defined dose in the absence of exceeding the M TD, which will be evaluated 
subsequently in a doseexpansion phase. To further minimize infu sion related reactions at 
higher dose levels, for the 24 and 48 mg/kg dose levels of MEDI -551, the initial weekly dose 
will be administered over 2 days on Day 1 and Day 2 in Cycle 1.  Subsequent doses at the 24 
and 48 mg/kg dose levels will be administered in an identical f ashion to lower dose levels (ie, 
weekly on Days 8, 15, and 22 in Cycle 1 and then on Day 1 of ea ch 28-day cycle in Cycle 2 
and beyond). 
Arm C 
Given the high unmet medical need in patients with multiply rel apsed aggressive lymphoma, 
the synergistic activity observed in preclinical studies with M EDI-551 and rituximab, as well 
as the promising clinical activity seen with other dual monoclo nal antibody (MAb) 
combinations in patients with B-cell malignancies, this arm of the study will evaluate the 
safety and efficacy of MEDI-551 in combination with rituximab i n subjects with aggressive 
lymphoma (relapsed or refractory DLBCL, Grade 3b FL, FL transfo rming to DLBCL and 
mantle cell lymphoma [MCL]). Using a standard 3+3 design, 3 to 6 subjects with aggressive 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) will be enrolled per cohort in the d ose-escalation portion of 
this arm, starting at a MEDI-551 dose of 8 mg/kg and escalating  to 12 mg/kg. This 
population will receive 8 mg/kg of MEDI-551 on Days 2 and 8 of Cycle 1 and Day 1 of 
Cycle 2, and beyond in 28-day cycles along with weekly rituxima b for 8 weeks beginning on 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 6 of 25 Day 1 of Cycle 1. Dose escalation will con tinue to 12 mg/kg if 0 of 3 or ≤ 1 of 6 subjects 
treated at the lower dose experience a DLT. The MTD will be def ined as the dose at which 
no more than 1 of 6 subjects experiences a DLT. No intrasubject  dose escalation will be 
allowed. Subjects will be considered evaluable for a DLT if the y complete the first cycle of 
therapy or discontinue therapy during Cycle 1 due to a DLT. Non evaluable subjects will be 
replaced in the same dose cohort. A total of up to 12 subjects will be enrolled in the dose-
escalation portion of this arm of the study. Dose escalation may be halted  at the sponsor’s 
discretion. Dose escalation will be permitted after all investi gators review the available data 
and unanimously agree to proceed with enrollment into the next cohort. The outcome from 
this meeting will be documented in writing and shared with all participating sites. Once an 
MTD is identified or the maximum planned dose not exceeding the  MTD is reached, 
additional subjects will be enrolled and treated at the selecte d dose of MEDI-551 in 
combination with rituximab in the dose-expansion portion of thi s arm to ensure a total 
sample size of 26 efficacy evaluable subjects are available for  analysis after completing one 
post-treatment disease evaluation. The 26 subjects will include  subjects treated at the selected 
dose during the dose-escalation portion of this arm. Treatment may continue until the subject 
experiences unacceptable toxicity, disease progression, or with draws consent. Subjects in 
Arm C will be stratified by their responsiveness to any prior a nti-CD20-based therapy with 
the option of ensuring a minimum number of 7 subjects who are r efractory to any anti-CD20-
based therapies are enrolled if clinical data from Arm D or eme rging preclinical data suggest 
that the combination of anti-CD20 and anti-CD19 therapies impro ve response in this 
subpopulation. 
Arm D Given the high unmet medical need in patients with refractory a ggressive lymphoma and in 
light of preservation of CD19 expression on the surface of thes e malignant cells, MEDI-551 
may represent a salvage therapy option for anti-CD20-refractory  patients. With evidence of 
clinical activity and safety of MEDI-551 established in an unse lected relapsed refractory 
lymphoma population (Arm A), it is now appropriate to investiga te MEDI-551 in the anti-
CD20-refractory population. Arm D will evaluate the efficacy of  MEDI-551 in subjects with 
any anti-CD20-refractory aggressive lymphomas (refractory DLBCL , Grade 3b FL, FL 
transforming to DLBCL, and MCL). Since the safety and tolerabil ity of the 12-mg/kg dose of 
MEDI-551 has been verified in Arm A, approximately 26 subjects with any anti-CD20-
refractory disease will be enrolled and treated with single-age nt MEDI-551 at the dose and 
schedule used in the expansion cohort of Arm A (ie, 12 mg/kg of  MEDI-551 on Days 1 and 8 
of Cycle 1, and on Day 1 of Cycle 2 and beyond in 28-day cycles ). Treatment may continue 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 7 of 25 until the subject experiences unacceptable toxicity, disease pr ogression, or withdraws 
consent. 
Primary Objectives: 
Arm A (MEDI-551 monotherapy in advanced B-cell malignancies) 
• To determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) or optimal biolog ic dose (OBD) of 
MEDI-551 in subjects with relapsed or refractory advanced B-cel l malignancies (chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia [CLL], including small lymphocytic lymphom a [SLL], diffuse 
large B-cell lymphoma [DLBCL], and follicular lymphoma [FL]) 
• To determine the preliminary safety profile of MEDI-551 
 
Arm B (MEDI-551 monotherapy in CLL) 
Dose Escalation 
• To determine the MTD or highest protocol-defined dose of MEDI-5 51 in the absence of 
exceeding the MTD in subjects with relapsed or rituximab-refrac tory CLL (defined as 
those with less than a partial response [PR] or progression wit hin 6 months after 
completing therapy with rituximab) 
 
Dose Expansion 
• To evaluate further the safety and tolerability of MEDI-551 at the dose selected in the 
dose-escalation phase in subjects with relapsed or rituximab-re fractory CLL 
• To evaluate the clinical activity of MEDI-551 at the dose selec ted in the dose-escalation 
phase in subjects with relapsed or rituximab-refractory CLL 
 
Arm C (MEDI-551 combined with rituximab in aggressive lymphoma) 
Dose Escalation 
• To determine the safety and tolerability of MEDI-551 in combina tion with rituximab at 
the MTD or the highest protocol-defined dose in the absence of exceeding the MTD in 
subjects with aggressive lymphomas 
 
Dose Expansion 
• To evaluate further the safety and tolerability of MEDI-551 at the dose selected in the 
dose-escalation phase in subjects with aggressive lymphomas 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 8 of 25 • To evaluate the clinical activity of MEDI-551 at the dose selec ted in the dose-escalation 
phase in combination with rituximab in relapsed and rituximab-r efractory population 
(defined as those with less than a PR or progression within 6 m onths after completing 
therapy with rituximab) 
 
Arm D (MEDI-551 monotherapy in any anti-CD20-refractory aggressive ly mphoma) 
• To evaluate the clinical activity of MEDI-551 in subjects with any anti-CD20-refractory 
aggressive lymphomas (defined as any subject with less than a P R to any prior anti-
CD20-based therapy or progression within 6 months after complet ing therapy with any 
anti-CD20-based regimen, including maintenance rituximab) 
 
Secondary Objectives: 
Arm A 
• To determine the preliminary efficacy profile of MEDI-551 in su bjects with advanced B-
cell malignancies (CLL [including SLL], DLBCL, and FL) 
• To determine the pharmacokinetics (PK) of MEDI-551 in subjects with advanced B-cell 
malignancies  
• To determine the effect of treatment with MEDI-551 on circulati ng lymphocyte 
populations and immunoglobulin (Ig) levels, including time to r ecovery after treatment 
• To determine the immunogenicity (IM) of MEDI-551 in subjects wi th advanced B-cell 
malignancies 
 
Arm B 
• To evaluate the PK and IM of MEDI-551 at doses studied in subje cts with relapsed or 
rituximabrefractory CLL 
• To evaluate the effect of therapy on the B-lymphocyte level in peripheral blood, 
including time to recovery of B-lymphocyte level 
 
Arm C 
• To evaluate the PK and IM of MEDI-551 when administered in comb ination with 
rituximab in subjects with aggressive lymphomas 
• To evaluate the effect of therapy on the B-lymphocyte level in peripheral blood, 
including time to recovery of B-lymphocyte level 
 
MedImmune SAP for Protocol MI-CP204
MEDI-551 03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 9 of 25Arm D
•To determine the safety and tolerability of MEDI-551 in subject s with any anti-CD20-
refractory aggressive lymphomas
•To evaluate the PK and IM of MEDI-551
•To evaluate the effect of therapy on the B-lymphocyte level in peripheral blood, 
including time to recovery of B-lymphocyte level
Exploratory Objectives:
Arm A
•
Arm B
•
Arm C
•
•
Arm D
•
•
2.2 Randomization and Blinding
This is an open-label study.  Randomization and blinding are no t applicable to this study.
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 10 of 25 2.3 Schedule of Study Procedures 
The schedule of Study Procedures is outlined in the study proto col.   
2.4 Sample Size Considerations 
Arm A 
For the dose-escalation phase, a minimum of 18 evaluable subjec ts (3 subjects each in Dose 
Cohort 1 through 6) or up to approximately 36 evaluable subject s (3+3 subjects per dose 
cohort) will be required to determine the MTD. A subject will b e considered evaluable for 
assessment of DLT if the subject receives at least one full cyc le (4 doses for Cohorts 1 and 2; 
2 doses for Cohorts 3 to 6) of MEDI-551 and completes the safet y follow-up through the 
DLT evaluation period (as defined in Section 4.5.6 ), or the subject experiences a DLT. Any 
nonevaluable subject will be replaced in the same dose cohort. Table 2.4-1 provides the 
probability of dose escalation to the next higher lever for eac h underlying true DLT rate. For 
example, for a common toxicity that occurs in 10% of subjects, there is a greater than 90% 
probability of escalating to the next higher dose level. Conver sely, for a toxicity that occurs 
with a rate of 60%, the probability of escalating to the next h igher dose level is less than 
10%. 
Table 2.4-1 True Underlying DLT Rate at a Given Dose Level 
True Underlying DLT Rate 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 
Probability of Escalating Dose 0.91 0.71 0.49 0.31 0.17 0.08 0.03 0.009 0.001 
 
For the dose expansion phase, approximately 20 subjects will be  entered into each of 4 arms 
to determine the preliminary efficacy profile of MEDI-551 in th e treatment of advanced 
CLL, DLBCL, FL, and MM. The primary objective of the dose expan sion phase is to 
determine the preliminary efficacy profile of MEDI-551 in subje cts with the advanced B-cell 
malignancies, including CLL, DLBCL, FL, and MM. The sample size  estimation is based on 
the exact binomial test.  A total of 20 subjects will be requir ed to have approximately 80% 
power for testing the following hypotheses at 1-sided significa nce level of 0.1. 
• Null hypothesis: undesirable CR rate = 5% 
• Alternative hypothesis: desirable CR rate = 20%   
 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 11 of 25 Arms B and C 
Dose Escalation 
There are 4 planned dose levels (6, 12, 24, and 48 mg/kg) for M EDI-551 in the Arm B dose 
escalation phase and 2 planned dose levels (8 and 12 mg/kg) for  Arm C dose escalation. 
Using a standard 3+3 design, approximately 24 to 36 subjects ma y be enrolled during the 
dose-escalation phase in Arms B and C depending on the observed  safety profile and total 
number of dose levels evaluated. 
Dose Expansion A sample size of 26 subjects is planned for each dose-expansion  cohort in Arms B and C. 
Given an expected response rate of 50% for both cohorts, this w ill provide 80% power at a 
significance level of 0.20 (2-sided) to exclude the historical response rate of 30%, and 
associated 80% confidence intervals for the response rate will have a precision of ± 13%. The 
30% historical response rate was selected for both Arms B and C  expansion cohorts based on 
the following reported data: 
In relapsed CLL patients, OR rates between 15% and 30% were rep orted for rituximab 
monotherapy ( O’Brien et al, 2001 ; Mavromatis and Cheson, 2003 ). 
In DLBCL patients with 2 prior lines of therapy, response rates  were only about 30% with 
single-agent rituximab ( Coiffier et al, 1998 ; Wang et al, 2013 ; Churpek et al, 2013 ). 
Arm D A sample size of approximately 26 subjects is planned for Arm D . Given an 
expected response rate of 50% for this cohort, this will provid e 80% power at 
a significance level of 0.20 (2-sided) to exclude the historica l response rate of 30% 
(Zinzani et al, 2013 ; Witzig et al, 2011 ), and associated 80% confidence intervals for the 
response rate will have a precision of ± 13%. 
3 STATISTICAL METHODS 
3.1 General Considerations 
All data will be provided in data listings sorted by dose level  and subject number.  All 
summary tables will be provided by dose level. The summary tabl es for baseline disease 
characteristics, study drug exposure, MTD evaluation and effica cy will be provided by dose 
level and disease type (CLL, DLBCL, FL, MM, MCL). Categorical d ata will be summarized 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 12 of 25 by frequency distribution (number and percentage of subjects fa lling within each category).  
In general, continuous variables will be summarized by descript ive statistics including N, 
mean, standard error or deviation, median, minimum, and maximum . All data collected, 
including unscheduled visits, will be presented in data listing s. Summary tables will be 
limited to planned visits. 
Subjects with missing data for a parameter will be excluded fro m the summary of this 
parameter.  
The data analyses will be conducted using the SAS£ System (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) 
Version 9.3 or above in Unix (Sun OS) environment. 
3.2 Subject Populations 
The following subject populations will be used when summarizing  the data: 
• Evaluable population for DLT:  includes all subjects in the dose -escalation phase who 
receive at least 1 full cycle of MEDI-551 and complete safety f ollow-up through the DLT 
evaluation period (defined in Section 4.5.6 of the protocol) or  experience any DLT. The 
evaluable population for DLT will be used for the MTD analysis.  
• Safety population:  includes all subjects who receive any treatment of MEDI-551. I t will 
be used to evaluate baseline characteristics as well as all end points for the safety.  
• Evaluable population for efficacy : includes all subjects who receive any treatment of 
MEDI-551 and complete at least one post-baseline disease assess ment. It will be used to 
evaluate the efficacy endpoints.  
 
The number and percent of subjects in each subject population f or evaluation will be 
summarized by dose level and overall (all subjects combined). T he number of screen failures 
will be also summarized.  
3.3 Subject Disposition 
The following summaries will be prepared for subject dispositio n by dose level and overall. 
Summary Population 
Number of Subjects Enrolled by Site All subjects enrolled 
Subject Status at the End of Study Therapy Safety 
Subject Status at the End of Study and Mortality Summary Safety  
 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 13 of 25 The number and percentage of subjects enrolled and the study du ration will be summarized 
by site number, the primary investigato r’s name , and location. The total number of subjects 
enrolled will be used as the denominator. 
The summary of subject status at the end of study therapy will include the number and 
percentage of subjects who discontinued treatment due to comple tion of protocol-defined end 
of treatment (up to 2 more cycles of MEDI-551 after complete re sponse), adverse event, 
death, lost to follow-up, withdrawal of consent, physician deci sion, non-compliance with 
investigational product, pregnancy, progressive disease, protoc ol violation, technical 
problems, other. The denominator for these summaries will inclu de all subjects in the safety 
population. 
Subject status at the end of study and mortality summary includ es the number and percentage 
of subjects who ended the study due to completion of protocol-d efined end of study, lost to 
follow-up, withdrawal of consent, death, or other.  For the sub jects who withdrew from the 
study, the reason for withdrawal (adverse event [AE] or other) will be summarized. For the 
subjects who are dead at the end of the study, the cause of dea th (due to disease, not due to 
disease) and the relationship of death to investigational produ ct (none, remote, possible, 
probable, definite) will be summarized .  For those subjects who died, the cause of death (due 
to disease, not due to disease) and the relationship of death t o investigational product (none, 
remote, possible, probable, definite) will also be summarized. The denominator for these 
summaries will include all subjects in the safety population.  
3.4 Baseline Characteristics 
Summaries on demographics, disease history, prior cancer treatm ent, baseline disease status, 
baseline bone marrow and aspirate assessment, Karnofsky perform ance status and other 
baseline disease characteristics will be provided by dose level  and overall to describe the 
subject population in this study.  They will aid in interpretat ion of the assessment of the 
primary and secondary objectives and provide an overview of stu dy conduct.  The following 
parameters will be summarized for the safety population:  
Summary Population 
Demographics Safety 
Disease History Safety 
Prior Cancer Treatment Safety 
Baseline Disease Status Assessment Safety 
Baseline Bone Marrow Biopsy and Aspirate Assessment Safety 
Baseline SPEP and UPEP Assessment Safety 
Baseline Spleen and Liver Assessment Safety 
Baseline Karnofsky Performance Status Safety 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 14 of 25  
Demographics will be summarized for the continuous variables: a ge (years), height (cm) and 
weight (kg) using descriptive statistics. Frequency distributio ns will be provided for the 
categorical variables: gender, race and ethnicity.  
Disease history summary will include descriptive statistics for  time from the initial diagnosis 
to study entry and frequency distributions for the stage of ini tial diagnosis (I, II, III, IV), 
constitutional symptoms at diagnosis (absent, present) and type  of transplant (hematopoietic 
stem cell, bone marrow, none) for all subjects as well as by di sease type (CLL, DLBCL, FL, 
MM, MCL).  
Baseline disease status assessment summary will include frequen cy distributions for the 
current stage (I, II, III, IV), constitutional symptoms (absent , present), any spleen 
involvement, any liver involvement and other organ involvement for all subjects as well as 
by disease type (CLL, DLBCL, FL, MM, MCL). 
The summary of prior cancer treatment will include the number a nd percent of subjects who 
had received prior therapies in the following categories: biolo gic, chemotherapy, radiation, 
surgery, hormonal and other for all subjects and by disease typ e. The best response to the last 
cancer treatment will be also summarized by disease type.  
Baseline bone marrow biopsy and aspirate assessment will includ e frequency distributions of 
subjects who have received bone marrow biopsy and aspirate, pre sence of malignant cells for 
DLBCL, MCL and FL subjects, presence of lymphocytes and nodules  for CLL subjects, and 
presence of plasma cells for MM subjects .  
For the baseline SPEP and UPEP assessment the results of these two tests will be presented 
in a listing. 
The baseline spleen and liver assessment summary will include t he number and percent of 
subjects with liver enlarged (by palpation) and spleen enlarged  (by palpation) presented for 
all subjects as well as by disease type. 
Karnofsky performance status will be summarized using frequency  distribution for the 
categories: <70, 70, 80, 90, and 100 for all subjects.  
3.5 Study Drug Exposure 
The following summary of study drug exposure will be provided f or the safety population by 
dose level and overall as well as by disease type (CLL, DLBCL, FL, MM, MCL). In 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 15 of 25 addition, summaries for study treatment change and subsequent a lternative cancer treatment 
will be provided for the safety population by dose level and ov erall.  
Summary Population 
Study Treatment Exposure Safety 
Summary of Study Treatment Change Safety 
Summary of Subsequent Alternative Cancer Treatment Safety 
 
Summary of study treatment exposure includes descriptive statis tics for the number of doses 
received during the study, total dose received, and total numbe r of treatment cycles, defined 
as the number of cycles during which subject received at least one dose of MEDI-551. The 
total number of treatment cycles of MEDI-551 will also be summa rized using frequency 
distribution for categories to be defined in the Statistical Pr ogramming Plan (SPP). The dose 
intensity of the study treatment is a percent of total actual d ose that a subject received during 
the study treatment period versus total intended dose for the s ame study treatment period 
according to the study protocol. It will be summarized using de scriptive statistics as part of 
study treatment exposure summary. The formula provided below gi ves calculation details for 
the dose intensity:  
 period treatment )/( dose intended)/( received dose100 (%) Intensity Doseuu ¦
kgmgkgmg
 
where 
mLmLkg mg kg mg250 )(  volume Actual)/( level dose)/( received Dose u  
 
 
The summary of study treatment change will present the total nu mber of subjects with dose 
delay, the reasons for dose delay (adverse events, scheduling c onflict, other), the total 
number of subjects for whom the entire dose was not administere d as scheduled, the reasons 
entire dose was not administered as scheduled (adverse events, other) and the reason subject 
did not receive investigational product (adverse events, other)  will be summarized using 
frequency distribution.  
The use of subsequent alternative cancer treatment after the di scontinuation of study drug 
will be summarized by type of treatment using frequency distrib ution. 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 16 of 25 3.6 MTD or OBD/Highest Protocol-Defined Dose 
The MTD will be based on the evaluable population for DLT and w ill be defined as the 
highest dose at which ≤ 1 out of 6 subjects experience a DLT during the DLT eva luation 
period. The number and percentage of subjects with a DLT will b e presented by dose level 
and overall. If the MTD is not reached, the OBD (Arm A) or high est protocol-defined dose 
(Arms B and C) will be determined based upon analysis of all av ailable data, including 
safety, PK, pharmacodynamics, and response. 
3.7 Safety Assessments 
Safety endpoints will be summarized descriptively. The occurren ce of AEs, abnormal 
laboratory values, and SAEs reported will be summarized for all  subjects who received any 
MEDI-551. Adverse events and SAEs will be graded according to t he National Cancer 
Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI C TCAE V4.03) and 
described by system organ class and by Medical Dictionary for R egulatory Activities 
(MedDRA) preferred term, severity, and relationship to MEDI-551 . Frequency rates will be 
calculated for each system organ class and MedDRA preferred ter m. All summaries will be 
done by dose level and overall and will be based on the safety population. 
The toxicity profile will be assessed primarily by summarizing adverse events, serious 
adverse events, significant or important clinical findings in e lectrocardiogram (ECG) results, 
Karnofsky performance status (summarized by worst performance s tatus during the study) 
and laboratory assessments during the study. All summaries for toxicity profile evaluation 
will be done by dose level and overall, and will be based on th e safety population.  
Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), defined as events pr esent at baseline that 
worsen in intensity after administration of study drug, or even ts absent at baseline that 
emerge after administration of study drug,  will be summarized by system organ class and 
preferred term using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Acti vities (MedDRA) 
dictionary, severity graded according to NCI CTCAE V4.03 (grade  1, grade 2, grade 3, grade 
4, grade 5), and relationship to study drug. 
Subjects will be counted only once for each preferred term, onc e for each system organ class, 
and by the highest event severity, regardless of how many event s the subject experienced.  
The following treatment emergent adverse event summaries will b e provided: 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 17 of 25 Summary Population 
Rate Summary of All Treatment Emergent Adverse Events Safety 
Number of Subjects with Treatment Emergent Adverse Events Safety 
Number of Subjects with Treatment Emergent Adverse Events by Hi ghest Severity Safety 
Number of Subjects with Treatment Emergent Adverse Events Sorte d by Frequency Safety 
Number of Subjects with Related Treatment Emergent Adverse Even ts Safety 
Number of Subjects with Related Treatment Emergent Adverse Even ts by Highest Severity Safety 
Number of Subjects with Treatment Emergent Serious Adverse Even ts Safety 
Number of Subjects with Treatment Emergent Serious Adverse Even ts by Serious Adverse Event 
Criteria Safety 
Number of Subjects with Related Treatment Emergent Serious Adve rse Events Safety 
Number of Subjects with Treatment Emergent Adverse Events Resul ting in Permanent 
Discontinuation of Study Drug Safety 
 
The AEs/SAEs occurring from the signing of the informed consent  and prior to the initiation 
of study treatment will be listed. The AEs/SAEs that begin 30 d ays after last dose will not be 
summarized or listed. 
Laboratory Parameters  
The change in each laboratory parameter from baseline to the “worst -case” (nadir and/or 
zenith) and to the last assessment for hematology/coagulation a nd blood chemistry will be 
summarized by descriptive statistics (N, mean, standard deviati on, median, minimum, 
maximum).  Baseline values will be defined as the last valid as sessment prior to the first dose 
of MEDI-551.   
Laboratory abnormalities with toxicity grades according to the NCI CTCAE V4.03 will be 
derived according to laboratory values. Laboratory abnormalitie s will be presented.  Shift 
tables from baseline to the maximum severity grade and to the l ast assessment will be 
generated for each of laboratory parameter.  
The following summaries for lab parameters will be prepared. 
Summary Population 
Change from Baseline in Hematology/Coagulation Parameters Safety 
Change from Baseline in Chemistry Parameters Safety 
Toxicity Grades for Hematology/Coagulation Parameters Safety 
Toxicity Grades for Chemistry Parameters Safety 
 
Results of urine protein electrophoresis, serum protein electro phoresis, urinalysis, 
cytogenetic analysis, and flow cytometry will be listed by subj ect and visit.   
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 18 of 25 ECG Parameters and Karnofsky Performance Status  
The following summaries will be provided for ECG parameters and  Karnofsky performance 
status: 
Summary Population 
Change from Baseline in ECG parameters Safety 
Summary of ECG clinical findings Safety 
Summary of Karnofsky performance status Safety 
 
Descriptive statistics for ECG parameters (heart rate, PR inter val, QRS duration, QT interval, 
QTcB [Bazett], QTcF [Fridericia]), including change from baseli ne, will be provided for 
each scheduled time point. ECG clinical findings will be summar ized at each time point in 
terms of overall ECG interpretation (within normal limits, abno rmal insignificant, abnormal 
significant, un-interpretable and incomplete analysis) as well as comparison with baseline 
interpretation (improved, worsened, unchanged, not compared).   
Karnofsky performance status will be summarized using a shift t able from baseline to the 
worst performance status and to the last assessment. 
Vital Signs Descriptive statistics of value and change from baseline value for heart rate, blood pressure, 
temperature, weight and respiratory rate will be provided for e ach scheduled time point. The 
following summary will be prepared for vital sign parameters ba sed on the safety population. 
Summary Population 
Change from Baseline in Vital Sign Parameters Safety 
 
3.8 Efficacy Assessments 
The efficacy will be assessed based on CR, duration of CR, obje ctive response, disease 
control, TTR, duration of objective response, duration of disea se control, PFS, and OS. 
Anti-tumor Activity of Medi-551  
To evaluate the anti-tumor activity of MEDI-551, summaries for CR rate, duration of CR, 
best disease response, objective response rate, disease benefit  rate, time to response, duration 
of objective response, time to progression, progression free su rvival and overall survival will 
be performed by dose level and overall (all doses combined) bas ed on the evaluable 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 19 of 25 population for efficacy for each of the advanced B-cell maligna ncies CLL, DLBCL, FL and 
MM. These summaries will be repeated using the per-protocol pop ulation.   
Complete Response Rate  
The CR rate is defined as the proportion of subjects that have achieved CR in the safety 
population. The 95% and 80% confidence interval (CI) of the CR rate will be estimated 
based on the exact probability method (Clopper-Pearson exact in terval). As a supportive 
analysis, the CR rate and its 95% and 80% CI will be estimated based on the evaluable 
population for efficacy.  
Duration of Complete Response  
Duration of CR will be measured from the first documentation of  a CR to the time of 
progressive disease/relapse. Duration of CR will be censored on  the date of last disease 
assessment for subjects who have no documented relapse prior to  data cutoff, dropout, or the 
initiation of alternative anticancer therapy. Duration of CR wi ll be calculated using the 
Kaplan-Meier method for the subgroup of subjects with CR. Also,  as a supportive analysis, 
the duration of CR will be evaluated based on the evaluable pop ulation for efficacy.  
MRD-negative CR Subjects with CR and negative MRD defined as the proportion of subjects with a best 
response of CR and without MRD. The MRD rate is defined as the proportion of subjects 
that have achieved CR in the safety population. The 95% and 80%  confidence interval (CI) 
of the CR rate will be estimated based on the exact probability  method (Clopper-Pearson 
exact interval). 
Best Disease Response  
The best overall response during the study will be calculated a nd summarized with number 
and percentage of subjects for the following categories: comple te response (CR), partial 
response (PR), stable disease (SD), and progressive disease (PD ).  
Objective Response Rate  
Objective response rate is defined as the proportion of subject s with CR or PR. The 
denominator of ORR in the summary for the safety population wil l be equal to the number of 
subjects in this population. Subjects that have missing overall  response assessments will be 
considered non-responders, so they will be counted in the denom inator, but not in the 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 20 of 25 numerator of ORR. The 95% CIs of ORR will be estimated using th e exact probability 
method (Clopper-Pearson exact interval).  
Disease Control  
Disease control includes CR, PR, or SD for at least 8 weeks.  
Time to Response 
Time to response (TTR) is measured from the start of MEDI-551 t reatment to the first 
documentation of disease response (CR or PR) and will be evalua ted only in subjects who 
receive any treatment of MEDI-551 and have achieved objective r esponse (CR or PR). TTR 
is calculated in months as follows: 
TTR (months) = (Date of first disease response – Date of MEDI-551 start + 1) / (365.25/12) 
TTR will be summarized using Kaplan-Meier estimates (median tim e, 95% CI for median 
time). 
Duration of Objective Response 
Duration of objective response (DOR) is measured from the first  documentation of objective 
response to the first documented progressive disease (PD) or re lapse. DOR is calculated in 
months as follows:  
DOR (months) = (Date of PD/relapse or censoring – Date of first response + 1) / (365.25/12), 
where date of PD/relapse or censoring is given in Table 3.8-1. DOR will be summarized 
using Kaplan-Meier estimates (median time, 95% CI for median ti me). 
Table  3.8-1 Definition and censoring information for DOR 
Situation Date of PD/relapse or Censoring Outcome 
PD or relapse  Date of earliest sign of PD or relapse Progressed 
No PD or relapse Date of last disease assessment Censored 
PD or relapse after ≥ 2 missed consecutive 
disease assessments  Date of last disease assessment Censored 
 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 21 of 25 Duration of Disease Control  
Duration of disease control will be defined as the time period from start of MEDI-551 
administration to the event of PD/relapse. Duration of disease control will be censored on the 
date of last disease assessment for subjects who have no docume nted PD/relapse prior to data 
cutoff, dropout, or the initiation of alternative anticancer th erapy. Duration of disease control 
will only be calculated for the subgroup of subjects with best response of CR, PR, or SD, and 
will be evaluated using the Kaplan-Meier method. 
Time to disease progression/relapse  
Time to disease progression/relapse (TTP) is measured from the start of MEDI-551 treatment 
until the first documentation of disease progression or relapse . TTP is calculated in months as 
follows:  
TTP (months) = (Date of PD/relapse or censoring – Date of MEDI-551 start + 1) / 
(365.25/12), 
where date of PD/relapse or censoring is given in Table 3.8-2. TTP will be summarized using 
Kaplan-Meier estimates (median time, 95% CI for median time). 
Table 3.8-2 Definition and censoring information for TTP 
Situation Date of PD or Censoring Outcome 
PD or relapse Date of earliest sign of PD or relapse Progressed 
No PD or relapse Date of last disease assessment Censored 
PD or relapse after ≥ 2 missed consecutive 
disease assessments  Date of last disease assessment Censored 
No disease assessment at baseline or post-
baseline visits  Date of first MEDI-551 Censored 
 
Progression-free survival 
Progression-free survival (PFS) is measured from the start of M EDI-551 treatment until the 
first documentation of disease progression, relapse or death, w hichever occurs first. PFS is 
calculated in months as follows:  
PFS (months) = (Date of PD/relapse/death or censoring – Date of MEDI-551 start + 1) /    
                           (365.25/12), 
where date of PD/relapse/death or censoring is given in Table 3 .8-3. PFS will be summarized 
using Kaplan-Meier estimates (median time, 95% CI for median ti me). 
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 22 of 25 Table  3.8-3 Definition and censoring information for PFS 
Situation Date of PD/relapse/death or Censoring Outcome 
PD or relapse Date of earliest sign of PD or relapse Progressed 
Death before the first post-baseline disease 
assessment or after disease assessments documenting 
no PD Date of death Death 
No PD, death or relapse Date of last disease assessment Censored 
PD/relapse/death after ≥ 2 missed 
consecutive disease assessments  Date of last disease assessment Censored 
No disease assessment at baseline or post-
baseline visits  Date of first MEDI-551 Censored 
 
Overall survival 
Overall survival (OS) is measured from the start of MEDI-551 tr eatment until death. For 
subjects who are alive at the end of study or lost to follow-up , OS will be censored on the last 
date when subjects were known to be alive. OS is calculated in months as follows:  
OS (months) = (Date of death or censoring – Date of MEDI-551 start + 1) / (365.25/12). 
OS will be summarized using Kaplan-Meier estimates (median time , 95% CI for median 
time). 
3.9 Pharmacokinetic Assessments 
To support the pharmacokinetic assessments of MEDI-551, analysi s of pharmacokinetic 
parameters of MEDI-551 will be performed and reported by the Me dImmune Global PK-PD 
& Bioanalysis group. The PK of MEDI-551 will be estimated by no n-compartmental 
analysis. A population PK analysis may also be performed to obt ain additional PK 
parameters. Those PK parameters will be summarized by descripti ve statistics including N, 
mean, standard deviation, coefficient of variation, median, min imum, maximum, and 
geometric mean. 
3.10 Assessment of Effect on Circulating Lymphocyte Populations  
Circulating levels of blood mononuclear cells, including T-cell s, B-cells, NK cells and 
monocytes will be determined using standard clinically availabl e flow cytometry. B-cell 
levels will be monitored from start of treatment until recovery .  
Recovery will be defined as a B- cell count of ≥ 200 cells/mm3 in subjects with baseline B-
cells of ≥ 200 cells/ mm3 or two consecutive B-cell counts within ± 20% of baseline or a bove 
in subjects with baseline B-cell counts of < 200 cells/ mm3. It will be defined only for the 
MedImmune SAP for Protocol MI-CP204
MEDI-551 03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 23 of 25subjects with a nadir level of < 200 cells/mm3and baseline B-cell level greater than the nadir 
level. It will be summarized by presenting the number and percen tage of subjects with B-cell 
recovery by dose level and overall. 
Time to B-cell recovery will be defined for the subjects with B-c ell recovery as 
•the time from nadir to first B-cell level ≥200 cells/mm3for the subjects with baseline B-
cell levels ≥200 cells/mm3or
•the time from nadir to the first of the 2 consecutive values wit hin ± 20% of baseline or 
above, if such 2 consecutive values are observed, for the subjec ts with baseline B-cell <
200 cells/mm3.
Time to recovery will be summarized in subjects with recovery u sing descriptive statistics.
Quantitative immunoglobulin (IgM, IgG, IgA, IgE) levels will be s ummarized using 
descriptive statistics for each scheduled time-point during tre atment and at the time of B-cell 
recovery, if sufficient immunoglobulin level data are collected at this time. A plot of the 
immunoglobulin levels and B-cell actual values or descriptive st atistics, if sufficient data is 
available, across time will be done considering all the time poi nt at which both 
immunoglobulin and B-cell levels are collected. All summaries wi ll be done for the safety 
population.
3.11 Immunogenecity Assessments
The immunogenic potential of MEDI-551 will be assessed by summar izing the presence of 
anti-MEDI-551 antibodies with number and percentage of subjects in each category: present, 
absent for each scheduled time point. In addition, the number of treatment cycles prior to 
developing anti-MEDI-551 antibodies will be summarized using de scriptive statistics. All 
summaries will be done for the safety population.
3.12 Exploratory Summaries
  
    
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 24 of 25 4 INTERIM SAFETY ANALYSES 
An interim safety analysis will be undertaken when the MTD or O BD has been established, 
and prior to enrollment in the expansion phase. Treatment emerg ent AEs, SAEs, laboratory 
assessments and concomitant medications at subject level will b e provided to evaluate the 
safety of MEDI-551. 
5 REFERENCES 
Anderson KC, Bates MP, Slaughenhoupt BL, Pinkus GS, Schlossman SF, Nadler LM. 
Expression of human B cell-associated antigens on leukemias and  lymphomas: a model of 
human B cell differentiation. Blood. 1984(63):1424-1433. 
Coiffier B. Monoclonal antibodies in the treatment of indolent lymphomas. Best Practice & 
Research Clinical Haematology Mar 2005:18(1):69-80. 
Coiffier B. State-of-the-Art Therapeutics: Diffuse Large B-cell  Lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 
2005 Sep 10:23:6387-6393.  
Cooper LJN, Al-Kadhimi Z, DiGiusto D, Kalos M, Colcher D, Raubi tschek A et al. 
Development and application of CD19-specific T cells for adopti ve immunotherapy of B cell 
malignancies. Blood Cells, Molecules, and Diseases 2004;33:83-8 9. 
D’Arena G, Musto P, Cascavilla N, Dell’Olio M, Di Renzo N, Caro tenuto M. Quantitative 
flow cytometry for the differential diagnosis of leukemic B-cel l chronic lymphoproliferative 
disorders. Am J of Hematology 2000;64:275-281.  
Ginaldi L, De Martinis M, Matutes E, Farahat N, Morilla R, Cato vsky D. Levels of 
expression of CD19 and CD20 in chronic B cell leukaemias. J Cli n Pathol. 1998(51):364-
369.  
Hennessy BT, Hanrahan EO, Daly PA.  Non-Hodgkin lymphoma:  an u pdate.  Lancet Oncol 
2004;5:341-53. 
Matsui W, Wang Q, Barber JP, Brennan S, Smith BD, Borrello I, e t al. Clonogenic multiple 
myeloma progenitors, stem cell properties, and drug resistance.  Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 
01;68:190-197.  
Richardson PG, Barlogie B, Berenson J, Singhal S, Jagannath S, Irwin D, et al. A phase 2 
study of bortezomib in relapsed, refractory myeloma. N Engl J M ed. 2003 Jun 
26;348(26):2609-2617.  
MedImmune  SAP for Protocol MI-CP204 
MEDI-551   03/Dec/2015   V4.0 Final 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY 25 of 25 Robak T. Recent progress in the management of chronic lymphocyt ic leukemia. Cancer 
Treatment Reviews. 2007(33):710-728.  
San Miguel JF, Schlag R, Khuageva NK, Dimopoulos MA, Shpilberg O, Kropff M, et al. 
Bortezomib plus melphalan and prednisone for initial treatment of multiple myeloma. N Engl 
J Med. 2008 Aug 28;359(9):906-917. 
Uckun FM, Jaszcz W, Ambrus JL, Fauci AS, Gajl-Peczalska K, Song  CW et al. Detailed 
studies on expression and function of CD19 surface determinant by using B43 monoclonal 
antibody and the clinical potential of anti-CD19 immunotoxins. Blood 1988;71:13-29. 
 