Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
1 of 13  
 PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Investigation of a New Skin Closure Device, Dermabond PRINEO, for Total Shoulder 
Arthroplasty: A Randomized, Controlled Trial  
Principal Investigator: Josef K. Eichinger, MD  
1.0 Objectives/ Specific Aims  
Our study aims to compare the efficacy of  a deep -layer , knotless closing method using 
the Dermabond PRINEO skin closure device  (2-octyl cyanoacrylate adhesive glue in 
combination with self -adhesive polyester mesh  tape ) to the current practices of wound 
closure after total joint arthroplasty. While surgeons utilize a variety of incision closure 
techniques , most use  a layered closure with  deep  fascial  closure consisting of  interrupted, 
knotted sutures combined with either staples  (Figure 1)  or sutures (Figure 2) for 
superficial closing. In this Phase 4 clinical trial, w e hypothesize that the Dermabond 
PRINEO wound closure system with running knotless sutures  for deep and superficial 
closure) (Figure 3)  will significantly  reduc e closure time in the operating room a nd 
achieve similar or better  incision healing after shoulder arthroplasty.  
Primary aims:  
1.1 Aim 1: To quantify differences the time required for wound closure with the  PRINEO  
closure method (Figure 3) and that of traditional  closure methods  (interrupted deep 
fascial suture with either subcuticular  sutures  and traditional Dermabond (Figure 2)  or 
metal staples  for superficial closure (Figure 1)  
H0: There are no differences in wound closure times between PRINEO  and 
subcuticular sutures or  metal staples in time to close incisions  
HA: There are differences between PRINEO and subcuticular sutures or  metal 
staples in time to close incisions such that staples will be significantly faster than 
PRINEO and PRINEO will be  significantly faster than sutures.  
1.2 Aim 2: To quantify differences between PRINEO and subcuticular sutures or  metal 
staples in wound healing over three  postoperative follow -up points  
H0: There are no differences between PRINEO  and subcuticular sutures or  metal 
staples  in wound healing (dehiscence and drainage) over three  postop follow -up 
points.  
HA: There are differences between PRINEO  and subcuticular sutures or metal  
staples  in wound healing (dehiscence and drainage) over three  postop follow -up 
points such that PRINEO  demonstrates superior healing to both sutures and 
staples.  
 
 
 
        
     
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
2 of 13  
 Exploratory Aims:  
1.3 Aim 3: To quantify differences between PRINEO and subcuticular sutures or  metal 
staples in observer -evaluated and patient -evaluated cosmetic outcomes for the 
surgical scar over four postoperative follow -up points   
 H0: There are no differences between PRINEO and subcuticular sutures or  metal 
staples  in cosmetic outcomes over fo ur postop follow -up points.  
 HA: There are differences between PRINEO and subcuticular sutures or metal 
staples in wound healing (dehiscence and drainage) over four postop follow -up 
points such that PRINEO demonstrates superior cosmetic outcomes to both 
sutures and staples.  
1.4 Aim 4: To quantify differences between PRINEO and subcuticular sutures or  metal 
staples in complication rates (defined  as allergic reaction, inflammation, irritation, 
drainage, or infection ) 
H0: There are no differences between PRINEO a nd subcuticular sutures or metal 
staples  in wound complication rates over four postop follow -up points.  
HA: There are differences between PRINEO and subcuticular sutures or  metal 
staples  in wound c omplication rates . 
1.5 Aim 5: To evaluate the overall cost -effectives of PRINEO for wound closure relative 
to subcuticular  sutures and metal staples  
H0: There are no differences between PRINEO, subcuticular sutures, and metal 
staples in cost -effectiveness over four postop follow -up points.  
HA: There are differences between PRINEO, subcuticular sutures, and metal 
staples in cost -effectiveness such that staples are superior to PRINEO and 
PRINEO is superior to subcuticular sutures.  
 
2.0 Background   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 • Interrupted sutures (0 -0 vicryl)  
• Placed completely under the epidermal skin layer  
• Not removed post -operatively  Figure 1. Dr. Richard Friedman treatment arm –  control closure system.  
Deep layer – interrupted sutures  
Aneskey .com, adapted from Singer AJ, Hollander JE: Lacerations 
and acute wounds . Philadelphia, 2002, FA Davis.  
Adapted from Yasuda et al (2017)  
Superficial layer – metal staples   
• Removed Post -Operatively 10 -14 days  
Pablo Paul / Alamy  Stock Photo  
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
3 of 13  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A wound closure system requires proper  closure of both deep and superficial tissue. 
Traditionally, knotted (interrupted) sutures are used for deep layer closures , in combination with 
eithe r staples or subcuticular sutures for superficial skin clos ure. However, tissue adhesives such 
as Dermabond PRINEO act as an effective microbial barrier  and effectively prevents wound 
dehiscence. W ith Dermabond PRINEO, running sutures can be used for both deep and 
Subcuticular suture. Wikimedia Commons.  
Dermabond, Sutureonline.com  • Interrupted sutures ( 2-0 vicryl)  
• Placed completely under the epidermal skin layer  
• Not removed post -operatively  Deep layer – interrupted sutures  
Aneskey .com, adapted from Singer AJ, Hollander JE: Lacerations 
and acute wounds . Philadelphia, 2002, FA Davis.  
Adapted from Yasuda et al (2017)  
Figure 2. Dr. Josef Eichinger treatment arm –  control closure system.  
         Superficial layer -  subcuticular sutures  
 
• Running,  subcuticular  sutures ( 32-0 Stratafix)  
• Traditional Dermabond applied to incision  
Figure 3. Dermabond PRINEO closure system.  
Deep layer – running sutures  
• Running, unidirectional sutures (2 -0 Stratafix)  
• Placed completely under the epidermal skin layer  
• Not removed post -operatively  
Adapted from Stratafix  Best Practices Video, Youtube  
Adapted from Yasuda et al (2017)  
 Subcuticular suture. Wikimedia Commons  
Dermabond PRINEO, ethicon.com  
 Superficial layer –   
subcuticular sutures + Dermabond PRINEO  
 
• Running, bidirectional sutures (3 -0 Stratafix)  
• Dermabond PRINEO  (60cm) or (22cm)  

Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
4 of 13  
 superficial closing, saving significant time. In this proposal, we define the PRINEO skin closure 
system as one that uses running unidirectional sutures for deep layer sutures and running 
bidirectional suture for superficial skin closure, followed by the Dermabond PRINEO with 
Medipore and 4x4 cotton gauze as additional wound dressing.  
 
Tissue adhesives like PRINEO  are well -researched as alternatives for wound closure [1 -5]. The 
common tissue  adhesive , 2-octyl cyanoacrylate (OCA), has been used in surgical procedures 
since the 1950s and was FDA approved for use in wound closure in 1998 [6] . The OCA adhesive 
has been shown to reduce operating time, produce similar or improved cosmetic outcomes, 
similar or improved dehiscence and infection rates, and concurrent reduction in costs relativ e to 
the standard subcuticular  suture method of closure [7 -10]. The adhesive is also more flexible, 
allowing for easier application to incisions which span the joint [11] .  
 
Although the PRINEO system is not uncommonly used for wound closure after joint 
replacement, there is l imited  research to document the relative outcomes of  a PRINEO closing 
system in contrast to other methods. This prospective study will randomize shoulder arthroplasty 
patients to wound closure with the PRINEO adhesive -mesh system , metal staples,  or by 
subcuticular  system to determine the relative efficacy, safety, and cosmetic outcomes of the 
Dermabond PRINEO system for the shoulder. As the delto- pectoral incision for shoulder 
arthroplasty can be a visible scar and the shoulder joint is highly mobile, the successful 
implementation of the PRINEO system may have substantial effects on patient satisfaction with 
their wound healing and surgical scar.  
 
The efficiency and outcome of wound closure has also significance to ope rating room and clinic 
staff alike. Improving efficiency of wound closure, which may be particularly time consuming 
for long incisions in major s urgery such as joint replacement, has cumulative effects in 
improving operating room flow and schedule adherence, and potentially, allowing for additional 
caseload. Removing sutures post -operatively may also be a time consuming process for clinic 
staff, in  addition to being a source of discomfort for patients [1]. For this reason, interventions to 
optimize wound closure and ease of care are a highly relevant area of research.  
  
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
5 of 13  
  Figure 4: Outline of study design 
3.0  Intervention to be studied 
 
Specifically, in the 510(k) cleared Dermabond PRINEO skin closure system (Ethicon Inc.), 
the 2 -octyl cyanoacrylate adhesive is used in combination with a polyester mesh tape, either 
22cm or 60cm in width. This mesh tape is designed to provide for tighter s ealing of the 
incision and may further protect against discharge in more mobile wounds. Use of the tape 
may strengthen the wound closure and also simplify and improve alignment and apposition 
of wound edges [ [12] and Ethicon internal testing]. Several prospective randomized, 
controlled trials have demonstrated consistently lower wound closing times and equivalent or 
significantly improved cosmetic outcomes and complication rates with this system [13 -16]. 
More flexibility in application due to “body- contouring” has also been noted [17] . 
Observational studies of the PRINEO system report success use of the device as evaluated by 
surgeon and patient satisfaction [11, 17, 18] . Research of the PRINEO system used after total 
joint replacement are at present limited to retrospective studies [11, 18]  and case reports of 
allergic reactions [19, 20] .  
Dr. Richard Friedman currently closes incisions after shoulder arthroplasty with metal 
staples, and Dr. Josef Eichinger currently closes incisions after shoulder arthroplasty using 
subcuticular s utures with Dermabond. Both surgeons use interrupted deep- layer sutures. This 
study will consist of two parallel comparisons to these distinct control arms. The PRINEO 
closing method, which utilizes running deep and superficial sutures with Dermabond 
PRINE O, will be directly compared to each surgeon’s wound closure technique, as half of 
each surgeon’s patients will be randomized to the PRINEO treatment condition while the 
other half continue to undergo wound closure with the current technique utilized by the 

Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
6 of 13  
 surgeon. This will result in two parallel treatment arms and two distinct control arms (Fig. 1). 
Both surgeons have significant experience in the application of Dermabond PRINEO for 
wound closure.  
 
4.0 Study Endpoints  
 
The duration of w ound closure is primary endpoint for this study. Wound closure timing 
outcomes will be collected in the operating room towards  the conclusion of each surgery. 
Closure time is the time between the first stitch for closure and the completion of 
application of dressing to the wound. The incision length will be measured to calculate 
time per centimeter.   
 
Cost per minute of operation time  is another endpoint for the study. It  will be 
conservativel y approximated using existing reports of personnel capacity rates for 
orthopaedic surgeon. Cost -effectiveness analysis will be conducted by c omparing the 
total cost of all wound closure materials for each technique , and a cost per minute applied 
to wound c losure time.  
 
Wound outcomes, both clinical and cosmetic, will be another primary endpoint for this 
study. Patient -centered outcomes for wound and scar evaluation will be collected at 6  
weeks and 3 month postoperative  appointments in clinic. These outcomes will be 
measured using the Modified Hollander Cosmesis Scale [14, 21] , the Patient and 
Observer Scar Assessment Scale (POSAS) [14, 22, 23] , and the Acute Inflammatory 
Response Evaluation (AIRE)  score as described in the 2015 study by Blondeel et al [14].  
 
5.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria/ Study Population 
 
All adult (18 and older) patients undergoing primary total shoulder arthroplasty by Dr. 
Josef Eichinger or Dr. Richard Friedman will be considered for the study. Patients will be 
included if they are willing and have the capacity to provide informed consent, and if 
they expect to continue their post -operative follow up care with their operating surgeons 
at MUSC.  
 
Subjects will be excluded if : 
• They have a unique, identifying tattoo or skin marking within 2 inches of intended 
site of surgical incision  
• They s elf-report  a known hypersensitivity to cyanoacrylate, formaldehyde, 
benzalkonium chloride, or pressure sensitive adhesive;  
• They self -report or have a documented prior ipsilateral shoulder arthroplasty or 
other open ispilateral shoulder surgery utilizi ng the delto- pectoral approach;  
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
7 of 13  
 • Their medical record shows that they are HIV positive or otherwise 
immunocompromised;  
• Their medical record shows  a skin abnormality or dermatological condit ion which 
affects skin healing;  
• They report  a personal or family  history of significant keloid  or significant 
hypertrophic scar formations, or other problems with wound healing. 
 
6.0 Number of Subjects  
 
A total of  88 patients, with 2 2 in each treatment group, will be enrolled. With a treatment 
and control arm for each surgeon, this results in a total of 44 patients in a treatment arm 
and 44 in a control.  
 
7.0 Setting  
 
All research will be conducted at sites within the Medical University o f South Carolina 
(MUSC) in Charleston, SC  
 
8.0 Recruitment  
 
Only patients of the treating physicians (Dr. Eichinger and Dr. Friedman) who are 
indicated for  total shoulder arthroplasty and meet all inclusion and exclusion criteria will 
be recruited . The  treating  physicians  (either Dr. Eichinger or Dr. Friedman) will 
determine eligibility  based on the indication for surgery and the patient’s medical history. 
Recruitment restricted to the surgeons’ patient base only.  
 
 
9.0       Consent Process:  
After patient’s eligibility  is confirmed , patients will be approached by either the treating 
physician or other study staff to obtain informed consent . The consent process will take 
place in their private clinic room.  
 
There will be no dedicated waiting period between informing the subject of the study and 
obtaining consent. Patients who express interest  in participating will then review the 
consent document with a member of the research team , who will explain the study and 
answer any questions that the patient has. They will be told that by signing they 
understand and are agreeing to the nature of the study but that consent is voluntary and 
can be withdrawn at any t ime. To ensure proper understanding, patient s will be asked to 
summarize main components of the study, e.g. types of data collected and post -operative 
clinic visits.  HIPAA authorization will be obtained with informed consent.  
 
Once the patient signs consent he/she will be given a copy of the signed form for his/her 
records.  
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
8 of 13  
  
10.0 Study Design/ Methods  
 
Randomization will take place the morning of surgery based on a randomly organized, 
computer -generated order.  
 
Patients in Dr. RJ Friedman’s clinic will be randomized to  one of two treatment 
conditions for wound clos ure after shoulder arthroplasty: 1) deep layer closure with 0- 0 
vicryl interrupted sutures followed by superficial skin closure with metal staples  with 
aquacel dressing and 2) deep layer closure with a running 2- 0 unidirectional Strat afix 
suture followed by superficial c losure with subcuticular bidirectional 3- 0 Stratafix suture 
followed by the Dermabond PRINEO (60cm or 22cm polyester mesh and 2- octyl 
cyanoacrylate adhesive) with Medipore and folded 4x4 cotton gauze dressing.  
Patients  in Dr. JK Eichinger’s clinic will be randomized to one of two treatment 
conditions for wound closure after shoulder arthroplasty: 1) deep closure with interrupted 
2-0 vicryl sutures followed by a running subcuticular  bidirectional 3 -0 Stratafix  with 
Dermabond and Me dipore dressing with folded 4x4 cotton gauze dressing and 2) deep 
layer closure with a running 2- 0 unidirectional Strat afix suture followed by superficial 
closure with subcuticular bidirectional 3 -0 Stratafix suture followed by the Dermabond 
PRINEO ( 60cm or 22cm polyester mesh and 2- octyl cyanoacrylate adhesive) with 
Medipore and folded 4x4 cotton gauze dressing.  
 
The rationale for investigating the current practice of deep closure with interrupted 
sutures is as follows:  Using running suture introduces a potential risk of wound 
dehiscence if the suture fails at any juncture despite the presence of the barbs. T he 
Dermabond PRINEO represents a powerful closure mechanism that in all probability 
eliminates the risk of wound dehiscence regardless of the skin closure method. Therefore , 
using a rapid wound closure method with deep layer  running sutures is now a possibility 
with the Dermabond PRINEO that was not available before.   
 
Patients will not be made aware of the treatment they are randomized to until their first 
follow up visit or when wound dressing is removed to reveal the device used for wound 
closure.  
 
At the conclusion of  the surgery, the  assigned  wound closure technique will be 
implemented . The following data points  to measure the primary outcome, wound closure 
efficiency,  will be collected  in the operating room :  
1. Total operating time  in minutes and seconds , from the firs t incision to the application 
of wound dressing.  
2. Total time for wound closure  in minutes and seconds , from the first stitch for closure 
to the application of wound dressing.  
3. The incision length in centimeters  
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
9 of 13  
 4. The cost of materials utilized for wound clos ure (suture, Dermabond, PRINEO, 
staples, dressings, etc.)  
 All patients will be seen in clinic 2 weeks post operatively during which time the wound 
closure technique (sutures, or staples) will be removed by a nurse according to the 
manuf acturer and standard technique . The patients who are randomized t o o Dermabond 
PRINEO will be instructed to keep their polymer mesh on for an additional 2 weeks  after 
their 2 weeks visit . Any complications such as drainage, acute inflammation, or signs of 
infection will be recorded at this time  and treated per clinical standards . The following 
data points  to measure wound clinical and cos metic outcomes,  will be collected at 6  
weeks  and 3 months  postoperatively:  
1. mHCS  score 
2. AIRE score  
3. POSAS score  
4. Complications  and adverse events  
 mHCS , AIRE, and POSAS scores are all dependent on aspects of the physical exam, 
such as evaluation of pliability , temperature,  edema, pain,  and contour. To mitigate any 
observer bias , all incisions will be photographed and additionally evaluat ed by a plastic 
surgeon (MLT)  blinded to the treatment condition using the POSAS -Observer 
characteristics which may assessed through standardized photography alone (Vascularity, 
Pigmentation, Thickness, Relief, Surface Area, and Overall Opinion).  
 
A medical record review will also be performed to collect the following data:  
Age; gender; BMI (including height and weight), race, diabetes status (type, insulin 
dependency, years diagnosed);  history of smoking/tobacco use;  frequency of alcohol 
consumption.  
 
11.0 Data Management  
 
Justification of sample size:  
The Cohen’s effect size of 0.93 corresponds to a difference of means of 7.5 minutes with 
a pooled standard deviation of 8 minutes . The PI has determined that  a difference of 10 
minutes will be the minimum significant difference for clinical and economic relevance. 
5 minutes alternatively would be an irrelevant amount of time savings.  Therefore, 
designing the investigation to detect 7.5 minutes would ensure that we would de termine if 
10 minutes difference exists between the different wound closure techniques. 
Economically, at an estimated cost of $30 per minute of operative time [24], this 
corresponds to $300 saved per procedure. Ten fewer minutes of operative time across six 
consecutive shoulder arthroplasties would save an hour total of oper ative time, which 
allows for the possible inclusion of a seventh surgery in the operative room schedule.  
 
In our study, differences in time to closure between the groups will be compared by two-
sample T -tests for independent means. With a Cohen’s effect s ize of 0.93, a standard 
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
10 of 13  
 alpha of 0.05 to determine statistical significance, and a target power of 0.80, an apriori 
power analysis indicates 76 total for the sample size, or 19 per group. A sample size of 88 
total patients, with 22 in each group (two paral lel treatment arms and two distinct control 
arms each representing surgeon’s choice), will ensure sufficient power to detect 
economically relevant, statistically significant differences in time to closure outcomes 
between the three wound closure methods , while leaving room to accommodate patients 
who withdraw from the study or are lost to follow up.   
 
Data storage and management:  
As multiple data points will be collected for each patient over the course of their 
treatment, an enrollment log will be established, assigning patients unique identifiers, and 
a data sheet will be started where the total operating time, the wound closure time, the 
cost of wound closure, and the incision length will be recorded. Furthermore, the mH CS 
score, the AIRE score, the POSAS scores, and complications will be recorded in this data 
sheet for each postoperative visit to the clinic (at 6 weeks  and 3 months ).  
Upon enrollment, patients will be assigned unique identifiers to be used in statistical 
analysis. Enrollment logs , data sheets and photographs will be electronically stored 
within a MUSC password protected secured  computer , in a MUSC supported password-
protected digital folder , accessible only to the members of the research team. Copies of 
consent forms , visit report forms, and adverse event forms will be stored in a locked 
cabinet in a locked room on the Medical University of South Ca rolina campus in 
downtown Charleston, SC. If a patient has a unique, identifying tattoo near his/her 
incision site, the tattoo will be avoided during photographing or blurred out digitally 
before storage. If the tattoo is within 2 inches of the site and therefore difficult to avoid or 
blur without compromising the image quality of the wound, the patient will be excluded 
from the study. 
 
Data analysis plan:  
Data from patients’ medical records to be included in the data sheet to include as 
covariates during data analysis will include age, gender, BMI, race, diabetes status, 
history of smoking/tobacco use, and alcohol consumption. The differences in mHCS, 
AIRE, and POSAS scores between treatment groups will be tested through ANOVA tests  
and subsequent Tukey -HSD post -hoc tests , and difference in complication rates will be  
evaluated by Chi -square tests.  Analysis will be conducted on MUSC registered 
computers through IBM SPSS 25.0.  
 
 
12.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of S ubjects (if applicable)  
 
Adverse events will be collected at follow up visits and PI will review them regularly and 
report them per MUSC IRBs policy.  
 
 
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
11 of 13  
 13.0 Withdrawal of Subjects (if applicable)  
Subjects may opt to withdraw from the study at any time point between enrollment and 
the conclusion of data analysis. Patients can withdraw from the study by communicating 
their desire to do so through email, over the phone or in person with any study team  
member.  
 
14.0 Risks to Subjects  
 
There are no additional risks to subjects in the subcuticular  sutures and metal staples  
(control)  treatment arms. For these control groups, t he only potential risks to subjects 
arise from the standard of care for shoulder arth roplasty wound treatments.  
 
However, there is risk associated with randomization to the treatment group. PRINEO is 
a well -established and widely available method of wound closure. While several case 
reports of allergic contact dermatitis reactions after use of PRINEO for wound closure 
have been published, the overall rate of allergic reaction remains fairly low (between 0% 
to 1.8% in the literature)  [19, 20, 25, 26] . Cases of contact dermatitis around the incision 
have been successfully managed with topical and oral steroids and have not resulted in a 
higher risk for superficial or deep wound infection [20] . Nonetheless, all patients will be 
informed of the risk of allergic reaction, will be excluded based on prior history of 
hypersensitivity to cyanoacrylate, formaldehyde, benzalkonium chloride, or pressure 
sensitive adhesive, and will be monitored closely at their 2 week follow up appointment 
to promptly manage any signs of irritation, blistering, or inflammation. Any adverse 
event experienced by patient s in the  experimental arm will be addressed per the standard 
clinical treatments.  
 
There is also a risk o f loss of confidentiality which will be mitigated by coding the 
research data set and storing study data securely. Finally, there might be unknown risks 
of using PRINEO on the shoulder that will be monitored throughout the study. 
 
 
15.0 Potential Benefits to Su bjects or Others  
 
Patients assigned to the control treatment arms will not receive any additional benefits 
from participating in the study. P atients randomized to the PRINEO treatment arm may 
benefit from less time in the operating room and g reater ease of  care postoperatively, 
such as reduced pain and no need to remove suture or staples at the first postoperative 
appointment. Prior randomized, controlled clinical studies of the PRINEO closure system 
have demonstrated that use of the system is associated wi th shorter operating times, 
equivalent or lower complication rates, and equivalent or improved cosmetic outcomes 
[13-16].  
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
12 of 13  
  
16.0 Drugs or Devices (i f applicable)  
 
The PRINEO system, subcuticular  sutures, and metal staples are all readily available at 
MUSC operating room settings and are commonly used by various surgeons in these 
settings.  
 
References  
1. Al-Mubarak, L. and M. Al -Haddab, Cutaneous Wound Closure Materials: An Overview and 
Update.  Journal of Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery, 2013. 6 (4): p. 178 -188.  
2. Khan, R.J., et al., A comparison of three methods of wound closure following arthroplasty: a 
prospective, randomised, controlled trial.  J Bone Joint S urg Br, 2006. 88 (2): p. 238 -42. 
3. Grimaldi, L., et al., Octyl -2-cyanoacrylate adhesive for skin closure: eight years experience.  In 
Vivo, 2015. 29 (1): p. 145 -8. 
4. Mudd, C.D., J.A. Boudreau, and B.R. Moed, A prospective randomized comparison of two skin 
closure techniques in acetabular fracture surgery.  J Orthop Traumatol, 2014. 15 (3): p. 189 -94. 
5. Soni, A., et al., Comparing cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive and conventional subcuticular skin 
sutures for maxillofacial incisions --a prospective randomized trial considering closure time, 
wound morbidity, and cosmetic outcome.  J Oral Maxillofac Surg, 2013. 71(12): p. 2152.e1- 8. 
6. Eaglstein, W.H., et al., A liquid adhesive bandage for the treatment of minor cuts and abrasions.  
Dermatol Surg, 2002. 28 (3): p. 263- 7. 
7. Singer, A.J., et al., Closure of lacerations and incisions with octylcyanoacrylate: a multicenter 
randomized controlled trial.  Surgery, 2002. 131 (3): p. 270 -6. 
8. Toriumi, D.M., et al., Use of octyl -2-cyanoacrylate for skin closure in facial plastic s urgery.  Plast 
Reconstr Surg, 1998. 102 (6): p. 2209 -19. 
9. Scott, G.R., C.L. Carson, and G.L. Borah, Dermabond skin closures for bilateral reduction 
mammaplasties: a review of 255 consecutive cases.  Plast Reconstr Surg, 2007. 120(6): p. 1460 -5. 
10. Gennari,  R., et al., A prospective, randomized, controlled clinical trial of tissue adhesive (2 -
octylcyanoacrylate) versus standard wound closure in breast surgery.  Surgery, 2004. 136(3): p. 
593-9. 
11. Holte, A.J., et al., Use of 2 -Octyl Cyanoacrylate Adhesive and Polyester Mesh for Wound Closure 
in Primary Knee Arthroplasty.  Orthopedics, 2017. 40(5): p. e784 -e787.  
12. Chigira, M. and M. Akimoto, Use of a skin adhesive (octyl -2-cyanoacrylate) and the optimum 
reinforcing combination for suturing wounds.  Scandinavian  Journal of Plastic and Reconstructive 
Surgery and Hand Surgery, 2005. 39(6): p. 334- 338.  
13. Parvizi, D., et al., Use of 2 -Octyl Cyanoacrylate Together with a Self -Adhering Mesh 
(Dermabond™ Prineo™) for Skin Closure Following Abdominoplasty: An Open, Pros pective, 
Controlled, Randomized, Clinical Study.  Aesthetic Plastic Surgery, 2013. 37(3): p. 529- 537.  
14. Blondeel, P.N., et al., Evaluation of a new skin closure device in surgical incisions associated with 
breast procedures.  Ann Plast Surg, 2014. 73(6): p . 631- 7. 
15. Richter, D., et al., A comparison of a new skin closure device and intradermal sutures in the 
closure of full- thickness surgical incisions.  Plast Reconstr Surg, 2012. 130(4): p. 843- 50. 
16. Singer, A.J., et al., Evaluation of a novel wound closure device: a multicenter randomized 
controlled trial.  Academic Emergency Medicine, 2011. 18(10): p. 1060- 1064.  
Dermabond PRINEO for Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: Protocol  
Version 6, 06/26/2019   
 
13 of 13  
 17. Huemer, G.M., et al., Effective wound closure with a new two -component wound closure device 
(Prineo™) in excisional body -contouring surgery: experience in over 200 procedures.  Aesthetic 
plastic surgery, 2012. 36 (2): p. 382- 386.  
18. Purcell, R.L., et al., Comparison of Wound Complications and Deep Infections With Direct 
Anterior and Posterior Approaches in Obese Hip Arthroplasty Patie nts. J Arthroplasty, 2017.  
19. Lake, N.H., et al., Contact Dermatitis Reaction to 2 -Octyl Cyanoacrylate Following 3 Orthopedic 
Procedures.  Orthopedics, 2017.  
20. Chan, F.J., K. Richardson, and S.J. Kim, Allergic Dermatitis After Total Knee Arthroplasty Usi ng the 
Prineo Wound- Closure Device: A Report of Three Cases.  JBJS Case Connector, 2017. 7 (2): p. e39.  
21. Hollander, J.E., et al., Wound registry: development and validation.  Annals of emergency 
medicine, 1995. 25(5): p. 675- 684.  
22. van de Kar, A.L., et al., Reliable and feasible evaluation of linear scars by the Patient and 
Observer Scar Assessment Scale.  Plastic and reconstructive surgery, 2005. 116(2): p. 514 -522.  
23. Beausang, E., et al., A new quantitative scale for clinical scar  assessment.  Plastic and 
reconstructive surgery, 1998. 102(6): p. 1954- 1961.  
24. Bisson, L., et al., A cost analysis of single -row versus double -row and suture bridge rotator cuff 
repair methods.  Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy, 2015. 23 (2): p. 487 -493.  
25. Dunst, K., et al., Extensive allergic reaction to a new wound closure device (Prineo™).  Allergy, 
2010. 65(6): p. 798- 799.  
26. Chalmers, B.P., et al., Characterizing the Diagnosis and Treatment of Allergic Contact Dermatitis 
to 2-Octyl Cyan oacrylate Used for Skin Closure in Elective Orthopedic Surgery.  J Arthroplasty, 
2017.  
 