Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 1 of 20 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Self-care Decision -making: Feasibility of the BREATHE Asthma Intervention Trial - Phase II (Part 
2 - a Pilot Randomized Trial Phase)  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
March 8th, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 2 of 20 
 Self-care decision-making: Feasibility of the BRE ATHE asthma intervention trial 
Principal Investiga tor: Maureen George 
Phase II: T he BREAT HE intervention 
 
 
 
STUDY PURPOSE AND RATIONALE 
Study Purpose 
The overall goal of this study is to develop and to preliminarily validate a novel intervention delivered by 
primary care providers (PCPs) to their Black adult patients with uncontrolled asthma in federally qualified 
health centers (FQHCs). We recently developed and rigorously tested a brief questionnaire, the Conv entional 
and Alternative Management for Asthma (CAM-A) tool1,2, that screens patients for  beliefs about asthma self- 
care and inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) treatment and prompts PCPs to discuss ICS adherence at office visits 
based on patient CAM-A responses3. In over 300 adults (80% Black; 67% u ninsured or government-insured) 
with high rates of uncontrolled asthma (69%), the validated CAM-A identified that erroneous personal health 
beliefs and negative ICS beliefs were commonly en dorsed (93%  and 68 %, respectively)1. Importantly, 
erroneous personal health beliefs were significantly associ ated with uncontrolled asthma, likely driven by ICS 
non-adherence. In the first phase of this trial we held six focus groups (AAR060 5) with adult asthma patients 
and their loved ones to inform the intervention by adapting an evidence-based brief shared decision-making 
strategy with proven efficacy4-6, delivered by PCPs, for use with our validated CAM-A tool. As such, this 
project has three specific aims: 
 
Specific Aims: 
1. To develop an intervention to i mprove asthma control in Black a dults receiving care in FQHCs 
(completed); 
2. To evaluate the feasibility and  acceptabil ity of  the int ervention procedures; and  
3. To assess the  preliminary evidence of intervention effects on asth ma control (p rimary outcome), 
ICS a dherence, forced expiratory vol ume in one second (FEV1) – an objective lung function 
measure – and asthma quality of life (secondary outcomes) over a 3-month follow-up period. 
 
Please note, we alr eady have IRB a pproval for Phase I (focus group and PCP review  only). Focus groups 
are completed and independent PCP review  is about to begin (AAR0605 ). 
 
In this application  we are seeking approval of  Aims #2 a nd #3 (Phase II-pilot int ervention). 
 
 
Background / Rationale 
 
Uncont rolled asthma due to ICS non-adherence is common among Black a dults. Nearly every asthma- 
related hospitalization and death could be prevented with appropriate self-management that achieves and 
maintains disease control7-10. However, as many as 64%  of adults have uncontrolled asthma11; minorities are 
disproportionately represented within that population12. While inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are a safe and 
effective treatment for uncontrolled asthma, relative to Whites, Blacks have lower rates of ICS adherence (74% 
vs. 29 %)13-17. 
 
Heal th beliefs are associa ted with ICS non-adherence. Erroneous personal beliefs about asthma and its 
pharmacologic treatment are among the most significant factors contributing to ICS non-adherence18-21. ICS 
non-adherence, a primary cause of uncontrolled and/or fatal asthma7, is more common in Blacks relative  to 
Whites13-17 due, in part, to higher rates of endorsement of non-pharmacologic approaches to asthma self-care1 
(e.g., coffee is a safe, effective asthma treatment) and negative ICS beliefs13-15,22-29 (e.g., ICS is addicting)
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 3 of 20 
 These beliefs have been shown to be associ ated with ICS non-adherence22,23,27, more asthma attacks22,30 and 
delays in  seeking care23. 
 
There are unique challenges to a chieving asthma control in FQHCs. PCPs deliver up to 80% of asthma care. 
However, compared to specialists, uncontrolled asthma is more common in their patients31. There are unique 
challenges to achieving asthma control in FQHCs, a particular type of primary care setting designated to receive 
enhanced Medicaid reimbursement because their clientele are underserved, underinsured, and uninsured 
Americans who receive more episodic primary care32. In these settings PCPs have limited time to evaluate 
asthma control, to assess ICS non-adherence, and to identify beliefs associ ated with ICS non-adherence33. This 
speaks to t he pressing need for novel brief interventions that facilitate evidence-based guideline-directed asthma 
self-management. 
 
Shared decision-making interventions to pr omote asthma control in this v ulnerable po pulation are 
lacking. The study is guided by the theoretical model of S hared Decision-Making in evidence-based practice34, 
which posits that the best treatment decisions are informed by patient’s preferences, the best available evidence, 
and practitioner expertise. The PCPs role  is to facilitate discussion of the risks and merits asso ciated with 
specific options in the context of patients’ goals and preferences, and in a manner that activates patients to 
engage in self-management. PCPs offer options to  consider jointly35 with the goal of reconciling differences and 
reaching mutually agreed upon higher quality decisions that align patients’ needs with evidence-based 
guideline-directed care36,37. Prior research has demonstrated that with repeated lengthy engagement (1+ hour), 
highly-trained interventionists in settings other than primary care can increase medication adherence38-40; this 
intervention model improves disease control39,41-43, identifies health beliefs that conflict with evidence-based 
care44 and reduces risky  behaviors4-6. The framework’s  application to asthma has been limited to children39,47 
and to White  privately insured adults40. Sustained implementation  of effective shared decision-making 
interventions has been restrict ed, in part, by burdensome protocols requiring multiple visits, lengthy 
engagement, highly-trained interventionists, and by protocols inappropriate for populati ons like those served in 
FQHCs. 
 
Implementation research is underutilized in asthma intervention research. Evidence-based interventions 
may be difficult to sustain8-10, in part, because factors associ ated with implementation  are overlooked. To close 
this gap between research and practice, researchers should conduct formative assessments with the target 
audience and program providers during development, and evaluate the program features that enhance a 
program’s reach. Further, FQHCs are overlooked in asthma intervention research. 
 
Impact. Black adults with uncontrolled asthma experience profound health disparities. Despite data that point 
to the critical need for enhanced asthma self-management, we continue to see  rates of controlled asthma well 
below Healthy People 2020  targets48, particularly among vulnerable populations49. Our Brief Evaluation of 
Asthma Therapy (BR EATHE) intervention has the potential to offer a new avenue to ast hma control via 
shared decision-making that supports ICS adherence. 
 
STUDY DESIGN AND PROCED URES  
 
This R21 proposal will proceed in two major phases: (1) a development phase (Year 1) where BREATHE  was 
developed using iterative community-based participatory research (CBPR) approaches with feedback from 
PCPs (focus groups completed; independent PCP review about to commence); and (2) a pilot randomized trial 
phase that will allow estimation of parameters crucial for a larger randomized control trial (RCT) including final 
content specification, participant recruitment rates, and potential intervention effect sizes (the focus of this 
application). 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 4 of 20 
  
PHASE II ON LY 
Study Procedures 
Pilot Randomized Clinical T rial Phase 
 
Study Procedures: PCP Recruitment, Cons ent and Randomization. Randomization will be at the level of 
the PCP. This is a two-group randomized trial with outcomes analyzed at the patient level. We will randomize 8 
PCPs (4 / FQHC site) into BREAT HE and attention control conditions stratified for provider type (physici an 
vs. n urse practitioners [NPs]/physician assistant [PAs]) to insure equal numbers of PCPs within each PCP type 
are assigned to each condition. Randomization lists will be computer generated in advance by our data manager 
(allowing the biostatistician to remain blinded during analysis). We do not anticipate difficulty in recruiting 4 
PCPs/FQHC s ince one FQHC has ~15 PCPs (10  physicians and 5 NPs /PAs) and the other has 35 (20 physici ans 
and 10  NPs/PAs). 
 
Provider Cons ent. After reading the informed consent and having questions addressed, PCPs will be asked to 
sign informed consent indicating they are entering the study voluntarily. Declinations to enroll, if any occur, 
will be a metric that we will track. Consent will be obtained by either the PI or the Project Manager as these 
individuals are unblended. 
 
Inclusion Criteria: PCPs (MDs and NPs/PAs) working in family, primary or internal medicine care services 
who have at least 40  adult patients with persistent asthma (defined as having been prescribed ICS) on their 
patient panel will be considered eligible for enrollment. 
 
Exclusion Criteria: PCPs whose primary focus is outside of adult health services (family, primary or internal 
medicine), such as behavioral health, pediatrics and OB-GYN. 
 
Patient Recruitment. We will recruit patients using methods we have used successfully in prior 
studies7,16,18,32,33,55. The FQHC administrator will create a potential list of subjects using a combination of ICD- 
10 (Asthma 493)-specific queries of electronic membership records and searching of scheduled patient visits for 
the FQHC PCPs to r eview. The research team will receive only the names and contact information of t hose the 
FQHC clinicians have contacted and w ho agree to receive a call from the research team. We will also accept 
subjects who respond to posted recruitment flyers. 
 
Patient Participants & Cons ent. We will enroll 80  Black adults with uncontrolled asthma (10 / PCP). The 
study team will read the informed consent and  when subjects have had all questions addressed, they will be 
asked to sign indicating they are entering the study voluntarily.  Consent will be obtained the RA who is 
blinded. 
 
Inclusion Criteria: Patients must be 1) adults (> 18 years of age) who self-report race as Black or African 
American; 2) with PCP-diagnosed persistent asth ma; 3) prescribed ICS; 4) receiving asthma care at 
participating FQHCs; 5) who have uncontrolled asthma (defined below) ; and  6) have erroneous personal health 
and/or negative ICS beliefs (defined below). 
 
Interested participants who meet the first 4 criteria will be screened for uncontrolled asthma by administering 
the Asthma Control Q uestionnaire (ACQ) by phone (phone administration is both reliable and valid) 73-75. The 
ACQ includes 6 self-reported items about as thma symptoms and an objective measure of pulmonary function: 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 5 of 20 
 the forced expiratory vo lume in one second (FEV1). The ACQ has demonstrated validity and reliability wi th and 
without the use of the FEV1.    ACQ scores >1.5 have a positive predictive value of 88% in identifying 
uncontrolled asthma in clinical trials73. PCPs will be notified of all patients with ACQ scores >1.5 and patients 
will be scheduled for a follow-up visit with their PCP  as these scores indicate that asthma is not in good control. 
At that visit, if they remain interested in enrolling in the trial, they will be screened for beliefs associated with 
ICS non-adherence using the CAM-A instrument, administered on customized tablet that allows for immediate 
scoring. patients wi ll complete the 17-item CAM-A18 which will self-score. Any one endorsement of a non- 
prescription asthma management preference or negative ICS belief is considered a positive screen and the 
patient is eligible for enrollment in this two-step screening process (+ ACQ s creen by phone and + CAM-A 
screen at visit). At this visit, trained study staff will also o btain the FEV 1 using a hand held spirometer calibrated 
daily, as well as additional surveys (see Table 1). 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 1) participation in Phase 1 of the BREAT HE trial (focus groups); 2) non-English 
speaking; 3) serious mental health conditions (e.g., psychosis) that preclude completion of stu dy procedures or 
confound  analyses. 
 
Enrollment feasibility. The two FQHCs provide primary care to over 100,000 u nique patients a y ear, who are 
cared for by 50 providers. Each provider sees approximately 2,000 asthma patients. Using a conservative 
estimate of 8% asthma prevalence, 160 unique patients with asthma are served per provider. Based on our 
preliminary stu dies6, 55,58,599 we expect ~69% of subjects screened will have uncontrolled asthma (n=110 
patients / PCP); of these, 97% will screen positive on the CAM-A16 yielding 107 eligible patients / PCP. Thus, 
we have an adequate patient pool from which to draw 10 patient subjects / PCP. 
 
Blinding. Patient codes, tied to PCP assignment (active vs. control), will be entered into a t ablet prior to t he 
completion of the CAM-A by the RA. The meaning of these codes will not be known to the RA. Using these 
codes, the software will trigger the tablet to load  either the BREAT HE intervention steps or the attention 
control t imer (described below) after the CAM-A has been completed. These screens will be hidden from the 
patient and  the RA by two “hold” screens warning the RA/patient subject not to advance further. We will assess 
the adequacy of blinding of the subject and the RA as a process outcome at the end of the study. Both active and 
control PCPs will receive the tablet from the RA  and the results of the lung function testing (FEV 1). The RA 
will set up two digital recorders to capture the audio of t he office visit and then leave the room. The RA will be 
instructed to stay close by to monitor the end of visit but not close  enough to ove rhear the conversation. The 
statistician (Jia) will be blinded. The PI , Project Manager and database manager will not be blinded. 
 
Survey Ad ministration. 
The PI and/or Pr oject manager (unblinded) will administer the follo wing surveys after the clinician has signed 
informed consent: Demographic and professional history; PCMI. 
The RA (blinded) will be responsible for all patient data collection. 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 6 of 20 
 Surveys, Diaries, Testing, 
Interviews  and Fidelity 
Checks  Type of Data; how 
collected  Who 
will 
collect  Data source  Pre
-
visi
t 1 
(V1
) Visit 1  
Baseline  Within 
24 
hours 
of V1 Visit 2  
~ 4 
weeks 
after V1  Visit 3  
 ~ 4 
weeks 
after 
V2 Visit 4  
 ~ 4 
weeks 
after V1  Post-
trial 
Asthma Control 
Questionnaire – 6 items 
(ACQ 6) without item 7 
(FEV1)  Survey; Collected by 
phone  RA or 
PM Patient  X       
Demographics  Survey: Collected by 
phone  RA or 
PM Patient  X       
Conventional and Alternative 
Management for Asthma 
(CAM -A) Survey;  Collected on 
tablet  RA Patient  X     X  
Asthma history  Survey; Paper and 
pencil  RA Patient   X      
Forced Expiratory Volume in 
One Second (FEV 1) alone – 
item & on the ACQ  Non-invasive measure 
of airflow obstruction; 
hand -held spirometer  RA Patient ; hand -held 
spirometer   X      
Newest Vita Sign (NVS)  Survey; Paper and 
pencil survey  RA Patient   X      
Shared Decision Making 
Questionnaire - 9 items 
(SDMQ9)  Survey; Paper and 
pencil  RA Patient   X      
Medication Adherence 
Record Scale -Asthma 
(MARS -A)  Survey; Paper and 
pencil survey  RA Patient   X  X X X  
Patient reported Outcome 
Measurement Information 
System - 29 items (PROMIS -
29) Survey; Paper and 
pencil survey  RA Patient   X  X X X  
Asthma Quality of Life 
Questionnaire (AQLQ)  Survey; Paper and 
pencil survey  RA Patient   X  X X X  
Patient I mmediate post -visit 
debriefing and blinding 
assessment  Survey; Paper and 
pencil  RA Patient   X      
Asthma Control 
Questionnaire – 7 items 
(ACQ 7) with FEV1  Survey and non -
invasive measure of 
airflow obstruction; 
Paper and pencil and 
hand -held spirometer  RA Patient ; hand -held 
spirometer     X X X  
Asthma  daily diary  Diary; Paper and 
pencil  Patient  Patient   DISPENS
ED  X X X  
Doser electronic dose counter  Electronic dose 
counter  RA 
will 
downlo
ad by 
hand  Patient ; Doser  
electronic counter   DISPENS
ED  X X X  
Client Satisfaction 
Questionnaire 8 items (CSQ8)  Survey; Paper and 
pencil  RA Patient       X  
Post-trial interviews  Interviews, Audio 
recorded  PI Patients, loved 
ones and 
providers        X 
Provider Data Collection 
Form  Survey; Paper and 
pencil  PM or 
PI Providers  X       
Provider Co -Management 
Index (PCMI)  Survey; Paper and 
pencil  PM or 
PI Providers  X       
Readiness Ruler  Scale; Collected on 
tablet  Provid
er Patient   X      
Provider Immediate post-visit 
debriefing  Survey; Paper and 
pencil  RA Providers   X      
Brief Negotiated Intervention 
(BNI) Adherence Scale 
(Active condition)  Fidelity Checklist  Coder 
(TBD)  Audio files of 
patient -provider 
visits    X     
Fidelity Check Attention 
control condition  Fidelity Check  Coder 
(TBD)  Audio files of 
patient -provider 
visits    X     
 
 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 7 of 20 
 Intervention Con dition. PCPs randomized to BREAT HE will receive the tablet which, when the screen is 
advanced by the PCP, will prompt the PCP through a 7-minute, 4-step brief intervention tailor ed to respond to 
the patient’s specific beliefs endorsed on the CAM-A using content identified in our CB PR development phase 
(focus groups). See the Brief Negotiated Intervention (BNI) for the full intervention details. 
 
Step 1: Raise the subject (1½  minute). PCP establishes rapport using persuasive communication techniques and 
assesses the patient’s disease knowledge, perception of asthma control, q uality of life  (QoL), self-care 
preferences, and motivation for enhanced asthma control, exploring specific beliefs that may affect adherence. 
 
Step 2: Provide feedback (1½ minutes). PCP provides feedback to the patient based on assessments made in the 
prior step. The PCP candidly discusses the patient’s uncontroll ed asthma and specific beliefs in the context of 
ICS non-adherence, drawing a connection between current symptoms and ICS non-adherence. 
 
Step 3. Enhance motivation (2 minutes).   The PCP attempts to enhance the patient’s motivation to increase ICS 
adherence using motivational interviewing techniques such as collaboration, empathy, concern, and acceptance 
of ambivalence about self-management. In this step, the PCP may elicit the patient’s beliefs regarding the 
benefits, a nd negative sequelae, of their current self-management approach (pro/con). 
 
Step 4: Shared decision-making (2 minutes). The PCP and patient jointly consider treatment options. The PCP 
will actively atte mpt to build consensus around  ICS adherence, reconciling conflicts to better align beliefs with 
evidence-based guideline-directed ICS treatment. For example, if the patient uses ICS intermittently (rather than 
the required twice-daily dosing) because of an erroneous belief that tolerance to ICS develops with daily dosing, 
then the PCP will attempt to cou nter that belief using responses gleaned from the CBPR development phase 
(focus groups) and information from national guidelines. This will likely include encouraging the patient to use 
ICS once a day (50% adherence) as an initial short-term plan to be follo wed by a return visit and  re-evaluation 
of asthma control. If the patient declines to engage in shared decision-making or declines attempts at 
negotiating ICS use, then the PCP and the patient agree to disagree. This is a one-time intervention. 
 
Usual ca re with an  attention control con dition. Patient codes associ ated with PCPs randomized to the 
attention control condition will trigger the tablet to load  a 7-minute timer for the PCP to use to track the length 
of the attention control condition (discussion of healthy lifestyles). Co ntrol PCPs will have access to all the data 
that the active intervention PCPs have: the ACQ score, CAM-A results, and lung function results. To control for 
contact, they will be instructed to engage in a 7-minute diet and exercise discussion as this will not co nfound 
results and it was a common topic in our prior study; ICS adherence was not discussed18. 
 
Intervention T raining for BREAT HE PCPs.  We will train PCPs randomized to the BREAT HE condition 
using procedures we have used before26-28,60-62 with content gleaned from our CBPR development phase (focus 
groups and PCP review) as described previously. The core training for PCPs delivering the BRE ATHE 
intervention will be conducted by our consultant, Dr. Pantalon, and will consist of o ne, 2-hour instr uctional 
session: 30 minutes of didactic instruction addressing the delivery of  the 4 steps of t he brief intervention; 10 
minutes of role-playing of commonly encountered scenarios and; a 50  minute skills workshop in which PCPs 
role play creating a trusting environment, relinquishing sole decision-making, motivating and empowering 
patients to engage in self-management decisions. A question and answer period will conclude the training. PCPs 
will receive a laminated action card that fits in a lab coat pocket summarizing the intervention steps as a 
resource although the steps of the intervention will be available to the PCP on a tablet during the visit. 
 
Immediately after training, PCPs will be tested using a standardized patient scenario to demonstrate that he/she 
can deliver the intervention in 7 minutes or less. All testing will be audiotaped and a trained rater will determine 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 8 of 20 
 whether the critical elements of t he brief intervention were completed in 7 minutes using the validated Brief 
Negotiation Interventions Ad herence Scale (BAS)76 adapted to as thma (see draft BNI protocol and BAS). If the 
PCP fails testing, she/he will receive additional instruction and retested. Prior studies have shown that such 
remediation  re-training results in 100%  proficiency76. PCPs will be encouraged to informally try o ut some of 
these techniques before the study goes live. The Consultant will follow-up with each PCP to answer questions 
from this “dry run” before the first subject is enrolled. 
 
Intervention Fidelity. To evaluate adherence to the treatment protocol, all BREAT HE visits will be 
audiotaped. The Project Manager (who is not blinded) will review all audio files within 24 hours of the visits at 
which time she will complete the Brief Negotiated Intervention Ad herence Scale (BAS) to evaluate drift, when 
in the visit (beginning, middle, end) the intervention is delivered, as well as the length of the BREAT HE 
sessions. The Consultant Pantalon will conduct additional training to enhance intervention fidelity and  brevity if 
problems are identified. PCPs will not be excluded from the study if they fail to deliver all elements or require 
more than 7 minutes to d eliver BREAT HE; this feasibility metric will be tracked. 
 
Fidelity to the attention control con dition. PCPs randomized to the control int ervention will not receive any 
specific training but audio files will be reviewed by the Project Manager (who is not blinded) within 24 hours of 
the visit to ascertain the content and length of the healthy lifestyles discuss ion (the attention control condition), 
as well as to listen for any evidence of contamination (use of the 4-step shared decision making intervention 
using motivation interviewing techniques). Feedback to improve fidelity to the attention control co ndition, if 
needed, will be made promptly after reviewing the audio fil es. 
 
Anti cipated Problems and Strategies. If time does not allow  for rapid review of all audio fil es, 20% will be 
randomly selected to be rated by the Project Manager: all 1st visits will be rated, and at least one additional file 
per PCP will be reviewed prior to enrollment of t heir 5th patient subject. We will minimize contamination 
within FQHCs by (1) training only BREAT HE PCPs to deliver the active intervention and (2) encouraging 
PCP confidentiality regarding training and intervention content. We will also review audio fil es of t he attention 
control condition to ass ess for  contamination. 
 
Final as sessment and  refinement of the intervention. We will conduct nested cohort interviews with five 
patient subjects and five family/support person of enrolled subjects post-trial to ascertain their reactions to the 
intervention. An additional five patients will be interviewed who were lost to follo w-up to better understand 
what it was that prevented their continued participation. A purposive sample of ~ 6 PCPs (2-4 who participated 
in the BREAT HE intervention and two who declined participation, should we have any) will also  be 
interviewed to better understand their perspectives about the intervention or their clinical settings that facilitated 
or prevented study participation. The PI will cond uct the interviews and data will be analyzed as described in 
the methods section. 
 
STATI STICAL PROCEDURES  
Patient data collection. While we recognize the need for longer follow-up in  a full-scale RCT, trained RAs, 
blind to treatment status, will coll ect data four times: baseline and 1-month, 2-month, and 3-month follow-up. 
To address the risk of  assessment reactivity, both groups will receive an equal number of assessments. 
Patient subject measures (see Table 1).  The primary outcome measure is patient-reported asthma control 
over 3 months as measured with the ACQ73-75. We will colle ct the ACQ and secondary outcomes including 
objective measures of airflow obstruction (FEV 1), asthma QoL using the Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire 
- AQLQ77,78 and ICS adherence using the Medication Ad herence Record Scale-Asthma (MARS-A) 79-89. The 
MARS-A correlates with objective ICS adherence as measured by electronic monitoring and ICS fill/refill 
claims data79-89. Other surveys that will be used to characterize the subjects include the asthma history, Newest 
Vital Sign, the PROMIS-29 and the Shared Decision Making Questionnaire- 9 items. All patient subjects will 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 9 of 20 
 ε  1i  2ij,  ijt also be asked to complete the Patient Debriefing and Blinding Assessment survey immediately after V1. The 
blinded RA will dispense a 30-day asthma diary (4th grade reading level) to all subjects after each data 
collection visit. The Doser™, an electronic monitor capable of recording 30-days ICS use, will be attached to 
compatible ICS. Due to unique delivery sys tems for ICS, there is no single electronic device to monitor all ICS 
types. No change in ICS is required to participate in the Doser tracking log. Finally, we will coll ect pati ent 
satisfaction using the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire-8 (CSQ-8)90 at 3-months.. 
 
 
 
CP measures.  PCPs will be asked to complete a demographic and professional history form and one survey at 
the time they sign informed consent: the Provider Co-Management Index (PCMI). The PCMI  is a measure of 
PCP shared management. All PCPs will also be asked to complete the Provider Debriefing survey immediately 
after V1. 
Data Management & Statisti cal Analysis. Double data entry will be made into a s ecure database with regular 
integrity checks. Data analysis in the context of an R21 must balance two primary agendas: (1) effect size 
estimation and (2) statistical significance testing. Our primary goal is to examine intervention feasibility, which 
will guide modifications of design elements for  a future RCT, if warranted. Descriptive data analysis will 
proceed with formal hypothesis testing and model building in order to understand the data distribution and to 
check for outliers. Linear mixed models will be used to adj ust for  the heterogeneity of t he sites and sub jects by 
including PCP- and patient-specific random effects. The linear mixed model is used to adjust for clustering of 
data due to the repeated measurement of t he same patient and  due to asso ciation within a PCP with both PCP- 
level and patient-level random effects. We will examine the patterns of missing data; linear mixed models 
provide unbias ed estimates for data with missing values. Intention-to-treat analyses will be conducted. 
 
Hypothes es 1: Int ervention Feasibility. We will document BREAT HE’s penetration using PCP recruitment 
data. The process evaluation  will include descriptive statistics on PCPs intervention proficiency and fidelity 
(e.g., session length) and will assess proficiency and fidelity differences by sites. If we find variability, we will 
explore potential causes (e.g., FQHC size). 
 
Hypothes es 2: Int ervention Effects. Intervention effects will be assessed using mixed effects regression 
models90. All hypothesis tests will be two-sided at level α=0.05. The key outcome will be asthma control; ICS 
adherence, FEV1 and QoL will be examined to inform the future RCT. Separate models will be fitted for different outcome measures. If yijt  is the outcome for patient j of provider i at time t, without loss generality then the follo wing linear mixed model will be used: yijt  = βo  + β1Group + β3Xij  + v1i + v2ij  + εijt , where Xi and Xij  are vectors of possible PCP- and patient-level confounders, respectively. The random term 
2  2 
v1i iid~N(0, σ1 ) is a P CP-specific random effect and v2ij  idd~N(0, σ2) is a patient-specific random effect; 
εijt  iid~N(0, σ2) is the model random error. We  assume that v  , v and ε are mutually independent. To test 
for a time and group interaction, we will add the time*group term to the model. 
 
Power & Sample Size. With a sample size of 10 patients/PCP and 4 PCPs in both intervention groups (total 
n=10*4*2=80), and a conservative estimate of 10% attrition at 12 weeks, we calculated the reliability of 
estimated mean score differences between the two groups. Power calculations were based on: (1) 4 repeated 
observations / patient over the 3-month follow-up with a correlation  of ρ=0.8 between repeated measures; (2) 
intra-cluster correlation among PCPs=0.2 to account for clustering of patients from the same PCP; and  (3) linear 
mixed models to estimate mean score differences. For the ACQ, the half-width of 95% CI for the estimated 
mean score difference between the 2 groups is 0.32 (assuming SD=0.76). This is equivalent to having 91% 
power to detect a medium effect size (Cohen's d=0.5). We are powered to detect a clinically meaningful 
difference on ACQ74 and A QLQ78. 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 10 of 20 
 Qualitative ana lysis. Qualitative  descriptive data analysis will focus on refining the intervention (see draft of 
sample questions for PCPs and patient/loved ones). De-identified transcripts will be entered into NVivo 1 1.0 for 
coding and analysis. Three coders working independently of each other will systematically read the transcripts 
to identify emerging themes; the Patient Advocate consultant will serve as one coder. Themes will be compared 
between coders and disa greements will be reconciled by consensus. As we have done in the past, we will 
employ an  iterative process in which themes in earlier interviews will be presented to su bsequent interviewees 
to ascertain if they resonate with them; unendorsed themes will be discarded. Typically, this iterative process 
continues until no new essential information is obtained, an endpoint known as data saturation. Data saturation 
usually occurs after in-depth interviews with 20-30 individuals per category (e.g., patient, loved one, PCP) 55. 
However, the focus of th ese more limited interviews are simply to assess acceptability and identify categorical 
level findings. We will use  interview data to triangulate with the 8-item Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ- 
8) that is completed by all 80 subjects.  All retained responses that are similar will be grouped together by code 
words to form the final thematic categories. Transcripts, field notes and codes will serve as points of 
triangulation. 
 
DSMP  
 
The proposed study includes (1) a development phase where we will develop the intervention using focus groups w ith 
patients and patients’ family/suppo rt persons (N = 60) with primary care provider (PCP) review, and  (2) a pilot validation 
phase where we will conduct a pilot randomized con trolled trial with 8 PCPs from Philadelphia primary care clinics 
rando mized to one of two study arms: (1) the BREAT HE intervention, or (2) usual care. We will follow 10 Black adult 
patients with uncontrolled asthma per  PCP (N = 80) for three months post-intervention. Post-study refinement will include 
additional interviews with patients, family/supp ort persons and PCPs who did and did not participate. 
This Human Su bjects Research meets the NIH definition of  “Clinical Research.” Institutional review board (IRB) 
permission for the study will be obtained from the Columbia Uni versity (IRB of record) and will be reviewed  annu ally. 
Although the NIH requires data and safety monitoring for any clinical trials, having an Sa fety Monitoring Committee 
(SMC) – a small group of 3 experts who are indep endent of the protocol who review data from a particular study 
including indep endent investigators and biostatisticians - may be app ropriate if the study includes multiple sites and a 
vulnerable population. Because the application includes a feasibility trial in urban minority adults from different clinical 
sites, and because inclusion criteria require that participants have unc ontrolled asthma, we will establish an SMC. 
a. Mo nitoring entity or who will monitor the study. While the behavioral intervention itself is a low risk intervention, 
participants must have uncontrolled asthma to be eligible for enrollment. Because of this, we will appoint an SMC to 
establish a threshold for asthma exace rbations (defined below) with the PI’s input. The SMC will be appropriate experts 
who are indepen dent of the study and a vailable in real time to review and recommend ap propriate action regarding 
adverse events and other safety issues. 
 
The SMC, appointed by the PI and app roved by  the Program Officer include: 
Physician knowledgeable about the disease and  treatment: Emily Dimango, MD is  a pulmonologist and Associate 
Professor of Medicine, Columbia Uni versity Medical Center. She  is the Director of the John Eds all-John Wood Asthma 
Center and the Columbia University Asthma Coa lition. She has  been  a PI or Co I for multi-center clinical research trials 
since 2002,  helping design and /or execute nearly two dozen clinical research studies in lung disease, including a $9 
million study of the role of environmental intervention in asthma. Through her work in asthma, she has interacted w ith the 
local inner city community, and h as been successful in recruitment and retention of inner city minority subjects into 
clinical trials. Dr. Dimango will have primary responsibility for defining a plan for monitoring safety, minimizing risk to 
subjects, and adherence to protocol requirements; defining expe cted adverse events (AEs) and ap proving the definition of 
AEs, including serious adverse events (SAE). 
Statistician: Bruce Levin, Ph.D., Pro fessor and Pa st Chair, Department of Biostatistics at Columbia University Mailman 
School  of Public Health will serve as the statistician on  the SMC. Dr. Levin has a great deal of experience with small 
SMCs, including serving as a SMC c hair for an anesthesiology study. He has served as a  senior design and a nalysis 
statistician on many projects in diverse areas of clinical trials, HIV/AIDS, reproductive epidemiology, and statistics in the 
law. He is the senior living co-author of the classic textbook, Statistical Methods  for Ra tes and Prop ortions, 3rd Edition, 
which devotes entire chapters to the rando mized clinical trial and methods  for analyzing trial data. He  specializes in 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 11 of 20 
 innovative des igns for early phase clinical trials. Of additional importance to the current proposal, he is currently a co- 
investigator of a clinical trial which aims to test the effectiveness  of an asthma intervention with proven efficacy in urban 
high school students with a new sample of rural adolescents and was the statistician for the R01 that tested the efficacy of 
Asthma Self-Management  for Ado lescents (ASMA) w ith urban adolescents in NYC (R01 HL6726 8). He (Levin) will have 
primary responsibility for statistical monitoring of AEs reported to the SMC and, through the SMC c hair, notifying the 
team if such events meet the stop rules. Prior to the start of the study, and  in coordination with the other SMC members 
and the study team, he w ill review and  approve a proposed plan for monitoring completeness and quality of the 
measurements and the statistical analysis of the data. Mr. Jesse Chittams, the study’s database manager, will assume 
responsibility for statistical tabulations and reports to the SMC.  
Clinician knowledgeable about the disease and  treatment: David Evans, PhD  has over 30 years of research exp erience 
in intervention to enhance asthma con trol. He was one of the developers of Open Airways for Schools (OAS), a school- 
based program for children with asthma that has been shown to reduce the frequency of asthma symptoms in participating 
children; OAS is now delivered by the A merican Lung  Association in more than 24,000 pu blic elementary schools 
nationwide. He also participated in the development of the Physician Asthma Care Educ ation (PACE) program, a four- 
hour program to improve ped iatricians’ medical management and p atient communication and  teaching skills that show ed 
pediatricians could be trained to deliver the program. The PACE pro gram is now  being disseminated through the N HLBI 
website. Dr.  Evans was a Co-Investigator on a recent R01 testing the efficacy of PACE Plus, a version of PACE that 
included  cultural competence training. Currently, he is part of a team (as is the PI) working on a Di rect-to-Phase II SBIR 
grant from NHLBI to develop and  to pilot test Camp Air, a dynamic, e-learning intervention for adolescents with 
uncon trolled asthma. He s erves as Director of Community Outreach and E ducation for two environmental health research 
centers at Columbia Uni versity, the Center for Environmental Health in Northern Manhattan and the Center for Children’s 
Environmental Health. He has served on several NIH pane ls to improve the quality of asthma care, including the D ata and 
Safety Mon itoring Board of the N HLBI Children’s Asthma Management Program clinical trial (1992-2008 ), and the 
NHLBI Expert  Panel (Report 3) on the G uidelines for the Dia gnosis and Management of Asthma (2006-2007 ). Dr. Evans 
will have primary responsibility for reviewing  the study protocol including benefit/risk ratio of procedures and participant 
burden, selection, recruitment, and  retention of  participants and informed cons ent procedures. He will also review any 
amendments to the study protocol and consent forms, including whether any new data  from other sources affect the 
equipoise of the study being monitored. 
Although not members of the SMC,  the research team has a responsibility to the SMC. These include the Principal 
Inve stigator (PI) who is respon sible for ensuring participants’ safety on a d aily basis for the protocol that will be 
overseen by  the same SM C. The SMC will act in an advisory capacity to the PI  and to NINR to monitor participant safety, 
evaluate the progress of the study, and review procedures for maintaining the confidentiality of data and the quality of 
data collection, management and analyses. The PI will be responsible for timely communication of safety data to the 
appo inted SMC, appropriate response to any safety concern identified by  the SMC, and co mpliance with any actions that 
the SMC i dentifies as being need ed. The PI  will also be responsible for all reporting requirements. La stly, the PI will train 
all project staff to recognize and  report any adverse event immediately to her. The project manager and/or the data 
manager will review a ll data collected by the research assistant (RA) and co mmunicate data and/or safety concerns in real 
time to the PI. The RA will notify the project manager and/or the PI  in real-time when d ata collection indicates a possible 
data/safety conc ern. Details are provided in (d) below. 
b. Proced ures for 1) monitoring study safety to include monitoring schedule, auditing selected ca ses for compliance 
with IRB requirements, conformance with informed conse nt requirements, verification of source documents, and 
investigator compliance; 2) minimizing research-associated risk, and 3) protecting the confidentiality of participant 
data.  For the pilot test, we will use the following strategies to monitor and deal with possible adverse impacts. Research 
participants will be told to contact research staff (who will return calls within 72 hours) at any point during the entire 
project if they have any  questions or concerns about their participation. The PI and researchers will meet daily to review 
adverse or unexpected events data and wee kly to review data reports generated by the data management team regarding all 
study-related activities. This will include case detection, con sent, intervention activities, and surveys/interviews. The 
SMC will act in an advisory capac ity to the PI and NINR to monitor participant safety, evaluate the progress of the study, 
and to review procedures for maintaining the confidentiality of data and the quality of data collection, management and 
analyses. 
 
Recruitment. We will recruit patients using methods we have used successfully in prior studies. The federally-qualified 
health center (FQHC ) administrator will create a potential list of subjects using a combination of ICD-10 (Asthma 493 )- 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 12 of 20 
 specific queries of the electronic membership records and searching of sched uled patient visits for the FQHC PCPs to 
review. The research team will receive only the names and co ntact information of those the PCP permits the team to 
contact. We will also accept subjects who  respond  to posted recruitment flyers. 
Informed Consen t. The study team will read the informed cons ent and H IPAA to the subject and will discuss it section by 
section. When subjects have had all questions and concerns addressed, they will be asked to sign the consent indicating 
they are entering into the study voluntarily. Participants will be given a copy  of the HIPAA and the signed informed 
consent document; a copy  of the informed co nsent and HIPAA will be maintained with the study team. 
Auditing Selected Cases. Fidelity to consenting, data collection and the intervention will be evaluated in the following 
manne r. Twenty percent of all visits will be rando mly selected for auditing of the informed consent and data collection 
protocols. In add ition, intervention fidelity will be assessed by  reviewing audiotapes of 20% of rando mly selected visits 
(with the exception of the first visit; all first visits be reviewed) to be rated by  three indepen dent blinded  raters. At least 
one ad ditional file per PCP will be reviewed prior to enrollment of their 5th patient subject, to evaluate drift and the length 
of BREATHE sessions, and length, content and contamination, if any, of control sessions. Consultant Pantalon will 
condu ct additional training to enhance intervention fidelity and b revity if problems are identified. 
Minimizing research –associated risk. Wh ile the behavioral intervention itself is a low risk intervention, participants must 
have unco ntrolled asthma to be eligible for enrollment. Because of this, we will ask the SMC to  use the established 
threshold for asthma exacerbations (defined below) with the team’s input (see details below). 
The risk associated with the focus group p rocedures and intervention may include psychological distress due to sharing of 
personal information and  the loss of confidentiality (see below). To minimize the risk of loss of confidentiality, 
participants will be told that whatever they say in these group s ettings or report in the study surveys is confidential. 
 
We will not be collecting any sensitive patient data, such as  experiences with asthma dea th or asthma-related depression. 
However, we will be asking about  previous asthma attacks that may have been life-threatening which may be a traumatic 
memory. Subjects will be allowed to skip any  questions that they find troubling and should there be any indication of 
imminent medical or psychological risk associated with any  aspect of the study, participants will be referred to previously 
identified resources in the study catchment areas. In concert with our partners, we  will establish specific medical and 
coun seling protocols prior to study onset. To that end we have established the following procedure: all study visits will 
take place at the FQHC s which have urgent medical and ps ychological services available on-site for evaluation and have 
set procedures for the timely and safe transfers of acute medical and psychological conditions to appropriate services. 
 
To the best of our knowledge, the risks of obtaining spirometry (a measure of obstructive airflow) is minimal as this 
procedure is typically performed in community-based health screenings. 
Study  participants will be informed that they have a right to withdraw from the study at any stage. 
Patient confidentiality. 
Paper  and electronic case report forms and transcripts. Patients’ confidentiality will be protected in multiple ways. First, 
all study subjects will be assigned a  code that cannot be tied to personal identifiers and this code  will appear on all study- 
related materials. The personal identifiers tied to these codes will be known only to study personnel and w ill be stored in a 
password-protected program. All other deidentified materials will remain in a locked office in a locked cabinet. All 
electronic documents will be passwor d-protected. 
As part of the consent process, the procedures for obtaining outcome data as well as the safeguards for maintaining 
confidentiality and minimizing invasion of privacy will be fully described to potential participants. Participants will not 
have to answer  any question they do not want to answer. Participants will be given the contact information for the 
research staff to answer  any questions they might have about  the study and co nsent process. To further minimize risk, the 
PI will train the RA  on potential breach of confidentiality specific to this study and study environment and w ill assure that 
all study personnel complete and maintain Human Su bjects Protection certificates. The PI will periodically monitor 
adhe rence of these principles during a random  sample of visits. 
Audio fil es. Digital audio files (focus groups, audio recorded office visits and interviews) will be downloaded as 
a media file and stored on the PIs password-protected personal computer. Digital audio fil es will be assigned a 
code tied to personal identifiers. The personal identifiers tied to these codes will be known only to study 
personnel and  will be stored in a separate password-protected program. We will transcribe all focus groups and 
individual interviews and some/all of fice visits. The  transcriptionist is an approved Columbia vendor and has 
provided services in suppo rt of P hase I of this trial. The same standards will apply this this second phase: Audio 
files of t he interviews and office  visits will be deposited to the Columbia-approved transcription vendor’s 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 13 of 20 
 dropbox. The vendor has a confidentiality agreement that all e mployees sign stating that they may not share 
anything about any of the work that they transcribe with anyone. The vendor will then deposit the transcript in a 
word document in the drop box for the PIs retrieval. When it has been ascertained that the transcript is a 
verbatim representation  of the interview/office visit the PI will notify the vendor to destroy all files. A copy of 
the transcript will be maintained by the PI as described in the protocol. 
 
Equipment. After downloading digital audio fil es, the digital recorder’s memory will be cleared. The memory of 
the spirometer will be cleared of lung function results after a copy  has been printed and entered into the electronic 
data base. Su bjects who have the Dos er™ electronic ICS monitor will have the dose counter cleared monthly after a 
record of its use has been transcribed to spread sheets that will be stored in a password-protected program. 
Data management, data entry and integrity. An electronic study database (REDCap) will be created and maintained on  the 
password-protected research server at Columbia Uni versity. Data entry personnel will receive standardized training on 
data entry. The Project Manager and RA  will be trained and monitored by  the PI with periodic checks for drift in 
standardized practices. If drift is observed they will be re-trained. The study’s statistician (Jia) will receive deidentified 
data transferred via secured communication. 
Data entry into desktop computers will be equipped with password lockout and screen savers which activate if the 
computer is on but not in use for 15 minutes. All study personnel will have their own unique usernames and passwords. 
All servers are located in a secure datacenter, with necessary redun dancies. The server is behind a firewall and is 
registered as a “Critical Host” by the Uni versity. This means Colu mbia follows all University polices regarding critical 
hosts: firewalls, access controls, timely patch management and anti viral scans and software updates, and  an enterprise 
system monitoring solution (allowing us to detect and address intrusion attempts). All servers have HIPAA compliant 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 14 of 20 
 security. School  of Nursing computers operate und er a managed des ktop so lution which is locked down,  including hard 
drive and  thumb drive encryption. The base image includes, but is not limited to, Windows 7 w ith current patches and 
Antivirus software (which is upd ated every 4 hou rs). 
Publication or presentation of study findings. Aggregate group d ata will be used, free of identifiable features, in any 
publication or presentations that arise from this research. 
c. Pro cedur es for identifying, re viewing, and repor ting adverse events and u nanticipated problems to the IRB  and 
NINR, the type and number of events that would halt accru al and would generate a review of eligibility, 
monitoring, assessments, intervention, a nd how the resumption of accrual would oc cur. 
 
All study personn el will report any study-related adverse reactions and/or unanticipated problems involving risks to the 
PIs as soon as they occur. The PI  and/or study researchers will review all data collection forms on an ongoing basis for 
data completeness and accuracy as well as protocol compliance.  
During the trial, subjects will be instructed to notify the study team within 48 hours of any Emergency  Department (ED) 
visit or hospitalization, regardless of its cause, and to notify the study team within 48 hou rs of initiating oral 
corticosteroids (OCS), each event representing the standard definition of  asthma exac erbation. Because not all 
exacerbations cause individuals to seek acute care, we will track OCS use as those who manage an exac erbation ou tside of 
the ED  or hospital will manage their exacerbation with OCS. In this manner  we will not miss any exacerbations. To that 
end, we will also ask subjects to report these at monthly data collection points in an attempt to capture any exacerbations 
that might otherwise go unreported. S ubjects’ answers will then be compared to the medical record and/or claims data, as 
available. 
Because there are 1.75 million ED  visits annu ally (7%) among 24 million individuals with asthma we cou ld anticipate a 
rate of 1.7%  ED visits in a 3 month trial. However, only individuals with uncontrolled asthma will be eligible for 
enrollment so we will plan for 5% of our subjects to have an ED  visit for asthma at some time during the 3 month trial. 
Therefore, data on adverse events, including serious adverse events (SAEs) that meet the standard definition of asthma 
exacerbation (ED visits, hospitalizations, and O CS initiation), will be reviewed. Exacerbation rates as meeting any of the 
three standard definitions of asthma exac erbation (ED visits, hospitalizations, and OCS initiation) in excess of the 
threshold set by the SMC will trigger an immediate study shutdown (see below). AEs and S AEs will be systematically 
assessed at all data collection po ints via review of the medical record and/or patient interview. Subjects will be instructed 
to report AEs and SAEs to the study team within 48 hours of their occurrence. This information will then be shared with 
the SMC in  real-time, as we ll as additional information abo ut the event that the study team can ob tain from the PCP or 
from the medical record, as available. The SMC  will then determine how  an AE  is to be categorized using standard 
taxono my: Unrelated (clearly not related to the research), Unlikely (doubtfully related to the research), Possible (may be 
related to the research), Probable (likely related to the research) and Definite (clearly related to the research). 
The SMC will use the following definitions: 
Adverse events are defined as unanticipated problems involving risks to study participants or others, or as any untoward 
medical occurrence that may present itself during the study time period which may or may not have a causal relationship 
with the treatment. 
Serious adverse events result in any  of the following outcomes: death, a life threatening experience, inpatient 
hosp italization, or a significant disability/incapacity. Such e vents also include breeches of confidentiality. 
Mod erate adverse events are those discomforts severe enou gh to cause interference with usual activities or requiring 
treatment by a health care provider. Such e vents also include the loss of participants from the study for reasons related in 
any way to a de viation from procedu res for ensuring confidentiality. 
Mild adverse events are those events that are easily tolerated signs or  symptoms of discomfort; minor irritants that cause 
no loss of time from normal activities; symptoms that require no medication or a medical evaluation; and transient signs 
and symptoms. 
Unexpe cted adverse events are those events, the specificity or severity of which is not consistent with the risk information 
described in the general investigative plan or the IRB proposal. "Unexpected" refers to an adverse event that has not been 
previously observed. 
Expec ted adverse events are those events, the specificity or severity of which is consistent with the risk information 
described in the general investigative plan or IRB propos al. 
Any ED visit or hospitalization associated w ith primary ICD-10-CM Di agnosis Code 493. A sthma (493.00 asthma atopic 
unsp ecified; 493.01 asthma atopic asthmaticus; 493.02 asthma atopic acute exacerbation; 493.10  intrinsic asthma 
unspecified; 493.11 intrinsic asthma asthmaticus; 493.12 intrinsic asthma acute exacerbation;493.20 asthma chronic 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 15 of 20 
 
obstructive pulmonary disease copd; 493.21  asthma chronic obstructive pulmonary disease cop d; 493.22 asthma chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease copd; 493.81  exercise induced  bronchospasm; 493.82 cou gh variant asthma; 493.91 a sthma 
bronchial allergic nos asthmaticus; 493.92  asthma bronchial allergic nos acute exacerbation) will be characterized as a 
Prob able or Definite SAE. 
 
SAE repo rting. 
 
Any SAE, whether or not related to study intervention, will be reported to the IRB and the SMC.  The PI  will inform the 
IRB and SMC i mmediately and jointly make a decision whether the reported event is a SAE that must be reported to 
NINR due to the unexpectedness and/or the severity of the event. The initial SAE rep ort will be followed by submission 
of a completed SAE report to NINR within two days (refer to Table 1. Ad verse Events Form, Table 2. Adverse Events 
Coding, and  Table 3. Matrix for Adverse Events Reporting). 
In the event that a patient either withdraws from the study or the investigator decides to discontinue a patient 
due to SAE, the  patient will be monitored by  the investigator via ongoing status assessment until 1) a 
resolution is reached,  i.e., the problem requiring hospitalization has resolved or  stabilized wi th no further 
chan ges expected; 2) the SAE is determined to be clearly unrelated to the study intervention; or 3) the SAE 
results in death. Outcome of SAEs will be periodically reported to the IRB and to the funding agency. A 
summary of the SAEs that occu rred during the previous year will be included in the ann ual progress report 
to the IRB and the SMC.  The r eport will include the participants’ sociodemographic characteristics, 
expe cted versus actual recruitment rates, treatment retention rates, any quality assurance or regulatory issues 
that occurred during the past year, summary of AEs and S AEs, and  any actions or chan ges with respect to 
the protocol. 
Stop rules. If the PI, 
IRB and/or SMC 
determines that serious 
adverse events meeting 
the standard definition 
of an asthma 
exacerbation (ED visit; 
Hospitalization and/or 
OCS initiation) have 
occu rred in excess of 
the 5% threshold set for 
the study, then data 
collection and  study 
enrollment will be 
stopped. The SMC a nd 
the IRB will be asked to 
review the study and 
suggest modifications of 
the protocol, the 
threshold limit or other 
chan ges. If the SMC 
and the Chairperson of  the IRB believe that these modifications are adequate for resumption of  the study, 
then the study will resume. NINR will receive a written report within three days of any such suspension 
and/or resumption of data collection. 
 
Content of Data and Safety Mon itoring Report 
The Data and Safety Monitoring Report will include the following items: 
1. Narrative/Trial Summary including study status; minutes of SMC co nsultations (action items, resolution 
of action items), and  summary of any protocol changes. 
2. Study  Administration Recruitment and Participant Status including tables reporting overall study status, 
actual vs. expected enrollment, participant enrollment status by  condition, overall reasons for eligibility 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 16 of 20 
 
screen failures, overall protocol deviations, protocol deviations by condition, demographic and key baseline 
characteristics, participant attrition by  condition, and study duration for all participants. 
3. Study  Administration Data including tables reporting overall summary of assessment measures collected, 
assessment measures collected by  condition, overall summary of missing outcome measures, missing 
outcome measures by 
cond ition. 
4. Sa fety Assessments 
for All Participants 
including tables 
reporting incidence of 
adverse events and 
severity of adverse 
events overall, as well 
as incidence of 
adverse events and 
severity of adverse 
events by condition. 
 
d. For multi-site 
studies, procedures 
to ens ure compliance 
with the monitoring 
plan and reporting 
requirements across 
study sites. As 
described abo ve we 
offer a robust plan for Auditing Selected Cases. In add ition, consenting and data collection will be 
condu cted by the same research assistant. 
e. An  assessment of external factors or relevant information (e.g., de velopments in the literature, 
results of related studies) that may have an  impact on the safety of participants or on the ethics for the 
research study. Since our submission no new literature has been published that impacts the safety of 
participants. Uncontrolled asthma due  to poor patient- and p rovider-recognition of unco ntrolled disease with 
subsequent underuse of ICS therapy remains a major cause  of excess asthma morbidity and mortality. Our 
study specifically seeks to improve recognition and  treatment of uncontrolled asthma and therefore decrease 
risk of poor asthma outcomes. We will follow the literature during the trial and notify our participants and 
NINR if a chan ge in the standard of care poses a safety risk or creates an ethical dilemma. If that were to 
occur  the PI would con sult with the SMC, t he IRB and NINR to either stop the study or modify the protocol 
to address safety or ethical conc erns. All participants would be notified and participants would be re- 
consented. 
 
 
 
f. The adva nced plans for interim and/or futility analysis as appro priate. Not applicable; this is a 
feasibility trial and is not  powered for statistical significance. 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 17 of 20 
 REFEREN CES 
 
1.  George, M.,  Topaz, M.,  Rand, C., Sommers, M. S., Glanz, K., Pantalon, M.V., Mao, J., & Shea, J. 
(2014). Inhaled corticosteroid beliefs, complementary and alternative medicine and uncontrolled asthma 
in urban minority adults Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 134, 1252 –59. 
2.  George, M, Pinilla, R.,  Abboud, S., Shea, J., Rand, C., (2 013). Innovative use of a standardized 
debriefing guide to assist  in the development of a  research questionnaire with low literacy demands. 
Applied Nursing Research, 26, 139-42. 
3.  George, M., Abboud, S., Pantalon, M.V., Sommers, M. S., Mao, J., & Rand C. (20 16). Changes in 
clinical conversations when providers are informed of asthma patients' beliefs about medication use and 
integrative medical therapies. Heart & Lung, 45, 70-8. 
4.  Pantalon MV, Sledge WH, Bauer SF, et al. Important medical decisions: Us ing brief motivational 
interviewing to enhance patients' autonomous decision-making. J Psychiatr Pract. 2013;19(2):98-108. 
5.  D'Onofrio G, Fiellin DA, Pantalon MV, et al. A  brief intervention reduces hazardous and harmful 
drinking in emergency department patients. Ann Emerg Med. 201 2;60(2):181-192. 
6.  D'Onofrio G, Pantalon MV, Degutis LC, Fiellin DA, O'connor PG. Development and  implementation of 
an emergency practitioner-performed brief intervention for hazardous and harmful drinkers in the 
emergency department. Acad Emerg Med. 200 5;12(3):249-256. 
7. Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR-3) (2007). National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma. NIH pub no 07–4051. Bethesda, MD: National 
Heart, Lung, and Blo od Institute, National Institutes of Health. 2007. Available from: 
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/ guidelines/asthma/. 
8.  Powell H, Gibson PG. Options for self-management education for adults with asthma. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2003(1):CD00410 7. 
9.  Steuten L, Lemmens K, Vrijhoef B. Health technology assessment of asthma disease management 
programs. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 ;7(3):242-248. 
10. Toelle BG, Ram FS. Written individualised management plans for asthma in children and adults. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(2)(2):CD00217 1. 
11. Uncontroll ed Asthma among Persons with Current Asthma. 
http://www.cdc.gov/asthma/asthma_stats/uncontrolled_asthma.htm 
12. Akinbami LJ, Moor man JE, Liu X. Asthma prevalence, health care use, and mortality: United States, 
2005-2009. Natl Health Stat R eport. 201 1;(32)(32):1-14. 
13. Apter AJ, Boston RC, George M, et al. Mo difiable barriers to adherence to inhaled steroids among 
adults with asthma: It's not just black and w hite. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003;111(6):1219-1226. 
14. Le TT, Bilderback A, Bender B, et al. Do asthma medication beliefs mediate the relationship between 
minority s tatus and adherence to therapy? J Asthma. 200 8;45(1):33-37. 
15. Bender BG, Bender SE. Patient-identified barriers to ast hma treatment adherence: Responses to 
interviews, focus groups, and questionnaires. Immu nology and Allergy Clinics of  North America. 
2005;25(1):107-130. 
16. Krishnan JA, Diette GB, Skinner EA, Cla rk BD, Steinwachs D, Wu AW. Race and sex differences in 
consistency of care with national asthma guidelines in managed care organizations. Arch Intern Med. 
2001;161(13):1660-1668.  
17. World Health Organization. Adherence to long-term therapies: Evidence for action. 2003 ;92 4 154599 2. 
18. Horne R. Co mpliance, adherence, and concordance: Implications for asthma treatment. Chest. 
2006;130(1 Suppl):65S-72S. 
19. Boul et LP, Vervloet D, Magar Y, Foster JM. Ad herence: The goal to control asthma. Clin Chest Med. 
2012;33(3):405-417. 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 18 of 20 
 20. Conn KM, Halterman JS, Lynch K, Cabana MD. The impact of parents' medication beliefs on  asthma 
management. Pediatrics. 200 7;120(3):e521-6. 
21. Eakin MN, Rand C S. Improving patient adherence with asthma self-management practices: What 
works?  Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 201 2;109(2):90-92. 
22. Baptist AP, Deol BB, Reddy RC, Nelson B, Cla rk NM. Age-specific factors influencing asthma 
management by older adults. Qual Health Res. 201 0;20(1):117-124. 
23. George M, Birck K, Hufford DJ, Jemmott LS, Weaver TE. Beliefs about asthma and complementary 
and alternative medicine in low-income inner-city African-American adults. J Gen Intern Med. 
2006;21(12):1317-1324. 
24. George M, Freedman TG, Norfleet AL, Feldman HI, Apter AJ. Qualitative research-enhanced 
understanding of patients' beliefs: R esults of focus groups with low-income, urban, African American 
adults with asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003;11 1(5):967-973. 
25. Ponieman D, Wisnivesky JP, Leventhal H, Musumeci-Szabo TJ, Halm EA. Impact of positive and 
negative beliefs about inhaled corticosteroids on adherence in inner-city asthmatic patients. Ann Allergy 
Asthma Immunol. 200 9;103(1):38-42. 
26. Wells K, Pladevall M, Peterson EL, et al. Ra ce-ethnic differences in factors associ ated with inhaled 
steroid adherence among adults with asthma. Am J Respir Crit  Care Med. 2008;178(12):1194-1201.  
27. Roy A, Lurslurchachai L, Halm EA, Li XM, Leventhal H, Wisnivesky JP. Use of herbal remedies and 
adherence to inhaled corticosteroids among inner-city asthmatic patients. Ann  Allergy Asthma 
Immunol. 2010 ;104(2):132-138. 
28. Institute of Medicine. Unequal treatment:Confronting racial and ethnic disparities in health care (with 
CD). The National Academies Press; 2003. http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=1287 5. 
29. Barnes PM, Powell-Griner E, McFann K, Nahin RL. Complementary and alternative medicine use 
among adults: United States, 2002. Adv Data. 2004;(343)(343):1-19. 
30. George M, Topaz M. A systematic review of complementary and alternative medicine for asthma self- 
management. Nurs Cl in North Am. 201 3;48(1):53-149. 
31. Murphy KR, Meltzer EO, Blaiss MS, Nathan RA, Stoloff SW, Doherty DE Asthma management and 
control in the United States: results of the 2009  Asthma Insight and Management survey. Allergy 
Asthma Proc. 2012 Jan-Feb;33(1):54-64. doi: 10.2500/aap.2011.32.3518. Epub 20 11 Dec 15. 
32. Chang CH, Lewis VA, Meara E, Lurie JD, Bynum JP. Characteristics and Service Use of Medicare 
Beneficiaries Using Federally Qualified Health Centers. Med Care. 2016 May 23. [Epub ahead of print] 
33. The Physici an Workforce. Projections and research into the current issues affecting supply and demand 
(2008). US Dept Health Human Services Health Resources and Services Administration Bureau of 
Health Professions. http://bhpr.hrsa.gov/healthworkforce/reports/physwfissues.pdf. Accessed 2/12 201 4. 
34. Satterfield JM, Spring B, Brownson RC, et al. Toward a transdiscipl inary model of evidence-based 
practice. Milbank Q. 2009;87(2):368-390. 
35. Wagner EH, Bennett SM, Austin BT, Greene SM, Schaefer JK, Vonkorff M. Finding common ground: 
Patient-centeredness and evidence-based chronic illness care. J Altern Complement Med. 200 5;11 Suppl 
1:S7-15. 
36. Street RL,Jr, Makoul G, Arora NK, Epstein RM. How does communication heal? pathways linking 
clinician-patient communication to health outcomes. Patient Educ Couns. 2009;74(3):295-301 
37. Battersby M, Von Korff M, Sc haefer J, et al. Twelve evidence-based principles for implementing self- 
management support in primary care. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2010;36(12):561-570. 
38. Schedlbauer A, Davies P, Fahey T. Interventions to improve adherence to lipid lowering medication. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(3):CD004371. doi(3):CD00437 1. 
39. Schneider J, Kaplan SH, Greenfield S, Li W, Wilson IB. Better physici an-patient relationships are 
associ ated with higher reported adherence to antiretroviral therapy in patients with HIV infection. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2004;19(11):1096-1103. 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 19 of 20 
 40. Wilson SR, Strub P, Buist AS, et al. Shared treatment decision making improves adherence and 
outcomes in poorly controll ed asthma. Am J Respir Crit C are Med. 2010;181(6):566-577. 
41. Cooper LA, Roter DL, Carson KA, et al. A  randomized trial to improve patient-centered care and 
hypertension control in underserved primary care patients. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26(11):1297-1304. 
42. Von Korff M, Katon W, Rutter C, et al. Effect on disability outcomes of a  depression relapse prevention 
program. Psychosom  Med. 2003;65(6):938-943. 
43. Ludman E, Katon W, Bush T, et al. B ehavioural factors associated with symptom outcomes in a primary 
care-based depression prevention intervention tri al. Psychol Med. 2003;33(6):1061-1070. 
44. Cooper LA, Roter DL, Carson KA, et al. A  randomized trial to improve patient-centered care and 
hypertension control in underserved primary care patients. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26(11):1297-1304. 
45. Von Korff M, Katon W, Rutter C, et al. Effect on disability outcomes of a  depression relapse prevention 
program. Psychosom  Med. 2003;65(6):938-943. 
46. Ludman E, Katon W, Bush T, et al. B ehavioural factors associated with symptom outcomes in a primary 
care-based depression prevention intervention tri al. Psychol Med. 200 3;33(6):1061-1070. 
47. Butz  A, Kub J, Donithan M, et al. Influence of caregiver and provider communication on symptom days 
and medication use for inner-city children with asthma. J Asthma. 2010;47(4):478-485. 
48. US Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy people 2020. 
http://healthypeople.gov/2020/default.aspx. 
49. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2007).Asthma self-management education among 
youths and adults--United States, 2003. MMWR Morb  Mort al Wkly Rep. 2007  Sep 7;56(35):912-5. 
50. Peytremann-Bridevaux I, Arditi C, Gex G, Bridevaux PO, Burnand B. Chronic disease management 
programmes for adults wi th asthma. Cochrane Database of Sys tematic Reviews 2015, Issue 5. Art. No.: 
CD00798 8. DOI: 10.1002/1465185 8.CD00798 8.pub2. 
51. Probst J, Barker J, Enders A, Gardiner P, Roberston A. Current state of child health in rural America: 
how context shapes children's health. J Rural H ealth. In revision. 
52. Stokols D. Translating social ecological theory into guidelines for community health promotion. Am J 
Health Promot. 1996;10(4):282-298. 
53. Lau M, Lin H, Flores G. Racial/ethnic disparities in health and health care among U.S. adolescents. 
Health Serv Res. 2012;47(5):2031-2059. 
54. George M, Campbell J, Rand C. Self-management of acute asthma among low-income urban adults. J 
Asthma . 200 9;46(6):618-624. 
55. George, M. & M argolis, M. L. (2010). Race and lung cancer surgery-- a qualitative  analysis of relevant 
beliefs and management preferences. Oncology Nurs ing Forum, 37,  740-748. 
56. Townsend, K., Cor ry, J.M., Q uigley, B., George, M. (201 2). A feasibility study of Q-sort to  determine 
recall of skin  test results and environmental remediation  education. Journal  of As thma, 49, 83–89. 
57. Keddem, S. Barg, F. Glanz K. Jackson, T, Green, S. George, M. ( 2015). Mapping the urban asthma 
experience: using qualitative  GIS to understand contextual factors i nfluencing asthma control. Social 
Science & Medicine , 140, 9-17. 
58. George, M., Keddem, S., Barg, F., Greene, S., Cavanaugh, E., & Glanz, K. (2014). Urban adults’ 
perceptions of factors i nfluencing asthma control. Journal of As thma, 52, 98-104. 
59. Rhodes, K.V., Rodgers, M., Sommers, M. S., Hanlon, A., & Crits-Crist oph, P. (2014). The social health 
intervention project (SHIP): Protocol for  a randomized controlled clinical trial assessing the 
effectiveness of  a brief motivatio nal intervention for problem drinking and intimate partner vio lence in 
an urban emergency department. BMJ Central, 14, 10. 
60. Sommers, M. S., Lyons, M.S., Bohn, C.M., Ribak, J., & Fargo, J.D. (2013). Health-compromising 
behaviors among young adults in the urban emergency department: Opportunity for  a teachable moment. 
Clinical Nurs ing Research, 22(3), 285-309. 
61. Sommers, M. S., Lyons, M.S., Fargo, J.D., Sommers, B. D., McDonald, C. C., Shope, J.T., & Fleming, 
M.F. (2013). ED-based brief intervention to reduce risky driving and hazardous/harmful drinking in 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 20 of 20 
 young adults: A randomized  controlled trial. Alcoholism: Clinical and E xperimental Research, 37(10), 
1753-1762. 
62. Kangovi S, Long JA, Emanuel E. Community health workers combat readmission. Arch Intern Med. 
2012;172(22):1756-1757.  
63. Kangovi S, Grande D, Meehan P, Mitra N, Shannon  R, Long JA. Perceptions of readmitted patients on 
the transition from hospital to home. J Hosp Med. 201 2;7(9):709-712. 
64. Kangovi S, Barg FK, Carter T, et al. C hallenges faced by patients with low so cioeconomic status during 
the post-hospital transition. J Gen Intern Med. 201 3. 
65. Kangovi S, Mitra N, Grande D, White ML, McCollum S, Sellman J, Shannon  RP, Long JA (2014). 
Patient-Centered Community Health Worker Intervention to Improve Posthos pital O utcomesA 
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174(4):535-543. 
66. Bruz zese J-M, Bonner S, Vincent EJ, et al. Asthma education: the adolescent experience. Patient  
Education and Couns eling. 2004;55(3):396-406. 
67. Bruz zese J-M, Kingston S, Sheares BJ, Cespedes A, Sadeghi H, Evans D. Feasibility and preliminary 
outcomes of a school-based intervention to  help inner-city, ethnic minority adolescents with 
undiagnosed asthma. Patient Edu cation & Couns eling. 2011 ;85(2):290-294. 
68. Bruz zese J-M, Sheares BJ, Vincent EJ, et al. Effects of a  school-based intervention for urban 
adolescents with asthma: a controlled trial. American Journal of R espiratory  and Cri tical Care 
Medicin e. 2011;183(8):998-1006. 
69. Bruz zese J-M, Unikel LH, Gallagher R, Evans D, Co lland VT. Feasibility and impact of a  school-based 
intervention for families of urban adolescents with asthma: results from a randomized pilot trial. Family 
Process. 2008;47(1):95-113. 
70. Bruz zese, J.M., Kingston, S., Zhao, Y., DiM eglio, J.S., Cespedes, A. & George, M. (2016-in 
press). Psy chological factors i nfluencing the decision of urban adolescents with undiagnosed asthma to 
obtain medical care. J Adol Health. 
71. Carlsen B, Glenton C. What about N?  A methodological study of s ample-size reporting in focus group 
studies BMC  Med Res Methodol. 2011; 11: 26. 
72. Juniper EF, Bousquet J, Abetz L, Bateman ED; G OAL Co mmittee. Identifying 'well-controlled' and 'not 
well-controlled' asthma using the Asthma Control Q uestionnaire. Respir Med. 2006  Apr;100(4):616-21. 
73. Schatz, M, Kosinski, M, Yarlas, AS Hanlon, J, Watson, ME, Jhingran, P. The minimally important 
difference of the Asthma Control Test.J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;124:719-23) 
74. Juniper EF, O'Byrne PM, Guyatt GH, Ferrie PJ, King DR. Development and validation of a 
questionnaire to measure asthma control. Eur R espir J. 199 9;14(4):902-907. 
75. Pantalon MV, Martino S, Dziura J, et al. Development of a scale to measure practitioner adherence to a 
brief intervention in the emergency department. J Subst Abuse  Treat. 201 2;43(4):382-388. 
76. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Ferrie PJ, Griffith LE. Measuring quality of life in asthma. Am Rev Respir Dis. 
1993;147(4):832-838. 
77. Jones PW. Interpreting thresholds for a clinically significant change in health status in asthma and COPD. 
European Respiratory Journal 2002 19:  398-404 
78. Clatworthy J, Price D, Ryan D, Haughney J, Horne R. The value of self-report assessment of adherence, 
rhinitis and  smoking in relation to asthma control. Prim Care  Respir J. 2009;18(4):300-305. 
79. Cohen JL, Mann DM, Wisnivesky JP, et al. Assessing the validity of s elf-reported medication adherence 
among inner-city asthmatic adults: The medication adherence report scale for asthma. Annals of  Allergy, 
Asthma  & Immunolog y. 2009;103(4):325-331. 
80. Koster ES, Raaijmakers JA, Vijverberg SJ, Maitland-van der Zee AH. Inhaled corticosteroid adherence 
in pediatric  patients: The PACMAN  cohort study. Pharma coepidemiol Drug Saf. 201 1;20(10):1064- 
1072. 
Version #1R; 8-7-=8-17 Page 21 of 20 
 81. Menckeberg TT, Bouvy ML, Bracke M, Hugtenburg JG, Lammers JW, Raaijmakers JA. Patients' 
understanding of the reasons for starting and discontinuing inhaled corticosteroids. Br J Clin Pharm acol. 
2008;66(2):255-260 
82. Mora  PA, Berkowitz A, Contr ada RJ, et al. Factor structure and longitudinal invariance of the medical 
adherence report scale-asthma. Psychol Health. 2011;26(6):713-727. 
83. Patient-reported Outcome Measurement Group. Structured review of patient-reported outcome measures 
(PROMS) for asthma. Report to the Department of Health. 200 9. 
84. Ohm R, Aaronson LS. Symptom perception and adherence to ast hma controller medications. J Nurs  
Scholarsh . 200 6;38(3):292-297. 
85. Roy A, Lurslurchachai L, Halm EA, Li XM, Leventhal H, Wisnivesky JP. Use of herbal remedies and 
adherence to inhaled corticosteroids among inner-city asthmatic patients. Ann All ergy Asthma Immunol. 
2010;104(2):132-138. 
86. Roy A, Battle K, Lurslurchachai L, Halm EA, Wisnivesky JP. Inhaler device, administration technique, 
and adherence to inhaled corticosteroids in patients with asthma. Prim Ca re Respir J. 2011;20(2):148- 
154. 
87. Sofianou A, Martynenko M, Wolf M S, et al. Asthma beliefs are associated with medication adherence in 
older asthmatics. J Gen Intern Med. 2012. 
88. Wojtczak HA, Wachter AM, Lee M, Burns L, Yusin J S. Understanding the relationship among 
pharmacoadherence measures, asthma control t est scores, and office-based spirometry. Ann Aller gy 
Asthma Immunol. 2012;109(2):103-107. 
89. Larson, DL, Attkinsson, CC, Hargreaves, WA, Nguyen, TD (1979). Assessment of client/patient 
satisfaction: Development of a  general scale. Eval and  Progr Plan, 2, 197-207. 