 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  1 
V3    08/11/16  COVER PAGE FOR PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
 
Official Study Title : Effect of Combined Incretin -Based Therapy Plus 
Canagliflozin on Glycemic Control and the Compensatory Rise  in 
Hepatic Glucose Production in Type 2 Diabetic Patients   
 
 
NCT number : NCT 02324842  
 
IRB Approval Date : 03/19/2018  
 
Unique Protocol ID : 28431754DIA4009  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  2 
V3    08/11/16   
 
 
 
Collaborative Protocol supported by Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC (funding and 
canagliflozin) . 
Sponsor -Investigator:  Eugenio Cersosimo, MD, University of Texas Health Science Center  
Co-Investigator: Ralph DeFronzo, MD, University of Texas Health Science Center  
 
28431754DIA4009  
Effect of Combin ed Incretin -Based Therapy Plus Canagliflozin  on Glycemic Control and 
the Compensatory Rise in Hepatic Glucose Production in  Type 2 Diabetic Patients   
 
 
 RATIONALE: Endogenous  (primarily hepatic)  glucose production ( HGP ) plays a central 
role in the maintenance of normal glucose homeostasis  and impaired regulation of HGP  plays a  
pivotal role in the development of fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes  (1-
9).Because t he liver is responsible for the majority (>80%) of HGP , it has become an important  
target  for antidiabetic therapy  (10).  
 HGP  is under tight hormonal control  (11-14). Insulin is the primary regulator of HGP  and 
a small increase in plasma insulin concentration strongly suppresses HGP  (13). Conversely, 
glucagon and other counter -regulatory hormones (catecholamines, cortisol and growth hormone) 
stimulate HGP  (14). The plasma  glucose concentration also is a strong regulator of HGP , and a n 
increase in the plasma glucose concentration, independ ent of plasma insulin and glucagon 
concentration s, strongly inhibits HGP (14). Conversely, hypoglycemia is a powerful stimulator of 
HGP  (15).  
 SGLT2 inhibitors represent  a novel class of drugs which inhibit the renal sodium -glucose 
cotransporter 2 (SGLT2),  produce glucosuria and decrease the plasma glucose concentration  (16). 
The urinary glucose loss also promotes weight loss  (16). Despite the large glucosuria produced by 
SGLT2 inhibitors and the accompan ying weight loss, the decrease in HbA1c brought about  SGLT2 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  3 
V3    08/11/16  inhibitors is less than expected.  For example, canagliflozin  an SGLT2 inhibitor approved as an 
adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults with  T2DM, promote s a urinary 
glucose loss of ~70 -90 grams per day , but it only decreases  HbA1c by ~0.6-0.8% (17). Therefore, 
we hypothesized that  the glucosuria  produced by SGLT2 inhibition  stimulate s compensatory 
mechanisms that act to raise the plasma glucose concentration and compensate for (oppose) the 
urinary glucose loss. To te st this hypothesis, we examine d the effect of glucosuria produced  by 
dapagliflozin administration  on the rate of HGP  in T2DM  individuals . Administration of 
dapagliflozin (10 mg /day) produced glucosuria ( ~3 gram/hour) and reduced the  fasting plasma 
glucose (FPG) concentration  by 3 7 mg/dl (see preliminary results) . Because of the close 
relationship between the FPG and HGP , we anticipated that the decrease in FPG produced by the 
induction of glucosuria w ould be accompanied by a parallel decrease in HGP. However, to our 
surprise , following an initial decline in HGP,  the decrease in FPG concentration was associated 
with a paradoxical increase in HGP. This suggests the presence of a “compensatory” mechanism 
in which loss of gluco se in the urine and the accompanying decrease in plasma glucose 
concentration following dapagliflozin administration triggers an increase in HGP in an attempt to 
maintain the plasma glucose concentration at its fasting hyperglycemic level(18). The increase  in 
HGP following dapagliflozin administration was associated with an increase in plasma glucagon 
concentration  which was closely related to  the increase in HGP . Because glucosuria results in 
decreased return of glucose from the gl omerular filtrate to the renal vein, it results in widening the 
glucose A -V difference across the kidney and this could provide a signal to the CNS to stimulate 
(directly or indirectly via glucagon secretion) HGP to compensate for urinary glucose loss. 
Alternatively, the increase in glucagon secretion could represent the response to the acute decline 
in FPG concentration induced by dapagliflozin. Whatever the mechanism(s), our finding s indicate 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  4 
V3    08/11/16  the presence of a “reno -hepatic” interaction that participate s in the regulation of plasma glucose 
concentration. The primary aim of the present study is to examine whether the combination of 
incretin -based therapy, liraglutide, plus canagliflozin can block the compensatory increase in HGP, 
augment the decrease in plas ma glucose concentration produced by canagliflozin, and enhance the 
decline in A1c.   
 Canagliflozin, like other SGLT2 inhibitors, is associated with weight loss and a reduction 
in systolic blood pressure (17, 19).  The  weight loss amounts to ~2.5  kg during the first year and 
plateaus thereafter, without any attenuation of the drug ’s glucosuric effect.  This suggests a 
resetting of the appetite regulation center in the hypothalamus, leading to an increase in caloric 
intake that negates the loss of glucose calories in the urine.  GLP -1 receptor agonists bind to the 
GLP -1 receptor in the hypothalamus, causing appetite suppression and weight loss.  We 
hypothesize that combined liraglutide -canagliflozin treatment will result in additive, even 
synergisti c, decreases in body weight, hepatic fat content, and visceral fat content in type 2 diabetic 
patients.  
 Canagliflozin also reduces systolic (by 4 -5 mmHg), and to a lesser extent  diastolic (by 1 -2 
mmHg) , blood pressure (17).  The decline in blood pressure is evident within the initial 2 -4 weeks 
of treatment and most likely is related to the mild intravascular volume depletion associated with 
the natriuretic action of canagliflozin.  GLP -1receptor agonists also possess natriuretic properties 
(20), improve en dothelial dysfunction by augment ing release of the potent vasodilator nitric oxide 
(21), and cause a modest reduction in blood pressure ( 21).  Therefore, one might expect 
combination therapy with liraglutide plus canagliflozin to have an additive, even syn ergitic , effect 
to reduce systolic/diastolic blood pressure and in the present study we will examine the 
hypotensive action of combined therapy with canagliflozin plus liraglutide.  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  5 
V3    08/11/16   The SPECIFIC AIMS of the study are:  
 Specific Aim 1 .To examine whether the combination of liraglutide plus canagliflozin 
can prevent the  increase in HGP following institution of canagliflozin therapy  and produce 
an additive or even synergistic effect to lower the plasma glucose concentration and A1c.  We 
will examine this hypothesis by comparing the effect of administration of liraglutide alone, 
canagliflozin alone, and the combination of liraglutide plus canagliflozin  on:(i) the rate of HGP; 
(ii) decrease in fasting plasma glucose concentration; (iii) count er-regulatory hormone response 
and (iv) A1c. We anticipate that the addition of liraglutide  to canagliflozin will prevent the increase 
in plasma glucagon concentration , augment insulin secretion,  and blunt/block the increase in HGP 
in response to canagliflozin , resulting in a greater  decrease in fasting plasma glucose concentration  
and A1c  than observed with each therapy alone.     
 Specific Aim 2:   To examine whether combination  therapy with liraglutide  plus 
canagliflozin can produce an additive , or even synergistic , effect to promote weight loss and 
reduction in hepatic and visceral fat content.  
 Specific Aim 3.  To examine whether combination  therapy with liraglutide  plus 
canagliflozin can produce an additive or even synergistic effect to reduce systolic/diastolic blood 
pressure and 24 -hour integrated blood pressure.   
Background :  
 Endogenous (primarily hepatic) glucose production (HGP) plays a central role in the 
maintenance of glucose homeostasis and impaired regulation of HGP plays a pivotal role in the 
development of both fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) (1 -9). 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  6 
V3    08/11/16   The tissues/mechanisms responsible for the regulation of glucose metabolism during the 
fasting state, e.g. after an overnight fa st, are very different than those responsible for the regulation 
of the plasma glucose concentration following glucose ingestion, e.g. after a mixed meal  (1). After 
an overnight fast, tissue glucose uptake (~2 mg/kg.min) is closely matched by the rate of HGP 
(3,9). The rate of HGP  is under tight hormonal control  (11-14). Insulin is the primary determinant 
of basal HGP, and a small increase in the portal plasma insulin concentration markedly suppresses 
HGP (13).Conversely, glucagon is a strong stimulator of HGP and an increase in the portal 
glucagon concentration augments H GP (11,12,14,22).  
 The plasma glucose concentration also is an important regulator of HGP  (23-27). Studies 
with the pancreatic clamp technique have demonstrated that hyperglycemia strongly inhibits HGP  
in the absence of changes in plasma insulin and glucagon concentration s (26). Conversely, 
hypoglycemia strongly activates HGP  (15). Thus, c hanges in the plasma glucose concentration can 
affect HGP  both directly and indirectly via alteration s in both insulin and glucagon secretion .  
 Suppression of HGP  by hyperinsulinemia and hyperglycemia f ollowing glucose ingestion  
is a critical determinant  of postprandial  hyperglycemia (26,29,30 . Thus, glucose balance across 
the liver (uptake versus production) is an important factor which determines the rise in postprandial 
plasma glucose concentration.  
Subjects with T2DM manifest severe  hepatic insulin resistance and  an increased rate of basal  HGP , 
leading to  fasting hyperglycemia  (1). Excessive glucagon secretion also contributes to accelerated 
rate of HGP in T2DM patients (1,11). Numerous clinical studies have demonstrated that the rise 
in basal HGP  is the principal factor responsible for the  increase in FPG concentration in T2DM 
subjects  (1-3,5,6,) .  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  7 
V3    08/11/16   Canagliflozin  is a member of a new class of antidiabetic drugs and  recently has been 
approved by the FDA  for the treatment  of T2DM. Canagliflozin lowers the plasma glucose 
concentration by inhibiti ng the  SGLT2  transporter  and producing glucosuria  (17). Because SGLT2 
inhibitors produce urinary glucose loss, they also promote weight loss  (17). Clinical studies have 
demonstrated that canagliflozin promotes  the excretion of ~ 70-90 gram s of glucose  per day and 
result s in a weight loss of  2.5-3 kg during the first 6 -12 months of therapy (31,32 ). Despite the 
significant weight loss and large glucosuria produced by canagliflozin , the decrease in HbA1c 
cause d by the drug is modest. Clinical studies have reported that a maximal dose of canagliflozin 
and other SGLT2 inhibitors cause only a 0.6 -0.8% decrease in HbA1c in drug naïve T2DM 
diabetic subjects and in diabetic patients treated with metformin, sulfonylureas or pioglitazone 
(31-42)(reviewed in ref #43). Thus, we hypothesize that the glucosuria produced  by canagliflozin 
stimulates a compensatory response in glucose homeostasis that offsets the  urinary glucose loss in  
an attempt to maintain the plasma glucose concentration  constant at its fasting level .   
 Results  from our lab (see below) demonstrate tha t the SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin  (10 
mg) produce s significant glucosuria and decrease s the fasting plasma glucose concentration. 
Because of the strong correlation between the basal rate of HGP and the fasting plasma glucose 
concentration  (4),we anticipated that the decrease in FPG concentration brought about 
dapagliflozin  in T2DM patients would be accompanied by a decline in HGP . In contrast, the 
decrease in FPG produced by dapagliflozin was accompanied by a paradoxical increase  in the 
rate of HGP. The increase in HGP in response to glucosuria suggests the presence of a “reno -
hepatic” interaction in the regulation of glucose metabolism. In normal glucose tolerant ( NGT ) 
individuals, a “reno -hepatic axis” that leads to a compensatory increase in HGP in response to 
urinary glucose loss and maintains the plasma glucose concentration can be viewed as beneficial 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  8 
V3    08/11/16  because it prevents the development  of hypoglycemia. However, this “compensatory” increase in 
HGP in T2DM individuals is paradoxical because it occurs while the plasma glucose concentration 
is well within the hyperglycemic range, and  quantitatively offsets the reduction in plasma glucose 
concentration in response to the glucosuric effect of the SGLT2 inhibitor. Delineation of the 
mechanisms responsible for the “paradoxical” increase in HGP  produced by glucosuria  (i) will 
improve our understanding of the regulation of glucose homeostasis , and (ii) has important clinical 
implications. Thus, if the rise in HGP  in response to glucosuria can  be blocked, the decrease in 
plasma glucose conc entration produced by SGLT2 inhibitors can be enhanced. We hypothesize 
that the combination of an SGLT2 in hibitor with incretin -based therapy, which stimulates insulin 
and inhibits glucagon secretion (43,44), will block the paradoxical rise in HGP and augment the 
ability of the  SGLT2 inhibitor to lower the plasma glucose concentration and HbA1c.Although 
the D PP4 inhibitors augment insulin and inhibit glucose secretion, their effect on the beta cell is 
weak and it is likely that they will not inhibit the paradoxical increase in HGP observed following 
the initiation of canagliflozin therapy (44).   In contrast, the GLP -1 receptor agonists have a potent 
effect on the beta cell to augment insulin secretion  and inhibit glucagon  (45),thus  causing a greater 
more durable reduction in A1c ( 46).  Further, the DPP4 inhibitors are weight neutral and do not 
reduce the blood  pressure, whereas the GLP -1 receptor agonists promote weight loss and decrease 
the blood pressure.  Although canagliflozin is approved for use with the GP -1 receptor agonists, it 
is unclear whether they produce an additive, or even synergistic, effect to reduce body weight and 
blood pressure.  Therefore, in the present study we have chosen to examine combination therapy 
with canagliflozin and liraglutide.  
 Preliminary Results : To examine the effect of lowering the plasma glucose concentration  
with a SGLT2 inhibitor  on the rate of endogenous (primarily reflects hepatic) glucose production, 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  9 
V3    08/11/16  we treated  T2DM individuals  with dapagliflozin , which lowers the plasma glucose concentration 
by inhibiting renal glucose re absorption and producing glucosuria. 15 T2DM subjects (age=54 +4, 
BMI=32.7 +2.7 kg/m2, HbA1 c= 8.3 +0.2%) treated with metformin alone or in combination with a 
sulfonylurea participated in the study. Subjects receive d dapagliflozin (10 mg/day, n= 12) or 
placebo (n= 6) for 2 days and HGP  was measured before and after dapagliflozin administration . 
Subjects were admitted to the Clinical Research Center (CRC) for 3 days. On day 1, basal HGP  
was measured with 3-3H-glucose. Measurement of HGP was performed at 6 AM following a  
10hour overnight fast. At 6 AM, s ubjects received a prime (25 µC i X FPG/100 ) -continuous (0.25 
µCi/min) infusion of 3-3H-glucose . Arterialized blood (heated hand technique) was drawn from a 
catheter placed retrogradely in  a vein in the dorsum of the hand. After a 3 hour tracer equilibration 
period, 4 blood samples (-20, -10, -5, and 0 minutes) were obtained and plasma insulin, glucagon, 
and glucose concentrations and 3 -3H-glucose specific activity  were measured . On day 2, subjects 
received a 3-3H-glucose infusion as o n day 1  and the tritiated glucose infusion was continued until 
1 PM. A fter a 3 hour  tracer  equilibration period, subjects received dapagliflozin or placebo (at 9 
AM) and blood samples were drawn eve ry 20 minutes for 4 hours  after drug administration . Plasma 
glucose, insulin, and glucagon concentrations and 3-3H-glucose specific activity were measured. 
On day 3, subjects received a second dose of dapagliflozin or placebo and HGP  was measured  as 
described for day 1 . 24-hour urinary collection s, to quantitate urinary glucose excretion , were 
obtained on days  1, 2 and 3. Dapagliflozin caused a significant increase in urinary glucose 
excre tion (78+18 and 91 +23 gram s/day on days 2 and 3after dapagliflozin, respectively )compared 
to 2+1 grams/ day on day 1 (before dapagliflozin) (p<0.0001). Figure 1 depicts the fasting plasma 
glucose, insulin and glucagon concentrations and the rate of HGP measured  on day 2 ( before  and 
immediately  after the start of dapagliflozin ). 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  10 
V3    08/11/16   
Figure 1:  Plasma glucose (A) , insulin (C) , and glucagon (D) concentration and the rate of HGP  
(B) before and immediately after dapagliflozin and placebo  administration at time zero.  
 The plasma glucose concentration decreased similarly in subjects receivi ng dapagliflozin 
and placebo ( by 37+18 and 38 + 13 mg/dl, respectively , at 240 minutes ). The decrease in the 
plasma glucose concentration in subjects receiving placebo can be explained by the prolong ed 
fasting period (~20 hours) . Consistent with this, the rate of HGP decreased significantly in subjects 
receiving placebo from 2.10 +0.24 at baseline to 1.40 +0.16 mg/kg.min at the end of the study 
(p<0.001).In marked contrast, during the first 30 mi nutes following dapagliflozin administration, 
HGP initially decreased slightly and then increased progressively (Figure 1B) such that the rate of 
HGP during the last 40 minutes of the study was above baseline (2.32 + 0.42 versus 2.20 +0.28 
mg/kg.min, P=0.12). The mean difference in HGP  between dapagliflozin -treated  and placebo -
treated subjects (0.70 +0.34 mg/kg.min , p<0.001 ) virtually  is identical to the amount of glucose 
excreted in the urine in dapagliflozin -treated subject s (~15 grams). Thus, the decrease in FPG in 
placebo -treated subjects was entirely accounted for by a decline in HGP , while the decline in FPG 
in dapagliflozin -treated subjects was entirely accounted for by renal glucose excretion. On day 3, 
the fasting plasma glucose concentration was reduced by 23 mg/dl in dapagliflozin -treated 
subjects, while the FPG increased by 5 mg/dl  in placebo -treated subjects. The blunted decline in 
FPG concentration in dapagliflozin -treated subjects was explained by a 16% increase in HGP 
Time (min)0 60 120 180 240Plasma Glucose (mg/dl)120135150165180
Placebo
DapagliflozinDrug Ingestion
Time (min)0 60 120 180 240Plasma Insulin (uU/ml)46810
Placebo
DapagliflozinDrug Ingestion
Time (min)0 60 120 180 240EGP (mg/kg.min) 
1.01.52.02.5Drug Ingestion
Dapagliflozin
Placebo
Time (min)0 60 120 180 240Plasma Glucagon 
5560657075
Dapagliflozin
PlaceboDrug
IngestionA. C. D. B. 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  11 
V3    08/11/16  (from 2.20 +0.25 to 2.56 + 0.52, P<0.05) . There was no significant change in HGP  in subjects who 
received placebo. On  day 3, HGP remained elevated in dapagliflozin -treated subjects  (0.36 
mg/kg.min) and result ed in the addition of ~47 grams glucose per day to the circulation. This 
amount of glucose  (~47 grams) , produced  as a result of the increase in HGP, was  equal  to 
approximately  one half (52%) of the amount of glucose excreted in the urine secondary to SGLT2 
inhibiti on by dapagliflozin. Thus, the increase in HGP  in response to glucosuria offsets , by at least  
half, the  amount  of glucosuria  produced by inhibiting SGLT2 . If the increase in HGP  had been 
prevented, the decrease in the FPG caused by dapagliflozin wo uld have been at least  double that 
achieved with the drug.   
 The p lasma insulin concentration decreased progressively in both placebo -treated and 
dapagliflozin -treated groups on  day 2 . On day 3, the plasma insulin concentration in both groups 
was unchanged compared to day 1, while the plasma glucagon concentration progressively 
increased in subjects receiving dapagliflozin on day 2 (Figure 1D) and did not change in placebo -
treated subjec ts. On day 3 , the plasma glucagon concentration  was 32% higher compared to day 1 
(p<0.05) in dapagliflozin -treated subjects, while there was no significant change in plasma 
glucagon concentration in placebo -treated subjects.  The progressive decline in pla sma insulin 
concentration (despite the rebound increase in HGP and plasma glucose concentration ) and the 
paradoxical rise in plasma glucagon concentration facilitate the increase in HGP and plasma 
glucose concentration following dapagliflozin administratio n. 
 
RESEARCH HYPOTHESIS:  
 We hypothesize that the glucosuria produced by the inhibition of SGLT2 triggers an 
increase in the rate of HGP to compensate for the urinary glucose loss in an attempt to  maintain  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  12 
V3    08/11/16  the plasma glucose concentration  constant at the fasting level . Based upon our preliminary data, 
we hypothesize that the rise in plasma glucagon concentration , in concert with the decline  in 
plasma insulin  concentration , is the critical trigger that mediates the compensatory rise in HGP.  
The compensatory increase in HGP  offsets by ~50% the amount  of glucose lost in  the urine. This 
“paradoxical” increase in HGP attenuates the decrease in plasma glucose co ncentration and 
A1cand reduces  the clinical efficacy of the SGLT2 inhibitor.  Further, we hypothesize that 
combination therapy with an incretin -based agent, e.g. liraglutide, plus an SGLT2 inhibitor will, 
by inhibiting glucagon and stimulating insulin secretion, prevent the compensatory rise in HGP 
and amplify the decrease in plasma  glucose concentration and A1c caused by the SGLT2 inhibitor.  
We also hypothesize that combination therapy with canagliflozin/liraglutide will cause an additive, 
or even synergistic, decrease in body weight/hepatic fat content/visceral fat content and 
systolic/diastolic blood pressure.  
 Significance:  Increased basal rate of HGP  and impaired suppression of HGP  following a 
meal are major cause s of fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia, respectively, in T2DM 
individuals (1 -9). Based on our preliminary data, we hypothesize that the increase in HGP in 
response to glucosuria indicates the presence of an interaction between the kidney and liver, i.e. 
“a reno -hepatic axis” that plays a pivotal role in the regulation of glucose homeos tasis. The present 
study will provid e novel insights about  the regulation of glucose homeostasis, and has  important  
clinical implications. Although SGLT2 inhibitors produce large glucosuria and promote 2 -3 kg 
weight loss,  the decline in A1c (0.6 -0.8%)  is less than expected  (11). In NGT individuals , the 
presence of a “reno -hepatic axis” that leads to a compensatory increase in HGP in response to 
glucosuria and  maintains the FPG within the normal range represents a protective response against 
the development of hypoglycemia. On the other hand, the “compensatory” increase in HGP  in 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  13 
V3    08/11/16  T2DM individuals is paradoxical in that it occurs while the plasma glucose concentration is well 
within the hyperglycemic ran ge and opposes by ~50% the urinary glucose lo ss produced by 
SGLT2 inhibitors. This  markedly attenuates the glucose lowering effect of the SGLT2 inhibitors. 
The present study will help to elucidate  the mechanisms that mediate the rise in HGP in response 
to glucosuria and  allow the development of strategies to prevent this compensatory rise in HGP 
and increase the efficacy of SGLT2 inhibitors. Our preliminary data suggest a n important  role for 
increased glucagon secretion in mediating the “reno -haptic” intera ction. In this study, we will 
examine the ability of liraglutide  to block the increase in plasma glucagon concentration and 
subsequent stimulation of  HGP in response to canagliflozin -induced glucosuria. Liraglutide  
stimulate s insulin and inhibit s glucagon secretion . Therefore, it has  the potential to  prevent the 
compensatory rise in HGP following canagliflozin administration and provide  an additive , even 
synergistic , decrease in the plasma glucose concentration and HbA1c. Further, we anticipate th at 
combination therapy with canagliflozin plus liraglutide will produce an additive, even synergistic , 
effect to reduce body fat content and blood pressure.  
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND METHODS  
 Subjects:  45subjects with T2DM according to the ADA criteria will participate in the 
study . Subjects must be  between 18-70 years of age,  drug naïve or on a stable dose (more than 3 
months) of metformin  or on metformin and a sulfonylurea  and have HbA1c >7.0% and <10.0%. 
Subjects taking drugs known to affect glucose metabo lism (other than metformin) will be 
excluded. Other than diabetes, subjects must be in good general health as determined by physical 
exam, medical history, blood chemistries, CBC, TSH, T4, and urinalysis . Only subjects whose 
body weight has been stable (± 3 lbs) over the preceding three months and who do not participate 
in an excessively heavy exercise program will be included.  Individuals with evidence of 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  14 
V3    08/11/16  proliferative diabetic retinopathy or plasma cre atinine >1.4 females or >1.5 males  or eGFR< 60 
ml/min.172m2 will be excluded.    
 
 Study design: Each subject will receive the following: (i) quantitation of basal hepatic 
glucose production with 3 -3H-glucose; (ii) OGTT with measurement of plasma glucose, i nsulin, 
C-peptide, and glucagon; (iii) determination of total body fat content with DEXA; (iv) 
measurement of hepatic, visceral, and abdominal subcutaneous fat content with MRS/MRI; (v) 24 -
hour continuous blood pressure monitoring; (vi) A1c x 2 and then st arted on one of the following 
therapies for 4 months:  (1) canagliflozin  (film -coated tablet) , 100 mg/day , increased to 300 
mg/day after week two   if tolerated without side effects ; (2) liraglutide, 1.2 mg/day, increased to 
1.8 mg/day after week two  if tolerated without side effects ; (3) canagliflozin, 100 mg/day, plus 
liraglutide, 1.2 mg/day, increased to  300 mg/day and  1.8 mg/day , respectively  at week two , if 
tolerated without side effects .  
 Visit 1: Screening . After a 10 hour overnight fast, m edical history will be  obtained and 
physical exam is performed. Blood will be drawn for FPG, routine blood chemistries  (including 
renal function tests) , lipid profile, A1c, and thyroid function. An ECG, u rinalysis  and pregnancy 
test will be performed.  DEXA and OGTT will be performed and 24 -hour blood pressure 
monitoring will be initiated . Preventative foot exam will be performed (see description in follow -
up section).  
 Visit 2 :  Hepatic, visceral, and subcutaneous abdominal fat content  will be measured by 
MRI/MRS  after an overnight fast . 
 Visit 3: The rate s of endogenous (primarily hepatic) glucose production and whole body 
glucose disposal  will be measured with 3 -3H-glucose . Subjects will report to the CRC at 6 AM 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  15 
V3    08/11/16  after a 10 hour overnight fast. At 6 AM a catheter will be placed into an ant ecubital vein and a 
prime ( 40 uCi x FPG/100) -continuous (0.4 uCi) infusion of [3 -3H]-glucose will be started and 
continued until 3 PM. At 8 AM, a second catheter will be placed retrogradely in a vein on the 
dorsum of the h and, which is placed in a heated box (70°C)for sampling of arterialized blood. 
After 3 hours of tracer equilibration, blood samples will be drawn from the catheter on the dorsum 
of the hand at -30,-20,-15,-10,-5 and 0 (time zero is drug ingestion time) min utes. At 9 AM, blood 
samples will be obtained from the retrograde catheter on the dorsum of the hand every 20 minutes 
from 9 AM to 3 PM. Plasma glucose, insulin, C -peptide, glucagon, cortisol, growth hormone, and 
catecholamine concentrations, and [3 -3H]-glucose specific activity will be measured. Urine will 
be collected from 6 to 9 AM and from 9 AM to 3 PM. Urinary volume and urinary glucose 
concentration will be measured to obtain urinary glucose excretion. The study will end at 3 PM 
and subjects will  be allowed to return home.  
 Visit 4: After completing visit 3 , subjects will return  to the CRC within 7 -14 days for a 
repeat measurement of HGP with tritiated glucose as per visit 3, with the following exception:  at 
time zero (at 9 AM) , using a table of random numbers, subjects will be randomized  to receive one 
of the following :(i) canagliflozin  (100 mg orally ) n=15 ; (ii) liraglutide (1.2 mg sc) ; n=15; or (iii) 
canagliflozin 1 00 mg, plus liraglutide, 1.2 sc; n=15.  We will also draw blood to monitor kidney 
function.  Prior to initiation of therapy, subjects have a one hour session with a dietician who will 
discuss a nutritionally balanced, weight maintaining diet.  
 After completion of the above stud ies, subjects will continue to take canagliflozin, 
liraglutide, or canagliflozin plus liraglutide for 4 months.  Subjects will return for follow up visits 
at weeks 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 15 and 16. During each follow -up visit we will draw blood to monitor 
kidney fun ction. We will also draw some blood to measure A1c, lipid profile and FPG (fasting 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  16 
V3    08/11/16  plasma glucose) and weight and blood pressure will be measured. Measurements for A1c and lipid 
profile will be taken during visits 15 or 16, not on both. In addition, preven tative foot exams will 
be done on a monthly basis (see description in follow -up section).    During weeks 15 -16 
measurement of total body fat (DEXA), hepatic/visceral/abdominal subcutaneous fat content 
(MRS/MRI), OGTT, 24 -hour blood pressure monitoring, and  HGP (as described in visits 4) will 
be repeated.  
Schedule of events for Visits 1 -4 
Visit 1:  
- Screening procedures (including tests to monitor renal function and preventative foot 
exam) – about 60 -90 minutes  
- Test 1: Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT) – about 2 hours  
- Test 2: DEXA scan – about 10 minutes  
- Test 3: 24 -hour blood pressure monitoring – carried out over a 24 hour period during 
normal daily life  
 
Visit 2:  
- MRI or an MRS – about 2 hours  
 
Visit 3:  
- HGP (hepatic glucose production) measurement  
- Cathete r placed at 6AM (elbow); small amount of radioactive glucose given  
o Infusion continued until 3PM  
- 2nd catheter placed at 8AM (hand); hand placed in heated box  
- From 8:30AM to 9AM blood samples will be drawn from hand at 6 time points 
within 30 minutes ( -30, -20, -15, -10, -5 and 0)  
- At 9AM blood samples will be drawn from the hand every 20 minutes from 9AM 
to 3PM.  
- 6AM – 9AM there will be one urine collection  
- 9AM -3PM there will be one urine collection  
- Procedure ends at 3PM  
 
Visit 4:  within 7 -14 days of visit 3  
- Repeat HGP as in Visit 3  
- Difference: at 9AM (time 0) the subject will be  randomly assigned one of the 
following: (i) canagliflozin (100 mg orally) alone, (ii) liraglutide (1.2 mg 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  17 
V3    08/11/16  subcutaneously) alone, or (iii) both canaglifloz in 100 mg and lirgaglutide 1.2 mg 
sc 
- Renal function tests  
 
** Return home with instructions on taking medication assigned during visit 4 for 4 months.  
 
Follow -up visits  
- At weeks 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 15 and 16 blood will be drawn for  A1c, lipid profile, renal 
function tests  (BMP on visits 4 -16) and, FPG (fasting plasma glucose), and weight 
and blood pressure will be measured.  
- 3 visits during weeks 15 and 16 for repeat testing  
- 1: DEXA scan (as in visit 1, test 2) ~ 10 min  
- 1: OGTT (as in visit 1, test 1) ~ 3 hours  
- 1: 24 -hour blood pressure monitoring (as in visit 1, test 3)  
- 2: MRI/MRS (as in visit 2) - ~2 hours  
- 3: HGP (as in visit 3) ~ 9 hours  
 
- Preventative foot exams will be done on a monthly bases during the study. These 
exams include the following:  
 
o Visual inspection of both feet  
o Monofila ment sensory tests for both feet  
o Pulse exams for both legs and feet  
 
 
Data Analysis and Statistical Methods:  
 The primary end point  of the study is the change in the rate of HGP during the last hour 
of the study (i.e. from 300 -360 minutes) following drug administration compared to the basal rate 
of HGP (before drug administration). This change in HGP will be compared among the 3 different 
treatment s (canagliflozin, liraglutide, canagliflozin plus liraglutide) with ANOVA. Post hoc 
analysis will be performed with paired t -test.  
 The rate of HGP will be calculated as previously described (18). Under steady -state post 
absorptive  conditions, the basal r ate of endogenous (primarily reflects hepatic) glucose appearance 
(Ra) equals the 3 -3H-glucose infusion rate divided by the steady state plasma tritiated  glucose 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  18 
V3    08/11/16  specific activity. After drug administration, non -steady conditions for 3 -3H-glucose specific 
activity prevail and the total rate of glucose appearance (Ra) is calculated from Steele’s equation.  
Ra will be calculated for each time point after the drug administration and compared to Ra in the 
placebo study.  
 Secondary end points  will be: (i) the de crease in the fasting plasma glucose concentration  
and A1c  at the end of the study compared to baseline, (ii) improvement in oral glucose tolerance 
and insulin secretion during OGTT; (iii) improvement in Matsuda index of insulin sensitivity 
during OGTT; (i v) change in plasma glucagon concentration at the end of the study compared to 
baseline ; (v) change in plasma insulin concentration at the end of the study compared to baseline ; 
(vi) change in total body, hepatic/visceral/abdominal subcutaneous fat content  at study end  
compared to baseline; (vii) change in 24 -hour blood pressure at study end compared to baseline .  
 Values will be presented as the mean + SD. The difference in HGP  and all secondary 
endpoints at  study end versus  baseline will be calculated and compared between each active 
treatment group  with ANOVA .    
We plan to perform additional analysis on plasma samples that were obtained during the study. 
We plan to carry out both lipidomic and metabolomic analyses on sampl es previously collected at 
baseline, week 2 and 16 for all 45 completers.  These analyses utilize GCMS to identify specific 
lipids and metabolites in plasma that are increased or decreased.  Using pathway analysis, this can 
provide insight into specific in tracellular defects that are present in individuals with type 2 
diabetes.  
Anticipated Results and Data Interpretation  
 Consistent with our preliminary data  with dapagliflozin  we anticipate tha t, after an initial 
decline , HGP  progressively will increase following canagliflozin administration  compared to the 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  19 
V3    08/11/16  baseline study . We anticipate that plasma glucagon concentration will increase following 
canagliflozin administration  and plasma insulin concentration will decline . Based upon previous 
studies  (42), we anticipate that a single administration of liraglutide  will cause an increase in 
plasma insulin concentration and a decrease in plasma glucagon concentration compared to the 
baseline study . The increase in plasma insulin and decrease in plasma gl ucagon concentration will 
result in greater decline  in both HGP and fasting plasma glucose concentration compared to the 
baseline study . We also anticipate that the increase in plasma glucagon concentration and rise in 
HGP following canagliflozin administr ation will be prevented when canagliflozin is co -
administered with liraglutide . Therefore, we anticipate an additive , and even synergistic , decrease 
in the plasma glucose concentration following the co -administration of canagliflozin plus 
liraglutide  compa red to either drug alone.   
 After 4 months of treatment, we anticipate that T2DM patients treated with canagliflozin 
plus liraglutide will have a greater decline in A1c, FPG, 24 -hour blood pressure, total body fat, 
hepatic fat, and visceral and abdominal subcutaneous fat content when compared to either 
canagliflozin alone or liraglutide alone.  We also expect to observe a greater improvement in beta 
cell function (insulin secretion/insulin resistance index) and insulin sensitivity (Matsuda index) 
during the OGTT in the canagliflozin/liraglutide group compared to the other two groups.  
 Sample Size Calculation:  In preliminary results, the difference in the rate of basal HGP 
during  the last hour between dapagliflozin -treated and placebo -treated individuals w as 0.70+0.34 
mg/kg.min (mean +SD). From this, w e computed that 15 individuals per group would provide 95% 
power to detect a similar difference in HGP between  (i)can agliflozin -treated versus can agliflozin  
plus liraglutide -treated individuals  and (ii) between  liraglutide -treated versus canagliflozin  plus 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  20 
V3    08/11/16  liraglutide -treated individuals at alpha =0.05. To ensure  15 completers  per group , we have set the 
sample size at 90.  
 
SAFETY  
All drugs can cause unwanted effects called side effects.  As of 28 September 2015 , approximately     
13173  subjects have received canagliflozin in completed or ongoing studies of 12 weeks or longer.    
Side effects found in  these studies that  are more likely to occur with canag liflozin include those 
below.  The subject should speak wi th the  doctor about any changes to his or her diet or other 
medications they are  taking:  
 
• Dizziness or lightheadedness upon standing - These adverse events, from a decrease in 
blood pressure, occur soon after starting canagliflozin and are more likely to occur in 
people on medicines to lower blood pressure including diuretics (water pills such as 
Lasix/furosemide),  on a low salt diet, older patients  or those who have reduce d kidney 
function. While subject is  taking canagliflozin, the subject  should try to avoid becoming 
dehydrated and should speak to the  doctor about any changes in his or her  diet or other 
medications.  This side effect may occur in up to 1 in 20 people on canagliflozin, or slightly 
more frequently in those at risk as describ ed above.  
 
• Hypoglycemia in patients taking other medications associated with hypoglycemia    
. If subject  takes canagliflozin with another medicine that can cause low blood sugar, such 
as a sulfonylurea or insulin, the subject’s  risk of getting low blood s ugar is higher. The 
dose of the subject’s  sulfonylurea medicine or insulin may need to be lowered while the 
subject  takes canagliflozin and the subject  should s peak to the  doctor about any changes in 
other medications. This side effect is very common and m ay occur in more than 1 in 10 
people on canagliflozin.  
Signs and symptoms of low blood sugar may include:  
o headache  
o drowsiness  
o weakness  
o dizziness  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  21 
V3    08/11/16  o confusion  
o irritability  
o hunger  
o fast heart -beat 
o sweating  
o shaking or feeling jitter  
 
• Increased urination and thirst  – Symptoms might include feeling thirsty , having a dry 
tongue, urinating more frequently or in larger amounts, an urgent need to urinate or more 
frequent urination  at night. These side effects may occur in up to 1 in 20 people taking 
canagliflozin . 
• Urinary tract infections  – Symptoms of urinary tract infections may include burning with 
urination, discomfort in passing urine, or fever.  This side effect may occur  in up to 1 in 
20 people on canagliflozin.  
• Allergic reaction including rash or hives  – These events can occur shortly after starting 
canagliflozin, are generally not serious or associated with other serious symptoms, such as 
breathing problems. This side effect may occur in up to 1 in 20 people on canagliflozin.  
• Constipation  – The side effec t of constipation may occur in slightly more than 1 in 50 
people on canagliflozin.  
• Nausea  - There is a slightly higher rate of nausea (stomach sickness or queasy sensation) 
with canagliflozin.  . The side effect of nausea may occur in slightly more than 1 in 50 
people on canagliflozin.  
 
• Laboratory changes that have been observed in clinical studies with canagliflozin  
o Blood test might show an increase in the LDL, or “bad”, cholesterol.  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  22 
V3    08/11/16  o Blood test might show an increase in serum potassium, phosphate and/or 
hemoglobin; decreases in serum urate can also occur.  These changes are generally 
not serious and not associated with serious symptoms.   
o A change in lab tests associated with kidney fu nction might occur. These changes 
have generally been temporary and may relate to hydration status.   During the 
study, the doctor regularly monitors kidney fu nction, and may discuss with subject 
any necessary changes in subject’s diet or other medications . 
o  
• Bone fractures may occur in up to 1 in 50 people per year on canagliflozin.  
 
• Amputation of the toes (and to a lesser extent the foot or leg) could occur in up to 1 in 
150 people per year on canagliflozin.  This risk is greater in those with a prior history of 
amputation, disease of the circulation involving the legs or in those with nerve damage 
due to diabetes.  
Side effects in patients not involved in clinical studies who have been prescribed canagliflozin to 
treat their diabetes include those below . It is difficult to know specifically how often these side 
effects occur or always be certain if they are more likely to occur as a result of canagliflozin 
because these were not reported in the manner similar to data collection in a clinical study.   
• Serious allergic reactions, including those with the symptoms of swelling of the face, 
throat, and/or tongue or breathing problems.    
 
• Related to changes in lab tests associated with kidney function, severe cases of decreases 
in kidney function have been  reported more commonly in patients who were dehydrated.  
Acute Kidney Injury : Sudden kidney injury (acute kidney injury) has happened to 
people taking canagliflozin. Talk to your doctor right away if you:  
o reduce the amount of food or liquid you drink for example, if you are sick or 
cannot eat or  
o you start to lose liquids from your body for example, from vomiting, diarrhea or 
being in the sun too long.  Seek medical attention immediately if you experience 
signs and symptoms while taking these medicines such  as: 
▪ Decreased urine  
▪ Swelling in your legs or feet  
 
• Infections of the urinary tract that can spread to the kidneys or into the bloodstream.  Symptoms 
may include high fever, increased heart rate and breathing, low blood pressure, low urine output 
and lower back pain. Call your doctor if you experience these symptoms.  
 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  23 
V3    08/11/16  • Diabetic ketoacidosis  - your blood may show increased levels of blood acids called 
ketones. Sometimes this can occur even if your blood sugar levels are not very high (e.g., less 
than 250 mg/ dL [13.9 mmol/L]). The risk of developing diabetic ketoacidosis may be increased 
with prolonged fasting, excessive alcohol consumption, dehydration, sudden reductions in 
insulin dose, or a higher need of insulin due to major surgery or serious illness. Symptoms may 
include difficulty breathing, nausea, vomiting, excessive thirst, rapid weight loss, abdominal 
pain, confusion, fruity -smelling breath, a sweet or metallic taste in your mouth, a different odor 
to your urine or sweat, and unusual fatigue or sleep iness. This side effect may occur in up 1 in 
1000 people with Type 2 diabetes. Call your doctor if you experience these symptoms. Do not 
stop or change study drug or diabetes medicines without first discussing with your doctor. There 
may be side effects wit h the use of canagliflozin that are not yet known.  Sometimes the 
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio  may learn new facts about the study 
drugs/treatments. It is possible that  this information might make the subject change their  mind 
about being in the study. If new  information is discovered, the study doctor will inform the 
subject  of such new information in a timely manner.  
o  
For Women:  
• Vaginal yeast infections and vaginal itching  - Symptoms such as vaginal itching, 
burning, irritation, odor or discharge. This side effect may occur in slightly more than 1 in 
10 women on canagliflozin.  
For Men:  
Yeast infection at the head of the penis  - Symptoms such as penile itching, irritation, burning, 
swelling, foul smelling discharge or pain. In 0.3% (1 in 300  
) of men who are not circumcised, this could lead to swelling of the foreskin, and require 
circumcision.   The side effect of yeast infection may occur in up to 1 in 20 men on canagliflozin.  
PREGNANCY  AND BIRTH CONTROL DURING THE STUDY  
Canagliflozin has been tested for its ability to cause harm to the fetus during pregnancy or cause 
birth defects. These studie s have been done in animals.   The studies that have been completed do 
not indicate that canagliflozin is associated with birth defects.    
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  24 
V3    08/11/16  Nonetheless, women who are pregnant, lactating or intend to become pregnant during the study 
will  not  be allowed to p articipate in the study.   Women who could possibly become pregnant must 
have a negative pregnancy test prior to starting on the study drug and report immediately to the 
study site if they suspect they are pregnant during the study.  
Women who are able to ha ve children and are heterosexually active , must  use birth control 
(contraception) during the study.   Birth control methods that can be used while in this study 
include:  avoiding sex, birth control pills, birth control injections or patch, intrauterine devi ce, 
barrier method (for example, condoms or diaphragm) combined with spermicide (foam, cream, or 
gel), or the male partner is sterile (e.g. sperm tubes are cut or blocked).   The type of birth control 
used must be discussed with the study doctor before the start of the study. The study doctor must 
approve the method the subject uses before the subject can enter the study.  
If the subject becomes pregnant during the study, he or she must tell the doctor immediately. The 
subject will have to stop taking the stu dy drug.   The doctor will advise the subject about medical 
care and will ask the subject to allow him/her to collect information about the pregnancy and the 
health of the subject’s baby.  
For male subjects, if his partner becomes pregnant, the subject must tell the study doctor 
immediately.  
The following are the risks associated with Liraglutide : 
Likely, not serious  
In 100 people, approximately 20 or more may have:  
• Nausea  
Less likely, not serious  
In 100 people, approximately 20 or less may have:  
• Back pai n  
• Nasopharyngitis  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  25 
V3    08/11/16  • Sinusitis  
• Dizziness  
• UTI 
• Influenza  
• Headache  
• Upper respiratory tract infection  
• Constipation  
• Vomiting  
• Diarrhea  
Rare and Serious  
In 100 people, approximately 5 or less may have:  
• Thyroid C -cell Tumors – There have been 4 reported cases of thyroid C -cell hyperplasia 
among Victoza -treated patients and 1 case in a comparator -treated patient (1.3 vs 0.6 cases per 
1000 patient -years).  
• Pancreatitis – There were 7 cases of pancreatitis among Victoza -treated patients and 1 cas e 
among comparator -treated patients (2.2 vs. 0.6 cases per 1000 patient -years). Five cases with 
Victoza were reported as acute pancreatitis and two cases with Victoza were reported as chronic 
pancreatitis.  
• Hypoglycemia may occur in patients taking other  antidiabetic medications such as a 
sulfonylurea or insulin but is uncommon in patients taking only metformin. Liraglutide taken with 
another medicine that can cause low blood sugar, such as a sulfonylurea, the risk of getting low 
blood sugar is increased.  The dose of sulfonylurea medicine may need to be lowered while taking  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  26 
V3    08/11/16  liraglutide and a physician should be contacted  about any changes in other medications. This side 
effect may occur in more than 1 in 10 people on liraglutide.  
 
Adverse Events and Seriou s Adverse Events  
I. Management of Safety Data  
This Study has been designated as an interventional study.  Janssen requirements for IIS 
interventional studies are all adverse events regardless of causality and special situations 
excluding those from subjects not exposed to a Janssen Medicinal Product  and product 
quality complaints with or without an adverse event will be reported, once the subject has 
signed and dated an Informed Consent Form is obtained until the subject has completed 
participation in the stu dy and for 30 days after the last dose of study drug.  
 
II. Definitions  
a. Adverse Event (AE)  
An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical study subject administered 
a medicinal (investigational or non -investigational) product. An adverse even t does not 
necessarily have a causal relationship with the treatment. An adverse event can therefore be 
any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal finding), symptom, or disease 
temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigatio nal or non - investigational) 
product, whether or not related to that medicinal (investigational or non -investigational) 
product. (Definition per International Conference on Harmonisation [ICH]).  
This includes any occurrence that is new in onset or aggravated in severity or frequency from 
the baseline condition, or abnormal results of diagnostic procedures, including laboratory test 
abnormalities.  
 
b. Adverse Events of Special Interest  
Events that Janssen Scientific Affairs is actively monitoring as a result of a previously 
identified signal (even if non -serious).  These adverse events are:   
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA),  Amputation   
 
The INSTITUTION and the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR) will transmit all AEs related to 
Diabetic ketoacidosis following exposure to a Janssen product under study in a DKA form 
provided by the COMPANY in accordance with Section 10,Transmission Methods, in English.  
If also an SAE, please submit Janssen within 24 -hours of becoming aware of the event(s).  
 
 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  27 
V3    08/11/16  c. Individual Case Safety Report (ICSR)  
A valid ICSR must contain the four minimum criteria required to meet regulatory 
reporting requirements.  
• an identifiable subject  (not disclosing the subject’s name and address)  
• an identifiable reporter (investigational site)  
• a Janssen medicinal product  
• an adverse event, outcome, or certain special situation  
 
The minimum information required is:  
• suspected Janssen product (doses, indication)  
• date of therapy (start and end date, if available)  
• batch or lot number, if available  
• subject details (subject ID and country)  
• gender  
• age at AE onset  
• reporter ID  
• adverse event detail (AE verbatim in English), onset date, relatedness, causality, action 
taken, outcome, (if available)  
• Janssen protocol ID  
 
d. Product Quality Complaint (PQC)  
A product quality compliant is related to a potential quality issue during manufacturing, 
packaging, release testing, stability monitoring, dose preparation, storage  or distribution 
of the product, or delivery system.  Not all PQCs involve a subject.  Lot and batch 
numbers are of high significance and need to be collected whenever available.  
 
Examples of PQC include but not limited to:  
• Functional Problem: e.g., altered delivery rate in a controlled release product  
• Physical Defect:  e.g. abnormal odor, broken or crushed tablets/capsules  
• Potential Dosing Device Malfunction: e.g.,  autoinjector button not working, needle 
detaching from syringe  
• Suspected Contamination  
• Suspected Counterfeit.  
 
e. Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
A serious adverse event based on ICH and EU Guidelines on Pharmacovigilance for 
Medicinal Products for Human Use is any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose:  
 
• Results in death  
• Is life-threatening  
(The subject was at risk of death at the time of the event. It does not refer to an 
event that hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe.)  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  28 
V3    08/11/16  • Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• Resu lts in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
• Is a suspected transmission of any infectious agent via a medicinal product  
• Is medically important*  
 
*Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited 
reporting is also appropriate in other situations, such as important medical events that may 
not be immediately life threatening or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize 
the subject or may require intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the 
definition above. These should usually be considered serious.  
 
NOTE: DEATH FOR ANY REASON SHOULD BE REPORTED AS A SERIOUS 
ADVERSE EVENT.  
 
For reports of hospitalization, it is the sign, symptom or diagnosis which led to the 
hospitalization that is the serious event for which details must be provided.  
 
Any event requiring in -patient hospital admission (or the prolongation of hospitalization) 
must be reported as an SAE. Events that do not meet the criteria for SAE reporting are:  
• Reasons described in the Protocol, e.g. drug administration, Protocol -required 
testing  
• Social reasons, e.g. overnight stay because of distance between home and hospital  
• Surgery or procedure planned and documented prior to entry into the Study.  
 
Any event requiring hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization that occurs during 
the study must be reported as a serious adverse event, except hospitalizations for the 
following:  
• Hospitalizations not intended to treat an acute illness or a dverse event (e.g., social 
reasons such as pending placement in long -term care facility)  
• Surgery or procedure planned before entry into the study. [Note: Hospitalizations 
that were planned before the start of data collection and where the underlying 
condit ion for which the hospitalization was planned has not worsened will not be 
considered serious adverse events. Any adverse event that results in a 
prolongation of the originally planned hospitalization is to be reported as a new 
serious adverse event.]  
 
The cause of death of a subject in a study within 30 days of the last dose of study drug, 
whether or not the event is expected or associated with the study drug, is considered a 
serious adverse event.  
 
f. Unlisted (Unexpected) Adverse Event/Reference Safety Info rmation  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  29 
V3    08/11/16  An adverse event is considered unlisted if the nature or severity is not consistent with the 
applicable product reference safety information. For a medicinal product(s) with a 
marketing authorization, the expectedness of an adverse event will be de termined by 
whether or not it is listed in the applicable product information.  
 
III. Special Situations   
Safety events of interest for a Janssen medicinal product that require expediting reporting 
and/or safety evaluation include, but are not limited to:  
• Drug e xposure during pregnancy (maternal and paternal)  
• Overdose of a Janssen medicinal product  
• Exposure to a Janssen medicinal product from breastfeeding  
• Suspected abuse/misuse of a Janssen medicinal product  
• Inadvertent or accidental exposure to a Janssen medi cinal product  
• Any failure of expected pharmacological action (i.e., lack of effect) of a Janssen 
medicinal product  
• Medication error involving a Janssen medicinal product (with or without patient 
exposure to the Janssen medicinal product, e.g., name confusion)  
• Suspected transmission of any infectious agent via a medicinal  
• Unexpected therapeutic or clinical benefit from use of a Janssen medicinal product  
 
These safety events may not meet the definition of an adverse event; however, they are 
treated in  the same manner as adverse events. Special situations should be recorded on 
the Adverse Event page of the CRF.  
 
Any special situation that meets the criteria of a serious adverse event should be recorded 
on a Serious Adverse Event Report Form and be repor ted to Janssen Scientific Affairs 
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event.  
 
IV. Pregnancy  
All initial reports of pregnancy must be reported to Janssen Scientific Affairs by the Sponsor 
Investigator within 24 hours of their awareness of the event  using the Serious Adverse 
Event Form. Abnormal pregnancy outcomes (e.g. spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, and 
congenital anomaly) are considered serious adverse events and must be reported using the 
Serious Adverse Event Form.  
 
Any subject who becomes pregnant during the study must be promptly withdrawn from the 
study and discontinue further study treatment.  
 
Because the effect of the Janssen medicinal product on sperm is unknown, pregnancies in 
partners of male subjects exposed to a Janssen medicinal product will be reported by the 
Sponsor Investigator within 24 hours of their awareness of the event  using the Serious 
Adverse Event Form.  Depending on local legislation this may require prior consent of the 
partner.  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  30 
V3    08/11/16   
Follow -up information regarding the outcome of the pregnancy and any postnatal sequelae 
in the infant will be required.  
 
V. Reporting Procedures for Adverse Events and Pregnancies [and/or Pregnancies in 
Partners]  
All adverse events, whether serious or non -serious, related or not related, special situations, 
pregnancy exposures and/or pregnancies in partners following exposure to a Janssen medicinal 
product are to be documented by the investigator and recorded in the CRF and in the subject’s 
source records. Investigators must record in the CRF their opinion concerning the relationship 
of the adverse event to a Janssen medicinal product.  
All (serious and  non-serious) adverse events reported for a Janssen medicinal product should 
be followed -up in accordance with clinical practice.  
 
All serious adverse events that have not resolved by the end of the study, or that have not 
resolved upon discontinuation of the subject's participation in the study, must be followed until 
any of the following occurs:  
• The event resolves  
• The event stabilizes  
• The event returns to baseline, if a baseline value/status is available  
• The event can be attributed to agents other than th e study drug or to factors unrelated to 
study conduct  
• It becomes unlikely that any additional information can be obtained (subject or health care 
practitioner refusal to provide additional information, lost to follow -up after demonstration 
of due diligence  with follow -up efforts)  
 
All serious adverse events, pregnancy exposures and/or pregnancies in partners for Janssen 
medicinal products under study should be reported directly by the Sponsor Investigator, 
within 24 hours of becoming aware,  to Janssen Scien tific Affairs using the Janssen 
Scientific Affairs Serious Adverse Event Report Form. In the event the study is blinded, the 
Sponsor Investigator will submit an unblinded SAE or pregnancy exposure report to Janssen 
Scientific Affairs.  
 
All follow -up inform ation for serious adverse events that are not resolved at the end of the 
study or by the time of patient withdrawal must be reported directly by the Sponsor 
Investigator, within 24 hours becoming aware , to Janssen Scientific Affairs using the 
Janssen Scien tific Affair’s Serious Adverse Event Report Form.  
 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  31 
V3    08/11/16  VI. Product Quality Complaints for Janssen Medicinal Products  
 
A PQC may have an impact on the safety and efficacy of the product. Timely, accurate, and 
complete reporting and analysis of PQC information from studies are crucial for the 
protection of patients, investigators, and Janssen Scientific Affairs , and are man dated by 
regulatory agencies worldwide. Janssen Scientific Affairs has established procedures in 
conformity with regulatory requirements worldwide to ensure appropriate reporting of PQC 
information.  Lot and/or Batch #s shall be collected or any reports of  failure of expected 
pharmacological action (i.e., lack of effect).  
 
All initial PQCs involving a Janssen product under study must be reported to Janssen 
Scientific Affairs by the Sponsor Investigator  within 24 hours after being made aware of 
the event.  
 
If the defect for a Janssen product under study is combined with either a serious adverse 
event or non -serious adverse event, the Sponsor Investigator  must report the PQC to Janssen 
Scientific Affairs according to the serious adverse event reporting timeli nes.  A sample of the 
suspected product should be maintained for further investigation if requested by Janssen 
Scientific Affairs . 
 
VII. Maintenance of Safety Information  
All safety data should be maintained in a clinical database in a retrievable format. The 
Institution and Sponsor Investigator shall provide all adverse events, both serious and non -
serious, in report format. However, in certain circumstances more frequent provision of 
safety data may be necessary, e.g. to fulfill a regulatory request, and as su ch the data shall be 
made available within a reasonable timeframe at Janssen Scientific Affair’s request.  
 
VIII.  Transmission Methods:  
The following methods are acceptable for transmission of safety information to Janssen 
Scientific Affairs:  
• Electronically via J anssen SECURE Email service (preferred)  
• For business continuity purposes, if SECURE Email is non -functional:  
o Facsimile (fax), receipt of which is evidenced in a successful fax transmission 
report  
• Telephone (if fax is non -functional).  
 
Please use the contact information and process information provided by Janssen Scientific 
Affairs.  
 
IX. Procedures for Reporting Adverse Events (AE), Serious Adverse Events (SAE), 
Pregnancy, and Product Quality Complaints (PQC) to Janssen Scientific Affairs  
 
A. AEs, SAEs, Speci al Situations and Pregnancy Reporting.  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  32 
V3    08/11/16  The Institution and the Sponsor Investigator  will transmit SAEs and Special Situations in a 
form provided by Janssen Scientific Affairs in accordance with Section VIII Transmission 
methods, in English within 24 -hours of becoming aware of the event(s).  
 
All available clinical information relevant to the evaluation of a related SAE or Special 
Situation is required.  
 
• The Institution and/or Sponsor Investigator  are responsible for ensuring that these cases 
are complete and  if not are promptly followed -up. A safety report is not considered 
complete until all clinical details needed to interpret the case are received. Reporting of 
follow -up information should follow the same timeline as initial reports.  
 
• Copies of any and all  relevant correspondences with regulatory authorities and ethics 
committees regarding any and all serious adverse events, irrespective of association with 
the Janssen Product under study, are to be provided to Janssen Scientific Affairs using a 
transmissio n method in Section VIII within 24 hours of such report or correspondence 
being sent to applicable health authorities.  
 
 
B. PQC Reporting  
The Institution and the Sponsor Investigator  will report any suspected PQC to the Janssen 
contact within 24 hours of becoming aware of the complaint.  The product should be 
quarantined immediately and if possible, take a picture.  
 
X. Reconciliation of SAEs  
At a minimum, on a quarterly basis and at the end of the Study, Janssen Scientific Affairs 
will provide to the Institut ion and/or Sponsor Investigator, a listing of all SAEs reported to 
Janssen Scientific Affairs.  The Sponsor Investigator will review this listing and provide any 
discrepancies to Janssen Scientific Affairs.  
 
Upon request, Institution and/or Sponsor Investi gator shall provide Janssen Scientific Affairs 
with a summary list of all SAEs, and AEs of Special Interest and Special Reporting Situation 
reports to date, for reconciliation purposes.  
 
XI. Dissemination of Safety Information from Janssen Scientific Affairs t o 
Institution/Sponsor Investigator  Sponsor Investigator will be responsible for submitting IND 
safety reports for the Study Product to Institution’s IRB in accordance with Federal regulations 
21 CFR 312.66.   
 
Janssen Scientific Affairs agrees to provide t o the Sponsor Investigator IND safety reports for 
the Study Product as they become available until all subjects in the Protocol have completed 
their last Study visit according to the Protocol (i.e. Last Subject Last Visit has occurred).  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  33 
V3    08/11/16   
All observed or volunteered AEs or suspected causal relationship to the study drugs or procedures 
will be reported.  For all AEs, the investigator must pursue and obtain information adequate both 
to determine the outcome of the AE and to assess whether it meets the criteria for classification as 
an SAE requiring immediate notification to Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC and to UTHSCSA IRB  
(per UPIRSO policy).  For all AEs, sufficient information should be obtained by the investigator 
to determine causality o f the AE.  For AEs with a causal relationship to the investigational product, 
follow -up by the investigator is required until the event is resolved or stabilized at a level 
acceptable to the investigator, and IRB.  
As part of ongoing safety reviews, any non -serious adverse event that is determined by the 
investigator to be serious will be reported as an SAE.  To assist in the determination of case 
seriousness, further information may be requested from the investigator to provide clarity and 
understanding of the event in the context of the clinical study.  
All AEs related to protocol procedures will be reported to the IRB, Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC 
and to FDA (by the study sponsor) . Subjects will self -report AEs occurring at all other times. (iii) 
Any clinically significant findings from ECGs, labs, vital sign measurements, other procedures, 
etc. that result in a diagnosis will be reported to the IRB and subjects physician for a follow up 
outside of the research study.  Any conditions that may put subje cts to risk will be grounds for 
withdrawing the subject from the study. Investigators will report to the IRB their assessment of 
the potential relatedness of each AE to study procedure, disease, or study drug via Unanticipated 
Problems Involving Risk to Su bjects or Others (UPIRSO) or AE Report.  
The Collection of UPIRSO begins after the subject has signed informed consent and has started 
the study procedures. If a subject experiences an UPIRSO after signing informed consent, the 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  34 
V3    08/11/16  event will NOT be collected u nless the investigator feels that the event may have been caused by 
a protocol procedure/study medication.  UPIRSOs will be reported to the IRB in according to the 
IRB policy. Study site personnel will alert the IRB (within 24 hours) of becoming aware of a ny 
life threatening or fatal events  via approved method.  Alerts issued via telephone are to be 
immediately followed with official notification. An SAE is any AE from this study that results in 
1 of the following outcomes:  
• death  
• initial or prolonged in sub ject hospitalization  
• a life -threatening experience (that is, immediate risk of dying)  
• persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• considered significant by the investigator for any other reason.  
Important medical events that may not result in death, be  life-threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered serious adverse drug events when, based upon appropriate 
medical judgment, they may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes liste d in this definition. All other AEs will be 
reported to the IRB once a year in the Continuing Review Report. As the PI/Sub -PI evaluates 
SAEs/AEs, actions will be taken to eliminate any hazards and/or changes that should be 
submitted to the IRB, if necessar y, will be considered.  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  35 
V3    08/11/16  Risks will be minimized by a careful screening process including medical history, physical 
exam, and review of complete blood count, coagulation tests, chemistry and electrocardiogram.  
Experienced study research personnel during the  visits and procedures and of at least one 
physician at all times (or on call during the 4 -day in -patient visit) further minimizes any potential 
risks.  
Severity Assessment  
If required, when documenting the AE, the investigator will use the adjectives MILD,  
MODERATE or SEVERE to describe the maximum intensity of the AE.    These intensity 
grades are defined as follows:  
MILD  Does not interfere with subject’s usual function  
MODERATE  Interferes to some extent with subject’s usual function  
SEVERE  Interferes sign ificantly with subject’s usual function  
The terms “serious” and “severe” are not synonymous.  The term “severe” is often used to 
describe the intensity (severity) of a specific event.  The event itself, however, may be of 
relatively minor medical significa nce.  This is not the same as “serious,” which is based on 
subject/event outcome or action criteria.  Accordingly, a severe event is not necessarily a serious 
event.  
Causality Assessment  
The investigator’s assessment of causality must be provided for all A Es.  The investigator must 
record the causal relationship in the CRF, as appropriate, and report such an assessment in 
accordance with the serious adverse event reporting requirements, if applicable.  An 
investigator’s causality assessment is the determina tion of whether there exists a reasonable 
possibility that the investigational product caused or contributed to an AE.  If the investigator 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  36 
V3    08/11/16  does not know whether or not the investigational product caused the event, then the event will be 
handled as “relate d to investigational product” for reporting purposes.  If the investigator’s 
causality assessment is “unknown but not related to investigational product”, this should be 
clearly documented on study records.  In addition, if the investigator determines an S AE to be 
associated with study procedures, the investigator must record this causal relationship in the 
source documents and CRF, as appropriate, and report such an assessment in accordance with 
SAE reporting requirements.  
Withdrawal Due to Adverse Events  
Withdrawal due to AE should be distinguished from withdrawal due to insufficient response, and 
recorded on the appropriate AE CRF.  When a subject withdraws due to an SAE, the SAE must 
be reported in accordance with the reporting requirements.  
Eliciting Ad verse Event Information and Reporting  
The investigator is to report all directly observed AEs and all AEs spontaneously reported by the 
study subject.  Each study subject will be questioned about AEs.  Each AE is to be assessed to 
determine if it meets the  criteria for SAEs.  If an SAE occurs, expedited reporting will follow 
appropriate regulations.  
Serious Adverse Event Reporting Requirements  
If an SAE is determined as UPISRO, it will be reported to IRB in accordance with UPIRSO 
policy.  
In the rare event t hat the investigator does not become aware of the occurrence of an SAE 
immediately (e.g., an outpatient study subject initially seeks treatment elsewhere), the 
investigator is to report the event within 24 hr after learning such event and document the time  of 
first awareness of the AE.   
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  37 
V3    08/11/16  Non-Serious Adverse Event Reporting Requirements  
All AEs will be reported on the AE page(s) log.  AEs should be reported using concise medical 
terminology on the CRFs as well as on the form for collection of the SAE informa tion. 
Sponsor Reporting Requirements to Regulatory Authorities  
AE reporting, including suspected serious unexpected adverse reactions, will be carried out in 
accordance with applicable regulations. Expected AEs or AEs that are not related to the study 
will be reported on the annual progress report to the IRB.  
 The investigator also must notify the IRB of the occurrence of the SAE, in writing, as 
soon as is practicable and in accordance with local law  
 
Subject Monitoring  
Subjects will be monitored for AEs th roughout the study by the study unit staff.  Safety 
parameters, including laboratory results and ECGs, will be assessed by the principal investigator 
or his delegate using the site’s criteria for clinical laboratory and ECG acceptance ranges as 
suggested g uidelines in making the medical assessment.  
Scheduled safety measurements will be repeated according to appropriate SOPs or upon request 
from a physician.  Any abnormal repeated measurement will be evaluated by a physician and 
repeated if judged necessary.   Further action may be taken on the physician’s request.  
Subjects will be advised to notify their health care professionals (e.g., physician, dentist, and/or 
pharmacist) that they are participating in a clinical research study of a drug called synthetic 
glucagon for injection before taking any medicines or undergoing any medical procedure.  
Data Integrity  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  38 
V3    08/11/16  The data collected during the study will be reviewed in a timely fashion by the PI or Sub -
Investigator to ensure that the studies are performed as approv ed by the IRB and the study 
medication is well tolerated, and that plasma glucose concentration during the study meets the 
targets of the study. In the case that the levels of plasma glucose concentrations do not meet the 
targets, the PI will decide which measures are required to achieve that.  The PI will convert the 
data in the sheet to electronic file and will be responsible for the data analysis. The PI will 
review the patient records with the nurse coordinator every month to ensure the safety of all 
study participants and that any encountered AE are within the expected frequency and severity.  
The Research Compliance Manager and/or UTHSCSA Compliance monitors may conduct 
periodic monitoring of the research protocol/procedure and participant records for c ompliance 
and adherence to the study protocol.  The monitoring tool used by the Research Compliance 
Manager will indicate the date of the review.   
Data will be discussed at the monthly Clinical Management Team with the PI or Sub -
Investigator. Safety data will also be assed at the submission of annual progress reports to the 
IRB.   
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  39 
V3    08/11/16  References : 
 
1) DeFronzo RA.  Banting Lecture. From the triumvirate to the ominous octet:  a new 
paradigm for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes 58:773 -795, 2009  
2) DeFronzo RA. Lilly Lecture: The triumvirate: β -cell, muscle, liver: a collusion responsible 
for NIDDM . Diabetes 37: 667 – 687, 1988  
3) DeFronzo RA, Ferrannini E, Simonson DC. Fasting hyperglycemia in non -insulin 
dependent diabetes mellitus: contributions of excessive hepatic glucose production and 
impaired tissue glucose uptake . Metabolism 38: 387 – 395, 1989  
4) Ferrannini E, Simonson DC, Katz LD, Reichard G, Bevilacqua S, Barrett EJ, Olsson M, 
DeFronzo RA. The disposal of an oral glucose load in patients with non -insulin dependent 
diabetes . Metabolism 37: 79– 85, 1988  
5) Chen YD, Jeng CY, Hollenbeck CB, Wu MS, Reaven GM. Relationship between plasma 
glucose and insulin concentration, glucose production, and glucose disposal in normal 
subjects and patients with non -insulin-dependent diabetes . J Clin Invest 82: 21– 25, 1988  
6) Jeng CY, Sheu WH, Fuh MM, Chen YD, Reaven GM. Relationship between hepatic 
glucose production and fasting plasma glucose concentration in patients with NIDDM . 
Diabetes 43: 1440 – 1444, 1994  
7) Magnusson I, R othman DL, Katz LD, Shulman RG, Shulman GI. Increased rate of 
gluconeogenesis in type II diabetes mellitus: a 13C nuclear magnetic resonance study . J 
Clin Invest 90: 1323 – 1327, 1992  
8) Consoli A, Nurjhan N, Reilly JJ, Jr, Bier DM, Gerich JE. Mechanism of incr eased 
gluconeogenesis in noninsulin -dependent diabetes mellitus: role of alterations in systemic, 
hepatic, and muscle lactate and alanine metabolism . J Clin Invest 86: 2038 – 2045, 1990  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  40 
V3    08/11/16  9) DeFronzo RA, Ferrannini E. Regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism in h umans . 
Diabetes Metab Rev 3: 415 – 460, 1987  
10) Edgerton DS, Johnson KM, Cherrington AD. Current strategies for the inhibition of hepatic 
glucose production  in type 2 diabetes. Front Biosci . 14:1169 -81, 2009.  
11) Cherrington AD . Banting Lecture 1997. Control of glucose uptake and release b y the liver 
in vivo. Diabetes 48:1198 -214, 1999  
12) Lin HV, Accili D. Hormonal regulation of hepatic glucose production  in health and 
disease. Cell Metab . 14:9 -19, 2011  
13) Sindelar DK, Chu CA, Venson P, D onahue EP, Neal DW, Cherrington AD. Basal hepatic 
glucose production is regulated by the portal vein insulin concentration. Diabetes 47: 523 -
9, 1998  
14) Gustavson SM , Chu CA , Nishizawa M , Neal D , Farmer B , Yang Y , Donahue EP , Flakoll 
P, Cherrington AD . Effects of hyperglycemia, glucagon, and epinephrine on renal glucose 
release in the conscious dog. Metabolism.  53:933 -41, 2004  
15) Cersosimo E, Zaitseva I N, Ajmal M Effects of beta -adrenergic blockade on hepatic and 
renal glucose production  during hypoglycemia in conscious dogs. Am J Physiol . 275(5 Pt 
1):E792 -7, 1998  
16) Abdul -Ghani MA, Norton L, Defronz o RA. Role of sodium -glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT 
2) inhibitors in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Endocr Rev . 32:515 -31, 2011.  
17) Cefalu WT, Leiter LA, Yoon K -H, Arias P, Niskanen L, Xie J, Balis  DA, Canovatchel W, 
Meininger G.  Efficacy and safety of canagliflozin versus glimeperide in patients with type 
2 diabetes inadequately controlled with metformin (CANTATA -SU):  52 week results from 
a randomised, double -blind, phase 3 non -inferiority trial.   Lancet 382:941 -950, 2013.  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  41 
V3    08/11/16  18) Merovci A, Solis, C, Daniele G, Eldor R, Fiorentino TV, Perez Z, Tripathy D, Xiong  J, 
Norton L, Abdul -Ghani MA, DeFronzo RA. Dapagliflozin  improves muscle  insulin 
sensitivity but t enhances endogenous glucose production. s. J. Clin. Invest. 124:509 -
14,2014.  
19). Stenlof K, Cefalu WT, Kim K -A, Alba M, Usiskin K, Tong C, Canovatchel W, 
Meininger G.  Efficacy and safety of canagliflozin monotherapy in subjects with type 2 
diabetes mellitus inadequately controlled with diet an d exercise.  DiabObesMetab 
15:372 -382, 2013.  
20). Gutzwiller JP, Tschopp S, Bock A, Zehnder CE, Huber AR, Kreyenbuehl M, Gutmann 
H, Drewe J, Henzen C, Goeke B, Beglinger C.  Glucagon -like peptide 1 induces 
natriuresis in healthy subjects and in insulin -resistant obese men.  J ClinEndocrinolMetab 
89:3055 -3061, 2004.  
21). Chilton R, Wyatt J, Nandish S, Oliveros R, Lujan M.  Cardiovascular comorbidities of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus:  defining the potential of glucagonlike peptide -1-based 
therapies.  Am J Med 12 4(suppl 1):S35 -S53, 2011.  
22) Stumvoll  M, Meyer C, Kreider M, Perriello G, Gerich  J. Effects of glucagon on renal and 
hepatic glutamine gluconeogenesis in normal postabsorptive humans. Metabolism . 
47:1227 -32, 1998.  
23) Basu A, Caumo A, Bettini F, Gelisio A, Alzaid A, Cobelli C: Impaired basal glucose 
effectiveness in NIDDM: contribution of defects in glucose disappearance and production, 
measured using an optimized minimal model independent protocol. Diabetes  46:421 -432, 
1997  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  42 
V3    08/11/16  24) Nielsen MF, Basu R, Wise S, Caumo A, Cobelli C, Rizza RA: Normal glucose -induced 
suppression of glucose production but impaired stimulation of glucose disposal in type 2 
diabetes : evidence for a concentration -dependent defect in upt ake. Diabetes  47:1735 -1747, 
1998  
25) Kelley DE, Mandarino LJ: Hyperglycemia normalizes insulin -stimulated skeletal muscle 
glucose oxidation and storage in noninsulin -dependent diabetes  mellitus. J Clin Invest 
86:1999 -2007, 1990  
26) DeFronzo RA, Ferrannini E, Hendl er R, Felig P, Wahren J: Regulation of splanchnic and 
peripheral glucose uptake by insulin and hyperglycemia in man. Diabetes  32:35 -45, 1983  
27) Connolly CC, Myers SR, Neal DW, Hastings JR, Cherrington AD. In the absence of 
counterregulatory hormones, the increase in hepatic glucose production  during insulin -
induced hypoglycemia  in the dog is initiated in the liver rather than the brain.  45:1805 -13, 
1996.  
28) DeFronzo RA, Ferrannini E, Hendler R, Felig P, W ahren J: Regulation of splanchnic and 
peripheral glucose uptake by insulin and hyperglycemia in man. Diabetes  32:35 -45, 1983  
29)  Katz LD, Glickman MG, Rapoport S, Ferrannini E, DeFronzo RA.  Splanchnic and 
peripheral disposal of oral glucose in man. Diabetes 32:675–679, 1983.  
30) Mari A , Wahren J , DeFronzo RA , Ferrannini E . Glucose absorption and production 
following oral glucose: comparison of compartmental and arteriovenous -difference 
methods. Metabolism 43:1419 -25, 1994.  
31) Schernthaner G, Gross JL, Rosenstock J, Guarisco M, Fu M, Yee J, Kawaguchi  M, 
Canovatchel W, Meininger G.  Canagliflozin compared with sitagliptin for patients with 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  43 
V3    08/11/16  type 2 diabetes who do not have adequate glycemic control with metformin plus 
sulfonylurea.  Diabetes Care 36:2505 -2515, 2013 . 
32) Rosenstock J, Aggarwal N, .Polidori D,  Zhao Y, Usiskin K, Capuano G, Canovatchel W.  
Dose -ranging effects of canagliflozin, a sodium -glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor, as add -
on to metformin in subjects with type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes Care 35:1232 -1238, 2012.  
33) Haring H -U, Merket L, Seewaldt -Becker E, Weimer M, Meinicke T, Woerle HJ, Broedl 
U.  Empagliflozin as add -on to metformin plus sulfonylurea (SU) for 24 weeks improves 
glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2DM).  Diabetes 62(suppl 1):A279, 
2013.  
34) Kovacs C, Seshiah V, Swallow R,  Jones R, Rattunde H, Woerle HJ, Broedl UC.  
Empagliflozin as add -on to pioglitazone with or without metformin improves glycemic 
control in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2DM).  Diabetes 62(suppl 1):A290, 2013.  
35) Haring H -U, Merker L, Seewaldt -Becker E, Wei ner M, Meinicke T, Broedl UC.  
Emphagliflozin as add -on to metformin for 24 weeks improves glycemic control in patients 
with type 2 diabetes (T2DM).  Diabetes 62(suppl 1):A282, 2013.  
36) Stenlof K, Cefalu WT, Kim K -A, Alba M, Usiskin K, Tong C, Canovatchel W, 
Meininger G.  Efficacy and safety of canagliflozin monotherapy in subjectswithtype 2 
diabetes mellitus inadequatelycontrolledwithdiet and exercise.  DiabObesMetab 15:372 -
382, 2013.  
37) Bailey  CJ, Iqbal N, T'joen C, et.al. Dapagliflozin monotherapy in drug -naïve patients with 
diabetes: a randomized -controlled trial of low -dose range . Diabetes ObesMetab . 14:951 -
9, 2012  
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  44 
V3    08/11/16  38) Henry RR , Murray AV , Marmolejo MH , et.al. Dapagliflozin, metformin XR, or both: 
initial pharmacotherapy for type 2 diabetes, a randomised controlled trial. Int J ClinPract.  
66:446 -56, 2012  
39) Bailey CJ , Gross JL , Pieters A , et.al. Effect of dapagliflozin in patients with type 2 
diabetes  who have inadequate glycaemic control with metformin: a randomised, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial . Lancet 375:2223 –33, 2010 . 
40) Nauck MA , Del Prato  S, Meier JJ , et.al. Dapagliflozin  versus glipizide as add -on therapy 
in patients with type 2 diabetes who have inadequate glycemic control with metformin: a 
randomized, 52 -week, double -blind, active -controlled noninferiority trial. Diabetes Care.  
34:2015 -22, 2011  
41) Devineni D, Morrow L, Hompesch M, Skee D, Vandebosch A, Murphy J, Ways K, 
Schwartz S.  Canagliflozin improves glycaemic control over 28 days in subjects with type 
2 diabetes not optimally controlled on insulin.  Diabetes ObesMetab 14:539 -545, 2012.  
42) Sha S, Devineni D, Ghosh A, Polidori D, Chien S, Wexler D, Shalayda K, Demarest K, 
Rothenberg P.  Canagliflozin, a novel inhibitor of sodium glucose co -transporter 2, dose 
dependently reduces calculated renal threshold  for glucose excretion and increases 
urinary glucose excretion in healthy subjects.  Diabetes ObesMetab 13:669 -672, 2011.  
43) Cervera A, Wajcberg E, Sriwijitkamol A, Fernandez M, Zuo P, Triplitt C, Musi N, 
DeFronzo RA, Cersosimo E.  Mechanism of action of exen atide to reduce postprandial 
hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes.  Am J PhysiolEndocrinolMetab 294:E846 -E852, 2008.  
44) Balas  B, Baig MR, Watson C, Dunning BE, Ligueros -Saylan M, Wang Y, He YL, Darland 
C, Holst JJ, Deacon CF, Cusi K, Mari A, Foley JE, DeFronzo  RA. The dipeptidyl peptidase 
IV inhibitor vildagliptin suppresses endogenous glucose production and enhances islet 
 
14-322H, Cersosimo, Form BB, 03 -19-18, AMD  45 
V3    08/11/16  function after single -dose administration in type 2 diabetic patients. J 
ClinEndocri nolMetab . 92:1249 -55, 2007 . 
45) Bunck  MC, Comer A, Eliasson B, Heine RJ, Shaginian RM, Taskinen MR, Smith U, Yki -
Jarvinen H, Diamant M.  Effects of exenatide on measure of -cell function after 3 years 
in metformin -treated patients with type 2 diabetes.  Diabe tes Care 34:2041 -2047, 2011.  
46) Pratley  RE, Nauck M, Bailey T, Montanya E, Cuddihy R, Filetti S, Thomsen AB, 
Sondergaard RE, Davies M.  Liraglutide versus sitagliptin for patients with type 2 diabetes 
who did not have adequate glycaemic control with metformin: a 26 -week,randomised, 
parallel -group, open -label trial.  Lancet 375:147 -1456, 2010.  
 
 