Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL #16-308-Redacted 
XIENCE 90  Study  
 
Version Number  Version 3.0 
Date  May 25, 2018 
Principal  Investigator  
 Roxana Mehran, MD,  
Professor of Medicine,  
Director, Interventional Cardiovascular Research and Clinical 
Trials at the Zena and Michael A. Weiner Cardiovascular Institute 
at Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine 
New York, NY  
Planned Number of Sites 
and Region(s)  Approximately 100 sites globally  
Abbott Vascular Medical 
Expert  Charles A Simonton , MD  
Chief Medical Officer  
Trial Type  Prospective, single arm, multi -center, open label  trial  
Sponsor /Data Monitoring  
 Abbott Cardiovascular Systems, Inc.,  
A subsidiary of Abbott Vascular, Inc.  
3200 Lakeside Drive 
Santa Clara, CA  95054  
Trial Monitor  Novella Clinical LLC  
1700 Perimeter Parkway           
 Morrisville, NC 27560   
Electronic Data Capture 
Software  Medidata RAVE  
Clinical Events Committee  Cardiovascular Research Foundation  
1700 Broadway, 9th Floor 
New York, NY 10019  
Data Safety Monitoring 
Board  Axio  Research  
2601 4th Avenue, Suite 200 
Seattle, WA 98121  
Protocol Author  Lijuan Jenny Wang , PhD 
 
  

Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
COMPLIANCE STATEMENT:  
This trial will be conducted in accordance with this Protocol, the Declaration of Helsinki, applicable Good Clinical Practices and regulations (e.g., US 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, 21 CFR Part 812, 45 CFR Part 46 and OUS ISO14155) and the appropriate local legislation(s). The most stringent requirements, guidelines , or regulations must always be 
followed. The conduct of the trial will be approved by the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Ethics Committee (EC) of the respective investigational site and by the applicable regulatory authorities (e.g., FDA, PMDA, MHRA, etc.). 
 
  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
Trial Name and 
Number  XIENCE 90  Study: #16 -308-Redacted  
 
Title  XIENCE 90  Study  
Trial Device  The commercially approved XIENCE family of coronary drug -
eluting stents1 manufactured by Abbott Vascular, Inc., including: 
• XIENCE Xpedition (stent diameter 2.5, 2.75, 3.0, 3.25, 3.5 
and 4.0 mm, stent length 8, 12, 15, 18, 23 and 28 mm), XIENCE Xpedition SV (stent diameter 2.25 mm, stent length 
8, 12, 15, 18, 23, 28 mm) and XIENCE Xpedition LL 
Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System (stent diameter 
2.5, 2.75, 3.0, 3.25, 3.5 and 4.0 mm, stent length 33 and 38 mm).  
• XIENCE Alpine Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System : 
stent diameter 2.25, 2.5, 2.75, 3.0, 3.25, 3.5 and 4.0 mm; stent 
length 8, 12, 15, 18, 23, 28, 33, and 38 mm. Stent lengths 33 
mm and 38 mm are not available for 2.25 mm diameter stent.  
• XIENCE PRO
X Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System 
(OUS only)2: stent diameter 2.25, 2.5, 2.75, 3.0, 3.25, 3.5 and 
4.0 mm; stent length 8, 12, 15, 18, 23, 28, 33, and 38 mm. 
Stent lengths 33 mm and 38 mm are not available for 2.25 
mm diameter stent.  
• XIENCE PROA Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System 
(OUS only)3: stent diameter 2.0, 2.25, 2.5, 2.75, 3.0, 3.25, 3.5 
and 4.0 mm; stent length 8, 12, 15, 18, 23, 28, 33, and 38 mm. Stent lengths 33 mm and 38 mm are not available for 2.25 
mm diameter stent.  
• XIENCE Sierra Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System: 
stent di ameter 2.25, 2.5, 2.75, 3.0, 3.25, 3.5 and 4.0 mm; stent 
length 8, 12, 15, 18, 23, 28, 33, and 38 mm. 
The above XIENCE family stent system will hereinafter be called 
“XIENCE” in this study.   
 
    
1 The commercially approved XIENCE stent will be used in geographies where it is commercially available  
2 XIENCE PROX is a rebrand of the XIENCE Xpedition Stent System and is only available outside of the 
United States.  
3 XIENCE PROA is a rebrand of the XIENCE Alpine Stent System  and is only available outside of the United 
States.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
Objective  The objective of this trial  is to evaluate safety of 3-month dual 
antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) in subjects at high risk of bleeding 
(HBR) undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with 
XIENCE.  
 
Primary Objective:  to show non- inferiority of the primary endpoint 
of all death or all MI (modified ARC) from 3 to 12 months following 
XIENCE implantation in HBR subjects treated with  3-month DAPT 
compared to a historical control after propensity score adjustment.   
Secondary Objective:   
• To show superi ority of the major secondary endpoint of major 
bleeding ( Bleeding Academic Research Consortium [BARC] 
type 2-5) from 3 to 12 months following XIENCE implantation 
in HBR subjects treated with 3 -month DAPT  compared to a 
historical control after propensity sc ore adjustment.  
• To evaluate stent thrombosis  (ARC definite/probable) from 3 to 
12 months following XIENCE implantation in HBR subjects 
treated with 3 -month DAPT against  a performance goal (PG) . 
Targeted Number 
of Subjects  Approximately 2,000 subjects from approximately 100 sites 
globally, with at least 50% of subjects in the United States. Subject 
registration is capped at 300 per site.  
Clinical Trial 
Design  A prospective, single arm, multi -center, open label, non -randomized 
trial to evaluate the safety of 3- month  DAPT in HBR subjects 
undergoing PCI with XIENCE.  
Primary Endpoint  The primary endpoint is a composite rate of all death or all 
myocardial infarction (modified 4Academic Res earch Consortium 
[ARC] ) from 3 to 12  months. 
Major  Secondary 
Endpoints  • Major bleeding rate  (BARC type 2 -5) from 3 to 12  months.  
• Stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) from 3 to 12 months  
Secondary 
Endpoints  The following endpoints will be assessed from 3 to 12  months:  
• All death, cardiac death, vascular death, non-cardiovascular death  
 
 
   
4 Patients present any of the following clinical or imaging evidence of ischemia ( symptoms of ischemia;  ECG 
changes  indicative of new ischemia -  [new ST -T changes or new LBBB],  development of pathological Q 
waves;  or  imaging evidence of a new loss of  viable myocardium or a new regional wa ll  motion abnormality), 
AND confirmed with elevated cardiac biomarkers  per ARC criteria  (periprocedural MI: CK -MB > 3x URL or 
Troponin > 3x URL within 48 hours after PCI; CK- MB > 5x URL or Troponin > 5x URL within 72 hours after 
CABG; Assessment of CK -MB is preferred over troponin for the diagnosis of periprocedural MI, if possible. 
For spontaneous MI:  CK-MB > URL or Troponin > URL) (Circulation 2007; 116: 2344 -2351)   
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
• All myocardial infarction (MI) and MI attributed to target vessel 
(TV-MI, modified ARC)  
• Composite of cardiac death or MI (modified ARC)  
• All stroke, ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke  
• Clinically -indicated target lesion revascularization (CI -TLR)  
• Clinically -indicated  target vessel revascularization ( CI-TVR)  
• Target lesion failure (TLF, composite of cardiac death, TV -MI 
and CI -TLR)  
• Target vessel failure (TVF, composite of cardiac death, TV -MI 
and CI- TVR)  
• Major b leeding defined by the Bleeding Academic Research 
Consortium (BARC) type 3 -5  
Point of 
Registration  Subject registration will occur after the index procedure but prior to 
discharge and up to 3 days post index procedure, upon confirmation 
of the following:  
• Signed informed consent has been obtained;  
• Subject has met all the inclusion and none of the exclusion 
criteria (including both general and angiographic criteria).  
Planned staged procedures are allowed (recommend to be performed 
within 30 days). The site may consent the subject after the initial procedure. Subject registration will occur once the last staged procedure is performed and the last staged procedure is considered as the index procedure.  
Subject Follow -
Up Subjects registered in the trial will receive the following clinical 
follow -up: 
• 3 months (90 ±  7 days): office visit (Note: A formal office visit is 
required at 3- month follow -up to ensure a thorough clinical 
evaluation. A telephone contact is an option only for subjects 
who would otherwise be lost to follow-up due to being unable to 
complete an office visit, but a formal follow- up visit is still 
preferred at 3 months. ) 
• 6 months (180 ±  14 days): office visit/ telephone contact  (office 
visit is strongly recommended whenever possible) 
• 12 months (365 ±  28 days): office visit/ telephone contact  (office 
visit is strongly recommended whenever possible)  
Primary Analysis 
Sample Size Justification  To evaluate the safety of the 3 -month DAPT, non-inferiority (NI)  
will be tested comparing  3-month DAPT to XIENCE V USA 
historical control for the primary  endpoint of all death or all 
myocardial infarction (modified ARC) from 3 - to 12- month follow -
up in a “3 -month clear” population (defined as subjects who are free 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
from myocardial infarction [modified ARC], repeat coronary 
revascularization, stroke, or sten t thrombosis [ARC 
definite/probable] within 3 months (prior to 3 -month visit but at least 
90 days) after stenting AND have been compliant with 3 -month 
DAPT without interruption of either aspirin and/or P2Y12 receptor 
inhibitor for > 7 consecutive days).  
This analysis will be stratified by propensity score  with the following 
assumptions: 
 
• True event rate for the primary endpoint is assumed to be 
approximately 6.1% for both arms  
• One-sided alpha = 0.025 
• Attrition rate of 15% due to using “3-month clear” population for 
the XIENCE 90 3-month DAPT arm  
• Sample size: ~2,000 for the XIENCE 90 3-month DAPT arm and 
~1,150 for the XIENCE V USA control arm  
• Non-inferiority margin = 2.8% 
• Approximately 87% power   
Major  Secondary 
Analysis  Given the success of the primary analysis for the primary endpoint, 
the following major secondary analyses will be performed:  
• Superiority test for major  bleeding rate ( BARC type 2 -5) from 3 - 
to 12- month follow -up will be tested between  XIENCE 90  and 
the XIENCE V USA historical control stratified by propensity 
scores. 
 
• Stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) from 3- to 12-month 
follow -up of XIENCE 90 will be evaluated against  a pre-
specified PG.   
 
Details of the above major secondary analyses could be found in the 
Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  
Antiplatelet 
Medication  Antiplatelet Medication Loading Dose:  
• Subjects must receive a loading dose of aspirin AND a P2Y12 
inhibitor (Clopidogrel, Prasugrel or Ticagrelor). The dosages of 
aspirin and P2Y12 inhibitor shall be determined by physician per 
standard of care and label indication for loading dose usage. The choice of P2Y12 inhibitor is per site standard of care, but 
clopidogrel is strongly recommended for HBR subjects.  Per 
physician’s discretion, a loading dose of P2Y12 inhibitor may be 
omitted if the subject was on chronic usage for ≥ 7 days .   
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
 
Antiplatelet Medication Post -Procedure Daily Dose:  
• All subjects must receive ≥75 to ≤100 mg of aspirin daily 
throughout the study. All subjects must maintain a minimum of 
75 mg of clopidogrel daily or 5 or 10 mg of prasugrel daily (10 
mg preferred in most subjects*) or 90 mg twice daily of 
ticagrelor for at least 3 months following the procedure.  
­ The choice of P2Y12 inhibitor is per site standard of care, but clopidogrel is strongly recommended for HBR 
subjects. 
­ For subjects taking chronic anticoagulants, dual therapy (oral anticoagulant and a P2Y12 inhibitor, clopidogrel 
preferred) may be considered for the first 3 months after 
index procedure per investigator’s discretion .  
• At 3-month follow up, subject will be assessed for their 
eligibility of P2Y12 inhibitor discontinuation. Eligible subjects 
will discontinue P2Y12 inhibitor and receive ≥75 to ≤100 mg of aspirin daily through 1- year follow -up during the study if they 
are “3 -month clear”, defined as subjects who are  free from 
myocardial infarction (modified ARC), repeat coronary 
revascularization, stroke, or stent thrombosis (ARC 
definite/probable) within  3 months (prior to 3 -month visit but at 
least 90 days)  after stenting AND have been compliant with 3-
month dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) without interruption of 
either aspirin and/or P2Y12 receptor inhibitor for > 7 consecutive 
days.  
­ Peri-procedural MI  (occurred within 48 hours post index 
procedure) without any clinical symptoms will not be 
considered exclusionary event for the definition of “3-
month clear”.  
­ Dual therapy (oral anticoagulant and a P2Y12 inhibitor, 
clopidogrel is preferred) within the first 3 months post 
index procedure for subjects w ho are on chronic 
anticoagulants is acceptable for the definition of “3 -
month clear”.  
• Subjects who are not “3-month clear” are NOT  eligible for 
P2Y12 inhibitor discontinuation at 3-month. These subjec ts will 
be treated per the investigator's discretion an d will continue to be 
followed up through 12 months.  
*For prasugrel subjects < 60 kg in weight or ≥ 75 years of age, a 
maintenance dose of 5 mg per day for 12 months is allowable.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
Cardiac 
Biomarker 
Collection  Cardiac biomarker  CK, CK -MB and/or troponin  collection shall be 
done per site’s standard of care. CK and CK- MB are preferred.  If 
CK and CK-MB are not available, troponin should be collected.  
Key Inclusion 
Criteria  General Inclusion Criteria  
1. Subject is considered at high risk for bleeding (HBR), defined as 
meeting one or more of the following criteria at the time of 
registration  and in the opinion of the referring physician, the risk 
of major bleeding with > 3-month DAPT outweighs the benefit: 
a) ≥ 75 years of age .  
b) Clinical indication for chronic  (at least 6 months) or 
lifelong anticoagulation therapy. 
c) History of major bleeding which required medical 
attention within 12 months of the index procedure. 
d) History of stroke (ischemic or hemorrhagic).  
e) Renal insufficiency ( creatinine ≥ 2.0 mg/dl) or failure 
(dialysis dependent). 
f) Systemic conditions associated with an increased 
bleeding risk (e.g. hematological disorders, including a 
history of or current thrombocytopenia defined as a 
platelet count <100,000/mm3, or any known coagulation 
disorder associated with increased bleeding risk) . 
g) Anemia with hemoglobin < 11g/dl. 
2. Subject must be at least 18 years of age.  
3. Subject or a legally authorized representative must provide 
written informed consent as approved by the Institutional Review 
Board (IRB)/Ethics Committee (EC) of the respective clinical 
site prior to any study  related procedure .  
4. Subject is willing to comply with all protocol requirements, 
including agreement to stop taking P2Y12 inhibitor at 3 months, 
if eligible per protocol. 
5. Subject must agree not to participate in any other clinical trial for 
a period of one year following the index procedure. 
 Angiographic Inclusion Criteria  
1. Up to three target lesions with a maximum of two target lesions 
per epicardial vessel.  Note:  
• The definition of epicardial vessels means left anterior 
descending coronary artery (LAD), left circumflex coronary 
artery (LCX) and right coronary artery (RCA) and their 
branches . For example , the patient  must not have >2 lesions 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
requiring treatment within both the LAD and a diagonal 
branch in total . 
• If there are two target lesions within the same epicardial 
vessel, the two target lesions must be at least 15 mm apart per 
visual estimation; otherwise this is considered as a single 
target lesion.  
2. Target lesion ≤ 32 mm in length by visual estimation.  
3. Target lesion must be located in  a native coronary artery with 
visually estimated reference vessel diameter between 2.25 mm 
and 4.25 mm.  
4. Exclusive use of XIENCE family of stent systems  during the 
index procedure. 
5. Target lesion has been treated successfully, which is defined as 
achievement of a final in -stent residual diameter stenosis of 
<20% with final TIMI-3 flow assessed by online quantitative 
angiography or visual estimation, with no residual dissection 
NHLBI grade ≥ type B, and no transient or sustained 
angiographic complications (e .g., distal embolization, side branch 
closure), no chest pain lasting > 5 minutes, and no ST segment 
elevation > 0.5 mm or depression lasting > 5 minutes.  
Key Exclusion 
Criteria  General Exclusion Criteria  
1. Subject with an indication for the index procedure of acute ST -
segment elevation MI (STEMI).   
2. Subject has a known hypersensitivity or contraindication to 
aspirin, heparin/bivalirudin, P2Y12 inhibitors 
(clopidogrel/prasugrel/ticagrelor), everolimus, cobalt, 
chromium, nickel, tungsten, acrylic and fluoro polymers or 
contrast sensitivity that cannot be adequately pre -medicated . 
3. Subject with implantation of another drug -eluting stent (other 
than XIENCE) within 9 months prior to index procedure. 
4. Subject has a known left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 
<30%. 
5. Subject judged by physician as inappropriate for discontinuation 
from P2Y12 inhibitor use at 3 months , due to another condition 
requiring chronic P2Y12 inhibitor use. 
6. Subject with planned surgery or procedure necessitating 
discontinuation of P2Y12 inhibitor within 3 months following 
index procedure. 
7. Subject with a current medical condition with a life expectancy 
of less than 12 months . 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
8. Subject intends to participate in an investigational drug or 
device trial within 12 months following the index procedure . 
9. Pregnant or nursing subjects and those who plan pregnancy in 
the period up to 1 year following index procedure. Female 
subjects of child -bearing potential must  have a negative 
pregnancy test done within 7 days prior to the index procedure per site standard  test.  
Note : Female patients of childbearing potential should be 
instructed to use safe contraception (e.g., intrauterine devices, 
hormonal contraceptives: contraceptive pills, implants, transdermal patches, hormonal vaginal devices, injections with 
prolonged release.) It is accepted, in certain cases, to include 
subjects having a sterilised regular partner or subjects using a 
double barrier contraceptive method. However, this should be 
explicitly justified in special circumstances arising from the 
study design, product characteristics and/or study population  
10. Subject is part of a vulnerable population, defined as
 subject 
whose willingness to volunteer in a clinical investigation could 
be unduly influenced by the expectation, whether justified or 
not, of be nefits associated with participation or of retaliatory 
response from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate.   Examples of populations which may contain 
vulnerable subjects include: individuals with lack of or loss of autonomy due t o immaturity or through mental disability, 
persons in nursing homes, children, impoverished persons, subjects in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, 
homeless persons, nomads, refugees, and those incapable of 
giving informed consent. Other vulnerable subjects include, for 
example, members of a group with a hierarchical structure such 
as university students, subordinate hospital and laboratory 
personnel, employees of the sponsor , members of the armed 
forces, and persons kept in detention. 
11. Subject is  currently participating in another clinical trial that has 
not yet completed its primary endpoint. 
  
Angiographic Exclusion Criteria  
1. Target lesion is in a left main location .  
2. Target lesion is located within an arterial or saphenous vein 
graft. 
3. Target le sion is restenotic from a previous stent implantation . 
4. Target lesion is a total occluded lesion (TIMI flow 0) . 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
5. Target lesion contains thrombus as indicated in the angiographic 
images (per SYNTAX score thrombus definition).  
6. Target lesion is implanted with o verlapping stents, whether 
planned or for bailout. 
 
Note: If there is more than one target lesion, all target lesions must 
satisfy the angiographic eligibility criteria. Non-target lesion (i.e., 
lesions that do not meet the angiographic criteria listed above) 
treatments are not allowed during the index procedure.  
Primary Analysis 
Population The primary analysis population is “3-month clear ” population, 
defined as subjects who are free from myocardial infarction 
(modified ARC), repeat coronary revascularization, stroke, or stent 
thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) within  3 months (prior to 3-
month visit but at least 90 days) after stenting AND have been 
compliant with 3 -month DAPT without int erruption of either aspirin 
and/or P2Y12 receptor inhibitor for > 7 consecutive days.  
 
 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Trial Design  
XIENCE 90 study is a prospective, single arm, multi -center, open label trial to evaluate the 
safety of 3-month dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) in  subjects at high risk of bleeding (HBR) 
undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with the approved XIENCE family of 
coronary drug- eluting stents . 
The XIENCE family stent systems include commercially approved5 XIENCE Xpedition 
Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System (EECSS),  XIENCE Alpine EECSS, XIENCE 
PROX EECSS (OUS only)6, XIENCE PROA EECSS (OUS only)7, and XIENCE Sierra 
EECSS, which are all manufactured by Abbott Vascular, Inc., Santa Clara, USA .  The above 
XIENCE family stent systems will hereinafter be called “ XIENCE ” in this study.  
Approximately 2,000 subjects from approximately 100 sites globally will be registered  in this 
study, with at least 5 0% of subjects in the United States (US).  Study population consists of 
non-complex HBR subjects with up to three  native coronary artery lesions ( a maximum of 
two lesions per epicardial vessel ) with reference vessel diameter between 2.25  mm and 4.25 
mm. Eligibility of P2Y12 receptor inhibitor discontinuation will be assessed at 3 -month 
follow -up. Subjects who are free from myocardial infarction (modified ARC), repeat 
coronary revascularization, stroke, or stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) within  3 
months (prior to 3-month visit but at least 90 days) after stenting AND have been compliant with 3 -month DAPT  without interruption of either aspirin and/or P2Y12 receptor inhibitor for 
> 7 consecutive days are considered as “3 -month clear”, and will discontinue P2Y12 receptor 
inhibitor and continued with aspirin monotherapy after 3-month follow-up.   
All registere d subjects will be followed at 3, 6 and 12 months post index procedure.  
The data collected from the XIENCE 90  study will be compared with the historical control of 
non-complex HBR subjects treated with standard DAPT duration of up to 12 months from the XIENCE V USA study, which is a US post-approval study to evaluate the safety  of XIENCE 
V EECSS in “all -comer” population under real-world setting.   
1.2 Trial Objective  
Primary Objective:  to show non- inferiority of the primary endpoint of all death or all MI 
(modified ARC) from 3 to 12 months following XIENCE implantation in HBR subjects  
treated with  3-month DAPT compared to a historical control after propensity score 
adjustment.  
Secondary Objective:   
• To show superiority of the major secondary endpoint of major bleeding ( Bleeding 
Academic Research Consortium [BARC] type 2 -5) from 3 to 12 months following 
 
 
   
5 The commercially approved XIENCE stent will be used in geographies where it is commercially available  
6 XIENCE PROX is a rebrand of the XIENCE Xpedition Stent System and is only available outside of the 
United States.  
7 XIENCE PROA is a rebrand of the XIENCE Alpine Stent System  and is only available outside of the United 
States.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
XIENCE implantation  in HBR subjects treated with 3 -month DAPT  compared to a 
historical control after propensity score adjustment.  
• To evaluate stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) from 3 to 12 months following XIENCE implantation in HBR subjects treated with 3 -month DAPT against a 
performance goal (PG) .
 
2.0 BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
2.1 Background and Rationale 
Although drug-eluting stents (DES) have been shown to effectively reduce restenosis 
compared with bare- metal stents (BMS), there was a concern that DES might lead to an 
increased risk of stent thrombosis based on data from first -generation DES1-4.  This increased 
risk has been attributed, in part, to polymer hypersensitivity reactions, delayed arterial healing, endothelial dysfunction, and late acquired stent malapposition.  Stent thrombosis generally will manifest in serious clinical outcomes of MI and/or death. As a result of this 
concern, the previous 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guidelines recommend a prolonged duration of DAPT, a continuation of at least 1 year of DAPT following DES implantation as compared to a minimum of 1 month of DAPT following BMS implantation for patients without acute 
coronary syndrome (ACS)
5.  However, these recommendations were based primarily on 
observational dat a with the first generation DES . Compared with first-generation DES, 
currently used second -generation DES have a lower risk of stent thrombosis. Data from five 
RCTs 6-10of primarily low -risk patients (non -ACS) treated with DES comparing shorter-
duration (3 to 6 months) DAPT with 12 months of DAPT, as well as several meta- analyses 
and data review11-16, did not find an increased risk of stent thrombosis with shorter duration 
of DAPT. Therefore, the most recently published 2016 ACC/AHA guideline updated their 
recommendations to decrease the minimum DAPT duration from 12 months to 6 months after DES implantation in patients with stable ischemic heart disease (SIHD)
17. 
Long- term DAPT is known to increase the risk of bleeding. Multiple studies have 
demonstrated the relationship between bleeding and an increased risk for short- and long-term mortality
18,19, with major bleeding being identified as an independent predictor of 
mortality with a weight similar to o r event greater than MI20. This was confirmed in a recent 
meta -analysis by Palmerini with 12 trials comprising > 34,000 patients randomized to 
different duration strategies of DAPT21. In this meta -analysis (including patient level data of 
11,473 patients from 6 of those 12 RCT trials), bleeding was an independent predictor of mortality occurring within 1 year of the bleeding episode (hazard ratio: 6.93; 95% CI: 4.53 to 10.60; p < 0.0001). More importantly, shorter DAPT was associated with low er rates of all -
cause mortality compared with longer DAPT, which was driven by lower rates of bleeding -
related deaths with shorter DAPT duration. This important finding may underlie the potential mortality benefit with shorter DAPT, which is especially relevant for patients who are at high risk of bleeding  (HBR) . 
HBR patients represent approximately 15% or more of patients undergoing PCI
22,23.  This 
patient population is of a significant size but is usually excluded from traditional DES approval trials .   The traditional standard treatment for HBR patients who undergo 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is often stenting with BMS followed by 1 month of DAPT. While this strategy aims to minimize the risk of bleeding in  such patients, the use of 
BMS poses a higher risk of restenosis and re-intervention. Therefore, stenting with DES followed by a shortened course of DAPT may represent a more favourable treatment option providing that the potential risk of stent thrombosis  can be addressed.  With advances in stent 
technology, second-generation DES is equipped with novel stent materials and designs, 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
polymers, and anti-proliferative agents, which may modify the propensity of DES for ischemic events.  It is possible that the s ame level of safety may be maintained for second -
generation DES even if combined with a significantly shortened course of DAPT. In fact, the European ESC/EACTS guidelines have recommended 3 months of DAPT with second-generation DES for HBR patients undergoing PCI
24.  Consistent with the European guideline, 
the updated 2016 ACC/AHA guideline also provided a class IIb recommendation of 3-month DAPT in SIHD patients with high risk of bleeding following DES implantation
17.  
The second generation everolimus- eluting stent (EES) has been the subject of extensive 
clinical studies across multiple geographies. A consistently low late and very late stent thrombosis rate has been demonstrated with EES from randomized controlled studi es 
25-30 as 
well as real -world registry studies 31,32. The XIENCE family of stents has consistently been 
shown to have the best safety profile among coronary stents, including second-generation DES.   
To investigate whether there are any major differences in the risk of stent thrombosis between first- and second-generation DES, or between DES and BMS, Palmerini et al. conducted a comprehensive network meta -analysis involving 50,844 patients from 49 RCTs implanted 
with DES or BMS
33.  This meta -analysis demonstrated that XIENCE V had the lowest rate of 
stent thrombosis within 2 years of implantation compared with other stents.  Not only was XIENCE V associated with significantly lower 1 -year rate of definite stent thrombosis than 
the other first- and second-generation DES, including Cypher, Taxus, Endeavor, and Resolute, XIENCE V was also associated with significantly lower rates of definite stent thrombosis than BMS at both 1 year (odds ratio [OR]: 0.23, 95% confidence interval [ CI]: 
0.13-0.41) and 2 years (OR: 0.35, 95% CI: 0.17-0 .69), a result not duplicated by other DES.  The reduction in stent thrombosis with XIENCE V compared with BMS was apparent both early (0 -30 days) and late (31 days-1 year), suggesting the reduction was not caused by the 
difference in DAPT durations between XIENCE V and BMS as the reduction was already evident as early as 30 days when all patients should be treated with DAPT regardless of device types.    
Another recent large meta -analysis involving 106,427 patients from 126 RCTs was conducted 
to compare the safety and efficacy of these biodegradable polymer DES (BP -DES) with those 
of durable polymer DES and BMS
34.  Amo ng all the stents compared, XIENCE V was the 
safest with a lower risk of clinical events when compared to DES, including BP -DES and 
other first and second generation DES. Even when compared to BMS, XIENCE V was still 
associated with significant reductions in the rates of definite stent thrombosis (rate ratio: 0.35, 95% CI: 0.21 to 0.53), MI (rate ratio: 0.65, 95% CI: 0.55 to 0.75), and death (rate ratio: 0.72, 95% CI: 0.58 to 0.90).   
Even in the setting of elevated risk for thrombosis such as acute coronary syndrome, 
XIENCE V still demonstrated a favourable safety outcome as reported in the EXAMINATION trial, which was an all -comer trial randomizing 1,504 subjects with ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) in a 1: 1 ratio to XIENCE V or BMS (Vision).  This study demonstrated that XIENCE V was associated with reduced rates of stent 
thrombosis compared with BMS at 1 year and 2 years, with the rates becoming comparable between the two groups at 3, 4, and 5 years with similar DAPT usage at 5 -year fo llow-up 
35,36.  It suggests that the risk of stent thrombosis with XIENCE V, if not lower, is at least 
comparable to that of BMS even in this high risk STEMI population. 
The excellent safety profile of XIENCE in terms of stent thrombosis is likely attributed to the 
unique combination of its thin struts (81 µ m), the thromboresistant nature of the 
biocompatible fluoropolymer37, and a low loading dose and release kinetics of the anti-
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
proliferative agent, everolimus. Autopsy studies in humans have suggested that incomplete endothelialization of strut surface is a pathologic substrate for late stent thrombosis
38,39.  In a 
pre-clinical study conducted in rabbit iliac arteries , areas between struts showed most 
complete coverage (90.4%) for EES compared with other stents at 14 days40.  The rapid strut 
coverage by endothelium with XIENCE V was confirmed in humans in an optical coherence tomography (OCT) cohort of the MECHANISM- Elective study
41, which showed 93.6% strut 
coverage at 1 month (N=49) and 98% strut coverage at 3 months (N= 46) in subjects with 
stable coronary artery disease receiving XIENCE V.   
The XIENCE family of stents is unique from other currently marketed stents in featuring a 
fluorinated co- polymer coating [poly (vinylidene fluoride -co-hexafluoropropylene)] (PVDF -
HFP). This polymer coating not only serves as the vehicle for the controlled elution of 
everolimus, but just as importantly the fluorinated co- polymer offers a non -thrombogenic 
surface through a mechanism known as fluoropassivation42. Pre-clinical models comparing 
inflammation and platelet adhesion among XIENCE V, BMS and Resolute showed that XIENCE V had a lower  propensity for inflammation and platelet adhesion
43,44.  In a series of 
ex vivo  studies using porcine ar terio-venous shunt model to assess and compare the 
thrombogenicity of XIENCE to different stent platforms, XIENCE showed a significant reduction in acute thrombus formation (measured as platelet adhesion) in comparison to BMS as well as new generation of bioresorbable polymer-coated stent (Synergy) and polymer- free 
stent (BioFreedom)
8. The high degree of stent coverage within 1 and 3 months of implant, 
together with the results of ex vivo  studies which consistently showed low thrombogenic 
potential of XIEN CE through the unique properties of its fluorinated co-polymer coating, 
provides further evidence to support the safety of shorter DAPT with XIENCE.   
Short- term DAPT has been recently studied in HBR patients. The ZEUS study is a 
randomized, single-blind trial evaluating Endeavor DES vs. BMS combined with a tailored 
course of DAPT for treating subjects who were considered uncertain DES candidates, 
including HBR patients, patients at high risk for thrombosis, and patients at low risk for restenosis
45.  A total of 1,606 subjects were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to either Endeavor or 
thin-strut BMS (strut thickness < 100 µm).  DAPT duration was prescribed based on patient 
characteristics, rather than stent characteristics, and a personalized regimen of 1 -month 
DAPT was allowed.  The primary endpoint of the study was MACE (death, MI, or target vessel revascularization [ TVR] ) at 1 year.  In this s tudy, approximately half of the enrolled 
subjects were HBR patients (51.6%), who were  qualified for 1 -month DAPT. In the pre -
specified HBR subgroup analysis from ZEUS trial, MACE occurred in 22.6% of the Endeavor group and 29% of the BMS group with a hazard ratio 0.75 (p=0.033)
46.  The 
definite or probable ST was also significantly reduced in the Endeavor group (2.6% vs. 6.2%, p=0.016). 
The LEADERS FREE study is a randomized, double- blind trial evaluating BioFreedom 
combined with 1 month of DAPT for treating HBR patients undergoing PCI as compared to 
BMS
47.  A total of 2,466 HBR patients were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to BioFreedom or a 
very similar BMS (Gazelle). All patients received 1 month of DAPT and were to be followed at 1, 2, and 4 months, and 1 and 2 years.  The primary safety endpoint, tested for both non-inferiority and superiority, was a composite of cardiac death, MI, or stent thrombosis 
 
    
8 Data on file with Abbott Vascular  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
(definite/probable).  The primary effic acy endpoint was clinically driven target lesion 
revascularization (CD -TLR).  At 1 year, the rate of the composite of cardiac death, MI, or 
stent thrombosis was significantly lowered in the BioFreedom group than in the BMS group (9.4% (112/1221) vs. 12.9% (154/1211); P < 0.001 for noninferiority and P=0.005 for superiority).  The 1 -year rate of CD -TLR was also significantly lower in the BioFreedom 
group than in the BMS group (5.1% (59/1221) vs. 9.8% (113/1211), P <0.001).  There was also a significant reduction in the 1- year rate of MI with BioFreedom compared with BMS 
(6.1% vs. 8.9%, p = 0.01), whereas no differences in the 1- year rates of stent thrombosis were 
observed between the two groups (2.0% vs. 2.2%, p = 0.75). 
Results from both ZEUS and LEADER FREE suggest that DES can be as safe or even safer 
choice for HBR patients than BMS with short duration of DAPT. The confirmed safety of 
Endeavor and BioFreedom with short- term DAPT for HBR patients in the ZEUS and 
LEADERS FREE studies are of particular releva nce to the safety of the proposed study of 
XIENCE.  XIENCE V has consistently been shown to have a better safety profile than Endeavor based on results from several meta- analyses
33,34.  Pre -clinical studies of 
endothelialization also demonstrate that XIENCE V had a faster rate of strut coverage following stent implantation than Endeavor 
40, and was equivalent to BioFreedom48.  
Additionally, XIENCE showed a significant reduction in platelet adherence compared to BioFreedom stents in ex vivo  studies
9. Taken together, these clinical data of Endeavor and 
BioF reedom indirectly support the safety to evaluate short- term DAPT  with XIENCE.  
There is also clinical data exclusively evaluating short DAPT duration with XIENCE.  STOPDAPT trial is a prospective multi -center , single -arm study evaluating 3 -month DAPT 
duration after XIENCE implantation in 1,525 patients
49 . Using the XIENCE gr oup in the 
RESET trial as a historical comparison group, where nearly 90% of patients were on DAPT at 1 year, the cumulative incidence of the primary endpoint (a composite of cardiovascular 
death, myocardial infarction, stroke, definite stent thrombosis an d TIMI major/minor 
bleeding) at 1 year tended to be lower in the STOPDAPT than in the RESET (2.8% vs. 4.0%, 
p = 0.06). The difference is driven by the significantly lower rate of the composite major secondary endpoint of cardiovascular death, myocardial in farction, stroke and definite stent 
thrombosis rate (2.1% vs. 3.2%, p = 0.045) while the TIMI major/minor bleeding rates were similar between the two groups (1.0% vs. 1.3%, p = 0.4). The cumulative incidence of definite/probable stent thrombosis was also lower in the STOPDAPT (0% vs. 0.3%, p = 0.03). The STOPDAPT trial data support the safety of short- term DAPT following XIENCE 
V implantation.   
To assess the relationship between stent thrombosis and DAPT usage, a patient -level pooled 
analysis was conducted  on a total of 11,219 patients who had complete DAPT usage data 
through the 2- year follow -up period from seven Abbott Vascular-sponsored XIENCE V trials 
(including three pre- approval trials: SPIRIT II, III, IV, and four post-approval single- arm 
registry studies: XIENCE V USA, XIENCE V India, SPIRIT V and SPIRIT Women)
50 .  
DAPT requirement varied among these studies.  For the three randomized pre-approval trials, 
at least 6 months of DAPT wa s required in the protocol.  In the four single- arm registry 
studies, DAPT usage was recommended as per standard of care. The large sample size in this pooled analysis allows for a more robust evaluation of stent thrombosis and its association 
 
    
9 Data on file with Abbott Vascular  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
with DAPT in terruption /discontinuation for patients implanted with XIENCE V.  In this 
pooled analysis, the overall rate of definite/probable stent thrombosis at 2 years was 0.75%, with 0.36% for early stent thrombosis (within 1 month), 0.29% for late stent thrombosis (1 -12 
months) and 0.11% for very late stent thrombosis (after 1 year).  The risk of stent thrombosis with permanent DAPT discontinuation after 3 months was low, with similar ST rate through 2 years compared to those without permanent DAPT discontinuation (0.78% vs. 0.83%, respectively).  By propensity and DAPT usage adjusted multivariable analysis, permanent DAPT discontinuation in any interval after 90 days was not associated with the occurrence of  
ST.     
The optimal duration of DAPT remains a dilemma for clinicians with the current clinical 
practice. The possible benefits of extended DAPT therapy to prevent late stent thrombosis 
and the progression of atherosclerotic disease need to be weighed against the increased risk of bleeding in an individual patient based on stent type. The optimal duration of DAPT is of 
particular interest to HBR patients , in whom it is believed that the benefit of reduced bleeding 
with shorter DAPT outweighs the potential risk of thrombosis and ischemic events . There is 
clearly an unmet medical need to be addressed for this patient population. XIENCE has consistently been shown to have the best safety profile among the coronary stents, even when compared to BMS  and biodegradable polymer DES. The benefit/risk ratio of a shorter 
duration of DAPT following XIENCE implantation in this population has not been thoroughly evaluated. Therefore, the XIENCE 90  study is designed to prospectively evaluate 
the safety of XIENCE followed with  3-month DAPT in HBR patients . 
2.2 Summ ary of Investigational Device 
2.2.1 Name of the Investigational Device  
• XIENCE Xpedition®, XIENCE Xpedition® Small Vessel (SV) and XIENCE 
Xpedition® LL Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System (XIENCE Xpedition Stent 
System; P110019 / S025, approved on December 21, 2012)  
• XIENCE Alpine® Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System (XIENCE Alpine Stent 
System; P110019 / S070; approved on September 3, 2014) 
• XIENCE PROX Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System10 
• XIENCE PROA Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System11 
• XIENCE Sierra Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System (XIENCE Sierra  Stent 
System; P110019 / S094; approved on May 22, 2018) 
All the above trial devices  (hereinafter be called as “XIENCE” in the study) are manufactured 
by Abbott Vascular. The XIENCE Xpedition , XIENCE Alpine , and XIENCE Sierra  EECSS 
have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and are currently in 
commercial use in the United States. These stent systems, the  XIENCE PROX EECSS  and the 
XIENCE PROA EECSS  have also r eceived Conformité Européene ( CE) mark and are 
currently in commercial use in different European countries. Please refer to the Instructions 
for Use (IFU) for details of each stent system.  
 
    
10 XIENCE PROX is a rebrand of the XIENCE Xpedition Stent System and is only available outside of the U.S. 
11 XIENCE PROA is a rebrand of the XIENCE Alpine Stent System  and is only available outside of the U .S. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
2.2.2 Intended Indication for Use  
The following is the proposed Intended Use/Indications for Use for the XIENCE Xpedition , 
XIENCE Alpine and XIENCE Sierra stent system in US as a result of the XIENCE 90  trial:  
“The XIENCE [Xpedition/Alpine /Sierra ] stent system is indicated for improving coronary 
artery luminal diameter in patients, including those at high risk for bleeding and those with 
diabetes mellitus, with symptomatic heart disease due to de novo native coronary artery lesions (length ≤ 32 mm) with reference vessel diameters of ≥ 2.25 mm to ≤ 4.25 mm. In addition, the XIENCE [Xpedition/Alpine /Sierra] stent system is indicated for treating de novo 
chronic total coronary occlusions .” 
2.2.3 Description of the Investigational Device  
A full description of XIENCE Xpedition, XIENCE Alpine, XIENCE PROX, XIENCE PROA 
and XIENCE Sierra stent can be found in the individual stent  IFU.  
3.0 CLINICAL TRIAL/INVESTIGATION FLOW AND FOLLOW -UP 
SCHEDULE 
3.1 Number of Subjects to be Registered  
Approximately 2,000 subjects from approximately 100 sites globally will be registered in this 
study, with at least 5 0% of subjects in the US. Subject registration is capped at 300 per site.  
3.2 Overall Flow of the Trial and Follow -up Schedule  
The clinical investigation  flow is shown in Appendix V . Subjects who satisfy eligibility 
criteria become registered in the study. Subjects have follow -up visits at 3, 6 and 12 months. 
Assessment of eligibility of DAPT discontinuation will occur at 3-month follow-up. 
3.3 Measures Taken to Avoid and Minimize Bia s 
All the clinical endpoint events will be adjudicated by t he Clinical Events Committee (CEC). 
The CEC is an independent adjudication body comprised of qualified physicians who are not participants in the trial. The CEC will review and adjudicate events as defined in the CEC charter and according to definitions provided in this protocol.  
3.4 Early Termination of the Clinical Trial  
No formal statistical rule for early termination of the trial is defined.  
The Sponsor reserves the right to discontinue the cl inical trial/investigation at any stage or 
reduce the follow up period with suitable written notice to the investigator. Possible reason(s) 
may include, but are not limited to:  
• Unanticipated adverse device effect (e.g., UADE) occurs and it presents an 
unreasonable risk to the participating subjects.  
• Any oversight committee (e.g., Steering/Executive Committee, Data Safety 
Monitoring Board [DSMB]) makes a recommendation to stop or terminate the trial (such as higher frequency of anticipated adverse device effects).  
• Further product development is cancelled.  
Should the clinical trial be discontinued by the Sponsor, subjects will be followed up as per routine hospital practice with device related AEs being reported to the Sponsor as per vigilance/commer cial reporting requirements.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
Should this occur, the investigator shall return all clinical trial/investigation materials to the Sponsor, and provide a written statement as to why the premature termination has taken place to the IRB/EC (if applicable). All applicable Clinical Investigation documents shall be subject to the same retention policy as detailed in Section 12  Data Handling and Record 
Keeping.
  
4.0 ENDPOINTS  
4.1 Primary Endpoint  
The primary endpoint is a composite rate of all death  or all myocardial infarction (MI, 
modified ARC ) from 3 to 12 months.  This composite endpoint was chosen because death  
and MI are important safety endpoints to evaluate short- term DAPT after PCI.  
4.2 Major Secondary Endpoint(s)  
• Major bleeding rate (BARC typ e 2-5) from 3 to 12  months 
• Stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) from 3 to 12 months  
4.3 Other Secondary Endpoint(s)  
The following endpoints will be assessed from 3 to 12 months: 
• All death, cardiac death, vascular death, non-cardiovascular death   
• All MI (modified ARC) and MI attributed to target vessel (TV -MI, modified ARC) 
• Composite of cardiac death or MI (modified ARC) 
• All stroke, ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke  
• Clinically -indicated target lesion revascularizatio n (CI-TLR)  
• Clinically -indicated target vessel revascularization ( CI-TVR)  
• Target lesion failure (TLF, composite of cardiac death, TV -MI and CI -TLR)  
• Target vessel failure (TVF, composite of cardiac death, TV -MI and CI- TVR ) 
• Major b leeding defined by the Bleeding Academic Research Consortium (BARC) type 3-
5   
5.0 SUBJECT SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL  
5.1 Subject Population  
This trial will register male and female HBR subjects from the general interventional 
cardiology population who satisfy the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Approximately 2,000 
subjects will be registered . Subjects must meet all clinical and angiographic eligibility criteria 
and provide written informed consent prior to conducting any trial- specific procedures not 
considered standard of care.   
5.1.1 Medicare Population 
This trial will register male and fema le HBR subjects including those age 65 years old and 
older, i.e., Medicare age.  The study results are expected to be generalizable to the Medicare 
population. It is not expected that the results will be any different for Medicare patients than for non- Medicare patients.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
5.2 Subject Screening and Informed Consent  
5.2.1 Subject Screening  
Subjects admitted for a percutaneous coronary artery revascularization procedure  must be 
screened for clinical trial eligibility by a member of the clinical trial team (ph ysician and/or 
research coordinator) previously trained to the clinical trial protocol and if applicable will be entered into a site specific screening log .  
Subjects meeting the general inclusion and exclusion criteria will be asked to sign an informed consent. Pre -procedure (or baseline) imaging will be used for the final assessment 
of subject eligibility (details are described in S ection 5.3). Subjects who do not satisfy the 
angiographic inclusion and exclusion criteria are considered screen failures and will not be registered and proceed further in the trial. These subjects will be entered into the screening log. Also, the reason for screen failure as well as supporting data will be entered into the log.  
Patient  data wil l be collected following registration into the trial/investigation.  
5.2.2 Informed Consent  
The Investigator or designee, who has been trained on the Protocol, will explain the nature and scope of the trial, potential risks and benefits of participation, and answer questions for the subjects. All subjects (or legally authorized subjects’ representatives if applicable) must sign and date  (and time , as per applicable local standards) the Institutional Review Board 
(IRB)/Ethics Committee (EC) approved informed consent (ICF)  prior to any clinical 
trial/investigation -specific procedures. All efforts should be made to consent a subject prior 
to index procedure . However, it is acceptable for the subject to provide consent prior to 
hospital discharge and up to 3 days after the index procedure, only if the site confirms that the protocol required DAPT regimen is site’s standard of care.  If staged procedures are needed for a subject, the site may consent the subject after the initial procedure.  
Obtaining the consent an d provisioning of a copy to the subject, along with the date and time 
must be documented in the subject’s medical records. The ICF must be signed by the investigator or designate (if allowed per country specific regulations). In addition, the signed inform ed consent must be kept in the subject’s medical records/ research chart and a copy 
must be given to the subject or the legally authorized representative. 
In addition, an authorization for use and disclosure of the subject’s protected health 
information, in accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), must be obtained from the subject or their legally authorized representa tive (US 
only). 
For Live cases at congresses the patients need to sign a specific Live Case ICF, approved by 
the IRB/EC . The investigator must notify Abbott Vascular prior to performing a Live Case.  
FDA approval is also required for a live case conducted in US.  
5.3 Eligibility Criteria  
5.3.1   General Eligibility Criteria  
Assessment for general eligibility criteria is based on medical records of the site and interview with a candidate subject. If some of the clinical and laboratory tests are not included in site standard tests, they must be done but after written informed c onsent is 
obtained. Subjects must meet ALL of the inclusion criteria to be considered for the clinical evaluation. If ANY of the exclusion criteria are met, the subject is excluded from the clinical evaluation and cannot be registered .
   
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
5.3.1.1 General In clusion Criteria  
1. Subject is considered at high risk for bleeding (HBR), defined as meeting one or more of 
the following criteria at the time of registration  and in the opinion of the referring 
physician, the risk of major bleeding with > 3- month DAPT outwe ighs the benefit: 
a) ≥ 75 years of age .  
b) Clinical indication for chronic (at least 6 months) or lifelong anticoagulation 
therapy. 
c) History of major bleeding which required medical attention within 12 months of 
the index procedure. 
d) History of stroke (ischemic or hemorrhagic).  
e) Renal insufficiency (creatinine ≥ 2.0 mg/dl) or failure (dialysis dependent) . 
f) Systemic conditions associated with an increased bleeding risk (e.g. hematological 
disorders, including a history of or current thrombocytopenia defin ed as a platelet 
count <100,000/mm3, or any known coagulation disorder associated with 
increased bleeding risk). 
g) Anemia with hemoglobin < 11g/dl. 
2. Subject must be at least 18 years of age.  
3. Subject or a legally authorized representative must provide written  informed consent as 
approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB)/E thics Committee (EC) of the 
respective clinical site prior to any study related procedure . 
4. Subject is willing to comply with all protocol requirements, including agreement to stop 
taking P2Y12 inhibitor at 3 months, if eligible per protocol. 
5. Subject must agree not to participate in any other clinical trial for a period of one year 
following the index procedure. 
5.3.1.2 General Exclusion Criteria  
1. Subject with an indication for the index procedure of acute ST -segment elevation MI 
(STEMI) .  
2. Subject has a known hypersensitivity or contraindication to aspirin, heparin/bivalirudin, 
P2Y12 inhibitors (clopidogrel/prasugrel/ticagrelor), everolimus, cobalt, chromium, 
nickel, tungsten, acryli c and fluoro polymers or contrast sensitivity that cannot be 
adequately pre- medicated . 
3. Subject with implantation of another drug -eluting stent (other than XIENCE) within 9 
months prior to index procedure. 
4. Subject has a known left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) <30%. 
5. Subject judged by physician as inappropriate for discontinuation from P2Y12 inhibitor 
use at 3 months, due to another condition requiring chronic P2Y12 inhibitor use. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
6. Subject with planned surgery or procedure necessitating discontinuation of P2Y12 
inhibitor within 3 months following index procedure. 
7. Subject with a current medical condition with a life expectancy of less than 12 months 
8. Subject intends to participate in an investigational drug or device trial within 12 months 
following the in dex procedure. 
9. Pregnant or nursing subjects and those who plan pregnancy in the period up to 1 year 
following index procedure. Female subjects of child- bearing potential must  have a 
negative pregnancy test done within 7 days prior to the index procedure pe r site standard 
test.  
Note : Female patients of childbearing potential should be instructed to use safe 
contraception (e.g., intrauterine devices, hormonal contraceptives: contraceptive pills, 
implants, transdermal patches , hormonal vaginal devices, injections with prolonged 
release.) It is accepted, in certain cases, to include subjects having a sterilised regular partner or subjects using a double barrier contraceptive method. However, this should be 
explicitly justified in special circumstances arising from the study  design, product 
characteristics and/or study  population. 
10. Subject is part of a vulnerable population, defined as
 subject whose willingness to 
volunteer in a clinical investigation could be  unduly influenced by the expectation, 
whether justified or not, of benefits associated with participation or of retaliatory response 
from senior members of a hierarchy in case of refusal to participate.   Examples of 
populations which may contain vulnerable subjects include: in dividuals with lack of or 
loss of autonomy due to immaturity or through mental disability, persons in nursing homes, children, impoverished persons, subjects in emergency situations, ethnic minority groups, homeless persons, nomads, refugees, and those incapable of giving informed consent. Other vulnerable subjects include, for example, members of a group with a hierarchical structure such as university students, subordinate hospital and laboratory personnel, employees of the sponsor , members of the armed f orces, and persons kept in 
detention. 
11. Subject is currently participating in another clinical trial that has not yet completed its primary endpoint. 
5.3.2 Angiographic Eligibility Criteria  
All angiographic eligibility criteria are based on visual assessment. 
5.3.2.1 Angiographic Inclusion Criteria  
1. Up to three target lesions with a maximum of two target lesions per epicardial vessel. 
Note:  
• The definition of epicardial vessels means left anter ior descending coronary artery 
(LAD), left circumflex coronary artery (LCX) and right coronary artery ( RCA) and 
their branches. For example, the patient must not have >2 lesions requiring treatment 
within both the LAD and a diagonal branch in total. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
• If the re are two target lesions within the same epicardial vessel, the two target lesions 
must be at least 15 mm apart per visual estimation; otherwise this is considered as a 
single target lesion.  
2. Target lesion ≤ 32 mm in length by visual estimation.  
3. Target lesion must be located in a native coronary artery with visually estimated reference 
vessel diameter between 2.25 mm and 4.25 mm.  
4. Exclusive use of XIENCE family of stent systems  during the index procedure. 
5. Target lesion has been treated successfully, which is defined as achievement of a final in -
stent residual diameter stenosis of <20% with final TIMI -3 flow assessed by online 
quantitative angiography or visual estimation, with no residual dissection NHLBI grade ≥ 
type B, and no transient or sustained angiographic complications (e.g., distal 
embolization, side branch closure), no chest pain lasting > 5 minutes, and no ST segment 
elevation > 0.5 mm or depression lasting > 5 minutes. 
5.3.2.2 Angiographic Exclusion C riteria  
1. Target lesion is in a left main location .  
2. Target lesion is located within an arterial or saphenous vein graft. 
3. Target lesion is restenotic from a previous stent implantation .  
4. Target lesion is a total occluded lesion (TIMI flow 0). 
5. Target lesion contains thrombus as indic ated in the angiographic images (per SYNTAX 
score thrombus definition).  
6. Target lesion is implanted with overlapping stents , whether planned or for bailout. 
Note: If there is more than one target lesion, all target lesions must satisfy the angiographic 
eligibility criteria. Non-target lesion (i.e., lesions that do not meet the angiographic criteria 
listed above) treatments are not allowed during the index procedure. 
5.4 Subject Registration   
Subject registration will occur after the index procedure but prior to discharge and up to 3 
days post index procedure, upon confirmation of the following:  
• Signed informed consent has been obtained;  
• Subject has met all the inclusion and none of the exclusion criteria (including both 
general and angiographic criteria). 
Planned staged procedures are allowed (recommend to be performed within 30 days). The 
site may consent the subject  after the initial procedure.  Subject registration will occur once 
the last staged procedure is performed, and the last staged procedure is considered as the index procedure. 
5.5 Subject Discontinuation  
All registered  subjects will be  considered to have completed the study upon study completion 
of the 12-month follow-up.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
Each  registered subject shall remain in the trial until completion of the required follow -up 
period; however, a subject’s participation in any clinical trial is voluntary and the subject has the right to withdraw at any time without penalty or loss of benefit.  Conceivable reasons for 
discontinuation may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
• Subject death 
• Subject voluntary withdrawal  
• Subject withdrawal by physician as clinically -indicated  
• Subject lost -to follow-up as described below  
• Subject’s follow -up is terminated according to S ection 3.4 Early termination of the 
Clinical Trial 
The Sponsor must be notified of the reason(s) for subject discontinuation. The site will record 
this informatio n on the eCRF and source documents and provide this information to the 
Sponsor. Investigators must also report this to their respective IRB/EC as defined by their institution’s procedure(s).  
No additional follow –up will be required or data recorded from s ubjects once withdrawn 
from the trial, except for the status (deceased/alive).  
However, if a subject withdraws from the study  due to problems related to the investigational 
device safety or performance, the investigator shall ask for the subject's permission to follow his/her status/condition outside of the clinical investigation.  
Lost -to-Follow -up:   
If the subject misses two consecutive scheduled follow up time points and the attempts at contacting the subject detailed below are unsuccessful, then the subject is considered lost -to 
follow -up. Site personnel shall make all reasonable efforts to locate and communicate with 
the subject (and document these efforts in the source documents), including the following, at each contact time point:  
• A minimum of 2 tele phone calls on different days over the specified follow -up windows to 
contact the subject should be recorded in the source documentation, including date, time and initials of site personnel trying to make contact. 
• If these attempts are unsuccessful, a letter (certified if applicable) should be sent to the subject. 
• If a subject misses one or more non -consecutive follow -up contact time points it will be 
considered a missed visit. The subject may then return for subsequent visits. If the subject misses two con secutive time points and the above -mentioned attempts at communicating 
with the subject are unsuccessful, the subject will be considered lost -to-follow -up.  
Note : Telephone contact with General Practitioner, non- study  cardiologist or relative without 
presence of subject or indirect documentation obtained via discharge letters will not be considered as subject contact . 
Missed Visits:  
• If a subject misses one or more non -consecutive follow -up contact time points, the visit 
will be considered a missed visit and subject is not lost- to-follow -up.   
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
• If subject responds via written communication (including email correspondence), providing the protocol  required data, these data will be collected in the case report form 
and the visit will not be considere d a missed visit.   
5.6 Total Expected Duration of the Clinical Investigation  
The total expected duration of the clinical investigation is approximately 30 months. 
5.7 Expected Duration of Each Subject’s Participation  
The expected duration of each subject’s participation in this clinical investigation is 
approximately 12 months. 
5.8 Number of Subjects Required to be Included in the Clinical Investigation  
Approximately 2,000 subjects are required to be included in the clinical investigation. 
5.9 Estimated Time Needed to Register this Number  
The estimated time needed to register 2,000 subjects is approximately 18 months. 
5.10 Trial Completion  
A Trial Completion eCRF must be completed when: 
• the subject is considered lost to follow-up per the above defi nition or  
• the subject withdraws from the Clinical Trial or  
• the investigator withdraws the subject from the Clinical Trial or  
• the subject has died or  
• upon Clinical Trial completion or 
• sponsor termination of trial.  
Sponsor must be notified of the reason for subject discontinuation. The site will provide this information on the eCRF. Investigators must also report this to their EC/IRB as defined by 
their institution’s procedure. Subjects will not be replaced.  
6.0 TREATMENT AND EVALUATION  
6.1 Baseline and Pre -procedure  
6.1.1 Laboratory Assessments  
Baseline 12 -lead electrocardiogram (ECG) and laboratory assessments (such as blood counts, 
chemistry panel and lipid panel, cardiac enzymes, etc.) should be obtained per site’s standard of care. Baseline laborato ry results related to inclusion/exclusion criteria should be available 
and reviewed prior to the index procedure for screening. 
6.1.2 Clinical Assessments  
Subject demographics (age, gender, race), height, weight, family history of coronary artery 
disease ( CAD) , smoking status, cardiac history  (myocardial infarction, diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and previous PCI /CABG information ), subject’s current 
cardiac status ( presentation of CAD and multivessel disease)  and indication of high bleeding 
risk (per criteria specified in Section  5.3.1.1) will be obtained and recorded in electronic case 
report form (eCRF).   6.1.3 Pre-procedure Antiplatelet Medication 
Antiplatelet loading dose is required in this trial: 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
• Subjects must receive a loading dose of aspirin AND a P2Y12 inhibitor (Clopidogrel, Prasugrel or Ticagrelor). The dosages of aspirin and P2Y12 inhibitor shall be determined by physician per standard of care and label indication for loading dose usage. The choice of P2Y12 inhibitor is per site standard of care, but clopidogrel is strongly recommended for HBR subjects.  Per physician’s discretion, a loading dose of P2Y12 inhibitor may be omitted if the subject was on chronic usage for ≥ 7 days .  
The details o f the antiplatelet loading dose, including type of drug, dosage, date and time, 
will be recorded in eCRF.  
6.2 Index Procedure 
Only XIENCE stent can be used for target lesion(s). Stent implantation procedure should be 
performed according to the instruction for use (IFU) of the XIENCE family stent used . If 
XIENCE stent is delivered beyond the guide catheter but not implanted, the subject should not be registered  in the study. If oth er DES was implanted, the subject should not be 
registered in the study.  
In this study, a maximum of three  target lesions may be treated  with a maximum of two target 
lesions per epicardial vessel . Non -target lesion  (i.e., lesions that do not meet the angiographic 
eligibility criteria) treatments are not allowed during the index procedure.  
Planned staged procedures are allowed (recommend to be performed within 30 days). The 
site may consent the subject after the initial procedure. Subject registration will occur once the last staged procedure is performed and the last staged procedure is considered as the index procedure. Post- procedure DAPT duration will be measured from the last staged 
procedure.  Any planned stenting procedure must be done prior to subje ct registration. The 
subject must not have any additional stenting procedure planned after the index procedure.    
Subjects may receive appropriate anticoagulation and other therapy according to standard 
hospital practice.  
Overlapping stents are not allow ed in the study, whether planned or for bailout. Subjects who 
received overlapping stents should not be registered in this study.  
Lesion characteristic s (lesion location, % diameter stenosis, TIMI flow, RVD, lesion length, 
thrombus presence, bifurcation or not, lesion complexity), device (device name, size, number 
of device implanted, bailout usage, overlapping stent) and procedural information  (procedure  
time, access site, procedural anticoagulant and anti -thrombotic medications, any procedure 
complications)  will be collected  and recorded in eCRF .  
6.3 Post–procedure  
6.3.1 Post-procedure Laboratory and Clinical Tests 
Post-procedure ECG and cardiac enzymes are not mandatory in the study, and shall be 
performed per site’s standard care.  CK and CK- MB are preferred. If CK and CK -MB are not 
available, troponin should be collected. 
6.3.2 Antiplatelet Medications during Follow- up  
• All subjects must receive ≥75 to ≤100 mg of aspirin daily throughout the study. All 
subjects must maintain a minimum of 75 mg of clopidogrel daily or 5 or 10 mg of prasugrel daily (10 mg preferred in most subjects*) or 90 mg twice daily of ticagrelor for at least 3 months following the procedure.  
­ The choice of P2Y12 inhibitor is per site standard of care, but clopidogrel is strongly recommended for HBR subjects. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
­ For subjects taking chronic anticoagulants, dual therapy (oral anticoagulant and a P2Y12 inhibitor, clopidogrel preferred) may be considered for the first 3 months 
after index procedure per investigator’s discretion.  
• At 3-month follow up, subject will be assessed for their eligibility of P2Y12 inhibitor 
discontinuation. Eligible subjects will discontinue P2Y12 inhibitor and receive ≥75 to 
≤100 mg of aspirin daily through 1- year follow -up during the study if they are “3 -month 
clear”, defined as subjects who are free from myocardial infarction (modified ARC), repeat coronary revascularization, stroke, or stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) 
within 3 months (prior to 3- month visit but at least 90 days) after stenting A ND have been 
compliant with 3 -month dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) without interruption of either 
aspirin and/or P2Y12 receptor inhibitor for > 7 consecutive days.  
­ Peri-procedural MI (occurred within 48 hours post index procedure) without any 
clinical s ymptoms will not be considered exclusionary event for the definition of 
“3-month clear”.  
­ Dual therapy (oral anticoagulant and a P2Y12 inhibitor, clopidogrel preferred) 
within the first 3 months post index procedure for subjects who are on chronic 
anticoagu lants is acceptable for the definition of “3 -month clear”.  
• Subjects who are not “3 -month clear” a re NOT  eligible for P2Y12 inhibitor 
discontinuation at 3- month . These subjects will be treated per the investigator's discretion 
and will continue to be followed up through 12 months. 
*For prasugrel subjects < 60 kg in weight or ≥ 75 years of age, a maintenance dose of 5 mg 
per day for 12 months is allowable.   
The use of the above antiplatelet medications, including the start and stop date, any changes, 
as well as the reason to stop, will be documented in the eCRF. 
6.3.3 Other Chronic Concomitant Medications  
Administration of concomitant medications other than any approved P2Y12 inhibitors and aspirin are not required in this protocol. Subjects may receive  other medications as needed 
per physician’s discretion.  
6.4 Clinical Follow -up for All Subjects  
Subjects registered in the trial will receive the following clinical follow -up: 
• 3 months (90 ±  7 days): office visit (Note: A formal office visit is required at 3 -month 
follow -up to ensure a thorough clinical evaluation. A telephone contact is an option 
only for subjects who would otherwise be lost to follow-up due to being unable to 
complete an office visit, but a formal follow- up visit is still preferred at 3  months.) 
• 6 months (180 ±  14 days): office visit/ telephone contact  (office visit is strongly 
recommended whenever possible) 
• 12 months (365 ±  28 days): office visit/ telephone contact  (office visit is strongly 
recommended whenever possible)  
Clinical follow -up visits should be conducted by the investigator or study personnel who 
have been trained to the protocol. At 3-month follow -up visit, the investigator or designee 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
will assess whether the subject is “3 -month clear” and eligible for P2Y12 inhibitor 
discontinuation per criteria defined in Section 6.3.2.  
All registered subjects will be followed up through 12 months, regardless of eligibility to 
discontinue P2Y12 inhibitor.  
The following information will be collected at each of the time points: 
• Any adverse events  
• Use and compliance of protocol required antiplatelet medication  
• Details of any subsequent coronary interventions (e.g., repeat PCI or CABG) 
Note that information obtained through indirect contacts with a subject’s healthcare provider or immediate family member will NOT be considered as a study  visit.  
6.5 Additional Follow -up Visits for All Subjects  
Additional subject visits, such as unscheduled visits, may occur as clinically warranted. The following information will be collected  and recorded in eCRF :  
• Any adverse events  
• Use and compliance of protocol required antiplatelet medication  
• Details of any subsequent coronary interventions (e.g., repeat PCI or CABG) 
If an unscheduled visit is conducted due to a suspected i schemic cardiac event, cardiac 
enzymes and ECG may  be performed per site’s standard care . CK and CK- MB are preferred. 
If CK and CK-MB are not available, troponin should be collected. 
All efforts must be made to obtain follow -up information on subjects who have undergone 
procedures or have been treated for adverse events in a non -trial-related hospital(s).  
7.0 ADVERSE EVENTS  
To comply with worldwide standards and guidelines on clinical trial adverse event reporting, 
AV has developed uniform and worldwide applicable standard definitions and reporting timelines to be used and adhered to by the investigators. 
7.1 Definition  
7.1.1 Adverse Event  
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease or injury, or 
untoward clinic al signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) in subjects, users or other 
persons, whether or not related to the investigational medical device.  
Note 1 : This definition includes events related to the investigational medical device or the 
comparator. Note 2: This definition includes events related to the procedures involved. 
Note 3 : For users or other persons, this definition is restricted to events related to 
investigational medical devices.  
An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not related to the medicinal (investigational) product .  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
7.1.2 Serious Adverse Event  
If the AE meets any of the criteria below, it is regarded as a serious adverse event (SAE).  
a) Led to a death,  
b) Led to a serious deterioration in health that either:  
1) Resulted in a life- threatening illness or in jury, or  
2) Resulted in a permanent impairment of a body structure or a body function, or 3) Required in-patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, or 4) Resulted in medical or surgical intervention to prevent life threatening ill ness or  
injury or permanent impairment to a body structure or a body function. 
c) Led to fetal distress, fetal death or a congenital abnormality or birth defect.  
d) An important medical event that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require 
hospitalization but may be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical 
judgment, may jeopardize the subject and/or may require intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  
Note 1 : This includes device deficiencies that might have led to a serious adverse event if a) 
suitable action had not been taken or b) intervention had not been made or c) if circumstances had been less fortunate. These are handled under the SAE reporting system. 
Note 2 : A planned hospitalization for pre -existing condition, or a procedure required by the 
Clinical Investigation Plan, without a serious deterioration in health, is not considered to be a 
serious adverse event.  
7.1.3 Device Deficiency/Device Malfunction  
Device deficiency  (DD) is defined as an inadequacy of a medical device related to its 
identity, quality, durability, reliability, safety or performance, such as malfunction, misuse or use error and inadequate labeling. This includes the failure of the device to meet its performance specifications or otherwise perform as intended. Note : Performance 
specifications include all claims made in the labeling of the device.  
A device malfunction (DM) is the failure of a device to meet its performance specifications or otherwise perform as intended, when used in accordance with the instructions for use or the study protocol. 
7.2 Device Relationship  
Determination of whether there is a reasonable possibility that an investigational product or 
device caused or contributed to an AE is to be determined by the Investigator and recorded on the appropriate eCRF form. Determination should be based on assessment of temporal relationships, evidence of alternative etiology, medical/biologic plausibility, and patient condition (pre-existing conditi on). 
7.2.1 Unanticipated (Serious) Adverse Device Effect  
Unanticipated (serious) adverse device effect [U(S)ADE] refers to any serious adverse effect on health or safety or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a 
device, if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or 
degree of incidence in the investigational plan or application (including a supplementary plan or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
7.3 Adverse Event Reporting  
7.3.1 Adverse Event Reporting 
For all registered subjects, AE reporting starts when the guiding catheter enters the subject’s vasculature. A ll AEs will be collected through 12- month follow -up visit.   
Unchanged, chronic, non- worsening or pre -existing conditions are not AEs and should not be 
recorded on the AE eCRF page.  
Non-cardiac related abnormal laboratory values will not be considered AEs unless:  
1) the investigator determined that the value is clinically significant,  
2) the abnormal lab value required intervention, or  3) the abnormal lab value required subject termination from the study. The Investigator will monitor the occurrence of AEs for each subject during the course of the 
clinical trial and report as required by this protocol in S ection 7  per AE and SAE definitions. 
AEs need to be collected as of the time point of guiding catheter enters the subject’s 
vasculature on the appropriate AE eCRF form.  Additional information with regards to an 
adverse event should be updated within the appropriate case report form.  
A fax form will be made available to allow the investigator to report SAEs in the event the 
entry cannot be made in the EDC. This does not replace the EDC reporting system. All inform ation must still be entered in the EDC system as soon as feasible.  
The investigator should report all SAEs to the Sponsor as soon as possible but no later than outlined below.  
Study  site Reporting timelines  
All Study  Sites  SAEs must be reported no later than 3 calendar days from the day the study personnel became aware of the event or as per the investigative site’s local requirements, if the requirement is more stringent than those outlined. 
The date the site staff became aware that the event met the criteria of a serious adverse event must be recorded in the source document.  
Serious adverse events that occurred in the user or persons other than the  study subject should 
not be entered in the EDC system, however need to be reported via the SAE Notification 
Form.   
The Investigator will further report the SAE to the local IRB/EC according to the institution’s 
IRB/EC reporting requirements.    
7.3.2 
Unanticipated Serious Adverse Device Effect Rep orting to Sponsor and IRB  
Abbott Vascular requires the Investigator to report any USADE to the sponsor within 3 
calendar days of the investigator’s knowledge of the event, unless local requirements are more stringent, and to the IRB/EC per IRB/EC requireme nts.  
7.3.3 Device Deficiency/Device Malfunction Reporting    
All device deficiencies/malfunctions should be reported within the EDC System on the appropriate eCRF form. A fax form will be made available to allow the investigator to report device deficiencies/malfunctions in the event that the entry cannot be made in the EDC. This 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
does not replace the EDC reporting system. All information must still be entered in the EDC system as soon as feasible.  
In case a device deficiency/malfunction occurred before the patient ID has been assigned, the 
device deficiency should be reported to the Sponsor via the fax form . 
The investigator should report all DDs/DMs to the Sponsor as soon as possible but no later than outlined below:  
Study  sites  Reporting timelines  
All Study  Sites  DDs/DMs must be reported no later than 3 calendar days from the 
day the study personnel became aware of the event or as per the 
investigative site’s local requirements, if the requirement is more stringent than those outlined. 
The device, if not implanted or not remaining in the subject, should be returned to Abbott Vascular.   
Device deficiencies/malfunctions should be reported to the IRB/EC per the investigative site’s local requirements.   
 If there is a device deficiency/malfunction  related to other AV products , please contact the 
Product Performance Group (PPG) by e- mail: qahotline@av.abbott.com or contact AV Sales 
person to complete a Product Experience Form (PER Form).  
7.3.4 Adverse Event Reporting to Country Regulatory Authorities by the Sponsor  
The Sponsor or designee will report the SAEs and DDs/ product experiences ( PEs)  to the 
country regulatory authority, per local requirements.  
7.4 Safety Monitoring by Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
The DSMB will serve in an advisory role to Abbott Vascular to ensure safety by reviewing cumul ative data from the clinical trial at prescribed intervals for the purpose of safeguarding 
the interests of trial participants.  
The DSMB may consider a recommendation for modifications or termination of the trial based on any perceived safety concerns regardless of statistical significance. The recommendations of the DSMB are not binding, and all final decisions related to trial modifications rest with Abbott Vascular.  
8.0 ADJUDICATION OF EVENTS  
The Clinical Events Committee (CEC) is comprised of qualified  physicians who are not 
investigators in the trial. The CEC will review and adjudicate pre- specified events reported 
by trial investigators or identified by the Clinical Safety personnel/designate for the trial as documented in CEC Manual of Operations (MOPs).   
9.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
9.1 Statistical Overview  
The XIENCE 90  trial is powered based on primary endpoint of all death or all myocardial 
infarction [modified ARC]  (Death/MI ) from  3- to 12- month follow -up.  
Primary endpoint analysis for 3- month DAPT  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
The primary endpoint of Death/MI  between  3-month and 12- month follow -up will be 
evaluated  based on the “3 -month clear” population (as defined in section 9.2). The hypothesis 
test is designed for non- inferiority of 3 -month DAPT from XIENCE 90 compared to standard 
DAPT  duration up to 12 months from XIENCE V USA historical control for the primary 
endpoint with one-sided alpha of 0.025 after propensity score  stratification . The null (H 0) and 
alternat ive (H A) hypothesi s are of the following form:  
                        H 0: Death/MI 3m-DAPT  -  Death/MI Xience V USA   ≥ δ 
HA: Death/MI 3m-DAPT  -   Death/MI Xience V USA  < δ  
A stratified statistical  method through propensity score will be performed to test non-
inferiority (NI) of 3 -month DAPT to X IENCE  V USA historical control.  
The trial success is defined as passing the non- inferiority test on the primary endpoint 
Death/MI for the “3-month clear” population.  
Major secondary endpoint analyses for 3- month DAPT  
If the hypothesis testing for the primary endpoint is successful, the following major 
secondary analyses will be performed.  
A superiority test for the major secondary endpoint of BARC type 2 -5 bleeding. S tratified 
propensity score method will be applied for the analysis of the major secondary endpoint as 
well. This test will be based on one-sided alpha of 0.025. The null (H 0) and alternative (H A) 
hypotheses are of the following form: 
                  H 0: B3m-DAPT  –B Xience V USA  ≥ 0 
HA: B3m-DAPT  –B Xience V USA  < 0  
B3m-DAPT  and B Xience V USA are major bleeding rates  (BARC type 2 -5) between 3-month and 12-
month follow -up for XIENCE 90  and X IENCE  V USA historical control, respectively .  
Major secondary endpoint of stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) from 3 to 12 months 
of XIENCE 90 will be evaluated against a pre- specified performance goal (PG).  
Other secondary clinical endpoints will be descriptively analyzed.   
9.2 Analysis Populations  
The primary analysis population is “3- month clear” population, defined as subjects who are 
free from myocardial infarction (modified ARC), repeat coronary revasculariz ation, stroke, or 
stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) within 3 months  (prior to 3 -month visit but at least 
90 days) after stenting AND have been compliant with 3 -month dual antiplatelet therapy 
(DAPT) without interruption of either aspirin and/or P2Y12 receptor inhibitor for > 7 consecutive days.  
9.3 Sample Size Calculations and Assumptions  
9.3.1 Primary Endpoint  
To evaluate the safety of the 3 -month DAPT, the non- inferiority  test will be performed on the 
primary endpoint of Death/MI between 3- month and 12-month follow- up for XIENCE 90  
against XIENCE V USA historical control after propensity score stratification with the 
following assumptions:  
True event rate for the primary endpoint is assumed to be 6.1% for both arms     
Non-inferiority margin: 2.8%  
Attrition rate  of 15% due to using “3-month clear” population for the XIENCE 90 3-month 
DAPT arm  
One-sided alpha = 0.025 
Sample size in the control arm: ~1 ,150 
Approximately 87% power  
Sample size of 2 ,000 subjects in XIENCE 90  will be required for this test.  
The sample size calculations were performed using NCSS PASS 11 (Hintze, J., 2011, NCSS, 
LLC. Kaysville, Utah). 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
9.3.2 Major Secondary Endpoint  
Given the success of the primary analysis for the primary endpoint, the following major 
secondary analyses will be performed:  
Superiority test for the major bleeding rate ( BARC type 2 -5) from 3 - to 12 -month follow -up 
will be tested between XIENCE 90  and the XIENCE V USA historical control stratified by 
propensity scores. 
Stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) from 3- to 12-month follow-up of XIENCE 90 will 
be evaluated against a pre-specified performance goal (PG).  
Details of the above major secondary analyses could be found in the Statistical Analysis Plan 
(SAP).  
 
9.4 Statistical Analyses  
A stratified statistical  method through propensity score will be used to test non- inferiority of 
3-month DAPT in XIENCE 90  to X IENCE  V USA historical control for the primary 
endpoint of death/MI at a 0.025 significant level .  
Major se condary analyses wi ll be performed only if the primary hypothesi s testing is  
successful.  
Analyses of other secondary endpoints and additional endpoints will be descriptive in nature.  
For binary variables such as TLR, TVR, counts, percentages and 95% confidence intervals 
will be calculated, and p -values may be presented for hypothesis generating purposes. 
Pearson’s Chi -squared test of Fisher’s exact test will be performed when appropriate.  
For continuous variables such as age, means, standard deviation, and 95% confidence intervals for the mean will be calculated and p -values may be presented for hypothesis 
generating purposes. For time- to-event variables, such as time to Death/MI, survival curves 
will be constructed using Kaplan- Meier estimates, and log rank  test results will be displayed. 
Unless specified, analyses will be performed with pooled data across all study sites.  
For further details,  refer to the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP ). 
9.4.1 Primary Endpoint Analysis  
A non-inferiority test will be performed on the primary endpoint of Death/MI between 3-month and 12-month follow up for the “3-month clear” population of XIENCE 90 3-month DAPT arm and the XIENCE V USA historical control stratified by propensity score s. 
Details of the analyses for the powered primary endpoint can be found in the Statistical 
Analysis Plan (SAP).  
9.4.2 Major Secondary Endpoint Analysis  
• Superiority will be tested for the major secondary endpoint of major bleeding ( BARC 
type 2-5) between 3 -mont h and 12-month follow up for the “3- month clear” 
population of XIENCE 90 3- month DAPT arm and the XIENCE V USA historical 
control stratified by propensity scores.   
• Stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) from 3 to 12 months  for the “3 -month 
clear” popula tion of XIENCE 90 will be evaluated against a pre -specified 
performance goal (PG).  
9.4.3 Secondary Endpoint Analyses  
Other secondary and additional clinical endpoints will be descriptively analyzed.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
9.4.4 Subgroup Analysis  
Analyses will be performed for subgroups such as gender (male versus female) , diabetes 
(diabetes versus non- diabetes), ethnicity (white versus non -white), age ( age ≥  median versus 
< median) , clinical presentation (ACS NSTEMI, ACS u nstable angina, non -ACS ), and the 
subgroup of US elderly patient with age ≥ 65 years old.  
9.4.5 Procedures for Accounting for Missing, Unused or Spurious Data  
The primary and secondary endpoint analyses will be evaluated after  propensity score 
stratification . To handle missing data, multiple imputation method will be performed to 
compute propensity scores from these datasets. For further details , refer to the SAP.  
All other analyses will be based on available data with missing data excluded. Any unused or spurious data will be noted as appropriate in the final report. 
  
9.5  Deviations from the Original Statistical Plan  
Any major changes to the statistical plan will be docume nted in an amendment to the 
statistical plan. Less significant changes to the planned analyses will be documented in the final report.  
10.0 DIRECT ACCESS TO SOURCE DATA/DOCUMENTS  
The investigator/institution will permit direct access to source data/documents in order for clinical investigation -related monitoring, audits, IRB/EC review and regulatory inspections to 
be performed.  
Subjects providing informed consent are agreeing to allow Sponsor and/or its designee access and copying rights to pertinent inform ation in their medical records concerning their 
participation in this clinical investigation. The investigator will obtain, as part of the informed consent, permission for clinical investigation monitors or regulatory authorities to review, in confidence, any records identifying the subjects in this clinical investigation. This information may be shared with regulatory agencies; however, Sponsor undertakes not to otherwise release the subject's personal and private information .  
11.0 QUALITY CONTROL AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
11.1 Selection of Clinical Sites and Investigators  
Sponsor will select investigators qualified by training and experience, to participate in the investigation of the Clinical Investigation device. Sites will be selected based upon review of a recent site assessment, if applicable, and the qualifications of the Primary Investigator or multidisciplinary team at the site.   
11.2  Protocol Amendments  
Approved protocol amendments will be provided to the Investigators by the Sponsor prior to implementing the amendment. The Primary Investigator is responsible for notifying the IRB or equivalent committee of the protocol amendment (administrative changes) or obtaining IRB’s approval of the protocol amendment (changes in subject care or safety), according to the instructions provided by the Sponsor with the protocol amendment.   
Acknowledgement/approval by the IRB/EC of the protocol amendment must be documented 
in writing prior to implementation of the protocol amendment. Copies of this documentation 
must also be provided to the Sponsor. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
11.3 Training   
11.3.1 Site Training   
All Investigators/trial personnel are required to attend Sponsor training sessions, which may 
be conducted at an Investigator's meeting, a site initiation visit or other appropriate training sessions. Over -the-phone or self-training may take place as required. Training of 
Investigators/trial personnel will include, but is not limited to, the Protocol requirements, electronic case report form completion and trial personnel responsibilities. All Investigators/trial personnel that are trained must sign a training log (or an equivalent) upon completion of the training. Prior to signi ng the training log, Investigator/trial personnel must 
not perform any trial -related activities that are not considered standard of care at the site.  
11.3.2 Training of Sponsor’s Monitors  
Sponsor and/or designated monitors will be trained to the Protocol and case report forms. 
Documentation of this training will be according to written procedures. 
11.4 Monitoring   
Sponsor and/or designee will monitor the study over its duration according to the pre-
specified monitoring plan which will include the planned extent of source data verification.  
The Sponsor should be contacted for additional information on the person(s) responsible for monitoring activities.  
Prior to initiating any procedure, the Sponsor monitor (or delegate) will ensure that the following criteria are met:  
• The investigator understands and accepts the obligation to conduct the research study 
according to the Protocol and applicable regulations, and has signed the Investigator 
Agreement or the Clinical Study  Agreement.  
• The Investigator and his/her staff have sufficient time and facilities to conduct the study  
and that they have access to an adequate number of appropriate subjects to conduct the study.  
• Source documentation (including original medical records) must be ava ilable to 
substantiate proper informed consent procedures, adherence to Protocol procedures, adequate reporting and follow -up of adverse events, accuracy of data collected on case 
report forms, and device information.  
The Investigator/site will permit acc ess to such records. A monitoring visit sign- in log will be 
maintained at the site. The Investigator will agree to dedicate an adequate amount of time to the monitoring process. The Investigator and/or research coordinator will be available for monitoring visits. It is expected that the Investigator will provide the study  monitor with a 
suitable working environment for review of study- related documents.  
11.5 Deviations from the Protocol 
The Investigator will not deviate from the Protocol for any reason without prior written 
approval from Sponsor except in cases of medical emergencies, when the deviation is necessary to protect the rights, safety and well- being of the subject or eliminate an apparent 
immediate hazard to the subject. In that event, the Investi gator will notify Sponsor 
immediately by phone or in writing. All deviations must be reported to the Sponsor. In subject- specific deviations from the Protocol, a Protocol deviation case report form will be 
completed. The occurrence of Protocol deviations will be monitored by the Sponsor for evaluation of investigator compliance to the Protocol and regulatory requirements and dealt 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
with according to written procedures. Investigators will inform their IRB/EC or equivalent committee of all Protocol deviations in accordance with their specific IRB/EC or equivalent committee reporting policies and procedures.  
In the event of repeated non-compliance, as determined by the Sponsor, a Sponsor’s monitor 
or company representative will attempt to secure compliance by one or more of the following (and not limited to):  
• Visiting the investigator and/or delegate  
• Telephoning the investigator and/or delegate 
• Corresponding with the investigator and/or delegate 
Repeated non -compliance with the signed agreement, the Protocol or any other conditions of 
the study may result in further escalation in accordance with the Sponsor’s written procedures including securing compliance or, at its sole discretion; Sponsor may terminate the investigator's participation in the study .  
The following categories of protocol deviations will be considered as major:  
• Informed Consent deviation 
• Eligibility deviation  
• Serious adverse event reporting deviation 
• Treatment/procedure compliance deviation  
 The following categories of protocol deviations will be considered as minor:  
• Data outside time window  
• Missed visit  
11.6 Quality Assurance Audits   
A Sponsor representative or designee may request access to all clinical investigation records, including source documentation, for inspection and duplication during a Quality Assurance audit. In the event that an investigator is contacted by a Regulatory Agency in relation to this clinical investigation, the Investigator will notify Sponsor immediately. The Investigator and Research Coordinator must be available to respond to reasonable requests and audit queries made during the audit process. The Investigator must provide Sponsor with copies of all correspondence that may affect the review of the current clinical investigation (e.g., Form FDA 483, Inspectional Observations, Warning Letters, Inspection Reports, etc.). Sponsor may provide any needed assistance in responding to regulatory audits.  
11.7 Committees   
11.7.1 Steering Committee  
The Steering Committee is assigned by the Sponsor and comprises the Principal Investigator 
as specified on the cover page of this Protocol, the Trial Chairman (if  applicable) and 
four/five dedicated members from the trial sites. The Sponsor will be represe nted by at least 
one person each from the Clinical Science and Clinical Program Management groups. The 
Chairman of the core laboratories and other sponsor’s personnel may also participate in the Committee meetings if appropriate. Meeting minutes from this committee will be filed with 
the Sponsor.  The Steering Committee is responsible for overseeing the scientific and operational aspects of the trial. This committee will meet regularly to monitor patient registration or randomization, general data collectio n and non- compliance with the trial plan at individual centers, to review 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
and act upon recommendations of the Data and Safety Monitoring Board, to review operational issues that may arise and warrant a Protocol amendment or other corrective action and to determine policy regarding any publications arising from data generated from the performance of the trial.  
11.7.2  Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
The Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) is an independent multidisciplinary group that is 
restricted to individuals free of apparent significant conflicts of interest. The source of these conflicts may be financial, scientific, or regulatory in nature. The DSMB is typically composed of at least two physicians with relevant interventional experience (e.g., vas cular 
surgeon, interventional radiologist, interventional cardiologist) and a biostatistician and is responsible for making recommendations regarding endpoint analyses and any potentially significant patient safety -related observations. The composition of the DSMB, frequency of 
the DSMB sessions and the statistical monitoring guidelines are described in detail in the DSMB charter. DSMB meeting minutes and recommendations are forwarded to Abbott Vascular.     
In addition to an Abbott Vascular/designee safety monitor reviewing adverse events at regular intervals, a monthly listing of Adverse Events will be sent to the DSMB Chair or designee for review . If a safety signal is identified during this review, then the DSMB chair 
will call for an ad hoc full DSMB mee ting. 
11.7.3 Clinical Events Committee (CEC)  
The Clinical Events Committee (CEC) is an independent adjudication body comprised of qualified physicians who are not participants in the trial. The CEC will review and adjudicate events as defined in the CEC charter and according to definitions provided in this Protocol Appendix II .      
12.0 DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING   
Data Management will include documentation of the systems and procedures used in data collection for the duration of the trial.  
All CRF data collection will be performed through a secure web portal and all authorized 
personnel with access to the Electronic Data Capture (EDC) system must use an electronic signature access method to enter, review or correct data. Passwords and electronic signatures will be strictly confidential.   
All CRF data will be downloaded from the EDC system and reformatted into a data structure acceptable to Abbott Vascular. The data will be subjected to consistency and validation checks within the EDC system and will be subject to supplemental validation following download.   
At the conclusion of the trial, completed CRF images with the date-and- time stamped 
electronic audit trail indicating the user, the data entered, and any reason for change (if 
applicable) will be archived for each investigational site and a backup copy archived with Abbott Vascular.  
For the clinical trial/investigation duration, the Investigator will maintain complete and 
accurate documentation including, but not limited to, medical records, clinical trial/investigation progress records, laboratory reports, electronic case report forms, signed ICFs, device accoun tability records, correspondence with the IRB and clinical 
trial/investigation monitor/Sponsor, adverse event reports, and information regarding subject discontinuation or completion of the clinical trial/investigation.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
12.1 Source Documentation   
Regulations and GCP require that the Investigator maintain information in the subject’s original medical records that corroborates data collected on the case report forms. In order to comply with these regulatory requirements/GCP, the following information should b e 
included in the subject record at a minimum and if applicable to the investigation: 
• Medical history/physical condition of the subject before involvement in the trial sufficient to verify Protocol entry criteria  
• Dated and signed notes on the day of entry into the trial referencing the Sponsor, 
Protocol number, subject ID number and a statement that informed consent was 
obtained 
• Dated and signed notes from each subject visit (for specific results of procedures and exams)  
• Adverse events reported and their resolution including supporting documents such as discharge summaries, catheterization laboratory reports, ECGs, and lab results including documentation of site awareness of SAEs and of investigator device relationship assessment of SAEs.  
• Any laboratory reports and 12- lead ECGs  (if performed), reviewed and annotated for 
clinical significance of out of range results.  
• Notes regarding Protocol -required and prescription medications taken during the trial 
(including start and stop dates) 
• Subject’s condition upon completion of or withdrawal from the trial  
• Any other data required to substantiate data entered into the CRF  
12.2 Electronic Case Report Form Completion   
Primary data collection based on source- documented hospital and/or clinic chart reviews will 
be performed clearly and accurately by site personnel trained on the protocol and eCRF completion. eCRF data will be collected for all subjects that are registered  into the trial.  
12.3 Record Retention   
The Sponsor will archive and retain all documents pertaining to the trial as per the applicable regulatory record retention requirements. The Investigator must obtain permission from Sponsor in writing before destroying or transferring control of any clinical trial/investigation records. 
13.0 ETHICAL CONS IDERATION   
13.1 Institutional Review Board/Medical Ethics Committee Review   
Institutional Review Board (IRB)/ Ethics Committee (EC) approval for the Protocol and 
ICF/other written information provided to the patient will be obtained by the Primary Investigator at each investigational site prior to participation in this clinical trial/investigation. The approval letter must be received prior to the start of this clinical trial/investigation and a copy must be provided to the Sponsor. No changes will be made to the Protocol or ICF or other written information provided to the patient without appropriate approvals, including IRB/EC, the Sponsor, and/or the regulatory agencies.  
Until the clinical trial/investigation is completed, the Investigator will advise his /her IRB/EC 
of the progress of this clinical trial/investigation, per IRB/EC requirements. Written approval 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
must be obtained from the IRB/EC yearly to continue the clinical trial/investigation, or according to each institution’s IRB/EC requirements (US stu dies only). Further, any 
amendments to the Protocol as well as associated ICF changes will be submitted to the IRB/EC and written approval obtained prior to implementation, according to each institution’s IRB/EC requirements.  
No investigative procedures other than those defined in this Protocol will be undertaken on the registered subjects without the written agreement of the IRB/EC and the Sponsor. 
14.0 PUBLICATION POLICY   
The data and results from the trial are the sole property of the Sponsor. The Sponsor shall 
have the right to access and use all data and results generated during the clinical trial. The 
Sponsor will submit trial results for publication, regardless of tria l outcome, following the 
conclusion or termination of the trial.  The Investigators will not use the Clinical trial/investigation -related data without the written consent of the Sponsor for any other 
purpose than for Clinical trial/investigation completion  or for generation of publication 
material, as referenced in the Clinical trial/investigation Site Agreement. The publication and/or presentation of results from a single clinical trial/investigation site are not allowed 
until publication and/or presentation of the multi -center results. The Sponsor acknowledges 
that the trial’s Principal Investigator intends to publish a multi- center publication regarding 
the clinical trial/investigation results. The Sponsor must receive any proposed publication 
and/or pres entation materials at least 60 days prior to the proposed date of the presentation or 
the initial submission of the proposed publication in order for the materials to be reviewed by the Sponsor in compliance with the Sponsor’s publication policy set forth in the Clinical trial/investigation Site Agreement.  
The Sponsor will be responsible for determining whether to register the Clinical Investigation on www.clinicaltrials.gov
 or any other clinical investigations, in accordance with the 
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors guidelines, or any other applicable guidelines. In the event Sponsor determines that the Trial should be registered, Sponsor shall be responsible for any such registration and results posting as required by ClinicalTrials.gov. Institution and/or Principal Investigator(s) shall not take any action to register the Trial.  
15.0 RISK ANALYSIS   
The optimal duration of DAPT remains a dilemma for clinicians with the current clinical practice, and is of particular interest to HBR patients which represent approximately 15% or more of patients undergoing PCI
22,23. The default management of care for HBR patients who 
undergo PCI is often stenting with BMS followed by 1 month of DAPT. The European ESC/EACTS guidelines have recommended 3 months of DAPT with second-generation DES for HBR patients undergoing PCI
24.  Consistent with the European guideline, the updated 
2016 ACC/AHA guideline also provided a class IIb recommendation of 3-month DAPT in SIHD patients with high risk of bleeding following DES implantation
17. Studies with some 
DES (Endeavor, BioFreedom) have demonstrated  safety of short -term DAPT for HBR 
patients45,47. 
 XIENCE has consistently been shown to have the best safety profile among the coronary stents, even when compared to BMS, in both clinical trials and commercial data analysis. However, the benefit/risk ratio of a shorter duration of DAPT following XIENCE implantation in the HBR population has not been thoroughly evaluated. There is clearly an unmet medical need to be addressed for the HBR patient population as the possible benefits of extended DAPT therapy to prevent late stent thrombosis and the progression of 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
atherosclerotic disease need to be weighed against the increased risk of bleeding in an individual patient. Therefore, the XIENCE 90  study is designed to prospectively evaluate the 
safety of XIENCE followed with 3-month DAPT in HBR patients . 
15.1 Anticipated Clinical Benefits  
The excellent safety profile of XIENCE family of stents has been well demonstrated. Stent implantation and the following medical treatment are the same for subjects registered in this study as if they are not participating in this clinical study , except fo r DAPT duration. Short-
term DAPT may decrease the risk of bleeding in HBR subjects. Participation of this study contributes to defin ing the optimum duration of DAPT in  HBR subjects treated with 
XIENCE . 
15.2 Foreseeable Adverse Events and Anticipated Adverse Device Effects  
Observed and potential adverse events occurring with the XIENCE family of stents are listed in the IFUs. The incidence of these adverse events is comparable to other PCI devices. There may be risks related to the device that are unknown a t present.  
Please refer to the drug labelling (most recent versions available at www.fda.gov
 – drugs - 
drugs@fda and www.ema.europa.eu  – find medicine – human medicines), and publi shed 
guidelines on PCI and DAPT use17,24 for information on bleeding and other risks associated 
with DAPT use.  
Short- term DAPT use may decrease the risk of bleeding in HBR subjects, but may increase 
the risk of late stent thrombosis and progression of atherosclerotic disease.  
15.3 Residual Risks Associated with the Investigational Device, as Identified in the Risk  Analysis Report  
The XI ENCE Risk Assessment Report
12 utilizes the Failure Modes and Effects Analysis 
(FMEA) tool to systematically identify potential hazards associated with the process, design, components, and use of the XI ENCE product family. Based upon preclinical, clinical, bench 
data, and commercial post -production data, all residual risks are appropriat e and acceptable. 
The benefit of treatment from the XIENCE outweighs the potential risks to the patient. 
Comprehensive analysis of product level clinical data, including clinical trial, post-marketing, and literature data, confirms that any undesirable ris ks identified are outweighed by the 
clinical benefits of the device
13 . 
15.4 Risks Associated with Participation in Clinical Investigation  
All procedures required by the protocol are routine standard of care. There are no a dditional 
risks to the subjects, except that short- term DAPT may increase the risk of stent thrombosis 
and ischemic events.  
15.5 Possible Interactions with Protocol  Required Concomitant Medications  
Other than DAPT, the study protocol does not require concomitant medications.  
 
    
12 RAM10 70000 XIENCE Xpedition/XIENCE PROx EECSS RAM; RAM 1100000 XIENCE Alpine/XIENCE 
PROA EECSS RAM; RAM 1500000 XIENCE Sierra EECSS RAM  
13 RPT2098376 Rev G XIENCE EECSS Clinical Evaluation Report  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
15.6 Steps that will be Taken to Control or Mitigate the Risks  
In-depth recommendations, special precautions and instructions regarding patient selection, 
vessel sizing, device handling, device placement and system removal are included in the IFU. 
It is also stated in the IFU that the devices can only be used by physicians who have received 
appropriate training on how to use the device. This statement is interpreted to mean that the 
physician users are expected to be aware of the known and foreseeable saf ety risks associated 
with the use of the devices including the surgical and/or non- surgical treatment of these 
conditions. 
Risks associated with the use of the device during this clinical study  are minimized through 
device design, investigator selection and training, pre- specified patient eligibility 
requirements, study monitoring to ensure adherence to the protocol, clinical follow -up by 
investigator or designee at pre -specified time points and the use of a DSMB.  
All a dverse events and device deficiencies observed in this study will be reported to Abbott 
Vascular, will be monitored internally for safety surveillance purposes, and will be reported 
to the regulatory authorities, as applicable (Refer to section 7.3 of this protocol ). 
Abbott Vascular updates the risk assessment reports and conducts comprehensive analysis of 
product level clinical data on a regular basis. 
The XIENCE family of stents has not been tested in pregnant women. Effects on the 
developing fetus and excretion of everolimus in breast milk have not been studied. Pregnant or nursing subjects and those who plan pregnancy in the period up to 1 year following index procedure are excluded from participation in the clinical study. Female subjects of child -
bearing potential must have a pregnancy test done within 7 days prior to the index procedure with negative results known to confirm eligibility prior to registration.  
15.7 Risk to Benefit Rationale  
The XIENCE family of stent has consistently been shown to have the best safety profile among the coronary stents, in both clinical trials and commercial data analysis. The optimal 
duration of DAPT remains a dilemma for clinicians with the current clinical practice, and is of particular interest to HBR patients which represent approximately 15% or more  of patients 
undergoing PCI. The XIENCE 90  study is designed to prospectively evaluate the safety of 
XIENCE followed with  3-month DAPT in HBR patients. Reduced DAPT treatment duration 
may decrease the risk of bleeding, but may increase the risk of late ste nt thrombosis and 
progression of atherosclerotic disease, although studies with other DES have demonstrated safety of short -term DAPT for HBR patients.  Other than a reduction in the duration of DAPT, 
all procedures required by the protoc ol are routine standard of care and conducted according 
to the current IFU.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
APPENDIX I:  ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS  
 
Acronym or Abbreviation  Complete Phrase or Definition  
%DS  percent diameter stenosis  
ACS  Acute Coronary Syndrome  
AE adverse event  
AMI  acute myocardial infarction  
ARC  Academic Research Consortium  
BARC  Bleeding Academic Research Consortium  
BMS  Bare metal stents  
CABG  coronary artery bypass graft  
CAD  coronary artery disease  
CASS  Coronary Artery Surgery Study  
CCS  Canadian Cardiovascular Society (Canada)  
CEC  Clinical Events Committee  
CVA  Cerebrovascular Accident  
CI clinically -indicated  
CI confidence interval  
CK creatine kinase  
CK-MB creatine kinase myocardial -band isoenzyme  
CoCr -EES cobalt chromium everolimus -eluting stent  
CVA  cerebrovascular accident (or stroke)  
DAPT  dual antiplatelet therapy  
DD device deficiency  
DES  Drug-eluting stent  
DM device malfunction  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  
EC Ethics Committee (EU)  
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
eCRF  electronic case report form  
EDC  electronic data capture  
EECS  everolimus eluting coronary stent  
EECSS  everolimus eluting coronary stent system   
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
FMEA  Failure Modes and Effects Analysis  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GI gastrointestinal  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
HBR  High bleeding ri sk 
ICF Informed Consent Form  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
Acronym or Abbreviation  Complete Phrase or Definition  
IDE Investigational Device Exemption  
IFU Instructions for Use  
IRB Institutional Review Board (US and Japan)  
KM Kaplan -Meier  
LAD  left anterior descending coronary artery  
LCX  left circumflex coronary artery  
LMCA  left main coronary artery  
LVEF  left ventricular ejection fraction  
MACCE  major adverse cerebral and cardiovascular event  
MEC  Medical Ethics Committee (EU)  
MOP  Manual of Operations  
µg microgram  
mg milligram  
MI myocardial infarction  
mL milliliter  
MLD  mean lumen diameter  
mm millimeter  
N sample size; also N 
NSTEMI  non ST -segment elevation MI  
NQMI  non-Q wave myocardial infarction  
OCT  optical coherence tomography  
OR odds ratio  
OUS  Outside of United States  
PE product experience  
PCI percutaneous coronary intervention  
PG performance goal  
PTCA  percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty  
QCA  quantitative coronary angiography  
RCA  right coronary artery  
RCT  randomized clinical trial  
RVD  reference vessel diameter  
RX Rapid Exchange  
SAE  serious adverse event  
SAP statistical analysis plan  
SIHD  stable ischemic heart disease  
ST stent thrombosis  
STEMI  ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction  
TIA transient ischemic attack  
TIMI  thrombolysis in myocardial infarction  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
Acronym or Abbreviation  Complete Phrase or Definition  
TLR  target lesion revascularization  
TLF target lesion failure  
TVF  target vessel failure  
TVR  target vessel revascularization  
UADE  unanticipated adverse device effect  
ULN  upper limit of normal  
US United States  
USADE  unanticipated serious adverse device effect  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
APPENDIX II:  DEFINITIONS  
 
CLINICAL ENDPOINT DEFINITIONS  
 DEATH (Per ARC Circulation 2007; 115: 2344-2351) All deaths are considered cardiac unless an unequivocal non -cardiac cause can be established. 
Specifically, any unexpected death even in patients with coexisting potentially fatal non-cardiac disease (e.g. cancer, infection) should be classified as cardiac.   Cardiac death :  
Any death due to proximate cardiac cause (e.g. MI, low- output failure, fatal arrhythmia), 
unwitnessed death and death of unknown cause, all procedure related deaths including those related to concomitant treatment.  
 Vascular death:  
Deat h due to non- coronary vascular causes such as cerebrovascular disease, pulmonary 
embolism, ruptured aortic aneurysm, dissecting aneurysm, or other vascular cause.    
Non-cardiovascular death:  
Any death not covered by the above definitions such as death caused by infection, malignancy, 
sepsis, pulmonary causes, accident, suicide or trauma. 
 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION (MI)  
 MI Definition  (Modified  ARC) 
 Patients present any of the following clinical or imaging evidence of ischemia:  
• Clinical symptoms of ischemia;  
• ECG changes indicative of new ischemia - new ST -T changes or new left bundle branch 
block ( LBBB), development of pathological Q waves*;  
• Imaging evidence of a new loss of viable myocardium or a new regional wall motion 
abnormality)  
 
AND confirmed with elevated cardiac biomarkers ** per ARC criteria (Circulation 2007; 115: 
2344-2351): 
• Periprocedural MI:  
• Within 48h after PCI: CK -MB >3 x URL or Troponin > 3 x URL with baseline value 
< URL  
• Within 72h after CABG: CK -MB >5 x URL or Troponin > 5 x URL with baseline 
value < URL  
• Spontaneous MI (> 48h following PCI, > 72h following CABG):  CK- MB > URL or 
Troponin > URL with baseline value < URL 
 
* Pathologic Q waves may be defined according to the Global Task Force, Minnesota code, or Novacode  
**The assessment of CK-MB is preferred over the assessment of troponin for the diagnosis of peri -procedural MI, if possible. 
Baseline biomarker value requiring before study procedure and presumes a typical rise and fall.  
 
Electrocardiographic Classification  
 
• Based on Q -Wave 
o Q-wave MI [QMI]  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
 Development of new pathological Q waves in 2 or more contiguous leads with or without post- procedure CK or CK- MB levels elevated 
above normal. 
 
o Non Q -wave MI [NQMI]  
 All MIs not classified as Q waves.  
 
• Relation to the Target Vessel  
All infarcts that cannot be clearly attributed to a vessel other than the target vessel will be considered related to the target vessel.  
 WHO MI Definition  
 Myocardial infarctions will also be adjudicated based on the following definition:  
 Q wave MI : Development of new, pathological Q wave on the ECG  
 
 Non-Q wave MI : Elevation of CK levels to ≥  two times the upper limit of normal (ULN) 
with elevated CK -MB in the absence of new pathological Q waves 
  
 STENT THROMBOSIS (Per ARC Circulation 2007 ; 115: 2344-2351) 
 Timing:  
Acute stent thrombosis*:   0 - 24 hours post stent implantation  Subacute stent thrombosis*:   >24 hours . 30 days post stent implantation  Late stent thrombosis†:   30 days - 1 year post stent implantation  
Very late stent thrombosis†:   >1 year post stent implantation  
 *  Acute/subacute can also be replaced by early stent thrombosis. Early stent thrombosis (0 - 30 days) - this definition is currently used in the community.  † Including “primary” as well as “secondary” late stent thrombosis; “secondary” late 
stent thrombosis  is a stent thrombosis after a target segment revascularization.  
 Categories (Definite, Probable, and Possible):  
 Definite stent thrombosis  
Definite stent thrombosis is considered to have occurred by either angiographic or pathologic confirmation. 
  Angio graphic confirmation of stent thrombosis*  
The presence of a thrombus
† that originates in the stent or in the segment 5 mm 
proximal or distal to the stent and presence of at least 1 of the following criteria within a 48-hour time window:  
• Acute onset of ischemic symptoms at rest  
• New ischemic ECG changes that suggest acute ischemia  
• Typical rise and fall in cardiac biomarkers (refer to definition of spontaneous 
MI)  
• Non-occlusive thrombosis 
o Thrombus Intracoronary thrombus is defined as a (spheric, ovoid, or 
irregular) non -calcified filling defect or lucency surrounded by contrast 
material (on 3 sides or within a coronary stenosis) seen in multiple 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
projections, or persistence of contrast material within the lumen, or a visible embolization of intraluminal material downstream.  
• Occlusive thrombus  
o TIMI 0 or TIMI 1 intrastent or proximal to a stent up to the most adjacent proximal side branch or main branch (if originates from the side branch).  
 Pathological confirmation of stent thrombosis  
Evidence of recent t hrombus within the stent determined at autopsy or via 
examination of tissue retrieved following thrombectomy.  
 
    * The incidental angiographic documentation of stent occlusion in the absence 
of clinical signs or symptoms is not considered a confirmed stent thrombosis 
(silent occlusion).  
     † Intracoronary thrombus.  
Probable stent thrombosis  
Clinical definition of probable stent thrombosis is considered to have occurred after intracoronary stenting in the following cases: 
• Any unexplained de ath within the first 30 days
‡  
• Irrespective of the time after the index procedure, any MI that is related to 
documented acute ischemia in the territory of the implanted stent without 
angiographic confirmation of stent thrombosis and in the absence of any other obvious cause  
     ‡ For studies with ST -elevation MI population, one may consider the exclusion 
of unexplained death within 30 days as evidence of probable stent thrombosis. 
 
Possible stent thrombosis  
Clinical definition of possible stent thrombosis  is considered to have occurred with any 
unexplained death from 30 days after intracoronary stenting until end of trial follow -up. 
 STROKE  
 An acute symptomatic episode of neurological dysfunction attributed to a vascular cause lasting more than 24 hours or lasting 24 hours or less with a brain imaging study or autopsy showing new infarction. 
• Ischemic Stroke: An acute symptomatic episode of focal cerebral, spinal, or retinal 
dysfunction caused by an infarction of central nervous system tissue. 
• Hemorrhagic S troke: An acute symptomatic episode of focal or global cerebral or 
spinal dysfunction caused by a non- traumatic intraparenchymal, intraventricular, or 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
• Undetermined Stroke: A stroke with insufficient information to allow categorization 
as ischemic or hemorrhagic.  
 
Note: an event that last < 24 hours may be adjudicated as a stroke if the following treatments were used:  
• Pharmacologic, i.e., thrombolytic drug administration, or 
Non-pharmacologic, i.e., neurointerventional procedure (e.g., intracranial angioplasty)  
 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
 
BLEEDING (Per BARC, Circulation 2011; 123: 2736-2747) Bleeding will also be adjudicated per Bleeding Academic Research Consortium (BARC) definitions:  
• Type 0: no bleeding 
• Type 1: bleeding that is not actionable and does not cause the patient to seek 
unscheduled performance of studies, hospitalization, or treatment by a healthcare 
professional; may include episodes leading to self-discontinuation of medical therapy 
by the patient wi thout consulting a healthcare professional  
• Type 2: any overt, actionable sign of hemorrhage (eg, more bleeding than would be 
expected for a clinical circumstance, including bleeding found by imaging alone) that 
does not fit the criteria for type 3, 4, or 5 but does meet at least one of the following 
criteria: (1) requiring nonsurgical, medical intervention by a healthcare professional, 
(2) leading to hospitalization or increased level of care, or (3) prompting evaluation 
• Type 3 
o Type 3a 
 Overt bleeding plus hemoglobin drop of 3 to < 5 g/dL* (provided 
hemoglobin drop is related to bleed) 
 Any transfusion with overt bleeding  
o Type 3b 
 Overt bleeding plus hemoglobin drop ≥ 5 g/dL*(provided hemoglobin 
drop is related to bleed) 
 Cardiac tamponade  
 Bleeding requiring surgical intervention for control (excluding 
dental/nasal/sk in/hemorrhoid) 
 Bleeding requiring intravenous vasoactive agents 
o Type 3c 
 Intracranial hemorrhage (does not include microbleeds or hemorrhagic 
transformation, does include intraspinal) 
 Subcategories confirmed by autopsy or imaging or lumbar puncture 
 Intraocular bleed compromising vision  
• Type 4: CABG- related bleeding  
o Perioperative intracranial bleeding within 48 h  
o Reoperation after closure of sternotomy for the purpose of controlling 
bleeding 
o Transfusion of ≥ 5 U whole blood or packed red blood cells within a 48-h 
period† 
o Chest tube output ≥ 2L within a 24 -h period 
• Type 5: fatal bleeding 
o Type 5a 
 Probable fatal bleeding; no autopsy or imaging confirmation but 
clinically suspicious  
o Type 5b 
 Definite fatal bleeding; overt bleeding or autopsy or imaging 
confirmation  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
CABG indicates coronary artery bypass graft. Platelet transfusions should be recorded 
and reported but are not included in these definitions until further information is obtained 
about the relationship to outcomes. If a CABG- related bleed is not adjudicated as at least 
a type 3 severity event, it will be classified as not a bleeding event. If a bleeding event 
occurs with a clear temporal relationship to CABG (i.e., within a 48- h time frame) but 
does not meet type 4 severity criteria, it will be  classified as not a bleeding event.  
* Corrected for transfusion (1 U packed red blood cells or 1 U whole blood=1 g/dL 
hemoglobin). 
† Cell saver products are not counted. 
  REVASCULARIZATION (Per ARC Circulation 2007; 115: 2344 -2351) 
 Target Lesion Revascu larization (TLR)  
TLR is defined as any repeat percutaneous intervention of the target lesion or bypass surgery of the target vessel performed for restenosis or other complication of the target lesion. All TLR should be classified prospectively as clinical ly indicated [CI] or not clinically indicated 
by the investigator prior to repeat angiography. The target lesion is defined as the treated segment from 5 mm proximal to the stent and to 5 mm distal to the stent.  
Target Vessel Revascularization (TVR)  
TVR is  defined as any repeat percutaneous intervention or surgical bypass of any segment of 
the target vessel. The target vessel is defined as the entire major coronary vessel proximal and distal to the target lesion  which includes upstream and downstream branches and the target 
lesion itself  
Non Target Lesion Revascularization (Non- TLR)  
Any revascularization in the target vessel for a lesion other than the target lesion is 
considered a non- TLR.  
Non Target Vessel Revascularization (Non -TVR)  
Revascularization of the vessel identified and treated as the non -target vessel at the time of 
the index procedure.  
Clinically Indicated [CI] Revascularization (TLR/TVR) A revascularization is considered clinically indic ated if angiography at follow-up shows a 
percent diameter stenosis ≥ 50% and if one of the following occurs:  
• A positive history of recurrent angina pectoris, presumably related to the target vessel;  
• Objective signs of ischemia at rest (ECG changes) or during exercise test (or 
equivalent), presumably related to the target vessel;  
• Abnormal results of any invasive functional diagnostic test (e.g., Doppler flow 
velocity reserve, fractional flow reserve);  
• A TLR/TVR with a diameter stenosis ≥70% in the absenc e of the above mentioned 
ischemic signs or symptoms.  
 TARGET LESION FAILURE (TLF)  
TLF is defined as a composite of all cardiac death, myocar dial infarction attributed to target 
vessel or clinically -indicated TLR. 
 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
TARGET VESSEL FAILURE (TVF)  
TVF is defined  as a composite of cardiac death, MI attributed to target vessel, clinically -
indicated TLR, or clinically -indicated TVR, non- TLR.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
OTHER DEFINTIONS (in alphabetic order)  
 ACC/AHA Classification Scheme of Coronary Lesions: Lesion -Specific Characteristics  
Type A Lesions (High Success, >85%; Low Risk)  
• Discrete (< 10 mm length)  • Little or no calcification  
• Concentric  • Less than totally occlusive  
• Readily accessible  • Not ostial in location  
• Non-angulated segment, < 45 ° • No major branch involvement  
• Smooth contour  • Absence of thrombus  
Type B Lesions* (Moderate Success, 60 -85%; Moderate risk)  
• Tubular (10 -20 mm length)  • Moderate -to-heavy calcification  
• Eccentric  • Total occlusions < 3 mo old  
• Moderate tortuosity of proximal segment  • Ostial in location  
• Moderately angulated segment, > 45° , < 90° • Bifurcation lesions requiring double guide 
wires  
• Irregular contour  • Some thrombus present  
* Type B1 lesions: One adverse characteristic  
* Type B2 lesions: ≥ two adverse characteristics  
Type C Lesions (Low Success, <60%; High Risk)  
• Diffuse (> 2 cm length)  • Total occlusions > 3 mo old  
• Excessive tortuosity of proximal segment  • Inability to protect major side branches  
• Extremely angulated segments > 90 ° • Degenerated vein grafts with friable lesions  
 
ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME (ACS)  
ACS is defined as ischemic symptoms occurring at rest and lasting 10 minutes or more and 
occurring within 72 hours before index procedure AND either ST -segment deviation of 1 mm 
or more or elevated levels of a cardiac biomarker of necrosis (CK -MB or troponin T or I 
greater than the upper limit of normal.).   
 DE NOVO LESION  
A native coronary artery lesion not previously treated.  DISSECTION  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute [NHLBI] Dissection Classification System:  
A. Minor radiolucencies within the lumen during contrast injection with no persistence after dye clearance.  
B. Parallel tracts or double lumen separated by a radiolucent area during contrast injection with no persistence after dye clearance.  
C. Extraluminal cap with persistence of contrast after dye clearance from the lumen.  
D. Spiral luminal filling defects.  
E. New persistent filling defects.  
F. Non-A-E types that lead to impaired flow or total occlusion.  
Note:  Type E and F dissections may represent thrombus.  
 MAJOR EPICARDIAL VESSELS  
• Left anterior descending artery [LAD] with septal and diagonal branches;  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
• Left circumflex artery [LCX] with obtuse marginal and/or ramus intermedius branches; 
• Right coronary artery [RCA] and any of its branches. 
 MINIMUM LUMEN DIAMETER (MLD)  
The average of 2 orthogonal views (when possible) of the narrowest point within the area of assessment, assessed by visual estimation or online QCA by the investigator. 
 PERCENT DIAMETER STENOSIS (% DS)  
The value calculated by the following:  
100 * (1 – minimum lumen diameter / reference vessel diameter)  
using the mean values from 2 orthogonal views (when possible) assessed by visual estimation or online QCA  by the investigator. 
 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR A physician-specialist, related to the study, who is responsible for the overall conduct of the trial at all sites and compliance with protocol/CIP  and relevant.  
 PRIMARY INVESTIGATOR  
A physician responsible for conducting the clinical trial at each investigational site.  
 PROCEDURE START DATE AND TIME  
Procedure start date and time is recorded as the date and time the first guiding catheter was inserted into the subject.  
 PROCEDURE END DATE AND TIME Procedure end date and time is recorded as the time the last guiding catheter was removed from the subject.  
 REFERENCE VESSEL DIAMETER (RVD)  
An approximation of the treated lesion vessel diameter. The reference vessel diameter is visually estimated during angiography or online QCA by the investigator . 
 STAGED PROCEDURE  
A staged procedure is defined as the planned treatment of baseline lesions during one or more cardiac catheterization procedures following the i nitial  procedure. Revascularization of the 
baseline lesions treated at the initial procedure is not considered a staged procedure.  
 TARGET LESION  The target lesion is defined as the lesion that has met the angiographic inclusion and exclusion criteria , and is i mplanted with XIENCE stent during the index procedure. 
 TARGET VESSEL  
The entire epicardial vessel in which the target lesion  is located, which includes upstream and 
downstream branches and the target lesion itself.  
 THROMBUS (PER SYNTAX SCORE DEFINITION)  
Spheric, ovoid or irregular intraluminal filling defect or lucency surrounded on three sides by contrast medium seen just distal or within the coronary stenosis in multiple projections or a visible embolization of intraluminal material downstre am. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
TIMI (THROMBOSIS IN MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION) FLOW GRADES  
0. No contrast flow through the stenosis.   
1. A small amount of contrast flows through the stenosis but fails to fully opacify the artery beyond. 
2. Contrast material flows through the stenosis to opacify  the terminal artery segment. 
However, contrast enters the terminal segment perceptibly more slowly than more proximal segments. Alternatively, contrast material clears from a segment distal to a stenosis noticeably more slowly than from a comparable segment not preceded by a significant stenosis.  
3. Anterograde flow into the terminal coronary artery segment through a stenosis is as prompt as anterograde flow into a comparable segment proximal to the stenosis. Contrast material clears as rapidly from the dista l segment as from an uninvolved, 
more proximal segment.  
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
APPENDIX III:  CONTACT INFORMATION  
A list of investigational site co -ordinates can be obtained upon request from the Clinical 
Project Manager for the study . 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
APPENDIX IV : SCHEDULE OF EVENTS  
 
PROCEDURE /TEST 
Baseline  
Pre-Procedure  
(within 24 hours) 
Procedure  
Post-Procedure  
3-month ( ± 7d) 
Office visit2 
6-month ( ± 14d)  
 Office visit or 
phone contact 3 
12-month ( ± 28d) 
Office visit or 
phone contact3 
Unscheduled visits  
Subject Medical/Clinical History (Age, Sex, 
Risk Factors, Cardiac Status, Cardiac 
History)      
    
Subject Informed Consent (Must be obtained 
prior to any study related testing or 
procedures)      
   
General Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria          
Angiographic Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria          
Coronary Angiogram          
Study Stent and Procedure Information          
Antiplatelet Medications Loading Dose          
P2Y12 Inhibitor Discontinuation Eligibility Assessment          
Post-procedure Antiplatelet Medications1          
Adverse Events          
1Subject who are “3-month clear”  will discontinue P2Y12 inhibitor after 3- month visit , but continue taking aspirin through 12- month 
follow- up. Subjects who are not eligible for early P2Y12 inhibitor discontinuation  will be treated per site standard of care.  
2Office visit is required for 3 -month follow -up. A formal office visit is required at 3 -month follow -up to ensure a thorough clinical 
evaluation. A telephone contact is an option only for subjects who would otherwise be lost to follow- up due to being unable to complete an 
office visit, but a formal follow- up visit is still preferred at 3 mon ths. 
3Office visit is strongly recommended whenever possible.  
 
 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
APPENDIX V: CLINICAL INVESTIGATION FLOW  
  
1Consenting after the index procedure but prior to hospital discharge (or up to 3 days after the index procedure) is acceptable, only if the site 
confirms  that the protocol required DAPT regimen is site’s standard of care. If staged procedures are needed for a subject, the site m ay 
consent the subject after the initial procedure.  
2Office visit is required for 3 -month follow -up. A formal office visit is required at 3 -month follow -up to ensure a thorough clinical 
evaluation. A telephone contact is an option only for subjects who would otherwise be lost to follow- up due to being unable to complete an 
office visit, but a formal follow- up visit is still preferred at 3 months.  
3 “3-month clear” is defined as subjects who are free from myocardial infarction (modified ARC), repeat coronary revascularization, stroke, 
or stent thrombosis (ARC definite/probable) within 3 months (prior to 3 -month visit but at least 90 days) after stenting AND have been 
compliant with 3 -month dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) without interruption of either aspirin and/or P2Y12 receptor inhibitor for > 7 
consecutive days.  
4Office visit is strongly recommended whenever possible. 
   
Yes 
3-month  clear3? 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Informed consent signed1 
Angiographic 
inclusion/exclusion met   
3-month (90±7 days)  
Office visit2.  
6-month (180 ±14 days)  
Office visit or telephone contact4 
  
12-month ( 365±28 days)  
Office visit or telephone contact4 
Screen failure, do 
not register  
No 
Subject registered in the trial  
No 
Discontinue  
P2Y12 inhibitor  
Continue DAPT 
per standard care  Subject was screened and met general 
inclusion/exclusion criteria  
 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
APPENDIX VI : MONITORING PLAN  
A copy of the Monitoring Plan can be obtained upon request from the Clinical Project Manager for the study. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
APPENDIX VII: REFERENCES  
 1. Pfisterer M, Brunner- La Rocca HP, Buser PT, et al. Late clinical events after 
clopidogrel discontinuation may limit the benefit of drug-eluting stents: an observational study of drug- eluting versus bare -metal stents. Journal of the American 
College of Cardiology. Dec 19 2006;48(12):2584-2591. 
2. Stone GW, Moses JW, Ellis SG, et al. Safety and efficacy of sirolimus - and 
paclitaxel -eluting coronary stents. N Engl J Med. Mar 8 2007;356(10):998-1008. 
3. Mauri L, Hsieh WH, Massaro JM, Ho KK, D'Agostino R, Cutlip DE. Stent 
thrombosis in randomized clinical trials of drug -eluting stents. N Engl J Med. Mar 8 
2007;356(10):1020-1029. 
4. Lagerqvist B, James SK, Stenestrand U, et al. Long- term outcomes with drug -eluting 
stents versus bare- metal stents in Sweden. N Engl J Med. Mar 8 2007;356(10):1009-
1019. 
5. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for 
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention: executive summary: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. Circulation. Dec 6 2011;124(23):2574-2609. 
6. Colombo A, Chieffo A, Frasheri A, et al. Second-generation drug- eluting stent 
implantation followed by 6 - versus 12 -month dual antiplatelet therapy: the 
SECURITY randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Nov 18-25 2014;64(20):2086-2097. 
7. Feres F, Costa RA, Abizaid A, et al. Three vs twelve months of dual antiplatelet therapy afte r zotarolimus -eluting stents: the OPTIMIZE randomized trial. Jama. Dec 
18 2013;310(23):2510-2522. 
8. Gwon HC, Hahn JY, Park KW, et al. Six- month versus 12- month dual antiplatelet 
therapy after implantation of drug -eluting stents: the Efficacy of Xience/Pro mus 
Versus Cypher to Reduce Late Loss After Stenting (EXCELLENT) randomized, multicenter study. Circulation. Jan 24 2012;125(3):505-513. 
9. Kim BK, Hong MK, Shin DH, et al. A new strategy for discontinuation of dual 
antiplatelet therapy: the RESET Trial (R Eal Safety and Efficacy of 3-month dual 
antiplatelet Therapy following Endeavor zotarolimus- eluting stent implantation). 
Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Oct 9 2012;60(15):1340-1348. 
10. Schulz-Schupke S, Byrne RA, Ten Berg JM, et al. ISAR- SAFE: a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 6 vs. 12 months of clopidogrel therapy after drug-eluting stenting. European heart journal. May 21 2015;36(20):1252-1263. 
11. Bittl JA, Baber U, Bradley SM, Wijeysundera DN. Duration of Dual Antiplatelet 
Therapy: A Systematic Review for the 2016 ACC/AHA Guideline Focused Update on Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Cl inical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. Mar 29 2016. 
12. Giustino G, Baber U, Sartori S, et al. Duration of dual antiplatelet therapy after drug -
eluting stent implantation: a systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Apr 7 2015;65(13):1298-1310. 
13. Navarese EP, Andreotti F, Schulze V, et al. Optimal duration of dual antiplatelet therapy after percutaneous coronary intervention with drug eluting stents: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Bmj. 2015;350:h1618. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
14. Palmerini T, Benedetto U, Bacchi -Reggiani L, et al. Mortality in patients treated with 
extended duration dual antiplatelet therapy after drug -eluting stent implantation: a 
pairwise and Bayesian network meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet. Jun 13 2015;385(9985):2371-2382. 
15. Palmerini T, Sangiorgi D, Valgimigli M, et al. Short- versus long- term dual 
antiplatelet therapy after drug -eluting stent implantation: an individual patient data 
pairwise and network meta- analysis. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 
Mar 24 2015;65(11):1092-1102. 
16. Palmerini T, Della Riva D, Benedetto U, et al. Three, six, or twelve months of dual antiplatelet therapy after DES implantation in patients with or without acute c oronary 
syndromes: an individual patient data pairwise and network meta-analysis of six randomized trials and 11 473 patients. European heart journal. Jan 21 2017. 
17. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA Guideline Focused Update on 
Duration of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines: An Update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Percutaneous Coronary Intervention, 2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline for Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Patients With Stable Ischemic Heart Disease, 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management o f ST- Elevation Myocardial Infarction, 2014 
AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Patients With Non -ST-Elevation Acute 
Coronary Syndromes, and 2014 ACC/AHA Guideline on Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation and Management of Patients Undergoing Noncardi ac 
Surgery. Circulation. Mar 29 2016. 
18. Mehran R, Pocock S, Nikolsky E, et al. Impact of bleeding on mortality after 
percutaneous coronary intervention results from a patient -level pooled analysis of the 
REPLACE-2 (randomized evaluation of PCI linking angiomax to reduced clinical events), ACUITY (acute catheterization and urgent intervention triage strategy), and HORIZONS -AMI (harmonizing outcomes with revascularization and stents in acute 
myocardial infarction) trials. JACC. Cardiovascular interventions.  Jun 2011;4(6):654-
664. 
19. Pocock SJ, Mehran R, Clayton TC, et al. Prognostic modeling of individual patient 
risk and mortality impact of ischemic and hemorrhagic complications: assessment from the Acute Catheterization and Urgent Intervention Triage Strategy trial. Circulation. Jan 05 2010;121(1):43- 51. 
20. Genereux P, Giustino G, Witzenbichler B, et al. Incidence, Predictors, and Impact of 
Post-Discharge Bleeding After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology. Sep 01 2015;66(9):1036-1045. 
21. Palmerini T, Bacchi Reggiani L, Della Riva D, et al. Bleeding -Related Deaths in 
Relation to the Duration of Dual- Antiplatelet Therapy After Coronary Stenting. 
Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Apr 25 2017;69(16):2011-2022. 
22. Morice MC, Urban P, Greene S, Schuler G, Chevalier B. Why are we still using 
coronary bare- metal stents? Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Mar 12 
2013;61(10):1122-1123. 
23. Urban P, Abizaid A, Chevalier B, et al. Rationale and design of the LE ADERS FREE 
trial: A randomized double -blind comparison of the BioFreedom drug- coated stent vs 
the Gazelle bare metal stent in patients at high bleeding risk using a short (1 month) course of dual antiplatelet therapy. Am Heart J. May 2013;165(5):704-709. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
24. Authors/Task Force, Windecker S, Kolh P, et al. 2014 ESC/EACTS Guidelines on 
myocardial revascularization: The Task Force on Myocardial Revascularization of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surger y (EACTS)Developed with the special contribution of the European 
Association of Percutaneous Cardiovascular Interventions (EAPCI). European heart journal. Oct 1 2014;35(37):2541-2619. 
25. Garg S, Serruys P, Onuma Y, et al. 3- year clinical follow -up of the XIENCE V 
everolimus- eluting coronary stent system in the treatment of patients with de novo 
coronary artery lesions: the SPIRIT II trial (Clinical Evaluation of the Xience V Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System in the Treatment of Patients with de novo  
Native Coronary Artery Lesions). JACC Cardiovasc Interv. Dec 2009;2(12):1190-
1198. 
26. Kedhi E, Joesoef KS, McFadden E, et al. Second-generation everolimus-eluting and 
paclitaxel -eluting stents in real- life practice (COMPARE): a randomised trial. Lancet. 
Jan 16 2010;375(9710):201-209. 
27. Serruys PW, Silber S, Garg S, et al. Comparison of zotarolimus -eluting and 
everolimus-eluting coronary stents. N Engl J Med. Jul 8 2010;363(2):136-146. 
28. Stone GW, Midei M, Newman W, et al. Randomized comparison of ever olimus-
eluting and paclitaxel -eluting stents: two -year clinical follow -up from the Clinical 
Evaluation of the Xience V Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System in the Treatment of Patients with de novo Native Coronary Artery Lesions (SPIRIT) III trial. Circulation. Feb 10 2009;119(5):680-686. 
29. Stone GW, Rizvi A, Newman W, et al. Everolimus- eluting versus paclitaxel -eluting 
stents in coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. May 6 2010;362(18):1663-1674. 
30. Smits PC, Kedhi E, Royaards KJ, et al. 2- year follow-up of a randomized controlled 
trial of everolimus - and paclitaxel -eluting stents for coronary revascularization in 
daily practice. COMPARE (Comparison of the everolimus eluting XIENCE -V stent 
with the paclitaxel eluting TAXUS LIBERTE stent in all- comers: a randomized open 
label trial). J Am Coll Cardiol. Jun 28 2011;58(1):11-18. 
31. Grube E, Chevalier B, Smits P, et al. The SPIRIT V study. A clinical evalution of the XIENCE V everolimus -eluting coronary stent system in the treatment of patients with 
de novo coronary artery lesions. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2011;4(2):168-175. 
32. Krucoff MW, Rutledge DR, Gruberg L, et al. A new era of prospective real-world 
safety evaluation primary report of XIENCE V USA (XIENCE V Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System condition-of-approval post-market study). JACC. Cardiovascular interventions. Dec 2011;4(12):1298-1309. 
33. Palmerini T, Biondi- Zoccai G, Della Riva D, et al. Stent thrombosis with drug -eluting 
and bare- metal stents: evidence from a comprehensive network meta -analysis. Lancet. 
Apr 14 2012;379(9824):1393-1402. 
34. Bangalore S, Toklu B, Amoroso N, et al. Bare metal stents, durable polymer drug 
eluting stents, and biodegradable polymer drug eluting stents for coronary artery disease: mixed treatment comparison meta -analysis. Bmj. 2013;347:f6625. 
35. Sabate M, Cequier A, Iniguez A, et al. Everolimus- eluting stent versus bare -metal 
stent in ST -segment elevation myocardial infarction (EXAMINATION): 1 year 
results of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. Oct 27 2012;380(9852):1482-1490. 
36. Sabate M, Brugaletta S, Cequier A, et al. Clinical outcomes in patients with ST -
segment elevation myocardial infarction treated with everolimus -eluting stents versus 
bare- metal stents (EXAMINATION): 5 -year results of a randomised  trial. Lancet. Jan 
23 2016;387(10016):357-366. 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
37. Lin JC, Tiong SL, Chen CY. Surface characterization and platelet adhesion studies on 
fluorocarbons prepared by plasma-induced graft polymerization. J Biomater Sci Polym Ed. 2000;11(7):701-714. 
38. Joner M, Finn AV, Farb A, et al. Pathology of drug-eluting stents in humans: delayed 
healing and late thrombotic risk. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Jul 4 
2006;48(1):193-202. 
39. Finn AV, Joner M, Nakazawa G, et al. Pathological correlates of lat e drug-eluting 
stent thrombosis: strut coverage as a marker of endothelialization. Circulation. May 8 2007;115(18):2435-2441. 
40. Joner M, Nakazawa G, Finn AV, et al. Endothelial cell recovery between comparator 
polymer-based drug-eluting stents. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Jul 29 2008;52(5):333-342. 
41. Shinke T, Itoh T, Ishida M, et al. Early vascular responses to everolimus-eluting 
cobalt- chromium stent for the treatment of stable coronary artery disease: The results 
of MECHANISM -Elect ive 1 and 3 months OCT follow-up cohort. ESC; 2016. 
42. Szott LM, Irvin CA, Trollsas M, Hossainy S, Ratner BD. Blood compatibility 
assessment of polymers used in drug eluting stent coatings. Biointerphases. Jun 15 2016;11(2):029806. 
43. Van Dyck CJ, Hoymans VY, Bult H, et al. Resolute and Xience V polymer -based 
drug-eluting stents compared in an atherosclerotic rabbit double injury model. Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography & Interventions. Jun 1 2013;81(7):E259-268. 
44. Kolandaivelu K, Swaminathan R, Gibson WJ, et al. Stent thrombogenicity early in 
high-risk interventional settings is driven by stent design and deployment and protected by polymer-drug coatings. Circulation. Apr 5 2011;123(13):1400-1409. 
45. Valgimigli M, Patialiakas A, Thury A, et al. Zotarolimus -eluting versus bare -metal 
stents in uncertain drug-eluting stent candidates. Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology. Mar 3 2015;65(8):805-815. 
46. Ariotti S, Adamo M, Cost a F, et al. Is Bare- Metal Stent Implantation Still Justifiable 
in High Bleeding Risk Patients Undergoing Percutaneous Coronary Intervention?: A Pre-Specified Analysis From the ZEUS Trial. JACC. Cardiovascular interventions. 
Mar 14 2016;9(5):426-436. 
47. Urban P, Meredith IT, Abizaid A, et al. Polymer- free Drug -Coated Coronary Stents in 
Patients at High Bleeding Risk. N Engl J Med. Nov 19 2015;373(21):2038-2047. 
48. Yazdani S, Su S, Schulze J, Kolodgie F, Virmani R. Endothelialization of polymers-
free drug c oated stents. EuroIntervention. 2011;7(Supplement M). 
49. Natsuaki M, Morimoto T, Yamamoto E, et al. One- year outcome of a prospective trial 
stopping dual antiplatelet therapy at 3 months after everolimus-eluting cobalt-chromium stent implantation: ShortT and OPtimal duration of Dual AntiPlatelet Therapy after everolimus -eluting cobalt -chromium stent (STOPDAPT) trial. 
Cardiovasc Interv Ther. Oct 30 2015. 
50. Genereux P, Rutledge DR, Palmerini T, et al. Stent Thrombosis and Dual Antiplatelet 
Therapy Interruption With Everolimus- Eluting Stents: Insights From the Xience V 
Coronary Stent System Trials. Circulation. Cardiovascular interventions. May 2015;8(5). 
 
Abbott Vascular  Version 3.0  
XIENCE 90 Protocol #16 -308-Redacted   
May 25, 2018   
 
 
 APPENDIX VIII:  SUMMARY OF CHANGES  
 
VERSION 
# DATE OF 
RELEASE  REASON FOR AMENDMENT  
1.0 12 MAY 2017 N/A, ORIGINAL  VERSION  
2.0 17 JANUARY  2018 TO ADDRESS FDA FEEDBACK  
3.0 25 MAY 2018  TO ADD XIENCE SIERRA AND XIENCE PROA IN THIS 
STUDY  
   
   
   