HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
 
 
 
Protocol Title 
A Multi-Center, Single Arm, Phase II study of Pembrolizumab (MK -3475) in Combination 
with Chemotherapy for Patients with Advanced Colorectal Cancer:  HCRN GI14-186 
 
Sponsor-Investigator 
Kathy D Miller, M.D. 
Indiana University School of Medicine 
 
Statistician 
Ziyue Liu, PhD 
Indiana University, Schools of  Public Health and Medicine 
 
Trial Management Provided by  
Hoosier Cancer Res earch Network, Inc. 
 
Funding Support and Pembrolizumab Provided By 
Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. 
 
Investigational New Drug (IND) Application 
Exempt per FDA 24FEB2015  
  
 
Initial Protocol Version Date:  23FEB2015 
Amended Protocol Version Date: 
06JUL2015  
30SEP2015  
26FEB2016 
02AUG2016 
10NOV2016 
29APR2019  
 
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 C onfidential Page 2 of 69  PROTOCOL SIGNATURE PAGE  
A Multi-Center, Single Arm, Phase II study of Pembrolizumab (MK -3475) in Combination 
with Chemotherapy for Patients with Advanced Colorectal Cancer:   
Hoosier Cancer Resea rch Network GI14-186 
 
VERSION DATE: 29APR2019 
 
I confirm I have read this pr otocol, I understand it, and I wil l work according to this protocol 
and to the ethical principles st ated in the latest version of t he Declaration of  Helsinki, the 
applicable guidelines for good c linical practices , or the appli cable laws and regulations of 
the country of the study site for  which I am responsible, which ever provides the greater 
protection of the individual. I w ill accept the monitor’s overs eeing of the study. I will 
promptly submit the protocol t o applicable ethical review board (s). 
 
      ___________________________________   _______________________  
 S i g n a t u r e  o f  I n v e s t i g a t o r      D a t e   ___________________________________  
 Investigator Name (printed) 
 ___________________________________   Investigator Title  ___________________________________   Name of Facility  ___________________________________   Location of Facility (City and State)  ___________________________________   Not Submitting to IRB 
 Expected IRB Approval Date 
 
 
PLEASE COMPLETE AND EMAIL COPY TO HCRN 
 Instructions to the I nvestigator: Please SIGN  and DATE  this signature page. 
PRINT  your name and title, the name a nd location of the facility in which the 
study will be conducted, and the e xpected IRB approval date. Sc an and email 
the completed form to HCRN a nd keep a record for your files. 
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 C onfidential Page 3 of 69  SYNOPSIS  
TITLE A Multi-Center, Single Arm, Phase II study of Pembrolizumab (MK -
3475) in Combination with Chemother apy for Patients with Advanc ed 
Colorectal Cancer: HCRN GI14-186 
SHORT TITLE Phase II study of Pembrolizumab (MK-3475) in combination with 
Chemotherapy for patients with a dvanced colorectal cancer  
PHASE  II 
OBJECTIVES Primary Objective 
Estimate median progression free survival (mPFS) and compare to  
historical standard 
 
Primary Endpoint   Median progression free survival a s measured from the time of 
registration to the time of  progression per RECIST v1.1 or subj ect death  
 Secondary Objectives 
1- Objective respons e rate (ORR)  
2- Disease control rate (DCR)  
3- Delayed response  
4- Overall Survival (OS)  
5- Toxicity of the combination of P embrolizumab plus mFOLFOX6  
6- Response Criteria per estab lished Immune Related Response 
Criteria 
 
Secondary Endpoints 
1- ORR will be calculate d with combining the number of subjects 
who achieve complete response and partial response per irRC 
criteria 
2- Disease control rate; defined a s the sum of subjects with compl ete 
response, partial response and stable disease.  
3- Delayed response will be evaluated in subjects who achieve stab le 
disease on first tumor assessm ent but they exhibit an objective  
response on subsequent tumor evaluations per irRC.  
4- Overall Survival will be calculated from the time of registrati on 
till the time of  subject death  
5- Toxicity of therapy will be  assessed per CTCAE v4 
6- Response rate per Immune Relat ed Response Criteria (irRC) 
 Exploratory Objectives 
1. Assess the association betw een TLR4, MyD88, NF-kB expression 
by IHC and response rate 
2. Assess Microsatellite status 
by IHC
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 C onfidential Page 4 of 69  3. Assess the association betwee n HMGB1 blood level and response 
rate 
4. Assess the association betwee n PD-L1 expression and response 
rate 
5. Blood samples will be stored in the HCRN Biorepository for 
future correlatives. 
6. Tissue samples will be stored i n the HCRN Bio repository for 
future correlatives.
STUDY DESIGN Multi-institutional , single arm, open-label, phase II study, in cluding a 
safety run-in cohort. No random ization or blinding involved. 
ESTIMATED 
NUMBER OF 
SUBJECTS  N = 30 
ELIGIBILITY 
CRITERIA  Inclusion Criteria 
1. Be willing and able to provide wri tten informed consent for the  
trial and HIPAA authorization f or release of personal health 
information. 
NOTE:  HIPAA authorization may be  included in the informed 
consent or obtained separately. 
2. Be ≥ 18 years of age on day of signing informed consent. 
3. Have a performance status of 0 or 1 on the ECOG Performance 
Scale within 14 days prio r to registration. 
4. Have histological or cytological evidence of colorectal 
adenocarcinoma with confirmation of  metastatic disease either b y 
pathologic or radiologic findings.  
5. Have identified tissue from an a rchival tissue sample (preferab ly 
from a metastasis, but sample from primary tumor allowable) or newly obtained core or excisiona l biopsy of a tumor lesion. 
6. Have had no prior systemic thera py for advanced or metastatic 
disease. Prior adjuvant thera py should have been completed at 
least 9 months from documentati on of metastati c disease. 
7. Have measurable disease according to RECIST v1.1 obtained by 
imaging within 28 days prior to registration.  
8. Hemoglobin ≥ 9 g/dL (transfusions are acceptable) 
9. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1.5 × 10
9/L 
10. Platelets ≥ 100 × 109/L 
11. Serum creatinine ≤ 1.5 × uppe r limit of normal (ULN), or 
measured or calculated creatinine clearance (estimated by Cockcroft-Gault formula below or measured) ≥ 50 mL/min  
12. Serum total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 × ULN  
13. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST, SGOT) and alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT)  ≤ 3 × ULN, unless evidence of 
liver metastases, then AST/ALT ≤ 5 x ULN  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 C onfidential Page 5 of 69  14. International Norma lized Ratio (INR) or Prothrombin Time (PT) 
≤1.5 X ULN unless subject is rece iving anticoagulant therapy as  
long as PT or PTT is within thera peutic range of intended use o f 
anticoagulants 
15. Activated Partial Thromboplas tin Time (aPTT) ≤1.5 X ULN 
unless subject is receiving anticoagulant therapy as long as PT  or 
PTT is within therapeutic range  of intended use of anticoagulan ts  
16. Female subject of childbearing po tential should h ave a negative  
urine or serum pregnancy w ithin 14 days prior to study 
registration. If the urine test i s positive or cannot be confir med as 
negative, a serum pregnancy test will be required. Subjects of 
childbearing potential  (regardless of sexual orientation, havin g 
undergone a tubal ligation, or rem aining celibate by choice) ar e 
those who meet the following criteria: 
• Has not undergone a hysterectomy or bilateral 
oophorectomy; or 
• Has not been naturally postm enopausal for at least 24 
consecutive months (i.e., has  had menses at any time in the 
preceding 12 consecutive months). 
17. Female subjects of childbeari ng potential shoul d be willing to use 
2 methods of birth control or be s urgically sterile, or abstain  from 
heterosexual activity for t he course of the study through 120 d ays 
after the last dose  of study medication.  
 Exclusion Criteria  
1. Has clearly resectable colon cance r liver metastases (CCLM), fo r 
example oligometastatic diseas e involving only one lobe of the 
liver. Subjects with suspected  resectable CCLM should undergo 
evaluation by a liver surgeon prio r to enrollment to document t he 
incurable nature of their disease. 
2. Is currently participating i n or has participated in a study of  an 
investigational agent or using a n investigational device within  4 
weeks of registration. Subjects are not permitted to participat e in 
another investigational drug s tudy while being treated on this 
protocol. 
3. Is unable to receive a port or peri pherally inserted central ca theter 
(PICC). 
4. Has a diagnosis of immunodefici ency or is receiving chronic 
steroid therapy of prednisone ≥  10 mg daily or any equivalent d ose 
of corticosteroids.  
5. Has previously undergone organ or  bone marrow transplantation 
and is on immunosuppressive therapy 
6. Has had major surgery or signifi cant traumatic injury within 4 
weeks of study registration. S ubject must have recovered 
adequately from the toxicity a nd/or complications from the 
intervention prior to startin g therap y. A dia gnostic or research 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 C onfidential Page 6 of 69  biopsy does not exclude subjects from enrollment. Placement of a 
vascular access device such as a Port-A-Cath is not considered 
major surgery 
7. Has baseline peripheral neuropa thy/paresthesia grade ≥ 1. 
8. Has a known additional malignanc y within the past 3 years. 
Exceptions include treated loca lized basal cell or squamous cel l 
carcinoma of the skin, in situ c ervical or vulvar carcinoma tha t has 
undergone potentially curative th erapy, superficial bladder tum ors 
(Ta, Tis & T1), ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast a nd 
low grade prostate cancer (Gl eason sore 6). Any cancer curative ly 
treated > 3 years prior to regis tration with no c linical eviden ce of 
recurrence is permitted 
9. Has known active central nervous s ystem (CNS) metastases and/or  
carcinomatous meningitis. Subjects with previously treated brai n 
metastases may participate prov ided they are stable (without 
evidence of progression by imagi ng for at least four weeks prio r to 
trial registration and any neurolog ic symptoms have returned to  
baseline), have no evidence of ne w or enlarging brain metastase s, 
and are not using steroids for at least 7 days prior to trial 
registration.  
10. Has an active autoimmune diseas e requiring systemic treatment 
within the past 3 months or a doc umented history of clinically 
severe autoimmune disease, or a s yndrome that requires systemic  
steroids or immunosuppre ssive agents. Excepti ons to the rule: 
• Subjects with vitiligo  
• Subjects with resolve d childhood asthma/atopy.  
• Subjects that require intermittent use of bronchodilators or 
local steroid injections.  
• Subjects with hypothyroidism stable on hormone 
replacement or  
• Sjögren’s syndrome  
11. Has a history of pneumonitis that required steroids or current 
pneumonitis. 
12. Has known history of active tuberculosis. 
13. Has an active infection requiri ng systemic therapy (≥ grade 2) for 
more than 3 days within 1 week of enrollment. 
14. Is pregnant or breastfeeding, or e xpecting to conceive or fathe r 
children within the p rojected duration of t he trial, starting w ith the 
pre-screening or screening vis it through 120 days after the las t 
dose of Pembrolizumab. 
15. Has known hypersensitivity to fluorouracil (5FU), oxaliplatin, or 
other platinum agents. 
16. Known hypersensitivity to pembro lizumab or any of its excipient s. 
17. Has known dihydropyrimidine dehydr ogenase deficiency (DPD) 
deficiency (testing not required) 
18. Has received prior therap y with an anti-PD- 1, anti-PD-L1, anti-
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 C onfidential Page 7 of 69  PD-L2, anti-CD137, or anti-Cytotoxi c T-lymphocyte-associated 
antigen-4 (CTLA-4) antibody (incl uding ipilimumab or any other 
antibody or drug specifically targe ting T-cell co-stimulation o r 
checkpoint pathways). 
19. Has known active Hepatitis B unless patient subject has been on  
antiviral agents for at least  2 months (baseline testing not re quired) 
20. Has a known history of Human Imm unodeficiency Virus (HIV) or 
Hepatitis C (baseline t esting is not required). 
21. Has received a live vaccine within 30 days pr ior to trial 
registration.  
22. Has a history or current evide nce of any condition, therapy, or  
laboratory abnormality that might confound the results of the t rial, 
interfere with the subject’s par ticipation for the full duratio n of the 
trial, or is not in t he best interest of t he subject to partici pate, in the 
opinion of the site investigator.  
23. Has known psychiatric or substanc e abuse disorders that would 
interfere with coopera tion with the requireme nts of the trial. 
24. Has any other psychological, fam ilial, sociological or geograph ical 
condition potentially hampering c ompliance with the study 
protocol and follow-up sche dule. Those conditions should be 
discussed with the subject before  registration in the trial. 
STATISTICAL 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 This is a multi-institutional, s ingle arm, open-label, phase II  study, 
including a safety run-in cohort , of the combination of pembrol izumab 
plus FOFLOX in subjects with untre ated locally advanced or meta static 
colorectal cancer. After a saf ety run-in cohort of 6 subjects a t the tolerated 
dose level, 24 additional subjec ts will be enrolled. These 30 s ubjects will 
be analyzed as a single cohort for subsequent efficacy and safe ty analyses. 
PFS and OS will be estimated by Kaplan-Meier method. Median PFS  
(mPFS) and OS (mOS) will be est imated with 80% confidence inter vals 
(CIs). The response rates will be  estimated with their Agresti- Coull 95% 
CIs. Duration of response will be summarized by descriptive sta tistics. 
Frequencies and proportions will  be used to describe toxicities . Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4 will be used  for 
assessment of acute and late toxicities during the follow-up pe riod. 
Logistic regressions will be us ed for the exploratory objective s studying 
potential predict ors of responses. 
 Historically, first line FOLFOX achieves an mPFS of 9-months. I f there 
are moderate evidences that adding Pembrolizumab will increase mPFS 
from 9- to around 14-months, a full scale randomized Phase II s tudy will 
be considered to formally test wh ether the improvement is meani ngful and 
statistically significant.   The sample size N=30 is determined based on budget/recruitment considerations and precision of e stimation. We expect that thes e 30 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 C onfidential Page 8 of 69  subjects will be uniformly accr ued within 12-months with an add itional 
24-months follow up. Kaplan-Meie r method will be used to estima te PFS. 
mPFS and its two-sided 80% CI w ill be calculated. Consequently,  the 
half-width of the CI from th e lower bound to the point estimate  of mPFS 
will be around 4.5-months, which i s smaller than the difference  between 
14- and 9-months. We consider this precision level will allow a  decision 
to be made whether to pursue further studies. 
 
ESTIMATED 
ENROLLMENT PERIOD Estimated months: 12 months 
ESTIMATED STUDY 
DURATION  Estimated months: 24 months 
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 C onfidential Page 9 of 69  TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
SCHEMA ........................................................ ............................................................... .................... 10  
1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE ...................................... ...................................... 11  
2. STUDY OBJECTIVES .............................................. ...................................................... 15  
3. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA .......................................... .................................................... 16  
4. SUBJECT REGISTRATION .......................................... ................................................ 17  
5. TREATMENT PLAN ................................................ ...................................................... 19  
6. TREATMENT DISCONTINUATION ..................................... ...................................... 34  
7. STUDY SCHEDULE OF EVENTS ...................................... .......................................... 35  
8. CRITERIA FOR DISEASE EVALUATION ............................... .................................. 41  
9. BIOLOGICAL SPECIMEN PARA METERS FOR CORRELATIVES ............... ...... 49  
10. STUDY DRUG INFORMATION ........................................ ........................................... 50  
11. ADVERSE EVENTS ................................................ ........................................................ 55  
12. STATISTICAL METHODS ........................................... ................................................. 59  
13. TRIAL MANAGEMENT .............................................. .................................................. 62  
14. DATA HANDLING AND R ECORD KEEPING .............................. ............................ 63  
15. ETHICS ........................................................ ............................................................... ...... 65  
16. REFERENCES .................................................... ............................................................. 6 6 
17. APPENDIX ...................................................... ............................................................... .. 69 
 
   
 
        
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 10 of 69  SCHEMA 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
    
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 14 days prior to registration 
Medical and laboratory testing  
Disease progression  
suspected  Sustained CR or PR, SD  
Continue treatment for 24 
months then observe 
radiographically  See Section 7.4 Informed consen t
Pathologically confirmed un treated, advanced unresectable 
or metastatic adenocarcino ma of the colon. ECOG 0-1.  
28 days prior to registration: 
• Radiological assessmen t/tumor measurements 
• Identify available arch ived samples of tumor 
(preferably from a metastatic lesion  
mFOLFOX6 Treatment D1 and D15 
(Cycle = 28 days)  
• Oxaliplatin IV over 2 hrs 
• Leucovorin IV over 2 hrs 
• 5FU IV over 46 hrs  
 
Pembrolizumab  IV over 30 minutes 
every 3 weeks 
Disease evaluation every 8 weeks or after every 2 cycles If archival tissue is not identified the 
patient will undergo  a new biopsy 
prior to treatment if other eligibility 
criteria are met. 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 11 of 69  1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
 
1.1. Background 
Human cancers harbor numerous genetic and epigenetic alteration s, generating neo-antigens 
that are potentially recognizable by the immune system. Cancer evolves when intrinsic and 
extrinsic aberrations occur. Int rinsic genetic errors lead to o ncogenic activa tion and evasion 
of apoptosis, and an extrinsic a berration involves complex micr oenvironment interactions, 
and escaping immune surveillanc e [1] and immune mediated death [2]. Although an 
endogenous immune response to can cer is observed in preclinical  models and patients, this 
response is commonly ineffective to eliminate the tumor [3]. Th is is based on the hypothesis 
that cancer develops multiple resistance mechanisms, including local immune suppression, 
induction of tolerance, and syste mic dysfunction in T-cell sign aling. Additionally, there is a 
collective eviden ce that the innate immune  system can play a ro le as an extrinsic tumor 
suppressor, and in some cases, promote tumor growth [4]. This c omplex function of innate 
and adaptive immune system is c ommonly referred to as immunoedi ting [5]. The presence 
of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes  (TIL) in the tumor microenvir onment is associated with 
improved outcome in patients with several malignancies includin g colon cancer [6-10]. 
Additionally, the concentration of  TILs in colorectal liver met astases is associated with 
improvement in progression free survival, and better response t o chemotherapy [11]. The 
immunomodulatory enzyme indol eamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) that is present in the tumor 
microenvironment is associated with decreased CD3 tumor infiltr ating cells, and higher risk 
of developing liver metastases from colon cancer tumors[12]. Pr ogrammed death 1 (PD-1) is 
a key immune checkpoint recepto r expressed by ac tivated T cells , and it mediates 
immunosuppression [13]. PD-1, in a ddition to several inhibitory  and stimulatory key 
immune modulators, regulates  the activity and function of T cel ls. When PD-1 is unbound, 
the T cells on which it is expressed can engage and kill target  cells, but when bound to its 
ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2, it acts a s a brake that inhibits T cel l activities particularly during 
their cytotoxic attack in the t umor itself. Its ligands are ove rexpressed dir ectly on cancer 
cells, and their interaction with P D-1 prevents tumor-infiltrat ing T cells from recognizing 
their quarry [14].   
1.2. Immunotherapy and Cancer  
The concept of reprogramming t he immune system to recognize can cer as a “foreign entity” 
has been explored for decades. In fact, BCG was one of the firs t local immunotherapies used 
to treat early stage  superficial bladder cancer [15]. Since the n a tremendous effort has been 
made to explore several ways of s timulating the immune system a nd reprogram it to fight 
cancer. Early studies with inter leukin 2 in melanoma and renal cell carcinoma exhibited low 
response rate, but was associate d with first long durable respo nses in patients with 
metastatic disease [16]. Sipuleu cel-T consists of autologous pe ripheral blood mononuclear 
cells, including APCs, that have  been activated during a define d period in cell culture with 
recombinant human PAP–GM-CSF d ecreased risk of death for men wi th castrate resistant 
prostate cancer [17]. While some tumors appear to be more immun ogenic than others, recent 
data supported the potential promise of vaccine therapy in pati ents with gastrointestinal 
malignancies such as pancre atic adenocarcinoma [18, 19]. 
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 12 of 69  The human immune system is under a complex regulatory structure . Several key factors 
work as inhibitory checkpoints and others are immune stimulator y [20]. Perhaps the 
antibody targeting the negative i mmune checkpoint inhibitors ar e the most advanced in 
clinical trials amongst other immune modulatory agents. CTLA4, PD-1, PD-L1 and PD-L2 
antagonists have already been eva luated in advanced melanoma wi th promising results [21-
23]. Ipilimumab (CTLA4 antagonist ) is the first immune checkpoi nt inhibitor to be granted 
FDA approval for the treatment of  advanced melanoma. Combinatio n checkpoint inhibitors 
have demonstrated a promising new era of cancer immune therapy [21]. Proposals to 
evaluate whether combining a ch eckpoint inhibitor with an immun e stimulatory compound 
will be safe and eff ective are underway.  
 1.3. Pembrolizumab  
Pembrolizumab is a highly selective, humanized monoclonal IgG4– kappa isotype antibody 
against PD-1 that is designed t o block the negative immune regu latory signaling of the PD-1 
receptor expressed by T cells. The IgG4 immunoglobulin subtype does not engage Fc 
receptors or activate complement, thus avoiding cytotoxic effec ts of the antibody when it 
binds to the T cells that it is intended to activate [24]. In a  phase I dose escalation study, 9 
patients were enrolled at thr ee different dose levels: 1mg/kg, 3 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg with no 
observed dose limiting toxicity of the compound with evidence o f response in a patient with 
melanoma [23]. As a result, 135 pati ents with advanced melanoma  were treated with 
pembrolizumab and experienced a hi gh rate of sustained tumor re gression, even in patients 
who received prior CTLA4 inhibitor [24].   Toxicity associated with pembroliz umab were mainly grade 1 and 2 per the CTCAE, 
however 13% of patients experien ced grade 3 and 4. The most com monly reported treatment 
emergent AEs experienced are f atigue (43.8%), nausea (26.7%), c ough (25.3%), pruritus 
(24.6%), diarrhea (22.3 %), and rash (21.5%). Immune-related adv erse events were reported 
in 21.4% of melanoma patients; mos t of these events (15.8%) wer e considered drug-related 
by the investigator. The most co mmonly reported immune-related adverse events across the 
dose-schedules are rash (3.2%) , pruritus (2.9%), vitiligo (2.9% ), hypothyroidism (2.7%), 
arthralgia (2.2%), diarrhea (2.2%), and pneumonitis (1.9%).   
 1.3.1 Pembrolizumab Dose Available PK results in subjec ts with melanoma, NSCLC, and othe r solid tumor types 
support a lack of meaningful diffe rence in PK exposures obtaine d at a given dose among 
tumor types. An open-label Phase  1 trial (PN001) in melanoma su bjects is being conducted 
to evaluate the safety and clin ical activity of single agent pe mbrolizumab. The dose 
escalation portion of this trial evaluated three dose levels, 1  mg/kg, 3 mg/kg, and 10 mg/kg, 
administered every 2 weeks (Q2W) in subjects with advanced soli d tumors. All three-dose 
levels were well tolerated and no dose-limiting toxicities were  observed. This first in human 
study of pembrolizumab showed evidence of target engagement and  objective evidence of 
tumor size reduction at all dos e levels (1 mg/kg, 3 mg/kg and 1
0 mg/kg Q2W). No 
maximum tolerated dose (MTD ) has been identified. 
 In KEYNOTE-001, two randomized cohor t evaluations of melanoma s ubjects receiving 
pembrolizumab at a dose of 2 mg/kg versus 10 mg/kg Q3W have bee n completed. The 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 13 of 69  clinical efficacy and safety data d emonstrate a lack of clinica lly important differences in 
efficacy response or safety profil e at these doses. For example , in Cohort B2, advanced 
melanoma subjects who had received  prior ipilimum ab therapy wer e randomized to receive 
pembrolizumab at 2 mg/kg versus  10 mg/kg Q3W.  The overall resp onse rate (ORR) was 
26% (21/81) in the 2mg/kg group an d 26% (25/79) in the 10 mg/kg  group (full analysis set 
(FAS)). The proportion of subjects with drug-related adverse ev ents (AEs), grade 3-5 drug-
related AEs, serious drug-rela ted AEs, death or discontinuation  due to an AE was 
comparable between groups or lower in the 10 mg/kg group.    Available pharmacokinetic resu lts in subjects with melanoma, NS CLC, and other solid 
tumor types support a lack of m eaningful difference in pharmaco kinetic exposures obtained 
at a given dose among tumor types.  Population PK analysis has b een performed and has 
confirmed the expectation that intrinsic factors do not affect exposure to pembrolizumab to a 
clinically meaningful extent. T aken together, these data suppor t the use of lower doses (with 
similar exposure to 2 mg/kg Q3W) in all solid tumor indications . 2 mg/kg Q3W is being 
evaluated in NSCLC in PN 001, Cohort F30 and PN010, and 200 mg Q 3W is being 
evaluated in head and neck cance r in PN012, which are expected to provide additional data 
supporting the dose selection.  Selection of 200 mg as the appropriate dose for a switch to fix ed dosing is based on 
simulation results indicating that 200 mg will provide exposure s that are reasonably 
consistent with those obtained w ith 2 mg/kg dose and importantl y will maintain individual 
patient exposures within the expos ure range established in mela noma as associated with 
maximal clinical response. A popul ation PK model, which charact erized the influence of 
body weight and other patient cova riates on exposure, has been developed using available 
data from 476 subjects from PN 001. The distribution of exposure s from the 200 mg fixed 
dose are predicted to considera bly overlap those obtained with the 2 mg/kg dose, with some 
tendency for individual  values to range slig htly higher with th e 200 mg fixed dose. The 
slight increase in PK variabi lity predicted for the fixed dose relative to weight-based dosing 
is not expected to be clin ically important given that the range  of individual exposures is well 
contained within the range of exposures shown in the melanoma s tudies of 2 and 10 mg/kg 
to provide similar efficacy and safety. The population PK evalu ation revealed that there was 
no significant impact of tumor  burden on exposure. In addition,  exposure was similar 
between the NSCLC and melanoma i ndications. Therefore, there ar e no anticipated changes 
in exposure between different tum or types and indication settin gs.   
 1.4. Rationale for this Combination 
Until recently, a commonly held opinion was that chemotherapy a nd immunotherapy should 
not be combined because of the myelosuppressive effect of most cytotoxic agents. However, 
it has now become evident that ch emotherapeutics can exert seve ral beneficial effects on the 
immune system. Several studies  demonstrated an “immunogenic can cer death” associated 
with certain cytotoxic chemoth erapies. In particular, it has be en demonstrated that 
oxaliplatin (OXP), but not cisplat in, induces immunogenic death  of cancer cells  [25]. Cancer 
cells undergo immunogenic apoptosis  in response to OXP, meaning  that their corpses are 
engulfed by dendritic cells (DC) a nd that tumor cell antigens a re presented to tumor-specific 
CD8+ T cells, which then contro l residual tumor cells. One of t he peculiarities of 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 14 of 69  immunogenic apoptosis is the ea rly cell surface exposure of cal reticulin (CRT). Pioneering 
work by Zitvogel et al. has show n that OXP induces immunogenic cell death, as upon 
treatment with OXP, tumor cells  transport CRT to their cell sur face. The exposure of CRT 
provides a signal that is recognized by DCs and ultimately resu lts in phagocytosis of tumor 
cells [26]. Exposure of tumor ce lls to OXP also results in the release of high mobility group 
box 1 (HMGB1) protein [27], which activates DCs in a toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4)-
dependent manner. This in turn activates DC and leads to cytoto xic T-lymphocyte (CTL) 
infiltration of the tumor [28] . OXP also reduces expression of PD-L2 resulting in enhanced 
antigen-specific proliferati on and Th1 cytokine secretion [29].   
 Additionally, releasing antigens following effective therapy in creases the cross presentation 
of these antigens, leading to inc rease in functional T lymphocy tes activity in vivo [30]. 
Several mechanisms on how antigen presenting cells and other T cell inhibitory/stimulatory 
factors can interact following che motherapy have been previousl y explored and discussed in 
detail [31]. Constant antige n presentation by APC, may lead to the upregulation of CTL 
stimulatory factors leading t o activation of the immune respons e to antigen r elease [32]. 
 While early phase studies [14, 22]  included patients with color ectal cancer with no evidence 
of objective response, our propos al differs in the concept that  it is evaluating the 
immunogenic effect of OXP on cell death leading to a magnified response when combined 
with pembrolizumab. Since mFOLFOX6 can induce an objective resp onse (>30% tumor 
shrinkage per RECIST criteria)  in nearly 50% of patients with m etastatic colorectal cancer 
(mCRC) [33], this might lead to stimulating the immune response  through OXP mediated 
immune cell death in addition to massive r elease of intracellul ar antigens from dying cancer 
cells leading to APC s chain activation.  
 
The combination of OXP and 5FU (mFO LFOX6) represents a widely a ccepted standard of 
care for the treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal c ancer, and is commonly used in 
the first line sett ing with or without b iologic agents [34, 35] . Oxaliplatin demonstrated 
synergic effect in combination w ith 5FU and represented a parad igm shift in the 
management of patients with advanc ed colorectal cancer leading to superior response rate, 
progression free survival, and overa ll survival. Given the prev ious data referenced, there is a 
substantial rationale to combine  pembrolizumab with mFOLFOX6 in  patients with untreated 
locally advanced or metastatic c olorectal cancer. Here we propo se a phase II study of 
pembrolizumab plus mFOLFOX6 in s ubjects with untreated locally advanced or metastatic 
colorectal cancer.     
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 15 of 69  2. STUDY OBJECTIVES 
 2.1. Primary Objective 
• Estimate median progression free survival (mPFS) and compare to  historical standard 
 
• Primary Endpoint   
o Median progression free survival a s measured from the time of r egistration to the 
time of progression per RECIS T v1.1 or subject death  
 2.2. Secondary Objectives 
• Objective respons e rate (ORR)  
• Disease control rate (DCR)  
• Delayed response  
• Overall Survival (OS)  
• Toxicity of the combination of  pembrolizumab plus mFOLFOX6  
• Response Criteria per establis hed Immune Related Response Crite ria 
 
• Secondary Endpoints 
o ORR will be calculate d with combining the number of subjects wh o achieve 
complete response and partial  response per irRC criteria. 
o Disease control rate; defined a s the sum of subjects with compl ete response, 
partial response and stable disease.  
o Delayed response will be evaluated in subjects who achieve stab le disease on 
first tumor assessment but they e xhibit an object ive response o n subsequent 
tumor evaluations per irRC.  
o Overall Survival will be calculated from the time of registrati on till the time of 
subject death  
o Toxicity of therapy will be  assessed per CTCAE V4 
o Response rate per Immune Relat ed Response Criteria (irRC) 
 
2.3. Exploratory Objectives 
• Assess the association betw een TLR4, MyD88, NF-kB expression by  IHC and response 
rate. 
• Assess Microsatelli te status by IHC. 
• Assess the association betwee n HMGB1 blood level and response r ate. 
• Assess the association betwee n PD-L1 expression and response ra te. 
• Blood samples will be stored in the HCRN Biorepository for futu re correlatives.  
• Tissue samples will be stored in the HCRN Biore pository for fut ure correlatives 
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 16 of 69  3. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
 3.1. Inclusion Criteria 
In order to be eligib le for participation i n this trial, the su bject must: 
1. Be willing and able to provide wri tten informed consent for the  trial and HIPAA 
authorization for r elease of personal h ealth information. 
• NOTE:  HIPAA authorization may be inc luded in the informed consent or  
obtained separately. 
2. Be ≥ 18 years of age on day of signing informed consent. 
3. Have a performance status of 0 or 1 on the ECOG Performance Sca le within 14 days 
prior to registration. 
4. Have histological or cytological evidence of colorectal adenoca rcinoma with 
confirmation of metastatic diseas e either by pathologic or radi ologic findings.  
5.  Have identified tissue from an a rchival tissue sample (prefera bly from a metastasis, 
but sample from primary tumor allowable) or newly obtained core  or excisional 
biopsy of a tumor lesion.  See Section 9 for more details. 
6. Have had no prior systemic thera py for advanced or metastatic d isease. Prior 
adjuvant therapy should have bee n completed at least 9 months f rom documentation 
of metastatic disease.  Prior pa lliative radiotherapy allowed i f toxicities resolved to 
grade 1 or baseline.  
7. Have measurable disease according to RECIST v1.1 obtained by im aging within 28 
days prior to r egistration.  
8. Hemoglobin ≥ 9 g/dL (transfusions are acceptable) 
9. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1.5 × 10
9/L 
10. Platelets ≥ 100 × 109/L 
11. Serum creatinine ≤ 1.5 × upper limit of normal (ULN), or measur ed or calculated 
creatinine clearance (estimated by Cockcroft-Gault formula belo w or measured) ≥ 50 
mL/min  
• Males: (140 – Age in years) ×  Actual Body Weight in kg 
                                        72 × Serum Creatinine ( mg/dL) 
• Females: Estimated creatinin e clearance for males × 0.85 
12. Serum total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 × ULN  
13. Aspartate aminotransferase (AS T, SGOT) and alanine aminotransfe rase (ALT, 
SGPT) ≤ 3 × ULN, unless evidence of liver metastases, then AST/ ALT ≤ 5 x ULN 
14. International Norma lized Ratio (INR) or Prothrombin Time (PT) ≤1.5 X ULN unless 
subject is receiving anticoagul ant therapy as lo ng as PT or PTT  is within therapeutic 
range of intended use of anticoagulants 
15. Activated Partial Thromboplasti n Time (aPTT) ≤1.5 X ULN unless subject is 
receiving anticoagulant thera py as long as PT or PTT is within therapeutic range of 
intended use of anticoagulants  
16. Female subject of childbearing po tential should h ave a negative  urine or serum 
pregnancy test within 14 days pr ior to study reg istration. If t he urine test is positive 
or cannot be confirmed as negati ve, a serum pregnancy test will  be required. Subjects 
of childbearing potential (rega rdless of sexual orientation, ha ving undergone a tubal 
ligation, or remaining celibate by c hoice) are those who meet t he following criteria: 
• Has not undergone a hysterectomy or  bilateral oophorectomy; or 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 17 of 69  • Has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 consecuti ve months 
(i.e., has had menses at any time in the preceding 12 consecuti ve months). 
17. Female subjects of childbeari ng potential shoul d be willing to use 2 methods of birth 
control or be surgically sterile , or abstain from heterosexual activity for the course of 
the study through 120 days after the last dose of study medicat ion.  
 
3.2. Exclusion Criteria  
The subject must be excluded from participating in the trial if  the subject: 
1. Has clearly resectable colon cance r liver metastases (CCLM), fo r example 
oligometastatic disease invol ving only one lobe of the liver. S ubjects with suspected 
resectable CCLM should undergo e valuation by a liver surgeon pr ior to enrollment 
to document the incurable  nature of their disease. 
2. Is currently participating i n or has participated in a study of  an investigational agent 
or using an investigational devi ce within 4 weeks of registrati on. Subjects are not 
permitted to participate in another investigational drug study while being treated on 
this protocol. 
3. Is unable to receive a port or peri pherally inserted central ca theter (PICC). 
4. Has a diagnosis of immunodeficien cy or is receiving chronic ste roid therapy of 
prednisone ≥ 10 mg daily or any equ ivalent dose of  corticostero ids.  
5. Has previously undergone organ or  bone marrow transplantation a nd is on 
immunosuppressive therapy 
6. Has had major surgery or signifi cant traumatic injury within 4 weeks of study 
registration. Subject must have r ecovered adequately from the t oxicity and/or 
complications from the interven tion prior to starting therapy. A diagnostic or 
research biopsy does not exclude s ubjects from enrollment. Plac ement of a vascular 
access device such as a Port-A-Cath is not considered major sur gery. 
7. Has baseline peripheral neuropa thy/paresthesia grade ≥ 1. 
8. Has a known additional malignancy w ithin the past 3 years. Exce ptions include 
treated localized basal cell or s quamous cell carcinoma of the skin, in situ cervical or 
vulvar carcinoma that has undergon e potentially curative therap y, superficial bladder 
tumors (Ta, Tis & T1), ductal car cinoma in situ (DCIS) of the b reast and low grade 
prostate cancer (Gleason sore 6) . Any cancer curatively treated  > 3 years prior to 
registration with no clinical evi dence of recurrence is permitt ed 
9. Has known active central nervous s ystem (CNS) metastases and/or  carcinomatous 
meningitis. Subjects with previously treated brain metastases m ay participate 
provided they are stable (wit hout evidence of progression by im aging for at least four 
weeks prior to trial registrat ion and any neurologic symptoms h ave returned to 
baseline), have no evidence of ne w or enlarging brain metastase s, and are not using 
steroids for at least 7 days pr ior to trial registration.  
10. Has an active autoimmune diseas e requiring systemic treatment w ithin the past 3 
months or a documented history of c linically severe autoimmune disease, or a 
syndrome that requires systemic  steroids or immunosuppressive a gents. Exceptions 
to the rule: 
• Subjects with vitiligo  
• Subjects with resolve d childhood asthma/atopy  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 18 of 69  • Subjects that require intermittent use of bronchodilators or lo cal steroid 
injections 
• Subjects with hypothyroidism stable on hormone replacement  
• Subjects with Sjögren’s syndrome  
11. Has a history of pneumonitis that required steroids or current pneumonitis. 
12. Has known history of active tuberculosis. 
13. Has an active infection requiri ng systemic therapy (≥ grade 2) for more than 3 days 
within 1 week of enrollment. 
14. Is pregnant or breastfeeding, or e xpecting to conceive or fathe r children within the 
projected duration of the trial, s tarting with the pre-screenin g or screening visit 
through 120 days after the last dose of pembrolizumab. 
15. Has known hypersensitivity to fluorouracil (5FU), oxaliplatin, or other platinum 
agents. 
16. Known hypersensitivity to pembro lizumab or any of its excipient s. 
17. Has known dihydropyrimidine dehydroge nase deficiency (DPD) defi ciency (testing 
not required) 
18. Has received prior th erapy with an anti-PD -1, anti-PD-L1, anti- PD-L2, anti-CD137, 
or anti-Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-as sociated antigen-4 (CTLA-4) an tibody (including 
ipilimumab or any other antibody o r drug specifically targeting  T-cell co-stimulation 
or checkpoint pathways). 
19. Has known active Hepatitis B unless subject has been on antivir al agents for at least 
2 months (baseline t esting not required) 
20. Has a known history of Human Immunode ficiency Virus (HIV) or He patitis C 
(baseline testing i s not required). 
21. Has received a live vaccine w ithin 30 days prior to trial regis tration.  
22. Has a history or current evide nce of any condition, therapy, or  laboratory 
abnormality that might confound the results of the trial, inter fere with the subject’s 
participation for the full dur ation of the trial, or is not in the best interest of the 
subject to participate, in the  opinion of the site investigator .  
23. Has known psychiatric or substanc e abuse disorders that would i nterfere with 
cooperation with the requi rements of the trial. 
24. Has any other psychological, fam ilial, sociological or geograph ical condition 
potentially hampering compliance with the study pr otocol and fo llow-up schedule. 
Those conditions should be discus sed with the subject before re gistration in the trial. 
 4. SUBJECT REGISTRATION 
All subjects must be registered through Hoosier Cancer Research  Network (HCRN) 
electronic data capture OnCore pr ior to starting protocol thera py. A subject is considered to 
be registered to the protocol wh en an “On Study” date has been entered into OnCore.   
 Subjects must begin therapy within five business days  of the “On Study” date. 
 
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 19 of 69  5. TREATMENT PLAN 
 
5.1 Drug Administration 
 The treatment to be used in this  trial is outlined below in Tab le 1 and will consist of: 
Pembrolizumab 200 mg will be administered as a 30 minute IV inf usion, with a window of -
5 and +10 minutes.   mFOLFOX6 premedications and chemotherapy will be administered 3 0 minutes after 
pembrolizumab.  mFOLFOX is to be gi ven at each site per their g uidelines.  Administration 
of mFOLFOX6 outside the suggeste d time will not be considered a  deviation. 
• Oxaliplatin 85 mg/m
2 IV with  
• Leucovorin 400 mg/m2 IV followed by  
• 5FU 400 mg/m2 bolus and then 2400 mg/m2 via continuous infusion  
 
See Section 5.2.3 for premedications recommendations for mFOLFO X6. Standard 
supportive care should be followed at each site per their guide lines. Subjects should receive 
full supportive care , including transfusions of blood and blood products, antibioti cs, 
antiemetics, etc., when appropriate. The use of epoetin product s is not allowed. 
 NOTE : Chemotherapy (mFOLFOX6) dose re-calculation on Day 1 is neces sary for subjects 
who have >10% weigh change (gai n or loss) from baseline. All BS A-based doses should use 
actual, not adjusted, weight.   
 
Table 1: Drug Administration Schedule 
Cycle = 28 days 
Drug Dose Frequency of 
administration Route of 
administration Duration 
Pembrolizumab  200 mg every 3 weeks 30-minute IV 
infusion 
up to 24 
months mFOLFOX6 premeds and chemo will be administered 30 minutes after pembrolizumab  
Oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2 every 2 weeks IV 
Leucovorin 400 mg/m2 every 2 weeks IV 
5FU 400 mg/m2 bolus, 
then 2400 mg/m2 every 2 weeks IV continuous 
infusion 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 20 of 69  5.2 Safety run-in cohort 
The safety run-in cohort will in clude 6 subjects treated with 2 00 mg (fixed) IV infusion of 
pembrolizumab  every 3 weeks  plus standard-dose mFOLFOX 6 given every 2 weeks. These 
first 6 subjects will be followed for 4 weeks for dose limiting  toxicities (DLT) before 
enrolling an additional 24 subjec ts. If a DLT is observed in no  more than 1 of 6 subjects, the 
trial will continue with enrol ling subjects to the remainder of  the phase II portion of the 
study. If 2 or more subjects experience DLT, 6 additional subje cts will be enrolled at dose 
level -1. If no more than 1 D LT is observed, then phase II will  enroll subjects at DL-1 for 
the total expected number of accr ual. Otherwise, accrual will s top and the funder and 
sponsor-investigator will re-ev aluate continuation of the trial . 
 
Number of subjects with DLT Action 
≤1 of 6 sub jects Proceed with remainder of Phase II 
≥2 of 6 subjects MTD has been exceeded.  Enroll 6 subjects at dose 
level -1 and re-evaluate. 
 A given dose cohort may be expa nded up to a total of 12 subject s if further eva luation of the 
frequency of a given toxicity i s warranted, based upon the obse rved safety pr ofile in the 6 
subjects already recruited in the  cohort, and where the inciden ce of the confirmed DLT does 
not exceed 33%.   
 
5.2.1 Dose limiting toxicity definition :  
Dose limiting toxicity (DLT) is defined as one of the following  treatment-related events 
occurring during the first 4 weeks of treatment: 
• Any Grade 3-4 toxicity other than:  
o fatigue, or 
o nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea lasting less than 72 hours;  
• Grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia or neu tropenia that leads to treatme nt delays for > 14 
days.  
• Grade 4 febrile neutropenia if D PD deficiency is  ruled out and subject requires delay 
for the next cycle >14 days 
• Grade 3-4 Nausea, vomiting or diarrhea lasting 72 hours or long er despite maximal 
supportive care including anti em etics, intravenous hydration, anti-diarrhea agents 
and short term steroi d use, if indicated.  
• Asymptomatic grade 3-4 laboratory abnormalities will be discuss ed between the site 
investigator and sponsor-inves tigator before being assigned as DLT.   
   
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 21 of 69  5.2.2 Dose Level -1 
Pembrolizumab: 200 mg IV Oxaliplatin: 65 mg/m
2 IV; Leucovorin: 400 mg/m2 IV; 5FU: 320 mg/m2 IV bolus then 5FU: 
1920 mg/m2 continuous infusion over 46 hours 
Cohort Pembrolizumab  Oxaliplatin Leucovorin 5FU 
0 (start) 200 mg IV 85 mg/m2 IV 400 mg/m2 IV 400 mg/m2 IV bolus 
then 2400 mg/m2 
-1 200 mg IV  65 mg/m2 IV 400 mg/m2 IV 320 mg/m2 IV bolus 
then 1920 mg/m2 
 
5.3 Phase II 
If dose-limiting toxicity is obs erved in no more than 1 out of 6 subjects in the safety run-in 
cohort, the remainder of the s ubjects will be enrolled and trea ted at the current doses of 
pembrolizumab and mFOLFOX6.  All subjects will continue study treatment for up to 24 months,  until disease progression (as 
defined below at Section 8) or una cceptable treatment-related t oxicity occurs. Subjects will 
continue to be followed until progression of disease or death. Subjects with sustained CR, 
PR or SD at 24 months will stop therapy and be observed per stu dy imaging schedule. 
 5.4 Treatment Schedules Trial treatment should be administered on Day 1 of each cycle a fter all procedures/ 
assessments have been completed as detailed on the Study Schedu le of Events (Section 7). 
Trial treatment may be adminis tered up to 3 days before or afte r (±3 days) the scheduled 
Day 1 of each cycle due to administrative reasons.  All trial t reatments will be administered 
on an outpatient basis.  Pembrolizumab will be administered as a 30 minute IV infusion ( treatment cycle intervals 
may be increased due to toxicit y as described i n Section 5.4). Sites should make every effort 
to target infusion timing to be a s close to 30 minutes as possi ble. However, given the 
variability of infusion pumps fro m site to site, a window of -5  minutes and +10 minutes is 
permitted (i.e., infusion time is 30 minutes: -5 min/+10 min).  Please refer to the Study Proce dures Manual (SPM) for specific instructions for 
pembrolizumab, reconstitution, preparation of the infusion flui d, and administration. 
mFOLFOX6  will be given per institutional st andard of care.  Below are re commendations 
for pre-medication of mFOLFOX6.   
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 22 of 69   
Recommended pre-medications, hydr ation and prophylactic medicat ions 
for mFOLFOX6  
Agent  Dose/Precautions   Route  Schedule  
Ondansetron (or 
formulary 
equivalent).May consider use of 
palonosetron or 
addition of  neurokinin receptor 
antagonist for D1 24 mg Instruct subject 
to avoid exposure to 
cold (food, liquids, 
air) for 5 days 
following 
oxaliplatin PO 30 minutes prior 
to oxaliplatin Days 1 
  Prochlorperazine 10 mg PO/IV q6h PRN 
for nausea or vomiting Days 1-14 
D5W 100 cc/h IV during treatment 
for infusions in D5W 
and to flush lines between 
medications. Days 1 
Dexamethasone 12 mg PO for nausea and 
vomiting unresponsive 
to above medications per site 
investigator 
discretion 
Loperamide (home 
instructions)1 
 4 mg at onset of 
diarrhea, then 2mg q2h 
prn until diarrhea stops 
for at least 12 hours PO Days 1-14 
1For symptoms of diarrhea and/or abdominal cramping that occur a t any time during a treatment cycle, 
subjects will be instructed to begin taking loperamide. Loperam ide should be started at the earliest 
sign of (1) a poorly formed or loose stool or (2) the occurrenc e of 1 to 2 more bowel movements than 
usual in 1 day or (3) an increase in stool volume or liquidity.  Loperamide should be taken in the 
following manner: 4 mg at the first onset of diarrhea, then 2 m g every 2 hours around the clock 
until diarrhea-free for at least 12 hours. Subjects may take lo peramide 4 mg every 4 hours during 
the night. The maximum daily dose of loperamide is 16 mg/day. S ubjects should be advised to obtain 
loperamide at the initial treatment visit so that they have suf ficient supply on hand in case 
antidiarrheal support is required. Additional antidiarrheal mea sures may be used at the discretion of 
the site  investigator. Subjects should be instructed to increase fluid i ntake to help maintain fluid and 
electrolyte balance duri ng episodes of diarrhea. 
 
5.5 Dose Modifications The NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4 will be used to 
grade adverse events.  Subjects will be evaluated for a dverse events (all grades), ser ious adverse events, and 
adverse events requiring st udy drug interrupti on or discontinua tion at each study visit for the 
duration of their particip ation in the study. 
 
   
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 23 of 69  5.5.1 Pembrolizumab Dose Modificati ons and Toxicity Management 
The starting dose amount required t o prepare the pembrolizumab infusion solution is a fixed 
dose of 200 mg and does not require  calculation.  On days when both chemotherapy and 
pembrolizumab are administered, if chemotherapy is held due to toxicity, pembrolizumab 
should also be held.   Pembrolizumab will be held for the following hematologic AEs if  related: 
• Hematologic toxicities  
o Any Grade 4  
o Grade 3 except neutropenia, ane mia, thrombocytopenia and lympho penia   
 Pembrolizumab will be held for the following non-hematologic AE s if related:  
o Site investigators should consid er holding pembrolizumab for Gr ade 2 toxicities with 
persistent symptoms unless specified in Table 2 below. 
o Any ≥ Grade 3 toxicities including laboratory abnormalities.  E xceptions include 
AST, ALT and bilirubin; Table 2 below should be followed in tho se instances. 
 Table 2: Dose modification guide lines for drug-related non-hema tological adverse 
events 
Toxicity Hold 
Treatment 
For Grade Timing for Restarting 
Treatment Discontinue Subject 
Diarrhea/Colitis 2-3 
 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0-1. Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last 
dose or inability to reduce corticosteroid to 10 
mg or less of prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 weeks.  
4 Permanently discontinue Permanently discontinue 
AST, ALT, or 
Increased Bilirubin 2 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0-1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last 
dose. 
3-4 Permanently discontinue 
(see exception below)1 Permanently discontinue 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (if new 
onset) or 
Hyperglycemia T1DM or  
3-4 Hold pembrolizumab for new onset 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus or Grade 3-4 hyperglycemia associated with evidence of beta cell failure.  Resume pembrolizumab when subjects are 
clinically and metabolically stable. 
Hypophysitis  2-3 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0-1  Toxicity does not resolve within  12 weeks of last 
dose or inability to reduce corticosteroid to 10 
mg or less of prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 weeks. 
4 Permanently discontinue Permanently discontinue 
Hyperthyroidism  3 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0-1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last 
dose or inability to reduce corticosteroid to 10 
mg or less of prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 weeks. 
4 Permanently discontinue Permanently discontinue 
Hypothyroidism 2-4 Therapy with pembrolizumab can be 
continued while treatment for the 
thyroid disorder is institutedTherapy with pembrolizumab can be continued 
while treatment for the  thyroid disorder is 
instituted. 
Infusion Reaction 3-4 Permanently discontinue Permanently disco ntinue 
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 24 of 69  Pneumonitis 2 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0-1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last 
dose or inability to reduce corticosteroid to 10 
mg or less of prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 wee ks. 
3-4 Permanently discontinue Permanently discontinue 
Renal Failure or 
Nephritis  2 Toxicity resolves to Grade 0-1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last 
dose or inability to reduce corticosteroid to 10 
mg or less of prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 weeks. 
3-4 Permanently discontinue Permanently discontinue 
All Other Drug-
Related Toxicity2 3 or Severe Toxicity resolves to Grade 0-1 Toxicity does not resolve within 12 weeks of last 
dose or inability to reduce corticosteroid to 10 
mg or less of prednisone or equivalent per day 
within 12 weeks. 
4 Permanently discontinue Permanently discontinue 
Note: Permanently discontinue for any severe or Grade 3 drug-related AE that recurs or any life-threatening event.  
1 For subjects with liver metastasis who begin treatment with Gra de 2 AST or ALT, if AST or ALT increases by greater than or equ al 
to 50% relative to baseline and lasts for at least 1 week then subjects should be discontinued. 
2 Subjects with intolerable or persistent Grade 2 drug-related A E may hold study medication at s ite investigator discretion.  
Permanently discontinue study dr ug for persistent Grade 2 adver se reactions for which treatment with study drug has been held,  that 
do not recover to Grade 0-1 within 12 wee ks of the last dose.  
 
Any delays will be recorded in the appropriate electronic case report form(s). If needed, a 
site investigator may consult w ith the sponsor-investigator by contacting the HCRN Project 
Manager.   If the toxicity does not resol ve to Grade 0-1 within 4 weeks af ter last infusion, t rial treatment 
should be discontinued per protocol  guidelines.  With site inve stigator and sponsor-
investigator agreement, subjects with a laboratory adverse even t still at Grade 2 after 4 
weeks may continue treatment in t he trial only if asymptomatic and controlled.  See Section 
11 for information on the management of adverse events.  Subjects who experience a recurrenc e of the same severe or life -threatening event at the 
same grade or greater with re-challenge of pembrolizumab should  be discontinued from trial 
treatment.  If a subject discontinues mFOLFO X6 treatment completely or any portion of this therapy 
(i.e. oxaliplatin) due t o toxicity, the subject may elect to co ntinue pembrolizumab with any 
portion of the original chemother apy regimen or as a single-age nt every 3 weeks per the 
protocol schedule for a tota l of 24 months, or may discontinue all study treatment and be 
treated at site investigator’s  discretion. If all therapy is di scontinued, it is recommended that 
subjects not be treated with a s econd-line chemotherapy regimen  until disease progression 
has been documented.  Such subjects may continue to be imaged p er the study guidelines 
until progression or complete withdrawal from the study.  5.5.2 mFOLFOX6 Dose Modification s and Toxicity Management  
Missed doses of mFOLFOX6 will not be made up. Dose delays and t reatment restarts will 
be made at the discretion of the site investigator according to  institutional guidelines. Dose 
reduction of 5-FU and/or oxaliplati n is allowed and is recommen ded for grade 3 toxicities.   
 Subjects will receive mFOLFOX 6 per institutional guidelines. Be low are optional guidelines 
for dose modification and toxic ity management.  Subjects receiv ing oxaliplatin on this study 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 25 of 69  should be counseled to avoid col d drinks, chewing of ice chips,  and exposure to cold water 
or air because the neurotoxicity often seen with oxaliplatin ap pears to be exacerbated by 
exposure to cold. The period of tim e during which the subject i s at risk for these cold-
induced sensory neuropathies i s not well documented. Subjects s hould exercise caution 
regarding cold exposure during the  treatment period. Peripheral  sensory neuropathies can 
occur at any time after receiving oxaliplatin therapy. 
• If a dose reduction beyond Level -3 is required for oxaliplatin , oxaliplatin will be 
discontinued. Continue 5-FU/leucovorin and pembrolizumab. 
• If a dose reduction beyond level -3 is required for 5-FU, disco ntinue 
m FOLFOX6. Continue pembrolizumab. 
• If more than one dose reduction applies, use the most stringent  (i.e., the greatest dose 
reduction.) 
• If mFOLFOX6 is delayed due to toxicity for ≥ 4 weeks, counting from the originally 
scheduled day of treatment that was held, consider 2 level dose  reductions. 
Continue pembrolizumab at the same dose level. 
• If pembrolizumab held due to toxi city not deemed related to mFO LFOX6, 
continue mFOLFOX6 therapy as scheduled. 
• Missed doses of any of the drugs are not made up. 
 Dose Levels based on toxicity beyond DLT assessment period:
 
Agent  Level 0  Level –1  Level –2  Level –3  
Oxaliplatin  85 mg/m2 65 mg/m2 50 mg/m2 40 mg/m2 
5-FU Bolus  400 mg/m2 320 mg/m2 270 mg/m2 230 mg/m2 
5-FU  
Infusion  2400 mg/m2 
over 46-48 hrs 1920 mg/m2 over 
46-48 hrs 1600 mg/m2 
over 46-48 hrs 1360 mg/m2 
over 46-48 hrs 
Leucovorin dose is always 400 mg/m2. If 5-FU is skipped, leucovorin must also be skipped. 
  
Hematologic toxicities 
• Dose modifications for hematologi c toxicities are based on CBC on Day 1 of 
each cycle of m FOLFOX6. CBC may  be collected within 72 hours of  treatment (or 
96 hours if due to holidays). 
• For ANC 1000-1199: Delay mFOLFOX6 until ANC ≥ 1200, then resume at the 
previous doses of oxaliplatin and 5-FU. 
• For ANC < 1000: Delay mFOLFOX6 until ANC ≥ 1200, then resume with one 
dose level reduction of oxaliplatin and 5-FU for all subsequent  cycles. 
• For febrile neutropenia (defined as ANC < 1000 and T ≥ 38.5°C):  Delay 
mFOLFOX6 until fever has resolv ed and ANC ≥ 1200, then resume m FOLFOX6 
with one dose level reduction of oxaliplatin and 5-FU for all s ubsequent cycles. 
• For platelets 50,000 – 74,999: Delay mFOLFOX6 until platelets ≥ 75,000, then 
resume at the previous dose levels of oxaliplatin and 5-FU. 
• For platelets < 50,000: Delay mFOLFOX6 until platelets ≥ 75,000, then resume 
with one dose level reduction of  oxaliplatin and 5-FU for all s ubsequent cycles.  
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 26 of 69  Gastrointestinal toxicities 
• For ≥ grade 2 diarrhea: Delay mFOLFOX6 until diarrhea improves to < grade 2. 
Hold pembrolizumab until diarrhea improves to < grade 2. 
• Following grade 2 diarrhea at any time during a cycle: Continue mFOLFOX6 
at the previous dose levels of oxaliplatin and 5-FU. 
• Following grade 3 diarrhea at any time during a cycle: Continue mFOLFOX6 
with one dose level reduction of  5-FU for all subsequent cycles  and the previous 
dose level of oxaliplatin. 
• Following grade 4 diarrhea at any time during a cycle: Continue mFOLFOX6 
with one dose level reduction of  oxaliplatin and 5-FU for all s ubsequent cycles. 
  
Oral Mucositis  
• For ≥ grade 2 oral mucositis present on Day 1 of a cycle, delay mFOLFOX6 
until mucositis improves to < g rade 2. Continue pembrolizumab. 
• For grade 2 oral mucositis, at any time during a cycle, resume/continue 
mFOLFOX6 at the previous dose level. 
• For grade 3 or 4 oral mucositis, despite optimal management, at  any time 
during a cycle, resume/continue mFOLFOX6 with one dose level reduction of 
5-FU and the previous dose level of oxaliplatin. 
 Nausea or Vomiting  
• For grade ≥ 2 nausea or vomiting present on Day 1 of a cycle de spite 
optimal antiemetic therapy, delay mFOLFOX6 until nausea and vomiting 
improve to < grade 2. C ontinue pembrolizumab. 
• For grade 2 nausea or vomiting, at any time during a cycle, 
resume/continue mFOLFOX6 at the previous dose levels. 
• For grade 3 nausea or vomiting, despite optimal antiemetic ther apy, at any 
time during a cycle, resume/continue mFOLFOX6 with one dose level reduction of 
oxaliplatin and the previous dose level of 5-FU. 
• For grade 4 nausea or vomiting, despite optimal antiemetic ther apy, at any 
time during a cycle, r esume/continue mFOLFOX6 with one dose level reduction of 
oxaliplatin and 5-FU.  
 
Pulmonary Toxicities  
• For ≥ grade 3 cough, dyspnea, hypoxia, pneumonitis, or pulmonar y infiltrates, 
skip oxaliplatin until interstitia l lung disease is ruled out. Continue 5-
FU/leucovorin. Discontinue  all protocol therapy if interstitial lung disease is 
confirmed. 
  
Thrombotic microangiopathy
 
• For ≥ grade 3 hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS): Discontinue oxaliplatin. Continue 
5- FU/leucovorin and pembrolizumab . 
  
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 27 of 69  Neurotoxicity  
Toxicity Scale for the Sensory Neuropathies Associated with Oxa liplatin (using the Oxaliplatin 
Specific Neurotoxicity Scale) 
 
 Symptoms  
Grade 1  Paresthesias/dysesthesias* of  short duration that resolve and do not 
interfere with function. 
Grade 2  Paresthesias/dysesthesias* inte rfering with function, but not with 
activities of daily living (ADL) 
Grade 3  Paresthesias/dysesthesias* w ith pain or with functional impair ment that 
also interfere with ADL. 
Grade 4  Persistent paresthesias/dysesthesias* that are disabling or li fe threatening. 
 * May be cold-induced 
 
• For grade 2 neurotoxicity persisting between treatments: Continue mFOLFOX6 
with one dose level reduction of oxaliplatin for all subsequent  cycles and the 
previous dose level of 5-FU. Con tinue pembrolizumab at the same  dose level. 
• For grade 3 neurotoxicity resolving to ≤ grade 2 between treatm ents: Continue 
mFOLFOX6 with one dose level reduction of oxaliplatin for all s ubsequent 
cycles and the previous dose le vel of 5-FU. Continue pembrolizu mab at the same 
dose level. 
• For grade 3 neurotoxicity persisting between treatments: Discontinue 
oxaliplatin. Continue 5-FU/leuc ovorin and pembrolizumab at the same dose level. 
• For grade 4 neurotoxicity: Discontinue oxaliplatin. Continue 5-FU/leucovorin 
and pembrolizumab at the same dose level. 
• For pharyngolaryngeal dysesthesia: Increase the duration of oxaliplatin 
infusion to 6 hours for a ll subsequent cycles.  
 
Extravasation  
Extravasation of oxaliplatin has been associated with necrosis;  if extravasation is suspected, 
the infusion should be stopped and the drug administered at ano ther site. Extravasation 
should be treated according to institutional guidelines. 
 
Allergic Reactions  
• For grade 1 allergic reactions : Decrease the infusion ra te by 50% until symptoms 
resolve, then resume at the initial planned rate. 
• For grade 2 allergic reactions : Stop infusion. Administer H 1 and/or H 2 blockers, 
and/or steroids according to institutional policy. Restart the infusio n when 
symptoms resolve and pretreat before all subsequent doses. Trea t according to 
institutional policy. 
• For grade 3 or grade 4 allergic reactions or anaphylaxis: Stop the infusion. 
Discontinue oxaliplatin (if timing consistent with oxaliplatin hypersensitivity). 
Continue 5-FU and leucovorin and pembrolizumab. If grade 3 or 4  allergic reactions 
or anaphylaxis with first or second cycle, consider leucovorin as offending agent. 
Discontinue leucovorin and continue mFOLFOX6 (without leucovori n) and 
pembrolizumab. 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 28 of 69  Oxaliplatin-induced phar yngolaryngeal dysesthesia  
Should a subject develop oxaliplatin-induced pharyngolaryngeal dysesthesia, her/his oxygen 
saturation should be evaluated via a pulse oximeter; if abnorma l, an anxiolytic agent may 
be given and the subject observe d in the clinic until the episo de has resolved. Increase 
the duration of oxaliplatin to 6 hours for all subsequent treat ments. Some overlap may 
exist between the manifestations of pharyngolaryngeal dysesthes ia and hypersensitivity 
reactions. A table comparing the two is presented below  
Comparison of the Symptoms and T reatment of Phar yngolaryngeal D ysesthesias and Platinum 
Hypersensitivity Reactions 
 
Clinical Symptoms  Pharyngo-Laryngeal  Dysesthesias  Platinum Hypersensitivity  
Dyspnea presen t presen t 
Bronchospasm absent present 
Laryngospasm absent present 
Anxiety present present 
O2 saturation  normal decreased 
Difficulty swallowing present (loss of sensation) absent 
Pruritus absent present 
Urticaria/rash absent present 
cold-induced symptoms yes no 
BP normal or increased normal or decreased 
Treatment  anxiolytics, observation in a controlled  
clinical setting until symptoms abate or  
at the site investigator’s discretion oxygen, steroids, epinephrine,  
bronchodilators; fluids and  
vasopressors, if appropriate 
 
Cardiovascular toxicities 
• For grade 3 or 4 cardiac ischemia/infarction: Discontinue all protocol therapy 
(mFOLFOX6 and pembrolizumab). 
• For grade 3 or 4 cerebrovascular ischemia: Discontinue all protocol therapy 
(mFOLFOX6 and pembrolizumab). 
 Other non-hematologic toxicities for mFOLFOX6 For other grade 3 or 4 non-hematologic toxicities considered re lated to mFOLFOX6, delay 
mFOLFOX6 until toxicity resolves to ≤ grade 1, then resume mFOL FOX6 at one dose level 
reduction of oxaliplatin and 5-FU (if toxicity is hand-foot syn drome or stomatitis, dose 
reduction of only 5-FU bolus and continuous infusion of 5-FU is  permitted). Continue 
pembrolizumab.  Dose modifications for obese subjects There is no clearly documented adverse impact of treatment of o bese subjects when 
dosing is performed according to actual body weight. Therefore,  all dosing is to be 
determined solely by actual weight without any modification unless explicitly 
described in the protocol. This will eliminate the risk of calc ulation error and the possible 
introduction of variability in dose administration. Failure to use actual body weight in 
the calculation of drug dosages will be considered a major prot ocol deviation. Site 
investigators who are uncomfortable with calculating doses base d on actual body weight 
should recognize that doing otherwise would be a protocol viola tion. 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 29 of 69  The actual weight on the day of registration or the first day o f treatment may be used for 
cycle 1 unless the change in the weight results in a change in calculated dose ≥10%, in 
which case the weight on the day of treatment should be used. O ver the course of treatment 
it is not required to change the doses of 5-FU, leucovorin or o xaliplatin due to changes 
in weight unless the calculated dose changes by ≥10%.  5.6 Concomitant Medications/Vaccinations (allowed & prohibited) 
Medications or vaccinations speci fically prohibited in the excl usion criteria are not allowed 
during the ongoing trial. If there  is a clinical indication for  one of these or other medications 
or vaccinations specifically pr ohibited during the trial, disco ntinuation from trial therapy or 
vaccination may be required. The s ite investigator should discu ss any questions regarding 
this with the sponsor-investigat or by contacting the HCRN proje ct manager. The final 
decision on any supportive therapy o r vaccination rests with th e site investigator and/or the 
subject's primary physician. How ever, the decision to continue the subject on trial therapy or 
vaccination schedule requires the mutual agreement of the site investigator, the sponsor-
investigator, and the subject. P lease contact the HCRN project manager in such cases. 
 5.6.1 Acceptable Concomitant Medications All treatments that the site i nvestigator considers necessary f or a subject’s welfare may be 
administered at the discreti on of the site investigator in keep ing with the community 
standards of medical care. All concomitant medication will be r ecorded on the case report 
form (CRF) including all prescr iption, over-the-counter (OTC), herbal supplements, and IV 
medications and fluids.  If changes occur during the trial peri od, documentation of drug 
dosage, frequency, route, and da te may also be included on the CRF. 
 
All concomitant medications rec eived within 28 days before the first dose of trial treatment 
and 30 days after the last dose of  trial treatment should be re corded. Concomitant 
medications administered 30 days a fter the last dose of trial t reatment should be recorded if 
associated with SAEs and events  of clinical interest (ECIs). 
 5.6.2 Prohibited Concomitant Medications Subjects are prohibited from recei ving the following therapies during the Screening and 
Treatment Phase of this trial. T he Exclusion Criteria describes  other medications that are 
prohibited in this trial. 
 
• Anti-cancer systemic chemotherapy or biological therapy  
• Immunotherapy not specifi ed in this protocol 
• Chemotherapy not specifi ed in this protocol 
• Investigational agents ot her than Pembrolizumab 
• Radiation therapy  
 Note: Radiation therapy to a sympt omatic solitary lesion or to the brain may be 
allowed after consultatio n with sponsor-investigator.  
• Live vaccines within 30 days prio r to study registration and wh ile participating in the 
trial. Examples of live vaccines include, but are not limited t o, the following: 
measles, mumps, rubella, chicke n pox, yellow fever, rabies, BCG , and typhoid (oral) 
vaccine. Seasonal influenza vacc ines for injection are generall y killed virus vaccines 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 30 of 69  and are allowed; however, intrana sal influenza vaccines (e.g. F lu-Mist®) are live 
attenuated vaccines, and are not allowed.  Glucocorticoids for any purpose other than 
to modulate symptoms from an eve nt of clinical interest of susp ected immunologic 
etiology. The use of physiologic dos es of corticosteroids may b e approved after 
consultation with the sponsor-inv estigator. Please contact the HCRN project 
manager.  
Subjects who, in the assessment  by the site investigator, requi re the use of any of the 
aforementioned treatments for cl inical management should be rem oved from the trial 
treatment. Subjects may receive  other medications that the site  investigator deems to be 
medically necessary off trial treatment.  There are no prohibited therapi es during the Post-Treatment Fol low-up Phase. 
 
5.7 Supportive Care and Rescue Medications  
 
5.7.1 Supportive Care Guidelines 
Subjects should receive appropr iate supportive care measures as  deemed necessary by the 
site investigator including but not limited to the items outlin ed below: 
 
Nausea/vomiting:  Nausea and vomiting should be tr eated aggressively, and conside ration should be given in 
subsequent cycles to the adm inistration of prophylactic antieme tic therapy according to 
standard institutional practic e. Subjects should be strongly en couraged to maintain liberal 
oral fluid intake. 
 
Antimicrobials:   
Subjects with a documented infect ious complication should recei ve oral or IV antibiotics or 
other anti-infective agents as considered appropriate by the si te investigator for a given 
infectious condition, ac cording to standard i nstitutional pract ice. 
 Diarrhea/Colitis:  Subjects should be carefully monitored for signs and symptoms o f enterocolitis (such as 
diarrhea, abdominal pain, blood or  mucus in stool, with or with out fever) and of bowel 
perforation (such as perit oneal signs and ileus).   
• All subjects who experience dia rrhea/colitis s hould be advised to drink liberal 
quantities of clear fluids.  If sufficient oral fluid intake is  not feasible, fluid and 
electrolytes should be substituted via IV infusion.  For Grade 2 or higher diarrhea, 
consider GI consultation and e ndoscopy to confirm or rule out c olitis. 
• For Grade 2 diarrhea/colitis tha t persists greater than 3 days,  administer oral 
corticosteroids.  
• For Grade 3 or 4 diarrhea/colitis that persists > 1 week, treat  with intravenous 
steroids followed by high dos e oral steroids.   
• When symptoms improve to Grade 1  or less, steroid taper should 
be started and 
continued over no less than 4 weeks. 
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 31 of 69  Type 1 diabetes mellitus (if new  onset, including diabetic keto acidosis [DKA]) or ≥ 
Grade 3 Hyperglycemia, if associat ed with ketosis (ketonuria) o r metabolic acidosis 
(DKA) 
• For T1DM or Grade 3-4 Hyperglycemia 
o Insulin replacement therapy is re commended for Type I diabetes mellitus and for 
Grade 3-4 hyperglycemia associat ed with metabolic acidosis or k etonuria.  
o Evaluate subjects with serum gl ucose and a metabolic panel, uri ne ketones, 
glycosylated hemoglobin, and C-peptide.  
 Hypophysitis: 
• For Grade 2 events, treat with c orticosteroids. When symptoms i mprove to Grade 1 
or less, steroid taper shoul d be started and continued over no less than 4 weeks. 
Replacement of appropriate hormones may be required as the ster oid dose is tapered. 
• For Grade 3-4 events, treat with  an initial dose of IV corticos teroids followed by oral 
corticosteroids. When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, ster oid taper should be 
started and continued over no less than 4 weeks. Replacement of  appropriate 
hormones may be required as th e steroid dose is tapered. 
 Hyperthyroidism or Hypothyroidism:  Thyroid disorders can occur at a ny time during treatment. Monit or subjects for changes in 
thyroid function (at the start  of treatment, periodically durin g treatment, and as indicated 
based on clinical evaluation) and f or clinical signs and sympto ms of thyroid disorders. 
• Grade 2 hyperthyroidism events (a nd Grade 2-4 hypothyroidism): 
o In hyperthyroidism, non-selectiv e beta-blockers (e.g. propranol ol) are suggested 
as initial therapy. 
o In hypothyroidism, thyroid hormone r eplacement therapy, with le vothyroxine or 
liothyroinine, is indicate d per standard of care. 
• Grade 3-4 hyperthyroidism  
o Treat with an initial  dose of IV corticosteroid followed by ora l corticosteroids. 
When symptoms improve to Grade 1  or less, steroid taper should be started and 
continued over no less than 4 weeks. Replacement of appropriate  hormones may 
be required as the ste roid dose is tapered. 
 
Hepatic: 
• For Grade 2 events, monitor live r function tests more frequentl y until returned to 
baseline values (consider weekly). 
o Treat with IV or oral  corticosteroids 
•
 For Grade 3-4 events, treat with  intravenous corticosteroids fo r 24 to 48 hours.  
• When symptoms improve to Grade 1 or less, a steroid taper shoul d be started and 
continued over no less than 4 weeks. 
 
Renal Failure or Nephritis: 
• For Grade 2 events, treat with corticosteroids. 
• For Grade 3-4 events, treat with systemic corticosteroids. 
• When symptoms improve to Grade 1  or less, steroid taper should be started and 
continued over no less than 4 weeks.  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 32 of 69  Management of Infusion Reactions:   
Signs and symptoms usually develo p during or shortly after drug  infusion and generally 
resolve completely within 24 hours of completion of infusion.  
 Table 3  below  shows treatment guidelines for  subjects who experience an infus ion reaction 
associated with administration of pembrolizumab.  Table 3 Infusion Reaction Treatment Guidelines 
NCI CTCAE Grade Treatment Premedication at subsequent 
dosing 
Grade 1 
Mild reaction; infusion interruption not indicated; intervention not 
indicated Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically 
indicated until the subject is deemed medically stable in the opinion of the site investigator. None 
Grade 2 
Requires infusion interruption but 
responds promptly to symptomatic treatment (e.g., antihistamines, 
NSAIDS, narcotics, IV fluids); 
prophylactic medications indicated for < =24 hrs Stop Infusion and monitor symptoms. 
Additional appropriate m edical therapy may 
include but is not limited to: 
IV fluids 
Antihistamines 
NSAIDS Acetaminophen 
Narcotics 
Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the subject is deemed medically 
stable in the opinion of the site investigator. 
If symptoms resolve within one hour of stopping drug infusion, the infusion may be restarted at 
50% of the original infusion rate (e.g., from 100 
mL/hr to 50 mL/hr).  Ot herwise dosing will be 
held until symptoms resolve and the subject 
should be premedicated for the next scheduled 
dose. Subjects who develop Grade 2 toxicity despite 
adequate premedication should be 
permanently discontinued from further trial treatment administration.Subject may be premedicated 1.5h 
(± 30 minutes) prior to infusion of 
pembrolizumab with:  
Diphenhydramine 50 mg po (or 
equivalent dose of antihistamine).  
Acetaminophen 500-1000 mg po 
(or equivalent dose of antipyretic). 
Grades 3 or 4 
Grade 3: Prolonged (i.e., not r apidly responsive 
to symptomatic medication and/or 
brief interruption of infusion); recurrence of symptoms following 
initial improvement; hospitalization 
indicated for other clinical sequelae (e.g., renal impairment, pulmonary 
infiltrates) 
Grade 4: 
Life-threatening; pressor or ventilatory 
support indicated Stop Infusion. 
Additional appropriate m edical therapy may 
include but is not limited to: 
IV fluids 
Antihistamines NSAIDS 
Acetaminophen 
Narcotics Oxygen 
Pressors 
Corticosteroids Epinephrine 
 
Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the subject is deemed medically 
stable in the opinion of the site investigator. 
Hospitalization may be indicated. Subject is permanently discontinued from 
further trial treatment administration.No subsequent dosing 
Appropriate resuscitation equipm ent should be available in the room and a physician readily available during the period of dru g 
administration. 
 
 
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 33 of 69  5.8 Diet/Activity/Other Considerations 
 
5.8.1 Diet 
Subjects should maintain a norma l diet unless modifications are  required to manage an AE 
such as diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting.  5.8.2 Contraception 
Pembrolizumab may have adverse effects on a fetus in utero. Fur thermore, it is not known if 
pembrolizumab has transient adverse effects on the composition of sperm. Women of child-
bearing potential may be enrolle d if they are willing to use tw o methods of birth control or 
are considered highly unlikely t o conceive. Highly unlikely to conceive is defined as: 
• Surgically ste rilized, or  
• Postmenopausal (a woman who is ≥ 45 years of age and has not ha d menses for > 
one year will be considere d postmenopausal), or  
• Not heterosexually active fo r the duration of the study.  
 
The two birth control methods ca n either be two barrier methods  or a barrier method plus a 
hormonal method to prevent preg nancy. Subjects should start usi ng birth control from the 
point of registration up to 120 days  after the last dose of stu dy drug.  
 The following are considered ade quate barrier methods of contra ception: diaphragm, 
condom (by the partner), copper intrauterine device, sponge, or  spermicide. Appropriate 
hormonal contraceptives will include any registered and markete d contraceptive agent that 
contains an estrogen and/or a pr ogestational agent (including o ral, subcutaneous, 
intrauterine, or int ramuscular agents). 
 
Subjects should be informed tha t taking the study drug may invo lve unknown risks to the 
fetus (unborn baby) if pregnancy w ere to occur during the study . In order to participate in 
the study they must adhere to th e contraception requirement (de scribed above) for the 
duration of the study and for 120 da ys after the last dose of s tudy drug. If there is any 
question that a subject will not reliably comply with the requi rements for contraception, that 
subject should not be ent ered into the study. 
 5.8.3 Use in Pregnancy 
If a subject inadvertently beco mes pregnant while on study, the  subject will immediately be 
discontinued from protocol therapy. If treatment with pembroliz umab, the site will contact 
the subject at least monthly a nd document the su bject’s status until the pregnancy has been 
completed or terminated. The outcome of the pregnancy will be r eported to HCRN 
immediately and within 24 hours if  the outcome is a serious adv erse experience (e.g., death, 
abortion, congenital anomaly, or ot her disabling or life-threat ening complication to the 
mother or newborn). The site inves tigator will make every effor t to follow the outcome of 
the pregnancy and report the c ondition of the fetus or newborn to HCRN. If a male subject 
impregnates his female partner the study personnel at the site must be informed immediately 
and the pregnancy reported to HCRN  and followed as described in  the Adverse Event 
section 11.  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date:29APR2019 Conf idential Page 34 of 69  5.8.4 Use in Nursing Women 
It is unknown whether pembrolizum ab is excreted in human milk. Since many drugs are 
excreted in human milk, and becau se of the potential for seriou s adverse reactions in the 
nursing infant, subjects who are br east-feeding are not eligibl e for enrollment. 
 6. TREATMENT DISCONTINUATION 
 
6.1. Reasons for Discontinuing Protocol Therapy 
A subject will be discontinued f rom the treatment under the fol lowing circumstances: 
• If there is evidence of progre ssive disease (based on immune re lated response 
criteria) as outlined in the Schedule of Events. Progression pe r RECIST 1.1 is NOT a 
criteria for removal from st udy, unless the site investigator d etermines that removal 
from protocol is in the s ubject’s best interest. 
• If a situation other than progression of disease arises and the  site investigator 
determines a change of therapy w ould be in the best interest of  the subject.  
• If the drug(s) exhibit(s) an un acceptable adverse event. 
• If a subject becomes pregnant or is unwilling to use appropriat e birth control 
techniques as outlined in the inclusion criteria (See Section 3 ). 
• If there is a treatment interr uption for greater than 4 weeks d ue to treatment related 
adverse event. 
• Subjects can stop participating a t any time. However, if they d ecide to stop 
participating in the study, subj ects will continue to be follow ed for disease 
progression and survival. 
• Twenty-four months of uninte rrupted protocol therapy. 
 
6.2. Reasons for Withdrawal from Study   
• Subject withdraws consent for participation 
• Termination of the study 
• Lost to follow-up 
• Death 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 35 of 69  7. STUDY SCHEDULE OF EVENTS   Footnotes on next page   Cycle = 28 days  
Examination Screening Cycles 1–2 Cycles 3–4 Cycle 5+ Disease 
progressionEnd of 
Treatment Follow up 
-28 
days -14 
days Day 1 
(±3) Day 15 
(±3) Day 1 
(±3) Day 15 
(±3) Day 1 
(±3) Day 15 
(±3)  30 days  
(± 7) 
after last 
dose 
REQUIRED  ASSESSMENTS  
Informed Consent and Eli gibility  X  
Demo graphics, Medical Histor y, Ht  X  
Physical Examination  X X X X X X
Vital Signs (BP, wt) and ECOG PS11  X X X X X X X  X  
AEs, Con Meds, ECI’s11  X X X X X X X  X  
LABORATORY ASSESSMENTS 
Comprehensive Metabolic Panel1  X X1 X X X X X  X  
Calculated Creatinine Clearance  X        X  
CBC with Differential and platelet2  X X2 X X X X X  X  
PT, PTT, INR  X  
CEA9   X X X 
CA19-9  XX10 
TSH, T3 and T43  X X X X  X
Pregnanc y Test (Urine or Serum)4  X  
DISEASE ASSESSMENT  
CT or MRI of Chest, Abd and Pelvis5 X X X X
TREATMENT EXPOSURE  
mFOLFOX6 ever y 2 weeks X X X X X X
Pembrolizumab every 3 weeks11  C1D1    C1D22    C2D15    C3D8    C4D1    C4D22    C5D15    C6 D8; up to 24 months of treatment 
CORRELATIVE STUDIES  
MANDATORY serum collection 6  X    X 
MANDATORY whole blood 
collection6   X X X     X  
Tissue sample for PD-LI and IHC 7  X  X 
FOLLOW-UP   
For progression, start of additional 
cancer treatment, and survival8           X 
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 36 of 69  Footnotes: 
1Comprehensive metabolic profile to include will include: serum chemistries (creatinine, glucose , total protein, blood urea nit rogen [BUN], total carbon dioxide [CO 2 or 
bicarbonate], albumin, total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, a nd aspartate transaminase [AST] and alanine transaminase [ALT])  and electrolytes (tot al calcium, chloride, 
potassium, sodium).  NOTE: For Cycle 1 Day 1 only, required tests do not need to be repeat ed if done within 7 days prior. 
 
2 Complete blood cell profile to include hemoglobin, hematocrit, red blood cell count, WBC [total and differential], absolute ne utrophil count and platelet count.  NOTE: 
For Cycle 1 Day 1 only, required tests do not need to be repeat ed if done within 7 days prior   
 
3 TSH, T3, T4 at screening then eve ry 4 weeks during treatment wi th study medication through Cycle 5.  After cycle 5 thyroid tes ting will be done every other cycle 
(C7, C9, etc).  
 
4Women of child bearing potential ONLY 
 
5Chest/Abdomen/Pelvic CT scans to b e done every 8 weeks starting  C1D1. Screening CT scan done w ithin 28 days from C1D1 is adequ ate as a baseline imaging.  For 
EOT visit, radiological assessme nt is needed if > 28 days from last assessment only if subject EOT due to toxicity. 
 
6 MANDATORY correlative serum samp les are to be collected at pre -dose C1D1, pre-dose C2D1 and at End of Treatment . MANDATORY whole blood samples are to 
be collected at pre-dose C1D1, p re-dose C1D15, pre-dose C3D1 (a fter 2 cycles of treatment or at  first response assessment) and  at End of Treatment. Refer to the SPM 
for collection, processing, labeling and shipping instructions.   
 
7 MANDATORY: Have identified tissu e from an archival tissue samp le (preferably from a metastasis , but sample from primary tumor  allowable) or newly obtained 
core or excisional biopsy of a tumor lesion. OPTIONAL biopsy fo r submission of unstained slides for IHC  testing are requested at the time the subject progresses. 
OPTIONAL submission of tissue obta ined from surgery for those s ubjects that have surgery during  study treatment or follow up.  See Section 9 for more details.  See 
Study Procedures Manual for collection, labeling and shipping i nstructions. 
 
8Subjects who discontinue treatment without evidence of tumor pr ogression will be followed for pr ogression with imaging studies  performed every three months (±7 
days), or until new treatment is initiated. Every effort should  be made to perform the same imaging modality (e.g., CT or MRI)  throughout the follow-up period.  In 
addition, the site investigator or designees will make every po ssible attempt to contact the s ubject or family every three mon ths (±7 days) for two years from completion 
of protocol therapy, every six months (±7 days) for years 3-5, and annually thereafter (±2 weeks) to obtain the survival infor mation of the subject and start date of 
additional anticancer treatment. 
 
9Subjects will have CEA done every 2months while on treatment. 
 
10Subjects will have CA19-9 at base line and at the time of first scan while on treatment. 
 
11 On Days in which Pembrolizumab ONLY is given, the following ass essments are required: Blood pre ssure, weight [kg] and ECOG per formance status.  Adverse 
events and concomitant medications should also be recorded.  Th is includes ECI’s.   
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 37 of 69  7.1 Screening 
 Within 28 days prior to registration for protocol therapy : 
• Radiological assessment (CT or MRI of chest, abdomen, and pelvi s) with tumor 
measurements 
• Prior to the subject being regis tered to the study, an availabl e archived tumor block 
(preferably from a metastasis, bu t sample from primary tumor is  allowable) must be 
identified. If an archived tumo r tissue sample is not available , subjects may consent 
to a newly obtained core or excis ional biopsy of a tumor lesion  prior to treatment 
C1D1 after all other eligibilit y criteria has been met. See SPM  for collection, 
labeling and shipping instructions.  
 Within 14 days prior to registratio n for protocol therapy unles s otherwise noted:  
• Eligibility evaluati on (review of inclusion and exclusion crite ria) 
• Medical history and Height 
• Physical examination 
• Record Adverse Events and concom itant medications. Including EC I’s.  
• Vitals Signs (including blood pre ssure), Weight [kg] and ECOG P S 
• Laboratory Assessments: 
o Complete metabolic profile (CMP) will include: serum chemistrie s (creatinine, 
glucose, total protein, blood urea  nitrogen [BUN], total carbon  dioxide [CO2 or 
bicarbonate], albumin, total bilir ubin, alkaline phosphatase, a nd aspartate 
transaminase [AST] and alanine t ransaminase [ALT]) and electrol ytes (total 
calcium, chloride, potassium, sodium). 
o CBC (hemoglobin, hematocrit, re d blood cell count, WBC [total a nd 
differential], absolute neutr ophil count and platelet count) 
o Calculated Creatinine Clearance 
o Urine pregnancy test for female  subjects of chi ldbearing potent ial (If urine 
pregnancy results cannot be conf irmed as negative, a serum β-hu man chorionic 
gonadotropin test will be required) 
o PT, PTT and INR 
o TSH, T3, T4 
 
7.2. On Treatment 
 Cycles 1 and Cycle 2 Day 1 (± 3 days) unless otherwise noted: On Day 1 of each treatment cycle, the following assessments/tre atment administrations will 
occur: ( NOTE: For Cycle 1 Day 1 only, require d tests do not need to be repeat ed if done 
within 7 days prior) 
• Physical examination 
• Record Adverse Events and concom itant medications. Including EC I’s. 
• Vital signs, Weight [kg] and ECOG PS 
• Laboratory Assessments: 
o CMP will include: serum chemistries (creatinine, glucose, total  protein, BUN, 
total CO2, albumin, total bilir ubin, alkaline phosphatase, and AST and ALT) and 
electrolytes (total calcium , chloride, potassium, sodium) 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 38 of 69  o CBC (hemoglobin, hematocrit, re d blood cell count, WBC [total a nd 
differential], absolute neutr ophil count and platelet count) 
o CEA- prior to C1D1 ONLY 
o CA19-9- prior to C1D1 ONLY 
o TSH, T3, T4 
o MANDATORY serum samples are to be  collected at pre-dose C1D1 an d pre-
dose C2D1. Refer to the SPM for  collection, processing, labelin g and shipping 
instructions.  
o MANDATORY whole blood samples are  to be collected at pre-dose C 1D1.  
Refer to the SPM for collect ion, processing, labeling and shipp ing instructions.  
• Have provided tissue from an archi val tissue sample (preferably  from a metastasis, 
but sample from primary tumor allowable) or newly obtained core  or excisional 
biopsy of a tumor lesion. 
• Pembrolizumab IV is given every 3 weeks.  First dose C1D1 
• mFOLFOX6 IV is given ever y 2 weeks.  First dose C1D1  
  
Cycles 1 and Cycle 2 Day 15 (± 3 days) unless otherwise noted: 
• Physical exam 
• Record Adverse Events and concom itant medications. Including EC I’s. 
• Vital signs, Weight [kg] and ECOG PS 
• Laboratory Assessments: 
o CMP will include: serum chemistries (creatinine, glucose, total  protein, BUN, 
total CO2, albumin, total bilir ubin, alkaline phosphatase, and AST and ALT) and 
electrolytes (total calcium , chloride, potassium, sodium) 
o CBC (hemoglobin, hematocrit, re d blood cell count, WBC [total a nd 
differential], absolute neutr ophil count and platelet count)  
o Mandatory whole blood samples are  to be collected at pre-dose C 1D15. Refer to 
the SPM for collection, proces sing, labeling and shipping instr uctions.  
• Pembrolizumab IV C2D15 
• mFOLFOX6 a IV 
 Cycles 3 and Cycle 4 Day 1 (± 3 days) unless otherwise noted: On Day 1 of each treatment cycle, the following assessments/tre atment administrations will 
occur:  
• Physical examination 
• Record Adverse Events and concom itant medications.  Including E CI’s. 
• Vital signs, Weight [kg] and ECOG PS 
• Laboratory Assessments 
o CMP will include: serum chemistries (creatinine, glucose, total  protein, BUN, 
total CO2, albumin, total bilir ubin, alkaline phosphatase, and AST and ALT) and 
electrolytes (total calcium , chloride, potassium, sodium) 
o CBC (hemoglobin, hematocrit, re d blood cell count, WBC [total a nd 
differential], absolute neutr ophil count and platelet count) 
o CEA- prior to C3D1 
o CA19-9- prior to C4D1 or with f irst set of scans while on treat ment. 
o TSH, T3, T4 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 39 of 69  o MANDATORY whole blood samples are  to be collected pre-dose C3D1  (after 2 
cycles of treatment or at first response assessment). Refer to the SPM for 
collection, processing, labeling a nd shipping instructions.  
• CT or MRI of chest, abdomen/pelvi s: pre-dose C3D1 (after 2 cycl es of treatment or 
at first response assessment). 
• CT or MRI of chest, abdomen/pel vis after 4 cycles (PRIOR to 5TH CYCLE) 
• Pembrolizumab IV C4D1 
• mFOLFOX6 IV 
 Cycle 3 and Cycle 4 Day 15 (± 3 days) unless otherwise noted: 
• Record Adverse Events and concom itant medications. Including EC I’s. 
• Vital signs, Weight [kg] and ECOG PS 
• Laboratory Assessments 
o CMP will include: serum chemistries (creatinine, glucose, total  protein, BUN, 
total CO2, albumin, total bilir ubin, alkaline phosphatase, and AST and ALT) and 
electrolytes (total calcium , chloride, potassium, sodium) 
o CBC (hemoglobin, hematocrit, re d blood cell count, WBC [total a nd 
differential], absolute neutr ophil count and platelet count) 
• mFOLFOX6 IV 
 Cycle 5 and subsequent Cycles Day 1 (± 3 days) unless otherwise  noted: 
On Day 1 of each treatment cycle, the following assessments/tre atment administrations will 
occur:  
• Physical examination 
• Record Adverse Events and concom itant medications. Including EC I’s. 
• Vital signs, Weight [kg] and ECOG PS 
• Laboratory Assessments  
o CMP will include: serum chemistries (creatinine, glucose, total  protein, BUN, 
total CO2, albumin, total bilir ubin, alkaline phosphatase, and AST and ALT) and 
electrolytes (total calcium , chloride, potassium, sodium) 
o CBC (hemoglobin, hematocrit, re d blood cell count, WBC [total a nd 
differential], absolute neutr ophil count and platelet count) 
o CEA 
• CT or MRI of chest, abdomen/pelvi s after 4 cycles (PRIOR to 5TH  CYCLE) 
• mFOLFOX6 IV 
 Cycle 5 and subsequent Cycles Day 15 (± 3 days) unless otherwis e noted: 
• Vital signs, Weight [kg] and ECOG PS 
• Record Adverse Events and concom itant medications.  Including E CI’s. 
• Laboratory Assessments 
o CMP will include: serum chemistries (creatinine, glucose, total  protein, BUN, 
total CO2, albumin, total bilir ubin, alkaline phosphatase, and AST and ALT) and 
electrolytes (total calcium , chloride, potassium, sodium) 
o CBC (hemoglobin, hematocrit, re d blood cell count, WBC [total a nd 
differential], absolute neutr ophil count and platelet count) 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 40 of 69  • mFOLFOX6 IV 
 Pembrolizumab ONLY infusion days:   
• Record Adverse Events and concom itant medications.  Including E CI’s. 
• Vital signs[kg] and ECOG PS 
• Pembrolizumab IV every 3 weeks 
 7.3. Restaging Evaluations 
A restaging CT or MRI of the che st, abdomen, and pelvis will be  performed after every two 
cycles of treatment (i.e., appr oximately every 8 weeks). For su bjects on an increased dosing 
interval (every four weeks) due to pneumonitis (as per section 5.2.3), the frequency of 
restaging imaging studies shoul d be discussed with the sponsor- investigator by contacting 
the HCRN project manager. Eve ry effort should be made to perfor m the same imaging 
modality (e.g., CT or MRI) throughout the study. 
 7.4. Determination of Progression /Post-progression imaging 
irRC will be adapted as follows  to account for the unique tumor  response seen in this class 
of therapeutics.  After the first documentation of  progression per irRC, if the s ubject is clinically stable, 
confirmatory scans should be perf ormed 4-6 weeks later. It is a t the discretion of the site 
investigator to keep a clinical ly stable subject on study thera py or to stop study therapy until 
repeat imaging performed.   Clinical Stability is defined as: 
1. Absence of symptoms and signs ind icating clinica lly significant  progression of 
disease (including worsening of l aboratory values) indicating d isease progression. 
2. No decline in ECOG PS  
3. Absence of rapid progression of di sease or progressive tumor at  critical anatomical 
sites (e.g., cord compression) re quiring urgent alternative med ical intervention. 
 Subjects who are deemed clinically  unstable are not required to  have repeat imaging for 
confirmation of progression.   If progression is confirmed, the  subject will be discontinued f rom study therapy. If 
progression is not confirmed, the  subject should resume/continu e study therapy and have 
their next scan approximately ei ght weeks from the date of the scan that first showed 
progression.   When feasible, subjects shoul d not be discontinued until progre ssion is confirmed. 
 7.5. Progression/End of Treatment (EOT) 
Treatment will be discontinued if there is evidence of disease progression per irRC (after 
confirmatory CT scan) or unaccepta ble toxicity or if the subjec t stops participating or 
withdraws from the study.   
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 41 of 69  At least 30 days (+7) of last dose of study drug  
• Physical examination 
• Vital signs including Blood pre ssure, Weight [kg] and ECOG PS 
• Laboratory assessments 
o CMP will include: serum chemistries (creatinine, glucose, total  protein, BUN, 
total CO2, albumin, total bilir ubin, alkaline phosphatase, and AST and ALT) 
and electrolytes (total calcium , chloride, potassium, sodium)  
o CBC (hemoglobin, hematocrit, re d blood cell count, WBC [total a nd 
differential], absolute neutr ophil count and platelet count) 
o Calculated Creatinine Clearance 
o MANDATORY serum samples are t o be collected at end of treatment . Refer 
to the SPM for collection, pro cessing, labeling and shipping in structions.  
o MANDATORY whole blood samples a re to be collect ed at End of 
Treatment. Refer to the SPM for  collection, processing, labelin g and shipping 
instructions.  
o OPTIONAL biopsy for s ubmission of unstained slides from Time of  
Progression. In addition, subjects  that undergo surgery for tum or resection at 
any time during study treatment or follow up will be asked to p rovide tissue 
for research.  Refer to the SPM  for collection, labeling and sh ipping 
instructions.  
• Record Adverse Events and concom itant medications.  Including E CI’s. 
• Subjects will continue to be followed until resolution or stabi lization of any 
treatment-related toxicities.  
• Radiological assessments (only if > 28 days since last assessme nt) for subjects taken 
off study due to tox icity ONLY.   
 
7.6. Follow-up 
• Subjects who discontinue treatme nt without evidence of tumor pr ogression will be 
followed for progression with ima ging studies performed every t hree months (±7 
days), or until new treatment i s initiated. Every effort should  be made to perform the 
same imaging modality (e.g., CT or  MRI) throughout the follow-u p period.  
• The site investigator or designees will make every possible att empt to contact the 
subject or family every three m onths (±7 days) for two years fr om completion of 
protocol therapy, every six months  (±7 days) for years 3-5, and  annually thereafter 
(±2 weeks), to obtain the surviva l information of the subject a nd start date of 
additional anticancer treatment.  
8. CRITERIA FOR DISEASE EVALUATION 
Response assessments will be made both using the Immune Related  Response Criteria, and 
using RECIST v1.1, allowing additiona l comparisons among these criteria for disease 
response assessment. The same measurable and non-measurable les ions will be followed by 
both RECIST v1.1 & irRC. RECIS T v1.1 will be used in primary ob jective assessment. 
 8.1. Immune Related Response Criteria 
This study will utilize the Imm une Related Response Criteria (i rRC) for secondary 
endpoints. These response crite ria were developed to overcome t he variable and unusual 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 42 of 69  patterns of response to immunothe rapeutic agents, in particular , ipilimumab [1]. The 
development of the guidelines w ere prompted by observations, mo stly in subjects with 
metastatic melanoma, of initial  disease progression followed by  later response, late 
responses, and mixed responses w ith an overall decr ease in tumo r burden. 
 8.2. Antitumor response based on total measurable tumor burden
 
For the irRC, only index and measurable new lesions are taken i nto account (in contrast to 
conventional WHO criteria, whic h do not require the measurement  of new lesions, nor do 
they include new lesion measurem ents in the characterization of  evolving tumor burden). At 
the baseline tumor assessment, the sum of the products of the t wo largest perpendicular 
diameters (SPD) of all index les ions (five lesions per organ, u p to 10 visceral lesions) is 
calculated. At each subsequent t umor assessment, the SPD of the  index lesions and of new, 
measurable lesions (up to 5 new lesions per organ; 10 visceral lesions) are added together to 
provide the total tumor b urden:  Tumor Burden = SPD index lesions  + SPD new, measurable lesions   
 
Table 4: Comparison of WHO and irRC criteria 
 W H O  i r R C
New, 
measurable lesions  Always represent PD Incorporated into tumor burden 
New, non-
measurable lesions  Always represent PD Do not define progression (but preclude 
irCR) 
Non-index 
lesions Changes contribute to defining BOR of CR, PR, SD, 
and PD Contribute to defining irCR (complete 
disappearance required) 
CR Disappearance of all lesions in two consecutive 
observations not less than 4 wk apart Disappearance of all lesions in two 
consecutive observations not less than 4 wk apar
t
PR ≥50% decrease in SPD of all index lesions compared 
with baseline in two observations at least 4 wk apart, in absence of new lesions or unequivocal progression of non-index lesions  ≥50% decrease in tumor burden compared 
with baseline in two observations at least 4 wk apart 
SD 50% decrease in SPD compared with baseline cannot be 
established nor 25% increase compared with nadir, in absence of new lesions or unequivocal progression of non-index lesions  50% decrease in tumor burden compared 
with baseline cannot be established nor 25% increase compared with nadir 
PD At least 25% increase in SPD compared with nadir 
and/or unequivocal progres sion of non-index lesions 
and/or appearance of new lesions (at any single time 
point)  At least 25% increase in tumor burden 
compared with nadir (at any single time 
point) in two consecutive observations at 
least 4 wk apart  
 
8.3. Time-point response  assessment using irRC 
Percentage changes in tumor bur den per assessment time point de scribe the size and growth 
kinetics of both conventional and ne w, measurable lesions as th ey appear. At each tumor 
assessment, the response in inde x and new, measurable lesions i s defined based on the 
change in tumor burden (after ru ling out irPD). Decreases in tu mor burden must be assessed 
relative to baseline measuremen ts (i.e., the SPD of all index l esions at screening). The irRC 
were derived from WHO criteria an d, therefore, the thresholds o f response remain the same. 
However, the irRC response cate gories have been modified from t hose of WHO criteria as 
detailed in Tables 8 and 9.   
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 43 of 69  8.4. Overall response using the irRC 
The sum of the products of diameters at tumor assessment using the immune-related 
response criteria (irRC) for progr essive disease incorporates t he contribution of new 
measurable lesions. Each net Perc entage Change in Tumor Burden per assessment using 
irRC accounts for the size a nd growth kinetics of both old and new lesions as they appear. 
 Definition of Index Lesions Response Using irRC 
• irComplete Response (irCR):  Complete disappearance of all index lesions. This 
category encompasses exactly the same subjects as “CR” by the m WHO criteria. 
 
• irPartial Response (irPR):  Decrease, relative to baseli ne, of 50% or greater in the sum 
of the products of the 2 largest p erpendicular diameters of all  index and all new 
measurable lesions (ie, Percenta ge Change in Tumor Burden). Not e: the appearance of 
new measurable lesions is fact ored into the overall tumor burde n, but does not 
automatically qualify as progressi ve disease until the SPD incr eases by ≥25% when 
compared to SPD at nadir. 
 
• irStable Disease (irSD):  Does not meet criteria for ir CR or irPR, in the absence of 
progressive disease. 
 
• irProgressive Disease (irPD):  At least 25% increase Pe rcentage Change in Tumor 
Burden (i.e., taking sum of the products of all index lesions and any new lesions) when 
compared to SPD at nadir. 
 Definition of Non-Index Lesions Response Using irRC 
• irComplete Response (irCR):  Complete disappearance of all non-index lesions. This 
category encompasses exactly the same subjects as “CR” by the m WHO criteria. 
 
• irPartial Response (irPR) or  irStable Disease (irSD):  non-index lesion(s) are not 
considered in the definition of P R, these terms do not apply. 
 
• irProgressive Disease (irPD):  Increases in number or size of non-index lesion(s) does 
not constitute progressive diseas e unless/until the Percentage Change in Tumor Burden 
increases by 25% (i.e., the SPD a t nadir of the index lesions i ncreases by the required 
amount).  
Impact of New Lesions on irRC  
New lesions in and  by themselves do not qualify as pr ogressive disease. However, t heir 
contribution to total tumor burde n is included in the SPD which  in turn feeds into the irRC 
criteria for tumor response. The refore, new non-measurable lesi ons will not discontinue any 
subject from the study.  Definition of Overall Response Using irRC  
Overall response using irRC will be based on these criteria (se e Table 9): 
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 44 of 69  • Immune-Related Complete Response (irCR):  Complete disappearance of all tumor 
lesions (index and non-index togeth er with no new measurable/un measurable lesions) 
for at least 4 weeks from the  date of documentation of complete  response.  
 
• Immune-Related Partial Response (irPR):  The sum of the products  of the two largest 
perpendicular diameters of all index lesions is measured and ca ptured as the SPD 
baseline. At each subsequent tumor  assessment, the sum of the p roducts of the two 
largest perpendicular diameter s of all index lesions and of new  measurable lesions are 
added together to provide the Im mune Response Sum of Product Di ameters (irSPD). A 
decrease, relative to baseline of  the irSPD compared to the pre vious SPD baseline, of 
50% or greater is considered an im mune Partial Response (irPR).   
 
• Immune-Related Stable Disease (irSD):  irSD is defined as the failure to meet criteria 
for immune complete response or  immune partial response, in the  absence of progressive 
disease.  
• Immune-Related Progre ssive Disease (irPD):  It is recommended in difficult cases to 
confirm PD by serial imagi ng. Any of the following will constit ute progressive disease: 
− At least 25% increase in the s um of the products of all index l esions over nadir SPD 
calculated for the index lesions.  
− At least a 25% increase in the  sum of the products of all index  lesions and new 
measurable lesions (irSPD) over the baseline SPD calculated for  the index lesions. 
 Immune-Related Best Overall Response Using irRC (irBOR)  
irBOR is the best confirmed irRC overall response over the stud y as a whole, recorded 
between the date of first dose  until the last tumor assessment before subsequent therapy 
(except for local palliative ra diotherapy for painful bone lesi ons) for the individual subject in 
the study. For the assessment of i rBOR, all available assessmen ts per subject are considered. 
 irCR or irPR determinations inc luded in the irBOR assessment mu st be confirmed by a 
second (confirmatory) evaluation meeting the criteria for respo nse and performed no less 
than 4 weeks after the criteria for response are first met. 
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 45 of 69  Table 5: Derivation of irRC overall responses 
Measurable response Nonmeasurable response Overall 
response 
Index and new, measurable lesions (tumor 
burden),*% Non-index lesions New, nonmeasurable 
lesions Using irRC 
↓100 Absent Absent irCR† 
↓100 Stable Any irPR† 
↓100 Unequivocal progression Any irPR† 
↓≥50 Absent/Stable Any irPR† 
↓≥50 Unequivocal progression Any irPR† 
↓<50 to <25↑ Absent/Stable Any irSD 
↓<50 to <25↑ Unequivocal progression Any irSD 
≥25 Any Any irPD† 
*Decreases assessed relative to b aseline (scan prior to start o f any protocol therapy), including measurable 
lesions only  
†Assuming response (irCR) and progression (irPD) are confirmed b y a second, consecutiv e assessment at least 
4 wk apart.  
 
8.5. Definitions Associated with Resp onse Evaluation Criteria in Sol id Tumors 
(RECIST) version 1.1  
 
8.5.1.  Measurable disease  
The presence of at least one measurable lesion. If the measurab le disease is res tricted to a 
solitary lesion, its neoplastic  nature should be confirmed by c ytology/histology.  
 8.5.2.  Measurable lesions  
Measurable lesions are defined as those that can be accurately measured in at least one 
dimension (longest diameter to be  recorded) as >20 mm by chest x-ray, as >10 mm with CT 
scan, or >10 mm with calipers by c linical exam. All tumor measu rements must be recorded 
in millimeters (or decimal fractions of centimeters). 
 
8.5.3 Non-measurable lesions  
All other lesions (or sites of di sease), including small lesion s (longest diameter <10 mm or 
pathological lymph nodes with ≥  10 to <15 mm short axis), are c onsidered non-measurable 
disease. Bone lesions, leptomeni ngeal disease, ascites, pleural /pericardial effusions, 
lymphangitis cutis/pulmonitis, inflammatory breast disease, and  abdominal masses (not 
followed by CT or MRI), are cons idered as non-measurable.    
 NOTE:  Cystic lesions that meet the c riteria for radiographically def ined simple cysts should 
not be considered as malignant les ions (neither measurable nor non-measurable) since they 
are, by definition, simple cysts.  ‘Cystic lesions’ thought to repre sent cystic metastases can be considered as measurable 
lesions, if they meet the defin ition of measurability described  above. However, if non-cystic 
lesions are present in the same subject, these are preferred fo r selection as target lesions. 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 46 of 69  8.5.4 Malignant lymph nodes 
To be considered pathologically e nlarged and measurable, a lymp h node must be >15 mm in 
short axis when assessed by CT s can (CT scan slice thickness re commended to be no greater 
than 5 mm). At baseline and in f ollow-up, only the short axis w ill be measured and 
followed.  8.5.5 Target lesions All measurable lesions up to a m aximum of 2 lesions per organ a nd 5 lesions in total, 
representative of all involve d organs, should be identified as target lesions, recorded, and 
measured at baseline. Target le sions should be selected based o n their size (lesions with the 
longest diameter), be represent ative of all involved organs, bu t in addition should be those 
that lend themselves to reproduc ible repeated measurements. It may be the case that, on 
occasion, the largest lesion does not lend itself to reproducib le measurement in which 
circumstance the next largest l esion that can be measured repro ducibly should be selected.  
 A sum of the diameters (longe st for non-nodal lesions, short ax is for nodal lesions) for all 
target lesions will be calculate d and reported as the baseline sum diameters. If lymph nodes 
are to be included in the sum, t hen only the short axis is adde d into the sum. The baseline 
sum diameters will be used as reference to further characterize  any objective tumor 
regression in the measurable  dimension of the disease. 
 8.5.6 Non-target lesions  All other lesions (or sites of di sease) including any measurabl e lesions over and above the 5 
target lesions should be identif ied as non-target lesions and s hould be recorded at baseline. 
Measurements of these lesions a re not required, but the presenc e, absence, or in rare cases 
unequivocal progression of eac h should be noted throughout foll ow-up. 
 
8.6. Response Criteria 
 
8.6.1.  Evaluation of target lesions 
Complete Response (CR) Disappear ance of all target lesions. Any  
pathological lymph nodes (whether target or non-target) must have reduction in short axis to <10 
mm.
Partial Response (PR) At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the  
diameters of target lesions, taking as reference the baseline sum diameters 
Progressive Disease (PD) At leas t a 20% increase in the sum of the 
diameters of target lesions, taking as reference the smallest sum on study (this includes the baseline sum if that is the smallest on study). In 
addition to the relative increase of 20%, the sum must also demonstrate an a bsolute increase of at 
least 5 mm. (Note: the a ppearance of one or more 
new lesions is also considered pro
gressions).
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 47 of 69  Stable Disease (SD) Neither su fficient shrink age to qualify for  PR nor 
sufficient increase to qu alify for PD, taking as 
reference the smallest sum diameters while on stud
y
 
8.6.2.  Evaluation of non-target lesions 
Complete Response (CR) Disappear ance of all non-target lesions and 
normalization of tumor marker level. All lymph nodes must be non-pathological in size (<10 mm short axis) Note: If tumor markers a re initially above the 
upper normal limit, they must normalize for a subject to be considered in complete clinical response.
Non-CR/ Non-PD Persistence of one  or more non-target lesion(s) 
and/or maintenance of tum or marker level above 
the normal limits
Progressive Disease (PD) Appearance of one or more new lesions and/or 
unequivocal progression of  existing non-target 
lesions. Unequivocal pro gression should not 
normally trump target le sion status. It must be 
representative of overall  disease status change, 
not a sin gle lesion increase. 
 Although a clear progression of “non- target” lesions only is ex ceptional, the opinion 
of the site investigator should pr evail in such circumstances, and the progression 
status should be confirmed later  by the sponsor-investigator. 
 
8.6.3.  Evaluation of best overall response 
Target Lesions Non-Target Lesions New Lesions Overall 
Response 
CR C R No C R 
CR Non-CR/ Non-PD No P R 
 Not evaluate d No P R 
PR Non-CR/ Non-PD/ not 
evaluate dNo PR 
SD Non-CR/ Non-PD/ not 
evaluate dNo SD 
PD An y Yes or No PD 
Any PD* Yes or No PD 
Any A n y Yes PD 
*In exceptional circumstances, une quivocal progression in non-t arget lesions may be 
accepted as disease progression.  
Subjects with a global deteriora tion of health status requiring  discontinuation of treatment 
without objective evidence of dis ease progression at that time should be classified as having 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 48 of 69  “symptomatic deterioration.” Every effort should be made to doc ument the objective 
progression even after dis continuation of treatment. 
 In some circumstances, it may be  difficult to distinguish resid ual disease from normal tissue. 
When the evaluation of complete response depends on this determ ination, it is recommended 
that the residual lesion be inve stigated (fine needle aspirate/ biopsy) to confirm the complete 
response status.  8.7 Definitions for Response Evaluation – RECIST version 1.1 
 8.7.1 First Documentation of Response The time between initiation of t herapy and first documentation of PR or CR. 
 8.7.2 Confirmation of Response To be assigned a status of compl ete or partial response, change s in tumor measurements 
must be confirmed by repeat assessments performed no less than four weeks after the 
criteria for response are first met.  8.7.3 Duration of Response Duration of overall response—the period measured from the time that measurement criteria 
are met for complete or partial r esponse (whichever status is r ecorded first) until the date 
that recurrent or progressive di sease is objectively documented  (taking as reference for 
progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded since tr eatment started). 
 8.7.4 Duration of Overall Complete Response 
The period measured from the time that measurement criteria are  met for complete response 
until the first date that recurrent disease is objectively docu mented. 
 8.7.5 Objective response rate  The objective response rate is the proportion of all subjects w ith confirmed PR or CR 
according to RECIST v1.1, from the start of treatment until dis ease progression/recurrence 
(taking as reference for progres sive disease the smallest measu rements recorded since the 
start of treatment).  8.7.6 Time to Progression: A measurement from the date of r egistration until  the criteria for disease progression is met 
as defined by RECIST 1.1. Subject s who have not progressed or h ave died due to any cause 
will be right-censored at the da te of the last disease evaluati on or date of death. 
 8.7.7 Progression Free Survival A measurement from the date of r egistration until  the criteria for disease progression is met 
as defined by RECIST 1.1 or d eath occurs. Subjects who have not  progressed will be right-
censored at the date of the l ast disease evaluation. 
 8.7.8 Overall Survival Overall survival is defined by t he date of regis tration to date  of death from any cause. 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 49 of 69  9. BIOLOGICAL SPECIMEN PARAM ETERS FOR CORRELATIVES  
As part of the correlative research we will assess the relation ship between potential immune 
biomarker and response to the c ombination of pembrolizumab plus  chemotherapy. 
 Potential immune biomarkers include Toll-Like Receptor 4 (TLR4)  pathway including the 
expression level of TLR4, MyD88 and N F-kB as well as PD-1/PD-L1  expression level in 
the tumor.  9.1 Unstained Slides for PD-L1 Testing 9.1.1 MANDATORY: An archival tissue sample (preferably from a m etastasis, but sample 
from primary tumor allowable) or  newly obtained core or excisio nal biopsy of a 
tumor lesion will be used  for PD-L1 testing.   
 
9.1.2 Archival tissue sample for  submission must be identified during the screening 
process.  If not, available, the  subject will undergo a new bio psy 
 9.1.3 A fine needle aspirate, frozen sample, plastic embedded s ample, cell block, clot, 
bone, bone marrow or cytologic specimen are not acceptable for PD-L1 analysis. 
 9.1.4 A tissue sample from a pre- treatment biopsy will not be s ubmitted until the subject is 
registered to the trial. 
 9.1.5 Submission of unstained slides for PD-L1 expression will be analyzed at a central lab 
using a Merck-specified assay  
 
9.1.6  See SPM for collection, la beling and shi pping instructio ns.  
 
9.2 Unstained Slides for IHC Testing 9.2.1 MANDATORY: An archival tissue sample (preferably from a m etastasis, but sample 
from primary tumor allowable) or  newly obtained core or excisio nal biopsy of a 
tumor lesion will be us ed for IHC testing.   
 9.2.2 Archival tissue sample for  submission must be identified during the screening 
process.  If not, available, the  subject will undergo a new bio psy 
 9.2.3 A tissue sample from a pre- treatment biopsy will not be s ubmitted until the subject is 
registered to the trial.  
 9.2.4 OPTIONAL AT PROGRESSION: S ubmission of unstained slides a t time of 
progression for IHC testing. Poten tial immune biomarkers includ e Toll-Like 
Receptor 4 (TLR4) pathway incl uding the expression level of TLR 4, MyD88 and 
NF-Kb 
 
9.2.5 See SPM for collection, labe ling and shippi ng instruction s. 
 
9.3 MANDATORY submission of Whol e Blood and Serum Sample  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 50 of 69  9.3.1 MANDATORY serum samples are to be collected at pre-dose C 1D1, pre-dose C2D1 
and at End of Treatment.  
 9.3.2 MANDATORY whole blood samples  are to be collected at pre- dose C1D1, pre-dose 
C1D15, pre-dose C3D1 (or at first response assessment; after 2 cycles of treatment) 
and at End of Treatment. 
 9.3.3 See SPM for collection, labe ling and shippi ng instruction s. 
 9.4 OPTIONAL submission of  tissue from Surgery 
If patients undergo surgical res ection during study treatment o r follow up, formalin fixed 
paraffin embedded tissue will be  retrieved, or 10 unstained sli des will be retrieved for 
correlative studies.   10. DRUG INFORMATION  
 10.1 Drug Name 
Pembrolizumab (MK-3475), SCH 900475 (Anti-PD-1) Please see Investigator’s Broc hure for detailed information reg arding Pembrolizumab 
 10.1.1  Chemical Name 
Humanized X PD-1_ mAb (H409A11) IgG4 
 10.1.2  Investigational Product 
The site investigator shall take  responsibility for and shall t ake all steps to maintain 
appropriate records and ensure a ppropriate suppl y, storage, han dling, distribution and usage 
of investigational product in acc ordance with the protocol and any applicable laws and 
regulations.  Clinical Supplies will be provi ded by Merck as summarized below : 
Product Name & Potency Dosage Form 
Pembrolizumab (MK-3475) 100 mg/ 
4mL Solution for Injection 
 
10.1.3  Packaging and Labeling Information  
Clinical supplies must be store d in a secure, limited-access lo cation under the storage 
conditions specified on the label.  
 
10.1.4  Clinical Supplies Disclosure 
This trial is open-label; theref ore, the subject, the trial sit e personnel, the sponsor-
investigator and/or designee are  not blinded to t reatment. Drug  identity (name, strength) is 
included in the label text; ra ndom code/disclosure envelopes or  lists are not provided. 
   
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 51 of 69  10.1.5  Returns and Reconciliation 
The site investigator is respons ible for keeping accurate recor ds of the clinical supplies 
received from Merck or designee,  the amount dispensed to and re turned by the subjects and 
the amount remaining at the conclusion of the trial.  
 Upon completion or termination of  the study, all unused and/or partially used investigational 
product will be destroyed at the s ite per institutional policy.  It is the site investigator’s 
responsibility to arrange for dis posal of all empty containers,  provided that procedures for 
proper disposal have been established according to applicable f ederal, state, local and 
institutional guidelines and pr ocedures, and provided that appr opriate records of disposal are 
kept.  10.1.6  Storage and Handling Requirements 
Clinical supplies must be store d in a secure, limited-access lo cation under the storage 
conditions specified on the l abel.  Receipt and dispensing of t rial medication must be 
recorded by an authorized person a t the trial site.  Clinical s upplies may not be used for any 
purpose other than that stated in the protocol.  10.1.7  Adverse Events 
Please see Investigator’s Brochure for complete details regardi ng adverse events related to 
Pembrolizumab 
 
Pembrolizumab is generally well tolerated and demonstrates a fa vorable safety profile in 
comparison to chemotherapy. Pembrolizumab is an immunomodulator y agent, and based on 
this mechanism of action, immune  mediated adverse events are of  primary concern.  
Important identified risks for  pembrolizumab are of an immune m ediate nature, including: 
pneumonitis, colitis, thyroid disorders (hypothryoidism/hyperth yroidism), hepatitis, 
hypophysitis, Type I diabetes mellitis, uveitis, and nephritis.  After a recent review of data, 
events newly characterized as id entified risks also include pan creatitis, myositis, and severe 
skin reaction; these are include d in the reference safety infor mation in the current IB. The 
majority of immune-mediated advers e events were mild to moderat e in severity, were 
manageable with appropriate ca re, and rarely required discontin uation of therapy. In 
addition to the previously noted i dentified risks, infusion-rel ated reactions are a risk but are 
not considered immune mediated; t hese are also further describe d in the current IB. 
 10.2 mFOLFOX6  
Qualified personnel who are familiar with procedures that minim ize undue exposure to 
themselves and to the environment should undertake the preparat ion, handling, and safe 
disposal of chemotherapeutic agents in a self-contained, protec tive environment. 
 Discard unused portions of injectable chemotherapeutic agents t hat do not contain a 
bacteriostatic agent or are prepared with unpreserved diluents (i.e., Sterile Water for 
Injection USP or 0.9% Sodium Chloride for Injection USP) within  eight hours of vial 
entry to minimize the risk of bacterial contamination.  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 52 of 69  The total administered dose of cytotoxic chemotherapy may be ro unded up or down within 
a range of 5% of the actual calculated dose.  It is not necessary to change the doses of 5-FU, leucovorin or oxaliplatin due to changes in 
weight unless the calculated dose changes by ≥10% from baseline . 
 10.2.1 Oxaliplatin [Eloxatin]  Please refer to the p ackage insert for com plete product informa tion. 
 Availability Oxaliplatin is commercially available as an aqueous solution in  vials containing 50 mg and 
100 mg at a concentration of 5 m g/mL. The vials do not contain any preservative and 
they are intended for single use.  Storage and Stability Intact vials should be stored at room temperature. Solutions di luted in D5W are stable 
for 6 hours at room temperature or 24 hours under refrigeration . 
 
Preparation The calculated dose of oxaliplatin should be diluted for infusi on with 250 mL to 500 mL 
D5W. Oxaliplatin should not be diluted with a sodium chloride s olution. Needles, 
syringes, catheters or IV administration sets containing alumin um should not be used 
with oxaliplatin. As with other p latinum compounds, contact wit h aluminum may result in 
a black precipitate.  
Administration 
Oxaliplatin will be administered by intravenous infusion over 1 20 minutes prior to or 
concurrent with leucovorin. Infusion time may be prolonged (up to 6 hours) in 
subjects experiencing pharyngolaryngeal dysesthesia.  
 
Oxaliplatin is unstable in the presence of chloride or alkaline  solutions. Do NOT mix 
or administer oxaliplatin with sa line or other chloride-contain ing solutions. Do NOT 
administer other drugs or soluti ons in the same infusion line. Flush IV lines/catheters with 
Dextrose 5% in Water both before and after oxaliplatin administ ration. 
 Toxicity The most commonly observed oxaliplatin toxicities include neuro toxicity, GI toxicity, 
and myelosuppression. Three neurotoxicity syndromes have been s een: acute sensory 
neuropathy develops within hours to 2 days after oxaliplatin ad ministration. Symptoms 
include paresthesias, dysesthesias, and hypoesthesia of the han ds, feet, and perioral 
region. Jaw spasm, abnormal tongue sensation, dysarthria, eye p ain and a sensation of chest 
pressure have also been noted. Acute sensory neuropathy symptom s may be exacerbated 
by exposure to cold temperature or cold objects. Symptoms are r eversible, usually 
resolving within 14 days and commonly recurring with further do sing. This syndrome 
has been observed in about 56%  of subjects receiving oxaliplati n with 5-FU and 
leucovorin. 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 53 of 69  Acute pharyngolaryngeal dysesthesia is reported to occur in 1-2 % of subjects. This 
syndrome is characterized by a s ubjective sensation of difficul ty breathing or 
swallowing without laryngospasm or bronchospasm or objective ev idence of hypoxia. 
Avoidance of cold drinks, food and air is suggested in order to  minimize 
pharyngolaryngeal dysesthesia. Antianxiety agents (e.g., loraze pam) may be used to 
treat pharyngolaryngeal dysesthesias once oxygen saturation has  been documented to be 
normal.  Peripheral neuropathy persisting > 14 days is characterized by paresthesias, dysesthesias, 
and hypoesthesia. Abnormalities in proprioception may also be s een. Symptoms of 
persistent neuropathy may improve upon discontinuation of oxali platin. 
 Gastrointestinal toxicities include nausea, vomiting (oxaliplat in is considered to be 
moderately emetogenic) and diarrhea. 
 Neutropenia is reported in 73% of subjects receiving oxaliplati n with 5-FU and leucovorin 
(44% grade 3 or 4). Grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia is reported t o occur in 4% of subjects 
receiving the combination.  Allergic reactions, similar to t hose seen with other platinum c ompounds, have also 
been observed in subjects treat ed with oxaliplatin. Reactions r ange from rash to 
anaphylaxis.  Rarely, oxaliplatin has been associated with pulmonary fibrosis , which may be fatal. 
Oxaliplatin should be discontinued in the presence of unexplain ed pulmonary symptoms 
(e.g. nonproductive cough, dysphagia) or pulmonary infiltrates until interstitial lung 
disease or pulmonary fibrosis have been ruled out.  Recent reports of oxaliplatin extravasation suggest that tissue  necrosis may result and 
that oxaliplatin should be considered a vesicant. No standard t reatment exists for 
oxaliplatin extravasation although heat and sodium thiosulfate have both been suggested. 
Veno-occlusive disease (VOD) of the liver is a rare complicatio n associated with oxaliplatin 
and 5-FU. Clinical manifestations of VOD include hepatomegaly, ascites, and jaundice. 
Histologically, VOD is characterized by diffuse damage in the c entrilobular zone of the 
liver. Sequelae of VOD include hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, port al hypertension, and 
esophageal varices. A recent analysis of resected liver metasta ses in 153 subjects 
indicated histological findings consistent with VOD in 6/27 sub jects who received 5-FU 
alone, 4/17 subjects who received 5-FU and irinotecan, 20/27 su bjects who received 5-FU 
and oxaliplatin, and 14/16 who received 5-FU, oxaliplatin and i rinotecan. The remaining 
66 subjects had not received chemotherapy prior to resection. T here were no such findings 
in these subjects.    
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 54 of 69  10.2.2 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU; fluorouracil) 
Please refer to the p ackage insert for com plete product informa tion. 
 Availability 5-FU is commercially available as a 50 mg/mL solution for injec tion in 10 mL, 20 mL, 50 
mL and 100 mL vials.  Preparation Inspect for precipitate; if found, agitate or gently heat in wa ter bath. Bolus injections 
are prepared using undiluted drug.  46-48 hour infusion of 5-FU should be prepared for administrati on via ambulatory 
infusion pump according to the individual institution’s standar ds. These solutions may be 
prepared in D5W or 0.9% NaCl. 5-FU should not be mixed in the s ame solution with 
most parenteral antiemetics.  Storage and Stability Intact vials should be stored at room temperature and protected  from light. Slight yellow 
discolor does not usually indi cate decomposition. Stability in ambulatory pumps varies 
according to the pump, manufactur er of drug, concentration and diluent. Please refer to 
appropriate reference sources for additional information.  Administration 
In this study, 5-FU is administered as a 400 mg/m
2 IV bolus followed by 2400 mg/m2 by 
IV infusion over 46 to 48 hours. The bolus is administered afte r leucovorin, and the 46-
48 hour infusion follows immediately after the bolus.  Toxicity Nausea, diarrhea, vomiting (mild); stomatitis: 5-8 days after t reatment initiation; 
myelosuppression: granulocytopenia (9-14 days); thrombocytopeni a (7-14 days); Alopecia; 
loss of nails; hyperpigmentation; photosensitivity; maculopapul ar rash; palmar–plantar 
erythrodysesthesias: (42-82% receiving continuous infusion); CN S effects: cerebral ataxia 
(rare); cardiotoxicity: MI, angina; asymptomatic S–T changes 68 %; ocular effects: 
excessive lacrimation and less commonly, tear duct stenosis. 
 
Drug Interactions 
Leucovorin enhances the cytotoxicity of 5-FU by forming a more stable tertiary complex 
with thymidylate synthase. Concomitant administration of 5-FU w ith warfarin has been 
reported to result in increased INR/prolonged prothrombin time.  Subjects receiving both 
drugs should be followed with weekly INRs.  10.2.3   Leucovorin Calcium (Folinic Acid)  Please refer to the package inse rt for complete product informa tion. 
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 55 of 69  In the case of a leucovorin shortage, levo-leucovorin may be ad ministered (dose to be at site 
investigator’s discretion). Other dosing alternatives may also be used during leucovorin 
shortage such as leucovorin 20mg/m2.  
 Availability Leucovorin calcium is commercially available in: 50 mg, 100 mg,  200 mg, 350 mg and 500 
mg vials for reconstitution, and as a solution for injection in  50 mL vials at a concentration 
of 10 mg/mL.  Storage and Stability Intact vials should be stored at room temperature and protected  from light. Solutions 
reconstituted with BWI are stabl e for at least 7 days at room t emperature. Solutions diluted 
for infusion are stable for 24 hours at room temperature and 4 days under refrigeration. 
 Preparation Leucovorin may be reconstituted with Bacteriostatic Water for I njection (BWI), Sterile 
Water For Injection, or bacteriostatic NaCl or NaCl. Solutions should be further diluted in 
D5W, 0.9% NaCl or Ringers solu tion for infusion over two hours.  
 Administration Leucovorin will be administered as a 400 mg/m
2 IV infusion over 2 hours after 
oxaliplatin administration and immediately before 5-FU. Leucovo rin may also be 
administered concurrently with oxa liplatin as a separate IV inf usion. 
 Toxicity 
The only adverse reactions associ ated with leucovorin are aller gic reactions.  These are 
extremely uncommon.  11. ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
11.1 Definitions of Adverse Events  
 11.1.1  Adverse Event  
Adverse event (AE) means any untoward medical occurrence in a s tudy subject 
administered an investigationa l drug that does not necessarily have a causal relationship 
with the treatment. An AE can t herefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including 
an abnormal laboratory finding), s ymptom, or disease temporaril y associated with 
participation in an investigati onal study, whether or not consi dered related to the 
investigational product. An A E is any sign, symptom, or diagnos is that appears or changes 
in intensity during the course  of the study. An AE may be an in tercurrent illness or injury 
that impairs the wel l-being of the subject. 
 Abnormal laboratory values or diag nostic test results constitut e AEs only if they induce 
clinical signs or symptoms or re quire treatment or further diag nostic tests.  
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 56 of 69  11.1.2  Serious Adverse Event 
A serious adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence resu lting in one or more of the 
following: 
• Results in death: NOTE:  deaths due unequivocally to pr ogression are not SAEs. 
• Is life-threatening (defined as an event in which the subject w as at risk of death at 
the time of the event; it does  not refer to an event which hypo thetically might have 
caused death if it were more severe) 
• Requires inpatient hospitalizati on or prolongation  of existing hospitalization 
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
• Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect 
• Is an important medical event ( defined as a medical event(s) th at may not be 
immediately life-threatening or  result in death or hospitalizat ion but, based upon 
appropriate medical and scientific  judgment, may jeopardize the  subject or may 
require intervention (e.g., me dical, surgical) to prevent one o f the other serious 
outcomes listed in the definition a bove). Examples of such even ts include, but are 
not limited to, intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic 
bronchospasm; blood dyscrasias or  convulsions not resulting in hospitalization; or 
the development of dru g dependency or drug abuse.  
 11.2 Adverse Event Reporting 
 11.2.1  Site Requirements for Recording and Reporting Adverse Events 
Adverse events (AEs) will be reco rded from the time of consent and for at least 30 days after 
last dose of study drug, regardless  of whether or not the event (s) are considered related to 
the study drug. The descriptions  and grading scales found in th e revised NCI Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4 will be util ized for AE reporting. A 
copy of the CTCAE v4 can be downloade d from the CTEP website at  http://ctep.cancer.gov. 
 This study must be conducted in compliance with FDA regulations , local safety reporting 
requirements and reporting requi rements of the sponsor-investig ator. 
 11.2.2  Site Requirements for Reporting Serious Adverse Events 
Site investigators and other sit e personnel must report any SAE  to HCRN within one 
business day  of discovery of the event. This includes events both related a nd unrelated to 
the study drug.   Site investigators w ill report a follow up t o a SAE, including death due to any cause other 
than progression of the cancer unde r study, that occurs to any 
subject from the time the 
consent is signed through 90 days f ollowing the last dose of st udy drug, or the initiation of 
new anti-cancer therapy, whichev er is earlier, whether or not r elated to Merck product.  
   
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 57 of 69  The definition of “related” bei ng that there is a reasonable po ssibility the drug caused the 
adverse experience. 
Unrelated The Adverse Event is clearly not related  to the study drug 
Unlikely The Adverse Event is doubtfully related to the study drug
Possible The Adverse Even tmay be related to the study drug
Probable The Adverse Event is  likely related  to the study drug
Definite The Adverse Event is clearly related to the study drug
 
Additionally, SAEs considered by a site investigator to be rela ted to Merck product that is 
brought to the attention of the s ite investigator at any time o utside of the time period 
specified in the previous paragr aph also must be reported immed iately to HCRN. HCRN 
will report these events to Merck.  The completed SAE/ECI Submissi on Form must be faxed to HCRN within one business 
day of discovery of the event. The s ite investigator is responsibl e for informing the IRB 
and/or the Regulator y Authority of the SAE as per local require ments.
 All AEs and SAEs 
will be recorded in the subject ’s medical record and on the app ropriate study specific eCRF 
form within the EDC system.  In addition, all SAEs will be repo rted on the SAE/ECI 
Submission Form and submitted to HCRN per guidelines outlined i n this section. 
 The original copy of the SAE/ECI  Submission Form and the fax co nfirmation sheet (or 
equivalent) must be kept within t he Trial Master File at the st udy site. 
 Follow-up information will be fax ed to HCRN, using a new SAE/EC I Submission Form 
stating that this is a follow- up to the previously reported SAE  and giving the date of the 
original report. Each re-occu rrence, complication, or progressi on of the original event 
should be reported as a follow-up t o that event regardless of w hen it occurs. The follow-up 
information should describe wheth er the event has resolved or c ontinues, if and how it was 
treated, whether the blind was  broken or not (if applicable), a nd whether the subject 
continued or withdrew f rom study participation. 
 11.2.3  Definition of an Overdose for Th is Protocol and Reporting of Ov erdose to 
HCRN For purposes of this trial, an overdose will be defined as any dose exceeding the prescribed 
dose for pembrolizumab by 20% over the prescribed dose. No spec ific information is 
available on the treatment of overdose of pembrolizumab. In the  event of overdose, the 
subject should be observed close ly for signs of toxicity.  Appr opriate supportive treatment 
should be provided if clin ically indicated. 
 If an adverse event(s) is associated with (“results from”) the overdose of a Merck product, 
the adverse event(s) is reported as a serious adverse event, ev en if no other seriousness 
criteria are met.  If a dose of Merck’s product m eeting the protocol definition of  overdose is taken without 
any associated clinical symptom s or abnormal laboratory results , the overdose is reported as 
a non-serious Event of Clinical I nterest (ECI), using the termi nology “accidental or 
intentional overdose without adverse effect.” 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 58 of 69  All reports of overdose with a nd without an adverse event must be reported within one 
business day  to HCRN. HCRN will report such events to Merck Global Safety within one 
business day  of notification of the event. (At tn: Worldwide Product Safety;  FAX 215 993-
1220)  11.2.4  Reporting of Pregnancy and Lactation to HCRN 
Although pregnancy and lactation ar e not considered adverse eve nts, it is the responsibility 
of site investigators or their  designees to report any pregnanc y or lactation in a subject 
(spontaneously reported to the m), including the pregnancy of a male subject's female partner 
that occurs during the trial or  within 120 days after the last dose of study drug.  All subjects 
and female partners of male subj ects who become pregnant must b e followed to the 
completion/termination of the pregnancy.  Pregnancy outcomes of  spontaneous abortion, 
missed abortion, benign hydatidifor m mole, blighted ovum, fetal  death, intrauterine death, 
miscarriage and stillb irth must be reporte d as serious events ( Important Medical Events). If 
the pregnancy continues to term , the outcome (health of infant)  must also be reported. 
 Such events must be reported within one business day  to HCRN. HCRN will report such 
events to Merck Global Safety within one business day  of receiving notification of the 
event. (Attn: Worldwide Product Safety; FAX 215-993-1220)  11.2.5  Events of Clinical Interest 
Selected non-serious and serious  adverse events are also known as Events of Clinical 
Interest (ECI) and must be recorded as such on SAE Submission F orm and reported within 
one business day to HCRN. HCRN will report these events within one business day  of 
receipt to Merck Global Safet y. (Attn: Worldwide Product Safety ; FAX 215 993-1220).  
 
ECIs that occur in any subject f rom the date of first dose thro ugh 90 days following the last 
dose of study drug, or the initiati on of a new anticancer thera py, whichever is earlier, 
whether or not related to the Me rck’s product, must be reported  as outlined above. 
Events of clinical interest for this trial include: 
• An overdose of Merck product, as  defined above, that is not ass ociated with clinical 
symptoms or abnormal laboratory results.  
• An elevated AST or ALT lab value that is greater than or equal to 3X the upper limit 
of normal and an elevated total bi lirubin lab value that is gre ater than or equal to 2X 
the upper limit of normal and, at the same time, an alkaline ph osphatase lab value 
that is less than 2X the upper limit of normal, as determined b y way of 
protocol-specified laboratory t esting or unscheduled laboratory  testing.* 
*Note:  These criteria are ba sed upon available regulatory guid ance documents. The 
purpose of the criteria is to spe cify a threshold of abnormal h
epatic tests that may 
require an additional evaluation for an underlying etiology. 
 11.2.6  Hoosier Cancer Research Network R equirements for Reporting SAEs  to Merck 
HCRN will submit all SAEs receive d from sites to Merck & Co., I nc. within one business 
day of receipt of the SAE Submission F orm and to regulatory author ities (FDA) per federal 
guidelines.  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 59 of 69  HCRN will submit SAE reports and any other relevant safety info rmation to the Merck 
Global Safety facsimile number :  +1-215-993-1220.  Follow-up in formation will be 
provided as reasonably requested. 
11.2.7 Sponsor-Investigator Responsibilities  
HCRN will send a SAE summary to the sponsor-investigator within 1 business day  of 
receipt of SAE Submission Form from a site.  The sponsor-invest igator will promptly 
review the SAE summary and assess  for expectedness and relatedn ess.   
 11.2.8  Reporting to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
The FDA deemed this protocol IND exempt after review of the sub mission packet 
24FEB2015.    As such, HCRN will assist the s ponsor-investigator with complia nce with
 requirements for 
informed consent under 21 CFR  50.20 and initial/continuing Inst itutional Review Board 
review under 21 CFR Part 56.  In addition to complying with the  applicable provisions of 
sections 402(i) and 402(j) of the  Public Health Service Act (PH S Act) (42 U.S.C. §§ 282(i) 
and (j)), which was amended by T itle VIII of the Food and Drug Administration 
Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA) (Public Law No. 110-85, 121 Stat . 904). 
 12. STATISTICAL METHODS 
 12.1 General Considerations 
This is a multi-institutional, s ingle arm, open-label, phase II  study, including a safety run-in 
cohort, of the combination of pemb rolizumab plus mFOFLOX6 in su bjects with untreated 
locally advanced or metastatic col orectal cancer. After a safet y run-in cohort of 6 subjects at 
the tolerated dose le vel, 24 additional subjects will be enroll ed. These 30 subjects will be 
analyzed as a single cohort for  subsequent efficacy and safety analyses. PFS and OS will be 
estimated by Kaplan-Meier method. Median PFS (mPFS) and OS (mOS ) will be estimated 
with 80% confidence intervals (C Is). The response rates will be  estimated with their Agresti-
Coull 95% CIs. Duration of response will be summarized by descr iptive statistics. 
Frequencies and proportions will  be used to describe toxicities . Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4 will be used for assessm ent of acute and late 
toxicities during the follow-up pe riod. Logistic regressions wi ll be used for the exploratory 
objectives studying potential pr edictors of responses. 
 12.2 Study Design 
This is a multi-institutional, s ingle arm, open-label, phase II  study with a safety run-in 
cohort. No randomization or blinding will be involved.  12.3 Definition of Primary Endpoint 
Median progression free survival (mPFS), measured from the time  of registration to the time 
of signs of progression per REC IST 1.1 or subject death dependi ng on whichever occurs 
first.    
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 60 of 69  12.4 Definitions of Secondary Endpoints 
• Objective response rate (ORR) , calculated with combining the nu mber of subjects 
who achieve complete response a nd partial response per irRC cri teria 
• Disease control rate (DCR), defined as the sum of subjects with  complete response, 
partial response and stable disease.  
• Delayed response, evaluated in s ubjects who achieve stable dise ase on first tumor 
assessment but they exhibit a n objective response on subsequent  tumor evaluations 
per irRC.  
• Overall Survival (OS), calculated from the time of registration  till the time of subject 
death  
• Toxicity of therapy will be  assessed per CTCAE V4.0 
• Response rate per Immune Relat ed Response Criteria (irRC) 
 
12.5 Definitions of Exploratory Endpoints 
• Assess the association betw een TLR4, MyD88, NF-kB expression by  IHC and 
response rate. 
• Assess Microsatelli te status by IHC 
• Assess the association betwee n HMGB1 blood level and response r ate. 
• Assess the association betwee n PD-L1 expression and response ra te. 
• Blood samples will be stored at th e HCRN for future correlative s.  
• Tissue samples will be stored at the HCRN for f uture correlativ es 
 
12.6 Analysis Plan for Primary Objectives/Aims  
PFS will be estimated by Kaplan-Meier method. In particular, me dian PFS will be estimated 
with its two-sided 90% CI.  12.7 Analysis Plan for Secondary Objectives/Aims  
ORR, DCR, delayed response, ir RC and toxicities will be summari zed by frequency and 
percentages with Agresti-Coull  95% confidence intervals. OS wil l be estimated using 
Kaplan-Meier method.  12.8 Analysis Plan for Exploratory Objectives  
Logistic regressions will be use d to evaluate the associations between risk factors and 
responses. For the stored blood s amples, appropriate statistica l methods will be determined 
according to potential future correlatives 
 12.9 Interim analysis  
No interim analysis will be performed.  
12.10  Subgroup Analysis  
Subgroup analyses will be perfor med based on PD-1/PD-L1 express ions. Both efficacy 
endpoints and toxicity endpoints will be evaluated in the subgr oup analyses. 
 12.11  Criteria for Stopping Study 
The trial will be terminated if there is any definite pembroliz umab-related death despite 
maximum supportive therapy. 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 61 of 69  12.12  Analysis Datasets  
Populatio n Definitio n
Enrolled This will comprise all subjects who meet the 
eligibility criteria and are registered onto the 
study. This data set wil l be used for subject 
characteristics summaries.
Evaluable This will comprise all patients who receive at 
least one dose of trial  drug and either undergo at 
least one post-baseline a ssessment or die before 
any evaluation. This data set will be used for response rates and OS evaluations. 
Intention-to-treat (ITT) This will comprise all subjects who mee t the 
eligibility criteria and are registered onto the 
study irrespective of the ir compliance to the 
planned course of treatment . This data set will be 
used for the primar
y objective anal ysis. 
Safety This will comprise all subjects who receive at 
least one dose of trial drug. T his data set will be 
used for toxicities evaluations. 
 
 
12.13  Sample Size/Accrual/Study Dur ation/Replacement Rules  
The primary objective of this earl y Phase II study is to estima te mPFS. Historica lly, first line 
FOLFOX achieves a median PFS (mPFS) as 9.0 months [37].  If the re are moderate 
evidences that adding Pembrolizum ab will increase mPFS from 9- to around 14-months, a 
full scale randomized Phase II st udy will be consi dered to form ally test whether the 
improvement is meaningful and statistically significant.   The sample size N=30 is determined based on budget/recruitment considerations and 
precision of estimation. We expect  that these 30 subjects will be uniformly accrued within 
12-months with an additional 24-m onths follow up. Kaplan-Meier method will be used to 
estimate PFS. mPFS and its two-sided 80% CI will be calculated.  Consequently, the half-
width of the CI from the lower  bound to the point estimate of m PFS will be around 4.5-
months, which is smaller than t he difference between 14- and 9- months. We consider this 
precision level will allow a deci sion to be made whether to pur sue further studies. 
 12.14  Subject Characteristics and Sign ificant Protocol Violations  
Subject’s characteristics will  be summarized by descriptive sta tistics. Significant protocol 
violations will be documented and reported.  12.15  Concomitant Medications  
Concomitant medications will be documented and managed accordin gly. 
   
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 62 of 69  12.16  Disposition  
The number of enrolled subjects will be summarized in flow char t with frequency of 
completion and discontinuation. The  subjects discontinued from study medication and their 
corresponding information will be listed.   13. TRIAL MANAGEMENT  
This study will be conducted in accordance with the IU Simon Ca ncer Center’s (IUSCC) 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan.  T his study will have a Data S afety Monitoring Board as 
described below and a DSMB Charter.  In addition HCRN data and safety m onitoring activities include:  
• Conduct review of clinical tri al for progress and safety 
• Review of all adverse events req uiring expedited reporting as d efined in the protocol 
• Provide sponsor-investigator wit h trial progress and safety inf ormation monthly.  
• Notification of partic ipating sites of advers e events requiring  expedited reporting and 
subsequent committee recommendations for study modifications  
13.1 Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
This study will have a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) that will review and 
monitor study progress, toxicit y, safety and other data from th is trial. The DSMB is separate 
from the IU Simon Cancer Cente r (IUSCC) Data and Safety Monitor ing Committee 
(DSMC). The board is chaired by an independent medical oncologi st external to this trial. 
Questions about subject safety or  protocol performance will be addressed with the 
sponsor-investigator, statisti cian and study team members. Shou ld any major concerns arise; 
the DSMB will offer recommendati ons regarding whether or not to  suspend the trial.  
 The DSMB will meet after the first 6 subjects are treated with at least one dose of study drug 
and observed for a minimum of 4 w eeks after first dose of study  drug.  The DSMB will then 
meet twice a year thereafter to review accrual, toxicity, respo nse and reporting information. 
Information to be provided to the  DSMB may include: subject acc rual, treatment regimen 
information, adverse events and serious adverse events reported  by category, summary of 
any deaths on study, audit and/or  monitoring results.  During D SMB’s initial review of the 
1
st six subjects, accrual to the trial will be halted until comple tion of review. 
 The DSMB will provide a recommen dation to the team after all in formation is reviewed. 
This information will also be pr ovided to the site investigator  sites for submission to their 
respective IRB according to the local IRB’s policies and proced ures. 
 13.1.1  Early Study Closure 
At any time during the conduct of t he trial, if it is the opini on of the sponsor-investigator 
that the risks (or benefits) t o the subjects warrant early clos ure of the study, this 
recommendation should be made in writing to the DSMB Alternativ ely, the DSMB may 
initiate suspension or early c losure of the study based on its regular review of the sponsor-
investigator reports.  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 63 of 69  13.2 On-site Monitoring 
Monitoring visits to the trial s ites will be made periodically during the trial, to ensure all 
aspects of the protocol are followed. Source documents will be reviewed for verification of 
agreement with data as submitted via the data collection system . The site 
investigator/institution guarant ee access to source documents b y HCRN or its designee and 
appropriate regulatory agencies.  The trial site may also be subjec t to quality assurance audit b y Merck & Co., Inc. or its 
designee as well as inspection by appropriate regulatory agenci es. 
 It is important for the site i nvestigator and their relevant pe rsonnel to be available during the 
monitoring visits and possible a udits and for sufficient time t o be devoted to the process. 
 13.3 Compliance with Trial Registrat ion and Results Posting Requirem ents 
Under the terms of the Food and D rug Administration Modernizati on Act (FDAMA) and the 
Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA), the sponso r-investigator of the 
trial is solely responsible for de termining whether the trial a nd its results are  subject to the 
requirements for submission to t he Clinical Trials Data Bank, http://www.clinicaltrials.gov . 
Information posted will allow subj ects to identify potentially appropriate trials for their 
disease conditions and pursue participation by calling a centra l contact number for further 
information on appropriate trial l ocations and trial site conta ct information.  
 14. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  
 14.1 Case Report Forms and Submission 
This study will utilize electroni c case report form (eCRF) in t he Hoosier Cancer Research 
Network (HCRN) electronic data cap ture (EDC) system. Access to the data through EDC 
system
 is restricted by user accounts a nd assigned roles. Once logged into the EDC system 
with a user ID and password, the EDC system defines roles for each user, which limits 
access to appropriate data. User information and passwords can be obtained by contacting 
HCRN at (317) 921-2050.   Generally, clinical data will be e lectronically captured in 
the EDC  system and correlative 
results will be captured in the EDC  system  or other secure database . If procedures on the 
study calendar are performed for standard of care, at minimum, that data will be captured in 
the source document. Select standard of care data will also be captured in the EDC  system, 
according to study-specific objectives. Please see the Data Man agement Plan for further 
details.  
 
The completed dataset is the sol e property of the sponsor-inves tigator’s institution. It should 
not be made available in any form to third parties, except for authorized representatives of 
appropriate Health/Regulatory Aut horities, without written perm ission from the sponsor-
investigator and HCRN.  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 64 of 69  14.2 Record Retention 
To enable evaluations and/or aud its from Health Authorities/HCR N, the site investigator 
agrees to keep records, includi ng the identity of all subjects (sufficient information to link 
records; e.g., hospital records) , all original signed informed consent forms, copies of all 
source documents, and detailed r ecords of drug disposition. All  source documents are to 
remain in the subject’s clinic f ile. To comply with internation al regulations, the records 
should be retained by the site inve stigator in compliance with regulations. 
 During data entry, range and missing data checks will be perfor med remotely. The checks to 
be performed will be documented i n the Data Management Plan for  the study. A summary 
report (QC Report) of these ch ecks together with any queries re sulting from manual review 
of the eCRFs will be generated f or each site and transmitted to  the site and the site monitor. 
Corrections will be made by the s tudy site personnel. This will  be done on an ongoing basis. 
 14.3 Confidentiality 
There is a slight risk of loss  of confidentiali ty of subject in formation. All records identifying 
the subject will be kept confiden tial and, to the extent permit ted by the applicable laws 
and/or regulations, will not  be made publicly available.  
 Information collected will be  maintained on secure, password pr otected electronic systems. 
Paper files that contain personal information will be kept in l ocked and secure locations only 
accessible to the study team. Samp les that are collected will b e identified by a subject study 
number assigned at the time of r egistration to the trial. Any m aterial issued to collaborating 
researchers will be anonymize d and only identified by the subje ct study number. 
 
Subjects will be informed in writi ng that some organizations in cluding the sponsor-
investigator and his/her resear ch associates, HCRN, Merck & Co. , Inc., IRB, or government 
agencies, like the FDA, may inspect their medical records to ve rify the information 
collected, and that all personal information made available for  inspection will be handled in 
strictest confidence and in accordance with local data protecti on laws. 
 If the results of the  study are published, t he subject’s identi ty will remain confidential. 
 14.4 Changes to the Protocol 
Study procedures will not be cha nged without the mutual agreeme nt of the 
sponsor-investigator, HCRN , and Merck & Co., Inc. 
 If it is necessary for the study protocol to be amended, the am endment or a new version of 
the study protocol (amended protoc ol) will be generated by the HCRN and must be 
approved by each IRB, Merck & Co., Inc., and if applicable, als o the local regulatory 
authority. Local requirements must be followed.  If a protocol amendment requires a change to the Informed Conse nt Form, then the IRB 
must be notified. Approval of the r evised Informed Consent Form  by the IRB is required 
before the revised form is used.  
 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 65 of 69  The site investigator is respons ible for the distribution of th ese documents to his or her IRB, 
and to the staff at his or her center. The distribution of thes e documents to the regulatory 
authority will be handled according to local practice.  Merck & Co., Inc.’s willingness to supply study drug is predica ted upon the review of the 
protocol. HCRN agrees to provide w ritten notice to Merck & Co.,  Inc. of any modifications 
to the protocol or informed consent.  15. ETHICS 
 15.1 Ethics Review 
The final study protocol, includ ing the final version of the In formed Consent Form, must be 
approved in writing by an IRB. The s ite investigator must submi t written approval to the 
HCRN office before he or she can e nroll any subject into the st udy.  The site investigator is 
responsible for informing the I RB of any amendment to the proto col in accordance with 
local requirements. In addition, the IRB must approve all adver tising used to recruit subjects 
for the study. The protocol must  be re-approved by the IRB annu ally, as local regulations 
require.   Progress reports and notifications  of serious unexpected advers e drug reactions will be 
provided to the IRB according t o local regulations and guidelin es. 
 The site investigator is also r esponsible for providing the IRB  with reports of any serious 
adverse drug reactions from any other study conducted with the investigati onal product. 
Merck & Co., Inc. will provide t his information to the sponsor- investigator. These reports 
will be forwarded to participa ting sites for submission to thei r Institutional Review Boards 
per their guidelines.  15.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study 
The study will be performed in acco rdance with ethical principl es originating from the 
Declaration of Helsi nki, which are consist ent with ICH Good Cli nical Practice guidelines, 
and applicable regulatory requirements.  15.3 Informed Consent Process 
The site investigator will ensure the subject is given full and  adequate oral and written 
information about the nature, pur pose, possible risks and benef its of the study. Subjects must 
also be notified they are free t o discontinue from the study at  any time. The subject should 
be given the opportunity to ask que stions and allowed time to c onsider the information 
provided.  The subject’s signed and dated i nformed consent must be obtaine d before conducting any 
procedure specifically for the s tudy. The site investigator mus t store the original, signed 
Written Informed Consent Form. A copy of the signed Informed Co nsent Form must be 
given to the subject.   
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 66 of 69  16. REFERENCES 
1. Swann, J.B. and M.J. Smyth, Immune surveillance of tumors.  J Clin Invest, 2007. 
117(5): p. 1137-46. 
2. Dunn, G.P., et al., Cancer immunoediting: from imm unosurveillance to tumor escape.  
Nat Immunol, 2002. 3(11): p. 991-8. 
3. Mapara, M.Y. and M. Sykes, Tolerance and cancer: mechan isms of tumor evasion and 
strategies for breaking tolerance.  J Clin Oncol, 2004. 22(6): p. 1136-51. 
4. de Visser, K.E., A. Eichten, and L.M. Coussens, Paradoxical roles of the immune system 
during cancer development.  Nat Rev Cancer, 2006. 6(1): p. 24-37. 
5. Vesely, M.D., et al., Natural innate and adaptive immunity to cancer.  Annu Rev 
Immunol, 2011. 29: p. 235-71. 
6. Pages, F., et al., Effector memory T cells, early metast asis, and survival in colorectal 
cancer.  N Engl J Med, 2005. 353(25): p. 2654-66. 
7. Eerola, A.K., Y. Soini, and P. Paakko, A high number of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes 
are associated with a small tumor size, low tumor stage, and a favorable prognosis in operated small cell lung carcinoma.  Clin Cancer Res, 2000. 6(5): p. 1875-81. 
8. Kondratiev, S., et al., Intratumoral CD8+ T lymphocyt es as a prognostic factor of 
survival in endometrial carcinoma.  Clin Cancer Res, 2004. 10(13): p. 4450-6. 
9. Oshikiri, T., et al., Prognostic value of intratumoral CD8+ T lymphocyte in extrahepatic 
bile duct carcinoma as e ssential immune response.  J Surg Oncol, 2003. 84(4): p. 224-8. 
10. Sharma, P., et al., CD8 tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes are predictive of survival in 
muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2007. 104(10): p. 
3967-72. 
11. Halama, N., et al., Localization and density of immune ce lls in the invasive margin of 
human colorectal cancer liver metastases ar e prognostic for response to chemotherapy.  
Cancer Res, 2011. 71(17): p. 5670-7. 
12. Brandacher, G., et al., Prognostic value of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase expression in 
colorectal cancer: effect on tumor-infiltrating T cells.  Clin Cancer Res, 2006. 12(4): p. 
1144-51. 
13. Keir, M.E., et al., PD-1 and its ligands in tolerance and immunity.  Annu Rev Immunol, 
2008. 26: p. 677-704. 
14. Topalian, S.L., et al., Safety, activity, and immune correla tes of anti-PD-1 antibody in 
cancer.  N Engl J Med, 2012. 366(26): p. 2443-54. 
15. Alexandroff, A.B., et al., BCG immunotherapy of bladder cancer: 20 years on.  Lancet, 
1999. 353(9165): p. 1689-94. 
16. Rosenberg, S.A., et al., Treatment of 283 consecutive patie nts with metastatic melanoma 
or renal cell cancer using high-dose bolus interleukin 2.  JAMA, 1994. 271(12): p. 907-
13. 
17. Kantoff, P.W., et al., Sipuleucel-T immunotherapy for castration-resistant prostate 
cancer.  N Engl J Med, 2010. 363(5): p. 411-22. 
18. Laheru, D. and E.M. Jaffee, Immunotherapy for pancreatic  cancer - science driving 
clinical progress.  Nat Rev Cancer, 2005. 5(6): p. 459-67. 
19. Le DT, W.-G.A., Picozzi VJ, Gre ten TF, Crocenzi TS, Springett G M, Morse M, Zeh H, 
Cohen DJ, Fine RL, Onners B, Uram JN, Murphy A, Skoble J, Ed Le mmens, Grous JJ, 
Dubensky T, Brockstedt DG, Jaffee EM, Interim safety and efficacy analysis of a phase 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 67 of 69  II, randomized study of GVAX pancreas and CRS-207 immunotherapy in patients with 
metastatic pancreatic cancer.  J Clin Oncol 31, 2013 (suppl; abstr 4040^), 2013. 
20. Zou, W., Regulatory T cells, tumour i mmunity and immunotherapy.  Nat Rev Immunol, 
2006. 6(4): p. 295-307. 
21. Wolchok, J.D., et al., Nivolumab plus ipilimumab in advanced melanoma.  N Engl J Med, 
2013. 369(2): p. 122-33. 
22. Brahmer, J.R., et al., Safety and activity of anti-PD -L1 antibody in patients with 
advanced cancer.  N Engl J Med, 2012. 366(26): p. 2455-65. 
23. Patnaik A, K.S., Tolcher AW, Ras co DW, Papadopoulos KP, Beeram M, Drengler R, 
Chen C, Smith L, Perez C , Gergich K, Lehnert M, Phase I study of MK-3475 (anti-PD-1 
monoclonal antibody) in patients with advanced solid tumors.  2012. 
24. Hamid, O., et al., Safety and tumor responses with lambrolizumab (anti-PD-1) in 
melanoma.  N Engl J Med, 2013. 369(2): p. 134-44. 
25. Tesniere, A., et al., Immunogenic death of colon cancer cells treated with oxaliplatin.  
Oncogene, 2010. 29(4): p. 482-91. 
26. Zitvogel, L., et al., Immunogenic tumor cell death for optimal anticancer therapy: the 
calreticulin exposure pathway.  Clin Cancer Res, 2010. 16(12): p. 3100-4. 
27. Apetoh, L., et al., Toll-like receptor 4-dependent contri bution of the immune system to 
anticancer chemotherapy and radiotherapy.  Nat Med, 2007. 13(9): p. 1050-9. 
28. Apetoh, L., et al., The interaction between HMGB1 and TLR4 dictates the outcome of 
anticancer chemotherapy and radiotherapy.  Immunol Rev, 2007. 220: p. 47-59. 
29. Lesterhuis, W.J., et al., Platinum-based drugs disrupt STAT6-mediated suppression of 
immune responses against cancer in humans and mice.  J Clin Invest, 2011. 121(8): p. 
3100-8. 
30. Nowak, A.K., et al., Induction of tumor cell apoptosis in  vivo increases tumor antigen 
cross-presentation, cross-primi ng rather than cross-tolerizi ng host tumor-specific CD8 
T cells.  J Immunol, 2003. 170(10): p. 4905-13. 
31. Lake, R.A. and B.W. Robinson, Immunotherapy and chemotherapy--a practical 
partnership.  Nat Rev Cancer, 2005. 5(5): p. 397-405. 
32. Stumbles, P.A., et al., Cutting edge: tumor-specific CTL are constitutively cross-armed 
in draining lymph nodes and transiently di sseminate to mediate tumor regression 
following systemic CD40 activation.  J Immunol, 2004. 173(10): p. 5923-8. 
33. Giacchetti, S., et al., Phase III multicenter randomized trial of oxaliplatin added to 
chronomodulated fluorouracil-leuc ovorin as first-line treatmen t of metastatic colorectal 
cancer.  J Clin Oncol, 2000. 18(1): p. 136-47. 
34. Venook AP, N.D., Lenz HJ, Innocenti  F, Mahoney MR, O'Neil BH, S haw JE, Polite BN, 
Hochster HS, Atkins JN, Goldberg  RM, Mayer RJ, Schilsky RL, Ber tagnolli MM, 
Blanke CD, CALGB/SWOG 80405: Phase III trial of irinotecan/5-FU/leucovorin 
(FOLFIRI) or oxaliplatin/5-FU/leucovorin (mFOLFOX6) with b evacizumab (BV) or 
cetuximab (CET) for patients (pts) with KRAS  wild-type (wt) untreated metastatic 
adenocarcinoma of the colon or rectum (MCRC).  J Clin Oncol 32:5s, 2014 (suppl; abstr 
LBA3), 2014. 
35. Goldberg, R.M., Therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer.  Oncologist, 2006. 11(9): p. 
981-7.   
36. Wolchok, J.D., et al., Guidelines for the evaluation of immune therapy activity in solid 
tumors: immune-related response criteria.  Clin Cancer Res, 2009. 15(23): p. 7412-20. 
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 68 of 69  37. Tournigand, C., et al., FOLFIRI followed by FOLFOX6 or the reverse sequence in 
advanced colorectal cancer: a randomized GERCOR study.  J Clin Oncol, 2004. 22(2): 
p. 229-37. 
38. Bendell, J., et al., Safety and efficacy of MPDL3280A ( anti-PDL1) in combination with 
bevacizumab (bev) and/or FOLFOX in patients (pts) with metastatic colorectal cancer 
(mCRC) . J Clin Oncol, 2015.  33(3); abstract 704  
39. Bang, Y-J., et al., Trastuzumab in combination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy 
alone for treatment of HER2-positive advan ced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction 
cancer (ToGA): a phase 3, open-label, randomised controlled trial.  Lancet, 2010.  
376(9742) p. 687-697 
  
HCRN GI14-186 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Version Date: 29APR2019 C onfidential Page 69 of 69  17. APPENDIX 
17.1. ECOG Performance Status 
Grade Descriptio n
0 Normal activity. Fully active, a ble to carry on all pre-disease  
performance without restriction.
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory. Restr icted in physically strenuous 
activity, but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or 
sedentar y nature (e. g., light housework, office work). 
2 In bed < 50% of the time. Ambul atory and capable of all self-ca re, 
but unable to carry out any wor k activities. Up and about more than 
50% of wakin g hours.
3 In bed >50% of the time. Capable  of only limited self-care, con fined 
to bed or chair more than 50% of wakin g hours.
4 100% bedridden. Completely disabl ed. Cannot carry on any self-
care. Totall y confined to bed or chair.
5 Dead. 
* As published in Am. J. Clin. Oncol.: Oken, M.M., Creech, R.H., Tormey, D.C., Horton, J., Davis, T.E., 
McFadden, E.T., Carbone, P.P.: Toxicity And Response Criteria Of The Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol 5:649-655, 1982. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, 
Robert Comis M.D., Group Chair.
 
17.2. Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v4 (CTCAE) 
The descriptions and grading sca les found in the revised NCI Co mmon Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events ( CTCAE) v4 will be utilized for adv erse event reporting. 
(http://ctep.cancer.gov/r eporting/ctc.html)  
 
17.3. Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (R ECIST) 1.1 Crite ria for 
Evaluating Response in Solid Tumors 
RECIST version 1.1* will be used i n this study for assessment o f tumor response. While 
either CT or MRI may be utili zed, as per RECIST 1.1, CT is the preferred imaging 
technique in this study. 
* As published in the European Journal of Cancer: E.A. Eisenhauer, P. Therasse, J . Bogaerts, L.H. Schwartz, D. Sa rgent, R. Ford, J. Dancey, S. 
Arbuck, S. Gwyther, M. Mooney, L. Rubinstein, L. Shankar, L. Do dd, R. Kaplan, D. 
Lacombe, J. Verweij. New respons e evaluation criteria in solid tumors: Revised RECIST 
guideline (version 1.1). Eur J  Cancer. 2009 Jan;45(2):228-47. 
 1. Wolchok, J.D., et al., Guidelines for the evaluation of immune therapy activity in solid 
tumors: immune-related response criteria.  Clin Cancer Res, 2009. 15(23): p. 7412-20. 
2. Tournigand, C., et al., FOLFIRI followed by FOLFOX6 or the reverse sequence in 
advanced colorectal cancer: a randomized GERCOR study.  J Clin Oncol, 2004. 22(2): 
p. 229-37. 
 