HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  1 of 11PROTOCOL TITLE:
Oral  Ketorolac  as an Adjuvant Agent for Postoperative Pain Control following Arthroscopic  
Anterior Cruciate Ligament  Surgery
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
Michael R. Karns, M.D.
Orthopaedic Surgery
216-844-7200
Michael.Karns@uhhospitals.org
OTHER DEPARTMENTS INVOLVED  IN THIS STUDY  (IF APPLICABLE):    
☒  N/A   
VERSION NUMBER:
1
DATE: 
5/9/2019 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  2 of 11Objectives 
1. We aim to examine the use of IV and oral ketorolac as an adjunctive  agent to the standard of 
care pain protocol  for postoperative pain  control  following arthroscopic anterior  cruciate ligament 
surgery. 
2. We hypothesize that the use of IV and oral ketorolac in addition to the standard  of care pain  
protocol will reduce postoperative opioid consumption following  arthroscopic anterior  cruciate ligament 
surgery.
Background
The utilization of arthroscopic surgery  to treat anterior cruciate ligament injuries  has continued to 
increase in recent years, partly due to a younger, more  active population, and improved technology and 
technique. However, pain management  in the post-operative period is critical to the ability  to perform  
this procedure as an outpatient surgery.  Traditionally,  oral narcotic agents have been  the preferred 
analgesic postoperatively in orthopaedic  surgery. However,  these  agents are associated with several  side 
effects, including  nausea/vomiting,  constipation, and somnolence. In addition, opioid agents have  a 
significant potential  for abuse in comparison to non-narcotic analgesics.  In light  of the rising  opioid 
epidemic and nationwide initiatives to limit narcotic usage, surgeons  must explore alternate pain 
modalities in the acute  postoperative period. Ketorolac is an NSAID with analgesic  and anti-inflammatory 
properties.1 Multiple  prior  studies  have examined  the beneficial effect of oral and IV ketorolac as an 
analgesic in the postoperative  period,1-3 including ACL reconstruction surgery.4-6  However,  the 
beneficial effects of this agent following arthroscopic anterior cruciate  ligament  surgery have not been 
extensively studied. 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
At University Hospitals, patients in the practices of the orthopaedic investigators meeting the below 
inclusion and exclusion criteria will be eligible  for enrollment in this investigation.  Patients  will be 
evaluated for potential  inclusion in the office setting during pre-operative  discussion.  Patients will be 
evaluated for exclusion  criteria  before  enrollment. The patient’s past  medical  history will be evaluated 
for contraindications  to ketorolac and the other  exclusion  criteria. A patient’s medical record  and the 
pre-operative history form will be reviewed to ensure the patient does not meet any of the exclusion 
criteria. The patient will also be questioned prior to enrollment about having any of the conditions  in the 
exclusion criteria using the questions on the patient enrollment form created for this study  (see “Other 
Documents” in Sparta submission).
 
Inclusion Criteria
1. Patients between the ages of 18 and 89 years old, male or female
2. Patients undergoing primary  arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament surgery
3.
4.
Exclusion Criteria
1. Patients below the age of 18 or above  the age of 89
2. Illiterate or non-English speaking  patients
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  3 of 113. Patients with contraindications to Ketorolac
4. History of alcohol or drug abuse
5. Chronic use of analgesic or psychotropic drugs
6. Known peptic ulcer disease or bleeding  diathesis
7. Renal dysfunction (eGFR  < 50 mL/min/1.73m2)
8. Breastfeeding women
9. Pregnant women
Number of Research Participants
We are seeking to enroll 43 patients in this single-center study.
Recruitment Methods 
Patients will only be approached  about study enrollment in the outpatient clinics of the orthoapedic 
investigators after they have agreed to undergo arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament surgery  as part 
of the standard of care  for their anterior  cruciate  ligament pathology.   
Patients will only be approached  about study enrollment in the outpatient clinics of the orthoapedic 
investigators after they have agreed to undergo arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament surgery  as part 
of the standard of care  for their anterior  cruciate  ligament pathology.   
The source of patients will be from  the practices of the Drs. Karns, Voos,  Goodfellow, and Salata.
Patients will be evaluated  for potential inclusion in the research study based on meeting the above  
inclusion/exclusion criteria.   Patient must  be between the ages  of 18 to 89, and presenting  with  anterior 
cruciate ligament pathology  amendable to arthroscopic  surgery. Patients with  a history of prior surgery 
to the knee will be excluded as no revision  procedure  will be included  in the investigation.  
The orthopaedic investigators included in this investigation receives dozens of consults  every week for 
orthopaedic injuries to the knee and pain secondary  to anterior cruciate  ligament pathology  that require 
operative intervention.  As such, the investigators will have access to more than the required number of 
research participants required to appropriately power this investigation.   
Setting
The research will be conducted at University Hospitals-Cleveland Medical  Center, UH Ahuja  Medical 
Center, UH Richmond  Medical Center, UH Mentor Health Center, UH Westlake Health Center, and UH 
Suburban Health Center. Recruitment  will occur in the office setting of the orthopaedic investigators in 
outpatient clinics.  The primary  research location for University Hospitals  will be at UH Cleveland Medical 
Center (11100 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH, 44106),  UH Ahuja Medical  Center  (3999  Richmond Road., 
Beachwood, OH, 44122), UH Mentor Health Center  (9000  Mentor Ave, Mentor, OH 44060), UH Richmond  
Medial Center  (27100 Chardon Rd, Richmond Heights,  OH 44143), or UH Westlake Health Center (960  
Clague Road., Westlake,  Ohio 44145).
Consent Process
Consent will take place in the office setting prior to surgery  at one of respective locations listed above.  
Prior to discussion  of the investigation, the patient and family will be asked  if they  require  time  to 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  4 of 11discuss with  others  their desire to participate  in the study.  No coercion will be encountered by the 
patients to serve as a research subject, as patients  will be fully able to refuse.   Patient  may  be free to 
refuse participation at any point  in the study. At University Hospitals,  and all participating institutions, 
only IRB-approved study personnel will all be a part of obtaining consent in the clinic setting.  All will be 
up to date on their CITI training.  The authors anticipate 10 minutes  to discuss  the study  and patient 
involvement, with 5 minutes to answer  questions regarding study  participation,  resulting  in a total of 15 
minutes.  Patients will be informed that the decision to enroll in the study  is entirely  dependent on their 
willingness to participate and that no changes in their medical care will be experienced based on their  
decision to participate or not.  An unsigned consent will signify that the patient is not interested in 
enrollment in the study investigation.  Again, it will be emphasized to the patients that no changes 
during surgery or in medical management during the post-operative time will be experienced based on 
the patient’s decision. Investigators obtaining consent  will ensure adequate  understanding  by asking 
patients if they  have  any questions or concerns  and if they understand the investigation being  
performed. All patients who enroll in the study  will sign their consent form in the presence of a UH IRB-
approved study team  member.
Sharing of Results with Research Participants
☒  Results  will not  be shared with research participants
☒  Results  will not  be shared with research participants’ doctors
Study Design
This is a prospective randomized clinical study that involves studying  ketorolac  as an adjuvant pain 
medication for arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament surgery patients. All patients enrolled in this study  
will receive the standard pain control  protocol before, during, and after surgery.  This includes a 1) a 
regional block during the pre-operative period,  2), IV Dexamethasone and IV Odansetron during surgery, 
and 3) analgesics (as directed by the anesthesiologist) in the PACU. Both groups will also receive the 
standard of care discharge pain medications for arthroscopic anterior cruciate  ligament surgery: 
oxycodone-acetaminophen 5-325 (1-2 tablets PO q4-6h PRN for moderate to severe pain #28 tabs). 
Patients will be randomized into one of two groups. Randomization  would be performed using  a pre-
defined computer-generated randomization sheet.  Patients will not be randomized into a group until 
they are in the preoperative holding area. Patients  will not be made aware of their randomization  until  
postoperative. Patients will also Group  1 will receive  standard of care pain protocol, including a 
prescription for oxycodone-acetaminophen  5-325 on discharge. Group 2 will also receive the standard of 
care pain protocol  before, during, and after surgery but will also receive an intraoperative dose of IV 
ketorolac at the completion  of the procedure  and oral ketorolac  on discharge  (10mg  PO q6 x3 days). 
Patients in this group will also be given omeprazole (20 mg PO, once per day x3 days). Patients  will 
record their pain levels, oxycodone-acetaminophen 5-325 consumption, and pain medication side effects 
in a diary three times per day for the first five days after surgery. The patient will return the completed 
diary to their  surgeon at the first post-operative appointment. Participation in this study will not require 
any additional visits to the surgeon’s office  or hospital  outside of the standard  pre- and post-operative 
appointments.
Study Procedures
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  5 of 111. All patients  scheduled to undergo elective arthroscopic anterior cruciate  ligament surgery identified  in 
the office of one of the orthopaedic investigations will undergo the process  of obtaining consent  prior to 
surgery.  The  consent  form will be reviewed in depth with an IRB approved-member  of the research  
team, all questions  answered, and written consent  obtained by the patient after  all questions  have  been 
answered and the patient  demonstrates a full understanding of the investigation and their role in the 
study. The patient’s home medications will be reviewed,  and any potential  drug-drug interactions will be 
discussed with  the patient.     
2.  As part  of the standard of care, patients undergoing elective arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament 
surgery will undergo pre-operative testing to ensure  patients  are optimized for surgery from a medical  
perspective. During  the pre-operative testing period, the standard blood draw taken as part of the 
standard of care, utilizing no more of the patient’s time  or blood than  generally performed if the patient 
were not enrolled in the investigation. Before  surgery patients will fill out the following  patient  reported  
outcome metrics: Visual  Analogue Score (VAS),  Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome  Score  (KOOS), 
International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) evaluation,  and the Lysholm knee score. It is 
expected that it will take  the subject  about 5-10 minutes to complete these  questionnaires.
3.  Patients will be re-identified in the preoperative  holding area. Both Group 1 and Group 2 will receive 
the standard of care pain  protocol for arthroscopic  anterior cruciate ligament surgery,  which consists  of: 
1) IV Dexamethasone and IV Odansetron  during surgery, and 2) analgesics (as directed  by the 
anesthesiologist) in the PACU.  Both groups will also receive the standard  of care  discharge pain 
medications for arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament surgery: oxycodone-acetaminophen  5-325 (1-2 
tablets PO q4-6h PRN  for moderate to severe  pain #28 tabs). Group 1 will receive  only the standard of 
care pain protocol  on the day of their surgery and discharge  pain medications. Group 2 will receive  the 
standard of care pain  protocol on the day of surgery and an intraoperative dose of IV ketorolac at the 
completion of surgery (dosing individualized  by patient age and weight).  The operating surgeon will be 
responsible for directing the anesthesiologist  to administer the IV Ketorolac. Group 2 will also receive the 
standard of care discharge pain medications and scheduled oral ketorolac (10mg PO q6 x3 days). In 
addition, all Group  2 patients will receive a prescription for omeprazole (20 mg PO, once per day x3 days)  
to take for 3 days after surgery to decrease their risk of developing stomach ulcers. Patients in Group  1 
will not receive a prescription for omeprazole.  A 1:1 randomization ratio will be used (an equal number  
of patients  will be placed in each group). Patients will then undergo standard arthroscopic anterior 
cruciate ligament surgery with one of the surgical  investigators. Prior to discharge, all patients will be 
provided a handout on safely  using opioids.  
4. Following discharge from the ambulatory surgery center, patients in Group  1 and Group 2 will be 
asked to document  their VAS pain  scores at 6 hour intervals (morning,  afternoon, and evening) for five 
days in a journal administered to them at the time of study  enrollment. They will also be asked to record 
the number  of oxycodone-acetaminophen  5-325 pills they take during this time  interval  in their journal. 
At the end of each day,  patients will be asked  to document the following adverse effects: nausea, 
vomiting, somnolence,  dizziness,  headache, pain, pruritis,  other  in their journal.  All patients  in Group 2 
will be instructed  to take ketorolac every  6 hours for pain  every day for the first 3 days after surgery. 
Thus, patients  in Group 2 will not be required to record the number  of ketorolac pills they take each day.  
To ensure safety, all patients  assigned to Group 2 will receive a form outlining the common and serious 
side effects  of Ketorolac and specific  instructions for when they should call their doctor or go to the 
emergency room. All patients who receive anterior cruciate ligament surgery at UH are instructed to call 
their surgeon’s office if they feel their pain is not controlled at home after surgery.  
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  6 of 115. Patients  in Group 1 and Group 2 will receive a phone call from a member  of the study team on Day 2 
after surgery to see if they have any questions and to ensure they are filling out their journal. Patients in 
Group 2 will also be asked if they are experiencing any of the side effects from ketorolac. Patients in 
Group 2 will be given  an educational handout on the side effects  of ketorolac when they are discharged  
from the hospital.
6.  Patients will follow  up in clinic on a routine  basis based on the recommendations of the surgeon, 
typically at 1-2 weeks,  6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year  following surgery.  During these  follow  
up appointments,  patients will be screened per standard of care  for range of motion to the operative 
knee, pain levels, strength and questioned regarding functionality of the operative knee.  In the setting of 
a complication (wound breakdown,  infection),  patient information will be recorded  and communicated 
using university password protected email to communicate with the primary  investigator. At the first two 
follow-up clinic appointment after  surgery, patients will fill out the following patient  reported outcome 
metrics: VAS, KOOS, IKDC, and Lysholm questionnaires. The first appointment is about 1-2 weeks after 
surgery and the second  appointment is about  6-8 weeks  after surgery. Filling  out these questionnaires 
should only  take 5-10  minutes to complete at each clinic visit.
7. After 1 month from their surgery date, patients  will receive  a phone  call from  a member  of the study 
team to ask how many  refills they have received for their prescription for oxycodone-acetaminophen 5-
325. After the second follow-up  appointment, the subjects participation in the research  will be complete.
Study Timeline
Patients are evaluated in the orthopaedic investigators’  outpatient clinics for anterior cruciate ligament 
pathology. If a patient’s condition is amenable to arthroscopic surgery and they elect to undergo the 
procedure they will be approached  for participation in this study. This evaluation  and discussion  of the 
surgical procedure should take 10-15 minutes. The time for enrolling a patient should take 10 minutes  
with 5 minutes for patients’ questions. Therefore, an outpatient  visit for a patient enrolling  this study 
would take 25-30 minutes. This will be the only visit before surgery. After the surgery, patients will 
complete their pain diaries at home  each day, which should take about 5 minutes each day to fill in. They 
will bring  these completed  diaries to their first post-op visit. 
Data to be Collected  for your study 
(AFTER consent and HIPAA  Authorization  have been obtained)
Name, dates, telephone number, MRN, 
Pre-operative diagnosis
• Mechanism of injury/disease, if relevant
• Narcotic pain  medication and side effects in patient journal (number of opioid pills consumed 
at six hour intervals for five days postoperative)
• Pre- and post-operative  scores for the following
Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement  Information System (PROMIS)
oVisual Analog  (VAS)
oKnee injury  and osteoarthritis outcome (KOOS)
oInternational Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC)
oLysholm
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  7 of 11Data Analysis  Plan
Statistically significant differences in patient demographics and comorbidities between  Group  1 and 
Group 2 will be determined  initially with univariate analysis. Students t-test  will be utilized to compare  
the differences in mean VAS scores  and narcotics utilization between the two groups at each  time point. 
Linear regression models  will be utilized to identify  trends  over time. Descriptive analyses (e.g., 
percentages) will be used to report qualitative data as appropriate. 
The minimal clinically  important difference in VAS scores is 13 in patients  with rotator cuff disease.4 A 
prior study  by White et al.1 comparing oxycodone-acetaminophen versus oral ketorolac for analgesia 
following arthroscopic tubal ligation, the common standard  deviation  in VAS scores was 11 points.  Only 
one published study, by Honig  et al.,7  has reported pain levels after administering IV or oral ketorolac to 
patients undergoing anterior cruciate ligament surgery, with a common standard deviation in VAS scores 
of 13.3.  Using this data,  our power analysis showed that, with an alpha of 0.05  and 90% power,  we 
would need 34 patients, or 17 per group, to achieve adequate power.  However, to account  for a 20% 
dropout rate we will recruit  for 43 patients.  Power analysis was performed using G*Power 3.1.9.2.
The primary endpoint of this study  is VAS pain scores and number  of narcotic medications  consumed. 
Secondary scores  include,  KOOS, IKDC, Lysholm,  and PROMIS scores.
Drugs or Devices
Ketorolac is an FDA-approved  drug for pain relief. Omeprazole is an FDA-approved drug for the prevention 
and treatment of gastroesophageal  reflux disease (GERD). 
Patients randomized  to Group 2 will be provided IV and oral ketorolac during the study, as well as oral 
omeprazole. The IV ketorolac will be provided by the anesthesia team in the operating room at the 
conclusion of the study. The study investigators will provide patients with a prescription for the oral 
ketorolac and oral omeprazole, which they may  fill at a pharmacy  of their choice.
Confidentiality 
Data collected from subjects participating in the study will be immediately protected  as each subject will 
be assigned a number based on their enrollment  and the institution in which they were  enrolled that will 
in no way correspond to any pertinent data relating to the subject’s protected  health information. 
Following the results of lab studies and follow  up appointments, all data will be entered  electronically  
into RedCap  software. Electronic  copies of any documentation will be stored  in the UH Secure Network 
drive or UH Encrypted Drive  (Iron Key) while any physical documentation  be placed within  the locked file 
cabinets located within  the institution’s investigators  office.   Data will be accessed by only approved 
study personnel.   Data will be assessed for completeness, accuracy and per strict  adherence  to the 
approved protocol by the orthopaedic resident  (LS) and during bi-monthly  meetings with the 
investigative team who  will be responsible for data  protection using  files on only protected hospital  
computers.  In addition, monitoring  of the data  by the entire investigative team will be conducted 
frequently during these bi-monthly meeting in which the standards and rules of the protocol will be 
reviewed to ensure  that all regulations  set forth in the confidentiality  agreement are met and complete.  
Following the complete  data transfer  electronically, all documentation will be properly disposed  of to 
ensure complete participant protection of information.   Following  the conclusion  of the study, all 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  8 of 11documentation will be disposed of while maintaining patient confidentiality for 3 years following  study 
closure per UH policy.   
Risks to  Research Participants
All patients scheduled for elective arthroscopic anterior cruciate  ligament  surgery undergo pre-operative 
testing to ensure they are medically optimized  for surgery. Patients  with contraindications to Ketorolac  
will not be enrolled  in the study:
Previous allergic reaction to Ketorolac
History of any of the following: peptic ulcer disease, gastrointestinal bleeding, or perforation of 
the stomach  or bowel
Having experienced an asthma, urticarial,  or a allergic-type reactions  after  taking aspirin  or 
other NSAIDs
History of kidney disease or kidney failure
History of a brain bleed
History of a bleeding disorder
Currently taking the medication probenecid
Currently taking the medication pentoxifylline
The investigators will ensure  no patient with contraindications to Ketorolac are enrolled via the 
following: 1) the patient’s past medical  history in their electronic medical record and pre-operative 
history form will be evaluated for contraindications to ketorolac, and 2) the patient will be questioned  
prior to enrollment about having any of the conditions that are contraindications to Ketorolac using the 
patient enrollment  form created for this study (see “Other Documents” in Sparta submission). 
Common non-serious side effects of Ketorolac:
• Nausea, stomach  pain, indigestion, diarrhea
• Dizziness, drowsiness
• Headache
• Swelling
Serious side effects of Ketorolac:
• Gastrointestinal problems: ulcers,  bleeding, or peforation
• Hemorrhage
• Impaired renal function
• Impaired liver function
• Allergic or anaphylactoid reaction
• Anemia
• Ketorolac,  like other NSAIDs, may  cause serious cardiovascular side effects,  such as 
myocardial infarction or stroke, which may  result  in hospitalization and even death
All patients that  receive ketorolac will be monitored in the PACU for side effects  to Ketorolac after 
receiving an IV dose at the end of their surgery, and will be given an informative  handout on ketorolac 
and its side effects (see “Other Documents” in Sparta submission).  This handout also has instructions for 
when patients should call their surgeon’s office or seek immediate medical  assistance. In addition, all 
patients enrolled in this study will receive a phone  call on Day 2 after  surgery to ensure they are filling 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  9 of 11out their pain diary. Patients who received ketorolac will also be questioned  about having  any side 
effects of ketorolac.
Also, enrollment  in the investigation does  increase  the risk for breach  of confidentiality during subject 
enrollment in study.
Provisions to Protect  the Privacy  Interests of Research Participants
Privacy of the study subjects  will be protected  throughout  all phases of the research study.  Consent will 
be obtained by only  a member  of the investigative  team  and patients  will be given the opportunity to 
discuss participation with  an investigator out of the room, allowing the patient  to remain alone or with 
family.  During the study period, all subject data  will be protected through careful  handling of patient  
information by assigning each subject  a research number.  After  completion and collection  of all study  
documents, all documentation will then be securely transported back to the appropriate investigators  
office securely locked away after being entered electronically after the identifiable information is 
converted to a study number which will not contain  any protected health  information. All patient 
information will be stored confidentially  on protected hospitals computers and files using RedCap 
software to ensure added protection.  Following conclusion of the study, all hard documentation will be 
stored within the locked file cabinet in the investigators office after  being  transferred onto electronic  files 
protected by RedCap.  All documentation  will be disposed of at the end of the study to ensure 
confidentiality is maintained.  In addition,  participants and their information will not be discussed  in any 
public areas or with any medical or non-medical  personnel not directly involved with and approved as an 
active investigative  member  of the research study. 
 
Potential Benefit to Research Participants
There is no guaranteed  direct benefit  from participating in the study. All subjects undergoing surgery will 
benefit from the known effects of arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament surgery following surgery 
whether or not they are enrolled in the study.   Possible benefit of the research is patients  could 
experience increased pain  relief, compared  to standard pain control  protocols,  after  surgery from 
receiving intra-operative IV and PO Ketorolac. This will make their post-op period more comfortable.
Withdrawal of Research Participants
Patients can withdraw at any point during the study  period.  Patients will be withdrawn if they fail to 
appropriately follow up in the post-operative  period. If a patient withdraws from the study before their 
surgery, they will proceed  with  their  arthroscopic  anterior cruciate ligament surgery and clinical follow-
up, and no further data will be collected on them. If a patient withdraws during the post-operative 
period, then no more  follow-up data  will be collected past their withdrawal date.
Alternatives to Participation
Patients may elect to proceed  with arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament surgery with the standard  of 
care postoperative  pain  regiment oxycodone-acetaminophen 5-325  (1-2 tabs PO q4-6h PRN moderate  to 
severe pain #28 tabs))
Arthroscopic repair is a well-established treatment option for patients with anterior cruciate ligament 
pathology. Therefore, if their surgeon  has recommended  they receive arthroscopic  repair, it will be 
because the surgeon  believes it is the best  treatment  option for their condition,  not for research 
purposes. If a patient elects to withdraw from the Ketorolac arm, they will simply  be asked to discontinue 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  10 of 11use of Ketorolac and continue with the use of oxycodone-acetaminophen 5-325. Since this is the standard  
of care there is no alternative treatment to list in the consent.
Costs to  Research  Participants
There are not sufficient  funds within  our department to cover the cost of ketorolac and omeprazole for 
patients randomized into Group  2. As such, the patient’s  insurance company will be responsible for the 
cost of ketorolac and omeprazole. However,  ketorolac is a generic drug that is commonly  utilized both 
within and outside  of Orthopaedics. Patients will ultimately be responsible if the insurance company does 
not pay,  and for any associated co-pay. Paying for Ketorolac and Omeprazole will be discussed with the 
patient in clinic during the consent  process.
Research Participant  Compensation
There is no compensation for subjects.
Provisions to Monitor the  Data to Ensure the  Safety  of Research  Participants
Data collected from subjects participating in the study will be immediately protected  as each subject will 
be assigned a number that will in no way correspond to any pertinent data relating to the subject’s 
protected health information. Following collection  of data from questionnaires and pain  journals,  the 
orthopaedic resident will collect all documentation  and after being entered electronically behind RedCap 
software, will be placed  within  the locked file cabinets located within  the primary investigators office.  
Data will be accessed by only approved  study personnel.  Data will be assessed for completeness, 
accuracy and per strict  adherence to the approved  protocol  by the orthopaedic resident and during bi-
monthly (once per two months) meetings with  the investigative team who will be responsible  for data  
protection using  files on only protected hospital computers. In addition, monitoring of the data  by the 
entire investigative team will be conducted frequently during these  bi-monthly  meeting in which  the 
standards and rules of the protocol will be reviewed  to ensure that all regulations set forth in the 
confidentiality agreement  are met and complete. Recorded adverse/safety  events will be actively 
monitored by the Orthopaedic Resident, and reviewed  during the bi-monthly meetings. Any 
adverse/safety events identified through pain diaries  and post-op day 2 follow-up  calls will be 
documented in the regulatory binder and the PI of the study will be immediately informed, followed by 
reporting the events to the IRB. Following the complete data transfer electronically, all documentation  
will be properly disposed of to ensure complete participant protection of information.  Following  the 
conclusion of the study, all information  and hard  copies  will remain stored in a locked file cabinet located 
within the primary investigators office  per UH policy.
References   
1. White PF, Joshi GP, Carpenter RL, Fragen RJ. A comparison of oral ketorolac  and hydrocodone-
acetaminophen for analgesia after ambulatory surgery: arthroscopy versus  laparoscopic  tubal ligation. 
Anesth Analg. 1997 Jul;85(1):37-43. Epub  1997/07/01.
2. Gebuhr PH, Soelberg M, Strauss W. A multiple-dose,  double-blind comparison of intramuscularly 
and orally  administered ketorolac tromethamine and Ketogan in patients  with pain following 
orthopaedic surgery. J Int Med Res. 1994 Jul-Aug;22(4):202-17. Epub  1994/07/01.
3. McQuay HJ, Poppleton P, Carroll D, Summerfield  RJ, Bullingham RE, Moore RA. Ketorolac and 
acetaminophen for orthopedic postoperative pain. Clin Pharmacol  Ther.  1986 Jan;39(1):89-93.  Epub  
1986/01/01.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: 01/2019 Prior Version: 10/2018
Page  11 of 114. Barber  FA, Gladu DE. Comparison  of oral ketorolac and hydrocodone  for pain relief after anterior  
cruciate ligament reconstruction. Arthroscopy. 1998  Sep;14(6):605-12. Epub  1998/10/01.
5. Tierney GS, Wright RW, Smith JP, Fischer  DA. Anterior cruciate  ligament reconstruction as an 
outpatient procedure. Am J Sports Med. 1995  Nov-Dec;23(6):755-6. Epub 1995/11/01.
6. Brown DW, Curry CM, Ruterbories LM, Avery FL, Anson PS. Evaluation of pain after  
arthroscopically assisted anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Am J Sports Med. 1997 Mar-
Apr;25(2):182-6. Epub 1997/03/01.