  Revised 08 -13-2020  
  
 
Study Title:  Investigation of Potential Therapeutic Effects of Pulsed 
Electromagnetic Field for the Treatment of Symptoms Associated with Interstitial 
Cystitis/Bladder Pain Syndrom e 
 
 
IRB00068066  
 
 
 
NCT0454088 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Revised 08 -13-2020  
 Study Title:  Investigation of Potential Therapeutic Effects of Pulsed Electromagnetic Field 
for the Treatment of Symptoms Associated with Interstitial Cystitis/Bladder Pain 
Syndrome  
 
Background, Rationale and Context  
 
Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS) is a clinical diagnosis based primarily on 
chronic symptoms of pain perceived by the patient to emanate from the bladder and/or pelvis 
associated with urinary urgency or frequency in the absence of another identified  cause for the 
symptoms1. Although it is not a life -threatening disease, the chronicity and severity of pain , 
along with  urinary symptoms , causes great impairment in a patient’s quality of life2. IC/BPS 
poses as a significant clinical challenge for many reasons . For one,  the pathophysiology 
described in the literature is incompletely determined  and likely multi -factorial , including  factors  
such as inflammation , neurovascular dysfunction, ion imbala nce, and impaired urothelial cell 
integrit y3,4,5. Consequently, there are many options for  IC/BPS therapy, many of which are 
driven primarily by patient -reported symptoms. In this regard, IC/BPS patients with moderate to 
severe pain typically  require multi -modal therapy, often resulting in  incomplete or  no resolution 
of symptoms.  Another clinical challenge is the heterogeneity of the symptoms. W hile pelvic pain 
is the distinguishing characteristic, patients with IC/BPS also routinely present with additional 
urological and non -urological medical symptoms and syndromes6,7. This has led to the 
description of two specific sub -phenotypes in IC/BPS bas ed on anesthetized bladder capacity  
(BC) , in which patients with BC < 400 cc are more likely to experience severe pain, urgency and 
frequency (bladder centric sub -phenotype), and patients with BC > 400 cc (non -bladder centric 
sub-phenotype) ha ve a higher p revalence of non -urological associated syndromes (NUAS) such 
as fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue symptoms, irritable bowel syndrome, endometriosis and sicca 
syndrome8,9. 
 
The current landscape of IC/BPS therapies is  vast and imperfect, with the level of invasiveness  
ranging  broadly from lifestyle  and behavioral changes  to total cystectom y (for refractory end-
stage disease) . Current non -invasive treatments, including behavioral changes, dietary 
restrictions, and pelvic flo or physical therapy have shown benefit s in pain mitigation , but may 
not demonstrate consistent efficacy in more severe cases10. Pharmacologic strategies, such as  
NSAIDs and opiates, have also shown little evidence demonstrating consistent efficacy for  
treating  the chronic pain state, and certainly  are not without  adverse effect  profile s11. More 
invasive modalities such as cystoscopy with hydrodistention, bot ulinum toxin  injections, or total 
cystectomies carry morbidity and procedur al risk.  Furthermore, t here is a clear need for a new 
therapeutic strategy for IC/BPS management , as there is currently no standardized approach that 
provides relief for all , or even most,  patients .  
 
Pulsed Electro magnetic Field (PEMF) therapy may present  a promising alternative therapy for 
IC/BPS. PEMF is a safe, non -invasive, and effective therapy currently used for wound healing, 
  Revised 08 -13-2020  
 bone -related diseases  (osteoarthritis, RA ), and chronic pai n states (chronic lower back pain , 
fibromyalgia ), the latter of which is frequently associated with IC/BPS as NUAS . Based on 
Faraday’s law, electromagnetic interactions  (e.g. PEMF)  with biological processes  and 
conditions (e.g. IC/BPS)  will theoretically address many of the  proposed pathophysiological 
causes of the condition. While t he mechanism (s) of action  are not fully understood, PEMF 
therapy has been shown in several studies  (randomized, double -blinded, placebo -controlled 
trials ) to decre ase the output of pro -inflammatory proteins, improve oxygenation of blood  and 
tissue, stabilize transmembrane action potential and ion channels, and stimulate tissue 
regeneratio n12-15. Thus, PEMF may provide a safe, non -invasive therapeutic option that would be 
complementary to, or serve as an alternative for, the treatments that are currently being 
administered  in IC/BPS for pain reduction . Of note, PEMF has demonstrated an excellent safety 
profile wi th no associated systemic risks reported to date16.  Additionally, the application of 
exogenous PEMF to stimulate the pelvic floor muscle has recently been introduced for treating 
urge and/or stress urinary incontinence and overactive bladder17.  Furthermo re, if patient safety 
and efficacy for pain reduction are demonstrated , these feasibility studies  will provide the 
foundation  for larger multi -site trials to determine additional parameters regarding the 
appropriate number of treatments as well as  the duration of benefit (pain relief) following 
treatments.  
 
Objectives  
 
The objective of this pilot study is to  test the idea  that PEMF  therapy  will serve as a safe, non-
invasive therapeutic modality that can effectively improve the chronic pain and/or a ssociated 
symptoms  of IC/BPS patients. We hypothesize that PEMF therapy will result in significant pain 
reduction in IC/BPS patients , specifically those with a non -bladder centric phenotype.  
 
Published results from randomized, double -blinded, placebo -controlled clinical trials that have 
evaluated the efficacy of PEMF for pain management in conditions such as lower back pain, 
osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyalgia have all report ed significant pain reduction 
following PEMF  therapy . Chronic pelvic pain and widespread, non -localized pain (beyond the 
bladder) are common findings in many IC/BPS patients . The proposed mechanism of action of 
PEMF therapy (increased microcirculation and tissue regenerative capacity through modulation 
of inflammatory processes) provides a compelling rationale for evaluating the efficacy of PEMF 
in IC/BPS patient pain relief.  
 
Methods and Measures  
 
Design  
This is a single center clinical series evaluating symptom relief following a 4 -week trial of 
PEMF therapy. From our registry of IC/BPS patients we will recruit women, ages 18 -80, who 
  Revised 08 -13-2020  
 have met all inclusion  and exclusion criteria, which includes demonstration of an anesthetic BC 
> 400 cc (non -bladder -centric phenotype) and a current numeric rating scale (NRS ) pain score 
for pelvic pain  ≥ 6. Upon enrollment, each patient will be taught how to administer home 
treatment with the  BEMER (Bio Electro Magnetic Energy Regulation)  PEMF device s which 
consist of a  total body  mat (B.Body)  plus a targeted pelvic  mat (B.Pad) . Following the brief in -
clinic training, participants will be sent home with the PEMF devices (pre -set to deliver the same 
level of energy  each time ) and will self-admini ster 8 minute PEMF therapy sessions , twice daily 
(once in the morning, once in the evening) . 
 
Patient assess ments will occur  at three time points:  (1) enrollment,  (2) after four weeks of 
treatment , and (3) at twelve weeks  post-enrollment . The primary outcome measure will be the 
change in NRS  pain score  for pelvic pain . A decrease of at least 2 points on the  NRS  pain scale  
will be considered  as representative of a significant decrease in pelvic (and/or widespread) pain. 
Secondary outcomes wi ll be assessed by validated IC/BPS questionnaires (O’Leary -Sant 
indices), voiding characteristics (patient recorded voiding diary),  change in perceived pain as 
determined by pain body maps , and the patient’s overall impression of change (Global Response 
Assessment).  Follow -up assessments will be completed  remotely  through  phone or email 
surveys . During the twelve -week study, patients will not  undergo any of the following IC/BPS 
therapies: cystoscopy with hydrodistention, bladder instillations,  or trigger point injections . 
Patients that were  prescribed a stable  dose of pro re nata (PRN) narcotic medication at least three 
months prior to enrollm ent will be included in the study. Patients will be expected to report 
which, if any, pain medications they have been taking prior to enrollment and what additional 
medications they plan to use throughout the duration of the study . The following  IC/BPS ora l 
medications will be allowed during this time:  amitriptyline, cime tidine, hydroxyzine, and 
pentosan polysulfate . 
 
The demographic data will be extracted from patient’s electronic medical record . The basic 
office evaluation will be composed of detailed medical history, physical exam, urinalysis, urine 
culture, 7-days voiding diary, O’Leary -Sant symptom and problem index (ICPI/ICSI), Pelvic 
Pain and Urgency/Frequency Patient Symptom (PUF) scale, Ge nitourinary Pain Index (GUPI), 
SF-36 quality of life questionnaires,  and numeric rating scale  for pain in the last 24 hours.  
 
In this proof of concept study, all participants will receive the full therapy (i.e. there will not be a 
control group) . In the double -blind placebo -controlled crossover trial that will follow this proof -
of-concept study,  we will have  access to  placebo  (sham ) mats  for use as a control .  
 
Subject Selection Criteria  
 
Participants will be recruited from the Urology Clinic at Wake Forest Baptist Hospital  and all 
study participants will provide  written informed consent.  
  Revised 08 -13-2020  
  
• Inclusion Criteria  
Female patients between 18 to 80 years  with a previously established clinical diagnosis of 
IC/BPS . Participant s must have an anesthetic BC > 400 cc , a current NRS  score ≥ 6, and 
have no cognit ive deficit s.  Patients will be req uired to attes t that they will not receive a 
new prescription  and/or an increased dose of narcotic medication while participating in 
the study.  
 
• Exclusion Criteria  
Any history of bladder, uterine, ovarian, or vaginal cancer, urethral diverticulum, spinal 
cord injury, stroke, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis,  spina bifida, radiation cystitis, 
cyclophosphamide treatment , immunosuppressive therapy in consequence of 
transplantation, allogeneic cellular transplantation, or bone marrow or stem cell 
transplantations, deep vein thrombosis, or genital herpes . Patients  will be excluded from 
this study if they have an implanted pace -maker , metal prosthesis, urinary tract infection, 
BMI > 40 , or are currently pregnant.  
 
• Sample Size  
For this small pilot study, we will enroll up to  10 study patients  with the goal of 
achieving a full dataset from at least 6 patients .  
 
 
Human Subjects Protection  
 
Informed Consent:  An IRB -approved written informed consent will be obtained from each 
subject. Patients will initially be contacted and introduced to the st udy via phone call from a 
study team member to discuss study details and answer questions. If they agree, a n electronic 
copy of the IRB -approved consent form will be e -mailed to the patient. Informed consent and 
signature will be acquired in the Wake Forest University Urology Outpatient Clinic  prior to 
training o n the PEMF device . 
 
Confidentiality and Privacy:  Confidentiality will be protected by collecting only information 
needed to accomplish  future  demographic  matching (i.e. patient’s age , ethnicit y, BMI, etc. ), 
minimizing to the fullest extent possible the collection of any information that could directly 
identify subjects, and maintaining all study information in a secure manner.  To help ensure 
subject privacy and confidentiality, a unique study identifier will appear on the data collection 
form.  Any collected patient  identifying information corresponding to the unique study identifier 
will be maintained on a separate master log.  The master log will be kept secure, with access 
limited to designa ted study personnel.  Following data collection , subject identifying information 
will be destroyed at the earliest opportunity consistent with data validation and study design, 
  Revised 08 -13-2020  
 producing an anonymous analytical data set.  Data and records will be kept lock ed and secured, 
with access limited to study staff and password protection on all data stored electronically .  No 
reference to any individual participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that 
may arise from th is study.  
 
Every effort w ill be made to maintain participant privacy. Data will only be released to scientists 
who are qualified and prepared to conduct a research study. If publications or presentations result 
from this research, participants will not be identified by name or any  other personal identifier.  
Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
The principal investigator and study coordinator will be responsible for the overall monitoring of 
the data and safety of study participants and will ensure that the subjects’ information is not 
revealed.  The principal investigator will be assisted by other members of the study staff.  
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or Deviations  
 
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse events, deviations , or protocol 
chang es will be promptly reported by the principal investigator or designated member of the 
research team to the IRB and sponsor or appropriate government agency if appropriate.  
 
 
References  
 
1. Van de Merwe JP NJ, Bouchelouche P, Bouchelouche K, Cervigni M, Daha LK, Elneil S, 
Fall M, Hohlbrugger G, Irwin P, Mortensen S, van Ophoven A, Osborne JL, Peeker R, 
Richter B, Riedl C, Sairanen J, Tinzl M, Wyndaele JJ. Diagnostic criteria, classification, and 
nomenclature for painful bladder syndrome/interstitial cysti tis: an ESSIC proposal. Eur Urol. 
2008;53(1):60 -67. 
2. Vasudevan V, Moldwin R. Addressing quality of life in the patient with interstitial 
cystitis/bladder pain syndrome. Asian J Urol. 2017; 4(1): 50 -54. 
3. Keay SK, Birder LA, Chai TC. Evidence for bladder uroth elial pathophysiology in functional 
bladder disorders.  Biomed Res Int . 2014;2014:865463. doi:10.1155/2014/865463  
4. Parsons CL. “The role of leaky epithelium and potassium in the generation of bladder 
symptoms in interstitial cystitis/overactive bladder, uret hral syndrome, prostatitis and  
gynaecological chronic pelvic pain.” BJUI . 2010 (107): 370 -375. 
5. Christmas TJ, Rode J, Chapple CR, et al. “Nerve fibre proliferation in interstitial cystitis.” 
Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol.  1990 (416): 447 -451. 
6. Warren JW, van de Merwe JP and Nickel JC: Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome and 
nonbladder syndromes: facts and hypotheses. Urology 2011; 78: 727.  
  Revised 08 -13-2020  
 7. Nickel JC, Irvine -Bird K, Jianbo L et al: Phenotype -directed management of in terstitial  
cystitis/bladder pain syndrome. Urology  2014; 84: 175.  
8. Walker S, Zambon, JP, Andersson, KE, Langefeld, CD, Matthews CA, Badlani, G, Bowman, 
H, Evans, RJ. Bladder capacity is a biomarker for abladder centeric versus systemic 
manifestation in inte rstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome. J Urol. 2017;198(2):369 -375. 
9. Jhang J, Kuo, HC. Pathomechanism of interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome and mapping 
the heterogeneity of disease. Intl Neurol J. 2016;20(Suppl 2):S95 -S104.  
10. Adamian L, Urits I, Orhurhu V, et al. A Comprehensive Review of the Diagnosis, Treatment, 
and Management of Urologic Chronic Pelvic Pain Syndrome.  Curr Pain Headache Rep . 
2020;24(6):27. Published 2020 May 6. doi:10.1007/s11916 -020-00857 -9 
11. Volkow ND, McLellan AT. Opioid Abuse in Chronic Pain --Misconceptions and Mitigation 
Strategies.  N Engl J Med . 2016;374(13):1253 -1263. doi:10.1056/NEJMra1507771  
12. Benedetti M, Cavazzuti, L, Mosca, M, Fusaro, I, Zati, A. Bio -Electro -Magnetic -Energy -
Regulation (BEMER) for the treatment of type I c omplex regional pain syndrome: A pilot 
study. Physiother Theory Pract. 2018;9( doi: 10.1080/09593985.2018.1491661.):1 -9. 
13. Strauch B, Herman, C,  Dabb, R, Ignarro, LJ, Pilla, AA. Evidence -Based Use of Pulsed 
Electromagnetic Field Therapy in Clinical Plastic Surgery. Aesthet Surg J. 2009;29(2):135 -
143. 
14. Ross C, Harrison, BS. The use of magnetic field for the reduction of inflammation: a review 
of the history and therapeutic results. Altern Ther Health Med. 2013a;19(2):47 -54. 
15. 10. Ikehara T, Yamaguchi, H, Miyamoto, H. Effects of electromagnetic fields on membrane 
ion transport of cultured cells. J Med Invest. 1998;45(1 -4):47 -56. 
16. Ross C, Harrison, BS. The use of magnetic field for the reduction of inflammation: a review 
of the histor y and therapeutic results. Altern Ther Health Med. 2013a;19(2):47 -54 
17. Jorgensen W, Frome, BM, Wallach, C. Electrochemical therapy of pelvic pain: effects of 
pulsed electromagnetic fields (PEMF) on tissue trauma. Eur J Surg Suppl. 1994;574:83 -86. 
 