 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol: Decision Making Support for Parents and Caregivers  
 
 
 
 
Study Site:  
Duke University Hospital  
2301 Erwin Road  
Durham, NC 27710  
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
Monica Lemmon, MD  
Department of Pediatrics and Population Health Sciences  
DUMC 3936  
Durham, NC 27710  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ClinicalTrial.gov identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB: Pro 00111995 ; March 20, 2023  
 
Study Title : Decision Making Support for Parents and Caregivers  
 
Short Title:  Decision Making Support  
 
Study Objective .  
 
To determine  the feasibility  and acceptability  of a tool to support decision making for parents 
of critically ill children.  
 
Study Overview.  
 
The feasibility study will use a single -arm design. All critically ill infants for whom a 
serious decision is anticipated will be screened for enrollment. We  will enroll  up to 40 
infants,  their parent(s),  and their clinician(s).  A study team member will deliver the tool, 
discuss its use with parents, and answer parent questions as they arise. We will survey 
parents at baseline. Parents and clinicians will be surveyed and interviewed after utiliz ing 
the tool.  
 
Measures.   
 
Prior  to implementation  of this decision  aid in a prospective  randomized trial, we must 
first determine whether 1) study procedures are feasible and 2) the intervention is 
acceptable to parents and clinicians.  
 
Feasibility will be defined as 1) enrollment rate of ≥ 50% and 2) complete data collection 
rate of ≥ 80%. Parent and clinician acceptability will be measured using s elf-report survey 
measures, adapted from prior work. Additional  outcomes will include preparation for 
decision making, parent decisional conflict, regret, and satisfaction, perception  of feeling  
heard  and understood,  and psychological  distress.  Preparati on for decision making will 
be measured using the PrepDM. Decisional conflict and regret will be measured by the 
Decisional Conflict Scale (DCS) and the Decisional Regret Scale (DRS); perception of 
feeling heard and understood will be measured by the Feeli ng Heard and Understood 
Scale (FHAU); parent psychological distress will be measured using PROMIS -29. 
 
Data  collection.   
 
The infant’s  chart  will be reviewed  and relevant  data extracted.  We will also document 
recruitment feasibility data. Parent baseline surveys will include demographic information 
and measures of psychological distress. Post-intervention surveys will be given to parents 
and clinicians following use of the tool. Clinician surveys will include meas ures of decision 
aid acceptability. Parent surveys will include measures of decision aid acceptability, 
decisional satisfaction, conflict and regret, perception of feeling heard and understood, 
preparation for decision making, and psychological distress.  
 
Parents and clinicians will be invited to complete semi -structured interviews, with content 
targeting acceptability of the decision aid.  Survey  data will be collected  and stored  via 
REDCap.  Qualitative  data will be analyzed  using  NVIVO.  
 
Study participants.  
 
Study  participants  will include  infants, parent s, and clinician s. Study  team  members  will 
screen  unit lists for potential  eligible  patients.  
 
Infant  inclusion  criteria  will include  1) age < 1 year,  2) admission  to a critical  care unit, 
and 3) an anticipated serious health care decision, defined as 1) a decision about 
initiating, not initiating, or withdrawing life sustaining treatment or chronic life -sustaining 
treatment (e.g. tracheostomy) and/or 2) a decision about major surgery and/or medical 
therapy.  
 
All parents of eligible infants will be considered for inclusion. Parent exclusion criteria  
will include  1) age < 18 years,  2) hearing  or speech  impairment,  and 3) non -English 
speakers.  
 
All clinicians  of eligible  infants will  be considered  for inclusion.  
 
Subject Recruitment and Compensation.  
 
We anticipate  up to 40 infants,  60 parents,  and 40 clinicians  will be enrolled  in this study.  
 
Patients  and parents:  We will recruit  from the Duke  Intensive  Care  Nursery, Pediatric 
Intensive Care Unit, and Pediatric Cardiac Intensive Care Unit.  
 
A study team member  will communicate with  the unit about  1) eligible patients and 
2) approaching  the family  about  their willingness  to speak  with research  staff about the 
study. A waiver of HIPPA authorization has been requested to allow identification  of 
prospective  participants.  A member  of the study  team  will approach eligible families to 
introduce the study to the family. For infants enrolled, parents will be compensated $100 for 
completion of all study procedures. Clinicians will be compensated $50 for completion of all 
study procedures.  
 
Study Intervention.  
 
The intervention includes a paper -based decision support tool. This decision guide includes  
content  related  to decisional  awareness,  values  clarification,  and a series  of question 
prompts. This intervention will be introduced to participants by a study team member, who 
will remain available with parents as they review and complete the tool. The tool asks 
parents to consider which values matter most to them and  to identify questions they would 
like to ask the clinical team.  Following completion of the tool, a study team member will  ask 
parents if they would like their answers shared with their clinical team. If the parent would 
like to share their responses, the study team member will  share a copy of parent responses 
with clinician s caring for the patient and their family.  
 
Risk -benefit assessment  
 
Benefits . There will be no direct benefits to the participants in the study. The potential 
benefit to future parents and clinicians is substantial because of the potential for this 
study to lead to the development of interventions to improve shared  decision  making  for 
infants  and children  with life-threatening  conditions. Therefore, the risks of this study, 
which we anticipate to be minimal, are reasonable in relation to its anticipated benefits.  
 
Adverse  events . The principal  investigator  or the clinical  study  staff will record  and follow 
all adverse events that occur. Data describing adverse events will be collected and 
reported to the IRB.  
 
Confidentiality and data security . We believe this study poses minimal risks to participants.  
See additional sections  for procedural  information  concerning  data storage, privacy, 
confidentiality, and safety monitoring.  
 
Parent distress . It is possible that intervention delivery or study procedures, including 
participant interviews, could increase parent distress.  Previous research has shown that 
interviews do not increase grief, and that families are glad to have participated in studies 
involving interviews about highly emotional topics. We will use several strategies to 
minimize the possibility of increasing distress, including 1) keeping the interview flexible 
so that when emotional responses such as anger or crying occur, the interviewer may 
offer rest breaks and direct the interview in and out  of the sensitive  area,  and 2) providing  
immediate  therapeutic  intervention  when needed. A  study team member with interview 
experience or the study PI will perform the interviews. Should a parent become upset 
during an interview or survey completion, the stud y team member collecting the data will 
allow the parent to stop and encourage  them  to talk about their feelings. If a parent 
remains upset, the research staff member will stay with the parent and help them to 
contact the social worker or a communit y mental health professional about their concerns. 
As part of routine clinical care, a social worker is assigned to each patient and family. 
After each parent interview, parents will be reminded that if they have concerns they wish 
to discuss, they ca n contact their social worker, hospital chaplain or personal clergy, or 
community mental health professional. The parents will be given information on how to 
contact other resources if necessary or, if they prefer, the research staff will contact a 
profess ional for them. For concerns or questions about the study, parents will be given 
phone numbers for the investigators.  
 
Parent burden . We anticipate that tool completion will require 15 -20 minutes of participant 
time. Parent interviews are expected to last approximately 30 -45 minutes.  Clinician  
interviews  are expected  to last approximately  15 - 30 minutes. This time commitment may be 
a burden for some participants.
 
Data and safety monitoring  
 
We believe this study will infer minimal risk to  participants. Interval data analysis will be 
performed midway through study completion. Data monitoring, including ensuring audio -
recordings are transcribed in a timely manner, will be confirmed monthly by the principal 
investigator and/or study coordinat or. For the audio recordings, we will use a Duke -
approved  transcription  service.  For the purposes  of our study,  “de-identification” w ill 
involve the removal of all identifiers outlined by the HIPAA privacy rule. Qualitative 
software will be used to analyze de -identified transcripts.  
 
Analysis files will be permanently stored on the Duke Server. During the analysis phase, de -
identified analysis files may additionally be stored on Duke Box or  a Duke  University  or 
Duke  Health  System  computer,  and uploaded  to the Duke  server daily.  
 
Consent process.  
 
The consent  process  will be completed  by the principal  investigator,  clinical  research  
coordinator,  or clinical research specialist on the study team. There  is no time limit to the 
consent  discussion.  We are open  to answering  any potential  questions  that may arise 
when we present the study information to parents or clinicians.  
 
The consent  process  will occur  in the Neonatal  Intensive  Care  Unit,  the Pediatric  
Intensive  Care  Unit,  or the  Pediatric  Cardiac  Intensive  Care  Unit.  The parent/legal  
guardian  may be consented  over the phone  or by  using  an e-consent.  The phone  
consent  process  will take place  in those  situations  where  attempts  to find  families  in the 
neonatal  intensive  care unit have  failed.  With the use of phone  consent  or an e-consent  
all efforts  will be made  to provide  a copy of  the consent  to parents  either  by fax or email  
before  reading  the consent.  A telephone  script  will be used to  introduce  the study  and 
then the consent  form will be read to the parent  or sent via email  as an e-consent.  
 
 
 
 
To mitigate  the risk of loss of confidentiality,  all patient  and clinician  data will be fully de-
identified,  with a participant  ID number  assigned  in the place  of any identifiers.  This ID 
number  will be linked  to identifying information  only in a secure,  separate  file for the 
duration  of the study  period  and analysis,  to allow  follow -up clinical information to be 
collected as needed.  
 
Participants  can contact  the PI or members  of the study  team  with any questions  that 
arise.  In addition, given  that this study  has multiple  points  of contact,  participants  will have  
additional  opportunities  to raise questions throughout the study period.   
 
We will maintain  a high level  of sensitivity  to passive  refusal,  so prospective  participants  
who do not show active interest will not be enrolled in the study.  
 
Privacy and confidentiality.  
 
All patient  and physician  data will be de-identified,  with a participant  ID number  assigned  
in the place  of any  identifiers.  This ID number  will be linked  to identifying  information  only 
in a secure,  separate  file for the  duration  of the study  period  and analysis,  to allow  follow -
up clinical  information  to be collected  as needed. All recordings will be transcribed and 
de-identified.  
 
Audio -recordings,  transcriptions,  and other  data will be securely  stored  on a Duke  server  
accessible  to the research  team.  Audio  recordings  will be reviewed  by a Duke -approved  
transcription  service  to de-identify audio  recordings.  Paper  documents  will be kept in a 
locked  cabinet  in an access  controlled  area.  
 
 
 
 
 