OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
1 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OFFICIAL TITLE : 
Regulation of Cervical Mucus Secretion  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Leo Han, MD , MPH  
 
Assistant Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology  
Oregon Health & Science University  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NCT No:  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Protocol Version Date:  
November 12, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
2 
  
Project Summary  
 
 
Hormonal contr aception remains the primary for m of contraception used by US women.  
These methods include oral conceptive pills, rings, patches, injectables, implants and the 
progestin containing intrauter ine device (IUD).  All of these progestin -based hormonal methods 
are thought to cause thickening of the cervical mucus that  causes  poor sperm penetration . While it 
is widely accepted that progestero ne is a mediator of mucus change s observed at midcycle, the 
regulation of this effect is not well understood.   Subsequently, lingering questions regarding the 
onset and extent of progestins actions on cervical mucus affects our prescribin g practice of 
current progestin -based contraception.  Moreover, our neglect of cervical mucus over the last 40 
years has perhaps led us to overlook a biologically intuitive target for non -hormonal 
contraceptive development.  
Most of our current knowledge of cervical mucus remains based in clinical studies done 
in the 60s and 70s with the advent of various forms of progestin only contraception such as the 
mini-pill.  However, these studies suffer from serious limitations.  First, mucus cha nges 
progressively under the influence of increasing amounts of estrogen  by becoming  less viscous 
and more favorable to sperm  penetration .  Mucus evaluation of a progestin must be timed to 
coincide with the peak effect of  endogenous estradiol and potential  trough effect of the 
contraceptive steroid, a complex problem for ma ny study des igns.  Additionally, ovulation 
presents an important  confounder that is  not accounted for in many of the mini -pill studies when 
ovulation occurred 15 -70% of the time. With ovu lation there is also endogenous progesterone 
being produced, subsequently suppressing  endogenous estradiol production .  As there is a 
convolution  of forces on mucus from both estradiol withdrawal and endogenous progesterone, the 
early and late effects of p rogesterone signaling remain incompletely understood.   
We propose studies to evaluate the temporal changes in human cervical mucus in 
response to progesterone and progestins as an initial step toward clarifying these relationships.   
Our hypothesis is that d irect effects of progesterone on the endocervix, independent of estrogen 
withdrawal , cause contraceptive changes to cervical mucus .  To study this, we  plan to conduct a 
randomized, prospective, crossover study examining cervical mucus changes in a sm all cohort of 
women in whom we will suppress circulating hormonal levels by administering a GnRH a gonist .  
We will th en artificially replace Estrogen  and Progesterone  in order to differentiate their effects 
on clinical and laboratory measurements of mucus quality.  We will be looking closely at the 
immediate c hanges in mucus when .35 mg of n orethindrone, a marketed drug is administered in 
this experimental setting.  We will also colle ct cervical cell samples at various time points and 
perform RT -PCR to determine whether genes for membrane bo und progesterone receptor are 
expressed and regulated by Estrogen  and Progesterone .    
We believe this research will offer important , immediate insight into progestin regulation 
of cervical  mucus.  However, we also expect  this to lay  important foundations  for future studies 
both clinical  and laboratory based. We hope our model wil l provide the vigorous conditions  with 
which we can eval uate mucus effects from other proge stin-based contraceptives such as the 
levonorgestrol -releasing  intrauterine system  or the  etonorgestre l implant.  Last, elucidation  of the 
relationship between  membrane bound progesterone receptors  and cervical mucus  will offer  new 
biochemical pathways to target  for contracepti ve development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
3 
  
1. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT  
 
1.1 Rationale and objectives of the study  
 
1.1.1 Rationale  
 
At this time, the majority of women in the United States using contraception rel y on short 
acting , reversible , hormonally -based contracepti ve methods.  More than a quarter rely on 
combined oral contraceptive pills; this increases to 35% when other hormonal methods that 
inhibit ovulation (injectables, rings, patches and implants) are i ncluded [1].  Although there are 
many peripheral benefits to  the use of hormonal contraception, for many women the perceived 
risks of hormonally based contraception outweigh perceived benefits [2][3][4].  A smaller , but no 
less important  group of women  have relative (e.g. obesity) or absolute contraindications to 
hormonal contraception due to thrombosis risk associated with estrogen [5].  It is widely believed  
that e strogen -free hormonal methods that do not block ovulation (e.g. norethindrone progestin -
only pill; LNG -IUS) work at least in part by inhibiting cervical mucus [6–9].   Although these 
methods exploit the progest erone -mediated changes in cervical mucus , we know little about how 
progesterone regulates this effect.  We have the  potential for developing an easy to use, non -
hormonal contraceptive based on mucus thickening alone  with a better understanding of the  
regulation and modification of this secretory machiner y.  
Cervical mucus is thought to rely on a careful balance of its solid (primarily mucin 
protei ns) and liquid components to give it the qualities that make it either facilitate sperm 
transport into the uterus or help it serve as a barrier to sperm and other pathogens.  Mucus 
production occurs in the endocervix where a single layer of columnar  cells line the endocervical  
canal, producing a mixture of water, ions, lipids, mucin proteins and non -mucin proteins.  Mucin 
proteins are large glycoproteins, with highly anionic carbohydrated ends that bind liquid and form 
polymer networks which either  trap mic roorganisms (including sperm) or  facilitate sperm 
transport depending on their orientation [10–12].  Despite forming the critical backbone to the 
gel-like quality of mucus, mucins comprise only 2 -5% of the mucus content by weight while 
water content ranges from 90 % when mucus is pre - or post-ovulatory , and up to 98% at 
midcycle [13][11].  It appears that a number of ion channels are involved in regulation of fl uid 
content in mucus secretion including sodium channels, calcium -based chloride channels, 
aquaporins and the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) [10,14] .  
The production of mucin protein genes and the flow of water and channel ions has been 
shown to be directly co rrelated to estrogen and progesterone levels [12,14,15] .  However,  to date, 
no direct mechanistic pathway exists describing the steroid r egulation of mucus production.  We 
know estrogen promotes mucin gene transcription and protein levels as well as fluid transudation 
and ion exchange [15,16] .  Meanwhile, these effects are all muted with the presence of 
progesterone in the luteal cycl e.  Experiments using both anti -estrogens and synthetic progestins 
demonstrate t hat these compounds affect mucus quality and sperm penetrability [17–20].  
However, it remains unclear what  changes to cervical mucus  result from  inhibition  or withdrawal  
of estrogen -based effects and what  changes derive  from  direct progesterone actions  on 
endocervical cells.  Previous experiments of progesterone -based  contraceptives were done in 
normal cycling women where drug treatment occurs in the setting of endogenous hormone 
production.   
Steroid regulation of mucus likely affects multiple components of the cellular machin ery 
at various  time points in the synthesis a nd secretion of cervical mucus. Some experiments 
monitoring mucus changes f ollowing ovulation (or exogenous administration of progest in) 
demonstrate changes in quantity and quality much faster than what would be  expected from the 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
4 
 classical mechanisms through which steroids are thought to work.  In the well -characterized, 
classic nucl eus-based paradigm,  progesterone and estrogen bind to receptors located in the 
cytosol, but must be transported into the nucleus whe re they bind to the hormone response 
element (HRE) located within specific gene promoter regions and activate transcription  [21].  
This is generally a “slow” process (e.g. several hours  to days ) as it relies on DNA transcription 
and RNA translation to produce proteins that promote cellular changes.  However, there is 
evidence suggesting  changes in cervical mucus  happen very rapidly.  Serum contraceptive steroid 
levels peak approximately 2 hours after oral ingestion  [22].  One study demonstrates cervical 
mucus reach ing its maximum unfavorabil ity 3-4 hours after ingestion , and others  studies show the  
arrest of sperm migration to occur within 30 minutes  to 2 hours  [7,23] .  While t hese older studies 
are limited in that progestin administratio n does not coincide with peak estrogen effects on 
mucus, the demonstration that  cervical mucus change s occur faster than other progesterone 
mediated effects on the reproductive system  suggest s that possibly direct (non -nuclear) pathways 
are involved [7].  At least two classes of membrane associated progesterone receptors (MAPRs) 
have been described ; the progesterone membrane component 1 and 2 (PGRMC1, PGRMC2) and 
the membrane progestin receptors α and β (mPRs)  [21].  These receptors have been shown to bind 
progesterone and carry out functions in other reproductive tract tissues through non -nuclear 
mechanisms.  However, w hether progesterone could be involved wit h the inhibition of an ion 
channel or block the exocytosis of secretory granules of the cervix is completely 
unknown [15,24] . 
 Clarifying progesterone’s regulation  of mucus would have large implications on our 
evaluation of cervical mucus as a contraceptive  target .  While many current methods rely on 
mucus thickening for contraception, the potency , timing , and mediation of these transformations  
are poorly understood .  Answering these questions will contribute to the improvement of existing 
hormonal approaches and provide insight into new targets for non -hormonal contraceptive 
methods.  
 
1.1.2 Objectives and hypothesis  
 
Hypothesis:  Contraceptive action of progestogens  occur through direct effects on cervical mucus 
and not indirectly though reduction in systemic estrogen . 
 
Primary Objective:   Using ovarian suppressed women, we seek to indivi dually evaluate the 
effect of E 2 and progestin on cervical mucus to better understand its hormonal regulation.   To do 
this we will:  
1. Create and validate an artificial model of the menstrual cycle using exogenous E2 and P4 
replacement in ovarian suppressed women.  
2. Evaluate effects of incre asing estrogen levels on cervical mucus . 
3. Evaluate the timing of both the onset, duration and termination of progestin actions on 
cervical mucus following estrogen priming . 
4. Compare the effects of estrogen withdrawal to the synthetic progestin norethindrone . 
 
 
Secondary Objectives:  
1. To determine if membrane  bound progesterone receptors  are present in the cervix and 
are regulated by E2/ P4. 
 
 
 
 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
5 
  
1.2 Previous Similar Studies  
 
Much of the literature examining effects of progestin s on cervical mucus originate from 
the 1960’s and 1970’s  during  the advent and introduction of progestin only contraception.  These 
studies all had similar methods  [18,23,25 –31].  After baseline measurements were taken, a group 
of normal cycling women were starte d on a progestin -only treatment  one of the first few days of 
the following cycle.  Laboratory and clinical measures were ass essed serially with varying 
degrees of frequency including serum and urine hormonal levels to assess hormone profiles , basal 
body temperature, vaginal cytology, endometrial morphology and mucus characterizatio n through 
qualitative changes (I nsler scoring) and sperm -mucus interaction (through either in vitro  
penetration t esting or post -coital testing).  Findings consistently demonstrated changes in mucus 
characteristics  with ovulation including  lower spinnbarkeit scores, poor fer ning, increases in 
viscosity,  greater  cell content and decreases in volume  [18,25,28] .  Results with respect to sperm 
penetration were mixed , as some tests used a post -coital test while others used an in vitro  sperm 
penetration.   While some studies de monstrated essentially zero penetration  at peak progestin  
levels following administration  [23,26,31] , others demonstrated decreased penetration, but with 
some failures  [25,28,31,32] .   
In addition to mucus changes, these stu dies demonstrate that progestin -only pills had a 
range of effects including suppression of proliferative activity in the endometrium, suppress ion of  
midcycle FSH and LH peaks, and suppress ion of  ovulation in 15 -70% of cycles [7,18,20,32] .   An 
important  feature of our proposed study involves eliminating the  variability due to the timing of 
natural ovulation th rough the use of artificial cycles.  The progestin in tervention occurred at 
variable times when mucus may not have been at its most  favorable.  Moreover, since ovulation is 
not fully inhibited, there are likely endogenous progesterone effects in addition to  exogenous 
progestin effects. No previous studies disentangle this confounding influence on cervical mucus.   
The other advantage of our methodology is it allows reappraisal of  the time course of 
progestin effects .  Currently, the commonly held belief among providers is that progestin effects 
have rapid onset and rapid offset.  In reality very few studies examin e this outcome and even 
then,  in those older studies , rigid study design is not employed .  The study by Cox et al. 
evaluating six users of .5 mg of oral megestrol acetate showed that mucus penetration sharply 
falls from full penetration to no penetration in 2 hours, followed by an equally steep return to 
penetrative mucus  at 22 -24 hours [23].  Cox’s study contains almost no  measures of st atistical 
significa nce only pooled data of the 6 subjects is  presented .  Lebech et al., examining 17 patients , 
administ ered .25mg of megestrol acetate orally and noted “normal penetration of sperm” 38 hours 
later. In addition to no statistics, or measurements of sample variati on, Lebech’s study also noted  
anovulatory  cycles in some of his controls.   
Perhaps more interesting than the literature reported is the abs ence of literature 
supporting current guidelines  of oral administration .  The most definitive review on progestin 
only oral contraceptives is a 195 page supplementary report  publishe d in Contraception in 1994 
by McC ann and Potter [22].  The review details all aspects of pill  properties  including mode of 
action, metabolic effects and drug interac tions  based on over 530 references .  From this review, in 
the final  section entitled “Taking POPs effectively”  the authors endorse that taking the pill every 
single day at the same time is essential [33].  In addition to the papers described above, t he 
reference for this recommendation  consists of  two letters of personal correspondence and a 
textbook written for general practi tioners to become more familiar with basic principles of birth 
control methods.  Yet McCann’s guideline s serve  both as the reference and the basis for similar 
recommendations foun d in Speroff and Darney’s A Clinical Guide for C ontraception  and 
Hatcher’s  Contraceptive Technology [34,35] . 
Also contained within the progestin only literature, t here is some suggestion that the type 
of progestin and the mode of delivery may affect the rate at which changes in cervical mucus 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
6 
 occur.  Several old mini pill studies comparing  different progestins , including many of which are 
either unavailable or  no longer widely used , detail that there appear to be varying degrees of 
mucus response  depending on the progestin [26,32] .  The results of these studies are difficult to 
evaluate as they compare specimens in different women.  Similarly, the topic of dose-dependent 
changes  on mucus is essentially unexplored .  As for route of  administration , both  Depo -Provera 
and the Levonorgestre l implant (Norplant) having been shown to cause  more gradual declines in 
mucus quality after administration [36,37] .  More recent evaluations of the LNG -IUS system has 
shown that users of the LNG -IUS have mucus that is substantia lly different from usual metrics 
and highly impenetrable by sperm compared to controls [8].  Moreover, temporal studies of LNG -
IUS and cervical mucus indicate  that mucus quality and sperm penetration is rapidly, but not 
universally  altered following insertion [38]. 
It has been demonstrated that peak protein levels of one of the most important secreted 
protein in cer vical mucus MUC5b , occurs at least one day after peak expression of mRNA 
levels [39]. Therefore there is interest in finding a regulating  mechanism for “fast” mucus 
chan ges.  Current research has focused on non-genomic estrogen receptors as well as the role of 
membrane channels in hydration [24,40 –43].  In the case of progesterone,  at least two classes of 
membrane associated progesterone receptors (MAPRs) have been described, including 
progesterone membrane component 1 and 2 (PGRMC1, PGRMC2) as well as membrane 
progestin receptors α and β (mPRs) [21].  Both PGRMC1 and mPRs have been demonstrated to 
serve functions in the endometrium and oviduct v ia non -nuclear protein cascades [44][45] (See 
Figure 1  in addendum ).  PGRMC1 for example has been shown to impair binding of oxytocin 
with its membrane receptor and that it mediates an anti -apoptotic effect in ovarian cells via non -
nuclear protein cascades [44,46] . Although PG RMC1 expression was noted in Hela cells, which 
are derivative from a squamous cell cerv ical cancer line, neither PGRMCs  nor mPRs ha ve been 
identified in human muc us producing endocervical cells [47].  Initial steps  towards exploring this 
possible  source of regulation further would be to confirm the presence of non -nuclear 
progesterone receptors in these  cells.  
 
 
  
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
7 
 1.3 Design and Methodology  
 
General summary of the approach:   
This study will consist of two parts : (1) examining cervical mucus during a normal cycle  
(2) suppressing endogenous hormone production, add ing back therapy through estrogen patches 
and randomiz ing women  to assess the impact of estrogen withdrawal v ersus  progestin 
administration  on mucus . Serum , cervical mucus  and endocervical brush  samples will be 
collected at defined points through out the  experiment .  Figure s 2 and 3 below illustrate the 
experimental design .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3.1 Subject Selection  
A prospective cohort of healthy, normally menstruating women will be recruited. No 
subpopulations of women will be specifically included or excluded, and no special classes of 
subjects will be enrolled.  For detailed inclusion/exclusion criteria see Table 1.  
 
Table 1: Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
3	weeks	aer	
LUPRON	
.3	mg	TD	E2	
24	
 24	
E2	withdrawal	
Intervenon	1	Figure	3:	Sampling	and	Hormone	and	Replacement	Plan	for	Randomized	Cycles	
.1	mg	TD	E2	
Connue	
to	OCPS	
Intervenon	2	
0.35	mg	NET			
24	
 24	
=	 or	
5	days	of		
Progesterone	
For	withdrawal	bleed	
15	 10	 5	 28	 20	 25	
Follicular	Phase	Luteal	Phase	 Ovulaon	SAMPLING	TIME	
CYCLE	DAY	Start	of	Menses	
Mid		
Follicular	Late	
Follicular	Ovulaon	
Day:14	
By	24hrs	
	post	“Peak”	home	
test	result	mid	Luteal	Figure	2:	Sampling	Plan	for	Baseline	cycle	
Natural		
Cycle	
Leuprolide		
7-9	
 1-3	
 14	
 3-5	
 6-9**	Early		
Follicular	
**=days	post	ovulaon	
		
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
8 
 Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
 Normal menstrual cycles of 25 -35 days in 
length for at least previous 3 cycles  
 21-40 years of age  
 BMI >18, <3 5 
 Serum P4 ≥ 3 ng/ml on single sample 
collected between days 18 -25 of self -
reported menstrual cycle  
 Flexible schedule allowing blood draws 
on less than 48 hour notice  
 In good general health  
 Commit to using non -hormonal 
contraceptive methods without spermicide 
during  study period except those 
prescribed in the experimental protocol  
 No objections to taking study drugs  
 No objections to refraining from 
intercourse the night before any sampling 
and willing to using condoms during 
vaginal intercourse.   Oral contraceptive us e or other hormone 
supplement within the preceding 2 months  
 Women with current cervical infection  
 Evidence of abnormal cervical cytology  
 Use of any IUD for contraception  
 Long -acting hormonal contraceptive use in the 
past 12 months (e.g., Depo -Provera®)  
 Contraindications to study drugs  
 Current or past pregnancy within the previous 6 
months or currently trying to conceive  
 Desiring to conceive in the next 8 months  
 Breastfeeding in the past 2 months  
 Diagnosed Diabetes or Metabolic Syndrome  
 Diagnosed Polycystic Ovary Syndrome  
 History of, or self -reported, substance abuse  
 Smoker  
 Previous infertility treatment excluding male 
factor issues  
 Use of an investigational drug within the past 2 
months  
 History of excisional or ablative treatment 
procedure on cervix (ie. LEE P, Cryotherapy, Cold 
Knife Cone)  
 Current treatment for a vaginal infection such as 
Bacteria Vaginosis  
 History of Venous thromboembolism (VTE) or 
inherited thrombophilias  
 
 
 
1.3.2 Treatment Cycles : 
  
The study will begin with the first day of menstruation following enrollment.  This cycle 
will be untreated but monitored and sampled (see figure 2 and section 1.3.3 for sample collection 
schedule).  In order to determine points corresponding to late folli cular and ovulation in these 
women, s ubjects will be provided with Clearblue® Ovulation Test  (Inverness Medical 
Innovations , Inc., Waltham, Massachusetts).  The fertility monitors test for urinary metabolites of 
LH, which will aid in staging of the menstrual cycle.    At the end of the natural cycle treatment 
(menses), subjects will receive the gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist Lupron ® 
(leuprolide acetate; Abbvie , Chicago , IL) in a 11.25  mg single injection which is sufficient for 3 
months  of continuous suppression. At 3 weeks, a visit will occur where an additional blood 
aliquot will be obtained and sent to the endocrine lab to confirm suppression. A phone call 
following confirmation will be made to instruct the subject to begin patches .  We have previous 
experience with this model that shows ovarian suppression is reliably achieved at 21 days [48]. 
After confirmation of ovarian suppression and collection of baseline serum samples, all subjects 
will undergo replacement of endogenous estrogen with patches .  
Transde rmal E2 patches changed twice weekly (Vivelle -Dot®, Noven Pharmaceuticals 
Inc.; Miami, FL) will be used to replace E2, with a 0.1 mg/day transdermal dose having been 
previously shown to restore circulating E2 levels in ovarian -suppressed women to 89 ± 38 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
9 
 pg/ml [49], levels comparable to the late follicular and luteal phases of natural cycles [50,51] .  
Women will be kept at this level until prior to a randomized intervention at which poin t the day 
prior we will bring the women to mid-cycle levels (.3 mg/day). Levels of E2 in normal women 
during the mid -cycle surge have been reported to be 335 ± 21 pg/ml [51] or approximately 3 
times the E2 concentrations measured with a 0.1 mg/day transdermal E2 dose[49]. 
Pharmacokinetic data of E2 patches demonstrates  that half -life is approximately 5.9 -7.7[52]. 
Again previous use of this replacement schedule demonstra tes that these levels approximate 
serum hormone levels of normally cycling women [48].  In between interventions the subject will 
be maintained at the .1 mg /day level to prevent menopausal symptoms.  At the end  the subject 
will be placed on oral micronized P4 (200 mg/day)  for 5 days to trigger a withdrawal bleed .  This 
dose cause s circulating P4 levels similar to those detected during the luteal phase of the menstrual 
cycle[56]..   
Table 3 : Sample Collection Schedule for Natural Cycles.  
Experimental Cycle  Phase of Cycle  Days of  Collection  
Natural Menstrual 
Cycle  Early Follicular  Days 3 -5  
Mid Follicular  Days 7 -9 
Late Follicular  Days 11-13 
Ovulation  Days 0 -1 Post LH -Surge 
(“Peak” fertility home test 
result)  
Mid Luteal  Days 6-9 Post LH Surge  
 
For the intervention phase women will be  randomized to receive two different 
interventions twice  to assess the effects of a single dose of oral progestin, Norethindrone (NET) 
versus estrogen withdrawal only.  The dose of NET .35 mg is the same dose found in 
commercially sold oral progestin -only contraceptives [57].   During the intervention cycles, 
women will be started at the .1 mg dose.  After at least 5 days the su bject can undergo an 
intervention.  The day prior to the intervention the subject will have her patches increased to the 
.3mg level.  On the day of intervention that subject will either leave the patch es on and take a 
NET pill or the subject will have the patch es removed.   At this point, in order to evaluate 
temporality of effect, we will collect several timed samples over 24 hours  from i nitiation of 
intervention (see F igure 4) . Following this  24-hour collection, all patients will be placed again on 
.1 mg patch for ~5 days as a washout.  Recognizing there is some burden to allotting time to 
come to the visits, the subjects may schedule their next intervention a time beyond 5 days that is 
convenient for them.  Again, we will only increase to the .3 mg the da y before the scheduled 
intervention is to take place.   All in all, the subject will receive 4 intervention/24 hours sampling 
periods, 2 of which will be the NET and 2 of which will be the estrogen withdrawal . See Figure 3 
for replacement and collection sc hedule  during this part of the experiment . Finally, after the 
progesterone withdrawal , subjects will be placed on a low dose oral contraceptive pill (.35 mcg 
ethinyl estradiol/1 mg norethindrone  acetate) for management of side effect related to leuprolide.   
  
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
10 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3.3 Monitoring and evaluation  
 
Ovulation testing : Subjects will be provided with Clearblue® Fertility Tests (Inverness 
Medical Innovations, Inc., Waltham, Massachusetts) for use beginning between days 8-10 of the 
menstrual cycle (depending on individual cycle length history) and continuing daily for up to 15 
days or until the LH surge is detected.   The device  reports a positive result on detection of the LH 
surge  which should occur approximately 24 -36 hours prior to ovulation .  
 
 
Collection of samples : At each visit  where we are collecting data , blood samples and 
mucus samples will be collected.  For blood sample s, approximately 5 ml of blood will be 
collected and sent for analysis. A basic gynecological exam will be used to collect  cervical  
mucus. An unlubricated speculum will be placed so that the cervix will be fully visualized. A 
large dry sterile swab used to clean the ectocervix of any debris.  We will obtain fresh mucus 
using a special endocervical aspirator (Unimar Aspirette device, C ooper Surgical, Trumbull, CT, 
USA) [58].  Grasping ring forceps will be used for collecting thick or densely adherent 
3	weeks	aer	
LUPRON	
.3	mg	TD	E2	
24	
 24	
E2	withdrawal	
Intervenon	1	Figure	3:	Sampling	and	Hormone	and	Replacement	Plan	for	Randomized	Cycles	
.1	mg	TD	E2	
Connue	
to	OCPS	
Intervenon	2	
0.35	mg	NET			
24	
 24	
=	 or	
5	days	of		
Progesterone	
For	withdrawal	bleed	
Figure	4:	24	hr	sampling	schedule:	
Time	0	hours	
	6	
 	2	
	4	
 22	
24	
24	
	0	
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
11 
 endocervical mucus.  For the days we are collecting endocervical cells for RNA analysis, 
following mucus collection, an endocervical brush will be inserted into the os  and then 
immediately rinsed into a special RNA preserving  reage nt.  Mucus will be transported in the 
collection device to a laboratory area close by wher e analysis will be conducted . Brush samples 
and any remaining mucus will immediately be frozen for later analysis.   
Five collections  will be performed during the natural cycle between days 3 -5 (early 
follicular), 8 -10 (mid follicular),  11-13 (late follicu lar), within 24 hours of positive ovulation  test 
(ovulation), and days 6-9 post ovulation ( mid luteal ) (see Table 3 ).   
Figure 3 shows the s ample collection during the second part of experiments  when we 
replace hormone exogenously .  The patient will undergo 4 periods of sample collection each 
spanning a 24 hours period.  The subject  upon initiation of the randomized intervention (estradiol 
withdrawal vs. NET ).  Each collection period will include six samples  (see figure 4).  This 
sampling schedule  will take place over 2 days.  Beginning in the morning, we will collect samples 
at time 0 (initiation of intervention),  2,4, and 6 hours . They will then return the next morning for 
collections at 22 and  24 hours. There will also be one sample collection at the beginning of the 
period (3 weeks after the Lupron shot), to confirm that ovarian suppression has been achieved and 
mucus is poor.  
 This means there will be 5 collections in the natural cycle and 4 (interventions) x 6 
(collections/intervention) + 1 (pri or to start of period) for a total of 30 collections.   These will 
occur over 15  visits.  Enrollment can also be combined with the first collection visit to make 1 4 
total visits ).  Measure o utcomes are further described below . 
 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
12 
 * Visits 8, 10, 12, and 14  will include serum hormone levels, cervical mucus scoring, sperm penetration testing at 0,2,4,6 hours. 
Endocervical sampling will be done at 6 hours.  
** Visits 9, 11, 13, and 15  will include serum hormone levels, cervical mucus scoring, sperm penetration testing at 22 and 24 hours 
(from previous day). Endocervical sampling will be done at 24 hours.  
# You will be randomized to receive NET at 2 out of the 4 24 hr visits (visits8, 1 0, 12, and 14).  
@ Sperm Penetration Testing is an experiment done in a laboratory where donor sperm is placed in extracted cervical mucus and  
evaluated for their ability to swim.  
 
 
 
 
Please note the protocol will have certain flexibility regarding initiation of certain parts of 
the study in order to minimize study burden on the subjects.  Enrollment (visit 2) and the first 
collection (visit 3) can be combined for one longer visit if th e subject desires.  During both 
natural and  artificial cycles, a personalized study schedule regarding hormone replacement plan 
and sampling dates will be given to the patient.  A study diary will be kept by the patient 
recording all medications taken by t he patient as well  as the daily  results of the home fertility test. 
Almost all sampling visits have a 3 -day window during the natural cycle except days marking Study Visit Schedul  
Study Mon th -  
 
Month 1    
 
Month 2  
Corresponding  
Experimental  
Time  Screening  Enrollment  Natural Cycle  Lupron 
Injection    
 
Randomized Cycles  
EF MF LF Ovulation  
ML Ovarian 
Suppression   
 
24 hr 
collection  24 hr 
collection   
 
24 hr  
collection   
 
24 hr  
collection  
Visit Number  0 1 2 3 4 5 6  
7 8* 9** 10* 11**  12*  
13**   
14*  
15**  
Consent  X                
Medical History  X                
Urine Pregnancy 
Test X                
Vitals (Blood 
Pressure, Pulse)  X                
Height and Weight  X                
Serum 
Progesterone+ 
Estrogen Levels  X  X X X X X X X* X** X* X** X* X** X* X** 
Cervical Mucus 
Scoring    X X X X X  X* X** X* X** X* X** X* X** 
Sperm Penetration 
Testing@     X X X  X* X** X* X** X* X** X* X** 
Endocervical cell 
collection for 
RNA testing    X X X X X  
X* X** X* X** X* X** X* X** 
Receive Home 
Fertility Test Kit   X               
Receive Study 
Diary   X               
Receive Combined 
Oral Contraceptive 
(at end of visit)           
        
X 
Lupron  or 
equivalent  
Injection        X  
        
Receive Study 
Patches                  
Receive 
Progesterone Pills                  
Receive NET          X#  X#  X#  X#  
Study wrap -up                 
Estimated time  90
m 30
m 15
m 15
m 15
m 15
m 30m 15m 8hr 2.5h
r 8hr 8hr 2.5h
r 8hr 2.5h
r 2.5h
r 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
13 
 ovulation in the natural cycle .  Similarly, the time between interventions is flexible as long a s 
they are at least 5 days apart and the subject is able to come for back -to-back days of the 24 -hour 
collections in the replacement  cycle.  Recognizing that the 24 -hour samplings are time consuming 
and potentially burdensome, this gives flexibility to the  subject on when these days occur.  Also, 
as this is well within the three -month suppression period of leuprolide, offering this flexibility 
should not be a problem.  
 
Moreover, cycles themselves can be initiated with some flexibility.  Following leuprolide  
administration, the artificial cycle can begin between 21 to 28 days later allowing for subsequent 
visits to occur on weekdays or times best suited for the subject . 
 
 
Cervical Mucus T esting : During and following the collection, the clinical measures of Mu cus 
Scoring, Slide Testing and Penetration Testing will be evaluated as outlined by #1, #2 and #3 
below . The remaining mucus as well the endocervical brush sample will be frozen for laborato ry 
evaluations at later time (#4 , #5, and #6 ).  In order to preven t disruption of sperm -mucus 
penetration tests, sexually active women will be asked to use non -spermicidal condoms  for 
vaginal intercourse .  The women’s health research unit will provide such condoms to subjects.   
 
1. Cervical Mucus Scoring  
 
During and immediately following every mucus collection , these metrics will be graded: 
volume, consistency, cellularity, spinnbarkeit and ferning.  This scoring system is described in the 
WHO laboratory Manual for the Examination and Processing of Human Se men and is a 
modification of the original Insler Score.  Table 5 below outlines the components and grading of 
the score.  A score of 10 is considered to be conceptive mucus favoring sperm penetration.  
 
Table 5 WHO Laboratory Scoring of Cervical Mucus  
Scor e:  0 1 2 3 
Volume - as 
estimated by 
amount that fills 
collection 
catheter  
 0 ml .01-.1 ml  .1-.29 ml  = > .3 ml  
Viscosity  thick, highly 
viscous, 
premenstrual 
mucus  mucus of 
intermediate 
viscosity  mildly viscous 
mucus  watery, 
minimally 
viscous, mucus  
Ferning  no 
crystallization  
 atypical fern 
formation  
 primary and 
secondary stem 
ferning  
 tertiary and 
quaternary stem 
ferning  
 
Spinnbarkeit  
 <1cm  
 1–4cm 
 5–8cm 
 9cm or more  
 
Cellularity  
 >20 cells per 
HPF or >1000 
cells per Pl  
 11–20 cells per 
HPF or 501–
1000 cells per Pl  
 1–10 cells per 
HPF or 1 –500 
cells per Pl  
 0 cells  
 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
14 
  
 
 
 
2. Simplified Slide Test  
 
 For both the SST and sperm -cervical mucus penetration test, cryopreserved sperm 
derived from our sperm bank at OHSU will be unfrozen and confirmed for activation. .  Prethaw 
sperm count, motility and morphology sufficient for fertilization  will be documented prior to use.   
Following thaw we will re -evaluate sperm count and motility.  
A simplified slide test (SST) will be performed again according  to the WHO Laboratory 
Manual.   In this test, a drop of fresh cervical mucus is placed on a clear glass slide and flattened 
under a cover slip, surrounded by semen placed at each edge of the cover slip, incubated for 30 
min at 37.1°C. Penetrability will be  determined by the presence of any sperm <.5 cm the edge of 
the mucus sample.  The outcome is graded as having normal penetrability, poor penetrability or 
abnormal penetrability (penetration with immotile sperm).  The simplified slide test (SST) was 
initia lly designed for use only when scant or thick mucus prohibited performance of the sperm -
cervical mucus penetration test (SCMPT) described below.  We will perform this test if enough 
mucus is available for two different penetration tests . 
 
3. Sperm -cervical  mucus penetration test   
 
Sperm penetrability will also be assessed using the sperm -cervical mucus penetration test 
(SCMPT).  The SCMPT is an in vitro sperm penetration test, described in detail by Eggert -
Kruse [59].  Fresh cervical mucus is immediately aspirated into a capillary tube.  It is then sealed 
from one end — and with a single drop of mucus protruding from the open end— it is placed into 
a reservoir of semen.  Migration distance of the foremost spermatozoon, density of penetration 
using an average of the total number of live sperm at each centimeter between 1 and 5 cm, and 
the quality of motility at the distal end of  the capillar y tube are assessed (see table 5  below). The 
test will be performed once , at 2 hours after incubation . Each parameter is graded on a scale from 
0 to 3 for at total score of 9.  Scores greater than >= 6 are considered to have good 
penetration [60].  For both sperm -penetrations tests these tests will be done by 5 days following 
mucus collection in accordance with recommendations of the WHO manual . 
 
 
Table 6: Sperm Penetrati on Meter Score as adapted from Eggert Kruse [59] 
Penetration 
Parameter  0 1 2 3 
Migration 
Distance (mm)  <15 15-29 30-44 >=45  
Sperm Density  0-9 10-49 50-99 >=100  
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
15 
 Motility Grade  Immotile  In Situ motility 
(shaking)  50-99 
Slow forward 
motility  >=100  
Highly 
Propulsive  
Motility  
 
4. Real -time PCR of MAPRs.   
Frozen samples of rinsed endocervical brushings  in RNA later (Qiagen ) will be thawed 
for quantitative real -time PCR.  After total RNA is isolated and purified, it will be reverse 
transcribed into cDNA using primers.  Primers for PGRMC1 and PGRMC2, mPR α and β, and 
PGR  will be created using Primer Express software [Applied Biosystems (ABI), Foster City, CA, 
USA].  The primer and probe sequences for PGRMC1 and PGRMC2 have been validated 
recently in the macaque ovary by comparing the values obtained from real -time PCR with 
microarray data [61].  Transcript levels in each sample will be quantif ied against a five -point 
standard curve.  Samples from similar points in the cycle will be pooled.  The real -time PCRs will 
be performed in MicroAmp Fast Optical 96 -well plates on an ABI 7500 Fast Real -time PCR 
System.    
 5. Mucus Rheological Characteristics  
Once mucus samples have been evaluated by mucus score and sperm  penetration  (#2 and 
#3 above), the remaining, de -identified samples will be sent to the Complex Fluids and Soft 
Solids Laboratory at Oregon State University. OSU will only rece ive samples that are de -
identified and coded by the subject number so that their tests and analysis can be correlated to 
serum hormone levels and results from #2 -3 above.  Labels on the samples will contain the 
subject number, the sample number (visit numb er) and the date the sample was originally 
obtained.  The data returned would both be aggregated data of samples pooled from similar time 
points as well as data sorted by subject in order to account for inter -subject variability.  OSU will 
use the same cod ing system as OHSU (subject number).  
Led by Dr. Travis Walker, the lab specializes in developing both theoretical and 
experimental methods to study complex fluids, soft solids, miscible fluid interactions, and 
biological systems. They will use both sheer a nd extensional rheological techniques to provide 
detailed mechanical chara cterization of the cervical muc us samples.  These will be performed on 
samples that are otherwise destroyed and will be destroyed following testing.  This mechanical 
data will be cor related to conventional mucus scores.  
6. Ion Content  
Following mucus collection,  an aliquot of the coded  mucus may  be sent to the OHSU 
elemental analysis core lab to measure ion content of mucus.   The lab  will only receive sam ples 
that are coded by the subject number so that  their tests and analysis can be correlated  to serum 
hormone levels and results from #2 -3 above.   Labels on the samples will contain the 
subject  number, the sample number (visit  number) and the date the sample was 
origina lly obtained.   The elemental analysis core lab is an on campus facility run by Martina 
Ralle Ph.D. that provides quantification of ions such as sodium, calcium in biological 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
16 
 samples.  Read out will be used to help  understand changes in mucus composition du e to 
hormonal fluctuations.  
 
1.3.3 Subject Recruitment and Compensation  
 
We will recruit subjects from the Portland metro area. Most of our enrollment will likely 
be in response to notifications of research opportunities posted on campus (print, flyers, and on -
line), and through community sources soliciting volunteers and study participants (e.g., Craig’s 
List).  Subjects will be reimbursed $ 45 per collection and $ 250 for the leuprolide aceta te injection .  
In the artificial cycle s, we will give a 100 dollar bonus for completing each 24 cycle in order to 
additionally compensate subjects for the time spent at OHSU between 2 –hour collections .  Total 
compensation for completion of all aspects of the study will be $2000.  
  
 
1.3.4 Description of drugs and d evices to be studied  
 
GnRH a gonist : Lupron (leuprolide acetate)  is FDA -approved for use in men for the palliative 
treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Lupron  belong s to the GnRH agonist class of drugs. In 
addition to prostate cancer, Lupron is approved f or use in women for the management of 
endometriosis and for fibroid surgery to improve anemia resulting from vaginal bleeding due to 
fibroids. Lupron is also approved for use in children for the treatment of central precocious 
puberty [62]. Our proposed use of Lupron  is unapproved because we plan to use it in healthy 
women, which  represents a different patient population. Our reason for using it in a different patient 
population is not to support FDA approval for a new indication, but is based on purely scientific 
reasons. As this is a small prospective study, to be able to study the outcomes in a crossover fashion 
increases the statistical power and reliability of results.  
Using Lupron  will allow us to determine what happens to cervical mucus when the 
menstrual cycle is stopped in young women thus mimicking a menopausal state, and what happens 
when E2, P4 and NET  are added back in the absence of ovarian processes (i.e. follicle growth, 
corpus luteum development and function). Lupron act by down regulating  GnRH receptor s in the 
pituitary, thus inhibiting gonadotropin release. This mechanism of action is the same in everyone 
receiving leuprolide acetate, so the risks of its use in women with endometriosis or fibroids are a 
good surrogate for the expected risks of its use in healthy women. The dose of Lupron  selected 
(11.25  mg) is the FDA approved 3 -month dose used in women .  Moreover, higher dose s of 
leuprolide acetate are used safely  (up to 30 mg for 3 month formulation). Thus, the use of Lupron  
is not expected to significantly increase the risks to subjects.  
  
Estradiol:  Transdermal E2 doses were selected to in order to  reproduce circulating E2 levels 
consistent with a  normal menstrual cycle and not to maintain replacement levels of hormone. We 
are assuming that absorption of E2 from multiple patches will be linear. The form of E2 in the 
patches is identical to endogenous E2 from the ovaries, and the transdermal route of administration 
is preferable as it avoids the first pass effect in the liver and thus is more ph ysiologic than oral 
administration [49].   
The transdermal E2 patches will be used at higher than United States Food and Drug 
Administration ( FDA) -approved doses during the .3 mg patch days.  However, subjects will be at 
this level for a sh ort period of time. The amount of E2 delivered at the highest dose (0.3 mg/day on 
days 7-9, 28-30) is within the normal physiologic range of E2 secreted by the ovary during the 
menstrual cycle (0.07 -0.5 mg/day, Vivelle -Dot package insert), so it is anticipated that even at the 
highest doses subjects will not be exposed to circulating E2 levels that exceed what they are 
routinely exposed to during their menstrual cycle. Because the form of E2 in the patches is identical 
to natural E2, the route of administration allows for physiologic E2 delivery, the subjects will only 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
17 
 be acutely exposed to unapproved doses, and our doses are anticipated to cause circulating E2 levels 
similar to what the subjects are routinely exposed to  during their menstrual cycle, we do not 
anticipate a significant increase in risk to the subjects by our proposed unapproved use of the 
transdermal E2 patches .  In fact, this replacement schedule was used in a previous study and E2 
peak levels were closel y aligned to natural cycle peaks (mean E2 levels 210 pg/ml in artificial vs 
230 pg ml in natural cyles) [48]. 
 
Progestins:    Progesterone is widely used in treatment of preterm labor as well as in support of 
in vitro  fertilization cycles.  We chose oral micronized progesterone  to maintain the luteal phase  as 
this is more tolerable than daily IM injections to patients . Approximately 200 mg of oral micronized 
progesterone is need ed to reach mid  luteal phase levels in premenopausal women [63].  Studies  have 
been conducted with progesterone at much higher doses (300, 600, 1200 mg oral micronized) and 
no serious adverse effects were found at these higher levels [65].   
Norethindrone (NET) is one  of the  most widely studied progestin s among contraceptive 
steroid hormones with no associated serious adverse events  and no upper dos e limit s known to 
cause toxicity [66,67] .  Metabolic stu dies on  NET alone have shown negligible effects on metabolic 
measures such as lipid levels, carbohydrate metabolism. They have been shown to have little or no 
effect on coagulation factors and when used  without estrogen  does not increase the risk of VTE. 
Norethindrone and i ts acetate ester derivative norethindrone acetate are often pac kaged with 
Ethinyl Estradiol in common oral contraceptive formulations.  These “ first generation” pills are 
some  of the  oldest  FDA approved combined oral contraceptive pill  formulations  with de cades of 
population data .  VTE risk represents the most common serious complication of oral contraceptive 
pills with a 3 to 4 fold increase in the baseline VTE risk of 3 -4/10,000 in oral contraceptive 
users [68].  
 
 
1.3.5 Admission Procedure  
Potential study subjects will undergo a telephone screen by the study PI or the OHSU 
Women’s Health Research Unit’s (WHRU) recruitment specialist. All study procedures will be 
performed in the WHRU outpatient Clinic.  Following confirmation of study eligibility and 
informed written consent by either PI or study staff, confirmation of ovulatory status by serum 
progesterone level during days 18 -25 of their menstrual cycle.  The OHSU researc h pharmacy 
will be utilized for any and all drug dispensing during the study.  
A computer -generated algorithm through the OHSU research pharmacy will perform 
randomization.  Treatment alloca tion and blinding will occur at the end of the artificial study an d 
prior to the start of the randomized cycle (visit 17) .  Blinding will single blinded so that the 
researcher collecting the mucus and performing the mucus scoring and sperm penetration tests 
does not know the patient status.  The patient will know there t heir status and will be given strict 
instructions to not inform the researcher of their allocation group during this part of the study.  
We will ask study patches during this time to be worn during non -visible areas. We chose this 
design because we are una ble to provide placebo estrogen patches.  However, we feel that this 
single -blinding design is acceptable,  as patient knowledge of their status should not affect mucus 
scores or serum hormone levels.   
 
1.3.6 Follow -up procedure  
 All data for this study wi ll be collected during scheduled visits to the Women’s Health 
Research Unit . (see study flow figure) .  Our research unit has been highly successful in 
recruitment, enrollment and retention of subjects as part of our screening process, ease in 
scheduling, a nd appropriate compensation for study procedures.  
 
1.3.7 Criteria for discontinuation  
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
18 
 Patients have the right to withdraw from the trial at any time on their own request for any 
reason; the reason for withdrawal will be recorded in detail. No further data  will be obtained from 
the patient once withdrawal occurs. Any data obtained up to this point will be analyzed in 
accordance with intention to treat.  
The Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) for the WHRU at OHSU will meet on 
an as needed basis if any se rious adverse events related to the study protocol are reported by the 
investigator.  
 
 
1.3.8 Data Collection   
 See Section 1.3.3 for detailed descriptions of our planned analysis of mucus samples.  
Additionally , serums samples will be sent for laboratory testing of LH, FSH, E2 and P4 levels 
immediately following  collection.  As mentioned above, endocervical brus h samples will  be 
frozen for later usage.  These will be stored in a repository freezer in the Women’s Health 
Research Unit at OHSU.  
 
 
1.3.9 Data management  
 
The PI will manage data collection and monitoring for this study .  Study personnel and 
study investigators will collect data at the procedure visit .  
All patient data sheets will be kept confidential and in a locked office. A unique patient 
study identification number will be placed on the data forms. Study identifiers kept in a logbook 
will be assigned to each patient to protect confidentiality.   Subjects will be contacted by the 
reminder method of th eir choice one-day prior to each collection  by study coordinators or the PI. 
No patient names will be included with the study data during statistical analysis. Forms will be 
transferred to the PI’s locked office for data entry and analysis. Patient identif iers will be stored 
separately from the data files on the PI’s password -protected computer. Only the study 
investigators will have access to this identifier list.  
Sample data will be analyzed with  STATA. Once the data has been entered into STATA, 
descripti ve statistics will be used to check to outliers. In addition, random data entry checks will 
be performed to further verify correct entry of the data.  
 
1.3.10 Data analysis  
Data will be extracted and entered into STATA on a password -protected computer. 
Analysis will be performed with the blinded data.  
The primary analytic approach will be to compare differences  in fertile cervical mucus 
(WHO score>=10 ) and penetrable cervica l mucus (SST, SCMPT >6) between the two groups. 
Frequencies will compared using McNemar’s test and median scores can be compared with a 
Wilcoxon Signed -Rank tests .  A Cochran -Mantel -Haenszel  statistic can be used to examine the 
effects of blood in the cervical mucus sample on test results.  Real-time PCR data will be log -
transformed and then subjected to one-way analysis of variance using the mixed model 
subroutine in SAS software.    
 
 
 
1.3.1 1 Number of subjects and statistical power  
 
This is meant to be a small pilot study and as such, a power analysis was not performed.  
Absolute quantification is less important than relative measures.  A number of ten was chosen for 
the study because this w ill provide some buffer against biological variability  as well as an 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
19 
 estimated 70% completion rate.  This sample size collection is consistent with design of similar 
experiments  exploring biological mechanism.  
We currently have enrolled 7 subjects.  However, an interim analysis noted that the 
original protocol did not optimize patch hormone levels immediately prior to the 24 -hour 
collection and that we did not need more data from the original “middle artificial cycle”. The data 
most  critical to our clinical experiment is the randomized cycles and the study has been amended 
to optimize data collection for these points in fewer visits.  
 
The 7 subjects enrolled under the original protocol (approved by the IRB 19 Mar ch 2015) 
will complete the study under that protocol and will not be affected by these changes.  The 
remaining subjects enrolled will follow this updated protocol.  
 
1.3.12 Study limitations  
 
Clinical R elevance of Outcomes:  
 Currently the clinical measure  we are using (WHO Mucus Score, Sperm Penetration 
Testing), have been validated as measures of fertility.  At this time, only associations between the 
actual scores and contraceptivity have been made in other experiments [8,59] .  This is one of the 
most important limitations of research in cervical mucus.   Studies that prove if something is 
contraceptive require large numbers and examination of hard outcomes like pregnancy.  
Meanwhile our study employs smaller numbers in order to  do the detailed testing that can give us 
mechanistic insight . While our data can give suggestions  into contraceptive efficacy as we are 
performing tests that look at sperm penetration, it cannot be used to accurately estimate efficacy 
in real -life use of progestin contraceptives.   
 
The addition of Dr. Walker’s rheological testing will provi de additional mechanical information 
on mucus samples that will otherwise be destroyed.  His lab is well equipped to conduct  a suite of 
molecular, rheological, surface, and thermal characterization s of various complex fluids and soft 
solids.   This prelimin ary data can hopefully be used to find a better way of evaluating mucus.  
This would aid in contraceptive studies  
Experimental Conditions and Generalizability:   
The experiment has been designed such that natural HPO influences are suppressed.  The 
rigid control of hormonal conditions allows us to better discriminate between estrogen and 
progesterone  effects on mucus in a novel way, providing insight into its regulation .  These are 
non-physiologic conditions and our results are not generalizable to the actual physiology that 
occurs in normal cycling women.  
 
Sampling Frequency:  
Timing of effect is an important outcome of this experiment.  Once estrogen is withdrawn 
and p rogesterone or a progestin is administered, we would like to estimate the temporal nature of 
this effect.  However, our discriminatory abilities will be limited by sampling frequency that is 
both reasonable for subject convenience as well unlikely t o influ ence the outcomes of subsequent  
samples. Based on previous data, we believe that two hours is the minimum spacing  needed to 
give us meaningful temporal data and which also minimizes previous mentioned considerations.   
 
 
1.3.13 Duration of project  
The stud y will begin once OHSU Institutional Review Board approval has been obtained 
(estimated time for approval: 8 weeks). Given small enrollment numbers and our history of 
enrollment for experimental trials, we anticipate 10 months to complete enrollment.  Foll owing 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
20 
 sample collection, initial clinical data analysis can be performed and report writing can be 
completed within four months.  For testing of frozen samples for PGMC1, and PGMC2 an 
additional  3 month of time will be used to conduct laboratory experiment s.   
 
 
1.4 Project management  
 
This project requires collaboration between the Women’s Health Research Unit, the 
investigators, and the study personnel. The study will remain the responsibility of Dr. Leo Han. 
Drs. Jeff Jensen, Ov Slayden  and Alison Edelman will be the faculty mentors for the project.  
 
 
1.5 Links with other projects  
 
This study is not linked to other projects.  
 
 
1.6 Main problems anticipated  
 
Full sample collection :  This study contains a rigorous sample collection timeline over a short 
period of time.  Subjects will be thoroughly briefed to the extent of their involvement during the 
informed consent process.  Furthermore, compensation will be structured such that t here will be 
an incentive to come for all collection appointments.   
 
Interpersonal Variation : One of the difficulties in studying cervical mucus is the person -to-person 
variation in normal secreted mucus quality and quantity .  Moreover ovulatory cycles vary in 
women and can affect results if the exact point in the cycle is unknown .  For this reason we have 
chosen this cross -over study design, a comparison of serial samples of mucus in the same woman 
under different conditions.  Through this design a woma n can serve as her own controls.  In 
addition to this concern, we are unsure if there is a  time-effect  after administration of leuprolide  
and a randomized crossover design will account for this.  Last there is some concern that when 
we administer P4 or NET , the samples maybe inadequate for running all of the tests we wish to 
conduct.  Previous studies have managed the  issue  of inability to obtain samples by  assigning a 
“0” value to both mucus scoring and sperm penetration tests [36,37]  or by excluding them from 
the calculations [8].  However, we will have additional outcomes for comparison,  as we will also 
be assessing temporal change s in addition to qualitative changes.  
 
 
1.7 Expected outcomes of the study and dissemination of findings  
 In all groups, we expect that estrogen priming will  lead to fertile mucus.  However, based 
on prev ious research, we anticipate evidence of direct progesterone  effect s either qualitatively or 
temporally .  Currently , there is  suggest ion that mucus changes could occur as soon as 2 hours 
after administration with a return to fertile mucus in equally rapid fashion .  Based on our reading, 
there is some skepticism to the validity of this data and our findings could  challenge these 
previous re ports .  Additionally, i t would add to the overall paucity of data that assesses the timing 
of onset and offset of progesterone action  on cervical mucus .  This information has important 
implic ations in terms of our usage of  progestin based birth control met hods and perhaps would 
necessitate a re -evaluation of our current cl inical recommendations for use of  progestin only 
contraception.  We may also however find qual itative differences between estrogen withdrawal 
effects and proges tin mediated effects.  It is possible that the progest in influences are related 
primarily to mucus hydration and not mucin protein production. In this case we may see 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
21 
 differences in the components of mucus scores or sperm penetrability without outright differences 
in favorability.   
  Again, consistent with our overall hypothesis of mechanism, we expect that evidence of 
MAPRs in endocervical cells will be found and this would be a novel finding. MAPRs would 
then serve as a  regulatory mechanism from which further pathway elucidation co uld be 
elaborated. It also would offer a potential non -genomic target for drug design.   
Some of the results of this study will be submitted for publication in one of the obstetrics 
and gynecology specific journals. Our data on MAPRs maybe more appropriate  for a basic 
science journal in reproductive science.  
  
 
1.8 References  
[1] Guttmacher Institute. Contraceptive Use in the United States. New York: 
Guttmacher Institute; 2014.  
[2] Peipert JF, Gutmann J. Ora l contraceptive risk assessment: a survey of 247 educated 
women. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82:112 –7. 
[3] Rosenberg MJ, Waugh MS, Meehan TE. Use and misuse of oral contraceptives: 
Risk indicators for poor pill taking and discontinuation. Contraception 
1995;51:283 –8. doi:10.1016/0010 -7824(95)00074 -K. 
[4] Emans S, Grace E, Woods ER, Smith DE, Klein K, Merola J. ADolescents’ 
compliance with the use of oral contraceptives. JAMA 1987;257:3377 –81. 
doi:10.1001/jama.1987.03390240083028.  
[5] CDC - United States Medical Eli gibility Criteria (USMEC) for Contraceptive Use - 
Reproductive Health n.d. 
http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/unintendedpregnancy/usmec.htm (accessed 
July 28, 2014).  
[6] Rivera R, Yacobson I, Grimes D. The mechanism of action of hormonal 
contraceptives and intrauterine contraceptive devices. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1999;181:1263 –9. doi:10.1016/S0002 -9378(99)70120 -1. 
[7] McCann MF, Potter LS. Progestin -only oral contraception: A comprehensive 
review: II. Mode of action. Contraception 1994;50:S13 –21. doi:10.10 16/0010 -
7824(94)90114 -7. 
[8] Lewis RA, Taylor D, Natavio MF, Melamed A, Felix J, Mishell Jr. D. Effects of the 
levonorgestrel -releasing intrauterine system on cervical mucus quality and sperm 
penetrability. Contraception 2010;82:491 –6. 
doi:10.1016/j.contra ception.2010.06.006.  
[9] Stanford JB, Mikolajczyk RT. Mechanisms of action of intrauterine devices: Update 
and estimation of postfertilization effects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;187:1699 –
708. doi:10.1067/mob.2002.128091.  
[10] Fahy JV, Dickey BF. Airway Mucu s Function and Dysfunction. N Engl J Med 
2010;363:2233 –47. doi:10.1056/NEJMra0910061.  
[11] Lai SK, Wang Y -Y, Wirtz D, Hanes J. Micro - and macrorheology of mucus. Adv 
Drug Deliv Rev 2009;61:86 –100. doi:10.1016/j.addr.2008.09.012.  
[12] Gipson IK. Mucins of the human endocervix. Front Biosci J Virtual Libr 
2001;6:D1245 –55. 
[13] Joseph A Jordan, Albert Singer, Howard W Jones, Mahmood I Shafi. The cervix. 
2nd ed.. Malden, Mass; Oxford: Blackwell; 2006.  
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
22 
 [14] Pluta K, McGettigan PA, Reid CJ, Browne JA, Irwin JA, Tharmalingam T, et al. 
Molecular aspects of mucin biosynthesis and mucus formation in the bovine cervix 
during the periestrous period. Physiol Genomics 2012;44:1165 –78. 
doi:10.1152/physiolgenomics.00088.2012.  
[15] Haas GG, Nicosia SV, Wolf DP. Influence of  estrogens on vascular transudation 
and mucus production in the rabbit endocervix. Fertil Steril 1987;48:1036 –42. 
[16] Casslén B, Nilsson B. Human uterine fluid, examined in undiluted samples for 
osmolarity and the concentrations of inorganic ions, albumin , glucose, and urea. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 1984;150:877 –81. doi:10.1016/0002 -9378(84)90466 -6. 
[17] Massai MR, de Ziegler D, Lesobre V, Bergeron C, Frydman R, Bouchard P. 
Clomiphene citrate affects cervical mucus and endometrial morphology 
independently of th e changes in plasma hormonal levels induced by multiple 
follicular recruitment. Fertil Steril 1993;59:1179 –86. 
[18] Moghissi KS, Syner FN, McBride LC. Contraceptive mechanism of microdose 
norethindrone. Obstet Gynecol 1973;41:585 –94. 
[19] Katz DF, Slade DA , Nakajima ST. Analysis of pre -ovulatory changes in cervical 
mucus hydration and sperm penetrability. Adv Contracept Off J Soc Adv Contracept 
1997;13:143 –51. 
[20] Graham S, Fraser IS. The progestogen -only mini -pill. Contraception 1982;26:373 –
88. doi:10.101 6/0010 -7824(82)90104 -4. 
[21] Kowalik MK, Rekawiecki R, Kotwica J. The putative roles of nuclear and 
membrane -bound progesterone receptors in the female reproductive tract. Reprod 
Biol 2013;13:279 –89. doi:10.1016/j.repbio.2013.09.001.  
[22] McCann MF, Potter  LS. Progestin -only oral contraception: A comprehensive 
review: III. Pharmacology. Contraception 1994;50:S22 –34. doi:10.1016/0010 -
7824(94)90115 -5. 
[23] Cox. The pre -coital use of mini -dosage progestagens. J Reprod Fertil Suppl 
1968;6:167 –72. 
[24] Curlin M,  Bursac D. Cervical mucus: from biochemical structure to clinical 
implications. Front Biosci Sch Ed 2013;5:507 –15. 
[25] Gibor Y, Cohen MR, Scommegna A. Effect of continuous administration of small 
doses of chlormadinone acetate on the cervical mucus and po stcoital test. Fertil 
Steril 1969;20:572 –80. 
[26] Kesserü -Koos E. Influence of various hormonal contraceptives on sperm migration 
in vivo. Fertil Steril 1971;22:584 –603. 
[27] Lebech PE, Svendsen PA, Ostergaard E. The effects of small doses of megestrol 
acetate on the cervical mucus. Int J Fertil 1970;15:65 –76. 
[28] Martinez -Manautou J, Giner -Velasquez J, Cortes -Gallegos V, Aznar R, Rojas B, 
Guitterez -Najar A, et al. Daily progestogen for contraception: a clinical study. Br 
Med J 1967;2:730.  
[29] Roland M, F riedman M, Hessekiel RJ. Norgestrel, a low dose, oral progestogen for 
fertility contro. Supplementary report. Obstet Gynecol 1968;31:637 –42. 
[30] Moghissi KS, Marks C. Effects of microdose norgestrel on endogenous 
gonadotropic and steroid hormones, cervica l mucus properties, vaginal cytology, 
and endometrium. Fertil Steril 1971;22:424 –34. 
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
23 
 [31] Roland M. Endocervical inhibition of sperm capacitation by norgestrel 
contraception. Int J Fertil 1968;13:390 –8. 
[32] Mears E, Vessey MP, Andolsek L, Oven A. Prelimin ary Evaluation of Four Oral 
Contraceptives Containing only Progestogens. Br Med J 1969;2:730 –4. 
[33] McCann MF, Potter LS. Progestin -only oral contraception: A comprehensive 
review: XII. Taking pops effectively. Contraception 1994;50:S151 –8. 
doi:10.1016/00 10-7824(94)90124 -4. 
[34] Speroff L, Darney PD. A Clinical Guide for Contraception. Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2010.  
[35] Hatcher RA, Trussell J, Nelson AL. Contraceptive Technology. Ardent Media; 
2008.  
[36] Dunson TR, Blumenthal PD, Alvarez F, Brache V , Cochon L, Dalberth B, et al. 
Timing of onset of contraceptive effectiveness in norplant implant users. Part I. 
Changes in cervical mucus. Fertil Steril 1998;69:258 –66. doi:10.1016/S0015 -
0282(97)00476 -7. 
[37] Petta CA, Faundes A, Dunson TR, Ramos M, Deluc io M, Faundes D, et al. Timing 
of onset of contraceptive effectiveness in Depo -Provera users: Part I. Changes in 
cervical mucus. Fertil Steril 1998;69:252 –7. doi:10.1016/S0015 -0282(97)00477 -9. 
[38] Natavio MF, Taylor D, Lewis RA, Blumenthal P, Felix JC, Me lamed A, et al. 
Temporal changes in cervical mucus after insertion of the levonorgestrel -releasing 
intrauterine system. Contraception 2013;87:426 –31. 
doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2012.09.034.  
[39] The Amount of MUC5B Mucin in Cervical Mucus Peaks at Midcycl e. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:594 –600. doi:10.1210/jcem.86.2.7174.  
[40] Levin ER. G Protein -Coupled Receptor 30: Estrogen Receptor or Collaborator? 
Endocrinology 2009;150:1563 –5. doi:10.1210/en.2008 -1759.  
[41] Revankar CM, Cimino DF, Sklar LA, Arterburn JB, Prossnitz ER. A 
Transmembrane Intracellular Estrogen Receptor Mediates Rapid Cell Signaling. 
Science 2005;307:1625 –30. doi:10.1126/science.1106943.  
[42] Muchekehu RW, Quinton PM. A new role for bicarbonate secretion in cervico -
uterine mucus r elease. J Physiol 2010;588:2329 –42. 
doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2010.187237.  
[43] Hayslip CC, Hao E, Usala SJ. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene is 
expressed in the human endocervix throughout the menstrual cycle. Fertil Steril 
1997;67:636 –40. doi: 10.1016/S0015 -0282(97)81358 -1. 
[44] Cahill MA. Progesterone receptor membrane component 1: An integrative review. J 
Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2007;105:16 –36. doi:10.1016/j.jsbmb.2007.02.002.  
[45] Fernandes MS, Pierron V, Michalovich D, Astle S, Thornton S, Peltoketo H, et al. 
Regulated expression of putative membrane progestin receptor homologues in 
human endometrium and gestational tissues. J Endocrinol 2005;187:89 –101. 
doi:10.1677/joe.1.06242.  
[46] Duras M, Mlynarczuk J, Kotwica J. Non -genomic effect of st eroids on oxytocin -
stimulated intracellular mobilization of calcium and on prostaglandin F2α and E2 
secretion from bovine endometrial cells. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat 
2005;76:105 –16. doi:10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2005.02.001.  
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
24 
 [47] Crudden G, Loesel R, Craven RJ. Overexpression of the Cytochrome P450 
Activator Hpr6 (Heme -1 Domain Protein/Human Progesterone Receptor) in 
Tumors. Tumor Biol 2005;26:142 –6. doi:10.1159/000086485.  
[48] Bogan R. Identification of the Menstrual Cycle -Associated Activities tha t Modulate 
Circulating Lipid Levels in Premenopausal Women 2013.  
[49] Torgrimson BN, Meendering JR, Kaplan PF, Minson CT. Depot -
medroxyprogesterone acetate and endothelial function before and after acute oral, 
vaginal, and transdermal estradiol treatment. Hypertension 2011;57:819 –24. 
doi:10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.163386.  
[50] Stricker R, Eberhart R, Chevailler M -C, Quinn FA, Bischof P, Stricker R. 
Establishment of detailed reference values for luteinizing hormone, follicle 
stimulating hormone, estradiol, and progesterone during different phases of the 
menstrual cycle on the Abbott ARCHITECT analyzer. Clin Chem Lab Med CCLM 
FESCC 2006;44:883 –7. doi:10.1515/CCLM.2006.160.  
[51] Soules MR, McLachlan RI, Ek M, Dahl KD, Cohen NL, Bremner WJ. Luteal phase 
deficie ncy: characterization of reproductive hormones over the menstrual cycle. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1989;69:804 –12. doi:10.1210/jcem -69-4-804. 
[52] Novartis Pharmaceuticals. Vivelle -Dot Full Prescribing Information 2014.  
[53] Usadi RS, Groll JM, Lessey BA, Li ninger RA, Zaino RJ, Fritz MA, et al. 
Endometrial Development and Function in Experimentally Induced Luteal Phase 
Deficiency. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:4058 –64. doi:10.1210/jc.2008 -0460.  
[54] Hull MG, Savage PE, Bromham DR, Ismail AA, Morris AF. The value of a single 
serum progesterone measurement in the midluteal phase as a criterion of a 
potentially fertile cycle (“ovulation”) derived form treated and untreated conception 
cycles. Fertil Steril 1982;37:355 –60. 
[55] Israel R, Mishell Jr. DR, Stone SC,  Thorneycroft IH, Moyer DL. Single luteal phase 
serum progesterone assay as an indicator of ovulation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1997;176:490 –1. doi:10.1016/S0002 -9378(97)70520 -9. 
[56] Tavaniotou A, Smitz J, Bourgain C, Devroey P. Comparison between different 
routes of progesterone administration as luteal phase support in infertility 
treatments. Hum Reprod Update 2000;6:139 –48. 
[57] Janssen Pharmaceuticals. Ortho Micronor Prescribing Information 2001.  
[58] CooperSurgical. Unimar Aspirette Device Description n.d.  
www.coopersurgical.com/.../36024 -DFU.pdf (accessed September 4, 2014).  
[59] Eggert -Kruse W, Leinhos G, Gerhard I, Tilgen W, Runnebaum B. Prognostic value 
of in vitro sperm penetration into hormonally standardized human cervical mucus. 
Fertil Steril 1989;5 1:317 –23. 
[60] Eggert -Kruse W, Gerhard I, Tilgen W, Runnebaum B. Clinical significance of 
crossed in vitro sperm -cervical mucus penetration test in infertility investigation. 
Fertil Steril 1989;52:1032 –40. 
[61] Bishop CV, Satterwhite S, Xu L, Hennebold JD,  Stouffer RL. Microarray analysis 
of the primate luteal transcriptome during chorionic gonadotrophin administration 
simulating early pregnancy. Mol Hum Reprod 2012;18:216 –27. 
doi:10.1093/molehr/gar073.  
[62] Abbvie. Lupron (leuprolide acetate for depot admi nistration) prescribing 
information n.d.  
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
25 
 [63] Goletiani NV, Keith DR, Gorsky SJ. Progesterone: Review of safety for clinical 
studies. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 2007;15:427 –44. doi:10.1037/1064 -
1297.15.5.427.  
[64] Progesterone - FDA prescribing information, side effects and uses n.d. 
http://www.drugs.com/pro/progesterone.html (accessed January 26, 2015).  
[65] Freeman EW, Weinstock L, Rickels K, Sondheimer SJ, Coutifaris C. A placebo -
controlled study of effects of oral progesterone on performance and mood. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol 1992;33:293.  
[66] Norethindrone. Micromedex n.d.  
[67] Stanczyk FZ. All progestins are not created equal. Steroids 2003;68:879 –90. 
[68] Han L, Jensen JT. Expert opinion on a flexible extended regimen of 
drospirenone/ethinyl estradiol contra ceptive. Expert Opin Pharmacother 
2014;15:2071 –9. doi:10.1517/14656566.2014.949237.  
[69] Thomas P. Characteristics of membrane progestin receptor alpha (mPRα) and 
progesterone membrane receptor component 1 (PGMRC1) and their roles in 
mediating rapid proges tin actions. Front Neuroendocrinol 2008;29:292 –312. 
doi:10.1016/j.yfrne.2008.01.001.  
 
  
OHSU IRB# 11532  
Protocol Version Date: 11.12.2018  
26 
  
 
Figure 1: Summary of signal transduction pathways active by progestins through mPR alpha 
and PGRMC1  (taken from Thomas, P) [69]  
 
