IRB NUMBER:  2018 -9031  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  06/12/2020   
 
    
 
Title  
Pain outcomes of non-opioid analgesia after ureteroscopy or percutaneous  nephrolithotomy for 
nephrolithiasis: a prospective randomized controlled trial. 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Version  3.0 05June2020 
IRB NUMBER:  2018 -9031  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  06/12/2020  
V3.0  10March2020  
Page  2 of 7  
  
  
 
Title  
Pain outcomes of non-opioid analgesia after ureteroscopy or percutaneous  nephrolithotomy for 
nephrolithiasis: a prospective randomized controlled trial. 
 
Purpose  
To compare postoperative pain outcomes of opioid vs non-opioid analgesia  in patients 
undergoing ureteroscopy or percutaneous nephrolithotomy for treatment of 
nephrolithiasis.  
 
Princip al Investigator: Dr.  Kara Watts  
 
Study  Location: Montefiore Medical  Center (Moses, Weiler,  and Hutchinson Metro campuses)  
 
Sponsor:  none 
 
 
Background/Significance  
The United States is currently experiencing an epidemic of overdose deaths involving 
prescription opioids.[1] Along with mortality, the opioid epidemic has  led to marked increases  in 
morbidity and economic costs, as well as a rise in ED visits and substance -abuse treatment 
admissions. [1, 2] Perioperative pain is often managed by opioids [3 -5]. Opioids bind to and 
modulate the effect of nociceptors in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues to cause 
analgesia.[6] Commonly prescribed opioids for acute pain include oxycodone, hydrocodone, and 
morphine. However, post surgical pain management with opioids can often lead to long- term 
opioid use.[7,8] This prolonged opioid use after surgical procedures has been seen both in 
patients who have existing opioid use and in those who are opioid- naive.[8] In addition, 
diversion of these opioids to others can occur  when  only a portion of the prescribed  medication  is 
taken; in fact, 67% of urologic patients had a surplus of opioid medication from the initial 
prescription in a survey of 210 patients who underwent surgery.[9] Besides dependence and 
addiction, opioid use can also cause unwanted side effects including respiratory depression that 
can lead to hypoxia and respiratory arrest, as well as nausea, vomiting, pruritus, ileus, and constipation.[6] As an alternative  to opioid perioperative pain management,  non-opioid analgesia 
has been proven to be as effective as opioid management in acute pain.[10] NSAIDs and acetaminophen are often utilized as alternatives to opioid analgesia, and have an increased efficacy when combined.[11] They both have been proven to decrease opioid requirements and 
have minimized opiate -induced adverse events.[12, 13] Non-opioid analgesics, including 
ketorolac (Toradol) and acetaminophen (Tylenol), are often used alone or in combination with 
opioids after major surgery.[14] Ketorolac (Toradol) is an NSAID with strong analgesic activity that works by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis, and provides similar pain relief to that of 
opioids; the analgesic effect is slightly delayed but persists longer than that of opioids. It has 
been shown to decrease opioid requirements and has led to a decrease in opioid induced adverse 
IRB NUMBER:  2018 -9031  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  06/12/2020  
V3.0  10March2020  
Page  3 of 7  
 events, shorter hospital stays, and a faster return to normal gastrointestinal function than that of 
opioid use.[15] It does not alter gastric motility or adversely affect respiration, and it is not 
associated with abuse or addiction as opioids are.[15] Common side effects of ketorolac include 
prolonged bleeding times, GI ulceration and hemorrhage, nephropathies, and allergic reactions.[15] Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is a centrally acting analgesic that has been confirmed 
to be effective for acute pain, and has been shown to display opioid sparing effects.[6] A 
common side effect of acetaminophen is hepatotoxicity.[6] In this randomized clinical trial, we intend to investigate pain outcomes after ureteroscopy and percutaneous nephrolithotomy in patients who are treated with opioids versus a non-opioid regimen of Ketorolac and 
Acetaminophen. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy and ureteroscopy are minimally invasive 
surgical  techniques to surgically  remove kidney stones. This trial will seek to determine  whether 
non-opioid therapy is noninferior to opioid therapy in the determination of pain intensity as 
measured by an 11-point numeric rating scale, in which 0 indicates no pain and 10 indicates the 
worst possible pain, one week after the surgery. 
 
 
Study  Design  and Popul ation  
This will be an open label, prospective study of approximately 140 subjects undergoing either 
ureteroscopy or percutaneous nephrolithotomy. Depending on stone burden, location, and symptoms, patients will be counseled on the risks and benefits of both non- surgical and surgical 
stone management strategies including medical expulsive therapy, ureteroscopic stone extraction, ESWL, or percutaneous nephrolithotomy according to American Urological Association Guidelines. Patients who are eligible and choose to undergo ureteroscopy or 
percutaneous nephrolithotomy will then be asked if they would like to participate in the study 
and informed consent will be obtained. After consent is obtained, the electronic medical record will be checked to determine if the p atient underwent a routine history and physical, as well if 
pre-operative imaging such as a plain abdominal film, renal/bladder sonogram, or non- contrast 
enhanced CT was obtained. Additionally, the chart will be reviewed to determine if there was a pre-operative urinalysis and culture. Patients will then be randomized to control (opioid 
analgesia) or non -opioid analgesia groups, and given this medication at discharge. Percocet 
(Oral, 5 mg tablet: 1 tablet every 4-6 hours, or as needed; 10 tablets prescribed) will be the medication for the opioid group, and Acetaminophen (Oral; patient directed as needed and not prescribed) and Ketorolac (Oral, 10 mg tablet: 1 tablet every 6 hours, or as needed; 20 tablets 
prescribed)  will be the medications  for the non-opioid group. The plan for randomization will be 
to use a random number generator to allot subjects to opioid and non-opioid groups. For all 
patients, we will record the age, sex, location of stone, stone burden (maximal diameter on CT 
scan), stone size, length of surgery, length of hospital stay, and pain medications administered 
after the surgery  but prior to  discharge.  This  is a non- inferiority  trial in which  primary  outcomes 
are pain outcomes as measured by pain intensity levels one week after surgery when receiving 
non-opioid versus opioid analgesia.  The patient  will be asked,  over telephone call,  to complete  a 
questionnaire rating their satisfaction with pain relief, current pain intensity level, worst and 
average pain intensity levels, and their belief of an acceptable pain intensity level since the surgical procedure; these will be measured on an 11-point ordinal scale.[16] The mean of these 
IRB NUMBER:  2018 -9031  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  06/12/2020  
V3.0  10March2020  
Page  4 of 7  
 values  will be evaluated  as the main  analysis;  secondary analysis  will evaluate individual values. 
One week post-op, the patient will also be asked, via telephone call, about any adverse events 
experienced since the surgery, and how many medication pills they have left. As a secondary 
outcome, rates  of constipation  and rates  of unused medications  by the time  of the phone- call one 
week after the surgery will be measured. Patients will be considered to complete the study after 
the follow up phone call, which occurs one week postoperatively. 
 
 
Inclusion  Criteria  
1. Men and Women  age>18  years  old 
2. Presence  of renal  or ureteral  stones suitable  for ureteroscopy or percutaneous 
nephrolithotomy.  
3. Uncomplicated  ureteroscopy or percutaneous nephrolithotomy  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Pregnant/Breastfeeding/Possibly Pregnant Patients  
2. Pediatric  Patients  
3. Sensitive  or Allergic to  Opioids, Ketorolac, or Acetaminophen  
4. Significant Renal Disease, or Creatinine>1.5  
5. Peptic  Ulcer Disease  
6. Chronic Pain  and recovering opiate use  
7. Inability  to complete questionnaires.  
8. Non-mobile  Patients  
9. Patients  on methadone  
10. Known Asthma  
11. Bleeding  Disorders  
 
Participant  Recruitment  
Patients  will be recruited  in the course of regular  care in the Urology clinic  at Montefiore. Both 
subjects  and controls will be recruited  by physician referral.  Patients  diagnosed with ureteral  or 
renal stones will be presented with surgical or non-surgical treatment options. If they choose 
ureteroscopy or percutaneous nephrolithotomy as their surgical treatment, the patient will be asked if they would like to participate in the study. P hysicians will stress that participation is 
voluntary, that their decision will not impact the care that they receive, and that their patient privacy will always be protected. Informed consent will be obtained while the patient is in the clinic (Hutchinson clinic or pre- operative clinic) if they choose to participate.  
 
Cost  
The patient’s  primary  insurance will cover the cost of any surgical  and post- surgical  care as all 
procedures fall within the current standard of care. 
 
Informed  Consent  
A written informed consent will be obtained (full text submitted to the institutional review 
boa
rd). Patients  will be counseled that we are investigating  pain outcomes based  on the type of 
IRB NUMBER:  2018 -9031  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  06/12/2020  
V3.0  10March2020  
Page  5 of 7  
 analgesia utilized  after undergoing ureteroscopy or percutaneous nephrolithotomy. Patients  will 
be given all the available information regarding the risks and benefits of the type of analgesia, 
and they will be given the choice as to whether they would like to be enrolled in the study. 
Informed consent will be obtained by study personnel. All consent will be obtained in the Urology clinic (Hutchinson clinic or preoperative clinic) at the patient’s regularly scheduled 
appointment once a patient  chooses to undergo ureteroscopy or percutaneous  nephrolithotomy. 
 
Risk/Benefit  
The risks associated with participation in the study include the known risk factors of 
ureteroscopy and percutaneous nephrolithotomy, as well as that of opioid, Ketorolac, and 
Acetaminophen  use. The known risk factors  for ureteroscopy  and percutaneous nephrolithotomy 
include infection, bleeding, ureteral damage or perforation, or injury to other organs. Common 
adverse events  of opioids include confusion, vomiting, nausea,  constipation, respiratory  distress, 
urinary retention, and physical dependence. Possible risks of Ketorolac include peptic ulcers, 
gastrointestinal bleeding, cardiovascular thrombotic events, myocardial infarction, and volume 
depletion. A possible risks of acetaminophen is liver damage. Possible benefits to inclusion in 
the study include less opioid-induced side effects such as nausea, vomiting, constipation, and respiratory distress with similar pain relief. Broader benefits of the study include identifying 
whether non-opioid analgesia is as effective in treating postoperative pain as that of opioid 
analgesia. Perioperative outcomes may allow future patients to be spared side effects and the possibility of physical dependence that comes with opioid use. Additionally, the greater use of non-opioids post-operatively can be a modulating factor in reducing the current widespread 
opioid epidemic. 
 
Data Analysis  
Statistical Analysis  
Analysis will be based on the null hypothesis that there is no difference among opioid and 
nonopioid analgesia use in patients  in regards  to pain outcomes and adverse events.  The alternate 
hypothesis is that there is a difference in regards to these 2 outc omes. This trial seeks to 
determine if non-opioid analgesia is non-inferior to opioid analgesia after ureteroscopy or 
percutaneous nephrolithotomy. Data will be analyzed using the Mann-Whitney U- Test. Patients 
will be analyzed via intention- to-treat analys is. 
 
Data Monitoring  
We will be following a Data Safety  Monitoring Plan,  with oversight by a Data Safety  Monitoring 
Board (DSMB). The monitoring group will consist of three independent physicians in the 
Montefiore Urology department: Dr. Evan Kovac, Dr. Alexander Sankin and Dr. Beth 
Drzewiecki. The PI will give reports to the monitoring committee every six mo nths for the 
duration of the trial on matters concerning enrollment and loss to follow up. This report will also 
include an analysis of protocol deviations, violations and adverse events. 
IRB NUMBER:  2018 -9031  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  06/12/2020  
V3.0  10March2020  
Page  6 of 7  
 Minutes of each DSMB meeting, along with recommendations, will be sent the PI. The 
investigator will also report  to the DSMB  immediately  if there are any serious adverse events 
related to the study. 
 
We do not anticipate  the trial will last long enough for many  new scientific  developments to 
occur in the interim, but the research assistant will monitor the literature (via pubmed) on 
nonopioid analgesia for postoperative pain. 
 
Determination  of Sample  Size 
The primary outcome in this study will be pain intensity as measured by the numeric rating scale 
at the postoperative visit.  Other  reported  randomized trials  measuring similar  outcomes utilized  a 
non-inferiority  margin  of 1.3. [17] Assuming a power  of 80% with  a 95% confidence interval,  as 
well as a standard  deviation of 2.6, each  arm must contain  51 patients  (total of 102) as  calculated 
using PASS Software. Assuming a 36% attrition rate, we will recruit 140 patients (70 for the opioid group, 70 for the non-opioid group). 
 
Data  Quality  Control and Database Management  
All data will be kept on a secured, password- protected server that only the PI and research 
assistants will have access  to. All data will be entered  by the PI or research  assistant.  Data will be 
submitted in a de-identified manner (without name, MRN, zip code, or date of birth) to the DSMB  to ensure quality  of data e ntry on a monthly basis.  Data collected  for analysis  will contain 
only de-identified patient information. The identifier log will only be able to be accessed by 
members of the study team. Once all patient data is collected and the study is over for three 
years, all patient identifiers will be removed from the database.  
References  
1. Volkow, N.D.,  et al., Medication -assisted  therapies --tackling  the opioid-overdose epidemic. 
N Engl J Med, 2014. 370(22): p. 2063-6. 
2. Leider,  H.L., et al., Healthcare costs  and nonadherence among chronic opioid users.  Am J 
Manag Care, 2011. 17(1): p. 32-40. 
3. Kalso,  E., et al., Opioids in chronic non- cancer  pain: systematic  review  of efficacy  and 
safety. Pain, 2004. 112(3): p. 372-80. 
4. C
hou, R., et al., Clinical guidelines for the use of chronic opioid therapy  in chronic 
noncancer pain. J Pain, 2009. 10(2): p. 113-30. 
5. Katz,  J. and Z. Seltzer,  Transition  from  acute to chronic postsurgical pain: risk factors  and 
protective factors. Expert Rev Neurother, 2009. 9(5): p. 723-44. 
6. V, G. and C. C., Postoperative Pain Control. Clinics  in Colon and Rectal Surgery., 2013.  
26(3): p. 191- 196. 
7. Mudumbai, S.C., et al., Time- to-Cessation of Postoperative Opioids: A Population- Level 
Analysis of the Veterans  Affairs  Health  Care System.  Pain Med,  2016. 17(9):  p. 1732-43. 
8. Sun, E.C., et al., Incidence of and Risk Factors for Chronic Opioid Use Among Opioid- Naive Patients  in the Postoperative Period. JAMA  Intern  Med,  2016. 176(9):  p. 1286- 93. 
IRB NUMBER:  2018- 9031 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  07/26/2018  
IRB NUMBER:  2018 -9031  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  06/12/2020  
V3.0  10March2020  
Page  7 of 7  
 9. Bates,  C., et al., Overprescription of postoperative narcotics:  a look at postoperative pain 
medication delivery, consumption and disposal in urological practice. J Urol, 2011. 
185(2): p. 551- 5. 
10. Fujii,  M.H., et al., Post- Discharge  Opioid Prescribing  and Use after Common Surgical 
Procedures. J Am Coll Surg, 2018. 
11. Ong, C.K., et al., Combining paracetamol (acetaminophen) with nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory  drugs: a qualitative  systematic  review  of analgesic  efficacy  for acute 
postoperative pain. Anesth Analg, 2010. 110(4): p. 1170-9. 
12. Chen, J.Y., et al., Opioid-sparing effects  of ketorolac and its correlation  with the recovery  of 
postoperative bowel function in colorectal surgery patients: a prospective randomized double- blinded study. Clin J Pain, 2009. 25(6): p. 485-9. 
13. Gupta, A. and M. Bah, NSAIDs  in the Treatment  of Postoperative Pain.  Curr Pain Headache 
Rep, 2016. 20(11): p. 62. 
14. Practice guidelines for acute pain management in the perioperative setting: an updated 
report  by the American  Society  of Anesthesiologists Task  Force  on Acute Pain Management. 
Anesthesiology, 2012. 116(2): p. 248-73. 
15. Gillis, J.C. and R.N. Brogden, Ketorolac. A reappraisal of its pharmacodynamic and 
pharmacokinetic properties and therapeutic  use in pain management.  Drugs, 1997. 53(1):  
p. 139- 88. 
16. Helmerhorst,  G.T.T., et al., Pain Relief  After  Operative Treatment  of an Extremity 
Fracture: A Noninferiority Randomized Controlled Trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am, 2017. 
99(22): p. 1908-1915. 
17. Chang, A.K.,  et al., Effect  of a Single Dose  of Oral Opioid and  Nonopioid Analgesics  on 
Acute Extremity  Pain in the Emergency  Department:  A Randomized  Clinical  Trial.  Jama,  2017. 
318(17): p. 1661-1667. 