Page 1 of 19Examinin g the effect s of Theta Burst Stimulatio n on corticothalami c mediate d inhibitory 
contro l and smokin g relaps e vulnerability 
NCT#03960138 
07/21/2021 
Page 2 of 19BIOMEDICAL  RESEARCH PROTOCOL 
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI  
Project Title:  Evaluating the effects of TBS on corticothalamic inhibitory control  
IRB Number : 2020766  
Version Number:  2 
Version Date:  29/09/2020  
Principal Investigator:  Brett E. Froeliger  
Funding Source:  NIH/NIDA  
Clinical Trial Phase:  II 
Clinicaltrials.gov Number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
As of 2017, cigarette smoking remained the leading cause of preventable premature death 
worldwide and the CDC predicts tobacco use will result in more than 8 million deaths per year by 
2030. Tobacco use disorder (TUD), like other drugs of abuse, is associated with deficits in 
prefrontal mediated inhibitory control (IC) —the ability to stop pre -potent behavioral responding. 
We recently reported findings in JAMA Psychiatry showing t hat IC task -based functional 
connectivity (tbFC) between the right inferior frontal gyrus (r.IFG) and thalamus (corticothalamic 
circuit) mediated the association between IC task performance (i.e. successful trial inhibition) and 
smoking relapse vulnerabili ty: both in a smoking cessation study and delaying to initiate ad lib 
smoking in the laboratory. Those findings form the basis of our current work examining brain 
stimulation strategies to strengthen corticothalamic tbFC, improve IC and increase the odds o f 
smoking abstinence among smokers.  
Theta burst stimulation (TBS), a form of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation effecting 
areas stimulated and associated networks, is administered in two forms: a) Intermittent TBS (iTBS) 
which induces long -term p otentiation —putatively strengthening network activity, and b) 
Continuous TBS (cTBS) which induces long -term depression —putatively dampening network 
activity. In our crossover pilot study with smokers ( N=12), participants underwent a baseline fMRI 
visit whi le performing an IC task to obtain baseline performance and identify the IC -task related 
peak cluster in the r.IFG for stimulation in two subsequent TBS experimental visits: 1) iTBS and 
2) cTBS (order counterbalance), each 15 min. prior to performing the I C task. A significant effect
of condition on IC performance was observed (F= 9.49, p<.03) where, as compared to baseline,
performance: a) improved by 14.4% following r.IFG iTBS ( D =.81); b) worsened by -8.7%
following r.IFG cTBS ( D =.5); resulting in a tot al performance difference between the r.IFG TBS
conditions of 25.3% ( D = 1.56). These findings build on the extant literature on the role of the
r.IFG in IC, demonstrate feasibility of using single -subject task -related brain activation to
administer focal brain stimulation to modulate IC and provides the foundation for this proposal to
examine whether: a) r.IFG TBS parametrically modulates corticothalamic tbFC (strengthenI. Research Objectives /Background
Page 3 of 19 following iTBS; weaken following cTBS); and b) iTBS -induced strengthening of corticoth alamic 
tbFC reduces smoking lapse / relapse vulnerability.  In the UG3 component, we will conduct an 
assessment of the acute effects of TBS on corticothalamic IC -tbFC, IC task performance and ad 
lib smoking in the laboratory.  
The Specific aims and correspo nding hypotheses of the UG3 proposal are as follows:  
Aim 1.  Examine the effects of TBS on IC neural circuitry and task performance. Hypothesis 1:  
As compared to baseline: r.IFG iTBS stimulation will strengthen corticothalamic tbFC and 
improve IC task perfo rmance; whereas r.IFG cTBS simulation will weaken corticothalamic tbFC 
and result in worse IC task performance.  
Aim 2. Examine the effects of TBS on ad lib smoking. Hypothesis 2:  As compared to baseline: 
r.IFG iTBS, will extend the duration of abstinence;  whereas cTBS shorten the duration of 
abstinence during an ad lib smoking lapse paradigm in the lab.  
Aim 3.  Examine safety and tolerability of administering r.IFG TBS. Hypothesis 3 : r.IFG  TBS 
will have a similar overall adverse event profile in a TUD population as previously reported with 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex TMS.  
Exploratory Aims.  Using MR Spectroscopy, the effects of TBS on r.IFG excitatory/inhibitory 
neurochemical balance (gl utamate/GABA) will be examined. Effects of TBS on craving and mood 
will be explored.  
If the milestone of the UG3 component are met, the subsequent UH3 project will be an adequately 
powered two -week trial with two -week follow -up to assess the efficacy of iT BS in TUD.  
Overall rationale for our research approach.  The research proposed here builds upon our novel 
findings demonstrating that corticothalamic tbFC mediates IC and smoking relapse vulnerability 
[1], and our preliminary data showing that targeting the corticothalamic circuit with TBS 
parametrically modulates IC in a biologically relevant, stimulation -dependent m anner. The 
experimental design for the proposed research will address a number of important unanswered 
questions, including —Does r.IFG TBS:  
a) Modulate corticothalamic circuitry in a dose -dependent manner? (Aim 1)  
b) Modulate IC task performance in a dose -depend ent manner? (Aim 1)  
c) Attenuate lapse / relapse rates? (Aim 2)  
d) Produce effects in neural mechanisms that correspond with effects in behavior (Aim 1 & 
2)? 
e) Have a good safety and tolerability profile? (Aim3)  
f) Modulate r.IFG neurochemistry? (Exploratory Aim)  
g) Mod ulate primary symptoms associated with TUD e.g. craving and mood? (Integrated 
throughout)  
 
 
 
 
The MagPro X100  TMS Therapy System is indicated for the treatment of Major Depressive 
Disorder in adult patients who have failed to receive satisfactory improvement from prior II. Drugs/Biologics/Devices  
Page 4 of 19 antidepressant medication in the current episode.  It is a  510K/Pre -market Notification  device (a 
device that is substantially equivalent to a legally marketed device), as described in  21 CFR 807 
Subpart E . 
 
 
 
Participants will include 40 adult nicotine dependent smokers (age 18 -65; Female = 50%), 
recruited through the community and our advertising campaigns, individuals  interested in 
participating will undergo a phone screen or complete a REDCap survey to determine eligibility 
and those who meet study criteria will be invited to our lab for a screening visit. Individuals will 
be screened by trained and certified research staff, asked to read and sign an IRB -approved 
informed consent and then be assessed on smoking and medical history  and administered  an MRI 
safety screening questionnaire. Participants meeting all selection criteria will be scheduled for 
subsequent sessions.  Full inclusion/exclusion criteria  are provided in the appropriate  section  
below . Briefly, inclusion criteria  include: participants will be 18 -65 yrs. of age; smoke > 10 
cigarettes/day for ≥ 2 yrs.; and have an expired carbon monoxide (CO) concentration of ≥ 10 ppm, 
using a handheld CO monitor (Vitalograph, Lenexa, KS). Briefly, exclusion criteria include: use 
of psychotropic (e.g. antiepileptic) medications in the last month; positive urine illicit drug screen; 
presence of an untreated medical illness; history of major neurological illness or head injury 
resulting in loss of consciousness; and any contraindicatio n to MRI; and among females, positive 
urine pregnancy test.  Participants meeting all selection criteria will be scheduled for subsequent 
sessions.  
 
We will recruit participants from Columbia and the surrounding  area in which MU is located.  
Participants wil l be recruited through IRB -approved advertisements in regional newspapers, flyers, 
and on internet sites affiliated with our laboratory and the university.  These advertisements will 
briefly describe the study and ask interested individuals to contact the s tudy coordinator or 
designated study staff.  Following IRB approved procedures, the coordinator or designated study 
staff member will discuss the basics of the study and basic required principles of informed consent.  
If the potential participant remains i nterested, the coordinator or designated study staff member 
will ask focused screening questions using an IRB -approved phone script to see if the potential 
participant meets entry criteria. If they appear to be eligible, and continue to be interested in th e 
study, he or she will be scheduled for an in -person screening visit.  If not, they will be thanked for 
their interest. We will work within IRB requirements to assure Privacy Regulations are met.  
 
 
 
 
We will obtain formal written consent from all new participants enrolled in this project.  Following 
policies of the MU IRB, written informed consent will be obtained and documented by the study’s 
Research Coordinator or designated study staff before any s tudy-related procedures are performed.  
Informed consent will be obtained in a private research office.  A study coordinator or designated 
study staff member will review study procedures and the consent form with each potential 
participant.  Each individua l may take as much time as they like to decide if they do or do not wish 
to participate.  A decision not to participate will not affect their participation in other studies at 
MU, nor will it affect their access to health care at MU.  III. Recruitment Process  
IV. Consent Process  
Page 5 of 19  
 
 
 
 
 
Inclusion Criteria: Subjects will:  
1. Be between the ages of 18 and 65.  
2. Be in stable mental and physical health.  
3. Be willing to provide informed consent.  
4. Be able to comply with protocol requirements and likely to complete all study procedures.  
5. Be a current nicotine dependent cigarette smoker (smoke ≥10 cigs/day) with a minimum 
smoking history of smoking an average of  ≥ 10 cigs/day over the past two years.  
 
Exclusion Criteria: Subjects with:  
1. Contraindication to MRI (e.g., presence of metal in the skull, orbits or intracranial cavity, 
claustrophobia).  
2. Contraindication to TMS (history of neurological disorder or seizure, increased intracranial 
pressure, brain surgery, or head trauma with loss of consciousness for > 15 minutes, 
implan ted electronic device, metal in the head, or pregnancy, as indicated by a positive 
urine pregnancy test at screening).  
3. Any use of substances that lower seizure threshold (such as thyroid medications or 
cocaine).  
4. History of autoimmune, endocrine, viral, or  vascular disorder affecting the brain.  
5. History or MRI evidence of neurological disorder that would lead to local or diffuse brain 
lesions or significant physical impairment.  
6. Unstable cardiac disease, uncontrolled hypertension, severe renal or liver insu fficiency, or 
sleep apnea.  
7. BAC greater than 0.0.  
8. Any other condition or concern that in the Investigator’s opinion would impact participant 
safety, compliance with study instructions, or potentially confound the interpretation of the 
study results.  
 
As pa rt of exclusion criteria , participants are specifically asked to not take part in any other 
research during their active participation in the protocol once eligibility at screening is made 
through the last visit day of the protocol.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 V. Inclusion/Excl usion Criteria  
Page 6 of 19  
 
 
 
 
 
Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics. We propose to enroll 40 participants that meet   
inclusion/exclusion criteria  in order to obtain 30 complete usable datasets .  
 
TARGETED/PLANNED ENROLLMENT: 40  
Ethnic Category  Sex/Gender  
Females  Males  Total  
Hispanic or Latino  2 2 4 
Not Hispanic or Latino  18 18 36 
Ethnic Category: Total of All Subjects*  40 
Racial Categories   
American Indian/Alaska Native  0 0 0 
Asian  1 1 2 
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 
Black or African American  9 9 18 
White  9 9 18 
Other  1 1 2 
Racial Categories: Total of All Subjects*  20 20 40 
 
 
 
 
The UG3 phase is a proof -of-concept study to test mechanistic hypotheses of the acute effects of 
TBS on corticothalamic inhibitory control (IC) task -based functional connectivity (tbFC), IC task 
performance and ad lib smoking in the laboratory while preliminarily evaluating safety and 
tolerability of TBS among individuals with TUD. Clearly defined milestones, focused on iTBS VI. Number of Subjects  
VII. Study Procedures and Research Design  
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of UG3 Study Protocol.   

Page 7 of 19 versus cTBS and baseline on IC circuitry, will be met before proceeding to Phase 2 (UH3), a 4 -
session (over 2 -weeks) randomized iTBS versus cTBS trial to  assess smoking behavior over two -
weeks post -treatment period.  
 
As shown in Fig. 1, individuals ( N =30) with TUD will complete a baseline MRI visit and, using 
a crossover design, be randomly assigned to receive iTBS on one visit and cTBS on the other visit. 
Following TBS, they will repeat the protocol and then perform the SRT [4]. The effe cts of TBS 
on IC brain and behavior and smoking on the SRT, along with safety and tolerability, will be 
assessed.  
 
Strategies to Ensure a Robust and Unbiased Approach . As detailed throughout this section, the 
proposed study will achieve robust and unbiased  results via several design features including: 
explicit inclusion/exclusion criteria; randomization and blinding; use of validated measures; 
explicit hypotheses and well -validated analytic strategies; power estimates; and careful 
consideration of potentia l confounds. As standard practice in our laboratory, we will maximize 
participant retention and data collection compliance, while maximizing fidelity by providing 
participants with training on all task procedures prior to data collection.  
Participant Rete ntion and data collection compliance . We will minimize study drop -out and 
data loss due to participant burden by contacting participants 1 day prior to each session and 
provide session -specific details and reminders as needed. Over the study, participants will respond 
to digitally administered questionnaires regarding mood, craving and smoking over the past 24 -
hrs. This strategy has proven successful in characterizing self -report affect, craving and smoking 
behavior [50, 54] . In ongoing NIDA -funded smoking cessation studies by our group, response 
rates reach >95% following RA verificatio n of compliance over a 4 -week trial (R01DA038700); 
~80% over 8 -12 week trials (R34 DA042228, UG3 DA043231). The current proposed UG3 and 
UH3 studies both fall within a timeline where we have achieved greater than 95% participant 
compliance.  
Training Sessi on. Following consent, each eligible participant choosing to continue with the 
protocol will participate in an extensive training session to become familiar with all aspects of the 
study.  
• Inhibitory Control (IC) Task Training.  During training, participants  will perform one complete 
7.2 min. run of the IC task (see C.4.a.) and are required to achieve a minimum of 75% correct 
responses on “Go” trials and a minimum of 25% correct omissions on “NoGo” trials in order to 
demonstrate understanding of task instruct ions. If performance is sub -threshold, the participant 
will be provided feedback from the researcher and perform an additional practice run. Using this 
same training strategy in our prior studies with individuals with nicotine, cannabis, cocaine or 
opioid use disorder ( N > 250), > 95% of participants have met performance criteria after the 1st 
training run and, and among those participants requiring additional training, 100% of participants 
met criteria after the 2nd training run.  
• Habituation to Scanner En vironment.  Participants will practice the experimental task while 
inside of a mock scanner in order to reduce scan -related anxiety and improve scan data quality.  
• Practice ad lib smoking.  Participants will be introduced to, and practice smoking their preferred -
brand cigarette using the Clinical Research Support System (CReSS) Lab smoking topography 
device to become familiar with smoking through the system and minimize effects of a novel 
smoking experience during testing.  
 
Page 8 of 19  
 
 
Assessments, biomarkers, and self -report measures.  
• Diagnostic Assessment . A medical history and fMRI safety screening questionnaire will be 
conducted to ensure that the individual is eligible to participate.  
• Smoking history, behavior and dependence . The following validated measures of nicotine 
dependence and urge to smoke will be used at various times during the study: Shiffman/Jarvik 
Withdrawal scale [55], Fagerström Test of Nicotine Dependence [56] & Modified Cigarette 
Evaluation Questionnaire [57]. 
• Tobacco use biomarkers.  Expired air CO concentrations will be measured at screening to 
establish eligibility (CO > 10) at baseline,  and smoking or abstinence (CO < 6 ) status  prior to 
each experimental session, using standard procedures [33, 34] . Urinary cotinine will be used 
to assess quantitative measures of smoking and abstinence (ABS <80  ng/ml).  
• Smoking topography.  Clinical Research Support System (CReSS) Lab smoking topography 
device (Plowshare Technologies) will be used to assess smoking topography. Measures to be 
evaluated include number of puffs, puff volume (milliliters), puff durati on (milliseconds), puff 
velocity (milliliters/second) and inter -puff interval (seconds).  
• Trait and State Measures . Impulsiveness will be measured with the BIS -11 [58].Mood state 
will be evaluated with the Profile of Mood States [59], which has been shown to reliably 
characterize the effects of abstinence on mood in dependent smokers [60, 61] .  
• EMA measures.  Over the course of the study, participants will be prompted each day, via text 
messaging, to provide craving, mood ratings and quantify smoking (# cigs.) for the day through 
a link to a secure REDCap questionna ire and daily log of cigarettes smoked that day (see [50, 
54]). 
• Safety Assessment.  Tolerability will be assessed using a sixteen -item review of systems (ROS) 
questionnaire [36] and reviewed with research team at weekly visits.  
 
GoGo/NoGo Inhibitory control (IC) Task . The “GoGo/NoGo” task [4, 44]  will serve as the 
experimental probe to evaluate the mechanistic underpi nning of TBS on IC, determine whether or 
not to proceed from the UG3 mechanistic proof -of-concept project to the fully -powered UH3 
phase . fMRI BOLD response will be collected from participants as they perform the task. 
Participants are instructed to press a button in response to common (gray colored circles: 75% of 
trials) and rare (yellow colored circles: 12.5% of trials) Go stimuli and inhibit responding to rare 
NoGo stimuli (blue colored circles: 12.5% of trials). The task provides errors of omission and  
reaction times during Go trials, controls for novelty detection during processing of rare Go trials 
(yellow circles) and errors of commission on NoGo trials (blue circles). Behavioral data  will be 
processed and analyzed consistent with our prior work with  this task [4]. Prior to analysis, NoGo 
performance will be corrected by scoring NoGo trials with null response as incorrect when the 
participant did not respond to the ‘Go’ trial preceding it, in order to control for lapses in attention.  
Data will then be analyzed in SPSS.  
 
Smoking Relapse analog Task (SRT).  The SRT was developed by the PI (Froeliger) and smoking 
behavior outcomes (time to lapse) shown to be predicted by IC corticothalamic neural -circuitry 
function [4]. In brief, t he SRT is comprised of two phases. The first involves up to 10, six -minute 
Page 9 of 19 blocks of randomly presented trials of neutral, smoking and emotional images. Following each 
block, participants rate their craving on a scale from 1 -10 and then choose to earn $1 for each 
additional block up to 60 min., or quit the task and smoke a cigarette using a pocket CReSS system 
in which topography measures are recorded.  
 
Neuroimaging Protocol.  Imaging will be performed on a 3T Siemens Prisma sca nner:  a high -
resolution 3D MPRAGE anatomical sequence will be acquired (matrix = 256, flip angle = 9°, 166 
slices, slice thickness = 1 mm); w hole brain BOLD contrast sensitive images will be acquired using 
a multi -band (6) EPI sequence (60 slices, TR=800 m s, TE=30 ms, FOV=216, 2.4 mm3 voxels). 
Prior to the acquisition of images, the anterior and posterior commissures will be identified in the 
mid-sagittal slice of a localizer series, followed by the acquisition of PA and AP field maps, and 
then followed the  acquisition of functional images during the IC task.  
fMRI IC task data preprocessing.  Similar to our prior analytic strategy using this task [4], fMRI 
data wi ll be preprocessed using SPM12 to remove noise and artifacts, motion corrected [51], 
temporally realigned using B -spline interpolation and smoothed with an 8mm FWHM Gaussian 
filter. Functional images for each participant will be processed in their native space.  
IC Task Modeling.  Preprocessed data will be entered into a first -level, whole -brain analysis 
using the General Linear Model to examine BOLD response to each of the 5 trial s of interest: 
NoGo correct (successful inhibition), NoGo incorrect  (error of commission), RareGo correct (novel -target 
detection), RareGo incorrect  (novel -target error of ommission), and Go incorrect  (error of omission). 
Each event will be modeled as a delta r egressor (onset dur. = 0) and convolved with a canonical 
hemodynamic response function. Motion will be removed through rigid body rotation and 
translation and parameters included as covariates. A high -pass filter (128 seconds; .008 Hz) will 
be applied to r emove slow signal drift. To idenitfy successful IC -BOLD response, controlling for 
novelty detection, a NOGO correct–RareGo correct contrast image (IC -contrast) will be generated [4] 
and fed forwa rd to ROI identification.  
Region of Interest (ROI) Identification.  For each subject, the IC -contrast image will be loaded 
into, and overlaid onto their coregistered T1, in MRIcroGL 
(http://www.mccauslandcenter.sc.edu/mricrogl/ ). The PI (Froeliger) will train a postdoctoral 
fellow on how to identify the peak cluster  of activation in the r.IFG (e.g. neuroanatomical 
boundaries, software) and, once trained, work as a team to identify ROI’s with >95% agreement. 
The IFG is comprised of three sub -divisions —Pars opercularis, Pars triangularis and Pars 
orbitalis —all of which  have been demonstrated to play a role in inhibiotry control [52]. Across our 
work with TUD related disruptions in IFG activation  [4, 32 -35], activity in the posterior -ventral 
aspect of the Pars  triangularis and/or posterior extent of the Pars opercularis —ventral to the 
inferior frontal sulcus, dorsal to lateral sulcus, anterior to the precentral sulcus —is the focal extent 
of the r.IFG node in the corticothalamic circuit that mediates IC and smok ing relapse vulnerability 
[4], and is sensitive to TBS moudlating IC. Thus, we have clearly defined anatomical boundaries 
for confining the functionally defined peak cluster that will serves as the ROI for each participant. 
Each participants f unctionally defined ROI [as shown in Fig. 2]) will be used for neuronavigating 
TBS.  
Page 10 of 19 Neuronavigation Protocol. Following the baseline scan and ROI identification procedure, 
neuronavigation will be performe d using the Rogue Research Inc. © Brainsight system. First, co -
registered anatomical and functional ROI data will be entered into a participant’s workflow profile, 
followed by skin and full -brain curvilinear reconstructions, 3 -landmark identifications (bri dge of 
nose, l.ear, r.ear), placing a pin on the ROI and coil alignment with the gyrus. The same setup 
parameters will be used across each of the two TBS visits and I/O BOX TTL triggers enabled to 
record the spatial parameters for each pulse: a) distance t o target; b) target error; c) angular error; 
and c) twist error, for use in assessing quality control and entered as nuisance covariates in 
statistical analyses. In our pilot study (results shown in Fig. 1), the mean target error (i.e. shortest 
distance fr om the line projecting into the head along the coil’s path) across all conditions was 2.6 
mm (± 1.0) —within range of the manufactures recommended threshold (3mm) —for each 
participants ROI (samples in Fig. 2).  
 
Theta Burst Stimulation Protocols. Following fMRI data preprocessing, modeling, ROI 
identification and verification (C.4.b) and setting up the neuronavigation protocol (C.4.c), 
participants will be randomized to receive TBS to the r.IFG on two separate experimental visits: 
iTBS on one visit s; cTBS on one visit —counterbalanced across participants.  
Determining Resting Motor Threshold . Standard procedures will be used to determine the 
participants resting motor threshold (RMT) using parameter estimation by sequential testing 
(PEST) procedures [53]. 
Intermittent  Theta  Burst  Stimulation  (iTBS)  to the r.IFG.  The total duration  of the iTBS  
protocol  [38] is 190 seconds.  Participants  will receive  stimulation  over the r.IFG  (A series  of 3-
burst  pulses  presented  at 5Hz,10  pulses/sec,  10 pulses/train,  20 trains,  10.0 sec intertrain  interval;  
80% RMT,  MagPro)  using  a figure 8 coil (Coil  Cool  B65 A/P).  This protocol  has been  shown  to 
enhance  IC performance  as shown  in Figure  1. 
Continuous  Theta  Burst  Stimulation  (cTBS)  to the r.IFG.  The total duration  of the cTBS  
protocol  [41] is 34 seconds.  Participants  will receive  stimulation  over the r.IFG  (An intermittent  
series  of 3-burst  pulses presented  at 6Hz,  18 pulses/sec,  600 pulses/train,  .1 sec intertrain  interval;  
80% RMT,  MagPro)  using  a figure  8 coil (Coil  Cool  B65 A/P).  This protocol  has been  shown  to 
reduced  IC performance  as shown  in Figure  1. 
 
Randomization and Blinding.  This s tudy utilizes a double -blind, crossover design with a 
counterbalanced (latin -square) [62] TBS condition order. Given the short —~1hr duration of the   
Figure 2. Individual variability in inhibitory control task -based r.IFG activation.  Randomly selected cases ( n = 5) from our pilot 
IC-task based fMRI -guided TBS study. Though all participants exhibited significant r.IFG activation in the IC -contrast image —
similar to that reported in our prior published work [4: upper right excerpt], significant inter -subject variabil ity in neuroanatomy 
along with variability in the foci of functional activation were identified above. Thus, an individual subject’s functional a ctivity in 
their native space provides greater spatial specificity for targeting stimulation, as compared to us ing group mean activity 
following normalizing to an average template.  Landmarks for reference: *= sinus; STG= Superior temporal gyrus.  
Adapted from [4]  
*STG
Page 11 of 19 effects of a single session of TBS on neural funct ion and behavior [38, 41] , a crossover design 
with a minimum of a 2 -day washout period bet ween TBS session is appropriate for this study [63]. 
Both the participants and the research technicians, other than the technician administering TBS, 
will be blinded to the condition order. At the end of each visit, the participant and the researcher 
will independently co mplete a form indicating which TBS condition they believe was administered 
during the session and provide a confidence rating on a scale from 1 -10. 
Hypothesis Testing.  All hypothesis testing will be conducted with α <.05, unless otherwise noted.  
Rationale.  Based upon the tenet that iTBS induces LTP and strengthens network activity, our prior 
published work demonstrating that corticothalamic tbFC mediates the association between 
successful IC task performance and inhibiting smoking [4], and our pilot data demonstrating r.IFG 
iTBS improves IC (Fig. 1), we hypothesize that r.IFG iTBS will strengthen corticothalamic tbFC, 
improve IC and attenuate smoking lapse/relapse.  
 
Aim 1. Examine the effects of iTBS on IC neural circuitry and task pe rformance.  
Hypothesis 1:  As compared to baseline: r.IFG iTBS stimulation will strengthen corticothalamic 
tbFC and improve IC task performance; whereas r.IFG cTBS simulation will weaken 
corticothalamic tbFC  and result in worse IC task performance. Behavioral analysis plan:  
Following procedures outlined in C.4.a, IC performance data will be analyzed with a repeated -
measures ANOVA to examine the effects of Condition (Baseline, iTBS, cTBS). fMRI data 
analysis p lan: Following procedures in C.4.b —C.4.d, IC corticothalamic tbFC will be processed 
and modeled using our validated strategy [4] and then Fisher -transformed correlation coefficients 
(rZ) scores for each participant during each condition will be  fed forward and analyzed in SPSS 
using a repeated -measures ANOVA to examine the effect of Condition.  
 
Aim 2. Examine the effects of iTBS on ad lib smoking. Hypothesis 2:  As compared to 
baseline: r.IFG iTBS, will extend the duration of abstinence; whereas  cTBS shorten the duration 
of abstinence during an ad lib smoking lapse paradigm in the lab. Behavioral analysis plan:  As in 
[4], time to init iate ad lib smoking during the SRT (see C.4.a.2) will be analyzed in SPSS using a 
repeated -measures ANOVA to examine the effect of Condition. Main effects of Condition on 
secondary smoking topography variables (e.g. puff volume (ml) and number of puffs) wi ll be 
explored.  
 
Aim 3.  Examine safety and tolerability of administering r.IFG TBS. Rationale . Though 
TBS has a good safety profile [36, 37] , prior studies assessment of tolerability and adverse events 
(AE’s) have largely confined those assessments to the day of study [37]. In addition, although the 
TBS stimulation parameters proposed herein are published standards, the location —r.IFG  for 
ITBS is novel and thus both acute and protracted (24 hrs. post -stimulation) safety and tolerability 
profiles need to be assessed. Hypothesis 3:  r.IFG TBS will have a similar overall adverse event 
profile in a TUD population as previously observed in d orsolateral prefrontal cortex TMS trials. 
Assessment Plan.  Participants will be administered the ROS questionnaire (see C.9) at the 
beginning and end of each TBS visit, and 24hrs. post TBS. Dr. Froeliger will oversee participant 
compliance and, in the even t of an AE, consult with Dr. Ithman  who will serve as the Program 
Manager for AEs. Any AEs will be recorded in an AE log. If an AE is non -serious (self -limited 
with no intervention needed), no further action will be necessary. However, in the case of a ser ious, 
unresolved event, an AE follow -up log will be completed and subsequent safety procedures 
followed (see Human Subjects Section; DSMP). Treatment -emergent AEs for all participants and 
Page 12 of 19 comparisons between the number of participants with any adverse even ts will be conducted using 
Pearson’s chi -squared test statistic.  
 
Exploratory Aims.  MRS Rationale.  Converging evidence supports changes in glutamate 
release as a likely molecular mechanism associated with synaptic plasticity [64]. Glutamate 
receptors are necessary for the initiation and expression of LTP and LTD and GABA receptors are 
involved in the modulation of these phenomena. Consistent with animal findings [65], proton MRS 
studies have demo nstrated TUD is associated with abnormal medial prefrontal [66] and thalamic 
[67] concentrations of glutamate along with evidence for media l prefrontal GABA disturbances 
being associated with attentional bias to drug cues [68]. Emerging evidence suggests that LTP -like 
TMS to l.dlPFC is associated with increases in localized glutamate concentrations in depressed 
[69, 70]  and healthy [71] 
individuals. Recent research  
has also demonstrated that 
LTD -like cTBS to motor 
cortex is associated with 
increases in localized GABA 
concentrations [72]. However, 
to the best of our knowledge, 
no studies have investigated 
the impact of TBS on r.IFG 
GABA or glutamate 
concentrations or the impact of 
TBS on localized 
neurometabolites in TUD. We 
posit that r.IFG TBS induced 
neuroche mical changes may 
subsequently correspond with 
changes in IC.  
 
 
Data  acquisition:  At each visit,  the MRS  acquisition  voxel  (25 x 25 x 30 mm3) will  be placed  in 
the r.IFG  to correspond  to the brain  tissue  directly  underneath  the TMS  coil (Fig. 3). Following  
placement  of 6 saturation  bands  parallel to  the voxel  faces  and auto-shimming,  single -voxel  
water -suppressed .1H-MRS spectra will be acquired via HERMES (TR=2000ms; TE=80ms; 
number of averages=320) using editing pulse frequencies for GABA and GSH acquisition (1.9 
[ON GABA], 4.56 [ON GSH], and 7.5 ppm [OFF] [73]; and a PRESS sequence maximally 
sensitive to glutamate (TR=2000ms; TE=40ms; number of averages=128 [74]. Unsuppressed 
water spectra will be acquired for each sequence.   Data analysis:  Skull stripping and whole brain 
tissue -type segmentation will be performed on MP -RAGE images using FMRIB software [75]. In-
house MATLAB functions will be used to extract the 3D volume corresponding to the positioned 
MRS voxel to o btain within -voxel gray matter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) tissue content for each subject. GM/WM ratios will be used as covariates in all statistical 
analyses. Eddy currents and residual water will be removed using in -house MATLA B functions. 
HERMES data will be analyzed using the Gannet MATLAB toolbox [76]. PRESS data will be 
analyzed using LCModel 6.3 [77]. Metabolites with fitting uncertainties <20% will be retained.  
Figure 3. Sample r.IFG voxel placement (top panel ), sample fitted GSH 
(bottom -left), GABA / Glx  (bottom -right) and Water / Creatine (bottom -center) 
spectra acquired with HERMES.  

Page 13 of 19 Water will be quantified from a Gaussian -Lorentzia n fit to the non -water -suppressed data. Within -
voxel tissue fractions of gray and white matter and cerebrospinal fluid will be calculated based on 
automated segmentation in SPM 12 using a volume mask generated in Gannet [78]. Metabolite 
concentrations will be normalized to unsuppressed water and corrected for within -voxel CSF 
fraction. Cramer -Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) values will be provided by the ProFit software and 
only estimates with CRLB values < 20% will be submitted to further analysis. Estimated 
metabolite peak areas will be normalized to the unsuppressed water signal. Finally, 
metabolite/water, along with metabolite/creatine, ratios will be corrected for within -voxel CSF 
fraction [79]. Glutamate, glutamine, and GABA ratios will be entered into HLM models with a 
priori contrasts to examine differences in metabolite concentrations following r.IFG iTBS vs cTBS 
and baseline. Associations between metabolite concentrations and corticothalami c tbFC, IC and 
smoking on the SRT will be examined.  
 
Missing Data and Attrition. Missing data in repeated -measures study designs are problematic 
but can be minimized by effective communication between staff and participants and minimizing 
participant burd en via maintaining a relatively compact study duration. The study team has 
significant experience with ensuring a robust and unbiased approach and minimizing missing data 
(See C.8)   
 
Screening/Training Visit :  During screening, all aspects of the study wil l be described to 
participants and informed consent will be acquired. Participants will provide demographic and 
employment history via self -report forms.  Then, participants will be asked to provide breath 
samples to test 1) expired carbon monoxide (CO) an d 2) an estimate of blood alcohol content 
(BAC).  Additionally, urine samples will be obtained in order to assess pregnancy status and to 
screen for illicit drug use.  Among females, the pregnancy screen will be conducted prior to the 
drug screen. If the re sult of the pregnancy test is positive, participants will not be screened for drug 
use or undergo any further study procedures. The results of the drug test will be recorded primarily 
for data analysis purposes and cocaine will be the only exclusionary ill icit substance. After 
biological screening is complete, participants will complete medical and smoking history, MRI 
safety, and contact information forms and will be verbally guided through a timeline follow -back 
of cigarettes and other tobacco products.  Participants who meet all selection criteria will be 
provided with the option to continue onto the training phase of the visit. During training, 
participants will learn and practice the inhibitory control (IC) task and fill out commonly used 
questionnaires  that assess state and trait mood and cognitive processes (see Appendix).  
 
Experimental Baseline Visit:   At this visit, participants will first: provide an expired breath CO 
sample in order to assess recent smoking; and, among females, provide a urine sample in which 
the pregnancy test must be negative. Next, breath alcohol levels will be assessed with a handheld 
breathalyzer and partic ipants must record a BAL of 0.0. If participants continue to be eligible after 
the biological samples, they will complete study questionnaires to assess mood and to characterize 
smoking -related behavior.  After this, participants will move on to the first fMRI scan followed by 
the SRT task.  
 
fMRI Scan:   1) a high -resolution anatomical scan; 2) a 7 -minute run of the IC task (see 
Fig 1); and 3) a six minute resting state BOLD (blood -oxygen -level -dependent).  
Page 14 of 19 Randomization: This will be a single blind study w here participants will be randomized 
1:1 to receive one session of either intermittent TBS (iTBS) or continuous TBS (cTBS) 
following the first fMRI.  
SRT:  The Smoking Relapse task will be administered as described above.  
Experimental Visits 1 & 2:   At the b eginning of each of these experimental visits, participants will 
first: provide an expired breath CO sample in order to assess recent smoking; and, among females, 
provide a urine sample in which the pregnancy test must be negative. Next, breath alcohol lev els 
will be assessed with a handheld breathalyzer and participants must record a BAL of 0.0. If 
participants continue to be eligible after the biological samples, they will complete study 
questionnaires to assess mood and to characterize smoking -related be havior.  After this, 
participants will move on to the  first of two fMRI  sessions  followed by the  TMS session and the 
second  the fMRI and SRT task.  
 
fMRI Scan  1:  1) a high -resolution anatomical scan; 2) a 7 -minute run of the IC task (see 
Fig 1); and 3) a six minute resting state BOLD (blood -oxygen -level -dependent).  
TMS : Upon randomization, participants will receive either iTBS or cTBS per the theta 
burst protoco ls described above.   
fMRI Scan  2:  1) a high -resolution anatomical scan; 2) a 7 -minute run of the IC task (see 
Fig 1); and 3) a six minute resting state BOLD (blood -oxygen -level -dependent).  The 
second  
SRT:  The Smoking Relapse task will be administered as described above.  
 
Analytic Strategy  Behavioral and neural data analysis strategies are found in [1] and detailed 
below.  
fMRI data processing . Pre-processing of functional images includes: slice -time correction and 
realignment [18]; motion outlier detection (framewise displacement > 4 mm (~ 1 acquisition voxel) 
www.nitrc.org/projects/artifact_detect ) and correction (via nearest -neighbor interpolation); 
despiking at 4% of global mean (cibsr.stanford.edu/tools/human -brain -project/artrepair -
software.html ); coregistration of functional images  to structural  image; warping to MNI space 
using forward deformations, resampling to (1.5mm)3 voxel size (i.e., 3.375µL) and smoothing with 
a (10mm)3 FWHM Gaussian filter .  
Page 15 of 19 Task -based functional connectivity (tbFC) data 
processing.  Pre-processed fMRI data wi ll be 
uploaded into the conn14 toolbox 
(www.nitrc.org/projects/conn ) for denoising and 
connectivity analyses. Using unsmoothed segmented 
tissue images, along with functionally -defined 
regions of interest (ROIs), significant clusters will be 
exported using MarsBaR (marsbar.sourceforge.net) 
from the NoGo correct - RareGo correct ANCOVA model. 
Mean time -courses from the unsmoothed BOLD 
signal from each ROI will be characterized with no 
additional principal components. Confounds (mean 
white matter, cerebrospinal fluid signal, and motion  
parameters) will be regressed out of the m ean signal 
for each ROI. A high -pass filter of 0.008 Hz will be 
performed after confound regression (no detrending).   
Inhibitory Control Network (ICN) Mask.  An ICN 
mask that was created in WFU Pickatlas (fmri.wfubmc.edu/software/pickatlas) for previous 
studies, including R.IFG, bilateral thalamus, STN, preSMA and left primary motor cortex (BA 4 
/ M1), will be used as an explicit mask in all analyses.  
Statistical Analyses  
General Statistical Considerations.  Significance will be defined at α = .05, with a cluster -
determining threshold (CDT) of p < .001, as determined by Monte Carlo simulations (3dClustSim; 
afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/program_help/3dClustSim.htm, May 2016). Specifically, 3dcalc 
will take th e square root of the SPM model’s error variance image (ResMS) and 3dFWHMx  used 
to empirically determine the spatial smoothness of residual error in the model using the newly 
developed non -Gaussian autocorrelation function (ACF). Data from the NIH, replica ting the 
Beijing datasets [19], show that these settings, combined with CDT of p < .001 and a (10mm)3 
smoothing kernel, maintain a true false -positive rate of 5% for regular event -related designs [20].  
 
Experimental Inhibitory Control (IC) Task. Data from each fMRI scan will be entered into a 1st 
level, whole -brain analysis using the GLM [18] to examine BOLD response to each of the 5 trial 
types: NoGo correct (IC), NoGo incorrect  (error of commission), RareGo correct (correct novel -target 
detection), RareGo incorrect  (novel -target error of omission), and Go incorrect  (error of omission). Each 
event type will be modeled as a delta regressor at the onset of the event and convolved with a 
canonical hemodynamic response funct ion. Intra -run motion will be removed through rigid body 
rotation and translation and parameters included as covariates. A high -pass filter (.008 Hz) will be 
applied to remove slow signal drift. Finally, in order to examine successful inhibitory control (I C)-
related BOLD response, controlling for novelty detection, a NoGo correct - RareGo correct contrast 
image will be generated (henceforth, IC) and used for hypothesis testing. This is to be distinguished 
from IC accuracy, which refers to the percent of corre ct ‘NoGo’ trials achieved.  Main effects of 
condition (iTBS vs. cTBS) on IC will be assessed via ANCOVA.  Next, mean percent signal 
change (PSC) from 1st level models during IC will be extracted (via MARSBAR) form each of 
ROI within the ICN mask (Fig 4). 
 Figure 4: IC mask includes  right inferior frontal gyrus 
(IFG), left precentral gyrus (BA4/M1), and bilateral 
thalamus (Thal), subthalamic nucleus (STN), and 
pre-supplementary motor area (preSMA).  

Page 16 of 19 Task -based Functional Connectivity (tbFC ). Corticothalamic tbFC will be assessed at the 2nd level 
based on 1st level voxel -wise bivariate correlation maps (i.e., Fisher transformed correlation 
coefficient [rZ -value] maps) [21].  
 
 
 
 
The main study procedures include completion of questionnaires, MRI, and TMS, all of which are 
generally considered minimal risk procedures.  The primary risks are described below:  
 
1. Magnetic Resonance Imaging.   Because the MRI machine acts like a large magnet, it could 
move metallic objects in the MRI room during the examination, which could harmful to the 
participant. To prevent such an event from happening; loose metal objects, like pocket knives 
or key chain s, are not allowed in the MRI room. If a participant has a piece of metal in their 
body, such as a fragment in their eye, aneurysm clips, ear implants, spinal nerve stimulators, 
or a pacemaker, they will not be allowed into the MRI room and cannot have a M RI.  Having 
a MRI may be uncomfortable, particularly regarding feelings of claustrophobia and the loud 
banging noise during the scan. Participants will be asked to wear earplugs to avoid possible 
hearing impairment.  
 
2. Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation:  
 
a. Investigational Device Exemption: Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation is an investigational 
device. It s a  510K/Pre -market Notification device (a device that is substantially equivalent 
to a legally marketed device), as described in 21 CFR 807 Subpart E.  
b. Potential Risks of TMS  
i. Potential risk of a seizure:  The major risk using repetitive TMS subjects is the possibility 
of inducing a seizure. We have now studied and given rTMS to more than several hundred 
subjects over past 15 years. None of these patients has developed a seizure. We will exclude 
patients with a prior history of seizures.  
ii. Potential for scalp discomfort and headaches:  Some people report mild discomfort when 
the magnetic pulses are applied over the scalp. A small number of people (~5%) re port 
headache following TMS. However, the headaches are temporary and manageable with 
common over -the-counter pain remedies.  
iii. Potential hearing loss:  The discharge of the rTMS  coil generates a high -energy click 
that may cause cochlear damage. Foam earp lugs can protect against these changes and will 
be worn by the subjects and the researchers present during TMS sessions.  
 
3. Incidental Findings: Magnetic Resonance Imaging : Some MRI scans can detect medical 
conditions, such as cancer, brain injury, and abno rmal blood vessels; however, this functional 
MRI is carried out purely for experimental purposes and we are not looking for brain 
disorders. Furthermore, the study researchers are not trained in diagnosing brain disorders; 
therefore, the researchers are no t qualified to offer any medical opinions concerning the scan 
(good or bad). It is possible that the study researchers will notice something in a participant’s 
scan that appears unusual and/or abnormal, if this occurs, the researchers will inform the 
participant of the finding and provide them with a copy of their scan, which they may take to VIII.  Potential Risks/Adverse Events  
Page 17 of 19 a medical expert for further review and diagnosis. Being told about such a finding may cause 
anxiety as well as suggest the need for additional tests and financial cos ts.  Any costs 
associated with clinical follow -up(s) are the participant’s and/or the participant’s insurance 
carrier’s responsibility. Participants who do not wish to be informed of such findings will be 
advised to not participate in this study.  
 
4. Breach o f confidentiality:   There is the potential risk of breach of confidentiality of clinical 
ad laboratory information.  Dr. Froeliger has experience as an investigator dealing with such 
sensitive information and has experience assuring that data is adequately  protected.  
Safeguards to protect confidentiality include locked records and firewalls around password -
protected electronic data, and all study data being coded, with the key linking the code with a 
participant’s identity being kept on secure network stor age as a password protected document. 
Similar safeguards are followed for storage and processing of MRI data. MRI data is stored 
on secure network storage maintained by MU, where the PI has dual appointment.  The MRI 
scans are identified only by subject co de, study code, and date of acquisition. Participants’ 
initials will also be present on some questionnaires; however, the questionnaires containing 
the initials will be stored in a locked file cabinet.  
 
ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS  
 
a. Recruitment and Informed Consent. Participants will be recruited from the general community 
through media advertising (print and online sources). The IRB approved Informed Consent 
(IC) will be obtained prior to the initial assessment.  The consent will be explained orally and 
in the written form, and will be documented by the signature of the participant on the IC. 
Consent will be obtained in a private interview room so that the participant may ask any 
questions to the research staff.  
 
b. Protection against Risk. Research staff will closely supervise participants throughou t their 
enrollment in the study.  Specific to the BAC assessment, if a participant’s BAC is greater 
than 0.0 at any visit, the research staff will either a) ask the participant to remain in the 
laboratory until their BAC returns to 0.0, if they are driving , or b) work with the participant 
to ensure that they have alternative transportation home, including providing a taxi, if needed.  
  
c. Loss of confidentiality:   Paper -based information will be kept in on -site locked file cabinet(s) 
designated for study mater ials. Data collection instruments or forms containing participant 
names will be stored in separate secure locations from those instruments or forms containing 
subject identification (SID) numbers, and both will be stored separately from the master list 
linking the SID and names.  Paper -based information will be accessible only to study 
personnel who need access to the information for study purposes.  All electronic records will 
be stored on a password protected secure server with access limited only to stud y personnel 
who need access to the information for study purposes. All password protected hard -drive 
backups on will be stored in the PI’s offices in a secure location.  The results of drug and BAC 
testing will be stored in the same manner as other data (i .e. in separate location from any 
information containing participant PHI).  The results will not be reported to any authority (e.g. 
employer or law enforcement) nor will they be available to them upon request.  
 
Page 18 of 19  
 
 
Participants will not directly benefit from this study.  
 
 
 
 
Participants will receive up to $285 total in cash over one screening/training visit and three 
experimental visits (total study visits = 4): $55 at the training visit, $50 for each  of three fMRI 
session -visits ($150 total: baseline, TMS v1, TMS v2), $25 for each of two TMS session -visits 
($50 total: TMS v1, TMS v2), up to $10 for performance on the SRT on each of three experimental 
visits ($30 total).  
 
 
 
 
The costs of this study will be covered by grant 5UG3DA048510 -02 funded by NIH/NIDA. 
Materials and supplies will cost $1,725, fMRI scans will cost $58,500, advertising and 
participant recruitment will cost $9,305 and participant compensation will cost $8,550.   
 
 
 
 
This UG3 phase is a proof -of-concept study to test mechanistic hypotheses of the acute effects of 
theta bursts stimulation (TBS) on corticothalamic inhibitory control (IC) task -based functional 
connectivity (tbFC), IC task pe rformance and ad lib smoking in the laboratory (smoking relapse 
task: SRT [4]), and while preliminarily evaluating safety and tolerability of TBS among 
individuals with TUD. Adults smokers meeting criteria for TUD (N = 40) will complete a 
baseline MRI visit  and, using a crossover design, be randomly assigned to receive iTBS on one 
visit and cTBS on the other visit. Following TBS, they will repeat the MRI protocol and then 
perform the SRT. The effects of TBS on IC brain and behavior and smoking on the SRT, al ong  
with safety and tolerability during each visit will be assessed . 
 
 
 
 
1. Froeliger, B., et al., Association Between Baseline Corticothalamic -Mediated Inhibitory 
Control and Smoking Relapse Vulnerability.  JAMA Psychiatry, 2017. 74(4): p. 379 -386. 
2. Moeller, S.J., et al., Neuroscience of inhibition for addiction medicine: from prediction of 
initiation to prediction of relapse.  Prog Brain Res, 2016. 223: p. 165 -88. 
3. Kalivas, P.W. and N.D. Vo lkow, The neural basis of addiction: a pathology of 
motivation and choice.  Am J Psychiatry, 2005. 162(8): p. 1403 -13. 
4. Goldstein, R.Z. and N.D. Volkow, Drug addiction and its underlying neurobiological 
basis: neuroimaging evidence for the involvement of the frontal cortex.  Am J Psychiatry, 
2002. 159(10): p. 1642 -52. IX. Anticipated Benefits  
X. Compensation  
XII. Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
XIII.  References/Appendices  XI. Costs  
Page 19 of 19 5. Aron, A.R., T.W. Robbins, and R.A. Poldrack, Inhibition and the right inferior frontal 
cortex.  Trends Cogn Sci, 2004. 8(4): p. 170 -7. 
6. Rae, C.L., et al., The prefrontal cor tex achieves inhibitory control by facilitating 
subcortical motor pathway connectivity.  J Neurosci, 2015. 35(2): p. 786 -94. 
7. Swann, N.C., et al., Roles for the pre -supplementary motor area and the right inferior 
frontal gyrus in stopping action: electrop hysiological responses and functional and 
structural connectivity.  Neuroimage, 2012. 59(3): p. 2860 -70. 
8. Jahanshahi, M., et al., A fronto -striato -subthalamic -pallidal network for goal -directed 
and habitual inhibition.  Nat Rev Neurosci, 2015. 16(12): p. 7 19-32. 
9. Nambu, A., H. Tokuno, and M. Takada, Functional significance of the cortico -
subthalamo -pallidal 'hyperdirect' pathway.  Neurosci Res, 2002. 43(2): p. 111 -7. 
10. Eagle, D.M. and C. Baunez, Is there an inhibitory -response -control system in the rat? 
Evidence from anatomical and pharmacological studies of behavioral inhibition.  
Neurosci Biobehav Rev, 2010. 34(1): p. 50 -72. 
11. Oberman, L., et al., Safety of theta burst transcranial magnetic stimulation: a systematic 
review of the literature.  J Clin Neu rophysiol, 2011. 28(1): p. 67 -74. 
12. Huang, Y.Z., et al., Theta burst stimulation of the human motor cortex.  Neuron, 2005. 
45(2): p. 201 -6. 
13. Duprat, R., et al., Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation Increases Reward Responsiveness 
in Individuals with Hi gher Hedonic Capacity.  Front Hum Neurosci, 2016. 10: p. 294.  
14. Ragert, P., et al., Improvement of tactile perception and enhancement of cortical 
excitability through intermittent theta burst rTMS over human primary somatosensory 
cortex.  Exp Brain Res, 20 08. 184(1): p. 1 -11. 
15. Verschuere, B., T. Schuhmann, and A.T. Sack, Does the inferior frontal sulcus play a 
functional role in deception? A neuronavigated theta -burst transcranial magnetic 
stimulation study.  Front Hum Neurosci, 2012. 6: p. 284.  
16. Halko , M.A., et al., Intermittent theta -burst stimulation of the lateral cerebellum 
increases functional connectivity of the default network.  J Neurosci, 2014. 34(36): p. 
12049 -56. 
17. Chikazoe, J., et al., Functional dissociation in right inferior frontal cort ex during 
performance of go/no -go task.  Cereb Cortex, 2009. 19(1): p. 146 -52. 
18. Friston, K.J., P. Jezzard, and R. Turner, Analysis of functional MRI time -series.  Human 
Brain Mapping, 1994. 1(2): p. 153 -171. 
19. Eklund, A., T.E. Nichols, and H. Knutsson, Cluster failure: Why fMRI inferences for 
spatial extent have inflated false -positive rates.  Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2016. 
113(28): p. 7900 -5. 
20. Cox, R.W., R.C. Reynolds, and P.A. Taylor, AFNI and Clustering: False Positive Rates 
Redux.  bioRxiv, 2016.  
21. Whitfield -Gabrieli, S. and A. Nieto -Castanon, Conn: a functional connectivity toolbox for 
correlated and anticorrelated brain networks.  Brain Connect, 2012. 2(3): p. 125 -41. 
 