 
 
  
Page 1 of 15 
  
Promoting Evidenced -Based Tobacco Smoking Ces sation Treatment in Community Mental Health Clinics  
 
 
March 17,  2022 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
 
 
  
Page 2 of 15 
 Date: March 17,  2022 
Principal Investigator:  Gail Daumit  
Application Number : IRB00231836  
 
Protocol  – Promoting Evidence -Based Tobacco Cessation Treatment  
in Community Mental Health Clinics  
 
***************************************************************** ************* *********** **********  
 
1. Abstract  
a. Provide no more than a one page research abstract briefly stating the problem, the research 
hypothesis, and the importance of the research.  
 
Tobacco smoking is the single largest contributor to premature mortali ty among persons with serious mental  
illness (SMI).1,2 An estimated 53% of US adults with SMI – six million individuals – smoke tobacco,3 
compared to 15% of US adults overall.4 Overall US smoking rates have declined dramatically over the past 50 
years, but smoking has persisted at cons istently high rates among those with SMI .5 The vast majority of persons 
with SMI who smoke would like to quit,6 and combination pharmacoth erapy and behavioral counseling is 
effective and safe for people with SMI,7-10 increasing abstinence rates up to 7 -fold over behavioral counseling 
alone .8,11 Provision of eff ective evidence -based smoking cessation treatment could reduce substantially the 
premature mortality experienced by people with SMI, however few in this group receive evidence -based 
treatment.12-15 
 
In two large Mar yland healthcare systems, fewer than 5% of persons with schizophrenia who smoke are  
prescribed evidence -based smoking cessation pharmacotherapy;13,14 limited ava ilable research shows similarly 
low rates in other states.12,15 Rates of behavioral smoking cessation counseling are also low.16 As many people  
with SMI receive the majority of their healthcare in the specialty mental health sector,17-19 it is critical to  
increase mental health providers’ delivery of e vidence -based smoking cessation treatment. Strategies to  achieve 
this goal will need to overcome knowledge and self -efficacy barriers among mental health providers,  including 
skepticism that people with SMI want to quit smoking, misperceptions about cessat ion treatment  efficacy and 
safety for this group, and low self -efficacy to deliver evidence -based smoking cessation treatment  for 
consumers with SMI .12,20 -23 Mental health providers may also perceive smoking cessati on treatment as  outside 
their scope of practice .12,20 -23 Clinic -level barriers to treatment, such as lack of systems for assessing  smoking 
status and willingness to quit among consumers with SMI, may also need to be  addressed.20,21 No published 
studies have evaluated implementation strategies to increase mental health providers’ delivery of  evidence -
based smoking cessation pharmacotherapy and counseling for people with SMI.  
 
This is a R34 pilot study funded by NIMH as part of the Johns Hopkins NIMH P50 Center to Accelerate 
Translation of Interventions to Decrease Premature Mortality in Series Mental Illness . This is a pilot study to 
assist and study the implementation of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment in community mental health 
clinics in Maryland over 12 months. In this study, w e will develop and test an implementation intervention 
designed to improve mental health providers’ knowledge, self -efficacy and delivery of evidence -based smoking 
cessation treatment. The implementation intervention includes both synchronous and asynchronous  training  
modules , including using an avatar practice module for motivational interviewing skills, a tobacco smoking 
identification and cessation  protocol, expert consultation , coaching  and organizational strategy meetings. The 
study is guided by Gurses et al.’s interdisciplinary framework of clinicians’  compliance with  evidence -based 
guidelines.24 
 
The study  will result in a set of training and implementation tools and resources for community mental health 
clinics to address tobacco smoking. Results  also will inform the  future  design  of a large -scale  trial testing 
strategies to increase delivery of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment for SMI in community mental 
health settings.  
 
 
  
Page 3 of 15 
  
2. Objectives   
 
The specific aims are:  
 
Aim 1: To inform implementation intervention development, exam ine barriers to evidence -based  
smoking cessation treatment in community mental health clinics serving consumers with SMI.  
1. What do providers in a community mental health organization  perceive as the key barriers to delivery of 
evidence -based smoking  
cessati on treatment, and what strategies could help to overcome these barriers?  
 
Aim 2: Assess the implementation intervention’s effects on providers’ knowledge, self -efficacy, and  
delivery of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment and preliminary measures of  consumers’  
abstinence from tobacco smoking.  The intervention will:  
1. Increase providers’ knowledge of smoking cessation treatment for consumers with SMI.  
2. Increase providers’ self -efficacy to deliver evidence -based smoking cessation treatment.  
3. Increase provi ders’ delivery of the four key components of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment: 
assessment of smoking status & willingness -to-quit, pharmacotherapy prescribing, and behavioral 
counseling.   
4. Increase abstinence from tobacco smoking among consumers with SMI.  
 
Aim 3: Assess the acceptability, appropriateness, and feasibility of the implementation intervention to increase 
delivery of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment:  
1. The implementation intervention will be perceived as acceptable, appropr iate, and feasible by community 
mental health clinic providers.  
 
3. Background  (briefly describe  pre-clinical and clinical data, current experience with proce dures, drug or 
device, and an y other relevant information to justify the research ) 
 
Persons with serious mental illness ( SMI) have a mortality  rate three times higher than those without SMI,2,25-27 
primarily due to cardiovascular disease (CVD),28-31 and tobacco smoking is the si ngle largest contributor to 
CVD and premature mortality in this population.1,2 Fifty -three percen t of US adults with SMI smoke tobacco,3 
compared to 15% of US adults overall.4 Smoking prevalence is highest among adults with schizophrenia, with 
estimates of >60%.32 Smoking cessation has significant benefits: after one year of abstinence from tobacco 
smoking, risk of myocardial infarction is reduced by 50%, and smoking cessation in mid -life eliminates 90% of 
smoking -related mortality risk.33,34 Combination pharmacotherapy (3 efficacious options are available: 
varenicline, bupropion or nicotine replacement therapy (NRT)) and behavioral counseling is effective cessation 
treatment for smokers with SMI,7-10 but estimates suggest that fewer than 5% of smokers with SMI receive 
pharmacotherapy,12-15 and rates of behavioral counseling – which, alone, is not effective cessation treatment for 
smokers with  SMI10 – are also low ( ≈12%).16 
 
Research shows modifiable knowledge and self -efficacy barriers to mental health providers’ delivery of 
evidence -based smoking cessation treatment.12,20 -23 While 65 -80% of smokers with SMI want to quit,6 in a 
recent study 77% of mental health providers believed smoker s with SMI are not interested in quitting.22 
Providers’ disproven but persistent concerns that cessation may increase SMI symptoms and/or disrupt 
psychotropic medication regimens and their uncertainty about the safety of smoking cessation p harmacotherapy 
may also impede treatment.12,22  In 2009, case reports35-37 of adverse psychiatric side effects led to black box 
warnings on varenicline and bupropion. These wa rnings were removed in December 2016 after cohort and 
clinical trial evidence  showed no increased risk of adverse psychiatric events among people with SMI.8,13,14,38 
While few mental health providers feel comfortabl e delivering cessation treatment, they report high willingness 
to do so if they were to receive training.22 Mental health clinic -level barriers, including lack of  systems for 
assessing and tracking consumers’ smoking status and willingness -to-quit, may also need to be addressed.20,25  
 
 
  
Page 4 of 15 
  
Few mental health providers deliver evidence -based smoking cessation treatment and many mental health 
clinics lack standard systems for screening, monitoring, and treat ing tobacco smoking.12,22 Community mental 
health settings are often under -resourced and providers face multiple competing demands  and smoking 
cessation has not historically been an organizational priority. As noted  above, mental health providers may face 
knowledge and self -efficacy barriers that impede  their delivery of evidence -based smoking cessation 
treatment.12,20 -23 Nonetheless, mental health providers’ extensive experie nce working with consumers with SMI 
makes them optimally positioned to deliver effective cessation treatment for tobacco smoking, the leading cause 
of premature mortality among people with SMI.  
 
4. Study Procedures  
a. Study design, including the sequence and tim ing of study procedures   
(distinguish research procedures from those that are part of routine care).  
b. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participants.  
 
Currently this protocol is being submitted as a study where all study proced ures are delivered remotely. If and 
when COVID -19 restrictions are lifted, we may submit a petition to have some of the study activities in -person  
as appropriate.  
 
Overview:  We will work with 5 community mental health clinics in Maryland. This project’s go al is to 
implement evidenced -based tobacco smoking cessation treatment in community mental health clinics  serving 
the population of persons with serious mental illness . Tobacco smoking cessation treatment involves behavioral 
counseling and pharmacotherapy.  The main outcome of the  project is the utilization of 4  evidence -based 
practices in the clinic setting: 1) screening for tobacco use in all patients, 2) an assessment of willingness to quit 
for those who smoke, 3) referral and utilization of behavioral co unseling for those interested in cutting down or 
quitting smoking, 4) receipt of pharmacotherapy for those interested in cutting down or quitting  smoking . The 
community mental health clinics are already providing some treatment for smoking cessation for th eir patients.  
The evidence -based practices in this project are within  their scope of practice. The implementation intervention 
is 12 months.  
 
Study sites and participants:  We plan for five community mental health clinics in Maryland  to participate in 
this study . The clinics serve population s with serious mental illness. Participants for data collection  and the 
implementation intervention  will be employees of the community mental health organization including leaders,  
mental health providers ( psychiatrists  and/or nurse practitioners, licensed counselors, psychologists, social 
workers ), primary care providers  and other staff.  We estimate N=120 employee participants  across the five 
sites. Employees may take part in different parts of data collection, dependin g on their role in the clinic.  Patients 
with serious mental illness seen in the clinic are also study participants as their data will be analyzed.  
 
Description of Implementation Intervention:  The multicomponent implementation intervention is designed to 
improve providers’ knowledge, self -efficacy and delivery of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment for 
smokers with SMI. The intervention  includes training on evidence -based smoking cessation treatment, 
including an innovative online avatar motivational interviewing practice module; a tobacco smoking 
identification and cessation  protocol; expert consultation  for prescribers  and therapists ; coaching ; and 
organizational  strategy meetings.  A more detailed description of each component is outlined below.  
 
Tobacco smoking identification and cessation protocol : Our team has developed a tobacco smoking 
identification and cessation protocol  to assist providers in delivering evidence -based smoking cessation 
treatment. This protocol  include s a resource guide that p rovides an overview of the IMPACT study and will 
help clinicians navigate their work on the project, a manual for delivering smoking cessation behavioral 
counseling sessions  and pharmacotherapy , and willingness -to-quit guides to help facilitate brief smoki ng 
cessation conversations based on patient responses to the tobacco smoking status and willingness -to-quit 
assessment.  
 
 
  
Page 5 of 15 
  
Expert consultation : Expert consultation  will be available for prescribers  and therapists  to discuss issues  and ask 
questions  related to smoking cessation pharmacotherapy  and behavioral counseling . Study team members who 
are experts in smoking cessation pharmacotherapy  and behavioral counseling  will be available during the 12 -
month intervention  to conduct as -needed phone or email consult ation with smoking cessation medication 
prescribers  and therapists providing smoking cessation behavioral counseling .  
 
Coaching : Coaching  will be available for providers to discuss specific patient cases and develop smoking 
cessation behavioral counseling  skills. Coaching will be offered monthly (via Zoom /phone ) for one hour in 
groups  at each site  and as needed  individually, with the expectation that providers attend at least one session per 
quarter . Coaching sessions will take a case management approach , focusing on overcoming barriers to 
providing evidence -based smoking cessation treatment.  
 
Organizational Strategy M eetings  (OSMs) : Organizational Strategy Meetings  are designed to improve 
engagement in practice change. These meetings will  occur every 1 -3 months and  consist of a 3 -4 member clinic 
leadership team, including providers and staff leaders . OSMs will be a chance for the study team to work with 
the clinic to identify organizational -level implementation strategies, share feedback, and discuss imple mentation 
barriers and strategies to overcome identified barriers.   
 
Training:  Study team members will conduct trainings  (Table 1) by Zoom while the study is remote . All provider 
participants in the IMPACT project first will complete the pre -recorded onlin e training modules. The n, there  
will be separate real -time trainings for therapists and prescribers  (psychiatrists/nurse practitioners /primary care 
physicians ). Trainings will be housed on the ETHOS Online M anagement System platform. See Table 1  for 
traini ng outline.   
 
The real-time motivational i nterview ing training is supplemented with an online avatar practice module.39,40 The 
online avatar practice module includes a 15 -minute didactic component where providers learn about 
motivational interviewing and te chniques that can be used to guide clients with serious mental illness toward 
health changes and 15 -minute practice conversations where providers take on the role of virtual provider avatar 
and practice the use of motivational interviewing  techniques in si mulated conversations about smoking 
cessation  with consumer avatars on the Kognito platform. We will recommend  that providers practice weekly  
for the first three months . An online dashboard will give providers an individualized report on their 
performance each time  they practice .  
 
Table 1. Training  
Prescribers   Therapists  
Online Training Modules  (1 hr) : 
Module 1:  Why IMPACT?  
Module 2:  Evidence -based treatment for smoking cessation 
for persons with SMI  
Module 3:  Assessing Smoking Status Willingness to Q uit  
Module 4:  Pharmacotherapy for Smoking Cessation  
Real -time Trainings (Zoom)  (2 hrs) : 
Training 1 (1hr):  Facilitating smoking cessation 
conversations  
Training 2 (1hr):  Motivational Interviewing Approach to 
Pharmacotherapy  
Online Motivational Interviewin g Avatar 
(Recommended weekly 15 -minute practice sessions  for 3 
months and then as needed/desired ) Online Training Modules  (1hr) : 
Module 1:  Why IMPACT?  
Module 2:  Evidence -based treatment for smoking cessation 
for persons with SMI  
Module 3:  Assessing Smoki ng Status Willingness to Quit  
Module 4:  Pharmacotherapy for Smoking Cessation  
Real -time Trainings (Zoom)  (4 hrs) : 
Training 1 (2hrs):  Facilitating Smoking Cessation 
Conversations and an Overview of Behavioral Counseling  
Training 2 (2hrs):  Motivational Int erviewing Approach to 
Smoking Cessation Behavioral Counseling  
Online Motivational Interviewing Avatar 
(Recommended weekly 15 -minute practice sessions  for 3 
months then as needed/desired ) 
 
Data Collection : 
 
 
  
Page 6 of 15 
 Study data collection is outlined in Table 2 and i n more detail below. Study team involvement in data collection 
is all virtual/remote.  
 
Table 2. Study Data Collection  Who  Estimated 
Time  When  
Qualitative Data Collection  
Provider Interviews   Select providers /clinic 
director  (~6 per site)  30 minutes  Baseline, 12 
months  
Survey Measures  
Demographic Characteristics: age, sex, race, ethnicity, length of 
time at program, role in program , years at clinic, work hours , 
previous Motivational Interviewing  training  All providers, clinic staff 
including leaders (~30 per 
site) ~5 minutes  Baseline  
Implementation Climate:  This is a measure of the degree to 
which an organization supports evidence -based practice 
implementation  All providers, clinic staff 
including leaders (~30 per 
site) ~3 minutes  Baseline  
Acceptabili ty, Appropriateness, and Feasibility of the 
Intervention Implementation Strategies :  Measured with a brief 
4-item practice instrument (AIM, IAM, FIM)41 All providers, clinic staff 
including leaders (~30 per 
site) ~5 minutes  Baseline, 12 
months  
Acceptability, Appropriateness, and Feasibility of the 
Evidence -Based Practice: Measured with a brief 4 -item practice 
instrument (AIM, IAM, FIM)41  All providers, clinic staff 
including  leaders (~30 per 
site) ~5 minutes  Baseline, 12 
months  
Clinic Social Network: A 4-question survey used to collect data 
about social networks  All providers, clinic staff 
including leaders (~30 per 
site) ~10 minutes  Baseline, 6, 12 
months  
Knowledge of Evi dence -Based Smoking Cessation Treatment:  
A 16 -item scale developed by our team to assess knowledge  All providers (~25 per 
site) ~10 minutes  Baseline, 12 
months  
Self-Efficacy  to deliver evidence -based smoking cessation 
treatment  All providers (~25 per 
site) ~5 minutes  Baseline, 12 
months  
Motivation Measures:  Degree  to which providers agree or 
disagree with statements that deal with aspects of the intervention 
to improve use of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment.  All providers (~25 per 
site) ~3 minutes  Baseline, 12 
months  
Beliefs about Motivational Interviewing Questionnaire   All providers (~25 per 
site) ~2 minutes  Baseline, 3, 6, 12 
months  
Importance and Confidence of Using Motivational 
Interviewing  All providers (~25 per 
site) ~2 minutes  Basel ine, 3, 6, 12 
months  
Perceived  Usefulness  of Motivational Interviewing Avatar  All providers (~25 per 
site) ~2 minutes  12 months  
Fidelity Measures  
Avatar Motivational Interviewing Performance 
Measurements : from use  of motivational interviewing  techniques  
in simulated online conversations  All providers (~25 per 
site) Recommended 
weekly 15 -min 
practice 
sessions  Baseline, 3, 6, 12 
months  
Fidelity to Motivational Interviewing: Standardized Actor 
Interviews  will be conducted to assess fidelity to motivational  
interviewing.  
Fidelity to behavioral smoking cessation counseling:  
Standardized Actor  Interviews  will be conducted to assess fidelity 
to smoking cessation behavioral counseling sessions  All providers (~25 per 
site) 30 minutes  3, 6, 12 months  
Smoking and Smoking -Cessation Measures  
These are our primary measures of fidelity to evidence -based 
smoking cessation treatment.  
Guideline -concordant smoking cessation treatment: Measures 
will be calculated at site & provider levels  
Smoking status assessment rates: % of visits where smoking 
status assessment is documented.  
Willingness -to-quit assessment rates: % of visits where 
willingness -to-quit assessment is documented.  
Prescription Rates: % of willing -to-quit smokers prescribed, or 
offered but refused, cessation p harmacotherapy.2 
Behavioral Counseling Rates: (1) % of not willing -to-quit All mental health 
consumers (patients)  
(~3000 per site)   Baseline  through 
12 months  
 
 
  
Page 7 of 15 
 smokers given brief behavioral counseling to increase willingness -
to-quit; and (2) % of willing -to-quit smokers who were referred to 
the clinic’s cessation  counselor.2 Among willing -to-quit smokers 
referred the counselor, we will also measure the number of 
counseling sessions completed.  
 
7-day absti nence : % of willing -to-quit consumers abstinent for ≥7 
days self -report, documented in the EMR  All mental health 
consumers (patients)  
(~3000per site)   Baseline through  
12 months  
Other Patient Measures  
Year of birth, gender, race/ethnicity, primary mental  health 
diagnosis, hospitalization during the study period  All mental health 
consumers (patients)  
(~3000 per site)   Baseline through  
12 months  
 
Qualitative Data Collection  
 
Provider Interviews : Study team members will conduct up to 40 (8 per site)  30-minu te interviews with the clinic 
director and approximately 7 other providers at each site  at baseline and 12 months . Interviews will e licit 
providers’ perceptions of: barriers to smoking c essation treatment and  implementation strategies to overcome 
barriers.  Interviews will obtain information on how the 5 work system elements (people, tasks, tools and 
technologies, environment and organization) influence delivery of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment 
for consumers with SMI. Semi -structured interviews will be conducted using a standard protocol  for both pre -
implementation (baseline) and post -implementation (12 months) . Interviews will be audio -recorded, and 
recordings will be transcribed using Production Transcripts, Inc.  
 
Surveys  
Surveys will be admini stered via email with instructions and a link to the surveys  in REDCap . Surveys may also 
be delivered in hard copy if needed and mailed back to the study team. We will recruit and survey the 
staff/providers  at the 4 community mental health clinic study sit es. 
 
Demographic Characteristics:  Will include a ge, sex , race, ethnicity . We will also ask about their current role in 
the at the clinic, years worked at the clinic, work hours, and any prior Motivational Interviewing training. This 
survey is 11 questions.   
 
Implementation Climate:  Ehrhart’s implementation climate scale;42 overall score of 4 = excellent 
implementation climate. This is a measure of the degree to which an organization supports evidence -based 
practice implementation.   
 
Acceptability, Appropriateness, and Feasibility of the Intervention Implementation Strategies: Acceptability, 
feasibility and appropriateness of the intervention implementation strategies (IMPACT smoking cessation 
program, trainings, avatar, resource manu als, organizational strategy meetings, coaching)  will be measured with 
validated 4 -item measures.41  
 
Acceptability, Appropriateness, and Feasibility of the Evidence -Based Practices:  Acceptability, feasibility and 
appropriateness of the evidence -based practices (smoking status and willingness -to-quit assessment, 
pharmacotherapy, behavioral counseling, brief motivational enhancement counseling will be measured with 
validated 4 -item measures.41  
 
Clinic Social Network:  This is  a 4-question survey used to provide information about how people interact in 
each clinic. The survey will include a staff list in order to identify co -workers that regularly interact. Once data 
has been col lected, names from the staff list will be deleted.  
 
Knowledge of Evidence -Based Smoking Cessation Treatment:  This is a  16-item scale developed by our team to 
assess knowledge  of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment ( e.g. that most people with SMI wan t to quit 
and that varenicline is safe an d effective for people with SMI).  
 
 
  
Page 8 of 15 
  
Self-Efficacy : Assessing self -efficacy to deliver evidence -based smoking cessation treatment measured as a 
numeric score created by averaging 10 items adapted from Compeau & Higgin s’ task -focused self -efficacy 
scale43 (score>8 = high self -efficacy).  
 
Motivation Measures:  Measured by assessing the degree to which providers agree  or disagree  with each 
statement, and the degree to which providers find each item important or not important.  Statements deal with 
aspects of the IMPACT intervention to improve use of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment.  
 
Beliefs about Motivational Interviewing Questionnaire:  A 7-question survey assessing the extent to which each 
person  agrees with statements about motivational intervi ewing .  
 
Importance and Confidence of Using Motivational Interviewing: A 6-question survey assessing the importance 
and confidence each person has with motivational interviewing.  
 
Perceived Usefulness of Motivational Interviewing Avatar : A 6-item survey a ssessing the impact of the avatar 
on each person’s use of motivational interviewing and performance in the study.  
 
 
Fidelity Measures  
Avatar Motivational Interviewing  Performance Measurements:  Providers will conduct 15 -minute practice 
conversations where t hey practice use of motivational interviewing  techniques in simulated conversations about 
tobacco smoking cessation with patient  avatars . An online dashboard will give providers an individualized 
report on their performance each time they practice.  
 
Fidel ity to Motivational Interviewing: Standardized Actor Interviews:  Providers will conduct 30 -minute audio -
recorded phone interviews with standardized patient actors. These standardized patient actors are trained actors 
playing roles of patients with SMI who smoke. Used  to assess fidelity to motivational interviewing.  
 
Fidelity to behavioral smoking cessation counseling:  Standardized Actor Interviews:  Providers will conduct 30 -
minute audio -recorded phone interviews w ith standardized patient actors . These stand ardized patient actors are 
trained actors playing consumers with SMI who smoke. Used to assess fidelity to smoking cessation behavioral 
counseling sessions . 
 
Smoking and Smoking Cessation Processes of Care, Patient Measures  
Providers will document smoking -related processes of care during the study  (see IMPACT Study Medical 
Record Variables document) . We will work with each community mental health clinic on how providers will do 
this. At Johns Hopkins, this information  will be entered into EPIC  using smart f orms and adapting current clinic 
note templates . For other study clinic sites, data will come from a combination of electronic health records and 
from REDCaP surveys that clinic provider participants complete when they assess smoking status or provide 
smok ing cessation treatment. If the other sites are not able to change their electronic health records to collect 
smoking cessation processes of care or provide documentation of  smoking cessation process es of care directly 
to us, we plan to use REDCaP to suppl ement available electronic health record data . We describe in more detail 
below in the data management section.  
 
Data Management:  
Qualitative data . Interview data will be audio or video -recorded and recordings will be transcribed using 
Production Transcr ipts, Inc  or another approved Johns Hopkins vendor . Names will be removed from 
transcripts. Recordings will be stored in a Johns Hopkins secure network drive and will be destroyed when 
analyses are complete. Standardized actor interview recordings will be reviewed by experts in motivational 
interviewing and smoking cessation behavioral counseling to assess for fidelity to motivational interviewing 
 
 
  
Page 9 of 15 
 practices and fidelity to IMPACT smoking cessation behavioral counseling sessions. These recordings will be 
stored in a Johns Hopkins secure network drive or OneDrive.  
 
Quantitative data.  Each participant will be assigned a unique study ID number for data collection. Study team 
members are trained to protect integrity and confidentiality of the data. Staff and prov ider questionnaire data 
will be stored in a Johns Hopkins REDCap database. Kognito , a health simulation company, developed the 
avatar simulations for this project and hosts the avatar training platform and dashboard. Avatar performance 
measurement data for  motivational interviewing practice conversations is accessible only by the individual 
study participant ( provider ) and the study team, not shared outside Kognito. Kognito stores data securely behind 
two firewalls.  
 
 
 
Figure. Data sources, management and security.  
 
 
 
 
 
This figure describes planned  data management and security for this study. We developed this plan with Bonnie 
Woods, IT Director for the Johns Hopkins ICTR. The ICTR/CCDA will serve as an honest broker both for data 
coming from Johns Hopki ns and from non -Johns Hopkins clinic sites. They will create limited datasets  for 
 
 
  
Page 10 of 15 
 patient data  for study team use on a study team SAFE Desktop  including linking REDCap process of care data 
from to the appropriate patient.  REDCap: We will store questionnair e data from staff/providers who agree to 
participate in the study in a Johns Hopkins REDCap  database, restricted by study site . REDCap will also be 
used if needed for providers at non -Johns Hopkins study sites to document process es of care information for 
smoking cessation treatment  to supplement data from electronic health records . One site (Vesta) plans to use a 
spreadsheet to document  deidentified process of care data to be placed on a Johns Hopkins OneDrive.  EPIC: 
Johns Hopkins EPIC data from smartform s developed for this project and from clin ic notes  will be used for 
process of care information at the Johns Hopkins site. Additional data from EPIC will be used including for  
demographics, medications, and information about number of outpatient encounters . (see IMPACT Study 
Medical Record Variables document) . Weekly reports of process of care data will be provided to the study 
team , not identifying patients. SFTP: Electronic medical record data from non -Johns Hopkins study sites will be 
transmitted to John s Hopkins through SFTP . The ICTR/CCDA will serve as an honest broker and store data on 
a CCDA Safe Desktop while preparing the limited datasets for the study team.  
 
 
 
c. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable.   
Not applicable  
 
Justification of why participants will not receive routine care or will have current therapy stopped. 
Not applicable  
 
d. Justification for inclusion of a pl acebo or non -treatment group  
Not applicable  
 
e. Definition of treatment failure or part icipant removal criteria.  
Not applicable  
 
f. Description of what happens to participants receiving therapy when study ends or if a participant’s 
participation in the study ends prematurely.  
Not applicable  
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Community mental health clinic staff  (e.g., licensed counselor, psychologist, social worker, nurse 
practitioner, physician, organizational leader, clinic director , administrative assistant ) at one of the 4 
community mental health clinic study sites . All are  18 years and older and English -speaking.  
 
Clinic p atients are by definition persons with serious mental illness  seeking treatment at community 
mental health outpatient clinics . All are 18 years and older.  
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  – Not applicable  
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be used.  
b. Justification and safety information if FDA approved drugs will be administered for non -FDA 
approved indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant populations are changed.  
c. Justif ication and safety information if non -FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered.  
 
7. Study Statistics  
a. Primary outcome variable and analytic plans.  
 
We will conduct three main analyses. First, we will assess the effects of the implementation int ervention 
(baseline and 12 months)  on providers’ knowledge and self -efficacy, the mechanisms through which the 
 
 
  
Page 11 of 15 
 implementation intervention is designed to improve delivery of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment, 
using a generalized linear mixed effec ts modeling approach. The mean model will include a binary pre/post 
indicator, fixed  effects for the four study site s, and provider demographic characteristics. Second, we will 
evaluat e the effects of the implementation intervention (baseline and 12 months ) on consumer level guideline -
concordant care and 7 -day smoking abstinence outcomes using a multi -level modeling approach. Third, we will 
assess mediator s and moderators. Specifically, we will test whether providers’ knowledge and self -efficacy 
mediated th e implementation intervention’s effects on consumer outcomes by estimating the magnitude of 
attenuation on intervention effects in the multi -level models of consumer outcomes with versus without these 
potential mediators. We will also assess the potential moderating effects of implementation climate by adding 
appropriate interaction terms to main models. We will use descriptive statistics to analyze survey measures of 
staff perceptions of the acceptability, feasibility and appropriates of the implementation  intervention strategies 
and the IMPACT evidence -based practices. Interview transcripts will be analyzed in NVivo V.11, using 
inductive coding to identify key themes. Survey analysis will be done using Stata 14 or SAS software.   
 
To analyze the standardize d actor  interviews,  we will use the Motivational Interviewing Treatment Integrity 
(MITI) rating sy stem  and our IMPACT Smoking Cessation Counseling Session skills Assessment Form . For 
MITI:  We will MITI code random 3 0-minute segments of audio -recorded inter actions with standardized patient 
actors . Standardized consumer scenarios will be scripted to reflect the kind of situations community mental 
health clinicians would likely encounter with clients; this method has predictive validity in terms of providers’ 
performance with real patients.44 “Global” scores provide benchmarks of “fair” or “good” on the technical (e.g. 
capacity to elicit motivations for change) and relational (person -centered) aspects  of motivational interviewing . 
“Behavior Counts” are tallies of 10 specific clinician b ehaviors, e.g. giving information and “persuading with 
permission.” Summary measures indicate the degree to which c linicians are motivational interviewing adherent 
(e.g. affirm, emphasize autonomy, seek collaboration), motivational interviewing  non-adheren t (e.g., confront, 
persuade), and show an appropriate ratio of questions to reflections.  For fidelity to evidence -based smoking 
cessation treatment: a ll interviews will be scored by our team to assess individual clinician’s skills 
implementing the interven tion.  
 
b. Secondary outcome variables. N/A 
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and interim data analysis. N/A 
d. Early stopping rules. N/A  
 
8. Risks  
 
Risk of loss of confidentiality and negative implications for employment are the main risks. We expect 
these risks to be extremely low. Plans to minimize this risk are described below.  
 
a. Medical risks, listing all procedures, their major and minor risks and expected frequency.   
 
For the implementation intervention, community mental health clinic prov iders  (including primary care 
providers)  are already providing care  including some smoking cessation treatment  for their patients with 
serious mental illness. For this project, we will work with community mental health clinic providers to 
implement eviden ce-based best tobacco smoking cessation practices . The evidence -based practices in this 
project are based on current guidelines and are within  the clinicians’current  scope of practice. Thus, we do not 
expect there to be an increased risk for clinic patient s.  
 
Community mental health clinic providers and staff may become tired or bored during surveys or interviews.  
 
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks.  
 
Community mental health clinic leaders, providers and staff will be appropriately recruited and informed o f the 
study by the study team with waiver of documentation of informed consent. The study team will inform them 
 
 
  
Page 12 of 15 
 that they do not have to answer any questions they do not want to, and that their employment or evaluations will 
not be affected by their respon ses.  
 
c. Plan for reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations.  
 
Dr. Daumit , internist with experience in working with persons with SMI and staff in community mental health 
settings, will be responsible for data safety and monitoring. If new guidelin es for smoking cessation treatment 
were to be released during the study period, we will make any appropriate modifications in protocols (resource 
guides, manuals), during coaching sessions and expert consultation , and communicate with the study sites. If 
safety issues about management of smoking cessation treatment in individual clients arise , Dr. Daumit will 
communicate with the provider or clinic director as appropriate. Any unanticipated problems will also be 
reported to the IRB. We expect any issues to be rare.   
 
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with breach of confidentiality.  
 
Risk of loss of confidentiality is the main risk. We expect this risk to be extremely low, as we will be taking 
multiple s afeguards to protect the data. To protect against breach of confidentiality, all information will be 
considered conf idential. This confidentiality will be assured through several mechanisms.    
 
As per above, community mental health providers, primary care providers and staff will be appropr iately 
recruited and informed of the study by the study team with waiver of documentation of informed consent. The 
study team will inform them that they do not have to answer any questions they do not want to, and that their 
employment or evaluations will not be affected by their responses. Data will not be presented in such a way that 
identity can be inferred.  As described in Data Management, data will be stored in Johns Hopkins secure drives . 
Folders and spreadsheets will have password protection. For qua litative data, each interviewee will be assigned 
a study identifier . The link to the study  ID will be held in a locked file . Interview transcripts will have names (if 
mentioned during interview ) removed, and no participants will be identifie d by name in an y publications. For 
quantitative data , each staff participant will be assigned a unique study ID number for data collection and data 
will be stored  in REDCap.  The study team will receive limited datasets for patient data on SAFE Desktop.  
 
 
e. Financial risks  to the participant s. N/A 
 
9. Benefits  
a. Description of the probable benefits for the participant and for society.  
 
There is no benef it to individual participants. This research will help stakeholders have a greater understanding 
of the organizational and provi der-level barriers to delivery of evidence -based smoking cessation treatment in 
community mental health settings. This research will also inform development of the implementation 
intervention tested in this R34.  
 
10. Payment and Remuneration  
a. Detail compensati on for participants including possible total compensation, proposed bonus, and 
any proposed reductions or penalties for not completing the protocol.  
 
Study participants  will be paid  $50 for completing each interview.  Providers will be paid $25 for each 
standardized actor  interview.  All study participants  will be compensated $20 for complet ion of survey s 
administered at baseline data collection  and 12 month data collection and $10 for completion of surveys at 3 
and 6 months . Providers will receive $50 for do cumenting smoking related processes of care during the study.  
 
11. Costs   
 
 
  
Page 13 of 15 
 a. Detail costs of study procedure(s) or drug (s) or substance(s) to participants and id entify who will 
pay for them.  
 
There are no costs to participants.  
 
 
 
  
Page 14 of 15 
 REFERENCES  
1. Schroeder SA, Morris CD. Confronting a Neglected Epidemic: Tobacco Cessation for Persons with Mental Illnesses and Substance 
Abuse Problems. In: Fielding JE, Brownson RC, Green LW, eds. Annual Review of Public Health, Vol 312010:297 -314. 
2. Parks J, Sv endsen D, Singer P, Foti ME. Morbidity and mortality in people with serious mental mental illness.  Alexandria: 
National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors (NASMHPD) Medical Directors Council. 2006.  
3. McClave AK, McKnight -Eily LR, Davis SP, Dube SR. Smoking characteristics of adults with selected lifetime mental illnesses: 
results from the 2007 National Health Interview Survey. Am J Public Health 2010;100:2464 -72. 
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Current Cigarette Smoking Am ong Adults in the United States. 
https://wwwcdcgov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/adult_data/cig_smoking/ , Accessed May 1, 2017 2017.  
5. Lê Cook B, Wayne GF , Kafali EN, Liu Z, Shu C, Flores M. Trends in smoking among adults with mental illness and association 
between mental health treatment and smoking cessation. Jama 2014;311:172 -82. 
6. Siru R, Hulse GK, Tait RJ. Assessing motivation to quit smoking in peopl e with mental illness: a review. Addiction 2009;104:719 -
33. 
7. Evins AE, Cather C, Pratt SA, et al. Maintenance treatment with varenicline for smoking cessation in patients with schizophre nia 
and bipolar disorder: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2014;311 :145-54. 
8. Anthenelli RM, Benowitz NL, West R, et al. Neuropsychiatric safety and efficacy of varenicline, bupropion, and nicotine patch  in 
smokers with and without psychiatric disorders (EAGLES): a double -blind, randomised, placebo -controlled clinical tr ial. The 
Lancet 2016;387:2507 -20. 
9. Evins AE, Culhane MA, Alpert JE, et al. A controlled trial of bupropion added to nicotine patch and behavioral therapy for 
smoking cessation in adults with unipolar depressive disorders. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2008;28:6 60-6. 
10. Tsoi DT, Porwal M, Webster AC. Interventions for smoking cessation and reduction in individuals with schizophrenia. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2013;2:CD007253.  
11. Chengappa KN, Perkins KA, Brar JS, et al. Varenicline for smoking cessation in bip olar disorder: a randomized, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled study. J Clin Psychiatry 2014;75:765 -72. 
12. Prochaska JJ. Smoking and mental illness —breaking the link. New England Journal of Medicine 2011;365:196 -8. 
13. Dickerson F, Schroeder D, Katsafanas E, et al. Cigarette Smoking in Patients with Serious Mental Illness, 1999 -2016: An 
Increasing Disparity. Under Review 2017.  
14. Daumit G. EPIC Report on Smoking Cessation Pharmacotherapy Prescribing, run 3/30/17. 2017.  
15. Thorndike AN, Stafford RS, Rigott i NA. US physicians' treatment of smoking in outpatients with psychiatric diagnoses. Nicotine 
Tob Res 2001;3:85 -91. 
16. Himelhoch S, Daumit G. To whom do psychiatrists offer smoking -cessation counseling? Am J Psychiatry 2003;160:2228 -30. 
17. Frank R, Glied  S. Better but not well: Mental health policy in the United States since 1950: Johns Hopkins University Press; 2006.  
18. Grace Hunter, Jean Yoon, Daniel M. Blonigen, Steven M. Asch, Donna M. Zulman. Health Care Utilization Patterns Among High -
Cost VA Patie nts With Mental Health Conditions. Psychiatric Services 2015;66:952 -8. 
19. Horvitz -Lennon M, Kilbourne AM, Pincus HA. From silos to bridges: meeting the general health care needs of adults with severe 
mental illnesses. Health Aff (Millwood) 2006;25:659 -69. 
20. Malte CA, McFall M, Chow B, Beckham JC, Carmody TP, Saxon AJ. Survey of providers' attitudes toward integrating smoking 
cessation treatment into posttraumatic stress disorder care. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 2013;27:249.  
21. Brown CH, Medoff D,  Dickerson FB, et al. Factors influencing implementation of smoking cessation treatment within community 
mental health centers. Journal of dual diagnosis 2015;11:145 -50. 
22. Himelhoch S, Riddle J, Goldman HH. Barriers to implementing evidence -based smoking  cessation practices in nine community 
mental health sites. Psychiatr Serv 2014;65:75 -80. 
23. Ortiz G, Schacht L, Lane GM. Smoking cessation care in state -operated or state -supported psychiatric hospitals: from policy to 
practice. Psychiatr Serv 2013;64:66 6-71. 
24. Gurses AP, Marsteller JA, Ozok AA, Xiao Y, Owens S, Pronovost PJ. Using an interdisciplinary approach to identify factors tha t 
affect clinicians' compliance with evidence -based guidelines. Crit Care Med 2010;38:S282 -91. 
25. Brown S. Excess mortal ity of schizophrenia. A meta -analysis. Br J Psychiatry 1997;171:502 -8. 
26. Colton CP, Ronald W, Manderscheid P. Congruencies in Increased Mortality Rates, Years of Life Lost, and Causes of Death 
Among Public Mental health Clients in Eight States.  . Preven ting Chronic Disease 2006;3:1 -14. 
27. Daumit GL, Anthony CB, Ford DE, et al. Pattern of mortality in a sample of Maryland residents with severe mental illness. 
Psychiatry Res 2010;176:242 -5. 
28. Newcomer JW, Hennekens CH. Severe mental illness and risk of cardiovascular disease. JAMA 2007;298:1794 -6. 
29. Osborn DP, Levy G, Nazareth  I, Petersen I, Islam A, King MB. Relative risk of cardiovascular and cancer mortality in people with 
severe mental illness from the United Kingdom's General Practice Rsearch Dat abase. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2007;64:242 -9. 
30. Osby U, Correia N, Brandt L, Ekbom A, Sparen P. Mortality and causes of death in schizophrenia in Stockholm county, Sweden. 
Schizophr Res 2000;45:21 -8. 
31. Saha S, Chant D, McGrath J. A systematic review of mor tality in schizophrenia: is the differential mortality gap worsening over 
time? Arch Gen Psychiatry 2007;64:1123 -31. 
32. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Smoking Cessation for Persons with Mental Illnesses. 
http://wwwintegrationsamhsagov/Smoking_Cessation_for_Persons_with_MIpdf  2009.  
33. Doll R, Peto R, Boreham J, Sutherland I. Mortality in relation to smoking: 50 years' observations on male Br itish doctors. BMJ 
2004;328:1519.  
 
 
  
Page 15 of 15 
 34. Pirie K, Peto R, Reeves GK, Green J, Beral V, Collaborators MWS. The 21st century hazards of smoking and benefits of stopping : 
a prospective study of one million women in the UK. The Lancet 2013;381:133 -41. 
35. Freedma n R. Exacerbation of schizophrenia by varenicline. Am J Psychiatry 2007;164:1269.  
36. Kohen I, Kremen N. Varenicline -induced manic episode in a patient with bipolar disorder. Am J Psychiatry 2007;164:1269 -70. 
37. May AC, Rose D. Varenicline withdrawal -induced delirium with psychosis. Am J Psychiatry 2010;167:720 -1. 
38. Federal Drug Administration. FDA Briefing Document: Serious Neuropsychiatric Adverse Events with Drugs for Smoking 
Cessation. 
http://wwwfdagov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/PsychopharmacologicDrugsAdvisoryCo
mmittee/UCM520103pdf  2016.  
39. Albright G, Adam C, Goldma n R, Serri D. A Game -Based Simulation Utilizing Virtual Humans to Train Physicians to Screen and 
Manage the Care of Patients with Mental Health Disorders. GAMES FOR HEALTH: Research, Development, and Clinical 
Applications 2013;2:269 -73. 
40. Albright G, Gol dman R, Shockley KM, McDevitt F, Akabas S. Using an avatar -based simulation to train families to motivate 
veterans with post -deployment stress to seek help at the VA. Games for Health: Research, Development, and Clinical Applications 
2012;1:21 -8. 
41. Weine r BJ, Lewis CC, Stanick C, et al. Psychometric assessment of three newly developed implementation outcome measures. 
Implement Sci 2017;12:108.  
42. Ehrhart MG, Aarons GA, Farahnak LR. Assessing the organizational context for EBP implementation: the developm ent and 
validity testing of the Implementation Climate Scale (ICS). Implement Sci 2014;9:157.  
43. Compeau DR, Higgins CA. Computer self -efficacy: Development of a measure and initial test. MIS quarterly 1995:189 -211. 
44. Imel ZE, Baldwin SA, Baer JS, et al. Evaluating therapist adherence in motivational interviewing by comparing performance wit h 
standardized and real patients. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 2014;82:472.  
 