 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quit for Life  Protocol  
 
PI: Lisa Quintiliani, PhD  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB Number: H -41807  
Version date: 11 -21-2024  
 
Statistical Ana lysis Plan  see Section 2.4
1. PURPOSE  
The purpose of this MOP is to guide the study’s conduct and operations. It will help to facilitate 
consistency in recruitment, screening, enrollment, randomization, intervention procedures and follow -up 
procedures, data collection methods, data flow, surveys conducted at different time points and quality 
control procedures. This guide will supplement the study IRB protocol.  
 
User/audience  
• Principal Investigators,  Co-Investigators  
• Counselor  
• Research Assistants  (RA)  
 
2. PROCEDURES  
Description of responsibilities for study personnel as well as the steps and processes to be followed when 
conducting the study.  
 
2.1.1 Pre-launching  
• Before launching the study, the study research assistant  will: 
o Approach individuals who attend the HIV clinic at GMU and conduct face -to-face 
interviews to screen them for  eligibility.  
o Get notified by physicians at the clinic of potentially eligible/interested participants  so 
that the RA can conduct face -to-face interviews to screen them for  eligibility  
o Get trained on conducting follow -up counseling sessions according to the counseling 
guide  
o Prepare baseline and follow -up surveys in the same format across participants  (via 
computer, WeChat, in -person  etc.)  
o Ensure paper data forms are finalized and computer data entry systems are ready for 
data entry (EpiData) so that computer -generated spreadsheets of data can be  generated  
o The RA will prepare self -help manual and NRT gum for every  participant  
o Purchase the CO monitor, train users how to use it for biochemical verification of 
quitting at 12 -month follow -up assessment  
o Train the counselor using the counseling guide that is established to conduct counseling 
sessions.  Counselors  should  be familiar  with  the content  and procedures  of the guide  to 
communicate with  participants  
o Counselor  should be  familiar  with  referral services  around  the area/online  for smoking 
cessation  
2.1.2 Study visits  
• Pre-study visit  procedures  
o Prior to conducting study visits, the RA will ensure that appropriate materials are in 
place to help in the smooth running of the clinical research study activities. The 
materials needed to begin the trial is listed in Section 2.4. Below are the  procedures 
needed to be done to begin the  trial:  
▪ Train counselors according to the counseling guide to prepare for the  counseling 
sessions  
▪ Prepare the brief screening agreement, baseline survey, 8 -week  follow -up 
survey, and 12 -week follow -up survey  
▪ Prepare informed consent form (one form for the study participant to keep,  one 
form to be collected by the  RA) 
▪ Set up EpiData system and be ready to enter participant data once the screening 
process  starts  
▪ Prepare approximately 110 envelopes for  randomization  
▪ Create a storage location to list participants’ phone  number  
▪ Create a list to keep track of what messages have been sent to each  participant  
▪ Create a WeChat account for the study and for sending text  messages  
▪ The RA should be accustomed to accessing the WeChat account and sending the 
messages to each  participant  
▪ Print the self -help manual for each participant (110  copies)  
▪ Purchase and prepare NRT gums to give out to participants (gums will be given 
out 8 week dosage at a time to all  participants)  
▪ Familiarize the usage instructions for the NRT gums to explain to  participants  
▪ Obtain usage instruction of the NRT gums to hand out to  participants  
▪ Training on using the CO monitor and filters (at least  100)  
• Study visit  procedures  
o The RA will conduct face -to-face interviews with potential participants and ask  the 
screening questions (Refer to document 1: brief screening  agreement)  
▪ If eligible: Make a note in tracking system that an individual was screened  and 
was eligible, and the criteria for which they were eligible. Answers will not be 
retained.  
▪ If not eligible: Make a note in tracking system that an individual was screened 
and was ineligible, and note the criteria for which they were ineligible.  Answers 
will not be  retained.  
o The RA will collect and verify all signed informed consent documents and place them  in 
participants’ study folders (labeled by ID number).  
o Participants will receive a signed copy of the informed consent  form  
o The RA will add participants’ WeChat contact after participants have signed the 
informed consent form and are randomized into the intervention  group  
o The RA will record participants’ phone number for follow -up counseling sessions (Refer 
to document 11: tracking  spreadsheet)  
o Record survey completion status for each  participant  
2.1.3 Randomization  
• Study  statistician  will produce  a randomization  scheme  that is unknown  to the RAs and produce 
110 envelopes for randomization. Half of the envelopes indicate that participants are assigned 
to the control group, half of the envelopes indicate that participants are assigned to the 
intervention  group  
• After  the completion  of baseline  questionnaire,  RA is going  to randomly  open  up an envelope  to 
assign participants to either the control or the intervention  group  
• The RA is going to input participants’ ID number and their assigned group into the data  storage 
system  (EpiData)  
2.1.4 Monitoring  
• The principal  investigators  will periodically  monitor  the trial progression  to ensure  aspects  of the 
protocol are  followed  
• Study and source documentation will be reviewed for verification of data collected. Check the 
source documentation at  visits  
• Review the participants’ study folders to ensure it is complete and  current  
• Create a tracking spreadsheet to keep track of participant activities, such as enrollment 
progress, phone numbers, WeChat account names, text message schedule for each  participant, 
and NRT usage (Refer to document 11: tracking  spreadsheet)  
• Meeting with the study coordinator approximately once a week to review any  issues found 
during screening, enrollment and any other study  activities  
 
2.2 R ESEARCH ASSISTANT  
Step 1: Identifying Subjects, Screening and Eligibility, and Enrollment  
• Recruitment  will occur  via physician  referral  and approaching  individuals  who  are seeking  care 
at the HIV  clinic  
• Individuals will be screened for eligibility (Refer to brief screening  agreement)  
Step 2: Informed Consent Process  
• RA must have enough copies of the consent documentation (Refer to document 2:  adult 
informed consent  form)  
• The RA will conduct  the consent  process  in a private  location,  hand  out the printed  consent  form 
and review the form with the  participant  
• If the participant provides consent to participate, the adult informed consent form should  be 
maintained in the participant’s study file  
• A copy of the signed consent document will be provided to the participant to  keep  
• RA will submit the signed participant informed consent forms to the study coordinator to  be 
saved in the participant study  file 
Note: If a participant is withdrawn after enrollment, the consent form should still be maintained and 
not destroyed  
• The study team obtaining the consent must also sign and date the consent  form  
• Record  date  the ICF has been  signed  on a tracking  spreadsheet (Refer  to document  11: tracking 
spreadsheet)  
• The RA will record participant’s contact information including WeChat name and telephone 
number (Refer to document 11: tracking  spreadsheet)  
Step 3: Survey Administration and Randomization  
• After participants sign the informed consent document, RA will administer the baseline survey, 
baseline demographics, smoking habits, and other information will be surveyed (Refer to 
document 3: baseline  survey)  
• For accurate baseline measurements, the protocol below will be  followed:  
o The RA will conduct face -to-face baseline surveying process to all  participants  
o After participants complete the baseline survey, RA will make sure participant ID  is 
written on the  survey  
o Participant’s identifiers are going to be removed from the survey and gets stored in 
another location separated from the survey answers. Survey responses are going to 
match participants’ ID number in  EpiData  
o The RA will enter the participant’s ID and responses into  EpiData  
• The RA is going  to conduct  the randomization  process  after  baseline  surveys  are completed. 
Corresponding participant ID and assigned group should be entered into  EpiData  
Step 4: Intervention group (Counseling Sessions and Text Messages)  
• The RA will give each participant in the intervention group a self -help manual and  8-week 
dosage of NRT  gum  
• The text messages are going to be sent by the RA following the pre -determined schedule with 
pre-determined content (Refer to document 6: text  messages)  
• RA should keep a record of the messages that are sent and have not been sent to each 
participant (Refer to document 11: tracking  spreadsheet)  
• RA should keep a record of whether each participant is accepted the NRT gum (Refer to 
document 11: tracking spreadsheet)  
Step 5: Control group  
• The RA is going to give out a self -help manual and 8 -week dosage of NRT gum to  participants 
who are assigned to the control  group  
• RA should keep a record of whether each participant is accepted the NRT gum (Refer to 
document 11: tracking spreadsheet)  
 
Step 6: Follow -up Visits  
• The RA is going to administer the follow -up survey at 8 -week and 12 -week (Refer to document 
4: 8-week survey and document 5: 12 -week  survey)  
• RA has the flexibility to administer the surveys over WeChat or phone if in -person 
administration is not  possible  
• The RA is going to make sure that surveys are completed by the participants and  have  
participants’ ID number on each survey  
• The RA is going to enter ID numbers and responses into  EpiData  
Step 7: CO2 Measurement  
• At 12 -week, the amount of carbon monoxide in the exhaled air for all participants using a  CO 
monitor (Refer to document 5: 12 -week follow -up survey)  
• The RA will prepare the CO monitor and make sure that there are enough filters (100 filters) for 
all participants to get  measured  
• The RA will learn the method of measuring carbon monoxide in the exhaled  air 
• The RA will record the CO2 measurement results into EpiData along with participant’s  ID 
number and other follow -up results  
 
2.2 COUNSELOR  
Step 1: Preparation for Counseling Sessions  
• The counselor will  train  with  experts  according  to the counseling  guide  (Refer  to document  7: 
counseling  guide)  
• The counselor will be notified by the RA when there are new intervention participants  joining 
the study (once an ICF has been  signed)  
 
Step 2: Follow -up Counseling Sessions  
• The counselor will provide counseling sessions at participants’ follow -up appointments at the 
HIV clinic  
• The initial counseling session will be face -to-face (20  minutes)  
• The next three counseling sessions will be face -to-face ideally, but can be switched to telephone 
if appropriate (15 minutes  each)  
 
Step 3: Quality Assurance  
• Counselor  will record  10%  of all calls  for the counseling  sessions,  these  recordings  will be 
transcribed and  translated  
• The counselor will  record  any feedback  or issues  during  the sessions  and should  meet  regularly 
with supervisor for  troubleshooting  
 
2.3 MATERIALS  
1. Brief screen  agreement  
2. Adult consent form  
3. Baseline  survey  
4. 8-week follow -up survey  
5. 12-week follow -up survey  
6. Text messages  
7. Counseling  guide  
8. Self-help  manual  
9. CO monitor  
10. 100 filters for the  monitor  
11. Tracking  spreadsheet  
a. Spreadsheet with enrollment progress (date and  ICF) 
b. Spreadsheet with contact information (WeChat account names, phone  numbers)  
c. Spreadsheet with text message schedule for each  participant  
d. Spreadsheet of NRT gum  usage  
 
2.4 STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  
1. Generate mean and standard deviation for demographic variables at baseline (or N and 
percentage). Run chi -square tests and t -tests for the variables and compare if there is a 
difference  between  treatment  groups for  each  of the variables. Variables  that are significantly 
associated with treatment group will be covariates in future  analyses.  
2. Analyze primary outcome: PPM (CO level) at 12 -week. PPM will be a binary outcome: 
participants have either a PPM level that is less than 8 (success in cessation), or a PPM level  of 
equal or greater than 8 (no success in cessation). Run an unadjusted logistic regression with 12 - 
week PPM as the outcome and treatment group as the predictor. Run an adjusted logistic 
regression adjusting covariates  
3. Analyze secondary outcomes: 7 -day point prevalence abstinence at 8 - and 12 -week. Run an 
unadjusted logistic model with 8 -week PPA as the outcome and treatment group as the 
predictor. Run the same logistic model as above but with 12 -week PPA. Run an unadjusted 
logistic model with 8 -week PPA as the outcome and treatment group as  the predictor, adjusting 
for covariates. Run the same logistic model as above but with 12 -week PPA, adjusting for 
covariates  
4. Analyze  other  secondary  outcomes:  quality -of-life, ART adherence,  change  in smoking  quantity, 
quit attempts.  