 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CES1 Crossover Trial of Clopidogrel and Ticagrelor  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
March  5, 202 4  
STUDY PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
The purpose of this investigation was to conduct a randomized crossover study of clopidogrel and ticagrelor in 
participants recruited by carboxylesterase 1 ( CES1 ) genotype (G143E and rs7498748). Extensive phenotyping 
including ex vivo  platelet aggregometry performed pre - and post -drug administration was pe rformed in order to 
assess the interaction of genotype and drug choice on on -treatment platelet function. Specifically, we enroll ed 
89 healthy Amish participants based on  CES1  genotype (1 7 G143E carriers, 38 rs7498748 minor allele 
carriers, and 3 4 controls  who did contain the minor alleles of either of these variants) . All of these individuals 
underwent a randomized crossover study of clopidogrel  (75 mg per day for 7 d) and ticagrelor (90 mg twice 
daily for 7 d) , with a t least a  14-day washout  period between drug interventions. Plat elet aggregation studies  
and other clinical information  were recorded  before and after each intervention.  
 
Home visit to screen for eligibility : A research nurse and an Amish community liaison visit ed potential research 
subjects in their homes. The nurse explain ed the study and obtain ed informed consent. If a research subject 
consent ed, the nurse obtain ed a medical history and screening laboratory tests to assess eligibility. Briefly, 
participants w ere excluded if they were  pregnant, currently breastfeeding, had history of a bleeding disorder or 
major spontaneous bleed, hypertensive, creatinine levels > 2.0 mg/dL, ALT or AST > 2 x the upper limit of 
normal, hematocrit < 28%, TSH < 0.4 or >5.5 mlU/L, plat elet count > 500,000 or < 75,000, currently taking 
clopidogrel, ticagrelor, prasugrel, or other anti -coagulant, history of cardiovascular disease or diabetes, was 
taking vitamins or other supplements and was unwilling or c ould not  safely, in the opinion of  the study 
physician, discontinue their use at least 1 week prior to protocol initiation.  
 
Subjects w ere informed that to participate in this study, they had to discontinue for a period starting 7 days 
prior to the initial clinic visit any vitamins, supple ments and medications that might affect the results of the 
study. Specifically, if a subject is on medications that may potentially interfere with the planned intervention, 
he/she w as instructed to consult with his/her physician regarding discontinuing suc h therapy prior to study 
enrollment. Alternatively, with the subject's permission, the study physician contact ed the subject's physician to 
discuss and obtain permission for medication withdrawal. If in the opinion of the subject's physician and the 
study physician, discontinuation of medications for the duration of the study d id not pose any undue health 
risks, medications w ere discontinued one week before the first clinic visit. If a medication require d tapering, this 
commence d two weeks prior to the first clinic visit. Similarly, all vitamins (except daily multivitamins) and other 
supplements w ere withdrawn for 7 days prior to  the first clinic visit. If the research subject was on anti -platelet 
medications, these agents w ere withdrawn 14 days prior to the first clinic visit.  
 
Female research participants w ere informed that they could  not participate in this study if they are p regnant. All 
female subjects had an assessment of child -bearing potential. Pregnancy status w as determined by self -report 
at the screening visit. A urine pregnancy test w as performed at the clinic visit s #1 and #3 prior to drug 
administration.  
 
Following r eview of screening information and lab results, eligibility w as confirmed. Eligible participants 
complete d studies during the course of four visits to the Amish Research Clinic  in Lancaster, PA . 
 
Randomization : Prior to Clinic Visit #1, enrolled subjects w ere randomized (1:1) to either the clopidogrel or 
ticagrelor intervention. Clinical staff, blinded to CES1  genotype, were notified of the order of drug intervention 
though the delivery of a sealed, opaque envelope from a research team member who was also b linded to 
participant genotype. Assignment envelopes were shuffled prior to study initiation and delivered sequentially.  
Participants who started with the clopidogrel intervention underwent the ticagrelor intervention after the 
prerequisite washout period  and vice versa.  
 
Clinic Visit #1 (Baseline Platelet Function) : Research subjects w ere transported to the Amish Research Clinic 
after an overnight fast where heights, weights, and vital signs w ere measured. Women of childbearing age 
completed  a pregnancy test. A catheter w as placed, and fasting blood samples w ere obtained  to assess 
circulat ing lipid levels  (LDL, HDL, and triglycerides) , evaluate  baseline measures of agonist -stimulated platelet 
aggregation , and for sample banking. Participants w ere then observed wh ile taking their first dose of 
clopidogrel or ticagrelor (based on randomizatio n procedure) , discharged  to home with additional  tablets, and 
instructed to take the appropriate dose (75 mg/ daily for clopidogrel, 180 mg/d for ticagrelor) at the same time  
each day . A participant logbook was given to each participant to record their dai ly doses  
 
Clinic Visit #2 (On -Clopidogrel Platelet Function) : On the 7th day, subjects return ed to the clinic, observed 
taking their last dose, and fasting blood samples w ere drawn 1-hour post-dose for measurement of agonist -
stimulated platelet aggregation  and sample banking . Drug adherence was assessed by pill count and 
participant logbook. Each  participant then underwent a  14-day washout period  to restore basal platelet 
function, consist ent with the average lifespan of a platelet (7 – 10 days).  
 
Clinic Visit #3 (Repeat Measures of Baseline Platelet Function) : After the 14 -day washout period, research 
subjects  again were  transported to the Amish Research Clinic in the fasting state where t hey w ere weighed 
and their vital signs measured. Reproductive age women underwent  a 2nd pregnancy test.  Blood samples 
were obtained for repeat measures of baseline platelet function and sample banking.  Participants w ere then 
observed while taking their f irst dose of clopidogrel or ticagrelor (whichever one was not administered during 
the first intervention period), discharged to home with additional tablets, and instructed to take the appropriate 
dose at the same time each day. A participant logbook was g iven to each participant to record their daily 
doses.  
 
Clinic Visit #4 (On -Ticagrelor Platelet Function) : On the 7th day, subjects return ed to the clinic, observed taking 
their last dose, and fasting blood samples w ere drawn 1-hour post -dose for measurement of agonist -stimulated 
platelet aggregation and sample banking.  Drug adherence was assessed by pill count and participant logbook.  
 
Asses sment of Platelet Function : at each clinic visit, p latelet -rich plasma (PRP) w as isolated from fasting blood 
samples drawn into 3.2% citrate -anticoagulated tubes (Becton -Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and platelet 
counts w ere adjusted to 200,000 platelets/ μl using platelet -poor plasma. Platelet function w as assessed by 
optical aggregometry using a PAP 8E Aggregometer (Bio/Data Corporation, Horsham, PA) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions after stimulation with 20 μM  ADP and expressed as the maximal percentage 
change in light transmittance using platelet -poor plasma as a referent . 
 
Distributions of summary statistics (e.g. age, sex, change in platelet function ) were generated using SAS 
(Cary, NC) . Change in clopidogrel -induced platelet aggregation in response to ADP w as calculated by 
subtracting observed post -clopidogrel maximal platelet aggregation values from baseline (i.e. pre -drug) values. 
Similarly, change in ticagrelor -induced platelet aggregation in response to ADP w as calculated by subtracting 
observed ticagrelor  maximal platelet aggregation values from baseline (i.e. pre -drug) values . 
 
The primary endpoint  of this investigation  was to determine within each drug group if CES1  genotype is 
associated with change in  platelet aggregat ion. Change in platelet aggregation , defined as the relative 
differences in platelet aggregation between baseline and day 7 of a given drug intervention, was calculated as: 
Change  = [(MPA baseline  – MPA day 7), where MPA = maximal platelet aggregation. Con sideration of relevant 
biological variables that influence platelet aggregation and/or drug response w ere explored  in our statistical 
models.  Specifically, the effect of CES1 genotype on agonist -stimulated change in platelet aggregation  was 
calculated usi ng a variance component method under an additive or dominant model that simultaneously 
adjust ed for age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and relatedness among study participants. Relatedness among 
participants w ere accounted for by including a polygenic compon ent as a random effect. Briefly, a model for 
the polygenic component w as established by constructing a relationship matrix derived from the complete 
Amish pedigree structure available through published genealogical records maintained by the church.  