 
Protocol  # Page 1 of 3 
IRB version 03.09.04  
PI version 9/19/2016 2:44:00 PM  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title:  
Refinement of the LaborView Electronic Fetal Monitor  
 
NCT:  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date:  
September 19, 2016  
 
Document approval Date by WIRB:  
September 29 , 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol  # Page 2 of 3 
IRB version 03.09.04  
PI version 9/19/2016 2:44:00 PM  
 Protocol  
 
1. Project Title:  
 
 Refinement of the LaborView Electronic Fetal Monitor  
 
2. Investigator(s):  
 
 Tammy Y. Euliano, MD  
 Professor of Anesthesiology  and Obstetrics & Gynecology  
 
3. Abstract:  
 
Despite its limitations, fetal heart rate (FHR) tracing  analysis is our best monitor of fetal well -being 
during labor or preparation for cesarean delivery.  Current monitoring methods:  transabdominal 
ultrasound and fetal scalp electrodes have limitations (tracing loss during fetal movement, potential 
to confu se maternal for fetal heart rate, inability to monitor during cesarean section or abdominal 
surgery) and, in the latter case, risks (infection, hematoma).  A reliable, non -invasive monitor of the 
fetal heart rate that can be used during labor, non -obstetri c and obstetric surgery during pregnancy is 
needed. Recent developments in use of maternal abdominal electrodes for extraction of the FHR 
and contraction information inform this study.  
  
LaborView®, developed by researchers at UF College of Medicine and OB Medical , is an FDA -
approved non -invasive labor monitoring device. Refinement of the extraction algorithms continue s, 
and that work is most effectively performed  at UF, where the primary researchers and OBMedical 
are located.  
 
LaborView monitoring will be recorded from 1 50 subjects admitted to Labor and Delivery at 
UFHealth .  Data will be simultaneously obtained from the standard labor monitor.  These signals 
will then be analyzed off -line for comparison and refinement of algorithms .   
 
4. Background : 
  
Despite its limitations, fetal heart rate (FHR) tracing analysis is our best monitor of fetal well being 
during labor.  Typically, continuous electronic fetal monitoring is via transabdominal ultrasound 
(CTG: cardiotocograph).  A transducer is strapped to the  maternal abdomen and positioned in such 
a way to detect fetal rather than maternal heart rate.  There are occasional periods of signal loss as 
the patient or her fetus moves, as well as times when the monitor incorrectly records the maternal 
signal.  Mate rnal obesity presents particular challenges to non -invasive monitoring.  
 
When there is particular concern regarding the fetal heart rate tracing the obstetrician may opt for a 
fetal scalp electrode (FSE).  This is screwed into the fetal presenting part thr ough the opening in the 
cervix (requires ruptured membranes and adequate dilation).  This signal is usually more reliable, 
but entails risks of chorioamnionitis, fetal scalp infection, scalp hematoma, and potential vertical 
transmission of maternal viruses  including HIV and hepatitis .   
 
Recently, devices have come to market that extract the FHR and uterine electromyograph (EMG) 
from maternal abdominal electrodes. The proposed study will provide data for refinement of the 
LaborView device produced by OBMedi cal. 
 
 
5. Specific Aims : 
 
 
Protocol  # Page 3 of 3 
IRB version 03.09.04  
PI version 9/19/2016 2:44:00 PM  
  The goal of this research is to evaluate the LaborView device under various settings and test 
algorithm and device enhancements.  
 
6. Research Plan:  
 
 All patients admitted to  the Labor & Delivery Suite at UF Health , will be eligi ble for inclusion in 
the study  except minors and those unable to consent for themselves .   
 
 Following written informed consent, the external monitors  (tocodynamometer and ultrasound) 
may not be removed.  Per LaborView directions, e lectrode application sit es will be prepared to 
reduce skin impedance, electrodes will be applied to the maternal abdomen and data acquired for 
comparison with CTG  data obtained through the traditional  monitoring system . FHR, ECG, and 
uterine activity data from the existing fetal monitors will be collected via a laptop PC connected 
to the systems for comparison.  The comparison will be performed off-line.    
 
Evaluation of the externally obtained FECG will include (1) comparison of the calculated FHR 
with that of the CTG and /or fetal scalp electrode, (2) comparison of calculated short -term beat -to-
beat variability between each source,  (3) expert opinion comparison of the FHR tracings, and (4) 
morphologic and time interval analyses.   
 
In addition, EMG data will be obtained via the el ectrodes.  This will be analyzed real -time and 
compared with the toco and /or IUPC contraction information.  When the toco signal fails (e.g., 
when the patient move s and the strap no longer overlies the uterus), the patient’s nurse will be 
asked to repositi on the strap.  We may count the frequency with which nursing intervention is 
required.  This intervention is always required when a patient is monitored with a toco, we are 
merely counting the frequency of required nursing intervention.  
 
Nothing is require d of the subjects.  They will be non -invasively monitored for one to several hours.  
The information obtained will not be used for medical decision -making and there is no  significant  
risk to the patient or her fetus.  No longitudinal follow -up is planned  or indicated .   
   
7. Possible Discomforts and Risks : 
 
 Other than possible skin irritation from the electrodes, t here are no health risks from this study.  
 
8. Possible  Benefits:  
 
 There are no health benefits directly for the subject.   There are also no fi nancial risks.  
 
 Patients will receive $50 in gift cards for participation in this protocol.  
 
9. Conflict of Interest:  
 
The PI is an unpaid consultant to OBMedical , the company that licenses  the technology from UF. 
The PI is married to the CTO  of OBMedical , Neil Euliano, PhD.  The idea for the project  came 
from both.  Conflict of Interest management has been through the Office of Research Affairs 
under Gary Wimsett  and a monitoring plan is in place.  There is the potential for commercial 
application from wh ich Neil E uliano  and the University of Florida may benefit financially.  
 