 
 
 
 
Implementing Family -Based Treatment for 
Adolescent Anorexia Nervosa for Providers in 
Private Practice: A Feasibility Study  
 
Study Protocol  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
June 9, 2020  
  
We will employ the same recruitment strategy that was successful in  our initial  study and advertise throughout the 
United States (US) on the Academy  for Eating Disorders (AED) websites, Eating Disorder Research Society (EDRS)  
listserve, and the National Eating Disorder Association (NEDA) listserve. In addition, we will use Facebook and 
Twitter advertisements to augment these approaches.  
 
Therapists will be trained in one of two ways for this study: 1) online training x 3 months, followed by expert 
supervisi on for 3 months; or 2) recorded webinar training provided in 12 1 -hour webinar lectures provided weekly,  
followed by expert supervision for 3 months. UCSF, listed as a collaborating institute, will aid in training and 
supervising the participating therapists in one of these two arms of Family -based Treatment training (see description 
of research activities at  UCSF below).  
 
Therapists are eligible to participate if they have completed a masters or doctoral training in their field (psychology, 
psychiatry, fam ily therapy, social work), are licensed in their respective state, have no reports of malpractice or  
loss of privileges at relevant clinical institutions, have computer/web access for online training and assessments and 
no previous 2 -day in -person workshop training in FBT, and submit baseline data on weight gain from week 1 -4 from a  
previously treated adolescent with AN they have treated in the last 6 months or alternatively one that they treat within 
3 months of the initial screening before starting the tr aining. Therapists who have had previous training in FBT are not 
eligible to be randomized.  
 
Therapists will complete an online screen. If they appear to be eligible, an online consent form will be triggered 
(waiver of documentation included on the application). If they do consent, they will be asked to complete online  
questionnaires that will amount to be the baseline assessment prior to randomization. Demographic and practice 
characteristics of all therapists (age, gender, ethnicity, race, months of experience treating eating disorders, 
specialized trainings, practice setting, payments accepted),  self- report of fidelity, knowledge of FBT, skills of FBT 
using responses to role played videotapes, and expert ratings of fidelity will be collected. The total assessment  
burden for therapists will be about one hour to an hour and a half for the entire screen, consent, and baseline 
assessment.  
 
Once this is complete the research team will review the assessment and double check eligibility before randomizing 
the participant to either arm of training. The research team will then reach out to the therapist t o inform them of  
which arm of training they were randomized to and go over again what that entails as well as get them set up with 
either:  
 
1) Online training which consists of 10 lectures that are self -paced with a maximum of three months to complete with 
each lecture bundle comprising of 5 - 8 short (about   4  minutes in length), didactic videos that discuss the treatment  
model and provide mock therapy session video clips (modeling FBT with a typical adolescent AN case), as well as 
supplementary readings a nd videotaped role - plays. Enrollees complete each lecture bundle and complete the  
assignments as they move through the training at their own pace, but to have completed all within the 3 -month time 
frame.  
 
2) Webinar training which consists of 1 -hour weekly webinar lectures  that essentially is the FBT training that is 
conducted in person, just  recorded.  There will  be lectures discussing the scientific evidence supporting FBT, how  
therapists set  up treatment for FBT, main interventions used in FBT during eac h phase,  and recorded role -plays 
illustrating interventions throughout the 3  phases.  Enrollees  watch each webinar video as it is released weekly over a 
12 week (3  month  period).  
 
When the training is completed, therapists will proceed to schedule  post- online  supervision for a minimum of 1 case 
and a maximum of 2 cases over the  course of  3 months with one of two clinicians at UCSF. At the 4 week treatment  
mark  for each case, therapists will  complete a  self-report on FBT fidelity to key components and patien t weight  
change.  Therapist video skill assessments related to key components will take  place  at baseline and at the end of 
online ET -FBT and end of supervision. Once  the therapist completes a minimum of one case, the therapist will 
receive  CE credit and a certificate of completion of FBT training. Therapists who enter  the online  training protocol will 
be compensated for their time for the  completion  of all  assessments ($100 for each assessment point).  
 
UCSF's role in research activities are as such: Two UCSF clinicians  will be responsible for conducting individual work 
with each therapist  participant weekly for 1 hour per week for 12 weeks during the  supervision timepoint o f the study. 
They will use the published  supervision manual for FBT (Forsberg et. al) published by Guilford.  They  
will rate fidelity using a therapist version of self -report  (described  below) and will rate the recorded responses to the 
clinical vignettes  (described below). The y will have access to all of the fidelity  assessments (the self -reports and the 
vignettes all outline below) in  order to complete these ratings. Access will be through RedCap in  order  to make sure 
the data they receive is secure and HIPAA compliant in  accordance with Stanford's IT recommendations. They will 
also know  the patient weight change data (solely session 1 through 4 weights and  dates  taken no patient PHI will be 
collected in the study) as they need  this information to teach the therapist using supervision.  
 
Therapists will complete the following measures/assessments:  
 
Demographic and professional survey: This is a basic demographics  questionnaire asking for age, race, gender, 
geographic location  (City and State), specialty (psychology, psychiatry, social work),  treatment  setting  (private  
practice, group private practice, full or part -time); specialty  training  in anorexia  nervosa, experi ence treating anorexia 
nervosa (years), numbers of  adolescents  with AN treated in the last two years, willingness to pay for this  training.  
This measure will take approximately 10 minutes to complete and is  completed  only at baseline (BL). This measure 
will be used to examine possible  predictors  (candidate -moderators) for fidelity and patient outcome (Aim 4).  
 
The therapist version of Parents versus Anorexia Nervosa Scale(PVAN):  This is measure of therapist self -efficacy  
specific to key components  knowledg e and skill in FBT. We use this measure as a learning tool in ET -FBT. It takes 5  
minutes  to complete. This measure will be completed at BL, ~3 months (end of  online  training -EOT), and end of 
supervision (EOS) ~6 months. This measure  will be used as a possible predictor (candidate moderator) for fidelity 
and patient  outcome (Aim 4).  
 
Evidence -based Practice Attitude Scale -36 (EBPAS -36): This is a brief  version  of EBPAS -5O and is a measure of 
therapist attitudes about evidence -based  practice. It has sound psychometric properties and takes about 10  
minutes  to complete. This measure will be used as a possible predictor  (candidate  moderator) for fidelity and patient 
outcome  and will be given at BL  only (Aim 4).  
 
Motivation for training in FBT: This is a new measure asking for  therapist to choose one of the following reasons for 
seeking training  in FBT:  belief that this is the best approach; customer demand; curiosity  about  the approach; 
increased income; professional development. Therapists  may choose  as many reasons as they wish but will rank 
those they choose. This  measure will  take 5 minutes to complete. This measure will be used as a possible  predictor  
(candidate moderator) for fidelity and patient outcome (Aim 4).  
 
Treatment Outcome Measures:  
 
Weight change in patients treated pre and post -training: Weight  change  from sessions 1 to 4 will be collected on one 
adolescent patient with  AN treated  pre-training (baseline eligibility) and post online ET -FBT per  participating  therapist  
during supervision or within 3 months following completion of  supervision.  No patient identifying information will be 
collected. This will take 5  minutes to  complete. This measure  will be used as the main outcome for treatment  (patient  
outcome) efficacy (Aim 2).  
 
Key component skills: Therapists will be asked to view mock therapy  session  video clips and play the role of the  
therapist. These clinical  videotapes  are actors  playing families using a script and usually lasting less than three  
minutes.  The therapist in training watches the video and records their verbal  intervention  response to the clinical  
scene. The specific skills assessed are  related  to how effectively the therapist used externalization or agnosticism (as  
appropriate  clinically) and will be scored by expert clinicians using  standardized  coding.  This was the approach used 
in our preliminary study. This measure will be  completed  at BL, ~3 months (end of online training -EOT), and end of  
supervision  (EOS)  ~6 months. This is a measure of fidelity and change will be correlated  with patient  weight change 
outcome (Aim 3) for target validation.  
 
Key component knowledge: This is a brief 10 question mul tiple choice  measure  of knowledge of key components of 
FBT that was used in our preliminary  study.  These will be conducted at BL, ~3 months (end of online training - 
EOT),  and end of supervision (EOS) ~6 months. This is a measure of fidelity and  change  will be  correlated with 
patient weight change outcome (Aim 3) for target  validation.   
 
Consultation Questions: The brief 8 questions ask participants about their experience with supervision in the research 
study. This measure will be administrated at ~3 months  (end of training -EOT), and end of supervision (EOS) ~ 6 
months.  
 
Fidelity to FBT Self -Report: This is a new measure that has been  piloted  at the two study sites and found acceptable 
to therapists to use as a brief  measure  of self- reported fidelity to key component of FBT during the first 4  sessions.  
It consists  of 8 multiple choice questions and takes approximately 5 minutes to  complete.  This will be conducted at  
BL, end of training (~ 3 months), and end of  supervision (~6   months). This is a measure of fidelity and change will be 
correlated  with patient  weight change outcome (Aim 3) for target validation.  
 
Supervisor reported fidelity to key componen ts of FBT: Using a  published  coding  frame that was used in our previous  
studies, supervisors will rate  therapists  during  supervision on their fidelity to FBT during the first 4 sessions.  This will  
be completed only at the end of supervision by therapy supervisors. This  measure  is a measure of fidelity and change  
will be correlated with patient  weight  change  outcome (Aim 3) for target validation.  
 
Working Alliance Inventory: This is a 12 -item Likert measure derived  from the original 36 item version with  
satisfactory psychometrics. The  therapist  will be asked to complete the measure as it relates to the patient for whom  
post- training  weight change is provided. It will take 5 minutes for the therapist  to complete.  These will be conducted  
at BL, end of training (~ 3 months), and end  of supervision (~6 months). This is a measure of fidelity and change  will 
be correlated with patient weight change outco me (Aim 3) for target  validation.  
 
For the purpose of this study adverse events will be  defined as “unanticipated problems involving risk to the study  
participant.”  A serious adverse event will be defined as “any untoward occurrence  that results in death; is life - 
threatening; or creates persistent or  significant disability.” All such events will be immediately  reported  to the IRB and 
DSMB. These events will be reviewed by the Data and  Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) at their regular meeting,  
however,  deaths and suicide attempts will be immediately reported to the  DSMB and IRB.  
 
The initial reporting of adverse events (of any kind) will take  place with the study staff consulting with the PI. The PI 
will then  decide whether the event is of such a severity that requires  discontinuation  of a particular training, and 
whether the participant should remain  in the study or  be withdrawn. All study withdrawals together with  a detailed  
explanation of the withdrawal will be reported to the  DSMB.  