Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 1 Study Title : Study of the Effects of Caloric Restriction and Exercise Training II (SECRET  II) 
 
Principal Investigator :  Dalane W. Kitzman  
 
Co-investigator(s) :   Peter Brubaker,  Barbara Nicklas, Denise  Houston, Timothy Morgan, Greg 
Hundley, Anthony Molina, Mary Lyles , Jam ehl D emons  Shegog  
 
Sponsor or funding source: NIH 
 
IRB: 00032364  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT026364 39  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 2 Amendment 51 
 
A limited dataset of demographics, clinical variables, and outcomes measures will be sent via 
encrypted files to Dr. Ambarish Pandey, MD at UT Southwestern. Additionally, deidentified 
extracted DNA samples will be sent for CHiP analyses. A Data Use Agreeme nt and Material 
Transfer Agreement will be completed with the Office of Sponsored Programs.   
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 3 Background , Rationale  and Context  
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is a relatively recently recognized disorder 
and the fastest growing form  of HF. (170; 180)   HFpEF is nearly exclusively found in older 
persons, particularly women, in whom 90% of new HF cases are HFpEF. (85)  HFpEF is 
associated with markedly increased morbidity, mortality, and health care expenditures. (12; 86; 
136; 193)   Despite its impor tance, the prognosis of HFpEF is worsening, its pathophysiology is 
poorly understood, and other than diuretics no medications have proven effective. (170; 197; 
229) 
 
Exercise intolerance, with severe exertional dyspnea and fatigue during normal activities, is the 
primary manifestation of chroni c HFpEF and a major cause of reduced quality of life (QOL). (28; 
125)  Our work has focused on understanding the pathophysiology of HFpEF and testing 
strategies to improve exercise intolerance. (8; 31; 96 -98; 110; 118; 124; 125; 127; 128; 178; 190)   
Peak oxygen consumption during exercise (peak VO 2) is a widely accepted primary outcome in 
HF trials, (9; 89)  including older HFpEF patients, (89; 190)  because it provides an objective, 
standardized, valid, reproducible measure of e xercise intolerance, (11; 21; 190)  is an 
independent predict or of QOL, hospitalizations and mortality, and is sensitive to interventions 
that improve the underlying abnormalities. (11; 63; 89; 127; 128)    
 
Peak VO 2 is determined by the combined contributions of cardiac, arterial, and skeletal muscle 
function. (11)  As recently cited by others, our work has helped change the conventional 
paradigm of chronic HFpEF, (27; 115; 146; 197)  by demonstrating  that in addition to 
cardiovascular dysfunction, older HFpEF patients have multiple skeletal muscle abnormalities, 
including adipos e infiltration, reduced muscle mass, capillary density, type 1 oxidative fibers, 
citrate synthase activity, and mitochondrial content and these strongly contribute to their 
severely reduced peak VO 2.(94; 98; 100; 120; 164)   As first reported in a randomized trial by our 
group, (128)  aerobic exercise training (AT) remains the only inte rvention that improves peak VO 2 
in HFpEF. (116)  Our work and others’ i ndicate that improvements in skeletal muscle function 
account for nearly all the improvement in peak VO 2 with AT. (78; 99; 123; 127)  This recent 
understanding of the key role of skeletal muscle abnormalities mirrors th at of two other 
conditions related to HFpEF: aging and HF with reduced EF (HFrEF).  Loss of muscle is a major 
factor in the age -associated decline in peak VO 2.(64)  Aging is also associated with reduced 
capillary density (48), accumulation of intermuscular adipose, (53; 187)  and alterations in 
mitochondrial mass and function, (47; 186)  all associated with reduced peak VO 2, strength, and 
endurance (17; 133; 164; 187; 214; 215)   Furthermore, in HFrEF, decreased skeletal muscle 
mass, oxidative capacity, and mitochondrial content and function all contribute strongly to 
reduced peak VO 2 and its improvement after AT, and are not due merely to deconditioning. (43; 
46; 56; 57; 73; 84; 93; 131; 142; 149; 150; 199; 212)  
 
Obesity is one of the strongest risk factors for de velopment of HFpEF. (91; 121; 166; 182; 194)  
About 85% of older HFpEF patients are overweight/obese, twice the general aging population, 
making obesity a major yet under -recognized contributor to the HFpEF phenotype. (91; 18 2; 
196)  Increased adiposity markedly impairs physical function, skeletal muscle composition, and 
mitochondrial function, (23) as well as cardiovascular function.  In obese older adults, weight 
loss improves body composition and physical, cardiac, vascular , skeletal muscle, and 
mitochon drial function. (19; 44; 184; 213)   However, weight reduction therapy is controversial in 
HF patients because observational studies uniformly report that overweig ht/obese HF patients, 
including specifically HFpEF, appear to have better survival. (10; 45; 69; 91)   Recently surgical 
weight reduction was reported to prevent the onset of HF, and to improve peak exercise 
intolerance in HFrEF. (151; 200)   To date, there have been no published studies of dietary 
weight loss in any type of HF.  Our recently completed study challenges conventional HF 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 4 paradigms as the first dietary weight loss intervention for HFpEF.  It found that caloric restriction 
(CR) significantly improves peak VO 2, other measures of exercise capacity and QOL. The 
improvements were related to reduced total and intermuscular fat and increased mitochondrial 
content.  CR and AT were additive and the combination of CR+AT produced robust 
improvements in peak VO 2 and QOL. This suggests CR+AT as a novel treatment for the 1.8 
million patients with the overweight/obese HFpEF phenotype.   
 
However, 35% of the weight lost during CR in our HFpEF patients was muscle mass and this 
was not prevented by the com bination with AT .  This is concerning because muscle mass is a 
major determinant of peak VO 2 such that the loss of muscle mass may have limited even further 
increases in peak VO 2 with CR+AT.  Al though CR+AT strongly increased peak VO 2, about 75% 
of the deficit in peak VO 2 in HFpEF vs. controls remained, indicating ample opportunity for 
further improvement. (15)  Thus, a strategy that helps preserve m uscle mass in the setting of 
CR+AT may further improve peak VO 2 and its associated functional and QOL benefits for 
HFpEF.  Preserving muscle mass may also: 1) facilitate weight loss and its long -term 
maintenance since muscle mass is the strongest determina nt of metabolic rate; (179; 205; 217; 
223) 2) address concerns about exacerbating aging a nd HF -related muscle loss which is 
strongly associated with increased disability, hospitalizations, and death; (7; 15; 62; 93; 219)  and 
3) avoid worsened body composition (18) and reduced physical function that can occur with 
weight regain after CR when lost muscle mass is replaced disproportionately with fat mass. (14; 
15; 18)   These factors provide the rationale for retaining skeletal muscle during CR+AT.   
  
Multiple lines of evidence and our prelim inary data indicate that resistance training (RT) could 
be an ideal addition to CR+AT for HFpEF. (184)   (1) RT reliably increases muscle mass, quality, 
strength, and function, significantly more than AT, (37) and specifically duri ng CR. (36; 50; 74; 
76; 77; 101; 144; 184; 225)   We found that in older non -HF patients undergoing CR, RT reduced 
loss of lean mass by 47%, and enhanced body composition and physical function (198)  - nearly 
identical to Frimmel et al who found that RT reduced loss of m uscle mass by 48%. (74)  (2) In 
HFrEF, RT improves exercise capacity independent of cardiac function and to a similar degree 
as AT. (177)   In older men, RT s ignificantly increased peak VO 2 (+1.9 ml/kg lean/min) and was 
associated with increased type 1 fiber area, thigh muscle area, capillary density, and citrate 
synthase (all of which we have found deficient in HFpEF). (76; 77)   (3) RT and AT can have 
additive effects on peak VO 2(20; 49; 144)   In HFrEF, the addition of RT to AT doubled the 
training -related increase in endurance. (20)  (4) RT also improves peak VO 2 by mechanisms 
independent of muscle mass, including m uscle mitochondrial function, blood flow, inflammation, 
and neuromuscular function. (50; 76; 77; 103; 201; 207; 226)  Muscle mitochondrial function is a  
fundamental driver of peak VO 2 and is reduced in older persons and in HFrEF, (50; 76; 77; 104; 
201; 207; 226)  and is improved by RT in HFrEF. (226)   In diabetics, addition of RT to AT 
improves muscle mitochondrial content, function and oxidative capacity, resulting in increased 
peak VO 2.(201)   Our preliminary data (Sections 3.D.4.) suggest that:  a) muscle mitochondrial 
content is reduced in HFpEF, and b) is related to the increase in peak VO 2 following CR+AT; c) 
mitochondrial respiratory function is reduced in obese older adults, and d) improves with RT.  
(5) RT and AT have complementary effects on muscle and cardiovascular function. (52; 92; 95; 
101; 103; 144; 157)   (6) Regimens adding RT to AT improve compliance. (50; 225)   These data 
provide a strong rationale for the a ddition of RT to AT during CR.   
 
However, RT has never been tested with CR in any type of HF.  Furthermore, there are few 
data regarding RT in HFpEF; a pilot study used a small dose of RT in combination with AT, (58) 
and another small study included just 3 HFpEF patients. (177)   Although initial concerns have 
been largely allayed regarding the potential effect of RT on left ventricular (LV) function in 
HFrEF, (135)  there remains equipoise in HFpEF.  RT can significantly increase arterial stiffness 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 5 and LV hypertrophy (153; 225)  a potential concern in HFpEF patients who often already have 
increased arterial stif fness and LV hypertrophy. (106; 124; 137; 230)    Therefore, it is important 
to rigorously test the efficacy and safety of adding RT to CR+AT, as we propose here using 
state -of-the-art methods.  
  
Objective s 
The primary  aim is to conduct a randomized, controlled, single -blinded  20-week intervention  
trial of RT added to CR+AT in 84  overweight / obese (BMI > 28 kg/m2), older (age >60 years) 
HFpEF patients to test the following primary hypothesis:  
 The addition of resistance training to CR+AT will improve peak VO 2. 
The secondary  aims of the study are to test the following secondary hypotheses:  
 Resistance training added to CR+AT will improve retention of skeletal muscle mass.   
 Resistance training added to CR+AT will improve skeletal muscle mitochondrial 
function.  
 The improvement in peak VO 2 with RT will be related to improved skeletal muscle 
mass and mitochondrial function, and accompanied by improved QOL.   
Peak VO 2 (ml/min) will be assessed by expired gas analysis. Skeletal muscle mass will be 
measured as thigh muscle area by MRI and total lean mass by DXA. (94; 100)  Mitochondrial 
function and indices of cell death will be assessed by respirometry, protein expression analyses, 
and enzyme activity assays. (23; 24;  209) QOL will be assessed by the KCCQ instrument. 
Muscle strength and quality , and cardiac and vascular function will also be assessed.  
 
Methods and Measures  
 
Design  
This is a randomized, controlled , single -blind clinical trial.  After baseline assessm ents, 84 
patients with HFpEF aged > 60 years will be randomly assigned to 1 of 2 groups: CR+AT or 
CR+AT+RT.  Outcomes will be assessed in blinded fashion at baseline and after the 20week 
intervention. The primary outcome is peak VO 2 (in ml/min) by expired gas analysis during 
treadmill exercise to exhaustion. The secondary outcome of skeletal muscle mass will be 
measured by MRI and DXA. The secondary outcome of mitochondrial function will be assessed 
by respirometry, protein expressio n analyses, and enzyme activity assays on vastus lateralis  
muscle biopsy samples with RCR as a pre -planned, key outcome. Other measures will include: 
health -related QOL by the KCCQ instrument , SF-36,EuroQOL,and CES -D.  SPPB;  lower 
extremity strength and po wer by isokinetic dynamometer; muscle quality; 6 -min walk distance; 
thigh composition and LV and arterial function by MRI; and LV diastolic function by echo -
Doppler.   
 
 
 
Setting  
All study tests and procedures will be performed at Wake Forest School of Medicine  and Wake 
Forest University Clinical Research Center.   Testing labs include the Cardiac Ultraso und and 
Stress Testing lab, Clinical Research Unit, Geriatric Research Center, and the Center for 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging.  
 
Subjects Selection C riteri a 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 6 Eligible patients will have chronic, stable, well -compensated HFpEF with no  changes in cardiac 
medications or symptoms and no hospitalizations or unscheduled visits for at least 6 weeks 
prior to enrollment; these criteria minimize status changes and study interruptions. (168)   To 
ensure safety for CR, patients will have a BMI > 28 kg/m2; this cutoff will still include ~75% of 
older HFpEF patients.  H FpEF will be defined using the 2013 ACC/AHA Guidelines and as 
previously described. (4; 96; 98; 100; 117 -119; 124; 125; 127; 128; 181; 210)   The 4 key criteria 
include: clinical signs and symptoms of HF, a normal LV ejection fractio n (>50%) by 
echocardiogram, LV diastolic dysfunction ( > grade I) (59; 160)  and no evidence of significant 
ischemic, valvular, pulmonary or other medical disorder to account for t heir symptoms.  As 
previously reported, (118; 125; 127; 128)  clinical signs and symptoms of HF will be defined as  
either  NHANE S HF score of >3 (188)  or by the Rich criteria. (185)   These criteria produce 
HFpEF patient characteristics similar to population -based studies (122; 211)  and with severely 
reduced peak VO 2.  Patients with contraindications to the assessments (exer cise tests, MRI, 
muscle biopsy) or interventions will be excluded.   Final eligibility decisions will be made by a 
board -certified cardiologist with experience in HFpEF following the conclusion of all baseline 
assessment s.   
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Clinical sig ns and symptoms of HF :  HF Clinical score ≥3 or Rich Criteria  
 
___________________ Heart Failure Clinical Score ( ≥3 required)______________________  
____________________Clinical Variables______________Score_____________  
Dyspnea/difficulty breathing   
    Trouble with breathing (shortness of breath)         1 
    Hurrying on the level or up slight hill         1 
    At ordinary pace on the level?         2 
    Do you stop for breath when walking at own pace?         2 
    Do you stop for breath after 1 00 yards on the level?         2 
Physical examination   
    Heart rate (beats/min)   
    91 to 110         1 
    111+         2 
Rales/crackles   
    Either lower lung field         1 
    Either lower and either upper lung field         2 
Jugulovenous distention   
    Alone         1 
    Plus edema         2 
    Plus hepatomegaly         2 
Chest x -ray film   
    Cephalization  of pulmonary vessels         1 
    Interstitial edema         2 
    Alveolar fluid plus pleural fluid         3 
    Interstitial edema plus pleural fluid         3 
 
 
 
Or 
 Rich Criteria  
- history of pulmonary edema, or  
- occurrence of 2 or more of the following with subsequent improvement with 
medical  therapy and with no other identifiable cause: dyspnea on exertion, 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 7 paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, orthopnea, systemic edema, exertional 
fatigue.  
 
2. Preserved  Ejection Fraction ≥50% 
3. LV diastolic dysfunction (≥ grade 1)  
4. Age ≥60  
5. BMI ≥28  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 Medical  
A. Valvular heart dise ase as the primary etiology of HF  
B. Significant change in cardiac medication  or HF symptoms <6  weeks  
C. Hospitalization or urgent care visit <6 weeks  
D. Uncontrolled hypertension  
E. Uncontrolled diabetes  
F. Evidence of significant COPD  defined as either:  
a. On continuous home oxygen therapy for COPD  
b. Hospitalization for COPD in last 6 months    
G. Recent or debilitating stroke   
H. Cancer or other noncardiovascular conditions with life expectancy less than 2 years  
I. Significant anemia (<10  gms Hgb)  (eligibility will be determined by CBC)  
J. Significant renal ins ufficiency ( eGFR < 30 ml/min/1.73 m2) (eligibility will be 
determined by comprehensive  metabolic  panel ) 
K. Pregnancy -women of child bearing potential are excluded from participation in this 
study.  
 Psychiatric disease - uncontrolled major psychoses, depressions, dementia, or personality 
disorder  
 Other  
 A. Plans to leave area within 1 year  
 B. Refuses informed consent  
 Screening Echocardiogram  
A. Left ventricular ejection fraction < 50%  
B. Significant valvular heart disease  
 Exercise Test  
A. Evidence of significant ischemia  
B. Electrocardiogram : 1mm flat ST depression  
C. Stopped exercising due to chest or leg claudication  or any reason other than 
exhaustion/fatigue/dyspnea  
D. Exercise SBP > 240 mmHg, DBP > 110 mmHg  
E. Unstable hemodynamics or rhythm  
F. Unwilling or unable to complete adequate exercise test  
 Magnetic resonance imaging  
A. Indwelling metal -containing prosthesis (orthopedic, valvular, other)  
B. Pacemaker or defibrillator  
C. History of welding occupation (ocular metal debris)  
D. Uncontrollable claustrophobia  
E. Any other contra -indication to MRI  
 Thigh muscle biopsy  
A. History of bleeding disorder  
B. Current anticoagulation  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 8 C. Contraindication to stopping aspirin for 1 week  
D. Allergy to topical anesthetic  
 
Sample Size  
Confidence in our estimates is enhanced because they are based on data from our recently 
completed factorial trial of CR and AT using the same patient population and primary outcome. 
The chosen sample size has adequate power for the primary and secondary a ims and QOL.   
The effect of CR+AT on peak VO 2 was 110.8 ml/min (7.6% relative effect) with a square root of 
the mean square error for the ANCOVA model being 107.5.  To have 9 0% power to detect a 
relative effect due to RT of 5.6% (absolute difference of 8 2.0 ml/min) in peak VO 2 at the 0.05 
two-sided level of significance, the study requires 38 evaluable participants per group.  In our 
recent trial, the retention rate was excellent (93%), similar to our previously published trials in 
HFpEF.  To allow for up to 11% loss to follow -up, a total of 42 subjects per group (84  total) will 
be randomized.  In our recently completed study, we observed a 7.4 cm2 decrease in thigh 
muscle area measured by MRI in the CR+AT vs. control group. The square root of the mean 
squa re error was 5.98 using analysis of covariance.  With 76 evaluable subjects we will have 
80% power to detect if the decrease in muscle mass is reduced by 5 3% (e.g. a difference of 3. 9 
cm2).  In our study of older, non -HF participants, RT had an effect of t his magnitude on muscle 
retention during CR. (198) .  We will confirm muscle retention with DXA measurement of total 
lean mass. In our recently completed study; we observed a 2 .2 kg decrease  (3.2% relative 
effect ) (square root mean squared error of 2 8.47) providing 80% power to detect a 2 .8% relative 
effect of RT. This sample size also allows adequate power for the secondary aim, mitochondrial 
function.  In our pilot study, RT increased respiratory control ratio (RCR) from 2.78 to 7.23 
(160% increase; mean square error of 6.372).  The sampl e size provides 80% power to detect a 
60% increase in RCR.  It also provides 80% power to detect a 10% relative difference in the 
KCCQ QOL score. The sample size also provides adequate power to detect increases in 
confirmatory measures of exercise capacity . In our recent study, we observed a 35.4%, 13.8%, 
and 13.9% increase in the AT+CR vs. control group in exercise time, VO 2 reserve, and six -
minute walk distance respectively. The sample size provides 90% power to detect a 10%, 8%, 
and 6% increase in exerci se time, VO 2 reserve, and six -minute walk, respectively. We will also 
have 80% power to detect partial correlations as low as 0.30 at the 0.05 two -sided level of 
significance to examine independent relationships with peak VO 2. 
 
Intervention s  
Exercise training overview .  The exercise training regimens are based on our successful 
experience with aerobic training (AT) in 3 randomized trials in HFpEF patients, (127; 128; 156)  
and resistance training (RT) in 6 trials i n older persons with disability due to conditions other 
than HF (60; 147; 148; 198)    These were effective for improving peak VO 2, lean body mass, and 
QOL (22) and were safe. The exercises are based on ACSM and AHA guidelines for older 
persons and for HFrEF. (2; 65; 72; 225; 225)   The AT and RT interventions are individualized 
and progressive in nature, beginning at a low level and increasing based on specific milestones 
(Table 1) to safely deliver an optimal stimulus.  Both groups (AT-only and AT+RT) will  meet 3 
times per week for 20 weeks. The total stimulus  phase of the sessions for both groups will be 50 
minutes (30 min for AT and 20 min for RT). To keep the duration similar for both groups, 20 min 
of light chair -based range -of-motion, stretching, and flexibility maneuvers will be included at the 
end of the  AT-only group sessions.  This attention /physical activity control will provide no 
resistance or aerobic activity. Warm -up and cool -down phases will be 5 min each with 
stretching, flexibility, and light walking for a total session time of 60 min for both groups.   
Table 1  AT Regimen  RT Regimen  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 9  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sessions will be conducted at the Wake Forest Clinical Research Center by Masters -level, 
Certified Clinical Exercise physiologists  with medical supervision to ensure safety and a uniform, 
robust stimulus. This facility has been used for numerous clinical trials and has appropriate 
emergency equipment and response team, staff trained in BLS/ACLS .  To eliminate potential f or 
cross -group contamination, the 2 groups will meet at different times.  
 
Aerobic exercise training.  The AT prescription for each participant will be based on initial 
evaluations and stress testing results: heart rate reserve (HRR), peak VO 2, RPE.  AT ses sions 
will be similar for each group (AT only, and AT+RT) and include a walking circuit , and/or 
stationary cycling. Initial intensity will start at 40 -50% of HRR, calculated by a standard 
formula (34) and increase gradually for the first 6 -8 weeks until the participant can maintain ~60 -
70% heart rate reserve for at least 20 minutes.  Exercise training intensity will be re -evaluated at 
least every 3 weeks by assessment of heart rate response during subm aximal exercise.  
Depending on subject tolerance, the stimulus duration will progress to 30 minutes, performed 
continuously or as intermittent bouts.  When a subject can complete 30 minutes of continuous 
exercise, the AT intensity will be increased increme ntally to 70 -80%.  Periodic HR, rhythm, and 
blood pressure measures will be performed to ensure safety and compliance with the exercise 
prescription.  After completion of the AT phase, the AT -only group will perform the light chair -
based maneuvers describe d above for 20 min. In contrast, the AT+RT group will go on to the 20 
minute RT regimen described below.     
 
Resistance training .  Participants in AT+RT will have a short rest period before initiating the RT 
session.  The progressive RT intervention is designed to elicit adaptations resulting in increased 
skeletal mus cle strength, mass, and quality.   Participants will exercise in small groups to allow a 
rotation/rest between machines and enhance the social environment.  All participants will first 
attend  an orientation session where correct use of the equipment will be demonstrated.  Heart 
rate, blood pressure, and rhythm will be monitored before and after the RT session. (225)   We 
will use a gradual progression to allow participants to become familiar with the equipment, 
minimize muscle soreness and reduce potential for injury. We have had excellent safety using 
this approach.  
 
To optimize the re sistance stimulus for maximal functional gain, the exercise prescription is 
based on a relative intensity level and will progress at a rate specific to each individual’s 
strength gain.  The RT regimen is based on AHA and ACSM guidelines for intensity, numb er of 
repetitions, number of sets, and frequency. (5; 225)   It will consist of 2 upper and 4 lower body 
exercises on Nautilus RT equipment which can accommodate d ifferent body sizes and allow 
small increments in resistance, both important considerations for low -functioning older HF 
patients.  As employed in studies of HFrEF, (29; 58; 61; 112; 143; 177; 192; 203; 208; 218)  the 
RT exercises (and muscle groups affected) will be: leg curl (hamstrings), leg extension Intensity  Initial: 40 -50% 
HRR  
Goal: 70 -80% 
HRR  Initial: 20 -30% 1 -RM 
Goal: 70 -80% 1 -RM 
Amount  Initial: ~15 
minutes  
Goal: 30 minutes  Wk 1 -3: 1 set of 8 -12 reps  
Wk 4 -20: Addition of 2nd set to volitional 
fatigue  
Type  Walking, treadmill, 
cycling  6 weight machines: leg curl, leg extension, 
leg press, calf raise, chest press, 
compound row  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 10 (quadriceps), leg press (multi -joint: knee extensors and hip flexors), calf raises (gastrocnemius), 
chest press (pectorals and triceps), and compound row (latissimus dorsi and biceps) .  For the 
first 3 weeks, 1 set of 8 -12 repetitions will be done on each exercise.  To deliver a progressive 
muscle stimulus, starting at week 4, a second set of each exercise per formed to volitiona l 
fatigue will be added.  Parti cipants will be instructed to complete the concentric phase of the 
movement in ~2 -3 sec, pause briefly at the mid -point, and complete the eccentric phase in ~2 -3 
sec with ~1 -min rest between sets.  Using a 2:1 recovery -exercise ratio (1 min recovery after 30 
sec RT), the RT (12 total sets of RT exercises) will require ~20 minutes.   
The initial resistance (weight) setting on each piece of equipment will be based on the person’s 
one-repetition maximum (1 -RM) tested on the machine. The 1 -RM testing process is well 
described (2; 102; 225)  and well -tolerated by older adu lts, including those with HFrEF. (177)  
During the first 3 weeks, the weight on each exercise will be 20 -30% of participants’ 1 -RM.  In 
addition to adding a 2nd set of each exercise,  beginning at week 4, the resis tance will increase to 
40-50% of 1 -RM. For the remaining 20 weeks, if >12 repetitions are completed on the 2nd set in 
2 consecutive sessions, the weight will be increased for the next ses sion. The 1 -RM t esting will 
be repeated every 4 w eeks to assess gains in strength and help ensure optimal resistance 
settings. The goal will be to achieve 70 -80% 1 -RM for the last 8 weeks of the study. Amount of 
weight lifted, number of repetitions, and sets completed for  each session will be recorded. (225)  
Our experience and others’ indicate this regimen will produce sufficient stimulus time & load 
progression t o elicit the desired neuromuscular adaptations. (2; 80; 102)    
 
Adherence, retention, and intercurrent illness .  We will utilize multiple behavioral management 
strategies to create a positive exercise en vironment and ensure c ompliance, including promptly 
contacting participants who miss a session, scheduling makeup sessions, and individual 
counseling sessions with Dr. Brubaker to discuss strategies to promote attendance and limit 
obstacles to participatio n.  Using these strategies i n 3 prior exercise trials in older HFpEF 
patients, we had  excellent attendance (88%) and retention (87 -93%). If a participant has a 
change in health status or intercurrent i llness, Dr. Kitzman will commun icate with the personal 
physician to determine suitability for returning to the intervention, and with Dr. Brubaker who will 
determine need for modifications to the exercise prescription. In prior studies, only 3% of 
patients had intercurrent illness requiring interruption of the  intervention and all but 1% were 
able to return to complete the study.  If there is a substantial change in beta -blocker dosage, we 
will re -evaluate the heart rate range.  
 
Caloric restriction  intervention.  The caloric restriction  intervention will be supervised by Denise 
Houston, PhD, RD, Co -I, in coordination with Linda Easter, MS, RD, LDN and conducted in 
accord with published recommendations for overweight/ obese older adults  (213; 221)  similar to 
our recent trial in obese older HFpEF patients.  A hypo cal oric diet (lunch and supper daily, plus 
snacks), will be prepared by the CRU Metabolic Kitchen.  Portions are weighed individually. 
Menus will be provided to guide food selection and preparation of daily breakfasts, and 
participants will be reminded to con sume only the items provided and to keep a log.  Participants 
will pick up meals 3 times/week; in addition to this frequent staff contact, there will be weekly 
weigh -ins and progress review sessions, further ensuring safety.  Participants choose from a 
36-item menu, enhancing acceptance. We will employ several strategies to enhance 
compliance including weekly individual counseling sessions if diet records or inadequate weight 
loss suggest suboptimal compliance and allowance of 2 ‘free’ days/month. We have 
successfully conducted several weight loss trials in older adults, including our recently 
completed trial in HFpEF patients and achieved 99% meal compliance, consistent weight loss, 
with excellent safety and no adverse events. (16; 198)    
 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 11 The diet  will be adjusted to achieve a 300 kcal/day deficit. Our preliminary data in this 
population indicate  this is safe and when combined with exercise will produce a total weight loss 
of ~10.0 kg (about 9.5% body weight) over the  20-week intervention.  Individual calorie levels 
will be prescribed using measured RMR by indirect calorimetry (51) which in our preliminary 
study yielded an average daily intake of ~1650kcal/day.  To further ensure safety, no participant 
will receive less than 1100 kcal/day for women and 1300kcal/day for men, and total weight loss 
will be c apped at 15% of body weight or a BMI of 25 kg/m2.  The tailored meals provide a 
balanced diet with <30% calories from fat and 1.2 g protein/kg/day. (13; 79; 162)     Overall, 
participants will r eceive ~1.5 gm protein/kg/day, ensuring adequate protein intake, consistent 
with recommendations for older adults undergoing weight loss (26; 55; 134; 154; 222)  and the 
Dietary Reference Intake Standards for Macronutrients. (13; 162)   Per PROT -AGE 
recommendations, (13) patients with eGFR < 30 ml/min/1.73 m2 will be excluded . 
 
Outcome Measure(s)  
All outcomes assessments  will be performed at baseline and following the  20-week intervention 
and will be assessed by observers blinded to intervention group assignment  when feasible .  
Written, informed consent will be obtained from each subject by trained research staff using an 
IRB-approved consent form and study protocol.   
 
Exercise testing.   Exercise tolerance will be measured as peak VO 2. The primary outcome will 
be determined during a progressive exercise test on a motorized treadmill according to 
standards established by the American Heart Association and as previously described in 
detail. (33; 83; 125; 17 6; 224)   The standardized extended modified Naughton protocol will be 
used which is well suited to older heart failure patients. (75; 227)   Expired gases will be 
measured with a Med Graphics (Minneapolis, MN) Ultima  system following calibra tion for VO 2, 
VCO 2.(125; 155; 165)   Patients will be encouraged to give a maximal, exhaustive effort as 
judged by either an RER > 1.05 or  >90% age predicted maximal heart rate.  Blood pressure, 
heart rate, and ECG will be continuously monitored. The tests will be administered by a 
Master’s -level exercise physiologist, and attended by a cardiolog ist.  We have administered > 
800 maximal exercise tests in older heart failure patients in clinical trials without a significant 
adverse event.  VO 2 will be assessed by averaging the final three 15 s ec averages, ventilatory 
threshold by the Wasserman method, and VE/VCO 2 slope as previously described in d etail in 
older patients with HFp EF in our laboratory. (32; 114; 125; 145; 155)  
 
Six-minute walk distance (6MWD ).  The 6MWD test is a well -established outcome measure in 
HF.  It is valid a nd reproducible in patients with a wide range of physical function, predicts 
clinical events, and responds to interventions. (1; 54; 129; 195)  We showed that it is as 
predictive of clinical events as exercise oxygen consumption, (70) and improves with AT, 
including in older HFpEF patients. (128; 167)   The 6MW D will be conducted by the method of 
Guyatt et al (90) at the first  and last  visits to the Wake Forest University Clinical Research 
Center utilizing a  standardized script as previously reported. (1; 70; 71)   Total distance covered 
and number and duration of rests and symptoms will be recorded.  
 
Short physical performance battery (SPPB) . The SPPB is a measure of physical function that 
incorporates three components: usual gait speed measured over 4 meters, tim ed repeated chair 
rise, and standing balance with progressively narrow base of support.  Each component is 
scored on a 0 -4 scale and then summed to provide an overall score range of 0 -12.  We will 
evaluate the overall SPPB as  well as each component .  A cha nge of 1 point in the overall SPPB 
score has been identified as representing a substantial change and 0.5 points as a small 
meaningful change. (172)  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 12  
Lower extremity m uscle strength  will be assessed as maximal isokinetic knee extensor strength 
(Newton -meters, Nm) in both legs using an isokinetic dynamometer (Biodex®) with the 
participant seated and the hips and knee flexed at 90°. For consistency, seat height and depth 
will be recorded and the best of 2 trials will be selected. Test -retest reliability of knee extensor 
maximal voluntary contraction  is high among older adults. (38; 189)    
 
Hand grip strength  will be measured in both hands using an adjustable grip strength 
dynamometer. (113)   The participant will be seated with the elbow at 90 degrees.  Two trials will 
be recorded for each hand.   
 
Body composition  will be measured by du al-energy x -ray absorptiometry (DXA, Hologic Delphi 
QDR). (100)  Scans will be analyzed by a certified DXA technician experienced in body 
composition measures in older adults. (100)   Whole body DXA estimates body and regional 
mass, lean mass, fat mass, and bone.  Percent lean mass will be calculated as lean mass / total 
mass x 100.  Total and appendicular skeletal muscle mass will be estimated using the 
Heym sfield method. (42)  Precision of our DXA lean mass measurements is excellent (CV =  
0.51%).  
 
Thigh muscle composition  will be assessed by MRI on a 3.0 T Skyra scanner (Siemens) as 
previously described.1 The left thigh will be scanned using a cardiac phased array coil.  A scout 
view will be obtained by single phase, multi -slice coronal acquisition. The slices will be 10 m m 
thick with a 5 -mm gap, with a 256 x 128 matrix, a 40 -cm field of view, a 30 flip angle, an auto 
repetition time, and a minimum echo time. Images will be transferred to a dedicated image 
analysis workstation and the slice corresponding to a constant loca tion of the mid -thigh will be 
selected. (111)   Cross -sectional areas of skeletal muscle (SM), intermuscular fat (IMF), and 
subcutaneous fat (SCF) will be measured using commercially available software (Tomovision, 
Montre al, Quebec).  This technique was been validated against cadaver specimens. (152)  
Duplicate tests from 10 random subjects analyzed in a blinded fashion yielded correlation 
coefficients fo r SM, IMF, and SCF of 0.99, 0.98, and 0.99 respectively, similar to others. (105)  
We will use fat -water separation by the Dixon method, recently shown to en hance precision of 
muscle mass measures. (228)   DXA provides total lean mass and is widely avail able; MRI 
provides regional thigh mass and is independent of fluid fluctuation which could affect DXA 
measurements.  
 
Muscle quality  will be calculated as the ratios of knee extensor strength to thigh muscle area 
assessed by MRI (Nm/cm2) and leg lean mass assessed by DXA (Nm/kg lean mass).  Muscle 
quality for the upper extremity will be calculated using dynamometer grip strength and DXA arm 
lean mass.  
Health -related QOL . The Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ) is a 23 -item self -
administered ques tionnaire that quantifies physical function, symptoms, social function, and 
self-efficacy in HF patients.  It is  a well -established survey that is valid and sensitive to physical 
and psychological effects from HF and its treatment, including with exercise in our previous 
trials of older HFpEF patients. (66; 68)  KCCQ score is an independent predictor of exerci se 
capacity, (66; 67)  all-cause mortality, and cardiovascular death and hospitalization, (130)  and is 
more sensitive to change than other QOL measures. (88; 202)   In addition, the SF -36, EuroQOL , 
MOCA and CES-D will be administered.  
LV structure / function and arterial function  will be assessed by cardiac MRI (CMR) and echo -
Doppler as previously described.12,13,146,231  Although our hypotheses focus on skeletal muscle, 
assessing the effect of RT on cardiovascular function will allow us to examine safety and 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 13 potential benefit. This can be  accomplished in the same setting as thigh imaging with a single 
30-minute exam, minimizing participant burden and cost.  RT can increase LV mass while CR 
can decrease it; RT can also increase arterial stiffness. (153; 225)  CMR is the most sensitive 
test for changes in LV mass. (108; 158)  LV volumes, ejection fraction, and strain, aortic 
distensibility and left atrial (LA) volume will be measured using a Steady State Free Precession 
cine protocol (35; 40; 41; 106 -108; 118; 138; 163; 216)  and body coil.231  A stack of short axial 
images of the LV a nd LA will be obtained. (141)   Epicardial / endocardial borders will be traced 
using a semi -automatic method (QMASS 7.1, Medis) and LV and LA volumes will be calculated 
by Simpson's rule (25; 118; 163)   Circumferential LV strain  will be assessed by myocardial tissue 
tagging (140)  and analyzed using the Harmonic Phase technique. (82; 169)   Aortic distensibility 
will be measured using phase -contrast gradient -echo sequences. (39; 106; 109; 118)    
 
Echo -Doppler  will be performed with a Phillips iE33 (Andover, MA) instrument according to ASE 
recommendations, as previously described. (118; 125; 126; 139; 220)  Early mitral annulus 
velocity by tissue Doppler (Ea) reflects diastolic relaxation (161; 204)  and ratio of peak early 
filling velocity (E) to Ea (E/Ea)  estimates LA pressure. (159; 204; 206)  We’ve shown these 
outcomes correlate with peak VO 2, have prognostic value, and respond to interventions. (81) We 
will assess carotid artery distensibility and carotid -femoral pulse -wave velocity as previously 
described. (118; 124; 127)  Measures will be performed in triplicate by blinded personnel.  
 
Biomarkers :  B-type natriuretic peptide, an established biomarker of HF severity and treatment 
response, will be analyzed on baseline/follow -up frozen plasma using a standardized, commercial 
radioimmunoassay .(118; 125; 127; 128)  
 
Thigh muscle tissue  will be obtained as previously described from the left vastus lateralis  by 
percutaneous needle biopsy under local anesthesia using aseptic technique and a 6mm 
University College Hospital needle and a 60cc syringe for suction.  Over 700  muscle biopsies 
have been performed using this technique in older research partici pants, including HFpEF, with 
good tissue yields (161±79 mg, >100 mg in 83%) and no serious complications. (164)  The 
portion intended for immunoblot an alyses is harvested and immediately stored at -80°C.  The 
portion intended for respirometry will be processed as described below.  
 
Mitochondrial function  will be examined comprehensively  by analysis of key aspects of 
mitochondrial physiology (Table 2 ).  Measures for this exploratory aim were selected to be 
relevant to older, obese patients with HFpEF and the effects of RT.   
Mitochondrial Physiology  Table 2.  Mitochondrial Outcome Assessments  
Respiratory Function   Respiratory control assessed with complex I, II and β -oxidation specific substrates (isolated 
mitos)  
 Respirometric kinetics and OXPHOS efficiency (Permeablized muscle fiber bundles - PmFBs)  
Content / Structure / 
Biogenesis   Content - citrate synthase activity; Expression of Porin, cardiolipin,Cox4, and Complexes I -V 
(Western blot); mitochondrial isolation yields  
 Structure – fiber type, cross -sectional area (histology); Mfn1, Mfn2, MFF, DRP1, Fis1, OPA1 
expression (Western bl ot) 
 Biogenesis - PGC1α, TFAM, SIRT3 expression (Western blot)  
Mitochondrial -Mediated 
Cell Death   Bcl-2, Bax, ICE, p53, Fas receptor protein, and Cyclophilin D expression (Western blot)  
 Susceptibility to calcium -induced mPTP opening (PmFBs)  
 Mitochondrial H 2O2 emitting potential (PmFBs)  
 
Muscle biopsy yield in our preliminary studies in HFpEF averaged 138 mg, sufficient for 
completion of all proposed experiments;  20 -30 mg of tissue to isolate mitochondria, (24) 10-15 
mg to prepare permeabilized fiber bundles (PmFB) (6), and the remainder (~100 mg) frozen for 
protein exp ression/histochemistry.   
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 14  
Mitochondrial Respiratory Function  will be assessed in parallel by complementary techniques 
using isolated mitochondria and PmFBs. (30; 173; 175)  Isolated mitochondria (5 µg) will be 
assessed with the Seahorse Bioscie nce XF24 system as a higher throughput system to 
maximize screening for potential defects/changes in respiratory control at key points in the 
electron transport chain (ETC) or tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle as previously described. (209)   
Basal (state 2), ADP -stimulated (state 3), non -ADP-stimulated (state 4) and maximally 
uncoupled (+FCCP) respiration will be determined under substrate conditions that distinguish 
potential d ysfunction at the level of (1) the PDH complex (pyruvate/malate) vs (2) the TCA cycle 
and/or complex I (glutamate/malate), (3) complex II (succinate/rotenone), (4) complex I + II 
(glutamate/malate/succinate), and (5) β -oxidation (palmitoyl -carnitine).  Dat a will be expressed 
as O 2 consumption per mg mitochondrial protein. The PmFB approach  will be used to determine 
in greater detail the kinetics of ADP -stimulated respiration (i.e., Km and Vmax) as previously 
described. (173; 174)   High-resolution respirometry (Oroboros Oygraph -2k, Innsb ruck Austria) 
coupled with direct monitoring of ATP synthesis (fluorometrically) will be used to determine 
OXPHOS efficiency (ATP /O 2 ratio) during respiration supported by glutamate/malate or 
succinate/rotenone. (87) All data will be expressed per mg dry weight and normalized for 
mitochondrial conte nt. RCR, a key pre -planned outcome, will be calculated as the ratio of state 
3/state 4. (30)   
 
Mitochondrial Content, Structure, and Biogenesis.   Mitochondrial content will be assessed by 
immunoblot (Porin, cardiolipin, and COXIV) and enzyme activity analysis (citrate 
synthase). (132)  Expression of Complex I -V of the ETC w ill be determined using the MitoProfile 
human antibody cocktail (Abcam, ab110411) . Regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC1α, 
TFAM, and SIRT3) and mitochondrial dynamics (Mfn1, Mfn2, MFF, DRP1, Fis1, and OPA1) will 
be determined by Western blot. (191)    
 
Mitochondrial Mechanisms for Skeletal Muscle Loss,  a phenomenon related to reduced peak 
VO 2 in HFrEF (3) but never examined in HFpEF,  will be assessed  by using: 1) expression of 
Bax, ICE, p53, Fas receptor protein, and cyclophilin  D as indices of programmed cell 
death; (171)  2) Bcl -2 as an index of protection against apoptosis; and 3) calcium retention 
capacity and H 2O2 emission in PmFBs as indices of susceptibility to opening of the 
mitochondrial permeability transition pore and mitochondrial failure. (6; 173)  
 
Physical Activity  will be assessed using two accelerometers, the Actigraph GT3X+ and the 
Lifecorder EX. The Actigraph monitor is a small device worn on the non -dominant wrist, and the 
Lifecorder monitors is a small device worn on the right hip, attached to the waistband . Both 
monitors assess variables related to physical activity: energy expenditure, steps, and physical 
activity duration, intensity, and frequency.  Participants will wear both devices for 7 continuous 
days during baseline and follow -up testing to assess chan ges in physical activity pre to post 
intervention. There are no risks associated with wearing an activity monitor.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 15  
 
 
Study visit timeline.  
 
 
Analytical Plan  
The trial is a 2 -arm, randomized, parallel design to test the effect of adding RT to the regimen of 
CR+AT shown as most beneficial in our recent trial.  Peak VO 2 (ml/min) will be the primary 
outcome  measure using an intention -to-treat analysis.  Analyses w ill be conducted using 
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with baseline peak VO 2, age and gender as predefined 
covariates. Similar analyses will be done for the secondary outcomes, skeletal muscle mass 
and mitochondrial function,  QOL, and other outcomes. Part ial correlation analysis adjusting for 
age and gender will be done to correlate changes in peak VO 2 with the other key outcomes of 
interest (muscle mass, mitochondrial function, and QOL).  
 
Data Management   
The REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) system will be used for this trial; as we have 
used this system previously, many data entry fields, screens, and data checks are in place.   
 
Human Subjects Protection  
 
Informed Consent  
Written informed consent will be obtained from each subject.  The study coordinator will 
obtain informed consent in private examination room.  Study staff will give adequate time for 
the participant to review the consent form and ask questions.  Each participant will be given 
a copy of the signed consent form.  
 
Confidentiality  and Privacy  
Confidentiality will be protected by collecting only information needed to assess study 
outcomes, minimizing to the fullest extent possible the collection of any information that 
could directly identify subjects, and maintaining  all study information in a secure manner .  To 
help ensure subject privacy and confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will appear on 
the data collection form.  Any collected p atient identifying information corresponding to the 
unique study identifier will be maintained on a separate master log.  The master log will be 
kept secure, with access limited to designated study personnel.  Following data collection 
subject identifying information will be destroyed at the earliest opportunity, consistent with 
data validation and study design , producing an anonymous analytical data set.  Data access 
will be limited to study staff.  Data and records will be kept locked and secure d, with an y 
computer data password protected .  No reference to any individual participant will appear in 
reports, presentations, or publications that may arise from the study.  Table 3.  Assessment Timeline                      Visit code  SV BV1 BV2 BV3 Interv.  FV1 FV2 FV3 
Activity/assessment                                 Week number      0-20    
Informed consent, screening, demographics, 
echocardiogram /Doppler , dietary interview  X        
Physical exam, medical history, medication review  X     X   
RMR, Blood draw, questionnaires , Exercise test   X    X   
SPPB, Muscle strength, DXA & MRI scans    X    X  
Muscle biopsy     X    X 
Randomization and dietary education     X     
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 16  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
The principal investigator will be responsible for  the overal l monitoring of the data and safety 
of study participants .  The principal investigator will be assisted by oth er members of the 
study staff.   If during the study assessments, an incidental medical finding occurs, the 
principal investigator will be notified  immediately.  Findings will also be reported to the 
patient’s personal physician for further determination of appropriate care.  
 
Although a DSMB was not required by NIH because it was deemed a low risk protocol, we 
have elected to utilize a DSMB for this study , the NIH -supported, Pepper Center DSMB , 
which  successfully monitored the recently completed prior cycle of this project, which had a 
similar patient population, methods, and intervention.    This DSMB monitors all Pepper 
Center supported projects.   These DSMB members have appropriate expertise  for this 
project and are :  Curt Furberg, MD  (Chair); Paul Laurienti, MD , Jack Rejeski, PhD , Tim 
Howard , PhD , Douglas Case, PhD.    This plan has been approved by Dr. Steve Krichevsky, 
Director of the Aging Center and PI of the Wake Forest Pepper Center, and by the NIA 
program project officer and director .    
 
The DSMB will be charged with monitoring study -wide safety and clinical events on a regular 
basis (semi -annually).  In particular, the DSMB will review the following SAE’s and the 
following specific clinical and safety events: death, hospitalizati on, hospitalization/  
observation unit stay lasting less than 24 hours, emergency room visit, urgent clinic visits, 
and adverse events occurring while the participant  is performing the SECRET II  intervention 
(including angina, syncope/presyncope, palpitations, symptomatic hypoglycemia and/or 
falls), cardiovascular events (including worsening heart failure, acute coronary syndrome, 
arrhythmia, and stroke), nursing home placement, and injury  (or fall) .  
 
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or Deviations  
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse events, deviations or protocol 
changes will be promptly reported  by the principal investigator or designated member of the 
research team  to the IRB  and DSMB . 
 
 
 Long -Term Follow -Up Visit  
The purpose of this long -term follow -up visit is to examine the long -term level of weight 
change (maintenance, continued loss, or regain) following a short -term weight -loss 
intervention and its effect on exercise capacity, physical function, quality of lif e, and body 
composition.  A long -term follow -up visit will be conducted to assess changes in weight, 
VO2peak, physical function, quality of life, and body composition.  All long -term follow -up 
visits will take place following the completion of the original  study.  Further, the visit(s) will 
take place no sooner than 1 year following study intervention completion in any participant.  
Therefore, this long -term follow -up visit will occur between 8 months and 4 years following 
study intervention completion for each participant.   
The exercise testing, physical performance battery, health -related quality of life, body 
composition by DXA , and an MRI  will be conducted.  In addition,  physical activity monitoring,  
basic vital signs (height, weight, blood pressure) w ill be collected and a review and update 
of medical history will be performed to check for any possible or new contraindications to 
exercise testing.  The blood and stool sample will also be collected at this visit.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 17 This visit should take ~2 -4 hours.  It may be done in 1 or 2 visits, depending on study 
participant desire.   
 
 
SECRET II Physical Activity Sub -Study (PASS) -COSMED K5  
 
Background  
The results of our Studies Examining Caloric Restriction and Exercise Trial (SECRET I) 
demonstrate that 20 weeks of moderate intensity aerobic exercise (AE) together with caloric 
restriction (CR) was safe and efficacious for individuals with heart failure and preserved ejection 
fraction (HFpEF) 1.  Despite many positive changes, the AE + CR combination resulted in a 
significant reduction of total muscle mass in these HFpEF patients 1. Therefore, we are currently 
examining the benefit of incorporating resist ance exercise training (RE) to improve body 
composition and exercise capacity in participants with HFpEF in the SECRET II study.  
Moderate intensity AE is generally prescribed at 60 -80% of the patient’s maximum oxygen 
consumption (VO 2peak) as this level is  a safe and effective for HF patients 2.  Since VO 2 cannot be 
easily measured during AE or RE, heart rate (HR) is commonly used as a surrogate measure to 
regulate exercise intensity.  While previous research has shown that % HR and % VO 2peak during 
AE are well correlated in clinical populations 3, this relationship has not been examined in 
HFpEF patients.  Performing AE at a low intensity (i.e. < 60% VO 2peak) may fail to produce 
optimal physiological benefits, whereas performing AE at an intensity that is t oo high (i.e. > 80% 
VO 2peak) may be intolerable and potentially dangerous to these HFpEF patients. Thus, it is 
important to ensure that HFpEF patients are performing AE and RT in the proper range of their 
% VO 2peak to ensure their safety and to stimulate m aximal physiological benefits.   
 
Measuring VO 2 during ambulatory AE or RT was not possible until the development of the 
portable COSMED K5 system (see photo below).  This COSMED K5 system, obtained by the 
Health and Exercise Science (HES) department in 20 16, can be used to measure VO 2 outside of 
the lab environment, while patients are performing their normal activities, and/or AE and RE.  
This will be the first time such a measurement/study will be performed in HFpEF patients.  
 
In addition to examining the relationship between % VO2 and % HR during AE and RE in 
HFpEF patients, the COSMED K5 allows for the direct determination of energy expenditure (i.e 
kcals).  In addition to measuring the energy expenditure (in kcals) during AE,  we can also 
determine the additional energy expenditure associated with preforming RE in these HFpEF 
patients.  It’s unknown if adding RE to AE will result in a significant increase in energy 
expenditure versus AE alone in HFpEF patients.  These findings will have important 
implications for weight loss and body composition changes and have not been assessed in 
HFpEF patients.  
 
Based on existing literature and direct experience we developed the following hypotheses;  
1. The average % HR will not be  significant ly different that the average % VO 2peak 
during either the AT only or AT + RT sessions.  
2. The average physical activity energy expenditure (PAEE) during a typical exercise 
session AT or AT + RT will be  significantly less than the recommended 300 kcal/day.  
3. AT + RT will result in significantly higher PAEE than AT alone.  
 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 18  
  
 
Methods.   
This research project would be conducted in HF patients that are already participating in the 
SECRET II study funded by the NIH and approved by WFUBMC IRB.   Participants in 
SECRE T II are randomly assigned to two groups; CR + AE or CR+AE+RE. The SECRET II 
intervention is 20 weeks and will eventually enroll up to 90  HF patients over a 4 year period. 
This proposed sub -study would be conducted on 15 -20 of the HFpEF patients already 
performing AE with/without RE in SECRET II study. All data collection for this sub -study 
would take place at the Health and Exercise Science Department’s Clinical Research Center 
under the supervision of Dr. Brubaker and will be stored on encrypted computers  and/or in 
locked files/offices.   
 
Participants in SECRET II would be asked to voluntarily participate in two experimental 
sessions (one near the beginning and one near the end of their 20 week intervention). For each 
session the participants would wear t he portable COSMED K5 system while performing their 
normal AE + RE exercise session.  Expired air will be collected continuously during the entire 
exercise session that lasts ~ 1 hr.  From the expired air collected by the COSMED K5 mask, the 
VO 2 for each m inute will be obtained and compared to HR values that are obtained from a wrist 
worn heart rate monitor (see photo below).  This data would allow us to determine if these 
HFpEF patients are at the appropriate intensity levels during AE + RE.  
 
Furthermore,  since we will be able quantify the physical activity energy expenditure (PAEE 
measured in kcal) from the VO 2 values obtained during both AE and AE + RE, we can compare 
the two groups to determine if there are additional metabolic costs associated with RT.   Finally, 
to determine the reliability of these measures (VO 2, HR, and kcal) we will ask the first 5 
participants in the study to perform a second identical experimental session ~ 1 week after the 
first session.  
 
Risks.  
There are no additional risks, bey ond those associated with AE and RE, for the volunteers in this 
sub-study.  Volunteering participants will perform their “normal” AE + RE session as part of 
SECRET II while wearing the COSMED K5 mask.  This mask comfortably covers the subject’s 
mouth/nose and allows, through a one -way valve system, for normal inhalation of room air and 
expiration to the analyzer.  If at any point the mask becomes uncomfortable to the participant, it 
will be removed and the experimental session will be terminated.   This is the same mask the 
participant wears during their baseline exercise test so they will already be familiar with it.   
 
References  
 
1. Kitzman DW, Brubaker P, Morgan T, Haykowsky M, Hundley G, Kraus WE, Eggebeen 
J, Nicklas BJ.  Effect of Caloric Restriction or A erobic Exercise Training on Peak 
Oxygen Consumption and Quality of Life in Obese Older Patients With Heart 
Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction: A Randomized Clinical Trial .  JAMA. 
2016 Jan 5;315(1):36 -46. 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 19  
2. O'Connor CM, Whellan DJ, Lee KL, Keteyian SJ,  Cooper LS, Ellis SJ, Leifer ES, Kraus 
WE, Kitzman DW, Blumenthal JA, Rendall DS, Miller NH, Fleg JL, Schulman KA, 
McKelvie RS, Zannad F, Piña IL; HF -ACTION Investigators.  Efficacy and safety of 
exercise training in patients with chronic heart failure: HF -ACTION randomized 
controlled trial . JAMA. 2009 Apr 8;301(14):1439 -50.  
 
3. Joo KC, Brubaker PH, MacDougall A, Saikin AM, Ross JH, Whaley MH. Exercise 
prescription using resting heart rate plus 20 or perceived exertion in cardiac 
rehabilitation . J Cardiopulm Rehabil. 2004 May -Jun;24(3):178 -84 
 
COSMED K5  
 
 
 
 
Garmen HR monitor  
 
 
 
Reference s 
 
 
 1.   ATS Statement: Guidelines for the Six -Minute Walk Test. Am J Respir Crit Care Med  
166: 111 -117, 2002.  
 2.  ACSM . ACSM's Guidelines for exercise testing and prescription.  Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013.  

Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 20  3.  Adams V, Jiang H, Yu J, Mobius -Winkler S, Fiehn E, Linke A, Weigl C, Schuler G 
and Hambrecht R . Apoptosis in skeletal myocytes of patients with chronic heart failur e 
is associated with exercise intolerance. J Am Coll Cardiol  33: 959 -965, 1999.  
 4.  American College of Chest Physicians HRSaISfHaLT . 2013 ACCR/AHA Guideline 
for the Management of Heart Failure. J Am Coll Cardiol  62: e147 -e239, 2013.  
 5.  American College  of Sports Medicine . Progression models in resistance training for 
healthy adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc  41: 678 -708, 2009.  
 6.  Anderson E, Lustig M, Boyle K, Woodlief T, Kane D, Lin C, Price J3, Kang L, 
Rabinovitch P, Szeto H, Houmard J, Cortright R, Wass erman D and Neufer P . 
Mitochondrial H2O2 emission and cellular redox state link excess fat intake to insulin 
resistance in both rodents and humans. J Clin Invest  119: 573 -581, 2009.  
 7.  Anker SD, Ponikowski P, Varney S, Chua TP, Clark AL, Webb -Peploe KM, 
Harrington D, Kox WJ, Poole -Wilson PA and Coats A . Wasting as independent risk 
factor for mortality in chronic heart failure. Lancet  349: 1050 -1053, 1997.  
 8.  Arena R, Brubaker P, Moore B and Kitzman D . The oxygen uptake efficiency slope is 
reduced in old er patients with heart failure and a normal ejection fraction. Int J Cardiol  
144: 101 -102, 2010.  
 9.  Arena R, Myers J and Guazzi M . Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is a core 
assessment for patients with heart failure. Congest Heart Fail  17: 115 -119, 2011.  
 10.  Arena R, Myers J, Abella J, Pinkstaff S, Brubaker P, Moore B, Kitzman D, Peberdy 
MA, Bensimhon D, Chase P, Forman D, West E and Guazzi M . Influence of Etiology 
of Heart Failure on the Obesity Paradox. The American Journal of Cardi ology  104: 1116 -
1121, 2009.  
 11.  Arena R, Myers J and Guazzi M . Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing Is a Core 
Assessment for Patients With Heart Failure. Congestive Heart Failure  no, 2011.  
 12.  Ather S, Chan W, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, Ramasubbu K, Zachariah A A, Wehrens 
XHT and Deswal A . Impact of Noncardiac Comorbidities on Morbidity and Mortality in 
a Predominantly Male Population With Heart Failure and Preserved Versus Reduced 
Ejection Fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol  59: 998 -1005, 2012.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 21  13.  Bauer J, Biolo G, C ederholm T, Cesari M, Cruz -Jentoft AJ, Morley JE, Phillips S, 
Sieber C, Stehle P, Teta D, Visvanathan R, Volpi E and Boirie Y . Evidence -based 
recommendations for optimal dietary protein intake in older people: a position paper from 
the PROT -AGE Study Group . J Am Med Dir Assoc  14: 542 -559, 2013.  
 14.  Beavers D, Beavers K, Lyles M and Nicklas B . Cardiometabolic risk after weight loss 
and subsequent weight regain in overweight and obese postmenopausal women. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  68: 691 -698, 2013.  
 15.  Beavers K, Beavers D, Houston D, Harris T, Hue T, Koster A, Newman A, 
Simonsick E, Studenski S, Nicklas B and Kritchevsky S . Associations between body 
composition and gait -speed decline: results from the Health, Aging, and Body 
Composition study. Am J Clin Nutr  97: 552 -560, 2013.  
 16.  Beavers K, Beavers D, Nesbit B, Ambrosius W, Marsh A, Nicklas B and Rejeski W . 
Effect of an 18 -month physical activity and weight loss intervention on body composition 
in overweight and obese older adults. Obesity Res  22: 325-331, 2013.  
 17.  Beavers KM, Beavers DP, Houston DK, Harris TB, Hue TF, Koster A, Newman AB, 
Simonsick EM, Studenski SA, Nicklas BJ and Kritchevsky SB . Associations between 
body composition and gait -speed decline: results from the Health, Aging, and B ody 
Composition study. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition  97: 552 -560, 2013.  
 18.  Beavers KM, Lyles MF, Davis CC, Wang X, Beavers DP and Nicklas BJ . Is lost lean 
mass from intentional weight loss recovered during weight regain in postmenopausal 
women? The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition  94: 767 -774, 2011.  
 19.  Beavers KM, Miller ME, Rejeski WJ, Nicklas BJ and Krichevsky SB . Fat Mass Loss 
Predicts Gain in Physical Function With Intentional Weight Loss in Older Adults. The 
Journals of Geronto logy Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences  68: 80 -86, 
2013.  
 20.  Beckers PJ, Denollet J, Possemiers NM, Wuyts FL, Vrints CJ and Conraads VM . 
Combined endurance -resistance training vs. endurance training in patients with chronic 
heart failure:  a prospective randomized study. Eur Heart J  29: 1858 -1866, 2008.  
 21.  Bensimhon DR, Leifer E, Ellis SJ, Fleg JL, Keteyian SJ, Pina LI, Kitzman DW, 
McKelvie R, Kraus WE, Forman DE, Kao AJ, Whellan DJ, O'Connor CM and 
Russell SD . Reproducibility of peak oxygen uptake and other cardiopulmonary exercise 
testing parameters in patients with heart failure.  American Journal of Cardiology, in 
review, 2008. Am J Cardiol  102: 712 -717, 2008.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 22  22.  Berry MJ, Rogers Z, Hauser JE and Adair N E. Aerobic versus strength training in 
COPD patients [abstract]. 59th Annual American College of Sports Medicine Meeting  
2012.  
 23.  Bharadwaj M, Nicklas B and Molina AJ . Obesity is accompanied by alterations in 
mitochondrial respiration in older adults. Gerontologist  53: 945 -959, 2013.  
 24.  Bhrardwaj MD, Lyles M, Demons J, Rogers G and Molina AJ . Preparation and 
respirometric assessment of mitochondria isolated from skeletal muscle tissue obtained 
by percutaneous needle biposy. J Vis Exp  (In press): 2014.  
 25.  Bluemke DA, Kronmal RA, Lima JAC, Liu K, Olson J, Burke GL and Folsom AR . 
The Relationship of Left Ventricular Mass and Geometry to Incident Cardiovascular 
Events: The MESA (Multi -Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) Study. J Am Coll Cardiol  
52: 2148 -2155, 2008.  
 26.  Bopp M, Houston D, Lenchik L, Easter L, Kritchevsky S and Nicklas B . Lean mass 
loss is associated with low protein intake during dietary -induced weight loss in 
postmenopausal women. J Am Diet Assoc  108: 1216 -1220, 2008.  
 27.  Borlaug B . Pathophysiology of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Nat Rev 
Cardiol  doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2014.83 [Epub ahead of print]: 2014.  
 28.  Borlaug BA and Paulus WJ . Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: 
pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treat ment. Eur Heart J  32: 670 -679, 2011.  
 29.  Braith R and Beck D . Resistance exercise: training adaptations and developing a safe 
exercise prescription. Heart Fail Rev  13: 69 -79, 2008.  
 30.  Brand M and Nicholls D . Assessing mitochondrial dysfunction in cell s. Biochem J  435: 
297-312, 2011.  
 31.  Brubaker PH, Joo KC, Stewart KP, Fray B, Moore B and Kitzman DW . 
Chronotropic incompetence and its contribution to exercise intolerance in older heart 
failure patients. J Cardiopulm Rehabil  26: 86 -89, 2006.  
 32.  Brub aker PH, Joo KC, Stewart KP, Fray B, Moore B and Kitzman DW . 
Chronotropic incompetence and its contribution to exercise intolerance in older heart 
failure patients. J Cardiopulm Rehabil  26: 86 -89, 2006.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 23  33.  Brubaker PH, Joo KC, Stewart KP, Fray B, Moore B and Kitzman DW . 
Chronotropic incompetence and its contribution to exercise intolerance in older heart 
failure patients. J Cardiopulm Rehabil  26: 86 -89, 2006.  
 34.  Brubaker PH and Kitzman DW . Chronotropic Incompetence: Causes, Consequences, 
and Managemen t. Circulation  123: 1010 -1020, 2011.  
 35.  Brumback LC, Kronmal RA, Heckbert SR, Ni H, Hundley WG, Lima JA and 
Bluemke D.  Body size adjustments for left ventricular mass by cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance and their impact on left ventricular hypertrophy classification. Int J Cardiovasc 
Imaging  26: 459 -468, 2010.  
 36.  Campbell WW, Joseph LJ, Davey SL, Cyr -Campbell D, Anderson RA and Evans 
WJ. Effects of resistance training and chromium picolinate on body composition and 
skeletal muscle in older men. J Appl Physiol  86: 29 -39, 1999.  
 37.  Carnier J, de Mello MT, Ackel -DElia C, Corgosinho FC, Campos RM, Sanches 
PdeL, Masquio DC, Bueno CR Jr, Ganen AdeP, Martins AC, Caranti DA, Tock L, 
Clemente AP, Tufik S and Damaso AR . Aerobic training (AT) is more effect ive than 
aerobic plus resistance training (AT&+RT) to improve anorexigenic/orexigenic factors in 
obese adolescents. Appetite  69: 168 -173, 2013.  
 38.  Carpenter MR, Carpenter RL, Peel J, Zukley LM, Angelopoulou KM, Fischer I, 
Angelopoulos TJ and Rippe JM . The reliability of isokinetic and isometric leg strength 
measures among individuals with symptoms of mild osteoarthritis. J Sports Med Phys 
Fitness  46: 585 -589, 2006.  
 39.  Chaosuwannakit N, D'Agostino R, Jr., Hamilton CA, Lane KS, Ntim WO, 
Lawrence J, Meli n SA, Ellis LR, Torti FM, Little WC and Hundley WG . Aortic 
Stiffness Increases Upon Receipt of Anthracycline Chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol  28: 166 -
172, 2010.  
 40.  Chaosuwannakit N, D'Agostino R, Jr., Hamilton CA, Lane KS, Ntim WO, 
Lawrence J, Melin SA, Ellis  LR, Torti FM, Little WC and Hundley WG . Aortic 
Stiffness Increases Upon Receipt of Anthracycline Chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol  28: 166 -
172, 2010.  
 41.  Charoenpanichkit C, Morgan TM, Hamilton CA, Wallace EL, Robinson K, Ntim 
WO and Hundley WG . Left Ventricul ar Hypertrophy Influences Cardiac Prognosis in 
Patients Undergoing Dobutamine Cardiac Stress Testing. Circulation: Cardiovascular 
Imaging  In Press, 2010.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 24  42.  Chen Z, Wang Z, Lohman T, Heymsfield SB, Outwater E, Nicholas JS, Bassford T, 
LaCroix A, Sherril l D, Punyanitya M, Wu G and Going S . Dual -energy x -ray 
absorptiometry is a valid tool for assessing skeletal muscle mass in older women. The 
Journal of Nutrition  137: 2775 -2780, 2007.  
 43.  Cicoira M, Zanolla L, Franceschini L, Rossi A, Golia G, Zamboni M,  Tosoni P and 
Zardini P . Skeletal muscle mass independently predicts peak oxygen consumption and 
ventilatory response during exercise in noncachectic patients with chronic heart failure. J 
Am Coll Cardiol  37: 2080 -2085, 2001.  
 44.  Civitarese AE, Carling S, Heilbronn LK, Hulver MH, Ukropcova B, Deutsch WA, 
Smith SR and Ravussin E . Calorie restriction increases muscle mitochondrial 
biogenesis in healthy humans. PLoS Med  4: e76, 2007.  
 45.  Clark AL, Chyu J and Horwich TB . The obesity paradox in men versus w omen with 
systolic heart failure. Am J Cardiol  110: 77 -82, 2012.  
 46.  Coats A, Clark A, Piepoli M, Volterrani M and Poole -Wilson P . Symptoms and 
quality of life in heart failure: the muscle hypothesis. Br Heart J  72: S39, 1994.  
 47.  Coen PM, Jubrias SA, Distefano G, Amati F, Mackey DC, Glynn NW, Manini TM, 
Wohlgemuth SE, Leeuwenburgh C, Cummings SR, Newman AB, Ferrucci L, 
Toledo FGS, Shankland E, Conley KE and Goodpaster BH . Skeletal Muscle 
Mitochondrial Energetics Are Associated With Maximal Aerobic Capa city and Walking 
Speed in Older Adults. J Gerontol A Bio Sci Med Sci  68: 447 -455, 2013.  
 48.  Coggan AR, Spina RJ and King DS . Histochemical and enzymatic comparison of the 
gastrocnemius muscle of young and elderly men and women. J Gerontol  47: B71 -B76, 
1992. 
 49.  Davidson LE, Hudson R, Kilpatrick K, Kuk JL, McMillan K, Janiszewski PM, Lee 
S, Lam M and Ross R . Effects of exercise modality on insulin resistance and functional 
limitation in older adults: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med  169: 12 2-131, 
2009.  
 50.  Davies EJ, Moxham T, Rees K, Singh S, Coats AJS, Ebrahim S, Lough F and 
Taylor RS . Exercise training for systolic heart failure: Cochrane systematic review and 
meta -analysis. Eur J Heart Fail  12: 706 -715, 2010.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 25  51.  De Weir JB . New meth ods for calculating metabolic rate with special reference to 
protein metabolism. J Physiol Lond  109: 1 -9, 1949.  
 52.  Delagardelle C, Feiereisen P, Autier P, Shita R, Krecke R and Beissel J . 
Strength/endurance training versus endurance training in congesti ve heart failure. Med 
Sci Sports Exerc  34: 1868 -1872, 2002.  
 53.  Delmonico MJ, Harris TB, Visser M, Park SW, Conroy MB, Velasquez -Mieyer P, 
Boudreau R, Manini TM, Nevitt M, Newman AB and Goodpaster BH . Longitudinal 
study of muscle strength, quality, and a dipose tissue infiltration. The American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition  90: 1579 -1585, 2009.  
 54.  Demers C, McKelvie RS, Negassa A and Yusuf S . Reliability, validity, and 
responsiveness of the six -minute walk test in patients with heart failure. Am Heart J  142: 
698-703, 2001.  
 55.  Dickinson J, Volpi E and Rasmussen B . Exercise and nutrition to target protein 
synthesis impairments in aging skeletal muscle. Exerc Sport Sci Rev  41: 216 -223, 2013.  
 56.  Drexler H, Riede J, Munzel T, Konig H, Funke E and Just H . Alterations of skeletal 
muscle in chronic heart failure. Circulation  85: 1751 -1759, 1992.  
 57.  Duscha BD, Annex BH, Green HJ, Pippen AM and Kraus WE . Deconditioning fails 
to explain peripheral skeletal muscle alterations in men with chronic heart failur e. J Am 
Coll Cardiol  39: 1170 -1174, 2002.  
 58.  Edelmann F, Gelbrich G, Dungen H, Frohling S, Wachter R, Stahrenberg R, Binder 
L, Topper A, Lashki D, Schwarz S, Herrmann -Lingen C, Loffler M, Hasenfuss G, 
Halle M and Pieske B . Exercise Training Improves Exe rcise Capacity and Diastolic 
Function in Patients With Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction: Results of the 
Ex-DHF (Exercise training in Diastolic Heart Failure) Pilot Study. J Am Coll Cardiol  58: 
1780 -1791, 2011.  
 59.  Edelmann F, Schmidt AG, Ge lbrich G+, Binder L, Herrmann -Lingen C, Halle M, 
Hasenfuss G, Wachter R and Pieske B . Rationale and design of the 'aldosterone 
receptor blockade in diastolic heart failure' trial: a double -blind, randomized, placebo -
controlled, parallel group study to dete rmine the effects of spironolactone on exercise 
capacity and diastolic function in patients with symptomatic diastolic heart failure (Aldo -
DHF). European Journal of Heart Failure  12: 874 -882, 2010.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 26  60.  Ettinger WH J, Burns R, Messier SP, Applegate W, Rej eski WJ, Morgan T, 
Shumaker S, Berry MJ, O'Toole M, Monu J and Craven T . A randomized trial 
comparing aerobic exercise and resistance exercise with a health education program in 
older adults with knee osteoarthritis. The Fitness Arthritis and Seniors Trial  (FAST). 
JAMA  277: 25 -31, 1997.  
 61.  Feiereisen P, Delagardelle C, Vaillant M, Lasar Y and Beissel J . Is strength training 
the more efficient training modality in chronic heart failure? Med Sci Sports Exerc  39: 
1910 -1917, 2007.  
 62.  Fielding RA, Vellas B , Evans WJ, Bhasin S, Morley JE, Newman AB, Abellan Van 
Kan G, Andrieu S, Bauer J, Breuille D, Cederholm T, Chandler J, De Meynard C, 
Donini L, Harris T, Kannt A, Keime Guibert F, Onder G, Papanicolaou D, Rolland 
Y, Rooks D, Sieber C, Souhami E, Verlaan S and Zamboni M . Sarcopenia: an 
undiagnosed condition in older adults. Current donsensus definition: prevalence, etiology, 
and consequences. International Working Group on Sarcopenia. J Am Med Dir Assoc  12: 
249-256, 2011.  
 63.  Fleg JL, Cooper LS, Borlaug BA, Haykowsky MJ, Kraus WE, Levine BD, Pfeffer 
MA, Pina IL, Poole DC, Reeves GR, Whellan DJ and Kitzman DW . Exercise training 
as therapy for heart failure: results from a National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
Working Group. Circulation  (In Review): 201 4. 
 64.  Fleg JL and Lakatta EG . Role of muscle loss in the age -associated reduction in VO2 
max. J Appl Physiol  65: 1147 -1151, 1988.  
 65.  Fletcher GF, Balady GJ, Amsterdam EA, Chaitman B, Eckel R, Fleg J, Froelicher 
VF, Leon AS, Pina IL, Rodney R, Simons -Morton DA, Williams MA and Bazzarre 
T. Exercise standards for testing and training: a statement for healthcare professionals 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation  104: 1694 -1740, 2001.  
 66.  Flynn K, Pina LI, Whellan DJ, Lin L, Bluementhal JA, E llis SJ, Fine LJ, Howlett 
JG, Keteyian SJ, Kitzman DW, Kraus WE, Miller NH, Schulman KA, Spertus JA, 
O'Connor C and Weinfurt KP . Effects of exercise training on health status in patients 
with chronic heart failure: Findings from the HF -ACTION Randomized controlled Study. 
JAMA  301: 1451 -1459, 2009.  
 67.  Flynn KE, Lin L, Ellis SJ, Russell SD, Spertus JA, Whellan DJ, Pi±a IL, Fine L J, 
Schulman KA and Weinfurt KP . Outcomes, health policy, and managed care: 
Relationships between patient -reported outcome measures and clinical measures in 
outpatients with heart failure. Am Heart J  158: S64 -S71, 2009.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 27  68.  Flynn KE, Lin L, Moe GW, Howlet t JG, Fine LJ, Spertus JA, McConnell TR, Pi+¦a 
IL and Weinfurt KP . Relationships between changes in patient -reported health status 
and functional capacity in outpatients with heart failure. Am Heart J  163: 88 -94, 2012.  
 69.  Fonarow GC, Srikanthan P, Costa nzo MR, Cintron GB and Lopatin M . An obesity 
paradox in acute heart failure: Analysis of body mass index and inhospital mortality for 
108 927 patients in the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure National Registry. Am Heart 
J 153: 74 -81, 2007.  
 70.  Forman DE,  Fleg JL, Kitzman DW, Brawner CA, Swank A, McKelvie R, Clare R, 
Ellis SJ, Dunlap ME and Bittner V . 6-minute walk test provides prognostic utility 
comparable to cardiopulmonary exercise testing in ambulatory outpatients with systolic 
heart failure. J Am Col l Cardiol  60: 2653 -2661, 2012.  
 71.  Forman DE, Clare R, Kitzman DW, Ellis SJ, Fleg JL, Chiara T, Fletcher G and 
Kraus WE . Relationship of age and exercise performance in patients with heart failure: 
The HF -ACTION study. Am Heart J  158: S6 -S15, 2009.  
 72.  Franklin B, Whaley M and Howley ET . ACSM's Guidelines for Exercise Testing and 
Prescription.  Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.  
 73.  Franssen F, Wouters E and Schols A . The contribution of starvation, deconditioning 
and ageing to the obs erved alterations in peripheral skeletal muscle in chronic organ 
diseases. Clinical Nutrition  21: 1 -14, 2002.  
 74.  Frimel T, Sinacore D and Villareal D . Exercise attenuates the weight -loss-induced 
reduction in muscle mass in frail obese older adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc  40: 1213 -
1219, 2008.  
 75.  Froelicher V, Lehmann KG, Thomas R, Goldman S, Morrison D, Edson R, Lavori 
P, Myers J, Dennis C, Sahbetai R, Do D and Froning JatVACSiHS#QSG . The 
electrocardiographic exercise test in a population with reduced wo rkup bias: Diagnostic 
performance, computerized interpretation, and multivariable prediction. Ann Intern Med  
128: 965 -974, 1998.  
 76.  Frontera WR, Meredith CN, O'Reilly KP and Evans WJ . Strength training and 
determinants of VO2 max in older men. J Appl Ph ysiol  68: 329 -333, 1990.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 28  77.  Frontera W, Meredith C, O'Reilly K, Knuttgen H and Evans W . Strength 
conditioning in older men: skeletal muscle hypertrophy and improved function. J Appl 
Physiol  64: 1038 -1044, 1988.  
 78.  Fujimoto N, Prasad A, Hastings JL, B hella PS, Shibata S, Palmer D and Levine BD . 
Cardiovascular effects of 1 year of progressive endurance exercise training in patients 
with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Am Heart J  164: 869 -877, 2012.  
 79.  Gaffney -Stomberg E, Insogna K, od riguez N and erstetter J . Increasing Dietary 
Protein Requirements in Elderly People for Optimal Muscle and Bone Health. J Am 
Geriatr Soc  57: 1073 -1079, 2009.  
 80.  Galvao DA and Taaffe DR . Resistance exercise dosage in older ddults: single - versus 
multiset  effects on physical performance and body composition. J Am Geriatr Soc  53: 
2090 -2097, 2005.  
 81.  Gardin J, Leifer E, Kitzman D, Cohen G, Landzberg J, Cotts W, Wolfel E, Safford 
R, Bess R and Fleg J . Usefulness of doppler echocardiographic left ventricula r diastolic 
function and peak exercise oxygen consumption to predict cardiovascular outcomes in 
patients with systolic heart failure (from HF -ACTION). Am J Cardiol  110: 862 -869, 
2012.  
 82.  Gerber BL, Rochitte CE, Melin JA, McVeigh ER, Bluemke DA, Wu KC, B ecker LC 
and Lima JAC . Microvascular Obstruction and Left Ventricular Remodeling Early After 
Acute Myocardial Infarction. Circulation  101: 2734 -2741, 2000.  
 83.  Gibbons R, Balady GJ, Beasley JW, Bricker T, Duvernoy WFC, Froelicher V, Mark 
DB, Marwick TH, McCallister BD, Thompson PD, Winters WL and Yanowitz FG . 
ACC/AHA guidelines for exercise testing: executive summary. J Am Coll Cardiol  96: 
345-354, 1997.  
 84.  Gielen S, Sandri M, Kozarez I, Kratzsch J+, Teupser D, Thiery J, Erbs S, Mangner 
N, Lenk K, Hamb recht R, Schuler G and Adams V . Exercise Training Attenuates 
MuRF -1 Expression in the Skeletal Muscle of Patients with Chronic Heart Failure 
Independent of Age: The Randomized Leipzig Exercise Intervention in Chronic Heart 
Failure and Aging (LEICA) Catabol ism Study. Circulation  2012.  
 85.  Gottdiener JS, Arnold AM, Aurigemma GP, Polak JF, Tracy RP, Kitzman DW, 
Gardin JM, Rutledge JE and Boineau RC . Predictors of congestive heart failure in the 
elderly: the Cardiovascular Health Study. J Am Coll Cardiol  35: 1628 -1637, 2000.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 29  86.  Gottdiener JS, McClelland R, Marshall RJ, Shemanski L, Furberg C, Kitzman DW, 
Cushman M, Polak JF, Gardin JM, Gersh BJ, Aurigemma GP and Manolio TA . 
Outcome of congestive heart failure in elderly persons: Influence of left ventricula r 
systolic function.  The Cardiovascular Health Study. Ann Intern Med  137: 631 -639, 2002.  
 87.  Gouspillou G, Rouland R, Calmettes G, Deschodt -Arsac V, Franconi J, Bourdel -
Marchasson I and Diolez P . Accurate determination of the oxidative phosphorylation 
affinity for ADP in isolated mitochondria. PLoS ONE  6: e20709, 2011.  
 88.  Green CP, Porter CB, Bresnahan DR and Spertus JA . Development and evaluation of 
the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire: a new health status measure for heart 
failure. J Am Coll  Cardiol  35: 1245 -1255, 2000.  
 89.  Guazzi M, Adams V, Conraads V, Halle M, Mezzani A, Vanhees L, Arena R, 
Fletcher GF, Forman DE, Kitzman DW and Lavie CJ . Clinical recommendations for 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing data assessment in specific patient populations. 
Circulation  126: 2261 -2274, 2012.  
 90.  Guyatt GH, Sullivan M, Thompson PJ, Fallen EL, Pugsley SO, Taylor DW and 
Berman LD . The 6 -minute walk: a new measure of exercise capacity in patients with 
chronic heart failure. Can Med Assoc J  132: 919 -923, 1985.  
 91.  Haass M, Kitzman DW, Anand IS, Miller A, Zile MR, Massie BM and Carson PE . 
Body Mass Index and Adverse Cardiovascular Outcomes in Heart Failure Patients With 
Preserved Ejection Fraction / Clinical Perspective. Circ Heart Fail  4: 324 -331, 2011.  
 92.  Hare DL, Ryan T, Selig SE, Pellizzer AM, Wrigley TV and Krum H . Resistance 
exercise training increases muscle strength, endu rance and blood flow in patients with 
chronic heart failure. Am J Cardiol  83: 1674 -1677, 1999.  
 93.  Harrington D, Anker SD, Chua TP, Webb -Peploe KM, Ponikowski PP, Poole -
Wilson PA and Coats AJ . Skeletal muscle function and its relation to exercise toleran ce 
in chronic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol  30: 1758 -1764, 1997.  
 94.  Haykowsky M, Kouba EJ, Brubaker PH, Nicklas BJ, Eggebeen J and Kitzman DW . 
Skeletal muscle composition and its relation to exercise intolerance in older patients with 
heart failure a nd preserved ejection fraction. Am J Cardiol  113: 1211 -1216, 2014.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 30  95.  Haykowsky M, Taylor D, Kim D and Tymchak W . Exercise training improves aerobic 
capacity and skeletal muscle function in heart transplant recipients. Am J Transplant  9: 
734-739, 2009.  
 96.  Haykowsky MJ, Brubaker PH, Stewart KP, Morgan TM, Eggebeen J and Kitzman 
DW. Effect of endurance training on the determinants of peak exercise oxygen 
consumption in elderly patients with stable compensated heart failure and preserved 
ejection fractio n. J Am Coll Cardiol  60: 120 -128, 2012.  
 97.  Haykowsky MJ, Herrington DM, Brubaker PH, Morgan TM, Hundley WG and 
Kitzman DW . Relationship of flow mediated arterial; dilation and exercise capacity in 
older patients with heart failure and preserved ejection  fraction. J Gerontol A Biol Sci 
Med Sci  68: 161 -167, 2013.  
 98.  Haykowsky MJ, Brubaker PH, John JM, Stewart KP, Morgan TM and Kitzman 
DW. Determinants of Exercise Intolerance in Elderly Heart Failure Patients With 
Preserved Ejection Fraction. J Am Coll C ardiol  58: 265 -274, 2011.  
 99.  Haykowsky MJ, Brubaker PH, Stewart KP, Morgan TM, Eggebeen J and Kitzman 
DW. Effect of endurance training on the determinants of peak exercise oxygen 
consumption in elderly patients with stable compensated heart failure and preserved 
ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol  60: 120 -128, 2012.  
 100.  Haykowsky M, Brubaker P, Morgan T, Kritchevsky S, Eggebeen J and Kitzman D . 
Impaired aerobic capacity and physical functional performance in older heart failure 
patients with preserve d ejection fraction: role of lean body mass. J Gerontol A Biol Sci 
Med Sci  68: 968 -975, 2013.  
 101.  Haykowsky M, Vonder Muhll I, Ezekowitz J and Armstrong P . Supervised exercise 
training improves aerobic capacity and muscle strength in older women with he art 
failure. Can J Cardiol  21: 1277 -1280, 2005.  
 102.  Heidenreich PA, Albert NM, Allen LA, Bluemke DA, Butler J, Fonarow GC, 
Ikonomidis JS, Khavjou O, Konstam MA, Maddox TM, Nichol G, Pham M, Piña 
IL, Trogdon JG and American Heart Association Advocacy Coo rdinating 
Committee . Progression Models in Resistance Training for Healthy Adults. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc  41: 2009.  
 103.  Hepple RT, Mackinnon SL, Goodman JM, Thomas SG and Plyley MJ . Resistance 
and aerobic training in older men: effects on V -O 2peak and th e capillary supply to 
skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol  82: 1305 -1310, 1997.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 31  104.  Hepple R, Mackinnon S, Goodman J, Thomas S and Plyley M . Resistance and 
aerobic training in older men: effects on V -O 2peak and the capillary supply to skeletal 
muscle. J App l Physiol  82: 1305 -1310, 1997.  
 105.  Holmback AM, Askaner K, Holtas S, Downham D and Lexell J . Assessment of 
contractile and noncontractile components in human skeletal muscle by magnetic 
resonance imaging. Muscle Nerve  25: 251 -258, 2002.  
 106.  Hundley W G, Kitzman DW, Morgan TM, Hamilton CA, Darty S.N., Stewart KP, 
Herrington DM and Little WC . Cardiac cycle dependent changes in aortic area and 
aortic distensibility are reduced in older patients with isolated diastolic heart failure and 
correlate with exer cise intolerance. J Am Coll Cardiol  38: 796 -802, 2001.  
 107.  Hundley WG, Meshack BM, Willett DL, Sayad DE, Lange RA, Willard JE, Landau 
C, Hillis LD and Peshock RM . Comparison of quantitation of left ventricular volume, 
ejection fraction, and cardiac outp ut in patients with atrial fibrillation by cine magnetic 
resonance imaging versus invasive measurements. Am J Cardiol  78: 1119 -1123, 1996.  
 108.  Hundley WG, Bluemke DA, Finn JP, Flamm SD, Fogel MA, Friedrich MG, Ho VB, 
Jerosch -Herold M, Kramer CM, Manning  WJ, Patel M, Pohost GM, Stillman AE, 
White RD and Woodard PK . ACCF/ACR/AHA/NASCI/SCMR 2010 Expert 
Consensus Document on Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. A Report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force on Expert Consensus Documents. 
Circulation  121: 2462 -2508, 2010.  
 109.  Hundley W, Kitzman D, Morgan T, Hamilton C, Darty S, Stewart K, Herrington D 
and Little W . Cardiac cycle -dependent changes in aortic area and aortic distensibility are 
reduced in older patients with isolated diastol ic heart failure and correlate with exercise 
intolerance. J Am Coll Cardiol  38: 796 -802, 2001.  
 110.  John JM, Haykowsky MJ, Brubaker P, Stewart K and Kitzman DW . Decreased let 
ventricular distensibility in response to postural change in older patients wit h heart failure 
and preserved ejection fraction. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol  299: H883 -H889, 2010.  
 111.  Jones DA, Round JM, Edwards RH, Grindwood SR and Tofts PS . Size and 
composition of the calf and quadriceps muscles in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.  A 
tomographic and histochemical study. J Neurol Sci  60: 307 -322, 1983.  
 112.  Jonsdottir S, Andersen KK, Sigurosson AF and Sigurosson SB . The effect of physical 
training in chronic heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail  8: 97 -101, 2006.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 32  113.  Kallman DA, Plato CC and Tobin JD . The role of muscle loss in the age -related 
decline of grip strength: cross -sectional and longitudinal perspectives. J Gerontol  45: 
M82 -88, 1990.  
 114.  Kaminsky LA, Brubaker PH, Peaker B and Kitzman DW . Prediction of peak oxygen 
uptake fro m cycle exercise test work level in heart failure patients >65 years of age. Am J 
Cardiol  85: 1385 -1387, 2000.  
 115.  Keteyian S . Exercise training in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection 
fraction: findings awaiting discovery. J Am Coll Cardi ol 62: 593 -594, 2013.  
 116.  Keteyian SJ . Exercise Training in Patients with Heart Failure and Preserved Ejection 
Fraction: Findings Awaiting Discovery. J Am Coll Cardiol  Epub ahead of print May 8 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.01.098.: 2013.  
 117.  Kitzman D.W and Fleg JL . Heart Failure. In: Effects of Aging on the Heart, edited by 
Aronow WS and Fleg JL.  2003.  
 118.  Kitzman DW, Hundley WG, Brubaker P, Stewart K and Little WC . A randomized, 
controlled, double -blinded trial of enalapril in older patients with he art failure and 
preserved ejection fraction; effects on exercise tolerance, and arterial distensibility. Circ 
Heart Fail  3: 477 -485, 2010.  
 119.  Kitzman DW and John JM . Exercise Intolerance in Patients with Heart Failure with 
Normal Ejection Fraction. In:  Heart Failure with Normal Ejection Fraction, edited by 
Klein AL and Garcia MJ.  Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2007, p. 203 -213. 
 120.  Kitzman DW, Nicklas B, Kraus WE, Lyles MF, Eggebeen J, Morgan TM and 
Haykowsky MJ . Skeletal muscle abnormalities and exercise intolerance in older patients 
with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol  306: 
H1364 -1370, 2014.  
 121.  Kitzman DW and Upadhya B . Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: A 
heterogenous disorder with multifact orial pathophysiology. J Am Coll Cardiol  63: 457 -
459, 2014.  
 122.  Kitzman DW, Gardin JM, Gottdiener JS, Arnold AM, Boineau R, Aurigemma GP, 
Marino E, Lyles M, Cushman M, Enright P and For the Cardiovascular Health 
Study Group . Importance of heart failure with preserved systolic function in patients > 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 33 or = 65 Years of Age.  CHS Research Group.  Cardiovascular Health Study. Am J 
Cardiol  87: 413 -419, 2001.  
 123.  Kitzman DW and Haykowsky MJ . Mechanisms of exercise training in heart failure 
with preserved ejec tion fraction: central disappointment and peripheral promise. Am 
Heart J  164: 807 -809, 2012.  
 124.  Kitzman DW, Herrington DM, Brubaker P, Moore J, Eggebeen J and Haykowsky 
MJ. Carotid arterial stiffness and its relationship to exercise intolerance in olde r patients 
with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction. Hypertension  61: 112 -119, 2013.  
 125.  Kitzman DW, Little WC, Brubaker PH, Anderson RT, Hundley WG, Marburger 
CT, Brosnihan B, Morgan TM and Stewart KP . Pathophysiological characterization 
of isolated diastolic heart failure in comparison to systolic heart failure. JAMA  288: 2144 -
2150, 2002.  
 126.  Kitzman DW, Sheikh KH, Beere PA, Philips JL and Higginbotham MB . Age -related 
alterations of Doppler left ventricular filling indexes in normal subjec ts are independent 
of left ventricular mass, heart rate, contractility, and loading conditions. J Am Coll 
Cardiol  18: 1243 -1250, 1991.  
 127.  Kitzman D, Brubaker P, Herrington D, Morgan T, Stewart K, Hundley W, 
Abdelhamed A and Haykowsky M . Effect of endur ance exercise training on endothelial 
function and arterial stiffness in older patients with heart failure and preserved ejection 
fraction: A randomized, controlled, single -blind trial. J Am Coll Cardiol  62: 584 -592, 
2013.  
 128.  Kitzman D, Brubaker P, Mor gan T, Stewart K and Little W . Exercise training in 
older patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail  3: 659 -
667, 2010.  
 129.  Kommuri NVA, Johnson ML and Koelling TM . Six-minute walk distance predicts 30 -
day readmission in  hospitalized heart failure patients. Arch Med Res  41: 363 -368, 2010.  
 130.  Kosiborod M, Soto GE, Jones PG, Krumholz HM, Weintraub WS, Deedwania P 
and Spertus JA . Identifying Heart Failure Patients at High Risk for Near -Term 
Cardiovascular Events With Ser ial Health Status Assessments. Circulation  115: 1975 -
1981, 2007.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 34  131.  Lang CC, Chomsky DB, Rayos G, Keoh TK and Wilson JR . Skeletal muscle mass 
and exercise performance in stable ambulatory patients with heart failure. J Appl Physiol  
82: 257 -261, 1997.  
 132.  Larsen S, Nielsen J, Hansen C, Nielsen L, Wibrand F, Stride N, Schroder H, 
Boushel R, Helge J, Dela F and Hey -Mogensen M . Biomarkers of mitochondrial 
content in skeletal muscle of healthy young human subjects. J Physiol  590: 3349 -3360, 
2012.  
 133.  Larsson L and Karlsson J . Isometric and dynamic endurance as a function of age and 
skeletal muscle characteristics. Acta Physiol Scand  104: 129 -136, 1978.  
 134.  Layman DK . Protein quantity and quality at levels above the RDA improves adult 
weight loss. J Am Coll Nutr  23: 636S, 2004.  
 135.  Levinger I, Bronks R, Cody DV, Linton I and Davie A . The effect of resistance 
training on left ventricular function and structure of patients with chronic heart failure. Int 
J Cardiol  105: 159 -163, 2005.  
 136.  Liao L, Jollis JG, Anstrom KJ, Whellan DJ, Kitzman DW, Aurigemma GP, Mark 
DB, Schulman KA and Gottdiener JS . Costs for Heart Failure With Normal vs 
Reduced Ejection Fraction. Arch Intern Med  166: 112 -118, 2006.  
 137.  Little WC . Normal and abnormal cardiac functio n. In: Heart Disease, edited by 
Braunwald E.  Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company, 2001, p. 502.  
 138.  Little WC, Zile MR, Kitzman DW, Hundley WG, O'Brien T.X. and deGroof RC . 
The Effect of Alagebrium Chloride (ALT -711), a Novel Glucose Cross -Link Breaker , in 
the Treatment of Elderly Patients with Diastolic Heart Failure. J Card Fail  11: 191 -195, 
2005.  
 139.  Little WC, Zile MR, Klein AL, Appleton CP, Kitzman DW and Wesley -Farrington 
DJ. Effect of Losartan and Hydrochlorothiazide on Exercise Tolerand in Ex ertional 
Hypertension and Diastolic Dysfunction. Am J Cardiol  98: 383 -385, 2006.  
 140.  Liu C, Bluemke D., Lima JA, Ricketts EP and Johns Hopkins University - MRI 
Reading Center . Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Manual.  MESA 5 
Protocol Version 1.0 . 3-30-2010  2010.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 35  141.  Liu C, Bluemke D., Lima JA, Ricketts EP and Johns Hopkins University - MRI 
Reading Center . Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Manual.  MESA 5 
Protocol Version 1.0. 3-30-2010  2010.  
 142.  Mancini DM, Walter G, Reichek N, Lenki nski R, McCully KK, Mullen JL and 
Wilson JR . Contribution of skeletal muscle atrophy to exercise intolerance and altered 
muscle metabolism in heart failure. Circulation  85: 1364 -1373, 1992.  
 143.  Mandic S, Myers J, Selig S and Levinger I . Resistance versu s aerobic exercise training 
in chronic heart failure. Curr Heart Fail Rep  9: 57 -64, 2012.  
 144.  Mandic S, Tymchak W, Kim D, Daub B, Quinney H, Taylor D, Al -Kurtass S and 
Haykowsky M . Effects of aerobic or aerobic and resistance training on cardiorespiratory 
and skeletal muscle function in heart failure: a randomized controlled pilot trial. Clin 
Rehabil  23: 207 -216, 2009.  
 145.  Marburger CT, Brubaker PH, Pollock WE, Morgan TM and Kit zman DW . 
Reproducibility of cardiopulmonary exercise testing in elderly heart failure patients. Am J 
Cardiol  82: 905 -909, 1998.  
 146.  Maurer MS and Schulze PC . Exercise intolerance in heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction: shifting focus from the  heart to peripheral skeletal muscle. J Am Coll 
Cardiol  60: 129 -131, 2012.  
 147.  Messier SP, Legault C, Mihalko S, Miller GD, Loeser RF, DeVita P, Lyles M, 
Eckstein F, Hunter DJ, Williamson JD and Nicklas BJ . The intensive diet and 
exercise for arthritis (IDEA) trial: design and rationale. BMC Musculoskelet Disord  10: 
1-14, 2009.  
 148.  Messier S, Mihalko S and Legault C . Effects of intensive diet and exercise on knee 
joint loads, inflammation, and clinical outcomes among overweight and obese adults with 
knee osteoarthritis: The idea randomized clinical trial. JAMA  310: 1263 -1273, 2013.  
 149.  Middlekauff HR . Making the Case for Skeletal Myopathy as the Major Limitation of 
Exercise Capacity in Heart Failure. Circ Heart Fail  3: 537 -546, 2010.  
 150.  Minotti JR, Pillay P, Oka R, Wells L, Christoph I and Massie BM . Skeletal muscle 
size: relationship to muscle function in heart failure. J Appl Physiol  75: 373 -381, 1993.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 36  151.  Miranda W, Batsis J, Sarr M, Collazo -Clavell M, Clark M, Somers V and Lopez -
Jimenez F . Impact of Bariatric Surgery on Quality of Life, Functional Capacity, and 
Symptoms in Patients with Heart Failure. OBES SURG  23: 1011 -1015, 2013.  
 152.  Mitsiopoulos N, Baumgartner RN, Heymsfield SB, Lyons W, Gallagher D and Ross 
R. Cadaver validation of s keletal muscle measurement by magnetic resonance imaging 
and computerized tomography. J Appl Physiol  85: 115 -122, 1998.  
 153.  Miyachi M, Kawano H, Sugawara J, Takahashi K, Hayashi K, Yamazaki K, Tabata 
I and Tanaka H . Unfavorable effects of resistance tra ining on central arterial 
compliance: a randomized intervention study. Circulation  110: 2858 -2863, 2004.  
 154.  Mojtahedi M, Thorpe M, Karampinos D, Johnson C, Layman D, Georgiadis J and 
Evans E . The effects of a higher protein intake during energy restric tion on changes in 
body composition and physical function in older women. J Gerontol A Bio Sci Med Sci  
66: 1218 -1225, 2011.  
 155.  Moore B, Brubaker PH, Stewart KP and Kitzman DW . VE/VCO2 Slope in Older 
Heart Failure Patients With Normal Versus Reduced Eje ction Fraction Compared With 
Age-Matched Healthy Controls. J Card Fail  13: 259 -262, 2007.  
 156.  Murad K, Brubaker PH, Fitzgerald DM, Morgan TM, Goff DCJr, Soliman EZ, 
Eggebeen JD and Kitzman DW . Exercise training improves heart rate variability in 
older p atients with heart failure: A randomized, controlled, single -blinded trial. Congest 
Heart Fail  18: 192 -197, 2012.  
 157.  Murias JM, Kowalchuk JM, Ritchie D, Hepple RT, Doherty TJ and Paterson D . 
Adaptations in Capillarization and Citrate Synthase Activity in Response to Endurance 
Training in Older and Young Men. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological 
Sciences and Medical Sciences  66A: 957 -964, 2011.  
 158.  Myerson SG, Bellenger NG and Pennell DJ . Assessment of Left Ventricular Mass by 
Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. [Article]. Hypertension  39: 750 -755, 2002.  
 159.  Nagueh SF, Middleton KJ, Kopelen HA, Zoghbi WA and Quinones MA . Doppler 
tissue imaging: a noninvasive technique for evaluation of left ventricular relaxation and 
estimation of filling pressures. J Am Coll Cardiol  30: 1527 -1533, 1997.  
 160.  Nagueh SF, Appleton CP, Gillebert TC, Marino PN, Oh JK, Smiseth OA, Waggoner 
AD, Flachskampf FA, Pellikka PA and Evangelista A . Recommendations f or the 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 37 Evaluation of Left Ventricular Diastolic Function by Echocardiography. Journal of the 
American Society of Echocardiography  22: 107 -133, 2009.  
 161.  Narahara KA and Blettel ML . Effect of rate on left ventricular volumes and ejection 
fraction during chronic ventricular pacing. Circulation  67: 323 -329, 1983.  
 162.  National Research Council . Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, fiber, 
fat, fatty acids, cholesterol, protein, and amino acids. National Academies Press  2005.  
 163.  Natori S,  Lai S, Finn JP, Gomes AS, Hundley WG, Jerosch -Herold M, Pearson G, 
Sinha S, Arai A, Lima JAC and Bluemke DA . Cardiovascular Function in Multi -
Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis: Normal Values by Age, Sex, and Ethnicity. Am J 
Roentgenol  186: S357 -S365, 2006.  
 164.  Nicklas B, Leng I, Delbono O, Kitzman DW, Marsh A, Hundley WG, Lyles M, 
O'Rourke KS, Annex BH and Kraus WE . Relationship of physical function to vastus 
lateralis capillary density and metabolic enzyme activity in elderly men and women. 
Aging Clin Ex per Res  20: 302 -309, 2008.  
 165.  Nicklas BJ, Rogus EM, Colman EG and Goldberg AP . Visceral adiposity, increased 
adipocyte lipolysis, and metabolic dysfunction in obese postmenopausal women. 
American Journal of Physiology -Endocrinology and Metabolism  33: E 72-E78, 1996.  
 166.  Nicklas BJ, Cesari M, Penninx BWJH, Kritchevsky SB, Ding J, Newman A, 
Kitzman DW, Kanaya AM, Pahor M and Harris TB . Abdominal Obesity Is an 
Independent Risk Factor for Chronic Heart Failure in Older People. J Am Geriatr Soc  54: 
413-420, 2006.  
 167.  O'Connor C, Whellan D, Lee K, Keteyian S, Cooper L, Ellis S, Leifer E, Kraus W, 
Kitzman D, Blumenthal J, Rendall D, Miller N, Fleg J, Schulman K, McKelvie R, 
Zannad F, Pina I and for the HF -ACTION Investigators . Efficacy and safety of 
exerci se training in patients with chronic heart failure: HF -ACTION randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA  301: 1439 -1450, 2009.  
 168.  O'Connor C, Whellan D, Lee K, Keteyian S, Cooper L, Ellis S, Leifer E, Kraus W, 
Kitzman D, Blumenthal J, Rendall D, Miller N, Fleg J, Schulman K, McKelvie R, 
Zannad F, Pina I and for the HF -ACTION Investigators . Efficacy and safety of 
exercise training in patients with chronic heart failure: HF -ACTION randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA  301: 1439 -1450, 2009.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 38  169.  Osman NF, Kerwin WS, McVeigh ER and Prince JL . Cardiac motion tracking using 
CINE harmonic phase (HARP) magnetic resonance imaging. Magn Reson Med  42: 1048 -
1060, 1999.  
 170.  Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, Jacobsen SJ, Roger VL and Redfield MM . 
Trends in prevalence and outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N 
Engl J Med  355: 251 -259, 2006.  
 171.  Palma E, Tiepolo T, Angelin A, Sabatelli P, Maraldi N, Basso E, Forte M, Bernardi 
P and Bonaldo P . Genetic ablation of cyclophilin D rescues mitochondrial defects and 
prevents muscle apoptosis in collagen VI myopathic mice. Hum Mol Genet  18: 2024 -
2031, 2009.  
 172.  Perera S, Mody SH, Woodman RC and Studenski SA . Meaningful Change and 
Responsiveness in  Common Physical Performance Measures in Older Adults. Journal of 
the American Geriatrics Society  54: 743 -749, 2006.  
 173.  Perry CG, Kane DA, Lanza IR and Neufer PD . Methods for assessing mitochondrial 
function in diabetes. Diabetes  62: 1041 -1053, 2013.  
 174.  Perry CG, Kane DA, Lin CT, Kozy R, Cathey BL, Lark DS, Kane CL, Brophy PM, 
Gavin TP, Anderson EJ and Neufer PD . Inhibiting myosin -ATPase reveals a dynamic 
range of mitochondrial respiratory control in skeletal muscle. Biochem J  437: 215 -222, 
2011.  
 175.  Picard M, Taivassalo T, Gouspillou G and Hepple R . Mitochondria: isolation, 
structure and function. J Physiol  589: 4413 -4421, 2011.  
 176.  Pina IL, Apstein CS, Balady GJ, Belardinelli R, Chaitman BR, Duscha BD, Fletcher 
BJ, Fleg JL, Myers JN and Sulli van MJ . Exercise and heart failure: A statement from 
the American Heart Association Committee on exercise, rehabilitation, and prevention. 
Circulation  107: 1210 -1225, 2003.  
 177.  Pu C, Johnson M, Forman D, Hausdorff J, Roubenoff R, Foldvari M, Fielding R 
and Singh M . Randomized trial of progressive resistance training to counteract the 
myopathy of chronic heart failure. J Appl Physiol  90: 2341 -2350, 2001.  
 178.  Puntawangkoon C, Kitzman D, Kritchevsky S, Hamilton C, Nicklas B, Leng X, 
Brubaker P and Hundle y WG . Reduced peripheral arterial blood flow with preserved 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 39 cardiac output during submaximal bicycle exercise in elderly heart failure. Journal of 
Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance  11: 48, 2009.  
 179.  Ravussin E, Lillioja S, Knowler WC, Christin L, Freymo nd D, Abbott WG, Boyce 
V, Howard BV and Bogardus C . Reduced rate of energy expenditure as a risk factor for 
body -weight gain. N Engl J Med  318: 467 -472, 1988.  
 180.  Redfield MM . Understanding "diastolic" heart failure. N Engl J Med  350: 1930 -1931, 
2004.  
 181.  Redfield MM and Kitzman DW . Heart Failure: A rose by another name? Congest Heart 
Fail 12: 166 -168, 2006.  
 182.  Redfield M, Chen H, Borlaug B, Semigran M, Lee K, Lewis G, LeWinter M, 
Rouleau J, Bull D, Mann D, Deswal A, Stevenson L, Givertz M, Ofili E, O'Conner 
C, Felker G, Goldsmith S, Bart B, McNulty S, Ibarra J, Lin G, Oh J, Patel M, Kim 
R, Tracy R, Velazquez E, Anstrom K, Hernandez A, Mascette A, Braunwald E and 
RELAX T . Effect of phosphodiesterase -5 inhibition on exercise capacity and clinical 
status in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA  
309: 1268 -1277, 2013.  
 183.  Reidy PT, Walker DK, Dickinson JM, Gundermann DM, Drummond MJ, 
Timmerman KL, Fry CS, Borack MS, Cope MB, Mukherjea R, Jennings K, Volpi E  
and Rasmussen BB . Protein blend ingestion following resistance exercise promotes 
human muscle protein synthesis. J Nutr  143: 410 -416, 2013.  
 184.  Rejeski W, Marsh A, Chmelo E and Rejeski J . Obesity, intentional weight loss and 
physical disability in olde r adults. Obes Rev  11: 671 -685, 2010.  
 185.  Rich MW, Beckham V, Wittenberg C, Leven CL, Freedland KE and Carney R . A 
multidisciplinary intervention to prevent the readmission of elderly patients with 
congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med  333: 1190 -1195, 1995.  
 186.  Rooyackers OE, Adey DB, Ades PA and Nair KS . Effect of age on in vivo rates of 
mitochondrial protein synthesis in human skeletal muscle. Proc Natl Acad Science USA  
93: 15364 -15369, 1996.  
 187.  Ryan AS and Nicklas BJ . Age -related changes in fa t deposition in mid -thigh muscle in 
women: relationships with metabolic cardiovascular disease risk factors. Int J Obes Relat 
Metab Disord  23: 126 -132, 1999.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 40  188.  Schocken DD, Arrieta MI, Leaverton PE and Ross EA . Prevalence and mortality rate 
of congest ive heart failure in the United States. J Am Coll Cardiol  20: 301 -306, 1992.  
 189.  Schroeder ET, Wang Y, Castaneda -Sceppa C, Cloutier G, Vallejo AF, Kawakubo 
M, Jensky NE, Coomber S, Azen SP and Sattler FR . Reliability of maximal voluntary 
muscle strength  and power testing in older men. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Medl Sc  62: 543 -
549, 2007.  
 190.  Scott JM, Haykowsky MJ, Eggebeen J, Morgan TM, Brubaker PH and Kitzman 
DW. Reliability of peak exercise testing in patients with heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction. Am J Cardiol  110: 1809 -1813, 2012.  
 191.  Sebastian D, Hernandez -Alvarez M, Segales J, Sorianello E, Munoz J, Sala D, 
Waget A, Liesa M, Paz J, Gopalacharyulu P, Oresic M, Pich S, Burcelin R, Palacin 
M and Zorzano A . Mitofusin 2 (Mfn2) links mitoc hondrial and endoplasmic reticulum 
function with insulin signaling and is essential for normal glucose homeostasis. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA  109: 5523 -5528, 2012.  
 192.  Selig SE, Carey MF, Menzies DG, Patterson J, Geerling RH, Williams AD, 
Bamroongsuk V, To ia D, Krum H and Hare DL . Moderate -intensity resistance 
exercise training in patients with chronic heart failure improves strength, endurance, heart 
rate variability, and forearm blood flow. J Card Fail  10: 21 -30, 2004.  
 193.  Senni M, Tribouilloy CM, Rode heffer RJ, Jacobsen SJ, Evans JM, Bailey KR and 
Redfield MM . Congestive heart failure in the community: trends in incidence and 
survival in a 10 -year period. Arch Intern Med  159: 29 -34, 1999.  
 194.  Shah AM and Solomon SD . Phenotypic and pathophysiological  heterogeneity in heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J  33: 1716 -1717, 2012.  
 195.  Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Gheorghiade M, Adams KF, Swedberg K, Califf RM and 
O'Connor CM . Prognostic usefulness of the six -minute walk in patients with a dvanced 
congestive heart failure secondary to ischemic or nonischemic cardiomyopathy. Am J 
Cardiol  88: 987 -993, 2001.  
 196.  Shah SJ, Heitner JF, Sweitzer NK, Anand IS, Kim HY, Harty B, Boineau R, 
Clausell N, Desai AS, Diaz R, Fleg JL, Gordeev I, Lewis EF,  Markov V, O'Meara E, 
Kobulia B, Shaburishvili T, Solomon SD, Pitt B, Pfeffer MA and Li R . Baseline 
Characteristics of Patients in the Treatment of Preserved Cardiac Function Heart Failure 
With an Aldosterone Antagonist Trial. Circ Heart Fail  6: 184 -192, 2 013. 
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 41  197.  Sharma K and Kass D . Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction: Mechanisms, 
Clinical Features, and Therapies. Circ Res  115: 79 -96, 2014.  
 198.  Shea M, Nicklas B, Marsh A, Houston D, Miller G, Isom S, Miller M, Carr J, Lyles 
M, Harris T and Kritchevsky S . The effect of pioglitazone and resistance training on 
body composition in older men and women undergoing hypocaloric weight loss. Obesity 
Res 19: 1636 -1646, 2011.  
 199.  Simonini A, Long CS, Dudley GA, Yue P, McElhinny J and Massie BM . Heart 
Failure in Rats Causes Changes in Skeletal Muscle Morphology and Gene Expression 
That Are Not Explained by Reduced Activity. Circulation Research  79: 128 -136, 1996.  
 200.  Sjostrom L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, Sjostrom CD, Karason K, Wedel H, Ahlin S, 
Anveden A, Bengtsson C, Bergmark G, Bouchard C, Carlsson B, Dahlgren S, 
Karlsson J, Lindroos AK, Lonroth H, Narbro K, Naslund I, Olbers T, Svensson PA 
and Carlsson LMS . Bariatric Surgery and Long -term Cardiovascular Events. JAMA: 
The Journal of the American  Medical Association  307: 56 -65, 2012.  
 201.  Sparks LM, Johannsen NM, Church TS, Earnest CP, Moonen -Kornips E, Moro C, 
Hesselink MK, Smith SR and Schrauwen P . Nine months of combined training 
improves ex vivo skeletal muscle metabolism in individuals with  type 2 diabetes. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab  98: 1694 -1702, 2013.  
 202.  Spertus J, Peterson E, Conard MW, Heidenreich PA, Krumholz HM, Jones P, 
McCullough PA, Pina I, Tooley J, Weintraub WS and Rumsfeld JS . Monitoring 
clinical changes in patients with heart failure: A comparison of methods. Am Heart J  150: 
707-715, 2005.  
 203.  Spruit M, Eterman R -M, Hellwig V, Janssen P, Wouters E and Uszko -Lencer N . 
Effects of moderate -to-high intensity resistance training in patients with chronic heart 
failure. Heart  95: 1399 -1408, 2009.  
 204.  Sundereswaran L, Nagueh SF, Vardan S, Middleton KJ, Zoghbi WA, Quinones MA 
and Torre -Amione G . Estimation of left and right ventricular filling pressures after heart 
transplantation by tissue Doppler imaging. Am J Cardiol  82: 3 52-357, 1998.  
 205.  Tataranni PA, Harper IT, Snitker S, Parigi AD, Vozarova B, Bunt J, Bogardus C 
and Ravussin E . Body weight gain in free -living Pima Indians: effect of energy intake vs 
expenditure. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord  27: 1578 -1583, 2003.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 42  206.  Torre -Amione G, Durand JB, Nagueh S, Vooletich MT, Kobrin I and Pratt C . A 
pilot safety trial of prolonged (48 h) infusion of the dual endothelin -receptor antagonist 
tezosentan in patients with advanced heart failure. Chest  120: 460 -466, 2001.  
 207.  Toth MJ, Miller MS, VanBuren P, Bedrin NG, LeWinter MM, Ades PA and Palmer 
BM. Resistance training alters skeletal muscle structure and function in human heart 
failure: effects at the tissue, cellular and molecular levels. J Physiol  590: 1243 -1259, 
2012.  
 208.  Toth M, Miller M, VanBuren P, Bedrin N, LeWinter M, Ades P and Palmer B . 
Resistance training alters skeletal muscle structure and function in human heart failure: 
effects at the tissue, cellular and molecular levels. J Physiol  590: 1243 -1259, 2012.  
 209.  Tyrrell D, Bharadwaj MS, Van Horn CG, Kritchevsky SK, Nicklas BJ and Molina 
AJ. Respirometric profiles of muscle mitochondria and blood cells are associated with 
differences in gait speed among community -dwelling older adults. J Gerontol Med Sci  
(In pr ess): 2014.  
 210.  Vasan RS and Benjamin EJ . Diastolic heart failure --no time to relax. N Engl J Med  
344: 56 -59, 2001.  
 211.  Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, Evans JC, Reiss CK and Levy D . Congestive 
heart failure in subjects with normal versus reduced l eft ventricular ejection fraction: 
prevalence and mortality in a population -based cohort. J Am Coll Cardiol  33: 1948 -1955, 
1999.  
 212.  Vescovo G, Serafini F, Facchin L, Tenderini P, Carraro U, Dalla Libera L, Catani C 
and Ambrosio GB . Specific changes in skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain composition 
in cardiac failure: differences compared with disuse atrophy as assessed on microbiopsies 
by high resolution electrophoresis. Heart  76: 337 -343, 1996.  
 213.  Villareal DT, Apovian CM, Kushner RF and Klein S . Obesity in older adults: 
technical review and position statement of the American Society for Nutrition and 
NAASO, The Obesity Society. Am J Clin Nutr  82: 923 -934, 2005.  
 214.  Visser M, Kritchevsky SB, Goodpaster BH, Newman AB, Nevitt M, Stamm E and 
Harris TB. Leg muscle mass and composition in relation to lower extremity performance 
in men and women aged 70 to 79: the health, aging and body composition study. J Am 
Geriatr Soc  50: 897 -904, 2002.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 43  215.  Visser M, Goodpaster BH, Kritchevsky SB, Newman AB, Nevi tt M, Rubin SM, 
Simonsick EM, Harris TB and for the Health ABC Study . Muscle Mass, Muscle 
Strength, and Muscle Fat Infiltration as Predictors of Incident Mobility Limitations in 
Well -Functioning Older Persons. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  60: 324 -333, 200 5. 
 216.  Vogel -Claussen JM, Finn JPM, Gomes ASM+, Hundley GWM, Jerosch -Herold MP, 
Pearson GM, Sinha SP, Lima JAC and Bluemke DAM . Left Ventricular Papillary 
Muscle Mass: Relationship to Left Ventricular Mass and Volumes by Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging. [Art icle]. Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography  30: 426 -432, 
2006.  
 217.  Vogels N and Westerterp -Plantenga MS . Successful long -term weight maintenance: a 
2-year follow -up. Obesity Res  15: 1258 -1266, 2007.  
 218.  Volaklis KA and Tokmakidis SP . Resistance ex ercise training in patients with heart 
failure. Sports Med  35: 1085 -1103, 2005.  
 219.  von Haehling S, Horwich TB, Fonarow GC and Anker SD . Tipping the Scale: Heart 
Failure, Body Mass Index, and Prognosis. Circulation  116: 588 -590, 2007.  
 220.  Warner JG, Metzger C, Kitzman DW, Wesley DJ and Little WC . Losartan improves 
exercise tolerance in patients with diastolic dysfunction and a hypertensive response to 
exercise. J Am Coll Cardiol  33: 1567 -1572, 1999.  
 221.  Weinheimer EM, Sands LP and Campbell WW . A sy stematic review of the separate 
and combined effects of energy restriction and exercise on fat -free mass in middle -aged 
and older adults: implications for sarcopenic obesity. Nutr Rev  68: 375 -388, 2010.  
 222.  Westerterp -Plantenga M, Nieuwenhuizen A, Tome D, Soenen S and Westerterp K . 
Dietary protein, weight loss, and weight maintenance. Ann Rev Nutr  29: 21 -41, 2009.  
 223.  Weyer C, Snitker S, Rising R, Bogardus C and Ravussin E . Determinants of energy 
expenditure and fuel utilization in man: effects of bod y composition, age, sex, ethnicity 
and glucose tolerance in 916 subjects. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord  23: 715 -722, 1999.  
 224.  Whellan DJ, O'Connor CM, Lee KL, Keteyian SJ, Cooper LS, Ellis SJ, Leifer ES, 
Kraus WE, Kitzman DW and Blumenthal JA . Heart Fa ilure and A Controlled Trial 
Investigating Outcomes of Exercise TraiNing (HF -ACTION): Design and rationale. 
American Heart Journal  153: 201 -211, 2007.  
Amendment 3 6/2/2022  
 44  225.  Williams MA, Haskell WL, Ades PA, Amsterdam EA, bittner v, Franklin BA, 
Gulanick M, Laing ST and Stewart KJ . Resistance exercise in individuals with and 
without cardiovascular disease: 2007 update: A scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology and Council on Nutrition, Physical 
Activity, and Metabolism. Circulation  116: 572 -584, 2007.  
 226.  Williams A, Carey M, Selig S, Hayes A, Krum H, Patterson J, Toia D and Hare D . 
Circuit resistance training in chronic heart failure improves skeletal muscle mitochondrial 
ATP production rate -- A randomized controlled tri al. J Card Fail  13: 79 -85, 2007.  
 227.  Wilson JR and Ferraro N . Exercise intolerance in patients with chronic heart failure; 
relation to oxygen transport and ventilatory abnormalities. Am J Cardiol  51: 1358 -1363, 
1983.  
 228.  Wokke BH, Bos C, Reijnierse M , van Rijswijk CS, Eggers H, Webb A, Verschuuren 
JJ and Kan HE . Comparison of dixon and T1 -weighted MR methods to assess the 
degree of fat infiltration in duchenne muscular dystrophy patients. J Magn Reson 
Imaging  38: 619 -624, 2013.  
 229.  Yancy CW, Jessup  M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE Jr, Drazner MH, Fonarow 
GC, Geraci SA, Horwich T, Januzzi JL, Johnson MR, Kasper EK, Levy WC, 
Masoudi FA, McBride PE, McMurray JV, Mitchell JE, Peterson PN, Riegel B, Sam 
F, Stevenson LW, Tang WH, Tsai EJ and Wilkoff BL . 2013 ACCR/AHA Guideline 
for the Management of Heart Failure. Circulation  128: e240 -e319, 2013.  
 230.  Zile MR and Brutsaert DL . New concepts in diastolic dysfunction and diastolic heart 
failure: Part I: diagnosis, prognosis, and measurements of diastolic fu nction. Circulation  
105: 1387 -1393, 2002.  
 
 