Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 1  
 
 
UPLOAD 4/07/2025 
 
PROTOCOL & SAP  
 
Medical Pain Consultants  
 
Orthopedic F oundation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 2  
 
 
Study  Protocol  
 
KP-01-2022 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Sustained Acoustic Medicine  for 
Symptomatic Treatment  of Knee Pain 
Related to Osteoarthritis  
 
 
March  21, 2022
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 3  
1.0 Background and Scientific Rationale  
1.1 Background Information  
Approximately 50 million people in the United States suffer from some form 
of arthritis pain, and Osteoarthritis is the most common form of the disease. 
The prevalence of osteoarthritis is greater among women than men, 
increases with age, and affects all r ace/ethnicity groups.  
  
Osteoarthritis affects articular cartilage, the smooth fibrous connective 
tissue essential for smooth movement and cushioning of the joint. As the 
disease progresses, the cartilage becomes thinner and may completely 
wear away. Inflammation of the synovial membrane, the lining that 
surrounds the knee joint and contains the synovial fluid, is often a result of 
these changes. Osteoarthritis can form in any joint but is more common in 
weight bearing joints such as the knee and hip, and results in joint space 
narrowing, severe pain and loss of mobility.  
 
Ultrasound therapy for the treatment of Osteoarthritis  may be used as 
conservative care (see reference: cochrane review).  
 
 
 
1.2 Product Description  
Ultrasound Devices (Groups 1  & 2): Long duration  therapeutic ultrasound 
will be delivered in this study using ZetrOZ’s Ultrasonic Diathermy Device 
called sam®. The device package s consist  of a Power Controller, 2 
Applicators (ultrasound generators), Ultrasound Coupling Bandages  with 
and without 2.5% Diclofenac  Ultrasound Gel,  Charger and User Manual.  
 
Ultrasound Coupling Bandages (Group 3): No active ultrasound  
administered. Only Ultrasound Coupling Bandages  2.5% Diclofenac 
Ultrasound Gel . 
 
1.3 Hypotheses  
It is hypothesized that treatment with the device  (groups 1 and 2) will yield 
improvements in pain, stiffness,  and range of motion relative to no active 
ultrasound administered  treated subjects  (group 3)  with knee Osteoarthritis. 
It is hypothesized that ultrasound applied with diclofenac coupling patch 
(group 2) will yield improvements in pain reduction relative to ultrasound  
alone (group 1).   
 
1.4 Potential Risks to Subjects  
The risks of using ultrasound devices to administer physical therapy are 
well established and include: burn, itching and/or pain. These risks 
decrease when using lower intensity ultrasound , as in this study . The 
Ultrasound Diathermy Device uses existing technology to deliver ultrasound 
therapy in a portable and convenient fashion. The subjects will be given the 
chance to ask any questions regarding the trial procedures, requirements, 
and purposes. Once the s ubjects are fully informed of the possible risks 
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 4 and benefits of participation in the study and all of their questions have 
been satisfactorily answered, they will be required to sign the informed 
consent form in order to participate in the study. All subjects must give 
consent themselves and no legally authorized representatives will be 
accepted on their behalf.  
 
 
2.0 Study Objectives and Design  
2.1 Objectives  
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the analgesic effect of 
ultrasound in subjects suffering from arthritis pain as measured by the NRS 
0-10 scale.  
 
Secondary objectives are to evaluate the differences  of the three treatment 
approaches to  reduce pain , stiffness as measured by  NRS scale and  the 
Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index (WOMAC)  
 
2.2 Study Design  
2.2.1  General Study Design  
This study is designed as a three arm parallel assignment study . 
After screening and enrollment, subjects will self-administer 
treatment daily for 8 consecutive weeks . 
 
2.2.2  Study D esign Schematic  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.0 Study Population  
3.1 General C haracteristics of the Proposed Subject Population(s)  
This study will enroll subjects with physician confirmed knee Osteoarthritis 
pain. The l ong duration wearable therapeutic ultrasound treatment has 

Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 5 multiple benefits likely to aid the patients enrolled in this study with  knee 
Osteoarthritis pain . Acoustic waves mechanically stimulate tissue, triggering 
biological effects including the down regulation of inflammatory cytokines, 
increased transport kinetics, protein synthesis, and extracellular matrix 
deposition.  It is therefore hypothesized that the ZetrOZ’s wearable device  
has the potential to provide sustained OA symptom management.  
 
3.2 Anticipated Number of Research Subjects  
 
Enrollment will be monitor ed at  the assumed rates of Screen Failures and 
Discontinuation may be found to differ in this study from historical controls. 
The objective is to screen and enroll towards a target of 120 completed 
subjects.  
 
Subjects to be Screened  220 
Assumed Screen Fail Rate  10% 
Subjects to be Enrolled  (sign IC F) 200 
Assumed Discontinuation Rate  10% 
Total Number Completers  (complete 8-wk treatment phase)  180 
 
3.3 Inclusion  Criteria  
Subjects to be enrolled in the trial will:  
• Have physician -diagnosed mild to moderate knee OA (OARSI atlas grades 
1-2)  
• Fulfill the American College of Rheumatology clinical and radiological 
diagnostic criteria for knee OA  
• Are between 35 -80 years of age  
• Report a frequent pain score between 4-7 (range: 0 -10) during the week 
preceding enrollment  
• Report that knee pain negatively affects quality of life  
• Are willing not to use any cream, gel, or topical solution during the 
administration of treatment other than the approved ultrasound gel 
provided to the subject at the initiation of the study  
• Are deemed appropriate by their physician or by the study site physician to 
participate.  
• Be willing and able to self -administer treatment daily within their place of 
residence or during normal daily activity, excluding bathing, showering, or 
other water activities which may result in submersion of the study device.  
• Not use or initiate  opioid and/or non -opioid analgesic medications.  
• Be willing to discontinue any other interventional treatment modalities on 
the knee  during the study period (e.g., transcutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation, electronic muscle stimulation, traditional ultrasound).  
 
3.4 Exclusion Criteria  
A potential s ubject will be excluded from par ticipation in this study if he or she : 
• Cannot successfully demonstrate the ability to put on and take off the 
device.  
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 6 • Display s any condition which, in the judgment of the investigator, would 
make participation in the study unacceptable including, but not limited to, 
the subject’s ability to understand and follow instructions.  
• Participated in a clinical trial for an investigational drug and/or agent 
within 30 days prior to screening.  
• Is pregnant.  
• Is a prisoner.  
• Is non-ambulatory (unable to walk).  
• Has a pacemaker.  
• Has a malignancy in the treatment area.  
• Has an active infection, open sores, or wounds in the treatment area.  
• Has impaired sensation in the treatment area, such as caused by 
chemotherapy or anesthesia.  
• Has a known neuropathy (disease of the brain or spinal nerves).  
• Has a hereditary disposition (tendency) for excessive bleeding 
(hemorrhage).  
• Have knee replacement, other surgical intervention, or hyaluronidase 
injection in the affected knee in the past 6 months  
• Are currently taking steroids  
• Have any contraindication to radiograph  
• Have a secondary cause of arthritis (metabolic or inflammatory)  
 
4.0 Study Procedures  
4.1 Subject Recruitment  
It is planned at one site  to enroll subjects into this trial . Therefore, based on 
the assumptions presented in Section 3.2, we will need to screen 
approximately 220 subjects to meet the target  enrollment number  of 200 
subjects , and support  a target completion number of 180. The target 
enrollment period for this study is 12 months .  
 
4.1.1  Subject Compensation  
Subjec ts will be compensated up to $ 250 for participation in the study.  
Subjects will not be compensated for the initial screening/enrollment visit, 
but will get $250 for completing three virtual meetings and Visit 2 (exit) . 
 
4.2 Screening Procedures  
Subjects will come to the clinic to be screened for inclusion in the study. 
The investigator or a sub -investigator will review the Eligibility Screening 
Checklist with the subject. All subjects must have physician -diagnosed mild 
to moderate knee OA (OARSI atlas grades 1 -2). 
 
4.3 Study T reatment  
4.3.1  Treatment Groups  
Subjects will participate in three  treatment arm s. The ultrasound device is 
manufactured by ZetrOZ Systems  (Trumbull, CT) . The 3 MHz device was 
FDA cleared in November 2013  and March 2020 , and is marketed in the 
United States under the brand name sam®. The study s ubjects will apply 2 
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 7 applicators affixed to the coupling bandages to their knee on the medial 
and lateral sides  as shown in the figure below . The applicators are 
connected via a Y-adapter to a single power controller  in the wired version, 
and with two small wireless  power controllers connected  directly  to the 
applicators in the wireless version . The subjects will activate the device  for 
each daily treatment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This device delivers continuous 
ultrasound with a maximum acoustic 
power output of 1.3 W/cm2 ±20% 
when 2 applicators are used. The 
frequency is 3 MHz ± 20%. The 
maximum treatment duration 
permitted is 4 hours per day.  
 
Ultrasound  treatment protocol: subjects will self -administer the ultrasound 
therapy for up to 4 hours per day at least 5  days  per week  (and up to 7 
days)  for the 8-week study . 
 
No ultrasound treatment protocol  control : Ultrasound coupling patch  
(Diclofenac  version) will be applied to medial and lateral sides of knee at 
least 5 days per week (and up to 7 days) for the 8 -week study.   
 
 
4.3.2  Randomization    
All study kits will be labeled with a color coded sticker located under the 
foam of the kit. The color coded  stickers correspond to a specific 
treatment arm of the study, which will be recorded by the Regulatory team 
at ZetrOZ. The Regulatory team will act as a non -research member of the 
sponsor, and will record kit and component serial numbers, as well as the 
color of the sticker in a locked Excel document. A spreadsheet of kit 
numbers will be provided to the Clinical Trials team at ZetrOZ who will 
utilize the randomization function in Excel to associate a kit number with a 
subject number. Therefore, the ZetrOZ clinical team will have no 
knowledge of the treatment arm assigned to a subject.  
 
4.3.3  Breaking the Blind  
Not Applicable  
 
4.3.4  Treatment Adherence/ Study Compliance  
Treatment compliance will be assessed by review of daily diaries , virtual 
meetings  and count of remaining bandages  and pain -gel quantity  at the 
end of the study . The Research Coordinator will remind the subjects of Sample  
Applicator Placement  

Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 8 the treatment protocol and retrain them on use of the device  or 
application of pain gel  if necessary. Study in person and virtual visits 
should be completed within 3 days of the s pecified  time in the Schedule 
of Assessments  (Section 4.6). 
 
 
4.4 Follow -Up Procedures  
4.4.1  Procedures to Assess Usability and Efficacy  
Usability and Efficacy will be assessed  at the end of the study . 
Subjects will maintain a Daily Diary at home, which will be a 
printed booklet that they will complete manually daily throughout 
the study period.  
 
Daily Diary  
Subjects will complete a Daily Diary throughout the 8-week  
treatment period to collect usability and pain ratings before  and 
after treatment.  
 
Numeric Rating Scale (NRS)  
Subject -reported rating of pain severity, 0 = no pain, 10 = worst 
pain imaginable  
 
Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis 
Index  (WOMAC)  
Subject reported rating of pain, stiffness and function validated for 
knee Osteoarthritis . 
 
Exit Assessment  
At the conclusion of the trial , each subject will be asked to 
complete an exit assessment form which solicits the subject’s 
feedback on their use of the device, and satisfaction with therapy.  
 
4.4.2  Procedures to Assess Safety  
Adverse events will be recorded at each study visit  and virtual 
meeting . 
 
4.5 Use of N on-Study Drugs and Procedures  
Not Applicable. Not Allowed.  
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 9 4.6 Schedule of Assessments  
 
 
1 - Visit window: ±3 days  
2 - Research coordinator should review subject diaries to ensure completeness, and evidence that subject is using the device per 
protocol.  
5.0 Data Management and Analysis  
5.1 Outcome  Measures  and Data Analysis  Plan  
Visit Number V1 V1 W2 W4 W6 V2 W8
Visit Type ScreeningStart 
TreatmentVirtual 
CheckVirtual 
CheckVirtual 
CheckEnd of 
Treatment
/Early 
Terminati
on (3)
Week (1) 0 0 2 4 6 8
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteriax
Informed Consent x
Medical history x
Treatment history x
Device Assignment Form x
Physical Examination x
Confirm baseline pain >4 
week preceding x
Train Subject on sam 
Device or Pain Gelx
Confirm subject and put 
on and take off devicex
WOMAC Scale x x
Adverse Events x x x x x
Protocol Deviations x x x
Distribute Daily Diary x
Review/Collect Daily Diary x x x x
Assess Compliance (2) x
Distribute study marterials 
sam Device or gel x
Distribute Patches x
Issue Subject 
Compensation and Signed 
Receiptx
Collect sam Device and 
Unused Study Suppliesx
Exit Assessment 
Questionnaire x
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 10 Change in NRS pain score from baseline will be analyzed for pre and post -8 week  
treatment and WOMAC (pain, stiffness, and functional change) will be evaluated 
on week 0  and week 8. Data will be analyzed using t -tests and repeated measure 
ANOVAs.  
 
6.0 Risk Analysis  
6.1 Adverse E vent Recording and R eporting  
6.1.1  Adverse E vent Definitions  
Adverse effect.  Any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical study of an 
investigational device; regardless of the causal relationship of the 
problem with the device or, if applicable, other study treatment or 
diagnostic product(s).  
 
Associated with the investigational device or, if applicable, other study 
treatment or diagnostic product(s) .  There is a reasonable possibility that 
the adverse effect may have been caused by the investigational device 
or, if applicable, the other study treatment or diagnostic product(s).  
 
Disability .  A substantial disruption of a person’s ability to conduct normal 
life functions.  
 
Life-threatening adverse effect .  Any adverse effect that places the 
subject, in the view of the investigator -sponsor, at immediate risk of death 
from the effect as it occurred  (i.e., does not include an adverse effect that, 
had it actually occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death).  
 
Serious adverse effect . Any adverse effect that results in any of the 
following outcomes: death, a life -threatening adverse effect, inpatient 
hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/ birth defect.  
 
• Hospitalization shall include any initial admission (even if less than 24 
hours) to a healthcare facility as a result of a precipitating clinical 
adverse effect; to include transfer within the hospital to an intensive 
care unit.  Hospitalization or prolongation of hospita lization in the 
absence of a precipitating, clinical adverse effect (e.g., for a 
preexisting condition not associated with a new adverse effect or with 
a worsening of the preexisting condition; admission for a protocol -
specified procedure) is not, in itself, a serious adverse effect.   
 
Unexpected adverse effect.   Any adverse effect, the frequency, specificity 
or severity of which is not consistent with the risk information described in 
the clinical study protocol(s) or elsewhere in the current IDE application, 
as amended.  
 
Unanticipated adverse device effect.   Any serious adverse effect on 
health or safety or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or 
associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or death was not 
previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the 
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 11 investigational plan or IDE application (including a supplementary plan or 
application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a 
device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 
6.1.2  Eliciting A dverse Effect Information  
Clinical study subjects will be routinely questioned about adverse 
effects at study visits  and virtual meetings . 
 
6.1.3  Recording and Assessment of Adverse Effects  
All observed or volunteered adverse effects (serious or non -
serious) and abnormal test findings, regardless of treatment 
group, if applicable, or suspected causal relationship to the 
investigational device or, if applicable, other study treatment or 
diagno stic product(s) will be recorded in the subjects’ case 
histories.  For all adverse effects, sufficient information will be 
pursued and/or obtained so as to permit 1) an adequate 
determination of the outcome of the effect (i.e., whether the effect 
should be  classified as a serious adverse effect) and; 2) an 
assessment of the casual relationship between the adverse effect 
and the investigational device or, if applicable, the other study 
treatment or diagnostic product(s).    
 
Adverse effects or abnormal test findings felt to be associated with 
the investigational device or, if applicable, other study treatment or 
diagnostic product(s) will be followed until the effect (or its 
sequelae) or the abnormal test finding resolves or s tabilizes at a 
level acceptable to the investigator -sponsor.  
 
6.1.3.1  Causality and Severity Assessmen t 
The investigator -sponsor will promptly review documented 
adverse effects and abnormal test findings to determine 1) 
if the abnormal test finding should be classified as an 
adverse effect; 2) if there is a reasonable possibility that 
the adverse effect was caused by the investigational 
device or, if applicable, other study treatment or diagnostic 
product(s); and 3) if the adverse effect meets the criteria 
for a serious adverse effect.  
 
If the investigator -sponsor’s final determination of causality 
is “unknown and of questionable relationship to the 
investigational device or, if applicable, other study 
treatment or diagnostic product(s)”, the adverse effect will 
be classified as associated with the use of the 
investigational device or study treatment or diagnostic drug 
product(s) for reporting purposes.  If the investigator -
sponsor’s final determination of causality is “unknown but 
not related to the investigational device or, if applicable, 
other study treatment or diagnostic product(s)”, this 
determination and the rationale for the determination will 
be documented in the respective subject’s case history.  
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 12 6.1.4  Reporting  of Adverse E ffects to the FDA   
The investigator -sponsor will submit a completed Form  FDA 3500 
A to the FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health for any 
observed or volunteered adverse effect that is determined to be 
an unanticipated adverse device effect.  A  copy of this completed 
form will be provided to all participating sub -investigators.   
 
The completed Form FDA 3500 A will be submitted to the FDA as 
soon as possible and, in no event, later than 10 working days after 
the investigator -sponsor first receives notice of the adverse effect.  
 
If the results of the sponsor -investigator’s follow -up evaluation 
show that an adverse effect that was initially determined to not 
constitute an unanticipated adverse device effect  does, in fact, 
meet the requirements for reporting; the investigator -sponsor will 
submit a completed Form  FDA 3500 A as soon as possible, but in 
no event later than 10 working days, after the determination was 
made.  
 
For each submitted Form  FDA 3500 A, the sponsor -investigator 
will identify all previously submitted reports that that addressed a 
similar adverse effect experience and will provide an analysis of 
the significance of newly reported adverse effect in light of the 
previous, similar  report(s).  
 
Subsequent to the initial submission of a completed Form  FDA 
3500 A, the investigator -sponsor will submit additional information 
concerning the reported adverse effect as requested by the FDA.  
 
6.1.5  Reporting of Adverse Effects to the Responsible IRB  
In accordance with applicable policies of the Institutional Review 
Board (IRB), the investigator -sponsor will report, to the IRB, any 
observed or volunteered adverse effect that is determined to meet 
all of the following criteria: 1) associated with the in vestigational 
device or, if applicable, other study treatment or diagnostic 
product(s); 2) a serious adverse effect; and 3) an unexpected 
adverse effect.  Adverse event reports will be submitted to the IRB 
in accordance with the respective IRB procedures.  
 
Applicable adverse effects will be reported to the IRB as soon as 
possible and, in no event, later than 10 calendar days following 
the investigator -sponsor’s receipt of the respective information.  
Adverse effects which are 1) associated with the investiga tional 
drug or, if applicable, other study treatment or diagnostic 
product(s); 2) fatal or life -threatening; and 3) unexpected will be 
reported to the IRB within 24 hours of the investigator -sponsor’s 
receipt of the respective information.  
 
Follow -up information to reported adverse effects will be submitted 
to the IRB as soon as the relevant information is available.  If the 
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 13 results of the sponsor -investigator’s follow -up investigation show 
that an adverse effect that was initially determined to not require 
reporting to the IRB does, in fact, meet the requirements for 
reporting; the investigator -sponsor will report the adverse  effect to 
the IRB as soon as possible, but in no event later than 10 
calendar days, after the determination was made.  
 
7.0 Monitoring Procedures  
Monitoring of the clinical study for clinical protocol compliance will be conducted 
periodically (i.e., at a minimum of annually) by  the ZetrOZ clinical team . The sponsor -
investigator will permit direct access to the study monitors and appropriate regulatory 
authorities to the study data and to the corresponding source data and documents to 
verify the accuracy of these data.  
 
8.0 Additional Records and Reports   
8.1 Data Handling and Record -keeping  
A Case Report Form  (CRF)  will be completed  at each study visit  for each 
subject enrolled into the clinical study.  The investigator -sponsor will review, 
approve and sign/date each completed CRF; the investigator -sponsor’s 
signature serving as attestation of the investigator -sponsor’s responsibility 
for ensuring that all clinical and laboratory data entered on the CRF are 
complete, accurate and authentic.   
 
ZetrOZ’s clinical research team will work with each site to ensure accurate 
completion of CRFs reconciling illegible entries, missing data, and 
conflicting data entries.  
 
Source Data  are the clinical findings and observations, laboratory and test 
data, and other information contained in Source Documents .  Source 
Documents are the original records (and certified copies of original 
records); including, but not limited to, hospital medical records, physician or 
office charts, physician or nursing notes, subject diaries or evaluation 
checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, rec orded data from automated 
instruments, x -rays, etc.  When applicable, information recorded on the 
CRF s hall match the Source Data  recorded on the Source Documents .   
 
 
8.2 Record Maintenance and Retention  
The investigator -sponsor will maintain records in accordance with Good 
Clinical Practice guidelines; to include:  
 
• IRB correspondence (including approval notifications) related to the 
clinical protocol; including copies of adverse event reports and annual or 
interim reports;  
• Current and past versions of the IRB -approved clinical protocol and 
corresponding IRB -approved consent form(s) and, if applicable, subject 
recruitment advertisements.  
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 14 • Signed Investigator’s Agreements and Certifications of Financial Interests 
of Clinical Investigators;  
• Curriculum vitae (investigator -sponsor and clinical protocol sub -
investigators);  
• Certificates of required training (e.g., human subject protections, Good 
Clinical Practice, etc.) for investigator -sponsor and listed sub -
investigators;  
• Instructions for on -site preparation and handling of the investigational 
device and/or study treatment or diagnostic product(s), and other study -
related materials (i.e., if not addressed in the clinical protocol);  
• Decoding procedures for blinded trials;  
• Master device list; 
• Signed informed consent forms;  
• Completed Case Report Forms; signed and dated by investigator -
sponsor;  
• Source Documents or certified copies of Source Documents;  
• Monitoring visit reports;  
• Copies of investigator -sponsor correspondence to sub -investigators, 
including notifications of adverse effect information;  
• Subject screening and enrollment logs;  
• Subject identification code list;  
• Device  accountability records, including documentation of device disposal  
and returns to sponsor ; 
• Final clinical study report.  
 
Site-subject identification numbers will be assigned to all subjects to de -
identify the associated clinical data. A master subject ID log will be 
maintained by ZetrOZ separately from clinical trial data. The master log will 
contain the assigned site -subjec t identification number matched to each 
subject’s full name, gender, and date -of-birth.  The site -subject ID will be 
generated by a two -digit site ID separated by a dash from the subject 
number at that site. Subjects’ names or other directly identifiable 
information will not be used in any reports, publication or other disclosures 
of clinical study outcomes.  
 
The investigator -sponsor will retain the specified records and reports for up 
to 2 years after the marketing application is approved for the investigational 
device; or, if a marketing application is not submitted or approved for the 
investigational drug, u ntil 2 years after investigations under the IDE have 
been discontinued and the FDA so notified.  
 
 
Version 1.0 - March 2022 
 15 9.0 References  
 
Therapeutic ultrasound for osteoarthritis , Cochrane Review, 20 January 2010. 
http://www.cochrane.org/CD003132/MUSKEL_therapeutic -ultrasound -for-osteoarthritis   