Page 1 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
1 TITLE PA GE 
MEDICAL UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH CAROLINA  
Study Protocol 
A Proof
 of Concept Study of Inhaled Nitric Oxide for Adults 
with P
ulmonary Non-T uberculous My cobacterial Infection 
IND Number: 140649  
Date and Version of Protocol: October 01, 2019 
(Version 3.0) 
NCT #:  03748992
IRB approved on 18SEP2018
Page 2 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
2 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS 
Title  A Proof of Concept Study of Inhaled Gaseous Nitric Oxide (gNO) for 
Adults with Pulmonary Non -Tuberculous Mycobacterial (NTM) Infection  
Clinical Phase  Phase 2  
Objective  To evaluate the efficacy and safety of open -label exposure of gNO in 
patients with NTM lung disease  
Endpoints  Primary  
•Culture growth (positive or negative) at end of treatment (EOT)
compared to baseline
Secondary  
•Safety and tolerability assessments based on adverse events (AEs),
clinical values (i.e., methemoglobin levels)
•Semiquantitative mycobacterial culture results comparing EOT tobaseline
Exploratory 
•Time to positive mycobacterial cultures comparing EOT to baseline
•Measures of systemic inflammation comparing EOT to baseline
•Absolute change in quality of life scores from baseline to EOT
Study Population  Adult subjects with NTM lung disease and persistently positive 
mycobacterial sputum cultures  
Number of Subjects  10 
Number of sites  2 
Study Duration  Subjects will be treated for 3 weeks (5 days per week) and followed 
monthly for 3 months  
Study Design  This 2 study is designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of open -label 
gNO treatment in subjects with NTM lung disease and persistently positive 
sputum cultures growing NTM.  This is a proof-of-concept study in which 
all subjects will be treated with gNO (i.e. no control) to see if there can be a microbiological effect by conversion to negative sputum cultures and how long that effect can be sustained following treatment. In addition, this study will assess the feasibility of such a treatment course in this patient population and measure relevant clinical outcomes (e.g. cough, quality of life).  Subjects will provid e sputum for culture at baseline, weekly during 
treatment, and monthly for 3 months following treatment to assess if there is persistence of infection in cultures.  Safety measures will include monitoring of arterial oxygen saturation and methemoglobin levels. All 
serious and non -serious adverse events will be collected  
Assessments  •Feasibility: ability to recruit subjects, ability to complete the planned
treatment, and assessment of  their experience and willingness to
undergo this therapy
•Efficacy: sputum cultures (mycobacteria), symptom scores (cough,
quality of life)
•Safety: AEs, clinical monitoring assessments (pulse oximetry), vital
signs, and physical examinations
Statistical Analyses  Data will be summarized descriptively for each subject.  The overal l 
response rates (culture conversion short and long term) will be calculated after each patient has completed the trial, and exact binomial confidence 
intervals will be constructed.  
Page 3 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
3  SCH
EDULE  OF ASSESSMENTS  
Table 3 -
1: Schedule of Assessments 
Screening  Treatment Period  Follow up Period  
Visit  S A1 A2-4 A5 B1 B2-4 B5 C1 C1-4 C5 F1 F2 F3 
Day -28--14 1 2-4 5 8 9-11 12 15 16-18 19 W7 W11  W15  
Informed 
consent  x 
Medical history  x 
Demographicsa x 
Physical 
examination  x x x x x x x 
Height and 
weight  x x x x x x 
Vital signs  x x x x x x x x x x x x x 
Symptom scoreb x x x x x x x 
Safety labsc x x 
CRP x x 
Spirometryd x xd xd xd 
Sputum culturese x x x x x x x 
Echocardiogram  x 
Pulse oximetry  x x x x x x x x x x x x x 
MetHb 
measurement  x x x x x x x x x x 
gNO dosing  x x x x x x x x x 
Adverse events  x x x x x x x x x x x x 
Concomitant 
medications  x x x x x x x x x x x x x 
aDemographics include sex, race, and age. Base line characteristic s include diagnosis,  and if 
CF include C FTR genotype 
bSymp tom scores will include cough score (Leicester), quality of life (SGRQ, CFQ -R, QOL -
B), as appropriate for the underlying diagnosis (i.e. CF subjects will complete the CFQ -R 
and SGRQ; other subjects will complete the QOL -B and SGRQ)  
cSafety labs include comprehensive metabolic p anel ( to include c reatinine, AST, ALP, ALT 
and chemistry) , complete blood cell count with differential, GGT , PT/INR , 6-GPD level, 
and urine pregnancy test (if applicable)  
dSpirometry will be performed pre and post first treatment of the day  
eSputum will be tested for bacteria and mycobacteria (including AFB smear and culture).  
Sus
ceptibility testing will not be performed  
Page 4 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
4 TAB LE
 OF CONT ENTS  
1 Ti
tle Page 1 
2 Protocol Synop sis  2 
3 Sche dule of Assessments 3 
4 Tab le of Contents  4 
List of  Tables 7 
5 L ist of Abb reviat ions  8 
6 In troduct ion 9 
Overview of NTM lung disease   9 
Overview of gNO and Ra tionale for S tudy  9 
7 St udy Ob jective s  11 
8 St udy E ndpoints 11 
9 St udy De sign 11 
9.1 Overview of Study Design 11 
9.1.1 Screening  11 
9.1.2 Treatment Period  12 
9.1.3 Follow up Months 1-3 12 
9.2 Ra tionale for S tudy Design 12 
10 Sel ection of St udy Popu lation  13 
10.1 Inclusion Cr iteria  13 
10.2 Exclusion Cr iteria  13 
11 Dosing of Study Drug  14 
11.1 Ge
neral dosing information 14 
11.2 Dosing information 14 
11.3 Dosage administration  14 
12 Assessments 15 
12.1 Timing  of Ass essments 15 
12.2.1 Subj ect and Dis ease Character istics  15 
12.2.2 Physical examination  15 
12.2.3 Vital signs  16 
12.2.4 Oxygen saturation 16 
12.2.5 Methemoglobin 16 
12.2.6 Prior and Conc omita nt M edications  16 
12.3 S afety  16 
12.3.1 Adverse Events  16 
12.4.1 Sputum cultures 16 
12.5.1 Quality of life measures  16 
13 Discontinuation or withdrawal from treatment  17 
13.1 Discontinuation of an inhalation period 17 
13.2 Withdrawal from the study  17 
14 Stat istical and Analytical P lans  18 
14.1 Sa mple  Size  18 
14.2 Statistical Analyses  18 
14.3.1 B ackground Char acteristics  18 
14.3.1.1 Subj ect Disposition   18 
14.3.1.2 Demog raphics and Baseline Charact eristics  18 
Page 5 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
14.3.1.3 Prior and Conc omita nt  Medications 18 
14.3.2 E fficacy Analysis 19 
14.3.3 S afety Analysis  19 
14.3.3.1 Adverse Events 19 
14.4 I nterim An alyses 19 
15 Procedural, Ethical, Regu latory, and Admin istrative Co nsiderations  18 
15.1 Adverse Event and S erious Adver se Event Do cumentation and Repor ting 19 
15.1.1 D efinition of an Adver se Event  19 
15.1.2 D efinition of a S erious Adver se Event  19 
15.1.3 Documentation of Adv erse Events  19 
15.1.4 Adverse Event Causa lity  20 
15.1.5 Adverse Event Outcome  20 
15.1.6 Repor ting Procedure for Adverse Events and Pregnancy 20 
15.2 Administra tive Requi rements  20 
15.2.1 Ethica l Considerations  20 
15.2.2 Subj ect Information and Informed Consent  21 
15.2.3 Inve stigator Compliance  21 
15.2.4 A ccess to Records 21 
15.2.5 Subj ect Privacy  21 
15.2.6 R ecord Retention  21 
15.3 Da ta Quality Assu rance  21 
15.4 Da ta Capture  22 
15.5 Publi cations and C linical S tudy Report 22 
15.5.1 Publi cation of S tudy Res ults 22 
15.5.2 S tudy Report  22 
16 Ref erenc es 23 
Page 6 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
List of T a
bles 
Table 3-1 
Schedule of Ass essments  3 
Table 15-1 Cla ssifications for Adv erse Event Causa lity 20 
Table 15-2 Cla ssifications for Out come  of an Ad verse Event  20 
Page 7 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
5 LIST OF  
ABBREV IATI ONS  
Abbreviation Definition 
AE Adverse events  
ALP  Alkaline Phosphatase  
ALT  Alanine transaminase  
AST  Aspartate transaminase  
ATS  American Thoracic Society  
BCG  Bacillus Calmette -Guérin  
CF cystic fibrosis 
CFF Cystic Fibrosis Foundation 
CFFPR  Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Patient Registry  
CFQ -R Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire -Revised  
CFTR CF transmembrane conductance regulator gene 
CRF case report form 
DNA  Deoxyribonucleoside acid  
ECFS  European Cystic Fibrosis Society  
EDC elect ronic data capture 
FDA  Food and Drug Association  
GCP Good Clinical Practice  
GGT  Gamma -glutamyl transaminase  
gNO  Gaseous Nitric Oxide  
HEENT  Head, eyes, ears, nose and throat  
HIPAA Health  Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
IDSA  Infectious Diseases Society of America  
IND Investigational new drug  
INODD  Inhaled NO Delivery Device  
INR International normalized ratio  
IRB institutional review board 
LVEF  Left ventricular  ejection fraction  
Mabs  Mycobacterium abscessus  
MAC  Mycobacteria avium complex  
MedDRA Medical Dicti onary for Regulatory Activities 
metHb  Methemoglobin  
MUSC  Medical University of South Carolina  
NO Nitric oxide  
NO 2 Nitrogen dioxide  
O2 Oxygen  
NTM  Non-tuberculous mycobacteria  
NTM -PD Non-tuberculous mycobacteria pulmonary disease  
PPM  Parts per million  
SAE serious adverse event 
SaO2  Arterial oxygen saturation  
SAP statistical analysis plan 
SGRQ  St. Georges Respiratory Questionnaire  
WHO-DD World Health  Organization Drug Dictionary 
Page 8 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
6 INTRO
DUCTION 
Overview of NT
M lung disease  
Non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) have been identified as a pathogen of increasing 
importance in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF)  [Floto 2016].  The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation 
Patient Registry (CFFPR) has shown prevalence rates for NTM -positive culture in the US of 
12% but with considerable variation among states ranging from 0-28% [Floto 2016; Adjemian 
2014]. The NTM most commonly identified in patients with CF are Mycobacterium avium  
complex (MAC) and M abscessus complex (Mabs)  [Olivier 2003; Sermet-Gaudelus 2003].  
NTM are insidious opportunistic organisms that cause lung disease in certain patient 
populations especially those who have cystic fibrosis (CF) but also in other populations [Honda 2015]. Although NTM could be an innocent resident in airway cultures [Martiniano 2017] there are patients in whom NTM may cause progressive lung damage leading to the diagnosis of NTM pulmonary disease (NTM- PD) [Tomashefski 1996]. There are consensus 
recommendations from the American Thoracic Society (ATS), infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF), and the European Cystic Fibrosis Society (ECFS) to guide clinicians in the diagnosis and management of NTM in patients including those with CF [Floto 2016; Griffith 2007].  
Treatment of NTM -PD currently involves a multidrug regimen (often 3 or more 
antibiotics) for prolonged durations; a frequently cited goal for treatment duration is for one year beyond conversion of cultures to negative [Griffith 2007]. These multidrug regimens have potential for intolerability and toxicity resulting in risk for suboptimal treatment and increased likelihood of antibiotic resistance.  In addit ion, many patients will not achieve culture 
conversion despite adhering to their treatment regimen.  There are few data available in CF patients, but overall culture conversion rates reported for other conditions are 55- 65% for MAC 
[Wallace 1996; Tanaka 19 98] and 48-58% for Mabs [Jarand 2011].  
It is clear from these observations that current options for NTM- PD treatment are 
limited in scope and in results. An additional problem for CF patients is that the presence of Mabs in sputum cultures may create an insurmountable hurdle for eventual lung transplantation.  Although the CFF/ECFS guidelines clearly state that NTM presence is not an absolute contraindication for lung transplantation [Floto 2016] , there are some patients who 
have been declined for transplant listing because of NTM- PD. [Chalermskulrat 2006; personal 
communication].  Therefore, there is an urgent need for novel treatment of NTM- PD in patients 
with and without CF. 
Overview of gNO  a
nd R ationale  for Study 
Recent observations of the antimicrobial effects of inhaled nitric oxide gas (gNO) 
suggest it may be a serious candidate for inclusion in the treatment regimen of NTM -PD.  
When NO molecules pass through the bacteria cell wall, they bind available thiols (e.g. glutathione) and cause cell death through a combination of asphyxiation of the electron transport complex, impairment of bacterial defense mechanisms, modification of oxygen and nitrogen radical species and metal ion deamination of its DNA  [Schaefer 2006]. In vitro studies 
have demonstrated that NO possesses antimicrobial activity against a wide variety of bacteria, 
viruses, helminthes and parasites [Schaefer 2006].  
Safety
 data: Animal studies of acute exposure to high concentrations of NO (500-1500 ppm 
NO) for up to 30 minutes demonstrated no acute pulmonary injury (i.e. there were no 
Page 9 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
differences in histopathological evaluation between the NO-exposed animals and room air 
control animals). An FDA reviewer noted that, aside from the effects due to formation of methemoglobin (a known adverse effect of NO), oxidative insult to respiratory epithelia may be low/minimal at 200 ppm.  
Anti-myco
bacterial effects : gNO has been demonstrated  to be capable of eradicating M 
smegmatis , a fast -growing mycobacteria [Miller 2007]. In vitro testing of M smegmatis  
(mc2155), M bovis - Bacillus Calmette -Guérin (BCG) and M tuberculosis  (H37Rv) exposed to 
160ppm gNO have recently been completed by Miller et al. (unpublished). The gNO was delivered both as a continuous exposure or as an interrupted exposure cycle (30 minutes repeated every 3.5 hours) until all bacteria were eradicated.  Initial bacterial concentrations were 6 log10 cfu/mL for all bacteria tested. M smegmatis  and BCG were more susceptible to 
gNO and complete cidal effect occurred within 10 hrs of exposure or 1,600ppm-hrs. M tuberculosis required 18 hrs or 2,880ppm-hrs of exposure to achieve complete kill. The control arm of the study was expo sed to air while the treatment arm was exposed to 160 ± 5ppm gNO. 
In each of the experiments the control samples remained viable for the duration of the study.  The results of multiple 30 min, 160 ppm gNO exposures of M smegmatis , BCG and M 
tuberculosis sh owed a complete kill of each of the organisms tested was achieved by 96 hrs. 
These results demonstrate that gNO is capable of eradicating a variety of both fast - and slow-
growing mycobacteria. This study suggests that gNO could safely be delivered to humans with potential efficacy in patients with NTM.  
Prel
iminary human work : This approach to therapy has undergone typical phase I clinical 
investigation and there is a current Phase II study of CF subjects (clinicaltrials.gov [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) evaluating the eff ects of gNO on bacterial species (i.e. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and  Stenotrophomonas maltophilia).  A prospective, single 
center, open labelled, clinical phase I study exposed eight adult CF patients (2 with Mabs in sputum cultures) to gNO by inhalation for 30 min, three times daily, at a concentration of 160 ppm for two periods of 5 days each [Deppisch 2016]. The primary outcome was safety and no serious drug-related adverse events occurred. Methemoglobin increased in a ll patients to a 
maximum of 3.0% after 30 min of treatment, considered an acceptable level.  Oxygen 
saturation did not decrease below 95% in any patient.  Secondary endpoints were change of bacterial and or fungal load after completion of the treatment from baseline and change in FEV1 from baseline. The intent- to-treat (ITT) analysis revealed a significant mean reduction of 
the colony forming units (cfu) of all bacteria, but what was notable was the reduction of M abscessus  by 5 orders of magnitude. 
More r
ecently, two pa tients with CF with persistent Mabs infection and clinical decline despite 
antibiotic treatment were treated with compassionate use of gNO given in intermittent periods at 160ppm [Yaacoby -Bianu 2018]. One patient received 72 inhalations over 26 days, while the 
other received 90 inhalations over 21 days.  Both subjects showed significant reduction in estimated colony forming units (CFU/ml) for Mabs (decreased from 7000 to 550 and 3000 to 0, respectively). Clinically the subjects were reported to have improve ment in well- being and ease 
of sputum production, while one patients experienced an increase in lung function. 
Finally, there are trials of gNO listed on clinicaltrials.gov.  One study is recruiting 
patients with Mabs for a Phase II study in Israel ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) with a primary safety endpoint.   Another study is being performed in Canada, which is  a safety study of gNO in 
adults with NTM -PD (HC6 -24-c207204). 
Page 10 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
In sum, t
here is sufficient preclinical evidence of antimicrobial effect of gNO on NTM.  There 
are compelling reasons to use a gas for treatment as it may get to areas of the lung that will not 
be reached by antibiotics by either the systemic or inhalation  route.  Even in poorly ventilated 
lung units, a 50 minute exposure should be sufficient time for NO to achieve therapeutic levels.  There are also sufficient safety data that the proposed exposure should be well tolerated.  It is premature to predict how this therapy will be best used, but multiple options could be conceived such as eradication of first infection (especially for Mabs), improving outcomes when used in conjunction with standard antibacterial regimens, shorter durations of treatment regimens,  among others.  This study proposes to demonstrate that there can, indeed, be a killing 
effect of NTM as well as assess for how quickly it may return in sputum cultures as these will be key factors in designing subsequent treatment trials. 
7 STUDY 
OBJECTIVE 
The short
 term goal of this proposal is a proof-of-concept study in which we will expose 
patients with NTM lung disease and who have persistently positive sputum cultures to test the feasibility of this therapy in this population as well as the safety and e fficacy of the therapy.   
8 STUDY E NDPO
INTS  
•The 
primary measure of efficacy will be sputum culture for mycobacteria converted to
negative at completion of treatment .
•Secondary measures of efficacy will include assessment of feasibility of this treatment (i.e.
recruitment, completion, and satisfaction), sputum culture results for mycobacteria at 3months following completion of treatment, and safety  and tolerability assessments based on
adverse events (AEs) and point of care testing for arterial oxygen sat uration and
methemoglobin levels .
9 STUDY D ESI
GN 
9.1 Ov
erview of Study D esign 
This ope
n-label treatment of NTM lung disease is a proof -of-concept study to assess the 
efficacy of gNO in reducing the burden of NTM in patients known to have persistently positive sputum cultures.  The patients will have documented NTM lung disease and meet inclusion criteria of persistently positive sputum cultures even if on antimicrobial therapy.  The  study is 
designed to evaluate the feasibility, efficacy and safety of open- label gNO  in this population.  
Feasibility will be assessed by ease of recruitment and completion of the study, as well as a survey of the subjects’ experience with the treatment and their willingness to use this as a therapy.  Efficacy  will be assessed by the results of sputum cultures for mycobacteria, looking 
at the short term effect (i.e. conversion to negative while on treatment) as well as the long- term 
effect (i.e. looking at the duration of culture conversion after treatment).  Subjects will undergo sputum cultures at baseline and weekly during treatment, and monthly for 3 months following completion of therapy. Additional measures will include symptom scores of cough and quality of life.  Safety will be assessed by monitoring of SaO2 and metHb levels while on treatment.   
All serious and non- serious adverse events will be collected . 
Page 11 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
9.1.1 Screening  
The inve stiga
tor w ill review the protocol and obtain informed consent from the  subjec ts prior 
to the conduct of any study procedures.  There will be a review of the medical history and 
demographic information including underlying diagnosis. For those patients with cystic 
fibrosis (CF) the results of previous genetic testing  will be recorded .  Physical examination, 
including vital signs, height and weight , and pulse oximetry , will be performed.  Assessment  of 
baseline measures for efficacy will be performed (i.e. sputum collection for mycobacterial 
culture, cough score (Leicester), quality of life ( SGRQ,  CFQ -R, QOL -B).   
9.1.2 T
reatment Period (Days 1 -15) 
The tr
eatment period is separated over 3 weeks (A, B, and C) each with 5 days of treatment, 
and 2 days off treatment in between.  On the first day of each treatment week (A1, B1, C1) subjects  will be evaluated for any changes in health or medications.  They will undergo 
physical examination, including height and weight.  They will undergo measurement of efficacy outcomes ( symptom scores ) as per the Study Assessment Schedule (Table 3 -1).  
During each day of treatment (A1 -A5, B1-B5, and C1-C5), subjects will be exposed to gNO 
through a tight-fitting mask at 160 ppm for 50 minutes for each treatment.  There will be three treatments given on each day, with 3 hours between each treatment.  The subjects will be monitored with pulse oximetry throughout their exposure to gNO to assess SaO2 and metHb levels. On the last day of each treatment period (A5, B5, C5), the subjects will repeat their symptom scores as well as provide sputum for mycobacteria l culture.  
9.1.3  F
ollow Up Period (3 months) 
Patien
ts will be evaluated monthly for 3 months for any changes in health or medications.  
They will undergo physical examination, including height and weight.  They will undergo measurement of efficacy outcomes (symptom scores, sputum cultures) as per the Study 
Assessment Schedule (Table 3 -1).   
9.2 Rat
ionale  for Study D esign 
This i
s a proof-of-concept study based upon in vitro  exposure of NTM to gNO.  The primary 
efficacy measure (conversion to negative mycobacterial cultures) are expected to change in the short term (i.e. during the 3 week  treatment period ), but assessment after completion of 
treatment is important to determine if there is a return to culture positivity in the immediate term post- treatment.  The overall culture response rate and the time to recurrence (if it recurs) 
will be important data to determine if this therapy has clinical potential for this patient population and the resulting data will be helpful for estimating the ef fect size to be used in 
designing a future randomized controlled trial 
The othe
r key measures include reduction in the mycobacterial density (in the event that 
cultures do not convert to negative, this will provide information about some treatment effect), efficacy based on symptoms, safety, and the feasibility of conducting a larger trial or whether this therapeutic regimen would have viability. 
As thi
s is a  proof-of-concept study, there is no value to a blinded aspect for the study.  
Page 12 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
Treatment will be o pen-label and clinical outcomes will be assessed by the individuals. 
10 SELECTIO
N OF STU DY POPULA TION  
10.1 Inclusion
 Criteria 
Patie
nts with NTM lung disease who persistently demonstrate infection with positive sputum 
cultures will be eligible for the study.  This will include patients with and without CF as this is 
typical of the NTM population and this therapy should be non- discriminatory.  Inclusion 
criteria are as follows : 
•Subjec ts are >18 years of age and able to provide informed consent.
•Subjects
 have NTM lung disease as defined by each of the following:
oSputum cultures positive for NTM (MAC or M
 abscessus)
oRadiologic studies that demonstrate f eatures consistent with disease such as 
nodular bronchiectasis and/or cavities
oSymptoms 
consistent with disease including respiratory (e.g. cough, sputum 
production, hemoptysis, chest pain) and constitutional (e.g. fevers, 
night 
sweats, fatigue, myalgias, arthralgias, weight loss)
•Subjec ts are able to 
produce sputum for culture (either spontaneous or induced).
•Subjects have a history of persistently positive sputum cultures for NTM defined  as
o> 2 positive cultures over the preceding 6 months AND
oHas not met the definition for 
culture clearance in the last 6 months
(three negatives in a row)
•Clinically s
table with no significant changes in health status within 14 days prior to 
Screening or Day 1
•Subjects are willing and able to perform requirements of the study. 
Page 13 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
Appendix
: Guidance for eligibility based on definition of persistent infection 
The definition of persistent infection in the inclusion criteria is:  
•Subjects are able to produce sputum for culture (either spontaneous or induced).
•Subjects have a history of persisten tly positive sputum cultures for NTM defined
as:
o>2 positive cultures over the preceding 6 months AND
oHas not met the definition for culture clearance in the last 6 months
(three negatives in a row .
Since 
there will be heterogeneity  in culture frequency, this table will assist in defining 
eligibility:  
Samples 
taken  Samples found to have NTM (positive samples)  
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
2 0/2 1/2 2/2 -- -- -- -- 
3 0/3 1/3 2/3 3/3 -- -- -- 
4 0/4 1/4 2/4 3/4 4/4 -- -- 
5 0/5 1/5 2/5 3/5 4/5 5/5 -- 
6 0/6 1/6 2/6 3/6 4/6 5/6 6/6 
Red = not eligible  
Green = eligible  
Yellow = potentially eligible (depending on whether culture conversion definition is met) 
The def
inition of culture conversion is at least 3 consecutive negative mycobacterial cultures 
from respiratory samples, collected at least 4 weeks apart (i.e. no intervening positives). The 
table below demonstrates the varying possibilities for the potentially eligible subjects from the 
table above.  
Number 
positives  Months prior to screeni ng Eligible  
6 5 4 3 2 1 0 No 
2 X O X O O O . No 
2 O X X O O O . No 
2 X X O O O O . No 
2 O X O O O X . No 
2 X O O O O X . No 
Page 14 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 2 X O O O X O . No 
2 O O O O X X . No 
2 O O O X X O . No 
2 O O O X O X . No 
         
3 X X X O O O . No 
3 X X O O O X . No 
3 X O O O X X . No 
3 O O O X X X . No 
         
2 X O O X O O X Yes 
2 O X O X O O X Yes 
2 O X O O X O X Yes 
2 O O X X O O X Yes 
2 O O X O X O X Yes 
2 O O X O O X X Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
  
For those deemed ineligible, they may yet become eligible.  In the following table, are different 
scenarios in which could be rescreened or become eligible within a period of time.  S2, S3 and S4 indicate that the participant should be screened again after 2, 3, or 4 months.  For these 
participants, no more than one positive culture has occurred since meeting the definition for 
culture conversion, and more positive cultures will need to occur to meet eligibility requirements. E1 and E2 indicate that the participant will be eligible after 1 or 2 months. For these persons, two qualifying, positive cultures have occurred since evidence of culture 
conversion. 
Number 
positives Months prior to screening 
 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 
2 X O X O O O S4 
2 O X X O O O S4 
2 X X O O O O S4 
2 O X O O O X S3 
2 X O O O O X S3 
2 X O O O X O S2 
2 O O O O X X E2 
2 O O O X X O E1 
2 O O O X O X E1 
        
3 X X X O O O S4 
3 X X O O O X S3 
3 X O O O X X E2 
3 O O O X X X E1 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
  
10.2 Exclus ion Cri teria 
 Subjects will be excluded if they have any of the following:  
 
• Smoking history in the prior 6 months 
• Significant hemoptysis  within 30 days prior to screening (>5 ml of blood in one 
coughing episode or >30 ml of blood in a 24 hour period) 
• Forced expiratory volume at one second (FEV
1) <40% of predicted  
• On supplemental oxygen or SaO2 <90% at screening or Day 1, or within 30 days prior to enrollment.  
• Known cardiac (left heart) insufficiency (defined as LVEF <35%) prior to screening 
• Known pulmonary hypertension 
• Known or suspected hemoglobinopathy 
• Initiation of  NTM treatment regimen or a change in the regimen was made in the prior 6 
months.  Subjects on active treatment can be enrolled if they have been on a stable anti-NTM regimen for at least 6 months . 
• Initiation of new chronic therapy within 4 weeks prior to screening 
• Use of drugs known to increase methemoglobin (see 12.2.7) at screening  
• Any of the following abnormal lab values at screening: 
o 6-GPD deficiency  
o Hemoglobin <10g/dl 
o Platelet count <100,000/ mm3  
o Prothrombin time international ratio (INR) >1.5  
o Abnormal liver function defined as any two of the following 
 ALT >3x ULN  
 AST >3x ULN  
 ALP >3x ULN 
 GGT >3x ULN  
o Abnormal renal function defined as:  
 Calculated Creatinine Clearance <50 ml (as calculated by Cockcroft/Gault) 
• For women of child bearing potential: 
o Positive pregnancy test at screening or  
o Lactating or  
o Unwilling to practice a medically acceptable form of contraception from screening to Day 15 (acceptable forms of contraception: abstinence, hormonal birth control, intrauterine device, or barrier method plus a spermicidal agent) 
• Use of an investigational drug within  30 days prior to screening 
• Intravenous or oral steroids (>10 mg/d prednisone equivalent) in the 14 days prior to screening  
• Any condition that the Investigator believes would interfere with the intent of this study or would make participation not in the best interest of the subject.  
    
Page 17 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
  
11 DOSING OF STUDY DRUG  
 
11.1 General Dosing Information  
Gaseous NO (5000 ppm), delivered with air as carrier to dilute it to 160 ppm, will be 
administered by inhalation for 50 minutes three times daily on Days 1 -5, 8-12, and 15-19.  On 
each day, treatment will be given with a minimum of 3 hours between the end of one treatment 
and the start of the following treatment. Subjects will receive 160 ppm during each 50 minute inhalation period (daily exposure 400 ppm hours. This will result in a total of 6000 ppm hours of exposure.  
11.2 Dosing Information  
 
The 5000 ppm nitric oxide source cylinder contains 5000 ppm (0.5% NO) with the balance of 
the gas being nitrogen. Only 3.2% of the gas the subject inhales will come from the NO cylinder. Therefore, the nitrogen in the NO cylinder will dilute the inspired oxygen in th e 
carrier gas. This will lower the inspired oxygen from 20.9% to 20.3% or the equivalent of standing at approximately700 feet above sea level.  Inclusion criteria for subjects include 
oxygen saturation >90% on room air and the estimated 3.5 torr change in PaO2 is not 
anticipated to have a significant clinical effect on subject oxygenation. Subjects will be monitored continuously during treatment with a pulse oximeter.  
 
11.3 Dosage Administration 
 
Gas cylinders with the study drug (5,000 ppm NO and 99.5% nitrogen) will be labeled with its contents.  These cylinders will be D -size cylinders with a CGA626 valve, containing 
approximately 350 liters of gas.  
 Subjects will receive the study drug by inha ling through a nasal mask attached to an Inhaled 
NO Delivery Device (INODD) administration system. The INODD is comprised of three components including an inspiratory flow monitor with a ratio- metric matching NO injector 
module, an inhaled gas monitoring module, and a gas mixing subject interface and breathing valve. It is a variable inspiratory flow delivery system that instantaneously matches the subject’s inspiratory flow with the injected 5000 ppm NO to deliver 160 ppm of nitric oxide independent of ins piratory flow up to 120 LPM, while keeping nitrogen dioxide ≤ 3 ppm. It is 
a breath -initiated delivery system and the NO will be blended into the inspiratory gas stream 
only as long as the subject is inhaling and proportional to the inspiratory flow. The a nalyzer 
monitors the inhaled nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxygen concentrations.  A sample pump in the INODD withdraws a low flow (~ 250 mL/min) from the inspiratory circuit to the subject for analysis of NO, NO
2 and O 2. These analyzers assure that t he subject is 
receiving the correct gas concentration and assures that the oxygen concentration remains in a safe range and that the inspired concentration of NO
2 is below the set alarm threshold limit. 
Should the NO concentration fall outside the targeted  range, an operator set alarm will sound. 
The system will shut off the NO flow should the NO analyzer measure a value that is ≥ 200 ppm In addition, should the NO
2 rise above the alarm limit of 3 ppm, an alarm will sound. If 
the NO 2 rises above 5 ppm, the system will alarm as well as shut off the flow of NO to the 
Page 18 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 circuit.  
 
12 ASSESSME NTS  
 
12.1 Timing of A ssess ments 
 
The timing  of asse ssments is shown in Table 3-1. 
 
12.2 Clinical Assessments  
 
12.2.1 S ubject and Di sease Characteristi cs 
 
Demographic information ( age, gender, race) will be captured at Screening.   Relevant 
medical history, including history of current disease, other pertinent respiratory history, 
and information regarding underlying diseases will be recorded at Screening. 
 
12.2.2 Physic al Examination  
 A complete physical examination will be performed by a physician (either the principal investigator or a sub- investigator) at Screening. Body systems to be examined include General, 
Skin, Lymph Nodes, HEENT, Respiratory, Cardiovascular, Gastrointestinal, Neurologic and Muscoskeletal.   Qualified staff (e.g. MD, nurse practitioner, registered nurse, physician’s 
assistant) may complete the abbreviated physical exam (General, HEENT, Respiratory, Cardiovascular and  Gastrointestinal) at all other visits. After screening, new clinically 
significant abnormal physical exam findings must be documented as adverse events (AEs) and will be followed by a physician or other qualified staff at the next scheduled visit or as medically indicated.  
 
12.2.3 Vital Signs 
 
Heart rate, blood pressure, respiration rate and temperature will be performed and recorded after resting for 5 minutes at Screening and prior to the start of the first treatment on each day of treatment. Heart rate from the pulse oximeter will additionally be measured and recorded 
every 5 minutes during each treatment.  
 
12.2.4 Oxygen Saturation 
 
Oxygen saturation will be measured by pulse oximetry on room air at multiple visits during the study after the subject has been at rest for 5 minutes. Additionally, during each 50 minute inhalation treatment period, measurements will be recorded at 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40 and 45 minutes.  
12.2.5 Methemoglobin  
 
Will be non-invasively measured (and recorded every 5 minutes) using a pulse methemoglobinometer at Screening, Baseline, continuously during each treatment, recorded every 5 minutes during each treatment. For the first treatment, subjects will be  monitored in 
clinic every 30 minutes post-treatment for adverse events related to study drug inhalation and to  
Page 19 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
  
ensure MetHb returns to baseline .  NOTE: Any Methemoglobin level >5% (absolute) above 
baseline requires a repeat level to be measured 5 minutes later an d the final measurement 
should be recorded. If methemoglobin is 15% or higher, see section 13.1 for treatment procedures.   Table 12.1 Monitoring before, during and after treatment 
Measurement  Pre-treatment  During treatment  Post-treatment  
Vital signs  HR, BP, RR, T prior 
to first treatment  
HR, BP, RR prior to 
each treatment  HR every 5 minutes  HR, BP, RR upon 
cessation of treatment  
Repeat at 30 minutes  
SaO2  Prior to treatment  Every 5 minutes  Upon cessation of 
treatment  
Repeat at 30 minutes  
Methemoglobin  Prior to treatment  Every 5 minutes  Upon cessation of 
treatment  
Repeat every 30 minutes until return 
to baseline  
 
 
12.2.6 P rior and Conc omitant Medications  
 Information reg arding a ll medications a dministere d bef ore study enr ollment and through 
the la st study visit will be  recorded. 
 
12.2.7 Excluded concomitant medications  
 
Some medications are known to be capable of inducing methemoglobinemia and are excluded from use in this trial.  This list may include:  
 
 
 

Page 20 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 12.3 Safety 
 
Study subjects will remain in the research clinic for at least one hour following each treatment, 
presuming all monitored parameters are acceptable as per Table 12.1  
 12.3.1 Adverse Events  
 Information regarding occurrence of adverse events will be captured throughout the study. Duration (start and stop dates and times), severity, outcome, treatment and relation to study medication will be documented on the case report form.  
12.3.2 Safety Monitoring  
 
A Medical Monitor for this study will consist of a single independent monitoring  clinician 
with experience in the treatment and management of patients with pulmonary diseases. Safety data will be monitored on a continual basis throughout the trial.  SAEs and important protocol defined medical events will be reviewed in real time throughout the trial. The Medical Monitor will review all SAE reports and  important protocol defined medical event 
reports , and may at any point temporarily stop the study for concerns of subject safety.
 IND 
safety reporting to the FDA and the IRB will be according to guidance procedures as 
delineated in CFR 312.32. 
12.4 Research Laboratory Assessments  
 12.4.1 Sputum cultures  
 
Sputum will be collected for culture at Screening , and Days 5, 12, and 19 (treatment dates),  and 
Weeks 7, 11 and 15 (follow up). Sputum samples w ill be  processed at  the MUSC  clinical 
laboratory, using standard decontamination procedures, fluorochrome microscopy, solid medium culture on a biplate of Middlebrook 7H10 agar with and without antibiotics, and a broth culture (BACTEC 960 [Becton Dickinson, Sparks, MD] or ESP [TREK Diagnostic Systems, Cleveland, OH]). MAC isolates are identified with AccuProbe (Hologic-GenProbe, San Diego, CA).  Semiquantitative AFB smear and culture results for each submitted clinical specimen will be  
recorded  [Wallace 1996] . Briefly, a negative culture exhibit s no mycobacterial growth. 
Cultures w ill be  reported as positive if growth occurs in broth medium only; growth on broth 
medium plus solid medium cultures with countable colonies w ill be reported as 0 –49 colonies, 
1+; solid medium growth with 50 –99 colonies, 2+; solid medium growth with 100–199 
colonies; 3+, solid medium growth with 200–299 colonies; and 4+, solid medium growth with at least 300 colonies. For data analysis, each culture w ill be  scored as follows: 0, no growth in 
broth or solid medium; 1, broth medium growth only; 2, countable colonies (<50 colonies) on solid medium; and 3–6, 1+ to 4+ growth on solid medium, respectively.  
12.5.1 Quality of life measures  
 
Validated instruments will be used for measurement of symptoms and quality of life.  Since study subjects may have different underlying conditions, for which there are different quality of life measures, we will use a condition specific measure for each as  follows: 
Page 21 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 • Cystic fibrosis: Cystic fibrosis Questionnaire -Revised (CFQ -R) 
• Bronchiectasis: Quality of Life – Bronchiectasis (QOL -B) 
• All: St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire (SGR -Q) 
• All: Leicester Cough Score  
 
13 DISCONTINUATION OR WITHDRAWAL FROM TREATMENT  
13.1 Discontinuation of a 50 Minute Inhalation Period  (note: treatment will not be 
initiated if threshold values are present beforehand)  
A 50 minute inhalation treatment period will be discontinued if the following occurs . 
• a change in the blood pressure systolic value ≥ 20 mmHg or an absolute value of ≤ 80 
mmHg repeated at 2 minutes  
• an oxygen saturation of < 85% and following recheck of sensor placement  
• a reduction in oxygen saturation >5% (e.g. 98% to 92%). 
• a persistent* increase in heart rate of ≥ 30 from start of a treatment or an absolute value of 150 
• a persistent* absolute increase in methemoglobin of more than 5% above the Day 1 baseline value and follo 0wing recheck of sensor placement  
• a recorded inspired NO2 > 5 ppm during any treatment  
• Subjects with methemoglobin of more than 15% should be treated with 100% oxygen. If 
20% or greater, subjects should be treated with Methylene Blue (1 to 2 mg/kg intravenously).  Repeat in one hour if necessary.  Note: Inject intravenously very slowly 
over a period of several minutes to prevent local high concentration of the compound from producing additional methemoglobin. Large intravenous doses of Methylene Blue may produce nausea, abdominal and precordial pain , dizziness, headache, profuse 
sweating, mental confusion and the formation of methemoglobin. Also note that 
methemoglobin cannot be measured by the oximeter after treatment with methylene blue and should be measured by blood values. See package insert for  full contraindications 
and side -effects.  Methylene blue is contraindicated in patients who have developed 
hypersensitivity reactions to it and in severe renal insufficiency. It is relatively contraindicated in G6PD deficient patients as it can cause severe hemolysis and also in patients with Heinz body anemia. In such cases it may be appropriate to treat with 
intravenous ascorbic acid. 
 *Persistent means that the value was obtained on a repeated measurement taken 5 minutes 
following the original measurement.  
 13.2 Withdrawal from study 
If a subject experiences any of the following events during the study period, they should be 
immediately be withdrawn from the study. Study drug related adverse events:  
• Two consecutive inhalation treatment periods with a persistent absolute increase in methemoglobin of more than 5% above the Day 1 baseline value 
• Study drug related significant hemoptysis: production of greater than 50 mL blood in a 24 hour period. Note: Standard treatment for significant hemoptysis should include immediate chest x -ray, hematocrit measurement and if frothy sputum present, an 
evaluation for hemosiderin labeled macrophages. 
• Any study drug related adverse event that repeats upon treatment continuation.  
. 
Page 22 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 Other withdrawal criteria:  
• At the discretion of the subject 
• At the discretion of the Investigator, if deemed appropriate, for any reason 
• Subjects will also be  withdrawn from the study if they have had to discontinue treatment 
during the 50- minute inhalation period more than twice due to cr iteria listed in 13.1.  
 
If a subject is withdrawn because of an adverse event, the subject will be followed and treated by the Investigator until the abnormal parameter or symptom has resolved or stabilized.  The adverse events must be followed to resolution and the follow -up evaluations should be 
performed when the subject has stabilized.  
 If for any reason a subject does not complete the study, the reason will be entered on the CRF. All subjects are free to withdraw from participation at any time,  for any reason, specified or 
unspecified, and without prejudice. The Investigator must record the reason for the early termination.  
 
14 STA TISTICAL A ND ANALY TICAL PLA NS 
 
Data analy sis will be  performed by the investigator . 
 14.1 Sample  Size and Power 
 Planned enrollment is a minimum of 6 and a maximum of 10 subjects in this study. If a high enough proportion of subjects demonstrate a response (e.g. 5 of 6 or 6 of 8) early on in the trial, we may be able to limit the sample size, since the 95% confidence intervals would indicate a high 
certainty that this therapy is worth pursuing in a larger randomized controlled trial.  If, however, none of the 10 subjects exhibit a response, then we can be almost certain that this particular therapy is futile, since th e resulting 95% confidence interval around the response rate would range 
from 0% to 31%.   
 
14.2 Statistical Analy ses 
 
Data will be summarized descriptively for each subject.  No formal comparative statistical analyses are planned  
 14.3.1 B ackground Characte ristics 
 14.3.1.1 S ubject Disposition 
 The number of subj ects in each disposition category (e.g., enrolled; prema turely discontinued 
from the stu dy; and completed the stu dy) will be  summ arized. 
 
14.3.1.2 De mogr aphi cs and Basel ine Characteristi cs 
 
The following demog raphic and base line char acter istics will be  captured  (as appropriate) : 
CFTR genotype, sex, race, age, weight, height, BMI, spirometry, SGRQ, CFQ -R, QOL -B, 
and sputum culture results. 
Page 23 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
  
14.3.1.3 P rior and Conc omitant Medications 
 
Medi cations taken during the coll ection per iod specified in S ection 1 1 will be  summ arized by 
preferred term using the World H ealth  Organization Drug Dictionary (W HO-DD) for the 
Safety Se t as fre quency tables in 2 par ts: 
• Prior medi cation: medica tion th at started bef ore the  first dose of inhaled nitric oxide 
regardless of wh en dosing of the medi cation ended. 
• Conc omitant medi cation: m edication re ceived at or after the first dose of inhaled nitric 
oxide , medi cation th at was received bef ore initia l dosing of  and continued after initia l 
dosing, or medica tion with missing  stop date. 
 Medi cations th at started bef ore the first dose of inhaled nitric oxide  and continued after the 
first dose of inhaled nitric oxide will be  summarized separately a s prior medi cations and 
concomitant medi cations, re spectiv ely.  Medi catio ns with a  missing  start date will be  
considered to have a st art date bef ore the first dose of inhaled nitric oxide. 
 14.3.2 E fficac
y Analys is 
 For the primary analysis, the proportion of subjects with culture conversion (negative) will be recorded.  For the secondary analysis the change (absolute change) in semi- quantitative cultures 
from baseline will be calculated as post -baseline value – baseline value.  Exploratory analysis 
will be the change in time-to-detection as reported in the broth culture system. 
 14.3.3 Safety Analys is 
 All s afety da ta will be  presented in individua l subj ect d ata listin gs. 
 14.3.3.1 Adverse Events  
 All adverse events with star t date on or af ter enrollment da te through the la st stu dy visit will 
be summ arized. Adver se events ar e defined in Section 15.1.1. Adver se event summary table s 
will in clude the following: 
• all adver se events; 
• related (ide ntified a s related to inhaled nitric oxide by the inve stigator) adver se event s; 
• adver se events l eading to treatment discontinua tion; 
• serious adver se events (S AEs); and 
• adver se events by relationship. 
 Summ aries 
 will be  presented by MedDR A system organ cla ss and pre ferred t erm using 
frequency counts and per centages. A subj ect with  multiple  occurre nces of the sa me adverse 
event or a continuing adv erse event will be  counted only once, by relationship. 
 14.4 Interim Analy ses 
 No interim analyse s will be  performed but safety will be monitored throughout. 
 
15 PROCE DURA L, ETHICAL, REGULATORY, AND 
Page 24 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 ADM INISTRATI VE CON SIDERA TIONS  
 
15.1 Adverse Eve nt and Se rious  Adverse Eve nt Documentation and 
Report ing 
 15.1.1 Def inition of an Adverse Eve nt 
 
For this stu dy, an adverse eve nt is d efined a s any untow ard medi cal o ccurrence in  a subj ect 
during the stu dy, including an y newly-occu rring event or pre vious condition tha t has 
increased in severity or fre quency afte r the informed consent for m is si gned. 
 A subset of adver se even ts may m eet serious cr iteria. The definition of an S AE and re porting 
procedure s for S AEs are deta iled in S ection 15.1.2. The def initions b elow apply to both 
adver se events and S AEs. 
 Planned hospita l admiss ions or su rgical p rocedure s for an illn ess or disease th at existed before 
the subj ect w as enrolle d in the  study are no t to be considered adver se events unle ss the 
condition det eriorated in an unantic ipated manner during the stu dy (e.g., surgery wa s performed 
earlier th an planned). 
 15.1.2 D
efinition of a  Serious Adverse Eve nt 
 An SAE is any adver se eve nt that meets any of the following cr iteria: 
 
• Fatal (death, reg ardless of cause, tha t occurs during par ticipation in the study, or 
occurs after participation in the  study and is suspected of being possibly related 
toinhaled nitric oxide ).  
• Life- threatening, such tha t the subj ect w as at imm ediate risk of death from the re action a s 
it occurre d. 
• Inpa tient hospita lization or prolongation of hospita lization, with the  exception of 
planned or el ective  hospita lization. 
• Persistent or si gnificant disa bility /incapacity (disa bility is defined as a 
substantia l disruption of a per son's ability to conduct norma l life functions). 
• Congenita l anomaly or birth def ect. 
• Important medi cal event that, based upon appropria te medi cal ju dgment, may 
jeopar dize the subj ect or may require medi cal or su rgical intervention to pre vent 1 of 
the outcome s listed above (e .g., an a llergic bronchospa sm requiring intensive trea tment 
in an emergency room or a t home). 
 15.1.3 Documentation of Adverse Events  
 From the time  informed conse nt is si gned through the la st stu dy visit all adver se events will 
be coll ected.  The  following da ta should be documented for each adver se event: 
• Des cription of the event 
• Cla ssification of "serious" or "not s erious" 
• Da te of fir st occurrence and da te of resolution ( if appli cable) 
• Causa l relationship to inhaled nitric oxide exposure 
• Action taken 
Page 25 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 • Outcome 
• Conc omitant medi cation or  other trea tment given 
 
15.1.4 Adverse Eve nt Causality 
 Every effort should be made by the inve stigator to  assess the  relationship of the adver se 
event, if any, to inhaled nitric oxide exposure . Causality should be cla ssified using the 
categori es presented in Table 15-1. 
 
Table 15-1  Classification for Adverse Event Causality  
Classification  Definition  
Related  There is a suspected association between the event and the 
administration of  inhaled nitric oxide , a plausible mechanism for the 
event to be related to inhaled nitric oxide and causes other than the 
inhaled nitric oxide have been ruled out, and/or the event re-
appeared on re -exposure to inhaled nitric oxide .  
Not related  The event is believed related to an etiology other than the inhaled 
nitric oxide . (The alternative etiology should be documented in the 
study subject's medical record)  
 
15.1.5 Adverse Eve nt Ou tcome 
 
An adver se event should be followed until the inve stigator ha s determined and provided the 
final outcome. The outcome  should be cla ssified a ccording to the categories shown in Table 
15-2.  
Table 1 5-2  Classifications for Outcome of an Adverse Event  
Classification  Definition  
Recovered/Resolved  Resolution of an adverse event with no residual signs 
or symptoms  
Recovered/Resolved with Sequelae  Resolution of an adverse event with residual signs or 
symptoms  
Not Recovered/Not resolved 
(Continuing)  Either incomplete imp rovement or no improvement of 
an adverse event, such that it remains ongoing  
Fatal  Outcome of an adverse event is death. "Fatal" should 
be used when death is at least possibly related to the 
adverse event  
Unknown  Outcome of an adverse event is not known (e.g., a 
subject lost to follow -up). 
 
15.1.6 Reporting P rocedure  for Adverse Events and Pregnancy  
 
All s erious events (a s defined in S ection 15.1.2) th at occur af ter obta ining  informed consent 
and assent (wh ere applicabl e) through the la st stu dy vis it, regardless of causality, will be 
reported to the MUSC IRB within 24 hour s of their awarene ss. 
 15.1.6 Adverse events of special interest  
 
Page 26 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 Short-term NO2 exposures, ranging from 30 minutes to 24 hours, are associated with the 
following adverse respiratory effects: decreased pulmonary function, chronic bronchitis, 
dyspnea, chest pain, pulmonary edema, cyanosis, tachypnea, tachycardia, which can  aggravate 
existing heart disease, leading to increased hospital admissions and premature death. We will 
monitor for and record the following adverse events of special interest: methemoglobinemia, acute hypoxia and hemoptysis, bronchospasm, nasal congestio n, sinus congestion, sinusitis, 
cough, bronchitis, pneumonitis, and alveolitis, as well as nausea, vomiting and diarrhea . 
 15.2 Ad mini strative Re quirements  
 15.2.1 Et hical Con sideratio ns 
 The study will be  conducted in accordance with the  ethical p rinciples founded in the 
Declaration of He lsinki,  and according to local appli cable la ws and regulations. The 
institution al review bo ard (IRB ) will revie w all appropria te study documentation to s afeguard 
the rights, safety, and we ll-being of the subj ects..  
 
15.2.2 S ubject Information and In formed Con sent 
 
Subjects must also be informed tha t participation is voluntary and tha t they may withd raw 
from the stu dy at any time, without pre judice to th eir curre nt or future care. Documentation of 
the discussion and the da te of in formed conse nt must be recorded in the sub ject's medical 
record or a stu dy/clinic char t. On ce all of their questions have been answe red and they have 
volunt arily agr eed to par ticipate in the stu dy, e ach subj ect will be  asked to sign and da te the  
ICF.  Informed consent must be obta ined from each subj ect bef ore the performance of any 
study-related ac tivity. 
 15.2.3 I
nvestigator Compli ance  
 No modifi cations to the protocol should be made without the approval of the IRB, ex cept 
where the modifi cation is  necessary to e limin ate an app arent immedia te hazard to human 
subjects.  Any depar tures from protoc ol must be  fully documented in the sourc e 
documentation and in a protocol devia tion lo g. 
 15.2.4 A ccess to R ecords  
 The records must also be ava ilable for direc t insp ection, ver ification, and copyin g, as required 
by appli cable la ws and regulations, by officials of the regula tory hea lth author ities (FDA and 
other s). The inve stigator must comply with appli cable privacy and s ecurity la ws for use and 
disclosure of informa tion related to the re search set for th in this p rotocol. 
 15.2.5 S ub
ject Privacy  
 To m aintain subj ect confidentia lity, a ll case re port forms (CRFs), study reports, and 
communi cations re lating to the  study will id entify subj ects by assigned subj ect number s. The 
FDA (or other regula tory authority) may also re quest access to all stu dy records, including 
source documentation, f or insp ection. 
 
Page 27 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 As appli cable, in a ccordance with the  Health Insurance Porta bility and A ccounta bility Ac t 
(HIP AA) and a ssociated pr ivacy regulations, a subj ect authorization to use per sonall y 
identifiable hea lth in formation may be re quired fro m each subj ect before re search activiti es 
begin. This authoriza tion docume nt must clearly specify which parties will h ave a ccess to a 
subject's personal health in formation, for wh at purpose, and for ho w lon g. 
 
15.2.6 R ecord R etention  
 The inve stigator will ma intain a ll stu dy records according to GCP guide lines for a minimum 
of 6 years per MUSC policy. 
 
15.3 Data Qu ality A ssurance 
 The inve stigator will  prepare and maintain adequa te and a ccura te case  histo ries designed to 
record a ll observations and other da ta pertinent to the  study for each stud y participant. S tudy 
data for each enrolled subjec t will be  entered into a  CRF by site personne l using  a secure, 
electronic data capture ( EDC) appli cation (REDCap) .
20  Any change s to stu dy da ta will be  
made to the CRF and documented in an audit t rail, whic h will be  mainta ined within the stu dy 
database. 
 
15.4 
Data Capt ure 
 It is the  inve stigator's responsibility to ensure the accuracy, completene ss, clarity, and 
timeliness of the da ta reported in the subj ect's CRF. Sourc e documenta tion suppor ting the 
CRF da ta should indi cate the subj ect's participation in the stu dy and should document the 
dates and deta ils of  study procedures, adver se events, other obs ervations, and subj ect 
status. 
 The investigator will retain the CRF da ta and cor respondin g audit t rails th at show all update s 
to data, with user id entification, date, and time.  
 15.5 P ublications and Cli nical Study Re port 
 15.5.1 P ublication of Study R esults 
 Any and a ll scientific, commercial, and techni cal informa tion in this p rotocol or e lsewhere 
should be considered the conf identia l and proprietary proper ty of the investigator.  The 
investigator will be responsible for publi cation and/or disclosure of stu dy results. 
 15.5.2 S
tudy Re port 
A clinical stu dy report will be written by the investigator  and submitt ed to the F DA per IND 
requirements . 
   
Page 28 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
  
16 REFERE NCES 
Adjemian J, Olivier KN, Prevots DR. Nontuberculous mycobacteria among patients with 
cystic fibrosis in the United States: screening practices and environmental risk. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med. 2014;190(5):581-6. 
Chalermskulrat W, Sood N, Neuringer IP, Hecker TM, Chang L, Rive ra MP, et al. Non -
tuberculous mycobacteria in end stage cystic fibrosis: implications for lung transplantation. 
Thorax. 2006;61(6):507-13. 
Deppisch C, Herrmann G, Graepler- Mainka U, Wirtz H, Heyder S, Engel C, et al. Gaseous 
nitric oxide to treat antibiotic resistant bacterial and fungal lung infections in patients with 
cystic fibrosis: a phase I clinical study. Infection. 2016;44(4):513-20. 
Floto RA, Olivier KN, Saiman L, Daley CL, Herrmann JL, Nick JA, et al. US Cystic Fibrosis 
Foundation and European Cystic Fibrosis Society consensus recommendations for the management of non-tuberculous mycobacteria in individuals with cystic fibrosis: executive summary. Thorax. 2016;71(1):88-90. 
Griffith DE, Aksamit T, Brown -Elliott BA, Catanzaro A, Daley C, Gordin F, et al. An official 
ATS/IDSA statement: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of nontuberculous mycobacterial 
diseases. American Journal of Respiratory & Critical Care Medicine. 2007;175(4):367-416. 
Honda JR, Hess T, Malcolm KC, Ovrutsky AR, Bai X, Irani VR, e t al. Pathogenic 
nontuberculous mycobacteria resist and inactivate cathelicidin: implication of a novel role for 
polar mycobacterial lipids. PloS one. 2015;10(5):e0126994. 
Jarand J, Levin A, Zhang L, Huitt G, Mitchell JD, Daley CL. Clinical and microbiolog ic 
outcomes in patients receiving treatment for Mycobacterium abscessus pulmonary disease. 
Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 2011;52(5):565-71. 
Martiniano SL, Davidson RM, Nick JA. Nontube rculous mycobacteria in cystic fibrosis: 
Updates and the path forward. Pediatric pulmonology. 2017;52(S48):S29-S36. Miller CC, Rawat M, Johnson T, Av- Gay Y. Innate protection of Mycobacterium smegmatis 
against the antimicrobial activity of nitric oxide is provided by mycothiol. Antimicrobial 
agents and chemotherapy. 2007;51(9):3364-6. 
Olivier KN, Weber DJ, Wallace RJ, Jr., Faiz AR, Lee J -H, Zhang Y, et al. Nontuberculous 
mycobacteria. I: multicenter prevalence study in cystic fibrosis.[see comment]. America n 
Journal of Respiratory & Critical Care Medicine. 2003;167(6):828-34. 
Salsgiver EL, Fink AK, Knapp EA, LiPuma JJ, Olivier KN, Marshall BC, et al. Changing 
Epidemiology of the Respiratory Bacteriology of Patients With Cystic Fibrosis. Chest. 2016;149(2):390-400. 
Page 29 of 29 
 
Medical University of South Carolina  Confidential Information NO-NTM  
 
 Schaefer AL, Perry BJ, Cook NJ, Miller C, Church J, Tong AKW, et al. Infrared detection and 
nitric oxide treatment of bovine respiratory disease. Onlin J Vet Res. 2006;10(1):7-16. 
Sermet -Gaudelus I, Le Bourgeois M, Pierre -Audigier C, Offredo C, Guil lemot D, Halley S, et 
al. Mycobacterium abscessus and children with cystic fibrosis. Emerging infectious diseases. 
2003;9(12):1587-91. 
Tanaka E. [Clinical features and diagnosis of disease caused by nontuberculous mycobacteria]. 
Nihon Rinsho. 1998;56(12):3195-8. 
Tomashefski JF, Jr., Stern RC, Demko CA, Doershuk CF. Nontuberculous mycobacteria in 
cystic fibrosis. An autopsy study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1996;154(2 Pt 1):523-8. 
Wallace RJ, Jr. Treatment of infections caused by rapidly growing mycobacteria in the era of 
the newer macrolides. Res Microbiol. 1996;147(1-2):30-5. 
Yaacoby -Bianu K, Gur M, Toukan Y, Nir V, Hakim F, Geffen Y, et al. Compassionate Nitric 
Oxide Adjuvant Treatment of Persistent Mycobacterium Infection in Cystic Fibrosis Patients. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2018;37(4):336-8. 