Cover Page 
 
Title: Time Course Adaptations Using Deuterated Creatine (D3Cr) Method  
NCT number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: 04/1/2021.   
 
Study  Protocol  
 
Funding agency:  Pepper  Older  Americans  Independence 
Center (National Institute on Aging)  
Study Name:  Time  Course Adaptations  using Deuterated 
Creatine (D3Cr) Method  
Study acronym  D3-Cr Study  
Study type Single  blind,  RCT 
Protocol  Number:  IRB 201801249  
Date  of Issue:   
Principal  Investigator:  • Todd Manini,  Ph.D 
Sub investigators  • Anoop  Balachandran,  Ph.D.  
• Stephen Anton,  Ph.D.  
• Duane Corbett  Ph.D 
• Peihua  Qiu, Ph.D  
Consultants • Peggy  Cawthon,  Ph.D 
• William  Evans,  Ph.D  
Table  of Contents 
 
 
1. Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………………..  
2. Background……………………………………………………………………………………  
3. Study Aims……………………………………………………………………………………  
• Primary  Objective  
• Secondary  Objectives  
4. Research Plan…………………………………………………………………………………….  
• Design  
• Time  and Schedule of events  
• Participants  
• Interventions  
• Outcomes  Measures  & Questionnaires  
• Recruitment  
• Screening  
• Interventions  
• Adherence  
• Retention  
• Statistical  Plan 
• Data  Safety  and Monitoring Board 
• Confidentiality  
5. Possible Discomforts  and Risks…………………………………………………………….  
6. Possible  Benefits………………………………………………………………………………  
7. Conflict  of Interest……………………………………………………………………………….  
 1. ABSTRACT  
 
Muscle  loss with  age is considered to be an important  cause of disability  in older  adults1,  2. However,  current 
tools frequently used and recommended to measure muscle mass in trials have limitations: For example, 
DEXA (Dual -energy X -ray absorptiometry) and BIA (Bioelectrical impedance analysis) - both widely used in 
clinical trials cannot distinguish muscle tissue from non -muscle elements such as subcutaneous and 
intramuscular fat, skin, water and connective tissue3- 5 
 
 
Deuterated creatine (D3Cr) dilution is a novel promising method that provides an accurate measure of the 
functional contractile tissue, without including the  non-contractile elements, by measuring total body creatine. 
Our preliminary  cross- sectional  results  in men aged >65 years  show  functional  muscle  mass  (FMM) assessed 
by D3-Cr to  be significantly  associated  with performance  outcomes (SPPB, 400m walk,  and chair  stands) and 
long- term outcomes (incident mobility problems, serious injurious falls), while DEXA showed no associations. 
However, these are observational data and cannot determine a causative role of muscle per se on functional outcomes.  
 
 
Hence, the objective of the pilot study is to assess the feasibility of our proposed future study to evaluate the 
role of muscle mass on functional outcomes. Specifically, the pilot study will randomize moderate to low - 
functioning older adults to a resistance training program or successful aging program to assess recruitment yields,  participant  adherence,  retention,  training program  design aspects,  sample size, and the cost of the main 
trial. Further, the impact of these changes in FMM on short -term performance outcomes, such as strength, 
walking speed, SPPB, self -reported measures, and balance will be examined.  
 2. BACKGROUND  
It has now been well established that there is a progressive loss of muscle mass with aging. Prospective 
studies  have shown this decline to be around 1% per year for both men and women6-8. This  dramatic  change  in 
anatomy with age has prompted the coining of the term sarcopenia (sarx: flesh; penia: loss)9 Although not the 
sole cause of strength loss in older adults, the loss of muscle mass is thought to be a major cause of the decline in strength observed with age. Consequently, the loss of muscle and strength has direct adverse 
consequences on physical function leading to disability and mobility impairments
1, 2. The recent establishment 
of ICD -10 code by CDC recognizing sarcopenia as an “independent reportable condition” further emphasize  
the role of muscle and muscle loss as major medical concern that needs immediate attention10. 
But, current  tools  frequently  used  and recommended to measure muscle  mass  in trials  have limitations11-13. 
 
• DEXA and BIA- both widely  used in clinical trials  and recommended  to diagnose sarcopenia,  cannot 
distinguish muscle tissue from non- muscle elements such as subcutaneous and intramuscular fat, 
skin, water and connective tissue3, 14. 
• Magnetic  resonance  imaging  (MRI) and computed  tomography  (CT) can detect  non-muscle  tissue 
in body segments but are extremely expensive and cumbersome when the analysis involves total 
body skeletal muscle15. 
Deuterated creatine (D 3Cr) dilution is a novel promising method that provides an accurate measure of the 
functional contractile tissue, without including the non- contractile elements, by measuring total body creatine. 
Briefly, the method involves ingestion of deuterated non- radioactive, labeled- creatine in a capsule and 
subsequently measuring total creatine from a single urine sample, without any special diet restrictions; thus 
making the method quite  safe and feasible. Considering there  is no gold standard in vivo measurement  of total 
body  skeletal  muscle  mass,  construct  validation studies have shown a strong correlation with MRI in both men 
and women16 (young and old) (r = 0.87) and in animal studies17 (r = 0.95). More importantly, our preliminary 
cross- sectional results in community -dwelling men aged >65 years show functional muscle mass (FMM) 
assessed by D 3-Cr to be significantly associated with physical performance (SPPB, 400m walk, and chair 
stands) and long -term outcomes (incident mobility problems, serious injurious falls), while DEXA showed no 
associations.  
However, these observational data cannot determine a causative role of muscle per se on functional 
outcomes.  Additionally, there are no longitudinal or experimental studies that establish D 3-Cr as a standard 
measure of functional muscle mass (FMM).  Our future study will use an experimental approach to evaluate 
the causative role and time course of FMM changes with D3 -Cr on functional outcomes. The accomplishment 
of this future longitudinal study will also validate this promising method for characterizing FMM in response to 
muscle -targeted interventions  for low functioning older  adults  (e.g.,  selective  androgen receptor  modulators).  A 
pilot study will fill necessary gaps that include feasibility and within- person variability of the D3- Cr method that 
is currently unknown. Hence, the objective of the pilot study is to assess the feasibility of our proposed future 
trial. 
Achieving the above aims will help in gathering feasibility information for our future study, but also provide 
novel  insights into the time course  of early  FMM to resistance training and its relation to short -term outcomes. 
In addition, future studies can use D 3-Cr to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions to increase functional 
muscle mass.  
 
 3. SPECIFIC  AIMS  / OBJECTIVES  
Primary  objective  
• To evaluate the feasibility  of implementing the D3Cr  method  in a resistance training trial as it 
relates to participant adherence, retention, training program design aspects (intensity, 
volume, frequency & safety) sample size, and cost of the main study. 
 
Secondary objectives  
The secondary  objectives  are to: 
• Evaluate and compare  the time-course adaptations  in skeletal  muscle mass  measured by 
D3-Cr and DEXA  
• Correlate the changes  in functional  muscle mass  with the change  in walking  speed,  SPPB, 
strength, and balance.  
4. RESEARCH PLAN  
Trial  Design  
• The pilot study will be single- blind, parallel group, randomized controlled trial of 24 
moderate to low functioning participants randomized i n a 1:1 allocation ratio to a high- 
intensity  Resistance  Training group (RT) or a Health  Education  comparator  group (HE) for 
14 weeks. We chose the specified population since they are at a greater risk of disability 
and is often excluded from trials18. 
 
Scehdule of Events  
 
Table  1. Study  visit and schedule  
. 
 
  
 
    
 
    
 
  
Schedule  of Events   Training  Intervention   
 Preparatory 
Phase  Training 
Phase   
 
Phone  scr. 
Scr. Visit 
Baseline  
 
Week  1 
 
Week  2 
Week  8 
 
Week  11 
Week  14 
Post-Test 
Screening           
Basic  eligibility  phone  screening  X         
Short  consent   X        
Informed  consent    X       
Physical  exam,  Medical  History,  Height    X       
Weight  & Vitals    X   X   X 
Interventions           
Resistance  Training           
Successful  Aging           
Assessments           
DEXA    X   X   X 
D3Cr  Dosing  & Collection     X  X  X  
SPPB   X    X   X 
Physical  Functional  Tests    X   X   X 
Questionnaires    X   X   X 
 
Participants 
24 low functioning,  both males  and females,  with 12 participants  in each of the treatment  arm. 
Inclusion criteria  
A participant  must  meet  the following  criteria  to be eligible  for inclusion  in the study:  
• men and women  aged  70 or greater  
• at high risk for mobility  disability  based on lower  extremity  functional  limitations 
measured by Short Physical Performance battery (SPPB) with a score ≤ 8 out of 12  
• could safely  participate in the resistance  training intervention as determined by medical 
history and physical examination.  
• willing to  give informed consent  to be randomized  to either  the resistance training group or 
successful aging (Heath Education) comparison group and willing to follow the study 
protocol  
Exclusion  criteria  
 
• Severe cardiac disease, including NYHA Class III or IV congestive heart failure, clinically 
significant  aortic  stenosis,  history  of cardiac  arrest,  use of a cardiac  defibrillator,  or uncontrolled 
angina  
• Myocardial  infarction,  major  heart  surgery,  stroke,  deep vein thrombosis,  or pulmonary  embolus 
in the past 6 months  
• Lung disease requiring either  oral or injected steroids,  or the use of supplemental  oxygen  
• Short,  portable  mental  status  questionnaire  with 3 or more  errors  
• Severe arthritis  (either  osteoarthritis  or rheumatoid arthritis)  that severely  limits  mobility  
• Severe lower  back  or shoulder  pain that can worsen  with weight  lifting  exercises.  
• Cancer  requiring treatment  in the past 1 year (Melanomas  excluded)  
• Any present  or recent  history  of severe  psychiatric  illness  including depression that might 
preclude providing informed consent, safe participation, or compliance (self ‐report and 
investigator judgement  
• Development  of chest  pain or severe  shortness  of breath on the 400 m self-paced walk test 
• Parkinson’s  disease or other  serious  neurological  disorders;  renal  disease requiring dialysis; 
other illness of such severity that life expectancy is considered to be less than 12 months  
• Current  diagnosis  of schizophrenia,  other  psychotic disorders,  or bipolar  disorder  
• Current  consumption of more  than 14 alcoholic  drinks  per week  
• Uncontrolled hypertension (systolic  blood pressure > 200 mm Hg and/or  diastolic  blood 
pressure >110 mm Hg)  
• Currently  on testosterone,  Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA),  or anabolic  steroids.  
• Undergoing physical  therapy  involving  the lower  extremities  
• Currently  enrolled in another  randomized trial involving a pharmaceutical  or lifestyle 
intervention. Observational studies are permitted  
• Participation in progressive resistance  exercise  regimen ( ≥1 day/week)  within  the previous  6 
months prior to screening.  
• Weight change  (intentional  or not) over the last 6 months  of > 5% of body  or plan to lose or gain 
weight during the study  
• Any other  cardiovascular,  pulmonary,  orthopedic,  neurologic, or  other  conditions  that in the 
opinion of the local clinician would preclude participation and successful completion of the 
protocol  
Temporary Exclusion  Criteria  
A person meeting any of the following temporary  exclusion  criteria  at the time of screening will not 
be enrolled but may be re- screened later.  
 
• Recent  bacterial/viral  infection  (e.g. pneumonia)  (< 2 weeks);  
• Acute  febrile  illness  in past 2 months;  
• Severe hypertension,  e.g., SBP > 200 mm Hg, DBP > 110 mm Hg 
• Major  surgery  or fracture  or hip/knee  replacement  (< 6 months);  
• Hospitalization  within  the last 6 months  ( Not ER visits)  
 
Premature Withdrawal  from the Study: A participant has  the right to  withdraw from the study  at 
any time,  for any reason,  and without  repercussion. The investigators  have  the right to withdraw a 
participant from the study in the event of an intercurrent illness, AE, treatment failure, protocol 
deviation,  and for administrative,  or other  reasons.  An excessive  rate of withdrawals  would  render 
the study uninterpretable; therefore, unnecessary withdrawal of participants should be avoided.  
Sample Size:  Our goal is to enroll a total of 24 participants. Since studies looking at changes in 
functional  muscle  mass  in response to resistance  training are  not available,  the sample  size was 
arrived based on budgetary constraints and minimum number of participants required to meet 
feasibility  goals.  Assuming  a conservative  20% loss to follow up, we estimate  12 participants  per 
group (10 evaluable participants after the 20% loss due  to attrition) would inform variance of the 
outcomes and feasibility for powering a future large- scale RCT.  
Randomization:  Randomization will be executed  via a computer  algorithm  using random  block 
lengths and stratified by gender. To ensure concealment of the allocation, the randomization 
procedures will be performed by an investigator who are not involved in the assessments  
Recruitment  
 
Participant  recruitment  will be coordinated in conjunction with the OAIC  Clinical  Research Core. Potential 
participants  will be recruited from the general  population in the North/Central  Florida region through:  
• IRB-approved advertisements  (postcards,  brochures,  social  media,  newspaper  ads) providing 
basic  information  about  the study  and inviting  potential  participants  to call for additional 
information;  
• Contact  of potential  participants  who are enrolled in the Claude D. Pepper  Recruitment 
Registry (IRB#417 -2007) by Registry staff;  
• We will also use existing  entities  of UF Health  that include the Consent2Share program. 
Individuals  who screen  out of other  studies  may also be approached  and asked about  their 
interest in this study;  
 
Screening  process 
We will employ  a staged  screening process  where  we will verify  eligible  participants  over a series  of 
contacts.  
• Interested participants  are first screened by phone.  The phone interview is designed to exclude 
individuals who are ineligible due to safety concerns or not interested after learning about the 
study.  
• After  the phone screening,  at the first in-person  screening visit, we will consent  participants  with 
a short form and perform the SPPB test. Participant with SPPB score of ≤ 8 will be invited for 
the baseline visit.  
Interventions 
Resistance Training Intervention: The 14- week supervised resistance training intervention will 
include a full body,  resistance  training performed  three days  per week.  The intensity,  volume,  tempo, 
and progression will be based on the Federal Physical Activity guidelines19 as shown in Table 2.  
Exercises: The resistance training exercises will include mainly multi- joint exercises using selectorized 
machines  to minimize training duration and  maximize the benefit. Each  session will include upper body 
exercises (Chest Press, Shoulder Press, Seated Rows) and lower body exercises (Leg Press, Leg 
Extension and Leg Curls,  and Calf raise)  that will be  tailored  to the particpant  needs.  Inerventionists  will 
suprvise all exercise sessions.  
 
Warm  up & cool down: Each training session  will begin with 1 set of warm -up at a lighter  load for 8–10 
repetitions on 1 multi -joint upper body and 1 lower body machine. Each session will end with a 5 min 
cool-down involving stretching exercises and light calisthenics  
Preparatory  phase:  Considering the participants  are low functioning;  we will use a 2-week preparatory 
phase, which will ensure sufficient time for connective tissue adaptations and for the participants to 
learn proper lifting form and breathing technique.  
 
Training Phase:  The training phase will last for 12 weeks  and will be divided into 2 phases  as shown  in 
Table 2.  
Intensity:  The intensity will be maintained at 6 -8 (moderate to vigorous RPE) as recommended by 
ACSM  for older  adults20 and the sets will be done  until volitional  fatigue.  The CR-10 BORG’s  scale 
ranges from 1 -10 will be used to document perceived exertion during resistance training21. 
 
Progression:  The load will increased when participants  can perform  all repetitions  in all sets . 
 
Table  2. Resistance  training  parameters  
Preparatory  Phase  Training Phase  
Week  1-2 Week  3-5  Week  5-14 
Days/wk  3 3  3 
Sets * Reps  1-2* 12-15 3 *12-15  3* 8-10 
RPE 6 - 8 6 - 8  6 - 8 
Rest (min)  1 1  1 
Progression  Can do 3 sets of 15  Can do 3 sets of 10 
Note:  All values  are subject  to change  based  on participant  availability  and ability  of the 
participant to conduct the number of sets and reps prescribed.  
 
 
Successful Aging: The comparator group will meet every 2 weeks. Weekly workshops will include 
flexibility exercises and presentation topics related to older adults, such as preventive services and 
screenings, finding credible health information, and so forth. We instruct all control participants not to 
change their PA levels  and the importance of remaining weight  stable throughout  the study  period.  The 
rationale for the health education group in place of a sedentary control is to minimize the social 
interaction effects and to minimize participant drop- outs22. 
 
Outcomes & Questionnaires 
All outcomes  and questionnaires will  be conducted at the Institute  on Aging  by trained and 
certified clinical site staff.  
Medical  history:  A questionnaire that asks about  health conditions  will be administered  prior to 
performing activities.  Medical staff will evaluate participants with any health conditions 
(cardiovascular disease, falls, metabolic diseases, etc.) that are exacerbated with physical 
exertion.  
Medication inventory: Many  adults use  both prescription  and non-prescription pharmaceutical 
products.  The use of these  products  is of interest  for several  reasons.  All participants  are asked 
to bring all prescription and non- prescription medications taken in the past two weeks to their 
first visit.  
 
Short, portable mental status questionnaire: The questionnaire will be administered to 
identify  potential  participants  with cognitive dysfunction who would  pose  a potential  safety  risk 
 
PROMIS: The NIH developed Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
(PROMIS) physical function questionnaire uses item response theory (IRT) and computer 
adaptive tests  (CAT)  to improve  precision  and minimize  respondent  burden.  The test has been 
shown to be reliable  and valid across  a range of population, including high- functioning and  low 
functioning individuals 23 The following PROMIS tests will be used: physical Function, upper 
extremity, and mobility. All measures are administered via computer. Time to complete each 
measure ranges from 1 ‐3 minute  
Photograph Series of Daily Activities Scale -  Short Electronic Version (PHODA -SeV) – The 
PHODA -SeV is an assessment of pain- related fear in the context of chronic back pain. The 
PHODA -SeV includes 40 photographs depicting common activities ranging from household 
chores  to physical  exercise.  Using  a 0–100 scale,  respondents  indicate their concern of harming 
their back when engaging in each depicted movement25. 
 
Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ) – The FFMQ is a reliable and valid 
comprehensive instrument  for assessing different  aspects  of mindfulness.  The FFMQ  is based 
on a factor analytic study of five independently developed mindfulness questionnaires26. 
 
Tampa Scale for Kinesiophobia (TSK) – The TSK is a reliable and valid self -report checklist 
that uses a 4 -point scale to measure of fear of movement or (re)injury. The scale is based on 
the model of fear avoidance, fear of work related activities, fear of movement and fear of re-  
injury.  The TSK is considered as one of the most  suited questionnaires  to evaluate pain beliefs 
and fear of movement/(re) injury in chronic low back pain27. 
 
Borg  Category Ratio  (CR) 10  pain/RPE  scale  – The Borg CR10 pain/RPE  scale  is a reliable, 
valid, and frequently used quantitative measure of perceived exertion and pain during each 
exercise session and after the physical function tests. The Borg CR10 uses a category ratio 
scale that ranges from 0 (no pain/exertion) to 10 (maximal pain/exertion)28. 
 
Gait Analysis:  We will ask participants to walk at their usual pace and a rapid pace two times 
across  a carpet  that contains  sensors  arranged in a grid pattern (48 X 288)  (GAITRite  Inc.).  The 
system collects temporal (step time, gait cycle, single support time, double support time, stance time and swing time) and spatial (step length and stride length) parameters.  
Vital  signs:  During  screening,  resting blood pressure  and heart  rate, height,  weight  will be 
measured. Blood pressure and heart  rate are measured to assess  eligibility  criteria  and for 
safety purposes and others are collected for descriptive purposes.  
Oxygen Consumption:  Oxygen consumption will be measured using a portable metabolic unit 
(Cosmed  K4b2)  for three daily tasks  for 6 minutes  each.  Oxygen consumption will be measured 
breath -by-breath through a mask that is fitted to the participants face.  
Mopping: Mop a 200 sqft room using mop and water 
Lifting:  Lift chairs  and transfer  across  a 200 sq ft room  
 
Muscle mass measurements:  
• D3-Cr method : The participant will ingest a 60- mg dose of deuterated creatine (D 3-Cr), a non - 
radioactive isotope, at the baseline assessment.  They will return morning to provide a urine 
sample 3- 5 days later. The sample will be frozen and deidentified for D 3-creatinine analysis. 
urine samples ( -200) will be shipped to University of California, Berkeley where unlabeled 
creatinine and creatine  will be measured using high-performance liquid  chromatography(HPLC) 
and mass spectrometry (MS). The details of methods have been published previously.16 
• DEXA: Total and regional body composition will be measured using at UF site Dual -energy X - 
ray absorptiometry  (DEXA,  QDR- 4500w;  Hologic,  Waltham,  MA, USA). DEXA is widely  used  in 
trials, is safe and is currently recommended to diagnose sarcopenia11, 12. 
Walk Tests: The 400m walk test is a feasible, objective, reliable, well -validated and used in large 
clinical trial. Participants  will be asked to walk 400  m at their usual  pace,  without  overexerting, on a 20- 
m course for 10 laps (40 m/lap)29, 30. The 6 min walk test will include walking at a rapid pace around 2 
cones 20 m apart wearing the portable metabolic unit.  
Physical  performance will be measured  using the Short  Physical  Performance  Battery  (SPPB),  which 
is based on a timed 4- m walk, balance, and chair stand tests. This scale is reliable and valid for 
predicting institutionalization, mortality and disability31, 32, 2933, 34 The score ranges from 0 (worst 
performers) to 12 (best performers).  
Muscle strength will be measured using tests of isometric grip strength and isokinetic leg extension test. Grip strength  is frequently  used of upper  body  skeletal  muscle  function and has been widely  used 
as a general indicator of functional status
35. Grip strength will be measured using the Jammar 
dynamometer. Leg strength will be assessed using Isokinetic dynamometry (System 3 pro; Biodex Medical Systems, Shirley, NY, USA) at velocities of 60º and 120º per second
36.2429 
Participants  will perform  2 sets of 5 maximal  isokinetic  leg extensions  at each  velocity  with one-minute 
of rest between each set for the dominant leg.  
Dynamic balance will be measured using the Timed Up and Go test which  is widely  used to examine 
mobility and dynamic balance. Also, the test is recommended as a screening test for falls by the 
American Geriatric Society and the British Geriatric Society37, 38. Standing or static balance (narrow, 
tandem and semi -tandem) will also be assessed as part of the SPPPB test.  
Adherence 
Adherence involves both attendance to scheduled sessions as well as the quality of the training that 
occurs during each session. Adherence to the exercise protocols are affected by personal, social and 
environmental  factors.  At a personal  level, it is  important  to ensure that the goals  of each participant  are 
realistic. We recognize that social interactions between staff and participant as well as the broader 
social  environment  surrounding the study  influence adherence.  All staff will  be instructed  to engage with 
and be supportive toward all participants. We will also adopt a number of other strategies to improve 
attendance and quality of training sessions. Some strategies include, having trained interventionists to supervise training, including a preparatory phase to educate the participants about proper lifting 
technique, tailoring the training program based on the physical needs of the participant, maintaining a 
workout log to help motivation, monitoring missed visits so that the study coordinator can take prompt action and so forth  
 
The physical  environment and accessibility  influence adherence.  This includes  such  factors  as ease  of 
parking, transportation, and accommodations made for friends or significant others who may come to  
training facilities  to support  participants  via transportation,  etc. At the time of baseline assessments, 
staff discuss these topics with each participant to be certain there are no significant barriers in this 
domain and/or to problem solve potential challenges that exist.  
The comparator group  will not participate in  a resistance  raining intervention and hence  pose  a greater 
risk of dropping out. We expect, based on our previous experiences, that the flexibility exercises and 
health education classes offered every 2 weeks will serves an effective “active control” that will help to 
promote retention  in the study.  We will also provide an exercise  prescription and education materials  at 
the end of the study duration so that they can start a resistance training program outside the site.  
Retention 
The following  guidelines  promote compliance to the protocol  and retention 
 
• Participant -staff relationship.  A key element  contributing to participants’  continued commitment 
to the study  involves  fostering positive,  respectful  relationships  between  study  participants  and 
individual members of the staff.  
• Continuity  of care.  In general, participants  appointments  should be scheduled so that they can 
be seen by the same clinic staff members during each visit.  
• Clinic  environment.  A clinic  environment  that is warm  and pleasant,  and oriented to the comfort 
of the participant.  
• Participant -staff communications.  Good and consistent  communication is essential.  Instructions 
are clear and interactions are friendly and individualized. The participant is reminded of the 
benefits of study participation. Written reminders about appointments further enhance 
communication efforts.  
• Convenience and accessibility. An easily accessible clinic location, availability of transportation, 
and convenient clinic hours all serve to facilitate study adherence. We will make study visits as 
easy  as possible  for participants, a critical  factor to the  success  of the study. All sites take steps 
to ensure  that clinic  attendance is not compromised  by a lack of transportation,  unsuitable  hours 
of clinic operation, or any similar circumstance. If necessary, participants are reimbursed for or 
are provided transportation to the clinic assessment visits.  
• Time  in clinic.  Total  clinic  visit time  is kept to a minimum,  consistent  with maintaining quality. If 
waiting is necessary, the situation is explained to the participant and, if possible, an offer is 
made for the participant to see another staff member, or to reschedule the visit. On the other 
hand, participants  are not rushed or  made to feel unwelcome. Study  personnel  trained to take 
time to visit with participants.  
• Appointment reminders. Appointment reminders are used to prompt participants to come for clinic  visits.  These written  reminders  are mailed  to participants  so that they receive them  before 
their scheduled visit date.  
• Compensation: Participant will be compensated $100.00 for being in the study. The 
remuneration  is given for attendance at clinic  assessments,  regardless  of the level of 
participation in intervention activities  
 
Statistical  plan 
Data analysis will be conducted at the Biostatistics and Data Management Core under the direction of 
Peihua Qiu, Ph.D. Our primary analysis will use an intention to treat approach in which participants are 
grouped according to randomization assignment without consideration of their adherence to the 
exercise  or successful  aging health education programs.  We will also perform  “per protocol”  analyses  to 
examine muscle adaptations in those individuals with adherence rates > 80%.  
 
Although pilot studies are not powered for hypothesis testing, we will use a mixed effects model to assess changes  in the outcomes  with baseline measure serving  as covariate.  Associations  between 
muscle mass and other outcomes will be explored using a correlational analysis  
 Data  Safety  and Monitoring Board  
 
This project is funded as a Pilot Study through the UF Claude D. Pepper Older Americans 
Independence  Center  (OAIC)  grant  (NIH P30 AG028740 ) and thus uses  the OAIC  Data  Safety 
Monitoring Board (DSMB).  
The OAIC  DSMB  consists of an established board  which  has reviewed all studies  conducted  within  the 
UF OAIC during for the past seven years. This board meets annually. DSMB Reports will be provided 
to the UF IRB -01 with annual Continuing Review submissions.  
 
 
Confidentiality  
Confidentiality of data is maintained by using research identification numbers or alphanumerics that 
uniquely identify each individual. Phone pre -screeners will be de- identified by replacing identifiable 
information with numbers or alphanumerics. Collected data will be used only for research purposes, 
and publications will not contain any individual identifiers Safeguards are established to ensure the 
security and privacy of participants’ study records. The research records are kept in a locked room in 
locked computer  files and  file cabinets.  Storage Areas  for all records containing PHI  or other  restricted 
information is physically secure and environmentally controlled, to protect the records from 
unauthorized access  and damage or loss from temperature fluctuations,  fire, water damage,  pests,  and 
other  hazards.  Only study  personnel  have  access  to these files. After  the study  is completed,  local data 
are stored with other completed research studies in a secured storage vault. According to the HIPAA 
rules, consent forms signed by the study participants, the study’s research records containing 
identifiable data will be stored for a minimum of 6 (six) years after the study is completed and closed 
with IRB.  
In compliance with the Health Insurance  Portability  and Accountability  Act (HIPAA) and  the Standards 
for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information of the Department of Health and Human 
Services, study staff accesses personal health information and medical records only after receiving 
informed consent (verbal for phone screener and signed for short form and main consent).  
 
 
4. POSSIBLE DISCOMFORTS  AND RISKS  
400-m walk: The 400 -meter test may be associated with the risk of falling or development of chest 
discomfort due to coronary ischemia or dyspnea due to heart failure or lung disease.  Rarely, falling 
during the 400-meter  walk test may result in  a fracture. Similar  to the six-minute walk test, completion  of 
the SPPB may be associated with the  risk of falling or development of chest discomfort due  to coronary 
ischemia or dyspnea due to heart failure or lung disease. Rarely, falling during the SPPB test may  
result in a fracture. In our experience conducting thousands of 400 m walk tests on individuals within 
various studies, the  risk of falling is less  than 1/500 and  the risk of a  fracture -associated  fall is less than 
1/5000. In the LIFE study we have performed approximately 10,000 400 m walk tests with no safety 
concerns raised by the DSMB.  
Questionnaires: There are some risks associated with questionnaire administration.  Sensitive 
information collected for this study  includes  lifestyle  factors  (e.g., alcohol  use) and personal  health 
information (PHI) and are used predominantly in screening for eligibility and safety. Participation 
includes a risk of loss of confidentiality of this information.  
To minimize risk, questionnaire data are collected in secure spaces where the interview cannot be 
overheard.  Participants  are reminded  that they can decline to answer  questions  that are uncomfortable 
or concerning.  All research staff members complete annual HIPPA for Researchers training as 
required by UF.  
DXA:  DXA scans  to determine body  composition involve small amounts  of radiation  
exposure.  The amount of  radiation exposure from each whole  body  DXA scan  is <2.5 mRem  per scan. 
Although the potential long‐ term risk from these radiation doses is uncertain, such doses are 
exceedingly low and have never been associated with any definite adverse effects.  
 
Resistance  Training:  Potential  risks associated  with RT will be explained to each  participant  by 
appropriately trained clinical site staff during the initial informed consent, screening, and study 
orientation.  
• Difficulty  breathing and/or  shortness  of breath  
• Muscle,  joint strains  and soreness  
• Soft tissue  injury,  falls and fractures  
• Increasing  intraocular and systemic pressures  associated with use of the Valsalva 
maneuver to levels that may cause injury (detached retina, hernia, conjunctival 
hemorrhage),  which  is greatly  reduced by instruction in proper  exercise  technique.  
• Hernia  
• Exacerbation  of arthritis  or other  joint conditions  
• Lumbar  disk hernia 
• A small increase in the risk of sudden death,  stroke,  and acute  MI occurring  during a bout of 
• vigorous  exercise  has been reported,  especially  in previously  sedentary  individuals.  
• Orthostatic  hypotension  
• Triggering of an asthma episode  
These risks are minimized in all exercise sessions by having supervised and trained exercise 
interventionists  who instruct  participants  in the proper  exercise  techniques,  including instructions  to breathe 
normally during the exercise. Procedures to minimize injury include warm ‐up and cool ‐down activities that 
include large muscle movements and stretching. The preparatory phase is designed so that participants can learn proper exercise technique and gradually increase training volume and intensity.  
The entire exercise intervention is conducted on‐ site and all sessions are supervised by trained 
interventionists,  who will monitor  potential  adverse experiences  and symptoms.  During  the exercise 
sessions, a defibrillator and on‐ site trained staff are available to deal with medical emergencies.  
To minimize these risks, research staff are trained in the conduct of all physical performance tests and 
certified by before they work with study participants.  Study staff are instructed not  to perform these 
tests  if they  feel that testing is unsafe for an individual  participant  or if the  participant  is concerned  about 
safety.  If safety concerns are identified by either the study staff or the participant during the testing 
procedures, testing is halted and the participant is not allowed to complete the test. In either case, the 
participant is assessed to determine the need for medical intervention and the cause for concern is 
evaluated. All study staff are trained in activating the emergency response system at The University of 
Florida’s Institute on Aging facility.  
All sessions are conducted by research staff trained to monitor potential adverse experiences and 
symptoms during the testing sessions.  All personnel associated with the study have completed Basic 
Life Support (BLS) training and education on management of acute events including syncope, chest 
pain, acute dyspnea, focal neurological symptoms and abnormal vital signs. Additionally, a study 
physician is available on call and contact  numbers  for emergency  services  are posted.  Institutional  and 
community EMS services will be activated if needed.  
Participants  will be instructed to talk with  the investigators  about  any discomforts  that occur  during the 
study.  If a participant reports an injury, chest pain, leg swelling, excessive shortness of breath, 
palpitations, or dizziness, he/she will be referred to medical attention (his/her doctor, or Emergency 
Department).  
All research  staff complete human participants  training required by The University  of Florida 
institutional review board (IRB) and National Institutes of Health (NIH).  
Adverse  events  (AE) and serious adverse  events (SAE)  
The study  will collects  and reports  only Serious  Adverse  Events  (SAEs)  and (nonserious)  
AEs associated with the intervention or study procedures. Pre ‐existing conditions and preplanned 
procedures  (surgeries  or therapies)  scheduled prior to signing the Informed  Consent  are not considered 
AEs/SAEs.  
Adverse events (AE): For this study’s purposes, an AE or experience is defined as any health ‐related 
unfavorable or unintended medical  occurrence that happens  after randomization.  Examples  of AEs include, 
but are not limited to, the following:  
• A clinically  significant  laboratory  or clinical test result  at follow up assessments 
• An event  that requires  a visit to a physician because it alters  the participant’s  ability  to exercise  
• An event that occurs  as a result  of a study  procedure which  is not listed  in the Risks  section of 
the consent  
 
Serious adverse events  (SAE): SAEs  are defined as events  that may be harmful  to the participant  and/or 
may be serious enough  to warrant either temporary  or permanent discontinuation of the  study  intervention 
or study procedures,  
either  because they are intolerable or because  they are judged to be potentially  harmful.  Consistent 
with NIH guidelines, SAEs are AEs that meet any of the following criteria:  
• results  in death  
• is life‐threatening 
• requires  inpatient  hospitalization  
• prolongs  an existing  hospitalization  
• results  in a persistent  or significant  disability/incapacity  
• important  medical  events  that investigators  judge  to represent  significant  hazards  or harm  to 
• participants,  and may require medical  or surgical  intervention  to prevent  one of the other 
SAEs  
• listed  in this definition  (e.g.,  hospitalization,  death,  persistent  disability)  
Relationship to study intervention:  The classification  of potential  relationship to the intervention is as 
follows.  
• Not Related  – AE is clearly  not related to the intervention or procedure  (e.g.,  temporal  sequence 
of events is not consistent with administration of intervention or procedures, other causes are 
more plausible or causal relationship is implausible.  
• Possibly  Related – AE that follows  reasonable sequence from administration  of intervention or 
procedure but that could readily have been produced by several other factors.  
• Definitely Related –  AE is clearly related to the intervention or procedure (e.g., follows 
reasonable temporal  sequence from administration  of the study  intervention or procedure,  
confirmed  by improvement  after stopping intervention or procedure,  and reappearance  on repeated 
exposure to intervention or procedure, and cannot be explained by participants clinical or health 
status).  
 
Expected AE’s: Expected AEs are defined as anticipated events based on the prior experience 
with the intervention  and listed  in the participant  consent and  protocol;  these  can be attributed to an 
underlying condition or the patient population being studied. These conditions that may be 
unpleasant and bothersome to the participant, such as sore muscles, muscle or joint pain, or 
breathing problems, do not require discontinuing the study intervention or components of the 
intervention.  
 
Unexpected Adverse Events: Unexpected adverse events (UAEs) are defined as events that 
occur  during participation in the study  but do not commonly  occur  in the study  population and are 
 
 not listed in the informed  consent.  An AE is not defined as a UAE unless  it meets  all three  defining 
criteria:  
 unexpected  given the research procedures  described in the informed  consent  and 
characteristics of the study population;  
 definitely  related  or possibly  related  to participation  in the study  intervention or 
procedures;  
 suggests  that the research intervention  or procedures  place participants  or others  at 
greater risk of harm than was previously realized.  
5. POSSIBLE BENEFITS  
 
 
• Participant  will receive health and medical  screening examinations  at baseline.  
• Participant  will have the opportunity  to participate  in a strength training  program  or health 
education program  with professional  supervision.  Participation  in these  activities  has the 
potential  to improve  participant’s  health,  body  composition,  and quality  of life.  
• Also,  all participants  will receive  an individualized report  of your strength,  muscle 
mass,  fat percentage,  bone density  and physical  function  in comparison with other 
older  adults  in your age group and gender  at the end of the  intervention.  
• The results  of the study  will help validate  a new tool to measure  muscle  mass that will 
have a number  of potential  uses,  ranging from detecting muscle  loss in both health 
and disease (cachexia)  to evaluating the efficacy  of behavioral  and pharmacological 
interventions to increase muscle mass.  
 
6. CONFLICT  OF INTEREST  
None  
 
 
1. Visser  M, Goodpaster  BH, Kritchevsky SB, et al. Muscle  mass,  muscle  strength,  and muscle  fat infiltration 
as predictors of incident mobility limitations in well -functioning older persons. J  Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . 
2005;60:324- 333. 
 
2. Schaap LA, Koster  A, Visser  M. Adiposity,  muscle  mass,  and muscle  strength in relation to functional 
decline in older persons. Epidemiol Rev . 2013;35:51- 65. 
 
3. Proctor  DN, O'Brien  PC, Atkinson  EJ, Nair KS. Comparison of techniques  to estimate  total body  skeletal 
muscle mass in people of different age groups. Am J Physiol . 1999;277:E489- 95. 
 
4. Overend  T, Cunningham  D, Paterson D, Lefcoe M. Thigh  composition in young and elderly  men determined 
by computed tomography. Clinical Physiology and Functional Imaging . 1992;12:629 -640. 
 
5. Rice C, Cunningham  D, Paterson D, Lefcoe M. Arm and leg composition determined by computed 
tomography  in young and elderly  men. Clinical Physiology and Functional Imaging. 1989;9:207- 220. 
 
6. Frontera WR, Reid  KF, Phillips  EM, et al.  Muscle  fiber size and function in elderly  humans:  a longitudinal 
study. J Appl Physiol (1985) . 2008;105:637- 642. 
 
7. Hughes  VA, Frontera  WR, Wood M, et al. Longitudinal  muscle  strength changes  in older  adults:  influence of 
muscle mass, physical activity, and health. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . 2001;56:B209- 17. 
8. Delmonico  MJ, Harris  TB, Visser  M, et al. Longitudinal  study  of muscle  strength,  quality,  and adipose tissue 
infiltration. Am J Clin Nutr . 2009;90:1579- 1585.  
 
9. Rosenberg IH. Sarcopenia:  Origins  and Clinical Relevance.  Clin Geriatr  Med. 2011;27:337 -339. 
 
10. Cao L, Morley JE. Sarcopenia Is Recognized as an Independent Condition by an International 
Classification  of Disease,  Tenth Revision,  Clinical Modification (ICD- 10-CM) Code.  J Am Med Dir Assoc . 
2016;17:675- 677. 
 
11. Morley  JE, Abbatecola AM, Argiles  JM, et al. Sarcopenia with limited  mobility:  an international  consensus.  
J Am Med Dir Assoc . 2011;12:403 -409. 
 
12. Studenski  SA, Peters  KW, Alley  DE, et  al. The FNIH  Sarcopenia Project:  Rationale,  Study  Description, 
Conference Recommendations, and Final Estimates. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological 
Sciences and Medical Sciences . 2014.  
 
13. Cruz -Jentoft AJ, Baeyens JP, Bauer JM, et al. Sarcopenia: European consensus on definition and 
diagnosis:  Report  of the European Working Group  on Sarcopenia  in Older  People. Age Ageing.  2010;39:412 - 
423. 
 
14. Lee RC, Wang Z, Heymsfield SB. Skeletal  muscle  mass  and aging:  regional  and whole -body  measurement 
methods. Canadian Journal of Applied Physiology . 2001;26:102 -122. 
 
15. Boutin RD, Yao L, Canter  RJ, Lenchik  L. Sarcopenia:  current  concepts  and imaging implications. Am J 
Roentgenol . 2015;205:W255- W266.  
 
16. Clark  RV, Walker  AC, O'Connor -Semmes  RL, et al. Total  body  skeletal  muscle  mass:  estimation by 
creatine (methyl -d3) dilution in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985) . 2014;116:1605- 1613.  
 
17. Stimpson SA, Turner  SM, Clifton  LG, et al. Total -body  creatine pool size and skeletal  muscle  mass 
determination by creatine- (methyl -D3) dilution in rats. J Appl Physiol (1985) . 2012;112:1940- 1948.  
 
18. Ferrucci  L, Guralnik  JM, Studenski  S, Fried  LP, Cutler  GB, Walston  JD. Designing randomized,  controlled 
trials aimed at preventing or delaying functional decline and disability in frail, older persons: a consensus 
report. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2004;52:625- 634. 
 
19. Physical  Activity  Guidelines  Advisory  Committee.  Physical  activity  guidelines  advisory  committee  report, 
2008. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services . 2008;2008:A1 -H14.  
 
20. Nelson  ME, Rejeski  WJ, Blair SN, et al. Physical  activity  and public  health  in older  adults:  recommendation 
from the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 
2007;39:1435- 1445.  
 
21. Sweet  TW, Foster  C, McGuigan MR, Brice  G. Quantitation  of resistance  training using the session rating of 
perceived exertion method. J Strength Cond Res . 2004;18:796 -802. 
 
22. Fielding RA, Rejeski  WJ, Blair S, et al. The Lifestyle  Interventions  and Independence for Elders  Study: 
design and methods. The journals of gerontology.Series A, Biological sciences and medical sciences . 
2011;66:1226.  
 
23. Fries  JF, Witter  J, Rose  M, Cella  D, Khanna D, Morgan- DeWitt  E. Item response theory,  computerized 
adaptive testing, and PROMIS: assessment of physical function. J Rheumatol . 2014;41:153 -158. 
24. McHorney CA, Ware Jr JE, Raczek AE. The MOS 36- Item Short -Form Health Survey (SF -36): II. 
Psychometric and clinical tests  of validity  in measuring physical  and mental  health constructs. Med Care . 
1993:247- 263. 
 
25. Leeuw  M, Goossens  ME, van Breukelen  GJ, Boersma  K, Vlaeyen JW. Measuring perceived  harmfulness 
of physical activities in patients with chronic low back pain: the Photograph Series of Daily Activities --short 
electronic version. J Pain . 2007;8:840 -849. 
 
26. Baer  RA, Smith  GT, Hopkins  J, Krietemeyer  J, Toney  L. Using  self-report  assessment  methods  to explore 
facets of mindfulness. Assessment . 2006;13:27- 45. 
 
27. Goubert  L, Crombez  G, Van Damme  S, Vlaeyen JW, Bijttebier  P, Roelofs  J. Confirmatory  factor  analysis  of 
the Tampa Scale for Kinesiophobia: invariant two -factor model across low back pain patients and fibromyalgia 
patients. Clin J Pain . 2004;20:103 -110. 
 
28. Borg  G. Borg's  Perceived Exertion and Pain Scales.  Human  kinetics;  1998.  
 
29. Newman  AB, Simonsick  EM, Naydeck  BL, et al. Association of long-distance corridor  walk performance 
with mortality, cardiovascular disease, mobility limitation, and disability. JAMA . 2006;295:2018- 2026.  
 
30. Espeland MA, Gill TM, Guralnik  J, et al. Designing  clinical trials  of interventions  for mobility  disability: 
results from the lifestyle interventions and independence for elders pilot (LIFE -P) trial. The Journals of 
Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences . 2007;62:1237- 1243.  
 
31. Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Pieper CF, et al. Lower extremity function and subsequent disability: consistency 
across  studies,  predictive models,  and value of gait speed  alone compared  with the short  physical performance 
battery. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . 2000;55:M221- 31. 
 
32. Guralnik  JM, Simonsick  EM, Ferrucci  L, et al. A short  physical  performance battery  assessing  lower 
extremity  function:  association with self-reported disability  and prediction of mortality  and nursing  home 
admission. J Gerontol . 1994;49:M85- 94. 
 
33. Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Pieper CF, et al. Lower extremity function and subsequent disability: consistency 
across  studies,  predictive models,  and value of gait speed  alone compared  with the short  physical  performance 
battery. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . 2000;55:M221- 31. 
 
34. Guralnik  JM, Simonsick  EM, Ferrucci  L, et al. A short  physical  performance battery  assessing  lower 
extremity  function:  association with self-reported disability  and prediction of mortality  and nursing  home 
admission. J Gerontol . 1994;49:M85- 94. 
 
35. Rantanen T, Harris  T, Leveille  SG, et al. Muscle  strength and body  mass  index  as long- term predictors  of 
mortality in initially healthy men. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical 
Sciences . 2000;55:M168 -M173.  
 
36. Drouin JM, Valovich- mcLeod TC, Shultz SJ, Gansneder BM, Perrin DH. Reliability and validity of the 
Biodex  system  3 pro isokinetic  dynamometer  velocity,  torque and position measurements.  Eur J Appl Physiol . 
2004;91:22- 29. 
 
37. Kenny  R, Rubenstein LZ, Tinetti  ME, et al. Summary  of the updated American Geriatrics  Society/British 
Geriatrics Society clinical practice guideline for prevention of falls in older persons. J Am Geriatr Soc . 
2011;59:148- 157. 
 
38. Lusardi  MM, Fritz S, Middleton A, et al. Determining  Risk of Falls  in Community  Dwelling  Older  Adults:  A 
Systematic Review and Meta -analysis Using Posttest Probability. J Geriatr Phys Ther . 2017;40:1 -36. 