Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 1  CLINCAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
 
 
Efficacy of Open -label vs Double -blind Treatment in IBS.  
 
 
IND Number:  126556  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Study Sponsor:  Anthony Lembo, MD  
 330 Brookline Avenue  
 Boston, MA 02215  
 Telephone: 617.667.2138  
 Fax: 617.667.1171  
 
Date:  June 15, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This study will be conducted according to the protocol and in compliance with Good Clinical 
Practice, the ethical principles stated in the Declaration of Helsinki, and other applicable 
regulatory requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 2   
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
Protocol 
Section  Contents  Protocol Page  
1 Study Objectives  3 
2 Background and Rationale  3 
3 Study Design  4 
4 Selection and Enrollment of Participants  5 
5 Study Interventions  6 
6 Study Procedures  7 
7 Safety Assessments  9 
8 Statistical Considerations  10 
9 Administrative Requirements  12 
Appendix  1 Schedule of Study Procedures  14 
Appendix 2  IBS – Symptom Severity Scale  14 
Appendix 3  List of Evaluations  to be Completed at Each Visit  15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 3   
 
 
1. Study Objectives  
 
1.1 Primary Object ives 
The primary objectives of this study are to: (1) to determine whether  6 weeks of open -label 
placebo, double -blind placebo and no  additional treatment  control  results in different clinical 
outcomes in patients with IBS  and (2) assuming there are signif icant differences (a) to 
determine whether open -label placebo results in greater clinical improvement compared to no  
additional  treatment control and (b) to determine if open -label placebo results in greater clinical 
outcome than double blind placebo .   
 
1.2 Secondary Objectives  
 To confirm our previous finding that the COMT val158met polymorphism is associated with 
placebo response.   
 To replicate our previous finding that certain personality traits (extraversion, agreeableness, 
openness) are associated wit h the placebo response in IBS.   
 Using ethnographic interviews to obtain insight into patients’ experiences, including their 
views of the clinical encounter.  
 An exploratory objective of the study is to obtain pilot data to assess whether  double -blind  
peppe rmint oil results in greater clinical improvement compared to double -blind placebo in 
patients with IBS.  
 
2. Background and Rationale  
 
2.1 Background on IBS  
IBS is one of the top 10 reasons for seeing a primary care physician, and the symptoms of IBS 
are p resent in 7 -15% of the North American population. IBS is a chronic functional 
gastrointestinal disorder that is not a disease since there is no definitive pathophysiology or 
biomarker. Endpoints in clinical trials with IBS are based on subjective responses  and include 
abdominal pain, alte red bowel habits and bloating. The average placebo response in 
randomized double -blind placebo controlled trials in IBS is approximately 41%, making IBS a 
particularly good population  to study placebo. The explanation for t he high placebo response in 
clinical trials such as IBS is unclear and attempts at reducing the placebo response in clinical 
trials h ave been largely unsuccessful. To date no studies have compared double -blind placebo 
to open -label plac ebo as proposed in t his study. This information is critical to understanding the 
effects of placebo as it relates to the design of clinical trials. Likewise, this information is critical 
to clinical practice, since clinical practice is unblinded yet decisions are based on inf erences 
made from blinded  randomized controlled trials. Including both blinded and open -label arms will 
allow us to quantify, for the first time prospectively, the difference in efficacy between these 
kinds of administrations . Such knowledge will strengthe n inferences on clinical practice that are 
based on blinded randomized controlled trials.   
2.2 Study Rationale  
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 4  The vast majority of placebos are administered with concealment (i.e., blinded assignment in 
RCTs).  Most clinicians and researchers believe tha t either deception or concealment is 
necessary to achieve a placebo response. To date, few studies have directly compared the 
effects of open -label placebo and double -blind placebo. We propose a novel, multi -disciplinary 
design to answer multiple clinical and research design questions concerning placebo effects.  
3. Study Design  
 
3.1 Overall Design and Plan of the Study  
This study aims to investigate the effects of open -label placebos with double -blind placebos as 
administered in a randomized controlled tri al in a 6 -week trial with 313 IBS patients on standard 
treatment for IBS randomly assigned to one of four arms:  
 open -label placebo  
 double -blind placebo  
 double -blind peppermint oil  
 no additional treatment control.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Efficacy Assessments  
 
Primary Outcome Measure  
The primary outcome measure is the IBS symptom severity scale (IBS -SSS). The IBS -SSS is a 
questionnaire that measures the sum of the participant’s evaluation on a 100 point scale of each 
of five items: severity of abdominal pain, freq uency of abdominal pain, severity of abdominal 
distension, dissatisfaction with bowel habits, and interference with quality of life. All five 
components contribute equally to the score, yielding a theoretical range of 0 -500, in which a 
higher score indicat es a more severe condition.  The responder will be considered a patient who 
has at least a 50 point decrease in their IBS -SSS from baseline to Visit 3.  Using data from our 
previous IBS trial the calculated Cronbach's alpha is .70.   
 
Secondary Outcome Measu res  
IBS-Adequate Relief : A single question: “ In the last seven days, have you had adequate relief 
of your IBS symptoms?  Yes/No”  
 
IBS-Global Improvement : A single question: “Compared to the way you felt one week ago, 
have your symptoms over the past 7 day s been: 1) Substantially Worse, 2) Moderately Worse, 
3) Slightly Worse, 4) No Change, 5) Slightly Improved, 6) Moderately Improved or 7) 
Substantially Improved.  
 Randomized  
N=313  
Open -Label 
Placebo  
N≈89  Double -Blind 
Placebo  
N≈89  Double -Blind 
Peppermint Oil  
N≈45  No Additional 
Treatment  
N≈89 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 5  SF-12 Health Survey : An assessment that measures functional health and well -being.  
 
PHQ -8: An 8-item scale that is used as a diagnostic and severity measure for depressive 
disorders in clinical studies.  
 
GAD -7: A 7-item scale that is used as a diagnostic and severity measure for anxiety disorders in 
clinical practice and research.  
 
Visceral Sensit ivity Index : A measure of gastrointestinal symptom -specific anxiety.  
 
Five Factor Inventory : A 60 -item instrument that measures the “Big Five” dimensions of 
personality. Cronbach alphas for the five dimensions are: N = .79, E = .79, O = .80, A = .75, C = 
.83 (Costa & McCrae 1985).  
 
Consultation and Relational Emp athy Measure (CARE) : Assesses physician empathy and 
relational skills on 10 ordinal items, which are  then summed.  
Expectancy Question : “If I receive placebo/peppermint oil/no additional treatment,  I expect my 
IBS symptoms to be: “ (numerical rating scale running from zero " not improved at all " to 100 
"completely improved ") 
Balanced Inventory of Desirable Reach : Describes the tendency of respondents to answer 
questions that will be viewed favorably b y others.   
Pain Catastrophizing Scale : A scale that measures the tendency to magnify or exaggerate t he 
seriousness of pain sensations.   
Interpersonal Support Evaluation List : Designed to measure perceptions of social support 
among individuals in the gene ral population  
Daily Symptom Diary : Questions regarding subject symptoms will be completed  daily for the 
seven day period prior to Visit 2 and Visit 3  
Miscellaneous : Additionally, details of demographics, medical history, symptoms and adverse 
events will b e recorded.   
4. Selection and Enrollment of Participants  
Approximately 313 IBS patients who meet all of the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion 
criteria will be enrolled.  
 
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
To be eligible for enrollment, male and female pati ents must meet all of the following inclusion 
criteria:  
1. Provide signed and dated informed consent and understand the nature of the study 
sufficiently to allow completion of all study assessments.  
2. Be ambulatory, community dwelling, 18 to 80 years, inclusive    
3. Meet Rome IV diagnostic criteria for IBS  
4. Have IBS of at least moderate severity, i.e., have a score on the IBS -SSS of > 175 (0-
500) at the baseline visit  
5. If the patient is on medications which affect the gastrointestinal tract or visceral 
sensation (e. g., tricyclic antidepressants, fiber, antispasmodics, etc.), must be on a 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 6  stable dose for at least 1 month prior to entering the study and for the duration of the 
study.  
 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
If any of the following exclusion criteria are met, the patien t is not eligible for the study:  
1. Self-reported pregnancy or planned pregnancy within the next two months.  
2. Have an established diagnosis of any concomitant bowel disturbance that would 
interfere with the assessment of efficacy or safety in the study (e.g., Hirschsprung’s 
disease, diverticulitis, colonic ischemia ).  
3. Report warning symptoms (e. g., rectal bleeding, weight loss >10%, iron deficiency 
anemia, etc.) otherwise not explained  
4. Have undergone previous abdominal surgery  of the intestines  (with the except ion of 
uncomplicated appendectomy, cholecystectomy, hysterectomy, or polypectomy > 6 
months prior to enrollment).  
5. Have a history of drug, excluding nicotine or caffeine, or alcohol abuse within 2 years of 
entry into the study  
6. Exhibit abnormalities on phys ical examination , unless judged to be clinically insignificant 
by the Investigator. Such cases will be noted.  
7. Current , within the past 30 days,  therapeutic use of  enteric coated  peppermint oil  for the 
treatment of IBS 
8. Known or suspected peppermint or soybe an oil allergy  
9. Severe acid reflux  (> 3 episodes of heartburn or regurgitation per day on average over a 
week)  
10. Inability to speak or read English  
11. Unable or unwilling to cooperate with the study protocol or considered by the 
Investigator to be unsuitable fo r the study.  
 
4.3 Screen Failures  
Patients will be allowed to rescreen once if they do not meet inclusion criteria #4 or #5 at the initial 
screening visit.  
 
5. Study In terventions  
 
5.1 Interventions, Administration, and Duration  
The study involves four groups as follows:  
 open -label placebo 1 softgel TID (N~ 80) 
 doub le-blind placebo 1 softgel TID (N~ 80) 
 double -blind peppermint oil 1 softgel TID (N~ 40) 
 no additional treatment control  (N~80) 
 
Placebo will be supplied as soybean oil ( manufactured by SoftGel  Technologies Inc. ), matched 
to peppermint oil  softgels  (Pepogest ™). The open -label and double -blind placebo are identical 
and both are matched to the peppermint oil.  Each peppermint oil dose is 0.2mL.  Study drug 
should be administered approximately 30 minutes  before meal times.  
 
5.2 Concomitant Interventions  
Patients will be allowed to continue their IBS medications (e.g., fiber, anti -spasmodics, 
loperamide, etc.) as long as they had been on stable doses for at least 30 days prior to entering 
the study and agr ee not to change medications or dosages during the trial.  Any non -
pharmacological treatments for IBS (e.g. meditation, acupuncture, etc.) will be allowed as long 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 7  as they were on a stable pattern/behavior for at least 30 days prior to entering the study. Al l 
concomitant interventions will be recorded.  Patients will be asked to refrain from making any 
major life -style changes (e.g., starting a new diet, changing their exercise pattern or starting a 
stress reduction program) during the study.   
5.3 Study Drug A ccountability  
Accountability for the study drug will be the responsibility of the Research Pharmacy at Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Drug accountability records indicating the study drug delivery 
date to the study center, inventory at the study ce nter, and use by each subject will be 
maintained at the Research Pharmacy. These records will document that the subjects were 
provided the study drug as specified in the protocol.  
All unused study drug will be retained at the study center.  
6. Study Proced ures 
The study will consist of a screening telephone call  no more than 60 days prior to the screening 
visit during which subjects will be assessed for study qualification. Eligible subjects will then 
undergo three visits – screening visit (baseline assessm ents and randomization will occur at this 
visit); midpoint visit; and endpoint visit.  
 
6.1 Schedule of Evaluations  
 
Assessment   
Screening Visit  Week 3 (± 5 
business  days)  
 
Midpoint Visit  Week 6 (± 5 
business  days)  
 
Endpoint Visit  
Informed Consent Form  X   
Clinician Interaction  X X X 
Demographics  X   
Medical History  X   
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X   
Physical Exam  X X X 
Vital Signs  X  X 
Current Medications  X   
Randomization  X   
Blood for Genetic Analysis  X  X 
Questionnaires  X X X 
Concomitant  Medications   X X 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 8  Adverse Events   X X 
 
 
6.2 Description of Evaluations  
Potential participants will be screened by telephone to determine if they meet the Rome IV 
Criteria for IBS and do not suffer from other active diseases or are on medications that wou ld 
disqualify them for enrollment.   
6.2.1 Enrollment, Baseline and Randomization  
Visit 1 (Baseline & Randomization) : The informed consent will clearly indicate that the study is 
testing placebo; it will also clearly indicate that the placebo pills are ine rt, “like sugar pills.” 
Subjects,  who provide informed consent and fulfill the inclusion and exclusion criteria, including 
an IBS -SSS of at least 175, will be eligible to enter the trial. A research coordinator will assist in 
completion of questionnaires a nd collection of blood. A clinician with expertise in IBS will review 
the patient’s history, perform a physical exam and confirm the diagnosis of IBS. Subjects  will be 
randomly assigned to one of the four groups. Randomization will be accomplished by using  
sequentially numbered opaque sealed envelopes provided to the clinician.  All assessments with 
the exception of blood collection  will occur prior to randomization.   
Depending on the assignment , subjects  will be given a semi -scripted discussion  regarding th eir 
assignment. The clinician will make every effort to assure equal attention, encouragement and 
patient -clinician relationship.   
Subjects  in all groups will be reminded not to make changes to their diet, exercise, and IBS 
medications, which may be conti nued during the study, provided that they are on a stable dose 
for 1 month. Subjects  will be told to return in 3 weeks. (Note: Approximately 42 patients will be 
randomly selected to participate in the nested qualitative study and will undergo a detailed 
interview at the conclusion of Visit 3).   
 
Subjects will be instructed on the completion of the daily diary to be completed nightly for the 
seven days prior to both Visit 2 and Visit 3.  
 
6.2.2 Follow -up Visits  
 
Visits 2 and 3 : At these visits, the following procedures will be performed: vital signs  (Visit 3 
only) , brief physical examination with clinician interaction, dispensation of pills (if appropriate), 
pill counts (if appropriate), review of concomitant medications, and documentation of adverse 
events. A research coordinator will assist in completion of questionnaires and collection of 
blood . Whenever possible, the same treatment provider will see the patient for all visits.   
 
Vital signs will not be recorded in the source documents, as t hey are  done to m irror a standard 
clinic visit from the subject perspective  and will not be analyzed . 
 
6.2.3 Sample Collection  
Gene tic variation in genes encoding proteins involved in several neurotransmitter pathways has 
been shown to modify response to placebo treatment.  This study will build on these findings to 
examine how placebo treatment modifies gene, protein and miRNA expression  as well as  
changes in metabolism that may be associated with differential response to placebo treatment. 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 9  Although all these genomic studie s will not be run in the primary study , it is important to collect 
samples that will allow these analyses to be done in the future. Aliquots of plasma, serum, white 
cells and red cells will be de -identified and stored at -80C.   Samples will be collected a t baseline 
and at the end of the study.  
GWAS will be conducted to identify genes implicated in modifying placebo response.  
6.2.4 Blinding  
Blinding of the double -blind treatment groups will be maintained throughout the study by using 
procedures that are iden tical in method and appearance.  The assessor  who administered the 
questionnaires will be blinded to all groups. For patients randomized to either of the double blind 
administration groups, t he clinician will be blinded to the treatment administered (pepper mint oil 
or placebo) . 
 
The Investigator and study center personnel will not have access to the randomization code 
during the study except in the case of an emergency. Breaking the blind for a subject will only 
be done in the event of a medical emergency wh ere the identify of study drug is necessary to 
appropriately treat the subject. If the blind is broken, the reason and date will be documented. 
Every attempt will be made to maintain the blind throughout the study.  
 
6.2.5 Completion/Final Evaluation   
Efforts will be made to complete data collection on all subjects regardless of compliance with 
treatment. Those who are not compliant will be noted.  
 
There will not be any additional study procedures done for subjects that discontinue early.  
 
7. Safety Assessm ents 
 
7.1 Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
Adverse Event: An AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient administered a study 
product  and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship to the study  product. Patients 
will be instructe d to contact the Study Team at any time if any symptoms develop.  
 
Serious Adverse Event: An SAE is an event that:  
 Results in death  
 Is immediately life threatening  
 Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongs existing hospitalization  
 Results in persiste nt or significant disability and/or incapacity, or  
 Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
 
An important medical event that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered an SAE when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, it 
may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of 
the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency r oom or at home, blood 
dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of 
drug dependency or drug abuse.  
 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 10  At every study visit, patients will be asked questions to elicit medically related changes in their well -
being. They will also be asked if they have been hospitalized, had any accidents, used any new 
medications, or changed concomitant medication regimens.  Any difference in responses to any 
question on the side effects questionnaire between visits  will not be  considered an adverse event 
unless the subject verbally informs the research team.   
 
7.2 Reporting Procedures  
All AEs observed from the time the patient receives the first treatment until the last follow -up visit 
will be recorded on the CRF. The descripti on of the AE will include the type of event, onset date, 
assessment of severity, date of resolution of event, seriousness, any required treatment of 
evaluations, and outcome.  
 
All SAEs will be reported to the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Institutio nal Review Board 
(IRB). In addition, the FDA will be notified of all serious and unexpected AEs in an IND safety 
report no later than 15 calendar days after awareness of the event and 7 days after a suspected 
unexpected serious adverse event that results i n death.  
 
A formal report from the DSMB will be supplied to NCCIH, which will be communicated to the PI 
and the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Each report will conclude with a 
recommendation to either 1) continue the study without changes; 2) conti nue the study with 
changes; or 3) terminate the study. This recommendation will be made by formal majority vote 
and fully justified by the preceding  report.  
 
Any AEs observed that are unanticipated will be reported under the following schedule:  
1. Unanticipat ed problems that are serious adverse events will be reported to the IRB 
within 1 week of the investigator becoming aware of the event.  
2. Any other unanticipated problem will be reported to the IRB within 2 weeks of the 
investigator becoming aware of the prob lem. 
8. Statistical Considerations  
8.1 Randomization  
Treatment assignments will be generated using permuted block randomization with randomly 
varying block sizes. Randomization will be done in a 2:2:2:1: ratio (open -label placebo; double -
blind placebo; no treatment control; double blind peppermint oil). Randomization for the 
qualitative sub -study will be done. Randomized assignments to one of the four groups will be 
sealed in sequentially numbered  opaque envelopes.  
A random subset of approximately 57 of the  participants will be selected for participation in the 
nested qualitative study . The participants will be randomly selected in the same ratio as the 
primary randomization . Care providers will be blinded to participation in the sub  study. A list of 
selecte d randomization IDs and access to the REDCap patient scheduling module will be 
provided to the interviewer  so that he or she can conduct the qualitative interview after the 
participant has completed the final clinical evaluation.  
8.2 Stratification  
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 11  Strati fication will be  based on IBS symptom severity score (< 300 and > 300) and gender , 
resulting in 4 strata . Each stratum will have a different color randomization envelope and a 
unique set of randomization ID numbers.  
8.3 Analyses  
All tests will be two -tailed with =.05. For our primary a nalyses , we will use a modified intention -
to-treat analysis including any patient who was randomized and provided a baseline 
assessment and at least one post -baseline primary outcome assessment.  We will also run per 
protocol analyses, and any substantive differences between the two methods will be reported . 
We will examine the amount of missing data and the nature of the missingness (missing 
completely at random, missing at random, and missing not a random). If necessary, we w ill 
conduct a full intention to treat analysis.   
Aim 1. To determine whether 6 weeks of open -label placebo, double -blind placebo and no -
treatment results in different clinical outcomes.   To test this aim, we will conduct a one -way 
analysis of covariance. I n addition to treatment group, the model will include baseline IBS -SSS 
and stratification factors for gender and symptom severity.  
Assuming that there is a significant difference between the 3 groups, Dunnett’s analysis will be 
used to do pairwise analyses  of the following aims  
1a. To determine if 6 weeks of open -label placebo results in superior  clinical outcome than no 
treatment control.   Hypothesis: open -label placebo > no treatment control.  
1b. To determine if 6 weeks of open -label placebo results in superio r clinical outcome than 
double blind placebo.   Hypothesis: open -label placebo > double -blind placebo . 
Secondary Aims Analysis Plan :  There are  three secondary multi -disciplinary aims in this 
study.   
Secondary Aim 1 (Genetics Aim) : In our previous lar ge RCT we found that the number 
methionine alleles in COMT val158met was associated with placebo responses especially to a 
combined placebo and supportive patient -provider relationship. We plan to confirm these 
findings and extend them by evaluating additi onal candidate genes implicated in placebo.   
Exploratory analyses will be performed in other candidate genes associated with placebo 
including: the mu -opioid receptor polymorphism (OPRM1 A118G), FAAH polymorphisms 
Pro129Thr. monoamine oxidase gene polymor phisms, and serotonin -related polymorphism 
CGTTLPR and G -703T (polymorphism in the tryptophan hydroxylase -2 (TPH -2) gene 
promoter) .  
DNA will be extracted from those study participants who agree to the genetic screening and will 
be analyzed by a TaqMan all ele discrimination assay. Subsequently, COMT and other 
candidate genotypes will be correlated with response to placebo or active drug treatment using 
the above mentioned outcomes. Furthermore, potential correlations of the COMT and other 
genotypes and pati ent-disease characteristics, for instance pain experience at baseline, will be 
examined.   
Secondary Aim 2 (Psychological Aim) : In our previous large RCT in IBS we found that higher 
levels of extraversion, agreeableness, and openness to experience are asso ciated with 
increased response to placebo treatment, especially with an augmented patient -practitioner 
relationship.  We will use the Five Factor Inventory (FFI) to measure these personali ty traits and 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 12  then use multiple regression to examine their associat ion with outcomes after controlling for 
baseline severity.    
Secondary (exploratory) Aim : To determine if 6 weeks of double -blind peppermint oil results in 
greater improvement than double -blind placebo in patients with IBS.   Hypothesis:   Double -blind 
pepp ermint oil > Double -blind placebo. To test this aim, we will conduct an analysis of 
covariance. In addition to treatment group, the model will include baseline IBS -SSS and 
stratification factors for gender and symptom severity.  
8.4 Power Calculations : To e stimate the effect size for Aim 1, we used our previous pilot trial in 
IBS.  In that study, t he effect size for the difference between open -label placebo and no -
treatment on the IBS Symptom Severity Scale was d= 0.53.  For this comparison, there will be 
88 patients in each group, and using ANCOVA to control for baseline scores leaves the power 
for the 3 group comparison at .96.  To estimate the power for secondary (exploratory) aim  using 
ANCOVA to control baseline scores leaves the power of .60;  however,  using more recent data 
that suggest a n effect size of d= 0.50, the power would  be .78. 
8.5 Missing Data  Minimization Strategies: Missing data minimization strategies includes 
patient retention efforts and a modified intent -to-treat analysis. Each individual p atient reported 
assessment will be captured electronically at each visit with missing responses prohibited by the 
electronic system.   
9. Administrative Requirements  
 
9.1 Good Clinical Practice  
The study will be conducted in accordance with the Internation al Conference on Harmonization 
(ICH) for Good Clinical Practice (GCP).  Essential clinical documents will be maintained to 
demonstrate the validity of the study and the integrity of the data collected. Files will be 
established at the beginning of the study , maintained for the duration of the study, and retained 
according to appropriate regulations.  
 
9.2 Data Management  
Data will be recorded and stored via REDCap. Data will be recorded on REDCap as the study is 
in progress. All passwords will be strictly con fidential.  
 
9.3 Protocol Deviations/Violations  
If a subject does not complete a daily diary entry, it will not be considered a protocol 
deviation/violation. If blood is not obtained at either Visit 1 or Visit 3, it will not be considered a 
protocol deviati on/violation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 13   
 
Appendix 1  
 
Schedule of Study Procedures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 14   
 
Appendix 2  
 
IBS-Severity Scoring System  
Instructions  
These questions are designed to enable us to record and monitor the severity of your IBS . It is 
to be expected that your symptoms might vary over time, so please try and answer the 
questions based on how you currently  feel (i.e. over the last 10 days or so). All information will 
be kept in strict  confidence.  
 
1. For questions where a number o f different responses are a possibility please circle the 
response appropriate to you.  
2.  Some questions will require you to write in an appropriate response.  
3.  Some questions require you to put a cross on a line which enables us to judge the severity o f 
a particular problem.  
 
Please place your cross (X) anywhere on the line between 0 -100% in order to indicate as 
indicate as accurately as possible the severity of your symptom.  
 
This example shows a severity of approximately 90%.  
 
              0%|------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ X-----| 100%  
            no pain      not very           quite              severe        very  
    or discomfort          severe          severe          severe  
 
1.    Do you current ly suffer from abdominal pain?     Yes  No 
1b. If yes, how severe is your abdominal pain?  Please make an “X” anywhere on the line.  
 
              0%|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | 100%  
            no pain      not very           quite              severe        very  
    or discomfort          severe          severe          severe  
 
1c. Out of 10 days, how many days do you experience abdominal pain?   _______  
2.  Do you currently suffer from abdominal distention (bloating, swelling , or tightness)?  
   Yes  No 
2b. If yes, how severe is your abdominal distention?  Please make an “X” anywhere on the line.  
 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 15                0%|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | 100%  
            no distention    not v ery          quite              severe        very                                         
severe          severe          severe  
 
 
              
  very happy                    quite happy                     unhappy                           very unhappy  
 
 
4.   How much does your IBS affect or interfere with your life in general?  Please make an “X” 
anywhere on the line.  
              0%|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | 100%  
 not at all                           not much                        quite a lot                          completely  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.  How satisfied are you with your bowel habit?  Please make an “X” anywhere on the line.  
              0%|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | 100%  
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 16   
Appendix 3  
 
List of Evaluations  to be Completed at Each Visit  
 
Paper Source Documents  
 
Evaluation  Visit 1  Visit 2  Visit 3  
Telephone screening     
Original signed ICF  X   
Physical Examination  X X X 
Rome IV Diagnostic Criteria  X   
IBS-SSS X X X 
Visit 1 Template  X   
Visit 2 Template   X  
Visit 3 Template    X 
Concomitant Medication Log  X X X 
Adverse Event Log   X X 
Blood Collection  X  X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol, Version 6.0 Page 17   
Entered Directly into RedCap  
 
Evaluation  Visit 1  Visit 2  Visit 3  
Rome IV Module  X   
Symptom Questionnaire   X X 
Why are you participating?  X   
IBS-ARS X X X 
IBS-GIS X X X 
Blinding Question   X X 
Expectanc y Question  X   
Medication Adherence Questionnaire   X X 
Side Effects Questionnaire  X  X 
PHQ -8 X   
GAD -7 X   
VSI X  X 
SF-12 X   
FFI X   
CARE    X 
PCS X  X 
BIDR    X 
ISEL -12 X  X 
Daily Questionnaire     
* All questionnaires above are completed by t he subjects. The demographic and Visit 1 IBS -
SSS data in RedCap is completed by stuff staff.  