Cover Page for ClinicalTrials.gov s 
Official Title of the Study:  
Acceptance and Mindfulness Based Exposure Th erapy For Survivors Of Sudden Cardiac 
Arrest 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Principal Investigator:  
Yuval Neria, PhD  
Yuval.Neria@nyspi.columbia.edu  
646-774-8041  
Date of Document:  
09/30/2022  
  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 Study analyses will employ  SPSS Statistics version 28.0. This feasibi lity study was not 
powered to detect treatment effects. Separate repeated measures ANOVAs will be conducted for 
CAPS -5 and HAM -D scores over time  will explore treatment effects on psychiatric symptoms.  
For completers, paired sample t-tests will compare sy mptoms at baseline, posttreatment, and 3 -
month follow -up using all available data. Cohen’s d will be  computed to determine effect sizes. 
Descriptive statistics will describe the proportion of patients achieving PTSD remission (defined 
a priori  as no longer  meeting PTSD diagnostic criteria and CAPS -5 score≤23) or clinically 
significant response (≥30% reduction from pretreatment CAPS -5). To classify HamD -17 
depression severity, we will follow recommendations of Zimmerman et al.: not depressed (0 –7), 
mild (8 –16), moderate (17 –23), and severe depression (≥24).  
The first recorded 7200 minutes of Fitbit actigraphy use (confirmed by pulse recording) 
post account activation will define the baseline and will be  compared to final treatment week in 
separate paired samples t -tests for average daily steps, sedentary minutes, and minutes asleep. 
Analyses will exclude patients lacking 7200 minutes of final week active wear.  
 
Protocol Summary  Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
1
Protocol Title:
ACCEPTANCE AND MINDFULNESS BASED  
EXPOSURE THERAPY FOR  SURVIVORS OF 
SUDDEN CARDIAC  ARREST
Protocol Number:
8017
First Approval:
09/04/2020
Expiration Date:
07/19/2023Version Date:
09/30/2022
Research Area:  
Anxiety, Mood, Eating & Related  Disorders
Division:  
Anxiety/PTSD/OCD
Contact Principal Investigator:
Yuval Neria,  PHD
Email: ny126@columbia.edu
Telephone: 646-774-8092Co-Investigator(s):
John Markowitz, MD
Maja Bergman
Doron Amsalem
Research Chief:
Helen Simpson, MD
Department & Unaffiliated Personnel
Department
What Department does the PI belong to?
Anxiety Disorders ClinicWithin the department, what Center  or group are  you affiliated with,  if any? 
PTSD Team
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
PTSD Team
Amendment
Describe the change(s) being made  
Clarifying language has been added to the  Methods to  Protect Confidentiality to  explain that  identifiable 
Protocol Summary  Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
2
data will be kept on secure, password-protected  NYSPI, while some completely deidentified data may be  
stored on secure, password-protected CUIMC servers.
Provide the rationale for the change(s)  
This will allow our  collaborators at the Roybal Center for Fearless Behavioral Change at Columbia 
University, the study sponsor, to assist with data analysis.Comment on the  extent to  which the proposed  change(s)  alter  or affect risks/benefits  to subjects 
N/AComment on if the  proposed change(s)  require a  modification to the Consent Form (CF)
N/A
Procedures
To create the protocol summary form,  first indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Audio or Videotaping
   Internet-based Data Collection  or Transmission
   Psychotherapy Trial
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Adults
   Adults  over 50
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Protocol Title: Version Date:
ACCEPTANCE AND MINDFULNESS
BASED EXPOSURE THERAPY FOR
SURVIVORS OF SUDDEN CARDIAC
ARREST07/11/2022
Protocol Number:
8017
First Approval:
09/04/2020
Expiration Date:
07/19/2022
Contact Principal Investigator:
Yuval Neria,  PHD
Email: ny126@columbia.edu
Telephone: 646-774-8092Co-Investigator(s):
John Markowitz, MD
Maja Bergman
Doron Amsalem
Research Chief:
Helen Simpson, MD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to your study
If you are creating  a new  protocol, select  "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are  no
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical purposes.
I am submitting an  annual continuation without modifications
Department & Unaffiliated Personnel
Department
What Department does the PI belong to?
Anxiety Disorders Clinic
Within the department, what Center  or group  are you affiliated with, if any?
PTSD Team
Unaffiliated Personnel
Page 1 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating  in this protocol but are not  affiliated with New  York
State Psychiatric  Institute  or Columbia University.  Provide:  Full Name, Degrees  and Affiliation.
Ian Kronish, MD, Columbia University
Sachin Agarwal, MD, Columbia University
Donald Edmondson, PhD, Columbia University
Jeff Birk, PhD, Columbia University
Alexandra Sullivan, Columbia  University
David Lopez-Veneros, Columbia University
Robin Cumella,  Columbia University
Gaspar Cruz, Columbia University
Jennifer Mizhquiri Barbecho, Columbia University
Maria Serafini, Columbia University
Ammie Jurado, Columbia University
Brooke Morgan, Columbia University
Tyla Yurgel,  Columbia University
Lee Sung, Columbia University
Cara McMurry, Columbia University
Datla Raju, Columbia University
Kaitlin Shaw, Columbia  University
Kristal Quispe, Columbia University
Faith Parsons, Columbia University
Application for Continuation  of Research
Status
Current Status  of Study:
All research interventions were completed. Only data analysis is ongoing.
Summary of  Experiences  to Date
Please provide a summary  of scientific progress of the study and  the experience of  research participants, to
date. This requirement is designed to allow for  the investigator and the IRB to reassess the study’s risks and
benefits in terms  of developments in the field,  changing practice  patterns, and new IRB policies  and
procedures.
To date we  have enrolled  11 participants (7 female and 4 male). Ten participants  completed the intervention,
while 1 participant decided to discontinue  study involvement. No serious adverse events have  occurred, and
all interventions have been well tolerated. There  have not  been any  study findings,  recent literature, or
untoward events in the past year which might affect  the analysis of the safety, risks, or benefits of study
participation.
Page 2 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Funding
Have there  been any changes in funding status since  the prior approval?
No
Have the principal  investigator  and other investigators made  all required disclosures of financial  interest in
the study sponsor/product?
Yes
Summary
Have there  been any study  findings, recent  literature, or untoward events occuring here or at other  sites  in
the past  year which might affect  the analysis of the safety, risks or benefits of study participation?
No
Have there  been any serious adverse events (serious and/or unanticipated problems involving  risks to
subjects or others  at this site which occured  in the past year)?
No
Have all study staff with a  significant role  in the design  or implementation  of the human subject components
of this study  received  required training in human research  subject  protections?
Yes
Is the study covered by a certificate of confidentiality?
No
Overall Progress
Approved sample size
14
Total number  of participants enrolled  to date
11
Number of participants  who have completed the study  to date
10
Have there  been any significant deviations from the anticipated study recruitment, retention or completion
estimates?
No
Comments / additional information
Sample Demographics
Specify population
Survivors of Sudden Cardiac Arrest with PTSD
Total number  of participants enrolled  from  this population to date
11
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
Gender:
Female: 7 (64%)
Page 3 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Male: 4  (36%)
Race:
White: 10 (91%)
Black: 1 (9%)
Native American: 0 (0%)
Asian or Pacific Islander:  0 (0%)
Other: 0 (0%)
Ethnicity:
Of Hispanic  or Latinx  descent: 0 (0%)
Not of Hispanic  of Latinx  descent:  11 (100%)
Summary of  Current Year's Enrollment and  Drop-out
Number of participants  who signed consent  in the  past year
6
Did the investigator  withdraw participants  from the  study?
No
Did participants  decide to discontinue study involvement?
No
Procedures
To create the protocol summary form,  first indicate if this research will include  any of the following
procedures
Audio or Videotaping
Internet-based Data Collection or Transmission
Psychotherapy Trial
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included in this  research
Adults
Adults over 50
Research Support/Funding
Page 4 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?
No
Is the project  externally  funded or is external funding planned?
Yes
Select the number of external  sources of funding that will be  applicable to  this study
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  of the  grant/contract the  same as the PI of the IRB protocol?
Yes
Select one of the following
The grant/contract application is a pending review or a funding decision
Source of Funding
Other
Sponsor
Roybal Center for Fearless  Behavior  Change  at Columbia University
Select one of the following
Single Site
Business Office
RFMH
Does the grant/contract involve a  subcontract?
No
Study Location
Indicate if the  research is/will be conducted at any of the following
NYSPI
Other Columbia University Medical  Center  Facilities
This protocol  describes research conducted by the  PI at other  facilities/locations
No
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
This pilot trial  seeks to examine feasibility,  acceptability, safety,  and preliminary  efficacy of a new
behavioral treatment for survivors of sudden cardiac arrest with clinically  elevated symptoms of post
traumatic stress  disorder (PTSD). While  several well-studied, validated  treatments for PTSD exist, to date,
there is no evidence-based treatment for PTSD in cardiac arrest survivors. Standard PTSD interventions
targeting fear extinction and threat  perception in the context of current safety pose a problem  in a population
that is living with an actual ongoing cardiac threat.  Thus, we will be developing a de  novo  protocol for an
Acceptance and  Mindfulness-Based Exposure  Therapy  (AMBET)  intervention that targets increased
discriminatory perception through mindful interoceptive attention  and adaptive threat responding. To  assess
Page 5 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
whether patients' medication adherence and physical activity are improved over the course of treatment,
participants will  be provided with a wearable device (Fitbit wristband) to monitor their physical activity.
The specific  aims of this study are  to: (1)  develop an acceptable protocol for an  AMBET intervention for
survivors of  sudden cardiac arrest with elevated  PTSD symptoms (2) examine its safety and feasibility in  a
small sample of 14 patients (3) investigate acceptability and  feasibility of the  measurements including a
physical activity monitoring device.
The subject  population will consist of cardiac arrest survivors  with clinically diagnosed  PTSD (n=14;
CAPS-5 ≥ 23). In Phase  1 (interview phase), with the aim to develop a treatment manual, 14 SCA survivors
will be interviewed about their symptoms and evaluated for baseline  assessment. In Phase 2 (treatment
phase) the same participants will be treated with eight sessions of AMBET. Participants will be evaluated  at
baseline, at treatment mid-point (week 4), and at  the end of treatment.
Background, Significance and Rationale
Background, Significance and Rationale
Clinically elevated  levels  of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms occur  in approximately 1 in 3
cardiac arrest survivors with  intact cognitive  function, and are associated  with  increased risk for future
cardiac events and  mortality(1),(2). Elevated PTSD symptoms have been associated  with low adherence to
physical activity and medication adherence in patients  with elevated  PTSD symptoms after  other types  of
cardiovascular events(3),(4),(5), in part because  medications and  physical activity  can serve as traumatic
reminders, and nonadherence to cardioprotective health behaviors may  explain the association  between
cardiac arrest-induced  PTSD  and poor prognosis. Given  the lack  of evidence-based psychological therapies
for cardiac arrest survivors  with PTSD, the development and testing  of an acceptance and  mindfulness-
based exposure therapy  (AMBET) protocol  may be beneficial to survivors  of cardiac arrest. Our long-term
goal is to determine  the effectiveness of this therapy on  reducing psychological distress, reducing aversive
associations with  secondary prevention  behaviors,  and improving quality of life and cardiovascular
outcomes.
Rationale for  Intervention: Survivors of acute cardiovascular  events  (e.g.,  cardiac  arrest, acute coronary
syndrome) are typically encouraged to monitor for  somatic cues of cardiovascular activity that might
indicate recurrent events. However,  threat-related attention bias  is a common  sequela of trauma. In cardiac
patients, this  hypervigilant attention to interoceptive cues of danger may serve to  maintain threat  perception,
as arousal  amplifies  awareness of internal stimuli(6). PTSD symptoms have been associated  with attempts
to avoid distressing internal symptoms  as well as  to negatively influence engagement in health behaviors in
both cardiac  and non-cardiac populations(7),(8),(9),(10),(11).
Treatments aimed at reducing fear of interoceptive  sensations in  patients with various anxiety disorders are,
however, not necessarily applicable to a  cardiac population where negative illness appraisals and  threat
perception might  be realistic. Furthermore,  elements  of interoceptive exposure  frequently  utilized in  these
treatments such as hyperventilation may  not be  recommended for some  cardiac  patients as they may
provoke arrhythmias common among cardiac arrest patients. While no evidence-based treatments for
Page 6 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
cardiac disease induced-PTSD currently exist, initial evidence has been published to suggest the safety, and
potential efficacy of,  imaginal exposure in cardiac patients  to reduce PTSD symptoms.(12)  Among PTSD
treatments, exposure  therapy is the most widely recommended.  However, even  among the most well-
supported treatments for PTSD, the efficacy is moderate, and  high dropout rates  are well  documented(13-
15). The need for novel  and adjunctive interventions that will  improve treatment engagement and outcomes
has been  widely acknowledged(16), (17).
One innovative  line of  PTSD therapies can be found among mindfulness- and  acceptance-based  treatments.
Although large scale  RCTs are still limited, there  are promising findings of treatment  effects  on reduced
PTSD symptoms,  with medium to large  effect sizes(18),(19). Reported dropout  rates  have been  low across
treatments, indicating a  high degree of  treatment acceptability. The addition of mindfulness components to
exposure therapy has  been proposed to enhance the effects of  exposure  as well as the willingness to  engage
in them(20). Of particular interest for cardiac patients  are findings that mindfulness-based approaches have
normalized cortisol levels and reduced inflammatory  biomarkers  in PTSD  patients,  as these are
physiological processes that have been implicated in the links between  PTSD and  cardiovascular
risk(21),(22),(23). Several mechanisms  have been  posited to  underlie the efficacy of mindfulness-based
approaches including  increased  metacognitive  awareness of interoceptive  sensations  and mind-body
connections(24),(25). Mindfulness may additionally  function as a  form of exposure to  aversive internal
experiences and reduce distress from  attempts  to control  thoughts  and emotions(26),  (27), (28).
Furthermore, and contrary  to the  associations found between  hypervigilant  interoceptive awareness and
psychopathology, mindful attention  to interoceptive  cues has been  linked with adaptive, resilience-
enhancing behaviors(29).
The goals of  the AMBET treatment will be  to reduce PSTD symptoms  and hypervigilance to  internal stimuli
(i.e., interoceptive bias), and increase cardiovascular health behaviors (medication  adherence, physical
activity) following cardiac  arrest. Following  psychoeducation about PTSD and cardiovascular disease
(CVD) related health behaviors, participants  will be engaged in in vivo and imaginal exposure exercises to
reduce avoidance responses. Participants will be introduced to acceptance and mindfulness-based strategies
that will be practiced in session and as homework  assignments. Sessions will be delivered to  patients
individually through  HIPAA-compliant zoom-hosted video  visits. A  meta-analysis of remote (e.g.,
telepsychiatry; video-based) treatments for PTSD  found these treatments  superior to waitlist conditions.
Compared to face-to-face treatments, videoconferencing CBT treatments  did not result  in significantly
different PTSD outcomes  at post-treatment(30).
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
The specific  aims of this study are  to: (1)  develop an acceptable protocol for an  AMBET intervention for
survivors of  sudden cardiac arrest with PTSD; (2) examine its  safety and feasibility  in a small  sample of 14
patients; (3) investigate acceptability and feasibility of the measurements including a physical activity
monitoring device.
Hypothesis 1: The AMBET  intervention will demonstrate preliminary tolerability  (<20% dropout)
Page 7 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Hypothesis 2: The AMBET  intervention will demonstrate efficacy (pre/post  decrements on psychological
distress) and the  recruitment  goal  (n=14)  will be met.
Hypothesis 3: Participants will find  the health behavior monitoring technology acceptable and comply  with
study procedures (wearing  Fitbit device daily and during sleep.)
Description of Subject Population
Sample #1
Specify subject  population
Survivors of sudden cardiac arrest  with clinically diagnosed  PTSD (CAPS-5  =23)
Number of completers  required to accomplish  study  aims
10
Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain required number  of completers
14
Age range of subject  population
18-85
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
Gender:
50% female (N:5-7)
50% male (N:5-7)
Ethnicity:
25% Hispanic
45% White
30% African-American
Description of subject population
All participants  will be  adult survivors of cardiac  arrest  who present with clinically elevated PTSD  or acute
stress disorder (ASD) symptoms. Patients will be evaluated at the Anxiety Disorders Clinic for potential
inclusion in the  study. The  expected ethnicity distributions are based on population data from  the CANOE
patient registry. The  study aims  to enroll an equal number of males and  females.
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Referrals will be  done  by Dr.  Sachin  Agarwal's  team. Dr. Agarwal is a  neurointensivist and founder  of the
Page 8 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Neuro Cardiac Comprehensive Care Clinic (N4C)  at New York  Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University
Irving Medical Center (CUIMC).  Patients will be recruited from the Cardiac Arrest Neuropsychological
Outcomes Evaluation (CANOE) study (CUIMC IRB-  AAAR8497), an observational, prospective cohort
study of cardiac  arrest survivors  discharged from CUIMC  who  have consented to being contacted about
future studies. CANOE participants who are currently seen in-person by the CANOE team at the hospital
will be provided  with an IRB approved flyer by a  CANOE team member informing them of the study and
how to contact  the study coordinator. Additionally, the study will be  advertised  via the Sudden Cardiac
Arrest Foundation’s network, other patient  support and interest groups  (i.e Facebook groups), and  local
cardiology departments  informing potential study participants to contact the study team  if they are  interested
in participation.  Posting of the  flyer  in online  support groups will be done by respective group
administrators.
How and by whom  will subjects be approached  and/or recruited?
Potential patients already enrolled in  the CANOE protocol  will be asked by Dr.  Agarwal's team to contact
the study research assistant who will schedule a phonescreen with the patient. If patient is potentially
eligible, a clinical evaluation will be conducted by the PTSD program clinicians.
How will the study be  advertised/publicized?
The study will be  advertised via  the included  recruitment flyer.
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this  time?
Yes
Does this study involve a  clinical trial?
Yes
Please provide the NCT Registration Number
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies?
Yes
Describe concurrent research  involvement
Subjects will be  recruited from CUIMC/CANOE protocol AAAR8497. No identifiable or de-identified data
will be shared back with the CANOE study  team.
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name the subject group/sub sample
Adult survivors of sudden  cardiac arrest
Create or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods to ascertain them
Method of
ascertainmentCriteria
Page 9 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Medical records
demographic
information1. Males or females between the  age of 18-85
2. A PCL-5  score of  > 33 at screening  and a
CAPS-5 score ≥ 23 at intake  assessmentPCL-5, CAPS-5
3. Hospitalization for cardiac  arrest with cardiac
etiology at any  time in the  past.Medical records  review
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to  ascertain  them
Exclusion Criteria Method of  ascertainment
Medical records  review1. Heart  failure with severe
systolic dysfunction (ejection
fracture < 25%)Rationale: Patients with severe systolic
dysfunction are unlikely to be able  to comply
with study  procedures.
Medical records  review  and/or clinical
interview
Rationale: Patients with terminal non-
cardiovascular illness with life expectancy <1
year are unlikely to be able  to comply with
study procedures due  to severe limitations.2. Terminal non-
cardiovascular illness with
life expectancy of  <1 year
SCID and clinical  evaluation3. History of  psychiatric
diagnosis of psychotic
episode, psychotic  disorder,
schizophrenia,Rationale: Such disorders are considered to
have a more  chronic trajectory and there is a
lack of  evidence  to support the  use of
exposure therapy and  remote treatments for
this population.schizoaffective disorder
4. Current severe  depression SCID, HAM-D and clinical evaluation.
determined by  a) a score  of Rationale: Patients with severe depression  are
>25 on  the Hamilton Rating less responsive  to exposure therapy and
Scale for Depression (HAM- severely depressed patients may be better
D-17-item), and b) clinical served by treatments  that target these
assessment symptoms first.
5. Significant  cognitive
impairmentReview of medical records: Cerebral
Performance Category Scale
Defined by Cerebral MMSE (conducted at intake)
Performance Category Score Rationale:  Cognitive impairments at this level
≥3, and/or MMSE score of is likely to impact  patient ability to complete
<24 neurological impairment study questionnaires  and other  activities  as
precluding ability  to
complete study
questionnaireswell as comprehension  of study  procedures
required for informed consent.
Page 10 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Clinical interview; score of
> 2 on item 3 of the Hamilton
Rating Scale for Depression
(HAM-D-17-item).
Rationale: To ensure safety  of participants,
active suicidal patients  will be referred to
psychiatric care.6. Active suicidal ideation
or behavior
SCID and clinical  evaluation.
Rationale: Patients with bipolar illness are less
responsive to exposure therapy and may be
better served  by treatments that target these
symptoms first.7. Current primary diagnosis
of bipolar disorder
8. Current unstable  or
untreated medical illnessClinical evaluation and  medical history.
Rationale: Patient  safety.
SCID and clinical  interview.
9. Current drug or alcohol Rationale: Severe substance abuse  issues
misuse: severe
alcohol/cannabis or anyshould be addressed with evidence-based
treatment targeting these symptoms and
other substance use disorder behaviors that are otherwise likely to  interfere
(except nicotine) with treatment  and ability to comply  with
study procedures.
10. Recent psychotropic
medication change or
initiation within the  last 3
monthsClinical interview regarding current
medication and treatment  history.
Rationale: to ensure safety and stability of
management.
11. Initiation of other
psychotherapy within  the last
3 monthsClinical interview regarding current
psychotherapeutic treatment history.
12. Patient resides  in a state
that does  not permit remote
research therapies to be
conducted out-of-state.Phonescreen
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waivers
Waiver of consent for  use of records  that include  protected health information (a  HIPAA waiver  of
Authorization)
No
Waiver or alteration of consent
No
Page 11 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Waiver of documentation of consent
No
Waiver of parental consent
No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different  IRB protocol?
Yes
Indicate NYSPI IRB #
7094R
Describe Study Consent Procedures
Patients will first give  verbal  consent  for the telephone screen with a screener who  has at minimum a
bachelor’s degree. Preliminary phone  screen will be  conducted as approved  under Anxiety Disorders Clinic
IRB #7094R. Patients  who are found eligible  for an intake evaluation  will then be  emailed  a link to a
REDCap e-consent.  NYSPI  REDCap  is a HIPAA approved platform hosted on secure NYSPI servers.
Patients will be  informed not to sign the consent  until the form  is reviewed with  a person that is authorized
to discuss  and document consent  (see section “Persons Designed  to Discuss and  Document Consent”) and
who has  at minimum a  master’s  degree. After  patient  reads the consent form the clinician  will go over  the
form with the patient and answer all the patient’s questions.  After answering  all the patient’s questions by
the clinician patient will sign the study consent. The signed consent form  is available to the study team
immediately upon  submission by the participant in REDCap.  Throughout this  process, the patient will be
told that they are free  to refuse to participate  in the  research and  that participation or non-participation in
research has  no effect on their ability to continue to receive clinical  care  or services.
Indicate which of  the following are employed as a part of screening  or main  study consent  procedures
Consent Form
Persons designated  to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Amsalem, Doron
Bergman, Maja
Campeas, Raphael, MD
Eder-Moreau, Elizabeth
Neria, Yuval, PHD
Sanchez-Lacay, jose, MD
Type in  the name(s) not found in the above list
Study Procedures
Page 12 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Describe the procedures required for this study
As shown in the study overview flow chart  below, the study comprises the following procedures: 1)
Eligibility assessment; 2)  Baseline assessment  with an independent evaluator (IE); 3) Intake interview; 4)
Treatment (during  which  there will a separate (additional) meeting with the IE at week 4);  3) End  of
treatment assessment; 6) Three-month follow-up assessment posttreatment.
The protocol  will be carried out remotely. Video-visits and assessments will be conducted over HIPAA-
compliant Zoom (utilizing licensed  NYSPI accounts), a password protected  and HIPAA compliant
electronic platform. For consent forms and  self-report measures, NYSPI REDCap will be utilized to gather
signatures and  information from  patients. Patients will receive an email  with  a weblink  to complete these on
this HIPAA  compliant platform and the data will be stored on secure NYSPI servers.
Approximately 7-10 days  after completion  of intake interview, participants will receive  a package  from the
study team  that will  include the Fitbit required for  study participation,  along  with instructions  for how to use
this device. Participants will be provided  with a  commercially available Fitbit  Inspire  HR,  equipped with a
highly sensitive accelerometer to track  activity as well as sleep quantity and sleep quality characteristics
(This product has previously been approved by the CUIMC  IRB and used successfully in studies conducted
by Center for Behavioral  Cardiovascular Health). The Fitbit  will be  registered with a study  ID and password
and participants will be instructed to download the FitBit app to their phone to  sync.  Participants  will be
asked to continuously wear the Fitbit throughout the study period, including regularly  charging the Fitbit
once per week and wearing  the device during sleep.  The participant will receive push notifications to
recharge the Fitbit if  its battery  is running low or if the Fitbit disconnects for a prolonged period of time
(>24 hours).
Flow Chart of Study Procedures:
Visit 0:  Eligibility Assessment (Review  of medical records and phone  screening).  Potential  patients will be
asked by Dr.  Agarwal's  team to contact the study research assistant who  will schedule a  phonescreen with
the patient. Alternatively, participants who respond to the flyer may also self-refer to  the study by contacting
the research assistant listed on the advertisement.  If patient is potentially eligible after completing the
phonescreen, a clinical  evaluation will be conducted by the PTSD program clinicians.
Meeting 1: Consent  for study participation, baseline assessment, and intake interview. Baseline  assessment:
Participants will meet over a  HIPAA-compliant  zoom video call with  a trained research clinician  who  will
administer the  Clinician-Administered  PTSD scale (CAPS-5) MMSE and HRSD-17. Participants will also
fill out self-report  measures (LEC-5,  HADS, CAQ, and MAIA, the Morisky  Medication Adherence Scale
[MMAS-8], and four  cardiac items from the  Anxiety Sensitivity Index  [ASI-3])  delivered to  them through a
weblink to a REDCap survey. Participants  will then meet with the  study clinician who will conduct a
qualitative clinical interview (interview guide attached) regarding participant’s experience with  PTSD
symptoms reported in CAPS-5.
Following meeting 1, eligible  participants will be  mailed the study devices  and instructions  for how to  use
them.
Page 13 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Meeting 2-9
Once weekly AMBET sessions. These visits will last 90 minutes  and will be conducted remotely  over
HIPAA-compliant zoom video call.  Treatment content described below.
Midpoint Assessment: Between  treatment session  4 and 5 a visit with an IE will take place over HIPAA-
compliant zoom  video call at which participants will complete self-ratings via REDCap  survey and the IE
will administer clinical measures (CAPS-5,  HamD-17, CGI).
Visit 9:  End of treatment  arm and  posttreatment evaluation. Following the final treatment session,
participants will  meet with  IE over HIPAA-compliant zoom video call  for clinical measures (CAPS-5,
HamD-17, CGI) and given an opportunity to provide  feedback on the treatment. Participants will also fill
out self-report measures.
Visit 10:  Participants  will once again  meet with IE at three months posttreatment for forty-five
minutes over HIPAA-compliant zoom video call for a clinical assessment  (CAPS-5,  HamD-17, CGI).
Participants will also fill out  self-report  measures (PCL-5, ASI-3, HADS).
Treatment:
Treatment sessions will be  carried  out virtually over a zoom video call. Treatment  sessions will be video
recorded to ensure integrity and  treatment  fidelity.
Acceptance and  Mindfulness Based Exposure  Therapy (AMBET)
A manual will be  developed to provide clear  structure for the course of treatment and will be forwarded to
the IRB when  a more  complete draft has been finalized.  All study therapists conducting the AMBET
sessions will be trained  clinicians  at master’s or PhD level  who have completed training in the protocol and
who have experience delivering exposure  therapy to treat traumatic stress.  Study therapists  will be
supervised by a  licensed psychiatrist. The clinician will first provide psychoeducation regarding PTSD
symptoms that can ensue after medical trauma  and then  introduce the rationale for the treatment. The
principal treatment content can  be summarized as: explore personal values and impact of avoidance
behaviors on well-being, increase  functional interoceptive awareness and cardiovascular symptom
discrimination through mindfulness  and defusion  exercises, approach feared events and activities through
values-based exposure, and create meaning and  cohesion through flexible perspective taking.  The protocol
will primarily target:
1. Maladaptive  behavioral responses related  to fear (particularly avoidance)
2. Hypervigilant interoceptive attention and catastrophic bias
3. Engagement  in heart-healthy behaviors  such as physical activity and medical adherence.
The specific  interventions are:
A) Mindfulness exercises to  increase functional interoceptive awareness and discrimination  of
benign/malign symptoms for more  accurate threat perception and adaptive responding.
B) Exposure exercises to physical sensations that are similar to cardiac symptoms  (e.g.,  palpitations due to
Page 14 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
physical activity or anxious arousal) to reduce symptom-related hypervigilance and increase  adaptive threat
responding. Values  exploration  to increase motivation for engagement in in-vivo, imaginal, and
interoceptive exposure exercises.
C) Increased physical activity to reduce  depressive  symptoms and improve cardiovascular  health.
Therapist adherence to protocol: All sessions will be videotaped and reviewed for adherence  to the
treatment protocol.
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Criteria for Early Discontinuation
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation
Principal Investigator and/or Co-Principal  Investigators, will review (at minimum)  all currently enrolled
patients in a weekly meeting.
1. Requests to withdraw from the study.
2. Elevated level of distress, for PTSD patients demonstrated by a score  of 6 or higher on the weekly  CGI
for two consecutive weeks, unless the distress is due to  an acute transient event (to  be evaluated by treating
clinician, PI, and study  psychiatrist).  The CGI will be administered  to consider  both PTSD and  Depression
symptomatology.
3. Significant  suicidal ideation, as assessed by the  study therapist and/or by the HAM-D-Item 3 and/or the
BDI-II suicide item
4. Clear-cut deterioration in social or occupational functioning as assessed by the clinician.
5. Non-compliance with protocol requirements.
6. New or inter-current illness that prevents  the patient from  complying with the protocol.
In the event discontinuation criteria are  met, the treating clinician will meet with the patient to  explain the
necessity of  termination,  provide appropriate  referrals, and assist in patient transfer  as needed.
Treatment via  IRB #8017 will continue  until such time as a  referral is complete.
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the instruments that will be used for assessment
Treatment credibility will be measured immediately after the first  therapy session with the Treatment
Expectancy Questionnaire (TEQ)(31).  This measure  contains  4 items scored using  a 10-point Likert scale (0
“No expectancy/credibility” to 9 “Very strong expectancy/credibility”) concerning how logical the
treatment seems, participant confidence in  undergoing the treatment and recommending it  to others, and
Page 15 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
their expectations for the treatment’s  success. The TEQ has good internal consistency and test-retest
reliability.
Satisfaction with AMBET intervention  will be assessed using the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ-
3)(32). The  CSQ-3 has good  test-retest reliability,  internal consistency,  and sensitivity to treatment.
Fear Related Mechanisms:  1) Interoceptive Attention Style will be  measured by the Multidimensional
Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA)(33). The MAIA  is a self-report  measure that  assesses
regulatory aspects  of interoceptive  processing  and differentiates between anxiety/hypervigilance driven
interoceptive attention and  acceptance/mindfulness-based attention. 2) Cardiac Anxiety will be assessed
using the Cardiac Anxiety Questionnaire (CAQ)(34). The CAQ is an 18-item self-report measure that
assesses heart-focused anxiety across  the three  subscales fear, avoidance, and  attention.  3. Interoceptive
threat bias will  be measured using  the four selected  cardiac-related items  from the physical subscale of the
Anxiety Sensitivity Index.(35)
Psychological Distress: 1) PTSD will be measured  using the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-
5 (CAPS-5)(36) at  intake and post treatment. PCL-5 will be used for screening and prior to weekly  sessions
during treatment.  2) Self-reported  depression  and general anxiety will be measured by Hospital anxiety and
depression scale (HADS)(37)  at intake  and post-treatment. A  clinician will also assess depressive symptoms
using Hamilton Rating Scale  for Depression  (HRDS-17)(38) at these time points, and Beck Depression
Inventory (BDI-II)(39) will be used as  a symptom measure prior to  each session.
Health behaviors: Adherence to a representative CVD medication (typically, beta-blocker) will be assessed
using Morisky  Medication Adherence  Scale  (MMAS-8)  (40). Physical activity will be measured
continuously for 3-months using a wrist-worn  Fitbit Charge accelerometer. The Fitbit  device has been
chosen because it has been validated for physical  activity and its heart rate monitor performed well  against
ECG for heart rate changes at relatively  low levels of physical  activity (41),  (42).
Prior trauma exposure will be measured  using the Life Events  Checklist (LEC-5)(43).
Clinical severity and change will be  measured  using  the Clinical  Global Impression Scale  (CGI)(44).
Psychiatric history will be  assessed using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM  Disorders  (SCID).(45).
Clinician Administered PTSD  Scale  (CAPS-5) (30 Minutes)
Beck Depression Inventory  (10 minutes)
Clinical Global Impression – Severity Scale  (CGI-S)  (5 minutes)
Clinical Global Impression – Change Scale (CGI-S) (5 minutes)
PTSD Checklist (PCL-5) (5 minutes)
Hamilton Depression  Rating Scale (HDRS-17) (10 minutes)
Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ-3) (2 minutes)
TEQ (2 minutes)
Life Events Checklist (LEC) (5 minutes)
CSQ-3 (5 minutes)
MAIA (5  minutes)
Page 16 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
CAQ (5 minutes)
HADS (5 minutes)
SCID (30 minutes)
MMSE (20  minutes)
MMAS-8 (5-minutes)
ASI-3 (2  minutes)
Please attach copies, unless  standard  instruments are used
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?
Yes
Maximum duration  of delay to any  treatment
All effort  will be made to  arrange an  intake as soon as possible, within a  few days of initial  contact  if
possible. Clinical  staff will meet weekly to discuss  new intakes, and disposition to  active treatment will be
made as  soon as  patients have  been  found eligible and have  signed  informed written consent.  We expect  that
patients should enter  treatment  within  two weeks  of initial  intake date. This allows  time to review the
qualitative information from the  initial intake interview to develop  individualized  treatment plans  within the
scope of the treatment protocol as  well as  for delivery of Fitbit device and HIPAA-compliant zoom video
call training. The patient will  have immediate access to the  intake clinician and  study-team  psychiatrist if  he
or she presents  with an emergent clinical issue.
Maximum duration  of delay to standard care or  treatment  of known efficacy
The maximum delay before active treatment of  known efficacy is offered will be  12 weeks from baseline
assessment. However, we are not excluding survivors who are  currently in  other treatment (provided there
has been  no change in treatment in previous  three  months) so  for these there will be  no delay in treatment.
Treatment to be  provided at the end of  the study
Participants will be  referred for further treatment as needed. The types of referrals offered may include
general referrals to other treatment clinics and centers in  the tri-state area, or more specifically referrals  may
be offered as  preferred to trauma-focused therapists,  low-cost therapists and  clinics, or to veteran specific
services.
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternatives
Patients who do not participate  in research will be referred to treatments for PTSD in the  community, such
as cognitive behavioral therapy, prolonged exposure therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy for PTSD, or
psychopharmacology depending on the clinical evaluation and their expressed  preferences.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences
Page 17 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Risks that  could be  encountered during the  study  period
Cardiovascular Risk: Physical activity following cardiac arrest  is generally recommended and will be
included in the  treatment plan only if  approval  is obtained from  the patient’s treating physician.  To ensure
patient safety during sessions, participants will be required to confirm the address where they are located at
the start of each remote session as  well as  to provide the study team with the telephone number to  an
emergency contact should any  medical emergency occur during the remote procedures. Additionally,
patients will sign a  release of information  form  between  the study  team  and patient’s  treating  physician. The
study team  includes an internist and  a neurologist who can both  be called upon to  determine  if urgent
medical attention is needed, and  advise  for the necessary action (e.g., calling  an ambulance). Sessions and
assessments will be  scheduled  during  times when at least one  of the study team MD's are available to be
contacted for urgent  consultation according to a rolling schedule of on-call responsibilities. Clinicians and
research staff will have a phone available during sessions and patient meetings to  be able  to call for back-up
while remaining in the HIPAA-compliant zoom session, and the MD can join the zoom  call via either
weblink or phone.  Before  enrolling any patients,  all research and clinical team members who  do not  hold an
MD will  receive  training in when to contact a study doctor for medical consultations and common
symptoms of  cardiovascular events such as  stroke or myocardial  infarctions  warranting immediate 911 call.
This training will be  provided  by Dr. Ian  Kronish over HIPAA-compliant zoom and will be  recorded  for
asynchronous viewing  to ensure all  team members are adequately trained.
Psychological Distress: Exposure treatments  pose some risk of psychological discomfort. Participants  may
find that  discussing  trauma related  memories or facing feared situations  may increase emotional distress.
The treatment protocol will start with introduction  to grounding  techniques  such as diaphragmatic breathing
and mindfulness-based techniques for distress management and emotion regulation, and  participants  will
practice these in session with clinician. Patients will also  be informed that they can  contact their clinician
between sessions for support and  to troubleshoot homework exercises. The treatment will be delivered by a
clinician with  experience in treating PTSD with exposure therapy.  Additionally,  as with  any time-limited
treatment, patients may feel uncomfortable when treatment ends. This is an  issue that patients will be
encouraged to  discuss  with their therapist, and treatment will be provided by a clinician  experienced in
delivering short-term treatments.
Loss of Confidentiality: A potential risk from  this study is the violation of the participant’s privacy, since
patient medical information will be used as a source of data. Special protections against this risk are
provided (see below).
Identification of Severe Mental  Illness: There  is the possibility that we will discover during screening that
participants have significant  cognitive or alcohol/drug impairments that disqualify  them from  participating
in the study. It may  be discovered during screening  or during  assessment  that a participant has severe
depression that  warrants  immediate treatment.  Should the subject  express suicidal ideation at any time
during the assessment or  treatment, the  study clinician will be  contacted immediately to assess the subject
and to determine the appropriate course of action.
During intake,  treatment and assessment,  participants will be  required to  confirm  the address  where  they  are
located at the start  of each  remote session as well as to provide  the study team with the telephone number to
an emergency contact.  Participants will  be required to provide a response to suicidality item  on BDI-II prior
to each session. If a  patient would endorse suicidal  thoughts, clinician or assessor would further assess risk.
Page 18 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Clinicians in our clinic  are well trained and experienced in conducting suicide assessments and
have additional completed  the Comprehensive Suicide Risk Assessment  online training course through  the
Center for Practice Innovations. Research  assistants have access  to clinician backup during  all scheduled
interactions with  research participants and are instructed to immediately contact a  clinician if there  are
endorsements or  disclosures of suicidal  ideation  for further assessment. In case of active suicidal  ideation  or
increased risk, clinicians will alert supervising psychiatrist immediately over phone  while remaining on
HIPAA-compliant zoom meeting with patient  for further action (safety  planning  and/or  contacting
emergency services as appropriate). In cases of acute risk, clinician will call 911 while  remaining on
HIPAA-compliant zoom meeting with patient  and additionally alert the supervising  psychiatrist.  Clinician
may contact 911 with or without patient  as needed.  Patient  will be informed of these procedures  and
exemptions to  confidentiality in such situations during the informed consent procedures. Other options for
addressing suicidal  ideation will include safety  planning with  clinician, referring for  urgent (same  day)
evaluation and treatment  in an outpatient  clinic,  or emergency room  evaluation and hospitalization.  Similar
practices will be  used for other emergencies, including but not limited to psychosis,  homicidal  or violent
thoughts, or an acute change in a  subject's  physical status.
There are no known long-term risks from  any study activities.
Interviews/assessments: Some subjects may find the  interviews and  assessments anxiety provoking or
upsetting. Subjects will be  informed that  they may choose not to answer  specific  questions  and may stop the
interview at any time  if they are feeling  uncomfortable. Trained evaluators  will be  sensitive to patient
vulnerabilities, and every effort will be made to ensure patients’  comfort.
Exposure Therapy: (1) Patients may become distressed by the discussion of sensitive or painful  material or
by the experience of  strong  emotions during treatment. Some patients may find psychotherapy embarrassing
or anxiety-provoking,  whether or not the treatment presses them to confront reminders of past traumas.  A
risk of this treatment  is that it may be ineffective  and that patients may not  improve  or even  worsen.
Therapists experienced in treating PTSD patients will assess this distress continually  as part of treatment
and will ask  for additional evaluations  or PI intervention when clinically  appropriate. Every effort  will be
made to ensure patients’ comfort during treatment, and patients  will be withdrawn if needed.
Video recording: Some patients may  feel uncomfortable about the treatments  being video recorded
(necessary for supervision and treatment  integrity checks). However,  this will be a  required  procedure. The
purpose of the  videotaping  will be  explained,  confidentiality will be respected, and  tapes will be erased after
the spot checks or following supervision. Informed consent for recording will be  obtained.  Patients  will be
informed that  they can withdraw their consent at any time,  upon which  time the recordings  will be  erased.
Recordings will be  made using HIPAA-compliant software through  Zoom and stored  on password protected
NYSPI servers.
Audio recording: Some  patients may  feel uncomfortable about the  treatment sessions being audio recorded
(necessary for supervision and treatment  integrity checks). However,  this will be a  required  procedure. The
purpose of the  audiotaping  will be  explained,  confidentiality will be respected, and  tapes will be erased after
the spot checks or following supervision. Informed consent for taping  will be  obtained.  Patients will be
informed that  they can withdraw their consent at any time,  at which  point the recordings  will be  erased.
Page 19 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Recordings will be  made using HIPAA-compliant software through  Zoom and stored  on password protected
NYSPI servers.
Describe procedures  for minimizing  risks
Other Procedures for Minimizing Risk:
1) Careful  medical  and psychiatric screening to identify patients for whom risk for  potential adverse  effects
are elevated.  Such  patients  will be excluded from  the study. As an example, an actively suicidal  patient
would be excluded from  study participation  as per the exclusionary criteria and appropriate clinical
treatment provided.
2) Patients  with any  of the following will be  removed from  research  and treated openly  or as clinically
indicated: a)  the occurrence  of assaultive  or illegal behavior; b) the occurrence  of active suicidal ideation at
any point during the  trial as assessed  by clinical  interview; c) behaviors while  intoxicated  that are a danger
to him/herself or others.
3) Inclusion of psychoeducation about PTSD,  the treatment  process  and memory triggers within the
therapeutic framework and in-session practice  of emotion regulation techniques.
4) Careful  monitoring of patients  during pretreatment and study participation by experienced clinicians.
Patients will see the  same clinician for each  of their treatment visits.
6) Ability to remove  any patient from the study  who evidences significant clinical  deterioration  during
treatment. Provisions will be made for appropriate clinical care of such patients.
7) All data will be coded and stored on secure servers and password protected drives to ensure
confidentiality. All  assessment and session procedures will be  conducted  remotely, using HIPAA compliant
platforms (NYSPI REDCap and  licensed  Zoom accounts).
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect  confidentiality
All data collected will be kept confidential  and used for research  purposes only. Patient charts  will be  kept
on secure and password  protected servers.  Identifiable data  will be limited to  secure,  password-protected  NYSPI 
servers. Some completely deidentified  data  may be  stored on secure, password-protected CUIMC servers. Access 
to research records is  restricted  to research  staff and Federal, State,  and Institutional regulatory authorities. No 
subject’s identifying  data will be published. All assessment and session  procedures will be conducted on HIPAA 
compliant platforms (NYSPI REDCap and licensed  Zoom accounts). No data (identifiable or de-identified) will  be 
shared with the CANOE study team.
Will the  study be conducted under a certificate of confidentiality?
No
Direct Benefits to Subjects
Page 20 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
Direct Benefits to Subjects
This study  is not designed  to benefit  participants directly.
Compensation and/or Reimbursement
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered  to subjects?
Yes
Please describe  and indicate total amount and  schedule of payment(s).
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
Participants will be  reimbursed for their time participating in  the study. Participants will receive $70 for
completing the  initial interview and assessment  and $50 for  completing the midpoint assessment.  At the  end
of treatment, participants will be paid  $50 for  completing the post-treatment evaluation  and up to $80 for
completing all session survey ($10 for each  session survey). Participants  will receive an additional  $20 for
completing the three-months posttreatment follow-up assessment. Participants  will only be compensated for  the
tasks and surveys that  have  been completed. The maximum compensation that  can be received  for
participation and completion of all study tasks is $270. Pre-loaded PayCards will be delivered individually
within four weeks following  each compensation  point  by mail, in non-identifying manila envelopes.
Participants will be  permitted to keep  the Fitbit at the end of the study, at which point they can set  it up with
their own account.
References
References
1. Agarwal, S., Presciutti,  A., Cornelius, T., Birk, J., Roh, D. J., Park, S., ... & Edmondson,  D. (2019).
Cardiac Arrest and  Subsequent Hospitalization–Induced Posttraumatic Stress  Is Associated With 1-Year
Risk of  Major Adverse Cardiovascular Events and  All-Cause Mortality. Critical care medicine, 47(6), e502-
e505.
2. Presciutti, A., Shaffer, J., Sumner, J. A., Elkind, M. S.,  Roh,  D. J., Park,  S., ... &  Agarwal, S. (2020).
Hyperarousal Symptoms in Survivors of Cardiac Arrest Are Associated With 13 Month Risk  of Major
Adverse Cardiovascular Events and  All-Cause  Mortality. Annals of Behavioral Medicine.
3. Wasson, L. T., Shaffer, J. A., Edmondson, D., Bring, R.,  Brondolo,  E., Falzon, L., ... & Kronish, I. M.
(2018). Posttraumatic  stress disorder and nonadherence  to medications prescribed for chronic medical
conditions: A meta-analysis. Journal  of psychiatric research, 102, 102-109.
4. Monane, R., Sanchez,  G. J., Kronish, I. M., Edmondson,  D., &  Diaz,  K. M. (2018). Post-traumatic  stress
disorder symptoms and  aversive cognitions regarding physical activity in  patients evaluated for acute
coronary syndrome. European journal of preventive  cardiology, 25(4),  402-403.
5. Husain, S. A., Edmondson, D., Kautz, M., Umland, R., & Kronish,  I. M. (2018). Posttraumatic stress
disorder due to  acute  cardiac  events  and aversive cognitions towards  cardiovascular medications. Journal  of
behavioral medicine, 41(2), 261-268.
Page 21 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
6. Edmondson, D. (2014).  An enduring somatic threat model of posttraumatic stress disorder due to acute
life‐threatening medical  events. Social and Personality Psychology Compass,  8(3),  118-134.
7. Falk, L. W.,  Bisogni, C. A., & Sobal, J. (2000). Personal, social, and situational  influences associated
with dietary experiences  of participants in an intensive heart program. Journal of Nutrition Education, 32(5),
251-260.
8. Horenstein, A., Potter, C.  M., & Heimberg,  R. G. (2018). How does anxiety  sensitivity increase  risk of
chronic medical conditions? Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 25(3), e12248.
9. Meyer, E.  C., La Bash, H., DeBeer, B. B., Kimbrel, N. A., Gulliver,  S. B., & Morissette, S.  B. (2019).
Psychological inflexibility  predicts PTSD  symptom severity in war veterans after accounting for established
PTSD risk factors  and personality.  Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 11(4),
383.
10. Murberg, T. A., Furze, G., & Bru, E. (2004). Avoidance coping styles predict  mortality among patients
with congestive heart failure: A 6-year follow-up  study.  Personality  and Individual Differences, 36, 757–
766.
11. Otto, M.  W., Eastman, A., Lo, S., Hearon, B. A., Bickel,  W. K., Zvolensky, M., ... & Doan, S. N.
(2016). Anxiety sensitivity and  working memory  capacity: Risk factors and targets for health behavior
promotion. Clinical  Psychology Review, 49, 67-78.
12. Shemesh, E., Annunziato, R. A., Weatherley, B.  D., Cotter,  G., Feaganes,  J. R., Santra, M., ... &
Rubinstein, D. (2011). A  randomized controlled trial of the safety  and promise of cognitive-behavioral
therapy using imaginal exposure  in patients with posttraumatic  stress disorder resulting  from cardiovascular
illness. The  Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72(2),  168.
13. Powers, M. B., Halpern,  J. M.,  Ferenschak,  M. P., Gillihan, S. J., & Foa, E. B. (2010). A  meta-analytic
review of  prolonged exposure for posttraumatic  stress  disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(6), 635-
641.
14. Goetter, E. M.,  Bui, E., Ojserkis, R. A., Zakarian, R. J., Brendel, R. W., & Simon, N. M. (2015). A
systematic review of  dropout from psychotherapy  for posttraumatic stress  disorder  among Iraq and
Afghanistan combat veterans. Journal  of Traumatic  Stress, 28(5),  401-409.
15. Myers, U. S., Haller,  M., Angkaw, A. C., Harik, J.  M., & Norman, S. B. (2019). Evidence-based
psychotherapy completion  and symptom improvement among returning combat veterans  with PTSD.
Psychological Trauma: Theory,  Research,  Practice, and Policy, 11(2), 216.
16. Bryant, R. A. (2019).  Post-traumatic stress disorder: a state-of-the-art review  of evidence and
challenges. World Psychiatry, 18 (3), 259-269.
17. Hoge, C.  W., Grossman, S. H., Auchterlonie,  J. L., Riviere, L. A.,  Milliken, C. S., &  Wilk,  J. E. (2014).
PTSD Treatment for Soldiers  After  Combat  Deployment: Low Utilization  of Mental  Health Care and
Reasons for Dropout.  Psychiatric Services,  65(8), 997-1004.
18. Bean, R.  C., Ong, C.  W., Lee, J., & Twohig, M. P. (2017). Acceptance and commitment therapy for
PTSD and  trauma: An empirical review. the Behavior Therapist, 40(4), 145–150.
19. Boyd,  J. E., Lanius, R. A., & McKinnon, M. C. (2018). Mindfulness-based  treatments for posttraumatic
stress disorder: A review of the treatment  literature  and neurobiological evidence.  Journal  of Psychiatry and
Neuroscience, 43(1), 7-26.
20. Treanor, M. (2011).  The potential impact  of mindfulness  on exposure  and extinction  learning  in anxiety
disorders. Clinical psychology review,  31(4), 617-625.
21. Bergen-Cico, D., Possemato, K., & Pigeon, W. (2014). Reductions  in cortisol associated  with primary
care brief mindfulness program for veterans with PTSD. Medical  Care, 52, S25-S31.
22. Gallegos, A. M., Lytle, M. C.,  Moynihan, J. A., & Talbot, N.  L. (2015). Mindfulness-based stress
Page 22 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
reduction to enhance psychological  functioning  and improve inflammatory  biomarkers in  trauma-exposed
women: A pilot study. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research,  Practice, and  Policy, 7(6), 525.
23. Kim, S. H.,  Schneider,  S. M.,  Bevans,  M., Kravitz, L., Mermier, C., Qualls,  C., &  Burge,  M. R. (2013).
PTSD symptom  reduction with mindfulness-based stretching and deep breathing  exercise:  randomized
controlled clinical  trial of efficacy. The  Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 98(7), 2984-2992.
24. Teasdale, J. D., Moore, R. G., Hayhurst, H., Pope,  M., Williams, S., & Segal, Z. V.  (2002).
Metacognitive awareness and prevention  of relapse in  depression:  Empirical  evidence.  Journal  of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70(2), 275–287. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.70.2.275
25. Treanor, M. (2011).  The potential impact  of mindfulness  on exposure  and extinction  learning  in anxiety
disorders. Clinical Psychology Review,  31(4),  617-625.
26. Baer, R.A. (2003),  Mindfulness Training  as a Clinical Intervention: A  Conceptual  and Empirical
Review. Clinical  Psychology: Science and Practice,  10, 125-143. doi:10.1093015
27. Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2011). Acceptance and  commitment therapy: The
process and practice  of mindful change. Guilford Press.
28. Brake, C. A., Sauer-Zavala,  S., Boswell, J. F.,  Gallagher, M. W., Farchione, T.  J., &  Barlow,  D. H.
(2016). Mindfulness-based exposure  strategies  as a transdiagnostic mechanism of change:  an exploratory
alternating treatment design. Behavior  therapy, 47(2), 225-238.
29. Mehling, W.  E., Chesney, M. A., Metzler, T. J., Goldstein, L. A., Maguen,  S., Geronimo, C., ... &
Neylan, T.  C. (2018). A 12‐week integrative exercise program improves self‐reported  mindfulness and
interoceptive awareness in war veterans  with posttraumatic  stress  symptoms. Journal of clinical psychology,
74(4), 554- 565.
30. Olthuis, J. V., Wozney, L., Asmundson, G. J., Cramm,  H., Lingley-Pottie, P., & Mcgrath,  P. J. (2016).
Distance-delivered interventions for PTSD: A  systematic review  and meta-analysis. Journal  of Anxiety
Disorders, 44,  9-26.
31. Borkovec, T. D. & Nau, S. D. (1972) Credibility of analogue  therapy rationales. Journal of Behavior
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 3:257-260.
32. Devilly, G. J. & Borkovec,  T. D. (2000) Psychometric properties of the credibility/expectancy
questionnaire. Journal of Behavior  Therapy  and Experimental Psychiatry, 31:73-86.  41.
33. Mehling, W.  E., Acree, M., Stewart, A., Silas, J., & Jones, A.  (2018). The multidimensional assessment
of interoceptive awareness, version 2 (MAIA-2).  PloS  one, 13(12).
34. Eifert, G.  H., Thompson, R. N., Zvolensky, M. J., Edwards, K.,  Frazer,  N. L., Haddad,  J. W., &  Davig,
J. (2000).  The cardiac anxiety  questionnaire: development and  preliminary  validity.  Behaviour research  and
therapy, 38(10), 1039-1053.
35. Taylor, S., Zvolensky,  M. J.,  Cox, B. J., Deacon, B.,  Heimberg,  R. G.,  Ledley, D. R., ... &  Coles,  M.
(2007). Robust dimensions of anxiety  sensitivity: development and initial validation of the Anxiety
Sensitivity Index-3.  Psychological Assessment, 19(2), 176-188.
36. Weathers, F.  W., Bovin,  M. J., Lee, D. J., Sloan, D. M.,  Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek, D. G., ... &  Marx, B.
P. (2018). The Clinician-Administered PTSD  Scale  for DSM –5 (CAPS-5): Development and  initial
psychometric evaluation  in military veterans. Psychological Assessment,  30(3), 383-395. doi:
10.1037/pas0000486
37. Zigmond, A. S., & Snaith, R. P.  (1983). The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale.  Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 67, 361–370.
38. Hamilton, M. A. X. (1967). Development  of a rating scale for primary depressive illness. British journal
of social and clinical  psychology, 6(4), 278-296.
Page 23 of 24
 
Protocol Summary Form
8017
Neria, Yuval
39. Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., Brown, G. K. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory manual (2nd  ed.). San
Antonio. TX: Psychological Corporation.
40. Morisky, D.E., Ang A., Krousel-Wood  M., Ward H.J (2008). Predictive validity of a medication
adherence measure in an  outpatient setting. The  Journal  of Clinical Hypertension. 10:348–354
41. Diaz, K. M., Krupka, D.J., Chang, M.J., Shaffer,  J.A., Ma, Y.,  Goldsmith, J.,  Schwartz,  J.E., &
Davidson K. W. (2016).  Validation  of the Fitbit One® for physical activity measurement at an upper torso
attachment site. BMC Res Notes, 9:213.
42. Diaz, K. M., Krupka, D. J., Chang, M. J., Peacock, J., Ma, Y.,  Goldsmith, J., Schwartz, J.E., &
Davidson, K. W.  (2015). Fitbit®: An accurate and reliable device  for wireless  physical activity tracking.
International Journal  of Cardiology.  185:138-140.
43. Gray, M.  J., Litz, B. T., Hsu,  J. L., & Lombardo,  T. W. (2004). Psychometric properties of the  life
events checklist. Assessment, 11(4), 330-341.
44. Guy, W. (1976). ECDEU assessment manual for  psychopharmacology. US Department of  Health,
Education, and Welfare,  Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse,  and Mental Health Administration,
National Institute  of Mental  Health, Psychopharmacology  Research  Branch, Division of Extramural
Research Programs.
45. First, M. B., Williams,  J. B. W., Karg,  R. S.,  & Spitzer, R. L.  (2015). Structured clinical interview for
DSM-5—Research version (SCID-5 for  DSM-5, research version; SCID-5-RV). Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Association,  1-94.
Uploads
Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)
Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)
Upload copy(ies) of recruitment  materials/ads to be reviewed
Upload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA  form
AMBET_HIPPA_SCAN_090320.pdf
Upload any additional documents that  may be  related  to this study
Page 24 of 24
Uploads
-HIPAA Form(s)-
AMBET_HIPPA_SCAN_090320.pdf