HILLHURST  BIOPHARMACEUTICALS,  INC.  HBI-002-001  
  Page 1 of 5   
STUDY SYNOPSIS  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date: January 30, 2023  
 
Title of Study: A Phase 1 ascending single-dose followed by multiple dose safety and 
pharmacokinetic study of HBI-002 carbon monoxide liquid formulation  in healthy  adult volunteers. 
Protocol Number:  HBI-002-001 
Investigators/Study  Center : 
Phase  of Development : 1 
Objectives/Endpoints:  
Primary Objective/Endpoint: To assess the safety and tolerability of HBI -002, given as single 
ascending  doses (SAD)  and multiple  doses  (MD)  daily  for 7 days in healthy male  and female  adult 
subjects based on frequency and severity of TEAE, including adverse events of special interest. 
Secondary  Objectives/Endpoints:  
1. To evaluate  the pharmacokinetics (PK)  of HBI -002 with increasing  doses  of oral HBI-002 as 
measured by COHb levels.  
2. To determine  the HBI-002 dose required to achieve peak COHb  levels  up to 10% within  one 
hour after ingestion.  
3. To evaluate  any accumulation  of CO as measured  by COHb  with daily dosing and to assess 
changes in venous lactate levels.  
4. To evaluate  biomarkers  of inflammation  and to assess changes induced by HBI-002. 
Planned  Sample  Size:  
Up to 16 subjects will be enrolled in  the SAD phase (up to 4 dose cohorts) and 4 subjects in  the MD 
phase (one dose cohort). Additional subjects (up to 8 in the SAD phase and up to 6 in the MD phase) 
may be enrolled in any cohort, as needed, if incomplete data is obtained or there is a need to obtain 
additional safety observations. Subjects in the MD cohort will be replaced if all 7 doses are not 
ingested or labs for safety  assessment  are not complete.  Subjects will not be replaced  in the event  the 
subject  discontinues  the study  due to a related  adverse  event.  
Study  Duration:  Approximately  26 weeks  
Study  Design:  
This is a single center, open- label trial investigating up to four single ascending doses (SAD), 
followed by a single cohort of multiple doses (MD) with dosing daily for 7 days. Both the SAD and 
MD dosing cohorts utilize an adaptive dosing regimen. Eligible healthy adult subjects who have signed the informed  consent  will undergo a screening  assessment  carried  out within 4  weeks of study 
entry consisting of a medical history, concomitant medications, physical examination, height and weight, vital signs, ECG, hematology and chemistry labs, infectious disease screen including SARS- 
CoV -2, hemoglobin electrophoresis, urinalysis, pregnancy and drug screen.  
Pregnancy testing  in females  of childbearing potential  will be carried  out in both the SAD and MD 
study components at screening and baseline, as well as in the SAD component at 48 hours and on 
Day 30, and in the MD component on Days 8 and 37. 
Concomitant medications and adverse events will continue to be monitored to the final follow up visit.  
Dosing  rules (SAD and MD)  
For the SAD study  component, there  will be at least 72 hours between  dosing of the first study subject 
at each dose level and the subsequent 3 subjects at the same dose level and with no minimum time 
between dosing of each subsequent subject. There also will be at least 72 hours between the last 
subject at each dosing level and the first subject at the next dose level. For the MD study component, 
HILLHURST  BIOPHARMACEUTICALS,  INC.  HBI-002-001  
  Page 2 of 5  there will be at least 30 days between the last subject at the final SAD dose level and the first subject 
in the MD dose level. For the MD dosing, there will be 72 hours between the first subject receiving 
the first MD dose and the subsequent 3 subjects at  that dose level with no minimum time between 
dosing of the 3 subsequent subjects.  
All subjects (SAD and MD)  
Peak COHb measured by co -oximeter will be monitored for safety, targeting levels of no more than 
10% COHb, and COHb saturation will be documented for each  subject at all  time points. The 
DSMB will  review  safety  information  through 72 hours after completion  of dosing for each SAD 
cohort. The specific dose cohort at  the next level,  as designated  under SAD dosing, may proceed  
provided that no related safety issues are observed.  
The DSMB  will review  safety  information  after completion  of dosing for all SAD  cohorts at 30 days 
post-dosing of the final subject  in the final SAD cohort. The safety  and PK data from  the SAD phase 
will be submitted to the FDA prior to the initiation of the MD phase. The MD phase will not be 
initiated until the FDA has approved of the advancement. 
COHb measured by co -oximeter and venous lactate  together with pH measurements will be carried 
out and reported within one hour of the respective blood draw for all study subjects. COHb, pH and 
lactate results will be provided  to the PI and MM as soon as available,  but not later than one hour 
after the respective blood draw.  
Subjects will be released  when  all of the following  criteria  have been  met. 
1. COHb  saturation by venous blood gas, venous lactate  and pH at normal physiological  
levels.  
2. Transcutaneous oxygen saturation  at normal  physiological  level.  
3. Normal  vital signs and cardiac rhythm. 
4. No adverse symptomatology. 
Subjects demonstrating clinical  or laboratory  abnormalities  at the designated  final visit will continue 
to be followed until the abnormality is resolved or stabilized. 
Stopping Rules  
If any subject  experiences  signs or symptoms  of CO toxicity  as detailed  below,  further  enrollment  
and dosing will be put on hold until the DSMB reviews relevant data and makes recommendations as to next steps. In addition, for the affected subject(s), that subject(s) will be discontinued and will 
immediately be administered oxygen.  If the protocol is put on hold for any reason, Hillhurst will 
communicate DSMB recommendations to FDA before resuming enrollment. 
Subjects  will not be replaced  if they discontinue  the study  due to an adverse  event  (AE).  
Diagnosis  and Key Subject  Selection  Criteria:  Subjects  who satisfy  all of the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria below will be eligible to participate in the study.  
Inclusion  Criteria  
1. Signed informed  consent.  
2. Healthy  male  or female  18-55 years of age inclusive.  
3. Negative HBsAg,  aHCV,  aHIV,  and SARS -CoV -2 test. 
4. Non-smoker or vaper (no use of tobacco  or marijuana products within  3 months  of screening).  
5. Body weight  between  60 kg and 110 kg (inclusive)  and with BMI  less than 30 kg/m2. 
6. Subjects must  be healthy as defined by: 
a. absence of clinically significant hematological, renal, endocrine, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular,  hepatic,  psychiatric,  neurologic or allergic  disease,  as 
determined by the Investigator. 
b. liver function: alanine  transaminase (ALT)  and aspartate  transaminase (AST)  ≤2 times 
the upper limit of the normal range  
HILLHURST  BIOPHARMACEUTICALS,  INC.  HBI-002-001  
  Page 3 of 5   c. total bilirubin  ≤1.5 times  the upper  limit  of the normal  range  
d. renal  function:  creatinine clearance  within  normal  range  as assessed  by Cockcroft  and 
Gault calculation  
e. carboxyhemoglobin level by  venous  blood gas ≤ 3.5%  (any time prior  to the first dose)  
f. venous  lactate  level  <2.0 mmol/L  at baseline.  
g. the absence of current clinically relevant abnormalities identified by a detailed medical 
history, full physical  examination including  blood pressure and pulse  rate measurement, 
12-lead ECG, and clinical laboratory tests (hematology and clinical chemistries), as 
determined by the Investigator.  
7. Negative  pregnancy tests for females.  
8. Subjects  must  be willing  to use a highly effective method  of contraception for the duration  of 
the study and for 30 days thereafter.  
a. Male subjects, without a vasectomy, must use a condom and be instructed that their 
female  partner  should use another  form  of contraception  such as an IUD,  diaphragm  with 
spermicide,  oral contraceptive,  injectable  progesterone,  subdermal  implant or a tubal 
ligation if the female partner could become pregnant  
b. Female  subjects of childbearing potential  (not surgically  sterilized  and less than one year 
post-menopausal) should use a form of contraception such as an IUD, diaphragm with 
spermicide, oral contraceptive, injectable progesterone, subdermal implant or a tubal 
ligation, and be instructed that their male partners should use a condom, if not 
vasectomized.  
Exclusion  Criteria  
Subjects  who meet  any of the following criteria  will be ineligible  for participation  in the study:  
1. Subjects  with concurrent  illness/disease as defined by: 
a. clinically significant hematological, renal, endocrine, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, 
cardiovascular,  hepatic,  psychiatric,  neurologic  or allergic  disease,  as determined  by the 
Investigator.  
b. current clinically relevant abnormalities identified by a detailed medical history, full 
physical  examination  including blood pressure  and pulse  rate measurement,  12-lead 
ECG, and clinical laboratory tests (hematology, clinical chemistries and urinalysis), as 
determined by the Investigator.  
c. clinically  significant illness  and/or  surgery  within  4 weeks  prior  to dosing.  
2. Anemia  of any cause.  
3. Homozygous  or heterozygous  hemoglobinopathy. 
4. Blood transfusion within  six weeks prior  to the first administration  of study drug.  
5. Carboxyhemoglobin ≥ 3.5%  (any time prior  to the first dose)  
6. Oxygen saturation  by transcutaneous  measurement  consistently  ≤ 95% (any time prior  to the 
first dose)  
7. Exposure  to any live vaccine within  28 days prior  to study  drug administration.  
8. History  of febrile  or infective  illness  within 14  days prior  to dosing.  
9. Positive  pregnancy test or breast  feeding  for females.  
10. Weight  loss or gain of more  than 5 kg within  3 months  prior  to dosing.  
11. History  of alcohol  abuse  or dependence  or regular  use of alcohol  within  six months  prior  to 
dosing (defined as more than 14 units of alcohol per week; 1 Unit= 150 mL wine, 360 mL 
beer or 45 mL of 40% alcohol)  
12. Positive  result  on alcohol  screen  
13. History  of pulmonary infiltrate  or pneumonia  within  6 months  prior  to dosing or 
pulmonary/bronchial infection within 2 weeks prior to dosing.  
14. History  of cancer,  with the exception  of adequately  treated  basal  cell or squamous  cell 
carcinoma of the skin more than 1 year prior.  
15. History  of cardiac  disease  
16. History  of drug abuse  or dependence.  
HILLHURST  BIOPHARMACEUTICALS,  INC.  HBI-002-001  
  Page 4 of 5  17. Positive  results  on drug screen  (oxycodone, benzodiazepines, THC, cocaine, opiates, and 
methamphetamine ). 
18. Use of prescription  drugs within  7 days or 5 half-lives  (whichever  is longer) prior  to dosing. 
Herbal and vitamin supplements must be discontinued 14 days prior to dosing. 
19. Unwilling  or unable to comply with the requirements  of the protocol.  
20. Treatment  with an investigational drug within  the longer of 30 days or five half-lives.  
21. Systolic blood pressure lower than 90 or above 140 mm Hg, diastolic blood pressure lower 
than 50 or above 90 mm Hg, heart rate less than 45 or above 100 bpm, or arrhythmia at 
screening and/or baseline.  ECG abnormalities or other vital sign abnormalities that are 
clinically significant at  screening  and/or baseline,  as determined by the Investigator. 
22. Other severe acute or chronic medical or psychiatric condition or laboratory abnormality that may increase the risk associated with study participation or investigational product 
administration  or may interfere  with the interpretation  of study results and, in the judgment 
of the investigator, would make the subject inappropriate for entry into the study. 
23. History  of allergic  reactions  to any of the drug  product excipients  
24. History  of epilepsy  or seizure 
25. History  of suicide  attempts  or ideation  (by medical  history)  
Criteria  for Evaluation/Statistical  Methods:  
Pharmacokinetics : 
PK will be assessed in each subject based on whole blood COHb levels obtained at each designated 
blood draw. PK will be assessed on each subject in the SAD phase and on each subject in the MD 
phase with COHb.  In the MD phase, PK analysis will  be carried  out on both the first and final dose  
of HBI -002. Standard pharmacokinetic parameters for COHb incremental recovery [IR], maximum 
concentration following oral administration [Cmax], time to reach Cmax [Tmax], terminal or disposition half- life [t1/2], mean residence time [MRT], systemic clearan ce [Cl/F], area under the 
whole blood-time curve [AUC] and volume of distribution [Vd/F] after single oral administrations of HBI -002 at each dose level. The PK concentration data at each timepoint will be listed for each 
subject and summarized by dose level using descriptive statistics. Individual subject and mean concentration -time data will be graphically presented separately. If  sufficient data  are available  
across SAD dose cohorts, dose proportionality will be evaluated using a power model. 
PK analyses  will use the actual  observed  sample  drawing  times.  Samples  with unknown drawing 
time and/or where the concentration could not be determined will be eliminated from the 
calculations. Concentration  data will be carried  out in two modes: No correction for baseline value 
and corrected for baseline by subtraction of the mean pre-dosing value. 
PK parameters will be derived using noncompartmental methods with appropriate software. The 
following parameters  will be calculated  for each patient  separately:  AUC,  IR, Cmax,  AUCinf, Tmax, 
t
1/2, MRT, Clearance (CL/F) and Vd/F. These parameters will be summarized for each Dose Cohort 
separately by using descriptive statistics (number, mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, 
median, coefficient of variation, geometric mean and the corresponding 90% confidence intervals as 
appropriate).  
 
Safety : 
All safety  data will be included  in the subject data  listings . Summary  tables will be based  upon the 
safety population. 
Serious and non-serious adverse events, occurring up to 30 days after the last oral dose will be tabulated and summarized according to the most recent version of the MedDRA. Frequencies and 
percentages of subjects experiencing at least one event  will be summarized  by system  organ  class 
and preferred term for all AEs, for AEs considered to be possibly or probably related to the study 
drug, and for SAEs. The number and proportion of subjects experiencing these events will be 
tabulated by dose for each study p hase (SAD or MD). Related adverse events will be listed.  
HILLHURST  BIOPHARMACEUTICALS,  INC.  HBI-002-001  
  Page 5 of 5   Individual  and summary  vital signs  and clinical  laboratory data will be presented  for each study  
phase in tabular form with mean, standard deviation and range as appropriate.  
For the vital signs, transcutaneous  oxygen concentration, venous COHb and other  laboratory  safety 
data,  and ECG  data,  out of range  values  considered  to be clinically  significant will be  flagged  in the 
data listings and a separate listing of clinically significant abnormal values will be presented, 
including any COHb value >10%.  
 