 
               Study Protocol : Sleep Disordered Breathing in Chronic SCI: A Randomized Controlled Trial of 
Treatment impact on Cognition, Quality of Life, and Cardiovascular Disease  
  Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 Last updated Nov ember 25, 2019  
                            
 
 
Background  
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is universally recognized as a catastrophic disability impacting every aspect 
of life. The incidence of SCI within the US military is currently 429 per million person years,1 
significantly higher than the civilian population.  Disability from SCI exerts significant  emotional , 
personal, economic , and social burdens.2,3 Most people with SCI sustain their injuries in their third or 
fourth  decade of life, and lifespan after SCI remains significantly foreshortened. Medical co-
morbidities including cardiovascular disease (CVD) have emerged as leading causes of mortality in chronic SCI with a prevalence exceeding non -disabled individuals , and an accelerated trajectory in 
early life. 
4 Prevalence rates of asymptomatic and symptomat ic CVD in SCI populations range from 
approximately 25% to more than 50%. In contras t, among age -matched non- disabled populations  the 
prevalence of CVD is typically reported to be in the range of 5 –10%.5 
  In addition to  medical complications , 10 - 60% of individuals with SCI experience co-morbid cognitive 
impairments in the areas of processing speed, attention, memory, and cognitive flexibility.
6-9 Cognitive 
impa irments prolong near -term and chronic adjustment to disability, and delay learning of new skills.  
An emerging clinical challenge is the management of these  medical,  psychological  and cognitive 
long- term sequelae of SCI.  
 An area that has garnered little attention in the SCI arena is the role of sleep disorders on 
psychological, cognitive, and physical health. People with SCI report higher rates of subjective sleep disturbances than the general population, particularly restless sleep, early morning awakenings, 
muscle spasms, daytime sleepiness, and snoring.
10 In the general population, sleep disorders, and 
poor sleep quality  adversely  impact CV health, mood, emotional well -being, cognition, and health-
related quality of life (HRQOL).11-13 In particular, sleep disordered breathing (SDB) , characterized by 
periods of complete cessation of breathing (apnea) or marked reductions in airflow (hypopnea), sleep fragmentation, and frequent oxygen desaturations, is associated with impaired cognition, depression, greater susceptibility to pain, increased risk of stroke, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, diabetes, and perhaps even mortality in the general population.
14-19  
 A) Prevalence of Sleep Disordered Breathing in Persons with Spinal Cord Injury  
 Small cross -sectional studies  in persons with SCI  report  SDB prevalence rates  ranging from 27 -62%, 
depending on the acuteness of, and level  of injury; these rates are 2- 5 times higher than the 
general population.
20-22 In a longitudinal study of patie nts with tetraplegia, sleep apnea was present 
in 60% of subjects within four weeks of injury, reaching a peak incidence of  83% three months after 
injury .20 In cross sectional studies conducted by our team, the prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea 
(OSA -subset of SDB) ranged from 56% in those with incomplete tetraplegia  to as high as 91% in 
those with complete lesions  (cited reference and preliminary data).23  Given the many health  and 
cognitive consequences related to SDB, it is imperative to determine the health impact of this disorder in the SCI population which is already at risk for many of the same secondary medical complications of SDB (e.g. diabetes, cardiovascular disease, poor memory and 
concentration).  
 The prevalence of SDB in SCI is consider ably higher than general population estimates of 2 -
4%.
24 Unfortunately, there is a paucity of information on the underlying reasons for this  incre ased 
prevalence and more research is needed in this field. Obesity  is an important risk factor for SDB. 
Among the 6 million users of Veteran Health services, an alarming 2/3 of women and 3/4 of men are 
overweight  or obese. 25 A retrospective review of 7959 veterans with SCI reported that 37% were 
overweight and another 31% obese.26 Additionally,  people with tetra plegia h ave an increased neck 
circumference and spend more time  sleeping supine , both known r isk factors for SDB  in the general 
population . However, these factors do not fully explain the increased prevalence of SDB in persons 
with SCI.27 In their 2001 retrospectiv e, case –contr ol study  of 53 SCI individuals , Burns et al. 
demonstrated that obstructive sleep apnea in tetraplegia is associated with obesity and a higher 
cervical cord level but not with ASIA impairment.21 In 2002, Stockhammer et al. demonstrated that 
SDB was significantly correlated with age, body mass index ( BMI), neck  circumference, and time after 
injury but not with lesion level or  ASIA impairment.28 Berlowitz, et al . have shown that in  those with  
acute tetraplegia, SDB is present at  a lower BMI than their non SCI counterparts .29 This suggests the 
interplay of several  mechanisms that increase the prevalence of SDB in SCI. Interestingly, SCI 
patients with SDB  require significantly less positive airway pressure ( PAP) therapy at any given SDB 
severity compared with able- bodied individuals with sleep apnea.29 
 Emerging data demonstrates  that the prevalence of SDB in SCI  is increased . Additionally,  the 
characteristic risks for , and subsequent response to therapy likely diff ers from the general 
population and deserves dedicated research to determine the nature and significance of SDB and its treatment in SCI  
 B) Cognit ive and Quality of Life  Conseque nces  of SDB  
 The cognitive functions most frequently and reliably reported as being affected by SDB in the general population, are vigilance, attention, memory, executive and motor functioning.
30,31 A meta -analytic 
review suggests that obstructive sleep apnea ( OSA ) has a moderate to severe impact on vigilance, 
motor coordination, and executive functions, while there is little effect on intelligence, verbal, an d 
visual- perceptual abilities.32 Many of the studies are limited by relatively small sample sizes, non-
comprehensive cognitive test batteries, and inadequate control groups .  
 Cognitive deficits in information- processing, speed, attention, memory, and executive function are  
also commonly reported post SCI .
6-8,33 The intermittent hypoxia and frequent ly disrupted sleep 
associated with untreated SDB may worsen already existing cognitive deficits in the subset  of 
patients with  both SCI and SDB , leading to sub- optimal cognitive outcomes in this unique 
patient population.  Cardiovascular disease (seen commonly in chronic SCI and  in SDB) likely 
also plays a role in  this cognitive decline.34 Sajkov, et al,35 studied the effect of SDB on 
neuropsychological functioning  in 37 tetraplegic patients at least 6 months post injury. Thirty percent 
(11 of 37) had moderate to severe SDB.  Neuropsychological measures of cognitive ability  were 
significantly correlated with measures of sleep hypoxia, with deficits cited in attention, concentration, memory and learning. Further, cognitive impairments sustained by subjects with tetraplegia were both statistically and clinically significant when compared with non- disabled population values. These 
deficits are likely to substantially prolong rehabilitation, reduce future independence, and limit vocational outcomes following injury ; all of which are essential benchmarks for successful 
community re -entry after injury.    
 Several studies have demonstrated that individuals with SDB  in the general population have a lower  
quality of life, than age - and gender -matched controls.  SDB effects man y different aspects of a 
person’s life, including physical, emotional, and social well -being.
36 In a community sample of SCI 
individuals, Berlowitz , et al determined that t he self -reported quality of life and health utility  scores in 
individuals with SCI and SDB were very low  when compared with Australian population norms  and 
correlated with severity of SDB. The large reduction in health status attributable to SDB, 
especially in those with complete lesions, suggests that effective, well -tolerated treatments for 
SDB have substantial potential to improve quality of life in this population.23 
 C) Cardiovascular Consequences of SDB  
 In the general population, c onsiderable evidence points to  the association between SDB and 
cardiovascular disease. This association is particularly s trong for systemic hypertension, observed in 
large population studies.16,37 In the Sleep Heart Health Study cohort, sleep apnea was found to be an 
independent  risk factor for coronary artery disease (CAD) , congestive heart  failure,  cerebrovascular 
disease38, and cardiac arrhyt hmias, including atrial fibrillation and complex ventricular  arrhyth mias .39 
Additionally , long -term outcome st udies of patients with CAD have demonstrated higher 
cardiovascular mortality  in patients with sleep apnea compared with those without, even after 
controlling for important risk factors such as age, weight, and smoking.40 
 
The pathophysiological mechanisms of cardiovascular morbidity in SDB  are complex  and related to 
the repetitive episodes of intermittent hypoxia, sleep fragmentation and sympathetic surges observed in those with sleep apnea. Oxidative stress is a major component in  the chain of events leading to 
atherogenesis and cardiovascular morbidi ty in SDB. 
41 Oxidative stress alters signalling pathways and 
activates inflammatory and immune responses via increased interactions of blood cells with 
endothelial cells, facilitating endothelial cell injury  and dysfunction. Such events can promote 
atherosclerosis and the development of cardiovascular morbidities in sleep apnea.42  Figure 1 
illustrates the proposed pathogenetic mechanisms leading to the CV consequences of SDB.  
 A number of biomarkers , linked with CVD, are also elevated in patients  with SDB including  an 
increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines  such as  TNF-α, IL-6, and hs-CRP .
41 Several 
measures of oxidative stress have been proposed in the study of molecular mechanisms of SDB 
causing CVD. From the many candidates availabl e, the best currently available biomarker for 
oxidative stre ss, and the one most accepted in the field is 8-isoprostane (8- iso-PGF2α), a marker of 
lipid peroxidation .43  Isoprostane metabolites in urine are stable and have been found to be an 
accurate way to measure oxidative stress in humans .44 
 Cellular adhesion molecules, which promote adhesion of circulating leukocytes to endothelial cells  
and endothelial dysfunction, are potentially one of the first steps in the p athogenesis of 
atherosclerosis.
45 The release of cel lular adhesion molecules can be stimulated by inflammatory 
cytokines, and oxidative stress, both increased in SDB . A variety of cellular adhesion markers, such 
as ICAM -1, vascular adhesion molecule- 1 (VCAM -1), E -selectin, and L- selectin, have been shown to  
be elevated in sleep apnea compared to controls. 46,47  
 Oxidative stress, inflammation,  and sympathetic activation can all affect the expression of adipokines , 
molecules released by metabolically active white adipose tissue.
43  One such adipokine, adiponectin, 
has an anti -inflammatory function as  it inhibits production of IL- 6 and TNF -α.48 Oxidative stress, TNF -
α, and IL -6 all inhibit adiponectin production and thus potentiate their own pro- inflammatory  effects. 
Adiponectin levels have been shown to be lower in sleep apnea  patients compared to BMI -matched 
controls.49,50 A decrease in adiponectin levels is associated with obesity, insulin resistance , type 2 
diabetes, and CVD.43,51 The biomarkers that are chosen in this study  are thus repres entative of key 
pathways in the proposed model  of atheroge nesis  and have been associated with CVD .  
 D) Treatment of Sleep Apnea and Its Impact on Cognitive Measures in the General Population  
 Positive airway pressure therapy (PAP) has emerged as the most effective therapy for SDB in the general population. PAP is administrated by a small motorized unit that pushes pressurized air through a hos e attached to a mask strapped to the patient’s face.  PAP works as a “pneumatic splint” 
by delivering a positive intraluminal pres sure, alleviating the  episodes of upper airway collaps e 
characteristic of sleep apnea. PAP is an effective means of normalizing breathing, and eliminating the 
repetitive deoxygenation -reoxygenation cycles thought to be responsible for the oxidative stress 
burden of SDB. 
52-54 
  
 
 
Figure 1. Proposed Mechanisms for Cardiovascular Disease in Sleep Apnea42 
                                 PAP has b een shown to improve some but not all  cognitive deficits noted in persons with sleep apnea 
in the general population.
31 Several studies have shown that post PAP therapy, cognition has 
improved in the areas of memory55, sustained attent ion 56, motor speed, and executive function 57,58. 
However, other studies suggest no or minimal improvement in a battery of cognitive measures.31,59,60  
Studies in this area  are heterogeneous and vary by population characteristics, methodology, design, 
severity of SDB, duration of PAP prescription, and compliance with therapy.  One hypothesis that has 
emerged from these conflicting reports on PAP and cognition is that PAP only partially reverses measured cognitive def icits. The reasons for this partial reversibility is not entirely clear but may be 
due to the lack of sensitivity of existing cognitive measures and/or structural changes in the brain that are no longer reversible.
61 Arguably individuals with chronic SCI differ  from the general 
population in their medical co- morbidities contributing to co gnitive decline as well as their 
baseline neuro -psychological vulnerabilities.  The treatment of SDB in this unique population may 
have a significant beneficial impact on cognitive function. Indeed there is limited evidence in the literature that  suggests in other conditions with baseline cognitive deficits, treatment of SDB may lead 
to some improvement  in cognitive performance.
31 In a randomized trial of PAP treatment in mild 
Alzheimer’s disease, following 3 w eeks of PAP treatment, general cognitive performa nce improved 
within a  subset of patients with Alzheimer’s and sleep apnea.62 Subsequent analysis suggested those Obstructive Sleep 
Apnea/Intermittent 
Hypoxia  Obesity  
Oxidative Stress  
Inflammation  
Adhesion Molecules  
Cytokines  
Adipokines  
Leukocytes  
Platelets  
Endothelial Cells  Hypertension  
Hyperlipidemia  
Diabetes  
Endothelial Dysfunction  
Atherosclerosis  Sleep Fragmentation, Sympathetic Surges  
 
with Alzheimer’s and SDB who were adherent to PAP had a slower cognitive decline, especi ally in the 
domain of executive function and processing speed, exhibited stabilization of depressive symptoms 
and daytime somnolence, and showed significant improvement in subjective sleep quality.63  Our 
proposal is the first  to evaluate the impact of PAP therapy on cognitive measures in chronic 
SCI. 
 E) Impact of PAP on Cardiovascular Measures in the General Population  
In the general population, there is a growing body of literature that demonstrates the effectiveness of PAP in improving systemic blood pressure 
64 and several longitudinal observational studies showing 
that PAP therapy is associated with decreased fatal and non- fatal cardiovascular events.15,65   
Additionally, PAP has been shown to reduce biomarkers of ox idative stress and inflammation.43 Most 
studies report a reduction in TNF-α, IL-6, and hs -CRP  within 2 -4 weeks of therapy ; 66,67  a few show 
no effect. Obesity, cardiovascular disease, smoking status, asthma, and other inflammatory 
conditions confound the association between SDB and systemic inflammation; many of the studies that do not report any improvement in inflammatory biomarkers with PAP may not have adequately 
addressed these confounders.  Two small studies have given conflicting results about  effects of PAP 
on adiponectin levels . One found an increase  in adiponectin levels after  14 days of  PAP therapy 
68 
while another observed no change from baseline levels.69 Adhesion molecules including VCAM -1 
have been shown to decrease with PAP therapy.70  
 The SCI population is uniquely at risk  for chronic i nflammation . Studies  in SCI  have shown elevated 
hs-CRP levels in addition to increased VCAM -1, endothelin- 1, and IL-6 levels .
71 The crossroads of 
SCI and SDB may well represent an elevated pro- inflammatory stat e that predisposes to CVD  
disease burden. Reducin g systemic inflammation is likely  to be beneficial.  There is no information 
on the impact of PAP therapy on these inflammatory markers in the SCI population with SDB.  
Our proposal is the first to evaluate this associ ation and determine the  therapeutic impact  of 
PAP in this uniquely vulnerable population.  
 F) Impact of PAP on Mood, Sleep Quality , and Quality of Life in the General Population  
There is limited information on the effect of PAP on mood in patients with SDB and the results have 
been mixed, with some studies reporting improvement  
72 and other s showing no significant effects.56 
Howe ver, these studies were limited by small sample size , and use of differing indexes of mood, and 
heterogeneous controls. Several small studies have documented significant improv ement in quality -
of-life measures following PAP treatment in patients with sleep apnea.56,73,74 The most recent 
Cochrane systemic review  included 36 trials  of PAP therapy  and 1718 people. Study quality was  
mixed. Compared with control (sham or no therapy), PAP showed significant improvements in objective and subjective sleepiness and several quality of life, cognitive function , and d epression 
measures .
75 In a condition where functional recovery has remained elusive, interventions that 
improve quality of life, daytime functioning, and cognition will  play an important role in overall 
well-being of individuals with SCI and improve social, vocational, and emotional interactions.  
 Our cumulative pilot data indicate that sleep complaints and disorders are prevalent in individuals with 
SCI and likely play an important role in physical and psychological well -being. It  further highlight s the 
increased prevalence of SDB, and the need to systematically study the impact of  SDB on cognitive 
and cardiovascular health in individuals with SCI, as proposed in this application. The ease of  
applying the technology with minimal  technical difficulties, coupled with the strong expressed 
preference for at  home studies, supports our decision to use portable PSGs in this proposal. Our 
proposal builds upon our experience with acute SCI and extends it to study cognitive and 
cardiovascular variables in those with chronic SCI.  This is the first proposed clinical trial that 
explores the impact of PAP therapy on cognitive and cardiovascular measures in participants with chronic SCI and SDB.  Our team has extensive clinical experience in the diagnosis and 
management of SDB in SCI. We have studied the prevalence of SDB in acute and chronic SCI and  
have determined the feasibility, safety, and challenges of PAP use in this population. We have 
recently measured cardio- metabolic changes pre and post PAP in chronic SCI and cognitive changes 
with PAP in acute SCI. These preliminary data form  the basis  for the much needed proposed 
study, a multi -center prospective, double -blinded randomized controlled trial ( RCT) designed 
to determine the impact of four months of PAP therapy on cognitive and CV measures in persons with chronic SCI.  
 G) Study Relevance and Applicability of Proposed Findings  
 There is a paucity of information on the impact of SDB and its treatment in chronic SCI . 
Despite the increased prevalence of SDB in SCI , screening for SDB and its treatment are not yet 
standard of care. To enable change in practice, well -designed RCTs  are needed to demonstrate the 
importance of SDB and its treatment in the health of this population.  The following is a summary of perceived knowledge gaps and the beneficial impact of our proposed study:  
 
 
Aim: 
 Problem Being Addressed  Beneficial Impact of the Research  
1 Limited data exists on clinically 
relevant determinants of sleep quality and SDB  in persons with 
SCI. 
Very little is known about sleep quality and prevalence of sleep disorders in racially diverse persons 
with SCI . a) The research will quantify sleep 
quality, mood, pain, and presence of risks for SDB and insomnia in SCI  
participants using state -of-science 
evaluation techniques and validated instruments.  
b) The research brings needed attention to the problem of poor sleep quality and SDB after  SCI, particularly 
among underserved ethnically diverse persons  (Hispanic and Black) . 
c) In addition to questionnaires, sleep 
studies will be conducted using the gold standard of clinical polysomnography, which will provide the most discriminating evidence for diagnosis of SDB.  
d) A prevalent diagnosis of SDB will justify vigilance from health care providers in anticipat ing the risk, and  
provide treatment of this disorder.  
e) The research will develop a rich database of sleep disorders and clinical outcomes in minorities and 
underserved SCI  participants.  
1 Cognitive deficits in SCI  impair 
rehabilitation and long term social re-adaptation and vocational 
pursuits. SDB in general, has been associated with impairments in 
memory, attention, and executive a) The research will identify the 
associa tion between SDB and 
cognitive impairments in SCI  by using 
a battery of well -defined neuro-
psychological tests and comparing 
function. These deficits are 
important for day to day activities. 
SCI participants w ith SDB may 
indeed demonstrate worse cognitive impairment in these domains .  
More study is needed to determine the full extent of the interaction between SDB and SCI  and their 
combined impact on cognitive function . results between those with and 
without SDB.  
 
b) Additionally, other factors that may impact cognitive performance including pain severity, mood, pre-morbid intelligence, duration of injury, presence of insomnia, and use of sedating medications will be measured and included in a multivariable regression model to 
better delineate the impact of each of these factors and SDB on cognitive  
impairment.  
1 and 2  Although ther e is now some data 
that demonstrate increased prevalence of  poor sleep quality 
and SDB in SCI  subjects, there is 
no clear evidence that treating these conditions will lead to short and long term benefits.  
PAP is a medically -justified 
intervention in persons with SDB, but has seen  limited use in persons 
with SCI . Strength of evidence does 
not currently support screening for SDB and intervention with PAP in persons with SCI . 
 Persons who are prescribed PAP are not always compliant with its use. Compliance in this population has seen limited study.  
 The impact of PAP on cognitive outcomes in chronic S CI is 
unknown  
 
The impact of PAP on surrogate CV biomarkers, mood, and quality of 
life in this population is unknown.  a) The research will determine  the 
effectiveness of PAP in treating SDB 
in chronic SCI using gold standard research methodology (RCT) .  
 b) The research will provide the empirical support necessary to justify treatment of SDB in persons with SCI . 
 c) The research will examine population- specific compliance levels 
in PAP use, and identify whether compliance influences health- related 
outcomes.  
 
d) Our clinical trial will identify the 
impact of PAP therapy on cognitive measures, mood, quality of life, and surrogate CV endpoints. All these measures are relevant to the emotional and physical well -being of 
participants with chronic SCI and will 
likely have a practical impact on day to 
day living in this population.  
 Objectives/Specific Aims/Hypotheses The proposal  describes a multi -center double blinded, placebo controlled randomized trial (RCT) 
designed to examine the impact of SDB treatment in persons with chronic SCI.  The central 
hypothesis  is that the treatment of SDB with PAP will improve cognition, sleep quality, HRQOL, and 
CVD surrogate measures in persons with chronic SCI. The specific aims  and hypotheses  of the 
proposed research are:  
 
Specific 
Aim 1 Determine the associations between sleep disordered breathing  (SDB) and 
cognitive impairments in chronic SCI and the impact of PAP therapy on cognitive 
measures in a cohort with chronic SCI and SDB.  
   Hypothesis 1a: Compared with patients without SDB, patients with SDB will exhibit 
more severe and widespread cognitive impairments  (in memory, attention, and 
executive fu nction), while controlling for depression, pain severity, duration of injury, 
level of injury, sedative use, and pre- morbid intelligence  
  Hypothesis 1b: SCI participants who are randomized to four months of therapeutic 
PAP will show improvement in cognitive measures (memory, attention, and executive 
function) compared with those receiving sham PAP.  
Specific 
Aim 2 Determine the impact of PAP therapy on sur rogate CV biomarkers, sleep quality, 
quality of life, mood, and pain in a cohort with chronic SCI and SDB.  
  Hypothesis 2a:  SCI participants randomized to four months of PAP will show an 
improvement in CV biomarkers (hs -CRP, TNF -a, VCAM -1, adiponectin, and 8-
isoprostane) compared with sham PAP.  
  Hypothesis 2b: Sleep quality, quality of life, mood, and pain will improve in SCI 
participants receiving PAP and stay the same or worsen in those randomized to sham 
PAP.  
 Research Strategy and Study Design  
Study Overview:  
During the 4- year study period we will screen  200 SCI participants  who meet eligibility criteria  and 
consent to participate with portable level II  polysomnography (PSG) and randomize  100 subjects  who 
have SDB to auto- PAP or sham PAP . Partici pants will be recruited from  the University of Miami 
(Miami Projec t to Cure Paralysis), the Miami VA,  Wayne State University  (Michigan Rehabilitation 
Institut e), and affiliated Detroit VA through  their outpatient SCI clinics and/or inpatient rehabilitation 
units.  Participants will be asked to complete questionnaires measuring sleep quality (SQ), SDB risk, insomnia severity, daytime sleepiness, pain severity, mood, and HRQOL. They will undergo an overnight, at home (or if hospitalized, in the hospital room) portable unattended  PSG  performed at 
their normal sleep time. Subjects with an apnea- hypopnea index (AHI) ≥  10 events/hr will be 
randomized to receive 4 months of auto- PAP therapy or PAP set at a fixed pressure of  3 cmH20 
(sham PAP).  
 We will perform neuro- psychological evaluations  prior to randomization on all participants who 
complete a portable PSG to evaluate general and  pre-morbid function, immediate verbal  memory, 
simple and sustained attention, processing speed, and executive function. Selection of these 
particular cognitive measures reflect s impairments in these domains observed in patients with SDB 
within the general population .
14,30,32,76 These domains are also impaired  in patients with acute and 
chronic SCI.6-8,77,78 Importantly , none of the cited SCI  studies have examined the potential role 
of SDB in cognitive impairment in SCI participants.   
 One cognitive measure ( PASAT)  and 3 sleep questionnaires ( PSQI, FOSQ and ESS) will be repeated 
at 1 month follow -up in those randomized to therapy or placebo. Complete n euro- psychological 
evaluations will be repeated at the 4 month follow- up time point  in those with SDB who were 
randomized to PAP or sham PAP  (primary outcomes).  All measures obtained from these repeated 
assessments will be subject to a Reliable Change Index analysis to control for potential practice 
effects .
79 We will obtain blood and urine samples for measurement of CV biomarkers  at time of 
randomization and the four m onth follow- up. Additionally, s leep and quality of life questionnaires will 
be repeated at four month follow -up (secondary outcomes).    
 Study Population:  
We will perform unattended portable  level II  PSG on  SCI participants from the  Miami and Detroit  
study sites (100 from each site) who meet the following eligibility criteria:  
Inclusion Criteria:   
• Chronic  tetraplegia or paraplegia (C4-L1), American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA)  
Impairment Scale A, B, C an d D 
• 18 years and older  
• At least one year post  injury  
• Hearing and vision suitable for comprehension of instructions, and perception of cognitive test 
stimuli  
• No color blindness as measured by a brief screen with color perception Ishihara cards  
• Stable medical condition for 2 weeks prior to enrollment. Patients admitted to hospital will be 
eligible for enrolment if the acute illness precipitating admission is in recovery phase  for 2 
weeks or longer  
 Exclusion Criteria:   
• Diagnosis of SDB and successful positive airway pressure (PAP) therapy prior to injury. Those with a diagnosis of SDB post  injury who are not receiving therapy for SDB (PAP, surgical, 
and/or oral appliance) are eligible for study enrol lment  
• Patients who are intubated, have a tracheostomy, and/or are using long term invasive/non-invasive positive pressure ventilation  
• Participants with predominant central sleep apnea on PSG requiring bi -level PAP therapy  
• Severe traumatic brain  injury (GCS < 8 at first assessment)  
• Unable to understand or read English at a grade 5 level  
• Inability to provide informed consent  
• Evidence of advanced neurological or systemic disease that may affect cognitive functioning 
(e.g., Alzheimer’s disease, Dementia, Parkinson’s disease)  
•  Significant aphasia or language impairments  
 Randomization Protocol  
Participants who meet above eligibility criteria and are diagnosed with SDB  with AHI ≥ 10 will be 
randomized to treatment with either auto- PAP or fixed PAP set at 3 cmH20 (sham PAP). It is 
anticipated that 100 participants will have AHI ≥ 10 (50 from each site) and undergo randomization to treatment or placebo in a 1:1 ratio  within each center .  
 The randomization sequence will be generated by the study statistician using a computer -generated 
random -number table. The randomization numbers will be placed in se rially numbered, sealed, 
opaque envelopes  available to the study PI /site PI . The study coordinator  from each site will request 
an envelope to be open ed by the PI at the time of randomization. The study coordinator and the 
participant s will be blinded to treatment assignment. Interpretation of study results will occur blind to 
study arm  assignment .   
 Intervention  
All randomized subjects will be fitted with a nasal or full -face mask and head gear. PAP will be 
delivered by an auto- titrating device (Resmed S9-Autoset, San Diego USA). These devices 
automatically set the level of delivered pressure to ensure upper airway patency,  to treat detected 
apneas and hypopneas , thereby eliminating the need for a pressure titration sleep study to be 
performed in the sleep laboratory.  Auto-PAP has been successfully used in several patient 
populations and may improve compliance with PAP. 
80-83 Participants who are random ized to the 
placebo arm will receive an auto -PAP device that is set to a fixed low pressure of 3 cmH20 without an 
ability to titrate according to detected respiratory events. The pressure is too low to eliminate respiratory events  and serves as sham  or sub -therapeutic  PAP (placebo PAP) . Additionally, six extra 
4 mm holes will be  cut in the rubber collar of the connecting tubing at the  mask end. These extra 
blow-off holes, together with the standard hole in the PAP mask, allow more air to escape and keep  
the nasal pressure low while ensuring no CO2 re -inhalation.  This method has been successfully  and 
safely  used as a placebo in previous RCTs in participants with SDB.60,84,85 
 
The auto- PAP machines  will record the number and type of respiratory events detected, the pressure 
delivered in response to these events and the amount of time that the machine was on and delivering pressure to a patient. All subjects will be instructed to use the device nightly during sleep, for the 
ensuing four  months. Objective compliance checks will be conducted at 1 week, 1 month, and study 
completion, by having the subject present the PAP “Smartcard” for download and interpretation.  To 
increase patient compliance and decrease variance in outcomes introduced from differing degrees of exposure to the intervention, we will employ standardized procedures for management of PAP currently employed at University of Miami PAP clinic. These include instructing subjects on machine and mask  use and regular phone follow -up for troubleshooting as necessary. The study PI will review 
compliance downloads and instruct  the Research Associates (RA)  to contact participants if 
compliance is low  or machine reported air leakage from mask  is too high. This is will be done for both 
arms of the study. The RA will not be aware of the details of the compliance report or machine pressure delivered to maintain blinding. Daily compliance will be reported as the total number of 
hours of PAP use per 24 hour period. Patients who use PAP > 4 hours/night for more than 50% of the 
nights at 4 month follow -up will be classified as PAP compliant . 
 Baseline Measurements All Subjects: At the Miami and Detroit  sites the study RA will approach 
SCI individuals identified by the study PI  and Co- investigators  to determine eligibility for participation 
in the study. Upon consent, we will ask participants to complete several questionnaires detailed 
below. We will schedule participant s for a single night unattended portable home PSG within one 
week  of enrollment to evaluate sleep architecture and diagnose SDB. The RA at each site will review 
medical records to document medical and psychological co-morbidities, medication use, laboratory 
data, spinal cord injury level, ASIA classification, and duration of injury.  We will interview participants 
during their enrol lment visit to obtain a medical/sleep history, and anthropometric measures (height, 
weight, neck circumference, and abdominal girth at end  expiration).  Whenever possible  the RA or 
PI/site PI will complete the international SCI core dataset for each participant.
86,87 Additionally, we will 
use the international SCI CV function basic data set to obtain information about CV co- morbidity.88 
Cognitive testing will be completed at baseline on all subjects who complete portable PSG.  Figure 2 
outlines study flow and measurements. 
 We will obtain the following respiratory measures during PSG: a) AHI : defined as the number of 
apneas and hypopneas per hour of sleep, b) arousal index (AI): the number of  arousals per hour of 
sleep, c) percentage of total sleep time (TST) spent with arterial oxygen saturation (Sa- O2) < 90%, d) 
mean minimum Sa- O2, and e) oxygen desaturation index 4% (ODI4), defined as the number of four 
percent desaturation events per hour of study time. Respiratory and sleep architecture definitions will  
be scored according to  accepted criteria put forth by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine 
(AASM ).
89 We will define SDB as an AHI ≥ 10 . We will score hypopneas initially using alternative 
rules  (>50% reduction in airflow with 3% desaturation or arousal) . We will rescore using 
recommended rules (>30% reduction in airflow with 4% desaturation). In the sleep research community, there is currently no clear  consensus on which scoring method  is preferred. SDB 
prevalence rates reported in the literature differ depending on the definition used.
90 Consequently , we 
will perform all analyses with both definitions  in mind  and report any differences in observed 
associations .  
 
Questionnaires :  
All participants will be asked to complete questionnaires described below. Questionnaires are 
validated and have been used successfully in prior SCI and SDB research. The RA will hand out the 
questionnaires and allow the participant to complete them in a private setting.  The RA will be 
available to answer any questions that may arise and will check the returned questionnaires for 
completeness.  All questionnaires are found in Appendix 10.  
  Sleep Questionnaires  
1) Sleep Quality (SQ):  We will assess sleep quality using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI).91 
The PSQI is the most widely used global sleep assessment tool. Validity and test -retest reliability of 
this instrument has been extensively studied. A global PSQI score greater than 5 yields a diagnostic sensitivity of 89.6% and specificity of 86.5% (kappa = 0.75, p < 0.001) in distinguishing ‘good’ and ‘poor’ sleepers.
92,93  
2) Chronic Insomnia:  We will use the Athens Insomnia Scale (AIS) to assess insomnia in the study 
population. It consists of eight items: the first five pertain to sleep induction, awakenings during the night, final awakening, total sleep duration, and sleep quality; while the last three items refer to well -
being, functioning capacity, and sleepiness during the day. Reliability and validity for the instrument have been well documented. 
94,95 
3) Screening for SDB:  We will screen for increased risk of SDB using the Berlin questionnaire (BQ). 
This is a validated questionnaire with good performance characteristics in the general population.96 It 
has been successfully used by our group in the SCI population (see preliminary data).  
4) Daytime Sleepiness:  Epworth Sleepiness Score (ESS) is a valid measure of subjective daytime 
sleepiness.97 Eight items are rated on a scale of 0– 3, total scores range 0 –24, with higher scores 
indicating a greater propensity to fall asleep in different situations. In samples of sleep apnea patients, it shows high internal consistency and correlates well with objective measures of sleep latency.
98-100It has successfully  been used in SCI individuals.22 
5) Impact of Sleepiness on Functioning:  The Functional Outcomes of Sleep Questionnaire (FOSQ) is 
the gold- standard, disease specific instrument designed to assess the impact of  sleepiness on the 
ability to conduct daily activities. 101 The FOSQ has proven validity and reliability, and is sensitive to 
treatment changes. 102,103 There are 30 items, which are divided into 5 scales: Activity, Vigilance, 
General Prod uctivity, Social Outcome, and Intimacy and Sexual  Relationships. These scales are 
summed to make a total score. Higher scores on the FOSQ indicate self -perceived better daily 
functioning. The FOSQ has been used by our team in a previous study of acute SCI and sleep disorders.
23 
                   
 
 
      Figure 2. Study Flow and Measurements  
                                     Mood, Pain, and Quality of Life Questionnaires  
1) Health related quality of life (HRQOL):  We will measure HRQOL in participants using the Medical 
Outcomes Study Short Form SF -36 (v2, Quality  Metric, Inc.).104 We will score tests online, and 
express results  as the coalesced scores for physical and mental domains. The SF -36 is the mos t 
widely used of the HRQOL instruments, and has been used in populations of persons with SCI105-108, 
and those with a wide range of sleep disorders.109-112 The instrument tests 8 coalesced dimensions of 
health that create a physical component score and a mental component score. Additionally, we will Screen and 
enroll SCI 
patients 
N = 200 
Baseline Portable 
Polysomnography  
N = 200 Enrollment Visit  
• Sleep Questionnaires  
• HRQOL 
• Pain and Mood Questionnaires  
• Anthropometric Measures  
• Medical History  
• SCI Core Dataset  
• SCI CV Function Basic Dataset  
• Baseline Cognitive Evaluations  
Follow-up Visit at 4 months  
• All Questionnaires  
• Anthropometric 
measures  
• Cognitive battery of tests  
• Blood and Urine 
Samples  
N = 100 Sleep Disordered  
Breathing Diagnosed  
Auto-PAP 
(Treatment)  
N = 50 
Follow -up for 
Compliance check at 
first week, first and 
fourth month  Randomize  
N = 100 
Sham PAP 
(Placebo) 
N = 50 Blood and Urine Samples  
Follow-up Visit at 1 month  
Cognitive Evaluation: PASAT  
Questionnaires: PQSI, ESS, FOSQ  
 
use the recently proposed International SCI Quality of Life (QoL) Basic data set to facilitate future 
comparisons to other QoL studies in SCI worldwide. The QoL data set consists o f 3 variables: ratings 
of satisfaction with general quality of life, satisfaction with physical health,  and satisfaction with 
psychological health. All variables are rated on a scale ranging from 0 (completely dissatisfied) to 10 
(completely satisfied).113 
2) Depression and Anxiety: A) Beck Depression Inventory -2nd edition (BDI -II): is a brief psychological 
screening  tool to assess depressive symptomatology. The BDI -II114,115 is a 21- item, self -report 
measure with high test –retest reliability and internal consistency in a variety of patient groups, 
including those with SCI.116 It has been shown to correlate with biological markers of depression and 
to be sensitive to change. B) State- Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI ): The State- Trait Anxiety Inventory  is 
a well- validated and reliable instrument that has been successfully used with SCI populations to 
evaluate anxiety.117-119 
3) Assessment of Pain: Presence and severity of pain will be determined by the International Spinal 
Cord Injury Basic Pain Data Set (ISCIBPDS)  recently validated in persons with SCI.120,121 Additionally, 
in accordance with IMPACT II consensus recommendations for evaluating pain outcomes in clinical 
studies, 122 we will determine the presence and severity of pain by a written numerical scale.  Ranging 
from 0 to 10, with 0 meaning ‘No pain’ and 10 meaning ‘Pain as bad as you can imagine,’ the scale will be accompanied by the instructions, “Please rate your pain by  indicating the number that best 
describes your pain on average in the last week.” We will also use a verbal rating scale to measure pain intensity over the preceding week (none, mild, moderate, severe) as a secondary pain outcome measure.  
 
Polysomnography : We will conduct portable in home Level II PSG in accordance with standards 
established by the AASM 123. We will use  the Embletta x100 portable recording unit. The PSG 
recording montage consists of two electroencephalographic channels (EEG -C3 and C4), left or right 
electroculogram (EOG), chin muscle electromyogram (EMG), nasal cannula (NP -measure of airflow), 
thoracic and abdominal respiratory effort bands, body -position sensor, and pulse oximetry. The 
trained RA will connect participants to t he device  in the outpatient clinic or inpatient room. The 
Embletta x100 will record o vernight events . We will teach the participant and/or caregiver how to 
disconnect from the device prior to returning it to the clinic the following day. Portable sleep studies 
have been successfully used in outpatient clinical and research settings.123-125 The Embletta x100 unit 
has been validated against a standard in lab oratory , attended PSG with good performance 
characteristics and accuracy in detecting SDB .126 
 A certified sleep technologist will perform manual scoring using 30 second epochs and standardized 
scoring techniques recommended by AASM.
89 Drs. Shafazand and Wallace will review all scored 
epochs and interpret the overall sleep study.  PSGs performed by  Detroit  sites will be scored  and 
interpreted centrally in Miami.  
 Specific Aim 1: Determine the associations between sleep disordered breathing (SDB) and 
cognitive impairments in chronic SCI and the impact of PAP therapy on cognitive measures in a cohort with chronic SCI and SDB.  
 Protocol:  Dr. Johnson -Greene will train RAs at both sites  to perform a battery of comprehensive, 
cognitive assessments to obtain a global evaluation of cognitive functioning  in all subjects with SCI  
who undergo PSG. The particular emphasis is on measures related to cognitive impairment common in persons with SDB.
30 Administration of these tests by appropriately trained RAs is consistent with 
current standards of practice in clinical neuropsychology.127  Sample protocol sheets and stimuli for 
each cognitive measure can be found in Appendix 10.  
 
1) Pre -morbid Functioning:   
WIDE RANGE ACHIEVEMENT TEST – IV (READING SUBTEST)128: The WRAT -IV Reading Subtest 
is a norm -referenced test that measures the basic academic skill of word reading.  It was 
standardized on a representative national sample of over 3,000 individuals ranging in age from 5 to 
94 years. Higher scores are indicative of better sight reading abilities and can serve as a proxy for pre-morbid intellectual functioning.  
 
2) Simple and Divided Attention: 
a) DIGIT SPAN SUBTEST OF THE WECHSLER ADULT INTELLIGENCE SCALE –IV129: The digit 
span subtest requires the individual to repeat a series of numbers in the same order, or in reverse order, than orally provided by the test administrator. Low scores on the digit span subtest suggest limited attention, while higher scores indicate a greater ability to concent rate and attend to orally 
presented information.  
 b) PACED SERIAL ADDITION TEST (PASAT): The PASAT measures divided, attentio n and working 
memory;  cognitive domains that have been shown to be particularly salient to SDB.  The individual 
being tested is given single digits at fixed intervals  administered by a computer, and needs to add the 
current number to the last number on each successive presentation.  The participant provides verbal 
responses and the examiner records the responses on a scoring sheet.  Lower scores indicate greater 
impairment of attention. 
130-132 The PASAT is the primary outc ome measure for this study.  
 
3) Processing Speed:   
SYMBOL DIGIT MODALITIES TEST (SDMT)133: The SDMT is a substitution task that requires the 
individual being evaluated to replace symbols with the numbers assigned to them on a reference key. A time limit is imposed to complete the task. Only the oral version of the SDMT will be administered requiring verbal responses. The SDMT has shown excellent reliability, sensitivity, and validity.
134-136 
 
4) Memory:  
HOPKINS VERBAL LEARNING TEST -REVISED (HVLT -R): The HVLT -R is an assessment of verbal 
learning and memory, co mposed  of three learning trials, a delayed recall trial, and a delayed 
recognition trial. It has high test -retest reliability and validity, and has been used in studies of 
participants with  chronic medical conditions. 137,138 
 
5) Executive Function:  
WISCONSIN CARD SORTING TEST -64 (WCST): The WCST -64 is used primarily to assess 
perseveration and abstract thinking. It is  considered a measure of executive function because of its 
reported sensitivity to frontal lobe dysfunction. As such, the WCST allows the clinician to assess strategic planning, organized searching, and the ability to utilize  environmental feedback to shift 
cognitive sets and direct  behavior toward achieving a goal .
139 The test is administered by computer.  
Participants will indicate their re sponse verbally and the examiner will select the appropriate choice 
on the computer so that motor responses are not required.  
 This battery of tests takes approximately 75 minutes for subjects to complete.  All cognitive measures 
will be completed at baseli ne and four month follow -up. Scoring of cognitive measures from Miami 
and Detroit sites will be completed by Dr. Johnson- Greene at Miami site who will be blinded to study 
arm assignment.  
 Specific Aim 2 : Determine the impact of PAP therapy on surrogate CV biomarkers, sleep 
quality, quality of life, mood, and pain in a cohort with chronic SCI and SDB.  
 Given the increased prevalence of CVD and its associated morbidity, mortality and health costs in the SCI population
4,5, much attention has been paid in recent years to identifying and modifying 
traditional and nontraditional CVD risk factors  in SCI. SDB is likely  to be a nontraditional, but 
modifiable risk factor . Our study will be the first to evaluate in persons with chronic SCI, the 
association between SDB and surrogate cardiovascular biomarkers and the impact of PAP 
therapy on these measures.  
 
Biomarkers  
We will measure inflammatory cytokines ( TNF-α and hs -CRP ), a cellular adhesion molecule (VCAM -
1), a marker of oxidative stress (urinary 8- isoprostane), and adiponectin at baseline prior to PAP 
intervention and at four month follow -up. 
 
Blood collection and sample preparation Participants will be instructed to refrain from caffeine and alcohol intake for 24 hours before testing. Antecubital venous blood samples will be taken under antiseptic conditions in the post -absorptive 
state after an overnight (10h) fast, and will be drawn between 8:00 and 10:00 am. Ten milliliters of 
fasting blood will be obtained in EDTA -containing vaccutainer tubes or clot lysis activator tubes and 
centrifuged for 20 minutes at 1200 x g to obtain platelet poor plasma or serum, respectively.  
 After centrifugation, the serum or plasma are transferred to a new  labeled tube and kept on ice or at 
4°C until aliquots are prepared for storage.  If multiple tubes are needed to obtain the requisite volume of sample, then samples from individual tubes will be pooled prior to preparation of sample aliquots. For freezing, aliquots of serum, plasma or urine will be added to appropriately labeled and identified cryogenic vials suitable for storage at ultra- low temperatures on the day of sample 
collection.  Tube size will be dictated by the required sample volume.  Sample vials will be placed in 
containers and frozen at ≤ -70°C until shipped to the laboratory for analysis.  Samples to be shipped 
frozen will be placed in approved Styrofoam shipping containers containing sufficient quantities of dry 
ice to maintain samples in a frozen state for at least 48 hours and sent by overnight courier.   
 Urine Collection  
First morning urine specimens will be  collected at home by  participants . Participants will be  instructed 
to collect as much as possible of first morning urine into the supplied container, place the lid on the container carefully and tightly and bring the specimen as soon as possible on the same day to the RA. For those participants who self -cathet erize, urine specimens can be collected from catheters 
(e.g. Foley catheter) using a syringe, followed by transfer to a specimen tube or cup.  We will 
normalize urinary 8- isoprostane measurements  to urinary creatinine levels to account for differences 
in dilution.  
 Biochemical Assays  
Quality control procedures:   For all quantitative metabolic and biomarker measures, the laboratory 
follows guidelines established by the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA) for quality control and proficiency testing.  Each assay run must meet established quality control guidelines before results are accepted and reported. Sufficient stocks of control lots are maintained for long- term 
monitoring of assay precision and monitoring of long- term drift.  
   
Clinical Laboratory and Biomarker Testing:   Chemistry and immunoelectro-che miluminescence 
(IECL) assays are performed by automated analyzer on a Roche Cobas 6000 analyzer following all manufacturer’s instructions for instrument maintenance and assay calibration and test procedures.  ELISA testing is performed by manual methods.  
 Assays, methodology, intra-assay CV (coefficient of variability) , sample type and minimal sample 
requi rements are shown in Table 1.   
 
 
 
 
Table 1:  Assay method, sample type and volume requirement by test  
Test Methodology  Assay CV  Reagent Manufacturer  Sample 
Requirement  
C-reactive Protein  IECL  2.3%  Roche  0.3 ml Serum  
Adiponectin  ELISA  4.7%  Mercodia  0.1 ml Serum  
soluble VCAM  ELISA  5.8%  R&D Systems  0.2 ml EDTA 
Plamsa  
TNF-alpha (high sensitivity)  ELISA  6.2%  R&D Systems  0.5ml EDTA 
Plasma  
Urinary 8 -isoprostane  ELISA  6.9%  Northwest Life Science 
Specialties  0.5 ml First Void  
Urine  
Urine Creatinine (to 
normalize 8 -Isoprostane)  Chemistry  2.1%  Roche  0.5 ml First Void  
Urine  
 
Sleep, Quality of Life, and Mood  
Sleep quality, quality of life, mood and pain will be evaluated at baseline and four months follow -up in 
each study arm using questionnaires, according to methodology described above.  
 
Data Analysis:   
Feasibility:  The SCI Service at Miami VA actively serves approximately 300 patients. The Miami 
Project maintains a database of persons who have volunteered their participation in research studies  
and a database of individuals who have participated in past studies and volunteered additional 
participation. The database currently contains 3400 persons whose ages and levels of injury match the sought study participants.  The Detroit VA SCI service oversees the ca re of greater than  100 
patients/ year. The Rehabilitation Institute of Michigan provides  care for 350 SCI individuals . We 
anticipate completion of enrol lment by the second quarter  of Year 4, with 100 patients enrolled for 
PSG from each site.  
 
Sample size justification and power : We will recruit 200  participants  who meet our eligibility criteria 
and anticipate an SDB prevalence of 0.50 in SCI participants.  This will allow us to randomize 100 
participants with SDB to PAP or placebo arm.  The neurocognitive test best characterized in both SCI 
and SDB is the Paced Serial Addition Test (PASAT).35 The PASAT is our primary study outcome. A 
mean difference in PASAT scores of 7 discriminates between those with and without cognitive impairment in populations with and without SDB.
131 Assuming a standard deviation of 9 131 and alpha 
of 0.05, a sample size of 40 per study arm has a power of 0.93 to detect a mean difference of 7 units . 
Assumin g a PAP non -adherence rate and/or loss to follow -up of 40 %, we will continue to have 
sufficient power  (81%)  to detect such a difference with our proposed sample size of 100. These 
findings would be in keeping with PASAT values obtained in non-disabled  patients with SDB vs. 
controls 131, and PASAT performance in other populations (e.g. multiple sclerosis, mild traumatic 
brain injury) 132.  
 
Plann ed analyses:  We will score questionnaires while blind to PSG data  and group allocation using 
instructions provided by the questionnaire developer. We will first examine continuous variables for 
normality.  For those variables without a normal distribution,  we will explore appropriate 
transformations in an attempt to achieve normality.  Continuous variables will be summarized as 
means and SD, and categorical variables will be summarized as frequencies. Prevalence of poor SQ will be calculated as the proporti on of individuals who complete the PSQI with a score of ≥ 5. 
Prevalence of insomnia will be calculated as the proportion of individuals who complete the AIS with a 
score ≥ 6. Prevalence of SDB will be calculated as the proportion of individuals who undergo PSG 
with AHI ≥ 10 /hr.  
 To determine baseline  associations between SDB and cognitive measures  (Hypothesis 1a) , we will 
develop Generalized linear models (GLM), with each of the cognitive variables as dependent variables and presence or absence of SDB as an independent variable. The analyses will be repeated with AHI or ODI4 (measures of SDB severity) as independent variables. We will control for other co- variates including age, depression, anxiety, HRQOL, pain severity, duration of injury, level of 
injury, use of sedating medications, and presence of insomnia.  For all GLM developed, the data may 
be transformed to meet the normality and homogeneity of variance assumptions of the analysis.  
 Primary Hypothesis  (Specific aim 1, Hypothesis 1b)  
A test of the  primary null hypothesis, that PAP intervention does not increase mean PASAT score 
against the 1- sided alternative hypothesis that PAP intervention increases mean PASAT, will be 
based on a general linear model (GLM ). PASAT sco re is modeled as a function of PAP intervention, 
using an indicator variable with 1 indicating PAP and 0 the sham treatment. A 1 degree of freedo m 
test based on an F statistic will be used to test for a positive coefficient for the PAP indicator. This 
modeling approach provides a unified framework that accommodates covariates including use of sedating medications, years of education, level of injur y, duration of injury,  pain severity, presence of 
anxiety or depression, compliance with PAP , and recruitment center, each of which may reasonably 
be anticipated to influence PASAT score. We plan to include these covariates in our primary hypothesis test, which will be carried out at α= 0.05. If the null hypothesis of no effect is rejected, 
computation of 95% confidence limits on the estimate of treatment difference in PASAT score mean will be carried out.  
 Secondary Hypotheses  
A second phase of analysis will focus on CV biomarkers and measures of sleep quality, quality of life, 
mood and pain. These analyses are considered exploratory in nature and hence will benefit from comparisons within as well as between groups.   
 For within group contrasts, initial observations serve as baseline for assessing the effect of treatment at 4 months. As in a classical paired design, inference focuses on the difference between baseline and 4 month observations. Hence, individuals serve as their own control for an effect of i ntervention. 
The null hypothesis that the baseline does not differ from the 4 month measurement is tested using statistical methods for a paired design. For normally distributed measurements, a paired t test will be used. For variables that depart from nor mality and cannot be transformed to approximate normality, a 
Wilcoxon  signed rank test will be used.  
 Comparisons between PAP and sham treatment groups at 4 months will be made based on the linear model described above for the primary endpoint. In contrast  to PASAT, however, tests for treatment 
group differences of CV biomarkers and measures of sleep quality,  HRQOL,  mood and pain will be 2-
sided. Because the number of secondary hypotheses to be tested is potentially large, these tests will be considered exploratory in nature. Accordingly, control of the false positive inference rate for these tests will be carried out at the group level, as described below, rather than for the entire set of secondary analyses.  Similar approach will be taken for the analyses of select measures at the one 
month time -point.  
 Control of False Positive Rate of Inference  
The inference of primary interest in this study is the effect of treatment on PASAT score. Because the test for intervention on PASAT is considered pre- planned, it  will be carried out at α -level 0.05. 
Similarly, tests for effects on groups of CV biomarkers, sleep, mood and quality -of-life measurements 
are considered pre- planned in the sense that measurements in each group will be subjected to 
statistical testing regardless of test outcome for PASAT. Accordingly, tests for multiple measurements 
taken in each category of biomarkers will be carried out at α -levels below 0.05. This approach 
recognizes that multiple testing is involved within each biomarker category and adjusts the significance level for individual tests downward to control the false positive inference rate at the category level. We will apply a False Discovery Rate (FDR) criterion of 5% separately for each category, thereby acknowledging the substantial overall number of tests per category but preserving power to detect true effects for each type of biomarker.  
 Primary analyses will be conducted in accordance with the intention -to-treat principle. We will also 
repeat analyses using a per protocol viewpoint . We will use statistical software, SPSS for Windows  
version 19 for all analyses.  
 
 
  References  
  
1. Schoenfeld AJ, McCriskin B, Hsiao M, Burks R. Incidence and epidemiology of spinal cord injury within a closed 
American population: the United States military (2000 -2009). Spinal Cord. 
2. French DD, Campbell RR, Sabharwal S, Nelson AL, Palacios PA, Gavin -Dreschnack D. Health care costs for 
patients with chronic spinal cord injury in the Veterans Health Administration. J Spi nal Cord Med 2007;30:477- 81. 
3. Schulz R, Czaja SJ, Lustig A, Zdaniuk B, Martire LM, Perdomo D. Improving the quality of life of caregivers of 
persons with spinal cord injury: a randomized controlled trial. Rehabil Psychol 2009;54:1 -15. 
4. van den Berg ME,  Castellote JM, de Pedro -Cuesta J, Mahillo -Fernandez I. Survival after spinal cord injury: a 
systematic review. J Neurotrauma;27:1517 -28. 
5. Myers J, Lee M, Kiratli J. Cardiovascular disease in spinal cord injury: an overview of prevalence, risk, evaluatio n, 
and management. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2007;86:142 -52. 
6. Davidoff GN, Roth EJ, Richards JS. Cognitive deficits in spinal cord injury: epidemiology and outcome. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil 1992;73:275- 84. 
7. Dowler RN, Harrington DL, Haaland KY, Swanda RM, Fee  F, Fiedler K. Profiles of cognitive functioning in chronic 
spinal cord injury and the role of moderating variables. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 1997;3:464 -72. 
8. Dowler RN, O'Brien SA, Haaland KY, Harrington DL, Feel F, Fiedler K. Neuropsychological functionin g following a 
spinal cord injury. Appl Neuropsychol 1995;2:124 -9. 
9. Jegede AB, Rosado -Rivera D, Bauman WA, et al. Cognitive performance in hypotensive persons with spinal cord 
injury. Clin Auton Res;20:3 -9. 
10. Biering -Sorensen F, Biering -Sorensen M. Slee p disturbances in the spinal cord injured: an epidemiological 
questionnaire investigation, including a normal population. Spinal Cord 2001;39:505 -13. 
11. Knutson KL, Spiegel K, Penev P, Van Cauter E. The metabolic consequences of sleep deprivation. Sleep Med Rev 
2007;11:163 -78. 
12. Kundermann B, Hemmeter -Spernal J, Huber MT, Krieg JC, Lautenbacher S. Effects of total sleep deprivation in 
major depression: overnight improvement of mood is accompanied by increased pain sensitivity and augmented pain 
complaint s. Psychosom Med 2008;70:92- 101.  
13. Kundermann B, Krieg JC, Schreiber W, Lautenbacher S. The effect of sleep deprivation on pain. Pain Res Manag 
2004;9:25 -32. 
14. Kim HC, Young T, Matthews CG, Weber SM, Woodward AR, Palta M. Sleep -disordered breathing and  
neuropsychological deficits. A population -based study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:1813 -9. 
15. Marin JM, Carrizo SJ, Vicente E, Agusti AG. Long -term cardiovascular outcomes in men with obstructive sleep 
apnoea -hypopnoea with or without treatment wi th continuous positive airway pressure: an observational study. Lancet 
2005;365:1046 -53. 
16. Peppard PE, Young T, Palta M, Skatrud J. Prospective study of the association between sleep -disordered 
breathing and hypertension. N Engl J Med 2000;342:1378 -84. 
17. Punjabi NM, Caffo BS, Goodwin JL, et al. Sleep -disordered breathing and mortality: a prospective cohort study. 
PLoS Med 2009;6:e1000132.  
18. Punjabi NM, Shahar E, Redline S, Gottlieb DJ, Givelber R, Resnick HE. Sleep -disordered breathing, glucose 
intole rance, and insulin resistance: the Sleep Heart Health Study. Am J Epidemiol 2004;160:521 -30. 
19. Yaggi HK, Concato J, Kernan WN, Lichtman JH, Brass LM, Mohsenin V. Obstructive sleep apnea as a risk factor for 
stroke and death. N Engl J Med 2005;353:2034 -41. 
20. Berlowitz DJ, Brown DJ, Campbell DA, Pierce RJ. A longitudinal evaluation of sleep and breathing in the first year 
after cervical spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2005;86:1193 -9. 
21. Burns SP, Kapur V, Yin KS, Buhrer R. Factors associated with sleep apnea in men with spinal cord injury: a 
population -based case -control study. Spinal Cord 2001;39:15 -22. 
22. Burns SP, Little JW, Hussey JD, Lyman P, Lakshminarayanan S. Sleep apnea syndrome in chronic spinal cord 
injury: associated factors and tre atment. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2000;81:1334- 9. 
23. Berlowitz DJ, Spong J, Gordon I, Howard ME, Brown DJ. Relationships between objective sleep indices and 
symptoms in a community sample of people with tetraplegia. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2012;93:1246 -52. 
24. Young T, Evans L, Finn L, Palta M. Estimation of the clinically diagnosed proportion of sleep apnea syndrome in 
middle -aged men and women. Sleep 1997;20:705 -6. 
25. Weaver FM, Collins EG, Kurichi J, et al. Prevalence of obesity and high blood pressure in ve terans with spinal 
cord injuries and disorders: a retrospective review. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2007;86:22 -9. 
26. Gater DR, Jr. Obesity after spinal cord injury. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 2007;18:333 -51, vii. 
27. McEvoy RD, Mykytyn I, Sajkov D, et al. Sleep apnoea in patients with quadriplegia. Thorax 1995;50:613 -9. 
28. Stockhammer E, Tobon A, Michel F, et al. Characteristics of sleep apnea syndrome in tetraplegic patients. Spinal 
Cord 2002;40:286 -94. 
29. Le Guen MC, Cistulli PA, Berlowitz DJ. Continuou s positive airway pressure requirements in patients with 
tetraplegia and obstructive sleep apnoea. Spinal Cord 2012.  
30. Decary A, Rouleau I, Montplaisir J. Cognitive deficits associated with sleep apnea syndrome: a proposed 
neuropsychological test battery . Sleep 2000;23:369 -81. 
31. Kielb SA, Ancoli-Israel S, Rebok GW, Spira AP. Cognition in Obstructive Sleep Apnea- Hypopnea Syndrome (OSAS): 
Current Clinical Knowledge and the Impact of Treatment. Neuromolecular medicine 2012.  
32. Beebe DW, Groesz L, Wells C,  Nichols A, McGee K. The neuropsychological effects of obstructive sleep apnea: a 
meta -analysis of norm -referenced and case -controlled data. Sleep 2003;26:298 -307.  
33. Davidoff G, Morris J, Roth E, Bleiberg J. Closed head injury in spinal cord injured patients: retrospective study of 
loss of consciousness and post -traumatic amnesia. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1985;66:41 -3. 
34. Sanchez AI, Martinez P, Miro E, Bardwell WA, Buela- Casal G. CPAP and behavioral therapies in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea: effects on daytime sleepiness, mood, and cognitive function. Sleep Med Rev 2009;13:223 -33. 
35. Sajkov D, Marshall R, Walker P, et al. Sleep apnoea related hypoxia is associated with cognitive disturbances in 
patients with tetraplegia. Spinal Cord 1998;36:231 -9. 
36. Moyer CA, Sonnad SS, Garetz SL, Helman JI, Chervin RD. Quality of life in obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic 
review of the literature. Sleep Med 2001;2:477 -91. 
37. Nieto FJ, Young TB, Lind BK, et al. Association of sleep -disordered breathing, sleep  apnea, and hypertension in a 
large community -based study. Sleep Heart Health Study. JAMA 2000;283:1829- 36. 
38. Shahar E, Whitney CW, Redline S, et al. Sleep -disordered breathing and cardiovascular disease: cross -sectional 
results of the Sleep Heart Health  Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163:19 -25. 
39. Mehra R, Benjamin EJ, Shahar E, et al. Association of nocturnal arrhythmias with sleep -disordered breathing: The 
Sleep Heart Health Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;173:910 -6. 
40. Peker Y, Hedner J , Kraiczi H, Loth S. Respiratory disturbance index: an independent predictor of mortality in 
coronary artery disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:81 -6. 
41. Lavie L, Lavie P. Molecular mechanisms of cardiovascular disease in OSAHS: the oxidative stre ss link. Eur Respir J 
2009;33:1467- 84. 
42. Lavie L. Oxidative stress --a unifying paradigm in obstructive sleep apnea and comorbidities. Progress in 
cardiovascular diseases 2009;51:303 -12. 
43. Arnardottir ES, Mackiewicz M, Gislason T, Teff KL, Pack AI. Molecular signatures of obstructive sleep apnea in 
adults: a review and perspective. Sleep 2009;32:447 -70. 
44. Morales CR, Terry ES, Zackert WE, Montine TJ, Morrow JD. Improved assay for the quantification of the major 
urinary metabolite of the isoprostane 15 -F(2t) -Isoprostane (8 -iso-PGF(2alpha)) by a stable isotope dilution mass 
spectrometric assay. Clinica chimica acta; international journal of clinical chemistry 2001;314:93 -9. 
45. Galkina E, Ley K. Vascular adhesion molecules in atherosclerosis. Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular 
biology 2007;27:2292 -301.  
46. Ohga E, Tomita T, Wada H, Yamamoto H, Nagase T, Ouchi Y. Effects of obstructive sleep apnea on circulating 
ICAM -1, IL-8, and MCP -1. J Appl Physiol 2003;94:179 -84. 
47. Ohga E, Nagase T, Tomita T, et al. Increased levels of circulating ICAM -1, VCAM -1, and L -selectin in obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome. J Appl Physiol 1999;87:10 -4. 
48. Ouchi N, Kihara S, Arita Y, et al. Adiponectin, an adipocyte -derived plasma protein, inhibits endothelial NF -
kappaB signaling through a cAMP -dependent pathway. Circulation 2000;102:1296 -301.  
49. Nakagawa Y, Kishida K, Kihara S, Yoshida R, Funahashi T, Shimomura I. Nocturnal falls of adiponectin levels in 
sleep apnea with abdominal obesity and impact of hypoxia -induced dysregulated adiponectin production in obese 
murine mesenteric adipose tissue. Journal of atherosclerosis and thrombosis 2011;18:240 -7. 
50. Nakagawa Y, Kishida K, Kihara S, et al. Nocturnal reduction in circulating adiponectin concentrations related to 
hypo xic stress in severe obstructive sleep apnea -hypopnea syndrome. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2008;294:E778 -84. 
51. Kumada M, Kihara S, Sumitsuji S, et al. Association of hypoadiponectinemia with coronary artery disease in men. 
Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis , and vascular biology 2003;23:85 -9. 
52. Sullivan CE, Berthon -Jones M, Issa FG. Nocturnal nasal -airway pressure for sleep apnea. N Engl J Med 
1983;309:112.  
53. Sullivan CE, Issa FG, Berthon- Jones M, Eves L. Reversal of obstructive sleep apnoea by continuou s positive airway 
pressure applied through the nares. Lancet 1981;1:862 -5. 
54. Sullivan CE, Issa FG. Pathophysiological mechanisms in obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep 1980;3:235 -46. 
55. Canessa N, Castronovo V, Cappa SF, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea: brain structural changes and neurocognitive 
function before and after treatment. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011;183:1419 -26. 
56. Munoz A, Mayoralas LR, Barbe F, Pericas J, Agusti AG. Long -term effects of CPAP on daytime functioning in 
patients with sleep a pnoea syndrome. Eur Respir J 2000;15:676 -81. 
57. Naegele B, Thouvard V, Pepin JL, et al. Deficits of cognitive executive functions in patients with sleep apnea 
syndrome. Sleep 1995;18:43 -52. 
58. Ferini- Strambi L, Baietto C, Di Gioia MR, et al. Cognitive dy sfunction in patients with obstructive sleep apnea 
(OSA): partial reversibility after continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). Brain Res Bull 2003;61:87 -92. 
59. Vennelle M, White S, Riha RL, Mackay TW, Engleman HM, Douglas NJ. Randomized controlled trial of variable -
pressure versus fixed -pressure continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) treatment for patients with obstructive sleep 
apnea/hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS). Sleep 2010;33:267 -71. 
60. Quan SF, Chan CS, Dement WC, et al. The association between obs tructive sleep apnea and neurocognitive 
performance --the Apnea Positive Pressure Long -term Efficacy Study (APPLES). Sleep 2011;34:303- 14B.  
61. Lau EY, Eskes GA, Morrison DL, Rajda M, Spurr KF. Executive function in patients with obstructive sleep apnea 
treated with continuous positive airway pressure. J Int Neuropsychol Soc;16:1077 -88. 
62. Ancoli -Israel S, Palmer BW, Cooke JR, et al. Cognitive effects of treating obstructive sleep apnea in Alzheimer's 
disease: a randomized controlled study. J Am Geriatr Soc  2008;56:2076- 81. 
63. Cooke JR, Ayalon L, Palmer BW, et al. Sustained use of CPAP slows deterioration of cognition, sleep, and mood in 
patients with Alzheimer's disease and obstructive sleep apnea: a preliminary study. J Clin Sleep Med 2009;5:305 -9. 
64. Ba zzano LA, Khan Z, Reynolds K, He J. Effect of nocturnal nasal continuous positive airway pressure on blood 
pressure in obstructive sleep apnea. Hypertension 2007;50:417 -23. 
65. Doherty LS, Kiely JL, Swan V, McNicholas WT. Long- term effects of nasal continuous positive airway pressure 
therapy on cardiovascular outcomes in sleep apnea syndrome. Chest 2005;127:2076 -84. 
66. Minoguchi K, Yokoe T, Tanaka A, et al. Association between lipid peroxidation and inflammation in obstructive 
sleep apnoea. Eur Respir J 20 06;28:378 -85. 
67. Yokoe T, Minoguchi K, Matsuo H, et al. Elevated levels of C -reactive protein and interleukin -6 in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome are decreased by nasal continuous positive airway pressure. Circulation 
2003;107:1129 -34. 
68. Zhang XL, Yin KS, Li C, Jia EZ, Li YQ, Gao ZF. Effect of continuous positive airway pressure treatment on serum 
adiponectin level and mean arterial pressure in male patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Chinese medical 
journal 2007;120:1477 -81. 
69. Harsch IA, Wallaschofski H, Koebnick C, et al. Adiponectin in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: 
course and physiological relevance. Respiration 2004;71:580 -6. 
70. Chin K, Nakamura T, Shimizu K, Mishima M, Miyasaka M, Ohi M. Effects of nasal continuous positive airway 
pressure on soluble cell adhesion molecules in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. The American journal of medicine 2000;109:562 -7. 
71. Wang TD, Wang YH, Huang TS, Su TC, Pan SL, Chen SY. Circulating levels of markers of inflammation and 
endothelial activation are increased in men with chronic spinal cord injury. Journal of the Formosan Medical Association = Taiwan yi zhi 2007;106:919- 28. 
72. Yamamoto H, Akashiba T, Kosaka N, Ito D, Horie T. Long -term effects nasal continuous positive airway pressure 
on daytime sleepiness, mood and traffic accidents in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea. Respir Med 2000;94:87 -90. 
73. Jenkinson C, Davies RJ, Mullins R, Stradling JR. Long- term benefits in self-reported health statu s of nasal 
continuous positive airway pressure therapy for obstructive sleep apnoea. QJM : monthly journal of the Association of Physicians 2001;94:95 -9. 
74. Jenkinson C, Stradling J, Petersen S. Comparison of three measures of quality of life outcome in t he evaluation of 
continuous positive airways pressure therapy for sleep apnoea. J Sleep Res 1997;6:199 -204.  
75. Giles TL, Lasserson TJ, Smith BH, White J, Wright J, Cates CJ. Continuous positive airways pressure for obstructive 
sleep apnoea in adults. Coch rane Database Syst Rev 2006:CD001106.  
76. Quan SF, Chan CS, Dement WC, et al. The association between obstructive sleep apnea and neurocognitive 
performance --the Apnea Positive Pressure Long -term Efficacy Study (APPLES). Sleep;34:303 -14B.  
77. Davidoff G, Morris J, Roth E, Bleiberg J. Cognitive dysfunction and mild closed head injury in traumatic spinal 
cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1985;66:489- 91. 
78. Davidoff G, Roth E, Thomas P, et al. Depression and neuropsychological test performance in acute spinal cord 
injury patients: lack of correlation. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 1990;5:77 -88. 
79. Jacobson NS, Truax P. Clinical significance: a statistical approach to defining meaningful change in psychotherapy 
research. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology  1991;59:12 -9. 
80. Bravata DM, Concato J, Fried T, et al. Auto -titrating continuous positive airway pressure for patients with acute 
transient ischemic attack: a randomized feasibility trial. Stroke 2010;41:1464 -70. 
81. Bravata DM, Concato J, Fried T, et al. Continuous positive airway pressure: evaluation of a novel therapy for 
patients with acute ischemic stroke. Sleep 2011;34:1271 -7. 
82. Ip S, D'Ambrosio C, Patel K, et al. Auto -titrating versus fixed continuous positive airway pressure for the 
treatment of obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic review with meta -analyses. Systematic reviews 2012;1:20.  
83. Littner M, Hirshkowitz M, Davila D, et al. Practice parameters for the use of auto -titrating continuous positive 
airway pressure devices for titrating pressures and treating adult patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report. Sleep 2002;25:143 -7. 
84. Hack M, Davies RJ, Mullins R, et al. Randomised prospective parallel trial of therapeutic versus s ubtherapeutic 
nasal continuous positive airway pressure on simulated steering performance in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea. Thorax 2000;55:224 -31. 
85. Jenkinson C, Davies RJ, Mullins R, Stradling JR. Comparison of therapeutic and subtherapeutic nasal continuous 
positive airway pressure for obstructive sleep apnoea: a randomised prospective parallel trial. Lancet 1999;353:2100 -5. 
86. DeVivo MJ, Biering -Sorensen F, New P, Chen Y. Standardization of data analysis and reporting of results from the 
International Spinal Cord Injury Core Data Set. Spinal Cord;49:596 -9. 
87. DeVivo M, Biering -Sorensen F, Charlifue S, et al. International Spinal Cord Injury Core Data Set. Spinal Cord 
2006;44:535 -40. 
88. Krassioukov A, Alexander MS, Karlsson AK, Donovan W, Mat hias CJ, Biering -Sorensen F. International spinal cord 
injury cardiovascular function basic data set. Spinal Cord;48:586 -90. 
89. Iber C, Ancoli- Israel S, Chesson A, Quan SF. for the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. The AASM Manual for 
the Scoring of Sle ep and Associated Events: Rules, Terminology, and Technical Specifications. 1st ed. Westchester, 
IL2007.  
90. Ruehland WR, Rochford PD, O'Donoghue FJ, Pierce RJ, Singh P, Thornton AT. The new AASM criteria for scoring 
hypopneas: impact on the apnea hypopnea  index. Sleep 2009;32:150 -7. 
91. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a new 
instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res 1989;28:193 -213.  
92. Backhaus J, Junghanns K, Broocks A,  Riemann D, Hohagen F. Test -retest reliability and validity of the Pittsburgh 
Sleep Quality Index in primary insomnia. J Psychosom Res 2002;53:737 -40. 
93. Carpenter JS, Andrykowski MA. Psychometric evaluation of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. J Psycho som Res 
1998;45:5 -13. 
94. Soldatos CR, Dikeos DG, Paparrigopoulos TJ. Athens Insomnia Scale: validation of an instrument based on ICD -10 
criteria. J Psychosom Res 2000;48:555 -60. 
95. Soldatos CR, Dikeos DG, Paparrigopoulos TJ. The diagnostic validity of th e Athens Insomnia Scale. J Psychosom 
Res 2003;55:263 -7. 
96. Netzer NC, Stoohs RA, Netzer CM, Clark K, Strohl KP. Using the Berlin Questionnaire to identify patients at risk 
for the sleep apnea syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:485 -91. 
97. Johns MW. A new m ethod for measuring daytime sleepiness: the Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep 1991;14:540 -
5. 
98. Johns MW. Reliability and factor analysis of the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. Sleep 1992;15:376 -81. 
99. Johns MW. Daytime sleepiness, snoring, and obstructive sleep  apnea. The Epworth Sleepiness Scale. Chest 
1993;103:30 -6. 
100.  Johns MW. Sensitivity and specificity of the multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), the maintenance of wakefulness 
test and the epworth sleepiness scale: failure of the MSLT as a gold standard. J  Sleep Res 2000;9:5 -11. 
101.  Weaver TE, Laizner AM, Evans LK, et al. An instrument to measure functional status outcomes for disorders of 
excessive sleepiness. Sleep 1997;20:835 -43. 
102.  Montserrat JM, Ferrer M, Hernandez L, et al. Effectiveness of CPAP treatment in daytime function in sleep apnea 
syndrome: a randomized controlled study with an optimized placebo. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;164:608 -13. 
103.  Weaver TE, Maislin G, Dinges DF, et al. Self- efficacy in sleep apnea: instrument development and p atient 
perceptions of obstructive sleep apnea risk, treatment benefit, and volition to use continuous positive airway pressure. 
Sleep 2003;26:727 -32. 
104.  Ware JE, Jr., Kosinski M, Bayliss MS, McHorney CA, Rogers WH, Raczek A. Comparison of methods for the  scoring 
and statistical analysis of SF -36 health profile and summary measures: summary of results from the Medical Outcomes 
Study. Med Care 1995;33:AS264- 79. 
105.  Saadat S, Javadi M, Divshali BS, et al. Health -related quality of life among individuals wit h long- standing spinal 
cord injury: a comparative study of veterans and non- veterans. BMC Public Health;10:6.  
106.  Hill MR, Noonan VK, Sakakibara BM, Miller WC. Quality of life instruments and definitions in individuals with 
spinal cord injury: a systematic review. Spinal Cord;48:438 -50. 
107.  Forchheimer M, McAweeney M, Tate DG. Use of the SF -36 among persons with spinal cord injury. Am J Phys 
Med Rehabil 2004;83:390- 5. 
108.  Wood -Dauphinee S, Exner G, Bostanci B, et al. Quality of life in patients with spinal cord injury --basic issues, 
assessment, and recommendations. Restor Neurol Neurosci 2002;20:135 -49. 
109.  Winkelman JW, Redline S, Baldwin CM, Resnick HE, Newman AB, Gottlieb DJ. Polysomnographic and health -
related quality of life correlates of restless legs syndrome in the Sleep Heart Health Study. Sleep 2009;32:772 -8. 
110.  Lopes C, Esteves AM, Bittencourt LR, Tufik S, Mello MT. Relationship between the quality of life and the severity 
of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Braz J Med Biol Res 2008;41:908 -13. 
111.  Goncalves MA, Paiva T, Ramos E, Guilleminault C. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, sleepiness, and quality of 
life. Chest 2004;125:2091 -6. 
112.  Weaver TE. Outcome measurement in sleep medicine practice and research. Part 1: assessment of symptoms, 
subjective and objective daytime sleepiness, health -related quality of life and functional status. Sleep Med Rev 
2001;5:103- 28. 
113.  Charlifue S, Post MW, Biering- Sorensen F, et al. International spinal cord injury quality of life basic data set.  
Spinal Cord 2012;50:672 -5. 
114.  Cole JC, Grossman I, Prilliman C, Hunsaker E. Multimethod validation of the Beck Depression Inventory -II and 
Grossman -Cole Depression Inventory with an inpatient sample. Psychol Rep 2003;93:1115 -29. 
115.  Arnau RC, Meagher MW, Norris MP, Bramson R. Psychometric evaluation of the Beck Depression Inventory -II 
with primary care medical patients. Health Psychol 2001;20:112 -9. 
116.  Sakakibara BM, Miller WC, Orenczuk SG, Wolfe DL. A systematic review of depression and anxiety measu res 
used with individuals with spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord 2009;47:841 -51. 
117.  Pollard C, Kennedy P. A longitudinal analysis of emotional impact, coping strategies and post -traumatic 
psychological growth following spinal cord injury: a 10 -year review.  Br J Health Psychol 2007;12:347- 62. 
118.  Kennedy P, Rogers BA. Anxiety and depression after spinal cord injury: a longitudinal analysis. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil 2000;81:932 -7. 
119.  Craig AR, Hancock KM, Dickson HG. A longitudinal investigation into anxiety and depression in the first 2 years 
following a spinal cord injury. Paraplegia 1994;32:675 -9. 
120.  Jensen MP, Widerstrom -Noga E, Richards JS, Finnerup NB, Biering -Sorensen F, Cardenas DD. Reliability and 
validity of the International Spinal Cord Injury Basic Pain Data Set items as self- report measures. Spinal Cord;48:230 -8. 
121.  Widerstrom -Noga E, Biering -Sorensen F, Bryce T, et al. The international spinal cord injury pain basic data set. 
Spinal Cord 2008;46:818 -23. 
122.  Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Farrar JT, et al. Core outcome measures for chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT 
recommendations. Pain 2005;113:9 -19. 
123.  Collop NA, Anderson WM, Boehlecke B, et al. Clinical guidelines for the use of unattended portable monitors in 
the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea in adult patients. Portable Monitoring Task Force of the American Academy of 
Sleep Medicine. J Clin Sleep Med 2007;3:737 -47. 
124.  Collop NA. Portable monitoring for the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2008;14:525 -
9. 
125.  Quan  SF, Howard BV, Iber C, et al. The Sleep Heart Health Study: design, rationale, and methods. Sleep 
1997;20:1077- 85. 
126.  Chung F, Liao P, Sun Y, et al. Perioperative practical experiences in using a level 2 portable polysomnography. 
Sleep Breath;15:367 -75. 
127.  Puente AE, Adams R, Barr WB, et al. The use, education, training and supervision of neuropsychological test 
technicians (psychometrists) in clinical practice. Official statement of the National Academy of Neuropsychology. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 2006; 21:837 -9. 
128.  Psychological Assessment Resources. The Wide Range Achievement Test-IV: Lutz, Florida; 2011.  
129.  Wechsler D. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale  - Fourth Edition. The Psychological Corporation. San Antonio2006.  
130.  Diehr MC, Heaton RK, Miller W, Grant I. The Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task (PASAT): norms for age, 
education, and ethnicity. Assessment 1998;5:375 -87. 
131.  Naegele B, Launois SH, Mazza S, Feuerstein C, Pepin JL, Levy P. Which memory processes are affected in patients 
with obst ructive sleep apnea? An evaluation of 3 types of memory. Sleep 2006;29:533 -44. 
132.  Tombaugh TN. A comprehensive review of the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT). Arch Clin 
Neuropsychol 2006;21:53- 76. 
133.  Smith A. The symbol -digit modalities test : a neuropsychologic test of learning and other cerebral disorders. J ed. 
Learning Disorders . ed. Seattle: Special Child Publications; 1968.  
134.  Koh CL, Lu WS, Chen HC, Hsueh IP, Hsieh JJ, Hsieh CL. Test -retest reliability and practice effect of the oral- format 
Symbol Digit Modalities Test in patients with stroke. Arch Clin Neuropsychol;26:356 -63. 
135.  Akbar N, Honarmand K, Kou N, Feinstein A. Validity of a computerized version of the Symbol Digit Modalities 
Test in multiple sclerosis. J Neurol;258:373 -9. 
136.  Morrow SA, O'Connor PW, Polman CH, et al. Evaluation of the symbol digit modalities test (SDMT) and MS 
neuropsychological screening questionnaire (MSNQ) in natalizumab -treated MS patients over 48 weeks. Mult 
Scler;16:1385 -92. 
137.  Gaines JJ, Shapiro A , Alt M, Benedict RH. Semantic clustering indexes for the Hopkins Verbal Learning Test -
Revised: initial exploration in elder control and dementia groups. Appl Neuropsychol 2006;13:213 -22. 
138.  Woods SP, Scott JC, Conover E, Marcotte TD, Heaton RK, Grant I.  Test -retest reliability of component process 
variables within the Hopkins Verbal Learning Test -Revised. Assessment 2005;12:96 -100.  
139.  Nelson HE. A modified card sorting test sensitive to frontal lobe defects. Cortex 1976;12:313 -24. 
 