2014-0445
October 23, 2016
Page 1
Protocol Page
EVALUATION OF RUXOLITINIB AND PRACINOSTAT COMBINATION AS A 
THERAPY FOR PATIENTS WITH MYELOFIBROSIS2014-0445
Core Protocol Information
Short Title Ruxolitinib and Pracinostat Combination Therapy for Patients with MF
Study Chair:  Srdan Verstovsek
Additional Contact: Paula J. Cooley
Sandra L. Rood
Leukemia Protocol Review Group
Department: Leukemia
Phone: 713-792-7305
Unit: 428
Full Title: EVALUATION OF RUXOLITINIB AND PRACINOSTAT COMBINATION AS A THERAPY FOR 
PATIENTS WITH MYELOFIBROSIS
Protocol Type: Standard Protocol
Protocol Phase: Phase II
Version Status: Terminated  06/01/2018
Version: 13
Submitted by: Sandra L. Rood--10/23/2017 2:12:37 PM
OPR Action: Accepted by:  Elizabeth Orozco -- 10/26/2017 1:34:18 PM
Which Committee will review this protocol?
 The Clinical Research Committee - (CRC)
2014-0445
October 23, 2016
Page 2
Protocol Body
 

Page 1 of 33  
 EVALUATION OF RUXOLITINIB AND PRACINOSTAT COMBINATION AS A 
THERAPY FOR PATIENTS  WITH MYELOFIBROSIS 
 
 
1.0 HYPOTHESIS AND OBJECTIVES 
 
Hypothesis 
Ruxolitinib (also known as INCB018424), a JAK1/2 inhibitor, and  pracinostat (a histone 
deacetylase inhibitor; HDACi) a re effective and tolerable treat ments for patients with 
myelofibrosis (MF).  Combination of these agents in patients wi th MF can improve the 
overall clinical response to t herapy without causing excessive toxicity. 
 
Objectives Primary:   
 to determine the efficacy/clinical activity of the combination  of ruxolitinib 
with pracinostat as ther apy in patients with MF 
Secondary: 
 to determine the toxicity of the combination of ruxolitinib wi th pracinostat 
as therapy in patients with MF  
 
Exploratory: 
 to explore time to resp onse and duration of response 
 to explore changes in bone marrow fibrosis  
 to explore changes in JAK2V617F ( or other molecular marker) al lele 
burden or changes in cytogenetic abnormalities 
 
2.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
 
2.1  Myelofibrosis 
Myelofibrosis (MF) is a rare clonal proliferative disorder of a  pluripotent stem cell.  This 
clone subsequently induces fibrogenic cytokines and/or growth f actors in the marrow, 
which stimulate the deposition of extracellular matrix proteins by polyclonal fibroblasts.  
Megakaryocytic hyperplasia-dysp lasia is frequently observed.  Invasion of the blood 
stream and colonization of extr amedullary sites ensues, resulting in organomegaly and 
splenomegaly. Extensive marrow fi brosis and osteosclerosis may be observed in 
advanced MF.  
 
The entity of MF can be either idiopathic (primary) or represen tative of end-stage 
myeloproliferative diseases suc h as polycythemia vera (PV) or essential 
thrombocythemia (ET).  MF occurs in about 15-25% of patients wi th PV and in 5-10% of 
patients with ET. In the early c ellular phase of MF with minimal marrow fibrosis, the 
differential diagnosis includes Philadelphia-positive chronic m yeloid leukemia (CML), 
PV, and ET that must be distinguished based on cytogenetics and  clinicopathologic 
features. Other entities that  can induce myelophthisis include myelodysplastic syndrome 
(MDS), metastatic malignancies, lymphoma, Hodgkin’s disease, and plasma cell 
dyscrasias.  MF must be differentiated from acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AML, M7 
Page 2 of 33  
 of the French-American-British classification) and MDS with fib rosis. In acute 
megakaryocytic leukemia patients usually present with severe co nstitutional symptoms 
and pancytopenia but without organomegaly or peripheral blood m yelophthisis. 
 
The clinical picture of MF involves constitutional symptoms (e. g., cachexia, night 
sweats, fatigue, fever), splenomegaly, anisopoikilocytosis with  teardrop erythrocytes, 
progressive anemia, immature myeloid and erythroid precursors in the peripheral blood, 
elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)  levels, and fibrosis of th e marrow (as evaluated 
by reticulin and trichome [collagen] stains).  The leukoerythro blastic picture is postulated 
to be related to both the intr amedullary sinusoidal marrow and splenic hematopoiesis.  
 
The disease generally occurs in adults, with the median age of 65 years.  In 40% of the 
patients, constitutional symptom s are present, including fever,  weight loss, nocturnal 
sweating, pruritus, and bone pain.  Splenomegaly is present in 85% of the patients at 
diagnosis and is massive in 10%.   Hematologic disease features include anemia in 50% 
to 70% at diagnosis and 25% will have severe anemia with hemogl obin level < 8.0 g/dL.  
Approximately half of the patient s present with an elevated whi te cell count (WBC), 28% 
with thrombocytosis (platelet count > 500 x 10 9/L), and 37% with thrombocytopenia 
(platelet count < 150 x 10 9/L).  Circulating blast cells a re present in one-third of the 
patients. 
 
Complications of MF are varied.  Thrombotic obliteration of int rahepatic veins and 
splenomegaly may lead to portal hypertension; severe cases may be associated with 
ascites and/or variceal bleeding.  Left upper quadrant pain may  herald splenic infarction; 
episodes are usually self-limited  and may persist for several d ays.  Supportive care 
measures such as analgesics and hydration are usually sufficien t; refractory cases may 
require splenectomy or irradiation. Extramedullary hematopoiesi s (EMH) may occur in 
locations other than the liver or spleen; involvement of such s ites may be managed by 
low-dose irradiation.  Liver invol vement is associated with inc reased levels of plasma 
alkaline phosphatase.  Clinical manifestations of EMH include c ardiac tamponade, 
papular skin nodules, pleural effu sions, and spinal cord compre ssion. 
 
Autoimmune phenomena have been observed, including Coomb’s posi tive autoimmune 
hemolytic anemia, nephrotic syndrom e, antinuclear antibodies, r heumatoid factor, and 
lupus-type anticoagulant. Postulat ed etiologies include clonali ty of the lymphoid 
population or activation by abnormal monocyte-macrophage intera ction with the 
immune system. 
 
Adverse prognostic factors for survival include older age and a nemia (hemoglobin < 10 
g/dL).  The etiology for the latter finding is usually multifactorial and related both to marrow failure and hypersplenism.  Poor prognosis has also been correlated with leukocytosis, leukopenia, circulating blasts, increased numbers  of granulocyte 
precursors, thrombocytopenia, abno rmal karyotype, and 
 hypercata bolic symptoms. The 
course of the disease is highly variable.  Median survival from time of diagnosis ranges from 5 to 6 years.  Progressive marrow failure, transformation into acute myeloid 
leukemia, and portal hypert ension lead to demise. 
Page 3 of 33  
  
Several therapies are available for MF, however no one therapy has demonstrated an 
ability to produce sustained remissions. In addition, currently  available therapies are 
often limited by their myelosuppressive effects. Ruxolitinib, a  JAK1/2 inhibitor, produces 
symptom and spleen-size responses, but may result in anemia and /or 
thrombocytopenia in a significant  proportion of patients.  Hydr oxyurea is another 
commonly used agent in the proliferative phases of the disease.   Interferon-alpha had 
yielded hematologic responses and reductions in splenomegaly (d efinitions varying 
among studies) especially those with proliferative phase; howev er, this agent tends to 
be poorly tolerated.  Agents used for the management of anemia include androgens 
and/or erythropoietin.  Splenectomy and/or splenic irradiation have been used to 
manage symptomatic splenomegaly.   Splenectomy has been associat ed with risk of 
leukemia transformation in some series, and splenic irradiation  can result in severe 
myelosuppression. No medical ther apy has been proven to prolong  overall survival for 
these patients. Pati ents with an intact quality of life and no threatening hematologic 
abnormalities, such as erythrocytosis or thrombocytosis, have u sually been considered 
to not require any therapy. 
 
In vitro data suggests that cytokines elaborated by megakaryocy tes stimulate human 
bone marrow fibroblasts to divide and secrete collagens. In patients with MF, increased levels of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) have been observed in circulating 
peripheral blood mononuclear ce lls (PBMC) of megakaryocytic lin eage.   
 
Increased levels of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) have also been reported in 
patients with MF.  Both TGF-beta and bFGF are members of multifunctional polypeptide 
families that regulate cell growth and differentiation.  In addition to their potent fibrogenic 
activity, TGF-beta and bFGF regulate hematopoiesis by selective  actions on primitive 
stem cells. Expression of TGF- beta in early CD34+ hematopoietic  stem cells negatively 
regulated the cycle status; this effect could be abrogated by b FGF.  In addition, bFGF 
has been shown to augment the activity of stem cell factor (SCF ), interleukin-3 (IL-3), 
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), or e rythropoietin on 
committed progenitor cells.  Other cytokines/proteins that are dysregulated in MF 
include tumor necrosis factor-a lpha (TNF-alpha) and angiogenic agents like vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF).    
2.2 Ruxolitinib 
JAKs play an important role in s ignal transduction following cy tokine and growth factor 
binding to their receptors. I n addition, JAKs activate a number  of downstream pathways 
implicated in the proliferation and survival of malignant cells  including the STATs (signal 
transducers and activators of transcription), a family of impor tant latent transcription 
factors. Aberrant activation of  JAKs has been associated with i ncreased malignant cell 
proliferation and survival in pat ients with Philadelphia chromo some negative MPD. The 
finding that peripheral blood from myeloproliferative disease ( MPD) patients is capable 
of forming erythroid and megakaryocyte colonies in the absence of exogenous factors 
(which signal t
hrough JAKs) suggests that cells from these patients are intrinsically 
different than normal cells. Indeed,  work from a number of labo ratories led to the 
Page 4 of 33  
 identification of multiple soma tic mutations in genes associated with cytokine and 
growth factor signaling. These include a mutation in the pseudo -kinase domain of 
JAK2V617F (amino acid 617, valin e to phenylalanine) that result s in constitutive 
activation of JAK2 and downstream STATs. This mutation was foun d in > 90% of all PV 
patients and in approximately 50 % of all ET and MF patients. Mo r e  r e c e n t l y ,  o t h e r  
mutations have been identified in MPD patients lacking the JAK2V617F mutation. For 
instance, additional activating mutations in JAK2, mutation in the thrombopoietin 
receptor (MPL), and calreticulin  (CALR) mutations result in con stitutive ligand-
independent JAK-STAT act ivation. Importantly, ectopic expression of each of these 
mutant genes has been demonstrated to be sufficient to cause MP D-like syndromes in 
mice.  Moreover, even in MPD patients lacking a confirmed JAK2 mutation, the 
detection of STAT activation suggests dysregulated JAK activity . In fact, regardless of 
the mutational status of JAK2, the malignant cells expectedly r etain their 
responsiveness to JAK activating cytokines and/or growth factor s; hence, they may 
benefit from JAK inhibition.  These findings, in addition to th e limited life span of these 
patients and lack of beneficial t herapies for the treatment of PMF and post-PV/ET MF, 
clearly support the use of JAK inhibitor in these diseases. Rux olitinib is a JAK1/2 
inhibitor that is currently FDA approved for the treatment of p atients with intermediate 
and high risk MF. 
 
Ruxolitinib, has been shown to p roduce durable clinical benefits in terms of spleen 
volume reduction and improvement i n constitutional symptoms wit h an acceptable 
toxicity profile1,2. Based on the results of two phase III studies (COMFORT-I, 
COMFORT-II)3,4  showing improvement in spleen size, symptom control and 
improvement in quality of life, r uxolitinib was approved for us e in patients with 
intermediate or high-risk myelof ibrosis by the FDA. There is al so evidence of a benefit in 
overall survival (OS) in pati ents treated with ruxolitinib. An OS advantage (HR=0.58; 
95% CI, 0.39-0.85, p=0.005) in tr eated patients compared to his torical controls has 
been reported5. In addition, an analysis of the COMFORT-I study confirmed that 
patients treated with ruxolitin ib had an OS advantage compared with placebo (HR=0.58, 
95% CI, 0.36-0.95, p-0.03) with a median of 102 weeks of follow  up6. Follow-up analysis 
of the COMFORT-II trial has also demonstrated an OS advantage f or patients treated 
with ruxolitinib7.  
 
2.3 Pracinostat 
Abnormal epigenetic silencing of  important regulatory genes has  been described in 
cancer, including myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myel oid leukemia (AML).  
The reduction of acetylation status of histones is one mechanis m for this silencing.  
Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been extensivel y studied in both 
hematologic (‘liquid’) and solid t umors.  Histone deacetylases are enzymes involved in 
the remodeling of chromatin, and therefore, have a key role in the epigenetic regulation 
of gene expression.  There are cu rrently two US Food and Drug A dministration (FDA) 
approved HDAC inhibitors, one oral and one injectable, for the treatment of T-cell 
lymphoma. 
 
Page 5 of 33  
 The investigational agent praci nostat is a rationally designed,  potent, oral, pan-HDAC 
(including Class I, II, and IV isoforms) inhibitor with predictable pharmacokinetic (PK) 
properties.  The IC 50, across a broad range of human cancers in in vitro  cytotoxicity 
assays, ranged from 0.1 to 1.5 μM , with the lowest values noted in leukemia and 
lymphoma cell lines.  Synergistic interactions have been observ ed with multiple 
cytotoxic and targeted anti-cancer therapeutics; notably the co mbination index with 
azacitidine ranged from 0.44 to 0.55. 
Clinical Experience 
Pracinostat has been tested in more than 200 patients in multip le single agent and 
combination Phase I and pilot Phase II clinical trials and has been found to be generally 
well-tolerated at doses up to 60 mg given three times per week (e.g., Monday, 
Wednesday, Friday) for 3 weeks on an every-4-week schedule.  The most common 
manageable side effects often associated with drugs of this cla ss, including pracinostat, 
are fatigue, gastrointestinal (GI ) effects (nausea, vomiting, d iarrhea), and 
myelosuppression.  
Pracinostat has demonstrated clin ical evidence of both single-a gent and combination 
clinical activity, including patients with advanced hematologic  disorders.  Data from nine 
patients in a pilot Phase II clinical trial of pracinostat in c ombination with azacitidine in 
heavily-treated patients with adv anced MDS showed an encouragin g overall response 
rate (ORR).  This pilot study was conducted as an expansion coh ort in the context of a 
Phase Ib trial of pracinostat in  hematological malignancies to determine the efficacy and 
safety of the combination of pracinostat (60 mg orally every other day, 3 days a week, 
for 3 consecutive weeks) and azacitidine (75 mg/m2 IV daily x 5 days every 3 to 
6 weeks) given in 4-week cycles t o patients with intermediate-2  (INT-2) or high risk 
MDS. 
Baseline patient characteristi cs included the following:  media n age was 64 years 
(range, 22 to 73), white blood cells 2.4 x 109/dL (0.7 to 9.3), hemoglobin 10 g/dL 
(8.2 to 11), platelets 31 x 109/dL (14 to 269), and bone marrow blasts 7% (0% to 18%).  
Seven (78%) patients had therapy-r elated MDS with histories of prior 
chemotherapy/radiotherapy exposure (breast cancer [3], non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma [2], 
breast and ovarian cancer [1], and melanoma [1]).  Three patien ts had failed prior 
therapy: decitabine and haploidentical stem cell transplantatio n (N=1), lenalidomide 
(N=1), and decitabine and TXA-127 (N=1).  Patients received a m edian of 4 cycles.  All 
9 patients were evaluable.  The overall response rate (ORR; def ined as complete 
remission [CR] + complete remission with incomplete blood count recovery [CRi] + partial response [PR]) was 8/9 (89%) and the CR+CRi rate was 7/ 9 (78%).  Five (56%) 
patients achieved a complete cytogenetic response.  Eight-week mortality was 0%.  
Only 1 (11%) patient died, and this was felt to be unrelated to  study drug as it followed 
an allogeneic-stem cell transplantation.  The median duration of response was 45 days (0 to 229), and the combination was generally well-tolerated. Reasons for discontinuation were: transition to allogeneic-stem cell transp lantation (N=5), no 
pracinostat availability by Sponsor (N=2), no response (N=1), a nd progression to AML 
(N=1).  All toxicities were Grade 1 or 2, with the most frequen t being fatigue and nausea 
(56% each). Based on this data, Pracinostat is currently being tested in several Phase 2 
Page 6 of 33  
 clinical trials in combinati on with azacitidine and decitabine for patients with advanced 
hematologic malignancies.  
 
Experience with pracinostat in MF is limited to one small study  of 22 patients. Of them, 
18 (82%) carried the JAK2V617F mutation, with a median baseline  allele burden of 
59.66% (range 19.85–94.95%). Seven (31%) patients had abnormal cytogenetics at 
study entry, including 2 patients who had a complex karyotype. Most patients (n = 20) 
were symptomatic at study entry  with a performance status of 0 (n = 1 [5%]), 1 (n = 16 
[73%]), or 2 (n = 5 [22%]). The majority of patients entered th e study having 
splenomegaly (n = 21 [95%]), with a median spleen size of 13 cm  beneath the left costal 
margin (range 0–29 cm). Median follow-up was 5 months (range 1–11.3 months). Overall, 8 (36%) patients experie nced clinical benefit from pra cinostat therapy. Although 
when analyzed as a whole, the cohor t of patients did not experi ence a significant 
reduction in spleen size, 6 (27%) patients experienced a reduction in splenomegaly (median reduction 3 cm, range 1–4 cm) (Fig. 1). However, no pat ient had a response 
that could be classified as splenomegaly clinical improvement b y IWG criteria (i.e. 
spleen reduction of at least 50% from baseline). When only resp onders were 
considered, the reductions in spleen size from baseline were si gnificant (p = 0.02). Two 
patients had anemia clinical impro vement by IWG criteria, exper iencing increments in 
their hemoglobin level from 9.1 g/dL at baseline to 11.1 g/dL and from 7.9 g/dL to 15.3 
g/dL at last follow-up, respectively. Five (50%) of 10 patients  with hepatomegaly 
reduced their liver size by a med ian of 3 cm (range 1–6 cm). In summary, although a 
significant number of patients ex hibited signs of clinical acti vity to pracinostat, only 2 
patients achieved a response according to IWG criteria (2 anemi a responses as 
described). While all patients star ted pracinostat at 60 mg dai ly, 8 of them required at 
least one dose reduction to 50 mg and 1 patient required two do se reductions to 40 mg 
daily. Conversely, 6 patients had their dose of pracinostat increased to 80 mg daily due to lack of efficacy. Eight patients continued therapy at 60 mg daily. The most frequent side effect associated to praci nostat therapy was fatigue, whic h occurred in 20 (91%) 
patients, which was grade 1 in 1 7 and grade 2 in 3 patients. Ot her toxicities included 
pain (n = 5), peripheral edema (n = 4), and diarrhea (n = 3), a ll grade 1. Rates of grade 
3–4 neutropenia, anemia, and thro mbocytopenia were 13%, 0%, and  21%, respectively. 
No patient had died during the conduct of the study and 1 remai ned on the study 
receiving pracinostat at 50 mg daily. Twenty-one patients were off study due to lack of 
response (n = 9), disease progression (n = 6), patient’s reques t (n = 2), unrelated 
medical problems (n = 3: surger y for aortic aneurism, prostate cancer, infection) and 
fatigue (n = 1). 
 
2.4 Rationale for combining ru xolitinib and pracinostat as ther apy for MF 
 
The rationale for the use of histone modifiers in MF relies on the fact that both JAK2 as 
well as JAK2V617F can translocate to the cell nucleus and phosp horylate specific lysine 
residues at histone H3 (H3Y41). Th e affinity of the transcripti onal repressor 
heterochromatin protein 1α (HP1α) for histone H3 depends on the  phosphorylation 
status of H3Y41. Phosphorylation of H3Y41 
 decreases the affinit y of H3 to HP1α. JAK2 
inhibitors such as TG101209 or A T9283 abrogate nuclear H3Y41 ph osphorylation, 
Page 7 of 33  
 which increases chromatin-bound HP1α in cells, thus leading to repression of HP1α-
regulated genes such as lmo2. Of note, lmo2 is involved in leuk emogenesis. Thus, the 
JAK2-H3Y41-HP1α pathway links JAK2 kinase activity to histone m odifications, 
aberrant gene expression and leukem ogenesis, thus providing the  rationale for the use 
of agents that target histone modi fications in combination with  JAK2 inhibitors to more 
thoroughly suppress JAK2V617F signaling in JAK2-driven malignan cies. Clinically, 
then, one might expect synergism of the two medication in terms  of improving further 
the number of patients with clin ically relevant reduction in organomegaly and MF-related 
systemic symptoms, possibly for a longer duration of time. In a ddition, it is possible that 
addition of an HDACi would bring additional benefits to patients, like improvement in 
blood cell count or improvem ent in bone marrow fibrosis. 
  
3.0 BACKGROUND DRUG INFORMATION 
 
3.1 Ruxolitinib (INCB018424) (Refer to Investigator’s Brochure) 
 
INCB018424 phosphate, referred to  herein as INCB018424, is a su bstituted 
pyrrolopyrimidine compound that a cts as a potent and selective inhibitor of the Janus 
kinase family of enzymes. INCB018424 is a novel, potent, and se lective inhibitor of the 
JAKs with modest selectivity fo r JAK2. INCB018424 potently (IC5 0  v a l u e s  <  5  n M )  
inhibits JAKs, yet it does not significantly inhibit (<30% inhibition) a broad panel of 26 other kinases when tested at 200 nM (approximately 100 times the average IC50 value 
for JAK enzyme inhibition). More over, in cell-based assays relevant to the pathogenesis 
of MPDs, such as JAK-STAT signa ling and the growth of cytokine- dependent lines, 
INCB018424 demonstrated excellent potency (IC50 values of 80-141 nM). This effect 
was not due to general cytotoxic ity, because INCB018424 (up to 25 μM) had no 
significant effect on the growth  of cytokine-independent cell lines transformed by the 
Bcr-Abl oncogene. In addition, INCB018424 inhibited JAK/STAT si gnaling and growth of 
a cell line expressing the JAK2 m utant variant (JAK2V617F) that  has been implicated in 
the pathogenesis of the majority of Philadelphia chromosome neg ative MPD. Additional 
details as to the in vitro pharmacology of INCB018424 may be found in the Clinical 
Investigator’s Brochure (CIB).  INCB018424 was evaluated in two m ouse models where either a cyt okine-dependent 
multiple myeloma cell line, INA-6, or a cell line, BaF3, engine ered to express 
JAK2V617F was inoculated. The ability of INCB018424 to inhibit JAK pathway signaling 
as well as tumor cell survival and growth was assessed in vivo . In vitro cell biology 
experiments have demonstrated  that the potency of INCB018424 is  very similar 
between the cytokine-dependent INA-6 myeloma cells, with wild t ype JAKs, and the 
BaF3 cells expressing a clinically relevant mutant JAK2. As suc h, the in vivo studies 
described herein characterize the ability of INCB018424 to inhi bit wildtype JAK2 (using 
the INA-6 xenograft model) and MP D-related mutant JAK2 (using a  m o u s e  m o d e l  o f  
splenomegaly driven by cells exp ressing the mutant JAK2V61
7F). 
 
Page 8 of 33  
 Treatment of mice with orally administered INCB018424 resulted in a dose-dependent 
suppression of STAT3 phosphorylation and tumor growth in the cytokine-dependent 
INA-6 xenograft model at doses ≥  10 mg/kg BID. Moreover, oral a dministration of 
INCB018424 inhibited the dramat ic splenomegaly in mice resultin g from intravenous 
inoculation of the BaF3-JAK2V617F  cells. Additional details as to the in vivo 
pharmacology of INCB018424 may be found in the Clinical Investi gator’s Brochure 
(CIB). In summary, pharmacolo gical data obtained in both in vitro and in vivo model 
systems support the potential utility of orally administered INCB018424 in the treatment of malignancies, including MPD such as PMF and Post-PV/ET MF. 
 The chemical name of INCB018424 phosphate is ( R)-3-(4-(7 H-pyrrolo[2,3- d]pyrimidin-4-
yl)-1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-3-cyclopentylpropanenitrile phosphate (Figure 1) . INCB018424 
phosphate has a molecular formula of C17H21N6O4P and a molecula r weight of 
404.36. INCB018424 phosphate drug substance is a white to off-white powder, and is referred to herein as ruxolitinib.  
INCB018424 Phosphate Structural Formula 
 
 
 
Ruxolitinib will be provided upo n insurance approval through co mmercial supply. 
 
 
 
3.2 Pracinostat (Refer to Investigator’s Brochure) 
 
Investigational Product 
Structural formula: (free base) 
Chemical name: (2E )-3-{2-butyl-1-[2-(diethylamino)ethyl]-1H -benzimidazol-5-
yl}-  N-hydroxyacrylamide hydrochloride  
Common names: Pracinostat, SB939 Pharmacologic class: histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor 
Molecular mass: 358.38 (free base) Salt Form: Hydrochloride 
Molecular formula: C 20H30N4O2•2HCl 
N
NNHO
OH
N
Page 9 of 33  
  
Results from pharmacology studies showed that pracinostat inhibits predominantly 
Class I and II HDACs (K i=16 to 240 nM).  It effectively inhibits acetylation of histone s 
and various other target proteins in a variety of human tumor c ell lines at the same 
concentrations as it inhibits proliferation and promotes apopto sis (IC 50=0.1 to 1.5 μM).  
Lymphomas and tumors of hematol ogical origin show the highest s ensitivity. 
The antitumor activity of orally  administered pracinostat has b een demonstrated in 
several xenograft mouse models of  solid and hematological malig nancies including 
colorectal cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer, AML, and B cell lymphoma.  In 
addition, antitumor activity has been shown in a transgenic mur ine model of early 
colorectal cancer.  In all of these in vivo  models, pracinostat was well tolerated (<20% 
body weight loss) at doses of 100 mg/kg for up to 21 consecutiv e days and 
demonstrated dose-dependent  antitumor effects (statistically si gnificant reductions in 
tumor growth compared with vehicle control).  As observed in th e in vitro  cell studies, 
hematological malignancies are m ost sensitive to the anti-tumor  effects of pracinostat. 
Overall, results from nonclini cal studies provided appropriate justification for the safety 
and efficacy of pracinostat in th e proposed patien t populations . 
 
Drug Formulation, Availability, Adm inistration and Toxicity Inf ormation 
Study Medication 
 
Investigational 
Product Dosage Form and Strength Manufacturer 
Pracinostat  45 mg and 60 mg capsules  KP Pharmaceutical Technology, Inc. 
 
Study Medication Labeling, Packaging, and Supply Pracinostat will be supplied by Helsinn Healthcare SA in 2 stre ngths: 45 mg and 60 mg. 
Each 45 mg and 60 mg capsule contains 45 mg or 60 mg of pracino stat (as free base), 
respectively, and the following inactive ingredients: microcrys talline cellulose, USP/NF 
(Avicel PH102) and magnesium stear ate, USP/NF.  Pracinostat cap sule size 1:  45 mg 
are flesh, opaque, hard gelatin c apsules; 60 mg are Swedish orange and white, opaque, 
hard gelatin capsules. 
All study medications must be kept in a secure place under appropriate storage 
conditions.  Capsules are packaged in blister packs.  Pracinostat capsules should be stored at controlled room temperature, 15°C to 30°C (59°F to 86°F). 
 
Precautions and Risks Associated w ith the Study Medication Pracinostat  
Hematologic:  Treatment with pracinostat has been associated wi th cytopenias including 
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia.  The incidence of cy topenias may 
Page 10 of 33  
 increase with increasing doses of pracinostat.  Subjects partic ipating in clinical trials of 
pracinostat should be monitored closely for adverse hematologic  affects.  The effect of 
dose reduction on the amelioration of cytopenias has not been e stablished; however 
prudent clinical management, incl uding supportive care (appropr iate use of transfusions 
and/or hematopoietic growth fact ors) and dose modification or d iscontinuation should be 
followed (see Section 5.1). 
Gastrointestinal:  Gastrointestinal disturbances, including nau sea, vomiting, and 
diarrhea, have been reported in subjects treated with pracinost at.  Standard antiemetic 
and antidiarrheal medications and appropriate supportive care s hould be used per 
normal clinical practice in subj ects participating in clinical trials of pracinostat.  Pre-
existing nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea should be adequately co ntrolled before 
beginning therapy. QTc Prolongation/Cardiac:  Asympto matic QTc interval prolongati on has been observed 
during clinical trials of pracinostat.  Subjects with a prolonged QTc interval at Screening 
will not be permitted to participate in clinical trials of prac inostat.  Hypokalemia or 
hypomagnesemia should be corrected prior to pracinostat adminis tration and 
consideration should be given to  monitoring potassium and magne sium in symptomatic 
subjects (e.g., subjects with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fluid  imbalance, or cardiac 
symptoms). 
General Signs and Symptoms:  Fatigue has been the most common AE reported in 
subjects receiving pracinostat and has frequently prompted dose  reduction in subjects 
receiving >60 mg/day. Anorexia has also been commonly reported. Subjects experiencing debilitating fatigue or anorexia with weight loss may benefit from dose 
reduction or interruption of pracinostat treatment. 
Please refer to the IB for detailed information on the risks associated with the use of pracinostat. 
 
 
4.0 PATIENT ELIGIB ILITY CRITERIA 
 
Inclusion criteria 
1. Diagnosis of MF (either primary or post essential thrombocyt hemia/polycythemia 
vera) requiring therapy, including those previously treated and  relapsed or refractory, 
or if newly diagnosed, with inte rmediate-1 or -2 or high risk a ccording to International 
Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS). 
2. Palpable splenomegaly of mor e than or equal to 5 cm below le ft costal margin on 
physical exam 
3. Understanding and vol untary signing an IRB-approved informed consent form. 
4. Age ≥ 18 years at the time o f signing the informed consent. 
5. Disease-free of ot her malignancies. 
6. ECOG performance status 0 to 2. 
Page 11 of 33  
 7. Negative pregnancy test in fema les of childbearing potential  (FCBP)† Male patients 
with female partners of child-bearing potential and female pati ents of childbearing 
potential are required to use two  forms of acceptable contraception, including one 
barrier method, during their participation in the study and for 30 days following last 
dose. Acceptable forms of contraception include 1 highly effect ive method such as 
an intrauterine device (IUD), hor monal (birth control pills, in jections, or implants), 
tubal ligation, or partner’s vasectomy and at least 1 additiona l approved barrier 
method such as a latex condom, d iaphragm, or cervical cap. Female patients of 
childbearing potential must not be breast-feeding or planning t o breast feed and 
must have a negative pregnancy test ≤7 days before first study treatment. 
8. QTcF interval ≤470 msec 9. Normal serum potassium and magnesium levels 10. Adequate organ function as demonstrated by the following: 
 Direct bilirubin < 2.0 mg/dL 
 Serum creatinine < 2.0 mg/dL. 
 S G P T   3 x upper limit of normal (unless considered to be 
related to MF or patient has  known history of Gilberts)  
11. Platelets >/= 50 x 109/L  
12. ANC >/= 1 x 109/L  
 
Exclusion Criteria 
1. Prior therapy with a JAK inhibitor (other than ruxolitinib for less than 3 months 
duration and currently on it) or HDACi. Patients that are curre ntly on ruxolitinib for 
less than 3 months of therapy are eligible.   
2. Use of any other standard or  experimental therapy within 14 days of starting study 
therapy.   
3. Lack of recovery from all toxicity from previous therapy to grade 1 or baseline. 
4. Suspected pregnancy, pregnan t or lactating females. 
5. Any condition, including the presence of laboratory abnormal ities, which in the 
opinion of the treating physician places the subject at unacceptable risk if he/she were to participate in the study or confounds the ability to in terpret data from the 
study. 
6. Known positive for HIV or i nfectious hepatitis, type A, B or  C. 
7. Patients with gastrointestinal  (GI) tract disease, causing t he inability to take 
oral medication, malabsorption syndrome, a requirement for intravenous (IV) 
alimentation, prior surgical pr ocedures affecting absorption, u ncontrolled 
inflammatory GI disease (e.g., C rohn’s disease, ulcerative coli tis) 
8. Cardiopulmonary  function criteria: 
 Current unstable arrhythmia requiring treatment 
 History of symptomatic congesti ve heart failure (New York Hear t 
Association [NYHA ] Class III or IV)  
 History of myocardial infarct ion within 6 mont hs of enrollment  
                                            
† A female of childbearing potential is a  sexually mature woman who: 1) has not undergone a 
hysterectomy or bilateral oopho rectomy; or 2) has not been natu rally postmenopausal for at least 24 
consecutive months (i.e., has h ad menses at any time in the pre ceding 24 consecutive months). 
 
Page 12 of 33  
  Current unstable angina 
 Family history of long QT syndrome  
 
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN 
 
On this study 4 weeks of therapy is considered one cycle of the rapy. Ruxolitinib and 
pracinostat will be given orally i n an outpatient setting. Ruxo litinib will be given 
continuously daily in 28-day cycles. Patients will receive ruxo litinib alone for the first 3 
months, and then pracinostat wil l be added. Ruxolitinib provide s maximum benefit 
usually within 3 months, theref ore we add another agent to ruxo litinib after those initial 3 
months, in order not to compro mise benefit of ruxolitinib with some new side effect from 
additional medication (pracinostat in this case). Starting dose  of ruxolitinib will be based 
on patients’ platelet count, as per standard practice: 15 mg twice a day (BID) for patients with baseline platelet counts of 100‒200 × 10
9/L and 20 mg BID for those with 
baseline platelet counts >200 × 109/L. For patients with platelet counts of 50‒99 × 109/L, 
gradual up-titration from a start ing dose of 5 mg BID is recomm ended. Dose of 
ruxolitinib may be increased or decreased at the discretion of the treating physician prior to initiation of pracinostat (s ee section 5.1). Patients who st arted ruxolitinib before 
enrollment into this study, will have the time they have been o n ruxolitinib therapy 
counted toward the 3 cycles of ruxolitinib monotherapy, as per protocol.  When a dosage change of the Ruxol itinib is indicated (except for holdi ng therapy due to toxicity) 
patients will continue taking their previously prescribed dosin g level until the new supply 
of Ruxolitinib is availabl e for use by the patient. 
Pracinostat is supplied as  45 and 60 mg capsules and will be s elf-administered (by the 
patient) one-time each day, 3 days a week for 3 weeks with doses approximately 48 hours apart, followed by one week of rest. Study medication wil l be taken approximately 
30 minutes before a meal (e.g. b reakfast) or >2 hours after a m eal at approximately the 
same time each of the 3 days weekly (e.g., Monday, Wednesday, a nd Friday).  
Treatment cycles will be repeated every 28 days, unless delayed  due to toxicity.  
Pracinostat should be taken with a glass of water; pracinostat is not to be taken with 
grapefruit or any other juice.  P atients should be instructed t o swallow the capsules 
whole and to not chew or crush t hem. If vomiting occurs, no attempt should be made to 
replace the vomited dose. Nicoti ne may alter metabolism of prac inostat such that 
potential efficacy may be decr eased and therefore we will encou rage smoking cessation 
while on study. 
If the patient forgets to take his/her dose before noon, then t he dose should be withheld 
that day and restarted the next dosing day in order to ensure a pproximately 48 hours 
between each dose.  For example, if a patient misses a dose on Monday, the dose can 
be restarted on Tuesday, and the other doses would be taken on Thursday and 
Saturday. 
Dosage of either drug for cycles  can be reduced, increased or d elayed based on the 
assessment of efficacy (lack of it) or due to adverse events, i f any occur. Guidelines for 
reducing or increasing dosages are described in Section 5.1. De lays of a maximum of 8 
weeks are allowed from  scheduled next cycle.  
Page 13 of 33  
  
Subjects will be asked to maintai n a diary to record drug admin istration. Subjects will be 
asked to bring any unused study drug to the research center at their next visit.  
Research personnel will count and record the number of used and  unused study drug 
capsules/tablets at each visit and reconcile with the subject d iary. The study coordinator 
will question the patient regarding adherence to the dosing reg imen, record the number 
of capsules/tablets and strengths  returned, the date returned a nd determine treatment 
compliance before dispensing new medication to the study patien t.  Compliance below 
80% will require counseling of the  patient by study site person nel. Attempt will be made 
to provide an adequate treatment period of at least 6 months un less significant toxicity 
observed, to account for delayed time to response observed with  biologic agents. 
Patients experiencing clinical benefit will continue therapy fo r 4 years unless 
progression of disease or toxicity  warranting discontinuation o f therapy is observed. 
 
5.1 Dose Modification   
Non-hematologic toxicity: 
If drug-related grade 3 or 4 non- hematologic toxicity is attrib utable to one or both of the 
drugs, dose interruption of the drug(s) causing the toxicity, a s assessed by the treating 
physician, is mandatory. Patient  who experience grade 3 drug re lated non-
hematological toxicity may be given a subsequent course one dos e level below the 
previous course, but the patien t must have recovered to grade </=1 or baseline before 
institution of the next course. If a  patient has drug-related grade 4 non-hematologic 
toxicity, he/she may receive a subsequent courses at one reduce d dose level after 
resolution of toxicity to grade </=1, only if approved by the P rincipal Investigator based 
on the clinical significance of t he toxicity and only if patient has had derived a benefit 
from the therapy.  The dose of th erapeutic agents can be decrea sed at the discretion of 
treating physician, for chronic grade 2 non-hematologic toxicit y. In specific 
circumstances, after discussion w ith the Principal Investigator , one of the two 
medications can be discontinued for safety.  Documentation of t he reason(s) study drug 
is discontinued is required.  Other dose modifications may be c onsidered as clinically 
indicated with documentation and approval of the PI.  Hematologic toxicity: Ruxolitinib may be administer ed and dose adjusted as per standa rd practice (see 
Tables below). Reductions in dosi ng for therapy related anemia can be done at the 
discretion of the investigator 
 
Ruxolitinib dose modifications r ecommended for patients with st arting platelet 
count of at least 100 × 10
9/L*  
 Dose at time of decline in platelet count Maximum dose 
based on platelet 
count after prior treatment interruption or dose reduction 25 mg BID 20 mg BID 15 mg BID 10 mg BID 5 mg BID 
Current platelet count  New dose to be used 
Page 14 of 33  
 * Starting ruxolitinib doses of 15 mg BID for patients with platelet counts of 100 to 200 × 
109/L and 20 mg BID for those with a platelet count >200 × 109/L. Recommended dose 
modifications based on US prescribing information. 
For insufficient response, doses may be increased in 5-mg BID increments to a 
maximum of 25 mg BID, provided that platelet and neutrophil counts are adequate.  
BID: Twice daily  
 Ruxolitinib dose modifications r ecommended for patients with a starting platelet 
count of at least 50 × 10
9/L but less than 100 × 109/L*  
* Starting ruxolitinib dose of 5  mg BID. Recommended dose modif ications based on US 
prescribing information.  See full prescribing information  for a complete description of US Food and Drug 
Administration FDA-approved dosi ng of ruxolitinib in patients w ith intermediate or high-
risk MF. AE: Adverse event; ANC: Absolute neutrophil count; BID: Twice d aily; QD: Once daily.   
 While a patient is on both medications concurrently, dosing of pracinostat as well as 
ruxolitinib will be discontinued  for platelet counts </= 25X 109/L OR for ANC </= 0.5 
x109/L.  Patients who experience platelet count </= 25X 109/L or ANC </= 0.5 x109/L ≥125 × 109/L 
 No change No change No change No change No change 20 mg BID 
100 to <125 × 10
9/L 
 20 mg BID 15 mg BID No change No change No change 15 mg BID 
75 to <100 × 10
9/L 
 10 mg BID 10 mg BID 10 mg BID No change No change 10 mg BID for 2 weeks; if stable, may increase to 15 mg BID 
50 to <75 × 10
9/L 
 5 mg BID 5 mg BID 5 mg BID 5 mg BID No change 5 mg BID for 2 weeks; if stable, may increase to 10 mg BID 
<50 × 109/L Hold Hold Hold Hold Hold Continue holding 
Current platelet count Dosing recommendation 
<25 × 109/L  Interrupt treatment 
25 to <35 × 109/L AND <20% decrease during the 
prior 4 weeks Decrease dose by 5 mg QD or maintain the current dose if it is 5 mg QD 
25 to <35 × 109/L AND ≥20% decrease during prior 
4 weeks Decrease dose by 5 mg BID or use 5 mg QD if the current dose is 5 mg BID or QD  
≥40 × 109/L AND ≤20% decrease during prior 4 
weeks, ANC >1 × 109/L, AND no dose reductions 
or treatment interruptio ns for AE or hematologic 
toxicity during the prior 4 weeks Increase dose by increments of 5 mg QD to a maximum of 10 mg BID if response is insufficient 
Page 15 of 33  
 during a cycle of therapy, will have a 
dose reduction of pracinostat by one dose level for subsequent cycles (see Table below). 
 
   
 
     5.2 Initiation of a new cycle of pracinostat and ruxolitinib 
A new course of pracinostat may  begin on the scheduled Day 1 of  a new cycle if: 
 The ANC is >/=  0.5 X 10
9/L 
 The platelet count is >  25x 109/L,  
 Any drug-related grade 3-4 adver se event that may have occurre d has resolved to 
≤ grade 1 severity or baseline 
 Normal potassium and magnesium serum levels (hypokalemia or hy pomagnesemia 
should be corrected prior to pra cinostat administration) 
 QTcF interval <500 msec (reversible causes of QTc prolongation  should be 
corrected, e.g. hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia, and ECG repeate d. Provided 
that the patient is asymptomatic  and that QTc decreases below 5 00 msec, 
pracinostat administrat ion may continue).   
 
 
If these conditions are not met on Day 1 of a new cycle, the su bject will continue 
ruxolitinib alone (see guidelines for restarting/continuing rux olitinib in the next 
paragraph) and be evaluated weekly and a new cycle of pracinostat will not be initiated 
until the toxicity has resolved as described above.  If pracino stat dosing was interrupted 
during the previous cycle or if the new cycle is delayed due to  toxicity newly 
encountered on the scheduled Day 1, then the new cycle of praci nostat will be started 
when the criteria above are me t AND with at least a one-level d ose reduction.  
 Treatment with ruxolitinib may restart/continue at 5mg QD so lo ng as ANC> 0.5x10
9/L 
AND platelets > 25x109/L (with approval of Principal Investigator, and documented) or  at 
5mg BID so long as ANC>/= 1 x109/L AND platelets > 50x109/L while waiting to initiate 
a new cycle of pracinostat. If the toxicity has not resolved as  described above within 8 
weeks of the scheduled start date for the new cycle of pracinos tat, the patient may 
discontinue treatment  with pracinostat and continue therapy wit h ruxolitinib alone. In 
unusual circumstances this rule may be modified by the Principa l Investigator if felt to 
be in the best interest of the patient (for example, responding  patient with neutropenia 
or low platelets, that resolve past 8 weeks may be restarted on  therapy); such case 
must be fully documented.  Dose Level Pracinostat 
Level 0 60 mg  
Dose Level -1 45 mg 
Page 16 of 33  
 5.3     Concomitant Therapy 
  
Supportive measures consistent wit h optimal patient care may be  given throughout the 
study. Concomitant medications will be captured in the medical record and will not be 
recorded on the case report form. 
 Therapies considered necessary for the patient’s well-being may be administered 
at the discretion of the investig ator. These therapies include,  but are not limited 
to antibiotics, analgesics, antih istamines, or other medication s.  Guidance for 
growth factors and transfusions of red blood cells, platelets, or fresh frozen 
plasma are described below: 
 Packed red blood cells (RBCs): Transfusions of 2 units of packed RBCs should 
be considered for a decline in hemoglobin to <8 g/dl or symptom s of 
cardiovascular compromise. The following transfusion thresholds  and guidelines 
are recommended for study participants: 
o hemoglobin <8 g/dl, 2 units o f packed RBCs; hemoglobin <7, thr ee units of 
packed RBCs 
o Platelets: Six to 10 units of random donor platelets or one cy topheresis 
unit of single donor platelets should be administered to all su bjects with 
signs of hemostatic failure (i.e., bleeding or petechiae) or li fe-threatening 
thrombocytopenia (i.e., platelet count < 10,000/µ L) 
o Growth factor use with epoetin, darbepoetin, or granulocyte co lony-
stimulating factor must be terminated at least 14 days before i nitiation of 
study treatment and may not be used as part of supportive therapy while 
the patient is on study, except if in patients’ best interest a fter approval of 
PI (e.g. neutropenic fever) 
o Patients should not receive androgens or steroids for treatmen t of their 
anemia or thrombocytopenia as  part of supportive therapy 
 Patients may receive hydrocorti sone prophylactic ally to preven t 
transfusion reactions but chronic systemic steroid (above 5mg/d ay) 
are not allowed.  
 Over-the-counter products such as  herbal preparations or dieta ry supplements 
with the exception of multivita mins, Ensure, and similar nutrit ional supplements 
are not allowed throughout the tr ial.  Patients should stop usi ng these herbal 
medications at least 7 days prio r to the first dose of study me dication. 
Prohibited medications 
Drug interaction studies with pr acinostat are ongoing. Medicati ons that have possible 
risk of prolonging the QT interval and/or Torsades de Pointes (listed below) may have 
an unacceptable risk of co-adminis tration with pracinostat and are prohibited during .  
courses in which pracinostat is  administered. The following web site was used as a 
guide: http://www.qtdrugs.org/medical-pr os/drug-lists/drug-lists.htm#. All concomitant 
medications that the subject is  receiving both prior to enrollm ent and during study 
Page 17 of 33  
 conduct must be carefully reviewed and monitored. Subjects shou ld avoid grapefruit 
juice and Seville oranges. 
 
Prohibited drugs: Drugs that Have a Risk of Prolonging the QT Interval and/or Inducing 
Torsades de Pointes 
Page 18 of 33  
 Albuterol (salbutamol) 
Alfuzosin 
Amantadine 
Amiodarone 
Amisulpride 
Amitriptyline 
Amoxapine 
Amphetamine 
Anagrelide 
Apomorphine 
Arformoterol 
Aripiprazole 
Arsenic trioxide 
Astemizole (Off US mkt) 
Atazanavir 
Atomoxetine 
Azithromycin 
Bedaquiline 
Bepridil (Off US mkt) 
Bortezomib 
Bosutinib 
Chloral hydrate 
Chloroquine 
Chlorpromazine 
Ciprofloxacin 
Cisapride (Off US mkt) 
Citalopram 
Clarithromycin 
Clomipramine 
Clozapine 
Cocaine 
Crizotinib 
Dabrafenib 
Dasatinib 
Desipramine 
Dexmedetomidine 
Dexmethylphenidate 
Dextroamphetamine (d-Amphetamine) 
Dihydroartemisinin+piperaquine 
Diphenhydramine (doses up to 25 mg per day 
allowed) 
Disopyramide 
Dobutamine 
Dofetilide 
Dolasetron 
Page 19 of 33  
 Domperidone  
Dopamine 
Doxepin 
Dronedarone 
Droperidol 
Ephedrine 
Epinephrine (Adrenaline) 
Eribulin 
Erythromycin 
Escitalopram 
Famotidine 
Felbamate 
Fenfluramine  
Fingolimod 
Flecainide 
Fluconazole 
Fluoxetine 
Formoterol 
Foscarnet 
Fosphenytoin 
Furosemide (Frusemide) 
Galantamine 
Gatifloxacin  
Gemifloxacin 
Granisetron 
Grepafloxacin 
Halofantrine 
Haloperidol 
Hydrochlorothiazide 
Ibutilide 
Iloperidone 
Imipramine (melipramine) 
Indapamide 
Isoproterenol 
Isradipine 
Itraconazole 
Ivabradine  
Ketoconazole 
Lapatinib 
Levalbuterol (levsalbutamol) 
Levofloxacin 
Levomethadyl  
Lisdexamfetamine 
Lithium 
Mesoridazine  
Page 20 of 33  
 Metaproterenol 
Methadone 
Methamphetamine (methamfetamine) 
Methylphenidate 
Metronidazole 
Midodrine 
Mifepristone 
Mirabegron 
Mirtazapine 
Moexipril/HCTZ 
Moxifloxacin 
Nelfinavir 
Nicardipine 
Nilotinib 
Norepinephrine (noradrenaline) 
Norfloxacin 
Nortriptyline 
Ofloxacin 
Olanzapine 
Ondansetron 
Oxytocin 
Paliperidone 
Pantoprazole 
Paroxetine 
Pasireotide 
Pazopanib 
Pentamidine 
Perflutren lipid microspheres 
Phentermine 
Phenylephrine 
Phenylpropanolamine 
Pimozide 
Pipamperone  
Posaconazole 
Probucol  
Procainamide  
Promethazine 
Protriptyline 
Pseudoephedrine 
Quetiapine 
Quinidine 
Quinine sulfate 
Ranolazine 
Rilpivirine 
Risperidone 
Page 21 of 33  
 Ritodrine  
Ritonavir 
Roxithromycin  
Salmeterol 
Saquinavir 
Sertindole  
Sertraline 
Sevoflurane 
Sibutramine  
Solifenacin 
Sorafenib 
Sotalol 
Sparfloxacin  
Sulpiride  
Sunitinib 
Tacrolimus 
Tamoxifen 
Telaprevir 
Telavancin 
Telithromycin 
Terbutaline 
Terfenadine  
Tetrabenazine  
Thioridazine 
Tizanidine 
Tolterodine 
Toremifene 
Trazodone 
Trimethoprim-Sulfa 
Trimipramine 
Vandetanib 
Vardenafil 
Vemurafenib 
Venlafaxine 
Voriconazole 
Vorinostat 
Ziprasidone 
 
5.4 Correlative studies 
 
Before initiation of therapy with pracinostat (C4D1), after one  cycle of pracinostat 
therapy (C5D1), after 3 cycles (C7D1), and then every 3 cycles (C10, C13, C16,…) while on the study, peripheral blood will be collected if possible for measurements of 
inflammatory cytokine levels, ex pression of different proteins related to intracellular 
Page 22 of 33  
 signaling, and methylation of genes. This will include collecti on of: one red top (10ml) 
and two purple top tubes (10ml each).  Bone marrow aspirate wil l be collected every 6 
cycles if possible (5ml purple top tube). 
 
5.5 Pretreatment Evaluation  
 History  and physical exam including vita l signs, body weight and height , and spleen 
and liver measurements. This also includes a transfusion histor y for 3 months prior 
to day 1 and concomitant medicati on notation (wit hin 14 days of  study day 1)  
 CBC and differential, electroly tes (Na, K, Cl, Mg, HCO3), creatinine, uric acid, BUN, 
glucose, total and direct bilirubin, and SGPT, PT/PTT, INR (wit hin 14 days of study 
day 1). 
 Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate (within 1 month of study day 1 , or within 3 
months of study day 1 if pati ent was not on any therapy).  
 ECG (within 14 days of study day 1) 
 Pregnancy test (for FCBP only) w ithin 7 days of study day 1 
 Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Symptom Assessment Form Total Symp tom Score 
(MPN-SAF TSS) questionnaire  
 
5.6 Evaluation During Study 
 Directed history and physical ex amination including vital sign s, body weight, and 
spleen and liver measurements once each cycle on cycles 2-7, th en once every 3 
cycles (C10, C13, C16, …). This al so includes a transfusion his t o r y  f o r  p r e v i o u s  
cycle of therapy and concomitant m edication notation. Spleen and liver 
measurements will be obtained by the physicians or physician as sistants during the 
clinic visit and document ed in the medical record. 
 CBC and differential, electroly tes (Na, K, Cl, Mg, HCO3), crea tinine, BUN, glucose, 
total bilirubin, and SGPT every 2 weeks for 6 cycles, then CBC with differential 
every cycle and electrolytes (Na, K, Cl, Mg, HCO3), creatinine,  BUN, glucose, total 
bilirubin, and SGPT every 3 cycles and as deemed appropriate wh ile on 
therapy.  Therapy also includes the first 3 months of ruxolitinib alone. 
 ECG will be performed prior to the first cycle of pracinostat (C4), then once during 
cycles 5 and 6, then every 3 cycles starting with cycle 10 (spe cifically, ECG should 
be performed approximately 90 minutes post pracinostat dosing o n the day of visit 
to MD Anderson) 
 Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy after cycles 6 (+/- 10 days)  and 12 (+/- 10 
days), and if deemed appropriate by  the investigator, every 6 c ycles after cycle 12.  
 Response assessment after cycle 3 and cycle 6, then every 6 cy cles.  Assessment 
may not include bone marrow biopsy on all occasions.  
 Collect any unused study drug and review patient study drug dos ing diary for 
compliance during each cycle for the first 7 cycles then every 3 cycles.  
 Continuous assessment of AEs  
 Myeloproliferative Neoplasm Symptom Assessment Form Total Symp tom 
Score (MPN-SAF TSS) questionnaire during each cycle for the fir st 7 cycles 
then every 3 cycles.  
 
Page 23 of 33  
 Every effort will be made to adher e to the schedule of events a nd all protocol 
requirements within the +/- 10 day window. Variations in schedu le of events and other 
protocol requirements that do not affect the rights and safety of the patient will not be 
considered as deviations.  Such variations may include laboratory assessments 
completed outside of schedule, o ccasional missed required resea rch samples such as 
PK or PD.  All dose adjustments will be made according to the p rotocol unless 
discussed with the PI and do not e xceed the dosages described i n the protocol. 
 
 
Outside Physician Participation During Treatment 
 
 MDACC Physician communication with the outside physician is re quired prior to 
the patient returning to the lo cal physician. This will be docu mented in the patient 
record 
 A letter to the local physician outlining the patient's partic ipation in a clinical trial 
will request local physician agree ment to supervise the patient 's care  
 Protocol required evaluations outside MDACC will be documented  by telephone, 
fax or e-mail.  Fax and/or e-ma il will be dated and signed by t he MDACC 
physician, indicating tha t they have reviewed it. 
 Changes in drug dose and/or sc hedule must be discussed with an d approved by 
the MDACC physician investigator , or their representative prior  to initiation, and 
will be documented in t he patient record. 
 A copy of the informed consent, pr otocol abstract, and evaluation during 
treatment will be provided to the local physician. 
 Documentation to be provided by  the local physician will include drug 
administration records, progre ss notes, reports of protocol req uired laboratory 
and diagnostic studies  and documentation of any hospitalization s. 
 The home physician wil l be requested to report to the MDACC ph ysician 
investigator all life threateni ng events within 24 hours of doc umented occurrence. 
 Patients will return to MDACC ea ch cycle for t he first 6 cycle s then every 3 cycles 
as long as on the study  for evaluation. 
 
The patient will be contacted by the PI and his staff 30 days a fter discont inuation of 
protocol +/-14 days to assess for AE’s, unless the patient receives further MF-directed 
treatment. 
 
5.7 Criteria for Removal from the Study 
Treatment with study drugs is to be discontinued when any of th e following occurs: 
 Lack of therapeutic effect (any effort should be made to provi de therapy to the 
patient in a safe way for at least 3-6 cycles for proper assessment of potential 
efficacy) 
 Adverse event(s) that, in the judgment of the Investigator, ma y cause severe or 
permanent harm or which rule ou t continuation of study drug. 
 Withdrawal of consent 
Page 24 of 33  
  Lost to follow up 
 Death 
 Suspected pregnancy 
 
6.0 CRITERIA FOR RESPONSE  
Best overall response will be categorized according to the Inte rnational Working Group 
Criteria11: 
Complete remission (CR):  Requires all of the following in the absence of both 
transfusion and growth factor support:  
 Bone marrow: Age-adjusted normoce llularity; <5% blasts; ≤grade 1 MF† and 
 Peripheral blood: Hemoglobin ≥10 g/dL and <UNL; neutrophil count ≥ 1.0 × 109/L 
and <UNL; 
 Platelet count ≥100 × 109/L and <UNL; <2% immature myeloid cells‡ and 
 Clinical: Resolutio n of disease symptoms; spleen and liver not  palpable; no 
evidence of EMH 
 
Partial remission (PR):  
 
 Peripheral blood: Hemoglobin ≥10 g/dL and <UNL; neutrophil cou nt ≥1 × 109/L 
and <UNL; platelet count ≥100 × 109/L and <UNL; <2% immature myeloid cells  
and 
 Clinical: Resolution of dis ease symptoms; spleen and liver not  palpable; no 
evidence of EMH or 
 Bone marrow: Age-adjusted normoce llularity; <5% blasts; ≤grade 1 MF†, and 
peripheral blood: Hemoglobin ≥ 8.5 but <10 g/dL and <UNL; neutrophil count ≥1 × 
109/L and <UNL; platelet count ≥50, but <100 × 109/L and <UNL; <2% immature 
myeloid cells‡ and 
 Clinical: Resolution of dis ease symptoms; spleen and liver not  palpable; no 
evidence of EMH 
 
Clinical improvement (CI): The achievement of anemia, spleen or symptoms response 
without progressive disease or increase in severity of anemia, thrombocytopenia, or 
neutropenia§ 
   
Anemia response Transfusion-indepe ndent patients: a ≥2.0 g/dL i ncrease in 
hemoglobin level|| 
Transfusion-dependent patient s: becoming transfusion-
independent¶ 
Spleen response# A baseline splenomegaly that is palpable at 5-10 cm, below the  
LCM, becomes not palpable∗∗ or 
Page 25 of 33  
 A baseline splenomegaly that is palpable at >10 cm, below the 
LCM, decreases by ≥50%∗∗ 
A baseline splenomegaly that is palpable at <5 cm, below the 
LCM, is not eligible for spleen response 
Symptoms response A ≥50% reduction in the MPN-SAF TSS†† 
 
Progressive disease :  
 Appearance of a new splenomegaly that is palpable at least 5 c m below the 
LCM or 
 A ≥100% increase in palpable di stance, below LCM, for baseline 
splenomegaly of 5-10 cm or 
 A 50% increase in palpable distance, below LCM, for baseline splenomegaly 
of >10 cm or 
 Leukemic transformation confirmed by a bone marrow blast count  of ≥20% 
or 
 A peripheral blood blast content of ≥20% associated with an ab solute blast 
count of ≥1 × 10(9)/L that l asts for at least 2 weeks 
 Stable disease:  Belonging to none of the abov e listed response categories  
 Relapse:  
 No longer meeting criteria fo r at least CI after achieving CR,  PR, or CI, or 
 Loss of anemia response persist ing for at least 1 month or 
 Loss of spleen response per sisting for at least 1 month 
 Recommendations for assessing  treatment-induced cytogenetic an d molecular 
changes. 
 Cytogenetic remission 
 At least 10 metaphases must be 
analyzed for cytogenetic response evaluation and requires confirmation by repeat testing within 6 months window CR: eradication of a preexisting abnormality PR: ≥50% reduction in abnormal metaphases (partial response applies only to patients with at least ten abnormal metaphases at baseline) 
  
Molecular remission Molecular response evaluation must 
be analyzed in peripheral blood granulocytes and 
Page 26 of 33  
 requires confirmation by repeat testing 
within 6 months window CR: Eradication of a pre-existing abnormality PR: ≥50% decrease in allele burden (partial response applies only to patients with at least 20% mutant allele burden at baseline) 
  
Cytogenetic/molecular relapse Re-emergence of a pre-existing cytogenetic or molecular abnormality that is confirmed by repeat testing  
EMH, extramedullary hematopoiesis (no evidence of EMH implies the absence of pathology- or 
imaging study-proven nonhepatosplenic EMH); LCM, left costal margin; UNL, upper normal limit.  
*Baseline and post treatment bone marrow slides are to be interpreted at one sitting by a central 
review process. Cytogenetic and molecular responses are not required for CR assignment.  
†Grading of MF is according to the European clas sification: Thiele et al. European consensus on 
grading bone marrow fibrosis and assessment of cellularity. Haematologica. 2005;90:1128. It is 
underscored that the consensus definition of a CR bone marrow is to be used only in those 
patients in which all other criteria are met, includi ng resolution of leukoerythroblastosis. It should 
also be noted that it was a particularly difficult  task for the working group to reach a consensus 
regarding what represents a comp lete histologic remission.  
‡Immature myeloid cells constitute blasts + pr omyelocytes + myelocytes + metamyelocytes + 
nucleated red blood cells. In splenectomized patients,  <5% immature myeloid cells is allowed.  
§See above for definitions of anemia response , spleen response, and progressive disease. 
Increase in severity of anemia constitutes t he occurrence of new transfusion dependency or a ≥ 20 
g/L decrease in hemoglobin level from pretreatment  baseline that lasts for at least 12 weeks. 
Increase in severity of thrombocytopenia or neutropenia is defined as a 2-grade decline, from 
pretreatment baseline, in platel et count or absolute neutrophil count, according to the Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE)  version 4.0. In addition, assignment to CI 
requires a minimum platelet count of ≥25 000 × 10(9)/L and absolute neutrophil count of ≥ 0.5 × 
10(9)/L.  
||Applicable only to patients with baseline hemoglobin of  <100 g/L. In patients not meeting the strict 
criteria for transfusion dependency at the time of study enrollment (see as follows), but have 
received transfusions within the previous mont h, the pretransfusion hemoglobin level should be 
used as the baseline.  
¶Transfusion dependency before study enrollment is def ined as transfusions of at least 6 units of 
packed red blood cells (PRBC), in the 12 weeks prior to study enrollment, for a hemoglobin level of <85 g/L, in the absence of bleeding or treatm ent-induced anemia. In addition, the most recent 
transfusion episode must have occurred in the 28 days prior to study enrollment. Response in 
transfusion-dependent patients requires absence of any PRBC transfusions during any consecutive “rolling” 12-week interval during t he treatment phase, capped by a hemoglobin level of 
≥85 g/L.  
Page 27 of 33  
 #In splenectomized patients, palpable hepatomegaly is substituted with the same measurement 
strategy.  
 **Spleen or liver responses must be confirmed by imaging studies where a ≥35% reduction in 
spleen volume, as assessed by MRI or CT, is required. Furthermore, a ≥35% volume reduction in 
the spleen or liver, by MRI or CT, constitutes a response regardless of what is reported with 
physical examination.  
††Symptoms are evaluated by the MPN-SAF T SS.17 The MPN-SAF TSS is assessed by the 
patients themselves and this includes fatigue, concen tration, early satiety, inactivity, night sweats, 
itching, bone pain, abdominal discomfort, weight  loss, and fevers. Scoring is from 0 (absent/as 
good as it can be) to 10 (worst imaginable/as ba d as it can be) for each item. The MPN-SAF TSS 
is the summation of all the individual scores (0-100 scale). Symptoms response requires ≥50% 
reduction in the MPN-SAF TSS.  
	‡‡Progressive disease assignment for splenomegaly requires confirmation by MRI or 
 computed tomography showing a ≥25% increase in spleen volume from baseline. Baseline 
 values for both physical examination and imaging studies refer to pretreatment baseline  and not 
 to posttreatment measurements.  
 
 
7.0 REGULATORY AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
7.1  Adverse Event Reporting fo r MD Anderson-Sponsored IND Prot ocols 
 
All adverse events that are possible, probably or definitely related to the study treatment 
will be captured on t he case report form. Any grade 3 or higher  adverse event that is 
considered unrelated or unlikely related to the study treatment  will also be recorded. 
Adverse events will be defined using NCI CTCAE version 4.0.  All adverse events occurring between the time the subject is co nsented and begins 
study drug will be considered a ba seline event and recorded. Ba seline adverse events will 
be recorded in the case report form  in prior medical history. A ll baseline adverse events that 
increase in severity during t he course of treatment will be captured as an adverse 
event in the case report form.  Any adverse event that occurs dur ing the study period (up throu gh 30 days after the last 
day drug is administered) will be followed until clinical recov ery is complete and 
laboratory tests have returned to normal, until progression of the event has been 
stabilized, or until the PI det ermines there has been acceptabl e resolution of the 
event. 
 
7.2 
 Serious Adverse Event Report ing (SAE) for M. D. Anderson-
Sponsored IND Protocols 
 
An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “s erious” if, in the view of 
either the investigator or the sponsor, it results in any of th e following outcomes: 
 
 Death 
 A life-threatening adverse drug experience – any adverse exper ience that places 
the patient, in the view of the initial reporter, at immediate risk of death from the 
Page 28 of 33  
 adverse experience as it occurre d. It does not include an adver se experience 
that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death. 
 Inpatient hospitalization or pro longation of existing hospital ization 
 A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disrupti on of the ability to 
conduct normal life functions. 
 A congenital anomaly/birth defect. 
 
 Important medical events that may not result in death, be life- threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse drug experience when, based upon appropriate medical judgmen t, they may jeopardize the pati ent or subject and may 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this 
definition. Examples of such m edical events include allergic br onchospasm requiring 
intensive treatment in an emergen cy room or at home, blood dysc rasias or convulsions 
that do not result in inpatient  hospitalization, or the develop ment of drug dependency or 
drug abuse (21 CFR 312.32).  
 Important medical ev ents as defined above ma y also be consider ed serious 
adverse events. Any important  medical event can and should be r eported as an 
SAE if deemed appropriate by the Principal Investigator or the IND Sponsor, IND 
Office. 
 
 All events occurring during the conduct of a protocol and meet ing the definition of 
a SAE must be reported to the IRB in accordance with the timeframes and procedures as per “The University  of Texas M. D. Anderson Cance r Center 
Institutional Review Board Policy for Investigators on Reportin g Unanticipated 
Adverse Events for Drugs and De vices”.  Unless stated otherwise  in the protocol, 
all SAEs, expected or unexpecte d, must be reported to the IRB, regardless of 
attribution (within 5 working days of knowledge of the event). 
 
 All life-threatening or fatal ev ents, that are unexpected, and  related  to the study 
drug, must have a written report submitted within 24 hours (nex t working day) of 
knowledge of the event to the Safe ty Project Manager in the IND  Office.   
 
 Unless otherwise noted, the el ectronic SAE application (eSAE) will be utilized for 
safety reporting to  and MDACC IRB.  
 
 Serious adverse events will be captured from the time of the f irst protocol-specific 
intervention,  until 30 days after the last dose of drug, unless the participa nt 
withdraws consent. Seri ous adverse events mu st be followed until clinical 
recovery is complete and laborat ory tests have returned to base line, progression 
of the event has stabilized, or there has been acceptable resol ution of the event. 
 
 Additionally, any serious adver se events that occur after the 30 day time period 
that are related to the study tr eatment must be reported to the  IND Office. This 
may include the developmen t of a secondary malignancy. 
Page 29 of 33  
  
Reporting to FDA: 
 
Serious adverse events will be fo rwarded to FDA by the IND Spon sor (Safety Project 
Manager IND Office) according to 21 CFR 312.32. It is the responsibility of the PI and 
the research team to ensure seri ous adverse events are reported  according to the Code 
of Federal Regulations, Good Clinic al Practices, the protocol g uidelines, the sponsor’s 
guidelines, and Institutional Review Board policy. 
  
7.2 Expedited reporting by investigator to Helsinn Healthcare S A 
 
Serious adverse events (SAE) are  defined above.  The investigat or will inform Helsinn 
Healthcare SA of any SAE  within 24 hours of being aware of the event via email and/or 
fax.  
 
All pregnancies will also be reported.  
 The following SAEs are not subjec t to expedited reporting, but will be included in the 
annual report via the SAE log. a.        Infection or  cytopenias leading to hospitalization or  prolongation of 
hospitalization; disease progression leading to death; life-thr eating AE, hospitalization or 
prolongation of hospitaliz ation, or disability. 
 
Adverse events will be documented in the medical record and ent ered into the case 
report form. PDMS/CORe will be used as the electronic case repo rt form for this protocol. 
Investigator or physician desig nee is responsible for verifying  and providing source 
documentation for all adverse events and assigning the attribut ion for each event for all 
subjects enrolled on the trial. This form must be completed and  supplied to Helsinn 
Healthcare SA within 24 hours/1 business day at the latest on t he following working day.  
The initial report must be as com plete as possible, including d etails of the current illness 
and (serious) adverse event, and an assessment of the causal re lationship between the 
event and the investigational product(s).  Information not avai lable at the time of the initial 
report (e.g., an end date for the  adverse event or laboratory v alues received after the 
report) must be docum ented on a follow-up MD ACC SAE reporting f orm.  
 Pregnancies and suspected pregnancie s (including a positive pregnancy test regardless 
of age or disease state) of a fe male subject or the female part n e r  o f  a  m a l e  s u b j e c t  
occurring while the subject is on study drug, or within 30 days of the subject’s last dose of study drug, are considered i mmediately reportable events. St udy drug is to be 
discontinued immediately in a female patient and the patient in structed to return any 
unused portion of the study drug to the investigator(s).  The p regnancy, suspected 
pregnancy, or positive pregnancy test must be reported to Helsi nn Healthcare SA 
immediately by phone and facsimile using the MDACC AE report fo rm. The female 
should be referred to an obstetrician-gynecologist experienced in reproductive toxicity for 
further evaluation and counseling. 
Page 30 of 33  
  
8.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
This is a single-center phase II trial designed to assess the e ffect of ruxolitinib in 
combination with pracinostat  in subjects with Primary, Post Polycythemia Vera, or Post 
Essential Thrombocythemia Myelo fibrosis (PMF, post-PV MF, or po st-ET MF).  
The primary objective is to asse ss efficacy in terms of the obj ective response rate (i.e., 
complete and partial response, and clinical improvement by IWG- MRT) in patients with 
MF.  Secondary objective is to determine the safety of the comb ination therapy in this 
population. 
Primary Endpoint is the objecti ve response rate (ORR), defined as a clinical 
improvement (CI), partial remission (PR), and complete remission (CR) according to the 
International Working Group (IWG ) Criteria. All subjects meeting the eligibility criteria 
that have signed a consent form and have begun treatment will b e evaluable for 
response. 
A total of 25 patients will be enr olled from MDACC and patients  will be registered 
through the Clinical Oncology Res earch System (CORE). The estim ated accrual rate is 
2-3 patients per month. Initially patients will receive ruxolit inib alone for the first 3 cycles, 
where 1 cycle is 28 days (i.e., 4 weeks). Then, starting from c ycle #4, patients will 
receive the combination therapy o f ruxolitinib with pracinostat .  
The method of Thall, Simon and Es tey [1995] will be used for fu tility and toxicity 
monitoring for this study. For futility monitoring, the primary endpoint of interest is the 
objective response (OR) rate at the end of 6 treatment cycles. Patients who drop off the 
study early due to any reason will be counted as failures (i.e. , non-responders).  The 
target response rate is 50% and the following futility stopping  rule will be applied 
prob{p(OR)<0.5)>0.95, where p(OR) denotes the objective respons e rate, with a beta 
(1,1) prior distribution. That  is, the treatment will be stoppe d if during the study we 
determine that there is more t han 95% chance that the OR rate is less than 50%.   
For toxicity monitoring, we denot e the probability of toxicity by p (T), where toxicity is 
defined as Grade 3-4 clinically r elevant non-hematologic toxici ty or a serious adverse 
event that is at least possibly related to the study drug (Comm on Terminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events CTCAE version 4.0). We assume as a priori, p  (T) ~ beta (0.4, 1.6).  
We will stop treating patients if P r (p (T)> 0.20  | data) >0.87. That is, we will stop the trial 
for new patient enrollment if at any time during the study we determine that there is more than 87% chance that the toxicity rate is more than 20%. T he OR rate and the 
toxicity will be monitored simultaneously using Bayesian stopping boundaries (Table 1) calculated based on beta-binomial distribution. Independence is  assumed between OR 
and toxicity. Patients will be monitored in cohort size of 5, starting from the 5th patient. Multc Lean Desktop (version 2.1) was used to generate the futil ity/toxicity stopping 
boundaries and the operating characte ristics table (Table 2). 
 
Table 1: Stopping boundarie s for OR and toxicity 
Number of patients Stop the trial if Stop the trial if 
Page 31 of 33  
 evaluated there are this 
many OR patients  there are this 
many patients with toxicities 
5 0 3-5 
10 0-2 4-10 
15 0-4 6-15 
20 0-6 7-20 
  Table 2: Operating characterist ics of the Bayesian futility and toxicity monitoring 
 
True OR Rate True toxicity 
Rate Prob (stop the trial early) Average sample size 
0.3 0.1 0.69 15.7 
  0.2 0.74 14.6 
  0.3 0.84 12.4 
  0.4 0.94 9.8 
0.4 0.1 0.35 20.3 
  0.2 0.46 18.6 
  0.3 0.67 15.1 
  0.4 0.88 11.3 
0.5 0.1 0.13 23.1 
  0.2 0.27 21.1 
  0.3 0.56 16.8 
  0.4 0.83 12.1 
0.6 0.1 0.04 24.3 
  0.2 0.2 22.1 
  0.3 0.52 17.5 
  0.4 0.82 12.5 
  
Statistical Analysis Plan   
Summary statistics will be prov ided for continuous variables.  Frequency tables will be 
used to summarize categorical variables.  The objective respons e rate (ORR) will be 
estimated along with the Bayesian 95% credible interval. Data f rom all subjects who 
receive any study drug will be included in the safety analyses. The severity of the 
toxicities will be graded acco rding to the NCI CTCAE v4.0 whene ver possible. We will 
follow standard reporti ng guidelines for adver se events. Safety  data will be summarized 
by category, severity and frequency. The proportion of patients  with AEs will be 
estimated, along with the Bayesi an 95% credible intervals.  
Page 32 of 33  
 Duration of response:  Duration of response is defined as the date at which the 
subject’s objective status is first noted to be a CR, PR or CI to the date of progression 
(no longer meeting criteria for either CR, PR or CI) is documen ted (if one has occurred).  
Patients who continue to respond as of the data cut-off date wi ll be censored as of the 
date of their last assessment documenting continued response. 
Time to response : The time to response is defined as the time from study regist ration 
to the first date at which the subject’s objective status was c lassified as a response (CR, 
PR or CI). In subjects who do not achieve a response, time to r esponse will be 
censored at the subject’s last evaluation date.  
The distribution for each of thes e event-time variables (duration of response and time to 
response) will be estimat ed by Kaplan-Meier curves.  
Anemia:   Descriptive statistics will be used to explore improvements i n anemia and 
transfusion dependence.  The following outcomes will be summari zed: mean changes in 
hemoglobin at monthly intervals.  The proportion of transfusion independent patients not 
requiring transfusions on study who experience an increase of 2  g / d L  i n  t h e i r  
hemoglobin relative to baseline,  the proportion of transfusion dependent patients 
(defined as requiring a transfusion of 2 units PRBCs monthly fo r 3 months (12 weeks) 
prior to starting the trial) who become transfusion independent  (not requiring a 
transfusion of PRBCs over a period of 3 months (12 weeks) while  on study), the 
proportion of transfusion dependent  patients who become transfu sion independent and 
have a 1 g/dL increase in hemoglobin relative to baseline, and the proportion of 
transfusion independent patients requiring a transfusion while on study. 
JAK2V617F Allele burden:  Change in JAK2V617 allele burden from baseline to each 
visit where it is measured. 
Correlative Studies:  Descriptive statistics will be applied to the analysis of thes e 
findings.  
 
9.0 REFERENCES 
1. Verstovsek S, Mesa RA, Gotlib J , et al. A double-blind, plac ebo-controlled trial of 
ruxolitinib for myelofibrosis. The New England journal of medicine . 2012;366(9):799-
807. 
2. Harrison C, Kiladjian J-J, Al-Ali HK, et al. JAK Inhibition with Ruxolitinib versus 
Best Available Therapy for Myelofibrosis. New England Journal of Medicine. 
2012;366(9):787-798. 3. Verstovsek S, Mesa RA, Gotlib J , et al. A double-blind, plac ebo-controlled trial of 
ruxolitinib for myelofibrosis. N Engl J Med . 2012;366(9):799-807. 
4. Harrison C, Kiladjian JJ, Al- Ali HK, et al. JAK inhibition w ith ruxolitinib versus best 
available therapy for myelofibrosis. N Engl J Med . 2012;366(9):787-798. 
5. Verstovsek S, Kantarjian HM , Estrov Z, et a l. Long term outcomes of 107 
patients with myelofibrosis receiving JAK1/JAK2 i nhibitor ruxol itinib: survival advantage 
in comparison to matched historical controls. Blood . 2012. 
6. Verstovsek S, Mesa RA, Gotlib  J, et al. Efficacy, safety and  survival with 
ruxolitinib treatment in patient s with myelofibrosis: results o f a median 2-year follow-up 
of COMFORT-I. Haematologica . 2013. 
Page 33 of 33  
 7. Cervantes F, Vannucchi AM, Kila djian JJ, et al. Three-year e fficacy, safety, and 
survival findings from COMFORT-I I, a phase 3 study comparing ru xolitinib with best 
available therapy for myelofibrosis. Blood . 2013;122(25):4047-4053. 
8. Tefferi A, Cervantes F, Mesa  R, et al. Revised response crit eria for myelofibrosis: 
International Working Group-Myel oproliferative Neoplasms Resear ch and Treatment 
(IWG-MRT) and European LeukemiaNet (ELN) consensus report. Blood . 
2013;122(8):1395-1398.  