1 
  
 
Water Immersion and Polyp Detection: A Randomized Controlled Trial  
 
Edited April 23rd 2019  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
2 
  
  
3 
  
Introduction  
Although w ater can be used  to facilitate colonoscope insertion1-13, the use of  two 
techniques employing  water  have been evaluated for their effects on  adenoma detection 
as compared to standard  insertion  methods which employ air or CO214, 15. These 
techniques are called water exchange (WE) and water immersion (WI).  In WI, water is 
used to distend the colon during insertion and is  removed largely  during withdrawal.  WI 
utilizes enough water during insertion to identi fy the luminal direction  but dirty water is 
removed primarily during withdrawal . WE is a slower insertion technique in which the  air 
valve is  turned  off and  clean wate r is infused and dirty water is suctioned during 
insertion and the instrument is not advanced until the lumen is clean. WE also involves 
aspiration of retained gas pockets  during insertion . Both WE and WI use air or CO 2 
rather than water  to disten d the lumen during withdrawal , and therefore it is not known  
whether  visualization of the mucosa using water  as a medium , as opposed to air or 
CO 2, increases adenoma detection16. In contrast to the other methods, TUC involves 
water exchange (WE) during  insertion followed by continuous water infusion (rather 
than gas) on withdrawal in o rder to  distend the lumen for total underwater mucosal 
visualization.  
The use of w ater during colonoscopy  may improve adenoma detection through 
several possible mechanisms17. It may help to  further clear  the bowel of any residual 
stool . In addition, since w ater may allow for mucosal inspection withou t fully distend ing 
the lumen like air  does , water techniques  might increase the yield for flat lesions . Very 
flat lesions  may be less visible  with full disten tion of the lumen. Finally,  water has a 
magnifying effect, which may also increase  detection.  Thus , TUC, in which the entire 
procedure including withdrawal is performed unde rwater , could potentially improve 
polyp detection compared to gas insufflation.   
The goal of our study was to use TUC in tandem with  standard  CO 2 insufflation  to 
determine if water is a better medium  than CO 2 for visualizing and detecting  polyps and 
adenomas . Our goal was to randomize patients to tandem colonoscopy performed first 
with either TUC or CO 2 followed by the other medium  in order to compare miss rates for 
4 
 polyps and adenomas . Our hypothesis wa s that TUC was associated with a lower  
adenoma  and polyp  miss rate for tandem performance of colonoscopy  than CO 2. 
 
 
Methods  
We conduct ed a randomized trial of tandem colonoscopies comparing TUC to CO 2 
insufflation.  Our study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards at the White 
River Junction Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Indiana University. All patients were 
consented with written consent prior to the colonoscopies.  In one group, TUC was 
employed as t he first method for mucosal inspection while in a second  group, CO 2 
insufflation was used first.  
Study Population  
Eligib le subjects were adults 50 -80 years  who present ed for colonoscopy at White 
River Junction VAMC , Indianapolis VAMC,  and Indiana Univers ity. Exclusion criteria 
included a  co-morbid status of  American Society of Anesthesiologists  physical status 
classification system  ASA of III (severe systemic disease)  or higher, I nflammatory 
Bowel Disease  (IBD) , surgical resection of the large bowel , as well as the use of non-
aspirin anticoagulants.  Finally, potential subjects who d id not report a clear effluent in 
the most recent bowel movement at time of colonoscopy were excluded from the study . 
Randomization  
The participants were  randomized using a random number generator , stratified by 
endoscopist/site. The results of the randomization were  opened prior to the initial 
insertion of the colonoscope , inform ing the endoscopist which method was first, CO 2 or 
TUC. 
Colonoscopy  
Consenting adults were randomized to undergo colonoscopy with either TUC or 
CO2 insufflation for the first colonoscopy followed by an exam ination  using the other 
technique. All exam ination s were  performed by one of three  experienced endoscopists  
(JCA, CJK, DKR). Participant s were  sedated using propofol or moderate  sedation with 
midazolam/fentanyl and diphenhydramine. All colonoscopies were  performed with high 
definition colonoscopes . (Olympus  CF-HQ190L ; Olympus (Tokyo, Japan))  
5 
 The randomization envelope was opened prior to the initial  insertion. An assistant 
measure d the inspection time with a stopwatch from insertion of scope into the rectum 
until the cecum was reached , stopping the watch during insertion for polyp resection  in 
both techniques  or for time spent washing or suctioning  (in CO 2 arm only ). For the arm 
where CO 2 insufflation was used first, the lumen was distended with the gas  during 
insertion.  When  the TUC technique was used first, the air valve was shut off and water 
was infused and any residual stool or air was suctioned out during insertion.  After the 
cecum was intubated, the endoscopist attempted to intubate the terminal ileum. The  
mucosal inspection was then initiated during withdrawal when the distention with water 
or CO2 was adequat e for visualization.  Measurement of  withdrawal  and inspection 
times w as initiated at this point.  Inspection time was the withdrawal time minus the time 
for biopsy or polypectomy  or for time spent washing or suctioning  (in CO 2 arm only) . 
The assistant with a stopwatch announced the withdrawal time periodically with the goal 
to equalize  inspection times.  
When the withd rawal of the colonoscope reached  the rect um and after the retro -
flexion wa s performed, the en doscopist re-insert ed the colonoscope using  the ot her 
technique. For the exams with TUC as the first method, water was suctioned out of the 
lumen as CO 2 was introduced into the lumen during the second insertion. Upon 
withdrawal, the remaining water was aspirated and CO 2 was used to distend the lumen 
to allow for adequate inspection of the mucosa. In the group in which CO 2 is used first, 
CO 2 was suctioned out during the second colonoscopy as the scope wa s inserted with 
water infusion. As the scope was withdrawn, water was infused  with the air valve turned 
off. Inspection was not  started until  after cecal intubation and the lumen wa s filled with 
water allowing for adequate visualization of the mucosa through the infused water. 
Inspection time was measured as outlined above.  
Outcome s 
The primary outcome measure and study endpoint was the miss rate for polyps and 
adenomas in the two study groups  18. Miss rates were  also calculated for participant  
level for each technique. Adenoma -level miss rates were  calculated as the number of 
additional adenomas detected during the second examination  (for both insertion and 
withdrawal)  divided by the total number of adenomas det ected during insertion and 
6 
 withdraw al for both examinations. These miss rates were  reported for the technique 
used for the first examination. Participant -level miss rates were calculated as the 
number of participant s with one or more adenomas detected during the second 
examination, divided by the total number of participant s with at least one adenoma in 
either examination. We also examine d proximal  (cecum, ascending colon, transverse 
colon and splenic flexure)  adenoma miss rates as a secondary outcome, which were  
calculated as above.  Finally, we also calculated serrated polyp (hyperplastic, sessile 
serrated polyp and traditional serrated adenoma)  
For each polyp, we estimated  size by open forceps, and noted location, method of 
removal, whether polyps were  detected by insertion or withd rawal and whether CO 2 or 
TUC was used for mucosal inspection.  
We used the Boston Bowel preparation score to assess the quality of the preparation. 
We also used a scale of good (3), fair (2) and poor (1) to assess the clarity or turbidity of 
the water durin g TUC for 3 segments, right, transverse and left colons.  
Co-variates  
Data collected include d participant age and sex, exam indication, personal history of 
colorectal neoplasia, family history of CRC, time (total pro cedure, insertion and 
inspection),  volume of water infused  during insertion and withdrawal , quality of bowel 
preparation as measured by the Boston Bowel Preparation Score and medications 
provided during the procedure.  
Statistical considerations  
In calculating  a sample size required to det ect a clinically important difference in 
miss rates between TUC and CO2 we used  the following assumptions: a 30% 
adenoma miss rate for regular colonoscopy19, 20; a 10% adenoma miss rate with TUC; 
50% of participant s would have at least one adenoma, and participant s with adenomas  
would have an average of two adenomas . We based this in part on a tandem study 
using cap since the cap had similar reported increase in adenoma detection to water 
exchange18. For the study to have 80% power to detect a 3 -fold reduction in adenoma 
miss rates, by using a chi -square test with a 5% signifi cance level, the study needed 6 0 
adenomas  per group. We assumed that each participant  would have on average two 
polyps and planned to enro ll at least 12 0 participants (6 0 at each site).  
7 
 Participant s who underwent initial colonoscopy with TUC were compared with 
participant s who underwent colonoscopy with CO 2 first for differences in age and 
propofol dose by using 2 -sample t -tests, for differences in sex and indication by using 
chi square tests, and for a difference in quality of bowel preparation by using a Mantel -
Haenszel test for ordered categories. Logistic regression was used to compare the miss 
rates between participant s who underwent TUC first and participant s who underwent 
CO 2 first. The model was adjusted for participant age, sex, family history of CRC, exam 
indication, time  for inspection, insertion time and  volume of water infused/aspirated . A 
generalized estimating equation was used to control for the effect of the endoscopist.  
 
1. Leung FW, Amato A, Ell C, et al. Water -aided colonoscopy: a systematic review. 
Gastrointestinal endoscopy 2012;76:657 -66. 
2. Ramirez FC, Leung FW. The water method for aiding colonoscope insertion: the 
learning curve of an experienced colonoscopist. J Interv Gastroenterol 
2011;1 :97-101. 
3. Ramirez FC, Leung FW. A head -to-head comparison of the water vs. air method 
in patients undergoing screening colonoscopy. Journal of interventional 
gastroenterology 2011;1:130 -135. 
4. Pohl J, Messer I, Behrens A, et al. Water infusion for cecal  intubation increases 
patient tolerance, but does not improve intubation of unsedated colonoscopies. 
Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology : the official clinical practice journal of 
the American Gastroenterological Association 2011;9:1039 -43 e1.  
5. Leung J, Mann S, Siao -Salera R, et al. A randomized, controlled trial to confirm 
the beneficial effects of the water method on U.S. veterans undergoing 
colonoscopy with the option of on -demand sedation. Gastrointestinal endoscopy 
2011;73:103 -10. 
6. Leung FW. Water exchange may be superior to water immersion for 
colonoscopy. Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology : the official clinical 
practice journal of the American Gastroenterological Association 2011;9:1012 -4. 
7. Hsieh YH, Tseng KC, Hsieh JJ, et al. Feas ibility of colonoscopy with water 
infusion in minimally sedated patients in an Asian Community Setting. Journal of 
interventional gastroenterology 2011;1:185 -190. 
8. Hsieh YH, Lin HJ, Tseng KC. Limited water infusion decreases pain during 
minimally sedated  colonoscopy. World journal of gastroenterology : WJG 
2011;17:2236 -40. 
9. Radaelli F, Paggi S, Amato A, et al. Warm water infusion versus air insufflation 
for unsedated colonoscopy: a randomized, controlled trial. Gastrointestinal 
endoscopy 2010;72:701 -9. 
10. Leung FW, Harker JO, Jackson G, et al. A proof -of-principle, prospective, 
randomized, controlled trial demonstrating improved outcomes in scheduled 
8 
 unsedated colonoscopy by the water method. Gastrointestinal endoscopy 
2010;72:693 -700. 
11. Leung CW, Kal tenbach T, Soetikno R, et al. Water immersion versus standard 
colonoscopy insertion technique: randomized trial shows promise for minimal 
sedation. Endoscopy 2010;42:557 -63. 
12. Leung FW, Aharonian HS, Leung JW, et al. Impact of a novel water method on 
scheduled unsedated colonoscopy in U.S. veterans. Gastrointestinal endoscopy 
2009;69:546 -50. 
13. Rex DK, Chen SC, Overhiser AJ. Colonoscopy technique in consecutive patients 
referred for prior incomplete colonoscopy. Clinical gastroenterology and 
hepatology :  the official clinical practice journal of the American 
Gastroenterological Association 2007;5:879 -83. 
14. Hsieh YH, Tseng CW, Hu CT, et al. Prospective multicenter randomized 
controlled trial comparing adenoma detection rate in colonoscopy using water 
exchange, water immersion, and air insufflation. Gastrointest Endosc 
2017;86:192 -201. 
15. Cadoni S, Falt P, Rondonotti E, et al. Water exchange for screening colonoscopy 
increases adenoma detection rate: a multicenter, double -blinded, randomized 
controlled tr ial. Endoscopy 2017;49:456 -467. 
16. Rex DK. Reply. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14:323 -4. 
17. Rex DK. Editorial: Water Exchange vs. Water Immersion During Colonoscope 
Insertion. The American journal of gastroenterology 2014;109:1401 -3. 
18. Hewett DG, Re x DK. Cap -fitted colonoscopy: a randomized, tandem colonoscopy 
study of adenoma miss rates. Gastrointestinal endoscopy 2010;72:775 -81. 
19. Rex DK, Cutler CS, Lemmel GT, et al. Colonoscopic miss rates of adenomas 
determined by back -to-back colonoscopies. Ga stroenterology 1997;112:24 -8. 
20. van Rijn JC, Reitsma JB, Stoker J, et al. Polyp miss rate determined by tandem 
colonoscopy: a systematic review. Am J Gastroenterol 2006;101:343 -50. 
 