              
   
 
 
Improving exercise capacity in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients 
through uphill walking  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September  14, 2023 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
A. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
A.1 COPD is an important Veteran  health issue.  COPD is currently the third leading cause of death in the 
United States and worldwide.5 The prevalence of COPD  in the U nited States  Veteran population,  ranging from 
33%-43%, is approximately five -fold higher than among the general population of the United States.1, 2, 4 A two -
fold increase in risk of developing COPD was found in those working in the armed forces.6 Active smoking 
continues to be a significant risk factor for COPD in the Veteran population.7 Further, the prevalence of chronic 
lung disease  (i.e., COPD, asthma, and interstitial lung disease)  has steadily increased from 2003 to 2011  in VA 
care8 inferring that pulmonary disease  will continue to be a major health concern for the VA.  
A.2 Exercise performance is limited in COPD and largely attributed to dys pnea (breathlessness) and 
dynamic hyperinflation (air trapping).9, 10  For a large number of patients, exercise is limited by reaching a 
maximal amount of additional air that can be drawn into the lungs (inspiratory reserve volume). Dynamic 
hyperinflation in the presence of expiratory airflow limitation is a characteristic of COPD. Increasing respiratory 
rate causes insufficient time for subsequent emptying. As a consequence, air becomes progressive ly retained 
in the lung (dynamic hyperinflation), and this is the primary cause of symptomatic breathlessness in COPD.11 
Skeletal muscle strength also limits exercise in COPD, and this is often the outcome of  severe detraining (i.e., 
use it or lose it) that develops in COPD patients.12 
 Exercise performance is the result of the interaction between intensity (power  output) and exercise 
duration. Exercise intensity is characteristically limited by inspiratory capacity , which, in turn , can be 
compromised by dynamic hyperinflation and ensuing dyspnea . Our study is based on the observation  that 
respiratory rate will  increase if gait speed increases , since breathing and walking coupling is less likely to vary 
at a simple  ratio (1 stride:1  breath) in patients with COPD . The key hypothesis we will test is that exercise on a 
slope  will permit higher intensity exercise without  increas ing respiratory rate. This is important,  as intensity is a 
major driver of training benefit.  
A.3 Coupling of walking and breathing presents a novel 
approach to increas e exercise performance . Extensive research 
demonstrates the presence of entrainment of movement and 
respiration in humans.13-16 It is well established that locomotor and 
respiratory rhythms strongly influence each other.17-19 There have 
been several pathways proposed that may mediate this coupling.17, 
20-22 Importantly, when rhythms are optimally coupled, energy 
expenditure is economize d.23, 24 Our work  demonstrate s that 
patients with COPD display an unvarying coupling pattern with very 
low ratios at a self -selected walking speed (e.g., 1 stride:1  breath ;  
Figure 2).3 Further, we show that energy expenditure is increased 
during walking in patients with COPD and is associated with 
abnormal coupling of breathing and walking  as compared to 
healthy controls.25 Thus, in COPD patients, faster  treadmill speed s 
drive increased stepping cadence  and increased respiratory rate s 
with earlier onset of dynamic hyperinflation and dyspnea, ultimately 
contri buting to shorter exercise duration.    
A.4 Walking uphill offers a unique approach to optimizing 
walking and breathing coupling.  Walking uphill presents different 
mechanical and metabolic demands from level ground walking. 
Uphill walking introduces a new obstacle as compared to level 
walking because the body must expend more energy to fight the increased amount of work needed to move 
the body’s mass against gravity.26 Energy req uirements, amount of work, and muscle activation increase with 
steeper uphill slopes. At slope s greater than 0. 2%, the energy cost of walking becomes proportional to the 
slope .27 During uphill walking, self -selected speed decreases with increasing slope .28 This could be due to 
metabolic constraints and/or mechanical constraints that are altered during uphill walking.28-30  
Our preliminary work, as well as published literature, supports the overall hypothesis that having patients with 
COPD walk a slight slope  at a slower walking speed  may lower respiratory rate , mediated by optimized walking 
and breathing coupling, a nd result in a delayed onset of dynamic hyperinflation  and dyspnea as compared to 
level treadmill walking that relies on increased speed  to increase workload .  
B. PRELIMINARY STUDIES AND CURRENT STATUS OF THE FIELD  
Figure 2. The most frequently used coupling 
frequency ratios ( strides:breath) from 17 
patients with COPD (black) and 23 control 
subjects (gray) while walking at a self -
selected walking speed.3 More patients with 
COPD use less complex ratios such as 1:1 
and 3:2. Patients with  COPD do not use 
higher ratios such as 4:1 and 5:1. These 
results are consistent under various walking 
speeds. NOTE: NC=no coupling  
0246810
NC 1:1 3:2 2:1 5:2 3:1 4:1 5:1Number of Subjects
B.1 Preliminary work  
In addition to our published work3, 25, 31 demonstrating abnormal 
coupling ratios and their association with energy expenditure in patients 
with COPD, we have conducted a preliminary study investigating the 
effects of uphill walking on coupling ratios.  
Walking on a slope  alters coupling in older a dults. The goal of this 
study was to investigate the effect of walking on a slope  on energy 
expenditure and breathing and walking coupling in healthy young and 
healthy older adults. Ten healthy young adults ( Mean(SD): 22.5(1.1) 
years) and 10 healthy older adults (67.9(3.9) years) were asked to walk 
at their preferred walking speed on a treadmill that was either level (0%  
slope ) or slope d (10%  slope ). Energy expenditure, rating of perceived 
exertion, as well as breathing and walking coupling  ratios  were 
quan tified. Older adults walked at a slower speed uphill as c ompared to 
young adults . Uphill walking increased energy expenditure (p<0.001) 
and rating of perceived exertion (p<0.001) above level walking. 
Breathing and walking coupl ing ratios  became more variab le in older 
adults during uphill  walking as compared to level walking ( Figure 3 ).  
B.2 Current status of the field  
A dearth of information exists on the effect of slope  walking in patients with COPD. Previous focus, 
although limited, has been on downhill walking.32-34 Decline walking requires controlled, eccentric contractions 
of the lower -extremity musculature, considered a more stressful walking condition compared to level walking.35 
Eccentric muscle contractions lead to increased muscle damage, muscle soreness , and fatigue.36, 37 Recent 
research demonstrate s improvements in exercise capacity after a downhill walking program; howe ver, muscle 
soreness between training sessions was not measured and reported.32, 33 In addition, it has been shown that 
during decline walk ing, healthy young persons must tightly control their angular momentum as to maintain 
stability and this may be difficult for pathological populations , increasing their risk of falls.38 Our approach 
focuses on uphill walking at slight slope s. This approach increases exercise intensity through increased 
mechanical demand to move the body against gravity; however, this is done through concentric muscle 
contractions. For the most detrained individuals, this approach limits immediate effects of muscle damage, 
soreness, and fatigue, leading to increased confidence and efficacy in exercise performance.  
Other s trategies have been explored to permit tolerable exercise at higher intensity in COPD. Interval 
exercise, for example, has been shown to increase exercise duration,39, 40 but has yet to show a superior 
training effect .41, 42 Bronchodilators, helium -oxygen , and oxygen supplementation have been shown to reduce 
dynamic hyperinflation.43-47 Our approach could be combined with any combination of these other interventions 
and offers a separate means to permit improved exercise performance in COPD.  
Current pulmonary rehabilitation programs vary but generally include exercise, most commonly on a 
treadmill, behavioral change, and educational and nutritional counseling components.48, 49 Rehabilitation 
improves exercise capacity primarily th rough muscle training; however, not all individuals benefit from 
rehabilitation.48, 50 -52 Rehabilitation (or exercise training) has a positive impact on strength, exe rcise tolerance 
(measured in a laboratory setting), dyspnea, self -efficacy, and health -related quality of life; rehabilitation, 
however, does not improve lung function.48, 49, 53 -56 Further, the activity levels of COPD patients are not 
consistently improved following conventional rehabilitation.50, 57 -59 Improving the effectiveness of pulmonary 
rehabilitation will improve the outcomes for participants. In addition, many of those referred to 
rehabilitation are unable to continue and do not report benefit. Improvin g one’s ability to participate in 
rehabilitation will increase the percentage of COPD patients for whom rehabilitation will be beneficial .  
C. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
C.1 Overall Design   
This study will utilize a cross -sectional design to determine if walking on a slope  1) result s in less dynamic 
hyperinflation , 2), improve s dyspnea , and 3) leads to more complex  coupling as compared to walking faster . 
The study will be completed over four visits.  A total of 25 patients  (aged 45 -80 years) with moderate to severe 
COPD will be enrolled in the study. Hereinafter the patients will be referred to as subjects. During visit 1, 
subjects  with moderate to severe COPD, recruited and consented from the Omaha VAMC pulmonary and 
general medicine clinics , will undergo a maximal cardiopulmonary exercise test under medical supervision.  
Only those that are cleared for  participation by a physician will be enrolled  into the study . Subjects , stratified by 
02468
NC 1:1 3:2 2:1 5:2 3:1Number of Subjects
Figure 3. The most frequently used 
coupling frequency ratios (strides:breath) 
from 10 young (black) and 10 older 
adults (gray) while walking level (solid) 
and uphill (stripe). Older adults used 
more ratios (increased variability) whe n 
walking uphill as opposed to level 
walking. NOTE: NC=no coupling  
disease severity60 upon enrollment  (Table 1), will complete 
experimental conditions . The second  visit a cardiopulmonary exercise 
test will be used to determine a set speed and slope that equates to 
70%-80% of peak work rate using VO 2 (volume of oxygen consumed). 
Specifically, the time course of work rate will be calculated from the 
cardiopulmonary exercise test . The  speed and slope  that corresponds 
to where 70%-80% of peak work rate  was identified will be used . After sufficient rest, an additional constant 
work rate test will be given using increases in speed with a level treadmill to determine the speed that elicits a 
VO 2 comparable to the previous walking test. In addition, s ubjects will be asked to a series of questionnaires to 
characterize their disease state . During the third and fourth visits, airflow, respiratory rate,  oximetry,  dynamic 
hyperinflation, and walking  cadence  will be recorded during the trials  at the speed /no slope  or speed/ slope  
determined in the previous visit . Speed or slope conditions will be randomized across visits. At the end of each 
trial, dyspnea rating will be recorded.  
C.2 Subjects, Sample Size, and Inclusion Criteria  
C.2.a Sample size justification : For this proposal, we are requesting funding to recruit and enroll a pilot 
population of 25 subjects. Subjects will be recruited and screened until all 25 subjects  are enrolled. Stratified 
sampling will be conducted as  subject s are enrolled.  Subjects  will be stratified by disease severity  (Table 1). 
According to Omaha VAMC  patient numbers, more than 45,000 visits are documented  in the pulmonary clinics 
and other general health clinics  with over 2,000 pulmonary function tests yearly . We anticip ate recruiting 3-4 
subjects /month during months 3 -18. We anticipa te meet ing our enrollment  goal of 1-2 enrolled/month . 
C.2.b Inclusion and exclusion criteria:  Veterans  from all sex/gender, 
race, and ethnicity will be recruited. All subjects will undergo post -
bronchodilator spirometry and be clinically stable. All subjects must have 
documented FEV 1/FVC ratio of <0.7 , and between 30% to 80% FEV 1% 
predicted  (Table 1).60 If subject s have non-qualifying spirometry, they will 
not be screened further. Subjects with qualifying spirometry will be 
screened further  (Figure 4) . Potential subjects must have a BMI of less 
than 35 kg/m2 and must be free from co -morbidities that may affect 
walking patterns (e.g., peripheral arterial disease, diabetes, low back 
pain). Subjects must also be free from other co -morbidities that may have 
confounding effects such as neurological  or musculoskele tal disease. 
Those that meet the initial eligibility criteria will undergo  a 
cardiopulmonary exercise test . Those that are cleared for participation by 
a physician will be enrolled  in the study  following informed consent . 
Based on the exercise test and the  pulmonary function test , subjects  will 
need to meet the following criteria for enrollment: have moderate to 
severe COPD  and have no other pulmonary or cardiac issues that will 
pose a safety hazard when participating in the laboratory treadmill trials.  
C.2.c Recruitment of subjects:  The PI conducts a Pulmonary Clinic at the Omaha VAMC every Wednesday. 
During clinic, a member of her research team, will be present. When a subject that fits the preliminary inclusion 
criteria, the PI will refer the patient to  speak with the research team before leaving. The research team will also 
be allowed to recruit subjects  through Veteran communications such as newsletters and , by accessing 
potential subject names through VINCI,  with generic letters informing them of the study . 
C.3 Protocol – Common for all aims   
C.3.a Screening and eligibility  (VISIT 1) : All potential subjects will be consented and  begin screening  at the 
Omaha VAMC . Screening includes a comprehensive medical history and spirometry test. Potential subjects 
that meet the initial screening criteria will undergo a cardiopulmonary exercise test administered at the Omaha 
VAMC . The Porszasz  treadmill protocol61 will be used.  This treadmill protocol provides a linear increase in 
work rate and is appropriate for testing those with a low exercise tolerance. Medical professionals will oversee 
this test with all safety precautions in place (e.g., 12-lead ECG, crash cart). Potential subjects that are cleared 
to participate by a physician will be enrolled.  
C.3.b VISIT 2 : Once eligibility is determined, subjects will come  to the Biomechanics Research Building  at the 
University of Nebraska at Omaha (VA -leased space) . They will complete a series of questionnaires  that will be 
used as covariates in the analysis . Health -related  quality of life and activity -related dyspnea will be assessed 
through the Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire62, 63 and SF -36.64 To assess severity of dyspnea, they Table 1. Stratification strateg y 60 
Category  Criteria  
Mild FEV 1 ≥ 80% predicted  
Moderate  50% ≤ FEV 1 < 80% predicted  
Severe  30% ≤ FEV 1 < 50% predicted  
Very Severe  FEV 1 < 30% predicted  
Figure 4. Flow chart of enrollment 
process.  
will be asked to complete the modified British Medical Research Council Questionnaire.  To assess the impact 
COPD has on their everyday lif e, subjects will be asked to complete the COPD Assessment Tool.65 To 
determine work rate, t he time course of work rate (done against gravity)  from the Porszasz treadmill protocol 
will be calculated. The speed and slope  that corresponds to 70%-80% peak  work rate  will be used .  
Subjects will be outfitted with a face mask that covers their nose and mouth attached to a portable 
metabolic cart (K5, Cosmed USA, Inc., Chicago, IL). We previously have used this method to measure energy 
expenditure in COPD patients without reported adverse events. Resting heart rate , respiratory rates , and tidal 
volume  will be recorded  as well through this device . Subjects  will stand quietly for five minutes while energy 
expenditure is collected through the metabolic unit. Subjects will have a transcutaneous oximeter attached to 
their abductor pollicis brevis  (The Moxy Monitor System , Moxy, Minneapolis, MN ). Subjects will walk at t he 
speed and slope  that corresponds to 70%-80% peak work rate. Subjects will maintain this level of exercise for 
one minute. If fatigued, they will be instructed to stop. (As exercise time at 80% VO 2 max is generally six 
minutes, we anticipate most subjects will complete the test without difficulty.) After sufficient rest and the return 
of heart rate and respiratory rate to resting levels for at least 10 minutes, subjects will complete an additional  
constant work rate test.  They will walk at increasing speeds until the same VO 2 from the previous walking test 
is achieved. This speed will be recorded,  and the subject will be asked to continue to exercise at this rate for 
one minute.  
C.3.c VISIT 3 : Within  seven days , subjects will return for their first experimental  visit. Subjects will be prepared 
for data collection by wearing a form -fitting suit (i.e., wrestling singlet) and obtaining height  and body weight. 
Retro-reflective markers will be placed bilaterally on anatomical locations of the feet, legs, and hips  (Figure 5), 
in addition to 89 markers on the thorax and abdomen .66-69  Subjects will 
be outfitted with the portable metabolic cart and oximeter as in  the 
previous visit . One of t wo treadmill trials will be performed: 1) at the 
speed and 2) at the slope  +speed  determined in the previous visit. Trial 
order will be randomized among subjects  and across  visits  3 & 4 . For 
each trial, subjects will be asked to walk on a treadmill for up to  6 
minutes. Speed or slope  will be increased every 30 seconds and they will 
be asked to walk for one minute at that speed or slope . Once they reach 
the speed or slope  that was determined to be 70 %-80% of peak work 
rate, they will walk for an additional one minute. This procedure will allow 
for multiple data points for interpolation.  Immediately at the end of the 
trial, dyspnea will be assessed by Borg scale .70 Dynamic hyperinflation 
will be assessed through motion capture of the thorax and abdomen 
(optoplethysmograph y).66-69 
C.3.d VISIT 4 : Within seven days, subjects will return for their last 
experimental visit.  Methods will be similar to C.3.c. Subjects will 
complete the treadmill trial that was not completed in Visit 3 , either the 
speed or the slope  trial. The treadmill trial will be administered in the same manner between both visits.  
C.4 Instrumentation and Data Processing Measures  (Table 2):  
C.4.a Questionnaires to be used as  covariates  
Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire:62, 63 A 20-item questionnaire in which items are scored from 1 
(most severe) to 7 (no  impairment). There are four subscale areas tested: dyspnea, fatigue, emotion, and 
mastery. In the dyspnea section, the subject is asked to recall the five most important activities that caused 
dyspnea over the past two weeks.  Items within each subsection can range from 1 to 7 or most severe to no 
impairment.  A total score , as well as individual subscale scores , can be calculated.  
SF-36:64 A generic assessment of health -related quality of life from the subject’s perspective. The SF -36 
contains eight domains: physical functioning, role -physical, general health perceptions, vitality, social 
functioning, role -emotional , mental health , and health transition . Two composite scores result: physical health 
composite score and mental health composite score. Scores >50 indicate better physical or mental health than 
the mean and <50 indicate worse health. 22 
Modified British Medical Research Council Questionnaire:71-73 A five -level rating scale based on the patient’s 
perception of dyspn ea in daily activities.  Patient s rate their level of perception of dyspnea on 5 grades, from 0 
to 4. A grade of 0 reflects , “I only get breathless with strenuous exercise”; whereas a grade of 4 reflects “I am 
too breathless to leave the house” or “I am bre athless when dressing .” 
COPD Assessment Tool  (CAT) :65 A patient -completed instrument that complements existing approaches to 
assessing COPD.  It is a simple and reliable measure of health status in COPD to quant ifying the impact of 
Figure 5. Subject wearing form -fitting 
suit while walking on a level treadmill.  
COPD on the patient’s health. It is comprised of 
8 questions and scores range from 1 -40. A 
score 5 is typical of a normal, healthy individual. 
A score <10 is considered low impact; 10 -20 is 
considered medium impact; >20 is considered 
high impact; and >30 is considered very high 
impact on everyday life.  
C.4.b Aim 1: Identify differences in dynamic 
hyperinflation  and dyspnea  during speed v. 
slope walking.   
Dynamic hyperinflation:  Dynamic hyperinflation 
will be assessed through opto -plethysmography , 
an established method of computing lung 
volumes, including dynamic hype rinflation.66-69, 
74-84 Opto -plethysmography uses three -
dimensional motion capture information to 
determine lung volumes . The 3 -D coordinates of 
the 89 markers on the abdomen and thorax will 
be used to create a  representation of the  
surface of the trunk  (Motion Analysis Corp., Santa Rosa, CA; 120Hz) . The volume of the trunk enclosed by the 
surface will be obtained through a custom computer code  (MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA ). Dynamic 
hyperinflation  will be considered to be present when end -expiratory  chest wall volume  increased in relation to 
resting values.75, 84 
Perceived dyspnea:70 Breathlessness will be measured based on a 0 to 10 -point Borg scale at the end of the 
treadmill trials.   
C.4.c Aim 2:  Compare differences in respiratory rate, oxygen uptake, and lung dead space from speed 
to slope walking.  
Respiratory rate:  Respiratory rate will be analyzed using motion capture markers on the chest. With custom 
computer code, the markers will be identified to model a sphere. The  volume of the sphere  will be recorded 
over time. As the volume increases and decreases, respirato ry flow will be identified , and respiratory rate can 
be calculated.  
Oxygen uptake : Heart rate and p ulmonary gas exchange analysis will be recorded on a breath -by-breath basis  
(TrueOne2400; ParvoMedics, Sandy, Utah ). This will provide an accurate measure of  pulmonary gas 
exchange,  including oxygen uptake,  i.e. VO 2, in real -time. Steady -state VO 2 while  walking will be averaged  and 
normalized to standing metabolic rate . Heart rate is recorded via an interface with a Polar heart rate monitor 
and is synchronized to pulmonary gas exchange.  
Dead space : Tidal volume and expired carbon dioxide will be measured using the same equipment as oxygen 
uptake above. Partial pressure o f arterial carbon dioxide will be measured using a transcutaneous sensor ( The 
Moxy Monitor System , Moxy , Minneapolis, MN) . Dead space is equal to tidal volume multiplied by the partial 
pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO 2) minus partial pressure of e xpired carbon dioxide (PeCO 2) divided by 
PaCO 2. 
C.4.d Aim 3: Determine the complexity of  walking and breathing coupling  ratios  between speed v. 
slope walking.  
Coupling:  The laboratory is equipped with a 1 7-camera, digital motion capture system (Motion Analysis Corp., 
Santa Rosa, CA; 120Hz) to allow for collection of three -dimensional marker positions in real time. The marker 
position data will be analyzed using custom MATLAB code (MathWorks, Inc., Natick, M A) available in the 
laboratory. Data  will be  plotted to detect spikes and outliers. Spikes and data points greater than three 
standard deviations from the mean will be  removed. A cubic spline will be used to interpolate the removed data 
points. All marker data are then normalized to the unit vector for comparison . 
Coupling is often quantified  as frequency coupling .85, 86 Frequency coupling refers to how many heel 
strikes occur within a single cycle of respiration (one inhalation to the next); it is usually counted in integer or 
half-integer ratios , measured us ing discrete relative phase. Discrete relative phase values between 0 º-360º 
have a 1:1 relationship, 360 º-720º have a 2:1 relationship, 720 º-1080º have a 3:1 relationship, and so on. Half -
integer couplings (expressed as 3:2, 5:2, 7:2, etc.) exist when the frequency alternates between two integers.  
The range of ratios and the percentage of time each ratio is utilized will be recorded.   Table 2. Measures to be collected during the course of the study.  
General Descriptive 
Measures  Measurement Domain  Visit  
Demographics  Description of subject population  1 
FEV 1/FVC  Determination of presence of COPD  1 
Medical history  Determination of co -morbidities  1 
Potential Covariates    
Chronic Respiratory 
Disease Questionnaire  Health -related quality of life and 
activity -related dyspnea  2 
mMRC  Dyspnea severity  2 
CAT Impact of COPD on everyday life  2 
SF-36 Health -related quality of life  2 
Variables Collected    
Respiratory rate  Exercise performance  3,4 
VO 2 Oxygen uptake  3,4 
Oxygenation  Dead space  3,4 
Opto -plethysmography  Dynamic hyperinflation  3,4 
Rate of perceived 
dyspnea  Dyspnea  3,4 
Breathing rhythm  Coupling ratios  3,4 
Walking rhythm  Coupling ratios  3,4 
NOTE: m MRC=modified British Medical Research Council 
Questionnaire ; CAT=COPD Assessment Tool  
C.5 Statistical Analysis  
For sample size justification, please see section C.2.a. Demographic characteristics will be compared between 
groups using independent t -tests for continuous variables and Chi -square tests for categorical variables. For all 
aims, data transformations , non -parametric tests,  or generalized linear mixed models will be performed as 
appropriate .  
Aim 1:  A statistically significant decrease in dynamic hyperinflation  and/or dyspnea  during slope walking 
compared to speed walking will support our hypothesis. To dete rmine the effectiveness of speed versus slope  
on dynamic hyperinflation  and dyspnea  in patients with COPD, linear mixed -effects models will be conducted. 
The model will include dynamic hyperinflation  and dyspnea  as the outcome variable and walking conditions as 
the independent variable , as we ll as possible confounders . Missing data will be explored in terms of the 
missing data mechanism, multiple imputation s, or other missing data strategies will be considered depending 
on the extent of missing data.  
Aim 2 : A statistically significant decrease in respiratory rate and dead space with an increase in oxygen uptake  
during slope walking will support our hypothesis. Similar to Aim 1, linear mixed -effects models will be used to 
identify differences between  the two walking conditions. Confounding variables and missing data will be dealt  
with in the same manner as Aim 1 . 
Aim 3:  An increase in complexity  of coupling during slope walking compared to speed walking will support our 
hypothesis. Similar to Aim 1, l inear mixed -effects models will be used to identify differences in preferred ratios  
between the two walking conditions.  Confounding variables and missing data will be dealt  with in the same 
manner.  
C.6 Anticipated Results and Alternative Strategies  
We anticipate that dynamic hyperinflation and dyspnea will be reduced  in patients with COPD due to slower 
walking and slower respiratory rates during sloped  walking  as compared to level speed walking.  It is expected 
that this will be influenced  by the complexity  in breathing and walking coupling  ratios .  
Although the preliminary data indicate that change does occur in breathing and walking  coupling in 
healthy controls, the pathophysiology of COPD may prevent a similar change in breathing and walk ing 
coupling while walking on a slope . In this case, data regarding changes in dynamic hyperinflation and dyspnea 
will still prove to be beneficial. These data will provide clinically meaningful data with regards to alternative 
approaches to pulmonary reha bilitation. Meaningful changes in these measures will provide fundamental data 
that may be used to guide pulmonary rehabilitation approaches in the future.  
 There is the possibility that the patients with COPD that have less severe disease and are healthier 
could perform better than those with greater disease severity. Therefore, only those with moderate to severe  
disease will be included  (Table 1). We have addressed  this by stratifying subjects as they are enrolled in the 
study. It is possible that age may influence the results as well; however, we anticipate disease severity to be a 
larger confounding variable than age. There is no research, at this time, t o support the notion that age will 
influence one’s ability to couple walking and breathing rhythms.  
C.7 Timeline  
The study will be divided into specific goals that will be targeted and achieved  (Table 3). Every three  months, 
intermediate objectives will be assessed,  and decisions will be made regarding the course and direction of the 
continuing research effort.   
C.8 Future Directions  
In summary, our research proposal uses 
a novel theoretical approach and a shift 
in clinical research through a new 
method. By exploring an innovative 
approach to improving exercise 
performance in COPD , it may be possible to increase exercise training inten sity and duration and thus, 
improve the benefits of training during rehabilitation. Results from this study, including the demonstration  
of physiologic and symptomatic benefits from the proposed method of slope  walking , will set the stage 
for a rigorous , well-powered , full Merit award outcome study evaluating the effectiveness of a slope -
based training regimen as part of rehabilitation.  This future Merit award clinical trial need s to demonstrate 
that physical activity and lung function, outcomes most associated with morbidity and mortality, improve after a 
slope d-based pulmonary rehabilitation approach . Table 3. Timeline  Year 1  Year 2  
 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
Hire and train personnel          
Subject recruitment          
Data collection for all aims          
Data processing and analysis          
Manuscript preparation          
Grant preparation and submission          