4/21/2022  1 
 RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
 
Administration of ondansetron with P -glycoprotein inhibitor tariquidar in patients with neuropathic pain  
  
 
Principal Investigator:  
Simon Haroutounian, PhD  
Associate  Professor  of Anesthesiology  
Chief, Division of Clinical and Translational Research  
Department of Anesthesiology , Washington University School of Medicine  
660 S. Euclid Ave , Campus Box 8054 ,  
Saint Louis, MO, 63110  
E-mail: simon.haroutounian@wustl.edu  
 
Co-investigators:  
 
 
Robert A. Swarm, MD  
Professor of Anesthesiology  
Chief, Division of Pain Management  
Department of Anesthesiology, Washington University School of Medicine  
E-mail: swarmr@wustl.edu   
 
Katharine N. Gurba, MD, PhD  
Department of Anesthesiology, and Pain Management Center,  
Washington University School of Medicine  
E-mail: gurbak@wustl.edu  
 
Lara Crock , MD, PhD  
Department of Anesthesiology, and Pain Management Center ,  
Washington University School of Medicine  
E-mail:  crockl@wustl.edu   
 
Yan Yan, MD, PhD  
Professor of Clinical Epidemiology  and Biostatistics; Department of Surgery  
Washington University School of Medicine  
yany@wustl.edu   
 
 
Version Date:  September 8 , 2020  
Revised:  October 29 , 2020  
          April 21, , 202 2 
 
 
 
 
 
Short Title: Ondansetron -Tariquidar combination in patients with neuropathic pain  
   
4/21/2022  2 
   
1.  SYNOPSIS  
 
Study Title  Administration of ondansetron with P -glycoprotein inhibitor tariquidar in 
patients with neuropathic pain  
Objective  To determine the pharmacokinetics and tolerability of  co-administration of 5-
HT 3R antagonist ondansetron  with a P-glycoprotein inhibitor tariquidar , in 
patients with neuropathic pain . 
Hypothesis  Co-administration with tariquidar will  increase the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to 
plasma ratio of ondansetron after intravenous administration .  
 
Co-administration of a single dose 16mg ondansetron with 4mg/kg tariquidar 
will be tolerable in patients with neuropathic pain  
Study Period  Planned enrollment duration : Approximately  24 months  
Planned study duration:  Approximately  30 months  
Number of Subjects  28 evaluable patients with peripheral neuropathic pain   
Study Drug  Two infusion s of 16mg intravenous ondansetron  co-administered with 
intravenous 4mg/kg tariquidar or placebo (D5W) , 3 weeks  apart .  
If intolerable, t he dose of o ndansetron will be reduced to 12mg or 8mg in a 
stepwise fashion ( see section 3.2 ). 
Study Design  Prospective, randomized, double -blind , placebo controlled, cross -over proof 
of concept study.  
Inclusion and 
Exclusion Criteria  Inclusion criteria : 
1. Age 18-70;  
2. Documented diagnosis of neuropathic pain due to damage or disease 
affecting  the peripheral nerv ous system;  
3. At least P robable neuropathic p ain grading1; 
4. Pain duration >3 months ; 
5. Average pain intensity ≥4 on 0 -10 numerical rating scale ( NRS). 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Current pregnancy or lactation;  
2. Moderate -severe kidney or liver dysfunction;  
3. Active cardiac ar rhythmias (non -sinus rhythm) , Long QT syndrome, or 
QTc interval >450msec ; 
4. Congestive heart failure  
5. Abnormal troponin values at screening visit ; 
6. Current treatment with  MAO inhibitors, mirtazapine , SSRI or SNRI 
antidepressants, except duloxetine up to 60mg/day, escitalopram up 
to 10mg/day, or citalopram up to 20mg/day ; 
7. Current treatment with tapentadol , tramadol, or fentanyl ; 
8. Current treatment with P -glycoprotein  substra te drugs with narrow 
therapeutic window, e.g. digoxin ; 
9. Current treatment with tricyclic antidepressant medications (e.g. 
amitriptyline, desipramine, imipramine) at a dose >25mg/day ; 
10. Ongoing use of any of the following medications with known effects 
on Pgp function: carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, 
cyclosporine, clarithromycin, erythromycin, ritonavir, verapamil, 
rifampicin, St. John’s wort;  
11. Current treatment with QT -prolonging drugs , and drugs known to 
have a significant interaction with ondansetron  or other  P-
glycoprotein  substrates (see section 2.3.3.) ; 
4/21/2022  3 
  
Measurements  1. Venous blood sampling for pharmacokinetics: At 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, 
180, and 240 minutes from the beginning of ondansetron infusion.  
2. A CSF sample will be obtained via lumbar puncture between 30 and 180 
minutes from the beginning of ondansetron infusion , for the 
assessment of Ondansetron concentration in the CSF using population 
PK approach.  
3. Vital signs (pulse oximetry , blood pressure) : before infusion and 30, 60, 
120, 180 and 240 minutes after end of ondansetron infusion.  
4. 12-lead ECG : At baseline and prior to discharge.  
5. Troponin: prior to discharge.   
6. Intensity of spontaneous pain (on 0 -10 NRS): At baseline, and a fter 
ondansetron administration; every 10 minutes for 60 minutes, every 15 
minutes thereafter for a total of 120 minutes, every 30 minutes until 
240 minutes,  hourly on the study day until bedtime, and daily for 3 
weeks thereafter.  
7. Neuropathic Pain Symptom  Inventory (NPSI) pain descriptors: Prior to 
and 70 minutes after ondansetron administration.  
Statistical 
Methodology  Primary Outcome:   
The primary objectives are to evaluate the pharmacokinetics and the tolerability  
of ondansetron and tariquidar single dose iv co -administration  (in comparison 
to ondansetron administration alone) in patients with neuropathic pain.  
 
Secondary outcomes : 
1. Change in spontaneous pain intensity (measured on 0 -10 NRS) from 
baseline to 60 -120 minutes after ondansetron IV infusion,  compared 
between two sessions with and without tariquidar. The pain severity 
values obtained at 60, 90, and 120 minutes will be averaged to derive 
the outcome measure. The values will be compared via paired t -test (or 
Wilcoxon signed -rank test, if data no t normally distributed).  
2. Changes in NPSI total score and sub-scores  (burning pain, paroxysmal 
pain, paresthesia /dysesthesia score ) will be compared between 
treatment sessions;  
3. The association between baseline Conditioned Pain Modulation ( CPM ) 
magnitude (ΔCPM) and the % pain reduction from baseline will be 
determined by bivariate regression. A significant association between 
the two measures will be indicative of differential analgesic response as 
a function of descending pain modulation;  
4. Exploratory analyses will be performed  to determine if variables such as  
sex, weight,  baseline wind -up ratio (WUR), peak ondansetron plasma 
concentration, and P -glyco protein  genotype affect the difference in 
pain reduction  between the two study sessions . 
4/21/2022  4 
 2.  STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
2.1 Background and Significance  
Neuropathic pain (NeuP) affects more than  16 million Americans2 and results in considerable impairment in 
quality of life.3 Five of every six patients with NeuP do not achieve adequate pain relief with currently approved 
medications;4 moreover, efficacious drugs such as opioi ds and tricyclic antidepressants have major safety concerns. 
Therefore, new therapeutic approaches ar e urgently needed to reduce the burden of NeuP.  
Serotonergic 5 -HT 3 receptors  (5-HT 3R) in the central nervous system (CNS) have been identified as a promising 
pharmacological target for neuropathic pain.5,6 Normally, descending modulation from the brainstem inhibits the 
sensitization of spinal cord dorsal horn neurons through serotonin activity.7 However, a fter peripheral nerve 
damage, neurons in the dorsal horn demonstrate overexpre ssion of 5 -HT 3R, the only (excitatory) ion channels 
among serotonin receptors.6,8 As a result, the character of descending serotonergic modulation in NeuP can shift 
from inhibitory to excitatory (facilitatory).9,10 This finding is supported by studies demonstratin g that local 
intrathecal delivery of 5 -HT 3R antagonists such as ondansetron alleviates mechanical and thermal hypersensitivity 
in animal models of nerve injury.5,11-13 In contrast, these analgesic effects are not consistently observed with 
systemic administration of these drugs in either preclinical pain models14,15 or in analgesic clinical trials.16,17 This 
discrepancy can be explained by the fact that currently available 5 -HT 3R antagonists are substrates of efflux 
transporters such as the P -glycoprotein (Pgp), located at the capilla ries of blood -brain barrier (BBB) and blood -spinal 
cord barrier (BSCB).18,19 Our preliminary data and others20 suggest that this efflux limits the CNS exposure to 
systemic 5 -HT 3R antagonists, preventing neuropathic pain relief.  Bypassing Pgp -mediated efflux is  expected to 
increase the concentrations of these drugs at their CNS sites of action and thus provide adeq uate relief in 
neuropathic pain.  
In addition to CNS penetration, the choice of appropriate pain condition and patient somatosensory 
characteristics are important for preventing a “ translational mismatch ” between preclinical and clinical study 
design.21 While 5 -HT 3R overexpression in rodent nerve injury models contributes to the descending facilitation,11,22 
none of the previous clinical studies with 5 -HT 3R antagonists have attempted to select patients who would exhibit 
a phenotype suggesting descending facilitation, where the intervention is expected to work. Moreover, in one study 
that undertook the effort of quantifying descending modulation, most patients exhibited e fficient inhibition (and 
not facilitation).23 Interestingly, tropisetron was efficaci ous in fibromyalgia,24,25 a condition in which most patients  
tend to exhibit descending facilitation .26,27 Determining descending pain modulation phenotype is promising for 
predicting responses to certain analgesics,28,29 and recent recommendations for such sensory phenotyping in 
chronic pain studies have been published.30  
 
 
2.2 Preliminary Data  
Our preliminary data on conditioned pain modulation (CPM), a 
surrogate measure of descending inhibition vs. facilitation ( Fig. 1 ) 
demonstrate that while in healthy adults less than 20% exhibit descending 
facilitation, 40 -50% of patients with peripheral NeuP exhibit various 
degrees of descending facilitation. We expect to have sufficient balance 
between descending inhibition and facilitation among enrolled NeuP 
patients, to determine the association between this phenotype and pain 
reduction.  In a recent pharmacokinetic study of ondansetron disposition 
in the CSF, a 7-fold difference was observed betw een plasma and CSF 
concentrations of ondansetron after a single 16 -mg infusion .31 
 
We have also performed a series of experiments in rats to determine the 
distribution properties of ondansetron (in plasma, heart, and brain) in the 
setting of P-glycoprotein ( Pgp) genetic knockout (KO) or Pgp in hibition 
with tariquidar (Figure 2). Plasma concentrations (2A) of ondansetron 
were not different between wild type (WT) rats, Pgp KO rats, or after pre -administration of 15mg/kg tariquidar in 
Fig 1 . Conditioned pain modulation 
(CPM) in NeuP and healthy controls .  
DPN - diabetic peripheral neuropathy; CIPN - 
chemotherapy -induced peripheral neuropathy;  

4/21/2022  5 
 wild -type rats.  Heart concentrations (2 B) of ondansetron in Pgp  KO rats compared with WT rats were not different 
at 30 and 60 -min time points, and were lower at 15 - and 120 -min time points. In rats pre -treated with tariquidar 
(only 1 -h time point available), the heart concentrations of ondansetron were not different f rom wild -type or Pgp 
knockout.  Brain concentrations  (2C) of ondansetron were higher in Pgp KO rats and in tariquidar -treated rats, 
compared with ondansetron administered to WT rats. There was no difference in brain concentrations between 
Pgp KO rats and r ats pre -treated with tariquidar.  
 
 
 
 
 
 0.010.1110
0 1 2 3 4 5Ondansetron  (ug/mL)
Time (h)Plasma
Cp WT
Cp Pgp KO
Cp - OND only
Cp - OND+TQR
A 
0.010.1110
0 1 2 3 4Ondansetron (ug/mL)
Time (h)Heart
Chrt WT
Chrt Pgp KO
Chrt - OND only
Chrt - OND+TQR
B 
0.010.1110100
0 1 2 3Ondansetron (ug/mL)
Time (h)Brain Cbr WT
Cbr Pgp KO
Cbr - OND only
Cbr - OND+TQR
C Figure 2.  
Tissue concentrations of 
ondansetron in rats 
(mcg/mL tissue). Male 
Sprague -Dawley rats were 
injected with 10mg/kg  IV 
ondansetron (OND) via a 
jugular vein cannula  and 
sacrificed at indicated time 
points. Blue diamonds : 
concentrations of 
ondansetron in wild -type 
(WT) rats. Red squares : 
concentrations of 
ondansetron in P -gp knock -
out (KO)  rats. Orange 
diamond : single time -point 
(1h) concentration of 
ondansetron. Green square : 
single time -point (1h) 
concentra tion of 
ondansetron ; tariquidar 
(TQR) was administered 30 
min prior to ondansetron 
via a jugular vein cannula.  
4/21/2022  6 
 In addition, a series of experiments were performed to determine the concentration of ondansetron in rat CSF, 
spinal cord, and brain, performed in wild -type rats, with and without intravenous 7.5mg/kg tariquidar co -
administration.  
 Plasma to CSF partition coefficient (Cp) of ondansetron, after 10mg/kg dose, in wild -type male rats 
without tariquidar was  0.27±0.3 ; plasma to CSF partition coefficient (Cp) of ondansetron, with co -
administration of 7.5mg/kg tariquidar was 0.36 ±0.16  
 
 Plasma to spinal cord partition coefficient (Cp) of ondansetron, after 10mg/kg dose, in wild -type male rats 
without tariquidar was 1.11 ±0.4; plasma to spinal cord partition coefficient (Cp)  of ondansetron with co -
administration of 7.5mg/kg tariquidar was 4.72 ±2.8 
 
 Plasma to bra in partition coefficient (Cp) of ondansetron, after 10mg/kg dose, in wild -type male rats 
without tariquidar was 1.75 ±1.2; plasma to brain partition coefficient (Cp)  of ondansetron with co -
administration of 7.5mg/kg tariquidar was 5.88 ±5.6 
In summary, co -administration of tariquidar resulted in 1.3 fold increase in CSF to blood partitioning coefficient , 
while in parallel, spinal cord to blood partitioning coefficient  increased 4.2 -fold, and brain to blood partitioning 
coefficient  increased by 3.4 -fold.  
 
Cardiovascular safety d ata from the first 8 participants in the human pharmacokinetic study per IND 140361 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]; 2 participants with 4mg ondansetron, 4 participants with 8mg ondansetron, and 2 participants 
with 16 mg ondansetron , with and without 4mg/ kg tariquidar) demonstrate the following:  
 None of the participant had any increase in troponin  at any point in the study .  
 The QTc interval changes (before to after ondansetron) with and wit hout tariquidar were -2.5±16.1 ms  vs 
2.9±13.1 ms , respectively (non -significant  difference ). 
 Maximum change in systolic blood pressure was  an 8.6±9.7 mmHg increase , two hours after infusion of 
ondansetron with placebo , and  a 5.7± 8.2 mmHg  decrease,  1.5 hours after infusion of ondansetron with 
tariquidar, across doses.  
 Maximum change in diastolic blood pressure was  an 3.4±7.7 mmHg increase , two hours after infusion of  
ondansetron with placebo , and an 7.1± 9.6 mmHg increase , 105 minutes after infusion of ondansetron 
with tariquidar, across doses.  
 Maximum change in heart rate was  an 4.2±13.1  BPM  increase , 2 hours after infusion of ondansetron with 
placebo , and an 12.1 ±17.0  BPM increase , 105 minutes after infusion of  ondansetron with tariquidar, 
across doses.  
 
 
 
 
 
4/21/2022  7 
 The CSF concentrations of ondansetron have been analyzed only in the 8mg dose group.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Based on rodent data, we expect that the increase in spinal cord and brain exposure  with tariquidar co -
administration  will be higher than  the proportionate  CSF exposure. However, we don’t expect as high as 3 -4 fold 
higher exposure  in humans , as Pgp expression in rat blood -brain barrier  is substantially higher than in humans.  
 
The tolerability and pharmacok inetic parameters of ondansetron  co-administered with t ariquidar among patients 
with neuropathic pain is unknown, and should be evaluated before large -scale efficacy  clinical stud ies. 
 
2.3 Objective  
The primary objective of the study is t o determine the pharmacokinetics and tolerability of co -administration of 5-
HT 3R antagonist ondansetron  with a P -glycoprotein inhibitor tariquidar , in patients with neuropathic pain . 
 
Secondary objectives are to assess the change in pain intensity and neurop athic pain descriptors between the two 
study arms, and to determine psychophysical determinants of analgesic response.  
 
2.3.1 Subject Selection  
Patients with neuropathic pain meeting inclusion criteria will be recruited from the Saint Louis community until 28 
participants  have completed both study sessions .  
 
2.3.2  Inclusion Criteria  
1. Age 18-70;  
2. Documented diagnosis of neuropathic pain due to damage or disease affecting  the peripheral nerv ous 
system (e.g. Diabetic neuropathy, Post -herpetic neuralgia, Chemotherapy -induced peripher al neuropathy, 
Lumbar radiculopathy, or Post -traumatic neuropathy) ; 
3. At least P robable neuropathic p ain grading  (per Finnerup et al criteria)1;  
4. Pain duration >3 months;  -8-4048121620
0 1 2 3 4OND CSF concentration (ng/mL)
Time (hr)Ondansetron (OND) CSF concentration, 8mg single IV dose, n=3
OND + TQD
OND + placebo
Figure 3. CSF concentrations of ondansetron 8mg iv infusion (over 15 min) with and without 
concomitant administration of 4mg/kg tariquidar (TQD) in healthy volunteers, (0 -4 hours). The 
area under the concentration time curve (AUC 0-4) is 14.1 ng*h/mL for ondansetron administered 
with placebo (D5W solution), and 28.0 ng*h/mL for ondansetron administered with tariquidar.  
4/21/2022  8 
 5. Average pain intensity ≥4 on 0 -10 numerical rating scale ( NRS). 
 
 
2.3.3 Exclusion Criteria  
Participants  will not be enrolled if any of the following criteria exist:  
 
1. Current pregnancy or lactation;  
2. Moderate -severe kidney or liver dysfunction;  
3. Active cardiac arrhythmias (non -sinus rhythm) , Long QT syndrome, or QTc interval >450msec;  
4. Congestive heart failure  
5. Abnormal troponin values at screening visit  
6. Current treatment with MAO inhibitors mirtazapine, SSRI or SNRI antidepressants, except duloxetine up 
to 60mg/day, escitalopram up to 10mg/day, or citalopram up to 20mg/day;  
7. Current treatment with tapentadol , tramadol, or fentanyl  
8. Current treatment with P -glycoprotein  substrate drugs with narrow therapeutic window, e.g. digoxin.  
9. Current treatment with tricyclic antidepressant medications (e.g. amitriptyline, desipramine, imipramine) 
at a dose >25mg/ day  
10. Ongoing use of any of the following medications with known effects on Pgp function: carbamazepine, 
phenytoin, phenobarbital, cyclosporine, clarithromycin, erythromycin, ritonavir, verapamil, rifampicin, St. 
John’s wort;  
11. Current treatment with QT -prolo nging drugs , and drugs known to have a significant interaction with 
ondansetron or  other  P-glycoprotein  substrates (see below):  
 Antiretrovirals of Protease inhibitor (e.g. Ritonavir, Saquinavir) or Non -nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (e.g. Efavirenz, Zidovudine) family.  
 Phenytoin, Carbamazepine, Oxcarbazepine , Rifampin  
 Amiodarone  
 Azole antifungals (e.g. Itraconazole, Fluconazole)  
 Macrolide antibiotics (Erythromycin, Clarithromycin)  
 Cimetidine  
 Lithium  
 Methylene Blue  
 Non -DHP calcium channel blockers Verapamil and Diltiazem  
 First generation antipsychotic medications Thioridazine, Haloperidol, Chlorpromazine, and Pimozide  
 Second generation antipsychotic medications Ziprasidone and Quetiapine  
 Antihistamine Terfenadine,  
 Antidepressants Trazodone and Bupropion  
 Antiarrhythmics Propafenone, Flecainide, and Procainamide  
 Fluoroquinolone antibiotics  Norfloxacin, Ofloxacin, and Ciprofloxacin  
 Cisapride  
 Other strong inhibitors or inducers of Cytochromes P450 2D6 or 3A4.  
 Other strong inhibitors or induce rs of P -glycoprotein  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4 Design and Procedures  
4/21/2022  9 
  
2.4.1 Study Design  
 
Randomization and Blinding : The study is designed as a  prospective,  randomized, double -blind, cross -over 
experiment  in patients  with neuropathic pain . After signing informed consent and meeting eligibility criteria, 
participants will receive two 16 mg IV infusions of ondansetron, approximately 3 weeks apart. Participants will be 
randomized to the order of tariquidar (4mg/kg dose  in 500mL D5W ) and place bo (D5W solution ) co-administration 
with ondansetron.  
 
2.4.2 Pre -Study Period  
Potential participants  will be identified from the Pain Management Center of Washington University in St Louis , via 
ads in the community, Epic -based (and IRB -approved) direct recruitment tools, and through Volunteer for Health 
(VFH) organization . Once the potential subject has contacted a member of the research team, a research 
coordinator will provide a description of the project either by phone, email or mail, at the discreti on of the potential 
subject. Potential subjects will be asked to undergo telephone screening by a trained research coordinator to assess 
preliminary eligibility for the study, although this may be done in person at the request of the volunteer.  
 
 The follo wing screening information will be collected by phone: age, height and weight, known allergies, 
complete medical history, neuropathic pain description and intensity . Name and dosing regimen of any over the 
counter and prescription medications  or dietary su pplement will be collected as well .  
 
 Potential subjects meeting all inclusion and exclusion criteria during the telephone screening will be scheduled 
for a screening/consent visit at Washington University/Barnes -Jewish Hospital medical center campus. The  
following will take place at the screening/consent visit, which will occur approximately 1 week  before the  first 
treatment study session:  
 
 Verbal discussion of the study procedures, benefits, and potential risks  
 Subjects reads, understands, and s igns informed consent  (subjects will also be provided with a written 
copy);  
 Urine pregnancy test for women of childbearing age;  
 Brief history and physical, including vital signs, height and weight measurements , pain history and intensity, 
and medications ;  
 Blood draw for troponin, comprehensive  metabolic panel ( CMP) and complete blood count (CBC) ; if 
subject’s lab tests results are available within the past 30 days, we will utilize these . 
 12-lead ECG test to rule out QTc interval > 450ms  
 Completion  of the fo llowing questionnaires: Brief Pain Inventory (BPI), Hospital Depression and Anxiety 
Scale (HADS), and P ain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS) , Neuropathic Pain Symptom Inventory (NPSI) , Color -
Word Matching Stroop Test (CWMST) ; 
 Completion of standardized pain test ing: conditioned pain modulation (CPM), wind -up ratio (WUR) to 
punctate mechanical stimulation, and quantitative sensory testing (QST) for cold, heat, mechanical, and 
vibration sensitivity.  
 Pain diary to track daily pain levels.  
 
 Women of childbearing potential with positive urine pregnancy test will be excluded from the study. Women 
of childbearing potential must agree not to try to become pregnant during the study period and 28 days after study 
completion. Women of childbearing p otential  must also use a highly effective birth control method (such as oral 
contraceptives, condoms, or intrauterine device) throughout and 28 days after the study. Male participants must 
agree to use a highly effective method of co ntraception from screen ing to 90  days after last study drug 
administration . 
 
Concomitant analgesic use : 
4/21/2022  10 
 Stable doses of analgesics or adjuvant pain medications such as  gabapentin, pregabalin , around the clock opioids  
(with a total daily dose not exceeding 50mg oral morphine equivalent ), except those listed in the exclusion criteria,  
will be allowed, as long as no dose change has occurred  2 weeks prior to the study. PRN analgesic use  (NSAIDs, 
short -acting opioids, acetaminophen)  will not be allowed 48 hours prior to study part icipation.  If the participant is 
unable to abstain from short -term analgesics for the 48 hours prior to the study intervention, the participant can 
decide whether to reschedule the intervention, or withdraw from the study.  The participants can resume their  
short -acting analgesics 24 hours after the study intervention. The study coordinator will contact the participants by 
phone once a week during the washout period, and for 3 weeks after the second (crossover) intervention , to address 
any questions or conce rns the participants may have .  
 
SNRI neuropathic pain medications , tramadol, fentanyl and tapentadol  will not be allowed, per exclusion criteria.   
 
2.4.3 Study Period  
Participants  will be studied in the  Washington University Pain Center, or in the  Clinica l Research Unit (CRU) 
of Washington University School of Medicine, with continued presence of research and nursing personnel. The 
study will comprise three sessions over an approximately  28-day period  (Figure 2A) . As previously described, the 
screening visit will take place within about  7 days prior to the first study  visit.  The screening visit can be coordinated 
on the same morning as test day 1.   
Intervention : 
Each participant will receive two IV infusions of o ndansetron , 3 weeks apart, in randomized order . Placebo 
(D5W) or tariquidar (4mg/kg dose in D5W) will be administered IV over 60 minutes  according to randomization 
schedule . Ondansetron will be diluted in 100mL D5W , and tariquidar will be diluted in 500mL D5W. Starting 30 
minutes after the initiation of tariquidar/placebo, a 15-min ondansetron co -infusion will be given, to time its peak 
brain concentration with potent Pgp inhibition (Figure 3). A 3 weeks  interval between the two sessions (> 5 half -
lives) wi ll allow the elimination of the first dose of ondansetron  and tariquidar . A 12 -lead ECG will be repeated prior 
to the second infusion to confirm that subjects still have a normal QTc  and s inus rhythm . Any subject who has a 
QTc>450ms will not receive the se cond ondansetron dose and will be withdrawn from the study. A blood sample 
will be drawn at the 240 min time point for troponin levels. If troponin levels are elevated, the patient will be 
immediately evaluated by a physician and a cardiology consult will be obtained.  Further assessment and treatment 
of these subjects is described below in section 3, “M anagement of Intercurrent Events”.  
Vital signs (pulse oximetry and 3 -lead ECG; non -invasive blood pressure) will be monitored before infusion and 
approximately 30, 60, 120, 180 and 240 minutes after end of ondansetron infusion.  A 12 -lead ECG  will be performed 
at baseline and  before the participants are discharged .   
Adverse effects will be collected by spontaneous participant reporting, but also asked about every 30 minutes . 
On each of the intervention date s, women of childbearing potential w ill undergo urine β -hCG testing, and will be 
excluded if pregnancy test is positive.  Participants will complete a brief pain assessment, as well as WUR and  CPM 
testing at baseline  (Figure 2B) . Thereafter , two IV catheters will be inserted in participants’ arms. One will be utilized 
for drug infusion and the catheter in the contralateral arm will be used for serial blood sampling.  One 5-ml blood 
sample will be obtained for P -glycoprotein polymorphism analysis. At study visit 1 and study visit 2, a n additiona l 5-
ml baseline blood sample will be obtained for future research  with participant consent . Participants  will report 
baseline spontaneous pain (0 -10 NRS) and complete a baseline  NPSI. Placebo ( D5W solution ) or tariquidar (4mg/kg 
dose) will be administered IV over 60 minutes. Starting 30 minutes after  the initiation of tariquidar/placebo, a 15 -
min ondansetron co -infusion will be given, infused via Y -site, to time its peak brain concentration with Pgp 
inhibition.  The intensity of spontaneous pain (on 0 -10 NRS) will be assessed every 10 minutes for 60 minutes, and 
every 15 minutes thereafter for a total of 120 minutes, then every 30 min  for a total of 240 minutes. WUR and CPM 
testing will be repeated 90 minutes afte r the end of ondansetron infusion  (i.e., 105 minutes after the beginning of 
ondansetron infusion) . Participants will record self -reported pain hourly on the study day until bedtime, and daily 
for 3 weeks thereafter. NPSI pain descriptors will be assessed p rior to, and 70 minutes after , the beginning of 
ondansetron  infusion . Additionally, b lood samples for ondansetron concentrations will be obtained at baseline 
(time zero) and approximately at 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, 180 , and 240  minutes from the beginning of o ndansetron 
4/21/2022  11 
 infusion  (See Table 1 for full summary of the measurement schedule.) Plasma will be processed and stored in 
aliquots at -80°C until analysis.  A 3-mL CSF sample (per participant’s consent) will be obtained via lumbar puncture 
between 30 and 180 minutes from the beginning of ondansetron infusion , for the assessment of o ndansetron 
concentration in the CSF using population PK approach as we previously described31. Lumbar puncture will not be 
performed if participant is currently taking anticoagulant treatment or if the participant has a contraindication to 
the lumbar punct ure per investigator discretion . 
 
Participants will return for a follow -up visit approximately 3 weeks after the second infusion, to comp lete adverse 
effects assessment, and blood sampling for blood chemistry and blood count.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4.4 Minimization of Bias  
There will be no specific ethnic , racial , or gender  background for enrollment. The study is designed as cross -over in 
order to minimize inter -subject variability. The participants  and investigators  will be blinded to treatment al location 
sequence . 
 
2.4.5 Observations and Measu rements  
 
2.4.5.1 Primary Outcome Measures  
Primary outcome:  
The primary objectives are to evaluate the pharmacokinetics and the tolerability of ondansetron and tariquidar single 
dose iv co -administration (in comparison to ondansetron administration alone) in patients with neuropathic pain.  
 
Pharmacokinetics : 
-Venous blood sampling for pharmacokinetics will be obtained: at 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, 180, and 240 minutes from 
the beginning of ondansetron infusion.  
-A CSF sample will be obtained via lumbar puncture between 30 and 180 minutes from the beginning of 
ondansetron infusion, for the assessment of ondansetron concentration in the CSF using population PK approach.  
-CSF to plasma ratio of ondansetron will be c alculated, and compared between the two study arms  
 
Tolerability : 
-Spontaneous reporting of adverse effects  
Figure 3. Outline of s tudy design and procedures .  
A. Overall crossover design, including screening and testing visits.  
B. Testing day procedures. NRS=numerical rating scale; NPSI=neuropathic pain symptom inventory; WUR=wind -up 
ratio; CPM=conditioned pain modulation  
4/21/2022  12 
 -Vital signs (pulse oximetry, blood pressure): before infusion and 30, 60, 120, 180 and 240 minutes after end of 
ondansetron infusion.  
-12-lead ECG : At baseline and prior to discharge  after each treatment session .  
-Troponin T : at screening and prior to discharge  after each treatment session .  
-Blood chemistry (CMP) and count (CBC) at baseline and at 3-week time point after each treatment session . 
-In patients who are concomitantly treated with SSRI or SNRI  medications  that are allowed for inclusion (duloxetine 
≤60mg/day, citalopram ≤20mg/day , or Escitalopram ≤10mg/day,  additional assessments will be performed at the 
time of vital sign assessments ( baseline and 30, 60, 120, 180 and 240 minutes after end of ondansetron infusion ) to 
evaluate confusion, restlessness, dilated pupils, muscle twitching or rigidity, and sweating. This will be performed 
to identify signs suggestive of serotonin syndrome.   
 
2.4.5.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
Secondary outcome measures include:  
1. Change in spontaneous pain intensity (measured on 0 -10 NRS) from baseline to 60 -120 minutes after 
ondansetron IV infusion, compared between two sessions with and without tariquidar. The pain severity 
values obtained at 60, 90, and 120 minutes will be averag ed to derive the secondary  outcome measure. The 
values will be compared via paired t -test (or Wilcoxon signed -rank test, if data not normally distributed).  
2. Changes in NPSI total score and sub-scores  (burning pain, paroxysmal pain, paresthesia/dysesthesia s core ) 
will be compared between treatment sessions;  
3. The association between baseline Conditioned Pain Modulation (CPM) magnitude (ΔCPM) and the % pain 
reduction from baseline will be determined by bivariate regression. A significant association between the  
two measures will be indicative of differential analgesic response as a function of descending pain 
modulation;  
Exploratory analyses  will be performed  to determine if variables such as sex, weight, baseline wind -up ratio (WUR) , 
peak ondansetron plasma concentration, and P -glyco protein  genotype affect the difference in pain reduction  
between the two study sessions . 
A population PK approach will be used to model CSF concentrations of ondansetron with and without tariquidar co -
admin istration.   
 
Table 1. Study Day Timeline  
 Drug  Blood * PK NRS NPSI  CPM  WUR  QST Questio
nnaires  
Screening   TQD OND x Blood  CSF x x x x x x 
Study day (min after ondansetron infusion start)  
Baseline    x x  x x x x x  
-30 min 
TQD  / 
placebo 
Infusion            
0 min OND  
infusion   x  x      
10 min    x      
15 min  x        
20 min     x      
30 min   x 
x** x      
40 min     x      
50 min     x      
60 min    x x      
70 min      x     
75 min     x      
90 min    x x      
105 min     x  x x   
120 min    x x      
135 min     x      
4/21/2022  13 
 150 min     x      
165 min     x      
180 min    x x      
240 min    x  x      
Hourly after discharge - study day     x      
Post -study  day (weeks)           
1      daily       
2      daily       
3   x   daily       
*Blood sample  = baseline troponin, comp rehensive metabolic panel (CMP)  and complete blood count (CBC)  at the screening visit , a sample 
prior to visit #2 (3 -weeks after treatment #1), and 3 weeks after treatment #2. An additional blood sample will be obtained  for genetic analysis 
for P -glycoprotein polymorphisms  on the first study day ; TQD=tariquidar; OND=ondansetron; NRS=numerical rating scale; NPSI=neuropathic 
pain symptom inventory; CPM=conditioned pain modulation; WUR=wind -up ratio; PK – blood samples for ondansetron pharmacokinetics; 
QST=quantitative sensory testing.  
** CSF sample can be obtained  anywhere between 30 and 180 minutes after start of o ndansetron infusion.  
 
2.4.6 QST protocol  
 
A QST battery will be applied for more comprehensive sensory characterization of these patients. The QST will 
follow a standard protocol,32 and include the assessment of mechanical detection threshold (MDT) with Semmes -
Weinstein monofilaments, mechanical pa in thresholds (MPT) with standardized weighted metal probes, cold and 
warm detection thresholds (CDT and WDT), as well as cold and heat pain threshold (CPT and HPT) with TSA -II, and 
vibration detection threshold (with standard tuning fork). QST tests will be performed in the area of maximum pain 
and a control, non -painful area.  
 
Thermal detection and thermal pain thresholds  
Equipment:  The Thermal Sensory Analyzer (TSA -II platform - Medoc, Ramat Yishai, Israel) will be used to determine 
thermal detection and  pain thresholds. This equipment is used globally for functional assessment of pain and 
temperature -conducting nerve fibers (C and A -delta fibers).  
 
Method and Background: Using the thermal sensory analyzer, cold and warm detection thresholds (CDT and WDT,  
respectively), as well as cold and heat pain thresholds (CPT and HPT, respectively) will be determined .33,34 The 
thermode with contact area of 9.0 cm2 is applied to the tested site, and all thresholds are determined by 
continuous ramping of temperature from 32°C baseline tem perature by 1°C/s until the subject presses the ‘stop‘ 
button. Cut -off temperatures are 0°C and 50°C, to minimize thermal damage to the skin. The baseline temperature 
to which the thermode returns before each test is 32°C. The average threshold is calculat ed from three 
measurements in each area.  
 
Determination of mechanical detection threshold (MDT)  
Equipment: A set of standardised Semmes -Weinstein mono filaments (0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128 and 
256mN). The contact area of the filaments  with the skin is of uniform size (<1 mm²) and texture.  
 
Methods and Background: Standardised Semmes -Weinstein mono filaments will be used in a modified “method of 
limits” manner using 3 series of increasing and decreasing stimulus intensities to determine the geometric average 
as the tactile detection threshold of the affected and unaffected skin areas 35. 
Monof ilaments of different stimulus intensities are used to determine the tactile detection thresholds. A  filament 
eliciting 16mN force* is applied first, followed by filaments of consecutively lower intensity until the patient cannot 
detect the stimulus being applied. This respective force represents the first threshold value. The order in which the 
stimuli are applied is then reversed and stimuli of consecutively greater intensity are applied until sensation is 
detected (this intensity becomes the second value). Again filaments with decreasing intensity are applied until in 
total 3 upper and lower values of detection are fulfilled from which the mechanical detection threshold can be 
determined.  
4/21/2022  14 
 * In case the first filament with  an intensity of 16mN is not detected, the next highest intensity filament which can 
be detected must be used as a starting intensity.  However, the relevant force of this stimulus is not documented. 
Filaments with consecutively lower intensity are applied until the patient cannot detect the stimulus being applied. 
The procedure is followed as above; until in total 3 upper and lower value s of detection are fulfilled from which the 
mechanical detection threshold can be determined.  
 
Determination of mechanical pain thresholds (MPT)  
Equipment:  A set of standardized weighted metal probes (Nervetest, MRC systems) exerting pressure of 8, 16, 32,  
64, 128, 256 and 512 mN.  
 
 
Methods and Background:  
The standardized metal probes will be used in a modified method of levels manner, 3 series of increasing stimulus 
intensities to detect the mechanical pain threshold.  Beginning with an applied force of 8 mN, stimuli increase in 
intensity until the sensation induced by increase d pressure can be described as “sharp” . The corresponding force is 
used to represent the first MPT value. The stimuli are the applied in the descending order, until the sensation 
indu ced by pressure is described as “blunt”. The procedure is then repeated a total of 3 times and until a to tal of 6  
values are obtained, from which the mean MPT is determined.  
 
Determination of vibration detection thresholds (VDT)  
Equipment:  A standard tuni ng fork . 
Methods and Background:  
The tuning fork will be applied at the lateral malleolus, and vibration detection threshold (the moment patient stops 
feeling the vibration of the tuning fork applied to the skin) will be measured on a scale of 1 -8. The test will be 
repeated a total 3 time s. VDT is determined as an average of the three measures.  
 
Determination of wind -up ratio (WUR ) 
Equipment:  A standardized weighted metal probe (Nervetest, MRC systems) exerting pressure of 256 mN. 
Methods and Background:  
Wind -up ratio (WUR)  to punctate mechanical stimulation (i.e. temporal summation) will be measured as another 
surrogate of descending facilitation. WUR will be assessed by a published protocol.32,36 In this test a 256mN pinprick 
probe (Nervetest, MRC systems, Germany) is first applied singularly and then  as a series of 10 identical stimuli with 
1Hz frequency within an area of 1 cm2. Immediately following the single and 10 stimuli, participants rate their pain 
on a 0 -10 NRS, and a ratio is calculated using these values. This procedure is repeated twice; a geometric ‘wind -up’ 
average is calculated from the two ratios.  
 
Determination of conditioned pain modulation (CPM)  
Equipment : A thermostat -controlled digital water bath; The Thermal Sensory Analyzer (TSA -II platform - Medoc, 
Ramat Yishai, Israel)  
Methods and Background:  
Conditioned pain modulation (CPM)  is a surrogate measure of descending inhibition vs. facilitation. CPM efficiency 
is derived from a patient report of pain intensity following application of a calibrated painful stimulus (called te st 
stimulus) with and without  another ongoing unpleasant stimulus (called conditioning stimulus). The intensity of the 
conditioning and pain stimulus will be determined individually by cold temperature that elicits pain intensity of 30-
70 on 0 -100 NRS (con ditioning), and hot temperature that elicits pain intensity of 60 on 0 -100 NRS (test).  
The conditioning stimulus will be applied by immersing the non -dominant  or non -affected  arm in a cold thermostat -
controlled water bath . The initial temperature will be set to +8°C. If that temperature elicits pain intensity between 
30-70 on 0 -100 NRS, the CPM protocol will use +8°C conditioning. Alternatively, water temperature will be adjusted 
in 2°C increments (lowest will be 2°C) to elicit pain in that range.  
The prev iously determined Pain -60 test stimulus will be applied at the dominant  or affected forearm, using a 3x3 
cm Peltier thermode connected to TSA -sensory analyzer (Medoc Inc, Ramat Yishai, Israel) .  
4/21/2022  15 
 The length of the conditioning is 60 seconds ; during the last  30 seconds, the test stimulus is applied. The difference 
between test stimulus intensity with and without conditioning is defined as CPM magnitude. CPM>0 (i.e. increased 
pain to test stimulus following conditioning) implies descending pain facilitation .37,38  
 
 
2.4.7   Statistical Methods  
 
All demographic, sensory, analytical and patient -reported data will be captured on case report forms, manually 
entered to a Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) database that will be created for the project , and will be 
verified by an independent study team member . Plasma and CSF concentrations of ondansetron will be analyzed 
using a previously validated liquid chromatography method .39 Non -compartmental PK analysis will be performed to 
construct the concentration -time curves of ondansetron in human plasma with and without tariquidar .31 
Ondans etron concentration in CSF will be used to evaluate biodistribution of ondansetron to CNS , by the means of 
CSF to plasma concentration ratio . We do not expect missing outcomes data as all primary and most secondary 
outcomes will be collected with the participants  physically present with the research team . Any missing data will be 
described, but no data imputation will be attempted. Intergroup comparisons for parametric data will be performed 
by paired t -test, and for non -parametric data by Wilcoxon sig ned-rank test for paired samples.  McNemar’s test will 
be used to compare paired nominal data, and Fisher’s exact test to compare non -paired nominal data.   
 
Sample size:  
Change in spontaneous pain reduction (secondary outcome) was used to determine the sample size for the study. 
The baseline pain intensity (±SD) of patients with peripheral neuropathy we have recruited to various studies over 
the past two years have been 6. 3±2.1. This proof of conc ept study expects to demonstrate a 30% difference in 
pain reduction between the two intervention sessions. Given that in a published study of IV ondansetron in NeuP 
a 20% pain reduction has been observed (although not different fro m placebo), we assume pain intensity of 
5.1+2.1 in ondansetron+placebo group, and expect  pain intensity of 4.0+2.1 in ondansetron+tariquidar group at 
the 60 -120 minute time frame . To determin e a significant difference with two-tailed α<0.05 and 85% power (e ffect 
size 0.52), 28  subjects will be required in this cross -over study. We expect to  enroll 28-32 participants  to the study 
to reach 28  evaluable participants . 
 
3.0 Management of Intercurrent Events  
 
3.1 Adverse Experiences  
The investigator s will closely monitor subjects for evidence of systemic adverse events.  All adverse events will be 
reported and followed until satisfactory resolution.  The description of the adverse experience will include the time 
of onset, duration, severity, etiology , relationship to the study drug (none, unlikely, possible, probable, highly 
probable), and any treatment required.  Participants  will notify the monitoring physician/RN coordinator of any 
adverse expe rience during the study period.  
At discharge, subjects w ill be provided with contact information for team members and instructed to call if any 
adverse events occur.  
 
3.2 Dose Limiting Toxicities  
The dose -limiting toxicities (DLT) for the study  are defined as follows:  
 New QTc prolongation >60ms greater than bas eline, or QTc>450ms    
 Troponin T elevation > 0.03 ng/mL  
 Syncope  
 Sustained increase or decrease in SBP of >30 mmHg systolic or >20 mmHg diastolic  
 Sustained vital sign abnormalities  
 HR<40 or >120 beats per minute  
 SpO2 <92%  
4/21/2022  16 
  ALT/AST ≥3xULN AND total bilirubin ≥2xULN  
 AST/ALT ≥8xULN   
 Altered mental status (delirium, inability to follow simple commands)  
 Persistent visual disturbances  
 
If DLT is observed in >2 participants, o ndansetron dose will be reduced to 12 mg for all new participants .  
If further DLT is observed in >2 participants receiving 12 mg ondansetron, the dose will be reduced to 8 mg for all 
new participants.  
 
3.3 Premature withdrawal  from a study for a single patient  
If at any time the constraints of this protocol are considered to be detr imental to the patient’s health and/or the 
patient no longer wishes to continue protocol therapy, the participant will be withdrawn from the study  and the 
reason(s) for withdrawal  documented in the case report forms.  
 
Any participant will be withdrawn from  the study  in the following scenarios:  
 Death  
 Anaphylaxis  
 Allergic reaction with urticarial, rash o r dyspnea,  
 Cardiac arrest  
 Arial or ventricular fibrillation  
 Ventricular Tachycardia  
 Syncope  
 AV block (2nd degree type II or 3rd degree)  
 New QTc prolongation >60ms greater than baseline or >470ms for men or >480ms for women  
 Troponin elevation > 0.03 ng/mL  
 Sustained increase or decrease in SBP of >30 mmHg systolic or >20 mmHg diastolic  
 Sustained v ital sign abnormalities  
 HR<40 or >120 beats per minute  
 SpO2 <92%  
 Temperature <36 C or >38 °C 
 
 ALT/AST ≥3xULN AND total bilirubin ≥2xULN  
 AST/ALT ≥8xULN   
 Thrombocytopenia  
 Clinically meaningful CBC abnormalities (compared to baseline)  
 Altered mental status (delirium, inability to follow simple commands)  
 Seizures  
 Persistent  visual disturbances  
 General or specific changes in the patient’s condition that render the patient unable to receive further 
treatment in the judgment of the investigator  
 Suspected or confirmed pregnancy  
 Serious non -compliance with the study protocol  
 Lost to follow -up 
 Patient withdraws consent  
 Investigator removes the patient from study  
 Investigator decides to close the study  
 
4/21/2022  17 
 If a participant  withdraws from the study, the participant  will be replaced in order to provide the required number 
of evaluable subjects. Subjects will be withdrawn if the investigator decides that discontinuation is in the best 
interest of the subject, or the subject requests withdrawal from the study.  
 
3.4 Adverse experiences and premature termination of the study  
 
If any patient  should suffer any serious adverse  effect, including but not limited to serious neurologic or 
cardiovascular dysfunction or a reaction concerning for anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reaction, patient recruitment 
and randomization will be halted until the eti ology of such an adverse reaction can be determined.  
 
If two or more participants suffer any serious adverse effect, the study team will discuss premature termination of 
the study with Washington University IRB and the FDA.  
 
If more than 7 participants mee t the early withdrawal criteria, due to serious or non -serious adverse effects , the 
study will meet the early stopping criteria.  
 
3.5 Potential Risks  
 
3.5.1 Potential risks for intravenous (IV) catheter placement  
Placement of the intravenous catheter can cause a brief, generally mild period of pain lasting for a few seconds at 
the site of catheter placement. There is the potential that the first attempt at venous cannulation will be 
unsuccessful and the patient wil l require multiple attempts to place the IV. Intravenous catheter placement can 
cause a bruise, though in patients without known bleeding diathesis this is usually mild and self -resolving. Some 
individuals experience dizziness or lightheadedness. Other com plications are rarer. Infection from a cleanly -placed 
IV is rare, especially given the short anticipated duration of catheter retention. There is the chance of the catheter 
becoming dislodged from the vein and infiltrating the contents flowing through it i nto the muscle or subcutaneous 
fat. As only a minimal amount of fluid will flow through the vein and no caustic or vasoactive substances will be 
used (except in the case of a rare, potentially serious adverse event), this presents no risk to the volunteer.  
 
3.5.2 Potential risks from lumbar puncture  
Lumbar Puncture (LP) is widely used technique of CSF sample aspiration by thin needle from the subarachnoid space 
of the lumbar dural sac. LP is a major diagnostic tool used in neurological clinics as relatively  safe method to obtain 
CSF sample for further analysis. The important complication of LP is post -lumbar puncture headache (PLPH) 
developing within a week after LP. In a multisite international trial , 9% of 3868 enrolled patients reported PLPH ,40 
with  0.3% patients requiring and epidural blood patch (procedure of introducing autologous blood into epidural 
space).  Other adverse events were non -specific headache (10.2%), back pain  (17%), nausea and/or vomiting (2.5%), 
dizziness 45 (1.3%). Other possible complications may include bleeding as well as temporary or permanent 
neurological damage, although these are extre mely rare. Management of these potential adverse events are 
described below in section 3.4.  
 
3.5.3 Potential risks from blood collection  
The total amount of blood collected during each study visit is approximately 60  mL (  about 10% of a standard blood 
donation) , which should not have adverse physiological effects . As described above, the IV catheter placement  
necessary for blood draws may  cause bleeding, bruising, pain,  dizziness/lightheadedness, or (very rarely) infection.    
 
3.5.4 Potential risks from ondansetron  
Ondansetron is a widely -used drug approved for prevention of chemotherapy -induced, radiotherapy -
induced, and postoperative nausea and vomiting. It is commonly used off -label for treatment of nausea and 
vomiting. The most common reported side ef fects (~10%) include headache, constipation,  and fatigue. Less 
common (<10%) include drowsiness, diarrhea, fever, anxiety, transient liver enzyme increases, or burning at 
4/21/2022  18 
 injection site. Rare side effects (<1%) include cardiac arrhythmias, ECG changes, dry  mouth, anaphylaxis, transient 
blindness, and hypokalemia.  
The FDA has issued a drug safety communication regarding the risk of QTc prolongation and potential 
progression to torsades de pointes. The risk of cardiac side effects was determined to be dose -dependent with a 
maximum QTc prolongation by 20msec after 32mg IV administration; consequently, 32mg IV doses are no longer 
approved. 16mg IV infusion doses (as proposed in this study) are still approved and frequently used for 
chemotherapy -induced nausea a nd vomiting. Risk of arrhythmia is increased by comorbidities including: congenital 
long QT syndrome, congestive heart failure, bradyarrhythmias, or patients taking concomitant medications that 
prolong the QT interval. All such patients would be excluded b y our proposed exclusion criteria. Additionally, in our 
recent study, none of the 15 subjects who received 16mg intravenous ondansetron (meeting the same 
inclusion/exclusion criteria as in this study), experienced arrhythmias or any other serious side effe cts 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
 
3.5.5 Potential risks from tariquidar  
Tariquidar is an experimental drug, a specific 3rd generation inhibitor of P -glycoprotein, currently in 
development by Avaant Pharmaceuticals Inc. In a Phase I study in healthy volunteers, intravenous tariquidar 
doses in the range of 0.1 -2mg/kg did not cause any adverse effects.41 
In healthy volunteers, a 2mg/kg intravenous dose resulted in no serious adverse effects. Two of ten 
subjects receiving this dose developed mild metallic taste during tari quidar infusion. Two subjects who received a 
4mg/kg dose experienced light -headedness and conjunctival infection. One subject developed a brief syncopal 
episode after a PET -scan procedure, resolved without sequelae.  A 6mg/kg intravenous dose resulted in mi ld 
metallic taste and nausea that resolved after the infusion was stopped.42 
In healthy volunteers receiving 4, 6  or 8mg/kg intravenous tariquidar doses, no serious adverse events 
have been observed.43 Overall , four cases of hematoma and one case of phlebitis due to cannulation , as well as 
five cases of metallic taste in the mouth occurred. Other adverse drug effects to tariquidar were vertigo (two), 
bradycardia (one) and headache (one). Heart rate, blood pressure as well as ECG did not significantly change 
during and after tariquidar administration. No subject had any significant change in blood chemistries (including 
electrolyt es, liver and renal function tests), complete blood count and coagulation over the whole study period. 
No volunteer discontinued prematurely the study. In one case, for safety reasons the infusion was stopped 20 min 
before the scheduled end due to moderate orthostatic hypotension and vertigo.43 
In an additional healthy volunteer study testing intravenous tariquidar doses in a range of 3 -8 mg/kg, 
adverse events possibly/probably related to tariquidar included 1) dysgeusia (changes in the sense of taste) in 
6/20 subjects, across 3mg/kg, 4mg/kg, 6mg/kg and 8 mg/kg doses; 2) vertigo in 3/20 subjects receiving 3mg/kg 
(n=1) and 8mg/kg (n=2) doses; 3) headache (n=1, 6mg/kg dose); and 4) hypotension and bradycardia (n=1, 
8mg/kg; infusion stopped after 7.2mg/kg w as infused).  
Seven clinical studies of the pharmacokinetics and efficacy  of tariquidar have been completed in cancer 
patients. The main use of tariquidar in these clinical trials has been to enhance BBB -penetration and tumor -
penetration of Pgp -substrate chemotherapy agents, to improve the efficacy  of cancer chemotherapy. In th ese 
studies, tariquidar have been shown to increase the severity of known side effects of chemotherapeutic agents , 
including hematological abnormalities such as anemia and thrombocytopenia . No additional side effects other 
than those known to be associated  with chemotherapy have been identified in patients who have received 
tariquidar (Tariquidar Investigator’s Brochure).  
Each ampoule of Tariquidar for injection contains 10 mL of 7.5 mg/mL tariquidar  (as the dimesylate salt, in 
a sterile solution of 20% et hanol/80% propylene glycol with a small amount of hydrochloric acid)  for a total of 75 
mg tariquidar free base per ampoule. Ampoules will be stored refrigerated (2 -8°C) and protected from light. Within 
4 hours prior to  administration, the tariquidar soluti on will be diluted aseptically  by the Washington University 
Investigational Drug Service  with 5% dextrose in water (D5W) to give a final volume of 250 mL. The diluted solution 
will be protected from light until infusion is complete.  
 
3.5.6 Potential risks from tariquidar  and ondansetron combination  
 
4/21/2022  19 
 Combined use of tariquidar and onda nsetron may  change the safety profile of each of drugs. Changes  in 
onda nsetron pharmacokinetics such as increased penetration to CNS , is an expected  effect of tariquidar. However, 
there is a potential risk of increased incidence of undesirable effects of onda nsetron such as drowsiness, diarrhea, 
fever, anxiety, transient liver enzyme increases, prolonged QTc, arrhythmias .   
Preliminary data from  our o ndansetron -tariquidar combination  study in healthy volunteers suggest no 
occurrence of arrhythmia or clinically significant QTc prolongation. Most of adverse events were not related with 
study drugs, but to intrathecal catheterization.  QTc changes ater On dansetron and Ondansetron+ Tariquidar 
administrations were insignificant: mean QTc change was -2.5 ms ( ±16.1) after Day 1 and 2.9 ms ( ±12.9) after Day 
2, p=0.67 (see Table 2).  
 
 
Table 2 . QTc values (ms) of subjects on Day 1 -3 
Subject  Ondansetron dose  (mg)  Day 1  Day 2  Day 3  
1 4 390 404 417 
2 4 434 414 415 
3 8 424 430 425 
4 8 412 420 405 
5 8 399 400 399 
6 8 430 397 424 
7 16 401 397 406 
8 16 395 403 397 
 
3.5.7  Potential risks from thermal testing  
Risk of injury related to thermal pain testing is minimal.  Thermal testing is widely used and considered safe.  While 
thermal testing does produce pain, risks to the individual are minimal, because 1) the pain is transient in nature and 
generally subsides  immediately after the procedure; 2) subjects are instructed that they may stop any procedure at 
any time with no adverse consequences; and 3) the level of pain experienced by subjects is below their tolerance level.  
With thermal stimulation there is a ve ry slight risk of a burn, but this is minimized by the following: 1) positive lockout 
of stimulus parameters above 52°C; and 2) the stimulator has built in a shut -down system to prevent the delivery of 
prolonged or high intensity stimuli.  The TSA -II therm al devices have FDA 501(k) clearance (K922052). CPM testing is 
conducted using an ice water bath at 8°C and exposure is limited, thereby posing minimal risk of tissue damage from 
cold exposure.  
 
3.6 Procedures to Minimize Potential Risks  
Drug infusions will be administered  in the Washington University Clinical Research Unit  under the supervision of 
the PI and the co -investigator s. Subjects will be monitored by study personnel during infusion s, and dedicated RN 
personnel is available 24 -hours a day on sit e.  
Inclusion and exclusion criteria, monitoring, and the clinical protocol are designed to ensure that risks are absolutely 
minimal. Participants  are informed that participation is voluntary and they may refuse to participate and may 
withdraw from the stu dy at any time without penalty. A pregnancy test will be performed on women of childbearing 
potential and subjects excluded if pregnant. Subjects will be told that in the event of a physical injury as the direct 
result of study procedures, they will be car ed for by a member of the investigating team at no cost, within the limits 
of the Washington University compensation plan.  
Subjects will be instructed at the beginning of the visit that they can alert the investigator any time they experience 
bothersome si de effects. In particular, they will be instructed to immediately report palpitations or 
dizziness/lightheadedness. Continuous physiologic monitoring (ECG, pulse oximetry, and intermittent non -invasive 
blood pressure) will be used from the beginning of dru g infusion until 2 hours after ondansetron infusion is 
complete. Medical personnel will be immediately available throughout the visit. The subject can voluntarily 
withdraw from the study at any time.  
With regard to confidentiality; 1) all subjects will be assigned a study ID number, 2) Samples will be kept 
4/21/2022  20 
 confidentially.  They will be coded, with a key to the code linking code numbers to names kept at a separate location, 
under lock and key.  3) The link to identifiers will be destroyed at the end of the s tudy. 4) Data will be stored under 
lock and key (office, file cabinet) and only the investigators and research team will have access.  If data are 
published, there will be no link to identifiers.  Study data will not be revealed to any organization, indivi duals other 
than the subjects, or the subjects themselves. 5) Study data will not be entered in subjects' medical records.  
 
3.6.1 Prevention, diagnosis and management of ondansetron -associated arrhythmia  
To minimize the risk of ondansetron -associated arrhythmia , subjects will have a 12-lead ECG performed at 
the screening visit.  Subjects with QTc>450msec or any arrhythmia will be excluded. Potential subjects that would 
be at elevated risk of developing ondansetron -associated arrhythmia (e.g.,  current us e of QT -prolonging 
medication) are ineligible for this study. The ondansetron dose used (16mg IV infused over 15min) is approved and 
commonly used with chemotherapy. Subjects will be monitored with telemetry from the beginning of drug infusion 
until 2 hrs after infusion is complete. If arrhythmias or  prolonged QT develop at any time during the study, subjects 
will be immediately assessed by a physician . If ECG abnormalities are mild (e.g., infrequent premature 
atrial/ventricular contractions or QTc>450ms bu t <500ms), subjects will be monitored in the pain management 
center by nursing and medical personnel for at least 4 hrs. If the signs/symptoms meet the severity criteria 
described in Section 3.2 (“ Premature discontinuation of protocol for a single patient” ), the patient will be withdrawn 
from the study and sent to the Barnes -Jewish Hospital  emergency department (ED) for further evaluation , including 
cardiology consultation or hospital admission, as needed . 
 
3.6.2 Prevention, diagnosis and management of post -lumbar puncture headache (PLPH)  
Lumbar puncture and sampling procedure will conducted in a way to minimize the effect of risk factors 
contributing PLPH development. Particularly, an atraumatic needle of 25 G diameter will be used  for LP procedure.  
Passive withdrawal of CSF is known as associated with a lower risk for headache , therefore active withdraw with 
syringe will be avoided left only for  rare cases . 
 Subjects will be asked to notify clinical personnel immediately if they develop a headache while in the 
clinical research unit. Additionally, the periodic nursing assessment (see supplementary document) will include 
questions about headache. If a particip ant endorses new -onset headache, the anesthesiologist will be notified. The 
anesthesiologist will perform a brief history and physical exam to determine whether or not the symptoms suggest 
PLPH. If P LPH is likely and symptoms are mild, conservative treatme nt will be initiated. The participant  will be 
encouraged to lie in a comfortable position and drink fluids. The subject will also be offered analgesics including 
acetaminophen/butalbital/caffeine (e.g. Fioricet®), ibuprofen, or acetaminophen alone. IV flui ds or medication will 
be reserved for subjects who cannot tolerate oral administration due to nausea/vomiting. If symptoms are severe 
(e.g. uncontrollable nausea/vomiting, severe subject distress), the subject will be removed from the study and 
epidural bl ood patch will be offered (procedure described below).  
Discharge paperwork will include clear descriptions of P LPH and instructions about whom to contact in the 
case of headache. If a subject reports likely P LPH by contacting study personnel or during a f ollow -up phone call, 
symptom severity will be assessed. Conservative  treatment (as described above) will be offered  for the first 24 -48 
hrs. If unresolved, the participants will be brought to the Clinical Research Unit for further evaluation or treatment 
per discretion of the investigators which could include a potential epidural blood patch procedures, performed by 
the anesthesiologists on the study team.  
Epidural blood patches are commonly performed by our Acute Pain Service. Sterile technique (including 
chlorhexidine swabs, caps, masks, and sterile gloves)  is used at all steps by all personnel involved. First, the epidural 
space is located using a standard Tuohy needle and loss -of-resistance technique.  Next, 20ml of the subject’s blood 
is drawn  and then injected through the Tuohy needle.  Injection is stopped if the subject complains of pressure or 
paresthesia that could indicate compression of the cauda equina.  
 
3.6.3 Prevention of drug -drug interactions between study drugs and concomitant ly used  antidepressants  
 
Citalopram, Escitalopram and Duloxetine are not known to produce clinically meaningful interactions when 
combined with potent P -gp or CYP3A4 inhibitors. When tested specifically in combination with P -gp inhibitors such 
4/21/2022  21 
 as simeprevir, cyclo sporine, and verapamil, meaningful interactions were NOT identified for escitalopram and 
duloxetine44-46.  Given that tariquidar is a selective P -gp inhibitor (and possibly weak CYP3A4 inhibitor), we do not 
expect any meaningful interactions with citalopram, escitalopram, or duloxetine.  
 
Table 3  outlines the potential of drug interactions between SSRI/SNRI an tidepressants in the context of use with P -
gp inhibitors, and served as a basis for inclusion/exclusion of particular SSRI/SNRI antidepressants.  
 
Table 3. Potential of drug interactions between SSRI/SNRI antidepressants and P -gp inhibitors.  
SSRI   FDA -
approved 
maximum 
dose 
(mg/day)  Known P -
gp 
substrate  Known CYP3A4 
substrate  Known / 
Clinically 
relevant 
interactions 
with other P -
gp inhibitors  Clinically -
relevant 
interactions with 
CYP3A4 
inhibitors  Comments  on 
QT interval 
prolongation  
Citalopram  40 No47,48 Yes, CYP3A4 
and CYP2C1949 None found 
(extensive 
search  in 
PubMed, Lexi -
Comp, and  
IBM 
Micromedex ) No. ketoconazole 
co-
administration 
did not 
significantly 
affect the 
pharmacokinetics 
of citalopram [1]  Dose -
dependent QT 
prolongation 47 
50 
Escitalopram  20 No48 51 Yes, CYP3A4 , 
CYP2D6,  and 
CYP2C19  None foun d 
(extensive 
search  in 
PubMed, Lexi -
Comp, and  
IBM 
Micromedex )49 No. 
Administration of 
ritonavir (potent 
CYP3A4 inhibitor) 
did not affect  the 
pharmacokinetics 
of Escitalopram 
52 No clinic ally 
relevant QT 
prolongation vs 
placebo 52 
Paroxetine  60 Possibly53 
54. 
However, 
may be a 
weak 
inhibitor of 
P-gp 55 No. CYP2D6 
and unchanged 
excretion to 
urine  No No. Also, 
paroxetine does 
not meaningfully 
inhibit CYP3A456  Likely rare, only 
a few cases 
reported 57 
Fluoxetine  80  Conflicting 
data  53,54 58 Yes. Also 
possible 
inhibitor of CYP 
3A4. Although 
overall CYP3A4 
inhibition with 
fluoxetine is 
likely not 
clinically 
meaningful 44, 
some potential 
interactions 
have been 
reported with 
CYP3A4 
substrates.59 No Verapamil (likely 
due to 
Fluoxetine’s 
inhibition of 
verapamil 
metabolism 44) Fluoxetine has 
been associated 
with potential 
increase in risk 
of QT interval 
prolongation 50  
4/21/2022  22 
 Sertraline  200 No60,61. 
However, 
may be a 
weak 
inhibitor of 
P-gp55 Unclear. 
Multiple 
sources of data 
suggest 1st pass 
metabolism 
and N -
deme thylation, 
but specific 
enzymes are 
not well 
understood60,61, 
possibly 
suggesting 
CYP2C19 and 
CYP2B6  None found 
(extensive 
search  in 
PubMed, Lexi -
Comp, and  
IBM 
Micromedex ) No Likely not 
significant62 
SNRI  FDA -
approved 
maximum 
dose 
(mg/day)  Known P -
gp 
substrate  Known CYP3A4 
substrate  Known / 
Clinically 
relevant 
interactions 
with other P -
gp inhibitors  Clinically -
relevant 
interactions with 
CYP3A4 
inhibitors  Comments  on 
QT interval 
prolongation  
Duloxetine  120 No63,58 No. 
Metabolized 
primarily by 
CYP1A2  and 
CYP2D6  None found  
(extensive 
search  in 
PubMed, Lexi -
Comp, and  
IBM 
Micromedex )49  None found  No clinically 
relevant QT 
prolongation vs 
placebo 63 
Venlafaxine  225 Possibly  
53,54 Yes. Also 
metabolized by 
CYP2D6 
(major). 
Venlafaxine 
does not 
meaningfully 
inhibit CYP3A4 
64 Interaction 
with 
ketoconazole, 
likely due to 
CYP3A4 rather 
than P -gp 
inhibition. 
Minimum 
interference 
with P -gp 
activity in vitro 
64 Clinically 
meaningful 
interaction with 
ketoconazole, 
likely because 
3A4 inhibition 46 QT prolongation 
rare, likely  
happens only 
with very high  
doses / 
overdose65,66 
Desvenlafaxine  400mg, but 
doses >50mg 
not 
recommended  No67  Yes (minor). 
Also excreted 
renally 
unchanged 
(45%). 
Desvenlafaxine 
does not 
meaningfully 
inhibit CYP3A4 
64 Unlikely to be 
affected67 Ketoconazole can 
increase plasma 
concentrations of 
desvenlafaxi ne. 
Potential 
interaction with 
potent CYP3A4 
inhibitors.  No clinically 
relevant QT 
prolongation vs 
placebo67 
 
 
 
4/21/2022  23 
 For patient safety, we will limit maximally allowable doses of citalopram , escitalopram  and duloxetine  in enrolled 
participants to 50% of FDA -approved maximum dose, eg, 20mg for citalopram , 10mg for escitalopram  and 60mg 
for duloxetine . 
Due to possible interactions with other SSRI/SNRI medication, we will exclude  patients taking other SSRI/SNRI 
medications such as paroxetine, fluoxetine, sertraline, venlafaxine, and desvenlafaxine . 
 
3.6.4 Prevention, diagnosis and management of other lumbar puncture -related complications  
The potential complication of epidural hematoma  is exceedingly rare in patients with normal coagulation40. 
To minimize the risk of epidural hematoma, subjects will be asked over the phone and at the in -person screeni ng 
visit about a history of clotting disorders, easy bleeding/bruising, liver disease, or use of anticoagulants. A complete 
blood count will be drawn during the screening visit to rule out thrombocytopenia. Any potential subject with 
abnormalities on histo ry or lab work will be excluded from the study.  
To minimize the risk of infection or nerve damage  from lumbar puncture , the procedure  will be done  by 
experienced anesthesia personnel (board -certified or board -eligible anesthesiologists) under sterile cond itions. 
Specifically, the subject’s lumbar region will be sterilized with a chlorhexidine swab, a sterile drape will be placed, 
the anesthesiologist will wear sterile gloves, all personnel in the room will wear a cap and mask, and a  dressing will 
be applie d after LP. Subjects will be instructed to notify the anesthesiologist of the occurrence and resolution of 
any paresthesias during LP procedure . If symptoms are severe (e.g., severe pain, motor deficits) the subject will be 
sent to the BJH ED for further e valuation including neurology consultation, imaging, or hospital admission, as 
needed. Subjects with temporary, minor paresthesias during placement may continue with the study.  
 
 
3.7   Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
In compliance with the Washington Univ ersity Institutional Data and Safety Monitoring Plan, and 
commensurate with the risks of the proposed study, we will use an Independent Data Safety Monitoring Board  
(DSMB) for data safety and monitoring for this study.  The potential risks are attributable to the 5 -HT 3R antagonist 
ondansetron, and the Pgp efflux transporter inhibitor tariquidar . The Independent DSMB  will consist of an 
anesthesiologist, a Neurologist, and an independent Biostatistician . This DSMB  will review the annual summary of 
adverse even ts, prior to data and safety monitoring report submission to the Washington University IRB . In addition, 
the board  will review all reports of a Serious Adverse Event, or an Unexpected Adverse Event .  
The study principal investigator and Research Patient Coordinator will monitor for serious toxicities on an 
ongoing basis. Once the principal investigator or Research Patient Coordinator becomes aware of an adverse event, 
the AE will be reported to the HRPO according to institutional guidelines.  
 
 
4.  HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH  
 
4.1 Protection of Human Subjects  
The study will be conducted under appropriate Washington University Institutional Review Board protocols and 
consent forms approvals.  The study will be conducted under the supervision of the PI, who is a  GCP-certified 
pharmacist with several years of experience in the conduct of human studies; three  board -certified 
anesthesiologists pain management specialists as co -investigators , all of them with extensive clinical experience  
and research experience .  
 
4.2 Sources of Materials  
Subjects will be recruited from the greater Saint Louis area via their Washington University Pain Ma nagement 
Center physicians, flyers , IRB -approved Epic direct recruitment tools,  and the Volunteer for Health organization . 
Data on comorbidities and concomitant medication use are provided by subjects. Specimens include blood obtained 
exclusively for determining ondansetron  concentration , and an additional blood sample is obtained for determining 
4/21/2022  24 
 single nucleotide polymorphism s in P -gp and OCT1 transporters . Other data including quantitative sensory testing 
are obtained exclusively for research purposes.  
 
4.3 Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Participants will be recruited through their Washington University Pain Management Center physicians,  flyers , and 
through the Volunteers for Heal th organization. Interested subjects will contact the investigators . We may also 
screen the clinic schedule of the Washington University Pain Management Center, to identify potentially eligible 
subjects. We will then approach or contact them to ask for their interest in the study . Subjects will be given verbal 
(initially) and then written descriptions of the study aims, procedures, risks, and benefits, and will be required to 
give written informe d consent. A member of the study  team provides all study descriptions, informed consent, and 
answers all questions. Subjects are informed verbally and in writing that participation is voluntary and they may 
refuse to participate and may withdraw from the study at any time without penalty.  
 
4.4 Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others  
Study subjects could potentially experience improvement in neuropathic pain. Society could  benefit from 
development  of a novel treatment for neur opathic pain . 
 
4.5 Inclusion of Women  
Both women and men suffer from neuropathic pain and thus will be included in this study.  
 
4.6 Inclusion of Minorities  
All of our studies actively encourage the participation of minorities in the research.  Our minority recruiting typically 
matches the demographic composition of the Washington University community from which subjects will be 
recruited (78% white, 21% Black , <1 % Hispanic).  
 
4.7 Inclusion of Children  
Children <18 years of age  will not be studied in this investigation. Neuropathic pain is uncommon in this age group, 
and i ncluding children may expose them to an unnecessary risk without the benefit of generali zability of the r esults.  
 
  
4/21/2022  25 
 5.  REFERENCES  
 
1. Finnerup NB, Haroutounian S, Kamerman P, et al. Neuropathic pain: an updated grading system for research 
and clinical practice. Pain  2016.  
2. Yawn BP, Wollan PC, Weingarten TN, Watson JC, Hooten WM, Melton LJ, 3rd. The prevalence of 
neuropathic pain: clinical evaluation compared with screening tools in a community population. Pain medicine  
2009; 10(3): 586 -93. 
3. Smith BH, Torrance N. Epidemiolo gy of neuropathic pain and its impact on quality of life. Current pain and 
headache reports  2012; 16(3): 191 -8. 
4. Finnerup NB, Attal N, Haroutounian S, et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain in adults: a systematic 
review and meta -analysis. The Lancet Neurology  2015.  
5. Dogrul A, Ossipov MH, Porreca F. Differential mediation of descending pain facilitation and inhibition by 
spinal 5HT -3 and 5HT -7 receptors. Brain research  2009; 1280 : 52-9. 
6. Kim YS, Chu Y, Han L, et al. Central terminal sensitiz ation of TRPV1 by descending serotonergic facilitation 
modulates chronic pain. Neuron  2014; 81(4): 873 -87. 
7. Millan MJ. Descending control of pain. Prog Neurobiol  2002; 66(6): 355 -474.  
8. Thompson AJ, Lummis SC. 5 -HT3 receptors. Curr Pharm Des  2006; 12(28): 3615 -30. 
9. Bannister K, Patel R, Goncalves L, Townson L, Dickenson AH. Diffuse noxious inhibitory controls and nerve 
injury: restoring an imbalance between descending monoamine inhibitions and facilitations. Pain  2015; 156(9): 
1803 -11. 
10. Kimura M, Ob ata H, Saito S. Peripheral nerve injury reduces analgesic effects of systemic morphine via 
spinal 5 -hydroxytryptamine 3 receptors. Anesthesiology  2014; 121(2): 362 -71. 
11. Guo W, Miyoshi K, Dubner R, et al. Spinal 5 -HT3 receptors mediate descending facilit ation and contribute 
to behavioral hypersensitivity via a reciprocal neuron -glial signaling cascade. Molecular pain  2014; 10: 35.  
12. Oatway MA, Chen Y, Weaver LC. The 5 -HT3 receptor facilitates at -level mechanical allodynia following spinal 
cord injury. Pain 2004; 110(1-2): 259 -68. 
13. Wang R, King T, De Felice M, Guo W, Ossipov MH, Porreca F. Descending facilitation maintains long -term 
spontaneous neuropathic pain. The journal of pain : official journal of the American Pain Society  2013; 14(8): 845 -
53. 
14. Chang EY, Chen X, Sandhu A, Li CY, Luo ZD. Spinal 5 -HT3 receptors facilitate behavioural hypersensitivity 
induced by elevated calcium channel alpha -2-delta -1 protein. European journal of pain  2013; 17(4): 505 -13. 
15. Hall JD, DeWitte C, Ness TJ, Robbins MT. Serotonin enhances urinary bladder nociceptive processing via a 
5-HT3 receptor mechanism. Neuroscience letters  2015; 604: 97-102.  
16. McCleane GJ, Suzuki R, Dickenson AH. Does a single intravenous injection of the 5HT3 receptor antagonist 
ondansetron h ave an analgesic effect in neuropathic pain? A double -blinded, placebo -controlled cross -over study. 
Anesthesia and analgesia  2003; 97(5): 1474 -8. 
17. Tuveson B, Leffler AS, Hansson P. Ondansetron, a 5HT3 -antagonist, does not alter dynamic mechanical 
allody nia or spontaneous ongoing pain in peripheral neuropathy. The Clinical journal of pain  2011; 27(4): 323 -9. 
18. Marchi N, Guiso G, Caccia S, et al. Determinants of drug brain uptake in a rat model of seizure -associated 
malformations of cortical development.  Neurobiology of disease  2006; 24(3): 429 -42. 
19. Schinkel AH, Wagenaar E, Mol CA, van Deemter L. P -glycoprotein in the blood -brain barrier of mice 
influences the brain penetration and pharmacological activity of many drugs. The Journal of clinical investi gation  
1996; 97(11): 2517 -24. 
20. Borst P, Schinkel AH. P -glycoprotein ABCB1: a major player in drug handling by mammals. The Journal of 
clinical investigation  2013; 123(10): 4131 -3. 
21. Haroutounian S. Somatosensory phenotyping for better translation in n europathic pain? Pain  2016.  
22. Asante CO, Dickenson AH. Descending serotonergic facilitation mediated by spinal 5 -HT3 receptors engages 
spinal rapamycin -sensitive pathways in the rat. Neuroscience letters  2010; 484(2): 108 -12. 
23. Neziri AY, Dickenmann M, Scaramozzino P, et al. Effect of intravenous tropisetron on modulation of pain 
and central hypersensitivity in chronic low back pain patients. Pain  2012; 153(2): 311 -8. 
4/21/2022  26 
 24. Farber L, Stratz T, Bruckle W, et al. Efficacy and tolerab ility of tropisetron in primary fibromyalgia --a highly 
selective and competitive 5 -HT3 receptor antagonist. German Fibromyalgia Study Group. Scandinavian journal of 
rheumatology Supplement  2000; 113: 49-54. 
25. Spath M, Stratz T, Neeck G, et al. Efficacy a nd tolerability of intravenous tropisetron in the treatment of 
fibromyalgia. Scandinavian journal of rheumatology  2004; 33(4): 267 -70. 
26. Potvin S, Marchand S. Pain facilitation and pain inhibition during conditioned pain modulation in 
fibromyalgia and in  healthy controls. Pain  2016; 157(8): 1704 -10. 
27. Schoen CJ, Ablin JN, Ichesco E, et al. A novel paradigm to evaluate conditioned pain modulation in 
fibromyalgia. Journal of pain research  2016; 9: 711 -9. 
28. Niesters M, Proto PL, Aarts L, Sarton EY, Drewes AM, Dahan A. Tapentadol potentiates descending pain 
inhibition in chronic pain patients with diabetic polyneuropathy. British journal of anaesthesia  2014; 113(1): 148 -
56. 
29. Yarnitsky D, Granot M, Nahman -Averbuch H, Khamaisi M, Granovsky Y. Conditioned pain modulation 
predicts duloxetine efficacy in painful diabetic neuropathy. Pain  2012; 153(6): 1193 -8. 
30. Edwards RR, Dworkin RH, Turk DC, et al. Patient phenotyping in clinical trials of chronic pain treatm ents: 
IMMPACT recommendations. Pain  2016; 157(9): 1851 -71. 
31. Chiang M FK, Lee C, Kharasch ED, Tallchief D, Sawyer C, Blood J, Back HM, Kagan L, Haroutounian S “ Plasma 
and cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetics of ondansetron in humans”  British Journal of  Clinical Pharmacology  2020, 
in press.  
32. Rolke R, Baron R, Maier C, et al. Quantitative sensory testing in the German Research Network on 
Neuropathic Pain (DFNS): standardized protocol and reference values. Pain  2006; 123(3): 231 -43. 
33. Fruhstorfer H, L indblom U, Schmidt WC. Method for quantitative estimation of thermal thresholds in 
patients. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry  1976; 39(11): 1071 -5. 
34. Yarnitsky D, Sprecher E, Zaslansky R, Hemli JA. Heat pain thresholds: normative data and repeatability. Pain 
1995; 60(3): 329 -32. 
35. Baumgartner U, Magerl W, Klein T, Hopf HC, Treede RD. Neurogenic hyperalgesia versus painful 
hypoalgesia: two distinct mechanisms of neuropathic pain. Pain  2002; 96(1-2): 141 -51. 
36. Haroutounian S, Nikolajsen L, Bendtsen TF, et al. Primary afferent input critical for maintaining spontaneous 
pain in peripheral neuropathy. Pain  2014; 155(7): 1272 -9. 
37. Yarnitsky D. Conditioned pain modulation (the diffuse noxious inhibitory control -like effect): its relevance 
for acute and chronic  pain states. Current opinion in anaesthesiology  2010; 23(5): 611 -5. 
38. Yarnitsky D, Bouhassira D, Drewes AM, et al. Recommendations on practice of conditioned pain modulation 
(CPM) testing. European journal of pain  2015; 19(6): 805 -6. 
39. Chong YE, Chian g M, Deshpande K, Haroutounian S, Kagan L, Lee JB. Simultaneous quantification of 
ondansetron and tariquidar in rat and human plasma using a high performance liquid chromatography -ultraviolet 
method. Biomed Chromatogr  2019; 33(11): e4653.  
40. Duits FH, Mar tinez -Lage P, Paquet C, et al. Performance and complications of lumbar puncture in memory 
clinics: Results of the multicenter lumbar puncture feasibility study. Alzheimers Dement  2016; 12(2): 154 -63. 
41. Stewart A, Steiner J, Mellows G, Laguda B, Norris D,  Bevan P. Phase I trial of XR9576 in healthy volunteers 
demonstrates modulation of P -glycoprotein in CD56+ lymphocytes after oral and intravenous administration. Clin 
Cancer Res  2000; 6(11): 4186 -91. 
42. Kreisl WC, Bhatia R, Morse CL, et al. Increased perm eability -glycoprotein inhibition at the human blood -
brain barrier can be safely achieved by performing PET during peak plasma concentrations of tariquidar. J Nucl Med  
2015; 56(1): 82 -7. 
43. Bauer M, Zeitlinger M, Todorut D, et al. Pharmacokinetics of singl e ascending doses of the P -glycoprotein 
inhibitor tariquidar in healthy subjects. Pharmacology  2013; 91(1-2): 12 -9. 
44. FLUOXETINE: HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION. 2009. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/018936s108lbl.pdf  (accessed 4/20 2022).  
45. Boyer EW, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. N Engl J Med  2005; 352(11): 1112 -20. 
46. Lindh JD, Annas A, Meurling L, Dahl ML, A AL -S. Effect of ketoconazole on venlafaxine plasma concentrations 
in extensive and poor metabolisers of debrisoquine. Eur J Clin Pharmacol  2003; 59(5-6): 401 -6. 
4/21/2022  27 
 47. Celexa® (citalopram hydrobromide) Tablets. 2017. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/020822s047lbl.pdf  (accessed 4/20 2020).  
48. Rochat B, Baumann P, Audus KL. Transport mechanisms for the antidepressant citalopram in brain 
microvessel endotheliu m. Brain Research  1999; 831(1-2): 229 -36. 
49. Spina E, Trifiro G, Caraci F. Clinically significant drug interactions with newer antidepressants. CNS Drugs  
2012; 26(1): 39 -67. 
50. Stock EM, Zeber JE, McNeal CJ, Banchs JE, Copeland LA. Psychotropic Pharmacotherapy Associated With QT 
Prolongation Among Veterans With Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Ann Pharmacother  2018; 52(9): 838 -48. 
51. SIMEPREVIR: HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION. 2017. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/205123s012lbl.pdf  (accessed 4/20 2022).  
52. ESCIT ALOPRAM OXALATE: HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION. 2016. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/021323s047lbl.pdf  (accessed 4/20 2022).  
53. M U. Einfluss des P -Glykoproteins auf die Blut -Hirn -Schrankenfunktion: Bielefeld University.; 2002.  
54. Uhr M. Penetration of Amitriptyline, but Not of Fluoxetine, into Brain is Enhanced in Mice with Blood -Brain 
Barrier Deficiency Due to Mdr1a P -Glycoprote in Gene Disruption. Neuropsychopharmacology  2000; 22(4): 380 -7. 
55. Weiss J, Dormann SM, Martin -Facklam M, Kerpen CJ, Ketabi -Kiyanvash N, Haefeli WE. Inhibition of P -
glycoprotein by newer antidepressants. J Pharmacol Exp Ther  2003; 305(1): 197 -204.  
56. PAROXETINE HYDROCHLORIDE:  PRESCRIBING INFORMATION 2012. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2012/020031s067%2C020710s031.pdf  (accessed 4/21  
2022).  
57. Otsuka Y. Paroxetine -induced QTc prolongation. J Gen Fam Med  2017; 18(6): 442 -5. 
58. O'Brien FE, Clarke G, Dinan TG, Cryan JF, Griffin BT. Human P -glycoprotein differentially affects 
antidepressant drug transport: relevance to blood -brain barri er permeability. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol  2013; 
16(10): 2259 -72. 
59. Sternbach H. Fluoxetine -associated potentiation of calcium -channel blockers. J Clin Psychopharmacol  1991; 
11(6): 390 -1. 
60. SERTRALINE HYDROCHLORIDE: HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATI ON. 2016. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2016/019839S74S86S87_20990S35S44S45lbl.pdf  
(accessed 4/21 2022).  
61. Saiz-Rodrigu ez M, Belmonte C, Roman M, et al. Effect of Polymorphisms on the Pharmacokinetics, 
Pharmacodynamics and Safety of Sertraline in Healthy Volunteers. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol  2018; 122(5): 501 -
11. 
62. Ojero -Senard A, Benevent J, Bondon -Guitton E, et al. A comparative study of QT prolongation with 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Psychopharmacology (Berl)  2017; 234(20): 3075 -81. 
63. DULOXETINE HYDROCHLORIDE: HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION. 2008 (accessed 4/20 2022).  
64. Oganesian AS, A.D.; Young -Sciam e, R, Tran, J.; Watanyar, A.; Azam, F.; Kao, J.; Leung, L. Desvenlafaxine and 
Venlafaxine Exert Minimal In Vitro Inhibition of Human Cytochrome P450 and P -Glycoprotein Activities. 
Psychopharmacology Bulletin 2009; 42(2) : 47-63. 
65. VENLAFAXINE: HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION. 2017. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/020699s107lbl.pdf  (accessed 4/21 2022).  
66. Behlke LM, Lenze EJ, Pham V,  et al. The Effect of Venlafaxine on Electrocardiogram Intervals During 
Treatment for Depression in Older Adults. J Clin Psychopharmacol  2020; 40(6): 553 -9. 
67. DESVENLAFAXINE: HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION. 2011. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2012/021992s030lbl.pdf  (accessed 4/21 2022).  
 