Page 1 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016   Project Title: Investigating the neural correlates in memory retrieva l during HD- tDCS Application for Expedited or Full Board Review 
Institutional Review Board 
Office of Research Compliance  
 
 
Please submit this completed form, along with finalized copies of all recruitment materials (e.g., telephone scripts, fliers,  etc.), tests, surveys, 
interviews, and copies of human participants training completion certificates for all investigators and key  personnel to the IRB. This training 
can be found at http://www.utdallas.edu/research/orc/irb/required_training/.  
 
If you require further assistance in completing this form or need additional information, please contact Office of Research Compliance at 
extension 4575 or by E -mail amanda.boone@utdallas.edu.  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator (PI) 
Name (Last name, First name, MI)   Highest Earned Degree  
Vanneste Sven    PhD 
University  Title     Department  
Professor     BBS 
Campus Phone No.    E-mail Address  
972-883-7277   sven.vanneste@utdallas.edu  
Campus Mailing Address  Campus Mail Station  
CD 
  Faculty  Staff  Student  Other:   
 
 
Co-Principal  Investigator  Faculty Sponsor  
Name (Last name, First name, MI)  Highest Earned Degree  
University Title  Department  
Campus Phone No.  E-mail Address  
Campus Mailing Address  Campus Mail Station  
Faculty  Staff  Student  Other:  
 
  
 
Primary Contact Person  
Name  Campus Phone No.  E-Mail Address  
Shaheen Ahmed  972-883-7275 sxa176730@utdallas.edu  

Page 2 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016   Other Study Personnel:  
Name (Last Name, First Name, MI)  Role in Study  
Yuefeng Huang  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Wing Ting To  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Hye Bin Yoo  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Shaheen Ahmed  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Jeffrey Hullfish  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Ian Abenes  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Clisha DSouza  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Anusha Mohan  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Tiffany Kao  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Stephanie Royer  subject recruitment, subject screening, data  collection  
Natalie Garcia  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Venkata Esanakarra  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Aaron Duque  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Samantha Long  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
Juan Francisco Silva Riquelme  subject recruitment, subject screening, data collection  
  
  
 
Are study personnel outside UTD and its affiliated institutions involved in this study?  
 Yes   No 
 
Non-Affiliated Study Personnel:  
Name (Last Name, First Name, MI)  Institution  Role in Study  
   
   
   
 
Study Funding and Other Support  
 
Is this study funded?  
 Yes    No 
Please select all appropriate funding sources for this project, including sources of  pending  support:  
  Federal  
  Industry - For Proft  
  Private - Non Profit  
  Public - State  of Texas 
  Public - Local  
  Academic  
  Internal - Departmental  
 
Have all PIs, Co -PIs, and Faculty Sponsors provided a Conflict of Interest Disclosure  within the last 12 months? Student researchers 
should complete and submit the attached Student Conflict of Interest Disclosure  along with this application.  
 Yes    No 
Please Note: Final approval will be withheld until all Conflict of Interest Disclosures have been received and reviewed by the  Office 
of Research Compliance.  
 
Federal Grant Information:  
Granting Agency:  
Grant  Status:   Awarded
 Pending  
 Not Yet  Submitted  
Grant Title: 

Page 3 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016   Principal Investigator:  
Page 4 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016   Performance Sites 
Mark all UTD affiliated sites where research -related activities will be conducted and the relevant activities performed at each site:  
Performance Site  Recruitment  Procedure s Data Analysis  
Richardson Main Campus   
  
  
 
Callier Campus - Richardson   
  
  
 
Callier Campus - Dallas   
  
  
 
Center for BrainHealth   
  
  
 
Center for Vital Longevity   
  
  
 
TX Biomedical Device Center - Dallas   
  
  
 
 
If applicable, please indicate all performance site(s)/institution(s) that are non -UTD affiliated: 
Site Name  Research Related Activity  
  
  
  
 
Does the non -UTD affiliated institution have an IRB?  
 Yes    No 
If yes, has IRB approval been obtained? 
  Yes   No 
Note: A copy of the IRB approval letter is required. If the site/institution does not have an IRB, a Letter of Support/Permission  
from an equivalent entity or an authorized institutional official may be accepted.  
 
Which methods will this study include? (check all that apply)  
 Descriptive   Oral History  
 Qualitative   Experimental/Control  Design  
 Quantitative   Ethnographic  
 Formative   Longitudinal
 Other,  specify:  
 
 
Estimated Study Duration 
Please indicate the estimated length of research study:  
Between 1 to 2 years  
 
 
Publication of Results  
Please identify all methods in which you may publicly disseminate the results of your study (academic journal, academic conference, 
a thesis or dissertation for one of your students, etc.).  
 Academic journal  
 Academic conference paper 
 Public poster  session  
 Book  or chapter  
 Thesis  
 Dissertation 
 Class project  
 Other:  

Page 5 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016    Instructions:  
Use non -professional language  and address each part separately to describe your protocol. Attaching sections of a grant application 
or proposal is not an acceptable substitute. Provide sufficient information for effective review by all members of the IRB, i ncluding 
non-specialists. Def ine all abbreviations and terms that are not part of common language.  
 
 
Describe the objective(s) of the proposed research:  
Describe why this research project will be carried out. Clearly state the overall objectives, specific aims, hypotheses (research 
questions), and rationale for performing the study.  
The overall objective of this study is to investigate the neural correlate  in recognition memory task.  
 
The aim of the study is to understand the undergoing changes in late positive ERP component during recognition 
memory task when stimulating the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) with High Definition Transcranial Direct Current 
Stimulation (HD- tDCS). We hypothesize that participants who received active HD- tDCS will have larger late positive 
component compared to participants received sham HD -tDCS.  
Describe previous studies that form the basis for the proposed research:  
Recognitio n memory is supported by distinct retrieval process known as recollection and familiarity. These two process 
have been associated with distinct event related potentials (ERPs). At the time of retrieval, familiarity is associated with modulation of the FN40 0, an enhanced positivity for old items relative to new items observed from approximately  
400-600ms post stimulus onset. The FN400 tends to have mid -frontal scalp distribution which can extend to left and 
right frontal  areas  and central  midline regions. In contrast,  recollection has been linked  with modulation  of positive going 
waveform that emerges approximately 600ms post stimulus and is typically maximal over parietal sites (Curran et.  al. 
2000; Rugg et.al. 1998) and referred to as late positive component (LPC). In addition, FN400 is found to increase gradually as a function  of item recognition  confidence  whereas  LPC is limited to high confidence  recognition  response. 
 
High Definition transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (HD- tDCS ) is a newly developed non -invasive neuromodulation 
technic. Compared to the standard bipolar montage used by the conventional tDCS, it uses arrays of smaller, specially designed electrodes to deliver a constant and low current directly to the cortical brain areas to increase the spatial focality. Studies show that the cortical area undergoing stimulation with HD -tDCS is more restricted compared to the 
standard bipolar montage of conventional tDCS (Datta et al. 2009). TDCS has been proposed as a therapeutic procedure in various diseases (e.g. Hoy and Fitzgerald 2010; Zyss; 2010; Benninger et al. 2010; Freitas et al. 2011; Brunelin et al. 
2012; Brunoni et al. 2012b; Berlim et al 2013) and tDCS i n healthy adults have demonstrated to improve cognitive and 
memory performance (e.g. Floel et al., 2008; De Vries et al., 2010; Fiori et al., 2011; Fregni et al., 2005), but no HD - 
tDCS study have investigated its impact on recognition memory. By targeting the PCC area by HD -tDCS, we want to 
introduce a safer, easier -to-use and more accurate non -invasive neuromodulation procedure. The dysfunctions of 
posterior cingulate cortex are been linked to a range of psychiatric and neurological condition such as Alzh eimer’s 
disease, schizophrenia, autism, depression and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, as well as aging. It shows 
increased activity when subject retrieve autobiographical memories suggests its internal orientated function. PET and 
ERP combined s tudies have shown greater blood flow medial temporal lobe with a brief late positive ERP component in 
PCC (Duzel et. al.1998). Therefore, in this study we aim to understand whether HD -tDCS targeting the PCC can 
modulate the late positive ERP component.  
 
 
What information do you expect to obtain and how will the obtained knowledge be applied:  
To investigate the effects of HD -tDCS on recognition memory task we will measure the late positive ERP component 
performance in a group receiving active HD -tDCS and a group receiving sham HD -tDCS.  
 
Recognition memory task will be measured using a computeri zed recognition memory task, which includes learning face 
and word stimuli. We will base our task on an experiment published in NeuroImage by Ruggs (2012) and Neurobiology 
by Jacobs (2015) where all information is provided to conduct the face and word learning test.  
 
The knowledge gained from this study will provide evidence as to whether or not HD -tDCS modulates the late positive 
component during retrieval process and in improving the recognition memory.  PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
Page 6 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016    
 
Number of Participants  
Please indicate the maximum number of participants that will be involved in the research project at UTD affiliated sites:  
75 healthy subjects will screened, consented and enrolled for th e study.  
 
Will participants from non -UTD affiliated site be included?  
 Yes    No 
If yes, please indicate how many participants are anticipated at each  site. 
 
 
Characteristics of Participants 
 
To which of the following categories do the participants in this research belong?  
 
 Adults   UTD Students/Staff  
 Babies and Toddlers (0 -3)  Children in Daycare  
 Young Children  (4-10)  Children in School  
 Youth (11-12)  Teachers or Staff in  Schools  
 Adolescents  (13-18)  Clinic or Hospital Patients  
 Elderly (>65)   Clinic or Hospital Staff  
 Families (Parents  w/ Child)   Institutional residents 
 Prisoners or  parolees  
 
 Person with  language/hearing  disability   Person with  emotional disability 
 Cancer patients   Non-English  speaker  
 Person with  cognitive  disability   Terminally  ill 
 Person with physical  disability  
(If you checked one of the boxes above and are in need of assistance in accommodating a person with disabilities during the 
research activities, please contact the IRB office.)  
 
 Pregnant  women   Women undergoing in vitro fertilization  
 Fetuses   Other:  
 
 
Will any vulnerable participants be included?  
Participants can be vulnerable for multiple reasons. Some examples of vulnerable participant include: children, the elderly, pregnant 
women, fetuses, cognitively impaired individuals, emotionally impaired persons, terminally ill patients, institutional residents, prisoners, parolees, non -English speaking participants, and UTD students/staff.  
 Yes    No 
If yes, what is the justification for the inclusion of each vulnerable group named?  
We want to include homogeneous sample (regarding educational attainment and IQ) of students and young 
professionals, since we want to investigate how ERP correlates with recognition memory retrieval in young healthy 
adults. 
STUDY POPULATION  
Page 7 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016   Inclusion/Exclusio n Criteria  
Equitable inclusion of both men and women of all ages, and individuals from diverse racial/ethnic backgrounds, is important to 
assure that they receive an equal share of the benefits of research and that they do not bear a disproportionate share of its  burdens. 
Participation of adult participants of both genders and diverse racial/ethnic backgrounds should not be restricted without medical or scientific justification.  
 
Describe the selection criteria and justification for participant inclusion (for instance, if only women are included, explain the rational for excluding men).  
1. Age between 18 and 35  
2. Currently not using any medication  
3. Capable of understanding and signing an informed  consent  
Describe criteria and justification for any participant exclusion (for instance, if mentally ill participants are to be excluded from the procedure, state why, what steps will be taken to determine mental status).  
1. Severe disease 
2. Mental illness  
3. Cardiac history  
4. History of severe head  injuries  
5. History of epileptic  seizures 
6. Any implanted devices such as pacemaker,  neurostimulator  
7. Pregnancy  
What are the qualifications and training of the staff who will determine inclusion and exclusion?  
Staff will have a briefing/training before the start of the study. All personnel involved at the study will have undergone form research and ethical training at UTD.  
 
 
Selection procedures  
Will participants be fully informed about the selection criteria and the selection procedure? 
 Yes  No 
If no, please explain:  
 
 
Will a Control Group be used?  
 Yes  No 
If yes,  
 Participants will be informed that they may be a member of a control group.  
 The individual participants will not  be informed that they are part of a control group. 
Explain:  

Page 8 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016    The identification and recruitment of participants must be ethically and legally acceptable and free of coercion. Procedures used to  
recruit participants should be designed to reach diverse populations. For example, vulnerable participants, such as persons  in nursing 
homes or institutions, should not be recruited merely for the sake of convenience.  
 
Recruitment Methods  
 Advertisement    Phone  solicitations  
 Verbal scripts for  face-to-face meeting    E-Mail  
 Letters to potential participants    Web-Based
 Other, please explain:  Flyer 
Please describe the recruitment procedures including: 1) how participants will be identified; 2) the steps for recruiting 
participants; and 3) who will have responsibility for recruitment:  
1) We are recruiting healthy subjects between the ages of 18 to 35 years old for our study, which overlaps with  the 
overall UTDallas student and staff population.  
2) In order to recruit participants flyers will be handed out and publicly displayed at the main ca mpus of UTD at 
Richardson. 
Please describe how the timing of the recruitment and consenting process will provide potential participants ample 
opportunity to consider whether or not to participate in the study:  
Prospective participants who meet the preliminary inclusion/exclusion criteria on the flyer can contact the research  
personnel through the contact information on the flyer, if they are interested. They will be contacted by phone for more information about the study and they will be screened if they are still interested to participate in the study. If they are 
eligible, they have the choice to schedule for an appointment right away or to contact us back to schedule an 
appointment to give them more time to co nsider a possible participation in the study. Once scheduled, we will be sent 
an electronic copy of the Consent Form. This will allow prospective participants to read and gather any questions about the study at their own pace. Note: Prospective participants will be asked to sign the Consent Form only at the UTDallas 
main Campus.  
Please describe the measures that will be taken to minimize the potential for undue influence:  
As standard lab protocol, we ask the following questions before any prospective partic ipant signs the Consent Form:  
 
1 Can you tell me the main purpose of the study, and why you are involved?  
2. Can you tell me the main components of the study that require your  participation? 
3. Do you understand that signing this Consent Form does NOT mean that you have been officially included in the study, 
but rather, inclusion into the study will be determined based on outcomes on additional screening  measures?  
4. If you decide to not participate  in the study at any time, what should you  do? 
5. If you experience any discomfort or symptoms associated tDCS, what should you  do? 
 
Payment for Participation  
 
Will participants be paid an incentive for participation in research?  
 Yes  No 
If yes, please com plete the following (mark all that apply):  
 SONA system  credit(s)  
 Cash  
 Gift card 
 Other:  Clincard 
Please note: 1) payment amount; 2) payment schedule; 3) will the incentive be pro -rated based on participant's early 
withdrawal?  
1) payment of $30 in Clincard at the completion of the study, OR 2) Two SONA credits after completion of  study  
(participants can decide) , 3) participants get $5 in Clincard if the study procedure is not finished, .  
Will participants be reimbursed for parking, travel, or other expenses related to participation in the research? 
 Yes  No 
If yes, please describe:  
RECRUITMENT OF PARTICIPANTS  
Page 9 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016    In research involving more than minimal risk, when capacity to consent is unclear, the capacity to consent must be determined  by a 
physician, clinical psychologist, or by other qualified professionals. Individuals who la ck the capacity to consent may participate in 
research only if consent is given on their behalf by a legally authorized representative.  
 
Will you obtain written, signed informed consent from each participant/participant's representative? 
 Yes  No 
 
Will your study involve the use of any language other than English for Informed Consent forms, data collection instruments, 
or recruitment materials?  
 Yes  No 
If “Yes,” after the IRB has notified you of the approval of the English version of your forms, you must then submit the foreign language versions along with an English translation for each.  
Specify all foreign languages:  
Who will be authorized to obtain informed consent? Identify by name and training the individual(s) authorized to describe the research and obtain consent form from participants or their legal representatives.  
Sven Vanneste, Ph.D. – Associate Professor in BBS, study PI  
Shaheen Ahmed, PhD – Research Associate in BBS  
Will the participants be informed about which information is recorded and stored?  
 Yes   No 
If no, explain:  
 
 
Who will provide written informed consent/permission/assent? (Attach copies of all versions that will be used) 
 Adult Participants  (him/herself)  
 Legally  Authorized  Representative 
 Parents (Permission for  Minor)  
 Children (Assent)  
 
For studies involving the use of children as research participants, please describe how assent will be obtained in a manner 
that is sensitive to the developmental stage of the participants: 
INFORMED CONSENT  
Page 10 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016   Process of Consent  
Consider: a) the environment and location where informed consent will be solicited; b) the timing of the process (for instanc e the 
stress that may be associated with the situation); c) the involvement of someone other than the investigators to help explain  the 
research; and d) opportunity for the prospective participants or their legal representatives to discuss participation in the research with 
family, friends, or their advisors before signing the consent form.  
 
Where will the consent process take place?  
a) all participants will sign the consent form in dr. Vanneste's lab in Green Hall GR 2.404 or in BSB 14.604 at UTD Main 
Campus.  
How --and by whom --will it be determined whether the participants or their legally authorized representatives understand the 
information provided? This section should clearly document that the investigator has an adequate plan in place to assure existence 
of an acceptable level of comprehension before consent is documented.  
The study personnel who administer the consent form will follow strict lab protocol by asking the aforementioned 
questions about the study (see above on minimizing undue influence) to each participant before they sign the consent 
form.  
 
 
 
Waiver of Informed Consent Process (complete only if you are requesting a w aiver of consent)  
Explain why the use presents no more than minimal risk to the participants?  
 
 
 
Explain why a waiver of informed consent will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the participants? 
  
 
Why could the research not practicably be carried out with an informed consent from the participants?  
Page 11 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016    
 
Mark one or more of  the following that apply:  
 
 Interviews   Standardized  assessments  
 Survey/questionnaire   Deception 
 Behavioral observation  
 
Describe each activity in which participants will be involved: 
Attach surveys, instruments, interview questions, etc. Describe the frequency and duration of procedures, psychological tests, 
educational tests, and experiments; including screening, intervention, follow -up etc.  
Participants Review of Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: Prospective participants will initially review general inclusion and 
exclusion criteria about the study on the flyer where there is contact information to contact the researcher for more 
detailed information about the study. Interested individual will be screened through a standard phone screen script. 
Their continued interest confirms that they have met the basic inclusion/exclusion criteria (via self -report).  
 
Administration of Consent Form: When the consent form is administered, participants will have already acknowledged that they meet the criteria and have expressed continued interest for participating in the study. If at that time they feel 
that they do not meet the criteria or have specific question about the mentioned criteria, they will be asked to inform 
the research team member administering the consent form. If they again meet these criteria to the best of their 
knowledge, a second set of study screening procedures will be administered to evaluate whether or not they qualify for 
the stud y. All of the remaining screening and study procedures described hereinafter will be administered only if the 
participant has provided consent to participate (i.e., signed the consent form).  
 
Experimental Procedures: At the lab the participants will be ask ed to complete questionnaire such as demographic 
questionnaire, neuromodulation screening questionnaire, MMSE memory study,Beck Depression Inventory, and Beck 
Anxiety Inventory.  
 
Baseline Testing and Learning Phase:The participants will be presented with "face" and "word" stimuli. No stimulation using tDCS or EEG will be performed.  
 
Stimulation phase: After this the participant will be allowed to relax for 10min. The participant will be set up with the 3x1 HD -tDCS configuration by STARSTIM system that will start the active or sham stimulation. The anode electrode of 
the HD- tDCS will be placed over the posterior cingulate cortex dermatomes (PZ) and the other three cathode electrodes 
will be placed on OZ, PO7 and PO8 positions. For an active stimulation the electrical current will be initially increased in a ramp -like fashion until reaching 1.0mA and stimulation will be maintained for the duration of the task until it ramps 
down. For a sham stimulation, the electrical current will be increased in a ramp -like fa shion until reaching 1.0mA to 
mimic the sensation present  during  the real stimulation and then stimulation will be stopped  and ramp down  without  the 
participant knowing. The total duration of the sham HD- tDCS will be maintained for the duration of the task to be able 
to appropriately blind the  procedure.  
 
Retrieval phase: After the application of active or sham stimulation, the EEG cap and the elec trode will be affixed on the 
head. Once connected the participant will be represented the face or words again with the instruction of not responding 
to it when they see on the screen. The participant will respond after 90sec. The ERP data will be collected during the retrieval phase.  
 
After the completion of study the participant will need to fill out the tDCS questionnaire.  
METHODS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE COLLECTION OF NEW DATA  
Page 12 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016    
Will archival data be used?  
 Yes   No 
If yes, please continue  
 
Describe the records: medical, educational, employment existing data set, or pathological specimens:  
 
 
Do you have permission to access the records or specimens?  
 Yes, these sources are publicly available. Identify the source ( e.g., database name, website address,  etc.) 
 
 Yes, other. Identify the source and describe how you have permissible access to the records.  
 
 No 
Number of records or specimens to be used: 
 
 
Will the records you receive be stripped of all identifiers that would make it possible for you to identify a participant? 
 Yes 
 No 
Describe the identifying information to which you will have access to prior to recording data:  
  
Describe the identifying information you will record:  
  
Confirm that the data/specimens you wish to review already exist.  
 The data set  exists  
 The data set does not already  exist  
 
Confirm that you will not have access to, or create a link, which would make it possible to identify participants.  
 I will not have access to, or create a link. 
 I will have access to a link,  explain:  
If this record or specimen became publicly available, could it have negative psychological, physical, economic, 
sociological or legal consequences for the participant from which it originated?  
 Yes  No 
If yes, describe the potential negative consequences.  
METHODS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE USE OF ARCHIVAL DATA  
Page 13 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016    A reasonable person would consider it to be important to know the risk of harm or discomfort when deciding whether to participate  
in the research project.  
 
Potential Risks  
Are there risks of physical harm or discomfort associated with the research?  
 Yes   No 
If yes, describe: - The most common side- effect of neurostimulation is temporally local redness of the skin direct 
under the electrode. This disappears within 1 hour.  
 
- Itching at the site of the electrode, passing within the  hour. 
 
- Slight feeling of dizziness when starting the stimulation occurs in a small number of 
participants. This takes only a few seconds and does not affect balance after  stimulation. 
 
- Very rarely, temporary skin damage may occur under the electrode. This gives a  darkening of 
the skin, which normalizes after a weeks and heals. The size of such etch is a few millimeters. 
This is harmless, however, with the current that we will handle, this risk is minimal. 
 
On the safety of tDCS in healthy volunteers, in 2005 a wel l-conducted study published in the 
Journal of Neurology. There is a group of 103 people total tDCS stimulation given to 2 mA. Outside redness and itching they describe a transient slight improvement in language fluency (pronouncing words) or a transient slight delay in language fluency. The technique is seen as 
safe. 
 
Are there risks of psychological harm or discomfort associated with the research procedure?  
 Yes   No 
If yes, describe:  
 
Are there risks of social harm to the participants associated with the research?  
 Yes   No 
If yes, describe:  
 
Are there economic risks associated with the research?  
 Yes   No 
If yes, describe:  
 
What is your assessment of the overall risk classification of this research?  
 Minimal  
 Greater than Minimal Risk and the study presents the prospect of direct benefit to the participants  
 Greater than Minimal Risk and the study presents no prospect of direct benefit to the participants, but will likely yield 
generalizable knowledge about th e study  question.  
 
Minimizing Risks  
 
How will you minimize risks or discomfort?  
 Monitor the experiments by  professional  staff.  
 Provide opportunities for rest or  breaks.  
 Withdrawal of participant based  on specific  criteria,  explain: All participants who are terminated  from the study  will 
have the reason for their termination documented.  
Reasons for termination may include: lost -to-follow - 
up, participant -initiated withdrawal, staff -directed 
withdrawal, completion of study.  
 Remind participant of his/her opportunity to stop  or withdraw.  
 Modification of process,  explain:  
 Other,  describe:  
 
Potential Benefits  
Benefits to participants do NOT include monetary incentives  paid in return for participation.  
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
Page 14 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016   Please describe any direct benefits anticipated for the individual participants in this study:  
None 
 
Please describe any potential benefits to society:  
Knowledge gained from this study can be used in aging and patient populations, such as patients with Mild Cognitive 
Impairment or Alzheimer's disease, where memory performance is one of the first aspects to be impacted.  
Page 15 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016    The principal investigator/faculty sponsor is responsible for taking all necessary steps to maintain confidentiality of data. This 
includes coding data and choosing appropriate and secure ways to store data to prevent unauthorized access to the data.  
 
Will identifiers or links to an identifier of the participants be stored?  
 Yes   No 
If yes, what information that could be linked to the participants will be recorded?  
All data collected in this study will be coded. Identifying information, such as name, DOB, physical and contact 
email addresses and phone numbers, which link a particular participant to their coded data, will be kept in a 
locked file cabinet in Dr. Vannes te’s lab at BSB 14.604. The signed consent forms will be stored in another 
locked cabinet in Dr. Vanneste’s lab at BSB 14.604. All coded data will be kept in another separate locked file in 
Dr. Vanneste's lab BSB 14.604.  
 
Please explain the procedure for d e-identifying or anonymizing the data:  
All data collected during the experimental procedures used in the study will consist of only coded identifiers.  
 
Will you obtain any information containing personally identifying information? 
 Yes   No 
If yes, pleas e continue with the following questions.  
 
If information with personal identifiers will be accessed, will the participants provide consent for storing of personal data or biological specimens in connection with the research?  
 Yes  No 
If no, provide justification for a waiver of informed consent:  
 
 
Will anyone other than the specified study team, have access to the study records or data? If so, please specify each person' s 
name, role on this study, and affiliation.  
No 
 
If coded or identified data will be released outside of UTD or its affiliated institutions, please specify the persons/agenci es to 
which the information will be released. Please also indicate the precautions that will be taken to assure that confidentialit y 
will be maintained during transmission of the data.  
 
 
Will your study involve obtaining individually identifiable health information from health care plans, health care 
clearinghouses, or health care providers?  
 Yes    No    Not Applicable  
If "Yes," describe the procedures you will use to comply with the HIPAA Privacy Rule:  
 
 
Where, how long, and in what format (such as paper, digital or electronic media, video, audio, or photographic) will data be 
kept? In addition, describe what security provisions will be taken to protect this data (password protection, encryption, etc.). 
All hard- copy clinical and research data, as well as electronic data, collected during this study will be kept in locked file 
cabinets or on password -protected computers in the laboratory of Dr. Vanneste. Data will be stored indefinitely.  
What will happen to the data after the data analysis is  complete?  
 
 Data will be destroyed  years after completion of  the study 
 Data will be stored an unspecified length of  time 
DATA PRIVACY & CONFIDENTIALITY  
Page 16 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016   ASSURANCES   
THIS SECTION MUST BE COMPLETED  
The DHHS and other Federal Regulations require that the IRB is responsible for determining whether the proposed data collecti on 
meets the federal definition of research.  
 
Federal regulation s state all activities classified as research must be submitted for IRB review and approval.  
 
Expedited category of review is reserved for research that involves minimal risk and satisfies one or more of following seven  
categories defined by Federal Regulation (Department of Health and Human Services). All other research involving humans must be 
reviewed by the FULL BOARD of the IRB.  
 
Please mark all that apply:  
 
 Category 1 - Study of drugs or devices that do not require an IND application, are used consi stent  w/ label 
 Category 2 - Blood samples by finger/stick or venipuncture from healthy and non- pregnant adults  <550ml  
 Category 3 - Prospective biological specimens for research by non -invasive means (ex. hair or  nail clippings) 
 Category 4 - Non-invasive procedure used in routine clinical  practice  
 Category 5 - Materials collected previously (archival  data)  
 a) for non -research purposes  
 b) for another research protocol  
 Category 6 - Collection of data from voice, video, digital or other recordings for research purposes. 
 Category 7 - Research on individuals or groups using surveys, interviews, or program evaluation,  etc. 
 
 
 
My signature below certifies that : 
 
I agree to comply fully with the ethical principles and regulation regarding the protection of human subjects in research.  
 
I agree that the information provided in this form and all other supporting documents and forms are accurate and complete. 
Copies of all required documentation of consent and any data related to this research are securely stored at:  
UTD Building  Office  Num ber 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator's  Signature  Date  
  
 
 
 
 Co-Principal Investigator   Faculty  Sponsor  Date  
IRB REVIEW CATEGORY  
Page 17 of 17  Last Revised 01/2016   Student Conflict of  Interest  Disclosure  
for Non -Exempt IRB  Application  
Office of Research  Compliance 
 
 
The purpose of this form is to assist UTD undergraduate and graduate students conducting human subjects research that require s 
approval by the UTD Institutional Review Boar d to comply with the terms of UT System Policy 175. Please contact Conor 
Wakeman ( conor.wakeman@utdallas.edu , 972-883-4718) if you have any questions about this form.  
 
STUDENT INFORMATION  
Name:  Program:  
 
UTD Research Conflict of Interest Policy requires annual conflict of interest disclosures from all individuals who 
contribute significantly to research conducted at UTD. As an investigator on a human subjects research protocol, you are required to disclose the following interests related to your research at UTD that may constitute a significant 
outside interest:  
 
1) Compensation, travel reimbursement or royalty income that exceeds $5,000 in the previous 12 months. 
2) An equity interest that represents more than $5,000 in fair market value, more than 10% voting or participating 
interest, a controlling interest, or any interest (>0%) in a privately held business entity.  
3) A gift that represents more than $250 in value (excluding gifts from family  members).  
4) A fiduciary interest in a business or non-profit entity.  
 
 
 Yes No 
Do you have a significant outside interest related to your research at UTD that you need 
to disclose?   
If yes, you will be provided instructions by the Conflict of Interest Manager to complete a full disclosure.  
 
Certification  
In submitting this form, I certify that the above information is true to the best of my knowledge and that I have read and understa nd 
the policy on Research Conflict of Interest. I also certify that I will comply with conditions or restrictions imposed by UTD  to 
manage, reduce or eliminate actual or potential conflicts of interest. Furthermore, I supply this information for confidenti al review 
by the University and I do not authorize release of it for any other use.  
Signature  Date  
 
For Internal Use Only - Office of Research Review  
Sanaz Okhovat  Date  
Assistant Vice President, Office of Research Compliance 
Rafael Martin  
Associate Vice President for Research  
No Conflict  Full Disclosure  Required  
 
  
 