Protocol CRD -12-1176 -01, PI: Steven Batki, MD   
 
Version #1  Version Date : 12/18/2018  Page 1 of 4 
Protocol Template © CFFT TDN   Effective: 12 SEP  2007   
THERANOVA, LLC  
Clinical Research Protocol  
PILOT EVALUATION OF THE EMPOWER NEUROMOD ULATION SYSTEM IN 
AUD PATIENTS  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
Protocol Number:  CRD -12-1176-01 
Version Date:  December 18 , 2018  
Investigational Product:  Empower Neuromodulation System  
IND/IDE  Number:  N/A, non -significant risk study  
Development Phase:  Feasibility  
Sponsor:  TheraNova, LLC  
101 Mississippi St.  
San Francisco, CA 94107  
Funding Organization:  NIH-NIAAA  
Principal Investigator:  Name:              Steven Batki, MD   
Telephone:  415-221-4810 ext. 23671  
Fax:  415-750-2187  
E-mail:  Steven.Batki@ucsf.edu  
Coordinating Center:  Not applicable  
Protocol CRD -12-1176 -01, PI: Steven Batki, MD   
 
Version #1  Version Date : 12/18/2018  Page 2 of 4 
Protocol Template © CFFT TDN   Effective: 12 SEP  2007  PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
TITLE  Pilot evaluation of the Empower Neuromodulation System  in AUD 
Patients  
  SPONSOR  TheraNova, LLC  
  FUNDING 
ORGANIZATION  NIH-NIAAA  
NUMBER OF SITES  One (1)  
  RATIONALE  Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a major public health concern, 
affecting over 16 million American s. AUD i s a highly disabling 
disease associated with many  physi cal and psychiatric co-morbidities . 
Current AUD interventions include pharmacologic treatment  and 
behavioral therapies; however, these are not very effective, having 
high rates of relapse soon after initial successful treatment.  Therefore, 
new, more effective therapies are ne eded.  
Preclinical and clinical research has shown that stimulation of the 
ulnar sensory  nerve via acupuncture can inhibit dopamine signaling in 
the brain’s mesolimbic circuit that is responsible for drug craving and 
reward . While acupuncture is an excellen t adjunct procedure in 
treatment centers, it also has limited patient acceptability as it requires 
patients to  seek treatment in clinic.  Therefore, TheraNova  has 
developed the Empower Neuromodulation System , a portable, safe, 
easy-to-use neuromodulation device that stimulates the ulnar sensory  
nerve  to enable a convenient and acceptable therapy to treat AUD . 
The overall goal of this study is to conduct a 3-week  pilot 
investigation into the safety, effectiveness , and usability of the 
Empower Neuromodulation System in AUD patients.  
  STUDY DESIGN  This is a n open -label, pilot  study.  
  PRIMARY 
OBJECTIVE   Safety:  Evaluate safety of the Empower Neuromodulation 
System treatment via device -related adverse events and 
participant -reported side effects.  
 Effectiveness:   Evaluate the effectiveness of Empower 
Neuromodulation System treatment for reducing alcohol 
consumption (via self-reported daily consumption ) over a 2 -
week treatment phase and compared to a pre -treatment baseline 
phase.  
 
  
Protocol CRD -12-1176 -01, PI: Steven Batki, MD   
 
Version #1  Version Date : 12/18/2018  Page 3 of 4 
Protocol Template © CFFT TDN   Effective: 12 SEP  2007  SECO NDARY 
OBJECTIVES  The secondary study objectives are the following:  
 Effectiv eness: Evaluate the effectiveness of the Empower 
Neuromodulation System treatment for reducing alcohol 
craving (via self -reported craving intensit y (VAS responses) ) 
over a 2 -week treatment phase and compared to a pre -treatment 
baseline phase .  
 Usability:  Evaluate the usability of the Empower 
Neuromodulation System via the System Usability Survey 
(SUS).  
  NUMBER OF 
PARTICIPANT S 25 
  PARTICIPANT  
SELECTION  
CRITERIA  Inclusion Criteria : 
1. Is male or female ≥  21 year  of age at Visit 1  
2. Has a current diagnosis of alcohol use disorder per DSM -5 by 
clinician assessment  
3. Endorses Criterion 4 in DSM -5 
4. Has a desire to maintain abstinence or, if not abstinent, a desire to 
reduce or quit alcohol use  
5. Has a breath alcohol concentration of 0.00% at enrollment  
6. Is able to  provide informed consent   
7. Is able to understand spoken and written English  
8. Is capable and willing to follow all study -related procedures  
Exclusion Criteria : 
1. Has been diagnosed with unstable psychosis , epilepsy, peripheral 
neuropathy, or nerve damage  
2. Requires acute medical detoxification from alcohol based on a score 
of 12 or more on the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment of 
Alcohol Scale (CIWA -AD)   
3. Has implanted electrical and/or neurostimulator  device (e.g. 
pacemaker, defibrillator, vagal neurostimulator, deep brain 
stimulator, spinal stimulator, sacral stimulator, bone growth 
stimulator, or cochlear implant)  
4. Has an electrically conductive metal object (e.g. jewelry) that 
cannot be removed from the palm  and will directly contact the gel 
electrodes of the Empower Neuromodulation System  
5. Will not, for the duration of the participation in the study, have a 
living situation that provides regular access to an electrical outlet.  
6. Is pregnant, breastfeeding , or unwilling to practice birth control 
during participation in the study  
7. Has used an investigational drug/device therapy within the past 4 
weeks  
8. Is de emed unsuitable for enrollment in the study by the PI  
  
Protocol CRD -12-1176 -01, PI: Steven Batki, MD   
 
Version #1  Version Date : 12/18/2018  Page 4 of 4 
Protocol Template © CFFT TDN   Effective: 12 SEP  2007  TEST PRODUCT, 
DOSE, AND ROUTE 
OF 
ADMINISTRATION  Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation of the ulnar  nerve at the 
palm  with the Empower Neuromodulation System  
During the Treatment Phase (Weeks 2-3 of the study), the participant 
will self -administer a treatment session twice per day. Each treatment 
session consists of a total of 30 minutes of treatment, with 15 minutes 
of treatment on one hand followed by 15 minutes on the other hand.   
CONTRO L 
PRODUCT, DOSE 
AND ROUTE OF 
ADMINISTRATION  No control treatment will be used in this study.  However, each 
participant  will serve as his/her own control via data collection during 
the Baseline Phase (Week 1 of the study). For each participant , 
treatment effects during the Treatment Phase (Weeks 2 and 3) will be 
compared with the Baseline Phase.  
DURATION OF 
PARTICIPANT  
PARTICIPATION 
AND DURATION OF 
STUDY  Participant s will be on study for up to 35  days 
Screening:  up to 7 days  
Baseline Phase:   5-11 days  
Treatment  Phase :  11-17 days  
The total duration of the study is expected to be 9 months . Eight 
months for participant  recruitment and 1 month  for final participant  
follow -up. 
STATISTICS  
Primary Analysis Plan  The primary effectiveness endpoint will be change in alcohol 
consumption  as a result of treatment. We will compare  averages of 
daily drinking for the final week of the Treatment Phase (Week 2) vs. 
the week of the Baseline Phase via a paired t -test. 
Rationale for Number 
of Participant s As a pilot study, the sample size is not based on  a formal power 
calculation. Based on sample sizes for previous pilot studies for 
neuromodulation studies in addiction and mental health treatment, we 
aim to recruit 25 participants to obtain a meaningful cohort for a pilot 
evaluation of the Empower Neuromodulation System.  
 