 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Title:  
Social Ecological Based Smoking Cessation Intervention in Public Housing 
Neighborhoods  
 
 
#  R01HL090951  
 
 
Date:  8/09/2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statistical Analyses .   
 
 Preliminary Analysis.   Univariate descriptive statistics and frequency distributions will be 
calculated  as appropriate for all variables.  These analyses will identify departures from 
distributional assumptions for proposed procedures.  If departures are identified, appropriate 
transformations of data will be applied, or alternative analysis procedures (e.g ., semi -parametric 
or nonparametric) will be employed.  Baseline values for demographic and other putative 
prognostic variables will be compared for imbalance across the two treatment conditions (TX, 
C). These analyses will identify potential confounding v ariables to be used as covariates in 
subsequent analyses. Putative prognostic variables that will be investigated through these 
descriptive analyses include age, income, education, nicotine dependence score, and 
depression score.  To investigate potential limits on generalizability, we will compare 
demographic and other baseline characteristics of the dropouts with those who were 
completers.  
Premature exits (drop -outs) and missing data .  In order to minimize potential bias due to 
missing observations, we w ill carefully document why data are missing, which will involve 
contacting via telephone, if necessary, those who do not return for follow -up assessments to 
attempt to ascertain smoking status, and reason(s) for dropout   We will adopt several 
approaches t o dealing with missing data for the ITT analysis set. For the primary dichotomous 
cessation outcomes, we will impute outcome status in two ways: (1) by considering dropouts as 
smokers, and (2) using a stochastic regression imputation developed by Hedeker [ 143] taking 
different source of variation into account.  For analyses of continuous variables using a single 
outcome (e.g., change from baseline in nicotine dependence score), we will use the multiple 
imputation methods of Little [144] and Rubin [145]. For  longitudinal data, where appropriate, we 
will employ longitudinal data methods (e.g., mixed models, random regression, or hierarchical 
linear models) which allow for missing data [143,146]. We will carry out sensitivity analyses by 
comparing the results o f analyses using different methods of imputation to evaluate the role of 
missing data in the study's conclusions.  The implications of the sensitivity analyses will be 
discussed in presentations of study findings.  In addition, we will model the dichotomou s 
outcome, missing/not missing end -of-study score, using logistic regression to determine if 
“missingness” is related to treatment group and/or initial level of the given outcome variable 
(baseline score). We will also use information on drop -outs as one o f the outcome measures of 
effectiveness of the interventions being compared.  We will make every attempt to keep 
subjects in the study and to obtain required measurements.  
 
Analyses for Primary Aim . 
Aim #1. To test the effectiveness of a multi -level intervention ( Sister to Sister ) on 
smoking cessation outcomes in female smokers residing in public housing 
neighborhoods.  
Hypothesis 1.1 :  As compared to the control group, women receiving the Sister to Sister 
Intervention  will have higher 7 -day point prev alence quit rates at 6 -and 12 -months.  
Hypothesis 1.2 : As compared to the control group, women receiving the Sister to Sister 
Intervention will have higher 6 - and 12 -month prolonged abstinence.  
To evaluate the relationships between intervention outcomes and  intervention status (TX or 
C), we will use a generalized linear mixed models (GLMM) approach (or equivalently 
hierarchical linear models [HLM], random regression models [RRM], or mixed effects models 
[MEM]) with treatment assignment as the primary indepen dent variable and measures of 
effectiveness as the dependent variable  [146].  This approach accommodates a wide range of 
distributional assumptions for continuous and categorical outcome variables, including binary 
(e.g., smoking cessation/no cessation - the primary outcome), count, and ordinal measures, as 
well as multilevel data such as longitudinal measurements on subjects and a possible cluster 
effect within neighborhoods [143,146].These analyses allow for measurement of subjects at 
different time points , missing data, and time varying or invariant covariates.  
In the GLMM analyses, treatment (TX vs C) and measurement time (6 months and 12 
months) will be included as a fixed effect, a term representing neighborhood (the cluster effect) 
will be included in  the model as a random effect in order to account for correlation among 
women within the same neighborhood , with a pair -specific fixed intercept parameter to 
represent each neighborhood pair [148].  The statistical test of primary interest will be the F -test 
for the treatment x time interaction, which will reflect a difference in change between the 
intervention and control groups over the course of the study.  
 In further analyses, putative covariates will be added to the model to examine whether the 
interve ntion remained statistically and clinically associated with cessation after controlling for the 
potential covariates.  Each covariate considered for inclusion will be examined individually for a 
relationship with cessation outcomes. In the second step, tho se variables with a p value < .25 
will be included in an initial model. Next, the potential confounder variable in the initial model 
with highest p value will be removed and the model will be run again. If the removal of the 
potential confounder variable d oes not result in a significant reduction in model fit (as indicated 
by a change in the model -2 log likelihood), then the variable is removed from further steps. The 
removal and subsequent testing of change in model fit will be repeated until all non -significant 
potential confounders are tested. Potential covariates include demographic variables (i.e., age, 
income, education), nicotine dependence score, depression score, body mass index, perceived 
stress, social smoking influences,  social ties, neighborhoo d cohesion, neighborhood smoking 
prevalence, neighborhood stress, and time dependent covariates of self efficacy, spiritual well -
being, social support, and cessation resources.  
The magnitude of intervention effect sizes (e.g., differences in 7 -day point pr evalence 
proportions between TX and C groups, and odds ratios for cessation) will be estimated using 
95% confidence intervals (95%CI).  Effect size estimates allow evaluation of the "clinical" or 
practical significance/relevance of the study findings.  
 
Analyses for Secondary Aims.  
Aim #2. To evaluate the effect of the Sister -to-Sister intervention on individual (self -
efficacy, spiritual well -being), interpersonal (social support), and neighborhood 
(cessation resources) factors  and to determine if these f actors mediate the effect of 
treatment on smoking cessation outcomes.  
Hypothesis 2.1 : As compared to the control group, women receiving the  Sister to Sister  
intervention will have greater improvement  in individual factors (self -efficacy, spiritual 
well-being), interpersonal factors  
     (social support), and neighborhood factors ( cessation resources ) at 6 -and 12 months.  
Hypothesis 2.2 : Positive changes in individual factors (self -efficacy, spiritual well -being), 
interpersonal factors (social  support, and  neighborhood factor ( cessation resources ) will 
mediate the effect of the 6 - and 12-month cessation outcomes in women receiving the 
Sister to Sister  intervention.  
A generalized linear mixed models (GLMM) approach, as described for the Primary Aim, will 
be used for Aim 2.  To examine the effect of treatment (TX vs C) on individual factors (self -
efficacy, spiritual well -being), interpersonal factors (social support), and neighborhood factors 
(cessation resources)  [Hypothesis 2.1 ], each of the individual vari ables within the factors will be 
used individually as the outcome (dependent) variables in the GLMM. As described above, 
treatment and measurement time will be considered fixed effects, and neighborhood will be 
considered a random effect, with a pair-speci fic fixed intercept parameter to represent each 
neighborhood pair . Additional covariates, as described above, will be added to the model to 
determine the effect of treatment on these outcomes adjusted for the effect of the covariates.  
 The analyses for Hy pothesis 2.2 address the question of whether the individual (self -
efficacy, spiritual well -being), interpersonal (social support), and neighborhood factors 
(cessation resources) explain (mediate) the relationship between the outcome (6 - and 12 -month 
cessat ion) and the intervention (Sister -to-Sister). In mediator analyses, it is posited that variation 
in a given independent variable (intervention) accounts for variation in the mediators (self -
efficacy, spiritual well -being, social support, cessation resource s) and variations in mediators 
account for variations in outcome (6 -and 12 -month cessation).  For these analyses, we will 
follow the methods of Baron and Kenney [149], Holmbeck [150], and Kraemer [151]. GLMM 
analyses as outlined above will evaluate the rel ationship between the outcome (6 - and 12 -
month cessation) and the intervention (Aim 1). Next, the relationship between intervention and 
the putative mediator variables (self -efficacy, spiritual well -being, social support, cessation 
resources) will be evalu ated as described for Hypothesis 2.1.  Finally, the mediating effect of 
self-efficacy, spiritual well -being, social support, cessation resources on a significant treatment 
effect will be evaluated in a GLMM model that simultaneously regresses treatment (TX  vs C) 
and the putative mediating variables on outcome (smoking cessation). A significant smoking 
cessation/treatment relationship that becomes nonsignificant following the addition of the 
putative mediator covariable suggests that the latter accounts for (mediates) the former 
observed relationship. For example, we conclude that the relationship between treatment and 
smoking cessation is mediated by self efficacy if the variable representing self efficacy is 
significant and a previously significant treatmen t effect becomes nonsignificant in the 
multivariable model containing both.    
 
143. Hedeker D, Mermelstein RJ, Demirtas H. Analysis of binary outcomes with missing data:  
missing= smoking, last observation carried forward, and a little multiple imputation. Addiction. 
2007.  
102,10:1513 -1684.  
144. Little RJA, Rubin DB (1987 ) Statistical Analysis with Missing Data . 1987. J. Wiley & Sons, 
New York.  
145. Little RJA, Rubin DB (1987 ) Statistical Analysis with Missing Data . 1987. J. Wiley & Sons, 
New York.  
146. Gibbons R. Longitudinal Data Analysis. 2006. John Wiley and Sons, Inc. New York.  
147. McCulloch CE, Searle SR. Generalized, Linear, and Mixed Models. 2001. John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc , New York.  
148. Gail MH, Mark SD, Carroll RJ, Green SB, Pee D. On design considerations and 
randomization -based  
inference for community intervention trials. Statistics in Medicine. 1996.5,11:1069 -1092.  
149. Baron RM, Kenny DA. The moderator -mediator va riable distinction in social psychological 
research:  
Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology.  
1986;51:1173 –1182.  
150. Holmbeck , GN. Toward terminological, conceptual, and statistical clarity in the study of 
mediators and  
moderators: Examples from the child -clinical and pediatric psychology literatures. Journal of 
Consulting  
and Clinical Psychology. 1997;65(4):599 -610.  
151. Kraemer HC, Wilson GT, Fairburn CG, & Agras WS. Mediators and moderators of 
treatment effects in randomized clinical trials. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2002; 59:877-883. 
 
 