Title of the study : Daily Weight Feedback for Wheelchair Users to Promote Weight Los s 
 NCT number : 03264248  
Date: June 5th, 2018  
Section: Triage     [reviewer notes¬] Provide a short title for this study (200 characters or less):Daily weight feedback for wheelchair users to promote weight loss T1.0Select the type of application:New Research Study   T2.0Is the proposed research study limited to the inclusion of deceased individuals? * NoT2.1Are any research activities being conducted at the VA Pittsburgh HealthcareSystem or with VA funds? * No 
       [reviewer notes¬] T3.0What is the anticipated risk to the research participants?Minimal Risk T3.1Why do you feel that all aspects of this research study, including screening andfollow-up, involve no more than minimal risk to the research subjects?This study is a standard behavioral weight loss study focusing on diet, physical activity, andbehavioral strategies to effectively make lifestyle changes. It will also include using a newscale (E-scale) which has minimal risk as it will continuously record the weight of the bedwhich will allow for capturing the weight of the person when they are in bed.T4.0Does the proposed study qualify for 'exempt' IRB review or for a determination ofeither 'not research' or 'no human subject' involvement?* No T5.0Does the proposed research study qualify for 'expedited' IRB review status?* Yes
Section: Cover Sheet     [reviewer notes¬] CS1.0What is the reason for this submission?New Research Protocol SubmissionCS1.1Has this research study been approved previously by the University of PittsburghIRB?*  NoCS1.1.1Has this research study (or a substantially similar research study) been previouslydisapproved by the University of Pittsburgh IRB or, to your knowledge, by any otherIRB?*  No       [reviewer notes¬] CS2.0Title of Research Study:Daily weight feedback for wheelchair users to promote weight lossCS2.0.1   Requested approval letter wording:CS2.1Research Protocol Abstract:The goals of the proposed study are to test the usability, feasibility and preliminary efficacyof the E-Scale with wheelchair users. Up to fifteen overweight or obese wheelchair users willbe enrolled in a 13 week study that includes standard behavioral treatment (SBT) for weightloss that focuses on diet, physical activity, and behavioral strategies (e.g., goal setting, self-monitoring) to support lifestyle changes specifically for people with mobility impairments.The subjects will also be provided the E-scale to track their weight daily. The primaryoutcomes will be usefulness (subjective feedback from a survey about the program/E-scale), feasibility (accuracy and repeatable measurements from the E-scale) and efficacy(improvements in weight and other measures of health) of the weight loss program coupledwith the E-scale at the end of 13 weeks. The results could inform the refinement of thistechnology to increase its applicability for wheelchair users to independently monitor theirweight in their own homes while attempting to lose weight.  
CS2.2Select the category that best describes your research:Hybrid - includes aspects of BOTH types of research (check this option if your research ismainly social/behavioral but also involves specimen collection or blood draws to look atbiological measures)     [reviewer notes¬] CS3.0Name of the Principal Investigator:
Jonathan PearlmanNote: Adjunct faculty of the University, including lecturers and instructors, are notpermitted to serve as a PI or Faculty Mentor but may serve as co-investigators. Refer toChapter 4 on the HRPO website for more information.CS3.1Affiliation of Principal Investigator:UPitt faculty member  If you chose any of the Pitt options, please indicate the specific campus:Main Campus - Pittsburgh If you chose the UPi/ faculty member op6on, provide the PI’s University	Faculty	Title:Associate Professor  CS3.2Address of Principal Investigator:6425 Penn Ave Suite 400Pittsburgh, PA 15206 CS3.3Recorded Primary Affiliation of the Principal Investigator:U of Pgh | School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences | Rehabilitation Science andTechnology CS3.4Identify the School, Department, Division or Center which is responsible foroversight of this research study:U of Pgh | School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences   CS3.5Telephone Number of Principal Investigator:412-822-3685 CS3.6Recorded Current E-mail Address of Principal Investigator to which allnotifications will be sent:jlp46@pitt.eduCS3.7Fax Number:412-822-3699CS3.8Does this study include any personnel from Carnegie Mellon University, and/oruse any CMU resources or facilities (e.g., Scientific Imaging and Brain ResearchCenter (SIBR)?*  No
CS3.9Is this your first submission, as PI, to the Pitt IRB?  *  No       [reviewer notes¬] CS4.0List of Co-Investigators: LastFirstOrganizationDuvallJonathanU of Pgh | School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences | RehabilitationScience and TechnologyGoldElizabethOtherKargPatriciaU of Pgh | School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences   
     [reviewer notes¬] CS5.0Name of Primary Research Coordinator:Patricia Karg   CS5.1Address of Primary Research Coordinator:6425 Penn AveSuite 401Pittsburgh, PA 15206CS5.2Telephone Number of Primary Research Coordinator:412-624-6207CS6.0Name of Secondary Research Coordinator:CS6.1Address of Secondary Research Coordinator:  CS6.2Telephone Number of Secondary Research Coordinator: CS6.3Key Personnel/Support Staff (Only list those individuals who require access toOSIRIS): LastFirstOrganizationThere are no items to display     [reviewer notes¬] CS7.0Will this research study use any Clinical and Translational Research Center (CTRC)resources?No
       [reviewer notes¬] CS8.0Select the entity responsible for scientific review. External Scientific Review Completed – The scientific merit of this researchprotocol has been confirmed by an external scientific review committee as a condition offunding.         [reviewer notes¬] CS9.0Does this research study involve the administration of an investigational drug oran FDA-approved drug that will be used for research purposes?* No  CS10.0Is this research study being conducted under a University of Pittsburgh-based,sponsor-investigator IND or IDE application? *  No If YES, you are required to submit the IND or IDE application and all subsequent FDAcorrespondence through the Office for Investigator-Sponsored IND and IDE Support(O3IS).  Refer to applicable University policies posted on the O3IS website (www.O3IS.pitt.edu).       [reviewer notes¬] CS11.0Use the 'Add' button to upload one or more of the following:the sponsor protocol (including investigator initiated studies) and/orother brochuresthe multi-center protocol and consent form template, if applicableNameModified DateIs this research study supported in whole or in part by industry?  This includes theprovision of products (drugs or devices).   *  NoIs this a multi-centered study?*  No  
     [reviewer notes¬] CS12.0Does your research protocol involve the evaluation or use of procedures that emitionizing radiation?
*  No CS13.0Does this research study involve the deliberate transfer of recombinant orsynthetic nucleic acid molecules into human subjects? *  NoUpload Appendix M of NIH Guidelines:NameModified Date CS14.0Are you using UPMC facilities and/or UPMC patients during the conduct of yourresearch study? *  No If Yes, upload completed Research Fiscal Review Form:NameModified Date       [reviewer notes¬] CS15.0Indicate the sites where research activities will be performedand/or private information will be obtained.Choose all sites that apply and/or use Other to include sites not listed:Sites:University of Pittsburgh University of PittsburghCampus:Main Campus - PittsburghList university owned off-campus research sites if applicable:Bakery Square  If you selected School, International or Other, list the sites: *For research being conducted at non Pitt or UPMC sites, upload asite permission letter granting the researcher permission toconduct their research at each external site:NameModified Date CS15.1Have you, Jonathan Pearlman , verified that all members of the 
research team have the appropriate expertise, credentials, and ifapplicable, hospital privileges to perform those researchprocedures that are their responsibility as outlined in the IRBprotocol?*  YesCS15.2Describe the availability of resources and the adequacy of thefacilities to conduct this study:*  Our facilities at the Human Engineering Research Laboratories has all ofthe capabilities needed to conduct this study. We have the equipmentneeded to conduct the baseline and final measurements (scale, body-fatmonitor, and tape measure). We have a locked file room and protectedservers for consent and other confidential information. There is a privateroom for conducting screening and consent procedures. The study hasbeen fully funded by a grant from the Paralyzed Veterans of Americafoundation. 
       [reviewer notes¬] CS16.0Special Research Subject Populations: CategoriesNone     [reviewer notes¬] CS17.0Does your research involve the experimental use of any type of human stem cell?*  No      [reviewer notes¬]  NIH Definition of a Clinical TrialA research study1 in which one or more human subjects2 are prospectivelyassigned3 to one or more interventions4 (which may include placebo or othercontrol) to evaluate the effects of those interventions on health related biomedicalor behavioral outcomes.51 See Common Rule definition of research at 45 CFR 46.102(d) .2 See Common Rule definition of human subject at 45 CFR 46.102(f) .3 The term “prospectively assigned” refers to a pre-defined process (e.g.,randomization) specified in an approved protocol that stipulates the assignment ofresearch subjects (individually or in clusters) to one or more arms (e.g., intervention,placebo, or other control) of a clinical trial.4 An intervention is defined as a manipulation of the subject or subject’s environmentfor the purpose of modifying one or more health-related biomedical or behavioralprocesses and/or endpoints.  Examples include:  drugs/small molecules/compounds;biologics; devices; procedures (e.g., surgical techniques); delivery systems (e.g.,
telemedicine, face-to-face interviews); strategies to change health-related behavior(e.g., diet, cognitive therapy, exercise, development of new habits); treatmentstrategies; prevention strategies; and, diagnostic strategies.5 Health-related biomedical or behavioral outcome is defined as the pre-specifiedgoal(s) or condition(s) that reflect the effect of one or more interventions on humansubjects’ biomedical or behavioral status or quality of life.  Examples include:  positiveor negative changes to physiological or biological parameters (e.g., improvement oflung capacity, gene expression); positive or negative changes to psychological orneurodevelopmental parameters (e.g., mood management intervention for smokers;reading comprehension and /or information retention); positive or negative changesto disease processes; positive or negative changes to health-related behaviors; and,positive or negative changes to quality of life.CS18.0* Based on the above information, does this study meet the NIH definition of aclinical trial?  
Yes 
No   If Yes, click Save and then Click Here For Study Team's CITI Training Records .  Pleaseensure all personnel's training is up to date
Section: Section 1 - Objective, Aims, Background and Significance     [reviewer notes¬] 1.1Objective: What is the overall purpose of this research study?  (Limit response to 1-2 sentences.)To determine the usefulness, feasibility and efficacy of the E-scale system coupled with astandardized behavioral treatment weight-loss intervention for overweight or obesewheelchair users.   
1.2Specific Aims: List the goals of the proposed study (e.g., describe the relevanthypotheses or the specific problems or issues that will be addressed by thestudy).Aim 1. To investigate the usefulness and feasibility of the E-scale system and efficacy of theE-scale coupled with a weight-loss intervention to assist overweight or obese wheelchairusers with losing weight. Hypothesis 1a: The E-scale will be useful based on self-reported feedback from wheelchairusers by more than 50% stating that the E-scale is easy to use, their preferred weightmonitoring system, them feeling that they would use the E-scale if it was available for themto purchase.Hypothesis 2b: The E-scale will be feasible by providing accurate (+/- 2 lbs. from acalibrated scale measurement) and repeatable (<3lbs difference from day-to-day) weightmeasurements and by the wheelchair users continuing to use the scale more than 70% ofthe days of the study.Hypothesis 2c: The E-scale coupled with the weight loss intervention will demonstrateefficacy by wheelchair users having significant improvements in weight, abdominal girth,body fat percentage and score on the Self-Rated Abilities for Health Practices Scale(SRAHP). 1.3Background: Briefly describe previous findings or observations that provide thebackground leading to this proposal. Wheelchair users have about twice the prevalence of obesity than the general population.There is also very little or no technology to which they have access to measure their weightfrequently in their homes. Research however, has shown that monitoring your body weightfrequently (i.e. daily) yields significantly better weight loss and weight maintenance results.This research has never included wheelchair users because they have not had access totechnology to be able to measure their weight daily. The E-scale was developed as a weightmonitoring technology for wheelchair users and has been tested for precision and accuracyin the laboratory.   
1.4Significance: Why is it important that this research be conducted? What gaps inexisting information or knowledge is this research intended to fill? This research will tell whether wheelchair users find the E-scale to be useful and feasible asa way to monitor their weight in their homes. It will also show whether wheelchair users,like the general population, have better weight loss outcomes if they monitor their weightdaily. This could lead to refinement of the E-scale and a push for more available technologyfor wheelchair users to monitor their weight at home which could in turn lead to a decreasein the prevalence of obesity among wheelchair users.  
Section: Section 2 - Research Design and Methods     [reviewer notes¬] 2.1Does this research study involve the use or evaluation of a drug, biological, ornutritional (e.g., herbal or dietary) supplement?*  No       [reviewer notes¬] 2.2Will this research use or evaluate the safety and/or effectiveness of one ormore devices? *  Yes  2.2.1Does this research study involve an evaluation of the safety and/or effectivenessof one or more devices not currently approved by the FDA for general marketing?* Yes If YES, describe your plan to prevent unauthorized use of the investigational device:The E-scale is a non-invasive device which measures the weight of each of the four legs of abed. As such there would be no benefit or harm from unauthorized use.2.2.1.1List each of the unapproved devices being evaluated in this research study.  Specify for each listed device the corresponding Investigational Device Exemption (IDE)number or provide a justification for why you feel that this device and its use, as proposedin this research study constitute a non-significant risk (i.e., to include potential failure of thedevice) to the research subjects: UnapproveddeviceIDE#Non-significant risk justificationViewE-scale The E-scale is a set of weight sensors for each leg of a bed. Thisdevice does not have potential for serious risk to the health, safety, orwelfare of a subject since (1) The device is not an implant; (2) Thedevice is not used in supporting or sustaining human life; or (3) Thedevice is not of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing,mitigating, or treating disease, or otherwise preventing impairment ofhuman health. It has also been used in the home without any adverseevents in IRB # PRO14080007 
       [reviewer notes¬] 2.2.2Does this research study involve the use or evaluation of the safety and/oreffectiveness of one or more devices approved by the FDA for general marketing?*  No        [reviewer notes¬] 
2.3Summarize the general classification (e.g., descriptive, experimental) andmethodological design (e.g., observational, cross-sectional, longitudinal,randomized, open-label single-blind, double-blind, placebo-controlled, activetreatment controlled, parallel arm, cross-over arm) of the proposed researchstudy, as applicable.This study will be experimental. It will be a 13 week longitudinal efficacy study.2.3.1Does this research study involve a placebo-controlled arm?*  No     [reviewer notes¬] 2.4Will any research subjects be withdrawn from known effective therapy for thepurpose of participating in this research study?*  No         [reviewer notes¬] 2.5Will screening procedures (i.e., procedures to determine research subjecteligibility) be performed specifically for the purpose of this research study?*  Yes2.5.1List the screening procedures that will be performed for the purpose of thisresearch study.  Do NOT include the inclusion/exclusion criteria in this section asthey will be addressed in section 3; questions 3.13 and 3.14.A self-report questionnaire will be administered when the person first contacts us and priorto informed consent, this includes most of the screening for inclusion and exclusion criteria.When the person comes into the laboratory, and after consent, weight and heightmeasurements will be taken, and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale(CES-D) and the Eating Disorder Diagnosis Scale (EDDS) will be administered. We will alsoask as part of our first contact that the potential subjects obtain a doctor's note approvingtheir participation in the study and record their diet for 3 days. The note and food record canbe provided anytime up until they start the intervention. If they do not complete these twotasks they will be excluded.       [reviewer notes¬]  2.6Provide a detailed description of all research activities (e.g., all drugs or devices;psychosocial interventions or measures) that will be performed for the purpose ofthis research study. This description of activities should be complete and of sufficient detail to permitan assessment of associated risks. 	 
At a minimum the description should include:all research activitiespersonnel (by role) performing the procedureslocation of proceduresduration of procedurestimeline of study proceduresPotential subjects will be screened over the phone or in person with a list of questions thatmay exclude them from the study. If it is determined that they are likely to be eligible, theywill be asked to contact their doctor for a letter approving their participation in a weight lossprogram and scheduled to come to the lab where they will be consented into the study.They will also be asked to record their diet for 3 days to determine if they are willing tocomply with this key component of the study. When they come into the lab, informedconsent will be performed first. After the consent process is complete, subjects will be giventhe Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) and the Eating DisorderDiagnosis Scale (EDDS) to determine if they would be considered to have a current eatingdisorder or are currently depressed. Next the subject’s weight and height will be measuredin the lab by having the subjects drive onto a calibrated roll-on scale to get the weight oftheir chair with them in it. Then they will transfer out of their wheelchair (with assistance ofthe research team or trained member of our lab if requested) onto a mat table where theywill be asked to lay flat on their back so that their height can be measured with a tapemeasure. While they are on the mat table, a member of the research team will take theirchair back to the roll-on scale to weigh the chair. The subject’s weight will be determined bysubtracting the weight of the chair from the weight of the subject in the chair. The subject’sBody Mass Index (BMI) will then be calculated. They will then transfer (or be assisted) backto their chair.After the subjects’ have been determined to be eligible, they will have their abdominal girthmeasured with a tape measure and their body-fat percentage will be measured with ahand-held BIA inductance measuring tool. They will also be given a demographicsquestionnaire and the Self-Rated Abilities for Health Practices questionnaire to answer. TheLoseIt! (diet and activity journal) and E-scale apps will be installed on their phones/androiddevices or they will be provided with an android device with the apps already installed touse during the study. De-identified login and passwords will be provided to the subjects touse during all of the study procedures so no identifiable data will ever be collected by theseapps. Some training on use of the E-scale and LoseIt! apps will be provided to the subjectsas well as the first lesson of the 13-week curriculum. Over the next few days, the studyteam will go to all of the subject’s homes to install the E-scale under their beds. During the next 12 weeks, subjects will be asked to weigh themselves every day with the E-scale app and record their diet, exercise and weight every day with the LoseIt! app. Thedata that is reported in the LoseIt! app by the subjects will be monitored by the study teamusing the ascendapp for LoseIt!, which allows a “coach” to monitor all of the data submittedby a client. The weight loss curriculum involves weekly lessons for the participants to learnand practice things like counting calories and fat, reorganizing their kitchens, doing morecardio work around the house, etc. This curriculum was adapted from the DiabetesPrevention Program Group Lifestyle Balance (DPP GLB) curriculum at Pitt specifically forpeople with mobility impairments. The study team will send periodic emails with commentsto the participants encouraging their progress and adherence to the protocol and lessonmaterials for that week. Every week at a pre-defined time, a group chat room will beconducted with all of the subject’s and the research team invited to attend to go over thelesson for that week and to have a group discussion for the participants to share successesand difficulties with the group. The chat room will be hosted using Adobe Connect with theaudio and video capabilities disabled. The link to the chat room for each week will beemailed to the subjects along with the lesson materials. The curriculum disbursement,progress emails, and chat rooms will be led by a dietitian/nutritionist with experience inleading group weight loss programs.During the last week of the study (week 13). The subjects will be asked to come back to thelab in-person where their weight will again be measured using the roll-on scale. Their
abdominal girth and body-fat percentage will also be measured again. The SRAHP will beadministered to the subjects again and they will also be given the final questionnaire,System Usability Scale (SUS), which will evaluate how they felt about the E-scale and someaspects of entire study. Any android devices that were loaned to the subjects during thestudy will be collected and the apps on their personal devices will be deleted if they wish.Over the next few days, the study team will visit all of the subject’s homes to remove the E-scales or the participants can bring them with them to the lab.If a participant indicates during the study that the E-scale they are using is malfunctioning,an investigator may talk to the participant on the phone and/or schedule a time to travel tothe subjects home to troubleshoot and/or replace the E-scale with one that is workingproperly. 2.6.1Will blood samples be obtained as part of this research study?*  No *If submitting a protocol for expedited review, it should be clear that the planned blooddraws are within the parameters described here:http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/expedited98.html  (see Expedited Research Category #2)If Yes, address the frequency, volume per withdrawal, the total volume per visit, and thequalifications of the individual performing the procedure:  Study Flow Chart:NameModified DateFlowchart4/17/2017 10:46 AM     [reviewer notes¬] 2.7Will follow-up procedures be performed specifically for research purposes? Follow-up procedures may include phone calls, interviews, biomedical tests orother monitoring procedures.*  No       [reviewer notes¬] 2.8Does this research study involve the use of any questionnaires, interview orsurvey instruments?*  Yes  Upload a copy of all materials except for the SCID or KSADS which are on file atthe IRB.  The use of all instruments must be addressed in question 2.6 and/orquestion 2.7 (except for an exempt submission where they should be addressedon the appropriate uploaded exempt form).
NameModified DateEDDS6/24/2017 2:48 PMScreening tool7/17/2017 4:35 PMFinal Survey1/29/2018 9:45 AMCES-D6/24/2017 2:47 PMDemographics6/24/2017 2:50 PMSRAHP6/24/2017 2:50 PMPreviously the name and publisher for commercially available materialswere listed in the textbox below but effective 9/1/2015, all materials (except forthe SCID and KSADS) must be uploaded using the Add button above.     [reviewer notes¬] 2.9If subjects are also patients, will any clinical procedures that are being used fortheir conventional medical care also be used for research purposes?*  n/a If Yes, describe the clinical procedures (and, if applicable, their frequency) that will beused for research purposes: 2.10The blood sample question was moved to 2.6.1.     [reviewer notes¬] 2.11What is the total duration of the subject's participation in this research studyacross all visits, including follow-up surveillance?*  13 weeks     [reviewer notes¬]  2.12Does this research study involve any type of planned deception? If Yes, you are required to request an alteration of the informed consent process (question4.7)*  No       [reviewer notes¬]  2.13Does this research study involve the use of UPMC/Pitt protected healthinformation that will be de-identified by an IRB approved "honest broker" system? *  No       [reviewer notes¬]  
 2.14Will protected health information from a UPMC/Pitt HIPAA covered entity beaccessed for research purposes or will research data be placed in the UPMC/Pittmedical record?*  No 2.14.1Will protected health information from a non-UPMC/Pitt HIPAA covered entity beobtained for research purposes or will research data be placed in the non-UPMC/Pitt medical record?  *  No       [reviewer notes¬] 2.15Does this research study involve the long-term storage (banking) of biologicalspecimens?  *  No       [reviewer notes¬] 2.16Will research participants be asked to provide information about their familymembers or acquaintances?*  No       [reviewer notes¬] 2.17What are the main outcome variables that will be evaluated in this study?Subjective feedback from the survey about the usefulness and participants' satisfaction withportions of the program and E-scale.Accuracy and repeatability of the E-scale measurementsWeight change, abdominal girth change, body-fat percentage change and Self-Rated Abilitiesfor Health Practices (SRAHP) change  2.18Describe the statistical approaches that will be used to analyze the study data.*  Addressed below:Since there is only one group, most outcome variables will be analyzed using summarystatistics. Baseline and final measurements will also be analyzed using paired t-tests.     [reviewer notes¬] 2.19Will this research be conducted in (a) a foreign country and/or (b) at a site (e.g.,Navajo Nation) where the cultural background of the subject population differs 
substantially from that of Pittsburgh and its surrounding communities?*  NoNote that copies of training records, licenses, certificates should be maintained in thestudy regulatory binder and are subject to audit by the Research Conduct and ComplianceOffice (RCCO).In addition, individuals planning to conduct human subject research outside the UnitedStates must complete an optional module on the CITI training website: InternationalStudies.  Click here to access the instruction sheet for accessing optional CITI modules.        [reviewer notes¬] 2.21Will this research study be conducted within a nursing home located inPennsylvania?*  No    
Section: Section 3 - Human Subjects     [reviewer notes¬] Section 3 - Human Subjects3.1What is the age range of the subject population?18-80  3.2What is their gender?*  Both males and females  Provide a justification if single gender selected:3.3Will any racial or ethnic subgroups be explicitly excluded from participation?*  No  If Yes, identify subgroups and provide a justification:  3.4For studies conducted in the U.S., do you expect that all subjects will be able tocomprehend English?*  Yes        [reviewer notes¬] 3.5Participation of Children: Will children less than 18 years of age be studied?*  No If No, provide a justification for excluding children: Since we are investigating weight changes or weight loss, we do not want to includechildren who may be growing.       [reviewer notes¬] 3.6Does this research study involve prisoners, or is it anticipated that the researchstudy may involve prisoners?*  No        [reviewer notes¬] 3.7Will pregnant women be knowingly and purposely included in this research study?*  No       [reviewer notes¬] 
3.8Does this research study involve neonates of uncertain viability or nonviableneonates?*  No        [reviewer notes¬] 3.9Fetal Tissues: Does this research involve the use of fetal tissues or organs?*  No       [reviewer notes¬] --->3.10What is the total number of subjects to be studied at this site, including subjectsto be screened for eligibility?Note: The number below is calculated by summing the data entered in question 3.11. Anyadditions or changes to the values entered in 3.11 will be reflected in 3.10.*  20 
3.11Identify each of the disease or condition specific subgroups (include healthyvolunteers, if applicable) that will be studied.  Click on the "Add" button and specify for each subgroup:1) how many subjects will undergo research related procedures at this site; and2) if applicable, how many subjects will be required to undergo screeningprocedures (e.g., blood work, EKG, x-rays, etc.) to establish eligibility.  Do Notinclude subjects who will undergo preliminary telephone screening.*  SubgroupNumber to undergo researchproceduresNumber to undergo screeningproceduresViewAllsubjects1520   
3.12Provide a statistical justification for the total number of subjects to be enrolledinto this research study at the multicenter sites or this site.*  Described below:  Since this is an efficacy and exploratory study no sample size calculation was needed orconducted. Similar weight loss studies include 10-20 people in each group session orcohort. 
     [reviewer notes¬] 
3.13Inclusion Criteria: List the specific criteria for inclusion of potential subjects.• Use Wheelchair as primary means of mobility• Uses a bed with 4 legs• BMI ≥27 and ≤40.0 • age 18-80• Has daily access to Internet to access LoseIt website and/or app and weekly chat meeting(Adobe Connect)• Currently owns or willing to use an android device• Provides physician’s clearance to participate in a weight loss intervention• Speaks English 3.14Exclusion Criteria: List the specific criteria for exclusion of potential subjects fromparticipation.• Presence of an unstable condition requiring physician-supervised diet and exercise (e.g.,diabetes, recent myocardial infarction)• Presence of condition precluding engagement in exercise at moderate intensity (e.g.,asthma, congestive heart failure, etc.)• Pregnancy or intention to become pregnant during study• Currently being treated for any psychological issues or problems, taking any psychotropicmedications, or receiving treatment with psychotropic medications within the previous 6months• Reported alcohol intake > 4 drinks/day• Reported participation in a formal weight loss program, loss of ≥5% weight in the past 6months, or current use of weight loss medication.• History of bariatric surgery (lap-band, gastric bypass, etc.)• Planned extended vacations, absences, or relocation during study• A score ≥20 on the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D)• A classification of Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa or Binge Eating Disorder on theEating Disorder Diagnosis Scale (EDDS)• Unwilling to provide a diary of 3 days diet prior to beginning the intervention3.15Will HIV serostatus be evaluated specifically for the purpose of participation inthis research study?*  No If Yes, provide a justification: 
Section: Section 4 - Recruitment and Informed Consent Procedures     [reviewer notes¬] 4.1Select all recruitment methods to be used to identify potential subjects:AdvertisementsResearch RegistryPitt + MeOther Strategies: Described below Advertisements  Upload the advertisements for review:NameModified DatePRO16110460 Pearlman.pdf10/10/2017 10:29 AMFlyer4/18/2017 3:45 PM 
   Research RegistryList the IRB approval number and title for each registry source:Human Engineering Research Laboratories (Pitt IRB #PRO12080311) Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (Pitt IRB #PRO12030122) 4.2Provide a detailed description of your recruitment methods, including identifyingand initiating contact with participants:  We will distribute and post flyers at locations where wheelchair users meet (i.e., doctorsoffices, support groups, adaptive sporting events, etc.). We will also send flyers towheelchair users in two wheelchair research registries and through the CTSI registry. Wewill also utilize social media to spread the word about the study and the Pitt+me registry.This would include posts with our flyer, a link to the Pitt+me study page, etc.  Note: Questions jump from 4.2 to 4.6 as questions 4.3-4.5 have been removed and the information is nowcaptured in 4.1     [reviewer notes¬] 4.6Are you requesting a waiver to document informed consent for any or allparticipants, for any or all procedures? (e.g., a verbal or computerized consentscript will be used, but the subjects will not be required to sign a written informed
consent document.  This is not a waiver to obtain consent.*  Yes4.6.1Identify the specific research procedures and/or the specific subject populationsfor which you are requesting a waiver of the requirement to obtain a signedconsent form.Addressed below:If not all, identify the specific procedures and/or subject populations for which you arerequesting a waiver: The only activities that will be conducted before obtaining written consent is a phone or in-person screening to determine that the potential participant meets most of the eligibilitycriteria prior to having them travel to our lab.4.6.2Indicate which of the following regulatory criteria is applicable to your request fora waiver of the requirement to obtain a signed consent form.  45 CFR 46.117(c)(2)45 CFR 46.117(c)(1) That the only record linking the subject and the research would bethe consent document and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from abreach of confidentiality. Each subject will be asked whether the subject wantsdocumentation linking the subject with the research, and the subject's wishes will govern;or45 CFR 46.117(c)(2) That the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm tosubjects and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outsideof the research context.4.6.2.1Address why the specific research procedures for which you are requesting awaiver of the requirement to obtain a signed consent form present no more thanminimal risk of harm to the research subjects:We will go through a series of questions over the phone that determine if a person meetssome of the criteria. The least personal and invasive questions that are similar to everydayconversations will be asked, followed by questions similar to those asked when making aclinical appointment. Questions will be discontinued and no information will be maintained ifthe person is ineligible for any criteria.4.6.2.2Justify why the research listed in 4.6.1 involves no procedures for which writteninformed consent is normally required outside of the research context:The screening will only involve questions that occur during normal conversation and makinga clinical appointment, and no identifiable information will be recording with the screeningunless they complete the screening and are willing to participate.4.6.3Address the procedures that will be used and the information that will be provided(i.e., script) in obtaining and documenting the subjects' verbal informed consentfor study participation:When a potential subject responds to the ads, a member of the research team will gothrough the attached phone or in person screening script. The participant will be asked if it
is okay that we go through a series of questions to determine if they are eligible for thestudy, and instructed that they may discontinue and choose not to answer at any time. Assoon as an answer to a screening question makes them ineligible, no information aboutthem will be saved and the screening discontinued. If they meet the screening eligibilityrequirements, they will be invited to come to the lab and their screening answers will bekept on the secured server in our department.Upload Scripts:NameModified DateScreening.docx6/24/2017 3:07 PM       [reviewer notes¬] 4.7Are you requesting a waiver to obtain informed consent or an alteration of theinformed consent process for any of the following?  * No 4.7.1If Yes, select the reason(s) for your request:There are no items to displayGeneral Requirements: The Federal Policy [45 CFR 46.116 (d)] specifies in order for awaiver of consent to be approved, the request must meet four criteria. For each request,you will be asked to provide a justification addressing how each of these criterion is met.             [reviewer notes¬] 4.8Are you requesting an exception to the requirement to obtain informed consentfor research involving the evaluation of an 'emergency' procedure?Note: This exception allows research on life-threatening conditions for which available 
treatments are unproven or unsatisfactory and where it is not possible to obtain informedconsent.*  No     [reviewer notes¬]  4.9Upload all consent documents for watermarking:Draft Consent Forms for editing:NameModified DateICF10/19/2017 3:33 PMApproved Consent Form(s):NameModified DateICF12/13/2017 11:35 AM      
     [reviewer notes¬] 4.10Will all potential adult subjects be capable of providing direct consent for studyparticipation? * Yes         [reviewer notes¬] 4.11At what point will you obtain the informed consent of potential research subjectsor their authorized representative?After performing certain of the screening procedures, but prior to performing any of theresearch interventions/interactions  4.11.1Address why you feel that it is acceptable to defer obtaining written informedconsent until after the screening procedures have been performed.The questionnaire portion of the screening procedures will be done over the phone or inperson prior to the subject coming to the lab so that the subjects will not have to make atrip to the lab location if they will not be eligible. Once the subject is at the lab in person,informed consent will be obtained before their weight and height are measured and they areasked to complete the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) and theEating Disorder Diagnosis Scale (EDDS).4.11.2Taking into account the nature of the study and subject population, indicate howthe research team will ensure that subjects have sufficient time to decide whetherto participate in this study.  In addition, describe the steps that will be taken to
minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence.The study will be described to the potential subjects over the phone or in person prior tothem coming to the lab. Once they come to the lab, informed consent will be obtained wherethey will be given time to decide if they want to proceed with the study.       [reviewer notes¬] 4.12Describe the process that you will employ to ensure the subjects are fullyinformed about this research study. *  Addressed below: This description must include the following elements:who from the research team will be involved in the consent process (boththe discussion and documentation);person who will provide consent or permission; information communicated; andany waiting period between informing the prospective participant about the studyand obtaining consentIn addition, address the following if applicable based on your subject population:process for child assent and parental permissioncontinued participation if a child subject turns 18 during participationprocess for obtaining proxy consent and assent for decisionally impaired subjectscontinued participation if subject regains capacity to consentAll members of the research team will be involved with discussing and obtaining informedconsent at the beginning of the subject's initial visit. The information about the study will bedescribed during the screening and again when the potential subject comes into the lab,and all questions answered. This will give the subjects adequate time to decide toparticipate or not. The subjects will provide their own consent.  
4.13Are you requesting an exception to either IRB policy related to the informedconsent process?For studies involving a drug, device or surgical procedures, a licensed physician whois a listed investigator is required to obtain the written informed consent unless anexception to this policy has been approved by the IRB For all other studies, a listed investigator is required to obtain consent (Note: Inorder to request an exception to this policy, the study must be minimal risk)*  NoIf Yes, provide a justification and describe the qualifications of the individual who willobtain consent:  
4.14Will you inform research subjects about the outcome of this research studyfollowing its completion?*  No  If Yes, describe the process to inform subjects of the results:
Section: Section 5 - Potential Risks and Benefits     [reviewer notes¬] 5.1Describe potential risks (physical, psychological, social, legal, economic orother) associated with screening procedures, research interventions/interactions,and follow-up/monitoring procedures performed specifically for this study: * ViewResearch Activity:Consent, measurements and questionnaires Common Risks:No Value Entered Infrequent Risks:breach of privacy and confidentiality Other Risks:No Value Entered ViewResearch Activity:Installation and removal of escale Common Risks:No Value Entered Infrequent Risks:damage to bed or surrounding areas Other Risks:No Value Entered ViewResearch Activity:Transfers for weighing Common Risks:No Value Entered Infrequent Risks:Falling during transfers Other Risks:No Value Entered ViewResearch Activity:Using apps and adobe connect Common Risks:No Value Entered Infrequent Risks:breach of privacy and confidentiality Other Risks:No Value Entered ViewResearch Activity:Using E-scale Common Risks:No Value Entered Infrequent Risks:Breach of privacy with motion being detected. Height of the bed isincreased by approximately 1/2 inch which could make transfersmore difficult. Other Risks:No Value Entered   
5.1.1Describe the steps that will be taken to prevent or to minimize the severity of thepotential risks: Consent, measurements and questionnaires: During all activities of consent, measurementsand questionnaires we will provide the subjects will a private location to answer thequestions. Subject codes will be used on all data collection forms. All identifiableinformation will be stored in a locked file room separate from the research data. The onlylinkage code will be stored on a password protected department server.Installation and removal of E-scale: The study team will visit the participants' homes toinstall and remove the E-scale. It is possible that during this time, damage could be caused 
to the participant's bed or surrounding areas. The investigator is liable for any damage thatoccur as a result of participation in the study and damage will be reimbursed accordingly.During the first visit, the investigator will assess the condition of the bed and items placednear the bedside. After such verification, it is to the discretion of the investigator if hewishes to continue with installation of E-Scale or disqualify the participant due to concernswith the bed. IRB # PRO14080007 is a past study using these scales with no adverseevents. Use of E-scale: During the use of the E-scale, the bed height will be raised by approximately1/2 in when the sensors are under the bed legs. This may make transfers to and from bedmore difficult for the wheelchair users. We will describe this risk during the consent processso they are aware and can withdraw from the study if they feel it will be an issue. The E-scale also collects the weight from the bed legs continuously and as such changes in weightdistribution may make it possible to detect when the person is in or out of bed and if theyare moving. We will also make the participants aware of this risk during the consentprocess.Transfers for weighing: During the process of measuring the participant's height and weight,we will have them transfer to a mat table independently or with assistance. During thetransfers, we will have a spotter for all transfers and will provide someone who has beentrained to assist with transfers help if needed.Using apps and adobe connect: During the study we will have the participants using theLoseIt! app, the E-scale app and adobe connect. LoseIt! and E-scale apps will be installedon their android device or one will be provided to them to use during the study. Non-personal logins for these devices will be provided to them so that no identifiable informationis ever communicated with these apps. Adobe connect will be used to conduct weekly chatsessions with no audio or video being used. We will email the participants a link to join thechat room and ask them to join using their first names only. 5.2What steps will be taken in the event that a clinically significant, unexpecteddisease or condition is identified during the conduct of the study?*  Not Applicable5.3All the risk questions (screening, intervention/interaction, follow-up) have been merged intoone question (5.1).     [reviewer notes¬] 5.4Do any of the research procedures pose a physical or clinically significantpsychological risk to women who are or may be pregnant or to a fetus?* No       [reviewer notes¬] 5.5Do any of the research procedures pose a potential risk of causing geneticmutations that could lead to birth defects?*  No       [reviewer notes¬] 5.6Are there any alternative procedures or courses of treatment which may be of 
benefit to the subject if they choose not to participate in this study?*  NoIf Yes, describe in detail:      [reviewer notes¬] 5.7Describe the specific endpoints (e.g., adverse reactions/events, failure todemonstrate effectiveness, disease progression) or other circumstances(e.g., subject's failure to follow study procedures) that will result in discontinuinga subject’s participation?*  Describe below:If the subject is admitted to the hospital for more than 5 days we will remove them from thestudy. Also if the subject has not participated in any study procedures for 2 weeks they willbe removed from the study.       [reviewer notes¬] 5.8Will any individuals other than the investigators/research staff involved in theconduct of this research study and authorized representatives of the UniversityResearch Conduct and Compliance Office (RCCO) be permitted access to researchdata/documents (including medical record information) associated with theconduct of this research study?*  Yes  
5.8.1Identify the 'external' persons or entity who may have access to researchdata/documents and the purpose of this access:The sponsoring agency (The Paralyzed Veterans of America) may access the research dataand documents.5.8.2Will these 'external' persons or entity have access to identifiable researchdata/documents?*No; the research data/documents will be coded and subject identifiers removed prior toaccess by the external personsIf Yes, describe how they will protect the confidentiality of the research data:5.9Has or will a Federal Certificate of Confidentiality be obtained for this researchstudy?*  No 5.10Question has been moved to 5.17
5.11Question has been moved to 5.16       [reviewer notes¬] 5.12Does participation in this research study offer the potential for direct benefit tothe research subjects?Yes - Describe the direct benefit that subjects may receive as a result of study participation.Indicate if all, or only certain, of the subjects may derive this potential benefit.  Describe the benefit:All subjects may lose weight, which could benefit their overall health  
5.13Describe the data and safety monitoring plan associated with this study. If theresearch study involves multiple sites, the plan must address both a local andcentral review process.A data safety and monitoring plan will be implemented to ensure that there are no changesin the benefit/risk ratio during the study and that confidentiality of research data ismaintained. All investigators, study personnel, and the clinical coordinators involved in thestudy will meet quarterly to discuss the study (e.g., study goals, progress, modifications,documentation, recruitment, retention, data analysis, and confidentiality) and address anyissues or concerns at this time. The PI holds weekly lab meeting, in which progress isreviewed and issues addressed. Any instances of adverse effects will be reportedimmediately using the standard forms and/or procedures set forth by the InstitutionalReview Board. In addition, clinical coordinators will periodically review study documentationand/or consent forms to ensure that subject’s confidentiality is maintained. A summaryreport of all data and safety monitoring activities will be included in the annual IRB renewalapplication.  
     [reviewer notes¬] Section 5 - Potential Risks and Benefits of Study Participation5.14What precautions will be used to ensure subject privacy is respected? (e.g. theresearch intervention will be conducted in a private room; the collection of sensitiveinformation about subjects is limited to the amount necessary to achieve the aims of theresearch, so that no unneeded sensitive information is being collected, drapes or otherbarriers will be used for subjects who are required to disrobe) During consent and collection of questionnaires and measurements, the subjects will beprovided a private space. The collection of sensitive information about subjects is limited tothe amount necessary to achieve the aims of the research, so that no unneeded sensitiveinformation is being collected. 
5.15What precautions will be used to maintain the confidentiality of the research dataduring collection, transmission and storage? It is important that you indicate thedata security measures for all data types. Go to the A-Z Guidance, download the Data Security Assessment Form, complete, andupload using the Add button below.  Depending on the data type, you may need to consultwith your data manager to address some of the sections.  Email irb@pitt.edu if you haveany questions.     
* Upload Data Security Form:NameModified DateData Security Assessment form10/10/2017 11:04 AMAddress what precautions will be used to maintain the confidentiality of theresearch data collected in paper format if applicable: Records will be coded by assigning a case number unique to this study. The linkage codewill be stored electronically and not with other paper based files. All electronic data will bestored on the University of Pittsburgh network. Paper based records will be kept in a lockedfile room within the Human Engineering Research Laboratories. Access to both theelectronic and paper based files is restricted to the Principal Investigator and the associatedresearch staff working on the project.5.15.1Does your research study require a data security review? Answer Yes if any of thefollowing conditions are met:Identifiable or *coded data will be collected, stored, or transmitted using any of thefollowing technologies: mobile app, web-based site or survey, wearable device, textmessaging, electronic audio, photographic, or video recording orconferencing and/orThe IRB requested a data security review during their review of the study*  Yes*Coded: Identifying information (such as name) that would enable the investigator toreadily ascertain the identity of the individual to whom the private information orspecimens pertain has been replaced with a code (number, letter, symbol, or anycombination) and a key to decipher the code exists, enabling linkage of the identifyinginformation to the private information or specimens5.16If the subject withdraws from the study, describe what, if anything, will happen tothe subject’s research data or biological specimens.If the subject withdraws from the study, any existing data will be rendered anonymous andincluded in results. We will ask the participant to answer the final questionnaire if they arewilling to. Because this is a usefulness, feasibility and efficacy trial, even partial data couldprovide us with useful results.    5.17Following the required data retention period, describe the procedures utilized toprotect subject confidentiality. (e.g., destruction of research records; removal ofidentifiers; destruction of linkage code information; secured long-term retention)Following the data retention period, the linkage code file will be deleted. Data will beretained for a longer term using the security measures already outlined in section 5.15.  
Section: Section 6 - Costs and Payments     [reviewer notes¬]  6.1Will research subjects or their insurance providers be charged for any of theprocedures (e.g., screening procedures, research procedures, follow-upprocedures) performed for the purpose of this research study?*  No        [reviewer notes¬] 6.2Will subjects be compensated in any way for their participation in this researchstudy?*  Yes6.2.1Describe the amount of payment or other remuneration offered forcomplete participation in this research study.200 dollars6.2.2Describe the amount and term of payment or other remuneration that will beprovided for partial completion of this research study.20 dollars for enrolling (passing the phone screening and coming to the lab to beconsented) and being determined ineligible or withdrawing after enrolling75 dollars for participating for 4 weeks125 dollars for participating 8 weeks200 dollars for completing all requirements of the study 
  
Section: Section 7 - Qualifications and Source(s) of Support     [reviewer notes¬] 7.1Summarize the qualifications and expertise of the principal investigator and listedco-investigators to perform the procedures outlined in this researchstudy.               Jon Pearlman, PhD is associate professor in the Department of Rehabilitation Science &Technology at the University of Pittsburgh.  Dr. Pearlman earned his BS and MS inmechanical engineering at the UC Berkeley and Cornell University, respectively.  Dr.Pearlman completed his PhD work Rehabilitation Science and Technology at the Universityof Pittsburgh in 2007, with an emphasis on assistive technology design and transfer todeveloping countries.  Dr. Pearlman’s research interests are in the areas of participatoryaction design, assistive technology transfer methods, and new product development. Jonathan Duvall, MS is a graduate student researcher in the Rehabilitation Science andTechnology Department at the University of Pittsburgh. He received a BS in MechanicalEngineering and an MS in Rehabilitation Science and Technology from the University ofPittsburgh. This study is a large portion of his dissertation work and he has been approvedby his committee to conduct this work.Patricia Karg received a BS degree in Mechanical Engineering from Lehigh University, andan MS degree in Biomedical Engineering from the University of Virginia. She has broadexperience performing clinical research in the area of assistive technology. She performsclinical and laboratory evaluations of technology, maintains data and regulatory records.  Beth Casey Gold, MS,RDN,LDN is a Registered Dietitian with extensive experience leadingonline behavioral weight management groups. Beth earned her BS in Nutrition at PennState and her MS in Nutrition and Food Sciences at the University of Vermont where shepublished on the effectiveness of a structured online behavioral weight loss programcompared to a commercially available program. 
     [reviewer notes¬] 7.2Indicate all sources of support for this research study.* SelectionsFoundation: Upload a copy of the research plan that was submitted to the agency If Federal support, provide the sponsor information: Federal sponsorGrant TitleGrant numberAwardee institutionFederal grant application 
For projects not supported by a federal grant, upload the research plan that was submittedfor funding:NameModified DatePVA project narrative4/20/2017 1:02 PMIf Industry support, provide the sponsor information and level of support:
If Foundation support, provide the sponsor information:Paralyzed Veterans of AmericaIf Other support, provide the support information and level of support:     [reviewer notes¬]  7.3Is this study funded in part or whole by a PHS Agency? *  No  Does any investigator* involved in this study (select all that apply): Name
A. Have equity in a publicly-traded entity that either sponsors** this research orowns the technology being evaluated or developed that exceeds a 5% ownershipinterest or a current value of $10,000?
B. Have equity in a non-publicly-traded entity that either sponsors this research orowns the technology being evaluated or developed?
C. Receive salary, consulting fees, honoraria, royalties or other remuneration from anentity that either sponsors this research or owns the technology being evaluated ordeveloped that is expected to exceed $10,000 during the past or next 12 months?
D. Have rights as either the author or inventor of intellectual property beingevaluated or developed in this research that is the subject of an issued patentor has been optioned or licensed to an entity?
E. Have an officer or management position**** with a Licensed Start-up Companyoverseen by the COI Committee that either sponsors this research or owns thetechnology being evaluated or developed?
F. Receive compensation of any amount when the value of the compensation would beaffected by the outcome of this research, such as compensation that is explicitlygreater for a favorable outcome than for an unfavorable outcome or compensation inthe form of an equity interest in the entity that either sponsors this research or ownsthe technology being evaluated or developed?
None of the above options apply and there are no other financial conflicts of interest inthe conduct of this research.*Investigator means the PI, co-investigators, and any other member of the study team,regardless of title, who participates in the design, conduct, or reporting of this research, aswell as his/her spouse, registered domestic partner, dependents, or other members ofhis/her household. The PI is responsible for ensuring that s/he and all otherrelevant members of the study team review the above questions describingSignificant Financial Interests. **through the provision of funds, drugs, devices, or other support for this research****Such as serving on the Board of Directors or Board of Managers or a position thatcarries a fiduciary responsibility to the company (e.g., CEO, CFO, CTO, or CMO).7.3.1Provide the name of the investigator(s) and describe the nature of the SignificantFinancial Interest(s):Jonathan Pearlman and Jonathan Duvall both are listed as inventors for the E-scale. A PCT
has been filed by the University of Pittsburgh and the technology has been licensed to astart-up company called Nexaware. Neither inventors have equity in the company. NeitherJonathan Pearlman or Jonathan Duvall have received more than $5,000 in royalties.*NameModified Date  
Section: Supporting Documentation     [reviewer notes¬]  Supporting Documentation SectionReferences and Other Attachments Additional documents:NameModified DateVersion3-day diary ofdiet6/24/20173:29 PM0.01Script forPhysician6/27/20174:32 PM0.02System UsabilityScale11/30/20174:38 PM0.01 Please use the Add button to the left to upload additionaldocuments if needed.
     [reviewer notes¬] ClinicalTrials.gov is a registry and results database of publicly and privately supportedclinical studies of human participants conducted around the world."Applicable clinical trials" are required by federal law to be registered in ClinicalTrials.gov.Applicable Clinical Trials (ACTs) are studies that meet the following criteria:The study is an interventional study AND The study intervention is a drug, biologic, medical device, radiation or genetic ANDThe Study is not Phase 0 or 1 ANDThe study has at least one site in the United States or is conducted under an investigationalnew drug application or investigational device exemptionNIH PolicyEffective January 18, 2017, revised NIH Policy requires that all clinical trials funded in whole or inpart by the NIH be registered and results information posted on ClinicalTrials.gov. As defined by the NIH, a clinical trial is:A research study in which one or more human subjects are prospectively assigned to one ormore interventions (which may include placebo or other control) to evaluate the effects ofthose interventions on health related biomedical or behavioral outcomes.The NIH Policy extends beyond the Food and Drug Administration Amendment Act (FDAAA 801)requirements in that it requires registration and results reporting of:clinical trials of behavioral, surgical and other types of health and medical interventionsphase 1 studies of drugs and biological productssmall feasibility studies of device products Failure to submit all required registration and results information requested on ClinicalTrials.gov canjeopardize University grant funding, the future funding of the grantee and subject the University ofPittsburgh to future monetary penalties.
In addition, to promote transparency of the clinical trials process, the International Committee ofMedical Journal Editors (ICMJE) has established a policy requiring the entry of clinical trials in apublic registry, such as ClinicalTrials.gov, prior to subject enrollment as a condition of considerationfor publication of the trial results.* Based on the above information, will this study be registered in ClinicalTrials.gov?Yes  Who will serve as the Responsible Party? UPMC/Pitt Investigator or IND/IDE Pitt Sponsor Why are you registering your study? (Check all that apply)It is strongly encouraged by the NIHIf you are not yet registered and need to establish an account for the PI or other research staff thatmay need to access the record, please send an email to the  University of Pittsburgh PRSadministrator at ctgov@pitt.edu with the following information for each individual:Full nameTelephone numberPitt or UPMC email addressIf you have any questions or concerns, please email us at ctgov@pitt.edu. To find out additional information about how to register your study go to:https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/manage-recs/how-register   
  