Impact  Evaluation 
Analysis Plan Template 
for HMRF Grantees  
Alabama Healthy
Marriage and Relationship 
Education Initiative 
Analysis Plan
February 27, 2020
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
1 I
mpact Evaluation Analysis Plan  Template for HMRF  Grantees  
According to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, a n agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not  
required to respond to, a collection of information unless it displays a valid OMB control number. The valid OMB 
control number for this collection is 0970 -0356; this number is valid through 6/30/2021.   Public reporting burden for 
this collection of information is estimated to average 8 hours, including the time for reviewing instructions, gathering 
and maintaining the data needed, reviewing the collection of information, and revising it.  This collection of 
information is volunt ary for individuals, but the information is required from Grantees.  
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
2 Impact Evaluation  Analysis Plan : “The E valuation of the Alabama Healthy Marriage and 
Relationship Education Initiative  (AHMREI)”  
Grantee  
Grantee Name: Auburn University, Auburn, AL  
Project Lead : Francesca Adler -Baeder, Ph.D.  
Email address : francesca@auburn.edu  
Evaluator  
Evaluator’s Organization : Auburn University, Auburn, AL  
Evaluator Lead : Julianne McGill, Ph.D. 
Email address : mclanjm@auburn.edu  
 
 
  
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
3 IMPACT EVALU ATION ANALYSIS PLAN  
THE EVALUATION OF THE ALABAMA HEALTHY MARRIAGE AND 
RELATIONSHIP EDUCATION INITIATIVE  (AHMREI)  
A. Research questions  
This section presents the primary and secondary research questions that will be assessed in 
the impact e valuation of ELEVATE and Couples Connecting Mindfully (CCM) . 
1. Primary research questions : Program Impact  
1. What is the impact of  Elevate  when compared to the  no-program  control group on the 
change in couple relationship skills  from baseline to the immediate p ost-program  follow -
up? 
2. What is the impact of Couples Connect ing Mindfully when compared to the  no-program 
control group on change in couple relationship skills from baseline to the  immediate  
post-program  follow -up? 
3. What is the impact of Elevate when compared to the no- program control group on 
change in individual m ental health  from baseline to the six -month follow -up?  
4. What is the impact of Couples Connecting Mindfully when compared to the no- program 
control group on change in individual  mental health from baseline to the six- month 
follow -up?  
5. What is the impact of Elevate  when compared to the  no-program  control group on 
change in couple satisfaction  from baseline to the  six-month follow -up? 
6. What is the impact of Couples Connecti ng Mindfully when compared to the  no-program  
control group on change in couple satisfaction  from baseline to the  six-month follow -
up? 
2. Secondary research questions  
Program Impact:  
1) What is the impact of Elevate when compared to the no- program control group on 
change in individual  mental health  from baseline to the one -year follow -up?  
2) What is the impact of Couples Connecting Mindfully when compared to the no-
program control group on change in individual  mental health from baseline to the 
one-year follow -up?  
3) What is the impact of Elevate when compared to the no- program control group on 
change in relationship satisfaction from baseline to the one -year follow -up?  
4) What is the impact of Couples Connecting Mindfully when compared to the no-
program control group on change in relationship satisfaction  from baseline to the 
one-year follow -up?  
 
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
4 Process of change:  
In order to expl ore our logic model assumption that immediate change in program targets (i.e. 
couple relationship skills ) immediately following program  participation leads to longer -term 
outcomes in couple functioning we will examine a path model . See Figure 1.  
5) Do changes immediately following Elevate participation in couple relationship skills  
predict  couple satisfaction  at 6 months , accounting for  baseline ?   
6) Do changes immediately following Couples Connecting Mindfully participation in 
couple relationship skills  predict couple satisfaction at  6 months , accounting for 
baseline?   
   
B. Description of the intended i ntervention and counterfactual condition 
This section provides a brief description of t he intervention being evaluated. 
1. Intervention condition(s)  
Intended Components:  The intervention consists of participation in either the Elevate 
curriculum or the Couples Connecting Mindfully (CCM) curriculum.  The couples education 
interventions are multi- session programs written for delivery to couples in community- based 
educational settings. Each curriculum involves 6- week group -based classes in which couples 
receive content on relationship skills .  
Intended Content: The content of the curricula is focused on key relationship skills and 
information that promotes couple quality and stability (see The National Extension Relationship 
and Marriage Education Model www.nermen.org). These include: self -care, intentionality, 
conflict and stress management, development of intimate knowledge of partner, development of 
a couple identity, caring couple behaviors, and development of supportive social connections.  
Planned Dosage and Implementation Schedule:  Both curricula are explicitly research -
informed and consist of 6 sessions delivered in separate consecutive weekly sessions of 
approximately 2 hours each.  This  implementation schedule was consistent across the 10 
implementation sites.  
Intended Delivery:  Program s are delivered in accessible community -based facilities that 
support a productive learning environment.  Trained facilitators (male/female teams) deliver the 
programs.  
Target Population:  Each program is broadly offered in the 10 different implementation sites 
and are intended to serve couples aged 19 and older in self -defined committed couple 
relationships .  
Education and Training of Staff:  Most facilitators have a background in family services 
and/or education and all have a minimum of a Bachelor’s  degree.  Specifically, 73% of 
facilitators have a bachelor’s degree; 24% have a Master’s degree; and 3% have a doctorate. 
Each facili tator is provided a comprehensive 2- day training on program curriculum by program 
developers  prior to implementation . Facilitators then complete fidelity checklists following each 
program session to track program components that were implemented each week. C lasses were 
also routinely monitored by project staff for fidelity and qual ity. Ongoing t echnical assistance 
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
5 was provided to facilitators by scheduled phone calls and webinars with the project and 
Evaluation Staff to discuss program implementation, evaluation design, data collection, 
participant engagement, and evaluation feedback.  
2. Counterfactual condition 
Those assigned to the control group receive a list of family resources in the area. This occurs 
at time of random assignment and is sent via email.  The location -specific resource list was 
developed by the staff at each site so they are specific to the community of study participants. 
The resource list included sources for employment, housing, child services, health and we ll-
being, education, addiction treatment, legal services, and other multi -need services. The partner 
agencies’ staff was able to update the resource list throughout recruitment. No other programs 
and services are provided to them as part of the intervention study.   
Table 1. Description of intended intervention and counterfactual components 
and target populations  
Component  Curriculum and content  Dosage and schedule  Delivery  Target Population  
Intervention  
Relationship 
skills 
sessions  CCM: Healthy relationships 
curriculum: communication skills; 
relationship skills; mindfulness -
based stress relief skills  
ELEVATE: Hea lthy relationships 
curriculum; communication skills; 
relationship skills , self -care skills  6 sessions (2 hours each)  Group less ons 
provided at the 
intervention’s facilities 
by two trained 
facilitators in every 
session  Adult c ouples in a 
self-defined 
committed couple 
relationship  
Counterfactual  
Location-
Specific 
Resource 
ListN/A Control respondents were 
provided location specific 
resource lists. Resources 
covered: employment/work, 
housing, child services, mental & 
physical health services, 
education, addiction treatment & 
support, legal services, and multi -
need services.   Received at random 
assignment  Sent via email  Adult couples in a 
self-defined 
committed couple 
relationship  
 
Table 2. Staff training and development to support intervention and 
counterfactual components  
Component  Education and initial training of staff  Ongoing training of staff  
Intervention  
Relationship skills 
sessions  Facilitators are male and female and hold at least a 
bachelor’s degree and received four days of initial 
training (2 days per curriculum) .  Facilitators participated in  regular technical 
assistance calls  and webinars with project and 
evaluation staff . Observations and feedback 
sessions were also utilized.  
Counterfactual  
Location- Specific 
Resource List  Staff at partner agencies developed the resource 
list for their specific community.  Staff at partner agencies were able to update the 
resource list before each cohort recruitment period.  
 
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
6 C. Study  design 
This section provides a brief description of the study design and the process for creating 
intervention and comparison groups. 
1. Sample formation  
Couples were recruited into our study in five separate cohorts over two and a half years. 
Recruitment began in August 2016 and was completed in January 2018. Approximately a month 
before the beginning of programming for each cohort, recruitment across the 10 implementation 
sites began. The implementation sites are: 1) Alabama Cooperative Extension System in Elmore 
County, 2)  Circle of Care, 3) Family Guidance Center, 4) Family Success Center, 5) Hope Place, 
6) IMPACT Family Counseling, 7) Auburn University, 8) Parents and Children Together 
(PACT), 9) Sylacauga Alliance for Family Enhancement (SAFE), and 10) Tuscaloosa’s One 
Place (TOP).  
Recruitment of couples into the impact evaluation occurred through distribution of flyers 
(approved by the Auburn University Institutional Review Board) at community agencies, such as 
family resources centers, local churches, libraries, and other settings where community members 
were likely to frequent. Additionally, flyer inform ation was posted online via the AHMREI 
Facebook page and website. 
All adults who indicated they were in a committed couple relationship (married or 
nonmarried) and who expected to attend as a couple if selected for a program group were eligible 
to particip ate in the local impact evaluation study. Anyone under age 19 and adult individuals 
who intended to attend as singles were not eligible to participate in the impact evaluation.  
a. Random assignment process  
Couples were randomly assigned if at least one of the  individuals in the couple completed 
the baseline survey. The evaluation lead conducted the random assignment by implementation 
site. Couple IDs developed by the nFORM system were entered into separate site -specific SPSS 
files by evaluation staff . The evaluation staff utilized the SPSS random number generator to 
arbitrari ly code the couples as a 1 (Elevate), 2 (Couples Connecting Mindfully), or 3 (control) in 
order to randomly as sign the study participants. Following completion of random assignment, the 
evaluation staff notified each study participant  via an email with their assignment.  For those in 
the program groups, their email include d times and location of the assigned class.  Each step of 
the random assignement process was implemented by the evaluation staff.  
2. Data collection  
The following data collection procedures were approved by the Auburn University 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) that oversees Human Subjects protecti on in research . The 
original approval was provided on August 15, 2016 and is still currently up to date after yearly 
renewals . When couples or a member of a couple expressed interest in participating, we 
collected basic enrollment information and further explained the nature of the evaluation project 
using the recruitment script. We explained random assignment procedures, reminding couples 
they had a 2 out of 3 chance to be assigned to one of the program groups and a 1 out of 3 chance 
they would be assigned to the control (no program) condition.  We explained they would be 
asked to complete a series of  surveys on the web -based system, Qualtrics, at the following 
times: baseline, immediate post-  program  (8 weeks after baseline) , 6-month follow -up to 
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
7 baseline,  1-year follow -up and 2- year follow up. We explained that participants complete the 
surveys individually rather than as a couple. We offered  the option of filling out these surveys 
through a link provided via email or by coming to the agency/center to complete on a tablet in 
the rare case that a participant does not have personal access to technology. We also explained 
the participant compensation plan: participants who completed a survey received  $50 each at 
baseline, immediate post- program, 6- month, and 1- year, and $100 at 2- year follow -up.  
 
Once a couple agreed to participate, they provide d contact information (first name, last 
name, birthdate, address, phone, email) to a staff member/educator in order to generate a 
participant profile in the nFORM system. Enrollment took place both on the phone and  in-
person. Information was provided for ea ch member of the couple, resulting in an individual 
profile , and both a participant and couple ID in the nFORM system  were generated . 
Immediately following  enrollment  in the nFORM system , each participant indicated their 
willingness to participate in the study by reading and signing the informed consent letter 
approved by the Auburn University Institutional Review Boar d. 
Two weeks prior to  program start, all study participants who signed and returned an 
informed consent letter were emailed a link to a baseline Qualtrics survey to be completed 
within a week. One week before the start of classes, participants who completed (or who had a 
partner complete) a baseline survey were randomly assigned by site  (block random 
assignment), using a random number generator based on the couple ID (generated upon 
enrollment through nForm)  to either one of the two program groups or to the comparison group.  
Participants in the program groups also w ere asked at  their first clas s to complete the 
nForm surveys (i.e., applicant characteristics and Entrance surveys ). All participants who  
receiv ed programming were asked to complete the nForm  Exit survey at the last class meeting. 
Note:  the data from the Entrance and Exit surveys are  not included in our impact evaluation.  
All impact study participants (program groups and controls) were emailed a link to the 
immediate post -program Qualtrics survey within one week after  the class series ending .  
This survey process was repeated at the six month, one year, and two year  marks after 
baseline survey completion.  Participants were initially contacted one month prior to the data 
collection timepoint and given until one month after the data collection timepoint to complete 
the survey. Several prompts and reminders to complete the survey were sent during the “open” 
period.  
The evaluation staff at the central A.U. office t racks data as it is collected and initiate s 
compensation via mailed checks within the week of receiving a  completed survey from a 
participant .  
Efforts to reduce attrition after enrollment:  
Following enrollment in the study, the following engagement strategies were utilized: 
• Weekly emails and/or texts to remind participants of study activities and deadlines, such 
as receipt of the baseline survey and class start dates  for those assigned to program 
groups  
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
8 • Email and/or text throughout the week of survey completion until survey wa s submitted  
• An email and/or text one day prior to class start  for the program groups  
Engagement strategies to retain participants in the study for the 6- month , 1-year, and 
2-year  follow up include:  
a. Birthday card e mailed to participant 1 week prior to birthday. 
b. Anniversary card e mailed to participant 1 week prior to anniversary date (anniversary 
date information was collected on the pre -program survey).  
c. Receipt of “save the date” (email, mail, and /or text) 1 week prior to emailing follow -up 
survey links. 
d. Reminder texts and emails during the “open” period for survey completion that included 
offering scheduled appointments for coming to agency to complete on iPad  there.  
 
Table 3. Key features of the data collection  
 Data source Timing of data 
collection  Mode of data 
collection  Party responsible for 
data collection  Start and end 
date of data 
collection  
Intervention  Intervention 
group study 
participants  Enrollment (baseline)  
 Online Qualtrics 
survey  
nFORM Applicant 
Characteristics 
Survey & 
Entrance Survey  Evaluation Staff   
Implementation Staff  September 2016  
through January 
2018 
  End of intervention ( 6 
weeks after program 
start) Online Qualtrics 
survey  
nFORM Exit 
Survey  Evaluation Staff  
Implementation Staff  October 2016 
through March 
2018 
  6 month  follow -up 
 Online Qualtrics  
survey  Evaluation staff  March  2017 
through August  
2018  
  1 year follow -up Online Qualtrics 
survey  Evaluation Staff  September 2017 
through February  
2019  
  2 year follow -up Online Qualtrics 
survey  Evaluation Staff  September 2018 
through February 
2020  
Counterfactual  Control group 
study 
participants  Enrollment (baseline)  Online Qualtrics  
survey  Evaluation  staff September 2016  
through January  
2018 
  End of intervention ( 6 
weeks after program 
start) Online Qualtrics 
survey  
 Evaluation Staff  October 2016 
through March 
2018  
  6 month  follow -up 
 Online Qualtrics  
survey  Evaluation staff  March 2017 
through August 
2018  
  1 year follow -up Online Qualtrics 
survey  Evaluation Staff  September 2017 
through February  
2019  
  2 year follow -up Online Qualtrics 
survey  Evaluation Staff  September 2018 
through February 
2020  
 
3. CONSORT diagram  
[CONSORT diagrams are attached in the appendices .] 
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
9 D. Analysis  
1. Outcome measure s 
Primary:  
Couple relationship skills  will be measured using 32 items from the Couple Relationship 
Skills Inventory (CRSI).  This measure was constructed to match the core relationship skills and 
predictors of couple quality emphasized in the HMRE programs provided.  Items are taken from 
several established and validated social science measures assessing commitment and intentionality 
in the relationship, intimate knowledge about partner, sense of friendship and togetherness, caring 
behaviors, conflict management behaviors, and connections to support outside the relationship. 
We have recently conducted validity tests of the factor structure (i.e., confirmatory factor analyses) 
and have evidence of validity and reliability of the full measure for our sample. Response anchors 
range from 1  (Very strongly disagree)  to 7 (Very strongly agree). Composite  scores  will be created 
at the individual level  since they reflect the individual’s level of skills . Higher scores indicate 
greater  couple relationship skills . Cronbach’s al pha for men (α = . 91) and women (α = .92 ) indicate 
excellent  reliability.  
 
Individual mental health will be measured using the SF -12 Mental Component Summary 
score (Sanda, Wei, & Litwin, 2002) . Items are asked on differing scales ( e.g., 1 to 3 or 1 to 5) w ith 
different anchor responses (e.g., all of the time to none of the time, or not at all to extremely). 
Following the SF -12 scoring instructions, i tem responses are first standardized, then summed, and 
standardized further by adding 60.75781, per the SF -12 scoring instructions . Higher scores indicate 
better individual mental health. 
 
Relationship satisfaction  will be measured using an abbreviated version of the Couple 
Satisfaction  Index ( Funk & Rogge , 2007)  utilized in previously published studies.  The 3 items 
are: “I have a warm and comfortable relationship with my partner ,” “How rewarding is your 
relationship with your partner? ,” and “ In general, how satisfied are you with your relationship? ”  
Response anchors range from 0 (Not at all)  to 5 (Completely ). Composite  scores  will be created 
based on responses from each member of the couple individually and from both members of the 
couple  combined to represent a couple level variable .  Higher scores indicate higher relationship 
satisfaction . Cronba ch’s alpha for men (α = .85 ) and women (α = .89) indicate good reliability.  
 
Table 4. Description of outcome measures used to answer impact analysis 
primary research questions  
Outcome name  
i.Description of the outcome measure ii.Source of the 
measure  iii.Timing of measure  
Couple 
Relationship Skills  The outcome measure will be an individual composite  
score of 32 questions asked on a 7 -point Likert scale.  Qualtrics survey  Baselin e and 6 weeks 
after baseline  
Mental Health  The outcome measure will be an individual score 
calculated from 12 questions per the SF -12 instructions.  Qualtrics survey  Baseline  and 6-month  
follow -up 
Relationship 
Satisfaction  The outcome measure will be the couples’ composite  
score from 3 questions on a 5-point Likert scale.  Qualtrics survey  Baseline and 6 -month 
follow -up 
Participant Group  The predictor measure is based on participant group (1) 
or control group (0).  Evaluation Team 
Records  Random Assignment  
Secondary:  
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
10  The outcomes measures for the secondary research questions are the same as the measures 
used in the primary research question. See above for details on those measures.  
 
Table 5. Description of outcome measures used to answer impact analysis 
secondary research questions  
Outcome name  
iv. Description of the outcome measure v. Source 
of the 
measure  vi. Timing of 
measure  
Couple 
Relationship Skills  The outcome measure will be an individual composite 
score of 32  questions asked on a 7 -point Likert scale.  Qualtrics survey  1-year follow -up  
Mental Health  The outcome measure will be an individual score 
calculated from 12 questions per the SF -12 instructions.  Qualtrics survey  1-year follow -up 
Relationship 
Satisfaction  The outcome measure will be the couples’ composite  
score from 3 questions on a 5-point Likert scale.  Qualtrics survey  1-year follow -up 
Participant Group  The predictor measure is based on participant group (1) 
or control group (0).  Evaluation Team 
Records  Random Assignment  
 
2. Data preparation  
Survey responses for each cohort across each time point w ill be  downloaded from Qualtrics  
into separate SPSS databases. These databases w ill be  merged based on participant individual ID 
in order to create a master dataset with survey responses from each of the five cohorts across 
each of the five time points. Basic descriptives w ill be  run on all variables of interes t to assess 
for outliers or impossible scores on each scale.  
Furthermore, consistency in demographic data w ill be  assessed across participants and 
timepoints. E valuation staff will use  a master code list containing participant IDs and 
demographic data and nFORM to verify accuracy in demographic data across parti cipants and 
timepoints. Responses that are obvious keystroke errors of respondents based on master code list 
information and inconsistency with other timepoint reports will be co rrected .  We will also 
assess couple demographics reported between dyads  for agreement .  If a couple disagrees on 
marital status (i.e., one reports married and one reports nonmarried), we will defer to the 
nonmarried report.  
Data will be assessed for patterns of missingness using a thorough plan that explores percent 
of missingness by item, by composite score, and by respondent. We will explore at each 
timepoint whether those missing data within treatment and control groups differ systematically 
from those who do respond in order to determine whether there is a risk of generalizability bias.  
CONSORT  diagram s will clearly describe the number  of couples who consented to be in the 
study, who complete the baseline assessment, who were randomly  assigned to the program and 
control groups , and who responded to the immediate post -program and each follow -up survey.   
 
Another table will be completed to illustrate the sample characteristics of the groups, as well 
as the means and standard deviations of the measures of  interest, at baseline and at follow -up 
points.  Statistical tests will be conducted (t- tests for continuous variables and chi square 
difference tests for categorical variables) to determine whether there are differences between 
respondents in the control group and respondents in the program group. Additionally, the 
Hedge’s g effect size for group differences will be calculated based on the analytic sample.  
 
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
11 Another table will describe differences in measured baseline characteristics of those who 
respond at each timepoint and those who do not. We will conduct statistical tests of between -
group differences. Hedge’s g effect size for group differences will be calculated. Patterns of 
missingness between treatment groups also will be assessed in order to determine whether there 
is a risk of causal validity bias, which results from systematic differences between responders in 
the treatment and control groups.   
 
After assessing overall and differential attrition,  we will examine patterns of missingness by 
case and item. Our plan includes s everal approaches to  addressing missingness , depending on the 
findings from the initial examination of missingness . If it is determined that we have a very low  
rate of missing values , there are no systematic differences between respondents and 
nonrespondents  within and between groups , and loss of those cases would not affect power in 
our planned analyses, cases with missing valu es will be deleted in listwise fashion . Additionally, 
to address item nonresponse and to create scale scores, mean imputation methods will be used. 
Specifically, when an individual participant has responded to 80% of the items that make up the 
scale, they will be retained for the analyses and  the mean of the items will be imputed . This will 
be done separately for treat ment and control group member s.  
 
3. Analytic sample  
The analytic sample will differ based on the research question because response rates ar e 
different at immediate post- program and at 6- month follow -up.  T he current numbers presented 
in the CONSORT diagram illustrates the number of respondents at each time point who 
completed the survey (i.e., prior to imputation) . We anticipate using the procedures described in 
the previous section for addressing missing data to maximize the retention of cases and for 
ensuring valid comparability of the treatment and control groups; however, because we are using 
mean imputation for those who respond to 80%  or more of the measure, these numbers may 
change slightly based on the outcome of interest. Attendance at the program for those assigned to 
the program condition is not a condition of inclusion in the analytic sample (see explanation 
below for the Intent to Treat design).   
For primary research questions #1 & #2 we will utilize 753 couple data sets over 2 time 
points (baseline and immediate post -program). Specifically, 249 couples randomly assigned to 
Elevate, 249 couples randomly assigned to CCM, and 255 couples randomly assigned to the 
control condition responded to the immediate post -program survey. For primary research 
questions  #3-6 we will utilize 671 couple data sets over 3 time points (baseline, immediate post-
program, and 6 -month follow -up). Specif ically, 221 couples randomly assigned to Elevate, 231 
couples randomly assigned to CCM, and 219 couples randomly assigned to the control condition 
responded at the 6 -month follow -up. 
Assessment of baseline equivalence 
Differences among groups on baseline demographics (e. g., race, age, income, marital status, 
parent status, and education level ) and baseline levels of the outcomes of interest w ill be  assessed 
using independent t -tests for continuous variables and crosstabs with chi -squares for categorical 
variables  wherein statistical significance in differences is  determined at p < .05.  Additionally, 
the Hedge’s g effect size for group differences will be calculated based on the analytic sample.  
These tests of difference will be completed with non -imputed data.  
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
12 Furthermore, t here was no condition crossover .  That is , no control respondents participated 
in the HMRE program during the study period. Although not necessarily considered cross -over 
or contamination of services, 10% of control respondents did seek and/or receive services that 
are always available in the community  at the immediate post- program survey, 15% at the 6-
month follow -up, and 18% at the 1- year follow -up. Because case management is offered to all 
HMRE program participants, involvement in community services was higher for those randomly 
assigned to a program group. Specifically, 34% of program participants sought or received 
services available in the community immediately following  the program, 36% at the 6- month 
follow -up, and 37% at the 1- year follow -up. This information was gathered from questions on 
the Qualtrics surveys administered by the evaluation team asking about services outside of the 
intervention offerings. Regardless  of whether other services were accessed during the study 
period, all control respondents will be included in the control group for analyses to maintain an 
intent to treat model for analyses.   
4. Analytic approach  
 We will use an “Intent to Treat” (ITT) approach , which is the most rigorous approach to 
evaluation and yields the most reliable efficacy results for testing a program in a “real world” 
setting (OPRE, 2010; Weiss & Jacobs, 2008; Wood et al., 2014). Group com parisons are based on 
assignment to one of the three possible groups, rather than completion. All 6 primary questions 
center on the assessment of program impact (or treatment effect) of progr am participation.  
Questions 1 and 2 will include a test of progr am impact on immediate change (approximately 6 
weeks after baseline) in couple relationship skills for Elevate and for  CCM , the primary  areas of 
skills -training  for the intervention.  We will utilize multi- level modeling to assess differences 
between groups at the  immediate  post-program timepoint. With this method, we can account for 
baseline levels of the skills and account for the nesting of the individual within the couple. To test 
for program impact at the 6- month mark of the other two primary outcomes (questions 3- 6) we 
will employ recommended methods for randomized trials. Although most studies of C ouple 
Relationship Education using comparison groups and included in meta -analyses have used 
repeated measures analysis of covariance to test for treatment effects , suggestions are that growth 
curve modeling as a variant of mixed- effects models (or rand om effects, random -regression) is a 
more powerful techni que than the repeated -measures analysis  of covariance ( e.g., Schultz, Cown 
& Cown, 2006; Gueor guieva & Krystal, 2004; Amato, 2014) . The results of multilevel Growth 
Curve M odel can provide information on differences at timepoints between groups, as well as the 
program impact on rates of change.  We will model these statistical analyses with a Bayesian 
approach in Stan.  
 
 We will use  SPSS and Mplus (Muthén & Muthén, 1998- 2014), and the COMPLEX 
specification, which corrects for the non -independence of cases by clustering analyses by 
couple/site ID. Group differences across the 2  groups (i.e., one of the two program groups and the 
contr ol group) will be tested by constraining means to be equal and using the chi -square difference 
test to determine if variant and invariant models are significantly different. Findings are considered 
statistically significant based on p < .05, two -tailed tes t. Cohen’s effect size d will be calculated to 
evaluate effect size, .10 = small, .25 = medium, .40 = large (Cohen, 1988).  
 
 Sensitivity analyses will include testing alternative methods/approaches to ensure the 
robustness of the results and the appropria teness of the analytic approach taken. In couple datasets 
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
13 it is common to test results separately for men and women to compare to the results for methods 
that use the indi vidual nested with the couple. We will also compare results in which both 
individual and cluster level covariates are used and results in which only individual covariates are 
use. Even though random assignment was used, w e will fit models with and without covariates to 
test whether it is necessary to control for differences that may exist at baseline between groups.  
5. Additional planned analyses  
Secondary Research Questions . In addition to the primary research questions central to the 
local impact evaluation, there are several other important questions we plan to explore in order to 
more fully understand the experience of participation in HMRE programs at our sites. 
To addre ss secondary research question #1- 4, we will employ the same multi- level 
modeling methods described above to further test program impact  of program particitipation.  
To address secondary research question #5, whether changes immediately following 
program participation in  couple relationship skills predicts  couple satisfaction at 6 month 
follow -up, accounting for baseline level, a path model will be fit to test the change on change 
pathway . Structural equation modeling (SEM) techniques  allow us to test the “ spillover ” 
hypothes is. Goodness of fit indices will be assessed to establish fit of data to the model.  
 
 
 

ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
14  

ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
15  
 
 

ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
16 Appendix A: Primary Research Question Measures  
Couple Relationship Skills  
 
Please rate how strongly you disagree or agree with each of the following:  
 Very 
Strongly 
Disagree  Strongly 
Disagree Disagree  Mixed  Agree  Strongly 
Agree Very 
Strongly 
Agree  
9. I want this relationship to stay 
strong no matter what rough times 
we encounter         
10. I commit effort every day to 
making my relationship work         
11. I always think about how my 
choices could affect my 
relationship         
12. I always make an effort to 
focus on my partner's strengths         
 
Please rate how strongly you disagree or agree with how well each statement describes you:  
 Very 
Strongly 
Disagree  Strongly 
Disagree Disagree  Mixed  Agree  Strongly 
Agree Very 
Strongly 
Agree  
13. I know my partner's current 
life stresses         
14. I know some of my partner's 
major aspirations and hopes in life         
15. I know my partner's current 
major worries         
16. I know my partner pretty well         
 
 
 
 Please rate how strongly you disagree or agree with each of the following:  
 Very 
Strongly 
Disagree  Strongly 
Disagree Disagree  Mixed  Agree  Strongly 
Agree Very 
Strongly 
Agree  
1. I have the power to manage the 
challenges in my life.         
2. I ask for help from others when 
needed.         
3. I recognize my strengths.         
4. I manage the stress in my life.         
5. I eat healthy meals every day.         
6. I exercise at least 3 or more 
times a week.         
7. I get 7 -8 quality hours of sleep 
every night.         
8. I have quiet time for myself 
every day.         
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
17 In the past month, how often would you say the following events occurred between you and your partner?  
 Never  Less than 
once a 
month  Once or 
twice a 
month  Once or 
twice a 
week  3-4 
times a 
week  Once 
a 
day More 
often than 
once a day  
17. Had a stimulating exchange of 
ideas         
18. Engage in and/or talk about 
outside interests together         
19. Make time to touch base with 
each other         
 
On average, how often in the past month did you:  
 Never  Less than 
once a 
month  Once or 
twice a 
month  Once or 
twice a 
week  3-4 
times a 
week  Once 
a 
day More 
often than 
once a day  
20. Say "I love you" to your 
partner         
21. Initiate physical affection with 
you partner (e.g., kiss, hug)         
22. Share emotions, feelings, or 
problems with your partner         
23. Tell my partner things I 
appreciate about him/her and how 
much I care for him/her         
 
First, rate how strongly you disagree or agree with how well each statement describes you during the past month in 
a typical disagreement:  
 Very 
Strongly 
Disagree  Strongly 
Disagree Disagree  Mixed  Agree  Strongly 
Agree Very 
Strongly 
Agree  
24. I am able to see my partner's point of 
view and really understand it, even if I don't 
agree         
25. When things "get heated" I suggest we 
take a break to calm down         
26. I can easily forgive my partner         
27. I shout or yell at my partner         
28. I blame, accuse, or criticize my partner         
 
Please rate how strongly you disagree or agree with how well each statement describes you and your partner:  
 Very 
Strongly 
Disagree  Strongly 
Disagree Disagree  Mixed  Agree  Strongly 
Agree Very 
Strongly 
Agree  
29. Many of our friends are 
friends of both of us         
30. We know people who care 
about us and our relationship         
31. If we were to need help getting 
by or encountered a crisis, we 
would have friends and family to 
rely on         
32. As a couple, we try to help 
others in need         
ANALYSIS PLAN FOR HMRF LOCAL IMPACT EVALUATIONS: [ AUBURN UNIVERSITY ] 
 
 
 
18 Individual Mental Health  
 Excellent  Very 
Good  Good  Fair Poor  
1. In general, would you say your health is:       
The following questions are about activities you might do in a typical day. Does your health now limit you in 
these activities? If so, how much?  
 Yes, a lot 
limited  Yes, 
limited a 
little  No, not 
limited at 
all 
2. Moderate activities, such as moving a table, pushing a vacuum, 
bowling, or playing golf     
3. Climbing several flight of stairs     
During the past month, how much of the time have you had any of the following problems with your work or 
other regular daily activities as a result of y our physical health?  
 All of the 
time  Most of 
the 
time  Some of 
the time  A little of 
the time  None of 
the time  
4. Accomplishing less than you would like       
5. Did work or other activities less carefully 
than usual       
During the past month, how much of the time have you had any of the following problems with your work or 
other regular daily activities as a result of any emotional problems?  
6. Accomplishing less than you would like       
7. Did work or other activities less carefully 
than usual       
How much of the time in the past month…  
8. Have you felt calm and peaceful?       
9. Did you have a lot of energy?       
10. Have you felt downhearted and depressed?       
11. How much of the time has your physical 
health or emotional problems interfered with 
social activities (like visiting friends, relatives, 
etc.)?       
 Not at all  A little 
Bit Moderately  Quite a 
bit Extremely  
12. During the past month, how much did pain 
interfere with your normal work (including 
both work outside the home and housework)?       
Relationship Satisfaction  
 Not at All  A little  Somewhat  Mostly  Almost  Completely  
1. I have a warm and comfortable 
relationship with my partner.        
2. How rewarding is your 
relationship with your partner?        
3. How satisfied are you with your 
relationship?        
 