 
1 
  
 
 
Hemodynamic Effect of Norepinephrine Versus Vasopressin  
on the Pulmonary Circulation in Cardiac Surgery Patients: a Comparative - 
effectiveness  Pragmatic  Trial  
 
 
 
10/04/2024  
 
 
 
 
NCT Identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] , registered on August 6th, 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Background:  
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) during cardiac surgery is well known to activate a variety of 
neurohormonal and endocrine reactions in human body that disrupt the balance of systemic 
vasculature tone and organ perfusion, which ultimately lead to vasoplegic sh ock requiring 
administration of vasopressors. Several vasopressors targeting different receptors are available, 
and often required to maintain adequate perfusion pressure after CPB in cardiac surgery. These 
are phenylephrine (alpha -adrenoreceptor agonist),  norepinephrine (NE, alpha - and beta - 
adrenoreceptor agonist), vasopressin (VP, V1 receptor agonist) and angiotensin II (AT1 receptor 
agonist).  Both  NE and VP are acceptable  first choice  agents  for treatment  of post -CPB vasoplegic  
shock, and the selection between the two agents is mostly dependent on the preference of 
individual  anesthesiologists.  
 
Most of the literature on the effects of NE versus VP on pulmonary vasculature is based on in 
vitro studies, which demonstrated that in contrast to NE, VP does not cause vasoconstriction in 
animal and human pulmonary artery segments.1-4 Interestingly, VP may even cause vasodilation 
in pulmonary  vasculature  under  hypoxic  conditions  through  an endothelial  V1 receptor  mediated 
nitric oxide production, which relaxes the underlying vascular smooth muscle.5 An in vivo 
experiment using anesthetized and ventilated porcine models showed that VP maintained 
pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) and decreased pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR)/systemic 
vascular resistance (SVR) ratio by 45%, while NE increased PAP and PVR/SVR rati o,6 also 
suggesting more favourable effect of VP on pulmonary  vasculature.  
 
Clinical  evidence  regarding  NE versus  VP effects  on pulmonary  vasculature  during  cardiac  surgery 
is limited and unclear. In a recent large (n=300) randomized controlled trial (RCT), Hajjer et al 
focused on NE versus VP use in patients with vasoplegic shock after cardiac surgery, and found 
that VP group had lower mortality or severe complicatio ns including stroke, prolonged 
mechanical ventilation, deep wound infection, reoperation or acute renal failure, with 
unadjusted  hazard  ration  (HR)  of 0.55  (95%  CI, 0.38 to 0.80;  P = 0.0014).7 However,  the study  did 
not report pulmonary or systemic arterial pressures, and the influences of NE versus VP on 
pulmonary vasculature and right ventricular (RV) function remains unclear. A small (n=20) RCT 
found that both NE and VP increased PAP in patients having coronary artery bypass grafting 
(CABG)  surgery.8 A retrospective  analysis  demonstrated  that addition  of VP to NE decreased  PAP 
in patients having catecholamine resistant septic shock and post -cardiotomy shock.9 However, a 
concomitant decrease in the cardiac output  in patients who received VP, may explain the 
decrease in PAP, rather than direct effect on the pulmonary  vasculature.  
Pulmonary  arterial  hypertension  (PAH)  is defined  as resting  mean  PAP > 20 mmHg  and pulmonary 
capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) < 15 mmHg.10 Increased PAP causes RV pressure overload, 
which might lead to RV failure through multiple mechanisms including but not limited to: a) 
decreased aorta -RV pressure gradient reduces epicardial systolic flow and thus right coronary 
artery (RCA) perfusion;11 b) RV’s limited contractile reserve, despite dilatation or hypertrophy as 
compensation, limits its capacity of adaptation to an increased afterload;12 c) beta - 
adrenoreceptor  desensitization  and downregulation.13 As RV failure  requiring  intensive  care  unit 
admission and inotropic support has an extremely high inpatient mortality rate of > 45%,14 
monitoring RV function, and choice of a vasopressor with minimal effect on PAP and thus RV 
function would be important and  beneficial.  
 
 
3 
 Clinically it remains unclear, if NE and VP have different effect on PAP per same unit increase in 
mean arterial pressure (mPAP -to-MAP) in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. It also is unclear, 
if the two agents exert different effect in patients who hav e normal PAP, versus those who have 
pulmonary arterial hypertension.  
 
The specific  aims  of our study  are to compare  1) the relative  increase  in the mPAP  with  the same 
unit increase in MAP and 2) RV function assessed by global longitudinal strain (GLS) , between VP 
and NE in patients with normal and increased pulmonary artery pressure, who require 
vasopressor support during cardiac surgery. We hypothesize that the use of vasopressin 
compared with norepinephrine  induces  a lower  mPAP -to-MAP  ratio,  in cardiac  surgical  patients  
with  and without pulmonary hypertension. Second, we will test the hypothesis that vasopressin 
is associated with improved right ventricular global longitudinal strain compared to 
norepinephrine in patients requiring vasopressor support during cardiac surgery.  
 
 
Study Design:  
This unblinded  alternating  trial will compare the effect of NE versus VP on mPAP -to-MAP ratio in 
patients having cardiac surgery. The treatment will be randomized in one week blocks  and not by 
patient,  using the RedCap system. This means  that during  any week,  eligible  patients  will be 
exposed  to the same  vasopressor agent,.  And the following week there will be new randomization 
in place.  Allocations will be directly communicated to anesthesia personnel and by signs 
prominently displayed in anesthesia ready room . 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Adults> 18 years of  age 
2. Elective cardiac surgery with the use of  CPB 
3. Patients with pulmonary artery catheter  insertion  
4. Systemic hypotension (MAP < 70 mmHg) requiring continuous infusion of  vasopressor  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Transplant  surgery  
2. Ventricular assist device implantation other than intraaortic balloon  counterpulsation  
3. Pulmonary endarterectomy  
4. Thoracoabdominal aneurysm  repair  
5.  Use of extracorporeal life support (ECMO) before or after CPB  
 
 
4 
 6. Inhalational pulmonary vasodilators (e.g. Epoprostenol) administration before insertion of 
pulmonary artery  catheter  
7. Vasopressin is started as the first choice of pressor per clinical staff  discretion  
 
Informed Consent Waver:  
We request  waiver  of informed  consent  for two reasons.  The first is, there are similar indications 
for treatment and clinical efficacy of the two agents, which minimize s the risks associated with 
the study protocol : 1) both norepinephrine and vasopressin are considered acceptable and 
equally efficacious intial treatments for hypotension  during  cardiac  surgery,  and both  are used  
routinely at the Cleveland  Clinic;  2) the study is unblinded. The clinicians are aware of the 
vasopressor they administer, and completely at liberty to ignore the protocol -proposed 
vasopressor in any patient likely to benefit from an alternative approach. The second reason we 
request waived consent is that the proposed trial would be impractic al with  conventional  
consent15: 1) we cannot  predict  which  patients  will have  a pulmonary artery  catheter  inserted  for 
the surgery,  a decision  that is made  when  the attending  surgeon  and anesthesiologist “huddle” 
(standard procedure to review and discuss perioperative details and plan for the surgical case) 
just before anesthetic induction; and, 2) we cannot predict which patients will develop severe 
hypotension after CPB and require vasopressor  support.  As an alternative to the conventional 
consen t, we provide a patient information letter , which describes the study protocol and 
provides information regarding the two vasopressors. It will be included in the preoperative 
cardiac surgery package  for patient s seen at the “To Come In” Clinic (the preope rative clinic for 
cardiac surgery)  or during their hospital stay if they are admitted to the hospital before surgery . 
We provide an option to opt out from participation in the study  Investigators contact information 
has been provided in the information letter, and when a patient opted out from participation, 
the investigators will contact the anesthesiologist providing care for this patient to inform them 
that the patient will not be  included in the study. A separate file will contain the records of all 
patients who refused participation in the study, and they will not be included in the analysis.  
 
 
Outcomes:  
Primary outcome:  
We will compare the  mPAP -to-MAP  ratio  between  patients  who  received  norepinephrine  versus  
vasopressin during the post -intervention period . Post intervention  hemodynamic measurements 
will be recorded at the end of surgery in the period between  chest closure and last stitch. If this time 
point is unavailable, we will take the first 15 of the last 20 minutes  in the operating room  marked by 
“transport to recovery” (The last 5 min are not considered, because this involves patient transfer to the 
ICU bed which can affect the hemodynamic measurements ). 
 
 
Secondary outcome:  
Compare GLS between patients who received norepinephrine versus vasopressin 
intraoperatively. Post intervention measurements will be recorded  in the period after chest 
closure to last stitch. If this time point is unavailable, we will take the the first 15 of the last 20 
minutes in the operating room marked by “transport to recovery” . 
 
 
 
5 
  
Exploratory endpoints:  
1. Cardiac index –after PA catheter placement , and after chest  closure  
2. Peak creatinine level within 72 hours after  surgery  
3. Atrial fibrillation within 72 hours after surgery  
4. Duration of hospitalization  
5. Incidence of  stroke  
6. Prolonged mechanical ventilation > 72  hours  
7. Hospital  mortality  
8. Renal replacement therapy  
9. Need for reoperation  
10. Duration of inotropic support  
11. Duration of vasopressor support  
12. Post -intervention central venous pressure  
13. Bowel ischemia – diagnosed with imaging and requiring intervention  
14. Lactate level – peak lactate level in the first 48 hours postoperatively  
15. Tricuspid annulal plane excursion – TEE variable after chest closure  
16. Fractional area of change – TEE variable after chest closure  
 
 
 
Standard Anesthesia Procedures  
 
At our institution, cardiac surgical patients are monitored with standard ASA monitors, pre - 
induction  brachial  arterial  line,  and central  venous  cannula,  most  commonly  placed  in the internal 
jugular  vein  post -induction.  Pulmonary  artery  catheters  are routinely  placed  in patients  with  any 
of the following: preexisting pulmonary hypertension, reduced left or right ventricular systolic 
function, multi -redo surgeries, complex aortic procedures, and other complex cardiac surgeries. 
Routinely used induction medications include midazolam, fentanyl, lidocaine, propofol, 
etomid ate, and rocuronium, although specific drugs used depends on the individual patient’s 
medical  condition  and the preference  of the staff  anesthesiologist.  Maintenance  of anesthesia  is 
with inhaled isoflurane. We maintain ventilation using tidal volumes 6 -8cc/kg and PEEP 5 -10 
cmH 2O with ventilation adjusted to maintain normal pH. At the end of surgery, patients are 
typically transported to the ICU intubated on an intravenous infusion of  propofol.  
 
 
 
Study Drug Preparation and Administration:  
The study medications norepinephrine and vasopressin will be supplied in the operating room in  
one-week intervals.  Norepinephrine is stored in pre -mixed bags (4mg/250ml) in the OR main pixys 
machine, where it is readily available for use. Vasopressin is stored in each OR pixys machine, in 
20 U/1ml  vials, which are mixed in 100cc bags of dextrose 5% solution. Both medications are 
infused through a medication pump (SmartPump)  and infused through the medication port of the 
pulmonary artery catheter . The clinic ian enters the desired dose for norepinephrine (mcg/min), 
and for vasopressin (U/min). All clinical staff participating in patient’s care will be unblinded to the 
treatment.  
 
6 
 Initiation  of the study  medication  will be at the discretion  of the staff  anesthesiologist  when  there is 
need for vasopressor support while MAP < 70 mmHg, only after volume status has been optimized 
in the presence of cardiac index > 2.0 L/min/m2 (hemodynamic management protocol - figure 1).  
If the vasopressor needs to be started in the process of separation from CPB, there are no definitive hemodynamic 
criteria to guide its initiation. Thus, it would be entirely per anesthesiologist discretion .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
The s tudy medication administration will be titrated  from  lowest to highest dose  in a step wise 
fashion every 3 -4 min . NE doses range from 2 to 18 μg/min, and VP doses  from  0.01  to 0.06  U/min  
(Table  1)16,17,18. The goal  is to return  systemic  MAP  to 70 mmHg and sustain that pressure. If the 
study medication of the week is titrated to its maximum infusion rate and the blood pressure 
goal is not achieved, the opposite  vasopressor can be added , as a second agent.  In other words, 
if the study drug is norepinephrine, then the second agent will be vasopressin. If the blood 
pressure target is exceeded, the second agent  is tapered down first, and then the primary study 
medication  dose is decreased if necessary. Prior to reaching  the maximum  dose, and during  the 
drug titration , if acute  elevation of MAP is needed, boluses of norepinephrine can be  
administered.  This practical approach to vasopressor administration and titration described in 
our protocol is consistent with the current clinical management of hypotension during cardiac 
surgery at the Cleveland Clinic.  
Study medication will be considered discontinued when it is no longer required because MAP is 
at goal. If at the end of the case, the patient still requires vasopressor support, the known study 
medication will be continued at the current dose, which provides stable vital signs.  
 

 
7 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drug titration  table  based on equipotency drug properties  
 
 
Norepinephrine (mcg/min)  Vasopressin (Units/min)  
2 0.01  
4 0.015  
6 0.02  
8 0.03  
10 0.035  
12 0.04  
15 0.05  
18 0.06  
 
 
Data Collection:  
Patient data will be collected prospectively and stored in RedCap database. Hemodynamic and 
echocardiographic parameters will be recorded after  pulmonary artery catheter insertion; 
post intervention  period  is the interval between chest closure and last stitch. If this timepoint is 
unavailable in the anesthesia record, we will take the first 15 of the last 20 minutes before patient 
transport from the OR to the ICU . The parameters that will be recorded are as following:  
1. time  weighted  average  systolic,  mean,  diastolic  pulmonary  arterial  pressures  from ARKS  
2. time weighted average systolic, mean, diastolic systemic arterial pressures from ARKS  
3. time weighted average central venous pressure  
4. Cardiac output/cardiac index by thermodilution – the recorded measurement is the 
average value from 3 consecutive measurements, provided the difference between the 
measurements in no more than 10%. – by the  clinician  
5. Right ventricular global longitudinal strain – from intraoperative transesophageal 
echocardiography midesophageal 4 chamber view . The images will be obtained in the 
operating rooms by the anesthesiologist providing patient care with Phillips or GE echo 
machines. The right ventricular strain will be measured off line using  Syngo Velocity 
Vector Imaging (VVI) by  Siemens Healthineers Global.   
 
The infusion rate of the study medication s, as well as other medications, such  as inotropic  agents,  
insulin,  inhaled  epoprostenol,  antifibrinolytic  agents,  etc, on continuous infusion will be recorded 
in ARKS.  
 
We will report the following patient demographic and clinical parameters:  
I. Demographic  information  
1. Age 
2. Sex 
 
8 
 3. Body Mass  Index  
 
 
II. Preoperative comorbid  conditions  
1. Hypertension  
2. Coronary artery  disease  
3. Diabetes  
4. Chronic kidney  disease  
5. Peripheral artery  disease  
6. History of stroke/cerebral vascular  incident  
7. Congestive heart  failure  
8. Preoperative left ventricular ejection  fraction  
9. Smoking  
10. Hyperlipidemia  
11. Chronic obstructive pulmonary  disease  
12. Type  of surgery  – isolated  valve,  isolated  coronary  artery  bypass,  combined  bypass 
and valve surgery, major aortic  surgery  
13. Preexisting right ventricular dysfunction  
14. Preexisting pulmonary  hypertension  
15. Calculated EuroSCORE  (European System for Cardiac Operative Risk  Evaluation)  
 
III. Intraoperative  variables  
1. Primary or repeat open heart  surgery  
2. Blood transfusions – units of red blood cell concentrates, fresh frozen plasma, 
platelet concentrates, cryoprecipitate  
3. Inotropic and vasopressor requirements – continuous infusions at the end of 
surgery (epinephrine in mcg/min; norepinephrine in mcg/min; vasopressin 
IU/min; milrinone  mcg/kg/min)  
4. Duration of surgery (minutes)  
5. Duration of CPB  (minutes)  
6. Duration of aortic cross clamp time  
7. Total amount of crystalloid (Lactated Ringer’s and Normal Saline collectively) and 
albumin 5% - in milliliters  
8. Milrinone  infusion  after  separation  from  CPB – mcg/kg/min  at the end of the case  
9. pH value  (from  last  intraoperative  blood  gas analysis  in anesthesia record  
10. Epinephrine infusion – mcg/min at the end of  case  
11. Cardiac output/cardiac  index  – after PA catheter placement and post intervention  
12. Epoprostenol inhalational infusion post  CPB 
13. Use of rescue vasopressor agents – hydroxocobalamine; methylen blue  
14. Pulmonary artery wedge pressure after chest closure (PCWP) derived from the pulmonary 
artery catheter  
15. Pulmonary vasular resistance calculated value (PAPm – PCWP)/cardiac output  
 
IV. Echocardiographic variables  
1. Global  right ventricular  longitudinal  strain  
2. Amount of mitral regurgitation pre -CPB and post CPB  
 
9 
  
 
 
 
Statistical Analysis  
Control for potential confounding variables  
 
Baseline variables will be summarized via standard summary statistics and balance on the 
baseline  variables  across  patients  given  norepinephrine  versus  vasopressin  will be assessed  using 
standardized difference (differences in means or proportions divided by pooled standard 
deviation). Since vasopressor assignment  is carried by week instead of by randomizing patient s, 
baseline variables will be controlled for using inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW). 
The propensity score for each patient will be calculated using covariate balancing propensity 
score algorithm and  the weight for each patient will be calculated as the inve rse of propensity 
score if in the norepinephrine group and the inverse of (1 – propensity score) if in the vasopressin 
group. Balance  on the baseline  variables  will be assessed  again  after  weighting  and variables  with  
ASD > 0.10 will be considered as imbalanced and adjusted for in the models below.  
 
Main Analysis  
 
We will include a per protocol analysis and an intention to treat  analysis.  The per protocol  analysis will be 
primary.  The per protocol  analysis will include all patients who receive the study drug at the end of the case  
during the post -intervention measurement period .  The intention to treat  analysis will be secondary and 
will include all patients who received the study drug , but the study drug was discontinued before the post -
intervention period.   
 
For the primary analysis, we will compare mPAP -to-MAP ratio between chest closure and last stitch , in 
patients who received norepinephrine versus vasopressin through a linear mixed model, with individual 
patients weighted as described above . We will incorporate a random intercept for each week to account 
for intra -week correlation and potential correlation between weeks over time. Normality of mPAP -to-MAP 
relative change will be tested and if the distribution is found to be not normal, proper transformation will 
be performed before fitting the relative increase into the model. Interaction between treatment and 
baseline mPAP -to-MAP will be assessed a t a significance level of 0.10 to see if the treatment effect is 
associated with baseline mPAP -to-MAP.  For the secondary analysis, right ventricular global longitudinal 
strain will be compared through a linear regression model with patients weighed accordi ng to IPTW.  
 
For the exploratory analysis, cardiac Index and creatinine level will be compared using linear mixed models, 
incorporating a random intercept for each week. Duration of inotropic/ vasopressor  support and duration 
of hospitalization will be log -transformed to meet the normality assumption and then compared using linear 
mixed models, properly adjusting for intra -class correlation as described above. Other binary variables will 
be compared using a generalized linear mixed model with logit link, properly adjusti ng for intra -class 
correlation as described above. For all the comparison on the exploratory variables, patients will be 
weighted according to IPTW to adjust for baseline variables. As these results are exploratory, the Bonferroni 
correction will NOT be us ed to adjust significance levels.  
 
Interim Analysis  
 
10 
 Because of the small sample size required , we will perform only  one interim at 50% of the planned 
maximum enrollment to assess for efficacy and futility using a group sequential design with gamma 
spending functions using gamma of -4 for efficacy and -1 for futility. We will stop the trial and conclude 
efficacy if P -value on the first interim is smaller than 0.0298, or conclude futility if P -value on the first 
interim is greater than 0.27.  
 
Subgroup and Sensitivity Analys es 
1. For the primary and secondary outcomes, we will perform a subgroup analysis to assess 
treatment effect in patients with pre -existing significant pulmonary hypertension (defined as 
mean PAP >40 mmHg after  pulmonary artery catheter placement vs.  patient  without  (mean  PAP 
<40 mmHg).  The subgroup  analysis  will be performed  by adding treatment -group interaction 
term into the regression models. Interaction terms will be tested at a significance level of 0.10, 
and regardless of the significance of the interaction terms, treatment effect will be reported 
separately by the  subgroups.  
 
2. As Inhaled or intravenous pulmonary arterial vasodilators including milrinone or epoprostenolol 
will affect post -CPB pulmonary artery pressures, we will perform a sensitivity analysis that 
excludes patients who receive milrinone or epoprostenolol post CPB.  
 
 
 
Sample size calculation:  
Based on the data query for a sample of 732 patients from 2018, mPAP -to- MAP ratio has a mean ± SD of 
0.38 ± 0.09, during the period between start and end of chest closure . We will conservatively  assume a 
standard deviation of 0.12 to begin the study, and  re-evaluate the standard deviation during the first interim 
analysis. If a larger standard deviation is estimated, the sample size will be appropriately increased, with no 
statistical penalty. We further assume that we will have 2-3 cases per week, a within -cluster within -period 
correlation ρ of 0.10 and a within -cluster between -period correlation 0.01. With these assumptions and an 
average of 2.5 patients per week, total sample size needed will be 84 without adjusting for interim analysis, 
and 90 after ad justing for one interim analysis. Assuming 3 patients per week, the sample size needed will 
change to 88 before interim adjustment and 96 after adjusting for one interim19 
Within -period and intra -period correlation will be also be  assessed at interim analysis, and the total sample 
size will be adjusted if a larger within -period correlation or between -correlation were observed.  
 
Future implications:  
During this study, we will collect clinical outcomes, which will be presented in a descriptive 
analysis.  They  are listed  under  “exploratory  endpoints”  in the methods  section.  We plan  to apply 
to the American Heart Association for a grant to support a future project which will examine 
clinical outcomes of cardiac surgery patients, who were treated with norepinephrine versus 
vasopressin.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 Reference:  
1. García -Villalón AL, Garcia JL, Fernández N, Monge L, Gómez B, Diéguez  G. Regional 
differences in the arterial response to vasopressin: role of endothelial nitric oxide. Br J 
Pharmacol  1996;118(7):1848 -54. 
2. Rieg AD, Rossaint R, Uhlig S, Martin C. Cardiovascular agents affect the tone of pulmonary 
arteries and veins in precision -cut lung slices. PLoS One  2011;6(12):e29698 -e. 
3. Currigan DA, Hughes RJA, Wright CE, Angus JA, Soeding PF. Vasoconstrictor Responses to 
Vasopressor Agents in Human Pulmonary and Radial Arteries: An In Vitro Study. 
Anesthesiology  2014;121(5):930 -6. 
4. Hussain  A, Bennett  R, Haqzad  Y, Qadri  S, Chaudhry  M, Cowen  M, et al. The differential  effects 
of systemic vasoconstrictors on human pulmonary artery tension. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 
2017;51(5):880 -6. 
5. Evora PRB, Pearson PJ, Schaff HV. Arginine Vasopressin Induces Endothelium -dependent 
Vasodilatation of the Pulmonary Artery: V1 -Receptor mediated Production of Nitric Oxide. 
Chest 1993;103(4):1241 -5. 
6. Sarkar J, Golden PJ, Kajiura LN, Murata L -AM, Uyehara CFT. Vasopressin Decreases 
Pulmonary –to–Systemic Vascular Resistance Ratio in a Porcine Model of Severe Hemorrhagic 
Shock. Shock  2015;43(5).  
7. Hajjar LA, Vincent JL, Barbosa Gomes Galas FR, Rhodes A, Landoni G, Osawa EA, et al. 
Vasopressin versus Norepinephrine in Patients with Vasoplegic Shock after Cardiac Surgery: 
The VANCS Randomized Controlled Trial. Anesthesiology  2017;126(1):85 -93. 
8. Yimin H, Xiaoyu L, Yuping H, Weiyan L, Ning L. The effect of vasopressin on the 
hemodynamics in CABG patients. J Cardiothorac Surg  2013;8:49.  
9. Dünser  MW,  Mayr  AJ, Ulmer  H, Ritsch  N, Knotzer  H, Pajk W, et al. The Effects  of Vasopressin 
on Systemic  Hemodynamics  in Catecholamine -Resistant  Septic  and Postcardiotomy  Shock:  A 
Retrospective Analysis. Anesth Analg  2001;93(1):7 -13. 
10. Simonneau G, Montani D, Celermajer  DS, Denton CP, Gatzoulis MA, Krowka M, et al. 
Haemodynamic definitions and updated clinical classification of pulmonary hypertension. 
Eur Respir J  2019;53(1):1801913.  
11. Bogaard HJ, Abe K, Vonk Noordegraaf A, Voelkel NF. The Right Ventricle Under Pressure: 
Cellular  and Molecular  Mechanisms  of Right -Heart  Failure  in Pulmonary  Hypertension.  Chest 
2009;135(3):794 -804.  
12. van der Bruggen CEE, Tedford RJ, Handoko ML, van der Velden J, de Man FS. RV pressure 
overload: from hypertrophy to failure. Cardiovasc Res  2017;113(12):1423 -32. 
13. Piao L, Fang Y -H, Parikh Kishan S, Ryan John J, D'Souza Karen M, Theccanat T, et al. GRK2 - 
Mediated Inhibition of Adrenergic and Dopaminergic Signaling in Right Ventricular 
Hypertrophy. Circulation  2012;126(24):2859 -69. 
14. Campo A, Mathai SC, Le Pavec J, Zaiman AL, Hummers LK, Boyce D, et al. Outcomes of 
hospitalisation for right heart failure in pulmonary arterial hypertension. Eur Respir J 
2011;38(2):359 -67. 
15. Symons T, Zeps N, Myles P, Morris J, Sessler D. International Policy Frameworks for Consent in 
Minimal -Risk Pragmatic Trials. Anesthesiology 2020; 132:44 -54 
16. Gordon A, Mason A, Thirunavukkarasu N, Perkins g, Cecconi M, Cepkova M, Pogson D, 
Hollman  A, Anjun  A, Frazeir  G, Santhakumaran  S, Ashby  D, Brett  S. Effect  of Early  vasopressin 
vs norepinephrine on kidney failure in patients with septic shock. JAMA 2016: 316(5): 509 - 
518 
 
12 
 17. Hall L, Oyen L, Taner B, Cullinane D, Baird T, Cha S, Sawyer M. Fixed dose vasopressin 
compared with titrated dopamine and norepinephrine as initial vasopressor therapy for 
septic shock. Pharmacotherapy 2004;  24(8):1002 -1012  
18. Daley  M, Lat I, Mieure  K, Jennings  H, Hall J, Kress  J. A comparison  of initial  monotherapy  with 
norepinephrine versus vasopressin for resuscitation in septic shock. Ann Pharmacotherapy 
2013;  47:301 -10 
19. Arnup SJ, McKenzie JE, Hemming K, Pilcher D, Forbes AB: Understanding the cluster 
randomised crossover design: a graphical illustration of the components of variation and  a 
sample size  tutorial. Trials 2017; 18: 381 -381 