 
  
Piloting the IPROACTIF 
Program to Preserve 
Functioning & Prevent 
Cognitive Decline 
2020-1461: NCT: 04682977     Principal Investigator: 
Mansha Parven Mirza, PhD .  Date: May 17, 2022  
  
 
 
 
Page  1 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
  
Office for the Protection of Research  Subjects 
(OPRS) 
Institutional  Review  Board  
FWA#  00000083  
Initial Review Application: Social,  
Behavioral, and Educational  
Research   
  
Form  Version # & Date:  5.2; 03/09/2020    
201 AOB  (MC 672) 
1737 West Polk Street  
Chicago,  IL 60612- 7227  
Phone:  312 996-1711  
 
http://research.uic.edu/human- subjects -irbs/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. Personnel  
A. Principal  Investigator  (PI) 
Name  (Last,  First)  
Mirza,  Mansha  Degree(s)  
PhD,  OTR/L  Net ID (e.g., NetID @uic.edu)  
mmirza2  
Department  
Occupational Therapy  College  
Applied Health  
Sciences  University Status  
Student/Fellow/Resident  
Faculty/Staff  
Phone  Number  
312-35505427  UIC E-mail Address  
mmirza2@uic.edu  
 
B. Faculty  Sponsor  – Complete only  when  PI is a student,  fellow,  or resident  
Name  (Last,  First)  Degree(s)  Net ID (e.g.,  NetID @uic.edu)  
Department  College  
Phone  Number  UIC E-mail Address  
 
C. Primary Contact In Addition to PI – Complete only if the primary contact person is different than the 
PI 
Name  (Last,  First)  Net ID (e.g., NetID @uic.edu)  
Phone  Number  UIC E-mail Address  
Principal  Investigator grants  this personnel  access to OPRS  Live for this protocol  
 
D. List all co -investigators and key research personnel on  Appendix P  and upload with this  
application packet.  
 
 
III. Performance Sites Date application  completed  by the Investigator:  4.26.22  
I. Research  Title:  
Piloting  the IPROACTIF  program  to preserve  functioning  and prevent cognitive  decline  
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  2 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 
 
 
A. Are there  non-UIC performance sites?  
No – Skip to Section  IV. 
Yes – Complete  Appendix  K and upload with  this application packet  
 
IV. Research  Funding 
A. Is this research funded? 
No – Skip to Section V.  
Yes 
Pending  
B. Check all of the appropriate boxes for funding sources (including pending sources) for this  
research. If  the study is supported by more than one funding  source, complete  and upload Appendix  
Z for each additional funding source.  
  Federal  Agency  Name: National Institutes  of Health  
Foundation Name:  
State  Agency  Name:  
Department of Defense – Complete  Appendix  Q and upload with this application packet  
Sub-contract  from non-UIC agency  or institution:  Name:  
Other  - Name:  
C. Funding Identification: 
1. Institutional  Proposal  (IP) Number:  0045807 
2. a. Name of  the PI  on the grant  or contract  received  directly  from the sponsor:  Susan Hughes  
b. Is the PI  of this grant  or contract  affiliated with  UIC?  
No – Identify the agency or institution with which the above PI is affiliated:  
Explain  the relationship between that agency  or institution  and UIC: 
Yes 
c. Grant,  contract  or sub-contract  title: Midwest  Roybal Center  for Health Promotion 
and Translation 
d. Grant,  contract or  sub-contract number: 5P30AG022849-17 
 
V. Conflict of  Interest  (COI)  
 
 
A. Disclosure  
1. At present or in the 12 months prior to this disclosure, did or does any investigator or investigator’s  
family members have a significant financial interest (SFI) with the research sponsor or any  
subcontract recipient; or have a SFI reasonably related to a product (e.g., drug, device, method,  
treatment, etc.) that is the subject of the research; or have any other relationships (e.g. fiduciary,  
even if uncompensated)  that may present  a potential  conflict  of interest  with this research?  
No 
Yes – See Section B below.  
 
2. Are you aware of an institutional  conflict  of interest  with this study?  
Definition of a Performance Site:  A performance site is a location at which the research is conducted,  
data is gathered from subjects and/or records, and/or subjects are consented into the research.  Sites are 
performance  sites whether  the research activities  there  are funded or  not funded.  
All investigators must disclose all real, apparent, or potential Significant Financial Interest (SFI) to the  
IRB. For more information, see the Investigator Conflict of Interest Disclosure Policy for Human 
Subjects  Research . 

   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  3 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
  
No 
Yes – See Section B below.  
 
 
B. Management  
If YES is checked for any of these questions, complete the disclosure and management plan via  
START myDisclosures application ( https://myresearch.uillinois.edu/myDisclosures/ ). Guidance can  
be found on the COI website  under “Managing Conflicts”.  Final IRB approval of the research 
cannot be provided until a management plan is in place and is approved by the IRB. For additional  
assistance  contact  the COI  Office  at (312) 996- 3642 / (312) 996- 4070 or email  coi@uic.edu.  
 
VI. Protocol  Components  
A. Provide a description of the background and rationale for the proposed research.  Cite appropriate  
literature  to support  the relevance and importance of  this research.  
 
 
B. State the research objectives/hypothesis being explored by the current research.  Please include 
primary  and secondary  aims.  
 
Chronic  conditions  such  as diabetes  and heart disease entail  cardiovascular risk factors  
which play a critical role in cognitive decline1. The majority of aging adults presenting 
with these conditions and associated cardiovascular risk factors such as obesity, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and physical inactivity, are treated in primary care 
settings. Thus, primary care offers an opportunity to help patients manage chronic 
conditions, modify cardiovascular risk factors, and prevent cognitive decline2. One promising way to identify and target at- risk patients in primary care settings is through  
focus  on activities  and instrumental  activities  of dai ly living  (ADLs  and IADLs).  
Primary  care patients  with  chronic disease(s) and  cardiovascular risk factors  are more 
likely to be in the stage of preclinical cognitive changes. Converging evidence indicates  
that subtle deficits in ADL and IADL performance precede clinically identifiable cognitive impairment. ADL limitations are also strong predictors of progression between normal  cognition, mild  cognitive impairment  (MCI),  and dementia3 -5. 
Evaluation and rehabilitation of ADL/IADL performance in at- risk patients can  
activate a positive cycle of ADL  independence,  better management of chronic  disease,  
lowering of cardiovascular risk factors, and prevention/deceleration of cognitive decline. However, there is a dearth of evidence- based interventions that focus on  
ADL/IADL  training  for at-risk aging patients  in primary  care.  
 
C. Clearly  describe the study design/intervention.  The description  should  demonstrate how the stated  
objectives  will be  met. 
 
IPROACTIF (Integrated PRimary Care and Occupational Therapy for Aging and 
Chronic Disease Treatment to preserve Independence and Functioning) is an  
intervention  designed  to be delivered  in primary care settings  by an on -site 
occupational therapist. Based on the premise of preventing the physical and cognitive  
decline that is associated with aging and chronic disease, the 12- week intervention  
includes  a comprehensive assessment  of ADL  functioning  and ten intervention  sessions 

   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  4 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
  
addressing disease management, physical activity and executive functioning. The 
intervention is designed for adults, aged 55 and over, with a primary diagnosis of 
diabetes or heart disease, and pre- clinical cognitive decline. We propose a study to  
assess the efficacy  of IPROACTIF  in a pilot randomized  control  trial with  a control  
group receiving  usual  primary  care services.  
 
The intervention comprises three components spread across 12 weekly sessions: (1)  
comprehensive assessment of physical and executive functioning i.e. person factors  
(Session 1) using the Physical Performance Test, the Dimensional Change Card Sort,  
and the Executive Function Performance Test, (2) assessment of home safety and  
accessibility i.e. environmental factors using the HOME Falls and Accidents Screening  
Tool (Session 2), and (3) assessment of ADL/IADL competence and performance in  
context i.e. occupational factors using the Performance Assessment of Self -Care Skills  
(Session 2). Information in these areas is used by the interventionist to collaboratively identify three patient -centered goals. To facilitate this process, we have developed an  
agenda mapping script and a goal planning worksheet based on principles of  
motivational interviewing.  Goal planning  is followed  by 12 in-person  treatment  
sessions. Treatment sessions focus on chronic disease education, problem solving issues  
related to disease management by modifying daily routines, recommendations for embedding physical activity in everyday tasks, and environmental modifications or 
activity  adaptations to increase ADL/IADL  independence.  The  goal planning  worksheet  
is revisited at every session to ensure patient -centeredness. Thus, while the intervention  
is manualized, it also includes built in flexibility for individualized patient goals and 
treatment  plans.  
D. Describe in chronological order all the tasks/tests or procedures subjects will be asked to complete in 
participating in this research.  Distinguish between tasks performed solely for research and those  
being performed  for non-research purposes.  
At the beginning of the study participants will be asked to complete phone surveys and  
assessments in-person  and by video /phone  call. These activities  will take place in the 
following  order  
• Phone surveys – Participants will be asked to complete demographic and 
background surveys  (including self -reported height and weight) and 
assessments about their health, healthcare utilization, and daily activities. 
• In-person assessments – A week to ten days after the phone surveys, participants  
will be asked to visit  the study  occupational therapist  at the faculty  practice clinic  at 
1640  W. Roosevelt Road or in the Department of Occupational Therapy, 3
rd floor, 1919 W. 
Taylor Street . During this visit, the therapist will assess their physical and mental  
functioning using a variety of standard tests. The therapist will also give each 
participant  an accelerometer to take home and teach  them  how to wear it. 
• Video /Phone  call assessment – A week after the in -person visit, the therapist will 
make an  appointment  for a video /phone  call with  each  participant.  During  the 
video /phone  call, the therapist  will observe the  participant  performing one or two daily 
living  tasks  in their home.  
• Wearing the accelerometer – During the week between the in -person visit and the  
video /phone  call,  we will ask participants  to wear the accelerometer for at least  12 
hours  a day for 7 days. The accelerometer along with a stamped and self -addressed 
return envelope will be provided to the participant at the end of their in-person visit. 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  5 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 During this visit,  the therapist will explain the purpose of the accelerometer and 
demonstrate how to  wear  it. The  participant  will be informed that  a research assistant  
will contact  them  by 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  6 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
  
phone after a week to check if they are wearing the accelerometer and answer any  
questions.  If participants  have completed  their 7-day data  collection  period,  they  will be 
asked to return the accelerometer using the envelope provided. If not, they will be 
instructed to start wearing the accelerometer at their earliest convenience. A research  
assistant will check on the participant by phone again after a week. If the participant  
has still not begun wearing the accelerometer they will be reminded to do so at their 
earliest. After another week, a final reminder call will be made, and if the participant  
does not intend to wear the accelerometer, they will be asked to return it using the 
envelope provided.  
 
A
fter completing surveys and assessments participants will be randomly assigned to a  
treatment or control group. Participants in the treatment group will participate in ten  
sessions with an occupational therapist. Sessions will be held via video/phone  call, will 
take place weekly and will last 30 -45 minutes. During these sessions the therapist will 
work  with each participant to understand their strengths and challenges in doing day -
to-day activities and to improve their physical fitness and mental alertness . At the 
beginning of  treatment,  the therapist  will help participants  set three health -related  
goals. 
 
• Sessions 1 -3: The first three sessions will focus on the first health -related goal.  
During Session 1, the therapist will discuss how age and chronic disease affect physical  
functioning. The therapist will work with each participant to develop a step- by-step 
plan to achieve their goal. In Session 2, the therapist will offer advice on action steps 
toward that goal. These steps  might include  physical activity  and exercise, or changes  to 
the environment so that day -to-day activities are easy and safe. In Session 3, the 
therapist  will follow- up on progress  and help problem -solve barriers.  
• Sessions 4 -6: These sessions will focus on the second health -related goal. Activities  
conducted  during  these sessions will be similar  to those  conducted  during  Sessions 1-3. 
• Sessions 7 -9: These sessions will focus on the third health -related goal. Activities 
conducted  during  these sessions will be similar  to those  conducted  during  Sessions 1-3. 
• Session  12: During this session, the  therapist will  discuss the overall progress  you 
made on your health goals. The therapist will also check with you to make sure you have gained knowledge about your health and how to improve it. The therapist will  
share tips to maintain the gains you have made in your physical and mental functioning.  
 
Participants in the control group will not receive treatment sessions with the occupational therapist. They will only receive weekly check -in phone calls from a  
research  assistant that will last 5-10 minutes.  They  will have the opportunity  to receive 
occupational therapy  services  after  completion  of the  study.  
 
Follow- up Surveys  and Assessments 
Twelve weeks after beginning the study, all participants will complete the same surveys and assessments completed during the beginning of the study. These surveys and assessments will be completed in the same order and using the same format as at the beginning  of the study. Participants in the treatment group we will also complete a brief  
satisfaction  survey.  
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  7 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
  
 
In addition, we will also record blood pressure and HBA1C readings from participants’ 
medical records  AFTER we have obtained consent from participants . For participants in 
the treatment group, we will use readings from their last visit with the PCP before the intervention and closest visit with the PCP after the intervention.  For participants in the control group, we will use the information that is available in their medical records from the last available record  before the date of completing the baseline surveys and assessments, 
and the next available record approximately 10 weeks after the date that th ey complete the 
baseline surveys and assessments.  
 
Two occupational therapists will also be involved in the study and will provide the  
aforementioned  intervention  sessions to all patient  participants.  Some of these sessions 
might be monitored (observed in real -time) by the PI or a research assistant as part of  
fidelity  monitoring 
 
The entire study  will last  about 12-15 weeks.  
 
E. Describe the plans for data analysis.  If applicable, include statistical considerations and justification 
for subject  population and planned enrollment  numbers.  
We will use paired t -tests or Wilcoxon Signed- rank tests (nonparametric) to examine 
differences between pre  and post -intervention scores for the two groups. Between - 
group differences, variability, and effect size in outcome measures will be used to  
project sample size for future trials. Our analytical strategy for future trials is to  
estimate difference between groups in change over repeated measures (i.e. "group -by- 
time interaction"). We will use Pearson correlation to examine association between  
physical functioning and executive functioning, and between ADL/IADL performance  
and executive functioning.  
F. Is this is a clinical trial? 
No – Skip to section VII  
Yes - Is the research required to  be registered on  http://clinicaltrials.gov ? For more information,  
refer to the UIC  HSPP policy  Clinical Trials  Registration 
No 
Yes – Include the required language within the informed consent  document.  
 
VII. Research  Records  
A. Indicate the type(s) of data being collected and/or recorded (check all that apply) : 
X  Interviews/Questionnaires  
Audio recordings  
Video recordings  
Photographs  
School/Student  records  
Internet research data  
Lab, pathology and/or radiology  results  
X University of Illinois Hospital & Health System medical records  – University of 
Illinois Hospital & Health System medical records (only HBA1c and 
Systolic/Diastolic blood pressure readings from last visit with PCP before the 
intervention and closest visit with the PCP after the intervention – patients will NOT 
be asked t o make an appointment just for the study. For participants in the control 
group, we will use the information that is available in their medical records from the 

   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  8 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 last available record  before the date that that they completed  the baseline surveys and 
assessments, and the next available record approximately 10 weeks after the date that 
they complete the baseline surveys and assessments.  For participants in both groups 
these data will be abstracted AFTER consent is obtained.  
 
Physician/clinic/hospital  medical  records  from sources  outside of UI Health  System  
Psychotherapy Notes  
Billing  records  
Data  previously  collected  for research purposes  
Data containing no health information  
Study -generated health information 
Biological specimens  
X Other.  Describe:  Performance- based  observations by a clinician  
No audio/video recordings will be collected during the course of the study  
 
B. Will any of the following be banked or stored for future (planned or unplanned) analysis beyond the  
scope of the current research proposal ? If the following will be used and/or destroyed prior to the 
closure of the research,  they are not  considered to be stored;  therefore,  please  answer  “No”.  
• biological samples  or specimens  
• identifiable  data,  
• coded data where a master  list to the codes  exists 
  No Study assessments are only intended to generate data that will help monitor intervention 
and/or test  study  hypotheses.  These data should not  be considered health information.  
Yes – Complete  Appendix  D and upload with this application packet.  
 
 
VIII. Research  Subject Population 
A. Indicate  the anticipated  subject  enrollment number  (This  number  cannot be exceeded without  
prior IRB review  and approval  via an amendment) : 75 
B. Indicate which populations below are the PRIMARY FOCUS of this research.  Please refer to the UIC 
HSPP policies  regarding the incidental enrolment of select vulnerable populations (i.e., decisionally  
impaired,  prisoners,  etc.). 
 
Check all  that apply  
Adults  (18 years  of age and  older)  
Minors (17 years of age and younger) – Complete Appendix B  (required regardless of primary  
or incidental  enrollment) and upload with this  application  packet  
Pregnant  Women, Neonates,  Fetuses/Fetal  Tissue  – Complete Appendix  U and upload with this 
application packet  
Prisoners – Complete Appendix C  and upload with this application packet - Please note that 
certain types of research with prisoners approvable under the federal regulations may not 
be allowed  under  Illinois  state law including,  but not limited  to, biomedical  research.  
UIC Employees  
UIC Psychology  Student  Subject  Pool - 
• Complete Appendix S  and a debriefing document  and upload with  this application  packet;  
• Complete and upload Appendix B  if the research will involve Pool subjects who are minors.  If 
minors will be excluded, then a scientific justification must be provided under item VIII.D.1.b,  
below.  
UIC Management Study Pool - Complete Appendix S  and a debriefing document and upload with  
this application packet  
Students - Complete Appendix S  (required only if the research involves classroom activities and/or  
Note: A plan for securely storing the data must be submitted for IRB review and approval if identifiable  
and/or coded data will be retained after the research has been completed.  Development of a separate  
data/tissue repository/bank research protocol is required if the investigator will be retaining data from  
multiple  proposals.  
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  9 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 student  records)  and upload  with this application packet  
Decisionally -Impaired - Complete Appendix V  and upload with  this application packet  
Economically and/or Educationally Disadvantaged 
Vulnerable  to Coercion or  Undue Influence  
Other:  specify  
 
 
C. If including economically and/or educationally disadvantaged subjects, subjects vulnerable to 
coercion or undue influence, UIC Employees, and/or other populations that may be considered 
vulnerable, provide a rationale for their inclusion and what additional safeguards, if any, are in place 
to protect  their rights  and welfare:  
Two UI Health clinicians will be included in the study as the lead interventionists. They  
will provide data about the treatment sessions, which is necessary to monitor the 
fidelity of the experimental intervention. Specifically, the PI or a research assistant will  
attend and observe randomly selected treatment sessions and will complete a fidelity  
monitoring checklist based  on their observations of the clinician’s  delivery  of the session  
(uploaded). Clinicians  will also be asked  to complete case notes  for each  treatment  
session.  The case notes  template  is embedded in  the intervention  manual . 
D. Eligibility Criteria  
1. Provide  specific  details  regarding the following:  
a. Inclusion Criteria:  For patient participants:  
- Age 55 years or  over  
- Primary diagnosis of one or more of the following: diabetes ,heart  disease  
- Evaluated as experiencing or being at risk of functional decline OR self -identified 
need for  support with chronic  disease man agement  and functional  health  
 
For clinician  participants:  
- A certified  occupational  therapist  licensed  to practice in  the state  of Illinois  
- A minimum  of 5 years clinical  experience  
b. Exclusion  Criteria:  For patient  participants:  
- Unable  to participate  in study  activities due  to time or other  constraints  
- Current/past diagnosis  of stroke  or dementia,  or other  neurological  disorders 
- Receiving  pharmacological  treatment  for cognition 
- Participation in other clinical trials involving a rehabilitation/functional 
health  management  component 
- Non-English  speaking  
- Residing  in a long -term  care institution 
- Compromised  decision -making  capacity (score >8  on SOMCT)  - - Short Orientation 
Memory Concentration Test (SOMCT) will be used during the screening process to 
ensure the participant is eligible for the study. A score of 0 -8 on this test indicates 
normal to minimal impairment. Any one with a score>8 will be considered ineligible.  
 - Not an active patient at the study clinic (two years or more since last appointment) 
 
For clinician  participants:  
- Unable to participate in study activities due to time or other constraints. Please note,  
recruitment and eligibility sections have not been completed for clinicians as the clinicians  
have already been  selected  and will serve as co -investigators on this study.  
 
2. Explain how and by whom potential subjects will be assessed to determine their eligibility for the 
research:  A trained research assistant and graduate student in occupational therapy will  
assess potential subjects to determine eligibility using a screening questionnaire  
administered  over the  phone  
 
3. Explain how initial eligibility will be documented (upload any screening documents):  For patient  
participants: We have developed an eligibility screening form (attached) to ascertain eligibility of potential subjects. The screening form will include a standardized assessments for assessing risk  
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  10 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 of functional decline. Functional decline will be assessed using the Brief Risk Identification of 
Geriatric Health Tool (BRIGHT). Subjects will be flagged as being at risk of functional decline if they get a score of >=3 on the 11 item  BRIGHT. The entire screening procedure will be completed  
by a trained research assistant. We will maintain an Excel spreadsheet to document eligibility. The spreadsheet will be anonymized and subjects will only be identified by a serial number. For  
provider  participants: We will not be documenting  eligibility for  clinicians.  
 
 
4. Explain  how subjects  will be monitored  during  the course of the research to ensure that  they still 
meet  the eligibility  criteria  and how  their continuing  eligibility  will be documented:  
For patient participants: Participants in the intervention group (occupational therapy) will  
be continuously monitored by the occupational therapist who will administer the  
experimental  intervention.  The occupational  therapist  will monitor  patients for  any 
worsening in cognitive functioning. Being in close contact with patients, she will also be  
aware of changes in residential situation (e.g. move to a nursing home) and enrollment in  
other studies that might render participants no longer eligible for this study. Participants  
in the control group will also be closely monitored by a research assistant through weekly  
phonecalls to monitor for changes in cognitive functioning, living arrangement (i.e.  
relocation to nursing home),  and enrollment  in other  studies.  
 
We will not be monitoring  eligibility  for clinician  participants.  
OR 
N/A – Assessment  of continued eligibility  is not required  
 
IX. Recruitment  of Subjects 
A. Describe how  potential  subjects  will be initially  identified  for this research study.  
Potential subjects will be recruited in the following ways:  
1, Potential participants will be identified by their physicians or other primary healthcare  
providers  including nurses, pharmacists, occupational therapists, and care coordinators . We 
will conduct in- service trainings about the study and eligibility criteria with  clinical staff at 
three UI Health Clinics - University of Illinois Family Medicine Center,  University Village; 
University of Illinois Geriatric Outpatient Clinic; University of Illinois  Endocrinology  
Outpatient Clinic . A presentation template for this purpose is attached.  
A flyer advertising the study will then be disseminated  via physicians, nurse practitioners, 
and other clinical staff working at these clinics. The flyer will  include  a phone  number that 
patients  can call or further  information about the study.  
Alternatively, patients can complete a brief form on the flyer with their contact information and  
indicating their permission to be contacted by the research team. Physicians and other staff  
will contact  the research  team  to schedule a time for a research  assistant  to pick  up 
completed  flyers.  
 
The research assistant will then contact eligible individuals by phone and screen them for the  
study's inclusion criteria. Individuals who meet inclusion criteria will be invited to enroll in the  
study and set up a phone appointment for completion of consent procedures and baseline  
data collection.  
 
Due to the COVID -19 pandemic, some providers such as care coordinators are not seeing 
patients in- person.  We have developed an alternative secure strategy for the providers to 
share the study flyer with patients and pass on completed flyers to the study team. The 
details are described under section IX B below. Note that care coordinators will be identifying 
potential patients in the same way as physicians, nurses, and pharmacists described above i.e. based on study eligibility criteria which will be shared  with care coordination staff during 
an in -service presentation.  
  
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  11 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 2. Through electronic medical records – This will be done at two of the recruitment clinics. At the U 
of I Family Medicine Center,  this will be done in two ways: [1]  a data manager (member of the 
health iformatics team) who has completed training in HIPPAA compliance (specifically the UI 
Health Learning Management System (LMS) registration course for enhancing research compliance 
when using EHRs ) will use electronic medical records to generate a list of individuals who meet 
study inclusion criteria. This individual is not a key research personnel listed in the Appendix P. 
This someone who works at the clinic and will only abstract the data and tran sfer it to the UIC Box 
of the researchers [2] some physicians at the U of I Family Medicine who also have health formatics 
training will use EMRs to identify their own patients who meet study inclusion criteria. They will then send these patients a  one-time  bulk message via the patient portal which will include the study 
flyer as an attachment (please see the next section). A spreadsheet containing names and contact information of eligible individuals identified using either of the above strategies will be uploaded to a 
subfolder within a secure UIC Box Health folder. This spreadsheet will also include the patient’s 
primary diagnosis (diabetes or heart disease). Only names, contact information (specifically emails 
and phone numbers ) and the primary diagnosis (i.e. diabetes or heart disease) will be abstracted 
from medical records at recruitment and prior to subjects’ enrollment. Only the PI and key research personnel will have access to this spreadsheet ;  
 A
t the U of I Endocrinology Clinic, a study research assistant who has completed training in HIPAA 
compliance will access electronic medical records to generate a similar list as above. A spreadsheet 
containing names and contact information of eligible ind ividuals from this clinic will be uploaded to 
the same secure UIC Box Health folder described above.  
 
 
B. Describe how,  where,  when,  and by whom subjects  will be recruited  for the research.  
Recruitment will be conducted in four  ways: 
1. Recruitment via primary care providers seeing patients in -person - Potential 
participants will be identified by their physicians or other primary healthcare providers  
including nurses, pharmacists, occupational therapists, and care coordinators . We will 
conduct in- service trainings about the study and eligibility criteria  with clinical staff at 
three UI Health Clinics - University of Illinois Family Medicine  Center, University 
Village; University of Illinois Geriatric Outpatient Clinic; University  of Illinois 
Endocrinology Outpatient Clinic . A flyer advertising the study will be  disseminated  via 
physicians, nurse practitioners, and other clinical sta ff working at these clinics. 
Providers who are seeing patients in -person will share the flyer with their patient at the 
end of their regular scheduled appointment. A script has been created for introducing 
the flyer to specify that the decision to participate in the study is voluntary, that the 
providers themselves are not members of the research team, and that choosing to participate or not will not affect services received at the clinic [Note that the two clinicians who will be serving as study interventionists also work at two of the recruitment clinics. A separate script has been created for them to introduce the study 
to patients which specifies they are research personnel associated with the study – we 
have also addressed this in Section IX C] . The flyer will include a phone number that 
patients can call or further information about the study. Alternatively, patients can complete a brief form on the flyer with their contact information and indicating their permission to be contacted by  the research team . Physicians and other staff will contact 
the research team to schedule a time for  a research  assistant  to pick  up completed  flyers.  
 
The research assistant will then contact eligible individuals by phone and screen them  
for the study's inclusion criteria. Individuals who meet inclusion criteria will be invited  
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  12 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 to enroll in the study and set up a phone appointment for completion of consent  
procedures  and baseline  data  collection . 
2. Recruitment via primary care providers seeing patients remotely – Some providers, 
specifically care coordinators , are only seeing patients remotely (via phone or video 
conferencing using the Doxy.me platform) due to the COVID19 pandemic. They will share the flyer with their patient at the end of their regular scheduled appointment. These providers will share the flyer with their patient at the end of their regular scheduled REMOTE appointment. A separate script and instructions have been created for them to  introduce the study to their patient. They will also be asked to offer 
to read the contents of the flyer for the patient verbatim, with no deviation. If a patient has questions about the study, they will be asked to contact the research team directly using the number stated on the flyer.  If a patient is willing for their contact 
information to be shared with the study team, the provider will ask if they can complete the brief form at the end of the flyer on the patient’s behalf. Information noted in the fl yer (name and phone number) will be retrieved directly from the patient 
and NOT from their EHR. The completed flyer will then be uploaded to a separate subfolder (different from the one described in #1 above) within the study’s secure UIC Box Health folder. Patients will be informed and made aware of this procedure.  Of 
note, care coordinators will only be granted ‘uploader’ access to this folder. This means that they will be unable to see completed flyers uploaded by other care coordinators. 
The research assistant will then contact eligible individuals by phone and screen them  
f
or the study's inclusion criteria. Individuals who meet inclusion criteria will be invited  
to enroll in the study and set up a phone appointment for completion of consent  
procedures  and baseline  data  collection . 
 
3. In person recruitment by a member of the research team – This will be done only at the U 
of I Endocrinology clinic. One or two days a week, a trained research assistant will shadow physicians and/or nurse practitioners as they consult with patients. The research assistant will not accompany the physician/NP into an exam/consultation room but will wait outside until the visit is complete. Patients who might be eligible for the study will be identified by physicians and/or nurse practitioners based on the study’s inclusion criteria which they will be informed about during presentations about the study at clinical/staff meeting. Clinicians will introduce their patient to the research assistant at the end of their visit/consultation. A script has been created fo r this purpose. Then, the patient will have 
the option to meet separately with the research assistant to learn more about the study. The research assistant will then meet one-on- one with patients who express verbal interest 
in learning about the study. Thi s meeting will take place in a private consultation room. 
The research assistant will first introduce the study using language contained in the study flyer. If the participant expresses verbal interest in learning more, she will administer the screening qu estionnaire during the meeting. Individuals who meet inclusion criteria will 
be invited to enroll in the study and either complete the consent process in person or set up a phone appointment for completion of consent procedures and baseline data collection . 
 
4. Outreach to individuals identified through electronic medical records - As previously described, potential participants will also be identified through electronic medical records at 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  13 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 the U of I Endocrinology Clinic and the U of I Family Medicine Center. Individuals thus 
identified will be sent an email (provided their email address is available in the EHR) by the study PI introducing the study and notifying them that a member of our research team might contact them in the next couple of weeks. Physicians with health informatics capability who 
volunteer to run an EMR search  to identify eligible individuals from their existing patient 
caseload will have the option to send a bulk message to  eligible individuals using the patient 
portal. A script has been created for this purpose and will include the flyer for the study as an attachment. The patient portal (labelled MyChart within Epic) is typically used by physicians to communicate with patients – no changes will be made to the portal for this study. This means that we will not need a study build within EPIC. Regardless we have completed the Epic Study Build Request to adhere with institutional procedures. The research assistant will then contact individuals  identified through EMRs (in the order that 
they appear on the EMR list) by phone and screen them for the study's inclusion criteria. 
Individuals who meet inclusion criteria will be invited to enroll in the study. At this time, we will not be using the UI Health Research Registry or The New Normal for this study.
 
 
 
C. Explain the proposed measures to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence on potential  
subjects, particularly for subjects identified in VIII.B. as being vulnerable (for example: how will you  
maximize the subject’s autonomous decision- making; what if the investigator is also the participant’s  
healthcare provider, what if the participant is enrolled in a class the investigator is teaching, what if an 
employer/employee relationship exists) . 
To reduce this risk,  patient  participants will be told that being  in the study  is 
completely voluntary. They can choose to not participate in the study and they can 
discontinue their participation at any time. They will be told that choosing to not be in the study will not affect their legal rights, access to health care, or the quality of health  
care that they receive at the study clinic. All study -related compensation ($25-$75) has 
been kept to a reasonable amount so as not to make patients feel compelled to participate. Efforts will  be made to ensure that participants consent to becoming  
involved in the  project  only after  gaining a clear understanding  of the study  procedures  
and their rights as research  participants.  
 
The clinicians who will be serving as interventionists in the study also work at two of the  
clinics where recruitment will be conducted. It must be noted that both clinicians are co - 
investigators on the study and clinical faculty in the Department of Occupational Therapy.  
Neither their clinical contracts nor their academic appointments are contingent on the  
success of this study. In other words, there is no monetary reward or incentive for recruiting  
patients  into the study.  
 
The following steps will also be taken to minimize coercion during patient recruitment. These  
steps pertain to all healthcare providers who will assist with recruitment including, but not 
limited  to, the study interventionists:  
1. Providers will be advised to bring up the topic of this research only at the end of their  
clinical consultation to ensure  that the patient’s  therapeutic  needs  are not compromised.  
2. Providers will be advised to remind patients that participation in the study is not obligated  
and should they decide to not participate, they will continue to receive their usual clinical  
care.  
3. Providers will be advised to remind patients that they can take 2 -3 days to reflect on the  
study  before making  their  decision.  
4. It must be noted that providers will only seek patient permission to introduce them to 
the research assistant or pass on their contact                                           information to the research team so they can 
receive a call from a research assistant to  explain the study in detail. The actual decision to 
participate or not will be made  during the in- person meeting or  phone follow -up which will 
be conducted by a research assistant not connected with the  patient’s  clinical  care 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  14 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 (therefore  making  it easier for  patients  to decline  participation).  
 
 
D. Will any identifiable data obtained at recruitment, including screening data from records, be retained 
without  consent  from subjects  who failed to qualify  or declined  to participate?  
No 
Yes – Describe the screening data to be retained and justify the retention of such data: Names  
and contact information will NOT be retained. For participants found ineligible and for 
those who decline to be in the study, PHI (names, email addresses, diagnoses ) will be 
deleted from the spreadsheet listing potential participants identified through electronic 
medical records.  Recruitment fliers/permission slips containing                    this information will be 
shredded (if submitted in hard copy) or deleted  (if submitted in electronic copy) as soon 
as a potential participant is found ineligible or  declines to be in the study. However, we will 
retain deidentified data on reasons for  ineligibility and reasons for declining as this 
information will assist in planning of future studies . This information will be analyzed as 
frequency counts e.g. x/xx individuals  contacted were ineligible as they were receiving 
regular outpatient rehabilitation services;  x/xx patients declined because they reported 
being not  proficient with the technology that  would be needed to participate  This 
information will be critical for planning future recruitment efforts. Please note that some participants might not decline at first contact. instead they might request time to think over their decision or might be willing to be recontacted in 2- 3 weeks after they have had time to 
consider their decision. Completed screening forms of these 'undecided' participants will be retained for 2- 3 weeks until time of recontact. At that time, if  they decline, the forms will be 
destroyed immediately .
 
E. Check and upload  all materials that will be used for recruitment.  Refer to the OPRS website for  
the Investigator  Guidance:  Recruitment  Materials  for additional  information.  
No recruitment  materials  will be used  
X Print materials  (flyer,  brochure,  info sheets,  etc.) – Describe:  Flyer  
Ad (radio,  TV, etc.) – Describe:  
Letter – Describe:  
Verbal  script  – Describe:  
X Electronic  materials  (e.g.,  website,  mass  mailing,  email  notice)  – Describe:   
recruitment email  
rSocial Media – Specify  social  media outlets:  
Other  – Describe:  
 
X. Reasonably  Anticipated  Risks  of the Research  
A. Identify all of the reasonably anticipated risks or discomforts that may result from participation in this  
research (actual and reasonably possible, current and future) and describe the expected frequency,  
degree of severity, and potential reversibility of those risks (if known). Remember that risks can be psychological, physical, social, economic, or legal. If any portion of the research involves review of  
medical records, the potential for loss of privacy or confidentiality of health information should be  
listed as  a risk.  
There are five potential risks  for patient  participants  in this study.  
1. There is a mild  risk  of loss of confidentiality  if information about the  participant  
inadvertently released through study reports. The likelihood of this risk is ongoing  
through the course of the study. This risk will be minimized through a series of  
measures we will undertake (see section below), however, if it occurs, it is not  
completely  reversible.  
2. There is a mild risk for loss of anonymity if patients are inadvertently identified as  
being study participants. The likelihood of this risk is ongoing through the course of the  
study. This risk will be minimized through a series of measures we will undertake (see 
section  below),  however,  if it occurs,  it is not completely  reversible.  

   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  15 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 3. There is a potential mild risk of coercion because patients may feel that they have to  
participate in the study  to please the clinic  staff and providers. This is risk is likely  only 
during the recruitment phase of the study and is potentially reversible by allowing  
participants  to opt out of the  study  at any time.  
4. There is a potential  mild risk  of physical  and mental  fatigue  and some physical pain  
because patients may feel overwhelmed and tired from completing the battery of  
outcome measures and instruments. This is risk is likely only during periods when 
completing assessments  with  participants  and is potentially  reversible.  
5. There is a potential minimal risk of emotional reactions when patients express  
concerns  about their  functional  limitations  during  study  visits. The likelihood  of this 
risk is ongoing through the course of the study  but it is potentially reversible.  
 
We do not anticipate any risks for the clinician participants in this study other than 
minimal risk of losing privacy and confidentiality as they will only be providing data 
related  to fidelity  of intervention  delivery.  
 
 
B. Describe the measures taken to minimize the risks (other than undue influence or breaches of privacy  
and/or confidentiality) listed above.  Measures may include screening of subjects by qualified  
personnel,  eligibility  criteria,  use of procedures  already  being used for clinical purposes,  qualifications  
and experience of staff performing procedures, specialized facilities or equipment, medical or  
psychological services that may be required as a consequence of the research and frequency of  
monitoring.  
1) Measures  to minimize  loss of confidentiality.  
We will use the HIPPA -certified version of Zoom to conduct all treatment sessions via  
video -conference or via phone call if the participant so prefers . Clinical case notes  and 
assessment  data  will be stored  only in  electronic format in password- protected  files  or 
folders  stored on  a lab computer  at 1919 
W. Taylor Street, which is part of the network server of the College of Applied Health  
Sciences. Clinicians will be asked to complete notes using a  standard template 
(embedded in the intervention manual). The notes will be typed into  Microsoft  Word 
using  password- protected,  UIC- issued  laptops. Completed  notes  will be stored in a 
HIPPA -compliant UIC Box Health Folder temporarily before being  transferred to a 
password- protected folder stored on a secure HIPPA -compliant sever maintained at 
UIC. 
Outcomes data will be collected in RedCap. The  data will be coded and identifiers 
removed  before being  exported from RedCap as a CSV or SPSS file. The coded dataset 
without identifiers will be stored on  a lab computer at 1919 W. Taylor Street, which is 
part of the network server of the College of Applied Health Sciences. This is essential for 
data analysis as we have appropriate statistical software installed on our lab computer. If a statistician from a different UIC department is added to the research team, we will  
upload the coded  outcome s data to our HIPAA secured UIC Box Health Folder so the 
statistician can access it.  Our outcomes database will not include patient identifiers such 
as names and addresses.  Each  patient  in the database will be identified with  a unique  
project code.  Patient  names,  addresses, and contact information, which will be collected 
for purposes of scheduling  future visits, will be recorded in a separate master list. This 
master list will distinct from  the screener spreadsheet. The master list will include 
patient information and their  unique project identifiers and will be stored in a separate, 
password protected file, on a  secure HIPPA -compliant server maintained at UIC. Only 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  16 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 designated research personnel  will have access to these files through individualized 
passwords. Once data analysis is completed  the files will be destroyed.  
 
2) Measures to minimize loss of anonymity. To reduce this risk, only the PIs and key 
personnel involved in data collection and patient scheduling will have access to the  
master file which contains patient identifiers. It is anticipated that the results of this  
study will appear in scientific publications and will be presented at scientific meetings  
and community  events.  The  research  team  will ensure that dissemination  products  do 
not include  any identifying  information. Quantitative  findings  will be summarized  across  
all patients  in the study  and will not be presented  at the individual  level.  
3) Measures to minimize any risk of coercion. Patient participants will be told that being  
in the study is completely voluntary. They can choose to not participate in the study and 
they can discontinue their participation at any time. They will be told that choosing to not be in the study will not affect their legal rights, access to health care, or the quality of  
health care that they receive at the study  clinic.  All study -related  compensation ($25- 
$75) has been kept to a reasonable amount so as not to make patients feel compelled to participate. Efforts will be made to ensure that participants consent to becoming  
involved in the project only after gaining a clear understanding of the study procedures  
and their rights as research  participants.  
4) Measure to  minimize  physical and mental  fatigue  and physical  pain. Patients  will be 
given rest  breaks  as needed  during  completion  of rest breaks  and surveys.  
 
5) Measures to minimize emotional reactions. Patients will be free to not answer any  
questions  that  make  them  feel uncomfortable. Research  assistants and clinicians  will 
have the requ isite training and expertise to counsel patients if they express emotional 
reactions.  
 
C. Describe the process for reporting any unanticipated problems to the IRB and sponsor, as applicable.  
We do not anticipate serious adverse events for participants in the proposed study. Any  
health -related events occurring as a result of study procedures will be considered an  
adverse event. Potential AEs include fatigue, mild joint pain, and mild muscle soreness.  
Adverse events will be will be graded according to the National Cancer Institute’s  
Common Toxicity Criteria II (0 = No adverse event or within normal limits; 1 = Mild,  
not requiring treatment; 2 = Moderate, resolved with treatment; 3 = Severe, resulted in  
inability to carry on normal activities and required professional medical attention; 4 = Life-threatening  or disabling;  5 = Fatal.
 
 
The principal  investigator will use an adapted version of  the NIA Adverse Event Form  
(https:/ /www.nia.nih.gov/research/dgcg/clinical- research -study -investigators-  
toolbox/adverse events) to monitor any AEs. Such events will be reported immediately  
(within 24 -48 hours of occurrence) to the institutional IRB and the sponsor -approved 
DSMB.  
The Adverse Event protocol will be initiated when a potential issue is observed or identified 
by the investigators and/or clinicians/interventionists. Given that this study primarily focuses 
on encouraging participants to engage in daily living tasks in their own environment [things 
they are already doing to some extent in their everyday lives], we only anticipate adverse 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  17 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 events  in the 0-1 range based  on the NCI criteria described  above. The remote  intervention is  
a counseling and education- based intervention so chances of more serious risk or injury are 
very remote. The most likely events are fatigue, pain, and mild emotional reactions. These 
will be handled in the same way as they would be during in-person treatment sessions. The 
intervening clinicians have many years of experience working with patients with physical 
disabilities and are trained to identify any signs of physical fatigue. Participants 
demonstrating signs of fatigue will be asked to take a break before continuing with the 
assessment . Part of the intervention involves training participants to monitor their own levels 
of pain and their resting heart rate. Participants will be empowered to use these skills to 
monitor their own bodily reactions and rest and stretch their joints to relieve fatigue and/or 
mild pain.  In case of emotional reactions, the intervening clinicians are licensed 
occupational therapists with requisite training and experience to counsel paticipants through 
emotional reactions.  
In the rare case of a more serious adverse event (such as a fall) that occurs during a remote 
interaction,  the intervening clinician  will take the following steps:  
1. Assess whether the partcipant has sustained an injury and how serious it is. This will be 
done by asking the patient a series of questions to assess their mental status [e.g. What is 
your name? What  city are you in? What  is today’s date]  and their physical status  [e.g. Do 
you feel any pain? On a scale of 0 -10 how would you rate your pain? Do you see any 
swelling  or fresh  wound? Is the wound bleeding?]  
 
2. If the injury is deemed non- serious, the clinician will advise the participant to keep any  
on things, and if they feel no better/get worse in the next 24 hours, to contact their 
primary  care provider. 
3.  If the injury is deemed  serious, the clinician  will call 911 to  get the patient  immediate  
medical  assistance.  
4. Report the adverse event to the principal investigator, who will inform the IRB and the 
DSMB.  
 
XI. Reasonably  Anticipated Benefits of the Research  
A. Identify the potential for benefits to individual subjects, including those related to an experimental  
intervention or interaction that are available only in the context of the research.  Please note that  
participation in Social and Behavioral Sciences research (such as interviews, focus groups, surveys)  
rarely presents a direct benefit to the subject.  Unless a direct benefit to subjects is anticipated (such 
as an educational benefit from a new curriculum, therapeutic benefit from a new service/therapy),  
please state that no direct  benefits  to subjects  are anticipated.  
 
As part of the experimental  intervention  participants  will receive occupational therapy  
services at no cost. It is anticipated that many of these individuals will have little or no 
access to these services outside the context of this research study. Services delivered as  
part of the intervention will address patients’ physical functioning and occupational  
activities. If the intervention is effective, we anticipate that patients’ functional health  
will improve, as will their health -related quality of life and their experience of primary  
care services. Improved functional health might reduce burden of care for caregivers.  
There are no direct benefits for clinicians in this study. However clinicians will learn  
about the role of occupational therapy in the management of functional health. This  
knowledge might  have secondary  benefits  for other patients.  
 
B. Indicate how the knowledge  gained from the study  could produce a benefit  to society or to others  who 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  18 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 share the same disorder  or condition.  
Evidence from the proposed project will offer new insights on the effectiveness of  
embedding  occupational therapy  services  in outpatient  care settings.  Currently  there  is 
a lack of mechanisms  to monitor and address  functional  health  in these settings.  
Patients in need of this type of care may require referrals from their Primary Care 
Providers but may be unable to follow- through with referral advice. Embedded  
occupational therapy services may increase patient access to needed care, improve patients’ functional abilities, and influence physicians to be more holistic in their  
treatment approach with patients with chronic health conditions. The benefits may be  
particularly significant  for low income,  low literacy,  and underserved  patient  
populations such as those served by the study clinic. These patients often have multiple  
barriers to effectively engage in recommended health and wellbeing regimens. Second,  
evidence from the proposed project will offer new insights on how best to introduce occupational therapy services into primary health care clinics serving vulnerable patient populations. Community clinics must balance complex scheduling issues, time  
limitations, high patient needs, and limited referral resources, against available space, patient no -show rates, patients who have multiple health problems requiring extensive 
review  for a differential  diagnosis, etc. Identifying  ways to improve patient engagement,  
shared  decision -making,  and self-management has significant  positive implications  for 
improving clinical outcomes, patient experience of clinical care, and provider satisfaction.  
 
XII. Privacy  and Confidentiality  
 
A. Describe the precautions taken to protect subject privacy during the initial identification of subjects,  
subject recruitment, and collection of data from the subjects (for example: what precautions will be  
taken to protect the subject from being recognized as a research subject if recruitment or data 
collection  occurs  in a group setting or in public?) . 
1) Measures  to minimize  loss of confidentiality.  
We will use the HIPPA -certified version of Zoom  to conduct  all treatment  sessions via 
video -conference or via phone call if the participant so prefers. Clinical case notes 
and assessment data will be stored only in electronic format in password -protected 
files or folders stored on a lab computer at  1919 W. Taylor Street, which is part of the 
network server of the College of Applied  Health Sciences. Clinician notes will be 
stored in a UIC Box Health Folder temporarily   before being  transferred  to a lab 
computer.  
Our o utcomes  database will not include  patient  identifiers  such  as names  and addresses.  
Each patient in the database will be identified with a unique project code. Patient  
names, addresses, and contact information, which will be collected for purposes of  
scheduling future visits  and/or mailing gift cards , will be recorded in a separate master 
list. This master list will distinct from the screener spreadsheet. The master list will 
include patient information and their unique project identifiers and will be stored in a separate, password protected  file, on a secure HIPPA -compliant server maintained at 
UIC. Only designated research  personnel will have access to these files through 
individualized passwords. O nce data  analysis is completed  the files  will be destroyed.  
 
 O
utcomes data will be collected in RedCap. UIC Box is not a platform for collecting 
outcomes data from the standardized questionnaires and assessments that we plan to use. 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  19 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 The skip patterns and assessment item banks necessary for accurate data collection can only 
be configured in a program such as RedCap. Prior to RedCap, we would have administered via paper and pencil in hard copy. However, th e paper and pencil format of data collection 
is obsolete and inefficient and prone to errors.  
The data  in RedCap  will be coded i.e. subjects will be represented by a code.  The coded 
data will be  exported from RedCap as a CSV or SPSS file. The coded  dataset without 
identifiers  will be stored on a lab computer at 1919 W. Taylor Street, which is part of the 
network server of the College of Applied Health Sciences. This is essential for data analysis as we have appropriate statistical software installed on our lab computer. If a s tatistician 
from a different UIC department is added to the research team , we will upload the coded 
outcomes data to our HIPAA secured UIC Box Health Folder so the statistician can access it. 
 Unfortunately, data cannot be analyzed within RedCap and therefore need to be exported for analysis using statistical software such as SAS and SPSS. Data analysis involves multiple steps and cannot be completed in a single session. We anticipate that after  downloading the 
data into a password protected folder within our secure college server, we will need to:  
• Mathematically recode variables (e.g. merging two variables into one, creating summary scores of assessments)  
• Divide the dataset into two or more datasets for subgroup analyses (e.g. separate datasets for control and intervention participants, separate datasets for participants with heart disease and diabetes)  
• Clean datasets by deleting outliers  
• Run simpler analyses in SPSS and more complicated analyses in SAS  
Given the above, constantly downloading and uploading data from and into the UIC Box Health after every analysis session will not only be cumbersome (tens of files will need to be uploaded and downloaded every single time and have to re -labelled with every  download 
and upload) but also carry the risk of losing data files reconfigured for analyses. Therefore we will download t he coded  dataset without identifiers  to a lab computer at 1919 W. Taylor 
Street, which is part of the HIPAA compliant network server of the College of Applied Health Sciences.  
 The spreadsheet containing names and contact information of eligible individuals identified through electronic medical records will be uploaded to a secure UIC Box Health Folder. Only the PI and key research personnel will have access to this spreadsheet.  
 For participants recruited in person, the research assistant will meet with them separately in a private exam room or office so although others may see them together; they will not know if they agreed or not to research.   
 
 
2) Measures to minimize loss of anonymity. To reduce this risk, only the PIs and key 
personnel involved in data collection and patient scheduling will have access to the 
master file which contains patient identifiers. It is anticipated that the results of this  
study will appear in scientific publications and will be presented at scientific meetings  
and community events. The research team will ensure that dissemination products do  
not include any identifying information. Quantitative findings will be summarized across  all patients  in the study  and will not be presented  at the individual  level.  
 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  20 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 B. Data Security  and Management  Plan  
1. Indicate the identifiable elements that will be collected and/or included in the research  
records.  
Check  all that apply  
X Names  Social Security  Numbers * Device identifiers/Serial numbers  
X                         Phone numbers  Medical  record  numbers  Web URLs  
X Street  address  Health plan  numbers  IP address numbers  
X City or state  Account  numbers  Biometric identifiers1 
X Zip Code  Fax numbers  Vehicle ID numbers  
X E-mail address  License/Certificate numbers  Facial Photos/Images  
Financial  account  information (including student  ID) 
All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual; and all ages  
over 89 and all elements  of dates  (including  year)  indicative of  such  age 
Date of  Birth 
Identifiable  UIC Student  Records2 University Identification Number (UIN)  
X                              Any  other  unique identifier  - Specify:  HBA1c and Systolic/Diastolic blood 
pressure readings AFTER obtaining consent from participants . For treatment 
group participants we will record these parameters from their last visit with PCP 
before the intervention and closest visit with the PCP after the intervention. For 
participants in the control group, we will use the information that is available in 
their medical records from the last available record before the date of completing 
the baseline surveys and assessments, and the next available record approximately 10 weeks after the date that they complete the baseline surveys and assessments.  
 
None  of the identifiers  listed  above – Skip  to item C 
 
1 Biometric Identifiers are observable biological characteristics which could be used to identify an individual,  
e.g., fingerprints, iris/retina patterns, and  facial  patterns.  
2 Documentation of approval from the Registrar must be submitted unless prospective signed consent is  
obtained from the student or  guardian.  
*NOTE:  If social  security  numbers  will be collected,  explain below  why they are necessary  
and how  they will be used:  
 
2. Data Collection  and Storage  
a. Identify  what  methods  you will use to collect  and store data:  
  Internet -based application/package – Specify:  
REDCap  [define host  X CCTS/IHRP  Other  (define):  ] 
UIC ACCC Qualtrics  
UIC Box 
UIC Box Health  Data  Folder  (for research involving PHI)  
*Survey Monkey  or other  commercial survey  service – Specify:  
*Other - A thorough description of the characteristics of the application/tool must be 
provided. This description should address the following elements if applicable:  
product/tool name, host, security measures, encryption mechanism, and how collected 
data is  maintained and stored by  the application/tool.  
Non- internet based application (i.e. directly on a desktop/laptop).  
Paper  
Recording Media - Photo  Video  Audio  
Specify  how the data will  be stored and how  participants  will be identified  in the recordings:  
 
Subject  Artifacts  (such  as classroom assignments,  regular  work  products,  lesson plans)  
Stored  specimens  
Other:  

   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  21 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
  
 
b. Describe whether  and how social  media  platforms  (e.g.,  Facebook,  Twitter, Snapchat,  etc.) will 
be used to collect  data and/or  communicate with subjects:  
  Not applicable  
 
 
 
 
3. Data Security  
a. Describe how  all types  of data as selected  above  will be secured.  
i.   Indirectly  with a  code linked to the identity  of the subject.  
Describe the coding method, specify who will have access to the code/master key,  
indicate  where the key is stored,  and explain how it will be protected against  unauthorized  
access:  Participants who enroll in the study will be assigned a numeric code  i n the 
outcome database in RedCap i.e. outcome data from REDCap will be identified by a 
code.  The  master list including the participants' names, contact information, and  
corresponding numeric codes will be stored separately from the research data. The  
master list will be saved as a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet on the secure network 
server  of the College of Applied  Health  Sciences.  The file will be password  
protected and only the PI, Dr. Mirza and key research personnel, will have access to  
the password. Hard copies of permission flyers completed by participants who are  
screened eligible and agree to be in the study will be stored in locked filing cabinets  
in the PI’s locked research lab.  Only the PI, Dr. Mirza and key research personnel,  
will have access to  the cabinet.  
PHI collected post enrollment and POST CONSENT will include the following variables – BP  and 
HBA1c reading [for treatment group participants – at last visit with PCP before the intervention and 
closest visit with the PCP after the intervention. For control group participants - last time tested 
before completing the baseline surveys and assessments, and the next available record approximately 10 weeks .] These data will be stored in the RedCap outcome database where 
subjects will be identified by a code. Note  that dates of readings will not be recorded. We will 
record these variables as ‘preBP’, ‘postBP. ‘preglucose’ and ‘postglucose’. After data collections is completed the coded outcomes data with identifiers removed  will be exported from RedCap as a 
CSV or SPSS file. The coded dataset without identifiers will be stored on a lab computer at 1919 W. Taylor Street, which is part of the network server of the College of Applied Health Sciences.  
 
ii. x Directly, personal or private identifiers (identifiable elements) are maintained with 
the data.  
Justify the inclusion of direct subject identifiers, and indicate who will have access to the 
data:  
PHI collected at recruitment, pre- enrollment AND BEFORE CONSENT will only include the 
following variables – potential subject’s name, email, phone number, primary diagnosis (diabetes 
or heart disease). This information will be for recruitment purposes only and will be stored in the 
protected UIC Box health folder only. Only designated key personnel will have access to it.  
 
 
 Limited Data Set [Protected Health Information (PHI) subject to the Privacy Rule that  
includes elements limited to city, state, ZIP Code, elements of date, and other numbers,  
characteristics, or codes not considered as direct identifiers]. Requires a Data Use  
*Note: Any investigator who uses external survey software other than  REDCap, UIC ACCC Qualtrics, or  
UIC Box Health Data Folder  for collecting and maintaining UIC/UI Health PHI and/or personal data from 
individuals physically located in the European Union Economic Area (EEA)  must provide evidence of a  
business associate agreement between the University and the external survey software provider.  For 
more information, refer to the UIC HSPP policy  Research Data Security . Please visit the OPRS website 
or contact OPRS at uicirb@uic.edu  for more information regarding data collected in the EEA and the 
European  Union General Data Protections  Regulation (EU GDPR) . 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  22 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 
Agreement.   
  
 
 
b. Indicate the method(s) used to secure each data type.  
Password access 
Portable devices  – Specify  encryption software  (required): Data  Protection (in -built  
within  Apple  iPad)  
Encryption software will be used – Specify  encryption software:  
  Secure network  server will  be used – Specify  secure server:  College of Applied  
Health  Sciences  
Stand alone desktop/laptop computer will be used to store data 
Not connected to server/internet  
An organization outside of  the UIC  will store  the code  key. 
X Locked file cabinet  
Locked office/lab.  
Locked office  suite.  
Locked refrigerator/freezer  
 X                                            Other  - Specify:  HIPAA compliant UIC Box Health Folder  
 
c. Indicate when  identifiers  (including  the master  list) will be removed or destroyed.  
End of data collection  
End of data analysis  
Post publication/dissertation defense  
Other  – Specify:  
 
4. Data Sharing  
 
a. Will the data or  specimens  be shared with persons  other  than  UIC investigators  and research 
staff noted on the protocol application and Appendix  P? 
  No – Skip to item C.1. 
Yes – Specify  with whom the data  will be shared:  
 
b. Indicate  the manner  in which  the data will be shared:  
As a de-identified  dataset  – Skip to item C.1. 
With direct  identifiers  
With indirect identifiers (i.e., coded dataset) and/or Limited Data Set  
Identify  who will have access to the code key  or master  list: 
 
c. Specify  how identifiable  data will be transferred:  
Non- electronic transfer (hard copy or physical specimens) – Specify:  
Transmitted over  a secure network  – Specify  network:  
Via UIC e- mail - Specify  encryption:  
Cloud  based data sharing  program (UIC Box Health  Data  Folder  is the only  approved 
method of  sharing PHI  in this  manner ) 
Specify:  
Other  - Specify:  
Please  note:  
- Items i and ii require consent and/or authorization (if PHI is involved) from the subject or a Waiver of  
Consent  and/or  Waiver  of Authorization (if  PHI is involved)  from the IRB.  
- UIC and/or  outside  agencies  may require the use of a data use/data transfer agreement  that outlines  
the procedures necessary to protect identifiable or coded data that will be transferred or shared 
between agencies.  You must contact the Office of Sponsored Programs  (OSP) at 312 -996-2862 or  
awards@uic.edu  for additional information  and direction.  
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  23 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
  
 
C. 1. Does the research protocol have a data and safety monitoring plan? For more information refer to 
UIC OPRS HSPP policy  Data and Safety Monitoring Plans (DSMPs), Data and Safety Monitoring  
Boards  (DSMBs),  and Data  Monitoring Committees  (DMCs) . 
Not Applicable.  – Skip to item  D as all of the following criteria are met: 
• research is  minimal risk,  
• research does  not involve  physical  or therapeutic  intervention with subjects,  
• subject  trauma or  distress  is not an anticipated risk, and 
• the sponsor  does  not require a monitoring plan.  
  Yes – Describe the plan: The Principal Investigator (PI) will be responsible for 
ensuring  participants’ safety  on a daily  basis.  A local DSMB  has been  established.  
The Chair of the DSMB will serve in the capacity of Safety Officer, The Data and  
Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will act in an advisory capacity to the NIA 
Director to monitor participant safety, evaluate the progress of the study, to review procedures for maintaining the confidentiality of data, the quality of data  
collection,  management, and analyses. 
 
A minimum  of two annual meetings  will be scheduled  between the research  team  and 
the DSMB. Meetings will occur via teleconference, web conference or in -person  
per the convenience of DSMB members. The first meeting will focus on updating  
the DSMB about study progress and issues related to participant safety. The  
second meeting will focus on reviewing data quality and management. Reports summarizing safety issues, study progress, and data management will be submitted  to the DSMB twice a  year.  
 
The content of the report will include projected timeline and schedule, summary of  
changes (if an to study protocol), enrollment status (including reasons for ineligibility and participation refusal), demographic characteristics of recruited  
participants,  treatment  adherence and completion,  and incidence of adverse events  
and their resolution.  
 
2. Is this a multi- center  trial AND  UIC is the lead  site or  serving as the data coordinating center?  
Yes – Plans for managing and communicating the unanticipated problems involving risks to 
subjects or others, interim results, and protocol revisions among the multiple sites are 
described within the uploaded protocol OR explain:  
  No 
 
 
D. Will you be applying for a Certificate of Confidentiality?  Research funded by NIH that involves  
sensitive, identifiable data will be automatically granted a Certificate of Confidentiality.  Ensure the 
consent  document  includes  the appropriate language.  
No 
Yes – Include the required template language in the consent document and refer to the Guidance  
for Investigators: Certificates of Confidentiality  for more information regarding the 
submission process  and regulatory  requirements.  
 
E. Is this research being funded by the National Institute of Justice? 
No 
Yes – The investigator  is responsible for the following:  
- Uploading  the NIJ Privacy Certificate  
- Ensuring the proposal  indicates  that a copy  of all data must be  de-identified  and sent 
to the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, including copies of the consent  
document,  data collection  instruments,  surveys,  or other relevant  research materials  

   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  24 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 - Ensuring the Informed Consent  Document(s)  include:  
o NIJ approved Privacy Certificate  language  
o De-identifiable information will be sent to the National Archives of Criminal  
Justice Data  
o A statement  indicating  that if a subject  is a danger  to themselves  or others,  it will 
be reported to the authorities  
o A statement indicating that communicable diseases (TB, HIV) will be reported to 
the state and/or  federal  public  health authorities  
o Statement  that current  or past domestic,  child,  or elder  abuse is  not reportable  
Refer to the Additional Informed Consent Template Language and the Guidance for Investigators  
Informed Consent  for additional information.  
 
XIII. Compensation  & Costs  
 
 
 
A. 1. Will subjects receive any compensation (for example: money, gifts, or gift certificates) directly  
related to research participation?  If subjects will be entered into a lottery, select “No” and skip to 
item B. 
No – Skip to item B.  
Yes - Indicate  the type of compensation.  
  Monetary  (total  amount:  $90) 
Non- Monetary  
Both 
 
2. Describe in  detail:  
 
a) How compensation will be prorated (e.g., $x for each visit, $y for subjects who do not qualify  
after screening visit, etc.): Participants will receive a Target gift card worth $30 for 
completing all surveys and assessments at the beginning of the study and a 
Target gift card worth $40 for completing all follow- up surveys and 
assessments. This amounts to a total of $70 for completing the study.  
Participants who do not complete the study will be compensated for the  portion 
they have completed.  In addition,  partici pants will received  $10 to offset  parking  
and transportation costs  for attending  the two in-person sessions.  No 
identifiable subject contact information will have to be shared with the 3rd party for payment processing 
b) When compensation will be provided (e.g., after each visit, at the completion of all visits, 6-8 
weeks after the completion of all visits due to processing of check, etc.) and  in what format  
(e.g., cash, check, VISA gift card, etc.): We will send the first $30 gift card by postal 
mail within approximately one week after each participant completes all surveys and assessments  at the beginning  of the study.  We will send the  second  
$40 gift card           by postal mail within approximately one week after the 
participant completes all  surveys and assessments at the end of the study. 
Participants will be paid for transportation/parking  in cash  at the  end of the in-
person  visit.  
B. Will subjects be entered into a lottery for compensation (for example: money, gifts, or gift certificates)  
before,  during,  or after participation in the study?  
No 
Payment in exchange for referrals of potential participants (finder’s fee) and payments designed to  
encourage or accelerate recruitment by being tied to the rate or timing of enrollment (bonus payment) are 
generally  unacceptable.  
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  25 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 
Yes - 
a. Provide  a justification  for conducting a lottery  rather  than compensation per  subject:  
b. Indicate the type of  compensation:  
c. Indicate  the odds  of winning the  lottery:  
d. Indicate when  the winner will be notified  and receive  the compensation:  
 
C. Does  this study  provide  payments  in exchange for referrals  of potential  participants  (finder’s  fees) or  
payments designed to encourage or accelerate recruitment by being tied to the rate or timing of  
enrollment  (bonus  payment)? 
No 
Yes – Describe:  
 
D. Are subjects  or their insurance/third- party  payer  responsible for any research- related  costs?  
No 
Yes – Complete items  a and b:  
a. List the procedures/expenses:  
 
b. Provide  a justification as  to why research- related expenses  are not  being covered  by 
the research.  
 
 
XIV. Procedures  to Obtain  Informed Consent/Assent  
A. Indicate the type(s) of consent you will obtain:  
Written  
Verbal  
Waiver  of Informed Consent  and/or  Waiver of  Signed Consent  
 
B. Indicate who will obtain informed consent from potential subjects.  
PI 
Co-investigators  
Research coordinators/Others  as delegated  
 
 
C. Indicate where and  when informed  consent  will be obtained  from potential  subjects.  
We are requesting a waiver of consent for recruitment purposes. We will secure 
written, signed consent before study enrollment The research assistant will be trained  
by the PI with special  attention to  assessing  participants’  capacity  for consent. An 
assessment script has been developed for this purpose.  During  the consent process, 
potential participants will be periodically asked questions to  ascertain their capacity 
for consent (e.g. In your own words, can you describe the risks of participating in this 
study? What happens if you change your mind about  participating?). If the 
participant answers accurately, the research assistant will  continue with the consent 
process. If answers are inaccurate, the participant will be deemed ineligible for the 
study.  In addition, the Short Ori entation Memory  Concentration Test (SOMCT) will 
be used during the screening process to ensure the participant is eligible for the 
study. A score of 0- 8 on this test indicates normal to  minimal  impairment.  Any one 
with  a score>8 will be considered  ineligible.  
 
I
nformed consent will be obtained both in person and remotely. Participants who are 
recruited in person at one of the study clinics will be asked if they have time to complete 
the screening questionnaire and the consent process rightaway. Participants will  be given 
one signed hard copy of the form for their records while the research assistant will retain 

   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  26 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
 
the second copy, which will be later (after the clinic schedule is over and on the same day) 
stored in a locked cabinet in the PI’s research laboratory.  
 
For participants who are recruited remotely and screened by phone, the research assistant will ask if they are willing to complete the consent process during the same phonecall or if they’d like to schedule a separate phonecall for explaining the consent form by phone before baseline data collection begins. Either way, the research assistant will explain the consent form in detail and explain that they can sign the form on a separate and secure platform. We will use UIC REDCap hosted by CCTS/IHRP  fpr this p urpose. We will set 
up an e -consent survey in RedCap. T he e- consent survey form will be sent to each  
participant by email using a unique survey link so that the response status and follow -up 
can be done using the individually linked information. This email will be sent by the research assistant through an encrypted email via Microsoft Outlook. When the participant clicks on the link, they will be asked to authenticate themselves using a pre -
agreed password. The password will be agreed upon by the research a ssistant and 
participant over the phone right before the email link is sent. When  the e-consent 
framework is setup, at the end of consent form participant will be asked to  certify the 
information before clicking ‘submit’ under this statement - “I understand that clicking submit will electronically sign the form ad signing this form electronically is the equivalent of signing a physical form.” They will also be able to download a PDF copy of the form. 
 
  
D. Does  the potential  exist for enrolling subjects  (or subjects’  LARs)  who do not understand English?  
No 
Yes – Describe how the consent process will be conducted (e.g., who will convey information to 
the subject or LAR in a language they understand, whether the consent will be 
documented using a translated consent  form or short  form).  
 
 
 
E. Will any portion of the research involve deception? 
No 
Yes - Upload Appendix  J and a debriefing statement  with this application.  
 
XV. HIPAA Compliance  
A. Does your research use and/or disclose Protected Health Information (PHI)*? 
No – Skip this  section.  
X Yes For information about the involvement of non -English speaking subjects in research, including use of  
the short form, please refer to the Guidance: Involvement of Non- English Speaking Subjects in  
Research  at the University  of Illinois  at Chicago . 
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  27 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
  
*Data is considered to represent PHI when an individual’s health information, including billing records,  
contains or is linked to one of the identifiers listed in #XII.B.1. For example, health- related information 
is considered PHI  if any of the following are true: 
•The researcher obtains the information directly from a provider, billing records, health plan, health  
clearinghouse or  employer  (other  than records  relating  solely  to employment  status); 
•The records were created by any of the entities listed above and the researcher obtains the  
records from an intermediate source which is NOT a school record or an employer record related 
solely  to employment  status; OR 
•The researcher obtains it directly from the study subject in the course of providing treatment to 
the subject.  
 
Health- related information is not  considered PHI  if the researcher obtains it from:  
•Student  records  maintained  by a school;  
   Initial  Review  Application:  Social,  Behavioral,  and Educational  Research,  Version  5.2  
Page  28 of 22     OVCR  Document  #0201   
  
 
 
B. Will PHI be used for the purposes  of identifying and/or  recruiting potential  subjects  for the research? 
No 
X Yes 
 
C. Will subjects be selected from records outside the UI Health System? 
No 
Yes – Indicate who  gave approval  for the use of  the records:  
• Upload the protocol, consent documents, letters, etc., for securing consent of the  
subjects  for the use of  the records  if the records  are "private"  medical  or student  records.  
• Upload written documentation for cooperation/permission from the institutional holder or  
custodian of  the records.  
 
D. Will any research related information be put into the health information records or any other  
permanent  record of the subject? 
  No Clinical case notes , blood pressure readings, and HBA1c readings  are the only PHI that 
will be used in this study. These case notes will  be collected solely for monitoring fidelity of the 
intervention. These notes will NOT be put into the health  information records  or any other  
permanent  record of  the subject . Blood pressure and HBA1c readings will be retrieved from EHRs , 
AFTER obtaining consent from patients; no information will be added to patient records.  
Yes - E xplain:  
•Employee  records maintained  by an employer related  to employment  status;  OR 
•The research  subject  directly,  if the research  does NOT  involve  treatment.  