2009-0283
August 17, 2010
Page 1
Protocol Page
Combination of Lenalidomide and Ofatumumab in Patients with Previously Treated 
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia and Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma (CLL/SLL)2009-0283
Core Protocol Information
Short Title Lenalidomide and Ofatumumab in Previously Treated CLL/SLL
Study Chair:  Alessandra Ferrajoli
Additional Contact: Diane R. Lee
Tawana Heiskell
Leukemia Protocol Review Group
Department: Leukemia
Phone: 713-792-2063
Unit: 428
Full Title: Combination of Lenalidomide and Ofatumumab in Patients with Previously Treated Chronic 
Lymphocytic Leukemia and Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma (CLL/SLL)
Protocol Type: Standard Protocol
Protocol Phase: Phase II
Version Status: Terminated  01/31/2018
Version: 13
Submitted by: Tawana Heiskell--2/5/2014 11:31:04 AM
OPR Action: Accepted by:  Matthew D. Geidel -- 2/14/2014 12:45:50 PM
Which Committee will review this protocol?
 The Clinical Research Committee - (CRC)
2009-0283
August 17, 2010
Page 2
Protocol Body
 

  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1   
  
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
          P a g e  
 1.0 Objectives       1  
2.0 Background       2  -  3  
3 . 0  S t u d y  D e s i g n       4  
4 . 0  T r e a t m e n t  P l a n       4  -  1 1  
5 . 0  P a t i e n t  E l i g i b i l i t y       1 1  -  1 3  
6 . 0  P r e t r e a t m e n t  E v a l u a t i o n      1 3  -  1 4  7 . 0  E v a l u a t i o n  D u r i n g  S t u d y      1 5  -  1 6  
8.0 Criteria For Response     1 6  
9 . 0  E v a l u a t i o n  o f  T o x i c i t y      1 6  -  2 2  1 0 . 0  S t a t i s t i c a l  D e s i g n       2 3  -  2 4  
11.0 Amendments, Deviations, Regulatory   24 - 26 12.0 Optional Correlative Studies    26 - 27 
1 3 . 0  R e f e r e n c e s        2 7  -  2 8  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2   
  
1.0 Objectives 
 
The objective of this study is to  evaluate efficacy and tolerab ility of the 
combination of ofatumumab and l enalidomide in pat ients with recurrent CLL. 
 The primary end-point  will be efficacy and an overall response rate of 40% or 
higher will be the target for th is combination. The secondary endpoint is tolerance 
of the combination. Excessive to xicity will consist in a rate o f grade 3-4 non-
hematological toxicity in more than 50% of the patients.  
 
2.0 Background 
 
CLL is the most common form of adult leukemia in the United Sta tes. It has been 
estimated that there are approx imately 150,000 individuals livi ng with CLL in the 
United States. The use of combi nation of chemoimmunotherapy as initial therapy 
is associated with a high respons e rates.  Unfortunately, once disease relapse 
has been observed second line treat ment is less effective and r esponses 
obtained tend to be shorter(1). A  treatment for s econd line con sists in the use of 
the monoclonal antibody (mAb) alemtuzumab. Alemtuzumab is able to induce a 
response in up to 30% of the patients, but is associated with s ignificant 
immunosuppression. Also, it lacks activity in patients that have developed bulk 
lymphadenopathies (larger than 5 c entimeters)(2). Combination of purine-
analogue based regimens have limi ted activity: the combination of fludarabine, 
cyclophosphamide, rituximab, alemt uzumab (CFAR) is associated w ith an overall 
response rate of 65% in patients  that have received prior thera py and once 
patients are fludarabine refractory their median survival is le ss than twelve 
months based on our publis hed experience (3,4).   
 
Lenalidomide is a thal idomide derivative with immunomodulatory and anti-
angiogenic properties. Lenalidomi de has been studi ed in patient s with previously 
treated CLL as a single-agent and has shown encouraging activit y with an overall 
response rate of 30-50% (5,6 ). The mechanism of action of lena lidomide in CLL 
is not completely known at this  point: there is indication that  its activity could be 
mediated through the stimulati on of the immune system. An incre ased number of 
circulating T-cells has been obser ved in patient s with CLL trea ted with this agent. 
Lenalidomide has also the ability  to affect the interaction bet ween the leukemic 
cells and the bone marrow stroma l cells and T-cells (supported by pre-clinical 
data) and is able to suppress TN F-alpha and alter the cytokines  milieu that is 
potentially important for C LL proliferation (7,8). 
   
Ofatumumab is a novel anti-CD20 mAb, and has potential advantages over 
ritux
imab in the specific se tting of CLL. Ofatumumab is a fully  human monoclonal 
antibody (IgG1) produced via a  transgenic mouse technology and binds 
specifically to a unique epit ope on the human CD 20 molecule exp ressed on B-
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  3   
 cells. Ofatumumab has shown clinic al activity in a phase II stu dy of patients with 
refractory CLL, the overall resp onse rate was 58% in patients r efractory to 
fludarabine and alemtuzumab and 47% in patients with bulky lymp ho-nodes and 
refractory to fludarabine (9, 10) . The toxicity profile was fav orable with mainly 
infusion-related reactions. 
 
On human tissue sections ofatumu mab demonstrated tissue reactivity that is 
consistent with its target antigen specificity. Following the b inding of ofatumumab 
to tumor B-cells clustering of CD20 into lipid rafts, as seen with rituximab, was 
observed. Strong differences in antibody cell-surface off-rates  were detected 
between ofatumumab and rituximab . Ofatumumab dissociated much m ore slowly 
from surface CD20 than rituxim ab, corresponding to a half life of 180 minutes for 
ofatumumab and 90 minutes for rituximab. In this respect, both efficient 
clustering into rafts and a lowe r off-rate value for ofatumumab  are important 
characteristics for an effectiv e activation of the complement a nd may explain the 
superiority of ofatumumab over  rituximab in CDC of B-cells. Ofa tumumab-CD20 
was able to induce complement-mediated lysis of freshly isolate d human B-CLL 
tumor cells, and rituximab-resist ant cells lines expressing low  levels of CD20 and 
high levels of CD55/CD59, which is known to diminish the lytic effect of 
complement. Ofatumumab -CD20- and rituximab-mediated Antibody D ependent 
Cell-mediated Cytotoxicity (ADCC ) were equivalent. In an in viv o study 
employing a SCID mouse tumor m odel, HuMax-CD20-treated animals showed a 
dose-dependent prolongation of survi val that was superior to rituximab. A pilot 
pharmacokinetic study in cynomol gus monkeys demonstrated that d epletion of 
CD20 expressing B lymphocytes o ccurred rapidly after antibody a dministration. 
Depletion of B cells with ofat umumab lasted f our times longer than depletion 
observed after administration of  a similar dose of rituximab (11,12)         
 The rationale for combining lena lidomide and of atumumab is to p otentiate the 
clinical efficacy of these agents without increasing their toxi city. This is based on 
different mechanisms of action and non-overlapping toxicity pro file. The toxicity 
of ofatumumab consists mainly in infusion reactions and lenalid omide toxicity 
consisting mainly of early myelosuppression, fatigue, skin rash , diarrhea, and 
tumor flare. There is also the possibility that the combination  will ameliorate the 
tumor flare reaction seen with le nalidomide because of the rapi d reduction in 
tumor burden seen wit h anti-CD20 mAb therapy. Because of the de bulking 
properties of ofatumumab, lenali domide will be started on day 9 , after two doses 
of ofatumumab have been administered.   
Current experience with the combination of lenalidomide and the  anti-CD20 mAb 
rituximab (MDACC study 2007-0208) s hows
 favorable activity with 7 of the first 
12 patients responding and 8 non-hem atological grade >3 adverse  events during 
the 39 treatment cycles admin istered (data on file). 
  
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  4   
  
3.0 Study Design 
 
This is a single center open l abel phase II study to evaluate the efficacy and 
safety of the combi nation of lenalidomide and ofatumumab in pat ients with CLL 
who have received prior treatm ent. Celgene Corpor ation will sup ply lenalidomide 
as capsules via the RevAssist® pr ogram and GlaxoSmithKline (GSK ) will supply 
ofatumumab for this study.   
4.0 Treatment Plan  
The administration of ofatumuma b will be four weekly IV infusio ns at the dose of 
300mg week 1, 1,000 mg week 2, 3 and 4, then monthl y during months 2-6 and 
once every two months during m onths 7-24 (even months: 8,10,12 etc.). 
Lenalidomide will be given at t he dose of 10mg daily. Lenalidom ide will be 
started on day 9 – the day after the second infusion of ofatumu mab and will be 
continued daily. Treatment durat ion will be 24 cycles and it will be possible to 
continue lenalidomide beyond 24 cycl es if there is a significan t benefit such as an 
ongoing PR or CR. Response will be ev aluated after three, six, twelve, eighteen 
and twenty-four cycles. Only enough lenalidomide for 28 days of  therapy will be 
supplied to the patient each cycle. Each cycle consists of 28 d ays. Patients with 
baseline creatinine clearance or calculat ed GFR ≥ 30ml/min but < 50ml/min will 
begin treatment at Dose Level – 1  (lenalidomide 5mg daily).  Th ese patients may 
be escalated to lenalidomide 10m g daily on Day 29 or later at p hysician 
discretion based on tolerabili ty.  Dose reduction steps will fo llow in accordance 
with Table 4 taken from their current dose.  
 
Drug Dispensing Requirements 
 
Lenalidomide: 
Lenalidomide (Revlimid ®) will be provided to research subjects for the duration of 
their participation in this trial at no charge to them or their  insurance providers.  
Lenalidomide will be provided in accordance with the RevAssist®
 program of 
Celgene Corporation.  P er standard RevAssist® requirements all physicians who 
prescribe lenalidomide for res earch subjects enrolled into this  trial, and all 
research subjects enrolled into  this trial, must be registered in and must comply 
with all requirement s of the RevAssist® program.  Prescriptions must be filled 
within 7 days.  Only enough lena lidomide for one cycle of therapy will be supplied 
to the patient each cycle. 
 
Lenalidomide capsules should be s wallowed whole, and should not  be broken, 
chewed or opened.    
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  5   
 If a dose of lenalidomide is missed, it should be taken as soon  as possible on the 
same day.  If it is mi ssed for the entire day, it should not be  made up. 
Patients who take more than the prescribed dose of lenalidomide should be 
instructed to seek emergency medical care if needed and contact study staff 
immediately.   
Labeling and Lenalidom ide Distribution 
 
Lenalidomide will be shi pped directly to pati ents via a special ty, Registered 
Pharmacy.   Bottles will contai n a sufficient number of capsules for one cycle of 
dosing.    
Unused Lenalidomide supplies 
All unused lenalidomid e shall be returned via procedures outlin ed in the 
RevAssist® program. Special Handling Instructions 
Females of childbearing potential should not handle or administer lenalidomide 
unless they are wearing gloves. 
 
Ofatumumab 
 
The investigational medicinal product (IMP) is a clear colorles s liquid concentrate 
intended for intravenous infusion after dilution in sterile, py rogen free 0.9% 
sodium chloride. During infusion the IMP will be filtered using  a 0.2 mm in-line 
filter. 
 
Ofatumumab is supplied as a 100 mg (5 mL) vial or as a 1000 mg (50 mL) vial. 
 
Packaging and Labeling of Ofatumumab IMP 
 
The Ofatumomab IMP will be suppl ied to the site/pharmacy in car tons, each 
containing 10 vials. Labeling wi ll be according to local legal requirements. 
 Storage of Ofatumomab IMP 
 
The IMP will be stored refrigerated (2-8°C) in a safe and secur e place. The IMP 
will not be frozen. A temperatur e log with daily readings will be kept. 
After dilution in 0.9% sodium chloride the IMP can be kept at r oom temperature 
and will be administered to the pa tient within 24 hours. Exact time of dilution will 
be written on the infusion bag label. 
 
The IMP will not be utilized after the expiry date printed on t he label, unless 
extended in writing by the spons or (MDACC) based on ongoing sta bility studies. 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  6   
 Drug supplies will be kept in an appropriate restricted area, a ccessible only to the 
investigator,pharmacist or duly designated person. Returned, un used or expired 
ofatumumab will be destroyed according to MDACC guidelines. 
 
Ofatumumab Drug Accountabilit y and Compliance Check. 
The investigator will ensure that  a designated person receives IMP deliveries 
from GlaxoSmit hKline (GSK). 
 
Ofatumumab administration: 
 Pre-medication before each ofatumumab infusi on must be given within 30 
minutes to 2 hours prio r to the treatment: 
Table 1    Pre-medication Requirem ents prior to Ofatumumab Infu sions 
Infusion # Acetaminophen 
(po) 
or equivalent Antihistamine (iv or po) 
diphenhydramine  
or equivalent Glucocorticoid (iv) 
 prednisolone  
or equivalent  
1st  1000 mg 50 mg 50 mg 
2nd  1000 mg  50 mg 50 mg 
3rd -Nth  1000 mg 50 mg 0 – 50 mg1  
1.If the 2nd infusion has been comp leted without the subject experiencing any 
grade = 3 adverse event s (AEs), pre-medication with glucocortic oid may be 
reduced or omitted before the 3rd to Nth infusion at the discretion of the 
investigator.  Ofatumumab dosing recommendation fo r combination therapy in CLL: the first 
cycle of ofatumumab in combinati on with chemotherapy should con sist of an 
infusion of 300 mg on Day 1 and an infusion of 1000 of Day 8 of  Cycle 1.  For 
subsequent cycles, a dose of 1000 mg should be infused on Day 1  of each cycle.  
  
First Infusion of 300mg Ofatumumab 
The first dose administered of o fatumumab should be 300 mg to m inimize 
infusion reactions. The initial ra te of the first infusion of 300mg ofatumumab 
(0.3mg/ml) should be 12ml/h. If n o infusion reactions occur the  infusion rate 
should be increased every 30 minut es, to a maximum of 400 ml/h,  according to 
Table 2. If this schedule is fo llowed, the infusion duration wi ll be approximately 
4.5 hours.  
 
 
 
Table 2 Infusion rate at 1
st Ofatumumab infusion 
Time mL/hour 
0 – 30 minutes 12 
31 – 60 minutes 25 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  7   
 61 – 90 minutes 50 
91 – 120 minutes 100 
121 - 150 minutes 200 
151 - 180 minutes 300 
181+ minutes 400 
 
If an infusion reaction develops, the infusion should be tempor arily slowed or 
interrupted. Upon restart, the in fusion rate should be half of the infusion rate at 
the time the infusion was paused . If, however, the infusion rate was 12 mL/hour 
before the pause, the infusion sh ould be restarted at 12 mL/hou r. Hereafter, the 
infusion rate may be increased a ccording to the judgment of the investigator, in 
the manner described in this section. 
 
Subsequent infusion of full dose Ofatumumab 
 If the previous infusion has been completed without grade ≥ 3 i nfusion-
associated AEs, the subsequent infusion of the first full dose of ofatumumab can 
start at a rate of 25 mL/hour and should be doubled every 30 mi nutes up to  
a maximum of 400 ml/h, according  to Table 3. Duration of the in fusion will be 
approximately 4 hours if this schedule is followed. If the prev ious infusion has 
been completed with grade ≥ 3 infusion associated AEs, the subsequent infusion 
should start at a rate of 12 mL /hour according to Table 2. 
 
Table 3 Infusion rate at s ubsequent Ofatumumab infusion 
Time mL/hour  
0 – 30 minutes 25 
31 – 60 minutes 50 
61 – 90 minutes 100 
91 – 120 minutes 200 
121+ minutes 400 
 
During infusion the patient shoul d be monitored closely and app ropriate 
measurements should be perfo rmed whenever judged necessary. 
 Dose Reduction: DOSE REDUCTION GUIDELINES FOR OFATUMUMAB. 
No dose reduction is planned for ofatumumab, its administration  will be held for 
grade 3 or higher hepat ic toxicity and can be omitted if clinically indicated. 
  
Dose Reduction: DOSE REDUCTION  GUIDELINES FOR LENALIDOMIDE. 
  
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  8   
 Table 4: LENALIDOMIDE Dose Reduction Steps 
Starting Dose                                                      10 mg daily  
 Dose Level – 1  5 mg daily  
Dose Level – 2   5 mg daily, day  1-21 of a 28 days cycle - or 5 mg 
every other day for 28 days. 
Dose Level  – 3  5 mg every third day 
  
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  9   
 Table 4: Dose Modification  Guidelines for Lenalidomide 
NCI CTC Toxicity Grade Action 
Sustained (>7 days) G rade 3 neutropenia, or 
Grade 3 neutropenia associated with fever 
(temperature >38.5o C) or Grade 4 neutropenia (ANC <500/mm3, or 
<25% of baseline ANC)*. 1)  Hold (interrupt dose). 
2)  Follow CBC weekly until resolution or 
stabilization 3)  If neutropenia has resolved to <grade 
2, or 50% of baseline ANC, implement one 
dose reduction step and continue 
therapy***.  
Thrombocytopenia Grade 4 (platelet count 
<25,000/mm3) or <25% of baseline platelet 
count.* 1)  Hold (interrupt dose). 
2)  Follow CBC weekly until resolution or 
stabilization 
3)  If thrombocytopenia resolves to < grade 
2, or 50% of baseline thrombocytopenia implement one dose reduction step and continue therapy***.  
Non-blistering rash Grade 3 
 
  
 
 
 
Grade 4 1)  If grade 3, hold (int errupt) dose. Follow 
weekly until resolution or stabilization. 
2) If the toxicity res olves to <grade 1, 
implement one dose reduction step and 
continue therapy***.  
 
 
 
1) Discontinue lenalidomide. 
Desquamating (blistering) rash- any Grade Discontinue lenalidomi de. 
Erythema multiforme Grade 3 Discontinue lenalidomide. 
Neuropathy Grade 3  
 
 
 
  
Grade 4 1) If grade 3, hold (interrupt) dose. Follow 
weekly until resolution or stabilization. 2) If the toxicity resolves to <grade 2, 
implement one dose reduction step and 
continue therapy***.  
 
  
Discontinue lenalidomide. 
Sinus bradycardia/other cardiac arrhythmia Grade 2 
  
 
 
 
> Grade 3 1) Hold (interrupt dose). Follow at least 
weekly until resolution or stabilization. 
2) If the toxicity resolves to <grade 1, implement one dose reduction step and 
continue therapy***. 
 
 
Discontinue lenalidomide. 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1 0  
 Allergic reaction or hypersensitivity 
Grade 3 
 
 
  
 
Grade 4 
 1) Hold (interrupt dose). Follow at least weekly until resolution or stabilization 
2) If the toxicity res olves to <grade 1,  
implement one dose reduction step and continue therapy***.   
 
Discontinue lenalidomide. 
Constipation Grade 1-2 
 
> Grade 3 1) Initiate bowel regimen and maintain dose level 
 
If the toxicity resolves to <grade 2, 
implement one dose reduction step and 
continue therapy***.  
Venous  
thrombosis/embolism 
>Grade 3 Hold (interrupt) dose and start 
anticoagulation; restart at investigator's 
discretion (maintain dose level). 
Hepatic or other**  non-hematologic toxicity assessed as  
lenalidomide-related 
> Grade 3 1) Hold (interrupt) dose. Follow at least weekly until resolution or stabilization. 2) If the toxicity resolves to <grade 2, 
implement one dose reduction step and 
continue therapy***.  
Tumor flare refractory to oral pain meds Hold dose and differen tiate tumor flare 
from progression. Restart therapy at the investigator's discretion. 
 *The use of cytokine support and/ or transfusions to maintain ad equate blood 
neutrophil and platele t counts may be considered at the investi gator's discretion 
and as clinically indicated. **Further dose reduction will be allowed at the discretion of t he investigator in 
case of persistent non hematologi cal toxicity of Grade 3 or les s and in case of a 
change in laboratory ev aluation such as platelet count, absolut e neutrophil count, 
or hemoglobin count that indicate s upcoming myelosuppression or  as clinically 
indicated. ***Once toxicity has resolved, l enalidomide dos e can be increas ed to 10 mg/daily 
at the discretion of the investi gator or to the dose that is cl inically indicated. 
 
 
Concomitant Medication:   
Tumor Lysis: 
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) has been reported in CLL patients tr eated with 
lenalidomide and ofatum umab.  Precautions must be taken to prev ent TLS 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1 1  
 including proper selection of pat ients with regard to renal fun ction, correction of 
electrolyte abnormalities, and TL S prophylaxis an d monitoring. 
Allopurinol at the dose of 300mg daily will be given during the  first two weeks of 
treatment as standard tumor lysi s prophylaxis, it can then be continued at the 
discretion of the treating physician as clinically indicated.  
Subjects should be instructed to  maintain adequat e hydration an d maintain 
urinary output as an additional m easure to prevent TLS.  To maintain fluid intake, 
subjects should be instructed to  drink 8 to 10 eight ounce glas ses of water each 
day for the first 14 days of Cycl e 1.  Hydration levels should be adjusted 
according to age and clinical sta tus, and lowered if the subjec t’s cardiovascular 
status indicates the possibility of volume overload.  Within th e first 3 cycles of 
therapy, additional oral hydrati on should be considered concurrent with any dose 
escalation (or re-escalation, i f permitted) of lenalidomide, when lenalidomide is 
restarted after having been held  for any reason or in concomita nce with 
ofatumumab adm inistration. 
Based on a patient’s reaction and laboratory parameters, TLS pr ophylaxis may 
be continued or restarted as needed as clinically indicated. 
Prophylactic hepatitis treatment w ill be initiated if clinicall y indicated.  
 
 
Anticoagulation Consideration: 
 
 Lenalidomide increases the risk of thrombotic events in patients who are at high risk or who have a history of thrombosis in particular when combined with other 
drugs known to cause thrombosis . When lenalidomide is combined with other 
agents such as steroids, (e.g. dexamethasone, prednisone, eryth ropoietin, 
Adriamycin and daunorubicin), anthr acyclines (Doxil, Adriamycin ), the risk of 
thrombosis is increased. Treati ng physicians may consider the u se of aspirin 
(81mg or 325mg) or low molecula r weight heparin in patients at high risk for 
thrombotic events.  
5.0  Patient Eligibility 
 Inclusion Criteria: 
 
Patients will be eligible for incl usion in the study if they me et all of the following 
criteria:  1.  Patients age > 18 years at t he time of signing informed con sent. Understand 
and voluntarily sign an informed consent.  
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1 2  
 2.  Patients with CLL or S LL with active disease. 
 
3.  Prior treatment with puri ne analog based chemotherapy or 
chemoimmunotherapy. 
 4.  Platelet count > 30,000 mm
3 
 5.  ECOG/WHO performance status of 0-2  
 
6.  Adequate renal function indicat ed by creatinine clearance > 30ml/min 
(calculated by 24 hours urine co llection) or a GFR > 30 ml/min estimated using 
the Cockcroft-Gault equation.  A dequate hepatic function indicated as total 
bilirubin less or equal to 2 mg/d l and ALT less or equal to two  times the upper 
limit of normal.  7. Disease free of prior malignanc ies for 3 years with exceptio n of currently 
treated basal cell, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, or car cinoma "in situ" of 
the cervix or breast. Patients with malignancies with indolent behavior such as 
prostate cancer treated with r adiation or surgery can be enroll ed in the study as 
long as they have a re asonable expectation to have been cured w ith the 
treatment modality received. 
 
8. Females of childbearing potentia l (FCBP)† must have a negative serum or 
urine pregnancy test with a sensitivity of at least 50 mIU/mL w ithin 10 – 14 days 
prior to starting lenalidomi de and again within 24 hours prior to prescribing 
lenalidomide (prescriptions must be filled within 7 days) and p rior to first  
administration of ofatumumab and must either commit to continue d abstinence 
from heterosexual intercourse or begin TWO acceptable methods of birth control, 
one highly effective method and one additional effective method  AT THE SAME 
TIME, at least 28 days before s he starts taking lenalidomide an d continue it for 6 
months after therapy has been comp leted.  FCBP must also agree to ongoing 
pregnancy testing.  Men must agree  to use a latex condom during  sexual contact 
with a FCBP even if they have had a successful vasectomy.  All study 
participants must be registered into the mandatory RevAssist® p rogram, and be 
willing and able to comply with t he requirements of RevAssist®.  See Appendix: 
Risks of Fetal Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and Acceptable Birth 
Control Methods.  
 
 Exclusion Criteria: 
 
                                                 
 † A female of childbearing potential is a sexually mature woman who: 1) has not undergone a 
hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has not been natu rally postmenopausal for at least 24 
consecutive months (i.e., has had menses at any time in the pre ceding 24 consecutive months).  
  
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1 3  
 1. Known sensitivity to lenalidom ide, other thalidomide derivat ives or 
ofatumumab. 
 
2. Documented prolymphocytic leuk emia (prolymphocytes more than  55% in the 
blood). 
 
3. Known positivity for HIV or active hepatitis B or C.   
 
Known positivity for HIV or act ive hepatitis B or C. Positive s erology for hepatitis 
B (HB) defined as a positive te st for HBsAg. In addition, if ne gative for HBsAg but 
HBcAb positive regardless of HbsAb status, a HB DNA test will be performed and if positive the subj ect will be excluded.  
 4. Pregnant or breast feeding females. Women of childbearing potential must 
have a negative pregnancy test a t screening. Male subjects unab le or unwilling to 
use adequate contraception met hods from study start to one year  after the last 
dose of protocol therapy. 
 
5. Chronic or current infectious d isease requiri ng systemic antib iotics, antifungal, 
or antiviral treatment such as, but not limited to, chronic ren al infection, chronic 
chest infection with bronch iectasis and tuberculosis.  History of tuberculosis 
treated within the last five year s or recent exposure to tuberculosis.  
6. Any serious medical conditi on, laboratory abnormality, or ps ychiatric illness 
that places the subject at una cceptable risk if he/she were to participate in the 
study. 
 
7. Patients with a recent histo ry of deep vein thrombosis (DVT)  or pulmonary 
embolus (PE), in the six months p rior to enrollment are not eli gible for this study. . 
 8.Treatment with any known non-ma rketed drug substance or expe rimental 
therapy within 5 terminal half liv es or 4 weeks prior to enrollment, whichever is 
longer, or currently participating in any other interventional clinical study 
9. Prior treatment with other m onoclonal antibodi es within 4 we eks prior to 
enrollment. 
10. Subjects meeting any of the following criteria must not be enrolled on study: 
Positive serology for Hepatitis B  (HB) defined as a positive te s t  f o r  H B s A g .  I n  
addition, if negative for HBsAg but HBcAb positive (regardless of HBsAb status), 
a HB DNA test will be performed and if positive, the subject wi ll be excluded. 
 
6.0 Pretreatment Evaluation 
 Pretreatment evaluation will include a physical examination inc luding vital signs 
ECOG/WHO performance status and query for concomitant medications, height 
and weight and recording of conc urrent medications (within 7 da ys of Day 1).  
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1 4  
 Clinical laboratory evaluation wi ll include serum chemistry. Th is will include 
sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, BUN, creatin ine, glucose, 
albumin, total protein, alkali ne phosphatase, total bilirubin, ALT, AST, uric acid, 
and TSH and Beta-2-microglobulin (within 7 days of Day 1). 
 Hematology: Complete CBC (white  blood cell, hemoglobin, platelets and 
differential) and differential and peripheral blood lymphocyte subset and 
immunoglobulin levels (withi n 7 days of registration). 
 Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy within one month from registration. Bone 
marrow will be evaluated by flow cytometry for clonality and fo r IgVH mutation 
studies (unless known) ZAP-70 ex pression (unless known), cytoge netic and 
genomic abnormalities by F ISH (unless known). 
 Electrocardiogram monitoring will  be conducted at baseline (wit hin 7 days of Day 
1). 
Pregnancy Testing and Counseling per the RevAssist® program, as sess patient 
child bearing potential accordin g to the RevAssist® program gui delines outlined 
below.   
 
Pregnancy tests for females of c hildbearing potential.  A femal e of childbearing 
potential (FCBP) is a sexually mature female who: 1) has not un dergone a 
hysterectomy or bilateral oophor ectomy; or 2) has not been natu rally 
postmenopausal for at least 24 cons ecutive months (i.e., has had menses at any 
time in the preceding 24 consec utive months).  Pregnancy tests must occur 
within 10 – 14 days prior to sta rting lenalidomide, and  again within 24 hours prior 
to prescribing lenalidomide (prescriptions must be filled withi n 7 days) and prior 
to first administration of ofatu mumab.  FCBP with regular or no menstruation 
must have a pregnancy test weekly  for the first 28 days and then every 28 days 
while on therapy (including breaks in therapy); at discontinuat ion of lenalidomide 
and at Day 28 post the last dose of lenalidomide.  Females with  irregular 
menstruation must have a pregnan cy test weekly for the first 28  days and then 
every 14 days while on therapy ( including breaks in therapy), a t discontinuation 
of lenalidomide and at Day 14 and Day 28 post the last dose of lenalidomide (see 
Appendix: Risks of Fetal Exposur e, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines  and 
Acceptable Birth Control Methods).    
 Lenalidomide must be prescribed through and in compliance with the RevAssist® 
program of Celgene Co rporation.  Prescriptions must be filled within 7 days.  
Consideration should be given to prescribing lenalidomide 5 to 7 days in advance 
of lenalidomide administration of  each cycle to allow time for required patient and 
prescriber surveys, and drug ship ment to patient.  Any unused R evlimid® 
(lenalidomide) should be returned  to the patient for dispositio n in accordance with 
the RevAssist® program.   
 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1 5  
 7.0 Evaluation during Study 
 
Clinic visits (this will include vital signs and physical exam)  at The University of 
Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center are required at the end of c ycles 3, 
7,13,19, 23, and every 6 cycles (+ 14 days) after that. Hematol ogy complete 
blood counts (white blood cell, h emoglobin, platelets and diffe rential) will be 
monitored once weekly (+ 3 da ys) for the first five weeks and o nce every two 
weeks (+ 5 days) in case of dos e increase until a stable dose of lenalidomide has 
been established for the specific  patient (the once every two weeks laboratory 
monitoring will not apply if the dose is decreased for non-hematological or laboratory measurable toxicity) , and then every four weeks (onc e per cycle) 
thereafter. Pregnancy testing and counseling per the RevAssist® program.   
Serum chemistry basic metabolic p rofile, (sodium, potassium, ch loride, CO2, 
BUN, creatinine, uric acid, calcium and phosphorus, ALT, AST, a lkaline 
phosphatase, (bilirubin and glucos e) will be monitored once wee kly (+ 3 days) for 
the first five weeks and then once every two weeks (+5 days) until a stable dose 
of lenalidomide has been established for the specific patient a nd then every four 
weeks (once per cycle) thereafte r. Additional laboratory evalua tions may be 
obtained after the first dose o f lenalidomide, in week 2 of cyc le 1 and at any time 
during the study if clinically indicated.  TSH, beta-2-microglobulin, lymphocyte 
subset, immunoglobulin levels, bone marrow biopsy and aspiratio n will be 
performed at the end of cycles  3 ,7,13,19,23, and every 6 cycle s after that (+ 14 
days). If patients continue on the study past 24 cycles a bone marrow biopsy and 
aspirate (with flow cytometry and molecular studies if indicate d) to check the 
status of the disease will be obtained once every 6-12 cycles ( + 28 days) as 
clinically indicated and blood w ill also be drawn for routine t ests. 
Electrocardiogram wil l be conducted as clinically indicated dur ing and after 
treatment.  
 
In subjects that are HBsAg negativ e, HBcAb positive and have a negative HBV 
DNA testing at study entry moni toring for hepatitis B reactivat ion by HBV DNA 
PCR testing is required during  the on treatment periods at leas t every 2 months 
and during follow up at a minimum  of every 2-3 months up to 6 m onths after the 
last dose of ofatumumab. 
 
Once treatment has been complet ed or discontinued, liver functi on test (ALT, 
AST, alkaline phosphatase and bili rubin) will be performed 6 mo nths (+ 28 days) 
after the last  dose of ofatumumab has been adm inistered unless patients have 
received subsequent treatment for t heir CLL. Correlative labora tory studies and 
Quality of Life questionnaire (Ap pendix E) are optional and if the patient agrees 
they will be collected at baseline, at the end of cycles 3, 7, 13,19, 23 and every 6 
cycles after that (+ 14 days).  
You will be required to use TWO reliable forms of birth control , one highly 
effective method and one additional effectiv e method at the sam e time or 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1 6  
 practice complete abstinence from heterosexual intercourse duri ng the following 
time periods related to this s tudy: 1) for at least 28 days before starting 
lenalidomide; 2) while participat ing in this study; and 3) for at least 28 days after 
discontinuation from the study.   The following are the accepta ble birth control 
methods:  
Highly Effective Methods Additional Effective 
Methods 
Intrauterine device (IUD)  Latex condom 
Hormonal (birth control pills, injections, implants) Diaphragm Tubal ligation   Cervical Cap 
Partner’s vasectomy 
Females must not breastfeed a baby  while participating in this study and for at 
least 28 days after you have been discontinued from the study. 
 Females of childbearing potentia l with regular or no menstrual cycles must agree 
to have pregnancy tests weekly fo r the first 28 days of study p articipation and 
then every 28 days while  on study, at study discontinuation, an d at day 28 
following discontinuation from the study.  If menstrual cycles are irregular, the 
pregnancy testing must occur week ly for the first 28 days and t hen every 14 days 
while on study, at study discont inuation, and at days 14 and 28  following 
discontinuation from the study.   
 
8.0 Criteria for Response 
 
The 1996 NCI Working Group criter ia will be used. (See Appendix  F).  
Responses will be assessed afte r 3, 7, 13, 19 and 23 cycles and  every 6-12 
months as clinically indicated.  
9.0 Evaluation of Toxicity 
 Adverse events are reported as per UTMDACC and Leukemia Phase 2-3 studies 
(Appendix H and Appendix I). 
Adverse Events wit h Lenalidomide  
Most frequently reported adverse e vents reported during clinica l studies with 
lenalidomide in oncol ogic and non-oncologic indications, regardless of presumed 
relationship to study  medication include: anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia 
and pancytopenia, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea , dehydration, 
rash, itching, infections, sepsis, pneumonia, UTI, upper respir atory infection, 
cellulitis, atrial fibrillation , congestive heart failure, myoc ardial infarction, chest 
pain, weakness, hypotension, hypercalcemia, hyperglycemia, back pain, bone 
pain, generalized pain, dizziness, mental status changes, syncope, renal failure, 
dyspnea, pleural effusion, pulmonary embolism, deep vein thromb osis, CVA, 
  2 0 0 9- 0 2 8 3 
  A u g ust 1 7, 2 0 1 0 
  1 7  
 c o n v ul si o n s, di z zi n e s s, s pi n al c or d c o m pr e s si o n, s y n c o p e, di s e a s e pr o gr e s si o n, 
d e at h n ot s p e cifi e d a n d fr a ct ur e s.  
Pl e a s e r ef er t o l e n ali d o mi d e p a c k a g e i n s ert or I n v e sti g at or Br o c h ur e f or a 
c o m pl et e li st.  
A d v er s e E v e nt s wit h Of at u m u m a b 
T h e f oll o wi n g r e a cti o n s s h o ul d b e r e g ar d e d a s e x p e ct e d i nf u si o n -r el at e d a d v er s e 
r e a cti o n s i n c o n n e cti o n wit h t h e u s e of of at u m u m a b a s a c o n s e q u e n c e of B- 
l y m p h o c yt e d e pl eti o n: pr urit u s , d y s p n e a, br o n c h o s p a s m, t hr o at i rrit ati o n, c o u g h, 
p h ar y n g ol ar y n g e al p ai n, fl u s hi n g, h y p er hi dr o si s, n a u s e a a n d v o m iti n g, a b d o mi n al 
p ai n, h y p ot e n si o n, r a s h/ urti c ari a, i nfl u e n z a-li k e-ill n e s s, f ati g u e, f e v er, c hill s, 
h e a d a c h e, di z zi n e s s, m y al gi a a n d  artr al gi a. Pr of o u n d a n d l o n g-l a sti n g d e pl eti o n 
of C D 2 0 + B l y m p h o c yt e s h a s b e e n s e e n d uri n g tr e at m e nt wit h of at u m u m a b a s 
e x p e ct e d wit h a n a nti- C D 2 0 a nti b o d y, b ut s o f ar wit h o ut a n y si g n s of a n 
i n cr e a s e d ri s k of i nf e cti o u s c o m pli c ati o n s. I n all cli ni c al st u di e s a d v er s e e v e nt s 
w er e r e p ort e d wit h s u b st a nti a ll y hi g h er fr e q u e n c y o n t h e fir st i nf u si o n d a y, 
c o m p ar e d t o t h e s u b s e q u e nt i nf u si o n s. 
F urt h er i nf or m ati o n c a n b e f o u n d i n t h e Of at u m u m a b I n v e sti g at or ’ s Br o c h ur e. 
M y el o s u p pr e s si o n a n d a s s o ci at e d c o m pli c ati o n s ar e e x p e ct e d e v e n t s d uri n g 
l e u k e mi a t h er a p y a n d ar e p art of t h e tr e at m e nt s u c c e s s ( m arr o w e m pt yi n g of 
l e u k e mi c c ell s). T h er ef or e, m y e l o s u p pr e s si o n a n d a s s o ci at e d c o m pli c ati o n s s u c h 
a s f e v er, i nf e cti o n s, bl e e di n g a n d r el at e d h o s pi t ali z ati o n s wil l n ot b e r e p ort e d a s 
i n di vi d u al a d v er s e dr u g r e a cti o n s ( A D R s), b ut will b e s u m m ari z e d i n t h e u p d at e d 
a n d fi n al r e p ort s.  O nl y pr ol o n g e d m y el o s u p pr e s si o n, a s d efi n e d  b y t h e n e w N CI 
crit eri a s p e cifi c f or l e u k e mi a, i . e., m arr o w c ell ul arit y < 5 % o n d a y 4 2 or l at er ( 6 
w e e k s) fr o m st art of t h er a p y wit h o ut e vi d e n c e of l e u k e mi a, will  b e r e p ort e d.  
M D A n d er s o n ( S p o n s or) R e p orti n g R e q uir e m e nt s f or S eri o u s A d v er s e E v e nt s 
a n d D o s e Li miti n g T o xi citi e s:  
 
S eri o u s A d v er s e E v e nt ( S A E) D efi niti o n  
A s eri o u s a d v er s e e v e nt i s o n e t h at at a n y d o s e (i n cl u di n g o v er d o s e): 
  R e s ult s i n d e at h 
  I s lif e-t hr e at e ni n g 1 
    R e q uir e s i n p ati e nt h o s pit a li z ati o n or pr ol o n g ati o n of e xi st i n g 
h o s pit ali z ati o n 
  R e s ult s i n p er si st e nt or si g ni fi c a nt di s a bilit y or i n c a p a cit y 2 
  I s a c o n g e nit al a n o m al y or birt h d ef e ct 
  I s a n i m p ort a nt m e di c al e v e nt 3 
 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1 8  
 1“Life-threatening” means that the subject was at immediate risk  of death at the 
time of the serious adverse ev ent; it does not refer to a serious adverse event 
that hypothetically might have caused death if it were more sev ere. 
2“Persistent or significant dis ability or incapacity” means that  there is a 
substantial disruption of a per son’s ability to carry out norma l life functions. 
3Medical and scientific judgment s hould be exercised in deciding  whether 
expedited reporting is  appropriate in situations where none of the outcomes listed 
above occurred.  Important medical events that may not be immediately life-
threatening or result in death or  hospitalization but may jeopa rdize the patient or 
may require intervention to pre vent one of the other outcomes l isted in the 
definition above should also usua lly be considered serious.  Ex amples of such 
events include allergic bronchos pasm requiring intensive treatm ent in an 
emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that  do not result 
in inpatient hospitalization, or  the development of drug depend ency or drug 
abuse.  A new diagnosis of cancer  during the course of a treatment should be 
considered as medically important.  
Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting 
AS PER UTMDACC AND LE UKEMIA PHASE II-III STUDIES (APPENDIX H 
AND APPENDIX I), Toxic ity will be scored usi ng CTCAE Version 3. 0 for toxicity 
and adverse event reporting and myelosuppression will be report ed according to 
the recommended guidelines for CLL (Appendix J).  A copy of the  CTCAE 
Version 3.0 can be downl oaded from the CTEP homepage 
(http://ctep.info.nih.gov).  All appropriate treatment areas should have access to 
a copy of the CTCAE Version 3.0.  All adverse clinical experiences (according to 
Appendix H), whether observed by t he investigator or reported by the patient, 
must be recorded, with details about the duration and intensity  of each episode, 
the action taken with respect to  the test drug, and the patient ’s outcome.  The 
investigator must evaluate each adverse experience for its rela tionship to the test 
drug and for its seriousness.  The investigator must appraise  all abnormal laboratory results for their clinical 
significance.  If any abnormal la boratory result is considered clinically significant, 
the investigator must provide details about the action taken wi th respect to the 
test drug and about the patient’s outcome. Abnormal lab values are only 
significant if they require i ntervention or treatment. 
 
Serious Adverse Events Reporting:  The principal investigator has the obligation 
to report all serious adverse ev ents to The University of Texas  M. D. Anderson 
Cancer Center (MDACC) IRB via the Office of Protocol Research i n accordance 
with the timeframes and procedures outlined in “The University of Texas M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center Institut ional Review Board Policy on Rep orting Serious 
Adverse Events and to Celgen e and GSK within 24 hours.  
 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  1 9  
 All events occurring during the conduct of a protocol and meeting the definition of 
a SAE must be reported to the IRB in accordance with the timeframes and 
procedures outlined in “The Univ ersity of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center 
Institutional Review Board Policy on Reporti ng Serious Adverse Events”. Unless 
stated otherwise in the protocol, all SAEs , expected or unexpec ted, must be 
reported to ORERM, regardless of a ttribution (within 5 working days of 
knowledge of the event).  
All life-threatening or fatal ev ents, expected or unexpected, and regardless of 
attribution to the study drug, must have a wri tten report submi tted within 24 
hours  (next working day) of knowledge of the event to the Safety Pro ject 
Manager in ORERM. 
 
The MDACC “Internal SAE Report Form for Pr ompt Reporting” will be used 
for reporting to ORERM. 
 
Serious adverse events will be cap tured from the time the patient signs 
consent until 30 days after the last dose of lenalidomide and  for a 
minimum of 5 half lives (6 months) after the last dose of ofatumumab If a 
subject does start other therapy, then SAEs will no longer be required to be 
reported.  
 
 Serious adverse events must be  followed until clinical recovery is 
complete and laboratory tests have returned to baseline, progre ssion of the 
event has stabilized, or there has been acceptable resolution o f the event. 
 Additionally, any serious adverse events that occur after the 3 0 day time 
period that are related to the st udy treatment must be reported to ORERM. 
This may include the development of a secondary malignancy.  
Reporting to FDA: 
 Serious adverse events will be forwarded to FDA by the IND Spon sor (Safety 
Project Manager ORERM) according to 21 CFR 312.32.  
It is the responsibility of the P I and the research team to ensure serious 
adverse events are reported according to the Code of Federal Re gulations, 
Good Clinical Practices, the p rotocol guidelines, the sponsor’s  guidelines, 
and Institutional Review Board policy. 
 
NOTE:  Instructions concerning pr ocedures and reporting for pregnancies below. 
Pregnancies 
Pregnancy of a female subject or the female partner of a male s ubject occurring 
while the subject is on lenalidom ide and ofatumum ab or within 4 weeks after the 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2 0  
 subject’s last dose of lenalidomid e or ofatumumab are considere d expedited 
reportable events.  If the subj ect is on lenalidomide, it is to  be discontinued 
immediately and the subject is to  be instructed to return any u nused portion of 
lenalidomide to the Investigator .  The pregnancy must be report ed by the 
investigator to MDACC IRB and ORER M AND to Celgene Corporation 
Worldwide Drug Safety Surveill ance (WWDSS) and to GSK within 24 hours of 
the Investigator’s knowledge of the pregnancy by phone and facs imile using the 
SAE Form. 
 
The Investigator will follow the subject until completion of th e pregnancy, and 
must notify Celgene Corporation Worldwide Drug Safety Surveilla nce (WWDSS) 
of the outcome as specified belo w.  The Investigator will provi de this information 
as a follow-up to the initial SAE. 
 
If the outcome of the pregnancy meets the criteria for immediate classification as a SAE (i.e., spontaneous abortion [any congenital anomaly detected in an 
aborted fetus is to be document ed], stillbirth, neonatal death,  or congenital 
anomaly), the Investigator should  follow the procedures for rep orting SAEs (i.e., 
report the event to Celgene Corporat ion Worldwide Drug Safety S urveillance 
(WWDSS)  by facsimile within 24 hours of the Investigator’s knowledge of the 
event) and report the event to  MDACC IRB and ORERM. 
 
Any suspected fetal exposure to lenalidomide must be reported t o Celgene, 
GSK, MDACC IRB AND ORERM within 24 hours of being made aware of  the 
event.  The patient should be referred to an obstetrician/gynec ologist 
experienced in reproductive toxi city for further evaluation and  counseling. 
 All neonatal deaths that occur wit hin 30 days of birth should b e reported, without 
regard to causality, as SAEs.  In addition, any infant death af ter 30 days that the 
Investigator suspects is related  to the in utero exposure to le nalidomide should 
also be reported. 
In the case of a live “normal” birth, Celgene Corporation Worldwide Drug Safety 
Surveillance (WWDSS), GSK, MDACC  IRB AND ORERM should be advise d as 
soon as the information is available. 
 Drug Safety Contact Information: 
 
Celgene Corporation 
Worldwide Drug Safety Surveillance (WWDSS) 
86 Morris Avenue Summit, N.J. 07901 
 
Toll Free:   (800)-640-7854 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2 1  
 Phone:  (908) 673-9667 
Fax:  (908) 673-9115 
e-mail:  drugsafety@celgene.com 
 
  GlaxoSmithKline 
1250 South Collegeville Road 
Collegeville, PA  19426, USA 
Fax:  610-917-6715 
E-mail:  Robert.a.friedman@gsk.com 
Investigator Reporting Responsibilities 
The conduct of the study will co mply with all FDA safety report ing requirements.   
Serious Adverse Events Reporting :  The principle investigator h as the obligation 
to report all serious adverse ev ents to the University of Texas  M. D. Anderson 
Cancer Center (MDACC) IRB via the Office of Protocol Research i n accordance 
with the timeframes and procedures outlined in “The University of Texas M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center Institut ional Review Board Policy and al so to Celgene 
and GSK within 24 hours.  
 
IND Annual Reports If the FDA has granted an IND num ber, it is a requirement of 21 CFR 312.33, 
that an annual report is provided  to the FDA within 60-days of the IND 
anniversary date.  21 CRF 312.33 provides the data elements that are to be 
submitted in the report.  The A nnual Report should be filed wit h MD Anderson’s 
ORERM, who will then forward to  FDA.  An additional copy should  be placed in 
the study's Regulatory Binder and a copy must be sent by the PI /research team 
to Celgene and GSK as supporters of this study as follows. 
 
 Celgene Corporation 
 Attn: Medical Development  86 Morris Avenue 
 Summit, NJ  07901 
 Tel: (908) 673-9000 
 
 GlaxoSmithKline  1250 South Collegeville Road 
 Collegeville, PA 19426, USA 
 Phone: 610-917-7000 
 
 All adverse experience reports must include the patient number,  age, sex, 
severity of reaction (mild, moderate, severe), relationship to study drug (probably 
related, unknown relationship, definitely not related), date an d time of 
administration of test medication s and all concomitant medicati ons, and medical 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2 2  
 treatment provided.  The investigator is responsible for evaluating all adverse 
events to determine whether crite ria for “serious” and as defin ed above are 
present.  The investigator is re sponsible for reporting adverse  events to Celgene 
and GSK as described below. 
Expedited reporting by Principal  Investigator to Celgene and GS K 
Serious adverse events (SAE) are  defined above.  The investigat or should inform 
Celgene and GSK of a ny SAE within 24 hours of being aware of th e event.  The 
date of awareness should be not ed on the report.  This must be documented on 
an MD Anderson SAE form. This form must be completed and suppli ed to  
Celgene and GSK within 24 hours/1 business day at the latest on  the following 
working day.  The initial report m ust be as complete as possibl e, including details 
of the current illness and (ser ious) adverse event, and an asse ssment of the 
causal relationship between the event and the investigational p roduct(s).  
Information not availa ble at the time of the initial report (e. g., an end date for the 
adverse event or laboratory val ues received after the report) m ust be 
documented on a follow-up MD A nderson SAE form.  A final report  to document 
resolution of the SAE is requir ed.  The Celgene protocol number  (RV-CLL-PI-
0468) should be includ ed on SAE reports to Celgene.  A copy of the fax 
transmission confirmation of t he SAE report to Celgene and GSK should be 
attached to the SAE and retained  with the patient records. 
Report of Adverse Events to the Institutional Review Board 
The principal Investigator is required to notify his/her Instit utional Review Board 
(IRB) of a serious adverse event according to institutional pol icy.   
Sponsor Reporting to the FDA 
Adverse drug reactions that are  Serious, Unlisted/unexpected, a nd at least 
possibly associated to the drug, and that have not previously b een reported in 
the Investigators brochure, or reference safety information doc ument should be 
reported promptly to t he Food and Drug Admini stration (FDA) in writing by each 
investigator/physician engaged in  clinical research.  A clear d escription of the 
suspected reaction should be pr ovided along wit h an assessment as to whether 
the event is drug or disease related.   
 
The sponsor shall notify the FDA by telephone or by fax of any unexpected fatal 
or life threatening experience as sociated with the use of the d rug. As soon as 
possible, but no later than 7 ca lendar days after the sponsors initial receipt of the 
information. Each phone call or fa x shall be transmitted to the FDA new drug 
review division in the Center fo r Drug Evaluation and Research or the product 
review division in the Center  for Biologics Evaluation and Rese arch that has 
responsibility for review of the IND if applicable. 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2 3  
 Adverse event updates/IND safety reports 
Celgene and GSK shall notify the Investigat or via an IND Safety  Report of the 
following information: 
 
1.  Any AE associated with the us e of study drug in this study or in other studies 
that is both serious and unexpected. 
 
2.  Any finding from tests in l aboratory animals that suggests a significant risk for 
human subjects including repor ts of mutagenicity, teratogenicit y, or 
carcinogenicity.  
The Investigator shall notify his/her IRB/EC promptly of these new serious and 
unexpected AE(s) or signifi cant risks to subjects. 
 
The Investigator must keep copi es of all AE information, includ ing 
correspondence with Celgene an d the IRB/EC, on file. 
  
10.0 Statistical Design 
 
This is a single-arm, phase II s tudy of combination of lenalido mide and 
ofatumumab. The study population consists o f patients with prev iously treated 
CLL/SLL and patients will have to have received at least one pu rine analog-
based regimen. The prim ary outcome is overall response. A Simon’s two-stage 
minmax design will be used for this study. A sample size of 36 is chosen to 
differentiate between a good res ponse rate of 40% and a poor re sponse rate of 
20% with 90% power at a signific ance level of 0.1. In particula r, 19 patients will 
be enrolled at the first stage. I f there are 3 or fewer responses in the first 19 
patients, accrual wil l be suspended until  we have 4 responders among  the first  
19 patients. The tria l will be terminated  if all 19 patients have been evaluated  for 
6 cycles and there are 3 or fewer responses ; otherwise another  17 patients will 
be treated for a total of 36 pati ents. If there are 10 or fewer  responses among 36 
patients, the treatment will be concluded ineffective. The probability of early 
termination due to futility is 0. 46. Overall response includes complete remission 
(CR) and partial remission (PR) . Patients are considered non-re sponders if there 
is progression of disease. CR, P R and SD allow continuation of treatment.  
 
 
The probability of toxicity (gr ade 3 and 4 non-hematological) will be monitored 
based on the Bayesian model (beta- binomial) by assuming a prior i probability of 
toxicity following Beta (1,1).  The trial will be terminated if  Prob(toxicity > 0.33 | 
data) > .85. Following this rule, the trial will be terminated if [# toxicities]/[# 
patients evaluated] >/= 3/5, 5/10, 7/15, 9/20, 11/25, 13/30, and 15/35. A simulation study was performed to show the operating characteri stics for the 
stopping rule based on  10,000 repetitions. T he results are summ arized in the 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2 4  
 following table. For example, t he trial will be terminated earl y 90.8% of times if 
the true toxicity rate is 50%.  
 
True Prob(tox)  P r(stop)  Median 
#Pts (25%, 75%)  
0.10  0.011 36 (36, 36)  
0.20  0.084 36 (36, 36)  
0.30  0.305  36 (15, 36)  
0.40  0.646  15 (5, 36)  
0.50  0.908  10 (5, 15) 
0.60  0.991  5 (5, 10) 
  
The first time point to eval uate efficacy and toxicity will be at completion of cycle 
6 of treatment. Toxicity will be m onitored closely during the e ntire treatment, but 
toxicities occurring after cycle 6 will not be applied to the s topping boundaries. 
The descriptive statistical ana lysis can be used to explore the data, including 
histograms or box-plots, propor tions, mean, standard deviations . The Fisher’s 
exact test will be used for the univariate analysis on categorical variables 
(response variable with Yes ver sus No, for example). The t-test  or Wilcoxon test 
will be used for continuous variabl es (Age and WBC, for example ). Descriptive 
statistical analysis will also be used to report correlative st udies and the quality of 
life questionnaire.  
11.0 Amendments, Deviations, Regulatory 
Protocol Amendments 
Any amendment to this protocol m ust be agreed to by the Princip al Investigator 
and by M. D. Anderson Cancer Center and by Celgene and GSK.  Am endments 
should only be submitted to IRB after consideration of M. D. An derson Cancer 
Center, Celgene and GSK review.  W ritten verification of IRB ap proval will be 
obtained before any amendment is implemented.   
Protocol Deviations 
When an emergency occurs that requi res a deviation from the protocol for a 
subject, a deviation will be made only for that subject.  A dec ision will be made as 
soon as possible to determine w hether or not the subject (for w hom the deviation 
from protocol was effected) is to continue in the study.  The s ubject’s medical 
records will completely describe  the deviation from the protocol and state the 
reasons for such deviation.  In addition, the Investigator will  notify the IRB in 
writing of such deviation from protocol. 
Investigator Responsibilities 
Investigator responsibilities ar e set out in the ICH guideline for Good Clinical 
Practice (GCP) and in the US  Code of Federal Regulations. 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2 5  
 Investigators must enter study d ata into MDACC’s PDMS.  The Inv estigator will 
permit study-related monitoring visits and audits by MDACC’s OR ERM, Celgene 
or its representatives, IRB/EC rev iew, and regulatory inspectio n(s) (e.g., FDA, 
EMEA, TPP), providing direct acce ss to the facilities where the  study took place, 
to source documents, to CRFs, and to all other study documents.  
The Investigator, or a designated member of the Investigator’s staff, must be 
available at some time during monitoring visits to review data and resolve any 
queries and to allow direct access  to the subject’s records (e. g., medical records, 
office charts, hospital charts, and study related charts) for s ource data 
verification.  The data collection must be completed prior to e ach visit and be 
made available to MDACC ORERM and  the Celgene r epresentative so that the 
accuracy and completeness may be checked. 
Institutional Review Board/ Ethics Committee Approval 
The protocol for this study has been designed in accordance with the general 
ethical principles outlined in t he Declaration of Helsinki. The review of this 
protocol by the IRB/EC and the performance of all aspects of th e study, including 
the methods used for obtaining informed consent, must also be i n accordance 
with principles enunciated in the declaration, as well as ICH Guidelines, Title 21 
of the Code of Federal Regulation s (CFR), Part 50 Protection of Human Subjects 
and Part 56 Institutional Review Boards. 
 
The Investigator will be respons ible for preparing documents fo r submission 
to the relevant IRB/EC and obtai ning written approval for this study.  The 
approval will be obtain ed prior to the initia tion of the study.  
 
The approval for both the protoc ol and informed consent must sp ecify the 
date of approval, protocol number  and version, or amendment number. 
Any amendments to the protocol after receipt of IRB/EC approval  must be 
submitted by the Investigator  to the IRB/EC for approval.  The Investigator is 
also responsible for notifying t he IRB/EC of any serious deviat ions from the 
protocol, or anything else tha t may involve added risk to subjects. 
 Any advertisements used to recruit subjects for the study must be reviewed 
and approved by the IRB/EC prior to use.  Informed consent 
 
The Investigator must obtain in formed consent of a subject or h is/her 
designee prior to any study rel ated procedures as per GCPs as set forth in 
the CFR and ICH guidelines.  
Documentation that informed c onsent occurred prior to the subje ct’s entry into 
the study and the informed cons ent process should be r
ecorded i n the 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2 6  
 subject’s source documents.  A copy of the original consent for m signed and 
dated by the subject and by the per son consenting the subject p rior to the 
subject’s entry into the study, m ust be maintained in the Inves tigator’s study 
files. 
 Study records requirements 
 
The Investigator must ensure  that the records and documents per taining to 
the conduct of the study  and t he distribution of the study dru g, that is copies 
of CRFs and source documents (ori ginal documents, data, and rec ords [e.g., 
hospital records; clinical and o ffice charts; laboratory notes;  memoranda; 
subject’s diaries or evaluatio n checklists; pharmacy dispensing  records; 
recorded data from automated inst ruments; copies or transcripti ons certified 
after verification as being accu rate copies; microfiches; photo graphic 
negatives, microfilm, or magnetic  media; x-rays; subject files;  and records 
kept at the pharmacy, at the labor atories, and at medico-techni cal 
departments involved in the clinical study; documents regarding  subject 
treatment and study drug account ability; original signed inform ed consents, 
etc.]) be retained by the Inve stigator for as long as needed to  comply with 
national and internat ional regulations (generally 2 years after discontinuing 
clinical development or after the last marketing approval).  Th e Investigator 
agrees to adhere to the document/records retention procedures by signing the protocol. 
Premature Discontinuation of Study 
Single Center 
The responsible local clinical  Investigator as well as Celgene and GSK have the 
right to discontinue this study  at any time for reasonable medi cal or 
administrative reasons in any sin gle center.  Possible reasons for termination of 
the study could be but a re not limited to: 
1.  Unsatisfactory enrollment with respect to quantity or quali ty. 
2.  Inaccurate or incomp lete data collection. 
3.  Falsification of records. 
4.  Failure to adhere to the study protocol. 
 
12.0 Optional Correlative Studies  
Quality of life questionnaire. T he M.D. Anderson symptom invent ory (MDASI) will 
be collected at baseline, at t he end of cycles  3, 6,12, and ev ery 6 cycles after 
that. (Appendix E). 
At baseline, at the end of cycl es 3, 6, 12,18, and every 6 cycl es after that, 
PBMNC will be collected to measur e the number of CLL B-cells that express 
constitutively active, pSTAT3,  the percentage of Annexin-V+ le ukemic cell, the 
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2 7  
 number of Treg cells and the function of T cells measured by the ability of anti-
CD3 activated T cells to synthes is of IL-2, IFN-gamma, and IL-1 0; and NK cell 
cytotoxicity of K562 targets. A t baseline, at the end of cycles  3, 6, 12,18, and 
every 6 cycles after that, plasm a will be collected to measure VEGF, bFGF, TSP-
1, and IFN-gamma using Luminex M ultiplex assay system. At basel ine, at the 
end of cycles 3, 6, 12,18, and ever y 6 cycles after that, the a bility of neoplastic 
unstimulated and CD40L-activated B cells to act as APC for T-ce ll activation will 
be assessed by the production of IL-2 and IL-10, and T-cell pro liferation in mixed 
lymphocyte cultures. 
 13.0 References 
 
1.Wierda W, O’Brien S, Wen S, e t al. Chemoimmunotherapy with fl udarabine, 
cyclophosphamide, and rituximab for relapsed and refractory chr onic lymphocytic 
leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2005;18:1–9.  
2.Keating MJ, Flinn I, Jain V, e t al. Therapeutic role of alemtuzumab (Campath-
1H) in patients who have failed  fludarabine: results of a large international study. 
Blood. 2002;99:3554–3561. 
 3.Wierda W, O’Brien S, Faderl S, et al. Combined cyclophosphamide, 
fludarabine, alemtuzumab, and ritu ximab (CFAR) an active regime n for heavily 
treated patients with C LL. Blood. 2006;108:31a 
 4. Tam CS, O’Brien S, Lerner S, e t al. The natural history of f ludarabine-
refractory chronic lymphocytic l eukemia patients who fail alemtuzumab or have 
bulky lymphadenopathy. Leuk L ymphoma.  2007;48:1931–1939. 
 
5.  Ferrajoli A, O'Brien S, Faderl SH, Wierda WG, Davis D, Lee B-L, Reuben JM, 
Schlette E, Kantarjian HM, Keati ng MJ. Lenalidomide induces com plete and 
partial responses in patients wit h relapsed and treatment-refractory chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia ( CLL). Blood 2008 (epub).  
 6. Chanan-Khan A, Miller KC, Mus ial L, Lawrence D, Padmanabhan S, Takeshita 
K, Porter CW, Goodrich DW, Ber nstein ZP, Wallace P, Spaner D, Mohr A, Byrne 
C, Hernandez-Ilizaliturri F, Chr ystal C, Starostik P, Czuczman MS. Clinical 
efficacy of lenalidomide in patients with relapsed or refractor y chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia: results of a phase II study. J Clin Oncol  24(34):5343-5349, 
2006. 
7. Immunomodulatory drugs Revlimid  (lenalidomide) and CC-4047 i nduce 
apoptosis of both hematological and solid tumor cells through NK cell activation. 
Zhu D, Corral LG, Fleming YW, Stein B. 
Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2008 Dec;57(12):1849-59. Epub 2008 Apr 8  
  2009-0283 
  August 17, 2010 
  2 8  
 8. Ramsay AG, Johnson AJ, Lee AM, e t al. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia T cells 
show impaired immunological synaps e formation that can be rever sed with an 
immunomodulating drug. J Clin Invest. 2008;118:2427-24373.  
 
9. Coiffier B, Lepretre S, Peder sen LM, Gadeberg O, Fredriksen H, Van Oers 
MH, et al. Safety and efficacy of  ofatumumab, a fully human mon oclonal anti-
CD20 antibody, in patient s with relapsed or r efractory B-cell c hronic lymphocytic 
leukemia: a phase 1-2 study. B lood 2008 Feb 1;111(3):1094-100. 
 10. Osteborg A, Kipps TJ, Mayer J , et al. Ofatumumab (HuMax-CD2 0), a novel 
CD20 monoclonal antibody, is an ac tive treatment for patients w ith CLL refractory 
to both fludarabine and alemtuzu mab or bulky fludarabine-refrac tory disease: 
results from the planned interim analysis of an international pivotal trial. Blood. 
2008;112:36. (Abstract)  11. Mous R, Savage P, Eldering E, Teeling P, van Oers MH, van L ier RA. 
Adequate synapse formation between leukemic B cells and effector T cells 
following stimulation with artif icial TCR ligands. Leuk Lymphom a. 2008 
Aug;49(8):1592-602.  
12. Teeling JL, Mackus WJ, Wiegm an LJ, van den Brakel JH, Beers  SA, French 
RR, van Meerten T, Ebeling S, Vin k T, Slootstra JW, Parren PW, Glennie MJ, 
van de Winkel JG. The biological activity of human CD20 monoclo nal antibodies 
is linked to unique epitopes on CD20. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 1;177 (1):362-71. 
 
 
 