Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 1 of 16 Principal Investigator:  Danette Conklin, Ph.D.   
Co-Investigators : Joseph Calabrese, M.D.; Sana Loue, Ph.D.; Martha Sajatovic, M.D.  
 
Protocol Summary for IRB:  Cross -Cultural Cognitive Behavioral Group Therapy : Evaluating 
the effectiveness of a manualized cognitive behavior group therapy treatment for the 
management of menopause symptoms in a mood and anxiety disorder population.  
 
Introduction  
The population of women in the age range for peri - and early post -menopause is growing 
rapidly. There are approximately 52.816 -million females in the United States between the ages 
of 40 -64 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012). The female population for minorities has expanded at a 
higher rate than for white females. The Hispanic p opulation grew 43% from 2000 to 2010, 
compared to 5% for non -Hispanics and 1% for white females (Richard -Davis, & Mellons, 2013). 
An estimated 58% to 93% of American females have reported vasomotor symptoms such as hot 
flash es/flush es and night sweat s during the menopause transition; these symptoms are more 
frequent during the peri - and early post -menopausal years (Thurston, Joffe, Soares, & Harlow, 
2006).   The terms hot flash es and hot flush es are used interchangeably as both ter ms were used 
in the literat ure c ited in this protocol. 
 
Over the past decade, several studies have provided empirical evidence that peri - and early post -
menopausal women are at risk for major depressive episodes (Bromberger, Kravitz, Chang, 
Cyranowski, Brown, & Matthews, 2011). Wome n in the late stages of peri -menopausal transition 
are vulnerable to depressed mood (Woods, Smith -DiJulio, Percival, Tao, Mariella, & Mitchell, 
2008). Overall, studies consistently have supported a window of vulnerability for women in the 
midst of menopaus al transition, with or without a prior history of depression (Freeman, 2010).  
 
While Hormone Therapy ( HT) has been the “gold standard” for treating vasomotor symptoms, 
there has been a decline in using HT due to its potential long -term effects. Treatment based on 
selective serotonin re -uptake inhibitors (SSRI’s) has been found to be efficacious, but not 
without unwelcomed side effects. Therefore, there is a growing need to explore non -medication 
treatment options. To date, studies that have examined mindfu lness and cognitive behavioral 
therapy (CBT) have indicated that combining these therapies may be at least moderately 
effective in reducing the frequency and bother of vasomotor symptoms, with some studies 
revealing secondary gains such as a decrease in de pressive symptoms. There have been few 
studies that have examined the effectiveness of cognitive -behavioral group therapy (CBGT), 
with no studies examining the eff ectiveness of CBGT where the majority  of the female 
participants suffer from major depressive  disorder or bipolar disorder . Furthermore, the potential 
impact of race/ethnicity has not been pursued in studies examining the effectiveness of CBGT, as  
these studies have been focused predominantly on white females.   
 
Studies using SSRI’s, SNRI’s, and gabapentin to reduce hot flash frequency and vasomotor 
symptoms (i.e., severity or bother or interference) have shown a reduction in frequency and 
severity ranging from 21 to 61% (Joffe et al., 2014; NAMS, 2015; Shams et al., 2013). Clonidine 
has been foun d to be more effective than placebo but less effective compared to SSRI’s, 
SSNRI’s and gabapentin (NAMS, 2015).   
 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 2 of 16 More consistent results have been found with Paxil (paroxetine), Lexapro (escitalopram), Celexa 
(citalopram), venlafaxine (Effexor) and (Pris tiq) desvenlafaxine compared to (Zoloft) sertraline 
and (Prozac) fluoxetine (NAMS, 2015) with escitalopram showing the most effective compared 
to all other SSRI’s (Shams et al., 2013).  
 
Gabapentin has shown higher efficacy compared to SSSRI’s and SNRI’s a t 62.2% at 300mg/day 
(Allameh, Rouholamin, & Valaie, 2013) and the effects of gabapentin at 2400 mg/day are 
comparable to the first line treatment estrogen (NAMS, 2015). Most trials were conducted 
between 8 -12 weeks. Therefore, in order to reduce the possibility of any reductions in hot flash 
bother, frequency, or interference being a result of SSRI’s, SNRI’ s, gabapentin or clonidine, 
participants will be recruited after being stable on such medications for 8 -12 weeks.   
 
Many factors can lead to increased bother and the severity of vasomotor symptoms. These 
factors may include race/ethnicity, upsetting life events, body mass index (BMI), and negative 
views of the peri - and post -menopause developmental milestone (Bromberger, et al. 2011; 
Thurston, et al. 2006).  The majority of women view menopause as normal. Yet a subset of 
women view menopause negatively. Th ese negative attitudes toward menopause have been 
linked to increased menopausal symptoms (Rendall, Simonds, & Hunter, 2008). 
 
Various studies have looked at how the frequency, severity and bother of menopause vasomotor 
symptoms influence quality of life. Few studies have applied daily life interference as an 
outcome measure.  The literature has supported BMI and stressful life events as factors 
contributing to the severity of vasomotor symptoms as well as negative attitudes towards 
menopause.  
 
Vasomotor sy mptoms, which can last up to 10 years post -menopause (Freeman, Sammel, & 
Sanders, 2014),  are most frequent in the peri - and early post -menopausal years. Vasomotor 
symptoms are the leading reason for mid -life women to seek medical treatment (Thurston, et a l. 
2006). Due to the cardiovascular and breast cancer risks of treating vasomotor symptoms with 
hormone therapy, the efficacy of cognitive behavioral and behavioral treatments have received 
increasing attention(Ayers, Smith, Hellier, Mann, & Hunter, 2012; Carmody, Crawford, & 
Churchill, 2006; Carmody, Crawford, Salmoirago -Blotcher, Leung, Churchill, & Olendzki, 
2011; Thurston, Ewing, Low, Christie, & Levine, 2014).  
 
Vasomotor symptoms have been found to be correlated with depressive symptoms and negative 
affect (Gibson, Thurston, Bromberger, Kamarck, & Matthews, 2011), as well as depression and 
psychological distress (Bleil, Adler, Pasch, Sternfeld, Gregorich, Rosen, & Cedars, 2012).  Other 
factors that have been found associated with depressed symptoms dur ing menopause 
developmental milestones are negative beliefs about menopause, upsetting life events, BMI, 
severity of bother from vasomotor symptoms and susceptibility based on race/ethnicity.  
 
Most studies related to the relationship between menopause and  depression have been based 
primarily on non -clinical samples or compared women with and without a history of depression 
(Thurston, et al. 2006). The studies that have used non -clinical samples assessed for mood 
symptoms with few assessing for major depres sive disorder (Bromberger, et al. 2011). 
 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 3 of 16 Hunter and Mann (2010) developed a cognitive model for menopausal vasomotor symptoms and 
opined that the trigger for hot flashes (i.e. Estrogen withdrawal) is detected by the body. This 
detection is matched with co gnitive schemas and behaviors based on beliefs and experiences. 
Negative beliefs are associated with more physical and emotional problems. Rendall, Simonds & 
Hunter (2008) found a significant link between women’s prior tendency toward negative beliefs 
and their association between menopause and negative life consequences. These women have 
been found to be less likely to view menopause as a “new phase of their lives” (p. 166) (Rendall, 
et al., 2008). Psychological interventions, combining psycho -education, r elaxation and cognitive 
therapy, have resulted in reductions in self -reported frequency of hot flushes.  
 
Weight gain is common during menopause transition and tends to increase vasomotor symptoms. 
High or increased physical activity has been found to decre ase depressive and vasomotor 
symptoms in women with a history of depression compared to those without a history of 
depression (Bromberger, et al. 2011). The Thurston et al. (2014) pilot study demonstrated a 
negative correlation between lower BMI, body fat and reduced vasomotor symptoms. A 
longitudinal, community -based study by Green and Santoro (2009) found that vasomotor 
symptoms were more common in females with higher BMI’s and in African -American and 
Hispanic women.  
 
Studies have demonstrated mixed conc lusions regarding the impact of race differences on 
vasomotor symptoms, depression and anxiety. Some studies support the view that African -
American females tend to be more depressed and anxious, with more psychological distress and 
vasomotor symptoms, comp ared to white females and exhibit more total, physical and 
psychosomatic symptoms than white, Asian -American and Hispanic groups (Im, 2009). Reports 
from a cross -sectional survey showed that after controlling for age, education and financial 
problems, Afri can-American women reported more vasomotor symptoms compared to 
Caucasian females. Caucasian females reported more psychosomatic symptoms compared to 
other racial groups (Avis et al, 2001). Most symptoms varied by ethnicity.  
 
Looking at  the differences in hot flash beliefs, and using the hot flash belief scale is a true 
frontier and has virtually  not been studied for women diagnosed with depressive and anxiety 
disorders.  However, the very limited data shows the differences in coping style between White 
and Black females.  Even though African American females tend to experience VMS more 
frequently than Caucasian females, they obtain information about menopause symptoms more 
from family, whereas, Caucasian females obtain information from the media and tend to discuss 
these symptoms with their physicians more than African American females (Grisso et al., 1999).  
 
Helping women to manage menopausal symptoms in culturally compatible ways is important to 
their health and well -being (Richard -Davis, & Mellons, 2013).  Understanding the differences in 
symptom manifestation and beliefs about the menopausal transition can potentially enhance 
treatment.  
 
Studies that have examined the occurrence of major depressive disorder during peri - or early 
post-menopause transition have been mixed regarding the risk for mood symptoms across 
cultures. There is a recognition that an overlap of symptoms exist between Major Depressive 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 4 of 16 Disorder (MDD) and symptoms experienced during the menopause transition that needs to be 
addressed with assessment strategies (Clayton, & Ninan, 2010).  
 
Upsetting life events have been found to be a strong predictor of initial major depressive 
episodes in mid -life females. Experiencing at least two upsetting life events have been found to 
increase depression  by more than five times in mid -life females (Bromberger, et al. 2011). No 
studies were found comparing White and African -American females where group CBT was used 
as an intervention to improve vasomotor symptoms and quality of life.  
 
Research examining m enopause in chronically mentally ill women is sparse. No studies were 
found that used Group CBT for mid -life women with chronic and relapsing major depression. 
There were two studies found that conducted an assessment of chronically mentally ill women 
(major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia) and their quality of life 
(Friedman, Sajatovic, Schuermeyer, Safavi, Hays, West, Ignacio, & Blow, 2005; Sajatovic, 
Friedman, Schuermeyer, Safavi, Ignacio, Hays, West, & Blow, 2006).  One study wa s found that 
assessed how menopause affected chronic mental illness and mental illness of family members 
(Sajatovic, Rosenthal, Plax, Meyer, & Bingham, 2003).  
 
Results from cognitive and behavioral therapies have been promising (Ayers, et al., 2012; 
Carmo dy, et al., 2006; Carmody, et al., 2011; Thurston, et al., 2014).  Few studies have 
attempted to examine CBGT, combining cognitive restructuring, psycho -education and slow -
paced/deep breathing (Ayers, et al, 2012; Keefer, & Blanchard, 2005) with other stud ies 
combining cognitive restructuring, progressive muscle relaxation, psycho -education and group 
discussion as the CBT intervent ion (Alder et al., 2006). It is expected that participants will 
receive intrinsic benefits, physiological  benefits  (i.e., reduct ion in problematic hot flashes  and 
night sweats ) and improved ab ility to regulate emotions.  The MENOS 1 study investigated the 
effectiveness of CBGT on women wi th breast cancer  (Mann et al., 2012). The trial compared 
outcome measures from the treatment gr oup (CBT group therapy for 90 minutes for 6 weeks) 
and usual care group. Hot flashes and night sweats ( HFNS ) problem ratings were significantly 
reduced in the CBT group compared to the usual care group  at 9 and 26 weeks after 
randomization. Group CBT also improved mood, sleep and overall quality of life.  
 
The MENOS 2 study compared the effectiveness of group CBT, self -help CBT and no treatment 
group on well women (Ayers, Smith, Mann & Hunter, 2012 ). HFNS problem ratings were 
significantly reduced in the CBT group and self -help group compared to the no treatment group 
at 6 weeks and 26 weeks after randomization. There were no significant differences in problems 
ratings in the CBT group compared to the self -help CBT group. There were no differences found 
in reduction of HF frequency for all 3 arms. However, the CBT group had significantly less 
frequent NS at 6 weeks compared to the self -help and no treatment group . Group CBT also 
improved mood, sleep and over all quality of life.  
 
In the MENOS 1 and MENOS 2 studies, p articipants learned how to reduce stress (which can 
trigger and exacerbate hot flashes), identify and modify behaviors that increase the severity of 
hot flushes and identify negative automatic tho ughts that lead to maladaptive coping and 
challenge these beliefs with the aim of utilizing adaptive strategies (Hunter & Smith, 2015).   
 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 5 of 16 Study Design & Objectives  
Objectives: The general objective of this study is to advance insight into non -pharmacological 
treatments for maturing women that impact psychological health and wellbeing of women 
adapting to menopause, a natural but often challenging developmental milestone.  This 
exploratory study proposes to expand the knowledge in the menopausal literature and evaluate 
the effectiveness of CBGT in reducing problematic vasomotor symptoms, reducing daily 
interference and improving quality of life.  The study will include two homogeno us peri - or post -
menopausal cohorts  (African -American and Caucasian ) with major depressive disorder or 
bipolar disorder . Anxiety disorders tend to be co -morbid with depressive disorders . Therefore, 
women wit h or without anxiety disorders will be included in this study.   
 
The physiological mechanism that causes hot flashes is unknown but appears “to be associated 
with the rate of change of plasma oestrogen, which influences the thermoregulatory system via 
the hypothalamus” (Hunter & Smith, 2015, p. 5). The prevalence of hot flashes is thought to be 
associated with rapid estrogen withdrawal. The physiological mechanism for vasomotor 
symptoms is related to small fluctuations in core body temperature superimposed on an 
extremely narrow thermoneutral zone (TMZ).  Hot flashes are triggered when the core body 
temperature rises above an upper threshold, causing sweating. When the core temperature 
decreases below the lower threshold of the TMZ, shivering occurs (Freedman 2005 ).  
The intervention will follow a manualiz ed CBGT treatment developed by Hunter & Smith, 2015 
aimed to reduce problematic vasomotor symptoms, stress, probl ems with sleep and enhance 
well-being. The CBGT will occur weekly for 6 weeks. Each week the CBGT is for 90 minutes.   
The underlying premise of  CBGT is to promote stress coping and emotional regulation. This in 
turn will improve physiological regulation. For instance, improved stress coping decreas es 
anxiety and allows women the opportunity to regulate their emotions and behaviors, potentially 
resulting in less physiologic lability.  In addition, there is evidence to suggest that mood and 
stress and vasomotor symptoms are related to problems with memory and concentration. 
Problems with vasomotor symptoms, mood, memory and stress impact quality of l ife (Hunter & 
Smith, 2015) .  These symptoms will be assessed on the pre and post intervention. It is uncertain 
if the outcomes will be significant, which is why the research is being conducted. Since we are 
measuring each construct (i.e., hot flushes, dail y life interference, quality of life ), we will be able 
to test these theories.  
 
Specific Aims and Exploratory Hypothesis  
A manualized cognitive behavior group therapy treatment for vasomotor symptoms developed 
by Hunter and Smith (2105) has been found to significantly reduce hot flash es and night sweat s 
for well women and women with breast cancer.  The vasomotor symptoms of the participants 
were natural, surgically induced or followed medical procedures. Although not diagnosed with 
bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder or anxiety disorders, CBGT also reduced depressive 
and anxiety symptoms in these populations. However, the feasibility and effectiveness of this 
manualized treatment has not been studied for women who meet DSM -V criteria for bipolar 
disorder or major depressive disorder , with or without an anxiety disorder . In addition, no studies 
were found comparing Black and White females where group CBT was used as an intervention 
to reduce problematic vasomotor symptoms, qual ity of life and decrease daily interference.   
 
 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 6 of 16 Specific Aims:  
1. Evaluate the feasibility of a manualized Cognitive behavior group therapy treatment for 
vasomotor symptoms for Black and White females diagnosed with bipolar disorder or 
major depressive diso rder, with or without an anxiety disorder .  
2. Evaluate the effectiveness of a manualized Cognitive behavior group therapy treatment 
for vasomotor symptoms for Black and White females diagnosed with bipolar disorder or 
major depressive disorder , with or witho ut an anxiety disorder .  
3. Describe the characteristics for Black and White females diagnosed with bipolar disorder 
or major depressive disorder, with or without an anxiety disorder  on the Hot Fl ush 
Frequency and P roblem Rating Scale (HFFPRS) , Hot Flash Daily Interference Scale 
(HFRDIS ), Hot Flash Belief Scale ( HFBS ), Menopause Representation Questionnaire 
(MRQ) , Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale ( MADRS ), Perceived Stress 
Scale -10 (PSS-10), Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure Scale ( SHAPS ), Young Mania Ratin g 
Scale (YMRS) , Structured Interview for the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale ( SIGH -A) 
and the Short -Form Couple Conflicts ( CTS2S ).  
4. Describe the following descriptive characteristics for Black and White females diagnosed 
with bipolar disorder or major depres sive disorder, with or without an anxiety disorder : 
race/ethnicity, age, marital status, socioeconomic status, smoking status, average weekly 
alcohol and caffeine consumption, education, BMI, menopause status (early, late peri -
menopause, early, late post -menopause) and dosages and number of weeks on SSRI’s , 
SNRI’s , gabapentin or clonidine .  
 
This study will also explore which independent variables are significant predictors of change in 
problematic hot flashes and night sweats, hot flash daily interference (HFDIS), and menopause 
quality of life ( MRQ ) for peri - and post -menopausal Black and White females diagnosed with 
DSM -V bipolar disorder or major depressive disorder, with or without an anxiety disorder  from 
baseline to post -treatment (6 weeks of Cognitive  Behavioral Group Therapy). Examining which 
variables significantly contributes to the outcome variables will help direct non -pharmacologic 
treatment interventions and inform relevant psychoeducation for this population.  
 
It is expected that CBGT will red uce problematic hot flash es and night sweats  (as measured via 
the hot flash frequency and problem rating scale  ), reduce daily interference (as measured on the 
hot flash daily interference scale), and improve quality of life (as measured on the MRQ ). It is  
expe cted that strong negative beliefs about hot flashes and night sweats will be associated with 
more vasomotor s ymptoms and strong positive beliefs about vasomotor symptoms will be 
associated with significantly fewer vasomotor symptoms. The beliefs about  vasomotor 
symptoms will be measured on the HFBS.  
 
Overall Design:  This is a  6-week  cross -cultural study to test ef ficacy of CGBT treatment for 60  
menopausal participants with major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder, with or without an 
anxiety disorder .  The intervention will be delivered in groups of 5 to 10 participants per group 
of both race/ethnicities  in an outpatient setting during a 6–week time period. The participants 
will be assessed o n the degree of hot flash problem rating , hot flash related daily interference , 
and menopause quality of life at screening, baseline, and post -treatment. These are the outcome 
variables. Participants will be assessed using the following predictor variables at the same time 
points:  BMI, level of perceived s tress (PSS -10), severity of depre ssion (MADRS), severity of 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 7 of 16 anxiety (SIGH -A), Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS),  Young Mania Rating Scale 
(YMRS), and hot flash beliefs . Severity of couple’s conflict will  be assessed using the CTS2S.  
 
In addition, a t the end of the study inte rvention, a questionnaire will be given to the participants 
to illicit feedback about the interventions. The purpose is to collect qualitative feedback that may 
be useful in future studies.  
 
All participants will be seen for scree ning and treatment at University Hospitals Cleveland 
Medical  Center, Mood Disorders Program 10524 Euclid Avenue, 12th Floor, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106.  
 
Target Subject Population  
Participants:  This study will recruit women in early or late peri -menopause transition or early or 
late post-menopause with problematic HFNS and diag nosed with bipolar disorder  or major 
depres sive disorder with or without an  anxiety disorder . The age range will be 40 -65, including 
both African -American and Caucasian females. Early, late peri -menopause and early , late  post-
menopause are defined by The North American Menopause Society (NAMS), Menopause 
Practice guidelines, stages of reproductive aging. Early peri -menopaus e is operationalized as 
variable cycle length or  ≥7 days in length of consecutive cycles.  Late peri -menopause is 
operationalized as ≥ 60 days of amenorrhea . Early post -menopause is defined as up to six years 
after the final menstrual cycle. Late post -menop ause is defined as 6 years after the final 
menstrual period and the remaining lifespan. With respect to the age range, below 40 indicates 
premature menopause. The average age of the final menstrual cycle is 51 years old and 
approximately 25% between 50 -55 experience natural menopauses (North American Menopause 
Society, 201 4). Sixty  women will participate in the CBGT.  
 
Inclusion Criteria .  
1. Self-identified as African -American or Caucasian females between 40 -65 experiencing the 
early, late peri -menopause or e arly or late post -menopause stages of reproductive aging 
defined by The North American Menopause Society (NAMS, 2014), Menopause Practice 
guidelines, stages of reproductive aging. There are situations in which menopause status 
will not be able to be determ ined, such as with women who have had a hysterectomy. 
However, if the potential study participant meets all other inclusion criteria, then she can be 
enrolled in the study.  
2. Diagnosed with current or lifetime bipolar disorder  or major depressive disorder as 
assessed by the MINI .  
3. Menopause symptoms can be n atural or surgically induced.  
4. Willing to remain on current dose of  psychotropic medications until the study has 
concluded.  
5. Experiencing one or more hot flashes and/or night sweats per day.  
6. Willing to have the 6 CBGT interventions audio recorded.   
7. English speaking and capable of understanding and complying with study protocol and 
requirements . 
8. Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) total score  > 7 
9. Women stable on psychotrophic medi cations for ≥ 8 weeks.  
 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 8 of 16 Medication regimens to treat their DSM -V diagnoses will be encouraged to continue in order to 
determine if the CBGT accounted for any change in symptoms.  
 
Exclusion Criteria .  
1. Unwilling or unable to comply  to study requirements.  
2. Women diagnosed with schizophrenia, schizoaffective, borderline personality  disorder , 
and/or active psychosis, as confirmed by MINI . 
3. Diagnosed with active substance use disorder within past 12 months as confirmed on the 
MINI .  
4. Women  currently  taking  HT for Vasomotor Symptoms ( VMS ).  
5. Participants experiencing acute mania as defined by a Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) 
score > 15  
6. Serious suicidal risks judged by the investigator or having score equal or greater than 4 on 
MADRS item number 10 at screening or baseline.  
7. Participants  being treated with chemotherapy and/or tamoxifen.  
8. Women who are not self -identifying as either African -American or Caucasian.  
 
 
Study Specific Procedures  
Screening : After Informed Consent is obtained, the participants will be evaluated by the MINI 
International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)  for DSM -V Axis I diagnoses.  The participants 
must be evaluated by the following clinician rated measurements: Montgomery Asberg 
Depre ssion Rating  Scale (MADRS ), the Structured Interview for the  Hamilton Anxiety Rating 
Scale (SIGH -A), the Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) and the Perceived Stress Scale -10 
(PSS -10).  In addition, the subject will complete the Quick Inventory of Depression 
Symptomatology -Self Report (QIDS -SR16). The clinician will gather demographics, take BMI  
measurements and document menstrual cycle patterns based on interview guidelines from the 
North American Menopause Society (NAMS).  
 
At the end of this visit, participants who continue to meet all inclusion criteria and no exclusion 
criteria w ill be seen for a baseline vis it.  All qualifying participants will be asked to record The 
Hot Flush Weekly Diary for one week prior to Baseline visit.   
 
During the study period, research staff and the primary investigator will be available to answer 
questions or concerns.  
 
Baseline:  All participants will be asked to comp lete the following self -rated assessments: Hot 
Flush Frequency and Problem Rating Scale (HFFPRS) , Hot Flash Belief Scale (HFBS), 
Menopause Representation Questionnaire (MRQ) , Hot Flash Related Dai ly Interference Scale  
(HFRDIS), Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS),  Quick Inventory of Depression 
Symptomatology -Self Report (QIDS -SR16) and the Short -Form  Couple Conflicts (CTS2S) scale  
within 2 days before or the day of the first group session.  All participants will als o be evaluated 
by clinician -rated assessments using the Montgomery Asberg Depre ssion Rating Scale 
(MADRS), the Structured Interview for the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGH -A), the 
Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS), and the Perceived Stress Scale -10 (PSS -10) within 2 days 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 9 of 16 before or the day of the first group session. All participants will be weighed at baseline.  Baseline 
assessment s can be done in person, via e -mail, or over the phone.   
 
Study Interventions (week 0  through week 5 ): 
Cognitive -Behavioral Group Therapy (CBGT)  
The CBGT intervention will be delivered in groups of 5 to 10 participants including both African 
American and Caucasian females in an outpatient setting during a 6 –week time period. 
Treatment groups will start the ir first session when a minimum of 5 participants are  conveniently 
enrolled , and each session will last for 1.5 hours.  CBGT intervention will be facilitated by the 
primary investigator.  The principal  investigator will have periodic conference calls with Dr. 
Myra Hunter to review the conduct of the group sessions and to discuss any concerns/questions .  
Dr. Hunter originally created the manual, and her role is serving as an advisor of this study.  
 
Hunter & Smith’s manual was developed from research studies on well -women and women with 
breast cancer  (Alder et al., 2006; Mann et al., 2012 ). Permission has been given by Myra Hunter, 
PhD to use this manual in the proposed study. The six sessions are outlined in the manual 
entitled: Managing Hot Flushes with Group Cognitive Behaviour Therapy: An Evidenced -Based 
Treatment Manual for Health Care Professionals  (Hunter & Smith, 2015) as follows :  
 
Session 1: Psycho -education and the cognitive behavioural model  
Session 2: Stress  management, improving wellbeing and identifying precipitants  
Session 3: Managing hot flushes using a cognitive behavioural approach  
Session 4: Managing night sweats and improving sleep (part one)  
Session 5: Managing night sweats and improving sleep (part two) 
Session 6: Review and maintaining changes (One alteration: Open discussion about 
maintaining change in the context of other menopause -related issues or topics that were 
covered in sessions 1 -5. Other related menopause issues may include topics such as  
weight changes, sexual functioning, and/or cognitive functioning. The group may discuss 
the challenges of maintaining change due to mood and/or anxiety disorders. The PI will 
facilitate this topic in lieu of maintaining change in the context of breast can cer. The 
group may chose topics for part of the final session as stated in the manual.  
  
Study sessions will be audio recorded to assess reliability of following the treatment manual. The 
study sessions will be randomly reviewed by another study staff member to ensure quality 
control  and fidelity will be verified by a checklist provided by Dr. Hunter.  
 
End of Study (week 6 ): All participants will be asked to complete the same assessments 
completed at baseline. They will be asked to complete the followin g self -rated assessments: Hot 
Flush Frequency and Problem Rating Scale (HFFPRS) , Hot Flash Belief Scale (HFBS), 
Menopause Representation Questionnaire (MRQ) , Hot Flash Related Daily Interference Scale 
(HFRDIS), Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS),  Quick Inventory of Depression 
Symptomatology -Self Report (QIDS -SR16) and the Short -Form Couple Conflicts Scale 
(CTS2S) .  All participants will also be evaluated by clinician -rated assessments using the 
Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS), the Structured Interview for the 
Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGH -A), the Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS), and the 
Perceived Stress Scale -10 (PSS -10). All participants will be weighed at their end of study visit .  
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 10 of 16 The data can be collected immediately afte r the end of the last study session  or within 2 days of 
the last study session . End of Study assessments can be done in person, via e -mail, or over the 
phone.  
 
The Hot Flush Weekly Diary will be collected each week .  
 
Study Assessments  
Demographics: including date of birth , race, ethnicity  and smoking status  
Medical and Treatment History: including date of last menstrual period, number of menstrual 
periods in the past year, and treatment received to treat vasomotor and/or mood symptoms.  
Concomitant me dication(s): we will collect concomitant medication information on all 
medications a participant is taking at the time of screening and within the 90 days prior to 
screening. Participants will be asked if there have been any changes to medications at each study 
session.  
 
Participant -rated  
Quick Inventory of Depression Symptomatology -Self Report (QIDS -SR16):  This 16 -item 
scale will be used to measure depression severity. This self -reported questionnaire was 
developed based on the DSM -V diagnostic criteria for a major depressive disorder episode.  
The Hot Flush Weekly Diary:  This objectively measures the frequ ency and intens ity of daily 
hot flashes  and night sweats .   It is used one week prior to starting the intervention to gather 
baseline data  and then weekly during the CGBT sessions .  
The Menopause Representation Questionnaire (MRQ) : This is a 32 -item scale developed by 
Hunter & O’Dea (2001) to assess the cognitive appraisal of menopause. The questionnaire was 
derived from self -regulation theory. The MRQ consists of 2 sections (identity and beliefs sub-
scale s). The identity scale measures symptoms that are attributed to menopause. The greater the 
symptom attribution to menopause the greater menopause was viewed as having a bigger impact 
on their life.  The items on the identity scale are scored from 0 -2, with Yes= 2, Uncertain= 1 and 
No=0. Summation of scores range from 0 -40. The beliefs scales consists of 6 subscales, 
measuring positive and negative consequences of menopause , time frame  and the coping/control 
scale, which measures feelings of control over meno pause symptoms. The belief scale items are 
scored on a Likert scale - Strongly Agree (5) to Strongly Disagree (1). Negative impact 
(1,4,6,10,12), relief/new phase (2,11,13)  and control/coping (5,8,14,17) are used in the current 
study as they have higher re liability (personal communication with the author).   
Hot Flush Frequency and Problem Rating Scale (HFFPRS): This is a 5 -item rating scale 
assessing hot flush frequency and how much those hot flushes cause problems, distress or 
interferes with daily routin e.  
The Hot Flash Daily Interference Scale (HFRDIS): This is a 10 -item rating scale assessing the 
degree to which hot flashes interfere with daily functioning in nine areas (i.e., work, social 
activities, leisure activities, sleep, mood, concentration, rel ations with others, sexuality, and 
enjoyment in life). The tenth item requires rating the degree to which hot flashes interferes with 
overall quality of life. The degree of interference is rated on a 0 – 10 point Likert scale.  
The Hot Flash Beliefs Scale (HFBS): This is a 63 -item measure that uses a six -point response 
scale, coded from 0 -5 (i.e., strongly disagree, moderately disagree, mildly disagree, mildly agree, 
and strongly agree). This instrument was developed to assess the cognitive appraisal of wom en 
experiencing HFNS. Rendall et al. (2008) suggested that systematized use of this instrument will 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 11 of 16 provide reliable data and  “contribute to an increased understanding of the relationship of 
cognitions to the experience of hot flushes and night sweats” (p. 167). Systematized use can help 
define reasons for individual differences in response to menopausal symptoms that can 
potentially inform and evaluate psychological treatment interventions that will alleviate stress 
related to this developmental milestone.  
Short -Form Couple Conflict (CTS2S): A Short Form of the Revised Conflict Tactics Scales . 
This is a 20 -item assessment designed to assess how couples handle conflict.  
Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS): This is a 14 -item assessment designed to measure 
hedonic experience or positive valence.  
Managing Menopausal Symptoms: Evaluation of Groups: An evaluation of CGBT sessions 
and techniques learned. This is a short questionnaire asking participants to rate their experien ce 
of the group sessions, the effectiveness of the group sessions and the relaxation and breathing 
skills. The ratings are on a 5 -point Likert scale.  
The Perceived Stress Scale -10:  This is a self-rated psychological measurement designed to 
measure percei ved stress.  
 
Clinician -rated  
MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) for  DSM -V: A Clinical Interview for 
DSM -V Axis I diagnoses.   
Documentation of Menstrual Cycles : Interview based on NAMS criteria.  
Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale for monitoring depressive symptoms 
(MADRS):  This is a 10 -item clinician -rated measure that queries symptoms of depression.  
The Structured Interview for the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (SIGH -A): This is a 14 -
item clinician -rated measure designed to asse ss the severity of anxiety.  
Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS):  This is an 11 -item clinician rated instrument designed to 
quantify severity of participant’s current symptoms of mania  
BMI : A standard BMI calculator will be utilized for height and weight.  
 
Table 1: Study Procedures Schedule  
 
Screening  TX(1)  
Baseline  TX(2)  TX(3)  TX(4)  TX(5)  TX(6)  
End of 
Intervention  
Weeks   0 1 2 3 4 5 
Visit  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Intervention   X X X X X X 
Clinician Rated Assessments         
Demographics  and Height  X       
Weight  X X     X 
Tracking and Documentation of 
Menstrual Cycles  X       
MINI  X       
MADRS  X X     X 
YMRS  X X     X 
SIGH -A X X     X 
Concomitant Medications  X X X X X X X 
Patient Rated Assessment         
QIDS  X X X X X X X 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 12 of 16 PSS X X     X 
The Hot Flush Weekly Diary   X X X X X X 
HFFPRS   X     X 
MRQ   X     X 
HFBS   X     X 
HFRDIS   X     X 
SHAPS   X     X 
CTS2S   X     X 
Managing Menopausal Symptoms: 
Evaluation of Groups        X 
 
Medication regimens to treat their DSM -V diagnoses will be encouraged to continue in order to 
determine if the CBGT accounted for any change in symptoms. Changes to medications during 
study participation wi ll not be permitted.  All concomitant medications taken during the study 
will be documented, including information on the indication, dosing, and dates of administration.   
 
Efficacy & Data Analysis  
Statistical Analysis:  
Descriptive statistics will be used  to describe demographic and clinical variables.  This includes 
means and standard deviations for continuous variables and number and percentages for 
categorical variables.  Difference in outcome measures from baseline to post -treatment will be 
determined by a matched -pairs t-test.  Regression analysis will be used to assess the significance 
of the covariates on the differences of the 3 outcome variables.  The significance of the race 
covariate in the regression models will be of special interest to the stu dy.  Statistical significance 
will be based on a Type I error rate of 0.05 for all statistical tests (two -tailed).  Since this is an 
exploratory study no adjustment will be made for multiple comparisons.  
 
Sample size determination.  
For a two -tailed test, setting α = 0.017 to simultaneously account for the 3 outcome variables and 
assuming the dropout rate = 20%, a total sample size of 60 will provide at least 80% power for 
detecting a medium effect size (Cohen’s d = 0.5) in difference  in outcome measure from baseline 
to post -treatment.  A total sample size of 30 using these parameters would enable the detection of 
a large effect size (Cohen’s d = 0.8).  
Protecting Patient Privacy: Study information is collected in a private office by the research 
coordinator and study doctor.  Discussions regarding participant information or patient care will 
be restricted to private offices and involvement will be limited to study related staff.  
 
Prior to the participation, all participants will be asked to agree to maintain the confidentiality of 
all members of the group by signing the ICF. Participants will be reminded of this agreement at 
each group session.  
 
Protecting Data Confidentiality: Patient medical records are stored electronically, in 
Ambulatory EMR (aEMR), and are password protected.  Only investigators and staff involved 
with the study have access to this information.  All study participants are assigned a study ID.  
This ID is compos ed of a number, assigned sequentially, and the participant’s initials.  This 
identification code will take the place of a participants name on all study documents with the 
exception of the consent form, HIPAA authorization, and study participant ID log, al l of which 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 13 of 16 will be stored separately from other study related documents in order to maintain patient 
confidentiality.  All paper source documents and Case Report Forms (CRFs) will be stored in 
locked offices, and will only be listed with the study ID numbe r and no identifying information.  
Only study staff will have access to the source documents and CRFs, including REDCap.  For 
additional information on REDCAP, see “Digital Data Collection of Patient Assessments” 
section on pages 10 -11. In order to provide  additional confidentiality protection for this 
information, we will obtain a Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of 
Health.  
 
Recordings of the group sessions will be audio only and participants will not be identified on the 
tapes. The recordings will be kept in a protected program folder on a password -protected local 
hard drive that will be physically located in a locked environment, the Mood Disorders Progra m. 
Only investigators and staff involved with the study have access to this  information.    The audio 
files will be kept until 7 years after the last date of service delivery (i.e. EOS visit) and will be 
deleted at the end of 7th year.  
 
References  
Alder, J., Besken, E.K., Armbruster, U., Decio, R., Gairing, A., Kang, A., & Bitzer, J. (2006). 
Cognitive -behavioral group intervention for climacteric syndrome. Psychotherapy of 
Psychosomatics, 75, 298 -303. 
 
Allameh, Z., Rouholam in, S, & Valaie, S. (2013). Comparison of gabapentin with estrogen for 
treatment of hot flashes in post -menopausal women (J Res Pharm Pract) 2(2), 64 -69. 
 
Avis, NE., Stellato, R., Crawford, S., et al. (2001). Is there a menopause syndrome? Menopausal 
statu s and symptoms across racial/ethnic groups. Social Science & Medicine, 52(3), 345 -356. 
 
Ayers, B., Smith, M., Hellier, J., Mann, E., & Hunter, M.S. (2012). Effectiveness of group and 
self-help cognitive behavior therapy in reducing problematic menopausal h ot flushes and night 
sweats (MENOS 2): A randomized controlled trial. Menopause. 19 (7), 749 -759. 
 
Balabonovic, J., Ayers, B., & Hunter, M.S. (2013. Cognitive behavior therapy for menopausal 
hot flushes and night sweats: a qualitative analysis of women’s e xperiences of group and self -
help CBT. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 41, 441 -457.  
 
Balabanovic, J., Ayers, B., Hunter, M.S. (2012). Womens’s experiences of group cognitive 
behavior therapy for hot flushes and night sweats following breast cance r treatment: an 
interpretative phenomenological analysis. Maturitas, 72, 236 -242.  
 
Bleil, M.E., Adler, N.E., Pasch, L.A., Sternfeld, B., Gregorich, S.E., Rosen, M.P., & Cedars, M.I. 
(2012). Depressive symptomatology, psychological distress, and ovarian re serve: A role for 
psychological factors in ovarian aging? Menopause. 19(11), 1176 -1185.  
 
Bromberger, J.T., Kravitz, H.M., Chang, Y. -F., Cyranowski, J.M., Brown, C., & Matthews, K.A. 
(2011). Major depression during and after the menopausal transition: Study  of women’s health 
across the nation (SWAN). Psychological Medicine, 41, 1879 -1888.  
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 14 of 16  
Burns, D.S. & Carpenter, J.S., (2012). Paced respiration for hot flashes? The Female Patient, 
Vol. 37, 38 -41. 
 
Carmody, J., Crawford, S., & Churchill, L. (2006). A pilot s tudy of mindfulness -based stress 
reduction for hot flashes. Menopause, 13(5), 760 -769. 
 
Carmody, J.F., Crawford, S., Salmoirago -Blotcher, E., Leung, K., Churchill, L., & Olendzki, N. 
(2011). Mindfulness training for coping with hot flashes: Results of a ra ndomized trial.  
Menopause, 18(6), 611 -620. 
 
Carpenter, J.S. (2001). The hot flush related daily interference scale: A tool for assessing the 
impact of hot flashes on quality of life following breast cancer. Journal of Pain and Symptom 
Management, 22(6), 979-989. 
 
Clayton, A., & Ninan, P.T. (2010). Depression or menopause? Presentation and management of 
major depressive disorder in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women. Primary Care 
Companion Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 12(1). DOI: 10.4088/PCC.08r007 47blu, 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20582297   
 
Cohen, L.S., Soares, C.N., Vitonis, A.F., Otto, M.W., & Harlow, B.L. (2006) Risk for new onset 
of depression during the menopausal transition: the Harvard study of moods and cycles. Archives 
of General Psychiatry 63 (4), 385 -90. 
 
Freedman, R.R., (2005). Pathophysiology and treatment of menopausal hot flushes. Seminars in 
Reproductive Medicine, 23 (2), 117 -25. 
 
Freedman, R.R., Woodward, S., Brown,  B., Javaid, J.J. & Pandey, G.N. (1995). Biochemical and 
thermoregulatory effects of behavioral treatment for menopausal hot flashes. Menopause. The 
Journal of the North American Menopause Society, 2(4), 211 -218. 
 
Freeman, E.W. (2010). Associations of depr ession with the transition to menopause. Menopause. 
17(4), 823 -827. 
 
Freeman, E.W., Sammel, M.D., & Sanders, R.J., (2014). Risk of long -term hot flashes after 
natural menopause: Evidence from the Penn Ovarian Aging Study Cohort. Menopause, 21(9), 
924-932. 
 
Freeman, E.W., Sammel, M.D., Boorman, D.W., & Zhang, R. (2014) Longitudinal Pattern of 
Depressive Symptoms Around Natural Menopause. JAMA Psychiatry.71(1), 36 -43. 
 
Friedman, S.H., Sajatovic, M., Schuermeyer, I.N., Safavi, R., Hays, R.W., West, J., Ignacio , 
R.V., & Blow, F.C. (2005). Menopause -related quality of life in chronically mentally ill women. 
The International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 35(3), 259 -271. 
 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 15 of 16 Gartoulla, P., Worsley, R., Bell, R., & Davis, S.R. (2015). Moderate to severe vasomotor  and 
sexual symptoms remain problematic for women aged 60 to 65 years. Menopause. The Journal 
of the North American Menopause Society, 22(7) 694 -701.  
 
Gibson, C.J., Thurston, R.C., Bromberger, J.T., Kamarck, T., & Matthews, K.A. (2011). 
Negative affect an d vasomotor symptoms in the study of women’s health across the nation daily 
hormone study. Menopause, 18(12), 1270 -1277.  
 
Green, R., Santoro, N. (2009). Menopausal symptoms and ethnicity: The study of women’s 
health across the nation. Women’s Health, 5(2),  127-133. 
 
Grisso, J.A., Freeman, E.W., Maurin, E., Garcia -Espana, B., & Berlin, J.A. (1999). Racial 
differences in menopause information and the experience of hot flashes. J Gen Intern Med, 14, 
98-103. 
 
Hamilton, M. (1959).The assessment of anxiety states  by rating. Br J Med Psychol. 32(1), 50 -5. 
 
Hilditch J.R, Lewis .J, Peter A., van Maris B., Ross A., Franssen E., Guyatt G.H., Norton P.G., 
& Dunn E. (1996). A menopause -specific quality of life questionnaire: Development and 
psychometric properties. Maturitas, 24, 161 -175. 
 
Holmes, T. H. and Rahe, R. H. (1967). The social readjustment rating scale. Journal of 
Psychosomatic research, 11(2), 213 -21. Adaption of the rating scale retrieved from: 
https://www.ohrd.wisc.edu/home/portals/0/opc/2009/letting%20go%20of%20stress.pdf   
 
Hot Flash Diary, retrieved from:  
http://www.lhsc.on.ca/Patients_Families_Visitors/LRCP/Managing_Side_Effects/HFDiary.pdf   
 
Hunter, M., & Smith, M. (2015). Managing hot flushes with group cognitive behavior therapy. 
An evidence -based treatment manual for health professionals. London: Tay lor & Francis Group.  
 
Hunter, M.S., & Mann, E. (2010). A cognitive model of menopausal hot flushes and night 
sweats. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 69, 491 -501. 
 
Im, E.O. (2009). Ethnic Differences in symptoms experiences during the menopause transitio n. 
Health Care Women International, 30(4), 339 -355. 
 
Joffe, H. et al. (2014). Low -dose estradiol and the serontonin -norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor 
venlafaxine for vasomotor symptoms. A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med., 174, 
1058 -66. 
 
Jones, D . J., Bromberger, J.T., Sutton -Tyrrell,  K., & Matthews, K. A. (2003) Lifetime History of 
Depression and Carotid Atherosclerosis in Middle -aged Women.  Archives of General 
Psychiatry 60 (2),153 -60. 
 
Version Date:  April 18, 2017   Page 16 of 16 Keefer, L., & Blanchard, E.B. (2005). A behavioral group treatment program for menopausal hot 
flashes: Results of a pilot study. Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback 30 (1), 21 -29. 
 
Mann, E., Smith, M.J., Hellier, J., Balabonovic, J.A., Hamed, H., Grunfeld, E.A., & Hunter, M.S. 
(2012). Cognitive behavioural treatment for women who have menopausal symptoms after breast 
cancer treatment (MENOS 1: A randomized controlled trial). Lancet Oncology, 13, 309 -318. 
 
Montgomery, S. & Asberg, M. (1979). A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to 
change. Br J Psyc hiatry, 134, 382 -389. 
 
North American Menopause Society. (2010). Menopause Practice: A clinician’s guide (4th ed.).  
Mayfield Heights, OH: Author.  
 
North American Menopause Society. (2014). Menopause Practice: A clinician’s guide (5th ed.).  
Mayfield Heigh ts, OH: Author.  
 
North American Menopause Society (2015). Nonhormonal management of menopause -
associated vasomotor symptoms. Menopause: The Journal of The North American Menopause 
Society, Vol 22(11), 1 -18. 
 
Rendall, M.J., Simonds, L.M., & Hunter, M.S. (2008). The hot flush beliefs scale: A tool for 
assessing thoughts and beliefs associated with the experience of menopausal hot flushes and 
night sweats. Maturitas: The European Menopause Journal, 60, 158 -169. 
 
Richard -Davis, G. & Mellons, M. (2013). Racia l and ethnic differences in the physiology and 
clinical symptoms of menopause. Seminars in Reproductive Medicine, 31(5), 380 -386. 
 
Sajatovic, M., Friedman, S.H., Schuermeyer, I.N., Safavi, R., Ignacio, R.V., Hays, R.W., West, 
J.A., & Blow, F.C. (2006). Men opause knowledge and subjective experience among peri - and 
postmenopausal women with bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and major depression. The Journal 
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 194(3), 173 -178. 
 
Sajatovic, M., Rosenthal, M.A., Plax, M.S., Meyer M.L., & Bingham C.R. (2003). Mental illness 
and menopause: A patient and family perspective. Journal of Gender Specific Medicine, 10, 44 -
47. 
 
Thurston, R.C., Ewing, L.J., Low, C.A., Christie, A.J., & Levine, M.D. (2014). Behavioral 
weight loss for the management  of menopausal hot flashes: A pilot study. Menopause, 22(1), 1 -
7. 
 
Thurston, R.C., Joffe, H., Soares, C.N., & Harlow, B.L. (2006). Physical activity and risk of 
vasomotor symptoms in women with and without a history of depression: Results from the 
Harvard Study of Moods and Cycles. Menopause, 13(4), 553 -560. 