Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 2be added to this document is also confidential and proprietary to BMS and must be kept in 
confidence in the same manner as the contents of this document.  Any person who receives 
this document without due authorization from BMS is requested t o return it to BMS or 
promptly destroy it. All other rights reserved. References to B MS in this protocol may apply 
to partners to which BMS has transferred obligations, eg, a Con tract Research Organization 
(CRO).
Replace all previous version(s) of the protocol with this revis ed protocol and please provide a copy 
of this revised protocol to all study pers onnel under your supervision, and archive the previous 
versions.
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 3DOCUMENT HISTORY
Document Date of Issue Summary of Change
Revised 
Protocol 0401-Feb-2019 Incorporates Amendments 03, 04, 05, and 06.
Revised 
Protocol 0309-May-2018This protocol revision is to clarify language, adjust criteria to 
improve subject selection and clarify allowable concomitant 
medication.
Revised 
Protocol 0210-Mar-2017 Incorporates Amendment 02 and Administrative Letter 01
Amendment 02 10-Mar-2017This amendment clarifies the target population (Inclusion/Exclu sion 
criteria), randomization stratification criteria , 
study procedures and sub-studies, training requirements for sit e staff, 
the process for adjudication, the duration of samples retention  for 
additional research and the duration of post drug follow-up.  T his 
amendment also updates the IND number and contact information for a new medical monitor..
Administrative 
Letter 0126-Jan-2017This administrative letter corrects the study schematic, eliminates 
inconsistencies in the standard treatment instructions and samp le 
collection conditions and clarifies that exploratory sub-study results 
for the MRI muscle biopsies will not be provided to the sites o r 
subjects. 
Revised 
Protocol 0120-Oct-2016 Incorporates Amendment 01
Amendment 01 20-Oct-2016This amendment corrects several inconsistencies and clarifies 
several study procedures. It also incorporates feedback from the  
FDA and CHMP regarding the study population and study design
Original 
Protocol08-Jul-2016 Not applicable
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
SUMMARY OF KEY CHANGES OF REVISED PROTOCOL 04
Section Number & Title Description of Change
Renumbered  Section 3.1.6, 
Post-Treatment Follow-up 
PeriodAdded information for the Open Label Extension Period for Japan and the Long Term Extension Period (from 
Amendments 04 and 06).
Section 3.3.1 , Inclusion 
Criteria, 2) Target Population, 
e)ii)Added MPA is a formulation for 
mycophenolate and therefore acceptable 
as an allowed immunosuppressant (from Amendment 06).
Section 3.3.2 , Exclusion 
Criteria, 3) Physical and Laboratory Test Findings, a)Added information regarding hepatitis B 
exclusion (from Amendment 03).
Section 3.4.1.1, Standard 
Treatment, second bulletAdded MPA is a formulation for 
mycophenolate and therefore acceptable 
as an allowed immunosuppressant (from Amendment 06).
Section 3.4.2.1, Prohibited MedicationsAdded statement that provisions for prohibited medication will continue during the long-term open label extension period (Amendment 05).
Section 3.5 , Discontinuation 
of Subjects following any Treatment with Study Drug, 4th paragraph, 10th bulletAdded information that subjects missing 5 
or more consecutive doses of abatacept 
for any reason between Week 24 and Week 76 should be discontinued (from Amendment 04)..
Section 4.4 , Method of 
Assigning Subject IdentificationAdded information for subjects in the 
Open Label Extension Period for Japan 
and the Long Term Extension Period(from Amendments 04 and 06).
Section 4.5.1 , Abatacept 
Treatment, 2nd paragraphAdded information for subjects in the Open Label Extension Period for Japan and the Long Term Extension Period(from Amendments 04 and 06).
Section 5.1 , Flow Chart/Time 
and Events Schedule,  Table 
5.1-1Added autoantibody testing at screening 
to be tested centrally if requested by sites 
in Brazil, Mexico, and the U.S. (from Amendment 06). 
Section 5.1, Flow Chart/Time 
and Events ScheduleAdded Tables 5.1-5  and 5.1-6  and 
renumbered former 5.1-5 to be 5.1-7
(from Amendment 06).
Section 5.1, Flow Chart/Time and Events Schedule, Table 5.1-5, Open Label Extension for Japan, Table Note cModified information to indicate the 
efficacy assessments may be recorded on 
paper if the electronic tablet (ePRO) is unavailable/not functioning for transmission of the data (from Amendment 06).
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 5
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
SYNOPSIS
Clinical Protocol IM101611
Protocol Title: A Phase 3, Randomized, Double-Bli nd Clinical Trial to Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of Abatacept 
SC with Standard Treatment Compared to Standard Treatment Alone  in Improving Disease Activity in Adults with 
Active Idiopathic Inflammatory Myopathy (IIM)
Investigational Product(s), Dose and Mode of Administration, Du ration of Treatment with Investigational 
Product(s): 
Subjects receive investigational products for a period of 4.5 ye ars. Investigational products are defined as:
•Abatacept SC 125 mg in 1 ml pre-filled syringes
•Placebo to match abatacept SC in 1 ml pre-filled syringes [24 we eks (6 months) in the double-blind period]
Study Phase: III
Research Hypothesis: Subcutaneous abatacept (125 mg weekly) in combination with stan dard treatment will achieve 
a higher rate of responders, defined as the percentage of subje cts who achieve the IMACS DOI  (International Myositis 
Assessment and Clinical Studies - definition of improvement), af ter 24 weeks of treatment versus standard treatment 
alone in adult subjects with active IIM.
Objectives: Primary Objective
The primary objective for this study is to compare the clinical  efficacy of weekly ab atacept in combination with 
standard treatment to standard treatment alone by assessing the  percentage of subjects who achieve the IMACS DOI 
by Wk 24 compared to baseline, defined as:
•An improvement of ≥20% in 3 IMACS core measures, AND
•No more than 2 IMACS core measure scores worsen by ≥25%, AND
•Manual Muscle Test (MMT-8) may not decrease by ≥25%
Secondary Objectives
1) To assess the clinical efficacy of weekly abatacept in combina tion with standard treatment to standard treatment 
alone by assessing the change i n muscle endurance test using th e Myositis Function Index (FI-2) from baseline 
to Wk 24. 
2) To assess the efficacy of ab atacept in combination with standard treatment to standard trea tment alone by 
assessing the mean change i n functional disability usi ng the Health Assessment Ques tionnaire-Disability Index 
(HAQ-DI) from baseline to Wk 24.
3) To assess the efficacy of ab atacept in combination with standard treatment to standard trea tment alone by 
assessing the mean change in extra-muscular disease activity as  defined by Myositis Disease Activity Assessment 
Tool (MDAAT) from baseline to Wk 24. 
4) To assess the efficacy of abatacept in combination with stand ard treatment to standard treatment alone in 
achieving improvement on the Myositis Response Criteria by asse ssing the mean change from baseline to Wk 24.
Study Design: This is a 24 week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,  multicenter, study in subjects with 
active Idiopathic In flammatory Myop athy (IIM: eg, Dermatomyosit is [DM], Polymyositis [PM], autoimmune 
necrotizing myopathy; see Section 3.3.1 Inclusion Criteria, (2) Target Population), on standard backgrou nd treatment. 
In addition to the 24 week double blind period, the study include s a 28 week open-label treatmen t period during which 
all subjects will receive SC abatacept, an add itional  24 weeks open label period of SC abatacept with continued thera py 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 8
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
from the original OL period for sites in Japan, and a 3 year long term extension of SC abat acept (156 weeks) with 
background treatment for all subjects except subjects in the U. S. and the Czech Republic.
The Primary Endpoint occurs at Wk 24, however assessments will be made throughout both periods to evaluate safety 
and efficacy.
Double-Blind Period (Day 1 - Week 24)
During this period, approximately 150 subjects will be randomiz ed to one of two parallel treatment arms in a 1:1 ratio. 
The treatment arms are as follows: 
Arm A: Active abatacept SC (125 mg) weekly + standard treatment
Arm B: Placebo abatacept SC weekly + standard treatment  
Open-Label Period (Week 24 - Week 52) 
After Week 24, all subjects will receive abatacept plus standar d therapy.
Open-Label Extension Period (Week 52-Week 76 -- for Japanese only subjects
For Japan subjects will receive abatacept plus standard therapy.
Long Term Extension (3 years)
All subjects (excluding subjects r andomized from the U.S. and t he Czech Republic) will receive abatacept plus 
standard therapy.
Rescue Therapy
Subjects who meet the criteria for worsening between Wk 12 and Wk 24 will be eligible for rescue therapy. See 
Section 3.1.4  for details. In the Open-Label Period, subjects may adjust bac kground treatment at any time.
Study Population: Men and women (not nursing or pregnant) ≥18 years old who have active idiopathic inflammatory 
myositis.  
Key Inclusion criteria: Target population
a) Diagnosis of Definite or Probable IIM (DM or PM) based on the  Bohan and Peter classification criteria (outlined 
in Appendix 3 ) 
i) Subjects with dermatomyositis (DM) must also have a confirmed  myositis-associated rash (Gottron’s 
papules or a heliotrope rash preferably confirmed by skin biops y) and 2 or more of the remaining 4 
criteria.
ii) Subjects with a diagnosis of IIM other than DM include PM, au toimmune necrotizing myopathy, 
myositis in association with another connective tissue disease (overlap myositis) and juvenile myositis 
subjects above the age of 18. These subjects must have a prior muscle biopsy diagnostic for IIM ora 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 9
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
positive test for at least one myositis-specific autoantibody ( anti-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (Jo-1, 
PL-7, PL-12, EJ, OJ, KS, Zo, YRS), anti-Mi-2, anti-SRP, anti-TI F1-γ, anti-NXP-2, anti-MDA5, anti-
SAE, anti-HMGCR). For subjects with overlap myositis, the myosi tis must be the principal clinically 
active manifestation of their disease.
Where applicable, documentation of prior skin biopsy, muscle bi opsy, and autoantibody results must be 
obtained and retained by the site
b) Demonstrable muscle w eakness measured by t he MMT-8 of ≤135 units andany 3 of the following:
i) MMT-8 ≤125 units
ii) Physician’s global assessment (PGA) VAS ≥2 cm
iii) Sub ject’s global assessment (SGA) VAS ≥2 cm
iv) HAQ-DI ≥0.5
v) One or more muscle enzyme (CK, aldolase, LDH, AST, ALT) ≥1.3 times upper limit of normal (ULN)
vi) MDAAT Extramuscular Global Activity VAS ≥2 cm
c) Demonstration of currently active IIM will be determined by a n adjudication committee ( Section 7.1 ) unless the 
subject has any one of the following:
i. an active myositis-associated rash (Gottron’s papules or heli otrope rash), or
ii. a recent (within 3 months prior to signing informed consent) b iopsy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
or electromyogram (EMG) demonstrating active disease, or
iii. an elevated CK > 5 times the upper limit of normal at scree ning with no alternate explanation or cause
d) Active disease despite adequate prior treatment experience wi th corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, or 
biologics as determined by the investigator
e) The subject must be on background standard treatment for IIM (Section 3.4.1.1 ). The standard treatments that are 
allowed as background treatment for IIM includes:
i. Corticosteroids alone ( Section 3.4.1.2 ), or
ii. One of the following immunosuppressants: methotrexate, azath ioprine, mycophenalate mofetil, 
tacrolimus, or cyclosporine (combinations of these treatments a re not allowed), or
iii. A combination of corticosteroids and one of the above immun osuppressants
• If using corticosteroids for IIM, the subject must have been o n corticosteroids for at least 12 weeks prior to 
randomization and a stable dose of corticosteroids for at least  4 weeks prior to randomization.   
• If using immunosuppressants other than azathioprine, the subje ct must have been on the same medication 
for at least 12 weeks and a stable dose for at least 4 weeks pri or to randomization.  
• If using azathioprine, the sub ject must  have been on azathiopr ine for at least 24 weeks with a stable dose 
for at least 12 weeks prior to randomization.
Key Exclusion criteria: Medical history and concurrent diseases
a) Subjects with Inclusion Body Myositis or myositis other than IIM, e.g. drug-induced myositis and PM associated 
with HIV.
b) Subjects treated with penicillamine or zidovudine in the past  3 months.
c) Subjects treated with rituximab in the 6 months prior to rand omization (there must be laboratory results indicating 
the presence of circulating B cells [CD19+]). Any other biologi c treatment in the past 3 months or immune 
globulin (intravenous [IVIG] or subcutaneous [SCIG]) in the pas t 3 months prior to randomization..
d) Subjects with uncontrolled or rapidly progressive interstitia l lung disease (at the discretion of the investigator)
e) Subjects with severe muscle damage (Myositis Damage Index > 7 /10), permanent weakness due to a non-IIM 
cause, or myositis with cardiac involvement
f) Cancer-associated myositis (myositis diagnosed within 2 years  of a diagnosis of cancer). See criteria (2i)
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 10
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
g) Subjects who are known to be positive for the anti-TIF-1 (p15 5/140) autoantibody prior to randomization who 
were diagnosed with IIM < 1 year prior to randomization.
h) Subjects at risk for tuberculosis i) Subjects with recent acute infection requiring antibiotics j) Subjects with history of chronic or recurrent bacterial or vi ral infections
k) Subjects with active systemic fungal infections (eg, histopla smosis, blastomycosis, or coccidiomycosis)
l) Subjects who have a present malignancy or have had a previous  malignancy within the last 5 years prior to 
screening (except for a documented history of cured non-metasta tic squamous or basal cell skin carcinoma or 
cervical carcinoma in situ).  Additional screening requirements  for malignancy are outlined in Sections 3.3.2  and 
3.3.4 .
Study Assessments: See Section 5 of the protocol for detailed information regarding study assess ments.
Statistical Considerations:
Sample Size : A sample size of 150 sub jects (75 sub jects per treatment group) is planned based  on the primary 
comparison of the proportion of subjects with IMACS DOI (as def ined under the primary objective) at Day 169 
(Week 24) between the SC abatacept group and the placebo group o n a background of standard treatment.
A sample size of 150 subjects randomized in a 1:1 ratio to the SC abatacept group and p lacebo group will yield a 
power of approximately 90% to detect a treatment difference of 27% in the rate of IMACS DOI between the 
2 treatment groups based on a continuity corrected chi-squared t est. This power estimate assumes a two-sided alpha 
level of 5%, IMACS DOI rate of 60% in the abatacept group and 3 3% in the placebo group.
The 60% estimate of IMACS DOI i n the abatacept gr oup was based on reported rates of IMACS DOI in studies of 
patients with Myositis on combination therapy with another biol ogic agent
36. It is expected th at the rate of IMACS 
DOI on abatacept in combination with standard treatment should b e similar to that observed with the use of another 
biologic agent in combination with standard treatment. Randomiz ation will be stratified g lobally by 3 stratification 
variables: (1) Dermatomyositis (DM) vs non-DM IIM, (2) presence  or absence of Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD), (3) 
Japan vs rest of world (ROW).
Endpoints :
Primary Endpoint  
•Proportion of subjects who achieve IMACS DOI at Week 24 without  rescue
Secondary Endpoints 
•Mean change in muscle endurance using the myositis function ind ex (FI-2) from baseline to Weeks 12 and 24. 
•Mean change in Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI) from baseline to Weeks 12 and 
24.
•Mean change in Myositis Disease Activity Assessment Tool (MDAAT ) from baseline to Weeks 12 and 24.
•Mean change in Myositis Response Criteria score from baseline t o Weeks 12 and 24.
Safety Endpoints
•All adverse events (AEs/SAEs)
•AEs of interest (serious infections, malignancies, injection si te reactions, systemic reactions)
•Laboratory test abnormalities
Analyses :
To assess the primary endpoint for this st udy an analysis ( Week 24 Analysis) w ill be performed once all subjects 
complete their Week 24 visit assessments or discontinue prematu rely prior to Week 24. The Week 24 analysis will 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 11
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
include analyses of the primary, secondary and exploratory endp oints. The primary comparison of proportion of 
subjects in IMACS DOI at Week 24 between the abatacept and plac ebo arms will be assessed using a logistic 
regression model. The logistic regression model will include ba seline IMACS (continuous variable) and 
randomization stratification variables of diagnosis (Dermatomyo sitis [DM] vs non-DM IIM), Interstitial Lung disease 
status (present vs. absent), Japan vs. ROW to account for random ization stratification. All s ubjects who discontinue 
prematurely prior to reaching the Week 24 assessment visit, wil l be considered as not achieving IMACS DOI for the 
primary analysis. No formal statistical testing will be conduct ed for analyses related to the secondary and exploratory 
endpoints. Appropriate summary statistics will be provided for the analysis of each endpoint.
Safety summaries for the Week 24 analysis w ill include all adverse events (AEs ) reported during the D ouble-Blind 
Period and presented by treatment groups (abatacept vs. placebo ). AEs will be summarized from the first dose date in 
the study up to first dose date in the Open-Label Period or las t dose date in the  Double-Blind Peri od + 56 days for 
subjects who prematurely discontinued the study during the Doub le-Blind Period.
In accordance with an intent-to-treat approach, all available d ata from all subjects who receive at least one infusion of 
a treatment regimen being assessed at any time will be included  in the safety and efficacy analyses. Detailed definition 
of population for analyses will be included in the protocol.
An analyses will be performed for the study once all subjects c omplete their week 52 assessment and/or all follow-up 
visits up to 168 days post last dose visit.
An analysis for the long-term efficacy and safety for subjects from Japan will be performed including data collected 
up to Week 76.
A final analysis will be performed for the study when all subje cts complete the long-term open label extension and/or 
the follow-up period of the study.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 12
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
APPENDIX 1 HIGHLY EFFECTIVE METHODS OF CONTRACEPTION ............. 
APPENDIX 2 LABORATORY GUIDELINES: PATIENT STUDIES (REVISED 
AUGUST 13, 1999) ................................................................................................ 
APPENDIX 3 BOHAN AND PETER CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA ..................... APPENDIX 4 REVISED PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGE HISTORY ........ 124
126
128
129Clinical Protocol
BMS-188667IM101611
abatacept
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 17
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 Research Hypothesis 
Subcutaneous abatacept (125 mg weekly) in combination with stan dard treatment w ill achieve a 
higher rate of responders, defined as the percentage of subject s who achieve the IMACS DOI, after 
24 weeks of treatment versus standard treatment alone in adult s ubjects with active IIM.
1.3 Objectives(s)
1.3.1 Primary Objectives
The primary objective for this study is to compare the clinical  efficacy of weekly abatacept in 
combination with standard treatment to standard treatment alone  by assessing the percentage of 
subjects who achieve the IMACS DOI by Wk 24 compared to baseline, defined as:
•An improvement of ≥20% in 3 IMACS core measures, AND
•No more than 2 IMACS core measure scores worsen by ≥25%, AND
•Manual Muscle Test (MMT-8) may not decrease by ≥25%
1.3.2 Secondary Objectives
1) To assess the clinical efficacy of weekly abatacept in combin ation with standard treatment to 
standard treatment alone by assessing the change in muscle endu rance test using the Myositis 
Function Index (FI-2) from baseline to Wk 24. 
2) To assess the efficacy of abatacept in combination with standa rd treatment to standard 
treatment alone by assessing the mean change in functional disa bility using the Health 
Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI) from baselin e to Wk 24.
3) To assess the efficacy of abat acept in combination with stand ard treatment to standard 
treatment alone by assessing the mean change in extra-muscular disease activity as defined by 
Myositis Disease Activity Assessment Tool (MDAAT) from baseline  to Wk 24. 
4) To assess the efficacy of abat acept in combination with stand ard treatment to standard 
treatment alone in achieving improvement on the Myositis Respon se Criteria by assessing the 
mean change from baseline to Wk 24.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 23
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
2.1 Good Clinical Practice
This study will be conducted in accordance with Good Clinical P ractice (GCP), as defined by the 
International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) and in accordan ce with the ethical principles 
underlying European Union Dir ective 2001/20/EC and the United S tates Code of Federal 
Regulations, Title 21, Part 50 (21CFR50) and applicable local requirements.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 29
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
The study will be conducted in compliance with the protocol. Th e protocol and any amendments 
and the subject informed consent w ill receive Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics 
Committee (IRB/IEC) approval/favorabl e opinion pri or to initiat ion of the study.
All potential serious breaches must be reported to Sponsor or d esignee immediately. If required as 
per local regulation, serious breaches will be reported by Spon sor or designee to applicable 
authorities. A breach of the conditions and principles of Good Clinical Practice (GCP) (occurring 
in any country) in c onnection with that trial or the protocol related to the trial which is likely to 
affect to a significant de gree the safety or physical  or mental integr ity of 1 or more subj ects of the 
trial or the scientific value of the trial.
Personnel involved in conducting this study will be qualified b y education, training, and 
experience to perform their respective tasks.
This study will not use the services of study personnel where s anctions have been invoked or where 
there has been scientific misconduct or fraud (e.g., loss of me dical licensure, debarment). 
2.2 Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics Committee 
Before study initiation, the investigator must have written and  dated approval/favorable opinion 
from the IRB/IEC for the protocol, consent form, subject recrui tment materials 
(e.g., advertisements), and any other written i nformation to be provided to subjects. The 
investigator, Sponsor or designee should also provide the IRB/IE C with a copy of the Investigator 
Brochure or product labeling information to be provided to subje cts and any updates. 
The investigator, Sponsor or designee s hould provide the IRB/IEC with reports, updates a nd other 
information (e.g., exped ited safety reports, amendments, and ad ministrative letters) according to 
regulatory requirements or institution procedures.
2.3 Informed Consent
Investigators must ensure that subjects are clearly and fully i nformed about the purpose, potential 
risks, and other cri tical issues regardi ng clinical studies in which they volunteer to participate. 
In situations where consent cannot be given by subjects, their l egally acceptable representatives
(as per country guidelines) are clearly and fully informed abou t the purpose, po tential risks, and 
other critical issues regarding clinical studies in which the s ubject volunteers to participate. 
Sponsor or designee will provide the investigator with an approp riate (i.e., Global or Local) sample 
informed consent form w hich will include all elements required by ICH, GCP and applicable 
regulatory requirements. The sample informed consent form will adhere to the ethical principles 
that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.
Investigators must:
•Provide a copy of the consent form and written information abou t the study in the language in 
which the subject is most proficient prior to clinical study pa rticipation. The language must be 
non-technical and easily understood. 
•Allow time necessary for the subject or the subject's legally a cceptable representative to inquire 
about the details of the study.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 30
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
•Obtain an informed consent signed and personally dated by the s ubject or the subject's legally 
acceptable representative and by the person who conducted the i nformed consent discussion. 
•Obtain the IRB/IEC’s written approval/favorable opinion of the written informed consent form 
and any other information to be provided to the subjects, prior  to the beginning of the study, 
and after any revisions are completed for new information.
•If informed consent is initially given by a subject’s legally a cceptable representative or legal 
guardian, and the subject subsequently becomes capable of makin g and communicating his or 
her informed consent during the study, consent must additionally be obtained from the subject.
•Revise the informed consent whenever important new information becomes available that is 
relevant to the subject's consent. The investigator, or a perso n designated by the investigator, 
should fully i nform the sub ject or the subject' s legally accept able representative or legal 
guardian, of all pertinent aspects of the study and of any new i nformation relevant to the 
subject's willingness to continue participation in the study. T his communication should be 
documented. 
The confidentiality of records that could identify subjects mus t be protected, respecting the privacy 
and confidentiality rules applicable to regulatory requirements , the subjects' signed ICF and, in the 
US, the subjects’ signed HIPAA Authorization.
The consent form must also include a statement that BMS and reg ulatory authorities have direct 
access to s ubject records. 
Subjects unable to give their written consent (e.g., due to strok e or subjects with or severe 
dementia) may only be enrolled in the st udy with the consent of a legally acceptable represen tative. 
The subject must also be informed a bout the nature of the study  to the extent compatible with his 
or her understanding, and s hould this subject become capable, he or she should person ally sign 
and date the consent form as soon as possible. The explicit wis h of a subject who is unable to give 
his or her written consent, but who is capable of forming an op inion and assessing information to 
refuse participation in, or to be withdrawn from, the clinical study at any time should be considered 
by the investigator.
For minors, according to local regulations, one or both parents  or a legally acceptable 
representative must be informed of the study procedures and mus t sign the informed consent form 
approved for the study prior to clinical study participation.  In such cases, records on the 
relationship between the subject and the proxy consenter should  be maintained with those of the 
consent.  The explicit wish of a minor who is capable of formin g an opinion and assessing this 
information to refuse participation i n, or to be wit hdrawn from, the clinical study at a ny time should 
be considered by the investigation.
The rights, safety, and well-being of the study subjects are th e most important considerations and 
should prevail over interests of science and society.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 31
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
3 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
3.1 Study Design and Duration
This is a 24 week, Phase 3, ra ndomized, double-blind, placebo-co ntrolled, multicenter, st udy in 
subjects with active Idiopathic Inflammatory Myopathy (IIM; eg, DM, PM, autoimmune 
necrotizing myopathy; see Section 3.3.1 ) on standard background treatment.  
In addition to the 24-week double-blind period, the study inclu des a 28 week open-label treatment 
period during which all sub jects will receive SC abatacept with background tr eatment, an 
additional 24 weeks open label of SC abatacept with continued t herapy from the original OL period
for subjects in Japan, and a 3 year long term extension of SC aba tacept (156 weeks) with 
background treatment for all subjects except subjects in the U.S.  and the Czech Republic. 
The primary objective for this study is to compare the clinical  efficacy of weekly abatacept in 
combination with standard treatment to standard treatment alone  by assessing the percentage of
subjects who achieve the IMACS DOI after 24 weeks of treatment versus standard treatment alone 
in adult subjects with active IIM. The study design schematic is  presented in Figure 3.1-1.
Figure 3.1-1: Study Design Schematic
The start of the trial is defined as the first visit for the fi rst subject screened. The end of the trial is 
defined as the last visit or scheduled procedure shown in the T ime & Events schedule for the last 
subject. Study completion is defined as the final date on which  data for the primary endpoint was
or is expected to be collected.
3.1.1 Screening Period
Eligibility will be based on specified inclusion and exclusion criteria, medical history, disease 
activity and safety assessments (see Table 5.1-1 ). Randomization must occur within four weeks of 
signing the informed consent. However, subjects may extend the screening period beyond 4 weeks, 
but not beyond a total of 6 weeks (42 days), from the signing of  the informed consent. 
Subjects who extend the screening period beyond 4 weeks may be required to repeat some 
screening assessments. If more than 6 weeks is required, e.g. in itiation of treatment for latent TB, 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 32
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
a subject should be screen failed and re-enrolled when appropri ate. Screening for malignancy is 
expected to have been performe d prior to t he Screening Period ( Section 3.3.4 ).
3.1.2 Double-Blind Period (Day 1 - Week 24)
During this period, approximately 150 subjects w ill be rando mized in a 1:1 ratio to one of two 
parallel arms in a double-blinded manner as follows (see Table 5.1-2 ):
Arm A : Active abatacept SC (125 mg) weekly + standard treatment
Arm B: Placebo abatacept SC weekly + standard treatment
At the time of randomization, subjects must be on a stable back ground treatment (“standard 
treatment” see Section 3.4.1.1 ) for IIM. No adjustment in background tr eatment w ill be allowed 
during this Period. Rando mization will be s tratified globally by 3 stratification variab les: 
(1) Dermatomyositis (DM) vs non-DM IIM, and (2) presence or abse nce of interstitial lung disease 
(ILD), (3) Japan vs Rest of World (ROW). 
Rescue therapy will be available for subjects who meet the dise ase worsening criteria during the 
double-blind period as defined in  Section 3.1.4 .
During this period, subjects who have clinically active or relevant interstitial l ung disease (ILD) 
or anti-synthetase s yndrome as determined by the investigator m ust undergo pulmonary function 
testing and high-resolution CT (HRCT) scan of the chest during screening (prior to Day 1) and 
may have repeat pulmonary function testing (PFT) and HRCT scan at  Wk 24. (See  Section 5.3.6
and Section 5.3.7.2 ) 
Subjects who participate in the sub-study of MRI muscle (thighs)  imaging will have an MRI 
performed during screening (prior to Day 1) and Wk 24. See Section 5.8.2
Subjects who participate in the sub-study of muscle biopsy will have a muscle biopsy performed 
during screening (prior to Day 1) and Wk 24. See Section 5.8.3
Subjects who discontinue treatment with study medication during  the Double-blind Period will 
complete the Early Termination visit (which is the same visit a s Day 169 visit) (See Table 5.1-2). 
These subjects must also return on the previously scheduled Dou ble-blind Period Day 169 to 
complete the Post-Study Drug Efficacy Visit (see Table 5.1-4 ). The purpose of this visit is to assess 
all aspects of disease activity to ascertain the impact of stud y participation for regulatory review. 
Subjects must also complete 2 follow- up visits (85 and 169 days afte r the last dose) during the 24 
week post-treatment follow-up period, to perform safety and lab oratory assessments (See  Table  
5.1-7 Post-Treatment Follow-Up Period). This Period begins on the day  of the Early Termination 
visit and applies only to subjects who do not start commercial abatacept therapy.
3.1.3 Open-Label Period (Week 24 - Week 52) and Open-Label Extension 
Period (Week 52 - Week 76) for Japan
The 24-week Double-Blind Period is followed by a 28 week open-l abel abatacept treatment period 
(Open-Label Period, see Table 5.1-3 ). During this period, subjects initially randomized to receive  
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 33
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
the combination of abatacept and standard treatment will contin ue this regimen. Subjects who are 
initially assigned to receive standard treatment alone will be switched to standard treatment plus 
abatacept.
There will also be a 24 weeks (168 days) open label extension f or subjects randomized in Japan.
Background treatment may be adjusted (including the dose of cor ticosteroids and 
immunosuppressants) at any time during this period. Use of immu ne globulin (intravenous [IVIG] 
or subcutaneous [SCIG] is permitted during this peri od. Addition of a ny other prohibited 
medication ( Section 3.4.2.1 ) is not permitted.
During this period, subjects who have clinically active or relevant interstitial l ung disease (ILD) 
or anti-synthetase syndrome as determined by the investigator, may have to repeat pulmonary 
function testing and HRCT scan of the chest at Wk 52. (See Section 5.3.6 and Secti on 5.3.7.2 ) and 
at Wk 76 for Japan.
Subjects who participate in the sub-study of MRI muscle (thigh) imaging will have an MRI 
performed at Wk 52. See  Section 5.8.2
Subjects who discont inue treatment with  abatacept during the Op en-Label Period or Open Label 
Extension for Japan w ill complete the Early Termination visit for the OL (See Table 5.1-3 day 365 
is also the OL ET) and 2 follow-up visits during the 24 week po st-treatment follow- up period, to 
perform safety and laboratory assessments. (See Table 5.1-7 ). If the subject receives treatment 
with an alternate source of aba tacept (Post-Study Drug Program [PSDP] or Commercial), 
completing this post-treatment follow-up period is not required . 
Treatment with other biologic therapy is not recommended for at  least 70 days ( ∼5 half-lives of 
abatacept follo w-up period.
3.1.4 Long Term Open Label Extension for Subjects Randomized in 
Countries Other than the U.S. and the Czech Republic
There will be a three year long term extension period for subje cts randomized in c ountries other 
than the U.S. and the Czech Republic.
All subjects alone will receive standard treatment plus abatacep t.
Subjects who discontinue treatment with abatacept during the Lo ng Term Extension Open-Label 
Period will complete the Early Termination visit for the OL and  two follow-up visits to perform 
safety and laboratory assessments. (See Table 5.1-7). If the sub ject receives t reatment with an 
alternate source of abatacept (Post-Study Drug Program [PSDP] o r Commercial), completing this 
post-treatment follow-up period is not required. 
3.1.5 Rescue Therapy
Double-Blind Period (Day 1 to Wk 24)
Subjects in either treatment group who meet the criteria for worsening at any visit between 
Weeks 12 and 24 are permitted to use rescue therapy. Rescue is n ot permitted before Week 12 and 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 34
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
subjects who require a change in therapy due to worsening of th eir disease must discontinue from 
the study. Beginning at Week 12, if a subject meets criteria fo r worsening, the investigator will be 
notified by means of a Disease Worsening Report generated after  efficacy assessments are 
completed and uploaded via an electronic tablet (ePRO).
The use of rescue therapy is at the discretion of the investigat or; however, rescue treatment may 
not be abatacept or a prohibited medication (See Section 3.4.2.1 ). Allowable medication are 
restricted to allowable concomitant medication ( Secti on 3.4.1.1 Standard Treatment). Rescue 
therapy includes increases in dose of current therapy, addition  of therapy and change in therapy, 
all with some restrictions such that allowable rescue therapy m eets the criteria for allowable 
standard treatment. The following changes are allowable as resc ue therapy:
1) Subjects on corticosteroid (CS) alone can:
a) increase dose (to no more than 30 mg/day of prednisone or pre dnisone equivalent [3.4.1.2
Corticosteroid medications]), or 
b) initiate an allowable immunosuppressant, with or without incr ease in CS, or
c) discontinue CS and initiate an allowable immunosuppressant (S ection 3.4.1.1 Standard 
Treatment)
2) Subjects on allowable immunosuppressant (MTX, AZA, MMF, MPA, tacrolimus, or 
cyclosporine) alone can: 
a) increase dose of the current immunosuppressant, orb) stop current immunosuppressant and start a new allowable immu nosuppressant, or 
c) add CS ( Secti on 3.4.1.2 Corticosteroid medications)
3) Subjects on allowable immunosuppressant and CS can:
a) increase dose of immunosuppressant, orb) increase dose of CS  (Section 3.4.1.2 Cor ticosteroid medication s) , or
c) increase dose of both (following guidelines), or
d) stop current immunosuppressant and start a new allowable immu nosuppressant with or 
without increase in CS.
Rescued subjects w ill remain blinded to study med ication th rough Week 24 and w ill begin 
Open-Label abat acept afte r Week 24, however they w ill be considered not to have achieved the 
IMACS DOI for the purpose of the primary efficacy analysis. 
The criteria for worsening are:
1) Physician’s global assessment worsening by ≥2 cm on the VAS andworsening of ≥20% on 
the MMT-8 score compared to baseline, or
2) Physician’s global assessment worsening by ≥2 cm on the VAS and  global extramuscular 
activity wors ening by ≥2 cm on the MDAAT Extramuscular Global Activity VAS compared 
to baseline, or
3) Any 3 of 6 IMACS components worsening by ≥30% compared to baseline on 2 consecutive 
visits
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 35
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Subjects who fail rescue therapy, as determined by the investig ator, must discontinue from the 
study. These subjects must follow the same T&E schedule for oth er subjects who early terminate 
in the double-blind tr eatment period (see Section 3.1.2 )
Open-Label Period (Wk 24 to Wk 52 or to Wk 76 for Japan)
There is no rescue treatment in the Open-Label Period. Backgrou nd treatment may be adjusted as 
described in Section 3.1.3 .
Long Term Extension (3 Years Treatment for subjects randomized in countries other than the U.S. 
and the Czech Republic)
Background treatment may be adjusted as described in Section 3. 1.3.
3.1.6 Post-Treatment Follow-Up Period
The Post-Treatment Follow-Up Period (see Table 5.1-7 ) will last 24 weeks (169 days).  The Post-
Treatment Follow-Up is required for subjects who discontinue st udy treatment and do not start 
abatacept from an alternative source.  This applies to subjects  who either complete or early 
terminate any of the study peri ods (DB, OL, OL-EXT, or LTE). The  purpose of this Period is to 
perform safety and laboratory assessments.
3.2 Post-Study Access to Study Drug
At the conclusion of the study, participants who continue to de monstrate clinical benefit with study 
drug, ie abatacept, w ill be eligible to receive BMS supplied st udy drug as part of the a Post-Study 
Drug Program (PSDP). Study drug will be provided via an extensi on of the study, a rollover study 
requiring approval by responsible h ealth authority and ethics co mmittee or through another 
mechanism at the discretion of BMS. BMS reserves the right to t erminate access to BMS supplied 
study drug if any of the following occur: a) the study is termi nated due to safety concerns; b) the 
development of abatacept for this indication is terminated for o ther reasons, including but not 
limited to lack of efficacy and/or not meeting the study object ives; c) the participant can obtain 
medication from a government sponsored or private health program . In all cases BMS will follow 
local regulation.
Treatment codes will be provided to the investigators after com pletion of the study.
3.3 Study Population
For entry into the study, the following criteria MUST be met.
3.3.1 Inclusion Criteria
1) Signed Written Informed Consent
a) Subject is willing to participate in the study and has signed  the informed consent. See 
Section 2.3
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 36
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
2) Target Population
a) Diagnosis of Definite or Probable IIM (DM or PM) based on the Bohan and Peter 
classification criteria (outlined in  Appendix 3 )
i) Subjects with dermatomyositis (DM) must also have a confirmed  myositis-associated 
rash (Gottron’s papules or a heliotrope rash preferably confirm ed by skin biopsy) and 
2 or more of t he remaining 4 criteria.
ii) Subjects with a diagnosis of IIM other than dermatomyositis include PM, autoimmune 
necrotizing myopathy, myositis in association with another conn ective tissue disease 
(overlap myositis) and juvenile myositis subjects above the age  of 18. These subjects 
must have a prior muscle biopsy dia gnostic for IIM ora prior positive test for at least 
one myositis-specific autoantibody (anti-aminoacyl-tRNA synthet ases (Jo-1, PL-7, 
PL-12, EJ, OJ, KS, Zo, YRS), anti-Mi-2, anti-SRP, anti-TIF1- γ, anti-NXP-2, 
anti-MDA5, anti-SAE, anti-HMGCR). For subjects with overlap myo sitis, the myositis 
must be the principal clinically active manifestation of their disease.
Where applicable, doc umentation of prior sk in biopsy, muscle bi opsy, and 
autoantibody results must be obtained and retained by the site
b) Demonstrable muscle weakness measured by the MMT- 8 of ≤135 units andany 3 of the 
following:
i) MMT-8 ≤125 units
ii) Physician’s global assessment (PGA) VAS ≥2 cm
iii) Sub ject’s global assessment (SGA) VAS ≥2 cm
iv) HAQ-DI ≥0.5
v) One or more muscle enzyme (CK, aldolase, LDH, AST, ALT) ≥1.3 times upper limit 
of normal (ULN)
vi) MDAAT Extramuscular Global Activity VAS ≥2c m
c) Demonstration of currently active IIM w ill be d etermined by an adjudication committee 
(Section 7.1 ) unless the subject ha s any one of the following:
i) an active myositis-associated rash (Gottron’s papules or heli otrope rash), or
ii) a recent (within 3 months prior to signing informed consent)  biopsy, magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), or electromyogram (EMG) demonstrating active disease 
(documentation must  be obtained and retained by the site), or
iii) an elevated CK > 5 times the upper limit of normal at screen ing with no alternate 
explanation or cause
d) Active disease despite adequate prior treatment experience wi th corticosteroids,
immunosuppressants, or biologics as  determined by the investiga tor
e) The subject must be on bac kground standard treatm ent for IIM (Secti on 3.4.1.1 ). The 
standard treatments that are allowed as background treatment fo r IIM includes:
i) Corticosteroids alone ( Section 3.4.1.2 ), or
ii) One of the followi ng immunosuppressants: methotrexate, azathi oprine, mycophenolate
[any formulation of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) or mycophenolic  acid (MPA)], 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 37
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
tacrolimus, or cyclosporine (comb inations of these treatments a re not allowed during 
the Double-Blind Period), or
iii) A combinatio n of corticosteroids and one of the above immunosuppressants
•If using corticosteroids for IIM, the subject must have been on  corticosteroids for 
at least 12 weeks prior to randomization and a stable dose of c orticosteroids for at 
least 4 weeks prior to randomization.   
•If using immunosuppressants other than azathioprine, the subjec t must have been 
on the same medication for at least 12 weeks and a stable dose for at least 4 weeks 
prior to randomization.  
•If using azathioprine, the subject must have been on azathiopri ne for at least 
24 weeks with a stable dose for at least 12 weeks prior to rando mization.
f) Subject Re-enrollment: This study permits one re-enrollment o f a subject that has 
discontinued the study as a pre-treatment failure (ie, “screen failure”, the subject has not 
been randomized /has not bee n treated) for any reason (see Section 5.1.1 ). 
3) Age and Reproductive Status
a) Men and Women, age ≥18 or age of majority
b) Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) must have a negative serum or urine 
pregnancy test (minimum sensitivity 25 IU/L or equivalent units  of HCG) within 24 hours 
prior to the start of study drug.
c) Women must not be breastfeeding
d) WOCBP must agree to follow instructions for method(s) of cont raception for the duration 
of treatment with study drug(s) (abatacept) plus 5 half-lives of  study drug (70 days) plus 
30 days (duration of ovulatory cycle) for a total of 100 days p ost-treatment completion
e) Men who are sexually active with WOCBP must agree to follow i nstructions for method(s) 
of contraception for the duration of treatment with study drug( s) (abatacept) plus 
5 half-lives of the study drug (70 days) plus 90 days (duration o f sperm turnove r) for a t otal 
of 160 days post-tr eatment completio n. In addition, male subjects must be willing to refrain 
from sperm donati on during this time. 
f) Azoospermic males are exemp t from cont raceptive requir ements. WOCBP who are 
continuously not heterosexually active are also exempt from con traceptive requirements, 
and st ill must  undergo pregnancy testing as described in this section.
Investigators shall counsel WOCBP, and male subjects who are se xually active with WOCBP, on 
the importance of pregnancy prevention and the implications of an unexpected pregnancy. 
Investigators shall advise on th e use of highly effective metho ds of contraception ( Appendix 1 ), 
which have a failure rate of < 1% when used consistently and co rrectly. It is expected that 
investigators will refer to the P roduct Insert, as w ell as local regu lations and guid elines for 
prevention of pregnancy appropri ate for the standard background  treatment being used by 
individual subjects. 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 38
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
3.3.2 Exclusion Criteria
1) Target Disease Exceptions
a) Subjects with Inclusion Body Myositis, or myositis other than IIM, eg, drug-induced 
myositis and PM associated with HIV.
b) Subjects treated with penicillamine or zidovudine in the past  3 months.
c) Subjects treated with rituximab in the 6 months prior to rand omization (there must be 
laboratory results indicating the presence of circulating B cel ls (CD19+). Any other 
b i o l o g i c  t r e a t m e n t  i n  t h e  p a s t  3  m o n t h s  o r  i m m u n e  g l o b u l i n  ( i n t ravenous [IVIG] or 
subcutaneous [SCIG]) in the past 3 months prior to randomizatio n.
d) Subjects with uncontrolled or rapidly progressive interstitia l lung disease (at the discretion 
of the investigator).
e) Subjects with severe muscle damage (Physician VAS for muscle damage in Myositis 
Damage Index > 7 cm on a 10 cm scale), permanent weakness due t o a non-IIM cause 
(eg. stroke), or myositis with cardiac involvement.
f) Cancer-associated myositis (myositis diagnosed within 2 years  of a diagnosis of cancer). 
See criteria (2i)
g) Subjects who are known to be positive for the anti-TIF1- γ(p155/140) autoantibody prior 
to randomization who were diagnosed with IIM < 1 year prior to randomization.
2) Medical History and Concurrent Diseases
a) Subjects with severe pulmonary disease due to IIM requiring s upplemental oxygen or who 
have required mechanical breathing assistance (ventilator) withi n 1 year of signing 
informed consent. 
b) Subjects who, at the disc retion of the investigat or, have severe muscle damage evidenced 
by severe, clinically apparent muscle atrophy, or persistent we akness without evidence of 
active inflammatory disease.
c) Subjects at risk for tuberculosis (TB) defined as follows:
i) Current clinical, radiographic or laboratory evidence of acti ve TB, even if currently 
being treated. Chest X-rays (posterior/anterior and lateral) ob tained within the  6 months 
prior to screening and TB testing (IFN- γrelease assay or PPD) performed in the past 
month prior to screening will be accepted; however, a copy of t he reports must be 
placed in the subject binder.
ii) A history of active or latent TB unless there is documen tation that the subject had 
received prior anti-TB treatment that was appropriate in durati on and type according to 
local health aut hority guid elines.
iii) Subjects with a positive TB screening test indicative of la tent TB will not  be eligible 
for the study unless they:
(1) Have no evidence of current TB based on chest X-ray performe d during the 
screening period and by history and physical exam, and
(2) They are currently being treated for latent TB or the site h as documentation of 
successful prior treatment of latent TB. Treatment regimens sho uld be dictated by 
local guidelines as long as the tr eatment dose and duration meet or ex ceed lo cal 
health authority guidelines. If permitted by local guidelines r egarding treatment 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 39
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
with biologic medications, subjects with latent TB may be rando mized prior to 
completion of treatment as long as they have completed at least  4 weeks of 
treatment and they have no evidence of current TB on chest X-ra y at screening.
iv) In some cases, subjects wit h a positive TB screeni ng test, but no clinical or radiologic 
evidence of active disease may not require treatment to be eligible for the study 
(eg, positive TB screening test due to fully treated prior infect ion). All such cases 
require approval by the Medical Monitor.
d) Subjects with recent acute infection defined as:
i) Any acute infection within 60 days prior to randomization tha t required hospitalization 
or treatment with parenteral antibiotics 
ii) Any acute infection within 30 days prior to r andomization th at required oral 
antimicrobial or antiviral therapy
e) Subjects with history of chronic or recurrent bacterial infec tion (such as chronic 
pyelonephritis, osteomyelitis, bronchiectasis, infection of a j oint prosthesis or artificial 
joint) or serious latent viral infections at the time of enroll ment, including subjects with 
evidence of Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection
f) Subjects with active systemic fungal infections (eg, histopla smosis, blastomycosis, or 
coccidiomycosis)
g) Subjects with history of recurrent herpes zoster (more than 1  episode/year) or disseminated 
(more than 1 dermatome) herpes zoster or disseminated herpes si mplex, or ophthalmic 
zoster will be excluded. Symptoms of herpes zoster or herpes si mplex must have resolved 
more than 60 days prior to signing informed consent.
h) Subjects with history of primary or secondary immunodeficienc y
i) Subjects who have 1) a present malignancy or 2) a previous ma lignancy within the last 
5 years prior to screening (except documented history of cured n on-metastatic squamous 
or basal cell skin carcinoma or cervical carcinoma in situ). Su bjects who had a screening 
procedure that is suspicious for malignancy, and in whom the po ssibility of m alignancy 
cannot be reasonably excluded following additional clinical, la boratory or other diagnostic 
evaluations. Additional screening recommendations for malignancy  are outlined in 
Section 3.3.4 .
j) Current symptoms of severe, progressive, or uncontrolled rena l, hepatic, hematological, 
gastrointestinal, pulmonary, ps ychiatric, cardiac, neurological , or cerebral disease 
including severe and uncontrolled infections, such as sepsis an d opportunistic infections. 
Concomitant medical conditions that, in the opinion of the inve stigator, might place the 
subject at unacceptable risk for participation in this study
k) Subjects who have received any live vaccines within 3 months of the study drug 
administration or are scheduled  to receive live vaccines during  the study. Study subjects 
also should not be administered a live virus vaccine for a mini mum of 3 months following 
the last dose of st udy medication. Subjects who are in close con tact with others who have 
received a live vaccin e (e.g., live po lio vaccine) may be enrol led at the investigator’s 
discretion.
l) Subjects who have undergone a major surgical procedure, or an y surgery that involves the 
placement of a device or implant, within the 60 days prior to r andomization.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 40
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
m) Subjects with a history of (within 12 months of signing infor med consent), or known 
current problems with drug or alcohol abuse history or known ci rrhosis including alcoholic 
cirrhosis
n) Subjects who are impaired, incapacitated, or incapable of com pleting study related 
assessments
o) Subjects who have previously been treated with abatacept.
3) Physical and Laboratory Test Findings
a) Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive, orHepatitis B core antibody 
(HBcAb)-positive subjects with detectable Hepatitis B viral DNA , andwhere required by 
local regulations or standard pr actice Hepatitis B surface anti body (HBsAb)-positive 
subjects with detectable Hepatitis B viral DNA.
NOTE:  For Japan only subjects
Subjects at risk for Hepatitis B virus (HBV), specifically subj ects with:
(1) Hepatitis B surface antigen (+)
(2) Hepatitis B surface antigen (-) but Hepatitis B surface anti body  (+) or Hepatitis B 
core antibody (+) with Hepatitis  B virus DNA ൒1 . 1L o gc o p y/ m L ሺ20IU/mL ሻ.
     Subjects who are ne gative HBs antigen but positive anti-HB s antibody  or positive anti-
HBc antibody with Hepatitis B  virus DNA < 2.l Log copy /mL (20 IU /mL) can be 
enrolled in the study but must undergo periodic monitoring of HBV DNA and liver 
enzumes such as AST and ALT.  M onitoring should be  performed on  a monthly basis 
after initiation of tr eatment, for six months.  After 6 months, interval and duration  
should be decided at the investigator’s discretion and in accor dance with local 
guidelines.
b) Hepatitis C antibody (HcAb)-positive subjects with detectable Hepatitis C viral RNA
c) Hemoglobin (Hgb) < 8.5 g/dl
d) White Blood Count (WBC) < 3,000/mm3(3 x 109/L)
e) Platelets  < 100,000/mm3(100 x 109/L)
f) Creatinine clearance < 50 mL/min (Cockroft-Gault method)
g) Serum ALT or AST > 2 times upper limit of normal not due to I IM.
h) Any laboratory test results that, in the opinion of the inves tigator, might place the subject 
at unacceptable risk for participation in this study
4) Allergies and Adverse Drug Reaction
a) Hypersensitivity to abatacept or one of its excipients
5) Other Exclusion Criteria
a) Subjects who are unable to complete study procedures
b) Subjects with a history or suspicion of unreliability, poor c ooperation, or non-c ompliance 
with medical treatment
c) Prisoners or subjects who are involuntarily incarcerated. (No te: under certain specific 
circumstances a person who has been imprisoned may be included or permitted to continue 
as a subject. Strict conditions apply and Bristol-Myers Squibb approval is required.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 41
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
d) Subjects who are compulsorily detained for treatment of either  a psychiatric or physical 
(eg, infectious disease) illness
6) MRI Contraindications (for MRI sub-study only)
For a subject who intends to participate in the MRI sub-study, the radiologist at the site’s MRI 
facility is respons ible for determining if a subject is contrai ndicated from having this 
procedure. If the subject is contraindicated, the subject must be dropped from the MRI sub-
study. The following is a list of some common conditions that m ay preclude the subject from 
having MRI of the hands or wrists. However, this should not be used as a substitute for local 
clinical standards of care. The ult imate decision to perform an  MRI on an individual subject in 
the MRI sub-study rests with the site radiologist, the investig ator, and the standard set by the 
local Ethics Committee:
a) Subjects who have a history of claustrophobia.
b) Subjects who have a physical limitation related to fitting in  the bore of the magnet (ie, body 
weight in excess of 250 pounds or 113.4 kilograms).
c) Subjects with tattoos on the area to be imaged.d) Subjects who have a history of allergic reaction to contrast agents
e) Subjects who had exposure to a radiological contrast agent wi thin the 72 hours prior to the 
MRI examination.
f) Subjects who have joint replacements in the leg that is being  evaluated by the MRI 
examination.
g) Subjects with a pacemaker, epicardial pacemaker wires, MRI-in compatible cardiac valve 
prostheses, MRI-incompatible vascular clips less than two-month s old, or 
MRI-incompatible aneurysm clips of any age. 
h) Subjects with MRI-incompatible cochlear implants.i) Subjects with spinal nerve stimulators.j) Subjects with an infusion pump.
k) Subjects with metallic fragments  in the eyes/orbits or in the  vicinity of the brain or major 
neurovascular structures of the body, subjects with an employme nt history which involves 
exposure to welding, or subjects who have shrapnel any place in  their body.
Eligibility criteria for this study have been carefully consider ed to ensure the safety of the study 
subjects and that the results of the study can be used. It is im perative that subjects fully meet all 
eligibility criteria.
3.3.3 Women of Childbearing Potential
Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) is defined as any femal e who has experienced 
menarche and who has not undergone surgical sterilization (hyste rectomy or bilateral 
oophorectomy) and is not postmenopausal. Menopause is defined a s 12 months of amenorrhea in 
a woman over age 45 years in the absence of other biological or  physiological cau ses. In addition, 
females under the age of 55 years must have a serum follicle st imulating hormone, (FSH) level 
> 40 mIU/mL to confirm menopause.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 42
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
*Females treated with hormone replacement therapy, (HRT)  are likely to have artificia lly 
suppressed FSH levels and may require a washout period in order to obtain a physiologic 
FSH level. The duration of the washout period is a function of t he type of HRT used. The duration 
of the washout period below are suggested guidelines and the in vestigators should use their 
judgement in checking serum FSH levels. 
•1 week minimum for vaginal hormonal products (rings, creams, ge ls)
•4 week minimum for transdermal products
•8 week minimum for oral products
Other parenteral products may require washout periods as lo ng as 6 months. If the serum FSH level 
is > 40 mIU/ml at any time during the washout period, the woman  can be considered 
postmenopausal.
3.3.4 Screening for Malignancy
It is recommended that all sub jects should have been a ssessed for age and gender appropri ate 
malignancy (e.g. breast cancer, gynecologic cancers, prostate cance r, and colon cancer) and any  
other malignancy for which an individual subject is at an incre ased risk at the investigator’s 
discretion (e.g., lung cancer) prior to enrollment. 
All subjects who were diagnosed with IIM in the past year must have been screened for occult 
malignancy at the discretion of the investigator. 
Subjects who are anti-TIF1- γ(p155/140) autoantibody positive and a re more than 1 year from I IM 
diagnosis must also have undergone screening for occult malignan cy in the last year at the 
discretion of the investigator.58.
Testing can include any of the follo wing, at the discretion of the investigator:
•Chest imaging (chest CT required for subjects with a history of  smoking, CXR acceptable for 
all other sub jects)
•Abdominal imaging (CT or ultrasound)
•Laboratory testing: alpha-fetoprotein, CA-125
•Documented skin exam for malignancy
•Screening for gastrointestinal malignancy (e.g., stool analysis for occult blood, col onoscopy, 
sigmoidoscopy)
•Screening for breast cancer (e.g., imaging [m ammography or M RI]) for female subjects over 
the age of 40
•Screening for cervical cancer (e.g., Pap test and human papillom avirus [HPV] tes ting) for all 
female subjects
•Screening for prostate cancer (e.g., digital r ectal exam, Pros tate Specific Antigen testing) for 
all male subjects over the age of 40
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 43
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
All subjects who discontinue s tudy drug at an y time throughout the study, require visits to assess 
safety and immunogenicity at Day 85 and Day 169 after the last dose of study drug (see Table 5.1-
7). For subjects who disconti nue during the Double-Bli nd Period, if eithe r the Day 85 or Day 169 
visit falls within ±14 days of the Week 24 Post -Study Drug Efficacy Visit ( Table 5.1-4 ), only 
perform  immunogenicity and pharmac okinetic blood samples (Tabl e 5.1-7) along with the Post-
Study Drug Efficacy Visit.
The only exception to this requirement is when a subject withdr aws consent for all st udy 
procedures including post-treatment study follow-up or loses th e ability to consent freely (ie, is 
imprisoned or involuntarily incarcerated for the treatment of e ither a psychiatric or physical 
illness).
Subjects MUST discontinue inve stigational product (and non-inve stigational product at the 
discretion of the investigator ) for any of the  following reason s:
•Subject’s request to stop study treatment
•Subject withdraws consent  
•Any clinical adverse event (AE), laboratory abnormality or interc urrent illness which, in the 
opinion of the investigator, indicates that continued participa tion in the study is not in the best 
interest of the subject
•Pregnancy (see additional instruction below)
•Termination of the study by Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS)
•Loss of ability to fr eely provide consent thro ugh impris onment or involuntarily incarceration 
for treatment of either a psychiatric or physical (e.g., infect ious disease) illness
•Use of prohibited medication
•Subjects who fail rescue therapy, as judged by the investigator , between Wk 12 and Wk 24
•Subjects who, during the course o f the study, require mechanical  breathing assistance 
(ventilator) due to myositis, ILD, or another pulmonary cause.  Temporary mechanical 
breathing assistance during a procedure or elective surgery is permitted.
•Missed Doses
−Missed 4 or more doses of abatacept/placebo for any reason duri ng the first 24 weeks 
(Double-Blind Period)
−Missed 3 or more consecutive doses of abatacept/placebo for any  reason during the first 
24 weeks (Double-Blind Period)
−Missed 6 or more doses of abatacept for any reason between Week 24 and Week 52 
(Open-Label Period)
−Missed 5 or more consecutive doses of abatacept for any reason between Week 24 and 
Week 52 (Open-Label Period) or Week 76 (for subjects randomized in  Japan)
•Significant non-compliance with protocol (i.e., procedures, ass essments, medication, etc.). The 
investigator should discuss such issues with the BMS Medical Mo nitor.
•Participation in another clinical trial with an investigational  product.  
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 49
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
In the case of pregnancy, the investigator must immediately not ify the Sponsor or designee of this 
event. In most cases, the study drug w ill be permanently discontinued in an a ppropriate manner. 
Please con tact the Sponsor or designee within 24 hours of awareness of th e pregnancy. If the 
investigator determines a possib le favorable benefit/risk ratio  that warrants continuation of study 
drug, a discussion between the investigator and the Sponsor or designee must occur.
If study drug is discontinued prior to the subject’s completion  of the study, the reason for the 
discontinuation must be documented in the subject’s medical reco rds and entered on the 
appropriate case report form (CRF) page.
3.6 Post-Study Drug Study Follow up
Subjects who withdraw cons ent (according t o Section 3.6.1) or a re lost to follow-up (according to 
Section 3.6.2) w ill not be followed in this study; all other subjects will cont inue to be followed for 
collection of follow-up data as required and in line with Section 5 , Study Procedures and 
Assessments.
3.6.1 Withdrawal of Consent
Subjects who request to discontinue study drug w ill remain in the study and must continue to be 
followed for protocol specified follow-up procedures. The only exception to this is when a subject 
specifically withdraws consent for any further contact with him /her or persons previously 
authorized by subject to provide this infor mation. Subjects sho uld notify the investigator of the 
decision to withdraw consent from future follow-up in writing , if possible. The withdrawal of 
consent should be explained in detail in the medical records by the investigator, as to whether the 
withdrawal is from further treatment with study drug only or als o from study procedures and/or 
post treatment study follow-up, and entered on the appropriate CRF page. In the event that vital 
status (whether the subject is alive or dead) is being measured , publicly available information 
should be used to determine vital status only as appropriately directed in accordance with local 
law.
3.6.2 Lost to Follow-Up
All reasonable efforts must be made to locate subjects to deter mine and report their ongoing status. 
This includes follow-up with pe rsons authorized by the subject a s noted above. Lost to follow-up 
is defined by the inability t o reach the subject after a minimu m of three documented phone calls, 
faxes, or emails as well as lack of respons e by subject t o one registered ma il letter. A ll attempts 
shoul d be documente d in the subject’s medical records. If it is dete rmined that the subject has died, 
the site will use permissible local methods to obtain the date and cause of death.
If investigator’s use of a third-party representative to assist  in the follow-up portion of the study 
has been included in the subject’s informed consent, then the i nvestigator may use a 
Sponsor-retained third-party representative to assist site staf f with obtaining subject’s contact 
information or other public vital status data necessary to comp lete the follow-up portion of the 
study. The site staff and representative will consult publicly a vailable sources, such as public 
health registr ies and databases, in order to obtain updated con tact information. If after all attempts, 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 50
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
the subject remains lost to fo llow-up, then the last known aliv e date as determined by the 
investigator should be reported and documented in the subject’s  medical records.
4 STUDY DRUG
Study drug includes both Investigational [Medicinal] Product (I P/IMP) and Non-investigational 
[Medicinal] Product (Non-IP/Non-IMP) and can consist of the foll owing:
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 51
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Table 4-1: Study Drugs for IM101611
Product Description / 
Class and Dosage FormPotency IP/Non-IMPBlinded or Open-
LabelPackaging / Appe aranceStorage Conditions
(per label)
Abatacept Injection / 
Subcutaneous125 mg/syringe
(125 mg/mL)IP Blinded/Open LabelClear to slightly op alescent, 
colorless to pale yello w solution, 
essentially free of pa rticulate 
matter on visual ins pectionStore refrigerated, 2-8 °C 
(36-46 °F); protect from 
light; protect from 
freezing
Placebo to match 
Abatacept Injection / 
SubcutaneousNA IP BlindedClear to slightly op alescent, 
colorless to pale yello w solution, 
essentially free of pa rticulate 
matter on visual ins pectionStore refrigerated, 2-8 °C 
(36-46 °F); protect from 
light; protect from 
freezing
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 52
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
4.1 Investigational Product
An investigational product, als o known as investigational medic inal product in some regions, is 
defined a pharmaceutical form of an active substance or placebo  being tested or used as a reference 
in a clinical study, including products already with a marketin g authorization but used or 
assembled (formulated or packaged) differently than the authoriz ed form, or used for an 
unauthorized indication, or when used to gain further informati on about the authorized form.
The investigational product should be stored in a secure area a ccording to local regulations. It is 
the responsibility of the investigator to ensure that investiga tional product is only dispensed to 
study subjects. The investigational product must be dispensed o nly from official study sites by 
authorized personnel according to local regulations. 
In this protocol, investigational products are:
•Abatacept SC 125 mg in 1 ml pre-filled syringes
•Placebo to match abatacept SC in 1 ml pre-filled syringes
BMS will s upply the investigational products (also referred to as “study medication”), described 
above. 
4.2 Non-investigational Product
Other medications used as support or escape medicati on for preventative,  diagnostic, or therapeutic 
reasons, as components of the standard of care for a given diag nosis, may be considered as non-
investigational products. 
4.3 Storage of Study Drug
The product storage manager should ensure that the study drug i s stored in accordance with the 
environmental conditions (temperature, light, and humidity) as determined by BMS. If concerns 
regarding the quality or appearance of the study drug arise, th e study drug should not be dispensed 
and contact BMS immediately.
Study drug not supplied by BMS will be stored in accordance wit h the package insert.
Please refer to Section 9.2.2 for guidance on IP records and documentation.
Investigational product documen tation (whether supplied by BMS or not) must be maintained 
which includes all processes required to ensure drug is accurate ly administered. This includes 
documentation of drug stora ge, administration a nd, as applicable, storage temperatures, 
reconstitution, and use of required processes (e.g., required d iluents, administration sets).
4.4 Method of Assigning Subject Identification
At the time of enrollment, immediately after written informed c onsent is obtained and before 
performing any study-related procedures, each subject will be a ssigned a unique sequential subject 
number for identification throughout the study. Any subject num ber must not be reused for any 
other participant. The physician/coordinator must contact the C entral Randomization Sys tem 
(IVRS) to enroll each subject into a centralized database at th e time of signing consent.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 53
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
After completion of all screeni ng evaluations, concomitant medi cation adjustment and/or 
stabilization, all eligible subjects w ill be rando mized into the 24-week double-bl inded treatment 
period (Double-Blind Peri od), followed by a 28 week open-label abatacept treatment perio d 
(Open-Label Period).  Subjects ra ndomized in Japan will have an additional 24 week open label 
period.  Also subjects from all countries except the U.S. and t he Czech Republic will have a 3 
years long term open label extension with SC abatacept.
Randomization schedules will be generated and kept by the Rando mization G roup within Drug 
Supply Management of Bristol-Myers Squibb. Randomization treatm ent will be assigned using a 
Central Randomization System in the order in which subjects qua lify for tr eatment , not in the  order 
of study enrollment. Subjects will be randomized to abatacept S C or abatacept SC placebo in a 1:1 
ratio. To maintain a 1:1 ra ndomization between t he abatacept SC  and pl acebo SC arms wi thin 
subjects from Japan, the study r andomization will be stratified  by Japan vs. Rest of World (ROW).
Specific instructions for  randomization into t he Central Random ization System w ill be provided 
in a separate manual.
4.5 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject
On “Office Visit” days, study medication should be administered  AFTER all assessments, 
including blood draws for assessment of immunogenicity and drug  concentrations.
4.5.1 Abatacept Treatment
Abatacept (125 m g) or matching p lacebo w ill be administered subcutaneously (SC) once per week. 
See Section 5.1.1.1 for dosing windows. On Day 1, subjects and/or personal caregive rs will be 
trained in self-administration of SC injections using pre-fille d syringes. Administration of 
abatacept may be performed by the physician or medical staff at  the study site for training purpose 
through Week 4 if needed. All subsequent injections will be sel f-administered or administered by 
a personal caregiver. Medical sta ff can act as a caregiver only  when the subject cannot 
self-administer and does not have access to a personal caregive r. Training should be performed by 
investigational site personnel that are considered qualified tr ainers by the Investigator. Subjects or 
their caregivers will be trained using instructions that will b e provided by BMS or designee.
The last dose of SC abatacept/placebo for the Double-Blind Peri od will be administered in 
Week 23 while the last dose of SC abatacept for the Open-Label P eriod will be administered in 
Week 51.  For subjects randomized  from Japan, the last dose  of SC abatacept in the Open Label 
Period will be at Week 75.  Also, for subjects (all c ountries except the U.S. and the Czech 
Republic) participating in the long term open label extension p eriod, the last dose of SC abatacept 
will be at Day 1086.
Injections sites may include the upper arms (outside area), thi gh, or abdomen. When possible, 
injection sites and/or sides of the body should be rotated ever y week. The upper arm injection site 
should be used only by caregivers and not for self-administrati on.
To ensure compliance and to monitor technique “office visit” SC  injections should be administered 
in the presence of a qualified investigational staff.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 54
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
4.5.2 Standard Treatment
Subjects must be on background standard treatment for IIM (see Section 3.4.1 ).
4.5.3 Dose Modifications
4.5.3.1 Dose Modifications in the Absence of Adverse Events
Every effort should be made to give all study medications withi n ±3 days of the target date during 
the treatment periods. The last dose before each office visit s hould be administered at least 4 days 
before the scheduled visit date. If study medication is not rec eived within the dosing window, this 
dose should be skipped and the next  dose must then be administe red on the next scheduled target 
administration day.
4.5.3.2 Dose Modifications Due to Adverse Events
If abnormal laboratory test results or clinical adverse events i ndicate toxicity that, in the judgment 
of the investigator, could place the subject at risk, study dru g administration should be interrupted 
and the investigator should noti fy the BMS Medical Monitor. Sub jects may receive further study 
medication treatment only if full resolution of the adverse eve nt or abnormal laboratory finding is 
documented.  
If a dose is skipped, the next S C injection shoul d be administe red on the subsequent targeted 
administration day.
4.6 Blinding/Unblinding
Blinding of treatment assignment is critical to the integrity o f this clinical study. However, in the 
event of a medical emergency or pregnancy in an individual subj ect in which knowledge of the 
investigational product is cri tical to the subject's management , the blind for that subject may be 
broken by the investigator. The subject’s safety takes priority  over any other considerations in 
determining if a treatment assignment should be unblinded.
Before breaking the blind of an individual subject's treatment,  the investigator should determine 
that the unblinded information is necessary, ie, that it w ill alter the  subject's immediate 
management. In many cases, particularly when the emergency is c learly not related to the 
investigation al product, the problem may be properly managed by  assuming that the subject is 
receiving active product. It is highly desirable that the decis ion to unblind treatment assignment 
be discussed with the Medical Monitor, but the i nvestigator alw ays has ultimate authority for the 
decision to unblind. The Principal Investigator should only cal l in for emergency unblinding 
AFTER the decision to discontinue the subject has been made.
For this study, the method of unblinding for emergency purposes  is the Central Randomization 
System (IVRS).
In cases of accidental unblinding, contact the Medical Monitor and ensure every  attempt is made 
to preserve the blind.
Any request to unblind a subject for non-emergency purposes sho uld be discussed with the 
Medical Monitor.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 55
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
4.7 Treatment Compliance
Treatment compliance for study medication will be assessed by th e following:
1) Phone call reminders by the site staff.
2) Visual inspection of the contents of the sharps containers, w hich subjects will bring to their 
office visits.
3) Completion of subject diary cards to document administration of study medications between 
office visits.
4) Review and monitoring of p roper admin istration technique by investigation al site staff at office 
visits.
Subjects who miss doses may be required to discontinue from the  study (see Section 3.5 ). 
Therefore, reinforcement of proper treatment compliance at ever y study visit is encouraged.
4.8 Destruction or Return of Investigational Product
For this study, IP (those supplied by BMS, a vendor or sourced by the investigat or) such as partially 
used study drug containers, vials and syringes may be destroyed  on site. 
If... Then...
IP supplied by BMS (including its vendors) Any unused IP supplie d by BMS can only be 
destroyed after being inspected and reconciled 
by the responsible Study Monitor unless IP containers must be immediately destroyed as required for safety, or to meet local regulations 
(e.g., cytotoxics or biologics).
If IP will be returned, the return will be 
arranged by the responsible Study Monitor.
IP sourced by site, not supplied by BMS (or its 
vendors) (examples include IP sourced from 
the sites stock or commercial supply, or a specialty pharmacy)It is the investigator’s or designee’s
responsibility to dispose of all containers 
according to the institutional guidelines and procedures.
It is the investigator’s or designee’s responsibility to arrang e for disposal, provided that procedures 
for proper disposal have been established according to applicab le federal, state, local, and 
institutional guidelines and procedures, and provided that appr opriate records of disposal are kept. 
The following minimal standards must be met:
•On-site disposal practices must not expose humans to risks from  the drug.
•On-site disposal practices and procedures are in agr eement with applicable laws and 
regulations, including any special requirements for controlled or hazardous substances.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 56
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
•Written procedures for on-site disposal are available and follo wed. The procedures must be 
filed with the site’s SOPs a nd a copy  provided t o BMS upon requ est.
•Records are maintained that allow for traceability of each cont ainer, including the date 
disposed of, quantity disposed, and identif ication of the person disposing the containers. The 
method of disposal, ie, incinerator, licensed sanitary landfill , or licensed waste disposal vendor 
must be documented.
•Accountability and disposal records are complete, up-to-date, a nd available for the Monitor to 
review throughout the clinical trial period.
It is the investigator’s or designee’s responsibility to arrang e for disposal of all empty containers.
If conditions for dest ruction cannot be met the responsible Stu dy Monitor will make arrangements 
for the return of IP provided by BMS (or its vendors). Destructi on of non-IP sourced by the site, 
not supplied by BMS, is solely the responsibility of the invest igator or designee.
Please refer to Section 9.2.2 for additional guidance on IP records and documentation.
4.9 Retained Samples for Bioavailability / Bioequivalence
Not Applicable.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 57
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Table 5.1-6: Long Term Open-Label Period (all countries except U .S. and the Czech Republic)Day 1 (same day as last visit in OL Period)
Phone Visits (Day 29, 57, 113, 141, 197, 
225. 281, 309, and 337)
Quarterly Visits (Days 85 and 253)
6 Months Visits (Day 169 and 365)
Phone Visits (Day 393, 421, 477, 505, 
561, 589, 645, 673, and 701)
Quarterly Visits (Days 449 and 617)
6 Months Visits (Day 533 and 729)
Phone Visits (Day 757, 785 , 841, 869, 
925, 953,  1009. 1037, and 1065)
Quarterly Visits Visit (Day 813 and 981)
6  Month Visit (Day 897)
Day 1093/ET Visit
Notes
Study Administration
Informed Consent X
Enroll subject in the 3 Year
Extension Period through IWRSX
Dispense pregnancy kits for 
home use to WOCBPXX XX XX X Sufficient pregnancy kits should be 
dispensed to subjects to allow for pregnancy 
testing every 4 weeks.
Dispense SC abataept and diary 
kitsXX XX XX X Sufficient SC abatacept should be dispensed 
to allow for weekly SC dosing.
Review of diary cards X XXXXXXXXX
Dosing of SC Abatacept X X XXXXXXXX SC Abatacept will injected weekly.
Reconciliation of SC Abatacept X X X X X X X
Safety Assessments
Targeted Physical Examination X X X X X X X
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 74
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Table 5.1-6: Long Term Open-Label Period (all countries except U .S. and the Czech Republic)Day 1 (same day as last visit in OL Period)
Phone Visits (Day 29, 57, 113, 141, 197, 
225. 281, 309, and 337)
Quarterly Visits (Days 85 and 253)
6 Months Visits (Day 169 and 365)
Phone Visits (Day 393, 421, 477, 505, 
561, 589, 645, 673, and 701)
Quarterly Visits (Days 449 and 617)
6 Months Visits (Day 533 and 729)
Phone Visits (Day 757, 785 , 841, 869, 
925, 953,  1009. 1037, and 1065)
Quarterly Visits Visit (Day 813 and 981)
6  Month Visit (Day 897)
Day 1093/ET Visit
Notes
A d v e r s e E v e n t  M o n i t o r i n g XXXXXXXXXX
Laboratory Testing
Hematology Panel X X X X
Chemistry Panel X X X X
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 75
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Table 5.1-7: Post-Treatment Follow-Up Period (only performed for  subjects that discontinue study treatment and do 
not start Post-Study Drug Program (PSDP) or commercial abatacept)
Visit ( ± 14 days) 85 Days after 
Last Dose169 Days after 
Last DoseNotes
Safety Assessments
Vital Signs X X
Adverse Event Monitoring X X
Laboratory Assessments
Urine pregnancy test X X Testing performed locally on WOCBP subjects only
 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 76
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
5.1.1 Retesting During Screening or Lead-in Period / Rescreening
Retesting
Retesting of laboratory parameters and/or other assessments wit hin any single Screening period 
will be permitted (in addition to any parameters that require a  confirmatory value).
Any new result will override the previous result (i.e., the mos t current result prior to 
Randomization) and is the value by which study inclusion will b e assessed, as it represents the 
subject’s most current, clinical state.
Laboratory parameters and/or assessments that are included in Table 5.1-1 , Screening Procedural 
Outline may be repeated in an e ffort to find all possible well- qualified subjects. The Medical 
Monitor can be consulted if needed to discuss whether repeat te sting of any particular parameter 
is clinically relevant.
Rescreening
Subjects that are screen failures may be considered for re-scre ening if the investigator feels a 
change in status may render the subject eligible. Medical monit or approval is required if screen 
failure was related to safety concern. Rescreens are not permit ted within the four weeks after 
signing the first informed consent. The subject will need to sig n a new informed consent and be 
re-enrolled with a new subject number via the IVRS. Some tests,  such as chest X-ray, may not 
need to be repeated if they were performed within the protocol defined window.
5.1.1.1 Study Drug Administration Windows
SC injections of study medication may be administered ±3 days of the target day. Subjects who 
miss the dose window should skip the SC injection and wait unti l the next targeted administration 
day.
If abnormal laboratory test results or clinical AEs indicate toxicity th at, in the judgment of the 
investigator, could place the subjects at risk, study medicatio n administration should be withheld. 
Subjects may receive further study medication only if resolution  of the AE or abnormal laboratory 
finding is documented or, at a minimum, the subject’s status re turns to what it was at baseline. The 
investigator can contact the BMS Study Medical Monitor to discu ss as needed.
5.1.2 Order of Study Assessments
It is strongly encouraged that study assessments be performed i n the following order:
1) Patient reported outcomes (PROs) questionnaires
2) AE collection3) Vital signs4) Muscle strength assessments5) Other investigator assessments6) Blood draws7) Study drug administration (when applicable)
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 77
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
5.2 Study Materials
•Diary cards to record SC weekly dosing administration and the m onthly pregnancy test results 
for WOCBPs (mandatory)
•Written instructions on how to use the SC syringes
•eCRF instructions
•Pregnancy Surveillance Forms
•Source documents (paper or electronic device)
•Drug Inventory binder (optional)
•Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS) worksheets
•Laboratory test kits for all required laboratory testing
•Cooler bags and gel packs will be provided to assist subjects i n transporting study drug
•Sharps containers will be provided to assist subjects in dispos ing of used SC syringes
•Tote bags to transport cooler bags, sharp containers and study drug
•For WOCBP urine pregnancy kits/instructions will be provided to  be used between office 
visits.
•HRCT and MRI Imaging Manuals
•Actigraphy device Manuals
•Metronome, wrist weights, step stool
5.3 Safety Assessments
On Day 1, the results of all assessments must be reviewed to as sure that eligibility requirements 
are met before contacting the Central Randomization System for t he subject’s randomization 
assignment.
Subjects who terminate treatment early should complete the appr opriate Early Termination Visit 
(Table 5.1-2 , Table 5.1-3 , Table 5.1.-5 , and Table 5.1-6 ) and the Post Treatment Follow-
up Visits ( Table 5.1-7 ). The Early Termination Visit should be as soon as possible af ter the 
last dose of study medication.
All assessments should be performed or administered prior to st udy drug administr ation unless 
otherwise indicated.
Only data for the procedures and assessments specified in this protocol should be submitted to 
BMS on a case report form. Additional procedures and assessment s may be performed as part of 
the standard of care; however, data for these assessments shoul d remain in the subject’s medical 
record and should not be provided to BMS, unless specifically re quested from BMS.
Only results of central laboratory assessments relevant to clinical care will be sent to the sites 
(Section 5.3.5 ). All other clinical assessments done as part of this study, i ncluding PFTs, HRCT, 
MRI of the thighs and muscle biopsies will not be read centrall y for return to the site. These must 
be read locally following usual and customary practices for cli nical assessments a nd reviewed by 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 78
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
investigators as required by the protocol for safety assessment s (ie, PFT and HRCT) or as deemed 
necessary by investigators for those not required by the protoc ol (ie, MRI or muscle biopsy). 
Reports generated from central analysis of these will not be cl inical in nature and will not be sent 
to sites for review.
Subjects who have clinically active or relevant Interstitial Lu ng Disease (ILD) as determined by 
the investigator prior to randomization must undergo pulmonary function testing (PFT) and 
imaging by High Resolution CT scan (HRCT). The target populatio ns are described and the testing 
are outlined in Section 5.3.6 and Section 5.3.7.2 , respectively.
5.3.1 Physical Examination
Physical examinations preferably should be performed by a quali fied physician or Doctor of 
Medicine (MD). Where permitted by local pr actice and guidelines a  qualified Doctor of 
Osteopathy (DO), Physician Assistant (PA), or Nurse Practitione r (NP) may perform the physical 
examination. 
The physical examination s hould include examination of the heart, lungs, abdomen, the lym ph 
nodes, liver, spleen and skin. A physical examination may note any changes in the subject’s 
conditi on (body systems) since the last assessment and does not  preclude examination of any other 
body systems as clinically indicated. Any new findings after Da y 1 should be reported as (S)AE.
5.3.2 Physical Measurements
Weight and height is to be recorded at screening. Weight is to be recorded as noted in Table 5.1-
2,Table 5.1-3 , and  Table 5.1-5 , thereafter.
5.3.3 Vital Signs
Vital signs (seated blood pressure, heart rate, and temperature ) will be recorded during every office 
visit and prior to dose administr ation, when applicable. Bl ood pressure and heart r ate shoul d be 
measured after the subject has been seated quietly for at least  5 minutes.
5.3.4 TB Screening
A chest X-ray and physical examination are considered part of t he process to assess a subject’s 
eligibility. In addition to a chest  X-ray that does not show an y evidence or suspicion of latent TB, 
a tuberculin test will be performed and inte rpreted according to local country Health Authorities 
and/or Medical Society guidelines. Some guidelines have specifi c recommendations for subjects 
who are to receive biologics or immunosuppressant therapies (eg , RA experience with biologic 
agents),60,61(outside the US sites, local guidelines endorsed by med ical societies on PPD testing 
in subjects with RA being treated with biologics may also apply ) or who are immunocompromised 
and who have had prior BCG v accination(s).62Tuberculin skin testing is not contraindicated for 
persons who have been vaccinated w ith BCG. An interferon gamma release assay 
(eg, QuantiFERON Gold or Tspot/ELISpot) is an acceptable alterna tive when skin testing for 
tuberculosis (ie, PPD) is not  appropriate. TB screening test ma y be performed by qualified 
personnel at the central laboratory or by a qualified local lab oratory. If TB test has been performed 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 79
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
within 4 weeks prior to informed c onsent and cle ar documentatio n is available, the test result may 
be used to screen for eligibility. 
5.3.5 Laboratory Assessments
All laboratory assessments will be analyzed centrally except wh ere noted.
Blood and/or urine samples will be obtained at all visits noted  in Time and Events Schedule. Any 
laboratory test result that the investigator considers clinical ly relevant should be recorded on the 
appropriate Adverse Event page of the CRF (see  Appendix 2 ).
5.3.5.1 Hematology Panel
•Hemoglobin
•Total WBC count, including differential
•Platelet count
5.3.5.2 Chemistry Panel
•Sodium •Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
•Potassium •Total bilirubin
•Chloride •Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
•Total Protein •Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
•Albumin •Gamma-glutamyltra nsferase (GGT)
•Calcium •Alkaline phosphatase
•Phosphorus •LDH
•Glucose •Creatine kinase (CK)
•Aldolase 
•Creatinine
5.3.5.3 Antibody Panels
•Quantitative Immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM)
•Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) panel
•Myositis-specific autoantibodies (eg. Jo-1, PL- 12, PL-7, OJ, EJ, SRP, Mi-2, TIF1- γ, MDA5, 
NXP2)
•Myositis-associated autoantibodies (eg. PM/Scl, Ku, SS-A, U1 RN P, U2 snRNP, fibrillarin U3 
RNP)
5.3.5.4 Complement
•C3
•C4
•CH50
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 80
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
5.3.5.5 Urinalysis
•pH
•Protein
•Glucose
•Blood
5.3.5.6 Hepatitis Screen
•Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B core antibody. If posi tive, reflex Hepatitis B viral DNA 
testing must be performed. Where required by local regulations or standard practice Hepatitis 
B viral DNA testing also must be performed on Hepatitis B suface antibod y (HBsAb)-positive 
subjects.
•Hepatitis  C anti body. If  positive, reflex HCV RNA testi ng must be performed
NOTE:  For Japan only subjects
•Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B core antibody (hepatit is B surface antibody, where 
required by local guidelines).  If negative HBs antigen but pos itive anti-HBc antibody or 
positive anti-HBs antibody, reflex Hepatitis B viral DNA treati ng must be performed.
5.3.5.7 Pregnancy Tests
Urine/serum pregnancy tests (minimum sensitivity 25 IU/L of β-HCG) must be performed, with a 
negative result, for all WOCBP within 24 hours prior to dosing for visits specified in Table 5.1-2 ,
Table 5.1-3 , Table 5.1-5 , Table 5.1-6 and every 4 weeks in the Follow up period, Table 5.1-7 . 
Urine tests are the preferred method and must be performed unles s serum is required by local 
regulations. A serum test must be performed for confirmation of  any positive urine test result. 
Urine tests can be processed lo cally and can be self-administer ed by the subject between office 
visits, if permitted by local regulations. If any female subjec t becomes pregnant, she will stop 
receiving study treatment immediately and enter the Post Treatm ent Follow-up Period. A 
pregnancy surveillance form w ill be comp leted and submitted to Bristol-Myers Squibb. Serum 
pregnancy tests will be processed centrally.
5.3.5.8 HIV Testing
HIV testing will be performed centrally unless prohibited by lo cal regulation, guidelines, or 
standard practice.
5.3.5.9 Fungal Infection and Pulmonary Fibrosis Test 
The (1 to 3)- β-D-glucan and KL-6 test will only be pe rformed in regions and/or countries where 
it is considered the local standard of care at the screening vi sit. This test shoul d be analyzed locally.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 81
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
5.3.6 Pulmonary Function Testing
To assess the safety and efficacy of abatacept in IIM subjects with interstitial lung disease (ILD), 
pulmonary function testing including FEV1, FVC, and DLCO will b e performed on all sub jects 
who have clinically active or relevant Interstitial Lung Diseas e (ILD) or anti-synthetase syndrome 
at baseline (define in 5.3.7.2 ). Testing will be obtained at baseline (prior to Day 1), Week 24, Week 
52 and Week 76 (or early termination) for subjects with ILD. PFT  will be pe rformed and read 
locally and reviewed by the sites for clinical d ecision maki ng. No central clinical report w ill be 
generated for return to the site.
5.3.7 Imaging Assessment for the Study
Any incidental findings of potential clinical relevance that ar e not directly associated with the 
objectives of the protocol should be evaluated and handled by t he Study Investigator as per 
standard medical/clinical judgmen t. Images will be sub mitted to the imaging core lab for central 
analysis as specified below.
5.3.7.1 X-ray Assessment
A posterior-anterior and lateral chest X-ray, performed during screening, is required for all subjects 
unless performed within 6 months prior to obtaining written inf ormed consent and documentation 
of the earlier X-ray is on file. Investigators must ensure that  the results of the chest X-ray satisfy 
criteria for eligibility. The chest X-ray result will be record ed on the appropriate page of the eCRF. 
This assessment will not be evaluated by a central lab.
5.3.7.2 High-Resolution Computed Tomography (HRCT) Chest
HRCT of the chest will be ob tained to evaluate the extent of  lung fibrosis at bas eline (prior to 
Day 1) for subjects who are identified by the investigator as ha ving clinically active or relevant 
Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD) or anti-synthetase s yndrome at baseline (defined as the presence 
of anti-synthetase autoantibody and at least 2 of the following : ILD, inflammatory myositis or 
inflammatory polyarthritis).
Subjects with clinically active or relevant ILD will be defined  as those who have: 
1) clinical symptoms of ILD at baseline and/or during the study,  or
2) worsening ILD, at baseline and/or during the study, as per th e treating physician assessment 
necessitating a treatment change (with documented worsening of at least 2 the following 
parameters: patient’s report of worsening dyspnea, worsening in  severity of ground glass 
opacities (GGO), reticulation or honeycombing or fibrosis on ch est HRCT or a decline in the 
FVC% > 10%) within last 6 months, or
3) new onset of ILD (within 3 months of study entry), or
4) a clinically relevant decrease in lung function on Pulmonary Function Testing (at the discretion 
of the investigator)
Subjects with ILD who are evaluated with a HRCT at baseline wil l also have repeat HRCT 
performed at Weeks 24, 52, and 76 (or early termination).
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 82
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
honeycombing in non-septal, linear, plate-like, and sub-pleural  patterns.66However, it is not 
uncommon for consolidation to progress to frank fibrosis.67
HRCT has been applied in multiple clinical studies of lung fibr osis for drug development, serving 
as an inclusion criterion, a predictive marker of positive trea tment response, and/or efficacy 
readout. A computer-assisted diagnosis (CAD) score to quantify lung fibrosis as the percentage 
involvement of reticulation patterns based on texture measures from HRCT has been developed 
and validated as a measure of qua ntitative lung fibrosis (QLF) a nd a potential surrogate imaging 
marker. CAD scores of QLF have been successfully applied as out come measurements to test 
treatment eff icacy in ILD trials. Compared with visual assessme nts, CAD scores have been shown 
to improve objectivity, sensitivity, and repeatability when mea suring quantitative changes in lung 
features.
5.4 Efficacy Assessments
Questionnaires and investigator/subject assessments will be com pleted prior to st udy drug 
administration. If captured on an electronic tablet (ePRO), thi s device will serve as the source 
document.
5.4.1 Clinical Assessments for the Study
5.4.1.1 IMACS Definition of Improvement (DOI)
The IMACS DOI is:
•An improvement of ≥20% from baseline in 3 IMACS core measures, AND
•No more than 2 IMACS core measure scores worsen by ≥25% from bas eline, AND
•Manual Muscle Test (MMT-8) may not decrease by ≥25% from baseline
IMACS core measures are:
•Physician Global Assessment of Disease Activity (PGA)
•Patient (Subject) Global Assess ment of Disease Activity (SGA)
•Manual Muscle Test (MMT-8)
•Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI)
•Muscle Enzyme levels
•Myositis Disease Activity Assessment Tool (MDAAT) Extramuscular  Global Activity 
The muscle enzymes of interest are creatine kinase (CK), aldolase , AST, ALT, and LDH. To assess 
the DOI the most abnormal lab v alue (% above ULN) at baseline w ill be d etermined. The 
subsequent change from baseline for this lab value will be used  to determine if the patient has met 
the DOI at each time point indicated ( Table 5.1-2 , Table 5.1-3 ,a n d  Table 5.1-5 ).
To assess the criteria for worsening, the change from baseline will be determined for all 5 lab 
values at each time-point ind icated (Table 5.1-2, Table 5.1-3. an d Table 5.1-5). The lab value with 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 84
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
the greatest percent increase from baseline for each will be use d to determine if the patient has met 
the criteria for worsening respectively ( Section 3.1.5 ).
Descriptions of the other core measures are below.
5.4.1.2 Assessments Performed by Medical Staff
The investigator or sub-investigator performing this assessment  should have appropriate medical 
credentials and/or should be individuals with appropriate scien tific/medical background who are 
experienced in performing myositis disease activity assessments . The sub-investigator preferably 
should be a qualified physician or Doctor of Medicine (MD). Whe re permitted by local practice 
and guidelines, a qualified Doctor of Osteopathy (DO), Physicia n Assistant (PA), or Nurse 
Practitioner (NP) may perform the Physicians Global Assessment if they have substantial 
experience assessing patients wit h IIM. All other non-PGA asses sments may be performed by 
study site personnel that have appropriate relevant clinical or  technical training (eg, RN or physical 
therapist) and are trained to perform the specif ic IIM study as sessments. All individuals that 
perform study assessments must be  recorded in the  study file al ong with their educational 
background, work experien ce and training.
Physicians Global Assessment of Disease Activity (PGA)
This tool measures the global evaluation by the treating physic ian of the overall disease activity of 
the patient at the time of assessment using a 10 cm visual anal ogue scale that can be performed by 
the investigator or sub-investigator. 
Manual Muscle Test (MMT-8)
This tool assesses muscle strength using a 0 - 10 point scale. A  set of 7 designated muscles is tested 
bilaterally plus axial (neck flexor) testing, so that the poten tial MMT-8 sc ore ranges from 0 - 150. 
The designated muscles tested will be:
•Neck flexors
•Deltoid middle
•Biceps brachii
•Gluteus maximus
•Gluteus medius
•Quadriceps
•Wrist extensors
•Ankle dorsiflexors
Myositis Disease Activity Assessment Tool (MDAAT)
This is a combined tool that captures the physician’s assessmen t of disease activity of various 
organ systems usi ng (1) a 0-4 s cale and (2) a visual analog scale (VAS). It assesses the clinical 
features of each organ system based upon:
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 85
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
a) The presence of clinical feature s or symptoms within the prev ious 4 weeks that are due to 
active disease (i.e., use your clinical judgment to determine h ow active the myositis-
associated clinical feature has been within the previous 4 week s)
b) The judgment that the feature is due to the myositis disease p rocess (ie, clinical findings 
known or suspected to be due to another disease process or due to therapy should NOT be 
considered in this evaluation)
c) The concept that disease activity is defined as a potentially  reversible finding
d) A clinical, functional, and laboratory assessment for each or gan system
The scoring system is based primarily on the physician’s intent ion to treat (Categories A – E). In 
some cases, a patient may meet the clinical manifestations of a  particularly category, but the 
treatment does not match the intention to treat of that particu lar category; in those cases, the 
category matching the clinical symptoms should be marked. If mo re than one clinical symptom is 
present within a system, and different categories would be scor ed for each, mark the category that 
is most severe. 
Myositis Function Index (FI-2)
The FI-2 is a functional outcome developed for patients with ad ult polymyositis or 
dermatomyositis assessing muscle endurance in sev en mus cle grou ps. Each muscle group is scored 
as the number of correctly performed repetitions with 60 or 120  maximal number of repetitions 
depending on muscle group. The FI-2 is a furthe r development of the original Functi onal Index 
(FI) and has been validated as to content and construct validity  and intra- and inter-rater reliability. 
The FI-2 can be performed on both right and left sides requirin g a maximum of 33 minutes, or just 
on the dominant side which takes 21 minutes 
Myositis Damage Index (MDI)
This tool measures the degree of disease damage of all organ sy stems. It is composed of a series 
of organ-specific questions relating to the presence or absence  of a given sign or symptom or 
problem to measure the extent of damage, and an overall rating of the dise ase damage of each 
system using a 10 cm. visual analogue scale to measure the seve rity of damage 
Myositis Response Criteria (MRC)68
This Myositis Response Criteria (MRC) algorithm generates a con tinuous total improvement score 
(range 0-100) based on the sum of the absolute % change in the 6  core domains (weighted) used 
in the IMACS DOI. It also defines cut points for minimal ( ≥20 point increase), moderate ( ≥40 
points), and major ( ≥60 points) improvement in disease.
Cutaneous Dermatomyositis Disease Area and Severity Index (CDAS I)
This tool assesses the improvement in skin disease activity in subjects with dermatomyositis. Four 
domains are evaluated including 1) disease activity and damage in 15 anatomic locations, 
2) presence of Gottron’s papules on the hands, 3) periungual cha nges, and 4) alopecia. A total 
activity score a nd damage score are calculated. 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 86
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
5.4.1.3 Patient Reported Outcomes
Subjects will complete the Patient Global Assessment of Disease  Activity, HAQ-DI, PROMIS 
Fatigue, and SF-36 in the ePRO device. All of these patient rep orted outcomes should be 
performed prior to all other assessments.
Patient (Subject) Global Assess ment of Disease Activity (SGA)
This tool measures the global evaluation by the subject of thei r overall disease activity at the time 
of assessment using a 10 cm visual analogue scale.Health Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index (HAQ/HAQ-DI)
Scoring conventions are based on the Standard Disability Index of HAQ/HAQ-DI, using the 
20 response items. The HAQ-DI takes into account the subject’s u se of aids, devices, or assistance 
in the scoring algorithm for a disability category. For each of  the 8 disability categories there is an 
“aids/devices” companion variable that is used to record the ty pe of assistance, if any, a subject 
uses for his/her usual activities. If either “aids/devices” and/ or “assistance from another person” 
are checked for a disability  category, the sco re for t his categ ory is set to “2” (much difficulty), if 
the original score was “0” (no difficulty) or “1” (some difficu lty). The HAQ-DI is then calculated 
by summing the adjusted categories scores and dividing by the n umber of categories answered. 
Details of the HAQ-DI scoring conventions are documented in Fries et al69and Ramey et al70. 
The HAQ is based on a scale of 0-3. Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMI S) - SF Fatigue v1.0 Adult 
Form 8a 
The Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (P ROMIS) Fatigue Short Form 
8a will be used to capture fatigue. The PROMIS project was established as part of the National 
Institutes of Health Roadmap Initiative to create item banks wh ich are publically available, 
efficient, precise, and valid across a variety of diseases to a ssess PROs (www.nihpromis.org).
The PROMIS Fatigue instrument evaluates a range of self-re ported symptoms, from mild 
subjective feelings of tiredness to an overwhelming, debilitati ng, and sustained sense of exhaustion 
that likely decreases one’s ability to execute daily activities  and function normally in fa mily or 
social roles. Fatigue is divided into the experience of fatigue  (frequency , durati on, and intensity) 
and the impact of fatigue on physical, mental, and social activ ities.
In this study, the static form of eight questions will be used.  The Fatigue short form is universal 
rather than disease-specific. It assesses fatigue over the past  seven days.
 
 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 87
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
home for allergic bronchospasm; blood dyscrasias or co nvulsions that do not result in 
hospitalization.) Potential dr ug induced liver injury (DILI) is also considered an important 
medical event. (See Section 6.6 for the definition of potential DILI.)
Suspected transmission of an infectious agent (e.g., pathogenic  or nonpathogenic) via the study 
drug is an SAE.
Although pregnancy, overdose, cancer, and potential drug induced liver injury (DILI) are not 
always serious by regulatory definition, these events must be ha ndled as SAEs. ( See S ection 6.1.1
for reporting pregnancies).
Any component of a study endpoint that is considered related to  study therapy (e .g., d eath is an 
endpoint, if death o ccurred due to anaphylaxis, anaphylaxis mus t be reported) should be reported 
as SAE (see Section 6.1.1 for repor ting details).
NOTE : 
The following hospitalizations are not c onsidered SAEs in BMS cli nical studies: 
•a visit to the emergency room or other hospital department < 24 hours, that does not result in 
admission (unless considered an important medical or life-threa tening event)
•elective surgery, planned prior to signing consent
•admissions as per protocol for a planned medical/surgical proce dure
•routine health assessment requiri ng admission for baseline/trend ing of health status 
(eg, routine colonoscopy)
•medical/surgical admission other than to remedy ill h ealth a nd planned prior to entry into the 
study. Appropriate documentati on is required i n these cases
•admission encountered for another life circumstance that carrie s no bearing on health s tatus 
and requires no medical/surgical intervention (e.g., lack of housing, ec onomic inadequacy, 
caregiver respite, family circumstances, administrative reason)
•Admission for administration of  anticancer therapy in the absen ce of any other SAEs (applies 
to oncology protocols)
6.1.1 Serious Adverse Event Collection and Reporting
Section 5.5.1 in the Investigator Brochure (IB) represent the Ref erence Safety Information to 
determine expectedness of serious adverse events for expedited reporting. Following the subject’s 
written consent to participate in the study, all SAEs, whether related or not related to study drug, 
must be collected, including thos e thought to be  associated wit h protocol-specified procedures. All 
SAEs must be collected that occur during the screening period t hrough 24 weeks after
discontinuation of dosing.
The investigator must report any SAE that occurs after these tim e periods and that is believed to 
be related to study drug or protocol-specified procedure. 
An SAE report must be completed for any event where doubt exist s regarding its seriousness. 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 95
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
If the investigator believes that an SAE is not related to study  drug, but is potentially related to the 
conditions of the study (such as withdrawal of previous therapy  or a complication of a study 
procedure), the relationship must be specified in the narrative section of the SAE Report Form.
SAEs, whether related or not related to study treatment, and Pr egnancies must be reported to BMS 
(or designee) immediately within 24 hours of awareness of the event. 
SAEs must be recorded on the SAE Report Form. The required method for SAE data reporting is 
through the eCRF. The paper SAE Report Form is only intended as  a back-up option when the 
electronic d ata capture (EDC) system is unavailable /not functioning for tr ansmission of the eCRF 
to BMS (or designee). In this case, the paper form is transmitted via email or confirmed facsimile (fax) transmission. When paper forms are used, the original paper forms are to remain on site. 
Pregnancies must be recorded on a paper Pregnancy Surveillance Form and transmitted via email 
or confirmed facsimile (fax) transmission.
 
If only limited information is i nitially available, follow-up r eports are required. (Note: Follow-up 
SAE reports must include the same investigator term(s) initially  reported.) 
If an ongoing SAE changes in its intensity or relationship to s tudy drug or if n ew information 
becomes available, the SAE report must be updated and submi tted within 24 hours to Sponsor or 
designee using the same procedure used for transmitting the init ial SAE report.
All SAEs must be followed to resolution or stabilization.
BMS will be reporting adverse events to regulatory authorities and ethics committees according to 
local applicable laws including European Directive 2001/20/EC a nd FDA Code of Federal 
Regulations 21 CFR Parts 312 a nd 320. A SUSAR (Suspected, Unexp ected Serious Adverse 
Reaction) is a subset of SAEs and will be reported to the appropriate regulatory authorities and 
investigators following local and global guidelines and require ments.
6.2 Nonserious Adverse Events
Anonserious adverse event is an AE not classified as serious.
6.2.1 Nonserious Adverse Event Collection and ReportingThe collection of nonserious AE information should begin at init iation of study drug. Nonserious 
AE information should also be collected from the start of a plac ebo lead-in period or other 
observational period intended to establish a baseline status fo r the subjects.
Nonserious AEs should be followed to resolution or stab ilization, or reported as SAEs if they 
become serious (see Section 6.1.1 ). Follow-up is also required for nonserious AEs that cause 
interruption or discontinuatio n of study drug and for those present at the end of study treatment as 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 96
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
appropriate. All identified nonser ious AEs must be recorded and described on the nonserious AE 
page of the CRF (paper or electronic). 
Completion of supplemental CRFs may be requested for AEs and/or  laboratory abnormalities that 
are reported/identified during the course of the study.
6.3 Laboratory Test Result Abnormalities
The following laboratory test result abnormalities should be ca ptured on the nonserious AE CRF 
page or SAE Report Form electronic) as appropriate. Paper forms  are only intended as a back-up 
option when the electronic system is not functioning.
•Any laboratory test result that is clinically significant or me ets the definition of an SAE 
•Any laboratory test result abnormality that required the subjec t to have study drug discontinued 
or interrupted
•Any laboratory test result abnorm ality that required the subjec t to receive spec ific corrective 
therapy
It is expected that wherever possible, the clinical rather than  laboratory term would be used by the 
reporting investigator (e.g., anemia versus low hemoglobin valu e).
6.4 Pregnancy
If, following initiation of the study drug, it is subsequently discovered that a study sub ject is 
pregnant or may have been pregna nt at the time of study e xposure, including during at least 5 half-
lives after product administration, the investigator must immed iately notify th e Sponsor or 
designee of this event and complete and forward a Pregnancy Sur veillance Form to BMS Designee 
within 24 hours of awareness of the event and in accordance wit h SAE reporting procedures 
described in Section 6.1.1 .
In most cases, the study drug will be permanently discontinued in an appropriate manner (eg, dose 
tapering if necessary for sub ject safety). Pleas e call the Spon sor or designee within 24 hours of 
awareness of the pregnancy.
Protocol-required procedures f or study disconti nuation and foll ow-up must be performed on the 
subject.
The investigator must immediately notify the  Sponsor or designe e of this event and complete and 
forward a Pregnancy Surveillance Form to Sponsor or designee wit hin 24 hours of awareness of 
the event and in accordance with SAE reporting procedures descr ibed in Section 6.1.1. 
Follow-up information regarding the course of the pregnancy, in cluding perinatal and neonatal 
outcome and, where applicable, offspring information must be re ported on the Pregnancy 
Surveillance Form.
Any pregnancy that occurs in a female partner of a male study p articipant should be reported to 
Sponsor or designee. In order for BMS to collect any pregnancy surveillance information from the 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 97
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
female partner, the female partner must sign an informed consent  form for disclosure of this 
information. Information on this pregnancy will be collected on the Pregnancy Surveillance Form.
6.5 Overdose
An overdose is defined as the accidental or i ntentional adminis tration of any dose of a product that 
is considered both excessive and medically important. All occur rences of overdose must be 
reported as an SAE (see Section 6.1.1 for reporting details.).
6.6 Potential Drug Induced Liver Injury (DILI)
Specific criteria for identifying potential DILI have not been identified for this protocol. Standard 
medical pract ice in identifyi ng and monitoring hepatic issues should be followed.
6.7 Other Safety Considerations
Any significant worsening noted during interim or final physical  examinations, electrocardiogram, 
X-ray filming, any other potential safety assessment required o r not required by protocol should 
also be recorded as a nonserious or serious AE, as appropriate,  and reported accordingly.
For Japan only subjects, malfunctions of the pre-f illed syringes c ontaining study d rug shoul d be 
reported to the sponsor via designated form (el ectronic sys tem).  SAEs or events that could lead to 
an SAE that occurred as a result of the malfunction s hould be reported to th e sponsor within 24 
hours of awareness of the event.
7 DATA MONITORING COMMITTEE AND OTHER EXTERNAL 
COMMITTEES
7.1 Adjudication Committee
An adjudication committee w ill be estab lished t o determine eligibility of subjects with regard to 
the requirement that subjects have active disease at the time o f screening when they do not have 
at least one of the 3 identified clinical findings: 1) active m yositis-associated rash (Gottron’s 
papules or heliotrope rash), or 2) a muscle biopsy, MRI or EMG within 3 months demonstrating
active disease or 3) elevated CK > 5 times the upper limit of no rmal with no alternate explanation 
or cause (see Section 3.3.1 ). The committee will be composed of experts in the tr eatment a nd study 
of IIM who will evaluate all r elevant material including, but  not limited to, medical history , IIM 
history (such as disease duration and type), laboratory results  (including muscle enzyme levels and 
auto-antibodies), medication history (including dose, duration,  number of current and prior 
therapies), and available imaging, EMG, and biopsy results. Sit es will complete the Active Disease 
Adjudication Form and submit with supporting documen tation. Further d etails on the processes 
and procedures the committee will follow will be outlined in th e Charter of that committee.
7.2 Data Monitoring Committee
A Data Monitoring Committee w ill be established to  provide oversight of safety and eff icacy 
considerations in Study IM101611 and to provide advice to BMS r egarding actions the committee
deems necessary for the con tinuing protection of s ubjects enrol led in the study. Further details on 
the content and method of d ata reports to the DMC w ill be outlined in the Charter of that committee 
along with the proce sses and procedures the committee will foll ow.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 98
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
8 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
8.1 Sample Size Determination
A sample size of 150 subjects (75 subjects per treatment group) is planned based on the pr imary 
comparison of the proportion of subjects with IMACS DOI (as def ined under the primary 
objective) at Day 169 (Week 24) between the SC abatacept group and the placebo group on a 
background of standard treatment.
A sample size of 150 subjects ra ndomized in a 1:1 ratio to the SC abatacept group and placebo 
group will yield a power of approximately 90% to detect a treat ment difference of 27% in the rate 
of IMACS DOI between the 2 treatment groups based on a continuity corrected chi-squared test. 
This power estimate assumes a two-sided alpha level of 5%, IMAC S DOI rate of 60% in the 
abatacept group and 33% in the placebo group.
The 60% estimate of IMACS DOI in the abatacept group was based on reported rates of IMACS 
DOI in studies of patients with Myositis on combination therapy  with another biologic agent36. It 
is expected that the rate of IMACS DOI on abatacept in combinat ion with standard treatment 
should be similar to that observed with the use of another biol ogic agent in combination with 
standard treatment. Table 8.1-1 b elow presents the power estimates for other considerations of 
proportion of subjects in IMAC DOI in the abatacept group assum ing the total sample size of 
150 subjects. Rando mization will be s tratified globally by 3 str atification variables: (1) disease 
diagnosis (Dermatomyositis [DM] vs non-DM IIM), (2) Interstitial  Lung Disease (ILD) (present 
vs absent), (3) Japan vs ROW.
Table 8.1-1: Estimates of Power for Various Assumed Rates of IMA CS DOI at 
Week 24 Assuming Total Sample Size of 150
Aba Rate Placebo Rate Delta Power (%)
50%20% 30% 96
25% 25% 85
55%25% 30% 95
30% 25% 84
60%25% 35% ~ 99
30% 30% 95
35% 25% 83
8.2 Populations for Analyses
Efficacy endpoints will be summarized according to the Intent-t o-Treat (ITT) population and 
safety endpoints will be summar ized according to the As-Treated  population. These populations 
are described briefly below along with the Per-protocol populat ion  
.
•Intent-to-Treat Analysis Population
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 99
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
The Intent-to-Treat (ITT) Analysis Population is defined to inc lude all subjects randomized 
into the study for whom Case Report Form (CRF) data indicate th at at least one dose of study 
medication (abatacept or placebo) is administered during the Do uble-Blind Period. 
All subjects who are randomized but never received study medica tion are to be excluded. 
Given the blinded nature of this study, it is reasonable to ass ume that subjects who discontinue 
prior to the receipt of study m edication do so for reasons unre lated to st udy med ication. 
Subjects are grouped according to the treatments to which they are randomized by IVRS. 
ITT Analysis Population is also referred to as ‘All Randomized and Treated Subjects’. 
•As-Treated Analysis Population
The As-Treated Analysis Population con tain all subjects for whom CRF data indicate that at 
least one dose of study medication was administered during Doub le-Blind Period. 
Subjects are grouped according to th e treatments to which they are randomized, except in cases 
where information are available, which indicate that a subject receives a different tr eatment for 
the entire course of Double-Blind Period. In this case, the sub ject w ill be presented by the 
treatment they actually received. 
The As-Treated Analysis Population will also be referred as ‘Al l Treated Subjects’.
•Per-Protocol Analysis Population
The Per-protocol Analy sis Population is defined as a subset of the ITT Analysis Population 
which excludes subjects who have relevant protocol deviations d uring the double-blind study 
period. Relevant protocol deviations are those protocol deviati ons that might affect the primary 
efficacy endpoint of the study. A programmable list of relevant  protocol deviations will be 
included in the Statistical Analysis Plan and approved prior to  the Double-Blind Period 
database lock.
The Per-protocol Analysis P opulation w ill only be used if more than 10% of the subjects in 
either treatment group have relevant protocol deviations. In su ch a case, the analysis of the 
primary efficacy endpoint will be repeated in the Per-protocol Analysis Population.
 
 
•Open-label Abatacept Treated Population 
The open-label abatacept treated population will contain all su bjects for whom CRF data 
indicate that at least one dose of study medication was adminis tered during the Open-Label 
Period. All Week 52 analyses will be performed using this popul ation.
•Subjects randomized in Japan Open-label Abatacept Treated Popula tion
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 100
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
secondary endpoint measure s at Day 169 (week 24), no formal sta tistical testing will be conducted 
for any of the efficacy analyses related to the secondary endpoi nts at other time points and on any 
of exploratory endpoints. Appropriate summary statistics will b e provided for the analysis of each 
endpoint.
The Week 52 analysis will be performed once all subjects complet e 52 weeks of treatment in the 
study and/or follow-up visits whichever is later. The Week 52 an alysis will include summaries of 
AEs reported during the study up to 56 days post last dose date in the study  for all subjects. Eff icacy 
endpoints will be summarized ove r time during the open-label pe riod for the week 52 analysis. 
The 52 week analysis will be performed using the open-label tre ated analysis population. Nominal 
p-values will provided for the secondary endpoint measures at D ay 169 (week 24), no formal 
statist ical testing will be c onducted for any of the efficacy analyses related to the seconda ry 
endpoints at other time points and on any of exploratory endpoi nts. Appropriate summary statistics 
will be provided for the analysis of each endpoint.
An analysis using only Japanese sites will performed once all s ubjects complete 76 weeks of 
treatment in the study.
A final analysis will be perf ormed when subjects complete the 3  year long term extension and/or 
follow-up visits whichever is later.
8.4.1 Demographics and Baseline Characteristics
Frequency distributions and summary statistics of all demograph ic variables and baseline 
characteristics will be presented by tr eatment arm using the ITT population. Detail of bas eline 
characteristics to be presented will be included in the SAP.
8.4.2 Efficacy Analyses
8.4.2.1 Primary Efficacy Analysis
The primary comparis on of proportion of subjects in IMACS DOI a t Week 24 between the SC 
abatacept and placebo groups w ill be assessed using a logistic regression model. To account for 
randomization stratification, the logistic regression model wil l adjust for the randomization 
stratification variables of disease diagnosis (Dermatomyositis [DM] vs non-DM IIM), Interstitial 
Lung disease status (present vs . absent), and Japan vs. ROW; ba seline MMT8, baseline MDAAT, 
baseline PGA (continuous) and treatment group will also be inclu ded in the model. Point estimate 
of the adjusted Odds Ratios (OR) of the odds of achieving IMACS  DOI in the abatacept arm 
compared to the placebo arm, corresponding 95% CI and p-value w ill be provided. The proportion 
of subjects in IMACS DOI in each  treatmen t group and correspondi ng 95% CI w ill also be 
provided. All subjects who discontinue study medication prematu rely pri or to reaching the Week 
24 assessment visit, will be considered as not achieving IMACS DOI for the primary analysis. 
Efficacy assessments collected at week 24 on subjects who disco ntinue study medication prior to 
week 24 will not be included in the primary analysis of the pri mary endpoint, but will be included 
in a sensitivity analysis of the primary endpoint. Specificatio n of sensitivity analyses of the primary 
endpoint under different assumptions for missing data at week 2 4 will be provided in the Statistical 
Analysis Plan (SAP).
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 103
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
8.4.2.2 Secondary Efficacy Analysis
In addition to the primary efficacy endpoint, analyses related to the secondary and exploratory 
endpoints will also be included in the Week 24 analysis. The se condary efficacy assessment of 
change from baseline in m uscle endurance using FI-2 up to Day 169 (Week 24) w ill be assessed 
using a longitudinal (repeated measure) mixed model including t reatment group, ba seline FI-2 
value and randomization stratifi cation factors: diagnosis (DM v s non-DM IIM), ILD, Japan vs 
ROW, time (study days in which FI-2 is measured), time by basel ine FI-2 and time by treatment 
interactions as fixed effects and subject as a random effect. A djusted mean, SE, 95% CI for 
adjusted mean difference between tr eatment arms w ill be provided. A similar mixed model w ill 
also be used to assess the cha nge from baseline in HAQ-DI up to  Day 169 (Week 24). The model 
will include tr eatment group, baseline value HAQ-DI value, rando mization str atification factors: 
disease diagnosis (DM vs non-DM IIM ILD, Region (Japan vs ROW),  time (study days in which 
HAQ-DI is measured), time by baseline HAQ-DI and time by treatm ent interactions as fixed 
effects and subject as a random effect. Adjusted mean, SE, 95% CI for adjusted mean difference 
between treatment arms will also be provided.  
The secondary efficacy assessmen t of change from baseline in MD AAT value will also be assessed 
using a longitudinal (repeated measure) mixed model including t reatment group, baseline value 
MDAAT value, rando mization str atificatio n factors: disease dia gnosis (DM vs non-DM IIM), ILD, 
Region (Japan vs ROW ), time (study days in which MDAAT is measu red), time by baseline 
MDAAT and time by tr eatment interactions as fixed e ffects and subject as a random e ffect. 
Adjusted mean, SE, 95% CI for adju sted mean diffe rence between treatment arms w ill also be 
provided.
A similar mixed model will also be used to assess the change fr om baseline in Myositis Response 
Criteria (MRC) score up to Day 169 (Week 24). The mixed model w ill include tr eatment arm, 
baseline MRC score and ra ndomization stratification f actors: disease diagnosis (DM vs non-DM 
IIM), ILD (absent vs present), Region (Japan vs ROW), time (stu dy days in which MRC is 
measured), time by baseline MRC sc ore and time by tr eatment int eractions as fixed effects and 
subject as a random effect. Adj usted mean, SE, 95% CI for adjus ted mean difference between 
treatment arms will be provided.
Nominal p-values will be provided for the sec ondary efficacy endpoints at Day 169 ie, mea n 
change from baseline at Day 169 for each of the secondary endpoints: FI-2, HAQ-DI, MDAAT 
and MRC. The mixed longitudinal model will account for any miss ing values on any of the 
secondary efficacy endpoints. All construction of CIs for diffe rences in response rates between 
treatment groups w ill be based on minimum risk weights to account for randomizati on 
stratification factors, unless otherwise noted. All constructio n of CIs for response rates within 
treatment group will be based on normal approximation, unless o therwise noted.  
Efficacy assessments collected at week 24 on subjects who disco ntinue study medication prior to 
week 24 will not be included in the primary analyses of the sec ondary endpoints, but w ill be 
included in a sensitivity analysis of the secondary endpoints. The mixed longitudinal model will 
be considered the primary analyses for all the conti nuous secondary endpoints, specifications of 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 104
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
8.4.3 Safety Analyses
For the Week 24 analysis, frequency distribution of all adverse  events (AEs) reported during 
Period I of the study will be prese nted by the 2 treatment arms  (abatacept vs. placebo). AEs will 
be summarized from the first dose date in the study up to first  dose date in the Open-Label Period 
or last dose date in the Double-Blind Period + 56 days for subj ects who prematurely discontinued 
the study during the Double-Blind Period. Summary of AEs of spe cial interest will also be 
provided, d etails and analyses of the AEs  of special interest will be provided in the SAP. Individual 
listings of AEs indicating treatment arms will also be generated. Changes in clinical laboratory test 
results from baseline will be summarized by tr eatment group. La boratory marked abnormality 
using pre-defined abnormality criteria will also be descriptive ly summarized by treatment group. 
In general, there will be no statistical testing of gr oup difference with respect to frequencies of 
AEs or laboratory marked abnormalities, except otherwise specif ied in the SAP. All safety 
analyses in the Week 24 analysis will be performed using the as -treated analysis population. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.4.6 Outcomes Research Analyses
The changes from baseline in Fatigue (PROMIS) and SF-36 will be  summarized by treatment 
group. The treatment differences in adjusted mean changes from baseline for each measure, along 
with the corresponding 95% two-sided CI, will be based on a rep eated measure mixed model and 
will be presented at each scheduled study visit at which the PR OMIS Fatigue or SF-36 assessment 
was done. The mixed model will include baseline measurement, tr eatment group, randomization 
stratification factors: diagnosis (DM vs non-DM IIM), ILD (pres ent vs absent), Japan vs ROW, 
time (study days in which variable was measured), time by baseline value of variable and time by treatment as fixe d effects and subject as a random effect], adjusted mean, SE, 95% CI for adjusted 
mean difference between treatment groups will be provided.
8.4.7 Week 52 Analysis 
The final study (Week 52 analysis) for all study sites w ill be performed when all sub jects have 
completed a total of 52 weeks on treatment in the study (ie. co mpleted the Open-Label Peri od) 
and/or the follow-up period of the study. The Week 52 analysis will include efficacy and safety 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 106
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
analyses. No formal statistical testing will be conducted for a ny of the efficacy analyses included 
in the final Week 52 analysis, appropriate summary s tatistics will be provi ded. Safety summaries 
will include events re ported from the start of the Open-Label P eriod up to 56 days post last dose 
date in the Open-Label Period. Cumulative ab atacept safety summar ies will also be provided for 
all subjects who received abatacept at any time during the stud y. The cumulative safety summaries 
will include all AEs reported from the first dose date of abata cept up to 56 days post the last dose 
date of abatacept in the study.  
The Week 52 analyses will be based on open-
label treated analysis population except for the cumulative aba tacept safety summaries which will 
be based all subjects who received at least one dose of abatace pt at any time during the study.
8.4.8 Week 76 Japan Only Analysis
The analysis for the assessment of long-term eff icacy and safety for sub jects from Japan will be 
performed including data collected up to Week 76.
8.4.9 Long Term Open Label Extension (3 Years)
The analysis will be performed  when all subjects have completed  a total of 3 years open label 
treatment in the Long Term Open -Label Extension and/or the follow-up peri od of the st udy.  The 
analysis will include safety.  No formal statistical testing wi ll be conducted; appropriate summary 
statistics will be provided.  Safet y summaries will include eve nts reported from the start of the 
Long Term Open-Label Period up to 56 days post last dose date.
Cumulative abatacept safety summar ies will also be provided for all sub jects who received 
abatacept at any time during the study.  The cumulative safety summaries will include all AEs 
reported from the first dose of abatacept up to 56 days post the last dose of abatacept in the study.The analyses will be based on open-label treated analysis popula tion except for the cumulative 
abatacept safety summaries which will be based on all subjects who received at least one dose of 
abatacept at any time during the study.
8.5 Interim Analyses
Not Applicable
9 STUDY MANAGEMENT
9.1 Compliance9.1.1 Compliance with the Protocol and Protocol Revisions
The investigator should not imp lement any deviation or change t o the protocol without prior 
review and documented approval/favorable opinion of an amendmen t from the IRB/IEC (and if 
applicable, also by local health authority) except where necessa ry to eliminate an immediate 
hazard(s) to st udy subjects . If a deviation or change to a protocol is implemented to elim inate an 
immediate hazard(s) prior to obtaining relevant approval/favora ble opinion(s), the deviation or 
change will be submitted as soon as possible to:
•IRB/IEC 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 107
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
•Regulatory Authority(ies), if applicable by local regulations p er national requirements)
Documentation of approval/favorable opinion signed by the chair person or designee of the 
IRB(s)/IEC(s) and if applicable, also by local health authority ,  m u s t  b e  s e n t  t o  B M S .  I f  a n  
amendment substantially alters the study design or increases th e potential risk to the subject: (1) the 
consent form must be revised and submitted to the IRB(s)/IEC(s)  for review and 
approval/favorable opinion; (2) the revised form must be used t o obtain consent from subjects 
currently enrolled in the study if they are affected by the ame ndment; and (3) the new form must 
be used to obtain consent from new subjects prior to enrollment .
If the revision is done via an a dministrative letter, investiga tors must inform their IRB(s)/IEC(s).
9.1.2 Monitoring
BMS or designee representatives will review data centrally to id entify potential issues to determine 
a schedule of on-site visits for targeted review of study recor ds.
Representatives of BMS must be allowed to visit all study site locations periodically to assess the 
data quality and study integrity . On site they will review stud y records and directly compare them 
with source documents, discuss the conduct of the study with th e investigator, and verify that the 
facilities remain acceptable. Certain CRF pages and/or electron ic files may serve as the source 
documents:
In addition, the study may be evaluated by BMS or designee inte rnal auditors and government 
inspectors who must be allowed access to CRFs, source documents , other study files, and study 
facilities. BMS audit reports will be kept confidential.
The investigator must notify BMS promptly of a ny inspections scheduled by regu latory authorities, 
and promptly forward copies of inspection reports to BMS or des ignee. 
9.1.2.1 Source Documentation
The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that the source da ta are accurate, legible, 
contemporaneous, original and attr ibutable, whether the data ar e hand-written on paper or entered 
electronically. If source  data are created (first entered), mod ified, maintained, archived, retrieved, 
or transmitted electronically via computer ized systems (and/or any other kind of electronic 
devices) as part of regulated clinical trial activities, such s ystems must be compliant with all 
applicable laws and regulations governing use of electronic rec ords and/or electronic signatures. 
Such systems may include, but are not limited to, electronic medical/health records (EMRs/EHRs), 
adverse event tracking/reporting, protocol required assessments , and/or drug accountability 
records).
When paper records from such systems are used in place of elect ronic format to perform regulated 
activities, such paper records should be certified copies. A ce rtified copy consists of a copy of 
original information that has been verified, as indicated by a dated signature, as an exact copy 
having all of the same attributes a nd information as the original. 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 108
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
9.2 Records
9.2.1 Records Retention
The investigator (or head of the study site in Japan) must retai n all study records and source 
documents for the maximum period required by applicable regulat ions and guidelines, or 
institution procedures, or for the period specified by BMS or d esignee, whichever is longer. The 
investigator (or head of the study site in Japan) must contact B MS or designee prior to destroying 
any records associated with the study.
BMS or designee will notify the investigator (or head of the stu dy site in Japan) when the study 
records are no longer needed.
If the investigator withdraws fro m the study (e .g., relo cation,  retirement), the records sh all be 
transferred to a mutually agreed upon designee (e.g., another i nvestigator, study site, IRB). Notice 
of such transfer will be given in writing to BMS or designee.
9.2.2 Study Drug Records 
Records for IP (wh ether supplied by BMS, its vendors, or the si te) must substantiate IP integrity 
and traceability from r eceipt, prepar ation, administration, and  through destruction or return. 
Records must be made available for review at the request of BMS /designee or a Health Authority.
If... Then...
Supplied by BMS 
(or its vendors):•and guidelines and should include:
•amount received and placed in storage area
•amount currently in storage area
•label identif ication number or b atch number
•amount dispensed to and returned by each subject, including uni que 
subject identifiers
•amount transferred to another area/site for dispensing or stora ge
•non-study disposition (e.g., lost, wasted) 
•amount destroyed at study site, if applicable
•amount returned to BMS
•retain samples for bioavailability/bioequivalence, if applicabl e 
•dates and initials of person responsible for Investigational Pr oduct 
dispensing/accountability, as per the Delegation of Authority F orm.
Sourced by site, and 
not supplied by 
BMS or its vendors 
(examples include IP 
sourced from the 
sites stock or 
commercial supply, The investigator or designee accepts responsibility for documen ting 
traceability and study  drug integrity in accordance with requir ements 
applicable under law and the SOPs/standards of the sourcing pha rmacy. 
These records should include:
•label identification number or b atch number 
•amount dispensed to and returned by each subject, including uni que 
subject identifiers
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 109
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
If... Then...
or a specialty 
pharmacy)•date and initials of person responsible for Investigational Pro duct 
dispensing/accountability, as per the Delegation of Authority F orm.
BMS or designee will provide forms to facilitate inventory contr ol if the investigational site does 
not have an established system that meets these requirements.
9.2.3 Case Report Forms
An investigator is required to prepare and maintain adequate an d accurate case histories designed 
to record all observations and other d ata pertinent to the investig ation on each individual treated 
or entered as a control in the investigation. Data that are der ived from source documents and 
reported on the CRF must be consistent with the source documents  or the discrepancies must be 
explained. Additional clinical information may be collected and  analyzed in an effort to enhance 
understanding of product safety. CRFs may be requested for AEs and/or laboratory abnormalities 
that are reported or identified during the course of the study.
For sites using the Sponsor or designee electronic data capture tool, electronic CRFs w ill be 
prepared for all data collection fields except for fields speci fic to SAEs and pregnancy, which will 
be reported on the electronic SAE form and Pregnancy Surveillan ce form, respectively. If 
electronic SAE form is not av ailable, a paper SAE form can be used. Spaces may be left blank  
only in those circumstances permitted by study-specific CRF com pletion guidelines provided by 
Sponsor of designee. 
The confidentiality of records that could identify subjects mus t be protected, respecting the privacy 
and confidentiality rules in accordance with the applicable reg ulatory requirement(s).
The investigator will maintain a s ignature sheet to document si gnatures and initials of all persons 
authorized to make entries and/or corrections on CRFs. 
The completed CRF, SAE/pregnancy CRFs, must be promptly reviewe d, signed, and dated by the 
investigator or qualified physician who is a sub-investigator an d who is delegated this task on the 
Delegation of Authority Form. Sub-investigators in Japan may no t be delegated the CRF approval 
task. For electronic CRFs, review and approval/signature is comp leted electronically through the 
BMS electronic data capture tool. The investigator must retain a copy of the CRFs including 
records of the changes and corrections.
Each individual electronically si gning electronic CRFs must meet S ponsor or designee training 
requirements and must only access the BMS electronic data captu re tool using the unique user
account provided by Sponsor or designee. User accounts are not to be shared or reassigned to other 
individuals.
9.3 Clinical Study Report and Publications
A Signatory Investigator must be selected to sign the clinical study report. 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 110
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
For this protocol, the Signatory Investigator will be selected as appropriate based on the following 
criteria:
•External Principal Investigator designated at protocol developm ent
•National Coordinating Investigator 
•Study Steering Committee chair or their designee
•Subject recruitment (e.g., among the top quar tile of enrollers)
•Involvement in trial design
•Regional representation (e .g., among top qua rtile of enro llers from a specified region or 
country)
•Other criteria (as determined by the study team)
The data collected during this study are confidential and propr ietary to BMS or designee. Any 
publications or abstracts arising from this study must adhere t o the publication requirements set 
forth in the clinical trial agreement (CTA) governing [Study si te or Investigator] participation in 
the study. These requirements include, but are not limited to, submitting proposed publications to 
BMS or designee at the earliest practicable time prior to submis sion or presentation and 
otherwise within the time period set forth in the CTA.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 111
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
10 GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Term Definition
Complete AbstinenceComplete Abstinence is defined as complete avoidance of heteros exual 
intercourse and is an acceptable form of contraception for all study drugs. 
This also means that abstinence is the preferred and usual life style of the 
patient. This does not mean periodic abstinence (e.g., calendar , ovulation, 
symptothermal, profession of abstinence for entry into a clinic al trial, 
post-ovulation methods) and withdrawal, which are not acceptabl e 
methods of contraception. Women must continue to have pregnancy  tests. 
Acceptable alternate methods of highly or less effective contra ception’s 
must be discussed in the event that the subject chooses to fore go complete 
abstinence.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 112
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
11 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Term Definition
ACR American College of Rheumatology
ACTH adrenal corticotropic hormone
ADR adverse drug reaction
AE adverse event
ALT alanine aminotransferase (SGPT - serum glutamic pyruvate 
transaminase)
ARDS acute respiratory distress syndrome
AST aspartate aminotransferase (SGOT - serum glutamic oxaloacetic 
transaminase)
AZA Azathioprine
β-HCG beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin
BA/BE bioavailability/bioequivalence
BCG Bacillus Calmette–Guérin
BMS Bristol-Myers Squibb
BP blood pressure
BUN blood urea nitrogen
C Celsius
CA Contrast Agent
CAD Computer assisted diagnosis
CDASI Cutaneous Dermatomyositis Disease Area and Severity Index
CDC ACIP Center for Disease Control Advisory Committee on Immuni zation 
Practices
CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
CI confidence interval
cm Centimeter
COPD Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
CPK/CK creatine phosphokinase
CRF Case Report Form, paper or electronic
CT computed tomography
CXR chest X-ray
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 113
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Term Definition
DAD diffuse alveolar damage
D/C Discontinue
DILI Drug Induced Liver Injury
DLCO diffuse capacit y for carbon monoxide
DM Dermatomyositis
DMARD disease-modifying antirheumatic drug
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid
DOI Definition of Improvement
ECG Electrocardiogram
ECL Electrochemiluminescence
eCRF electronic Case Report Form
EDC electronic Data Capture
e.g. exempli gratia (for example)
EIA Enzyme Immunoassay
EMG Electromyography
ER exposure response
EU European Union
FDA Food and Drug Administration
FEV1 forced expiratory volume in 1 second
FI-2 Myositis Function Index
FSH follicle stimulating hormone
FVC forced vital capacity
gG r a m
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GGO Ground Glass Opacities
GGT gamma-glutamyl transferase
HAQ-DI Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index
HBcAb Hepatitis B core antibody
HBsAg Hepatitis B surface antigen
HcAb Hepatitis C antibody
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 114
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Term Definition
HCV Hepatitis C virus
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HPV Human papilloma virus
HRCT high-resolution computed tomography
HRT hormone replacement therapy
ICH International Conference on Harmonization 
i.e. id est (that is)
IEC Independent Ethics Committee
IIM Idiopathic Inflammatory Myopathy; Idiopathic Inflammatory My ositis
ILD interstitial lung disease 
IMACS International Myositis  Assessment and Clinical Studies gro up
IMACS DOI IMACS Definition of Improvement
IMP investigational medicinal products
IND Investigational New Drug Exemption
INH Isoniazid
IRB Institutional Review Board
ISR/T investigator sponsored research/trial
ITT intent-to-treat
IU International Unit
IV Intravenous
IVIG Intravenous Immunoglobulin
IVRS interactive voice response system
JIA juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Kg, kg Kilogram
L Liter
LDH lactate dehydrogenase
LT long term
MDAAT Myositis Disease Activity Assessment Tool
MDI Myositis Damage Index
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 115
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Term Definition
mg Milligram
μg Microgram
MHC major histocompatibility complex
min Minute
mL Milliliter
mmHg millimeters of mercury
MMR Measles, mumps and rubella
MMT Manual Muscle Test
MOA Mode of Action
MRC Myositis response criteria
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
MSD meso-scale discovery
MTX Methotrexate
N number of subjects or observations
N/A not applicable
NIMP non-investigational medicinal products 
NSAID nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
NSIP nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
OP organizi ng pneumonia
OR odds ratio
PBMC Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell
PD Pharmacodynamics
PFT Pulmonary Function Testing
PGA Physician Global Assessment of Disease Activity
PK Pharmacokinetics
PM Polymyositis
PPD Purified Protein Derivative
PRO (ePRO) Patient-Reported Outcomes (electronic Patient-Reporte d Outcomes)
PROMIS Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
QLF quantitative lung fibrosis
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 116
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Term Definition
RA Rheumatoid Arthritis
RBC red blood cell
RNA Ribonucleic Acid
ROW Rest of World
SAE serious adverse event
SC Subcutaneous
SCIG Subcutaneous immunoglobulin
SD standard deviation
SGA Patient (Subject) Global Assessment of Disease Activity
SOC system organ class
ST short term
Subj Subject
TB Tuberculosis
UIP usual interstitial pneumonia
ULN Upper-Limit of Normal
UV Ultraviolet
VAS visual analog scale
WBC white blood cell
Wk, wk Week
WOCBP women of childbearing potential
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 117
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
APPENDIX 1 HIGHLY EFFECTIVE METHODS OF CONTRACEPTION
At a minimum, subjects must agree to use one highly effective m ethod of contraception as listed 
below:
HIGHLY EFFECTIVE METHODS OF CONTRACEPTION
Highly effective methods of contraception have a failure rate o f < 1% when used consistently and 
correctly. WOCBP and female partners of male subjects, who are WOCBP, are expected to use 
one of the highly effective methods of contraception listed bel ow. Male subjects must inform their 
female partners who are WOCBP of the contraceptive requirements  of the protocol and are 
expected to adhere to using contraception with their partner. C ontraception methods are as follows:
1. Progestogen only hormonal contraception associated with inhib ition of ovulation.
2. Hormonal methods of contraception including oral contraceptiv e pills containing combined 
estrogen + progesterone, vaginal ring, injectables, implants an d intrauterine devices (IUDs) 
such as MirenaÒ
3. Nonhormonal IUDs, s uch as ParaGardÒ 
4. Bilateral tubal occlusion5. Vasectomised partner with documented azoospermia 90 days afte r procedure
•Vasectomised partner is a highly effective birth control method  provided that partner is the 
sole sexual partner of the WOCBP trial participant and that the  vasectomised partner has 
received medical assessment of the surgical success.
6. Intrauterine hormone-releasing system (IUS).7. Complete abstinence
•Complete abstinence is defined as the complete avoidance of het erosexual intercourse 
(refer to Glossary of Terms)
•Complete abstinence is an acceptable form of contraception for all study d rugs and must 
be used throughout the duration of the study treatment (plus 5 half-lives of the 
investigational drug plus 30 days).
•It is not necessary to use any other method of contraception wh en complete abstinence is 
elected.
•Subjects who choose complete abstinence must continue to have p regnancy tests as 
specified in Section 5. 1.
•Acceptable alternate methods of highly effective contraception must be discussed in the 
event that the subject chooses to forego complete abstinence.
•The reliability of sexual abstinence needs to be evaluated in r elation to the duration of the 
clinical trial and the preferred and usual lifestyle of the sub ject.
Local laws and regulations may require use of alternative and/or  additional contraception methods.
UNACCEPTABLE METHODS OF CONTRACEPTION
1. Periodic abstinence (calenda r, symptother mal, post-ovulation methods)
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 124
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
2. Withdrawal (coitus interruptus)
3. Spermicide only4. Lactation amenorrhea method (LAM)
TREATMENT WITH TERATOGENIC CONCOMITANT MEDICATION
Males and females taking a concomitant teratogenic medication s hould follow contraception
guidelines and duration described in the label for the concomit ant medication in addition to those
required for abatacept.
 
 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 125
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
APPENDIX 2 LABORATORY GUIDELINES: PATIENT STUDIES (REVISED 
AUGUST 13, 1999) 
Laboratory test results, which meet these criteria, and the Inv estigator feels is clinically relevant 
should be described on the Adverse Event Form. Those which are judged to be SERIOUS events 
require the completion of a Serious Adverse Event Form (see Sections 6.1.1 and 6.3).
[NOTE:  LLN = lower limit of normal; ULN = upper limit of norma l.]
albumin - < 0.9 x LLN or if pretreatment value is < LLN, < 0.75 x pretreatment
alkaline phosphatase - > 2 x ULN; or if pretreatment >ULN, 3 x pretreatment value
basophils (%) - > 3% if 0-1% pretreatment, > 3 x pretreatment value if pretreatme nt > 1%
bilirubin
a. direct - > 1.5 x ULN, or if pretreatment above ULN, > 2 x pretreatm ent
b. total - > 2 x upper limit of normal, or if pretreatment above ULN , > 4 x pretreatment 
value
blasts ->0
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) - > 2 x pretreatment
calcium - < 0.8 x LLN or > 1.2 x ULN; < 0.75 x pretreatment if pretreatment be low LLN, or >
1.25 x pretreatment if pretreatment above ULN; > ULN if < LLN pretreat ment, or < LLN if > ULN 
pretreatment
chloride - < 0.9 x LLN or > 1.1 x ULN; or < 0.9 x pretreatment if pretreatment below LLN, or >
1.1 x pretreatment if pretreatment above ULN; > ULN if < LLN pretr eatment, or < LLN if > ULN 
pretreatment
creatinine - > 1.5 x pretreatment value
eosinophils (%) - > 3 x pretreatment and > 8% if pretreatment normal; if pretreatm ent > ULN, >
3 x pretreatment
erythrocytes - < 0.75 x pretreatment value
glucose - < 0.8 x LLN or > 1.5 x ULN; if pretreatment < LLN then < 0.8 x pretre atment; if 
pretreatment > ULN then > 2 x pretreatment; < LLN if > ULN pretreatm ent, or > ULN if < LLN 
pretreatment
hematocrit - < 0.75 x pretreatment
hemoglobin - > 3 g/dL decrease from pretreatment value
lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) - > 1.5 x ULN; if pretreatment value is above ULN, > 3 x 
pretreatment value
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 126
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
leukocyte (WBC) count - < 0.75 x LLN or > 1.25 x ULN; < 0.8 x pretreatment if pretreatment <
LLN or > 1.2 x pretreatment if pretreatment > ULN; > ULN if pretrea tment < LLN or < LLN if >
ULN pretreatment
lymphocytes (%) - < 0.5 x LLN or > 2.0 x ULN, or < 0.5 x pretreatment if below LLN 
pretreatment; > 2.0 x pretreatment if above ULN pretreatment.  > U LN if < LLN pretreatment, or 
< LLN if > ULN pretreatment
monocytes (%) - > 2 x ULN; > 2 x pretreatment if pretreatment above ULN
neutrophil count (neutrophils+bands) - < 0.67 x pretreatm ent if pretr eatment < 1000/mm3; 
otherwise, < 1000/mm3.
phosphate - < 0.75 x LLN or > 1.25 x ULN; < 0.67 x pretreatment value if below LLN 
pretreatment, or > 1.33 x pretreatment if above ULN pretreatment;  > ULN if < LLN pretreatment, 
or < LLN if > UL N pretreatment
platelet count - < 0.67 x LLN or > 1.5 x ULN; if below normal pretreatment, < 0.5 x pretreatment 
value and < 100,000/mm3
potassium - < 0.9 x LLN or > 1.1 x ULN; < 0.9 x pr etreatment if pretreatment bel ow LLN, or >
1.1 x pretreatment if pretreatment above ULN; > ULN if < LLN pretr eatment, or < LLN if > ULN 
pretreatment
protein, total - < 0.9 x LLN or > 1.1 x ULN; <0.9 x pretreatment if below LLN pretr eatment, or 
> 1.1 x ULN if above ULN pretreatment; > ULN if < LLN pretreatment,  or < LLN if > ULN 
pretreatment
SGOT and SGPT (ASAT and ALAT) - > 3 x upper limit of normal; if pretreatment above ULN, 
> 4 x pretreatment value
sodium - < 0.95 x LLN or > 1.05 x ULN; < 0.95 x pr etreatment if below LLN pre treatment, > 1.05
x pretreatment if above ULN pretreatment; > ULN if < LLN pretreat ment, or < LLN if > ULN 
pretreatment
uric acid - > 1.5 x ULN; if pretreatment above ULN, > 2 x pretreatment value
urinalysis
a) urinary protein - > 1 gram/24 hours and 2 x pretreatment value
b) urinary RBC - > 5/HPF or, > 4 x pretreatment if pretreatment valu e 5/HPF
c) urinary WBC - > 5/HPF or, > 4x pretreatment if 5/HPF pretreatmen t
d) creatinine clearance (glomerular filtration rate) - < 0.67 x pre treatment value
e) urine dipstick measurements:  Protein, blood, sugar, and aceto ne- 2+, or if 1+
pretreatment, 2 x pretreatment. Do not evaluate protein if quant itative protein 
determination done
stool hemoccult - positive if negative pretreatment
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 127
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Summary of Key Changes of Revised Protocol 03
Section Number & Title Description of Change
2.1 Good Clinical Practice 
(3rd paragraph)Incorporated 
•‘If required as per local regulation, 
serious breaches will be reported by 
Sponsor or designee to applicable authorities’
•‘(occurring in any country)’ 
•and ‘of 1 or more subjects’.
2.2 Institutional Review 
Board/Independent Ethics 
CommitteeRemoved ‘BMS’ notation and added 
‘Sponsor’ & ‘designee’.
3.1.2 Double-Blind Period 
(Day 1 - Week 24)Additional text:’ Rescue therapy will beavailable for subjects who meet the disease worsening criteria during the 
double-blind period as defined in Section 
3.1.4.’&Subjects who discontinue treatment with study medication during the Double-blind Period will complete the Early Termination visit (which is the same visit as Day 169 visit) (See Table 5.1-2). These subjects must also return on the previously scheduled Double-blind Period Day 169 to complete the Post-Study Drug Efficacy Visit (see Table 5.1-4). The 
purpose of this visit is to assess all aspects 
of disease activity to ascertain the impact of study participation for regulatory review. Subjects must also complete 2 follow-up visits (Day 85 and 169) during the 24 week post-treatment follow-up period, to perform safety and laboratory assessments (See Table 5.1-5 Post-Treatment Follow-Up Period). This Period begins on the day of the Early Termination visit and applies only to 
subjects who do not start commercial 
abatacept therapy.’
3.1.3 Open-Label Period (Week 24 - Week 52)Supplementary text ‘Use of immune globulin (intravenous [IVIG] or subcutaneous [SCIG] is permitted during this period.’&‘Subjects who discontinue treatment with abatacept during the Open-Label Period will complete the Early Termination visit for the OL (See Table 5.1-3 day 365 is also the OL ET) and 2 follow-up visits during the 24 week post-treatment follow-
up period, to perform safety and 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 130
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Summary of Key Changes of Revised Protocol 03
Section Number & Title Description of Change
laboratory assessments. (See Table 5.1-5). 
If the subject receives treatment with an alternate source of ab atacept (Post-Study 
Drug Program [PSDP] or Commercial), completing this post-treatment follow-up period is not required.
Treatment with other biologic therapy is 
not recommended for at least 70 days ( ∼5 
half-lives of abatacept follow-up period.’
3.1.4 Rescue TherapyRemoved the following text ‘The choice 
of rescue therapy is at the discretion of the investigator; however, rescue treatment may not be abatacept or a prohibited medication (See Section 3.4.2.1).’ &Later in the segment, added ‘The use of rescue therapy is at the discretion of the investigator; however, rescue treatment 
may not be abatacept or a prohibited 
medication (See Section 3.4.2.1). Allowable medication are restricted to allowable concomitant medication (Section 3.4.1.1 Standard Treatment). Rescue therapy includes increases in dose of current therapy, addition of therapy and change in therapy, all with some restrictions such that allowable rescue therapy meets the criteria for allowable standard treatment. The following 
changes are allowable as rescue therapy:’ 
and sections (1), (2) & (3).
3.1.5 Post-Treatment Follow-Up PeriodRemoved sections:
•Double-Blind Period (Day 1 to Wk 
24)
•Open-Label Period (Wk 24 to Wk 
52)
•Study Completion (After Wk 52).
3.2 Post Study Access to TherapyAmended title to ‘3.2 Post Study Access to Study Drug’, and included ‘with study drug, ie abatacept’. 
3.3.4 Screening for 
MalignancyAdded the text ‘It is recommended that 
all’ & ‘at the discretion of the investigator’, at several points.
&Last paragraph, removed ‘require 
approval by’ and added ‘may be discussed with’.
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 131
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v

Clinical Protocol IM101611
BMS-188667 abatacept
Summary of Key Changes of Revised Protocol 03
Section Number & Title Description of Change
3.4.1.1 Standard TreatmentAdded the text ‘Use of immune globulin
(intravenous [IVIG] or subcutaneous [SCIG] is permitted during this period. Addition of any other prohibited medication (Section 3.4.2.1; except IVIG3.4.2.1) is not permitted’ to the last 
paragraph.
3.4.1.3 Immunosuppressant 
medicationsProvided substantial text revision to clarify what immunosuppressants are permitted
3.4.2.1 Prohibited MedicationsAdded text ‘All prohibited medication must have been discontinued at least 4 weeks prior to randomization with the exception of immune globulin, rituximab and d-penicillamine which have longer exclusion periods (see 3.3.2). Prohibited medication in this contest refers to immunomodulatory medications for the treatment of IIM which are not included 
as immunosuppressant medications 
(Section 3.4.1.3). The following list includes examples of specific prohibited medications.’
Also added/removed several therapies.
3.4.2.2 Restricted Medications Developed second bullet-point.
3.5 Discontinuation of 
Subjects following any 
Treatment with Study DrugSecond paragraph: Provided substantial 
text revision to clarify the requirements 
for subjects that discontinue
Table 4-1: Study Drugs for 
IM101611Added ‘Open Label’.
Table 5.1-2 Study Evaluations - Double-Blind Period 
(IM101611)Added Wk 8 assessments for MMT-8 & 
MDAAT
Table 5.1-5 Revised Schedule/T&E ‘Title’.
5.4.1.2 Assessments 
Performed by Medical Staff: Myositis Response Criteria Added a ‘continuous total improvement score’ range ‘0- 100’.
Table 5.5.1-1 Sampling ScheduleAmended Study Days to reflect ’85 Days & 169 Days after Last Dose
6.1.1 Serious Adverse Event 
Collection and ReportingText revised to clarify the reporting of SAEs and Pregnancies immediately. 
Revised Protocol No.: 04
Date: 01-Feb-2019 132
6.0 Approved 930103163 6.0v
