APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  1 of 42
                   
                                   
HRP-503B – BIOMEDICAL  RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
(2018-1)
Protocol Title:  Imaging  the Neuroimmune Response to Alcohol
Principal Investigator: Ansel T. Hillmer Ph.D
Version Date: .06
(If applicable ) Clinicaltrials.gov Registration  #: Click or tap here to enter text.
INSTRUCTIONS
This template is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes  all of the necessary information 
needed by the IRB to determine whether a study  meets approval criteria.  Read  the following instructions 
before proceeding:
1.Use this protocol  template for a PI initiated study  that includes  direct interactions with research 
subjects. Additional templates for other types of research protocols are available in the system  Library.
2.If a section or question does not apply  to your research study,  type “Not Applicable” underneath.
3.Once completed, upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  2 of 42SECTION  I: RESEARCH  PLAN
1.Statement  of Purpose:  State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.  
Alcohol use disorder affects nearly  14% of the population, accruing considerable cost to individual 
families and society. Much of this cost stems from alcohol’s influence on the immune system. Alcohol 
impairs peripheral  immune function, evidenced by increased susceptibility to infection related diseases 
such as liver cirrhosis and pancreatitis1. The neuroimmune consequences of alcohol  are subtler. 
Preclinically, alcohol triggers neuroimmune  abnormalities that contribute  to cognitive  dysfunction, 
neurodegeneration, and alter alcohol drinking behaviors2,3. Yet, limited  experimental tools hamper 
translational efforts  to study alcohol’s effects on neuroimmune function in people.  We propose to 
address this deficit by developing an innovative human imaging paradigm that measures neuroimmune 
response to alcohol.   Our team developed  an exciting imaging paradigm using positron  emission 
tomography (PET) to measure 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO) levels before and after a dose of the 
classic immune  stimulus lipopolysaccharide  (LPS)4. TSPO is a protein  located on the outer mitochondrial 
membrane5 that is overexpressed  during  microglial  activation6,7. Acute LPS increased TSPO  levels by 40-
60% throughout the brain in a variety  of species with  this paradigm8,9, establishing  an imaging approach 
measuring the magnitude  of acute  neuroimmune  response. However, LPS and alcohol act on microglia 
through different mechanisms10, motivating  the important need to validate alcohol as an immune  
stimulus to study alcohol use disorder. To this end, a recent PET study  reported robust increases  in TSPO 
levels after  alcohol infusion in monkeys11. We propose to translate this finding by measuring 
neuroimmune response to a fixed dose of alcohol in people. The clinical relevance of this approach  will 
be assessed with a battery designed  to evaluate  reward dysfunction,  anxiety, and cognition at the time 
of peak ‘sickness behaviors’. We will accomplish these goals with the following two specific  aims: 
Aim 1: To measure TSPO levels with PET imaging before and after a fixed-dose alcohol  session.       
We will recruit 50 moderate drinkers to participate  in this study. A baseline PET scan with [11C]PBR28,  a 
TSPO-specific radioligand, will be conducted9,12. Next, subjects will drink  a fixed alcohol dose,  followed  a 
post-alcohol [11C]PBR28  PET scan timed to capture  acute neuroimmune response11. [11C]PBR28 
distribution volumes (VT), which are proportional to TSPO number, will be measured throughout the 
brain. We will test the hypothesis  that acute alcohol  robustly increases  [11C]PBR28 VT, consistent with 
microglial activation. The percent change  in [11C]PBR28 VT (ΔV T) from  baseline will quantify the 
magnitude of neuroimmune response.  
Aim 2: To compare neuroimmune response  in moderate drinkers and heavy drinkers.
In addition to the 50 moderate  drinkers recruited for Aim 1, we will recruit 50 heavy drinkers  
(>21 drinks/week, women; >28 drinks/week, men).  Subjects will participate in the study design 
described in Aim 1 (a baseline [11C]PBR28 PET scan, drink a fixed  alcohol  dose, followed by a post-
alcohol [11C]PBR28  PET scans). The magnitude  of neuroimmune response, quantified  by ΔVT, will be 
compared between moderate drinkers and heavy drinkers to test the hypothesis that the neuroimmune 
response to alcohol is greater in heavy drinkers compared to moderate  drinkers , consistent with the 
concept of alcohol ‘priming microglia’.
Aim 3: To compare the neuroimmune  response to alcohol in women  and men.
There are well-established differences between men and women in the peripheral immune 
response to alcohol,  however, differences in the brain’s  response to alcohol  are not known. Of the 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  3 of 42moderate drinkers and heavy drinkers, we will recruit equal  numbers of women and men (25 in each  
group). Within each group, we will compare the magnitude  of neuroimmune response, quantified by 
ΔVT, between  women and men in each group. Consistent with the existent preclinical and peripheral 
literature, we hypothesize that women  will exhibit an exaggerated neuroimmune response to alcohol 
compared to men. 
Aim 4: To relate neuroimmune response with ‘sickness behaviors’ relevant to alcohol  use disorder.  
Ratings of reward processing, anxiety,  and cognitive function will be acquired  first before baseline 
scanning, and a second time the morning after the alcohol  session, timed  to capture peak  ‘sickness 
behaviors’13,14. We will assess the relationships  of neuroimmune  response (ΔV T) with subsequent 
changes in reward processing,  anxiety,  and cognitive function by testing the following  hypotheses:   
SubAim 4A: Greater  neuroimmune  response in basal ganglia predicts greater  reward dysfunction  
SubAim 4B: Greater  neuroimmune response in amygdala predicts heightened  anxiety 
SubAim 4C: Greater  neuroimmune response in hippocampus  predicts poorer cognitive  
performance 
Aim 5: To determine peak  neuroimmune  response with PET imaging after a fixed-dose alcohol  session
The same participants from  Aim 1 and Aim 2 will have an additional [11C]PBR28 PET scan 
approximately 20hrs post alcohol administration. The magnitude of neuroimmune response, 
quantified by ΔVT, will be compared with the first post challenge scan to determine when peak 
response occurs. 
2.Probable Duration  of Project: State the expected duration of the project,  including all follow-up and data 
analysis activities.  
5 Years
3.Background: Describe  the background information  that led to the plan for this project.  Provide  references to 
support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.
1. NEUROIMMUNE  RESPONSE TO ALCOHOL: THE ROLE OF MICROGLIAL  ACTIVATION
Microglia are the primary immunocompetent cells in the brain. These macrophages maintain 
homeostasis and provide the first line of defense against immune  challenges to the brain15. Under 
normal conditions,  microglia exist in a ‘resting' state featuring motile processes  that survey the 
environment for pathogens or brain  injury16. Resting  microglia  also interact  with neurons and synapses, 
influencing synaptic plasticity17,18. When  microglia encounter pathogens  or injury signs they  become 
activated. Microglial activation is a hallmark of neuroimmune  response. Activated  microglia  transform  to 
a ramified shape and release  immune signaling  substances such  as cytokines and chemokines17. This 
activation occurs in stages, and microglia fully  activated  to an amoeboid shape are phagocytic19. 
Microglial activation is a healthy process necessary for cell repair and re-establishing  homeostasis19. 
However, excessive microglial activation  can cause  toxicity and cell death20, while insufficient  microglial 
activation can allow  the immune stimulus to persist14. Dysregulated  microglial activation  is implicated  in 
many neuropsychiatric conditions21, including alcohol use disorder2,3.  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  4 of 422. MEASURING ALCOHOL-INDUCED IMMUNE RESPONSE IN PEOPLE
Human studies  identify altered immunity in alcohol use disorder.  Peripheral  pro-inflammatory 
cytokine levels are higher  in people  with alcohol  use disorder compared  to controls22-24, where greater 
cytokine levels are associated  with more alcohol craving25-27. Increased  gut permeability26,28,29 likely 
contributes to these cytokine elevations by leaking  inflammatory molecules such  as LPS and 
peptidoglycans27. Post-mortem brain  analyses  indicate higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, 
micro-RNA, genes, and immunohistochemical markers in alcohol dependent individuals compared to 
controls30-35. In contrast, imaging studies  suggest lower or no different levels  of immune-related 
biomarkers in alcohol use disorder compared to controls. This includes the magnetic resonance  
spectroscopy (MRS) measures of NAA36-42 and Cho36,38,39,42-44, related  to neuronal integrity and glial 
density, respectively; and the 18 kDa translocator  protein (TSPO)45-47, a protein sensitive  to activated 
microglia. These  human  data demonstrate alcohol’s intricate effects on the immune system,  but provide 
a snapshot of immune  state when measured.  Yet, it is clear  that a single measurement inadequately 
captures the dynamic nature of microglial activation. To this end, effects of alcohol on immune response 
in people are less well characterized. Peripheral  monocytes exhibit a blunted  pro-inflammatory 
response to LPS stimulation in alcohol use disorder9,27,48. While peripheral cytokines influence  brain 
immune signaling,  this relationship is neither  direct nor temporally in sync13,49,50; thus,  no studies have 
directly studied the neuroimmune response to alcohol  in people.  We propose  to address this knowledge 
gap by validating an imaging  approach directly  measuring  TSPO levels  before and after an alcohol  dose. 
This measurement is needed to elucidate clinically relevant aspects of microglial activation  in alcohol  
use disorder.  
3. TSPO IS AN IMAGING BIOMARKER SENSITIVE  TO MICROGLIA ACTIVATED BY ALCOHOL
TSPO is an extensively used biomarker associated with neuroimmune function12. TSPO  is found on 
the outer  mitochondrial  membrane of microglia and reactive astrocytes, with low expression in other 
neuronal cells5. PET radioligands with high affinity and specificity to TSPO, such as [11C]PBR2851-53, can 
be used to estimate  the ligand distribution  volume (VT)54, which is proportional to the number of in vivo 
sites available for [11C]PBR28 binding  Bavail where VT= Bavail/KD+VND. We therefore  term  [11C]PBR28  VT as 
‘TSPO availability’.  TSPO expression co-localizes with activated microglia6,55, where  binding to TSPO sites  
correlates strongly  with immunohistochemical  markers of microglial activation but not those of 
astrocyte activation56. Thus TSPO  is a biomarker  sensitive to microglial activation12. Yet, abnormal TSPO 
levels can also stem  from altered TSPO expression in non-microglial cells, change in numbers of cells 
expressing TSPO,  or other processes  such as abnormal  cell metabolism57. This context presents 
challenges interpreting data from single TSPO PET scans. 
A TSPO imaging strategy that maintains  unambiguous interpretation of TSPO availability acquires 
imaging data before and after an acute  immune  stimulus. For example,  LPS triggers ‘classic’ microglial 
activation58. In non-human primates, we and others  reported that LPS robustly increased [11C]PBR28 VT 
by 40-60%8,9. Post-mortem analyses indicated similar  morphology in cells immunoreactive for TSPO and 
cells immunoreactive  for CD68 (marker  of microglia), but not with cells immunoreactive for GFAP  
(marker of astrocytes; Fig. 1)8, demonstrating  that increased TSPO expression in microglia  mostly 
accounted for the observed increase  in TSPO  availability. A team led by Dr. Kelly  Cosgrove, a 
collaborator on this proposal (see letter)  translated this paradigm to image people, where 1 ng/kg  LPS 
increased [11C]PBR28  VT by 46±8% across the brain59. These data  demonstrate strong  scientific rigor 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  5 of 42validating TSPO as an imaging biomarker  of acute  microglial activation.  Yet, since  LPS indirectly acts on 
microglia while  alcohol’s actions are both direct  and indirect10, LPS inadequately models alcohol’s 
complex effects on the neuroimmune system. Thus, validation of alcohol  as an immune stimulus is 
needed to extend this exciting imaging paradigm to study alcohol use disorder.  
Microglia activated by alcohol overexpress  TSPO2,60-63. In a comprehensive preclinical study, a four-
day binge  alcohol paradigm increased  both OX-42 immunoreactivity, a cardinal index of microglia  
activation64, and TSPO radioligand binding62 (Fig. 2A-B). This report validates TSPO as a biomarker of 
alcohol-induced microglial activation. Indeed, TSPO radioligand binding increased  following  ethanol 
injected directly into rodent  striatum65,66, and alcohol administered systemically62,67. An exciting recent 
baboon study reported that i.v. alcohol  targeting  1 g/L in blood increased  TSPO radioligand VT by 58-
138%11 (Fig. 2C). Critically,  the radioligand  binding in brain was displaceable, demonstrating signal 
specificity. These data strongly support translation  of TSPO  PET imaging as a biomarker of microglia 
activated by alcohol in people. Aim 1 will measure  [11C]PBR28 VT before and after a fixed dose alcohol 
session (Fig. 3). We hypothesize that acute alcohol  will increase [11C]PBR28 VT throughout  the brain. This 
paradigm will establish  a novel assay of alcohol-induced  microglial activation  in humans
4. MICROGLIA ACTIVATION IN CHRONIC ALCOHOL EXPOSURE
Alcohol activates microglia by interacting (indirectly via ‘alarmins’68 or directly) with the toll-like 
receptor 431,69 (TLR4). TLR4 signaling activates transcription factors such  as NF-κB and AP-170, which 
regulate production  of cytokines,  chemokines,  and other alarmins. Alcohol increases the alarmin 
HMGB171 and pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1β,  and IL-6 in culture61 and in vivo31,49,72. 
Oxidative stress markers, such as the enzymes COX-2 and iNOS, also increase following  alcohol doses in 
rodents73-76. These  pro-inflammatory responses to alcohol can cause gliosis  and apoptosis60,69,70. 
Interestingly, alcohol can also increase  anti-inflammatory cytokines77 and markers of growth-promoting 
(M2-like) microglial  activation78 depending  on experimental  conditions. Moreover, alcohol has dynamic  
effects on neuroimmune response. For example, in some reports a single alcohol  bout  did not elicit 
microglial activation  or cytokine release31,79,80, but intermittent alcohol  exposure did31,76,79. These 
findings could reflect  microglia  priming81, where  a first alcohol bout  partially activates microglia  and 
subsequent alcohol  elicits exacerbated  immune  responses82. Aim 2 of this study will determine if the 
phenomenon of microglia priming has clinical relevance  in alcohol use disorder by comparing  
neuroimmune response to alcohol in moderate  drinkers  and heavy  drinkers.
5. SEX DIFFERENCES IN IMMUNE RESPONSES  TO ALCOHOL
A growing literature  indicates that women exhibit  a greater immune response to alcohol  than 
men. This sex difference  may have important implications  for sex-dependent trajectories and 
consequences of AUD, including  exacerbated health risks83. Intermittent alcohol  exposure  increased 
microglia number  and neuronal loss in hippocampus and prefrontal cortex for female but not male 
rats84,85.  Similarly,  in female mice acute23 and chronic86 ethanol induced  higher  cortical  levels of pro-
inflammatory cytokines, chemokines,  and enzymes  associated with oxidative  stress compared  to males. 
These findings translated to human  studies, where  acute alcohol  induced plasma  levels of endotoxin87 
and pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines23 that were higher  in women compared  to men. In 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  6 of 42populations with problematic drinking  behaviors, women exhibited  higher plasma  levels of the alarmin 
HMGB122,88, the pro-inflammatory  cytokine TNF-α89, and TIMP-190, a protease inhibitor involved in 
immune response91, compared to men. While  this work establishes sex differences  in peripheral 
immune response to alcohol,  similar  differences in the brain’s immune response have not been 
examined. Aim 3 of this proposal will address  this knowledge gap by comparing the neuroimmune 
response to alcohol in men and women.
6. CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS OF DYSREGULATED NEUROIMMUNE RESPONSE
Microglia activation elicits  a cluster  of symptoms called ‘sickness behaviors’, which include  reward 
dysfunction, anxiety, and mild  cognitive impairment13,92. For each  symptom,  neuroimmune effects 
converge on a specific brain region. Reward  response (via BOLD signal)93,94 and dopaminergic signaling95-
98 are modulated by neuroimmune stimuli  (including  alcohol97) in the basal ganglia. Stress  and anxiety  
(via BOLD signal)99-101 are associated with immune effects in amygdala, an important hub for alcohol use 
disorder and anxiety102. Indeed, a growing  preclinical  literature identifies the amygdala as mediating  
anxiety-like behaviors associated with alcohol103-105. Cognitive performance tracks with glucose 
metabolism106 and TSPO levels in alcohol dependent  patients46 in hippocampus. Alcohol  exposure that 
elicited a neuroimmune  response in hippocampus  also impairs rodent learning and memory 
performance67,76,107,108. Taken  together, this literature indicates  the basal  ganglia, amygdala, and 
hippocampus as brain regions  susceptible to alcohol-induced  immune influences  on the respective  
behaviors of reward processing, anxiety, and cognitive  impairment. Aim 4 of this study will determine  if 
alcohol triggers  a neuroimmune  response in these  specific regions that predicts the extent of specific 
behaviors clinically relevant  to alcohol use disorder.
4.Research Plan: Summarize the study  design and research  procedures  using non-technical language that can 
be readily understood  by someone outside the discipline. Be sure to distinguish between standard of care vs. 
research procedures when applicable, and include any flowcharts of visits  specifying  their individual  times  and 
lengths.  Describe the setting in which the research will take place.
4.1 Overall Research  Design: 
This research plan proposes experiments that are critical to advance our understanding of the brain’s immune 
response to alcohol in people. We will recruit  moderate drinkers  and Alcohol Use Disorder subjects between  
the ages of 21 to 50 years  to participate in the recruitment, evaluation, and imaging. All subjects  will be seen 
for an initial intake, including a full physical exam  and medical coging. The study design consists of up to three  
[11C]PBR28 PET imaging sessions, a laboratory alcohol session, an overnight stay at the CNRU or HRU, and 
behavioral and cognitive testing acquired  twice,  on the morning of each  study  day. A magnetic  resonance  
imaging session will be acquired on a separate day. 
4.2 Subject Selection:
Moderate drinker participating patients will self-report drinking consistent with at least one binge alcohol  
event in the past three  months but not meet DSM-5 criteria for AUD  to ensure  that accustomed drinking  
levels are not exceeded in the laboratory. AUD  subjects will meet  DSM-5  criteria  for current Alcohol Use 
Disorder. Subjects will be recruited mainly from New Haven County,  although  enrollment is not limited to this 
region. All research  subjects will be recruited  under guidelines of the Yale University Institutional Review  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  7 of 42Board (Human Investigation Committee). Subjects will be recruited from the community  at large  via IRB-
approved advertising (television, newspaper, postings in community locations,  Craigslist, Facebook).
Screening Evaluation
All screening procedures will be performed by a trained research  assistant  or study  coordinator. Initial  
screening will be performed  over the telephone. Potentially eligible subjects  will undergo  an initial in-person 
screening evaluation within 6 months  of PET scanning, this will be located either  at 2 Church St South Suite 
511, the Yale PET Center, or CMHC. Current non treatment seeking inpatient  subjects  at the CNRU will be able  
to participate  if participation in their  current study  is not a conflict  with this study  and vice versa.   The 
purpose of this evaluation is to ensure that subjects meet study criteria. Breath alcohol (BAC)  levels  will be 
monitored for subjects before the intake session. After informed consent is obtained, the structured  clinical 
interview for DSM-5  Axis I Disorders  (SCID-5) will be used to exclude primary psychiatric and substance  use 
disorders other than alcohol use disorder.  A medical history,  vital signs, physical examination, and EKG will be 
performed. The Timeline-Follow Back interview for Alcohol (TLFB) will be used to characterize quantity and 
frequency of alcohol drinking up to 90 days prior to enrollment. The Lifetime Drinking History, a retrospective 
interview procedure, will be used to characterize  lifetime patterns and quantities of alcohol.  Subjects will also 
indicate the maximum amount of drinks consumed in a single 24-hour  period over  the last three months. 
Several laboratory tests will be performed at this visit, which  include a complete blood  count (CBC),  chemistry 
profile, thyroid function studies, HIV, serum ß-HCG (women only), urinalysis, and urine  toxicology  screen. All 
female subjects  will undergo a pregnancy test at the time of screening. Additionally, urine  pregnancy  tests will 
be done on the day of each PET scan before radiotracer injection. Urine drug screens will be done at intake, 
mri, and on PET days.
4.3 Assessments:
All participants will be screened initially using a telephone screen that will include  questions to evaluate 
medical history, personal  and familial  psychiatric and smoking history.  A wide range of measures, such as 
psychiatric and substance abuse history,  medical  assessments and affective symptoms will be measured 
during the intake evaluation.
4.3.a. General Intake Assessments 
1.Structured  Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Axis I Disorders The psychotic screening and depression sections 
of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Axis I Disorders (SCID-5) will be used to determine whether  
subjects meet exclusion criteria for diagnosis  of primary psychiatric and substance use disorders other 
than alcohol use disorder.
2.Illicit Drug/Pregnancy Screen A urine  sample may  be collected to determine current illicit  drug  use (for all 
potential subjects). In addition, serum samples will be collected at the intake visit and urine  samples will 
be collected on each  PET scan day to confirm that the subject is not pregnant.  
3.Demographic Questionnaire This questionnaire will obtain: (1) basic  demographic information including  
age, gender,  marital status, employment status, occupation, (2) alcohol/drug  history, (3) family history of 
alcohol/drug use, depression, anxiety, and smoking history.
4.Medical History This questionnaire will obtain a basic medical history (personal  and family) including past  
or current conditions  such as neurological, endocrine, cardiovascular, renal,  liver, and thyroid pathology. 
Current body  weight and current  medications  will also be assessed. 
5.Medical Assessments will include a physical exam  by a state  licensed  physician, an EKG, and laboratory 
tests which may  include a complete blood count, blood urea nitrogen,  creatinine,  fasting  blood sugar, 
electrolytes, liver function tests, thyroid function  tests  (including  T3, T4, T3RU, estimated  free T4), thyroid 
stimulating hormone levels, urine  toxicology, and urinalysis. Female subjects will have serum pregnancy 
tests. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  8 of 426.Multidimensional Scale of Perceived  Social  Support  (MSPSS) is a brief  research tool designed to measure  
perceptions of support from 3 sources:  Family,  Friends, and a Significant Other.
7.Barratt Simplified Measure of Social Status (BSMSS) is a measure of socio-economic  status.
4.3.b.  Mood and Sleep Measures 
We may obtain these measures  at intake, up to two times on the PET scan  day, and the morning  following the 
alcohol session.
1. Center for Epidemiological Studies  Depression Scale (CES-D) The CES-D39 is a 20-item self-report 
instrument, which has been extensively used in both clinical and nonclinical populations to measure  the 
frequency and severity of depressive symptoms over the past  week. The CES-D,  which has been  used to 
document the severity  of depressive symptoms in adults  and has been shown  to be a sensitive measure of 
negative affect in smokers,  will be used in the proposed studies  to measure  levels  of mild depressive 
symptoms.
2. Anxiety: The State-Trait Anxiety  Inventory40 is a 40-item,  self-report measure, comprised  of two subscales. 
The State-Anxiety scale is 20 items and assesses transitory states  characterized  by feelings of tension,  
apprehension, and heightened autonomic reactivity. The Trait-Anxiety scale is 20 items and assesses stable 
individual differences in anxiety proneness.
3. Impulsivity : Barratt  Impulsiveness Scale (BIS; 109) is a 30 item  self-report  instrument  designed to assess the 
personality/behavioral construct of impulsiveness.  
4. Beck Depression Inventory:   This  widely used 21 item self-report instrument will be used  to assess 
depressive symptomatology  in addition to the SCID (43).
5.PSQI
 
4.3.c. Alcohol and other Drug Measures
We may obtain these measures  at intake  and also on the PET scan day. 
1. Timeline Followback for alcohol, tobacco,  and illicit  drugs.   Questionnaire to measure  the amount of 
alcohol, tobacco,  and other drugs that have  been used in the past  30 days.
2. Lifetime Drinking History is a structured interview designed to provide  quantitative indices of alcohol  
consumption patterns from the onset of regular drinking. 
3. Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence  (FTND). This will be used to measure  the severity of nicotine 
dependence.  It is a 6-item scale with an internal consistency of .61 and its total score is closely related to 
biochemical measures  of intensity of smoking.   A score of at least  3 is necessary for inclusion in the study. 
4. Smoking History. This questionnaire will assess basic smoking  status and history  such as number of years 
smoked, number and length of quit attempts, reasons for quitting, and second hand smoke  exposure.  
5. Nicotine Withdrawal Checklist. This measures the severity of eight withdrawal symptoms on 5-point Likert 
scales.  
4.3.d. Cognitive Measures
We may obtain these measures  at intake, up to two times on the PET scan  day, and the morning  following the 
alcohol session.
1. Cogstate  Battery  (30 minutes) – This computerized test battery will assess memory and cognition.  The 
tasks may  include:
a. International  Shopping  List Task – a computerized task to assess verbal  learning and memory.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  9 of 42b.  Groton Maze Learning Task – a computerized task to assess executive function and spatial problem 
solving.
c.  Detection  Task – a computerized task to assess psychomotor function and speed of processing.
d.  Identification Task – a computerized  task to assess visual attention and vigilance.
e.  One Card Learning  Task – a computerized task to assess  visual learning and memory.
f.  One Back Task and Two  Back Task – computerized tasks to assess attention and working  memory.
2. Probabilistic Reward  Task  (PRT) – The PRT has been successfully used  to assess reward  responsiveness (51-
53). In each  trial, subjects choose which of two difficult-to-differentiate  stimuli was presented.  Stimuli consist  
of simple cartoon  faces (diameter: 25 mm; eyes: 7 mm)  presented  in the center of the monitor. At the 
beginning of the trial, the face has no mouth. After a given  delay, either  a straight mouth of 11.5  mm (“short  
mouth”) or 13 mm (“long  mouth”) is presented for 100 ms. Subjects are instructed to press  an appropriate 
button to decide whether  a long or small  mouth  had been presented.   Unbeknownst  to subjects, correct 
identification of one stimulus (“rich stimulus”)  is rewarded three  times more frequently (“Correct! You won 20 
cents”) than the other (“lean”)  stimulus. In healthy  controls, this reinforcement schedule leads to a response 
bias (i.e., a preference for the more frequently rewarded stimulus). The degree of response bias toward  the 
more frequently reinforced alternative will be used  for operationalizing sensitivity  to reward.
3. Probabilistic Reversal Learning Task (PRLT) – The PRLT has been  shown to effectively detect “belief 
updating” behavior through  the use of the Hierarchical  Gaussian Filter model. This task uses a 3-option 
probabilistic reversal-learning paradigm which requires participants to choose between options with  
unknown, unequal  probabilities of reward. Three decks of cards are displayed on a computer monitor for 160 
trials. Participants select a deck on each trial by pressing a predesignated  key on a keyboard. We advise 
participants that each  deck contains either winning or losing cards (e.g. +100,  -50 points, etc.), but in different  
amounts. We also state that the best deck may change.  Participants are instructed to find the best  deck and 
earn as many points as possible.  Probabilities switch between decks  when  the highest probability deck  is 
selected in 9 out of 10 consecutive  trials (performance-dependent reversal).  It is predicted that AUD 
participants may interpret probabilistic errors (e.g., the occasional instance when a good option does not 
yield reward), as reversal errors (the world has changed) and thus switch their  choices prematurely. 
4.4 Procedures
Screening, Evaluation and Clinical Ratings
Screening, evaluation and clinical ratings (as described  above) are obtained  during the screening process.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (up to 1 hour)
Magnetic resonance  imaging  (MRI) scans (3T) will be collected in each subject to co-register PET and MRI for 
image analysis as well as collect resting state data.  MRI is without contrast. Within approximately  two weeks 
of the PET study, an MRI will be acquired  at the Yale University MRI Center. Subjects  will be taken through a 
ferromagnetic metal detector before entering the scan  room. 
3T Scan sequence: 
Series 1: 3 plane  localize 
Series 2: Sag 3d tfl; 256fov; 1mm thick slices; 176 slices total; TE 2.77; TR 2530; TI 1100;  FA 7; 256X256  1 
average. 
Series 3 – Resting state: Ep2d bold; 210fov; 2.5mm thick slices; TE 30; TR 3400; FA 85; 84x84 (Run  twice).
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  10 of 42MR images provide a matching anatomical atlas  for creating individualized region-of-interest templates for 
each subject. We will also examine functional connectivity at rest.
If an MR image is already on file at the PET Center, and has been  collected within a reasonable time  period,  a 
new MRI may not need  to be collected.
A member of the research  staff will accompany the subject and stay for the duration of the MRI. 
PET Scans
PET experiments will be conducted at the Yale University PET Center. Subjects will have  up to three 
[11C]PBR28 PET scans.  Subject will also be asked  to refrain from drinking caffeinated beverages that day, and 
from drinking  alcoholic  beverages 48 hours prior to study  day.  
Upon arrival at the PET center, subjects will complete questionnaires on  urges, withdrawal symptoms, and 
mood.  Plasma will be drawn before scans to measure  drug levels in the blood.  Urine drug tests  will be 
performed before all PET scans. To ensure overnight  abstinence for individuals with alcohol  use disorder, 
subjects who are at a higher  risk of withdrawal will be required to stay inpatient  at the CNRU the night before 
their PET scans unless there are scheduling conflicts with the subject.  Confirmation  of alcohol abstinence over 
the previous 48 hours will be made via self-report and BAC measures, and session will be rescheduled if 
positive.  
For all women, a urine pregnancy test will be performed at the beginning of the imaging day, prior to 
radiotracer injection, at the Yale University PET Center.
Up to three total [11C]PBR28 PET scans will be acquired  per subject. The first scan (baseline)  will occur the 
morning of the alcohol session before alcohol is consumed. The post-alcohol PET scan  aims to capture the 
peak neuroimmune response8,59, however, this exact timing is not known. In human studies,  peak  pro-
inflammatory protein  levels occurred 20-30 min after peak BAL87,110,111. Since peak  BAL commonly occurs 30 
min after drinking  cessation112, a second  [11C]PBR28 PET scan will begin approximately 60 min after 
completing the alcohol session. This timing is consistent  with the report  of increased TSPO  levels  30 min after  
alcohol infusion in baboons11. In contrast, rodent studies identify peak microglia responses 12-18 hours after  
ethanol gavage65,113. Therefore,  a third post-alcohol [11C]PBR28 PET scan may be acquired approximately 20 
hours after  the alcohol  session. Blood samples  will be collected throughout each PET scan  and during  the 
alcohol administration. 
PET Data  Acquisition  and Analysis
Subject preparation  consists of intravenous  (IV) catheterizations for IV administration of the radiotracer and 
blood sampling. A radial artery catheter will be inserted  by an experienced  physician in the morning before 
the PET scan.  The site will be anesthetized with  lidocaine prior to arterial line insertion.  The arterial line will 
remain in place for the whole day of scanning,  after  which it will be removed by trained  nursing staff  at the 
Yale PET Center.  PET data  are acquired while subjects rest with either  an HRRT PET scanner (207 slices, 
resolution better than 3 mm FWHM)  or a Siemens mCT PET scanner (resolution  better than 5 mm FWHM). A 
transmission scan, or low dose CT scan, will be obtained for each  emission  scan. Up to a total  of 4 low-dose CT 
scans may be completed for the entire study.   Motion  correction may be performed dynamically with 
measurements from the Vicra (NDI Systems, Waterloo,  Ontario)  used by a dedicated list-mode reconstruction 
algorithm. Acquisition of list-mode emission data will begin shortly before IV bolus administration of up to 20 
mCi of high-specific  activity [11C]PBR28  and will continue for up to 120 minutes post-injection. Dynamic 
images of radioactivity concentration will be reconstructed with corrections  for measured attenuation, 
normalization, random events, scatter,  and deadtime. Subjects will be asked to void after the scan  is 
completed to reduce radiation exposure  to the bladder. Blood samples to measure plasma blood  alcohol 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  11 of 42concentration (BAL) and peripheral cytokine levels will also be acquired from i.v. lines  used  for PET sessions. 
After the completion  of the days  final  PET scan, the IVs will be removed.  Monitoring of vitals will continue  for 
at least 30 minutes  before subject returns to the CNRU/HRU or discharged.  
List mode data will be reconstructed with  MOLAR114, with  corrections  for attenuation,  normalization, and 
motion to create high resolution images. Early PET image data will be registered to the subjects  T1-weighted 
MR image. The T1-weighted MR image  will be non-linearly registered  to MNI  space  for region of interest (ROI) 
identification. ROIs will be selected using  the Anatomical  Automatic Labeling template for SPM8.  To minimize 
possible partial volume effects, only gray-matter voxels  will be included in ROI definition  based on MRI 
segmentations performed with the Computational  Anatomy Toolbox115. Since  TSPO responses are observed  
throughout the brain9,11,59, ROI analyses  will focus on the primary brain regions of frontal, parietal,  temporal,  
and occipital  cortices; striatum, amygdala,  hippocampus, thalamus, and cerebellum. The primary  outcome  
measure will be [11C]PBR28  VT54, which will be estimated  with multilinear analysis (MA1)116 with t*=30  min, 
which yields a test-retest variability of 7-9%117. [11C]PBR28  VT will be estimated throughout the brain at both 
the ROI level and at the voxel level. 
Laboratory Alcohol Session
Laboratory sessions will occur at the Yale University PET Center. Subject body weight will be acquired  during  
intake as part of the medical  history and used for alcohol dose calculations,  this will work out to roughly  3 
standard drinks for females  and 4 standard drinks for males over 90 minutes depending on weight, height, 
and age. Subjects  will be asked not to diet between intake and study days. Alcohol dose will be recalculated if 
the subject’s weight  varies  by more  than 5 pounds  for women and 10 pounds for men. Confirmation of 
alcohol abstinence will be made via self-report and breathalyzer on study  day. Subjects will be given a light 
standardized breakfast on arrival to the laboratory and the morning prior  to discharge.
After the first baseline [11C]PBR28 PET scan, subjects will have a standardized light lunch to increase  
tolerability of the alcohol  dose while minimizing the potential for variations in food intake that could affect 
alcohol metabolism.  Alcohol  will be administered in the form of 80 proof vodka and a mixer  based on the 
subject’s choice of water or a decarbonated  noncaffeinated noncaloric soda. The dose will be prepared  by the 
research team and take  into account the participant’s total body water  (based  on gender,  age, height, and 
weight), duration  of drinking, and ratio  of alcohol to mixer, based  on Watson et al’s update  of the Widmark 
equation. The total volume  will be divided  into six equal  drinks,  with  each  consumed over a 15-minute  period  
to control  the rate of consumption. Pacing the drinking  over 90 min aims to reduce risk of nausea while  
maintaining a rate of consumption consistent  with a binge alcohol  event. After the session subjects may drink 
water ad lib until scanning. Subjects will be asked to void prior to the second PET scan. Afterwards, subjects 
will be given dinner  based  on food preferences. Water, crackers,  and other snacks  will be available ad lib for 
the rest of the evening until 12:00 A.M.  Subjects  may  have an mri the same day prior  to alcohol 
administration, subjects will not have  an mri the same  day post alcohol administration.  
Assessments following alcohol administration:
BAL will be measured at the end of drinking, every 30 minutes for two hours, and then  hourly.  BAC and vital 
signs will be measured  concurrently. BAL measurements will be discontinued following measurement of 
negative BAC levels. Other assessments that may  be collected during these  times  include  inflammation 
markers, self-reports of alcohol effects and mood. 
1. Blood Alcohol  Concentrations:  Blood samples  will be collected in gray stoppered (oxalate, fluoride) tubes 
and analyzed  with  gas chromatography  analyses in the Yale-New Haven Hospital Clinical Laboratories.  After 
microfuging, serum  will be transferred into microtubes and stored at -20⁰C until assay. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  12 of 422. Breath Alcohol Concentrations will be determined with an Alcohol-Sensor  III (Intoximeter Inc., St. Louis, 
MO).
3. Inflammation Markers:  Serum levels  of cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-8, and cortisol will 
be measured  at baseline  and when blood is drawn  to measure  BAL. We may  also collect monocytes to assess 
immune function in vitro. 
4. Visual  Analog Scale (VAS) self-ratings for drug effects.  Subjects will answer questions to assess behavioral 
changes induced by substance use.
5. Subjective Effects of Alcohol Scale is a self-report  measure that assesses  subjective experience of alcohol 
effects following  alcohol  administration118. 
6. Biphasic  Alcohol  Effects Scale is a self-report questionnaire that assesses  subjective experiences of alcohol 
stimulation and sedation119. 
The total amount  of blood drawn  during the study will not exceed  32 tablespoons  total.  
Discharge
Participants can be discharged  after  the alcohol session once they reach a BAC of 0.02 and vitals are within 
normal limits, transportation will be provided for them. Moderate Drinkers and Moderate AUD subjects will 
also have the option to stay at either the CNRU or HRU. People with high risk for continued  risk drinking or 
withdrawal symptoms, defined as people with  any of: history of medicated detoxification, CIWA-R scores 
greater than 5 during intake or scan day, or people characterized by heavy alcohol use disorder, will stay 
overnight at the CNRU  no matter what  their BAC. Participants who  stay overnight  will be discharged from the 
CNRU or HRU the morning  following the alcohol session after confirming that vital signs are within normal  
limits. If subjects are participating in Aim 5, they  will be escorted once discharged from the CNRU or HRU to 
the PET center. After the Aim 5 scan,  subjects will be allowed  to leave when vital signs are confirmed within 
normal limits. All subjects will be negative for BAC by this time and thus can return home  unescorted.  A 
research staff member will contact subjects the following  business day for a check on their  health status.  All 
subjects will be provided the telephone number of a research psychiatrist or physician  on call for any 
problems that arise in the immediate time period after discharge from the unit.   They will also be given a 
discharge form that has specific instructions for calling one of the physicians if they have any questions or 
concerns following the study. 
5.Genetic Testing   N/A ☐
A.Describe
i.the types of future  research to be conducted using  the materials, specifying if immortalization  of 
cell lines, whole exome or genome sequencing,  genome  wide  association studies, or animal 
studies are planned One 10 mL tube  of blood  will be collected for DNA for testing of 
polymorphisms in genes of interest  to drug  dependence. This sample may be collected 
during the screening  appointment or on one of the PET scan  days
ii.the plan for the collection of material or the conditions under  which  material will be received as 
above, a blood  sample will be collected at intake to test polymorphisms of interest for 
drug dependence.
iii.the types of information about the donor/individual contributors  that will be entered into a 
database the genetic  polymorphism results  will be entered. The results of this testing will 
be confidential, will not be entered into the subject’s medical  record,  and will not be 
made available to the subject.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  13 of 42iv.the methods  to uphold confidentiality The results of genetic testing  will be kept  on a 
University encrypted computer or secure server.  We will separate the personal 
identifying information of the subjects from the genetic  information.
B.What are the conditions  or procedures  for sharing of materials  and/or distributing for future research 
projects? Some  samples and related  information may be stored (banked)  for future research.  The 
specimens will be stored for an unlimited time  and may  be used to make a cell line that will live 
indefinitely. When specimens and information  are stored, we are careful  to try to protect subject 
identity.  Samples and information will receive a unique code.  Other researchers will only 
receive coded samples and information.  
C.Is widespread sharing of materials planned? Yes
D.When and under what conditions will materials be stripped of all identifiers?  It Will Not
E.Can donor-subjects withdraw their materials  at any time, and/or withdraw the identifiers that connect 
them to their materials?  Yes
i.How will requests to withdraw materials be handled  (e.g., material no longer identified: that is, 
anonymized) or material destroyed)? Subjects  will be informed that their  material has been  
anonymized and after  anonymization, destruction is not possible
F.Describe the provisions for protection of participant  privacy Risks associated with genetic testing will 
be minimized  by keeping the results  of genetic testing on encrypted computers or a secure 
server, and by separating  the personal identifying information of the subjects  from the genetic 
information.
G.Describe the methods  for the security of storage  and sharing of materials  The  results of genetic testing 
will be kept on an encrypted computer or secure server and  personal identifying information  of 
the subjects will be separated from  the genetic information.  Materials will not be shared.
6.Subject Population: Provide a detailed  description  of the types of human  subjects  who will be recruited into 
this study.
Up to 100 subjects (50 men,  50 women)  will participate in the study. According to census figures, minority 
groups comprise approximately 50% of the population of New Haven (36.1% African-American, 13.2% Hispanic, 
0.3% Native American, 2.4% Asian, and 4.1% other). Subjects will self-report a binge alcohol even in the previous 
3 months to ensure that subject’s customary drinking levels are not exceeded in the laboratory.
All subjects will be 21-50 years of age and physically healthy. All research subjects  will be recruited  under  
guidelines of the Yale University  Institutional Review Board (Human Investigation  Committee). Subjects will be 
recruited from the community at large via IRB-approved advertising (television,  newspaper, postings in 
community locations, Craigslist, Facebook).  All participants will be screened  initially on the telephone  by a 
research assistant who will schedule the initial intake assessment.  The screening and scanning sessions will 
involve psychological tests in the form of rating scales and questionnaires. These are all noninvasive 
questionnaires, e.g., to assess mood and craving, and should add no risk.
7.Subject classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects  that will be specifically recruited for enrollment in 
the research project. Will subjects  who may require additional  safeguards or other considerations be enrolled 
in the study? If so, identify the population of subjects requiring  special safeguards and provide a justification  
for their  involvement.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  14 of 42☐Children ☒ Healthy  ☐Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus
☐Non-English Speaking ☐ Prisoners ☐Economically  disadvantaged  persons
☐Decisionally Impaired ☐ Employees ☐Pregnant women  and/or fetuses
☐Yale Students ☐ Females of childbearing potential
NOTE: Is this research  proposal  designed  to enroll children who are wards of the state  as potential subjects?
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
8.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What  are the criteria  used to determine  subject  inclusion or exclusion?
General Inclusion  Criteria:
1.Men  and women, aged 21-50 years
2.Willing and able to give voluntary written informed consent
3.Able  to read and write English and communicate effectively with the investigators, and comply with 
all study requirements,  restrictions,  and directions of the clinic staff
4.AUD Subjects will meet DSM-5  criteria for current Alcohol Use Disorder
5.Moderate  Drinkers will report consuming alcohol  on at least  one occasion in the past three months  
that would  result in an estimated blood alcohol level greater than 100 mg/dl but not meet DSM-5 
criteria for AUD. This is to ensure that subjects have prior drinking  exposure consistent with levels 
proposed in this study. Prospective subjects  will be asked to recall the heaviest  two days of drinking 
in the previous three months.  Using  this information, approximate  BAC will be calculated for those 
prior episodes. 
6.Medically healthy upon physical examination and laboratory testing.  
General Exclusion  Criteria:
1.Individuals whom the investigators deem may  not be able to comply with alcohol abstinence for 
48 hours  prior to study day. 
2.Current significant medical condition  such as neurological, cardiovascular,  endocrine,  renal,  
liver, or thyroid pathology.
3.History of or current neurological or significant psychiatric disorder such as schizophrenia or 
bipolar disorder (DSM-5 Axis 1).
4.Other substance use disorder  with  the exception  of nicotine dependence  in smokers as assessed 
with the SCID or positive urine screen for drugs of abuse. 
5.Participants  with any significant current medical conditions that would contraindicate the 
consumption of alcohol, such as history of neurological trauma or diseases, seizures, delirium or 
hallucinations, hepatic, or other  unstable medical conditions. 
6.Current suicidal or homicidal intent  or behavior,  or history of suicidal or homicidal behavior.
7.No barbiturates or other  known  microsomal enzyme induces  or inhibitors in the past  month. 
8.History of significant  head trauma.
9.Women who are pregnant  or nursing or fail to use one of the following methods of birth  control 
unless she or partner is surgically sterile or she is postmenopausal (hormone contraceptives 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  15 of 42[oral, implant, injection, patch, or ring],  contraceptive sponge, double barrier [diaphragm  or 
condom plus spermicide],  or IUD).
10.Regular or current significant use of any prescription, herbal or illegal psychotropic medications 
(e.g., antidepressants,  antipsychotics, anxiolytics,  ecstasy)  in the past  6 mo, with no current 
illegal drug use confirmed by urine toxicology  (except for cocaine and marijuana when relevant).
11.Have  MRI-incompatible implants  and other contraindications for MRI,  such as a pacemaker, 
artificial joints, non-removable body piercings, claustrophobia, etc.
12.Subjects with  history of prior radiation exposure for research purposes within the past  year  such 
that participation in this study would  place them over FDA limits for annual radiation  exposure. 
This guideline is an effective dose of 5 rem received per year.
13.Subjects with  current, past or anticipated exposure to radiation  in the work  place within one 
year of proposed  research PET scans.
14.Subjects with  history of IV drug use which  would prevent venous access  for PET tracer injection.
15.Blood donation  within eight weeks of the start  of the study
16.History of blooding  disorder  or currently taking anticoagulants  (such as Coumadin, Heparin, 
Pradaxa, Xarelto).  
9.How will eligibility be determined,  and by whom?  Write here
Eligibility to participate  in screening session will be determined by the research staff under  the guidance of Dr. 
Ansel Hillmer.  Study participation will be determined after the screening session by the study physician and Dr. 
Hillmer.
10.Risks: Describe the reasonably  foreseeable risks, including risks to subject  privacy, discomforts, or 
inconveniences associated with  subjects  participating in the research. 
Risks Associated  with  Administration of Alcohol
Numerous medical conditions, such as liver disease, cardiac abnormality, pancreatitis,  diabetes, neurological  
problems, and gastrointestinal  disorders, could potentially be worsened by acute alcohol administration.  
Therefore, subjects with medical problems identified by physical exam and laboratory  findings will be 
excluded from  the study.  
Alcohol may induce nausea in high doses; however,  significant nausea is not expected  at the targeted dose 
for this study  because subjects  will have consumed a light lunch and they  will have had recent  (in the last 
three months) experience  with the targeted  alcohol dose. Subjects will be permitted to decline further 
drinking if they so choose. 
Another area of potential risk to subjects under the influence of alcohol is their  safety during intoxication. All 
subjects will be under the supervision of the experimenters to prevent possible  accidents such as falls.  
Subjects will not leave the laboratory during the self-administration procedures. By staying in the CNRU or 
HRU overnight,  the possibility that the subject might  leave the session  and continue to drink alcohol, which 
would place them at risk for accidents, is prevented. Ensuring that moderate drinkers have  reached a BAC of 
0.02 prior  to discharge reduces the possibility  of falls or impaired judgment once discharged. If moderate 
drinkers are discharged the same day as their alcohol challenge, a taxi will be provided for them. 
Risks Associated  with  Use of an Arterial Catheter. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  16 of 42On the PET scanning days a radial arterial catheter will be inserted. Some individuals may feel light-headed 
during placement  of the arterial catheter. This procedure may be associated with mild-to-moderate pain, 
hematoma, inflammation, bleeding, or bruising at the punctures cite.  If any of these, or any other symptoms  
occur, and they do not diminish  within 24 to 72 hours  after removal of the arterial line, or in the event that 
they worsen,  subjects will be advised to call the on-call doctor listed on the PET discharge  instructions. In rare 
instances blocking  or tearing of the artery, arterial leakage,  poor  healing, or infection at the catheter insertion  
site may  occur. 
Risks Associated  with  Blood Drawing and IV Line Insertion
At the screening visit, a routine venipuncture will be performed for screening  laboratory  studies. On the PET 
scan day(s),  up to two venous catheters will be inserted  for bolus injection and/or constant infusion of the 
radiotracer, and for blood  draws. 
Drawing blood and inserting an intravenous line (IV) into an arm vein are safe and standard medical 
procedures. Sometimes a bruise will occur at the puncture site and rarely  a blood  clot or infection  will occur 
in the vein.  Certain individuals may feel light-headed  during venipuncture. 
The volume  of blood collected during  this study will be up to 32 tablespoons.  Blood  samples will be drawn for 
routine labs and drug screening; measurement of radiopharmaceutical parent and metabolites, for analysis of 
plasma drug levels, serum estrogen, progesterone, and follicle stimulating  hormone levels.  This is not 
expected to have any serious negative effects on a study participant.
Risks Associated  with  Radiation
The Yale New  Haven Radiation  Safety Committee (YNHH RSC)  and Yale University Radiation  Safety  Committee  
(YU-RSC) will review the use of radiation in this research  study, and no subjects  will be scanned until RSC 
approval is obtained. This research study involves exposure  to radiation from [11C]PBR28 and, if the mCT 
camera is used, low dose whole body  CT scanning. This radiation exposure  is not necessary for medical care 
and is for research purposes only. 
The targeted  amount of radiation an individual subject will receive in this study is from up to three  injections 
of ≤ 20 mCi of [11C]PBR28 (0.814 rem each), plus a small amount of radiation from the transmission scans of 
the brain.  If scans are conducted on the mCT,  each subject may receive  an additional ¬¬¬2.5 rem (0.625  rem 
per CT x up to 4 CT scans). 
Although each organ  will receive  a different dose, the targeted amount of radiation exposure subjects will 
receive from  this study is equal to an effective  dose equivalent of 3.51 rem from participating in Aim 1 or Aim 
2, plus up to 1.44  rem for participating in Aim 5.  Therefore, the maximum possible radiation exposure for this 
study would be up to 4.95 rem.  
This includes a total of up to 60 mCi of [11C]PBR28 from three injections plus up to 4 CT scans. This calculated 
value is used to relate the dose  received  by each organ  to a single value.
       The amount  of radiation subjects will receive in this study is below the dose  guidelines established  by the FDA   
       and monitored by The Yale New Haven  Radiation Safety Committee (YNHH RSC) for research subjects. This 
       guideline  sets an effective dose  limit of 5 rem per year.
Adverse effects  of the radiopharmaceuticals  in this study have not been reported. However, the possibility 
exists for a rare reaction to any of the substances or procedures to which a subject is exposed.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  17 of 42Risks Associated  with  MRI
MR carries a risk for subjects who are claustrophobic  or have pacemakers,  metal pieces, aneurysm clips, large 
colored tattoos, or any other contraindications for MR.
Magnetic resonance  imaging  (MRI) is a technique that uses magnetism and radio waves,  not x- rays, to take 
pictures and measure chemicals of various parts of the body. The United States Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) has set guidelines for magnet strength  and exposure to radio waves, and we carefully  observe  those 
guidelines.
Subjects will be watched  closely throughout the MR study.  Some people may feel uncomfortable or anxious.  
If this happens, the subject may ask to stop the study at any time and we will take  them  out of the MRI 
scanner. On rare occasions, some people might feel dizzy, get an upset stomach, have  a metallic  taste  or feel 
tingling sensations or muscle twitches.  These sensations usually  go away quickly but we will ask subjects to 
tell the research staff  if they have any of these symptoms.
There are some  risks  with an MRI study for certain people.  If subjects  have a pacemaker  or some  metal 
objects inside  their body, they  may not be in this study because the strong magnets  in the MRI scanner might 
harm them.  Another risk is the possibility of metal  objects being  pulled into the magnet  and hitting a subject. 
To reduce this risk we require that all people involved with the study  remove all metal from their  clothing and 
all metal objects  from their pockets. We also ask all people involved  with the study  to walk through a detector 
designed to detect  metal  objects.   It is important to know that no metal can be brought into the magnet room 
at any time. Also,  once  subjects  are in the magnet, the door to the room will be closed  so that no one from 
outside accidentally goes near the magnet.
We want subjects read and answer  very  carefully the questions on the MRI Safety  Questionnaire  related  to 
your personal safety. We will be sure that subjects have  read the MRI Safety Questionnaire and tell us any 
information they think might  be important.
This MRI study is for research purposes only and is not in any way a clinical examination.
The scans performed  in this study are not designed to find abnormalities. The primary investigator,  the lab, 
the MRI technologist,  and the Magnetic Resonance Research Center are not qualified to interpret the MR 
scans and are not responsible  for providing a diagnostic evaluation of the images.   If a worrisome finding is 
seen on a subject’s scan, a radiologist will be asked to review the relevant images.   Based on his or her 
recommendation (if any), the primary  investigator or consulting physician will contact the subject, inform 
them of the finding, and recommend that they  seek medical advice as a precautionary measure.  The decision 
for additional  examination or treatment would lie solely with the subject  and your physician. The 
investigators, the consulting  physician, the Magnetic  Resonance Research Center, and Yale University are not 
responsible for any examination or treatment that a subject  receives  based  on these findings. The images 
collected in this study are not a clinical MRI exam  and for that reason, they  will not be made available for 
diagnostic purposes.
Risks Associated  with  Drug  Use and Suicidal/Homicidal  Behavior
Participants will be asked about current or past use of illicit "street" drugs  and urine drug  screens will be 
performed at the initial intake  appointment to rule out substance abuse that is not relevant  to the study. 
Participants currently using drugs or who have a history of using drugs may not be eligible to participate. 
Suicidal thoughts and behaviors will also be assessed.  Any reports of homicidal or suicidal tendencies will be 
immediately directed  to treatment for this condition; and appropriate authorities will be notified.
Risks Associated  with  Unanticipated Events
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  18 of 42The subject’s  health and safety will always be the primary concern of the doctors and staff performing the 
study. In the event  of an unanticipated  event, all necessary medical  action  will be taken. Medication  might  be 
administered as needed, per the Yale PET Center standard operating  procedure  for medical  emergencies,  in 
order to treat any unanticipated events/complications.
Risks Associated  with  Allergic Reactions
All drugs have a potential  risk of an allergic reaction, which if not treated promptly,  could become life 
threatening.  
11.Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned  risks  will be minimized.
 Risks  Associated with Administration of Alcohol:
Risks will be minimized  by adhering to the recommended guidelines  established  by the National Advisory 
Council on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism – Recommended Council Guidelines on Ethyl Alcohol Administration 
in Human Experimentation – Revised May 2005. People for whom  alcohol  consumption is contraindicated will 
be excluded based  on the screening process  including interviews, physical exams, and laboratory findings. 
To reduce the risk of nausea or gross impairment from acute alcohol  consumption, we will recruit  enroll 
participants with recent  (within the last three months)  drinking experience consistent with the blood alcohol 
concentration targeted  for this study.  We will provide a light  lunch prior  to the alcohol  session. Subjects will 
have 90 min to consume the drinks  and can refuse  to consume all of the drinks if they  choose to.
Personnel trained in the conduct of alcohol challenges will conduct  the sessions. All participants will be under  
supervision to prevent possible accidents. Following the alcohol sessions,  all Heavy Drinker subjects  will 
remain at the CNRU  or HRU overnight to prevent the possibility that they might continue  drinking after  the 
session, thereby placing  themselves at further risk of accidents. Moderate drinkers  will have the option  to 
stay overnight at either the HRU or CNRU  or be discharged after reaching 0.02 BAC.  If a subject should insist 
on leaving the research setting prematurely, we will provide transportation to their home. While subjects are 
free to discontinue the experiment at any point, we will strongly encourage them  to remain in the research 
setting until  their  breath  alcohol level  is below 0.02.  The consent form addresses this contingency under  
voluntary participation. 
Aud Subjects  with a higher  risk for withdrawal  or a history of withdrawal symptoms will stay at the CNRU. 
Moderate Aud subjects who are not at a high  risk for withdrawal will be able to stay the night  at the HRU  with 
the below criteria:
Not at risk subjects will be defined as those who meet both of the following requirements:
1)      No prior history of medicated detoxification
2)      CIWA-R score less than 5 during intake, scan day and just before admission  to the HRU
3)      Subjects  who are characterized by more moderate AUD.
Documentation: Moderate Aud subjects that are considered  for the HRU stay will be evaluated again on scan  
day by the covering  physician before and after  alcohol consumption which will be documented in the 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  19 of 42admission note. If the covering  physician is concerned there is a risk of withdrawal,  subjects will not be 
brought to the HRU and be admitted to the ER.
Risks Associated  with  Use of an Arterial Catheter: 
The risks  of radial artery cannulation  are minimized  by having the procedure performed  by an experienced 
physician. Pain is minimized with  the use of local  anesthesia. Infection  is avoided by adequate cleansing of the 
skin before intravascular line insertion.  After arterial catheter removal, bleeding is prevented by direct 
pressure applied to the site for a minimum  of 15 minutes followed by a pressure dressing (coban) that should 
be kept clean  and dry until evening. Subjects will have their hand and finger blood  supply examined after 
arterial cannulation throughout the study, and again following catheter  removal. Also, subjects will be asked 
to abstain  from using aspirin and other NSAIDS  for 7-10  days prior to arterial line insertion  and 7-10 days 
following arterial line removal.  Subjects will be provided a 24-hour emergency physician contact number to 
call if they encounter  pain,  discoloration, numbness, tingling, coolness, hematoma,  inflammation,  or any 
other unusual symptoms in the wrist or hand, or fever, chills or drainage  from the vascular puncture sites,  
following the procedure.  In addition, if an emergency arises at the time  of cannulation or scanning, 911 will 
be called, and the subject  will be sent to the Emergency Department  for evaluation and treatment. A nurse 
will provide  discharge instructions outlining general instructions in addition to post-arterial catheter 
precautions, problems to watch for, and procedures to follow should  such  problems  occur.
Risks Associated  with  Blood Drawing & IV Line Insertion:
The risks  of bruising,  clotting, and infection will be minimized by having venipuncture performed by trained  
and experienced personnel  using aseptic  technique. To avoid injury due to fainting, the catheter  will be 
inserted when  the subjects are in a recumbent position. The blood draws during PET scanning sessions will be 
obtained from the already inserted catheter,  to minimize discomfort. Subjects who  have donated blood 
within 8 weeks of the present study  will be excluded. Participants will be told that they should not give blood  
for at least  8 weeks.
Risks Associated  with  Radiation: 
The dose of radiation will be submitted for approval  to the Yale New Haven Hospital Radiation Safety 
Committee (YNHH RSC).  All scans will be done  in the presence of medical supervision and trained staff in an 
institution specifically  designed to support  imaging  studies. In the event of serious medical complications, the 
PET scan  facilities have immediate access to or consultation with specialized medical units at the Yale-New 
Haven Hospital. Preparation of radiopharmaceuticals and performance  of PET scans will be by radiochemists, 
physicians, and technologists of the Department of Diagnostic  Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine. 
These professionals are qualified by training and experience in the safe use and handling  of 
radiopharmaceuticals. Subjects will be asked about  their previous radiation exposure and those who have had 
research exposure within the past year will be excluded if their cumulative annual exposure  (including the 
present study)  exceeds FDA limits. The information  on the previous radiation exposure of study subjects  will 
be notified  to the study doctor. 
No PET studies  will be performed  on pregnant or potentially pregnant women,  as confirmed by pregnancy 
testing during evaluation  and on each  scan day before initiation of any scan  procedures.  If subjects are 
breastfeeding they will not be able to participate in this research study. 
Risks Associated  with  MRI Scanning  
To minimize risks, each subject will fill out the Yale Magnetic Resonance Research  Center MRI 
Safety Questionnaire before the study. Only subjects who fulfill the criteria by this questionnaire 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  20 of 42will be eligible  for the study.  In addition, subjects will remove all metal  (watch,  hair pins, jewelry) and walk 
through the metal detector  in the MRRC before entering  the MRI room.  If the subject  has any metallic  
prostheses/implants they will be excluded  from the study.  If a subject becomes anxious  during the scan they 
can request  that the MRI scan be stopped.
Risks Associated  with  Drug  Use and Suicidal/Homicidal  Behavior
Effective screening will exclude all subjects who would be at greater risk for complications  because  of medical 
or psychiatric illnesses. Any subject with a prior  suicide attempt or with active suicidal ideation at baseline as 
determined by psychiatric evaluation and C-SSRS, will be excluded from this study.
The subject’s  health and safety will always be the primary concern of the doctors and staff performing the 
study. In the event  of an unexpected outcome, all necessary medical action will be taken.
Risks Associated  with  Unanticipated Events
Medication might be administered as needed, per the Yale PET Center standard operating procedure for 
medical emergencies, in order to treat  complications
Risks Associated  with  Allergic Reactions
Subjects will be asked to monitor and report the following symptoms:  trouble breathing, or swelling of the 
face, mouth, lips, gums, tongue  or neck.  Other allergic  reactions may include  rash, hives, or blisters.
The subject’s  health and safety will always be the primary concern of the doctors and staff performing the 
study. In the event  of an unexpected outcome, all necessary medical action will be taken.
12.Data and Safety Monitoring  Plan:  Include  an appropriate Data and Safety  Monitoring  Plan (DSMP) based  on 
the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the risk to 
subjects.)
a. What is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects  participating in this 
study? Greater than minimal Risk
b. If children are involved, what  is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the 
children participating  in this study? N/A
c. Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are  
available here  http://your.yale.edu/policies-procedures/forms/420-fr-01-data-and-safety-
monitoring-plans-templates for
i.Minimal risk
ii.Greater than minimal
1.  Personnel  responsible for safety review and its frequency:
The principal investigator, in collaboration with  Kelly Cosgrove, Ph.D.,  and Stephanie O’Malley, Ph.D., will be 
responsible for monitoring the data,  assuring protocol compliance, and conducting the safety  reviews at the 
specified frequency,  which must be conducted at a minimum of every 6 months (including when reapproval  of 
the protocol  is sought).  During the review process, the principal  investigator  (monitor) will evaluate whether  the 
study should continue  unchanged, require modification/amendment, continue or close  to enrollment. The 
principal investigator, the HIC, the FDA, or the RSC, have  the authority to stop  or suspend the study or require 
modifications.
2. The risks associated with the current study are deemed  moderate for the following  reasons:
We view the risks associated with radiation  exposure  as greater than minimal.
We do not view  the risks  associated with  alcohol  administration as minimal. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  21 of 42Although we have assessed the proposed study as one of greater than  minimal  risk, the potential  exists for 
anticipated and/or unanticipated adverse events, serious or otherwise, to occur since  it is not possible to predict 
with certainty the absolute  risk in any given individual  or in advance  of first-hand experience with the proposed 
study methods.  Therefore, we provide  a plan for monitoring the data and safety of the proposed study as 
follows:
3. Attribution  of Adverse Events:
Adverse events will be monitored  for each  subject participating in the study and attributed  to the study  
procedures / design by the principal investigator Ansel Hillmer,  PhD. according to the following categories:
a.) Definite:  Adverse event is clearly  related  to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).
b.) Probable: Adverse event is likely  related  to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).
c.) Possible:  Adverse  event may be related  to investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).
d.) Unlikely: Adverse event is likely not to be related to the investigational procedures(s)/agent(s).
e.) Unrelated: Adverse event is clearly not related to investigational  procedures(s)/agent(s).
4. Plan for Grading Adverse Events:
The following scale will be used in grading the severity  of adverse events noted during the study:
1.Mild adverse event
2.Moderate adverse  event
3.Severe 
5. Plan for Determining Seriousness of Adverse  Events:
Serious Adverse  Events:
In addition to grading the adverse event, the PI will determine whether  the adverse event meets the criteria for a 
Serious Adverse  Event  (SAE).  An  adverse event is considered serious if it results in any of the following outcomes:
1.Death;
2.A life-threatening experience in-patient  hospitalization  or prolongation  of existing hospitalization; 
3.A persistent or significant disability or incapacity;  
4.A congenital anomaly  or birth defect; OR
5.Any other adverse event that, based upon  appropriate medical  judgment,  may jeopardize the subject’s 
health and may  require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in 
this definition. 
An adverse  event  may  be graded as severe but still not meet the criteria for a Serious Adverse Event.  Similarly, an 
adverse event  may be graded as moderate but still meet  the criteria for an SAE.   It is important for the PI to 
consider the grade of the event as well as its “seriousness”  when determining  whether reporting to the IRB is 
necessary.
6. Plan for reporting UPIRSOs (including  Adverse Events) to the IRB
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  22 of 42The principal investigator will report the following  types of events to the IRB: 
Any incident, experience  or outcome that meets ALL 3 of the following criteria:
Is unexpected (in terms  of nature, specificity, severity,  or frequency) given (a) the research procedures described 
in the protocol-related documents, such as the IRB-approved protocol and informed consent document  and (b) 
the characteristics of the subject population being studied; AND 
Is related or possibly related to participation in the research  (possibly related means  there  is a reasonable 
possibility that the incident, experience,  or outcome may  have been caused by the procedures involved  in the 
research); AND
Suggests that the research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm  (including  physical, psychological,  
economic, legal, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects  or Others (UPIRSOs) may be medical  or non-medical  in nature, 
and include – but are not limited to – serious, unexpected, and related adverse  events and unanticipated adverse 
device effects.   Please  note  that adverse events  are reportable  to the IRB as UPIRSOs only if they meet  all 3 criteria 
listed above.
These UPIRSOs/SAEs will be reported to the IRB in accordance with IRB Policy 710,  using the appropriate forms 
found on the website.  All related  events involving risk but not meeting the prompt reporting requirements 
described in IRB Policy 710 should be reported to the IRB in summary form at the time of continuing review. If 
appropriate, such summary may be a simple brief  statement that events have occurred at the expected frequency  
and level of severity as previously  documented.  In  lieu of a summary of external events,  a current DSMB report 
can be submitted for research studies that are subject to oversight by a DSMB (or other monitoring entity  that is 
monitoring the study  on behalf of an industry sponsor).
7. Plan for reporting adverse events:
For the current study,  the following  individuals,  funding,  and/or  regulatory agencies will be notified (choose those 
that apply):
  All Co-Investigators listed on the protocol.
  National Institutes of Health
  Yale- New  Haven  Hospital  Radiation  Safety Committee (Y-NHH)(if applicable)
  Yale University  Radiation Safety Committee (if applicable)
The principal investigator, Ansel Hillmer, PhD, in collaboration with David Matuskey, MD will conduct a review of 
all adverse events upon  completion of every study subject. The principal investigator will evaluate the frequency 
and severity  of the adverse  events and determine  if modifications to the protocol or consent form are required.
d. For multi-site studies for which  the Yale PI serves  as the lead investigator:    N/A
i.How will adverse events and unanticipated  problems involving  risks to subjects  or others be 
reported, reviewed and managed?
ii.What provisions are in place for management of interim results?
iii. What will the multi-site process be for protocol modifications?
d. For multi-site studies for which  the Yale PI serves  as the lead investigator:
iv. How will adverse events  and unanticipated  problems involving risks to subjects or others be 
reported, reviewed and managed?  Write here
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  23 of 42v.What provisions are in place for management of interim results? Write here
vi. What will the multi-site process be for protocol modifications? Write here
13.Statistical Considerations: Describe the statistical  analyses that support the study design. 
Frequency distributions and descriptive statistics for all variables will be computed before conducting analyses. 
Should Shapiro-Wilk normality tests indicate  non-normality for any continuous  variable,  we will compute  
necessary data transformations (e.g., logarithmic) before conducting analyses. 
AIM 1: To test the hypothesis that acute alcohol robustly increases [11C]PBR28  VT, regional  values  of [11C]PBR28 VT 
will be analyzed with a linear mixed model  featuring rs6971 genotype  as a between-subject  fixed factor, scan 
state (baseline, post-alcohol scan 1, post-alcohol scan 2) as a within-subject  fixed factor, and region as a within-
subjects factor.  The main effect of scan state will be examined to test the null hypothesis  of no difference in VT 
between scan states. Post-hoc linear  contrasts will examine  regional  differences in [11C]PBR28 VT between  
baseline and post-alcohol conditions.
From the imaging data we will calculate  an index of microglial activation as ΔV T=(V T(Alcohol) -VT(Baseline) )/V T(Baseline) . The 
value of ΔVT will then  be used as the primary  outcome  measurement for subsequent analyses. 
AIMS 2 and 3: To test the hypotheses that neuroimmune  responses  to alcohol  are 1) greater in heavy drinkers 
compared to moderate drinkers and 2) greater in women compared  to men, a linear mixed model featuring group  
(heavy alcohol use vs. moderate use)  and sex as between-subject fixed factors and region as a within subjects  
factor will be constructed.  The genotype  for rs6971 will not be included in the model since ΔV T is unaffected by 
genotype. The main effect of group will be examined  to test the null hypothesis of no difference in ΔV T between 
study groups;  the main effect of sex will be examined to test the null hypothesis  of no difference  in ΔV T between  
men and women.  The interaction term between the two factors will also be examined. Post-hoc linear contrasts 
will examine  regional differences in [11C]PBR28 ΔVT between groups. 
AIM 4: To relate neuroimmune response with  ‘sickness behaviors’. This outcome measurement will be used to test 
the hypotheses  that 1) ΔV T in basal ganglia  (average of caudate and putamen) is negatively  related to change  in PRT 
response bias. 2) ΔV T in amygdala is negatively related  to change in STAI score. 3) ΔVT in hippocampus  is negatively 
related to changes in the Cogstate domains of executive control and working memory. The percent  changes in all 
outcome measures  will be standardized with  the Fisher Transformation169, and Pearson product-moment 
correlations will be computed between  z-scores  for each a priori ROI and z-scores  for the reward/anxiety/cognitive 
measures. 
Exploratory analyses at the voxel level will be conducted for all aims using whole brain data and SPM12.
SECTION II: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS, RADIOTRACERS,  PLACEBOS AND DEVICES
If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable,  check  off N/A and delete  the rest of the section.
A.  RADIOTRACERS ☐N/A
1.Name of the radiotracer:  [11C]PBR28  (radiotracer  for PET studies),  IV
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  24 of 422.Is the radiotracer FDA approved?     ☐YES ☒NO
If NO, an FDA issued IND is required for the investigational  use unless RDRC assumes  oversight.  
3. Check  one:    ☒IND#  123984 or  ☐RDRC oversight  (RDRC approval will be required prior to use)
4.    Background Information: Provide a description of previous human use, known risks,  and data addressing 
dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration,  and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first 
time this radiotracer  is being  administered to humans, include relevant  data on animal models. 
[11C]PBR28 is a commonly  used PET radioligand to image  the 18-kDa  translocator protein (TSPO), a marker  related 
to neuroimmune state. Up to 20 mCi of [11C]PBR28 will be administered by iv per single dose which  is below the 
21 CFR 361.1 estimated permissible  single administration dose limit of 25.6 mCi based  on dosimetry calculations. 
As of Dec 2018, more than 210 preparations  of [11C]PBR28 have  been administered  in human subjects at the 
NIMH and had no clinically detectable pharmacological effects or side effects from the radiopharmaceutical. To 
date, 204 preparations of 11C PBR28 have administered to human at the Yale PET Center under  various  FDA (IND 
# 123984) and RDRC  approved clinical studies and had no clinically detectable effects or side effects  associated 
with the radiopharmaceutical.
4.    Source:   Identify the source  of the radiotracer  to be used. [11C]PBR28  
Preparation of radiotracers:  
[11C]PBR28 will be synthesized at the Yale University PET Center  radiochemistry  laboratory under the supervision 
of Dr. Henry  Huang and Dr. Nabeel Nabulsi. 
5.    Storage,  Preparation  and Use:  Describe the method  of storage, preparation, stability information, method of 
sterilization and method of testing sterility  and pyrogenicity.
 
Due to the short half-life,  PET drugs  are produced ex tempore and formulated immediately before 
administration, and therefore there  are no issues with  storage or stability. PET drug products are stored at 
room temperature and are stable  for at least  60 min after preparation.
[11C]PBR28 will be prepared at the Yale PET Center in accordance with  procedures  and quality  specifications 
described in local Drug Master File (DMF)  approved by the FDA (IND#123984) and the Yale University 
Radioactive Drug Research Committee (YU RDRC).
The preparation of sterile PET drug  products is validated prior to human  use. Sterility is achieved by passing  
the PET drug  product through a sterile  0.22 micron membrane filter during the last step  of the formulation  
process. Prior to release for administration,  a bubble  point test is performed on the membrane filter  used for 
terminal sterilization in order  to validate  and verify its integrity during the filtration process. Due to the short 
half-life, a sample of the PET drug product  is tested for sterility ex post  facto  for further  confirmation.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  25 of 42B.  DRUGS/BIOLOGICS    ☐N/A
1.If an exemption from IND filing requirements is sought for a clinical investigation of a drug product that is 
lawfully marketed in the United States, review  the following categories  and complete the category  that 
applies (and delete  the inapplicable categories) :
Exempt Category 1: The clinical investigation of a drug product that is lawfully marketed  in the United States  
can be exempt from  IND regulations if all of the following  are yes: 
1.The intention of the investigation is NOT to report  to the FDA as a well-controlled study in support  
of a new indication  for use or to be used to support any other  significant  change in the labeling for 
the drug.☒
2.The drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed  as a prescription drug product, and 
the intention of the investigation is NOT  to support  a significant change  in the advertising for the 
product.☒
3.The investigation does NOT involve  a route of administration  or dosage level or use in populations 
or other factor  that significantly increases the risks (or decreases  the acceptability of the risks) 
associated with the use of the drug product☒
4.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements for institutional (HIC) 
review and with the requirements for informed consent of the FDA regulations (21 CFR Part 50 and 
21 CFR Part 56).☒
5.The investigation will be conducted  in compliance with the requirements regarding promotion and 
charging for investigational drugs.☒
 Exempt Category 2 (all items i, ii, and iii must  be checked  to grant  a category 2 exemption)
☐i. The clinical investigation is for an in vitro diagnostic  biological product that involves  one or
more of the following (check all that apply):
☐ Blood  grouping serum
☐ Reagent red blood cells 
☐ Anti-human globulin
☐ii. The diagnostic  test is intended to be used  in a diagnostic  procedure that confirms  the
diagnosis made by another,  medically established,  diagnostic product or procedure; and
☐iii.  The diagnostic  test is shipped in compliance with 21 CFR §312.160.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  26 of 42 Exempt Category 3
☐ The drug is intended solely for tests in vitro  or in laboratory research animals if shipped  in accordance with 
21 CFR 312.60
 Exempt Category 4 
☐ A clinical  investigation  involving use of a placebo if the investigation does not otherwise  require submission  
of an IND. 
2. Background Information: Provide  a description of previous  human use, known risks, and data addressing 
dosage(s), interval(s), route(s) of administration,  and any other factors that might influence risks. If this is the first 
time this drug is being  administered to humans, include relevant  data on animal models. 
Write here
2.Source:  Identify the source of the drug  or biologic  to be used.  
a) Is the drug provided free of charge to subjects? ☒YES ☐NO  
If yes, by whom? Write here
4.Storage, Preparation and Use:  Describe the method of storage, preparation, stability information, and for 
parenteral products, method  of sterilization and method  of testing sterility  and pyrogenicity.
    
Check applicable Investigational Drug Service  utilized:
    ☐  YNHH IDS                                                        ☐  CMHC Pharmacy                                           ☐ West  Haven VA
    ☒  PET Center                                                      ☐    None      
    ☐  Other: 
Note: If the YNHH IDS (or comparable service  at CMHC  or WHVA) will not be utilized, explain in detail  how the PI 
will oversee these aspects of drug accountability, storage, and preparation.   
5.Use of Placebo:  ☒Not applicable to this research project
If use of a placebo  is planned, provide a justification  which addresses  the following:
a)Describe the safety and efficacy  of other available therapies. If there  are no other available therapies, state 
this.  
b)State the maximum total  length  of time a participant  may receive placebo while on the study.  
c)Address the greatest potential harm that may come  to a participant as a result  of receiving placebo. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  27 of 42d)Describe the procedures  that are in place to safeguard participants receiving placebo. 
6.Continuation of Drug Therapy After Study Closure   ☒Not applicable to this project
Are subjects  provided the opportunity to continue to receive the study drug(s) after the study has ended?
☐ Yes   If yes, describe the conditions under  which continued access to study  drug(s)  may  apply as well as 
conditions for termination of such access.  Write here
☐ NO   If no, explain  why this is acceptable. Write here
 B.  DEVICES  ☒N/A
1. Are there any investigational devices used  or investigational procedures performed at Yale-New Haven 
Hospital (YNHH) (e.g.,  in the YNHH  Operating  Room or YNHH Heart and Vascular  Center)?   ☐Yes   ☐No    
 If Yes, please be aware of the following requirements :
A YNHH New  Product/Trial Request Form must be completed via EPIC:  Pull down  the Tools tab in the EPIC Banner,  
Click on Lawson,  Click  on “Add new”  under  the New Technology Request Summary and fill out the forms 
requested including  the “Initial Request  Form,” “Clinical Evidence Summary”, and attach any other pertinent  
documents. Then select “save and submit” to submit your request;    AND
Your request  must be reviewed  and approved in writing by the appropriate YNHH  committee before 
patients/subjects may be scheduled to receive  the investigational device or investigational procedure.
2.Background Information: Provide  a description of previous human use, known risks, and any other factors  
that might influence risks.  If this is the first time this device is being used  in humans,  include relevant  data on 
animal models. 
Write here
3.Source: 
a) Identify the source of the device to be used. Write here
b) Is the device provided free of charge to subjects? ☐Yes   ☐No     
4.Investigational device accountability:  State how the PI, or named designee, ensures that an investigational 
device is used only in accordance with the research protocol approved by the HIC, and maintains control of 
the investigational device  as follows:
a)Maintains appropriate records,  including  receipt of shipment, inventory at the site, dispensation  or use 
by each participant, and final disposition  and/or  the return of the investigational device (or other 
disposal if applicable): Write here
b)Documents pertinent information  assigned to the investigational device (e.g., date, quantity, batch or 
serial number, expiration  date if applicable, and unique code number): Write here
c)Stores the investigational device according to the manufacturer's recommendations with  respect to 
temperature, humidity,  lighting, and other environmental considerations: Write here
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  28 of 42d)Ensures that the device is stored in a secure area  with limited access in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements: Write here
e)Distributes  the investigational  device to subjects enrolled in the IRB-approved protocol: Write here
SECTION III: RECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT  PROCEDURES 
1.Targeted Enrollment:  Give the number of subjects:  
a.Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol: 200 subjects will be screened to have 100 subjects 
participate.
b.If this is a multi-site study, give the total number  of subjects targeted across all sites: N/A
2.Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach  copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.
☐Flyers ☐ Internet/web postings ☐ Radio
☐ Posters ☐ Mass  email solicitation ☐ Telephone
☐ Letter ☐ Departmental/Center website ☐ Television
☐ Medical record review* ☒ Departmental/Center research boards ☐ Newspaper
☐ Departmental/Center newsletters ☐ Web-based  clinical trial registries ☒ Clinicaltrails.gov 
☐ YCCI Recruitment database ☐ Social Media  (Twitter/Facebook): 
☒ Other: Clinical Referral
* Requests for medical  records should be made  through JDAT  as described  at 
http://medicine.yale.edu/ycci/oncore/availableservices/datarequests/datarequests.aspx
3. Recruitment Procedures: 
All subjects will be 21-50 years of age and physically  healthy. All research subjects will be recruited  under 
guidelines of the Yale University  Institutional Review Board (Human Investigation  Committee). Subjects will be 
recruited from the community at large via IRB-approved advertising.
a.Describe how potential subjects  are contacted. 
The subjects will be asked to call us if they are interested in participating  in the research study. Interested 
individuals contacting  the clinic by phone in response to advertisements  are told that the information they  
give over  the phone is written down and discussed  by the research team.  They  are advised that if they do not 
enroll in research with the clinic the information  is destroyed, and that if they do, it becomes part of their  
research chart.    If an individual appears to meet enrollment criteria  and is interested  in participating, a face-
to-face interview  is conducted  by one of the project investigators. A release of information is obtained for 
review of any available historical and clinical  data.  A written authorization  form is also obtained  from each  
subject, permitting the research team to use, create, or disclose  the subject's PHI for research purposes.  The 
nature of the project,  procedures, relative risks and benefits, and alternatives to participation in the project  
are discussed  with  the individual.  Following this discussion, the individual is given a copy of the consent form 
to review, and any questions are answered. The PI of the protocol will seek written  consent from all 
participants.
b.Who is recruiting potential  subjects? 
c.Who is recruiting potential  subjects?  Members of the research team, as identified in the consenting staff 
section.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  29 of 424.Assessment of Current  Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship  with any 
potential subject? 
☐Yes, all subjects
☐Yes, some of the subjects
☒No
If yes, describe the nature of this relationship. Write  here
5.Request for waiver  of HIPAA authorization: (When  requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either  the 
entire study, or for recruitment  purposes  only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or email  
screen, you must  request  a HIPAA  waiver for recruitment purposes.)
Choose one: 
☐ For entire study 
☒ For recruitment/screening purposes  only
☐ For inclusion of non-English speaking subject if short form is being used  and there  is no translated  HIPAA 
research authorization form available on the University’s  HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.
i.Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this 
data: Write  here
ii.If requesting a waiver of signed authorization, describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the 
subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data:  Write here
The investigator assures that the protected health information for which  a Waiver of Authorization has been 
requested will not be reused or disclosed to any person  or entity other than those  listed in this application, except 
as required by law, for authorized oversight  of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another 
study by an IRB.
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale HIPAA-Covered 
entity must be accounted for in the “accounting  for disclosures log”, by subject name,  purpose,  date, recipients,  
and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy  HIPAA Privacy Officer.
6.Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, 
including parental permission  or surrogate permission  and the steps taken to ensure  subjects’ independent 
decision-making. 
The consent  process is a 2-step process, whereby the subject initiates contact via telephone  and will undergo 
a phone screen with a member of the research team. Thereafter, potentially eligible candidates will be 
scheduled for a face-to-face  interview. All subjects who will be asked to volunteer are informed that no 
immediate personal medical  benefits will be derived from participation. The study procedures will be 
described as a research tool with  potential to enhance  our knowledge about  treating  cognitive dysfunction.  
Subjects are also informed  of all potential risks of participation. Informed  consent  is documented using 
specific forms for each  study, reviewed and approved by the Yale University Human  Investigation  Committee 
(HIC).
Informed consent  will be obtained by physicians involved in this study or their designated representatives 
(see list of consenting personnel above). Subjects are required to read the informed consent form,  and the 
entire form is then reviewed  with  them by study  personnel. In addition, the study physician will ask if the 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  30 of 42subject has any additional  questions and further  describe  any risks and discomforts. Subjects will be informed 
that they can decline to participate  in the study without penalty, and given  the opportunity to withdraw from 
the study prior to analysis of their  data.  Following the resolution of any questions, the subjects will be asked 
to sign the consent form, if he/she agrees to participate.
7.Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide  Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the personnel obtaining 
consent will assess the potential subject’s  ability  and capacity to consent to the research being proposed. 
 
We will not recruit subjects with limited decision-making capacity. All of the subjects  who sign the consent  to 
participate in the protocol will have  completed and met medical (urine and blood  tests,  EKG, and physical) 
and psychological (SCID and clinical interview) criteria. As part of the consent process, prospective subjects  
are asked  open-ended  questions about the research in order to determine whether  the subject recalls and 
understand the process  of the study.  If an individual  shows poor comprehension of the consent form and 
study, we will not enroll them. A study doctor supervises the screening  and enrollment process.
8.Non-English  Speaking  Subjects:  Explain  provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving  
non-English speaking subjects.  If enrollment of these  subjects is anticipated, translated  copies of all consent 
materials must be submitted for approval prior to use. 
Non-English Speakers will not be enrolled in this study. 
As a limited alternative to the above  requirement, will you use the short form* for consenting process  if you 
unexpectedly encounter a non-English speaking individual  interested in study  participation and the translation of 
the long  form is not possible prior  to intended enrollment?  YES ☐  NO ☐
Note* If more  than 2 study participants are enrolled using a short form translated  into the same language, then 
the full consent form should be translated into that language for use the next time a subject speaking  that 
language is to be enrolled.
Several translated short form templates  are available on the HRPP website (yale.edu/hrpp)  and translated HIPAA  
Research Authorization Forms are available on the HIPAA website (hipaa.yale.edu). If the translation  of the short 
form is not available on our website, then the translated  short form needs  to be submitted to the IRB office for 
approval via modification  prior to enrolling  the subject.   Please review the guidance and presentation on use of 
the short form available  on the HRPP website.
If using a short  form  without  a translated HIPAA Research  Authorization Form,  please request a HIPAA waiver in 
the section above. 
9. Consent  Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant  a waiver of signed consent, or a full waiver 
of consent, depending on the study.  If you will request either a waiver of consent,  or a waiver of signed  consent 
for this study, complete  the appropriate section below.  
☐Not Requesting  any consent waivers 
☒Requesting  a waiver of signed consent:
☒ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment,  the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  31 of 42☐ Entire  Study  (Note that an information  sheet may  be required.)
 For a waiver of signed consent,  address the following:
Would  the signed consent form be the only  record  linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☐ 
Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal  risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☐
 
OR
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk? YES ☐    NO☒ 
Does the research include any activities  that would require  signed consent in a non-research  context? YES ☐   
NO ☒
 ☐ Requesting a waiver  of consent:
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment,  the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
☐ Entire  Study  
 
For a full waiver of consent,  please  address all of the following:
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk to subjects?   
☐ Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted.  
☐ No
Will the waiver  adversely affect  subjects’  rights  and welfare? YES ☐    NO☐
Why  would the research be impracticable to conduct  without the waiver? Write here
Where  appropriate,  how will pertinent information  be returned to, or shared  with subjects at a later  date?  
Write  here
SECTION  IV: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH  SUBJECTS
    Confidentiality & Security  of Data:
1.What protected health information (medical  information along  with the HIPAA identifiers) about subjects will 
be collected and used for the research?    Required private identifiable information  about individuals,  such as 
their medical history, current medications, psychiatric problems, and family history, will be collected by 
research staff and be used for research purposes and charting after consent is obtained. Required private  
identifiable information about individuals, such as their medical history, current medications, psychiatric  
problems, and family history, will be collected by research staff and be used for research purposes and charting 
after consent is obtained.
Subjects will also provide information about  their smoking history, their family smoking and psychiatric  history, 
drinking and drug use history, mood, cardiovascular  health, and other demographic variables. Biological 
specimens to be taken from subjects include urine samples to rule out or confirm drugs of abuse prior to 
imaging, and blood samples  (during imaging) to measure plasma concentration of tracer and other times  as 
well as to measure blood drug levels.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  32 of 42Subjects who stay at the Connecticut Mental Health Center (CMHC) will have  a medical record  at the 
Connecticut Mental Health Center  (CMHC).  If subjects  already have a medical record at CMHC, some 
information about  their participation in the study will be included here.  If they  do not have a medical record  
at CMHC, one will be made for their visit.  The information that will be entered into this medical record will 
include: name, date of birth, date of admission to the CNRU, date  of discharge from the CNRU,  phone number,  
address, medical history, individual  and family history of psychiatric problems,  and substance abuse history.  
Subjects will also sign a separate Notice  of Privacy Practices specific to CMHC.
2.How will the research data be collected, recorded and stored?  T on University encrypted computers. Results 
are published as group data without the use of characteristics that would identify individual subjects.  We quote 
information only  by number in conference discussions, scientific  reports, or publications, in order to maintain 
anonymity. 
Identifiable brain research data are stored on a secure  database  located on the internal PET Center Network. 
The PET network  is protected by a Cisco PIX firewall operated by ITS. All research data are backed up nightly to 
a Dell PV-136T library wit 4 IBM Ultrium-TD2 tape drives using the backup software Legato Networker 7.3 from 
EMC. Human  subjects enrolled  in the study are assigned  a subject-specific  random identifier. Subject identifiers 
and the means to link the subject names  and codes with the research data are stored in separate locations 
within the database. The software of the database limits the ability to connect the random identifier  to the 
actual subject identification information  to research team members only. Access  to the database is password  
protected and each  research team member is required to have a unique ID and password to gain access to the 
database. Authorized users employ their netid and authentication is performed using Yale’s central 
authentication server. Users always access research data  through the random identifier only.
3.How will the digital data be stored?  ☐CD  ☐DVD  ☐Flash Drive   ☐Portable Hard  Drive   ☒Secured Server   
☒Laptop Computer  ☒Desktop Computer  ☐Other
4.What methods and procedures will be used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of  the identifiable 
study data and the storage media indicated  above during and after the subject’s participation in the study?  
Identifiable paper information is kept in locked file drawers and password protected computer files 
on University encrypted  computers.  Results are published as group data without the use of 
characteristics that would identify  individual subjects. We quote information  only by number in 
conference discussions, scientific reports, or publications,  in order to maintain  anonymity.  
Identifiable brain research  data  are stored  on a secure database located on the internal PET Center 
Network. The PET network is protected by a Cisco PIX firewall  operated  by ITS. All research  data are 
backed up nightly  to a Dell PV-136T library wit 4 IBM Ultrium-TD2 tape drives  using the backup 
software Legato Networker 7.3 from EMC.  Human subjects enrolled  in the study are assigned  a 
subject-specific random identifier.  Subject  identifiers and the means to link the subject names and 
codes with the research  data are stored  in separate locations within the database. The software  of 
the database limits the ability to connect  the random identifier to the actual  subject identification  
information to research team  members  only.  Access to the database is password protected  and each  
research team member is required to have a unique ID and password to gain access to the database. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  33 of 42Authorized users employ their  netid  and authentication is performed using Yale’s central  
authentication server. Users always access research  data through  the random identifier only
All portable devices  must contain encryption  software, per University Policy 5100.  If there  is a technical reason a 
device cannot  be encrypted  please submit an exception  request to the Information  Security,  Policy and Compliance 
Office by clicking on url http://its.yale.edu/egrc or email it.compliance@yale.edu
5.What will be done with the data when the research is completed? Are there  plans to destroy the identifiable 
data? If yes, describe how,  by whom and when  identifiers will be destroyed.  If no, describe how the data 
and/or identifiers will be secured.  The data will be stored in locked filing cabinets and on the password-
protected secure database on the internal  Yale University PET Center Network for at least 7 years, accessed 
only by study personnel.
6.If appropriate, has a Certificate  of Confidentiality been obtained? This protocol  is funded by NIH. As such, 
according to the NIH policy issues in October 2017,  the information  collected from subjects  is automatically 
protected by a Certificate of Confidentiality  (CoC).
SECTION V: POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Potential Benefits: Identify any benefits  that may be reasonably expected to result  from  the research, either  to 
the subject(s) or to society  at large. (Payment  of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk 
benefit assessment.) 
These studies  are not of direct benefit to subjects.  This study  will help advance  knowledge  regarding the brain’s  
neuroimmune response  to drinking alcohol.   
In the long term, the knowledge mentioned above  can guide scientists  in their  efforts  to develop  new treatments  
for drug addiction. There is no direct benefit to these subjects. They will be able  to withdraw from the study at 
any time.
         SECTION  VI: RESEARCH  ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC  CONSIDERATIONS
1.Alternatives: What other  alternatives are available to the study subjects outside  of the research? 
 The alternative to participation in this research  protocol  is to not participate. Subjects will be informed that 
they are free to choose not to participate and,  if they do agree  to become a subject,  they  will be free to 
withdraw from the study at any time  during its course. They will also be informed that if they choose not to 
participate or if they withdraw, it will not adversely affect  their relationship with their  doctors or the hospital 
(per the consent form).
2.Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any payments that will be made to subjects, 
the amount and schedule of payments,  and the conditions for receiving  this compensation.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  34 of 42The subjects will be compensated for their time commitment and inconveniences  necessary for completing 
the study.  Subjects will have no financial responsibilities  for any portion of the study.
Compensation will be the following:
$50 for completing  the in-person screening  process
$400  for each PET scan (i.e.,  up to $1200  if participating in all three scans)
$50 per arterial line placement (up to $100  if scans occur on two separate days)
$50 for the MRI scan. 
Up to $60 for Probabilistic Reward Task
$100  per night of inpatient stay
$150  bonus upon completion of all study procedures
Subjects participating will receive a total of up to $1710. 
Subjects will be paid  either by check, and are advised to allow 4-6 weeks for receipt of payment,  or they  will 
be given a credit card or cash. In addition, subjects will be provided with a light lunch,  valued at no more than 
$10. They will also be reimbursed for parking  on their PET scan  days,  or they may be compensated for 
reasonable transportation  costs, including taxi fees to and from scans.  
         Cancellations: If a PET scan should be cancelled  by the PET Center for a reason outside of the subject's 
control (i.e. radiotracer synthesis failure) the subject will be paid $50 minimum,  or a higher amount not to 
exceed the payment for a full scan day. The amount of the payment  for cancellation will be based on the 
subject's length of participation on that scan day prior to the cancellation, and will be up to the discretion of 
the PI.
3.Costs  for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly  describe the subject’s costs  associated with 
participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost 
to subjects.  
 Subjects will not be financially responsible  for tests, examinations, and medical care provided  to them during  
their participation in this study.
4.In Case of Injury: This section is required for any research involving more than  minimal risk, and for minimal 
risk research that presents  the potential for physical harm (e.g.,  research involving blood draws).
a.Will medical  treatment  be available if research-related injury occurs? Write here
b.Where and from whom may treatment  be obtained? Write here
c.Are there any limits to the treatment  being  provided?  Write  here
d.Who will pay for this treatment? Write here
e.How  will the medical  treatment be accessed  by subjects? Write  here
Medical treatment  will be offered to the subjects for any physical injuries that they receive  as a result  of 
participating in this research. However, the subject or his/her insurance company is responsible for the 
cost. Federal  regulations require that subjects be told that if they are physically injured, no additional 
financial compensation is available.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  35 of 42Treatment may  be provided by Yale-New Haven Hospital or any health care provider chosen by the study 
subjects.  The  study  team will provide assistance  to the study subjects in accessing medical treatment 
through referrals, or the study  subjects may  choose to access treatment  on their own.
References
1. Szabo G, Saha B. Alcohol's Effect  on Host Defense. Alcohol research : current reviews. 2015;37(2):159-
170.
2. Crews FT, Lawrimore  CJ, Walter TJ, Coleman LG, Jr. The role of neuroimmune signaling in alcoholism. 
Neuropharmacology. 2017;122:56-73.
3. Montesinos  J, Alfonso-Loeches S, Guerri C. Impact of the innate immune response in the actions of 
ethanol on the central nervous system.  Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. 
2016;40(11):2260-2270.
4. Tufekci  KU, Genc S, Genc K. The endotoxin-induced neuroinflammation model of Parkinson's  disease.  
Parkinson’s disease.  2011;2011.
5. Rupprecht R, Papadopoulos V, Rammes G, et al. Translocator protein  (18 kDa) (TSPO) as a therapeutic  
target for neurological and psychiatric  disorders. Nature reviews Drug discovery. 2010;9(12):971-988.
6. Cosenza-Nashat M, Zhao  ML, Suh HS, et al. Expression of the translocator  protein of 18 kDa by microglia,  
macrophages and astrocytes  based on immunohistochemical localization  in abnormal human  brain.  
Neuropathology and applied  neurobiology. 2009;35(3):306-328.
7. Liu GJ, Middleton RJ, Hatty CR, et al. The 18 kDa translocator protein, microglia and neuroinflammation. 
Brain pathology (Zurich,  Switzerland). 2014;24(6):631-653.
8. Hannestad  J, Gallezot JD, Schafbauer  T, et al. Endotoxin-induced systemic  inflammation activates  
microglia: [(1)(1)C]PBR28 positron emission tomography in nonhuman  primates.  NeuroImage. 
2012;63(1):232-239.
9. Hillmer AT, Holden D, Fowles  K, et al. Microglial depletion and activation: A [11C]PBR28 PET study in 
nonhuman primates. EJNMMI research.  2017;7(1):59.
10. Singh  A, Jiang  Y. How does peripheral lipopolysaccharide induce gene expression in the brain of rats? 
Toxicology. 2004;201(1):197-207.
11. Saba W, Goutal S, Auvity S, et al. Imaging the neuroimmune response  to alcohol exposure in adolescent 
baboons: a TSPO  PET study using 18 F-DPA-714.  Addict Biol.  2017.
12. Schain M, Kreisl WC. Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative  Disorders-a  Review. Current  neurology  
and neuroscience reports. 2017;17(3):25.
13. Dantzer R, O'Connor JC, Freund GG, Johnson  RW, Kelley KW. From  inflammation to sickness  and 
depression: when  the immune  system subjugates the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008;9(1):46-56.
14. Perry VH, Nicoll  JA, Holmes C. Microglia in neurodegenerative disease. Nature Reviews Neurology. 
2010;6(4):193-201.
15. Prinz M, Priller J. Microglia and brain macrophages in the molecular age: from origin to neuropsychiatric 
disease. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 2014;15(5):300-312.
16. Nimmerjahn  A, Kirchhoff F, Helmchen F. Resting microglial cells  are highly  dynamic  surveillants of brain 
parenchyma in vivo. Science.  2005;308(5726):1314-1318.
17. Kettenmann  H, Kirchhoff F, Verkhratsky A. Microglia:  New  Roles for the Synaptic Stripper.  Neuron.  
2013;77(1):10-18.
18. Wake H, Moorhouse AJ, Jinno S, Kohsaka S, Nabekura J. Resting Microglia Directly Monitor  the 
Functional State of Synapses <em>In  Vivo</em> and Determine the Fate  of Ischemic Terminals. The 
Journal of Neuroscience.  2009;29(13):3974-3980.
19. Brown GC, Neher JJ. Microglial phagocytosis of live neurons. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 
2014;15(4):209-216.
20. Block ML, Zecca L, Hong J-S. Microglia-mediated neurotoxicity: uncovering the molecular  mechanisms.  
Nature reviews Neuroscience. 2007;8(1):57.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  36 of 4221. Frick  LR, Williams K, Pittenger C. Microglial  dysregulation in psychiatric disease. Clinical and 
Developmental Immunology. 2013;2013.
22. Orio L, Antón  M, Rodríguez-Rojo  IC, et al. Young alcohol binge drinkers have  elevated blood endotoxin, 
peripheral inflammation and low cortisol  levels: neuropsychological correlations in women. Addiction 
Biology.n/a-n/a.
23. Pascual M, Montesinos J, Marcos M, et al. Gender differences in the inflammatory  cytokine and 
chemokine profiles induced  by binge ethanol drinking  in adolescence. Addiction biology. 2016.
24. Umhau JC, Schwandt M, Solomon MG, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in 
alcoholics: support  for a neuroinflammatory  model of chronic alcoholism. Alcoholism, clinical and 
experimental research.  2014;38(5):1301-1306.
25. Heberlein A, Käser M, Lichtinghagen R, et al. TNF-α and IL-6 serum levels:  Neurobiological markers  of 
alcohol consumption in alcohol-dependent  patients? Alcohol. 2014;48(7):671-676.
26. Leclercq S, Cani  PD, Neyrinck AM, et al. Role of intestinal permeability  and inflammation in the biological 
and behavioral control of alcohol-dependent subjects. Brain, behavior, and immunity.  2012;26(6):911-
918.
27. Leclercq S, De Saeger C, Delzenne N, de Timary P, Stärkel P. Role of inflammatory pathways,  blood 
mononuclear cells,  and gut-derived bacterial products in alcohol dependence. Biological psychiatry. 
2014;76(9):725-733.
28. Leclercq S, Matamoros S, Cani PD, et al. Intestinal permeability,  gut-bacterial  dysbiosis, and behavioral  
markers of alcohol-dependence  severity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.  
2014;111(42):E4485-E4493.
29. Mandrekar  P, Szabo G. Signalling pathways in alcohol-induced liver inflammation. Journal  of hepatology. 
2009;50(6):1258-1266.
30. He J, Crews FT. Increased  MCP-1 and microglia  in various regions of the human  alcoholic brain.  
Experimental Neurology.  2008;210(2):349-358.
31. Qin L, He J, Hanes RN, Pluzarev O, Hong JS, Crews FT. Increased  systemic  and brain cytokine production 
and neuroinflammation by endotoxin following ethanol treatment. Journal of neuroinflammation.  
2008;5:10.
32. Zou J, Crews  FT. Inflammasome-IL-1β signaling mediates ethanol inhibition of hippocampal 
neurogenesis. Frontiers in neuroscience. 2012;6.
33. Ponomarev  I, Wang S, Zhang  L, Harris RA, Mayfield RD. Gene Coexpression  Networks in Human Brain  
Identify Epigenetic  Modifications in Alcohol Dependence.  The Journal of Neuroscience. 2012;32(5):1884-
1897.
34. Lewohl JM, Nunez  YO, Dodd PR, Tiwari GR, Harris  RA, Mayfield RD. Up-Regulation of MicroRNAs in Brain 
of Human Alcoholics. Alcoholism:  Clinical and Experimental Research. 2011;35(11):1928-1937.
35. Crews FT, Qin L, Sheedy D, Vetreno  RP, Zou J. High mobility group box 1/Toll-like receptor  danger  
signaling increases  brain neuroimmune activation in alcohol  dependence. Biological psychiatry.  
2013;73(7):602-612.
36. Bendszus M, Weijers HG, Wiesbeck G, et al. Sequential MR imaging  and proton MR spectroscopy in 
patients who underwent recent detoxification for chronic alcoholism: correlation with clinical and 
neuropsychological data. AJNR American journal of neuroradiology.  2001;22(10):1926-1932.
37. Meyerhoff DJ, Blumenfeld R, Truran D, et al. Effects of heavy drinking,  binge  drinking,  and family  history 
of alcoholism on regional brain metabolites. Alcoholism, clinical  and experimental research. 
2004;28(4):650-661.
38. Seitz D, Widmann U, Seeger U, et al. Localized proton magnetic  resonance  spectroscopy of the 
cerebellum in detoxifying alcoholics.  Alcoholism, clinical and experimental  research. 1999;23(1):158-163.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  37 of 4239. Durazzo TC, Gazdzinski  S, Banys P, Meyerhoff DJ. Cigarette smoking exacerbates chronic alcohol-induced 
brain damage: a preliminary metabolite imaging study.  Alcoholism, clinical and experimental  research. 
2004;28(12):1849-1860.
40. Durazzo TC, Pathak  V, Gazdzinski  S, Mon A, Meyerhoff DJ. Metabolite levels in the brain reward pathway 
discriminate those who remain abstinent from those  who  resume hazardous alcohol consumption after  
treatment for alcohol dependence. Journal  of studies on alcohol and drugs. 2010;71(2):278-289.
41. Jagannathan NR, Desai  NG, Raghunathan P. Brain metabolite changes in alcoholism:  an in vivo proton 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy  (MRS) study. Magnetic resonance imaging.  1996;14(5):553-557.
42. Parks MH, Dawant  BM, Riddle WR, et al. Longitudinal brain metabolic characterization of chronic 
alcoholics with proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Alcoholism,  clinical and experimental research. 
2002;26(9):1368-1380.
43. Ende G, Welzel H, Walter  S, et al. Monitoring the effects  of chronic alcohol consumption and abstinence 
on brain metabolism: a longitudinal  proton magnetic resonance  spectroscopy study. Biol Psychiatry.  
2005;58(12):974-980.
44. Zahr NM,  Pfefferbaum A. Alcohol’s  Effects on the Brain: Neuroimaging Results in Humans and Animal 
Models. Alcohol research : current reviews. 2017;38(2):183-206.
45. Hillmer AT, Sandiego CM, Hannestad J, et al. In Vivo Imaging of Translocator Protein, a Marker of 
Activated Microglia, in Alcohol Dependence.  Molecular  psychiatry. 2017:10.1038/mp.2017.1010.
46. Kalk NJ, Guo Q, Owen D, et al. Decreased hippocampal translocator protein (18 kDa) expression in 
alcohol dependence: a [(11)C]PBR28  PET study. Translational Psychiatry.  2017;7(1):e996.
47. Kim SW, Wiers CE, Tyler R, et al. Influence of alcoholism and cholesterol on TSPO binding in brain: PET 
[11 C] PBR28 studies in humans and rodents. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2018:1.
48. Laso FJ, Vaquero JM, Almeida J, Marcos M, Orfao A. Production of inflammatory cytokines  by peripheral 
blood monocytes  in chronic alcoholism: relationship with  ethanol intake and liver disease. Cytometry 
Part B, Clinical cytometry. 2007;72(5):408-415.
49. Qin L, Crews  FT. Chronic ethanol increases systemic  TLR3  agonist-induced neuroinflammation and 
neurodegeneration. Journal  of neuroinflammation. 2012;9:130.
50. Vitkovic  L, Konsman J, Bockaert J, Dantzer  R, Homburger V, Jacque  C. Cytokine signals propagate through 
the brain. Molecular  psychiatry. 2000;5(6):604.
51. Fujita M, Imaizumi  M, Zoghbi  SS, et al. Kinetic analysis  in healthy humans  of a novel positron emission 
tomography radioligand to image the peripheral benzodiazepine receptor, a potential biomarker  for 
inflammation. NeuroImage. 2008;40(1):43-52.
52. Kreisl WC, Fujita  M, Fujimura Y, et al. Comparison  of [(11)C]-(R)-PK  11195 and [(11)C]PBR28, two 
radioligands for translocator protein (18 kDa) in human and monkey: Implications for positron emission 
tomographic imaging of this inflammation biomarker. NeuroImage. 2010;49(4):2924-2932.
53. Owen  DR, Gunn RN, Rabiner EA, et al. Mixed-affinity binding in humans  with  18-kDa translocator protein 
ligands. Journal  of nuclear  medicine  : official publication, Society  of Nuclear  Medicine. 2011;52(1):24-32.
54. Innis  RB, Cunningham VJ, Delforge J, et al. Consensus nomenclature for in vivo imaging of reversibly 
binding radioligands. Journal  of cerebral blood  flow and metabolism : official journal of the International 
Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism.  2007;27(9):1533-1539.
55. Venneti S, Lopresti BJ, Wiley CA. Molecular imaging of microglia/macrophages  in the brain. Glia. 
2013;61(1):10-23.
56. Venneti S, Wang G, Nguyen  J, Wiley CA. The Positron Emission Tomography Ligand DAA1106 Binds  With 
High Affinity to Activated Microglia in Human Neurological Disorders. Journal of neuropathology and 
experimental neurology. 2008;67(10):1001-1010.
57. Notter T, Coughlin JM, Sawa  A, Meyer  U. Reconceptualization of translocator protein as a biomarker of 
neuroinflammation in psychiatry. Molecular  Psychiatry. 2017;23:36.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  38 of 4258. Cunningham  C. Microglia and neurodegeneration: the role of systemic inflammation. Glia. 
2013;61(1):71-90.
59. Sandiego CM, Gallezot JD, Pittman B, et al. Imaging  robust microglial  activation after lipopolysaccharide 
administration in humans with PET. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  of the United 
States of America. 2015;112(40):12468-12473.
60. Blanco  AM, Perez-Arago A, Fernandez-Lizarbe S, Guerri  C. Ethanol  mimics  ligand-mediated activation 
and endocytosis of IL-1RI/TLR4 receptors via lipid  rafts caveolae  in astroglial  cells.  Journal of 
neurochemistry. 2008;106(2):625-639.
61. Fernandez-Lizarbe S, Pascual M, Guerri C. Critical  role of TLR4  response in the activation of microglia 
induced by ethanol.  The Journal  of Immunology. 2009;183(7):4733-4744.
62. Marshall  SA, McClain JA, Kelso  ML, Hopkins DM, Pauly JR, Nixon K. Microglial activation is not equivalent  
to neuroinflammation in alcohol-induced neurodegeneration: The importance  of microglia  phenotype. 
Neurobiology of disease. 2013;54:239-251.
63. Qin L, Crews  FT. NADPH oxidase and reactive oxygen species  contribute to alcohol-induced microglial 
activation and neurodegeneration.  Journal of neuroinflammation. 2012;9(1):5.
64. Morioka  T, Kalehua  A, Streit W. Progressive expression of immunomolecules on microglial cells in rat 
dorsal hippocampus  following  transient forebrain ischemia.  Acta neuropathologica. 1992;83(2):149-157.
65. Maeda J, Higuchi M, Inaji M, et al. Phase-dependent roles of reactive microglia and astrocytes in nervous 
system injury as delineated by imaging of peripheral benzodiazepine receptor. Brain Research. 
2007;1157(Supplement C):100-111.
66. Toyama H, Hatano K, Suzuki  H, et al. In vivo imaging of microglial  activation  using  a peripheral 
benzodiazepine receptor ligand: [11C]PK-11195 and animal PET following ethanol injury  in rat striatum. 
Annals of nuclear  medicine. 2008;22(5):417-424.
67. Obernier  JA, White AM, Swartzwelder HS, Crews FT. Cognitive deficits and CNS damage after a 4-day 
binge ethanol exposure in rats. Pharmacology,  biochemistry, and behavior. 2002;72(3):521-532.
68. Bianchi ME. DAMPs, PAMPs and alarmins:  all we need to know about  danger. Journal  of leukocyte 
biology. 2007;81(1):1-5.
69. Vallés SL, Blanco AM, Pascual M, Guerri C. Chronic ethanol treatment  enhances  inflammatory  mediators 
and cell death in the brain and in astrocytes. Brain pathology. 2004;14(4):365-371.
70. Blanco  AM, Vallés SL, Pascual M, Guerri C. Involvement of TLR4/Type  I IL-1 Receptor Signaling in the 
Induction of Inflammatory Mediators and Cell Death Induced  by Ethanol in Cultured Astrocytes. The 
Journal of Immunology. 2005;175(10):6893-6899.
71. Vetreno RP, Crews FT. Adolescent  binge drinking  increases expression of the danger signal  receptor  
agonist HMGB1  and Toll-like receptors in the adult prefrontal cortex.  Neuroscience. 2012;226:475-488.
72. Kane CJM,  Phelan  KD, Douglas JC, et al. Effects of Ethanol  on Immune  Response in the Brain:  Region-
Specific Changes  in Adolescent Versus Adult Mice. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. 
2014;38(2):384-391.
73. Antón M, Alén  F, Gómez de Heras R, et al. Oleoylethanolamide prevents neuroimmune 
HMGB1/TLR4/NF-kB danger  signaling in rat frontal cortex and depressive-like behavior induced by 
ethanol binge  administration.  Addiction Biology.  2017;22(3):724-741.
74. Knapp DJ, Crews FT. Induction of cyclooxygenase-2 in brain during acute and chronic ethanol treatment  
and ethanol  withdrawal. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research.  1999;23(4):633-643.
75. Tajuddin N, Moon  K-H, Marshall SA, et al. Neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in adult rat brain 
from binge ethanol  exposure: abrogation by docosahexaenoic acid. PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e101223.
76. Pascual M, Blanco  AM, Cauli O, Minarro J, Guerri C. Intermittent ethanol exposure induces  inflammatory 
brain damage and causes long-term  behavioural alterations in adolescent rats.  European Journal of 
Neuroscience. 2007;25(2):541-550.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  39 of 4277. McClain JA, Morris SA, Deeny MA, et al. Adolescent binge  alcohol  exposure induces long-lasting  partial 
activation of microglia. Brain Behav Immun.  2011;25 Suppl 1:S120-128.
78. Peng H, Geil Nickell  CR, Chen KY, McClain  JA, Nixon K. Increased  expression of M1 and M2 phenotypic 
markers in isolated microglia after four-day binge alcohol  exposure in male rats. Alcohol. 
2017;62(Supplement C):29-40.
79. Riikonen  J, Jaatinen P, Rintala J, Pörsti  I, Karjala K, Hervonen  A. Intermittent ethanol exposure increases 
the number of cerebellar microglia. Alcohol and alcoholism. 2002;37(5):421-426.
80. Zahr NM,  Luong  R, Sullivan EV, Pfefferbaum A. Measurement of Serum, Liver,  and Brain Cytokine  
Induction, Thiamine Levels, and Hepatopathology in Rats Exposed  to a 4-Day Alcohol  Binge  Protocol.  
Alcoholism: Clinical  and Experimental Research. 2010;34(11):1858-1870.
81. Perry VH, Holmes  C. Microglial priming in neurodegenerative disease. Nature Reviews Neurology. 
2014;10(4):217-224.
82. Marshall  SA, Geil CR, Nixon  K. Prior  Binge Ethanol Exposure Potentiates the Microglial  Response in a 
Model of Alcohol-Induced Neurodegeneration. Brain sciences. 2016;6(2).
83. Erol A, Karpyak VM. Sex and gender-related differences in alcohol use and its consequences: 
Contemporary knowledge and future research considerations. Drug & Alcohol Dependence.156:1-13.
84. Barton EA, Baker  C, Leasure JL. Investigation of Sex Differences in the Microglial Response to Binge 
Ethanol and Exercise. Brain sciences. 2017;7(10):139.
85. Maynard ME, Barton EA, Robinson CR, Wooden JI, Leasure JL. Sex differences in hippocampal damage, 
cognitive impairment, and trophic factor  expression  in an animal model  of an alcohol use disorder. Brain  
Structure and Function. 2018;223(1):195-210.
86. Alfonso-Loeches S, Pascual  M, Guerri C. Gender differences in alcohol-induced neurotoxicity and brain  
damage. Toxicology. 2013;311(1-2):27-34.
87. Bala  S, Marcos M, Gattu A, Catalano D, Szabo G. Acute Binge Drinking Increases Serum Endotoxin and 
Bacterial DNA  Levels  in Healthy Individuals. PLOS ONE. 2014;9(5):e96864.
88. Antón M, Rodríguez-González A, Rodríguez-Rojo IC, et al. Increased plasma oleoylethanolamide and 
palmitoleoylethanolamide levels  correlate with inflammatory changes in alcohol binge  drinkers:  the case  
of HMGB1 in women. Addiction biology. 2017.
89. Kirpich IA, McClain CJ, Vatsalya V, et al. Liver  Injury and Endotoxemia in Male and Female Alcohol-
Dependent Individuals Admitted  to an Alcohol Treatment Program. Alcoholism: Clinical and 
Experimental Research. 2017;41(4):747-757.
90. Wilhelm CJ, Fuller BE, Huckans M, Loftis JM. Peripheral immune factors are elevated  in women with 
current or recent  alcohol dependence and associated with altered mood and memory. Drug and alcohol  
dependence. 2017;176:71-78.
91. Hoyo-Becerra C, Liu Z, Yao J, et al. Rapid Regulation of Depression-Associated Genes in a New  Mouse 
Model Mimicking Interferon-α-Related Depression in Hepatitis C Virus Infection. Molecular 
neurobiology. 2015;52(1):318-329.
92. Richey L, Doremus-Fitzwater TL, Buck  HM, Deak T. Acute illness-induced behavioral alterations are 
similar to those observed during withdrawal from acute alcohol exposure. Pharmacology, biochemistry,  
and behavior. 2012;103(2):284-294.
93. Capuron L, Pagnoni G, Drake DF, et al. Dopaminergic mechanisms of reduced basal ganglia responses to 
hedonic reward during interferon  alfa administration.  Archives  of general  psychiatry. 2012;69(10):1044-
1053.
94. Eisenberger  NI, Berkman ET, Inagaki TK, Rameson  LT, Mashal  NM, Irwin MR. Inflammation-Induced  
Anhedonia: Endotoxin  Reduces Ventral  Striatum Responses to Reward. Biological Psychiatry. 
2010;68(8):748-754.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  40 of 4295. Felger  JC, Mun  J, Kimmel HL, et al. Chronic interferon-α decreases  dopamine 2 receptor  binding and 
striatal dopamine release in association with anhedonia-like behavior  in nonhuman primates. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013;38(11):2179.
96. Petrulli J, Kalish B, Nabulsi N, Huang Y, Hannestad J, Morris E. Systemic inflammation enhances  
stimulant-induced striatal  dopamine  elevation. Translational psychiatry. 2017;7(3):e1076.
97. Blednov Y, Benavidez JM, Geil C, Perra S, Morikawa H, Harris R. Activation of inflammatory  signaling by 
lipopolysaccharide produces a prolonged increase of voluntary alcohol intake in mice. Brain,  behavior, 
and immunity.  2011;25:S92-S105.
98. Felger  JC, Miller  AH. Cytokine effects on the basal ganglia and dopamine function:  the subcortical source  
of inflammatory  malaise. Frontiers in neuroendocrinology. 2012;33(3):315-327.
99. Muscatell KA, Dedovic K, Slavich GM, et al. Greater amygdala activity and dorsomedial prefrontal-
amygdala coupling are associated with enhanced  inflammatory responses to stress. Brain Behav Immun. 
2015;43:46-53.
100. Redlich R, Stacey D, Opel N, et al. Evidence  of an IFN-gamma by early life stress  interaction in the 
regulation of amygdala reactivity to emotional stimuli. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2015;62:166-173.
101. Swartz JR, Prather AA, Di Iorio  CR, Bogdan  R, Hariri AR. A Functional  Interleukin-18 Haplotype Predicts 
Depression and Anxiety through  Increased Threat-Related Amygdala Reactivity in Women but Not Men.  
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016;42:419.
102. Gilpin NW,  Herman  MA, Roberto  M. The Central Amygdala as an Integrative Hub for Anxiety and Alcohol 
Use Disorders. Biological Psychiatry. 2015;77(10):859-869.
103. Bajo  M, Varodayan FP, Madamba SG, et al. IL-1 interacts with ethanol effects on GABAergic transmission 
in the mouse  central amygdala.  Frontiers  in Pharmacology. 2015;6(49).
104. Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . Hilsdale. NJ: Lawrence  Earlbaum  
Associates. 1988;2.
105. Knapp DJ, Whitman BA, Wills TA, et al. Cytokine  involvement  in stress may depend  on corticotrophin  
releasing factor to sensitize ethanol  withdrawal  anxiety. Brain,  Behavior, and Immunity.  2011;25:S146-
S154.
106. Harrison  NA, Doeller  CF, Voon V, Burgess N, Critchley HD. Peripheral  inflammation acutely impairs 
human spatial  memory via actions  on medial  temporal lobe glucose metabolism.  Biol Psychiatry. 
2014;76(7):585-593.
107. Pascual M, Baliño  P, Alfonso-Loeches S, Aragón  CMG, Guerri C. Impact  of TLR4 on behavioral and 
cognitive dysfunctions associated  with  alcohol-induced neuroinflammatory damage.  Brain, Behavior, 
and Immunity. 2011;25(Supplement 1):S80-S91.
108. Zhao Y-N, Wang F, Fan Y-X, Ping G-F, Yang J-Y, Wu C-F. Activated  microglia are implicated in cognitive  
deficits, neuronal  death, and successful recovery following  intermittent ethanol  exposure. Behavioural 
Brain Research.  2013;236(Supplement C):270-282.
109. Patton JH, Stanford MS, Barratt ES. Factor structure  of the Barratt impulsiveness scale. J Clin Psychol. 
1995;51(6):768-774.
110. Afshar M, Richards S, Mann D, et al. Acute immunomodulatory effects of binge  alcohol ingestion. 
Alcohol. 2015;49(1):57-64.
111. Neupane SP, Skulberg A, Skulberg KR, Aass HCD, Bramness JG. Cytokine  Changes following Acute Ethanol 
Intoxication in Healthy Men: A Crossover Study. Mediators of inflammation.  2016;2016.
112. Curtin  JJ, Fairchild BA. Alcohol and cognitive control: implications for regulation of behavior during 
response conflict.  Journal of abnormal psychology. 2003;112(3):424-436.
113. Walter TJ, Crews  FT. Microglial  depletion alters the brain neuroimmune response to acute  binge  ethanol 
withdrawal. Journal of neuroinflammation.  2017;14(1):86.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  41 of 42114. Carson RE, Barker WC, Liow J-S, Johnson  CA. Design of a motion-compensation OSEM list-mode 
algorithm for resolution-recovery reconstruction  for the HRRT. Paper presented  at: Nuclear Science  
Symposium Conference Record, 2003 IEEE2003.
115. Ziegler G, Ridgway GR, Dahnke R, Gaser C, Initiative AsDN.  Individualized Gaussian process-based 
prediction and detection of local  and global gray matter abnormalities in elderly subjects.  NeuroImage. 
2014;97:333-348.
116. Ichise M, Liow JS, Lu JQ, et al. Linearized reference tissue  parametric imaging  methods: application to 
[11C]DASB positron emission tomography  studies of the serotonin transporter  in human  brain. Journal  
of cerebral blood flow  and metabolism : official journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood  
Flow and Metabolism. 2003;23(9):1096-1112.
117. Park  E, Gallezot JD, Delgadillo A, et al. (11)C-PBR28 imaging  in multiple sclerosis patients and healthy 
controls: test-retest reproducibility and focal visualization of active white matter areas. European 
journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging. 2015;42(7):1081-1092.
118. Morean ME, Corbin WR, Treat  TA. The Subjective Effects  of Alcohol Scale: Development and 
psychometric evaluation of a novel  assessment tool for measuring subjective response to alcohol.  
Psychological assessment. 2013;25(3):780.
119. Martin CS, Earleywine M, Musty RE, Perrine M, Swift RM. Development  and validation of the biphasic 
alcohol effects  scale. Alcoholism: Clinical  and Experimental Research. 1993;17(1):140-146.
120. Hollister LE. Health aspects of cannabis. Pharmacological Reviews. 1986;38(1):1-20.
121. Devlin RJ, Henry JA. Clinical review:  Major  consequences of illicit drug consumption. Critical care 
(London, England).  2008;12(1):202.
122. Sughondhabirom A, Jain D, Gueorguieva  R, et al. A paradigm  to investigate the self-regulation of cocaine  
administration in humans. Psychopharmacology. 2005;180(3):436-446.
123. Lynch WJ, Sughondhabirom A, Pittman B, et al. A paradigm to investigate the regulation of cocaine  self-
administration in human cocaine users:  a randomized trial. Psychopharmacology. 2006;185(3):306-314.
124. Kalayasiri R, Sughondhabirom A, Gueorguieva  R, et al. Dopamine beta-hydroxylase gene (DbetaH) -
1021C-->T influences self-reported paranoia during cocaine self-administration. Biological psychiatry. 
2007;61(11):1310-1313.
125. Lynch WJ, Kalayasiri  R, Sughondhabirom  A, et al. Subjective responses and cardiovascular effects of self-
administered cocaine in cocaine-abusing  men and women. Addiction biology.  2008;13(3-4):403-410.
126. Morgan PT, Pace-Schott  EF, Sahul  ZH, Coric V, Stickgold R, Malison RT. Sleep, sleep-dependent  
procedural learning  and vigilance  in chronic cocaine  users:  Evidence  for occult insomnia. Drug and 
alcohol dependence. 2006;82(3):238-249.
127. Cheng Y, Prusoff W. Mouse ascites sarcoma  180 thymidylate  kinase. General properties, kinetic analysis, 
and inhibition studies. Biochemistry. 1973;12(14):2612-2619.
128. Kapur S, Barsoum S, Seeman  P. Dopamine D(2)  receptor blockade  by haloperidol. (3)H-raclopride reveals 
much higher occupancy than  EEDQ.  Neuropsychopharmacology. 2000;23(5):595-598.
129. Seeman P, Ulpian C. Dopamine D1 and D2 receptor selectivities  of agonists and antagonists. Adv Exp 
Med Biol. 1988;235:55-63.
130. Malmberg A, Nordvall G, Johansson A, Mohell N, Hacksell U. Molecular  basis for the binding of 2-
aminotetralins to human dopamine D2A  and D3 receptors. Mol Pharmacol.  1994;46:299-312.
131. Seeman P. Antipsychotic drugs, dopamine receptors, and schizophrenia. . Clin Neurosci Res. 2001;1:53-
60.
132. Graff-Guerrero A, Willeit  M, Ginovart  N, et al. Brain region binding of the D2/3 agonist  [11C]-(+)-PHNO  
and the D2/3 antagonist [11C]raclopride in healthy humans. Hum  Brain Mapp. 2007;29(4):400-410.
133. Newberg  AB, Ray R, Scheuermann J, et al. Dosimetry of 11C-carfentanil,  a micro-opioid  receptor  imaging  
agent. Nuclear  medicine communications. 2009;30(4):314-318.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021HIC: 2000024444
Page  42 of 4266.  Barth Wilsey, Thomas Marcotte, Alexander  Tsodikov, Jeanna Millman, Heather  Bentley, Ben  
Gouaux, Scott Fishman (2008).  “A  Randomized,  Placebo-Controlled,  Crossover  Trial  of Cannabis 
Cigarettes in Neuropathic Pain.” The Journal of Pain 9(6): 506-521.
IMPORTANT REMINDERS
Will this study  have a billable service?  Yes ☐  No☒
A billable service is defined as any service  rendered  to a study subject that, if he/she was not on a study,  would 
normally generate a bill from  either Yale-New  Haven  Hospital or Yale Medical Group to the patient  or the patient’s 
insurer. The service may or may not be performed  by the research staff on your study, but may be provided by 
professionals within either Yale-New Haven Hospital or Yale Medical Group (examples include  x-rays, MRIs, CT 
scans, specimens sent to central labs,  or specimens sent to pathology). Notes: 1. There is no distinction  made  
whether the service is paid for by the subject or their insurance (Standard of Care)  or by the study’s  funding 
mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally includes new services  or orders placed in EPIC for research 
subjects. 
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical research management  system, for 
Epic to appropriately route research  related  charges. Please contact oncore.support@yale.edu
Are there any procedures  involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?  
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note  instructions below.   
a. Does your  YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that you will perform? Yes ☐  No  
☐
b. Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past  for this procedure? Yes 
☐  No ☐
c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied? Yes ☐  No ☐
 
If you answered “no”  to question 4a, or "yes" to question  4b or c, please contact the YNHH Department  of 
Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval  before commencing with  your research protocol.
IMPORTANT REMINDER ABOUT RESEARCH AT YNHH  
Please note that if this protocol includes Yale-New Haven Hospital patients, including  patients  at the HRU, the 
Principal Investigator  and any co-investigators  who are physicians or mid-level  practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, 
psychologists and speech pathologists)  who may have  direct patient  contact  with patients on YNHH premises 
must have medical staff appointment and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.  If you are uncertain whether 
the study personnel  meet the criteria, please telephone  the Physician  Services  Department at 203-688-2615. By 
submitting this protocol as a PI, you attest that you and any co-investigator  who may have patient contact has a 
medical staff  appointment  and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 8/11/2021