IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0334 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/13/2017    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A COMPARISON OF METHODS OF DISCONTINUING NASAL CPAP IN PREMATURE INFANTS <30 
WEEKS GESTATION – A FEASIBILITY STUDY  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date:  09/13/2017  
  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0334 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/13/2017   A COMPARISON OF METHODS OF DISCONTINUING NASAL CPAP IN PREMATURE INFANTS <30 
WEEKS GESTATION – A FEASIBILITY STUDY  
Brittany Duyka, MD; Claire Beaullieu, MD; Amir M. Khan, MD  
Introduction: Nasal continuous positive airway pressure (NCPAP) mode of respiratory support is now 
widely used to support premature infants, especially those who are less than 30 weeks of gestation.1-2 
Recently, three large studies have shown that NCPAP therapy initiate d in the delivery room is equally 
effective  as prophylactic  surfactant  in the treatment  of respiratory  distress  syndrome  (RDS).3-5 Additionally, 
volutrauma and atelectrauma have been implicated in the development of Bronchopulmonary dysplasia 
(BPD).6 There fore, premature infants are being preferentially treated with NCPAP rather than mechanical 
ventilation. However, while there is significant body of literature justifying the use of NCPAP, very little is 
known about how long to continue CPAP and more import antly how and when to wean off NCPAP. There 
are three published trials, one of which showed, that infants are likely to tolerate being taken of NCPAP 
after gradual reduction in pressure with some increase in oxygen need.7 The second trial showed, that 
wean ing from NCPAP to supplemental oxygen via high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) did not decrease 
duration of NCPAP therapy but, increased the duration of oxygen use.8 Another recent trial showed, that 
discontinuation of NCPAP, rather than cycling NCPAP, results i n faster weaning off CPAP. In clinical 
practice,  CPAP  is either  discontinued  regardless  of the pressure  or, the pressure  is gradual  reduced  before 
discontinuing CPAP based on individual physician preferences. However, a clinical trial comparing 
discontinua tion of NCPAP with and without weaning the CPAP pressure has not been published. 
Therefore,  this is a feasibility  study  comparing  two strategies  of discontinuing  NCPAP.  
Study question:  
Among infants <30 weeks gestational age on NCPAP, does discontinuing CPAP after gradual reduction 
in CPAP pressure leads to successful weaning off CPAP when compared to discontinuing CPAP without 
weaning pressure.  
P: Premature infants <30 weeks gestation r equiring NCPAP therapy for respiratory support who are ready 
to wean NCPAP  
I: Wean NCPAP pressure gradually before discontinuing NCPAP  
C: Discontinue NCPAP without weaning pressure  
O: Number of total days on NCPAP after wean started or discontinuation, fai lure to wean off NCPAP, time 
to failure, need for intubation  
T: 28 days after randomization  
 
 
Study Population:  
 Inclusion  criteria:  
o All infants  < 30 weeks  by dates,  on NCPAP  therapy,  on caffeine  10mg/kg  daily 
o Meet CPAP stability criteria for ≥  12hours  
 CPAP 6 cm  H2O 
 FiO2 </=0.25 and stable (to maintain sats  85-95%)  
 Respiratory rate consistently less than  60 
 Mild to no subcostal/intercostal  retractions  
 No Apnea or bradycardia event that requires bag mask  ventilation  
 Less than 3 apnea/brady/desat episodes in any 1 hour period for previous 6 
hours.  
 Tolerated time off CPAP during routine CPAP care (~15  min) 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0334 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/13/2017    Exclusion  criteria:  
o Major congenital anomalies including congenital heart  disease  
o Anomalies that prevent discontinuation of  NCPAP  
o Undergoing current evaluation for and/or treatment of  sepsis  
 
Allocation Plan: Blinding is not possible due to technological constraints. Subjects will be randomized 
using permuted blocks using 4 -6-6 scheme. Assignment will be sequentially numbered and placed in 
opaque envelopes. Consent will be obtained in f irst 48hrs of life in potentially eligible patients. Subjects 
will be randomized once the subject meets eligibility (CPAP stability) criteria.  
 
Interventions:  
1. Discontinue NCPAP after weaning pressures : After randomization, CPAP pressure will be 
weaned by 1 every 24hours as long as the subjects continue to meet stability criteria after each 
wean, until CPAP of 4. If after decrease in CPAP pressure, the subject meets CPAP failure 
criteria (described belo w) pressure will be increased back to the previous level and after 
stabilization for 24 hours weaning process will be started again. Once the subject meets stability 
criteria on CPAP of 4, NCPAP will be stopped and subject will be placed on nasal cannula ( NC) 
according to unit guidelines (max 1L flow, 30% FiO2). Subjects will be considered to have failed 
CPAP discontinuation if they meet any one of the CPAP failure criteria after routine suctioning 
and prone  positioning:  
o Respiratory rate >75  consistently  
o Respiratory distress defined as moderate -severe retractions, grunting, nasal flaring that 
persists for >30  min 
o FiO2 >30% for 6 hours* (to keep oxygen saturations  85-95%)  
o Apnea or bradycardia that requires bag mask  ventilation  
o >2 apnea/bradycardia episodes in 1 hour  period  
Subjects will be restarted on CPAP of 6 and will be allowed to recover for 1 week. After 1 week, 
the weaning procedure will start again if the subject meets CPAP stability criteria.  
2. Discontinue NCPAP without weaning pressures: After random ization, once the subject meets 
stability criteria, NCPAP will be stopped and subject will be placed on nasal cannula (NC) 
according to unit guidelines (max 1L flow, 30% FiO2). Subjects will be considered to have failed 
CPAP discontinuation if they meet an y one of the CPAP failure criteria as described before. 
Subjects will be restarted on CPAP of 6 and will be allowed to recover for 1 week. After 1 week, 
the weaning procedure will start again if the subject meets CPAP stability  criteria.  
End of study: Each  patient will be followed for 28 days from randomization OR failure of CPAP wean x 2 
attempts. Should patient need further escalation of care from CPAP, will be eligible to enter NIPPV study.  
Outcomes: Primary outcome of interest is the number of days on N CPAP or mechanical ventilation from 
randomization until discharge (1 day= 0 -24h). Secondary outcomes to be analyzed will be duration of 
endotracheal ventilation, failure to wean off NCPAP, rate of BPD, rate of NEC, time to full PO ad lib feeds, 
length of h ospital stay, rate of air leak disorders.  
 
 
Sample size calculation: This type of intervention has not been reported in literature as a result we 
have no prior data to help us determine the sample size. Therefore, this study will carried out in two 
phases. During the initial phase, the study will be carried out for 1 year. The data from the first phase will 
be used estimate the sample size for the subsequent definitive trial. The initial goal for enrollment is 50 
patients.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0334 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/13/2017    
Data analysis:  
Baseline characteristics to be collected:  
 Gestational  age 
 Birth weight  
 Prenatal  steroids  
 Surfactant  use 
 Corrected gestational age at  enrollment  
 Weight at  enrollment  
 Duration of NCPAP before  enrollment  
 Duration of mechanical  ventilation  
 Co morbidities such as NEC, Sepsis episodes, IVH, treatment of  PDA 
 
 
Outcome indicators to be collected  
 Total days on NCPAP since  enrollment  
 Total days on endotracheal ventilation since  enrollment  
 Time to wean off  NCPAP  
 Number of  attempts  
 Total days until full PO  feeds  
 Length of hospital  stay 
 
 
Statistical analysis plan: Data will be analyzed using t -test for continuous variable and chi square for 
categorical assuming parametric criteria can be satisfied. Data will be reported as unadjusted and 
adjusted for gestational age, birth weight, prenatal steroids administrations, su rfactant administration, 
CPAP duration and mechanical ventilation before weaning off NCPAP. Difference between times to wean 
off NCPAP will be assessed using survival analysis (Kaplan -Meier methods for unadjusted and/or Cox 
proportional hazards analyses fo r adjusted (multivariable) outcomes).  
 
 
 
 
References  
1. Mulrooney N, Champion Z, Moss TJ et al. Surfactant and physiologic responses of preterm lambs 
to continuous  positive  airway  pressure.  Am J Respir  Crit Care  Med 2005;  171:488 -493. 
2. Ho JJ, Subramaniam P, Henderson -Smart DJ, Davis PG. Continuous distending pressure for 
respiratory  distress  syndrome  in preterm  infants.  Cochrane  Database  Syst Rev 2008.  
3. Morley CJ for the COIN Trial Investigators. Nasal CPAP or intubation at birth for very  preterm 
infants. N Engl J Med 2008;  358:700 -708. 
4. Finer NN for the SUPPORT Study Group of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD Neonatal 
Research  Network.  Early  CPAP  versus  surfactant  in extremely  preterm  infants.  N Engl J Med 2010; 
362:1970 -1979.  
5. Dunn MS, Kaem pf J, de Klerk A, et al; Vermont Oxford Network DRM Study Group. Randomized 
trial comparing  3 approaches  to the initial  respiratory  management  of preterm  neonates.  Pediatrics. 
2011;  128:e1069 -1076.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-17-0334 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/13/2017   6. Jobe AH, Hillman N, Polglase G et al. Injury and inflammation from resuscitation of the preterm 
infant. Neonatology 2008;  94:190 -196. 
7. Abdel -Hady H, Mohareb S, Khashaba M, et al. Randomized controlled trial of disconnection of 
nasal  CPAP  in stable  preterm  infants  breathing  room  air. Act Paeditr  1998  
8. Abdel -Hady  H, Shouman  B, Aly H. Early  weaning  from CPAP  to high flow nasal  cannula  in preterm 
infants  is associated  with prolonged  oxygen  requirement:  a randomized  controlled  trial. Early  Hum 
Dev 2011;87  
9. Todd DA, Wright A, Broom A et. Al. Methods of weaning babies <30 weeks gestation off CPAP: a 
multicenter randomized controlled  trial 