Study Title: Kappa -PET imaging and naltrexone in alcohol drinking behaviors  
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
Document Date: 5/6/2019 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 1 of 48
YALE UN IVER SITY
HUM AN INVES TIGATION COMM ITTEE
Appl icat ion to Involve H uman Subje cts in Biome dical Re search
100 F R1
HIC O FFICE USE ONLY Please  refer to the HIC website for a pplication 
instructions a nd info rmation r equire d to 
compl ete this a pplication.  The Instruc tions a re 
available a t  http://ww w.yale.edu/hrpp/for ms- 
template s/index .html.
Subm it the  original a pplication and two ( 2) 
copies of a ll mate rials including  relevant 
sections of the grant whi ch funds this projec t 
(if applicable) to the  HIC .DAT E S TAMPED -RECEIVED PROTOC OL NUMB ER
1011007710
SECT ION  I: ADM INIS TRAT IVE INF ORMATIO N
Title o f Research Project:
Kappa-PET ima g ing and na ltrexone in alc ohol drinking behaviors
Principal In vestigat or:
Suchi tra Krishna n-Sarin, P h.D.Yale Aca demic Appoin tment:
Assoc iate Profe ss or
Campus Addre ss:
34 
Park Stre et,  S-208, Ne w Ha ven, CT 06519
Campus Ph one: 203-974-
7595Fax: 203-974-7606 Pager: E-mail : suchitra.krishnan-
sarin@yale.edu
Protocol C orresponde nt Name & Addre ss (if different than PI ):
Dana Cav allo, 34 Pa rk Stree t, Ne w Ha ven CT  06 519
Campus Ph one: 203-974-
7607Fax: 203-974-
7606E-mail : dana.cavallo@yale.edu
Facu lty Advisor :(required if PI is a student,
residen t, fel low or oth er trainee) NAYale Aca demic Appoin tment:
Campus Addre ss:
Campus Ph one: Fax: Pager: E-mail :
Does the pr incip al invest igator, co-invest igator, or any re search team member obtaining consen t, or a ny of 
their fa mily members (sp ouse, child, domestic partner) have an incentive or int erest, financ ial or oth erwise, 
that ma y be viewe d as affecting the pr otection of the hu man subjec ts involved in th is projec t, the sc ientific 
objec tivity of the  research or its i ntegrity? See Disclosur es and Mana gement of Pe rsona l Inter ests in Human 
Research  http://www . yale.edu/hrpp/poli cies/inde x.htm l#COI
Yes X  No
I
f yes, list names of  the i nvestigator or person obt aining consent:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 2 of 48SECT ION II: GENERAL INFORMAT ION
1.   P erform ing Organi zation s:  Ide ntify th e hospital, in -patient or outpa tient fac ility, school or 
other agency that will serve as the loca tion of th e research.  Choose a ll that apply:
a. Int ern al Location [s] of the Study:
Magnetic  Resonan ce Research Cent er                    PET Cente r
(MR- TAC) YCC I /Church Stre et Research Unit (CS RU) 
Yale Ca ncer Center YCCI/Hospital Rese arch Unit (HRU)
Yale-New Ha v en Hospit al                                      YCC I/Keck Laboratories
Spe c ify Othe r Yale Location:                                 Cancer Data Re positor y/Tumor Re gistry
b. Ext e r nal L ocation [s]:
APT F ounda t ion, Inc .                                              Ha skins  Laboratories
Connec ticut Ment al Hea lth Center John B . Pierc e Laboratory, Inc . 
Veterans Affa irs Hospita l, West Ha ven Othe r Locations, Spec ify: CMU
c. Additio n al Re quire d Doc uments (c heck all that appl y): N/A
*YCC I-Scientific and Safety Comm ittee (YCC I-SSC)             Approva l Date:
*Pediatric P rotoc ol Review Comm ittee (PPRC)                        Approva l Date:
*YCC Protoc ol Review  Comm ittee (YRC -PRC)                      Approva l Date:
*Dept. of Ve ter ans Affa irs, W est Ha ven VA HSS                     Approva l Date:
*Radioac tive  Drug Research Com mittee (RDRC )                     Approva l Date: 
YNHH- Radiation Safety Comm ittee (YNHH-RS C)                Approva l Date: 
Magnetic Resonance Research Cent er PRC (MR RC-PRC)     Approva l Date: 
YSM/YNH H Ca ncer Data Re positor y (CaDR)                         Approva l Date: 
Dept. of L ab Me dicine request for service s or spe cimens form
*Approval f rom th ese comm ittees is requir ed before final H IC approv al is granted. See instructions 
for doc uments required for i nitial subm ission and approv al of th e protoc ol. A llow sufficie nt time for 
these requests. Chec k with the oversight body f or th eir time require ments.
2.   P rob able Dur ation of Pr oject: State the expec ted dura tion of the pr oject, including all follow-up 
and da ta analysis activities 5 years
3.   Ta rget ed En rollment: W hat is the number of subjec ts 56 non -treatment-seeking hea vy drink ers, 
family hist ory posit ive and ne gative and 10 healthy controls
a.targ eted for enroll ment a t Yale for thi s protoc ol?  66 pa rticipa nts
If this is a multi-site study, what is the tot al num ber of subjec ts targe ted across all sites? 
N/A
b. expec ted to si g n the consent form? 
136
c. ex pected to c ompl ete some or a ll interventions for thi s protoc ol? 66
4.   Re sea rch Typ e/Phase: (Chec k all that apply)
a. Study Ty p e
Single Ce nter  Study
Multi -Center Stud y
Do
es the Ya le  PI se rve a s the P I of th e multi-site stud y? Yes No
Coordina ting  Center/Data Ma nagement Othe r:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 3 of 48b. Study P h ase N/A
   Pilot  Phase  I Phase II Phase III Phase IV 
Othe r (Spe cify)
c. Are a of  Research: (Chec k all that apply) Note that these are overlapping de finiti ons a nd more 
than one ca tegory ma y apply to your re search protocol. D efiniti ons for the following can be 
found in t he instructions sec tion 4c :
Clinical Research: Patient-Oriente d Clinical Research: Outc omes a nd 
Clinical Research: Ep idemiol ogic a nd B ehaviora l Health Services 
Translation al Research #1 (“Bench-to-Bedside”)  Interdisc iplinary Research
Translation al Research #2 (“Bedside-to-Community”) Com munity-Based Rese arch
5.   Is thi s s tudy re quired to be r egistered in a publi c database? Yes No
If yes, whe re is it registered?
Clinical Tri als.gov re gistry
Othe r (Spe ci fy)
6. W ill this re search stud y utilize clinical care services at Ya le New Ha ven Hospita l or YMG?
Yes No
If yes, mi ght these be billable to the subjec t, the sponsor, gra nt or othe r third pa rty payer? 
Yes No
If you ans w ered "yes ", please reg ister this study i n the IDX/ GE sy stem at
http://y cci.yale.edu/compl y/billing_idxge.html
7. Ar e there any proc edures involved in thi s protoc ol that will be pe rform ed at YNH H or one  of its
affiliated entities?  Yes X No If Yes, ple ase answer que stions a throug h c and note
instructions below.  If No , pro ceed to Se ction III.
a. Doe s  your YNHH priv ilege delineation currently include the specific proce dure that you will 
perform?  Yes, use of  the IDS pha rmacy
b. W ill  you be using any ne w equipm ent or e quipment that  you ha ve not u sed in t he past for 
this proce dure? No
c. Wi ll a nove l appr oach using  existing equipm ent be a pplied? No
If you answered “no” to question 7a, or "yes" to question 7b or c , please contac t the YNHH 
Departmen t of Ph ysician Service s (688-2615) for prior a pprova l before c omm encing with  your 
research proto col.
SECT ION III: F UNDING , RE SEARCH TEAM A ND T RAININ G
1.   F undin g Source : Indi cate all of the fundin g sourc e(s) for this stud y. Che ck all boxe s that appl y.
Provide infor mation re garding the external funding source .  This i nformati on should include 
identifica tion of the a gency/sponsor, th e fundin g mec hanism  (grant or contrac t), and whe ther 
the a ward is p ending or ha s been awarded. Provide  the M/C # and Age ncy name (if grant- 
funded). If the funding source associated with a protocol is “pending” at the time of the 
protocol submiss ion to the HIC (a s is the case for most NIH submissi ons), the PI should note 
“Pending”  in the appropriate  section of the pr otocol applica tion, provide the M/C# a nd 
Agency name (if grant-funde d) and furth er note that Univer sity (de partmen tal) f unds support 
the re search (until such  time tha t an a ward is mad e).
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 4 of 48PI Title o f Grant Name o f Fundi ng Source Funding Funding  Mechanis m
Suchi tra 
Krishnan- Sarin, 
PhDKappa-PET 
i
maging and 
naltrexone  in 
alcohol dr inking 
behaviorsNIAAA Feder al
St
ate
Non Profit 
Indust ry 
Other For
Profit
 Other Grant-
M#1R01AA01998001
Contr
act# Contrac t 
P
ending 
Investigator/Depa rtment
Ini tiated
Sponsor Initiated
Other, Spe ci fy:
IRB Review  fees are charged for projec ts fund ed by Industr y or Other For-Profit Sponsors. 
Provide the Na me a nd Addre ss of the Sponsor Re presentative to whom the invoi ce should be 
sent.  Note : the PI’s ho me departm ent will be billed if t his inform ation is not pro vided. 
Send IRB Re view Fee Invoice To:
Name:
Compan y: 
Add
ress:
2
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Approved by the Yale University HIC on March 12, 2012Departm ent Chair’s Assur ance St atem ent
Do you know of a ny rea l or apparent institutional conflic t of intere st (e.g., Yale ow nership of aNOTE: T he HIC will r emove from the protocol any per sonne l who have not c omplet ed require d training. 
A per sonne l protocol ame ndme nt wil l need to be submitte d whe n training is com pleted.
SECT ION IV:
PRINC I PAL I NVE STIGAT OR/FACULT Y ADVISO R/ DEPART MEN T CHAIR
AGREE MENT
As the principal investigator of this research projec t, I certify that:
The infor mation provid ed in t his applica tion is c ompl ete and accurate.
I assu me full responsi bility for th e protec tion of human subjec ts and the prope r conduc t of the 
research.
Subjec t sa fety will be of pa ramount concern, and every effort wil l be ma de to prot ect subj ects‟
rights and we lfare.
The re search will be performed a ccordin g to ethi cal princ iples and  in comp liance with all fe deral, 
state a nd loca l laws, a s well as institutional re gulations a nd pol icies re garding the prote ction of 
human subje cts.
All m ember s of the  research tea m wil l be ke pt apprise d of re search goa ls.
I will obtain a pprova l for this research stud y and any subsequ ent revisions prior to m y initiating the 
study or a ny change and I will obtain c ontinuing approva l of this s tudy prior  to the expira tion da te 
of any approva l period.
I will report to the HIC a ny se rious inj uries a nd/or other  unanticipated problems involvi ng risk t o 
participa nts.
I am in compl iance with the re quire ments set by the Unive rsity  and qua lify to ser ve as the 
principa l investigator of this projec t or ha ve acquire d the a ppropria te approva l from the 
Dean‟s Office or Office of the Provost, or the Huma n Subjec t Prot ection Admin istrator at 
Yale-New Ha ven Hospit al, or ha ve a faculty advisor.
I will identif y a qualified succ essor should I cea se my role  as princ ipal inv estigator and fa cilitate a 
smooth t ransfer of inves tigator responsi bilities.
PI Name (PRINT) and Sig nature Date
As the facu lty advisor of this re search proje ct, I certify that:
The infor mation provid ed in t his applica tion is c ompl ete and accurate.
This proj e ct has sc ientifi c value a nd m erit an d tha t the student or t rainee investigator has the 
necessary resourc es to compl ete the  project and achieve  the aims.
I will train the student inve stigator in ma tters of a ppropri ate research compliance, prote ction of 
human subje cts and prope r conduc t of r esearch.
The re search will be performed a ccordin g to ethi cal princ iples and  in comp liance with all fe deral, 
state a nd loca l laws, a s well as institutional re gulations a nd pol icies re garding the prote ction of 
human subje cts.
The student  inve stigator will obtain approva l for this re search stu dy and any subseq uent revisions 
Prior to initiating the stu dy or revision and will obtain continuing  approva l prior to the expiration 
of any approva l period.
The student inv estigator will  report to the HIC a ny se rious inj uries a nd/or other unanticipate d 
problems involvi ng risk to pa rticip ants.
I am in compl iance with the re quire ments set forth by the Univ ersity  and qua lify to se rve as 
the fac ulty advisor o f this projec t.
Advisor Na me ( PRINT) a nd Sig nature Date
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 7 of 48sponsoring compan y, pa tents, l icensure ) associa ted with this research proj ect?
Yes (provide a description of tha t intere st in a separate letter addressed to the H IC.) 
No
As Chai r, do y ou have any real or apparent protoc ol-spec ific conflict of inte rest bet ween yourse lf and 
the sponsor of the research projec t, or its competi tor or a ny interest in any intervention and/or me thod 
tested in the proje ct that might compr omise this research proj ect?
Yes, and  I agree to submi t the Protoc ol-Spec ific C onflic t of Inter est Disc losure Form. 
No
I assure  the HIC that  the princip al investigator and all memb ers of the r esearch tea m are qualified by 
educa tion, tra ining, li censure a nd/or e xperience to assum e participa tion in t he conduc t of this re search 
trial. I also assure that the princ ipal inve stigator has departmen tal suppo rt and suffic ient re sourc es to 
conduc t this trial app ropriate ly.
Chair Na me  (PR INT) and S ignature Date
Departmen t
YN
HH Hu m an Subjects Protect ion Admi nistrator A ssurance State ment
Required when the  study is conduc ted solely  at YNHH by YNHH health care p rovid ers.
As Human Sub je ct Protection Admini strator (HSPA) for YNHH, I c ertify that:
I have read a c opy of the protocol a nd approve  it being c onduc ted at YNH H.
I agree to submi t a Proto col-Spec ific Con flict of Interest Dis closure  Form i f I am aw are of any rea l 
or apparent institutional conflic t of inte rest.
The principal  investi gator of thi s study is qua lified to s erve as P.I. a nd ha d the suppor t of the hospital 
for thi s research proj ect.
YNHH HSPA  Na me (PRINT) and Sig nature Date
For HIC  Use Only
Date Ap proved Human Inve stigat ion Commi ttee Sign ature
SECTION V: RE SEARCH PLAN
1.   Stat ement of P urpose: State the sc ientific a im(s) of the  stud y, or the hypothes es to be tested.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 8 of 48Naltrex one (NTX ), a non-spec ific opioi d antagonist that binds dose-dependently to mu, delta, 
and kappa opio id receptors, has been shown to be efficacious in the treatment of alcohol 
dependence [1].  Unde rstanding how NTX  reduces drinki ng is needed to help optimize NTX 
treatment and identi fy importa nt new targets for the development of new pharmacother apeutic 
agents  to  treat  alcohol  de pendence.  Recent  evidenc e  sugge sts  that  kappa  opioi d  receptors
(KOR‟s)  may play an important, but complex, role in mediating alcohol  drinking behavior.  This
proposa l brings togethe r a translationa l team of sc ientists to examine the in vivo bioch emistry of
NTX in h eavy drink ers (HD), be fore and durin g treatment with  NTX , via high resolut ion PET
imaging of the KOR a nd re late this to clinica l outc omes of NTX ef ficacy.
Using a labo ratory-based human Alcohol Drinki ng Paradigm (ADP; [2]) that we pionee red, we 
have shown that family history (FH) of alcoholi sm may mode rate (encode the direction of) 
response to NTX [3]. Spec ifically, pretreatment with a 100 mg/day dose  of NTX  was associa ted 
with lowe r drinki ng in the ADP in heavy drinke rs with a positi ve FH (FHP), whereas the same 
dose correlated with higher drinki ng for those with a negative FH (FHN).  What could be the 
underl ying bioch emistry?  Existing evidenc e sugge sts that, at a dose of 50 mg/day, mu-opio id 
receptors are saturated, and therefore unlikely to determine variability in NTX  responsi vity [4], 
point ing to possi ble roles for delta and kappa opioi d receptors.  At 100 mg /day, NTX should 
antagoniz e KOR, raising the possi bility that the differences we observed in the two cohorts of 
drinke rs may be  related to differences in KOR.  KOR l evels in clinical populations  can be 
examined using PET imaging, howe ver, until recently, such an examination was heretofore 
prohib ited by the lack of an appropriate  tracer.   [11C] LY2795050 (referre d to as [11C] -PKAB at 
Yale PET C enter) is a selective, high affinity, KOR antagonist  tracer with favorable kinetics for 
imaging KOR and drug occupancy in humans [5].  The new tracer has excellent test/r etest 
reproduc ibility and is we ll-suited to quantit ating KOR leve ls in stri atal and extra- striata l regions.
This pr oposa l unites neuroimagers, experts in conduc ting and analyzing human PET studi es with 
behaviora l scientists, e xperts in de veloping and testing trea tments for a lcoholism. We will 
conduc t the first-ever in vivo PET imaging study of KOR and NTX  occupancy in two cohorts of 
HD (18 FHP a nd 18 FHN) a nd re late our ima ging finding s to FH a nd alterations of drinki ng 
behavior by NTX in the ADP.  Th rough thi s work, we will advance our unde rstanding of (a ) the 
degree of invo lvement of the kappa system in reducing drinki ng in humans  by NTX , (b) th e 
contribution of FH to this relationship, and (c ) refine the us e of a new PET i maging tra cer. In so 
doing , we will inform the developm ent of futur e targeted ph armacother apies for a lcoholism and 
lay the groundwork for other important investigations into t he KOR/d ynorphin s ystem in viv o.
Primar y  (P), Se conda ry (S), a nd Auxil iary (A) Spec ific A ims:
P1. O ccupanc y of KOR by NTX and drinking:  To determine the degree to whic h occupancy of 
KORs  by a 100 mg/day dose  of NTX medi ates (influence s the strength of) responsi vity to 
NTX treatment in all heavy drinker s. It is expected that KOR occupancy will significa ntly 
mediate the relationship  between NTX treatment and respons ivity. „Responsivity‟,  measured 
via A DP, i s the c hange in number of drinks consu med a t the baseline ADP vs. NTX ADP.
P2. Fa mily  History  of  Alcoholi sm  as  a  moderator:  To  determine  whether  the  relationship 
betwee n NTX responsi vity and occupancy of KOR is different in FHP vs. FHN heavy 
drinke rs.
P3. To determine if baseline KOR availability differs between heavy drinkers and healthy control 
socialdrinkers
S
1. Baselin e KOR diffe rences
a.   To de te rmine if ba seline levels of KO R diff er between FHP and FHN hea vy drinke rs.
b.   To de termine if b aseline KOR leve l is related to ei ther baseline drinkin g or 
responsi vity to NTX .
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 9 of 48S2. Identify and v alidate a re ference region (area devoid of sp ecific b inding) for our ne w KOR
tracer. A re f erence region would simpl ify PET analysis.
S3. Optimize  the scan durati on for c linical popul ations be ing imaged with the new 
KOR trace r.
Shorte r s cans would increa se compl iance and de crease discom fort t o subje cts. 
A1.Re lationship t o oth er behavioral measure s:  To de termine if occupancy of KORs 
is related to measures of a lcohol c raving, stimulation or sed ation, a ssesse d in t he ADP.
We hypothesiz e that (1) degree of NTX occupancy of KOR  durin g tre atment will be 
correlated with the degree of responsiv ity to NTX in all heavy drinke rs and (2) FHP 
heavy drink ers, who re spond positi vely to NTX, will have lower baseline KOR levels 
when compare d with FHN hea vy drinke rs.
2.   Ba ckgro und: De scribe the bac kground infor mation t hat led to t he plan f or thi s 
projec t. Provide re ferences to s upport the e xpec tation of obta ining use ful sc ientific 
data.
Alcohol abuse is one  of the leading causes of disability in t he United St ates. At pre sent, three 
medica tions a re approv ed by the FDA for the tr eatment of a lcohol de pendence: disulfir am, 
naltrexone , and acampro sate. H owever, the efficacy of th ese agents ra nges from mini mal to 
modest, an d the y are unde r-utilized in clini cal commun ity setti ngs [6, 7]. The re is a p ressing 
need for nove l medications tha t are more effective in re ducing alcohol use .
Development of new pha rmac otherapeutic approac hes to treating alcohol depe ndence should be 
based on our unde rstanding of the behavioral and neurochemical mechanism s mediating  alcohol 
drink ing, a s well the e fficacy of a gents known to reduce alcohol drinki ng.  Na ltrexone (NTX ) is
a non-spe cific opio id antagonist that ha s bee n shown to ha ve minimal-modest ef ficacy in t reating 
alcohol de pendence.  Clinical trials indicate tha t trea tment-seeking heavy drink ers who rece ive 
NTX a t a dose of 50 m g/day [1, 8] or 100 mg /day [9], ha ve lowe r levels of relapse to drinkin g 
during the tr eatment pe riod than d o those re ceiving pl acebo.  Subpopulations of a lcohol de pendent 
patients ma y respond be tter to N TX [10] a nd fa mily hist ory (FH) of a lcoholism i s emerging as an 
importa nt predictor of NTX response [3, 11].
Our earlier wo rk, using a labora tory-based alcohol drink ing pa radigm (ADP) revealed that NTX 
responsi vity was altered by the presence  or absence of a FH of alcoholi sm; specifically NTX 
treatment was associated with lowe r drinki ng in those with a posit ive FH (FHP) and actually 
with higher drinki ng in those with a negative FH (FHN) [3]. De veloping a better pha rmacological 
unde rstanding of this differential response could help enhance the efficacy of NTX treatment.  
Naltrexone‟s ability to reduce alcohol  drinking is believed to be mediated, in part, throu gh its 
effects on the endoge nous opioi d system, specifically through dose dependent antagonism of 
mu, delta and kappa opioi d receptors. W eerts and colleagues [4] have shown that the most  
comm only use d dose of naltrexone , 50 mg/day, results in almost compl ete occupancy (sa turation) 
of mu-opioi d sites in the brain with variable, partial occupancy of delta opioid receptor sites.  
This evidenc e sugge sts that the differential efficacy of NTX is unlikely to be media ted by mu -
opioi d bindi ng but could be related to variability in binding to other (delta or ka ppa) opio id 
receptor sites.  While some  investig ations have foc used on the de lta system [4], to da te, no one 
has examined the relationship  of kappa opioi d receptors (KOR)  to alcohol drink ing or NTX 
responsi vity in h uman a lcoholics.
Emer ging evide nce sugge sts an importa nt, but complex, role for the KOR  system in alcohol 
drink ing.  Dynorphin is the endoge nous opioi d ligand that binds to both mu and KORs [12].  In 
general, activation of KORs is aversive . Animals  will not self-administer dynorphin, 
administration of dynorphin  results in condit ioned plac e aversion in animals, and dynorphin 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 10 of 48activ ation of KOR results in decreased dopa mine re lease in brain rewa rd areas [13, 14].  The 
potential role of KORs in media ting alcohol drinking be havior has been the focus of several 
studi es in animals and humans.  Mice that lack the KOR  drink more alcohol and have greater 
release of dopa mine in response to alcohol [15].   Rode nts with an increased prope nsity 
toconsume alcohol have lower dynorphin levels in several brain regions that are involved in the
control of  alcohol drinking [16-18]. In human s, the presence of the OPR K1 allele (whic h 
decreases expression of KOR) is associa ted with increa sed risk of alcoholism [19].  The above 
evidenc e sugge sts that diffe rences in the status of the KOR system  may media te differences in 
prope nsity to drink alcohol.  The current proposa l will be the first to compar e KOR occupancy in 
FHP and FHN drinke rs and correlate KOR levels with drinking in the ADP.
The eff ect of stimulating or inhibiting the KOR opioi d system on alcohol drink ing appears to 
depend, in part, on the prior hist ory of alcohol exposure .  In alcohol na ïve animals, stimulation of 
KOR by agonist s decreases alcohol  drinki ng [20], while inhibition of KOR by antagonist s 
increa ses alcohol  drinki ng [21].  Chronic alcohol exposure dysre gulat es the dynorphin/ KOR 
system;  specifically, dynorphin levels are enhanced and number  of KOR are reduce d [22, 23]. 
The aversive effect of dynorphin/ KOR activation is decreased in individuals whose 
dynorphin/ KOR  system has been chronica lly stimulated, such as those with chronic pain or those 
with a long history of pol ysubst ance abuse, which ma y reflect a reduced number or bind ing of
KOR‟s [24,  25].    In  contra st  to  the  above  eviden ce,  in  alcohol  dependent  animals,  KOR  
antagonis ts reduce alcohol drinki ng [26], sugge sting that chronic alcohol drinking also alters the 
KOR system.   The above eviden ce sugge sts that diffe rences in the KOR system may media te 
diffe rential responsi vity to NT X.
The pr opose d projec t would be the  first to assess the potential contribution of the KOR system to 
individual  diffe rences in naltrexone -medi ated changes in alcohol drinki ng usi ng an established 
ADP in alcohol dependent, heavy drinke rs (HD).   Addit ionally, the current proposa l will be the 
first to examine KOR levels and NTX  responsi vity in FHP and FHN heavy drinke rs; this will 
help us unde rstand if the diffe rential responsi vity to NTX observed in FHP and FHN drinke rs is 
related to KOR oc cupancy by NT X.
Our proje c t will investigate a provoca tive findi ng in alc ohol treatment research [3].  Na mely, that 
FH of alcoholism  may influe nce (or be a marker of an unde rlying trait that influe nces) the 
response of heavy drinke rs (HD) to NTX . Simply put, not every HD responds favorably to NTX 
but lower levels of drinking can be achieved and risk of relapse is diminished in some.   It is 
essential for clinical treatment and futur e drug developm ent to unde rstand how NT X works. 
Preclinical results have implicated kappa in change s in alcohol drinki ng, but the directionality of 
these changes are compl ex. We propose that the diffe rential efficacy of naltrexone may be relate 
to differences in occupancy of kappa opioi d receptors  by naltrexone .  This translation al proje ct 
will test this hypothesis.    The results of this projec t could not only help maximize treatment 
effectiveness of naltrexone but also result in identification of new medi cation treatment targets 
for more optimal re duction of a lcohol dr inking.
3.   Re sea rch Plan: Provide a n orde rly scientific description of the  stud y design and re search 
procedures as they directly affect the subjec ts.
A total of  56 HD  subjec ts will be tested; equal numbers of FHP  and FHN subjec ts will be 
recruited. Data from the first year’s subje cts (“initial cohort” perhaps spe cify how ma ny will be used for 
this purpose ) will be analyzed prior to sca nning the remaining subjects in orde r to a ddress aims 
S2 and S3 (identifica tion and va lidation of a re ference region; reduction in sca n dura tion) which 
are addressed be low in P ET me thods.
Study d esign: Because we are interested in investig ating the implications of ba seline KOR , as 
well as Occ upancy of KOR by NT X, we  must perform 2 PET scans on eac h subj ect; one at 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 11 of 48basel ine and one following 5-11 da ys of NTX pretreatment. Similarly, be cause we are interested 
in relating re sponsi vity to occupancy of KOR by NTX we must make two assessm ents of drink ing 
behavior using the ADP; one at baseline the day before or a fter the f irst PET sca n and one  
followin g 5-11 da ys of tre atment wit h NT X.  The post PET scan and post ADP will ideally take 
place on Day 6 or Day 7 of medication, but we will allow up to 11 days of medication for 
scheduling issues and the possibility that the appointments will be within this time frame. All  
eligible participa nts may or may not c ompl ete one mock  PET scan and all will receive an 
orientation of the AD P at the Hospit al Research Unit (HRU)  of Ya le New Ha ven Hospita l 
(YNHH). All participants will  compl ete an MR I scan prior  to the  first baseline PET sca n.  After 
completing the baseline ADP and PET scan,  subj ects will start NTX. The dose will be given po 
every mornin g at 10am and tape red up daily.  Participants will take 25 mg on the first day, 50 
mg on the second day, and then 100 mg on each subsequent day. During this 5-11 day  outpatient 
treatment period, participa nts will not be told to alter their drinki ng be havior.  On the 5th-11th 
day of medication, a fter they have been sta bilized on a 100 mg /day dose, they will compl ete the 
second ADP and PET scan; thi s sca n will be conduc ted at peak NTX levels (2-4 hours a fter oral 
dosing). 
In de sig ning the stu dy, we  had to bal ance various c ompeting  interests and we provide 
justifications be low:
a.    L ack of Pl acebo and use of withi n subjec ts desig n: We considered including a placebo control. 
But then in order to control for “order” effects,  we would have had to randomize placebo and NTX 
conditions AND allow a significant washout period between medication conditions, especially for 
those receiving NTX first.  This would have led to problems with re tention and inc reased the 
sample si ze.  We also conside red a between subjec ts desig n but th is would ha ve also increased 
sample si ze and costs.  The refore, in orde r to c ontain c osts and incr ease feasibility, we decided to 
use a withi n subjec ts desig n examining a change from ba seline, and configured the ove rall duration 
of pa rticipa tion to be a s close  to a sing le wee k as possib le.  While our proposed design could still have 
“order” effects we do not believe that it will influ ence our a bility to detec t an init ial signal.
b.   Use of Mock ADP and PET sessions:  To minimize the possible stress and novelty associated 
with a first
 PET scan and the ADP sessions, as time and scheduling permits, we will conduct a 
mock PET scan and a walk-through of the ADP procedures prior to the baseline PET and ADP. 
During the mock PET session, the subject will lie in a replica of the PET scanner, be told when the 
scanner is being “turned on” and when blood samples are “being drawn”.  During the mock ADP 
session, participants will be exposed to the HRU rooms in YNHH where the ADP ’s are conducted 
and will be walked through the ADP procedures. 
c.   Tim ing of PET scan: The preliminary PET test/re test data sugge st that BPND  for our new 
KOR  tracer may  be higher in the afternoon (Figure 6).  (Note: This cannot  be explain ed by 
a carryove r effect of a high-mass injection of tracer in the morning (t est) scan, since that would 
cause BPND  to be lowe r in the second scan.)  We speculate  that this effect could be due to 
diurna l fluctuations in dynorphin level. Regardless, we will control for it by scheduling each 
scan at approxim ately the sa me ti me of da y (around m id-day).
d.   Dose , Tim ing of NTX and PK samples: We will taper subjec ts up to a NTX  maintena nce 
dose of 100 m g/day. 100 mg/day is the dose of NTX that has shown efficac y in many recent 
clinical trials [9], and our own preliminary evidence sugge sts that this dose may produc e the 
greatest reduction in drinking in FHP drinke rs but incre ased drinking in FHN drinke rs.  We 
conside red testing mor e doses of NTX but we felt that this would not have been justified and 
would have been too costly.  NTX dose will be administered at approxi mately 10 am each 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 12 of 48day.   All  participa nts will start with 25 mg/day and be tapered up to 100 mg by day 3 of 
medication. We will obtain 2 blood samples for pha rmacokinetic (PK) analysis during the 
post PET scan to confir m that steady state levels of NTX were in effect durin g these 
proce dures.  The se PK sa mples will be tested for NTX and its major active meta bolite,
      6(be ta )-naltrexol.
e.   Tob acco Use and Smoki ng breaks:  In our experience, 50% of alcoholics  who participa te in 
our pr ojects smoke cigarettes or use other tob acco produc ts. In order to avoid nicotine 
withdra wal, on the ADP days, participa nts will be given smoke brea ks until about an hour 
prior to the start of the ADP.  We will not allow them to smoke  during the ADP since  this 
could not only alter their craving for alcohol but could also pose a potential risk (sinc e 
YNHH is a nonsmoking facility and the participa nt would  have to be walked out for a smoke 
break while  intoxica ted).   On the PET days, we will allow regular smoke breaks up until 
about two hours prior to PET scans.  It is very unlikely that the smoking  on the morning of 
the scans would cause kappa receptors to upregulate .  Since these individuals have been 
smoking and drink ing regularly, we expec t that any receptor regulatio n from  smoking 
proba bly  happened  a  long  time  ago.   Furthe r, if  there  is  any  acute  dynorphin  release 
associa ted with a smoki ng break, it will occur sufficiently early relative to the start of the 
PET scan to minimize any residual effect of transientl y elevated dynorphin on our 
measurements of KOR l evel (BPND).
Recru itment:
All heavy drinker particip ants will  meet DSM-IV criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence, will 
be drinki ng 25-70 drinks /week for men and 20-65 drinks per week for wome n and will repor t not 
being abstinent more than 3 days pe r week. All other  criteria, designed to protect subjec ts from 
risks of pa rticipa tion are described in the human subjects section and are similar to those  used 
by our group in earlier projects [2, 3, 28].
Particip ants will be r ecruited throug h advertisements in local newspa pers, comm unity TV 
channels and posting s in comm unity loc ations (bars, alcohol/cof fee shops, groce ry store s). We 
have also had succe ss with recruitin g pa rticip ants from  postin gs on Craigslist and social 
network ing sites like Facebook as well as our study URL, www.pa idalcoholstud y .com, which 
links  subjec ts  to  confide ntial  surve ys  that  a ssess  some  pre liminary  eligibility  criteria  and
provides  preliminary information about the project. Each potential particip ant‟s eligibility will be
assess ed ove r the phone by the  research assistant  who will then set them up for the initial intake
appoint ment.  We do not anticipate  any problems with recruiting these subjec ts since their profile 
is similar to tha t of the  participa nts we  have been recruitin g for our ongoi ng projec ts and we have 
been quit e successful in our re cruitme nt efforts.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 13 of 48We will  recruit hea vy dri nkers who c onsume  between 20-65 drinks per wee k for wome n and 25-
70 drinks pe r week for m en. The lowe r limit s reflect alcohol consumption t hat just ex ceeds the W HO 
Brief Intervention Stud y Group guidelines (W HO guidelines) for non-ha zardous drinki ng, whic h are no 
more than  4 drinks/da y 4-5 da ys pe r wee k for me n (20 drinks) and no more than 3 dr inks/ day 5 da ys per 
week for wome n  (15 drinks) . The uppe r limit s were chosen to ensur e that we c hose subje cts whose  typica l 
drinkin g qua ntities would be unlikely to ex ceed the amount of alcohol that would be  available to them f or 
possi ble a dministration during the labora tory session. The se criteria are similar to t he ones being used in 
our ong oing work wit h mem antine in HIC # 0602001068. We will also recruit healthy controls to match 
the demographics and background of the heavy drinkers, including family history of alcoholism;  these 
controls will be light social drinkers consuming less than or equal to  20 drinks per week for women, and 
less than 25 drinks per week for men in the past 90 days and not meet past or current criteria DSM-IV 
abuse or dependence
 criteria for the past 5 years.   The remainder of the exclusion criteria will be similar 
to the heavy drinkers.
Justi fi cation of Age Criteria an d for Excludin g Ch ildren a nd Adole scents Unde r 21 Y ears of
Age:
We will n ot use subjects unde r 21 years of a ge in this study. Fi rst and fore most , this is an alcohol s elf-
administration st udy i n whi ch we will be offeri ng drinkers a n opport unity to consum e alcohol, and in the 
State o f Connec ticut the legal age limit for dri nking a lcohol is 21. Sec ondly, subj ects below the  age of 21 
have p robably been drinking a lcohol for a short er dura tion of t ime and wil l have different patterns of drinking 
from  olde r drinkers, whi ch may affec t drinking duri ng the  self- administration para digm and confound st udy 
results. The uppe r age limit was dete rmine d usin g our pi lot data [3] whic h indica tes tha t the major ity of 
the subje c ts who pa rticip ated in our ong oing stud y we re in this age ra nge.
Justi fi cation for c hoice of naltrexone dose:
We wi ll use na ltrexone  in a dose of 100 m g/day. The 100 m g/day dose has shown e fficacy in man y 
recent clini c a l trials [9], a nd our own pre liminary evidenc e sugge sts that this dose may produc e 
greater red uction in drinking in FHP drin kers tha n the 50 m g dose .
Proce dure s:
R
ecruitme nt, Baseline Assessments, P hysica l Exam: Each potential  partici pant‟s  eligibility will be 
assess ed by a re s earch staf f member who wil l then contac t them and se t them up for the init ial intake 
appointm ent at the Substa nce Abuse Center in t he Conn ecticut Ment al Hea lth Center ,
New Ha v en, CT, whe re informed c onsent wil l be obta ined a nd eligibility will be assess ed.  At
this appoin tment,  DSM -IV c riteria (SC ID, [41], Fa mily hist ory of a lcohol ism (FHAM; [42]) a nd 
drink ing over the past 90 days (T LFB; [43, 44]) wil l be a ssesse d.  Urine will be collected to test for 
drugs and ethylglucuronide, a metabolite of ethyl alcohol that will be used as  a biomarker of alcohol 
consumption at baseline and the ADP session. The research assistant will s chedule a  physic al exam 
(including EK G) and routi ne laboratory work, a nd he patic, kidn ey, and thyroid func tion tests and 
pregnan cy tests for all female s. Subj ect charac teristics and m edical history wil l be reviewed by the PI’s 
and the study physician Dr. Julia Shi, medical directo r of the Central Medical Unit) to ensure that the 
subject meets  all the eligibility crit eria. If e ligible to participate and if they have also consented to 
participate in  the genetic study they will have additional blood drawn at this time.  We plan to study the genes 
that might be related to the medication’s effects on drinking behavior. In addition, we may study other genes.  
Since all of the genes cannot be anticipated at this time, we will store the samples to study in the future. 
These samples will only be used for the following purposes: to learn about relationships between genes and 
characteristics of yours that relate to alcohol drinking and to learn about natural variation of genes between 
different groups of individuals.  These samples will be de-identified and stored in a -70 freezer until they are 
transported to Dr. Joel Gelernter’s lab.  Eligible participants will be scheduled for t he study proce dures (as 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 14 of 48describe d in figure 9) and wi ll be reminded to not use any illicit drugs or ot her medications throughout the 
duration of t he study.
Practice ADP sess ion: All eligible participants will be scheduled to part icipate in a practice  ADP. 
Before participation in the first ADP, participants  will be shown  the HRU room where  the 
ADP‟s will be conduc ted, wa lked through a ll the proce dures of the ADP, and given information 
on what to bring and not to bring on the day of the ADP. Healthy controls will not complete the ADPs.
Mock PET scan: As time and scheduling permits, we  will conduct a mock PET scan prior to the 
baseline PET and ADP. During the mock PET session, the subject will lie  in a replica of the PET 
scanner, be told when the scanner is being “turned on” and when blood samples are “being drawn”. 
Medi
cation Admin istration:  Eligible participa nts will receive N TX f or a five to eleven  day period.  
The dose o f NT X wi ll be tapered up ove r the first four days as shown in fi gure 9 above . Participa nts 
will come into our c l inic on a daily basis to take their medica tions a nd provide re ports on dr inking 
behavior and adverse events. In the event that a participant cannot come to the clinic daily, other 
arrangements will be made, such  as giving the participant more than one dose of their medication at 
a time and using a daily phone call as both a reminder to take the medication and as a means to  
monitor adverse events.  We will allow this up until the final two doses of medication prior to the 
ADP or PET This arrangement will be determined by the investigator  and her staff based on the 
participant’s other obligations and compliance. Healthy controls  will not take any medication.
Alcohol Dr ink ing Pa radigm:  The proce dures for a ll the a lcoho l-drinki ng se ssions will be sim ilar. 
Participants will  be told not t o consume a lcohol sta rting a t 5 pm the ni ght be fore a nd arrive at the 
Hospita l Res earch Unit (HRU) of Ya le New Ha ven Hospita l, New Ha ven, at 9:00 a m.  W e will first 
assess brea th alcohol levels and conduc t urine drug t ests.  If the urine drug tests a re positi ve and/or 
breath al cohol l evels are 0.05 or gre ater, the n the s ession will be re scheduled. Participants will be 
given the opportunity to taste and drink two chosen beverages (of which they will choose one for 
the 2 ADPs; see below).
  These procedures will make them  more comfortable drinking in the HRU 
room and will also help reduce order effects in the current design.
The
 ADP wil l be conduc ted in a private room i n the H RU. It will start at 3 pm wit h the pri ming dose 
period, whi ch will be followed by thre e one-hour drinki ng pe riods ( 4-5 pm, 5-6 pm, and 6- 7 pm), a nd 
will conclude at 7 pm .
Exposure to Alcohol Cue
Ten minutes prior
 to the start of the  priming dose (PD) period (i.e., 2:50 pm), the research assistant 
will walk into the participant’s room with the glasses, the alcohol, and the mixers. The research assistant 
will then proceed
 with the mixing of the priming drink of alcohol in  front of the participant. When done, 
he/she will leave the drink on the table, instruct the participant not to consume the priming drink until
they are told to do so  and leave the room.
Priming dose ( PD)  period
The PD of alcohol  will be provided  at 3 pm to model  a “lapse” situation and subjects  will have
5 mi nutes  to drink it. A 40 mi nute absorption period will follow  during whic h the alcoho l
cravi ng (AUQ;  [45]), st imulation/ sedation (B AES; [46]) a nd physiol ogical effects (heart rate, 
blood pre ssure , breath alcohol l evels) of this primi ng dose of alcohol will be mon itored every 10 
minutes.
Alcoh ol sel f- administrat ion (SA ) periods
Following the PD, participants will be  exposed to three one-hour SA periods designed to model a 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 15 of 48“relapse” situation. During each SA period they will be  permitted to drink up to four alcoholic drinks 
designed to raise Blood Alcohol Level (BAL) by 0.015 mg% of alcohol, or to receive cash (equivalent 
to the price of each drink that is not consumed). The first SA period will begin at 4 pm, when the 
research assistant will
 take 4 prepared  drinks into the room along with a "tab" sheet worth $12. The 
participant will be informed that these 4 drinks will be available to him/her for the next 60 minutes
 (i.e., until 5 pm). S/he can choose either to drink or to  keep the money; each drink will cost $3. For 
example, if the participant chooses to drink only one drink in the next one hour, s/he will earn $9. 
The money will be given to them the
 next morning before they leave  the hospital. The second and
third SA periods will begin at 5 pm and 6 pm, respectively, and will be similar to the SA period. Thus, 
participants can choose to consume up to 12 additional drinks over
 this 3 hour period or to receive up 
to $36 to take home the next morning.  Number of drinks that each participant consumes  during this 
period will serve as the primary outcome for this portion of the experiment.

  Be ve rage c ontent and mi xers
The YNHH Investigational Pharmacy will calculate the alcohol dose for each participant.  The PD 
dose will be designed to raise blood alcohol  levels to 0.03 mg% and will be based on the formula 
specified by Watson [47] which takes into account gender, weight, and age of the subject. The 
subsequent drinks
 provided in the SD blocks will raise BAL by 0.015 mg% each, using the same 
formula. The alcohol doses
 will be  delivered to the HRU unit and any unused doses will be returned 
to the pharmacy. Alcoholic beverages administered  during this study will consist of 1 part 80 proof 
liquor of the subject's choosing to 3 parts mixer chosen from a  selection of equicaloric, non-
caffeinated, non-carbonated drinks. The research assistant will prepare  the drinks using the alcohol 
doses prepared by the YNHH pharmacy. Participants  would have already chosen their favorite 
alcohol and mixer earlier that day. Specifically, they will be asked to choose two mixed  drinks of 
their favorite alcohol and mixer to go with it from a  list that will be provided to them at the intake 
appointment. The mixers on this list have been chosen to be equicaloric and to not contain any 
carbonation (which could alter absorption of alcohol). Subjects will be asked to taste  both mixed 
drinks on the morning of the baseline  ADP and pick the one that they would like to use for both 
ADP’s.
End of a lcohol s elf -administration pe riod a nd ove rnight stay in HRU : The alcohol a dministration 
porti on of  the stu dy will end at 7:05 pm. F ollowing this, bre ath alc ohol l evels and craving will be 
assessed every 30 mi nutes unt il the subjec t's brea th alc ohol l evel falls below 0.02. P articipa nts will 
get dinner a nd will stay in t he hospital ove rnight and will be discha rged betwee n 6 a nd 7 a m the next 
day.
Asse ssments  during a nd after the three choice periods: Duri ng the s econd, thi rd and fourth hour of 
the la borato ry session alcohol c raving (AUQ; [45]) a nd sti mulation/ sedation (B AES; [ 46]) a nd brea th 
alcohol l ev els (assess ed using Alc o-Sensor 3; Intoximeter, St. L ouis, MO following rinsing of mo uth) 
will be a ssess ed every thi rty minutes. The  range of assessments, howe ver, is l imited to a void i nterfering 
with t he ev aluation of dr inking be havior. Chan ges in c raving and sti mulation/ sedation can then b e 
correlate d to KOR occ upancy.  B reath alc ohol leve ls will be used to con firm that there are no dif ferences 
in alc ohol abso r ption be twee n subjec ts.
Scheduling of the ADP and PET sessions  requires a lot of coordination and requests are made in 
advance. Given the consequences that occur when  a participant does not arrive for a scheduled 
appointment, we are  asking a secondary participant who is scheduled for a later session to serve as a 
standby participant in case the primary  scheduled participant has a conflict for the ADP and/or PET 
scan. If the scheduled participant arrives, we will pay the standby participant $50 for showing up and 
ask them
 to come back at a later date to complete their scheduled appointments. However, if the 
scheduled participant does not arrive, the
 standby participant  will still be paid $50 and will be invited 
to complete the appointments scheduled for the original participant. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 16 of 48In most instances, participants will be scheduled the PET scan  the morning after the ADP session; 
however, due to issues that could occur with the PET scanner and chemistry on the morning of the 
scan, participants will need
 to be rescheduled. In  the event that a participant, who is a heavy drinker, 
needs to be rescheduled, they will be asked if they are willing to spend the evening before the 
rescheduled PET scan at the HRU to ensure
 that they meet the BAC  requirements the next morning 
and can complete the PET scan. They  will be admitted to the HRU between 3:00 and 4:00 pm and 
be discharged early the next morning to be escorted to  the PET Center. The healthy controls will not 
be invited to spend the night at the HRU since they do not  meet criteria for heavy drinking.
Follow up appointments: Subjects will participate in a one week follow-up appointment during which  
drinking over the past week will be determined using TLFB techniques and any remaining adverse 
events will be monitored. At this appointment a brief motivational intervention will be provided to 
encourage the subject
 to  address their alcohol problem and an immediate referral to treatment will be 
made if subjects are interested. Even though the subjects participating  in this study are not seeking 
treatment for their drinking, we feel that their participation in  this project provides us with a “teaching 
moment” to address their drinking behavior. We have found that similar brief advice resulted in 
decreases in alcohol-drinking behavior and increased motivation to quit drinking [48]. As previously 
done, this intervention will
 be based on the  principles of Miller’ s Motivational Enhancement Therapy
 (MET) [49]. We will also  provide them with the NIAAA brochure, “Rethinking Drinking.”
PET Meth ods:
Data A cquisition: PET sca ns will be conduc ted on the S iemens Hi gh Re solut ion Research 
Tomo graph (HRRT), the world‟s highest sensitivity  and resolution  human  brain PET scanner, 
with a pr actical resolution of 2.5-3 mm [50]. The  Yale Unive rsity PET center has conduc ted 
more than 400 human  scans on the HRR T with 20 diffe rent tracers.  The  excellent spatia l resolut ion 
of the HRRT will  be critica l in discerning small struc tures [51].  The HRR T is a list- mode machine 
so we c a n bin up the  dyna mic data anywa y we choose .   W e will create a graduated series 
of time- frames statin g with 30 sec ond fra mes and len gthening to 5 mi nutes.
Hardw are motion correction using the Vicra system (NDI Systems,  Waterloo, Onta rio) will be 
performed  on a n event-by-e vent basis.  Arter ial blood samples will be ac quired via a continuous 
withdra wal  device (PBS-101, Ve enstra Instrum ents, Joure , The N etherlands) for the first 5-10 
minutes of  the scan and manua lly the reafter, and ra dioac tive metabolites identifie d by HPL C. 
Plasma c once ntration of fre e parent tracer ove r time will be used for subse quent kinetic modeling 
analy sis.   Emissi on im ages will be reconstru cted iteratively with  built-in corrections for a ttenuation, 
normaliz ation, sca tter, randoms, dea dtime and subj ect motion [27].
PK sa mp les:  Two PK sa mples will be collected during the NTX PET session.  Da ys 5-11 we re chosen 
for th e  NTX  PET sca n to build some flexibility into scheduling but  max imize the likelihood t hat NTX 
levels  would be at equil ibrium, whic h will be confirmed by PK a nalyses. We will also look (on a  
population basis) for a relationship betwee n occupancy of KOR and NTX  (and 6(be ta)-naltrexol) 
levels and int eraction with FH of a lcoholi sm.
ROI analysis and pa rametric image generation:  Af ter data reconstruction with  all correc tions, a 
new summ ed  image (0-10 mi n) will be reg istered to the subjec t's T1 -weighted MR image, whic h will 
be regis tered to an MR  template so that PET and MR  images are in the same MNI space . ROI‟s, 
including the 13 examined in the Preliminary da ta section in Figures 4 and 6 will be take n from a 
template (Anatomical Autom atic Labeling (AAL ) for SPM2).
Possi ble  to dispense with arterial sampling, 2T model  fitting?:  Preliminary re sults sugge st that the 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 17 of 48cerebel lum may be an appropria te reference region. That is, it may be devoid of KOR.  It certainly
 has low specific bindi ng compar ed to the other regions  assayed.   Th e excellent agreement between 
BPND  estimate d by th e 2T model and by SRTM certainly sugge sts that in hea lthy controls,  we can 
assess  BPND at baseline with a reference region model using the ce rebellum as the reference region.  
If this turns out to be generally true (e.g., in larger samples, in heavy drinker s), then  we can just ifiabl y 
dispe nse with arterial sampling and analyze all data via reference tissue models (such as SRTM and 
SRTM2) .   As mentioned in Preliminary PET studi es, to validate the a bsenc e of KOR in the 
cereb ellum, unde r mul tiple scan condit ions (ba seline and NTX ) in clinical populations,  we will have 
to show  that VT of ce rebellum does not c hange betwee n baseline and NT X (i.e., th ere is no specific 
bindi n g to bl ock).
Possi ble to short en scan dura tion?:
Preliminary results also indi cate tha t we could shorte n the s can dura tion from 2 hrs (use d in our 
prelim inary sca ns) to 1 ½ hrs wit hout an y loss  of accuracy or prec ision.
Analysis of  Initial Cohort : Data from the f irst 6 FHP and 6 F HN subje cts scanned in year one of the 
proje ct (24 sc ans tot al) will be  analyzed to d etermine whether or not a  reference region e xists for 
[11C] LY2795050 ([11C] -PKAB ) and whe ther or not t he scan dura tion ca n be short ened without loss 
of prec ision of  the da ta.  T o be sure that a reference tissue mod el is app ropriate in our stud y, two f indings 
are requi red.  The V T of the putative r eference region must be unc hanged by blocki ng and the endpoin t, 
BPND, estimate d by the re ference region m ethod m ust ag ree with the B PND calcula ted usin g an AIF.  If 
the BPND v alues f rom 2T a nd SRTM c ontinue to show e xcellent agree ment, as a pplied to both ba seline 
and NT X s cans, the n we  may choose to discontinue  arterial sampling thereafter and re ly solel y on a 
referen ce region model f or analysis. After a preliminary analysis of the initial coho rt, we  will determine 
the a cqu isition protocol for the re mainin g 24 subjec ts.
Modeling of PET d ata to yield BP in re gions of inte rest and p arametric images
1. Standa rd kin etic mode ling approac hes: W ith plasma input func tion me asurements in a nd, we can 
compa re multip le standa rd me thods of e stimating our d esired endpoint s (BPND at baseline and diff erence 
in BPN D from bas eline to NTX ) to de termine the best model or t echnique [ 52] that  yields the lowe st 
variance  in the estimates.  Te ntative ly based on pre liminary da ta, w e expec t to use the ce rebellum as 
the ref erence region for re ference region me thods but we will c ontinue to investigate the possi bility of 
another (be tter) reference region.
2. Mea surin g  occupancy doe s not de pend on displace ment, ti me of  day:
The two pri mar y ima ging endpoint s (B avail and Occ upKappa) depend on our a bility to m easureBPND.  
It is important to note tha t the half-life of NTX is ver y lon g (10.5 hrs in the blood a t 100 mg oral dose) 
and subjec ts would h ave been on 100 mg for at least 2 da ys be fore the NTX scan.  Therefore , we can 
expe c t that NTX in the brain wil l be a t a nearly constant level prior to a nd duri ng the N TX-scan. Thus, 
we are n ot measurin g displ acement  of [11C ]LY2795050 ([11C] -PKAB ) but r ather, the effect of a 
pre-blockin g  (i.e., a measurement a t a second st eady state) .  This is an import ant distinction.  The latter 
does not d epend on the displ aceability of the tracer (a kinetic issue), and thus, we have not addressed it 
in our pre limin ary da ta. To be safe, howe ver, we  will scan eac h subje ct near mid -day for both bas eline 
and NT X s cans. Given  that the half-life of NTX is 10.5 hours and that it drops ~5% pe r hour, we will 
maintain the d elay  from m orning oral dose o f NTX to time of sca n for eac h subje ct at 2 hours w hich 
should coin cide with the tim e of pe ak NT X concentration in t he blood.
Asse ssments
a)Soci o-demographic/General Information: At intake , demographic data, medica l history, and 
family  psyc hiatric hist ory will be assessed w ith interviews and se lf-report f orms t hat provide 
data on a g e, race, socio economi c status, ma rital status, e duca tional and oc cupational levels, and 
significant medical history. The se are adapted from pre vious di agnostic a nd clinical studi es at 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 18 of 48this ce nter.
b)S
CID: The S tructured Cli nical Interview for DSM-IV (SC ID) [41] will be used to determine 
psychiatric diagnoses. T his interview a ssesse s DSM-IV c urrent and lif etime ps ychiatric diag noses  
for anx iety, mood, psyc hotic, alcohol a nd subst ance use, somato form, and e ating disorde rs.
c)Psyc hiatric  Family  Histor y by Int erview, the FHAM:  As a sourc e of pe digree infor mation, the 
psychiatric status (inc luding subst ance abuse/de pendence, mood di sorde r, ASPD, e tc.) of all first- 
and sec o nd-de gree biologica l relatives wil l be obta ined f rom each subjec t (inc luding pa rents) usin g
 the f am ily his tory m ethod ( FHAM-Fa mily Histor y Asse ssment Module) de veloped b y COG A. 
DSM-IV  criteria will be used to di agnose all biological family memb ers. The FHAM is a reliable 
method for obt aining fa mily hist ory inf ormation and the spec ificit y and se nsitivity of the FHAM 
for the dia gnosis of substanc e dependence is quit e good [42]. W e will administer the FHAM in 
three steps. First, t he struc ture of the fa mily pedigree is drawn a nd reviewe d with t he informant. 
Next, ps y chiatric screening questions a re asked a bout all re latives in t he pedigree. The n, ba sed on 
the re sponse s to the screening que stions, sympt om che cklists are completed for each first-degree 
relative, spouse, or other re lative we ll known to th e infor mant.
d)Time- Line  Follow-Ba ck Asse ssment Method: This i nterview  proc edure will be used to obt ain 
quantity /frequency alcohol consumption data  for e ach day durin g the 90 -day period prior to the 
study, durin g  the out patient stabilization pe riod, a nd durin g the thr ee-month follo w-up [38]. 
Subje cts are  given a blank ca lendar covering the tim e interval to be re -construc ted a nd are asked 
to reconstru ct retrospec tively their  drinking behavior ove r that interval. The pr ocess is facilitated 
by establishing anchor point s (e.g., holi days, an niversaries, major na tional eve nts, etc .). It c an be 
scored to provide the number of da ys on which va rious leve ls of c onsumpt ion occ urred. The 
time- line method ha s good t est-retest r eliability and good va lidity for ve rifiable  events. It has b een 
used in n ume rous st udies to co mpar e pre- to post - treatment drinkin g.
e) Craving Me asures:
Alcoh ol Urge Qu estionnaire ( AUQ) [45]: The AUQ is an 8 ite m questionna ire, derived from a  
larger 49 item " Q uestionna ire of Al cohol Ur ges," that a ssess es desire for a drink , expectation of  
positi ve effe c t from drink ing, and inabi lity to av oid drinking i f alcohol w as av ailable. The AUQ is 
a reliable and va lid scale for the mea surement of self-reported alcohol ur ges, and scores have been 
shown to be stron gly related to alc ohol dep endence severit y (as mea sured by ADS sc ores) and to 
cognitive pre occupation with alc ohol. Its brevity and time fra me for ratings (i.e ., right now) make s 
it suitable for a dministration during the alcohol dr inking pe riod.
Yale Craving Sc ale  (YCS ): We have been collaborating wit h Linda Bartoshuk t o develop thi s craving 
measure based on psyc ho physiol ogical scaling me thods. In he r work on individua l differences in the 
ability to taste bitterness, Dr. B artoshuk a nd colleagues [35] use d magnitude- m atching proc edures 
[35] in whic h part icipants matched the intensity of pe rceived bitt erness to sounds. By doing so, the  
probl em of di fferences in how l abels (e.g., ve ry strong) a re applied wa s circumvented by mak ing the 
comparison t o a standard that is unre lated to taste. The re sulting sc ale, Labeled Ma gnitude Scale 
(gLMS) [36], ha s been extended to measure hedonic ra tings for foods, a nd we have adapted it for
 rating craving for toba cco and alcohol. It is not subj ect to the ceiling effects that often occ ur in 
cra ving re search [39]. W e have been collecting craving da ta usin g this scale in our ongoing 
proje cts and  the findings from this sca le ha ve bee n found to pa rallel those o btain ed using the 
Alcohol Ur g e questionna ire. A sign ificant adv antage of th is scale is that following co mpletion of  
baseline training t o matc h perceived intensity of crav ing to the pe rceived brightness from the  sun, 
each assess ment timepoint only c onsists of a singl e visual  analog sc ale of c raving, making it very 
easy to ad minister.
e)Clinical  Institute Withdrawal Ass essment for  Alcohol -Revised (C IWA-Ar): This i s a modifie d, 
shorte r version of  the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Scale for Alc ohol wh ich is equa lly efficie nt 
and re l iable as the or iginal scale without a significant loss in acc uracy. The CIWA- Ar is a 10 
item scale th at contains alcohol withdra wal signs an d sympt oms that include na usea/vomiting, 
tremor, h eadache, anxiety, agitation, orienta tion, swea ting, a nd auditory, visual, a nd tac tile 
distur ban ces. This tool often gui des the c linical management of a lcohol  [30] wi thdra wal [29] 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 19 of 48and is used e x tensive ly in research on a lcohol withdr awal [31, 32].
f)Intellec tual  Func tioning : In orde r to obtain a n assessment of general intellectual f unctioning a nd 
a refer ence point for other  cognit ive a ssessm ents, we will complete the two-subtest s hort- form 
of Block D esign and Information fr om the W AIS-III [56]. This combination co rrelates at .87 
with the F ull  Scale IQ.
g)Impulsivity and Automatic  Motivational Measures:  Change from occasional to compulsive drug use 
may be less dependent on positive  reinforcement and more dependent on implicit processes that 
automatically evaluate the motivational significance of the alcohol cue for affect regulation. Such 
processes may include “fast” impulsive responses which automatically orient the individual to 
either approach or avoid the stimulus  and “slower,” more reflective processes involving 
conscious deliberation and emotion regulation. We  will assess using impulsive responding using 
measures which encompass several clinically  relevant core components such as rapidity of 
response, degree of planning, and disregard of future consequences.
S
elf-R eports:
a)The Behavioral Inhibition System/Behavioral Activation System (BIS/BAS) [57, 58] will 
assess behavioral
 activation and inhibition, which  have been proposed as biological systems 
underlying behavior and affect. This measure has been shown to have  good convergent, 
discriminant, and predictive validity in which it measures  sensitivity rather than the person’s 
typical experience. The BIS will be  used to tap the component of impulsivity related to 
           decreased sensitivity to the negative consequences of behavior.
b)Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (version 11) [59]: This 30 item self-report instrument provides a trait measure 
of impulsiveness and
 yields four scores: a total score, non-planning activity, cognitive 
   impulsivity, and motor impulsivity. Cronbach  alpha coefficients range from .79-.83.
Laboratory Measures:
a)Experiential Discounting Task (EDT) (Reynolds and Schiffbauer,  2004): This delay 
Discounting task exposes participants to choice consequences during test administration. 
The EDT
 involves multiple blocks of choices, one for each delay. Choices are made between 
A standard amount that is delivered immediately and is
 certain  and a probable amount that is
delayed and uncertain. The EDT is sensitive to various levels  of alcohol dosing (i.e., between
0 and 0.8g/kg) (Reynolds et al., 2006).
b)Cued Go-No Go task (Abroms et al., 2006) This task will be used to examine the ability to 
Inhibit prepotent responses.  Subjects are presented with 250 trials
 over 20 minutes in which  a go 
or a no-go target is preceded by a cue; the orientation  of which cues the probability that a go or 
no-go target will be displayed.  Dependent  measures include: number of failures to inhibit 
responding and speed of responding.  Alcohol has been shown to impair the ability  to inhibit 
responses This computerized task assesses a component of impulsivity related  to rapid, 
unplanned reactions to  stimuli before completing information processing. 
h)Biphasic A lcohol  Effects Scale [46]: This 14 it em self- report, a djective rating sca le will be use d to 
Measure the stimul an t and se dative effects of alcohol during  the priming dose during ADP 2. 
This i nstrument h as bee n found to be sensiti ve to memantine a nd na ltrexone 's effects on a lcohol 
intoxica tion [63, 61, 64].
j) Rat ings of Drinking B ehavior D uring the A lcohol Self-Admin istration Pe riod: Subjec ts will
be videota p ed durin g the alcohol se lf-administration porti on. The se videota pes will be ra ted b y 
two indepe ndent r aters who will indicate the onset and of fset of e ach sip of alcohol. Using  this 
data, de p endent measures will be construc ted inc luding time until the first si p and average time 
to consume e a ch drink.
k) Blood Alcohol  Levels: Blood sa mples will be drawn to mea sure plasma levels of blood a lcohol
(BAC) du ring  the priming  dose and durin g the a lcohol s elf-administration pa radigm. B lood 
samples will be  store d at -4°C a nd will be analyzed usin g gas chromatog raphic tec hniques a t the 
HRU Labor atory.
l) Psyc hoph ysiol ogical Measures: These will include hea rt rate and blood pressure moni tored 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 20 of 48using a Critikon Din amap whil e skin temp erature will be mea sured usin g Ye llow Spring s 
Instrume nts 4600 prec ision ther mom eter. The  cuff of the D inama p will be on the subje ct's 
domi nant arm whil e the probe of wil l be a ttached to t he middle f inger of t he subjec t's non- 
domi nant arm.  The se data will be further  used to exa mine the safety of using the m edication 
combi nation during alcohol self -administration.
l) Cold Pressor Task (Edens & Gil, 1995): To evaluate the ability of participants to deal  with a 
physiological stressor and  to examine pain thresholds in relation to medication effects and drinking 
behavior.   Subjects will be informed that the experimenters are investigating the body’s physiological 
response to cold water during nicotine withdrawal.  Subjects will be asked to immerse their right arms 
into ice water maintained at 3-4oC.   Subjects are asked to  raise their left hand when they begin to feel 
pain (pain threshold) and to  remove their hand from the water when they can no longer tolerate the pain 
(pain tolerance).   While their hand is immersed in water subjects are also asked to rate their pain on an 
analog scale of 0-100.
3.   Stat istical Consi deration s: De scribe the st atistical ana lyses that support t he study design.
Outcomes for this study will  be collected using scannable forms (Teleforms). The scanned forms 
will be processed through the Teleforms software and exported to a database on a  secure 
computer. Error checking and data validation will occur weekly and  any problems will be 
queried and resolved immediately.  Drs. Krishnan-Sarin will receive monthly  data quality reports 
to check for completeness and accuracy  of key demographic and prognostic variables, as well 
as rates of recruitment, retention, and follow-up.   S tatis tical tests will be conduc ted usin g SAS 
v9.1 and SP SS v16 (or lat er) and will be performed a t 2-tailed alpha le vel of 0.05
Prim ary A i m 1. Occ upanc y of KOR by NTX an d drin king. This aim  seeks to de termine  the  
degree to which oc cup ancy  of  ka ppa  by  NTX  media tes responsi vity to NTX in heavy drink ers. 
Responsi vity to NTX is defined as the change in the total number of drinks consume d in the NTX 
ADP ve rsus  the baseline ADP. T ests for media tion will be conduc ted using the regression st rategies 
described initially Baron a nd Ke nny [53], a nd the more recent elabor ation by Kra emer et al. [54]. 
The pr opose d medi ator (i.e., the potential me chanism of change), occ upancy of KORs, is measured 
as the fractional change in BPND before a nd after treatment with NT X. The analyses will determine 
whether occupancy is associa ted with a ) NTX t reatment, and b ) NTX  responsi vity.
Prim ary Ai m  2.  Fa mily History of Alcoho lism as a m oderator : This aim seeks t o determine 
if the relationship  between NTX responsi vity and oc cupancy of KOR is altered by FH status.  
FHP a nd  FHN will be compar ed on NTX responsi vity and occ upancy of KOR. Tests for 
modera tion will  be conduc ted usin g the strategies described by Ba ron a nd Ke nny [53], a nd the 
elabor ated  by Krae mer et  al.  [54].  The primary  tests  will  be  whether  there  is  a  significant  
FH  by  dose inte raction on NT X response a nd occ upancy of KOR.
Secon dary Aim 1. Basel ine KOR  diffe rences. Th is aim seeks to determine if ba seline leve ls of 
KOR dif fer between FHP a nd FHN hea vy drinke rs, and are related to either drinki ng in  baseline 
or NTX AD P.  FHP a nd FHN groups will be compare d usin g chi-squar e tests  for c ategorical variables, 
and using  t-tests or  Mann- Whitney tests for c ontinuous va riables. All continuous va riables 
will be ex amined for a dherence to the norma l distribution using  norm al proba bility plots  
and Kolmo gor ov-Sm irnov tests. If norma lity is not satisfied and tra nsformations  do not he lp 
with achievin g normalit y, alternative analytic strategies will be conside red such as generalized 
estimatin g equations or nonpa rametric methods. The relation ship betwee n baseline KO R and 
drink ing will be ex amined via Pea rson produc t-mom ent co rrelations.
Secon dary Aim s 2 and 3. Sca n dura tion and re ference region.  We will look for c orrelations 
between BPND estimates based on 2T model with full AIF a nd all data vs alternative models and 
data r anges.    Group variances  in  ba seline KOR  a t  or lowe r than 2T estimate s  will permit 
adopti on of  simpler models.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 21 of 48Auxiliary Aim 1.  Kappa  and be havioral indicato rs relev ant for alcohol ism. This aim wi ll examine 
the c or relations between occ upancy of KOR a nd alcohol c raving, sti mulation and se dation.  A se ries 
of Spe arm an rank-orde r and Pe arson c orrelation an alyses will be conduc ted for this aim.
Power an alysis:  The s ample size was based on t he powe r calcula tions for the  hypothese s of (a ) 
reduc e d drinking in the NTX 100 c ondit ion, and (b) powe r to detect an interaction by FH. Powe r 
calcula tions we re generated using G*Pow er softwa re Version 3.0 [55]. E ffect sizes were estimated 
based  on the preliminary FH a nd NTX effects on drink ing be havior in the ADP de scribed in 
[6] and in our pre liminary studi es.  The effect size for the effect of FH is .91. To de tect this effect 
size at  alpha= .05 with 80% powe r, a tot al of 16 pa rticipa nts would be re quired for e ach arm. 
Therefor e the propose d sample size of n= 18 pe r arm would be sufficient to de tect diffe rences in 
drinkin g betwee n FHP and FHN a t the 100 mg dose of na ltrexone .
SECTION VI: RE SEARCH  INV OLVING DRUG S, DE VICE S, B IOLOGICS & P LACEB OS
Are the re any invest igational device s used o r inve stigational proc edures performed in a YNHH 
Operating Room?  Ye s No If Yes, ple ase be awar e of the following requireme nts:
a.  A YNHH OR Ne w P roduc t/Trial Reque st Form m ust be c ompleted.  P lease contact the OR 
Mate rials Ma nager, Chr is Baillargeon, a t 203 -688-8912 for more  informat ion on thi s require ment;
b. Your re qu est must be re viewe d and approve d by the O perating Room N ew Te chnology
Comm ittee  before patients may be scheduled; and
c. The not ice of approva l from the OR Ne w Technolo gy Comm ittee must be submit ted to t he
HIC for  the pr otocol file.
1.   Ide ntifica tion of Dr ug, De vice or Biologic: What is (are) the name (s) of the drug(s), 
device(s) or biol ogic( s) be ing used? Identify whe ther FDA a pprova l has be en gra nted and 
for wha t indication(s).
Naltrex one is an F DA a pprove d drug that is used in the trea tment of a lcoho lism and opioid 
addiction.
[C-11] LY2795050 ([C -11]PKAB ) PET ra diotracer to ima ge kappa opioid rece ptor,  Produc tion 
of [C -11] LY2795050 ([C -11]PKAB ) will be pe rforme d with t he permission of Yale-New 
Haven Hospit al RDRC
All protoc ols whi ch utilize a drug, de vice or biolog ic not a pprove d by, but regulate d by, the FDA m ust 
provide the foll owin g information: Not appli cable to this re search project
i.   W hat is  t he Investigational New Drug (IND) or Inve stigational Device Exemption (I DE) numbe r
assig ned by th e FDA? Produc tion of [C -11]L Y2795050 ([C -11]PKAB ) will be 
performed  with t he permission of Ya le-New Ha ven Hospita l RDRC
ii.   For IDE‟s: Did the FDA approve this IDE as a Category A (experimental/investigational)  or as a
Category B (non-e xperimen tal/investigational)?   Not a pplicable.
iii.  W ho hol ds the IND or IDE?
The c linic al investigation of a  drug produc t that is law fully ma rketed in the United St ates ma y be 
exempt f rom the re quire ments for fil ing a n IND. If ther e is no IND a nd an exemption is being sought, 
compl ete the foll owin g:  N/A
i.Is the inte nt ion of the  investig ation to re port to the F DA a s a we ll contro lled stu dy in support 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 22 of 48of a ne w indic ation for use or to be  used to support any oth er significa nt ch ange in the labeling for 
the drug?       Y es       No
ii.  If the dr ug that is unde rgoing invest igation i s law fully mar keted as a prescrip tion drug produc t, is 
the intention of the inve stigation to suppo rt a sig nifica nt change in the advertising for the produc t?
Yes No
iii.  Doe s the  investig ation invo lve a  route of  administration or dosa ge level or use in popul ations or other 
factor tha t significantly increases the r isks (or de creases the a cceptability of the risks ) associa ted w ith the 
use of the  drug produc t? Yes No
iv. Will  t he investig ation be c onduc ted in c ompl iance with t he require ments fo r inst itutional ( HIC) 
eview a nd with t he require ments for  informe d consen t of the FDA re gulations (21 CF R Part 50 a nd 21 
CFR Part  56)?      Yes       No
v.   W ill the investig ation be c onduc ted in compl iance with t he requirement s regarding promotion a nd 
charging for inv estigational drug s? Ye s No
2.   Ba ckgro und Infor matio n: Provide a description of pre vious human use , known risks , and da ta 
addressing dosa ge(s), int erval(s), route (s) of a dministration, a nd any other  factors that m ight influe nce 
risks. If thi s is the first t ime this drug is being a dministered to humans, include  relevant da ta on a nimal 
models.
Naltrex one:
Naltrex one, an opioi d antagonist, is wide ly used in the t reatment of opioid a ddiction and mor e 
recently  has bee n found t o be beneficial in t he treatment of a lcoholism.  Nume rous st udies ha ve 
found na l trexone use to be safe and rar ely associated with t oxici ty or se vere side e ffects.  The 
most fre quent reported side effects are gastroint estinal in nature.  Those  inclu de epigastric pain, 
nausea and vom iting.  Othe r, less fre quent side effects include ne rvousne ss, dizz iness, hea daches, 
blurred vis ion, low energy, fa tigue, slee piness, joi nt and muscle pain and insomnia.  He patotoxicit y, 
the most serious potential si d e effect, has b een shown in st udies using very high dose s of na ltrexone 
(1400 to 2100 m g  per week).  At the dose s used in this study na ltrexone  has not bee n reporte d to 
produc e  hepatotoxic e ffects.  Howe ver, we  will monitor liver func tion tests prior to the stud y and 
exclude indiv idu als with evidenc e of sig nificant hepatocellular injury (AST, A LT >3x norm al 
established in pre g nant and nursing wome n, they will be excluded from pa rticipa tion.  Na ltrexone 
can also p recipitate or exacerbate opia te withdra wal, as a results subj ects with abuse  or de pendence 
on opiate s will be ex cluded f rom the stud y on the  basis of se lf-report a nd urine drug scr eens.
Since n altrexone is an opia te antagonis t, alternative nonopioi d methods of a nalgesia  can be used.
In an emergency situation re quiri ng opioi ds, the amount  of opio ids nece ssary for a nalgesia may be 
greater than usu al, and th e resulting re spira tory de pression m ay be deeper and more prolon ged.  As a  
result, a rapidly acting analgesic w hich mini mizes respiratory de pression is pre ferred and the amount 
of the a nalg esic administration titrated to t he needs of t he patient in a setting equipped and staf fed for 
cardiopulmona ry resuscitation.  As a re sult, subj ects will  be given a ca rd showing that they ma y be 
receiving na ltrexone .  This ca rd wil l provide de tailed in form ation to m edical personne l describing the 
special pr ecautions ne cessary in t he event that the subject should re quire pa in management.  In 
addition, this ca rd wil l have  a code numbe r on it tha t can be used to identify whic h medica tion 
the su bject is on.  A phone number  of the pharmacy and for the ph ysicia n on c all at the Connec ticut 
Menta l Hea l th Center will be listed on the ca rd in the event of a n emergency in whic h it is nece ssary 
to determ ine whether the subjec t is on ac tive naltrexone .
[C-11] LY2795050 ([C -11]PKAB )
Dosime try :
A to tal of 4 human subjec ts (2 M, 2 F, 73 ± 16 kg) unde rwent whol e body dyna mic PET 
scanning  on  the  Siem ens  ECAT  HR+  scanner  following  iv  bolus  injection  of  [11C]PKAB 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 23 of 48
(injec ted a c tivity = 282 ± 68 MB q).  Subjec ts were scanned for 150 to  170 m in in a sequence of 12 or 
14 pa sses  with 8, 9 or 11 be d posit ions acc ording to their sizes, covering each subjec t from top of the 
head to mid-thigh.  Sca ns we re reconstr ucted and visuall y inspec ted for orga n activity conce ntrations 
exceeding bac kground l evel.  Included or gans we re liver, kidneys, urina ry bladder contents, heart, 
gallbladde r, b rain, splee n, thyroid s, gona ds and re d mar row (fe mur).  Re gions of int erest were drawn on 
these organs and mea n activity values comput ed in order to form  time ac tivity curves of ac tivity 
conce ntrat ion (kB q/cm3).
Within- pass dec ay correction wa s removed to reflect actual activity in each orga n, and cumul ated 
activi ty (Bq*hr/c m3) comput ed as trapezoid sums for da ta from the scan plus  physic al decay for the 
tail portions  after  the scan period.  These were multiplied by the organ volum es of a standa rd 70 kg 
reference math ematica l phantom , norma lized by subjec t  mass  /  70  kg  a nd  then  no rmalized  to  
injected ac tivi ty to obtain  orga n residenc e times (also called N), (hr).  The se we re entered into 
Olinda softwa re to obtain  absorbe d  doses  in  all  orga ns.     Ele ctron  dose s  to  the stom ach we re 
adjusted to reflect the fact that activity wa s obser ved in stom ach wa ll rather than contents.
Absorbe d dose s d erived from the 70 kg re ference man 
phantom were expressed as mea n ± st andard de viation 
across the 4 subje cts.  Un der RDRC exposure limits as 
specified in C FR 361.1, ( For sin gle stud y, 5 re m per orga n 
or 3 re m to selec ted orga ns unde rgoing ra pid c ell division, 
whic hever is less ) gallbladder is the dose- limiting orga n 
with sin gle stud y dose  of 26 mC i.  Applied to the 55 kg 
adult female phantom (Table 2) , gallbladde r is stil l the 
critical organ, with sing le stud y dose limit of 23 mC i.
PET Imaging Re sults –I maging of KOR S ites
Introdu ction
The
 prel iminary da ta in this sec tion re present our ini tial 
experience with the new PET  tracer [11C]LY2795050 ([C -
11]-PKAB ) in humans and monke ys.  A number  of opioi d 
receptor radiotracers are currently available for PET 
imaging in humans: [11C]carfentanil(m u-spe cific), 
[11C]/[18F]dipre norphine (nonspec ific), [11C]bupre norphine 
(nonspe cific), [18F]cyclofox y (mu, kappa), and 
[11C]meth ylnaltrindole (delta) [33]. None of thes e existing 
trace rs is selective for KOR. So fa r, the re sults with 
[11C]LY2795050 ([C -11]-PKAB ) sugge st that it is taken up 
consistent with the known dist ribution of KOR [34-36]; It 
also appea rs to have good c ontra st to background 
prope rties, good t est/retest reproduc ibility, and th ere may 
be a reference region with little to no KOR.Figure 2. Top row: MRI images of an individual subject. 
Middle row:0 -1 0 min summ ed PET i mage. Bottom: 60-120 
min summ ed PET i mage .   Le ft column: axial slice; middle 
column:  coronal slice; right c olumn: sagittal slice.   The 
amygdala is bri ght on al l three views at l ate time.  The 
cingul ate c ortex is apparent on the coronal  image at late time.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 24 of 48
Occupan cy of KOR by NTX – or simply “occupancy” - is measured as a percentage change in
BPND f rom the baseline condit ion to the drug c ondit ion (in our ca se, a week of NTX treatment).
If we assu me that neither the KD nor the fND of th e tracer change in an ind ividual  between scans, 
then occupancy can be seen to be the fractional change in available
receptors due  to the drug.
Total Volu me  of Dis tributio n, V T, is a re lated concept to BP.  V T is 
the e quilibrium ratio of the c oncentration of pa rent tracer in tissue 
to pare nt tracer in plasma .
b.   In vi tro results
Radioligand  competi tion assays we re conduc ted to assess the in 
vitro   bindi ng   a ffinities   of   L Y2795050   to   opioid   re ceptors.
LY2795050 is a KOR antagonist and displa ys high bi nding affinity 
and great selectivity to KOR in vitro (Ki  = 1.37, 87. 3, and 475 
nM, re spectively, for ka ppa, mu, and de lta receptors) [38].
c.Test /retest ima ging in hu mansFigure 3 .   Se lected regional time activity curves for 
a single subject; amygdala (AMY, pink, „1‟), cerebellum 
(CER,  blue,  „2‟),   and  caudate  (CAU,  orange,   „3‟). 
Smoot h curves through da ta represent fits of 2T model.
Metabolite-co rrected  arterial  pl asma samp les  we re  use d
 for input fu nction.
Seven  healthy volunt eers, age = 26 ± 6 (5 male s and 2 females), participa ted in a test-retest study 
of [11C]LY2795050 ([C-11]-PKAB ), an antagonist PET radiotracer for the KOR.  Each subject 
received two bolus injections of up to 20 mCi of radioac tivity and mass dose of < 10 µg for each 
injection.  The injected activity dose was 13.0 ± 4.6 mCi, specific activity wa s 0.59 ± 0.22 
mCi/nmol  at time of inj ection, and injection mass was 8.8 ± 1.2 µg across all subjec ts.  Arterial 
(plasma) input function (AIF) curves were prepared from  arterial samples taken during the study. 
Meta bolite fraction was applied to yield  an input curve for the native tracer only.   BPND 
throug hout the brain (calcula ted two different ways) wa s used as the study endpoin t.   Further
details of our stand ard image processing methods a re given below under „PET methods ‟.
d.   Distribution of [11C]LY2795050 ([C -11]-PKAB ) in t he brain
Figure 2 shows the early- and late-ti me distributions of [11C]LY2795050 ([C-11]-PKAB ) in the 
brain.  The early image is an average of the 0-10 min data (middle row); it reflects initial entry 
into the brain via blood flow. The late  image is an average of the 60-120 min data (bottom row) 
and reflects preferential retention  of the tracer by bra in regions containing specific binding sites 
for the trace r.  Rank order of activity uptak e was as follows:  amygda la (AMY) > cingulate cortex 
(CIN) > globus pallidus (PAL ) ~ putame n (PUT ) > tempo ral cortex (TEM) ~ frontal cortex 
(FRO) > hippoca mpus (HYP) ~ caudate (CAU ) > cerebellum (CER). The distribution of trace r at 
late time a grees with the known dist ribution of kappa receptors in t he brain [34-36].
e.   Time -activity curves: for use w ith kinetic mode ls
Estimates of kinetic pa ramete rs re quire regional 
tracer conce ntration values over time.  Automatic 
regions-of-in terest (ROI) we re applied (see PET 
methods)   to   the   dyna mic   emission   im ages   to
generate  time-activity  curves (TACs) in 13 ROI‟s.
The time-ac tivity curves (TAC) were fitted to the 4-
parameter, 2 -tissue compar tment model (2T) using 
the metabolite-corrected input  function.   Examples 
of fitted TACs are shown in Figure 3.   All of the
Figure 4. Reg ional estimates of BPND  by 2T model (blue 
bars)  and  by  SRTM  (red  bars).    Agree ment  between 
models is high and var iability across subj ects (error bar s
are SD = 7 - 8%) i s quit e good for ne urore ceptor tracers.regions wer e fit well by the 2T model.  The rapid 
efflux from the cerebellum compa red to the ot her 
regions sugge sts that th e cerebellum has little to no 
specific bindi ng and is  there fore a possi ble reference
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 25 of 48region.  Ho wever, the definitive  identification  of  a  reference  region  must  be  
based  on displ acement e xperimen ts.
f. Regional distribution of  desired endpoint : KOR a t base line (B PND)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 26 of 48Figure 7 .  Correlation be tween estimates 
of BPND using either a full 120 m in dataset 
(X-ax is) or onl y 90 m inutes (Y-a xis) of T AC 
data.
We  compu ted  BPND   in  each  ROI  two 
ways. One method re quires the use of AIF 
and the other does not.   From the fits of 
the TAC da ta via 2T model with AIF, we 
calcula ted BPND  as the relative  difference 
in volum es of dis tribution betwee n the 
target ROI and the putative re ference 
region, in this case, cerebellum: (VT(ROI)
– V T  (CER))  / VT(CER).   B PND  was also
comput ed  using the Simplified Re ference
Tissue Model (S RTM) using  the 
cerebellum as the re ference region. The 
regional distribution  of BPND based on 2T 
and SRTM is shown in Figure 4.  Figure 4 
shows that the methods are in close 
agreement and the variability, by region, 
across the c ohort i s small.                         a.                                                  b.
F
igure 5 a. Effe ct of pre-block with unl abeled  KOR antagoni st 
drug.   B aseline TACs for c erebellum (CER), caudate (CAU), a nd 
front al cort ex (FR O)   (sol id circles, ope n circles, diamond, al l in 
red).  Curve s after pre -block  (blue) all show re duce d spec ific 
binding an d are nearly indi stingui shable from  CER at base line.  
Curves are from one animal and ar e normal ized to injected activity 
dose.   b. B PND  is reduce d dose- dependently acc ording to dose of 
specific KOR  antagonist in bot h CAU an d FR O region.
g.   Pre-blocki n g of [11C ]LY2795050 ([C -11]-PKAB ): can we  
detect drug occ upancy at kappa sites?
We c a n verify that  uptake and re tention of [11C] LY2795050
([C-11]-PKAB ) is due to specific bindi ng to KOR by looki ng 
at pre- blocking studi es with  well-characterized (unla beled) 
drugs. Pre- blocking stud ies were performed  in 3 rhe sus 
monke ys.   The e x perimen ts were sim ilar to what is 
being propose d  herein to mea sure occupancy of KOR by 
NTX .  In th e  preliminary studi es, rhe sus monke ys we re 
given  iv, 1mg/kg naloxone, a non-se lective KOR  antagonist ,  
or  varyin g  do ses  of  L Y2456302,  a  se lective ka ppa  
antag onist  de veloped  by  a n  industr y  pa rtner.  Ex ample 
results  for the blocki ng studi es are shown in two parts of 
Figur e 5. Fig ure 5a: At baseline, regions such as CAU  and 
FRO app ear to ha ve more uptake than CER. Unde r 
pre-block with  the specific KO R antagonist , TACs forFigure 6.  Pe r cent change in BPND from test to retest 
scans fo r  bot h  2T (blue bars)  and  SR TM  
(red  ba r s)  mo dels. Ea ch region is base d on the average 
of 7 subj ects. Te st/retest variability is actual ly slightly 
better for SR TM estimates than for 2T .
two target  regions  (CAU and  FRO) are nea rly identical to the putative reference region 
(CER) in the unblocke d case because they reflect only (the same) non- displ aceable binding. T he 
data from these two experimen ts on the  same animal have bee n norma lized by inj ected activity.   
The behavior of the regions shown is typica l.  These data are sugge stive, but not definitive 
proof that CER is a valid reference region (See ”SRTM vs. 2T”,immedi ately below for 
criteria).  Further eviden ce of spec ific bindi ng in CAU and FRO  is shown
in 5b.  BPN D declines in a dose -dependent manner as the spec ific KOR antagonist  dose is 
increa sed from l ow to hi gh.
h.   SRTM vs 2T: C an we  use a reference region m odel?
A ref erence region mode l such as SRTM has a number of practical advantages, if its use is 
appropri ate.  Its use obviate s the need for arterial sampling, thus decreasing the risk to the patient and 
simplifyi ng the PET experimen t.  Figure 4 shows that estimation of BPND via SR TM and 2T is in 
good agreement  and that use of the re ference region method would be just ified.  In this case, CER was 
used as the reference region.  The correlation based on all regions over all subje cts was BPND 
(SRTM) = 1.01*B PND(2T), R2 = 0.98,
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 27 of 48
whic h confir ms near-perfe ct agreement.  Note : this agreement between the 2T and SRTM does 
not validate the CER  as a true reference region.  It indi cates a valuabl e fact: the two estimate s of 
BPND are consistent  (they mi ght both be biase d for different reasons).  For many purpose s, 
consistenc y may be sufficient to argue for a dopti on of
the SRTM or other refe rence method. For th e reference 
region to be va lidated (i.e ., shown to be de void of 
specific bindi ng), we must also show that VT of the 
region does not change in the presence of a pre - 
blocking drug suc h as NTX.
i.Percent change between „test‟ and „retest‟
scans: How small a n effect can we detect?
Small  test/re test  variability is essential for us to be able 
to  de tect  small  dif erences  be tween  condit ions.    For 
each subjec t, the test-retest variability was measured by 
comput ing the ratio of the difference between binding 
potentials to their means:
100*(B PND(TEST)  - BPND(RETE ST))
[ ½ ( B PND( TEST) + BPND(RETE ST) ) ].
The mean  test-retest variability indic es were 8.2% (2T )
and   7.2%   (SR TM)   indica ting   that   BPND     values
increa sed during the retest scan (conduc ted in the 
afternoon of the same day) compar ed to the test scan, 
across all regions. Figure 6 shows the test/re test 
compar ison as an average value over subjec ts for all 
regions.Figure  8.  T op  row:  MRI images  (axial,  coronal ,  sag ittal)  of  indi vidual
subject. M iddle row: Correspondi ng B PND images estimated using SRTM 
Bottom: Correspondi ng BP ND images estimated using SRTM2. They are 
slightly less noi sy tha n SR TM, as w ould be expected.
j.90 mi n vs 120 min r esults: Can we shorte n the sca n?
A 1 ½  hr PET scan is slightly less burde nsome for the subjec t than a 2 hr scan and given the 
fairly rapid kineti cs of the tracer, it seems worth conside ring the shorte r scan.   Therefore , we 
compare d results of BPND estimates from the SRTM model using the full 120 min worth of scan 
data and using only 90 minutes of data.  The answe rs were nearly identical.  The correlation plot 
between the two families of estimate s is shown in Figure 7.   We conclude from  this exercise that 
we need only to scan for 90 minutes  in each scan session.  A shorte r scan time could improve 
subjec t compli ance.
k.   B PN D images
One adv antage of having a kinetica lly well-behaved tracer, such as [11C]-LY2795050 ([C-11]- 
PKAB ), with sufficient signal to noise in the TACs for each pixel, is that we can produc e pix el- 
by-pix el parametric ima ges of BPND.  Figure 8 shows BPND (created with two variants of the 
SRTM model) for one of the subje cts in our test /retest cohort.  The mi ddle row in the figure 
presents three canonic al view s of the  BPND estimated by SRTM; the bottom row re peats the same 
view s of B PND images estimate d via SRTM2 whic h imposes a constra int that the apparent efflux
rate parameter, k2‟ be the same at each voxel.   The constraint has the effect of reducing the
variance in the image whic h ma y furthe r aid our a bility to detect slight diffe rences between
patient populations  or conditions.  The images show that there is discernible specific bindi ng of 
tracer in c ortical areas and max imal specific b inding in t he amygda la and cingulate  cortex .
Summary:  As we have shown above , we hav e developed and validated a specific KOR ligand 
that has high spec ificity and se nsitivity and that can be c ombine d with our establ ished AD P to 
evaluat e the hy potheses that are ce ntral to the current proposal.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 28 of 483.   Sou rce: a) Identify the sou rce of the drug, de vice or biolo gic to be used.
All st ud y medi cations (na ltrexone ) will be purc hased from appr opria te ve ndors thr ough 
the Investigational Pharmac y of YNHH.
Produc tion of  [C-11]L Y2795050 ([C -11]PKAB ) will be pe rformed w ith the permission of Y ale-Ne w
Haven Hospita l RDRC
b) Is the dr u g or de vice provide d free of charge? Ye s No
If yes, by whom?
4.   P repara tion and Use : Describe the m ethod of pre paration, stor age, stability info rmation, a nd for 
parenteral produc ts, m ethod of ster ilization and method of testing sterility and pyroge nicity.
The start ing material for the produc tion of [C-11]PKAB / [C-11]L Y2795050 will be provided by 
Eli Lilly and compan y. Manu facturing of [C-11]L Y2795050 ([C-11]PKAB ) will be carried out at 
the Ya le PET C enter.
[11C]Carbon  dioxide is pr oduce d by bombar dment of a target conta ining a mixture of nitroge n and
0.5 – 1% oxyge n with a ccelerated pr otons.  [11C]CO 2 is then conve rted to [11C]HCN using an 
autom ated c hemistry de vice from G E Me dical Systems.  R eaction of [11C]HCN w ith the iodo
precur sor L Y2806578 unde r Pd(0)-ca talyzed condit ions provid es the ra diolabeled be nzonitrile 
intermediate [C-11]L Y2893110, whic h is h ydrol yzed under ba sic conditions an d in t he presence of 
hydroge n peroxide to pr oduc e the radioac tive drug produc t [C-11]L Y2795050 ([C -11]PKAB ).
The prod uct is puri fied by se mi-preparative HPLC and f ormul ated w ith a mixture of ethanol a nd 
saline (fin al etha nol concentrati on less than 10%).  The final pr oduc t solution is fil tered thro ugh a
0.22 um m embra ne f ilter for ter minal sterilization be fore its release for disp ensing and IV
adminis tration.
The c arbon-11 lab eled drug produc t [C-11]L Y2795050 ([C -11]PKAB ) has a ra dioactive half-life 
of 20 mi n and ha s been demonstr ated to be stable for at least 65 mi n after preparation and 
formu lation.  An e xpira tion time of 60 mi n post -formul ation will be assigned to t he drug produc t.
For ea c h batch of the  radioac tive drug produc t [C-11]L Y2795050 ([C -11]PKAB ) that will be use d 
for human stud y, pyroge n and ste rility tests wil l be pe rforme d.  Pyroge n testing will be conduc ted 
in house a t the Yale PET Center using FDA-a pprove d method.  Sterility test wil l be pe rformed by 
the Ya le Micr obiolo gy La boratory.
The ra dioactive drug produc t [C-11]L Y2795050 ([C -11]PKAB ) will be produce d accordin g to t he 
local Dru g Maste r File and to l ocal qualit y control proce dures in ef fect at the Yale PET Ce nter. 
Produc tion of [C -11]L Y2795050 ([C -11]PKAB ) will be performed w ith the permission of Y ale- 
New Ha ven Hospit al RDRC
5.   Use  of Placebo: Not appli cable to this r esearch project
Provide a justification whic h addresses th e foll owing :
a.   De s cribe the sa fety and efficacy of othe r available th erapies (if a ny).
This i s not a tr eatment trial or a treatment see king population of hea vy drin kers
b.   State the m aximum total len gth of time a  participant m ay receive pla cebo while on the study.
No place bo
c.   Addre ss the greatest po tential ha rm tha t may come to a participa nt as a result of not rece iving 
effective therapy (im media te or delayed onse t.)
Not a tre a tment seeking population
d.   De scribe  the proce dures that ar e in pl ace to safeguard participa nts re ceiving plac ebo.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 29 of 48Not a tre a tment seeking population
6.   Use  of Contr olled Substance s:
Will th is research projec t invol ve the use of contro lled subst ances in human  subjec ts?
Yes No  Se e  instructions to view c ontrolle d subst ance listings.
If yes, is the use of the controlle d subst ance consid ered:
Therapeutic: The  use o f the c ontrolle d subst ance, withi n the c ontex t of the re search, ha s the 
potential to ben efit the re search participa nt.
Non T her apeutic: Note, the use of a c ontrolle d substanc e in a non the rapeutic research stud y 
invol ving human subjec ts may require  that the inv estigator obt ain a Laborator y Research License. 
Examples include c ontrolle d subst ances used for ba sic ima ging, obse rvation or bioche mical studies 
or other non-the rapeutic purpose s. Se e Instru ctions for furth er information.
7.   Continuat ion of Dr ug T herapy Afte r Study Clos ure Not appli cable to this p roject
Are subj ects provid ed the oppor tunity to continue  to rece ive th e study drug(s) a fter the study has 
ended? Ye s No
If yes, des cribe the condit ions unde r which c ontinued access to stud y drug(s) m ay apply as well as 
condit ions for termination of such a ccess.
SECTION VII: HUM AN SUB JECTS
1.   Recr uitmen t Procedures: De scribe how pote ntial subj ects will be identifie d, contac ted and 
recruited.
56 hea vy drink ers, drinki ng on a t least 4 da ys per week (20-45 we ekly standard drinks for wome n 
and 25-70 for m en), an equal number of f amily hist ory positi ve and family history negative (a s 
specified by the FHAM) will be recruited for the stud y. All subjec ts will be 21-65 ye ars of ag e, 
physi cally hea lthy non-trea tment-seeking hea vy drinke rs. Volunt eers wil l be recruited thro ugh 
advertiseme nts in loca l new spape rs, posti ngs in communi ty locations (ba rs, coffee shops, groc ery 
stores) and advertisements on fre e comm unity TV c hannels. Additionally, 25 healthy controls who 
report drinking socially will be recruited to match the demographics and background of the heavy 
drinkers, including family history of alcoholism; these controls will be light social drinkers 
consuming less than or equal to 20 drinks per week for women, and less than 25 drinks per week 
for men in the past 90 days and not meet past or current criteria DSM-IV abuse or dependence 
criteria, for the past 5 years.  The remainder of the exclusion criteria will be similar to the heavy 
drinkers.
1. Indic ate recruitme nt methods be low.  Atta ch copies of a ny re cruitme nt mate rials that will be use d.
Flyers Intern et/Web Posti ngs Radio
Poster s Mass E- mail Solicitation Telephone
Letter Departmen tal/ Center Website Television
Medica l Re c ord R eview Departmen tal/ Center Research Boards Newspa p er
Departmen tal/ Center Newsletters Web-Based C linical Trial Registries
Othe r (des cribe): Clinicaltrials.gov Re gistry (do not send m aterials to HIC )
2. Asse ssme nt of  Cur rent He alth P rovider Relation ship for HIP AA Consid eration : 
Does the Investigator or any m ember  of th e research tea m ha ve a direct existing clinical 
relationship wit h any pot ential sub ject?
Yes, som e  of the  subj ects If yes, describe the nature of this relationship.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 30 of 48No
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 31 of 48
3. Subje ct Population Provide  a detailed de scription of the targeted invol vement of human subje cts 
for thi s research proj ect.
56 hea lth y hea vy drin kers who a re not cu rrently see king trea tment for their  drinking behavior, 
between 21-65 ye ars of a ge, family hist ory positi ve or fa mily hist ory ne gative. Also, 10 
healthy controls between 21-65 years of age matched on demographics including family 
history of alcoholism. 
4.   Inc lusion/Ex clusion Cr iteria: What are the c riteria use d to dete rmine subject inclusion or 
exclusion? How will eligibility be determined, and by whom?
Inclusion criteria: 
Ages 21-65
Able
 to rea d E nglish at 6th g rade level or higher and to complete  stud y evaluations
Meet DSM -IV c riteria for alcohol abuse or de pendence (assessed using the 
SCID)
Family  history c riteria (assesse d using the FHAM; see Asse ssment sec tion)
Family  history posi tive subjec ts: At least one  first-degree relative 
with alcoholism as de termined by the FHAM
Family  history ne gative subjec ts:  No first de gree relative with a lcoholism and no 2nd 
degree relative with alcoholism unless the participant  cannot answer details about the 2nd 
degree family member’s drinking consequences on the FHAM.
   Ave rage week ly alcohol consumpti on of standa rd drinks of a t least 25 -70 drinks f or men 
and 20-65 drinks for women
   No mor e than 3 d ays abstinence/week in orde r to m aximize the likelihood that subjec ts will 
choose  to drink durin g the la boratory se ssions
Exclusion criteria :
   Indivi du als who a re seeking alcohol tr eatment or have been in alc ohol t reatment wit hin the 
past 6 m onths
DSM-IV de p endence criteria for oth er substance s, other than ni cotine in the past year
Posit ive for opiat es, cocaine, be nzodiazepines, or ba rbitura tes at more than one appointment
Quantitative marijuana levels going up from PE  to MR appointment
Regular use  of psyc hoac tive dr ugs in cluding anxiolytics and  antidepressants
Psyc hotic  or oth erwise se verely psyc hiatri cally disabled
Medica l conditi ons th at woul d contra indicate the consumpt ion of a lcohol
Medica l conditi ons th at would contra indicate the use o f naltrexone  such a s hepatic 
dysfunc tion
   Any history of ne urological trauma o r disease, seizures, hea d injury, bra in tumor,  delirium, 
or ha llucinations, or hep atic, cardiova scular, meta bolic, endoc rine, or ga strointestinal 
disea se
   Subje cts who a t an y inta ke appoint ment ha ve a Clinical Insti tute Withdrawal Assessment 
Scale score of 8 or grea ter, or who re port a ny hist ory of sig nificant or r epeated a lcohol 
withdra wals will be excluded f rom the stud y and re ferre d for stand ard alcohol 
detoxification. This i s to reduce the likelihood that subjec ts enr olled in t he study will 
experience withdr awal sympt omatology if they reduce their drinkin g.
   Women w ho are pregnant, nu rsing , or re fuse to us e a reliable method of bir th contr ol; urine 
pregnancy tests will be completed a t intake a nd prior to a dministration of a lcohol
   Subje cts who r eport dis liking spirits wil l be e xcluded be cause h ard liquor w ill be provided 
during the alcohol admi nistration components of the  stud y.
   Subje cts who ha ve taken any inv estigational drug withi n 3 wee ks imm ediately pre ceding 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 32 of 48
admiss ion to t he treatment per iod
   Subje cts who r eport any use d uring the 30 da ys prior to ra ndom ization of the f ollowing :
anxiolytics, beta blockers, ce ntral nervous system st imulants, h ypnot ics, non-thera peutic
cause e x cessive sedation.
Subje cts who ha ve dona ted blood wit hin the past six weeks
Subjects with a history of a bleeding  disorder or are currently taking anticoagulants (such as 
Coumadin, Heparin, Pradaxa, Xarelto).
Additi onally , subj ects who mee t the following im aging exclusion criteria will not be inc luded in 
this stu dy:
Subje cts who suffe r  from claustrophobia .
Subje cts with MR I -inco mpatibl e implants and other c ontraindications for MRI, such as 
pace-m aker, artificial joi nts, non-re movable body pierc ings, tattoos la rger than 1 cm in 
diame ter, claustrophobi a, etc.
   Subje cts who ha ve received a diagnostic or therapeutic radiopha rmace utica l within 7 da ys 
prior to pa rticipa tion in t his study.
   Particip ation in o ther research studies involvin g ioniz ing radiation wit hin one year of the 
PET sca ns tha t would c auses the subjec t to exceed the yearly dose limits for norm al 
volunt eers.
   Subje cts with hi sto ry of IV drug use w hich w ould prevent venous access for PET tr acer 
injection.
Severe  motor problems t hat prevent the subje ct from lying still for PET a nd MR imaging. 
Subje cts who c ompl ain of c hronic p ain (e.g., a s the result of rhe umatoid ar thritis)
4.a. Wi ll ema il or telephone c orresponde nce be used to sc reen potential sub jects for e ligibility 
prior to the potential subjec t comi ng to t he re search office ? Ye s No
4.b. If yes, will i dentifiable hea lth infor mation be collected dur ing this scre ening proce ss and 
retaine d by the research team? Ye s No
5.   Subje ct Clas sifications: Chec k off al l classi fication s of subje cts that wi ll be invited to e nroll in 
the r esearch project. Will subj ects, who ma y require a dditional sa feguards or oth er
consid erat ions, be  enrolle d in t he study? If so, ide ntify the popul ation of subjec ts requirin g spe cial 
safeguards a nd provid e a justification for the ir involve ment.
Children Health y Fetal mate ri al, placenta, or dea d fetus
Non-En g lish Spea king Prison ers Economi c a lly dis advantaged persons
Decision ally Impai red Emplo yees Pre gna nt women a nd/or fetuses
Students Female s of childbearing potential
5.a. Is th is r esearch proposal de signed to en roll children who a re wards of t he state a s pot ential 
subjec ts? Ye s No (If ye s, see Instruc tions se ction V II #4 for furth er requirements)
SECTION VIII: CO NSE NT/ ASSE NT PROCEDU RES
1.Conse n t Per sonne l: List the na mes of a ll memb ers of the re search team who will be obtaining 
consent/assent.  Nic holas F ranco, Da na Cavallo, Tr icia Dahl, Th omas Liss, Suc hitra Krishna n- 
Sarin, Ev an Morris,  Alissa Goldberg.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 33 of 482.   P rocess of Conse n t/Asse nt: De scribe the setting a nd condit ions unde r whi ch consen t/assent will
be obtaine d, includin g pare ntal pe rmission or surr ogate permission and the steps tak en to ensu re
subjects‟  indep endent decision-making .
At the sta rt of the  intake session, a ll subjec ts will receive an explana tion of the stu dy includin g its
risks, be nefits, and p rocedures, and will be given  an opportun ity to wit hdraw f rom the stud y. 
Following the resolut ion of a ny que stions, the subjec t will be a sked to sign the consen t form, if 
he/she a grees to pa rticip ate.
3.   Evalu ation  of Subject(s) Capacity to Provi de Infor med Conse nt/Assent: Indic ate how the personn el 
obtaining consent will  assess the potential  subject‟s  ability and capacit y to conse nt to the research be ing 
propose d.
Subje cts with l i mited dec ision making capacity will not be e nrolled in t his study.
4.   Doc umentat ion of Conse nt/Asse nt: Spec ify the  documents tha t will be use d during t he 
consent/assent pr ocess. C opies of a ll documents sh ould be a ppended to t he protocol, in t he same 
format that the y will be given to subjec ts.
Adult conse nt for m
5.   Non-En gl ish Spe aking Subje cts: Ex plain pr ovisi ons in pla ce to ensur e compre hension f or 
research invol ving non-E nglish spea king subjec ts. Translate d copies of a ll consen t materials must 
be submit ted for approva l prior to use .
Due to the  intensity and complexity of the  design of thi s study we will enroll only English 
speaking subjects.
6.   Waiver of Conse nt: W ill you re quest eith er a waiver of c onsent, or a waiver of si gned consen t, for 
this study? If so, ple ase address the followin g:
This se c tion i s not applicabl e to this re search project
Waiver of consen t: (No c onsen t form from subjec ts will be obtain ed.)
a.         Do es the research pose greater than minimal risk to subjec ts?      Yes       No 
b.         Will the waiver a dversely affect subjects‟ rights and welfare?      Yes       No 
c.         W hy would the re search be impracticable to cond uct without t he waiver?
d. Where  appropri ate, how will pertinen t information be re turned to, or sh ared with subjec ts 
at a la ter date?
Waiver of signed consent: (Verbal cons ent from s ubjec ts will be obtain ed.)
This se c tion i s not appl icabl e to this r esearch project
a.         W ould  the signed consen t form be the only record linking the subjec t and t he re search?
Yes No
b.         Doe s a b reach of c onfid entiality consti tute the princ ipal risk t o subjec ts?      Ye s       No
OR
c.         Doe s the research pose greater than minimal risk ?      Yes       No AND
d. Doe s the research includ e any activities tha t would re quire signed consen t in a non- 
research context? Ye s No
7.  Re quire d  HIP AA Authoriz ation: If the research invol ves the creation, use or disc losure of 
prote cted he alth info rmation (PH I), se parate subje ct autho rization is re quire d unde r the HIPAA 
Priva cy Rule. Indic ate which of the followin g forms ar e being provided:
Compound C onsen t and Authoriz ation form
HIPAA Re s earch Autho rization Form
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 34 of 488.   Re quest for  waiver of HIPAA author ization : (W hen requesting a waiver of HIPAA 
Author ization for e ither the entire study, or for rec ruitm ent purpose s onl y)
Choose on e: For e ntire study: For re cruitm ent purpose s onl y: X
Describe why it would  be im practicable to obtain the subject‟s authori zation for use/disclosure  of
this data - Data is collected over the phone and through survey monk ey so it wouldn‟t  be
practical to obtain a uthor ization to use this data .
i.   If requesting a waiver of sign ed authoriz ation, de scribe why it would be impracticable
to obtain the subject‟s signed authori zation for use/disclosure  of this data;
By sign ing this p rotocol appli cation , the investigator assure s that the protected 
health i nformation f or which a Wa iver of Author ization has bee n requested will not 
be re used or disclosed to any p erson or e ntity other than those list ed in this 
appli cation , except as re quire d by la w, for author ized over sight of this re search 
study, or as spec ifically appr oved for use in another  study by an IRB.
Researche rs a re reminded that unauthorized discl osures of PHI to individuals outsi de of the Yale 
HIPAA-Cov ered entity must be accounted for in the “acc ounting for disclosure s log ”, by subjec t 
name , purpose, date , recipients, and a de scription of information pro vided.  Logs are to be 
forwarded to the Deputy HIP AA P rivacy Officer.
SECTION IX: P ROTECTION OF RE SEARCH  SUBJE CTS
1.   Risk s: De s cribe the reasonably fore seeable risks, inc luding risks  to subje ct privacy, discomfor ts, 
or inconve niences assoc iated wit h subjec ts par ticipating in t he research.
The major potential risks in this study are related to naltrexone , administration of a lcohol, the 
blood dra w durin g the physica l exam and a lcohol drink ing pe riod, a nd the PET a nd MR I scans.
1. MR I:
MR carr ies a risk f or subjec ts who a re claustropho bia or have pacemakers, met al pieces, 
aneurysm clips, la rge colored tattoos, or a ny othe r contra indications for MR.  Ma gnetic 
resonan ce (MR ) is a  technique tha t uses ma gnetism and ra dio w aves, not x-ra ys, to t ake pictures 
and me asure c hemicals of va rious pa rts of the body.  The United St ates F ood a nd Drug 
Admini stration (FDA) ha s set guidelines f or ma gnet strength and e xposure to radio wa ves, and 
we carefully obse rve those guidelines.
2. Risks Assoc iated with Radiation:
The Yale- New Ha ven Hospital Radi ation Sa fety Comm ittee (R SC) w ill review  the use of 
radiation i n this research stud y, and no subje cts will be enroll ed unti l RSC a pprova l is obta ined. 
This re search stud y invol ves ex posure  to ra diation  from [ C-11]PKAB PET sca nning . This 
radiation ex posure is not nece ssary for med ical care and is for research purposes onl y. The total 
amount of radiation an in dividual subj ect will receive in th is study is fr om 2 injections with a
total of ≤ 40 mC i from [C-11]PK AB plus t ransmission sca ns of the bra in.
Althoug h ea c h orga n will receive a different dose , the a mount of radiation exposure subjec ts will
receive from this study is equal to an effective dose of 1.44 rem for a total of  ≤ 40 mCi of [C -
11]PKA B in 2 i njections (a pprox. 20 mC i each). T hat is, a total of 1.44 re m for 2 PET sca ns is the
amount of radiation ex posure  that a subject will receive from the stud y.  This ca lculated va lue is 
used to relate the dose re ceived b y each orga n to a single va lue.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 35 of 48The a mount of radiation subjec ts will receive in th is study is b elow the dos e guidelines established 
by the FDA a nd moni tored by th e Yale-New Ha ven Hospita l Radiation S afety Com mittee for 
research subj ects. Th is guide line sets a n effective dose limit of 5 re m per  year.
3. Alc ohol:
A numbe r of medi cal co nditions could pote ntially be worse ned by ac ute alcohol admini stration 
(e.g., li ver disea se, cardiac abnorma lity, pa ncreatitis, di abetes, ne urolo gical problems, a nd 
gastroint estinal disorde rs). As a r esult, subj ects with m edical problems a s revealed by physic al 
exam and la boratory find ings will be excluded from t he study.  Alc ohol ma y also cause n ausea in 
high dose s; howe ver, nausea is not ex pected a t the dose being used in this sample of he avy 
drinke rs. Subjec ts will not be dr inking to l evels more than the y typica lly consume  in their ow n 
drink ing contex t and wit h the e xception of the pr iming dose , they determin e the a mount of 
alcohol c onsume d.
Anothe r ar ea of potential r isk to subjec ts unde r the influ ence of alcohol inv olves their  safety 
during the experimen tal pr ocedures. Althou gh im pairment of gross motor coordina tion in he avy 
drinke rs is rare at the alcohol dose used in this study, a ll subjects will be unde r the supervision of 
the e xperimenters to pre vent possibl e accidents su ch as falls. Subjec ts will not leave the 
labora tory durin g the se lf-administration proce dure. By staying in t he YCCI or CNRU ove rnight, 
the possibi lity that the su bject might leave the se ssion and c ontinue to drin k alcohol there by 
placing themselve s at r isk for a ccidents is pre vented.
Alcohol i s a reinfor cing agent, whi ch ma y cause cha nges in be havior i ncluding re petitive or 
excessive alcohol c onsumpt ion. Beca use of this, t he administration of a lcohol to alcoholic s in 
treatment could potential ly impede the progre ss of their rec overy. In a ddition, t he administration 
of alcohol to sobe r alcoholi cs living in the comm unity pre sents a possible r isk of re lapse . As a 
result, we will be recruiting non-a bstinent non -treatment see king alcoholic s in kee ping with t he 
National Advisor y Counc il on Alc ohol Abuse a nd Alc oholism's (1989) re commended gui delines 
on ethyl a lcohol admin istration. At c ompl etion of the stud y, we  will make a serious a nd 
conce rted effort t o link the subjec t with t reatment for their a lcohol pr oblems . This wil l be done 
by givi ng the subjec t objective fe edback about t he fact that their drinki ng exceeds standards for 
avoidi ng ha zardous drinking , providi ng a brief one session moti vational intervention for th eir 
drinking , and by a rranging for alcohol tre atment service s if th ey are interested. In our pre vious 
and ongoin g work, se veral participants quit drinking and m any other s reduce d their drinkin g in 
the thre e months following this intervention.
4. Na ltr exone:
Naltrex one has bee n shown to ha ve an effect on t he embryo in t he rat and  the ra bbit when given 
in dose s app roxim ately 140 ti mes the hu man the rapeutic dose.  Na ltrexone , an opio id antagonist , 
is wide ly used in the treatment of opioid a ddiction and mor e recently has bee n found to be 
beneficial in t he treatment of a lcoholism.  Nume rous st udies ha ve found na ltrexone  use to be safe 
and ra rely associa ted with t oxicit y or se vere side effects.  The most f requent reporte d side  effects 
are gastroint estinal in nature.  Those include epigastric pa in, nause a and vomi ting.  Othe r, less 
frequent side effects include nervousne ss, dizz iness, hea daches, blu rred vis ion, low e nergy, 
fatigue, sleepiness, joi nt and musc le pa in and inso mnia.  He patotoxicit y, the most serious 
potential side e ffect, has been shown in s tudies using very high dose s of na ltrexone (1400 to
2100 mg p er week).  At the doses used in thi s study naltrexone  has not bee n reporte d to produc e 
hepatotoxic effects.  Howe ver, we will moni tor live r function tests pri or to the stud y and exclude 
individuals with eviden ce of sig nificant hep atocellular injur y (AST, ALT >3x norm al established 
in pre gnant and nur sing wome n, the y will be excluded f rom pa rticip ation.  Na ltrexone  can also
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 36 of 48precipitate or  exacerbate opiate withdrawal, as a re sults subj ects with abuse  or 
dependence on opiate s will be excluded f rom the stud y on the b asis of s elf-report a nd 
urine  drug sc reens.
Since n altrexone is an opia te antagonis t, alternative nonopioi d methods of a nalgesia  can 
be used. In a n emergency situation re quirin g opioi ds, the  amount of opi oids nece ssary 
for analgesia may be greater than usua l, and the re sulting respira tory depression ma y be 
deeper and mor e prolong ed.  As a result, a rapidly acting analgesic whic h minimizes 
respira tory depression is pre ferre d and the a mount of the a nalgesic administration 
titrated to the nee ds of the  patient in a se tting equipped and sta ffed for ca rdiopulmona ry 
resuscitation.  As a  result, subjec ts will be given a card showi ng th at they may be 
receiving na ltrexone .  This ca rd wil l provide de tailed info rmation t o medi cal personne l 
describing the special pr ecautions ne cessary in t he event that the subje ct should re quire 
pain management.  In addition, t his ca rd wil l have  a code number on it that ca n be used 
to identi fy whic h medica tion the subjec t is on.  A phone number of the pha rmacy and for 
the physicia n on ca ll at the Connecticut Menta l Health Center will be listed on the ca rd 
in the event of an emergency in which it i s nec essary to dete rmine  whe ther the s ubject is 
on ac tive naltrexone .
5. Inte ra ctions of Na ltrexone a nd Alc ohol:
There are no known risks to contra indicate the administration of a lcohol to subjec ts on 
naltrexone . It has bee n shown tha t phar macokinetics prope rties o f naltrexone  and ethanol 
are not a ltered on simul taneous a dministration of both a gents.
6.  Risks Assoc iated with Blood Dr awing a nd IV l ine Inse rtion:
Drawing  blood and ins erting an intravenous line ( IV) into a n arm ve in are safe and 
standard medica l proc edures. Som etimes a  bruise will occ ur at the punc ture site and 
rarely a blood clot or infec tion will occur in t he vein. C ertain individuals ma y fee l light-
headed during venipun cture. The  volum e of blood c ollected dur ing thi s study, i nclude 
screening labor atories, will be a pproxim ately 19 table spoons. This i s not e xpec ted to 
have any se rious ne gative effects on a study participa nt.
Subje cts will h ave approxim ately 30 c c of blood drawn a t the intake appointment to 
determine liver and kidne y func tioning and for genetics testing and a total of 60 c c of 
blood du ring the 2 ADPs. 180 cc will be taken at the PET scans and an a dditional 15cc 
in PK sa mples will  be drawn durin g the N TX PET sca n.  Th erefore, the t otal a mount of 
blood dra wn durin g the stud y ( 30+60+180+15 = 285cc ) is w ithin the HIC guidelines of 
450 c c within eight re search wee ks and th e blood l oss poses mini mal r isk in hea lthy 
subjec ts. We will advise subjec ts against dona ting blood for six weeks following study 
participation.
7. Risks Assoc iated with Use  of an Arte rial Catheter:
On the  PET sca n day, a radial arterial cathete r will be inse rted. Arter ial sa mpling may be 
associ ated with mild-to- modera te pa in or bruisi ng at the punc ture site. In rare instances 
blocking of the artery, poor healing, he matoma, inflammation, or infec tion at the cathete r 
insertion site may occur. Ce rtain indivi duals may feel light-headed durin g arterial cathete r 
placement. If for some reason, an arterial catheter cannot be inserted, after no more than 
three attempts per arm by a trained staff member, per the Yale University Positron 
Emission Tomography Center, the scan will be rescheduled for another day and the 
participant will still be paid $50 for his/her time. At the rescheduled scan, the physician 
will try to insert an arterial catheter again and the scan will be conducted regardless of 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 37 of 48whether or not the catheter was inserted.
For 
two days following the placement of the arterial line, participants will be instructed to 
check 
their wrist/arm daily.  The study team will also be in touch with them daily either via 
phone, or in person, during this two-day period. If they experience any excessive pain, 
tenderness, swelling, redness, drainage, skin color changes, numbness, pins and needles, or 
decreased strength in the arm that had the catheter, they are instructed call the study team 
immediately (203-464-6015).  They can also contact the study PI Dr. Krishnan-Sarin (860-
575-9895), the PET center physician, Dr, David Matuskey (203-370-1403), or the study 
physician, Dr. Julia Shi (203-781-4640).
8.  Alc ohol W i thdrawal:
We will  not ask pa rticip ants to alter their drinking be havior durin g their  participation i n the 
study.  Howe ver, the re is always the possibil ity that some particip ants m ay reduce or stop 
drink ing duri ng the outpa tient per iod whil e on the study medica tion.  Th erefore , we will 
infor m that that some individuals who re duce or stop thei r drink ing ca n experience alcohol 
withdra wal sympt oms s uch as mild agitation, a nxiet y, restlessness, t remor, loss of a ppetite 
and diff iculty slee ping or even mor e severe (but r are) symp toms l ike e xtreme re stlessness , 
nervousne ss, disorienta tion, c onfusion, ha llucinations ( hearing and see ing things that a re 
not there) and se izures, but these a re extremely rare.  We will monitor the m dai ly duri ng 
their visits to our c linic a nd will also inform t hem that if they experienc e worse ning of 
withdrawal sympt oms (C IWA > 8) we may have to hospit alize them a nd give th em 
medications tha t are typically use d to t reat and man age withdrawal including 
benzodiaz epines, suc h as chlor diazepoxide ( librium ), and other medic ations such a s 
carba mazepine (tegretol).
9. Ra ting  Scales and Que stionna ires:
These are a ll noninvasive and should a dd no risk. The major disadv antages are the time 
taken to c ompl ete the m, and possi ble bre ach of c onfide ntiality. Our pa st experience with 
these measures indi cates tha t they are acceptable  to subjec ts. Ca reful e fforts aim ed at 
maintaining confid entiality will be made .
10.  Laboratory Tasks:  The computer tasks (, EDT and Cued Go-No-Go) as well  as the cold 
water task can produce some uneasiness at the time of the task.  The hand kept in  the very 
cold water can be uncomfortable. However, once the task is over, there is very little anxiety 
that carries over, thus posing minimal risk.  Moreover, the participants will have total 
control over the task and can stop performing it if he/she gets too uncomfortable.  There is 
the possibility that the desire to drink may occur in participants during the task, which may 
linger after the end of the task. 
2.   M ini mizing Risk s: De scribe the mann er in w hich the a bove- mentioned risks will be 
minimized.
1) Na ltr exone:
Effect ive screening will exclude a ll subjec ts who would be  at greater risk f or complications 
because o f medical, neur ological or ps ychiatric  illnesses.  Indivi duals cur rently dependent 
on other drugs will be screened out.  S ubjec ts who a re using opiat es will be excluded to 
avoid an y possi bility of the subjects experiencing naltrexone  prec ipitated opiate 
withdra wal. Th e risk of he patotoxici ty will be minimized by e xcluding subje cts with a 
histor y of c irrhosis or sig nifica ntly elevated liv er enzyme tests. Subjec ts will be issued 
medca rds whic h allow hea lth profe ssionals to find out mo re about N altrexone by ca lling 
the CMHC pharmac y. Subjec ts will a lso be c onsta ntly mon itored for t roubl esome side 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 38 of 48effects duri ng the course of the outpatient a nd inpatient pe riods.
Give n the unc ert ain effects of na ltrexone during pregnancy, the  following precautions will 
be take n for wom en:  1) ur ine pregnancy tests wil l be pe rforme d at intake , and pre gnant or 
nursing wome n will be excluded f rom pa rticipa tion, a nd encouraged to s eek advice about 
the risk of hea vy drinkin g, encourage d to see k treatment and if inte rested re ferre d to ot her 
cessation progra ms; 2) women mu st agree to use a reliable method  of birth c ontrol while 
they are in the stud y and to ale rt the principal investig ator if she departs fr om he r birth 
control pla ns or if , in spit e of adherence to these plans, she thinks she mig ht be pre gnant.
2)  Alc ohol Challenges:
The a lcohol c h allenges wil l be c onduc ted by pe rsonne l experienced in al cohol cha llenge 
research. As de scribed above , all subjec ts will be unde r supe rvision t o pre vent possib le 
accidents. At the end of t he challenge session all subj ects will be kept in the H RU w here 
they will stay ove rnight to preve nt the possi bility that t hey would c ontinue drinking after 
the session a nd plac e themselve s at r isk of acc idents. Altho ugh we have never had a 
subjec t chose to leave a session ea rly, should a subjec t insist on l eaving the research 
setting pre maturely, we will provide tra nsporta tion bac k to t heir residen ce. This 
contingenc y is e xplicitly addressed in t he consen t form. C learly, subjec ts are free to 
discontinue the experimen t at a ny time.  Howe ver, ifa subjec t chose to discontinue 
participation a fter alcohol has bee n administered we will require them to sta y in t he HRU  
until their blood a lcohol leve l is below 0.04 a nd th ey will then be provided w ith a ride 
home. Furthermore, at the Principal Investigator’s discretion, a participant will be 
discontinued if he/she does not drink any of the choice drinks at ADP 1. This absence of 
drinking creates a floor effect and does not allow for evaluation of change in drinking 
behavior at ADP 2 after taking study medication. Given the cost of the scan and the 
hospital visit, it does not seem reasonable to continue participants whose data will not be 
meaningful. Participants will be told that the study doctor may discontinue his/her 
participation if they think you are not responding well to the medication.
3)  R es earch Records:
Right to  priva cy for parti cipation in this researc h will be protected through a nonymous c oding 
of da ta and prope r stora ge of researc h rec ords. Acce ss wi ll be limited to the PI and he r 
designates involve d in the study. A certi ficate of confide ntiality has bee n obtained from  
NIAAA. Sa feguards in clude sc reening b y experienced profe ssionals in orde r to e nsure that 
the inc lusion
and ex clusion criteria are met be fore patients ar e entere d in t he study, inclu ding physica l 
exam and labora tory tests.
4)  Risks Assoc iated with Blood Dr awing :
The risks  of b ruising, c lotting, and infe ction will be minimized by ha ving venipunctu re 
perform ed by tra ined and experienced personne l und er sterile condit ions. To a void i njury due 
to fainting, the antecubital vein c atheter will be inser ted when the  subjec ts are recumbent. The 
blood dra ws durin g PET sca nning sessions will be obta ined f rom the alrea dy inser ted 
catheter, to minimize discomfor t.
5)  Risks Assoc iated with Use  of an Art erial Catheter:
Risks of radial artery ca nnulation a re minimized by ha ving the p rocedure performed b y an 
experienced physicia n. Pa in is minimized by loca l anesthesia. Bleeding is p revented b y 
local pressure applied for a minimum of 15 minutes a fter catheter removal. S ubjec ts will 
have their ha nd and fin ger blood suppl y examined after arterial ca nnulation a nd again 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 39 of 48following cathete r r emoval. Also, subjects will be asked to abstain from aspirin and other 
NSAIDs for 7-10 days prior to arterial line insertion and 7-10 days following arterial line 
removal.  Subje cts will be provided a 24 hour e mergency physicia n telephone  numb er to 
call if the y encounter pain, di scolora tion, numbness, t ingling, c oolness, he matoma, 
inflammation, or a ny other unusua l symptoms in the wrist or ha nd, or fe ver, chills or 
drainage from t he vascular punc ture sites, followin g the pr ocedure. Nurse s will provide 
the subjec ts an instruction shee t doc umenting probl ems to watch for and proce dures to 
follow should such problems occ ur. Infe ction is a voided b y adequate cleansing of the skin 
prior to intravascular line  inser tion.
6)  Risks Assoc iated with Radiation :
The dose of radiation wil l be submitt ed for a pprova l to the Yale-New Ha ven Hospita l 
Radiation Sa fety Com mittee (Y-NHH RS C). A ll scans will be done  in the presence of 
medical super vision and tra ined nur sing staf f in an instit ution spec ifically designed to 
support i maging studi es. In the e vent of se rious medi cal comp lications, the PET s can 
facilities ha ve immediate a ccess to or c onsultation wi th spec ialized medica l units at the 
Yale-New Ha ven Hospit al.  Preparation of ra diophar maceuticals and pe rforman ce of PET 
scans will be b y radiochemists, physi cians, a nd tec hnolo gists of the Departmen t of 
Diagnostic Ra diology, Ya le Unive rsity School of Me dicine . The se profe ssionals are 
qualified by t raining and experience in the safe use and ha ndling of ra diopha rmaceuticals. 
Subje cts will be asked a bout t heir pre vious ra diation  exposure a nd those who ha ve had 
research exposure withi n the pa st year will be e xcluded if their cumulative annua l exposure 
(including the p resent study) e xceeds FDA lim its.   The infor mation on t he previous 
radiation ex posure of stud y subjec ts will be notified to t he stud y doc tor.
No PET studies w ill be p erformed on preg nant or potentiall y preg nant women, a s 
confirmed by pre gnancy testing durin g evaluation and on e ach sca n day before initiation 
of any sc an proce dures. If subje cts are breastfeeding the y will not be a ble to pa rticip ate in 
this re search stud y.
7) MRI:
Magnetic  resonance imaging (MR I) sca ns (3 T ) will be collected in e ach subjec t to co-
register PET a nd MR I for im age analysis. Within four weeks of the PET stud y, an MR I 
will be acquire d at the Yale University MR I Center. In the event that the PET does not 
occur within six months of the MRI, subjects will be asked to perform a repeat MRI. 
Subjec ts will be taken thro ugh a  ferroma gnetic meta l detector be fore entering the scan 
room. Th e acquisition seque nce is a 3D fa st spoiled gra ss (FSPGR) MR pul se seque nce 
with an IR pre p of 300 ms. ( TE= 3.3 ms, f lip angle=17 de grees;   sli ce thickness= 1.2 mm) 
optimized for de lineating gra y matte r/whit e matter/CSF bounda ries.   The small vox el size 
(0.93 X 1.2 X 0.93 mm ) provides hig h-resolut ion vol umetr ic imag es. MR i mages provide  a 
matching anatomical atlas for creating indi vidua lized reg ion-of-int erest template s for e ach 
subjec t.
To minim ize risks, eac h subjec t will fill out the Ya le Ma gnetic Resonance Research Center 
MRI Safety Que stionna ire before the stud y. Onl y subje cts who ful fill the criteria by th is 
questionna ire will be eligible for the  stud y. In a ddition, subje cts will remove a ll meta l 
(watch, ha ir pins, jewe lry) and change into scr ubs imm ediately prior  to the study and pa ss 
through the m etal detector in the  MRRC be fore entering the M RI room.
Subje cts will be watched closel y throu ghout t he MR stud y.  Some p eople m ay feel 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 40 of 48uncomfor table  or anxious.  If this happe ns, the  subjec t may ask to stop the study at any 
time a nd we will take them out of the MR sca nner.  On ra re occa sions , some people might 
feel dizzy, ge t an upse t stom ach, ha ve a meta llic taste or fe el tingling sens ations or musc le 
twitches.  Th ese se nsations usual ly go a way qui ckly but w e will ask subjec ts to tell t he 
research staff if they have them.
There are some risks with a n MR study for ce rtain people .  If subje cts have a pacemaker or 
some met al objects inside the ir body, the y ma y not b e in this study beca use the strong 
magnets in the MR  scanner might har m them.  Anoth er risk i s the possi bility of m etal 
objects being pulled into the ma gnet and hitt ing a subjec t.  To re duce this risk we  require 
that a ll people involved wit h the stu dy re move all meta l from their clothing and all metal 
objects from t heir pockets.  W e also ask a ll people involved w ith the stud y to wa lk through 
a detector designed to de tect metal objects.  It is i mporta nt to know th at no m etal ca n be 
brought i nto the magnet room at any time.  A lso, onc e subjec ts are in the magnet, the door 
to the room wil l be c losed so that no one from outsi de acc identally goe s nea r the magnet.  If 
the subject has a ny met allic prosthes es/implants they will be e xcluded f rom the st udy.
This MR study is for research purposes  only and is not in any way a clinical examination.  
The scans performed in this study are not designed to find abnormalities.  The primary 
investigator, the lab, the MR technologist, and the Magnetic Resonance Research Center are 
not qualified to interpret the MR scans and are not responsible for providing a diagnostic 
evaluation of the images.  If a worrisome finding is seen on a subject’ s scan, a radiologist or 
another physician will be asked to review the relevant images.  Based on his or her 
recommendation (if any), the primary investigator or consulting physician will contact the 
subject, inform them of the finding, and recommend that they seek medical advice as a 
precautionary measure.  The decision for additional examination or treatment would lie 
solely with the subject and their physician.  The investigators, the consulting physician, the 
Magnetic Resonance Research Center, and Yale University are not responsible for any 
examination or treatment that a subject receives based on these findings.  The images 
collected in this study are not a clinical MR exam and for that reason, they will not be made 
available for diagnostic purposes.
3.   Data and Safe ty Monitor ing Plan: Replace with new HIC tex t for data safe ty and moni toring
plan f orm hrpp we bsi te, doc ument: 420F R1DSMP Template.pdf (use t ext for  modera te risk 
studies) I nclude a n appropria te Data and Sa fety Monit oring Plan ( DSMP) ba sed on the 
investigator‟s risk assessment sta ted be low. (Note: the HIC will make the final de termination of 
the risk t o subjec ts.) F or more information, se e the Instruc tions, pa ge 24.
a.   What is the investigator‟s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects participating 
in this
 study?
This protocol is  a moderate risk protocol and therefore requires a data safety and 
monitoring plan.
b.   If children are involved, what is the investigator‟s assessment of the overall risk level
for the children participating in this study? NA
c.Data and Safety Monitoring
 Plan:
1. 
Personn el responsib le for the safety review  and its f requency:
The princ ipal invest igator will be re sponsi ble for moni toring the da ta, assuring protocol
compl ian ce, and conduc ting the sa fety reviews at the spec ified frequency whic h must be 
conduc ted a t a minimum of every 6 mont hs (inc luding when reapprova l of the pr otocol is 
sought). D uring the review proce ss, the princ ipal i nvestigator (monitor ) will eva luate 
whether the stud y should continue unchanged, require modification/am endment, c ontinue 
or close to en rollment. E ither the principa l investigator, o r the Yale HIC ha ve the a uthorit y 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 41 of 48to stop or suspend the stu dy or re quire modi fications.
2. Th e r isks assoc iated with th e curre nt study ar e deemed moder ate for the 
followin g reasons: (c hoose those tha t appl y)
1. W e do not v iew the risks  associa ted w ith the Naltrexone a s minimal.
2. W e do not v iew the risks  associa ted w ith the c ombi ned use of Na ltrexone a nd alcohol a s 
minimal.
3. Giv
en the now  establi s hed safe ty and va lidity of the c urrent Naltrexone in our 
prior w ork, we  do not vie w the proposed studi es as high risk.
4. Give n our e x perience with t he combi ned co-administration Na ltrexone a nd alcohol, we  do not 
view the propose d studi es as hig h risk.
Althoug h we h ave assess ed the pr opose d stud y as one of mode rate risk, t he potential 
exists for a nticipate d and/or una nticipate d adverse events, s erious or otherwise, to occ ur 
since it is not poss ible to predict with ce rtainty the absolute r isk in any giv en ind ividual 
or in adv ance of first -hand experience with t he proposed study methods. Th erefore, we 
provide a plan f or monitor ing the da ta and sa fety of the proposed study as foll ows:
3. Attr i bution of  Adver se Events:
Adve rse ev ents will be moni tored for e ach subje ct participating in the study and
attribute d to  t he study proce dures / design by the principa l investigator, Suchitra Krishnan -Sarin, 
PhD, acc ordin g to t he fol lowing categories:
a.) De finite: Adv erse event is clea rly related to i nvestigational procedures(s)/agent(s). 
b.) Proba ble: Adve rse event is likely related to investig ational proce dures(s)/agent(s). 
c.) Possi ble: Adve rse event ma y be related to i nvestigational proc edures(s)/agent(s). 
d.) Unli kely: Adve rse event is likely not t o be re lated to the inve stigational 
proce dures(s)/a gent(s).
e.) Unr elated: Adve rse event is clea rly not re lated to investigational 
proce dures(s)/a gent(s).
4. Plan for Gradin g Adver se Events:
The foll owing  scale wil l be used in grading the se verity of a dverse events noted dur ing
the stud y:
1. Mild adve rse  event
2. Mode rate adv erse event
3. Se vere
5. 
Plan for Determining Ser iousness of Adver se Events: 
Serious Adver se Events:
In addition to gra ding the adverse event, the PI wil l dete rmine  whe ther the adverse event 
meets the criteria for a Serious Adve rse Event (SAE) . An a dverse event is conside red 
serious if it:
1. is l ife-thr eatening
2. results in i n -patient hospit alization or prolong ation of e xisting hospitaliza tion
3. results in pe rsist ent or sig nificant disability or inca pacity
4. results in a c o ngenital anomal y or bir th def ect OR
5. results in dea th
6. based upon appropriate medical judgment,  may jeopardize the subject‟s health
and m ay require medic al or su rgical intervention to pre vent one o f the other
outcomes listed in this de f inition, or
7. advers ely affects the risk/bene fit ra tio of the study
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 42 of 48An a dver se event may be graded as severe but sti ll not m eet the criteria for a Serious 
Adve rse Event. Sim ilarly, an adverse event may be graded as mod erate but still meet the 
criteria for an SAE. It is import ant for the P I to co nsider the grade of the event as we ll as 
its “seriousn ess” when determining whether reporting to the HIC or HSC is necessary.
6. Plan for re porting se rious AND unantic ipated AND re lated adve rse events, 
antic ipated adver se events occ urring at a gr eater frequency than e xpec ted, and 
other unantic ipated problem s involving r isks to sub jects or others to the HIC or 
HSC.
The investig ator will report t he foll owing types of a dverse events to the H IC or HSC: a)
serious AN D un anticipated A ND possi bly, proba bly or definitel y related events; b) 
anticipate d adverse events occ urrin g with a  grea ter frequency than e xpec ted; and c ) othe r 
unanticipate d problems i nvolvi ng risks to subjec ts or othe rs.
These adv erse events or unanticipate d problems involvi ng risks to subjec ts or oth ers will 
be re ported to the HIC or HSC withi n 48 hours of it bec oming known to the investi gator, 
using the a ppropriate forms found on the we bsite.
7. Plan for re porting ad verse events to c o-investigat ors on the study, as appr opriate 
the pro tocol’s r esearch monitor (s), e .g., industr ial sponsor, Y ale Ce nter for Clinical 
Inve stigat ion Research Subje ct Advoc ates (RSAs), C ance r Center's Quali ty 
Assu rance , Compl iance and Safe ty Commi ttee (QUACS) P rotocol Re view 
Committ ee (PRC ), DSM Bs, stud y sponsors, fundin g and re gulator y age ncies, and 
regulator y and dec ision-makin g bodies.
For the c urrent study, the  following individuals, fu nding , and/or regulator y
agen cies wi ll be notifie d (choose those tha t apply):
X All C o -Inve stigators li sted on the protoc ol.
X Yale C enter for Cli nical Investigation
X Yale Ne w -Haven H ospital Radiation Safety Commit tee (Y-NHH -RSC)
□ Qua l ity Assura nce and Com pliance and Sa fety Comm ittee (QUACS )
□ Na t ional Institutes of Hea lth
□ Food a nd D rug Admini stration (Physicia n-Sponsore d IND # )
□ Medic a l Research Founda tion (Gra nt )
The princ ipal invest igator, Suc hitra Krishnan -Sarin, PhD, will conduc t a review  of all adverse 
events upon c ompl etion of e very stud y subje ct. The princ ipal investi gator will evaluate
the frequ ency and se verity of the adverse events and de termine if modifi cations t o the 
protocol or  consen t form are require d.
d. For multi-site studies for whic h the Y ale PI ser ves as the lead investigator: NA
i.   How will adverse events and una nticipate d probl ems involvi ng 
risks to subjec ts or othe rs be reporte d, reviewed and m anaged?
ii.   W hat provis ions are in place for ma nagement of interim 
results?
iii.  What will the multi-site proc ess be for protoc ol 
modifica tions?
4.Conf identiality & Sec urity of Data:
a.What prote cted he alth infor mation about subjec ts will  be c ollected and used for the 
research? Na me, address, tele phone number , email address SS #, a nd birth date will be 
collected from subjec ts
b.  How wil l the research data be collected, recorded and store d? Research will be 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 43 of 48colle c ted in a private  room b y a research a ssistant, rec orded in bi nders, and store d in a 
locked, secure location. 
c. How will the digital data be stored?  X Secure Server
d.What methods a nd proce dures will be used  to safeguard the c onfide ntiality and 
security of the ide ntifiable stu dy da ta and the stor age med ia indic ated a bove during the 
subjec t participa tion in t he study?
Identifi able research data, including recruitme nt and sc reening info rmation and code keys, 
are stor ed on a secure database located on the internal PET Cente r Network .  The PET 
network is protec ted by a  Cisco P IX fir ewall operated b y ITS.  All re search data are 
backed up ni ghtly to a De ll PV-136T libra ry wit h 4 IB M Ultrium -TD2 tape drives using 
the bac kup softwa re Legato Ne tworker 7.3 from EM C. Huma n subjec ts enrolled in the 
study are assigned a subjec t-specific ra ndom i dentifier.   Subj ect identifiers and th e means 
to link the subjec t names a nd codes with the re search data are stored in se parate loca tions 
withi n the da tabase.  The softwa re of the da tabase limits the ability to con nect the ra ndom 
identifier to t he actual subje ct identification infor mation t o those membe rs of the r esearch 
team who ha ve direct cont act with the re search subjec ts, such as physicia ns,  re search 
nurse s, and technolog ists. Ac cess to the da tabase is password prote cted a nd each research 
team member is require d to hav e a unique ID and pa ssword to gain access to the da tabase.  
Auth orized use rs employ their  netid, and authentic ation is performed using Yale‟s central 
authentication serve r.  Users always access research data throug h the random i dentifier only.  Dire ct 
identifiers be longing to subjec ts who wit hdraw from the stud y will be stripped from the 
key.
e.What mechanisms are in pl ace to ensu re the prope r use and continued protec tion of 
these da ta after the subj ect participa tion in t he study has ceased?
Procedures to ensure  confide ntiality foll ow the regulations a nd poli cies of Yale School of
Medic ine.  T he  security mea sures in 4d will continue to be in plac e to prot ect study da ta.
f.What  will be done with the data when the research is compl eted? Are there plans to 
destroy the identifia ble data? If yes, describe how, by whom and when identifiers will 
be destroyed. If no, de scribe how the  data and/or ide ntifiers wi ll be sec ured.
Study data will be a rchived in a sec ure stora ge facility, da ta will not be destroyed.
g.Who will have access to the protec ted health information? (such as the research 
sponsor, the investig ator, the research staf f, all research mon itors, F DA, QUAC S, SSC, 
etc.)
The PI, stud y  personne l and the De partment of Psyc hiatry Business  Offic e
h.   W hich e x ternal or inte rnal indivi duals or a gencies (such a s the study sponsor, FDA, 
QUACS , SSC, e tc.) will have ac cess to the stud y data?
Internal: P rincipal inves tigators and their respective research teams, YCCI Hospita l 
Research Unit, CMU,  PET and MRI centers, Y-NHH Radiation Safety Com mittee (RSC) 
and Ya le Unive rsity RS C.
i.If appropri ate, ha s a Certificate of Confid entiality been 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 44 of 48obtaine d? A ce rtifi cate has been obta ined from NIAAA
j Ar e there any mand atory reportin g require ments? (Incidents of child abuse, e lderly 
abuse, comm unica ble disea ses, etc.)
Child abuse,  elder  abuse and int ent to harm se lf or other s.
5. Pot ential B enefits: Identify a ny be nefits that may be reasonably expec ted to result from 
the re search, either to the subjec t(s) o r to soc iety at large. (Payment of subje cts is not 
conside red a b enefit in th is context of the  risk bene fit ass essme nt.)
This stu dy will not di rectly benefit the participa nts. The  results of this labor atory-ba sed 
drinking pa radigm with hi gh re solution PET imag ing before and after naltrexone tr eatment 
will shed ne w light on t he actions of NTX a nd the d ynorphin /KOR system in a lcohol 
drinking behavior. An a dditional be nefit to subjec ts is that the y will be offered fee dback 
about t heir drinki ng and ac tive re ferral to treatment for their alcohol pr oblems s hould t hey 
so de sire. Most alcohol a buser s have im pairmen ts in their psychosoc ial fu nctioning a s a 
result of the ir drinking and ca n benefit from trea tment. The propose d stud y may be a 
conduit for some to receive tr eatment and f or othe rs to re duce their drinking on their  own. 
Although the d irect bene fit is not grea t for subjec ts, given the potential be nefit to 
developing effective treatments for a lcoholism, t he risk -benefit ratio appears favorable.
SECTION X: RE SEARCH ALTE RNATI VES AND E CONOMIC CO NSIDE RATI ONS
1. Alternat ives: What other  alternatives are available to the stud y subjec ts outside of the 
research?
NA-This i s not a  treatment study. Howe ver, partic ipants will be pr ovided wit h a 
motivational int erview upon c ompl etion of the inpa tient and outpatient por tions of this 
study to provide fe edback on their drinkin g. If the y request a r eferral for tre atment to cut 
back or quit  drinking a t this time, w e will provide the m wit h referral options.
2. Pay ments for  Participation  (Economic C onsideration s): De scribe a ny pa yments that 
will be made to subjec ts, the amount and sc hedule of  payments, a nd the c ondit ions for 
receiving thi s compensa tion.
Heavy Drinkers: B ecause this stu d y may not have direct benefits to the indivi dual 
participant, subjec ts will be of fered payment for the ir participa tion. Subjec ts will have the 
opportuni ty to receive $50 for the ini tial interview, $50 for the ph ysical examination, $250 
for the first P ET scan, $450 for th e sec ond PET sca n and $50 for the MR I. Subjec ts will 
also re ceive $150 for pa rticipa ting in t he fir st drinki ng pa radigm, $10 pe r day (up to 11 
days) for tra nsporta tion to our c linic for da ily medi cation dose , $170 for t aking medi cation 
on all days, $250 for pa rticip ating in t he second lab drinki ng pa radigm, and $30 for 
compl eting a one week follow up.  In addition, all subjec ts will have the oppor tunity to 
earn an extra $36 (de pending on their drink con sumpti on) during eac h of t he ADP sessions 
and $30 for computer assessments at each of the ADP sessions. Additionally, in the case 
that the first arterial line cannot be placed at the first PET scan, participants will be paid 
$50 and rescheduled. In the event that a participant is asked to come back in for a repeat 
lab appointment (bloodwork or EKG) he/she will be paid $25. In the event that the 
participant serves as a standby for ADP/PET 1, he/she will be paid $50. In the event that 
a participant needs a repeat MRI, he/she will be paid $50. In the event that a participant 
needs to complete an extra overnight visit on the evening prior to a rescheduled PET 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 45 of 48scan, he/she will be paid $100. Th at is a po ssible total of $2017, for a ttending and 
participa ting in all ap point ments.
An a dditional b enefit to s ubjec ts is that the y will be offered fee dbac k about their drinki ng 
and ac tive re ferral to treatment for their a lcohol pr oblems should t hey so de sire. Most  
alcohol a buser s have impairmen ts in t heir psychosoc ial fu nctioning as a re sult of their 
drinking and ca n benefit from t reatment. Th e proposed study ma y be a conduit for some to 
receive treatment and for other s to re duce their  drinking on their own.
This prog ressively  increasing payment struc ture was deve loped in or der to motivate  
subjec ts to compl ete all phases of th e study, sinc e obtaining c ompl ete da ta in th is within -
subjec t crossove r stud y is t he key to a chieving the goals of t he project.  W e are trying to 
avoid early drop out b y usin g inc reasing ince ntives for c ompl etion of the entire stud y.
Healthy controls:  Healthy controls will be  paid $50 f or the in itial interview , $50 for the 
physic al examination, $250 for the P ET scan, and $50 for the M RI. Additionally, in the 
case that the first arterial line cannot be placed at the PET scan, participants will be paid 
$50 and rescheduled. In the event that a participant is asked to come back in for a repeat 
lab appointment (bloodwork or EKG) he/she will be paid $25. In the event that the 
participant serves as a standby for a PET scan, he/she will be paid $50. In the event that 
a participant needs a repeat MRI, he/she will be paid $50. Tha t is a po ssible total of $575 
for attending and pa rticip ating in all ap point ments.
3. Cost s for Participation (Economi c Consid erations): Clearly describe the subject‟s costs 
associa ted wit h particip ation in t he re search, and the interventions or proc edures of the 
study that will be provided a t no co st to subjec ts.
The subje c t will incur no c osts to par ticipate in this re search and will receive a full 
physica l exam at no c ost.
4.   In Case of  Injury: This section is re quire d for a ny re search invol ving more than mini mal 
risk. a .  Will medical treatment be a vailable if research-related injury oc curs? Yes, but 
injury is unli kely
b.  W here  and from whom ma y treatment be obta ined? Treatment ma y be provide d by 
Yale- New Ha ven Hospita l or a ny he alth care provide r chosen  by th e study subje cts.
c.  Are th ere any limits to the trea tment bein g provided? Limits to t reatment ma y be 
imposed b y the insur ance carrier of the study subj ects.
d.  W ho will p ay for thi s treatment? The study participant or their insura nce carrier will 
be expec ted to pa y for the  cost of the trea tment. No a dditional financ ial compe nsation 
for inj ury or lost wages is available.
e.   How will  the me dical treatment be a ccessed b y subj ects? The study tea m wil l provide 
assistanc e to the subjec ts in acce ssing medic al treatment through re ferrals, or the study 
subje cts ma y choose to access tre atment on t heir ow n.
Refer ences
1. O' Malley, S.S., A.J. Ja ffe, G. Chan g, R.S . Schotte nfeld, R .E. Me yer, and B. Rounsa ville, 
Naltrexone and c oping sk ills therapy for alcohol de pendence. A controll ed study.  Arch 
Gen Psyc hiatry, 1992. 49(11): p. 881 -7.
2. O' Malley, S.S., S. Krishnan -Sarin, C. Fa rren, R. S inha, a nd M.J. Kree k, Nalt rexone 
decreases craving and al cohol se lf-administrat ion in alcohol-dependent subjec ts and 
activates the h ypothal amo-pit uitary-adren ocortic al axis. Psyc hopha rmac ology (B erl),
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 46 of 482002. 160(1) : p. 19 -29.
3. Kr ishnan- Sarin, S., J .H. Kryst al, J. Shi, B . Pittman, and S.S. O'Malle y, Fa mily history o f 
alcoholism infl uences naltre xone-induc ed reduction in al cohol drinking. Biol Psyc hiatry,
2007. 62(6) : p. 694-7.
4.           W eerts, E.M., Y. K. Kim, G.S . Wand, R.F . Dannals, J.S. L ee, J.J. Frost, a nd M.E.
McCa ul, Diff er ences in d elta- and mu-opioi d rec eptor block ade measure d by positron 
emission tomography in nalt rexone-treate d rece ntly abstine nt alcohol-dependent 
subjec ts. Neuropsyc hopha rmac ology, 2008. 33(3): p. 653 -65.
5. Hua n g, Y., W . Williams, G. Tomasi, M. -Q. Z heng, J. Olse n, M. T abriz, R.E. Ca rson, 
Y.S. Ding , J. T ausche r, and A. Ne umeiste r, Imagi ng Kappa Op ioid Rece ptor in Hu mans 
with a Nove l Antagonist Trac er, [11C ]LY2795050. Annua l Mee ting of Soc iety of 
Nuclear Me dicine , 2010. Abstr act(Submi tted).
6. Ga rbutt, J.C., S .L. West, T.S . Car ey, K.N. L ohr, a nd F.T. Cre ws, Pha rmac ologi cal 
treatme nt of alcohol de pendence: a re view of the ev idenc e. Jama, 1999. 281( 14): p. 1318 -
25.
7. Kr ishnan- Sarin, S., S . O'Mall ey, and J.H. Krystal, Treatme nt Implications: Using 
Neuroscie nce to Guide t he Developme nt of New Pharmac otherapies for Alcoholism. 
Alcohol R esearch & H ealth, 2008. 31(4): p. 400 -407.
8. Volpice l li, J.R., A.I . Alte rman, M. Ha yashida, and C.P . O'Brie n, Nalt rexone in the 
treatme nt of alcohol de pendence. Arc h Ge n Psyc hiatry, 1992. 49(11): p. 876-80.
9. Anton, R. F., S.S. O'Mall ey, D.A. Ci raulo, R .A. Cisler , D. Coupe r, D.M. Donova n, D.R.
Gastfriend, J .D. Hosking , B.A. Johnson, J.S. L oCastro, R. Longa baugh, B .J. Mason, M.E. 
Mattson, W .R. Mi ller, H.M. Pe ttinati, C .L. Rand all, R. S wift, R.D. W eiss, L.D. W illiams, 
and A. Z weben, Combin ed pharmac otherapies an d behavioral  interventions for alcohol 
dependence: the COMBINE study: a randomized c ontroll ed trial. Jama, 2006. 295( 17): p.
2003-17.
10. Gue o rguiev a, R., R . Wu, B. Pittman, J. Cra mer, R.A. R osenhec k, S. O'Mal ley S, a nd J.H.
Kryst al,  New ins ights i nto the e fficacy of nal trexone base d on trajec tory-based reanalyse s 
of two ne gative clinical trial s. Biol Psyc hiatry, 2007. 61(11): p. 1290 -5.
11. Mont erosso, J .R., B.A. Flann ery, H.M. Pe ttinati, D.W . Oslin, M. Ruksta lis, C.P . O'Bri en, 
and J.R. Volpic elli, Predicting treatme nt response to nal trexone: the influence of crav ing 
and famil y history. Am J Addic t, 2001. 10(3) : p. 2 58-68.
12. Koste rlit z, H.W ., A.D. C orbett, and S.J. Pa terson, Opioid rece ptors and li gands. NIDA 
Res Monogr, 1989. 95: p . 159-66.
13. Much a, R.F. and A. Herz, Moti vational prope rties of kappa and mu opioid rece ptor 
agonists studi ed with place and taste pre ference conditioning. Psychopha rmac ology 
(Berl), 1985. 86(3): p. 27 4-80.
14. Shippenbe r g, T.S., A. Zapata, and V.I. Ch efer, Dynorphin and the pathoph ysiology of 
drug addic tion. Pha rmacol The r, 2007. 116(2): p. 306-21.
15. Kova cs, K.M., I. Sz akall, D. O'B rien, R. W ang, K.Y. Vinod, M. Sa ito, F. Si monin, B .L.
Kieff er, and C. Va dasz, Dec reased oral self -admi nistration of al cohol i n kappa-opioi d 
receptor kno ck-out mic e. Alc ohol C lin Exp Res, 2005. 29(5): p. 730 -8.
16. Fadda, P., S. Tr onci, G. Colom bo, a nd W . Fratta, Diff erences in t he opioi d system in 
selected brain regions of  alcohol -prefe rring and alcohol -nonpre ferring rats. Alcohol 
Clin Exp Res, 1999. 23( 8): p. 12 96-305.
17. Ma rinell i, P.W., K. Kii anmaa , and C. Gia noulakis, Opioid prope ptide mRNA c ontent and 
receptor de nsity in the brains of AA and ANA ra ts. Life Sci, 2000. 66(20) : p. 1915-27.
18. Winkler, A. and R. S panagel, Differences in t he kappa opioi d rec eptor mR NA c ontent in 
distinct brain reg ions of t wo inbr ed mic e strains. Neurore port, 1998. 9(7):  p. 1459-64.
19. Ede nb erg, H.J., J. W ang, H. T ian, S. P ochareddy, X. Xue i, L. Wetherill, A. Goate, T.
Hinric hs, S. Kupe rm an, J.I. Nurnberge r, Jr., M. Schuc kit, J.A. Tischf ield, a nd T. F oroud, 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 47 of 48A regulat ory  variat ion in OP RK1, t he gene encoding the k appa-opio id rece ptor, is 
associated with al cohol d ependence. Hum Mol Ge net, 2008. 17(12): p. 1783-9.
20. Lindhol m, S., M. W erme, S. B rene, and J. Fra nck, The selec tive kappa-opi oid rece ptor 
agonist U50,488H attenuate s voluntary e thanol intake in the rat. Behav Brain Res, 2001.
120(2): p. 137- 46.
21.
Mitche l l, J.M., M.T. L iang, a nd H.L . Fields, A singl e injection of t he kappa opioi d 
antagoni st nor binal torph imine inc reases e thanol c onsumption in rats. 
Psyc hopha rmac ology (B erl), 2005. 182(3): p. 384 -92.
22. Lindhol m, S., K. Pl oj, J. Fra nck, and I. Nyl ander, Re peated e thanol admini stration 
induce s short - and long -term c hange s in en kephalin and dynorphin tis sue conce ntrat ions 
in rat br ain. Alcohol, 20 00. 22(3): p. 165 -71.
23. Rosin, A., S. Lindhol m, J. Franck, and J. Ge orgiev a, Downregulati on of kappa opioid 
receptor mRNA leve ls by chronic e thanol and re petitive cocaine in rat ve ntral tegmentum 
and nuc leus acc umbe ns. Ne urosci Lett, 1999. 275(1): p. 1-4.
24. Pande, A.C., R.E. P yke, M. Gre iner, S.A. Coope r, R. B enjamin, and M.W . Pierce , 
Analge sic efficacy of the kappa-re ceptor agonist, enadoline, in de ntal surgery  pain.  Clin 
Neuropha rmac ol, 1996. 1 9(1): p. 92 -7.
25. Walsh, S.L., B. Geter-Douglas, E.C. S train, and G .E. B igelow, Enadoline and 
butorphanol: ev aluat ion of kappa-agonists on c ocaine pharm acodynami cs and c ocaine 
self-administrat ion in humans. J Pha rmac ol Ex p Ther, 2001. 299(1): p. 14 7-58.
26. Walker, B.M. a nd G.F. Koob, Pharma cologi cal ev idenc e for a motivational  role of
kappa-opioi d syst ems in ethanol dependence. Neuropsyc hopha rmacology, 2008. 33(3): p.
643-52.
27. C arson, R.E., W.C. B arker, J.S. L iow, and C.A. J ohnson, De sign of a moti on- 
compe nsation OSEM list-mode algori thm for re solut ion-recovery reconstr uction for the 
HRR T, in 2003 Iee e Nuclear Sc ience Symposium, Confer ence Record, Vols 1-5, S.D. 
Metz ler, Editor . 2004. p. 3281-3285.
28. Mc Kee, S.A., E .L. Harrison, S .S. O'Malle y, S. Kri shnan -Sarin, J . Shi,  J.M. Te trault, M.R.
Piccio tto, I.L. Petrakis, N . Estev ez, and E. Balc huna s, Vare nicline re duce s alcohol se lf- 
administrat ion in heavy-drinking smoke rs. B iol Psyc hiatry, 2009. 66(2): p. 185-90.
29. Sait z , R. & O'Malle y, S. S. (1997). Pha rmac otherapies f or alcohol a buse. Withdrawal and 
treatment. Medical Cli nics of N orth Ame rican , 81, 881-907.
30. Sullivan,  J., Sykora , K., Sc hneiderman, J., Na ranjo, C. A., &  Sellers, E.  M. (1991).
Asse ssment of Alcohol Withdrawal: the re vised clinical institute withdra wal asse ssment 
for alcohol sc ale (CiW A-Ar). Brit ish Journal of Addictions , 84, 1353-1357.
31. Sellers, E.  M., Higg ins, G. A., Tomkins, D. M., Romac h, M. K. & Toneatto, T. (1991).
Opportuni t ies for trea tment of ps ychoac tive substa nce use d isord ers wi th serotone rgic 
medica tions. J ournal of C linical Psyc hiatry, 52, 49-54.
32. Sait z , R., Ma yo-Smi th, M. F ., Robe rts, M. S ., Redmond, H. A., B ernard, D. R., C alkins, 
D. R., e t al. ( 1994). Indiv idualiz ed treatment for  alcohol wit hdrawal. A random ized 
double- blind controlle d tria l. JAMA, 272, 519- 23.
33. Ch apman, L. J., Ede ll, W.S., & Chapman, J .P. (1980). Physic al anhedonia, p erceptual 
aberration, a nd psyc hosis  prone ness. Sc hizophreni a Bull etin, 6, 639-653.
34. Ma rks, L. E., J . Steve ns, C ., Bartoshuk, L., Ge nt, J. F., Ri fkin, B ., & Stone, V. K. (1988).
Magnitude  matching: The measurement of taste a nd sme ll. Che mical Sense s, 13, 63-87.
35. Steve ns, J. C. & Marks, L . E. ( 1980). C ross-mod ality matching func tions ge nerated by 
magnitude estimation.  Perception and Psyc hophy sics, 27, 379-389.
36. Bartoshuk, L. M. (2002). Labeled sc ales (e.g. category, Likert, VAS) and invalid cross- 
group compa risons . What we have learned from genetic variation in taste. Food Quali ty 
and Pre ference, 14, 125- 138.
37. Bremner, J.D., Kryst al, J.H., Put nam, F.W., Sothw ick, S.M., Mar mar, C., C harney, D.S., 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 48 of 48et al. (1998). Mea s urement of dissociative state s with the Clini cian-Admin istered 
Dissocia tive States Sca le (CAD SS). J ournal of T raumatic Stre ss, 11, 125-136.
38. Sobe l l, L. C. & Sobe ll, M. B . (1992). Time line follow-bac k: a t echnique f or assessin g 
self-reporte d ethanol consumpti on. Me asuri ng Alcoho l Consumption: P sychosoc ial and 
Bioche mical Methods . J. Allen a nd R. Z . Litten. T otowa , NJ, Huma na Press, Inc .: 41-72.
39. Sayette, M.  A., Shi ffman , S., Tiffa ny, S. T., N iaura, R. S ., Ma rtin, C . S., & Shadel, W. G. 
(2000). T he measurement of drug c raving. Addi ction, 95 (Suppl2) , 189-210.
40. Kr ystal, J.H., W ebb, E., Coone y, N., Kra nzler, H. R., & Charney, D. S. (1994).
Spe c ificit y of e thanol li ke effects elicit ed by se rotonergic and nora drenergic mechanism s.
Archives of Ge n eral Psy chiatry, 51, 898-911.
41. First, M. B., R.L. Spitz er, M. Gibbon, and J.B .W. Williams, Structured Cl inical I nterv iew 
for DSM- IV Axis I Disorders, R esearch Version, Patie nt Edit ion. 1996, Ne w York: 
Biometrics Research, Ne w York State  Psyc hiatric Institute.
42. Rice , J.P., T. Reic h, K.K. B ucholz, R.J. Neuman, R. F ishm an, N. Roc hberg, V.M.
Hesselbr o ck, J.I. Nurnbe rger, Jr., M.A. Sc huckit, and H. Be gleiter , Comp arison of di rect 
interview and family history d iagnoses of alcohol de pendence. Alc ohol C lin Exp Res,
1995. 19(4) : p. 1018-23.
43. Coop er, A.M., M.B . Sobe ll, L.C. S obell, and S.A. Maisto,  Validit y of alcoholic's self - 
reports: duration data. Int J Addic t, 1981. 16(3) : p. 401-6.
44. Maisto, S.A., L .C. S obell, A.M. Cooper , and M.B . Sobe ll, Comparison of two tec hniques 
to obt ain retrospe ctive reports of drink ing beha vior from alco hol abuse rs. Addic t Behav,
1982. 7(1) : p. 33-8.
45. Bohn, M. J., D.D. Kra hn, a nd B .A. Sta ehler, Deve lopme nt and i nitial validation of a 
measure of drink ing urge s in absti nent alcoholi cs. Alc ohol C lin Exp Re s, 1995. 19(3): p.
600-6.
46. Ma rtin, C. S., M. Ea rleywine, R.E. Mus ty, M.W . Perrine, and R.M. S wift, Deve lopment 
and v alidation of t he Biphasic  Alcohol Effe cts Scale. Alcohol C lin Exp Res, 1993. 17(1): 
p. 140-6.
47. Watson, T.E.,  Total  body water and alcohol lev els: updati ng the fundame ntals, in Human
Metabol ism of Alc ohol, K.E . Krow a nd R.D.  Batt, Edito rs. 1989, C RC P ress: Florida . p.
41-66.
48. Sinha, R., S. Krishnan -Sarin, C. F arren, and S. O'Ma lley, Natural istic follow-up of 
drinking be havior following participati on in an al cohol admini stration stud y. J Subst 
Abuse Treat, 1999. 17(1- 2): p. 159- 62.
49. Mil ler, W.R.,  A. Z weben, C.C . DiCli mente , and R.G. R ychtarik, Motivational 
Enhance ment The rapy manual: A c linical re search guide for th erapists treating 
individual s with alcohol  abuse and de pendence. 1992, Roc kville, MD : National Insti tute 
on Alc ohol Abuse a nd Al coholi sm.
50. de J ong, H.W ., F.H. va n Ve lden, R.W . Kloe t, F.L. Buijs, R. Boellaard, and A.A.
Lamm e rtsma, Pe rformanc e evaluat ion of the E CAT HRRT: an LSO-LYSO double  laye r 
high re solution, hi gh se nsitivity s canne r. Phys Me d Biol, 2007. 52(5): p. 1505-26.
51. He is s, W.D., B . Habedank, J.C. Kle in, K. He rholz , K. W ienhard, M. L enox, a nd R. Nutt,
Metabol ic rates in small  brain nuc lei de termined  by high-resolut ion PET . J Nuc l Med,
2004. 45(11): p. 1811 -5.
52. Ga l lezot, J.D., N. Na bulsi, A. Ne umeiste r, B. Plane ta-Wilson, W .A. W illiams, T. Sing hal, 
S. Kim, R .P. Mag uire, T. McCa rthy, J.J. Frost, Y. H uang, Y.S. Ding , and R .E. Car son, 
Kinetic m odeling of t he serotonin 5 -HT(1B ) receptor r adiol igand [(11)C ]P943 in
humans. J Ce r eb Blood F low Met ab, 2010. 30(1): p. 196-210.
53. Baron, R.M.  and D.A. Ke nny, The mode rator -mediator va riabl e distinction in soc ial 
psychologi cal rese arch: conce ptual , strategic , and stati stical conside rations. J Pe rs Soc 
Psyc hol, 1986. 51(6): p. 1173-82.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019Page 49 of 4854. Kra e mer, H., G. W ilson, C . Fairbur n, and W . Agra s, Me diators and mode rators of 
treatme nt effec ts in randomized c linical trials. Arc hives of General Psychiatry, 2002. 59: 
p. 877-883.
55. Faul, F., E. E rdfelder, A.-G. L ang, a nd A. B uchner, G*Po wer 3: A flexible statistical 
power analysis program for t he social, be havioral , and biome dical sc ience s. Behavior 
Research Me thods, 2007. 39: p. 175-191.
56. Weschler , D. (1997). We schler Adult Intelligence Scale- Third E dition. Sa n Antonio: 
Psyc hological Corpora tion.
57. C arver, C.S. & White, T. (1994). Beha vioral Inhibi tion, Behavioral Activation, and 
Affec tive Responses to Impe nding Reward and Punishment: The BIS/BAS Sca les. 
Journal of Pe rsonal ity and Soc ial Psyc hology , 67, 319-333.
58. Gr ay, J.A. (1981). A c ritique of Eysenck's theor y of pe rsona lity. In H.J. E ysenck (Ed.): A
mode l for p ersonal ity. Sprin ger-Verlag: Berlin.
59. Patton, J.H., Stanf ord, M.S., & Barratt, E.S. ( 1995). Fa ctor struc ture of the Barratt 
impulsi veness sca le. Journal of C linical Psyc hology, 51, 768-774.
60. Lejuez, C. W., Read, J.P., Ka hler, C.W ., Richards, J.B ., Ramse y, S.E., Stua rt, G. L., et al. 
(2002). E valuation of a behavioral measure of risk takin g: the Balloon Ana logue  Risk 
Task (BART). J ournal of Experimen tal Psychology. A pplied, 8, 75-84.
61. R eynolds, B., R ichards, J. B ., & de Wit, H. (2004). Ethanol e ffects on ex periential  and 
hypothetical me asures of  delayed discounting in human s. Poster presented at the 30th 
Annua l Associa tion for B ehavior Ana lysis Conve ntion, B oston, MA.
62. R eynolds, B., R ichards, J. B ., & de Wit, H. (2006). Ac ute-alcohol e ffects on the 
Experiential Discounting Ta sk (E DT) a nd a question-ba sed measure of de lay discountin g. 
Pharmac ology, B iochemistry , and Be havior, 83, 194-202.
63. Kra n zler, H.R., 2000. Pha rmac otherapy of a lcohol ism: gaps in knowle dge and 
opportuni ties for re search. Alcoh ol and Alc oholi sm, 35, 537–547.
64. Swift, R. M., Whelihan, W ., Kuz netsov, O., B uongiom o, G. & Hsui ng, H. (1994).
Naltrex one-induce d alterations in human e thanol int oxica tion. Ame rican J ournal of
Psyc hiatry , 151, 1463- 1467.
65. Levine, J. & Schooler , N.R. ( 1986). SAFTEE: a technique f or the s ystem atic assessment 
of side e ffects in clinical trials. Psyc hopharmac ology Bulletin, 22, 343 -381.
66. Abroms, B.D., Fillmore, M.T., & Marczinski, C.A.  (2003). Alcohol-induced impairment 
of behavioral    control:  effects on alteration and suppression of pre-potent responses. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol,  64, 687-695.
67 Edens, J. L.  & Gil, K. M. (1995). Experimental induction of pain: Utility in the study of 
clinical pain. Behavior Therapy, 26, 197-216. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 5/6/2019