   
 
   
 Cost -Effectiveness of Different Surgeries for CSM  
July 10 , 2023  
 
 
Primary Investigator  
Zoher Ghogawala, MD – Department of Neurosurgery, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, 
Burlington, Massachusetts  
 
 
Co-Investigators  
 Robert Whitmore, MD  – Department of Neurosurgery, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, 
Burlington, Massachusetts  
Art Eleanore , MPH  – Department of Neurosurgery, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, 
Burlington, Massachusetts  
Mohamad Bydon, MD – Department of Neurological Surgery, M ayo Clinic Rochester , Minnesota  
Giorgos  D. Michalopoulos, MD – Department of Neurological Surgery, Mayo Clinic Rochester , 
Minnesota  
Konstantinos Katsos, MBBS – Department  of Neurological Surgery, Mayo Clinic Rochester , 
Minnesota  
Bijan J. Borah, PhD  – Department of Health Services Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester 
Minnesota  
James P. Moriarty, MS  - Department of Health Services Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester 
Minnesota  
Ruchi ta Dholakia, MS, MBA - Department of Health Services Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester 
Minnesota  
  
   
 
   
 DESCRIPTION OF STUDY  
 
A. Purpose  
 
1. To determine  if ventral surgery is more cost -effective compared to dorsal (fusion or 
 laminoplasty ) surgery . 
2. To determine the relative  cost-effective ness between anterior cervical discectomy and 
 fusion (ACDF), posterior cervical fusion (PCF), and cervical laminopl asty. 
 
A. Background  
 
This study aims to compare the cost of care of anterior versus  posterior surgical approaches 
for the management of Cervical Spond olytic Myelopathy ( CSM ).  Due to th e significant gap in 
today’s  literature , we aim to conduct a post  hoc analysis of data from the randomized trial 
“Cervical  Spondylotic Myelopathy Surgical Trial ” (www.ClinicalTrials.gov; identifier: 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ; LCID#  2013 -085) to determine  the cost effectiveness of various procedures 
as related to the management of CSM.  Specifically, we aim to compare 1) the cost 
effectiveness of ventral surgery versus dorsal ( fusion or laminoplasty ) surgery; and 2) to 
determine the relative cost -effectiveness between anterior cervic al discectomy with fusion 
(ACDF), posterior cervical fusion (PCF), and cervical laminoplasty.  
 
The aforementioned study that the proposed analysis is based on was  conducted in 
collaboration between multiple academic institutions in North America . The resulting clinical 
and patient -reported outcomes from the  CSM -S RCT suggested similar effectiveness  in both 
anterior and posterior surgical approaches.  Of note, the st udy showed that cervical 
laminoplasty, a relatively low instrumentation -related cost procedure, was effective in 
managing CSM. The findings of the proposed analysis will offer further consideration on 
patient financial burdens as related to CSM management to better improve  related clinical 
decision -making for both patients and their providers.  
 
 
B. Specific Location of Study  
 
This is a post  hoc analysis of data from a multicenter randomized clinical trial entitled “Cervical 
Spondylotic  Myelopathy Surgical Trial ” (www.ClinicalTrials.gov; identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) , 
which took place in eleven institutions across North America . Data will be analyzed by Mayo 
Clinic statisticians specializing in cost analyses . 
 
C. Duration of Project  
 
Statistical  analysis and manuscript writing is expected to be completed within a 12 -month 
period.  
 
D. Research Plan1 
   
 
   
 1. Post hoc anal ysis will be conducted on the following data that were collected during the 
trial (LCID# 2013 -085) The study flow schema is outlined in Figure 11 
 
1. Our post hoc study wil l utilize the health resource information,  well-known quantitative 
scales to measure functional outcomes  (SF-36, Oswestry Neck, mJOA, and EuroQol -
5D taken at pre -op, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, 2 years, 3 years, 4 years, and 5 
years ), costs related and inc idence of re -operations and complications at 30 days and 
1 year after surgery  to compare the costs related to each procedure : comparing the 
cost effectiveness of ventral surgery versus dorsal (fusion or laminoplasty) surgery 
and comparing the relative cost -effectiveness between anterior cervical discectomy 
with fusion (ACDF), posterior cervical fusion (PCF), and cervical laminoplasty.  Quality 
of life measures (I.e. SF -36 as one overall score per timepoint ) will be utilized to  
determine patient satisfaction with the procedure of choice and subsequently  create a 
comprehensive snapshot for clinical decision making . Utilization of  quality -of-life 
scales will help relate success of the procedure as deemed  by the patient in relation 
to the related costs.  
2. Health resource utilization information was collected using patient diaries along with 
copies of all medical bills and receipts at 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months 
post-operatively for all patient s. Participants were asked to monitor days missed from 
work and days unable to perform usual activities, in addition to days missed from work 
for medical treatments or evaluations.  
 
2. The overall cost  will be estimated for each patient from a societal perspe ctive and will 
include the following components : 
I.  Index Hospitalization Cost – performed on all patients :  
 
• Hospital Costs: Total hospital charges (Total  HC) will be used to estimate costs 
using hospital -specific and year -specific Medicare cost -to-charge ratios (CCR). 
The costs will be adjusted for inflation to the latest year of the study (2018) without 
a 3% discount. – Assumptions : cost -to-charge ratios for  all hospitals and all 
relevant years will be provided. Data will be complete for all patients from all sites.  
• Hospital charges for specific revenue  centers (i.e., radiology, pharmacy, 
physiotherapy , and occupational therapy) will be converted to costs using hospital -
specific and year -specific CCRs.  This will allow the identification of the major 
drivers of the difference in cost between the surgical strategies. A crosswalk 
between the revenue center  and the cost center will have to be created. – 
Assumptions : Total hospital charges will be segmented out into the relevant 
revenue  centers. All patients will have charges segmented in this manner. No 
major differences in how total hospital charges will be  segmented by each site will 
exist.  
• For professional services (identified with either HCPCS code or CPT -4 codes) 
provided to patients during the index hospitalization, costs will be calculated using 
national reimbursement amounts from the appropriate Medic are fee schedules for 
the respective year.  – Assumptions : Detailed line -item services of all HCPCS 
codes and CPT -4 codes (including any necessary billing modifiers) will be provided 
for all professional services. Data will be complete for all patients from  all sites.  
 
   
 
   
 II. One-year All -Cause Cost – performed on patients from sites capturing 1 year 
utilization :  
• One-year all -cause costs will be calculated for hospital and professional services 
in the manner described above.  – Assumptions : The same underlying 
assumptions described above.  
 
III. Time to Return to Work – performed on all patient s reporting employment :  
• We will assume that the work halted for patients on the procedure date).  
• For patients to whom this outcome applies, we will compare differen t cohorts using 
return to work as a time -to-event outcome.  
o Lost wages will be estimated using the median weekly earnings in the US 
as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.   
▪ Patients providing no employment information will be assumed to 
have zero lost wages.  
▪ Job-specific wages will not be estimated.  
 
IV. Index hospitalization costs and one -year all -cause costs will be combined with costs 
due to loss of productivity (indirect costs) to estimate total costs for each patient from 
a societal perspective.  
 
E. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan   
 
1. Deidentified data from the published primary study w ill be utilized for the post hoc analysis.  
 
F. Timepoints  of Data Collection  
 
1. Data variables included in the analysis : 
 
I. Procedure costs and related costs; related CPT codes  
II. SF-36 (pre -op, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 years)  
III. EQ5D (pre-op, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 years)  
IV. Neck pain  disability index (pre -op, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 years)  
V. Baseline Demographic s 
VI. MJOA (pre -op, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 years)  
VII. Return to Work Status 1 Month, 3 Months, 6 Months, 1 Year  
VIII. Health Resource Utilization Diary (1 month, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year)  
IX. Inpatient Hospital and Rehabilitation Utilization Data  
X. Hospital -specific and year -specific Medicare cost -to-charge ratios  
 
2. Study Endpoints  
 
I. The primary endpoint will be the cost -effectiveness comparison between ventral and 
dorsal surgery in CSM.  
   
 
   
 II. The secondary endpoint will be the cost -effectiveness comparison between dorsal cervical 
fusion and laminoplasty  
 
3. Data Timepoints  
I. Preop: SF36, EQ5D, neck pain disability index  
II. Procedure: related hospital costs, hospital -specific and year -specific Medicare cost -
to-charge ratio  
III. 1 month: Complications and related costs (if applicable), health resource utilization 
diary, Return to Work Status  
IV. 3 months: SF36, EQ5D, neck pain disability index, health resource utilization diary, 
Return to Work Status  
V. 6 months: SF36, EQ5D, neck pain disability index, health resource utilization diary, 
Return to Work Status  
VI. 1 year: SF36, EQ5D, neck pain disability ind ex, health resource utilization diary, 
Return to Work Status  
 
   
 
   
 Figure 1 : Cervical Spondylotic Myelopathy Trial Study Flow Schema  from CSM Trial1
 
 
 
 
 
 

   
 
   
 Figure 2: Flow of Participants in the Cervical Spondylotic Myelopathy Surgical Trial1 
 

   
 
   
 References  
1. Ghogawala Z, Benzel EC, Heary RF, et al. Cervical spondylotic myelopathy surgical trial: 
randomized, controlled trial design and rationale. Neurosurgery . Oct 2014;75(4):334 -46. 
doi:10.1227/NEU.0000000000000479  
 