AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 1 
  
STep-up Yellow Zone Inhaled 
Corticosteroid S to Prevent 
Exacerbations  
(STICS) 
 
Protocol Working Group : 
Daniel Jackson, David Mauger, Leon ard Bacharier, Avraham Beigelman, 
James Chmiel, Anne Fitzpatrick, Jona than Gaffin, Theresa Guilbert, Wayne 
Morgan, Steve Peters, Wanda Phi patanakul, Will S heehan, Stanley 
Szefler, and Robert Lemanske, Jr. 
On behalf of the AsthmaNet Steering Committee 
  
VERSION: 17  
DATE: 3/16/2015  
  
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 2TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Protocol Sections:        Page(s) 
P R O T O C O L  S U M M A R Y         5  
I. BACKGROUND         6-9 
A. Asthma population 
B. Intervention 
C. Rationale for the study  
 
II. OBJECTIVES AND RESEA RCH HYPOTHESES    9 
A. Primary B. Secondary 
C. Exploratory 
 
III. STUDY DESIGN         10-19 
A. Summary of the study 
B. Rationale for the study design 
C. Outcome measures  
D. Study population and control group 
E. Plan for patient safety  
F. Ethical issues 
G. Study organization  
H. Compliance 
 
IV. METHODS AND MATERIALS        2 0 - 3 1  
A. Study population 
B. Study intervention  
C. Permitted concomitant medications and interventions 
D. Study assessments 
E. Statistical Methods  
F. Data Management G. Anticipated Results 
 
V .  S A F E T Y            31-39 
A. Reporting period B. Adverse events 
C. Serious adverse events 
D. Grading severity of adverse events 
E. Determining relatedness 
F. Reporting requirements G. Required follow up of adverse events 
H. Adverse events related to asthma 
I. Unblinding 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 3 
V I .  S T U D Y  C O M P L E T I O N         39 
A. Study treatment discontinuation  
B. Early termination 
 
VII.  STUDY SITES         39-40 
A. Site responsibilities 
B. Informed consent 
C. Investigational Review Board  
 
VIII. REFERENCES         41-43 
 
I X .  A P P E N D I C E S          44-49 
A. Appendix A: Study visit table 
B. Appendix B: Excluded or withheld medications 
C. Appendix C: STICS Action Plan 
D. Appendix D: Procedures for measuring height 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 4 
Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Term 
ACRN Asthma Clinical Research Network 
AE adverse event 
AIMS Acute Intermittent Management Strategies 
BADGER Best ADd on therapy Giving Effective Responses 
BASALT Best Adjustment Strategy for Asthma in the Long Term 
CARE Childhood Asthma Research and Education network 
c-ACT Childhood Asthma Control Test 
DCC data coordinating center 
EPR Expert Panel Report 
FEV 1 forced expiratory volume in one second 
FVC forced vital capacity 
GINA Global Initiative for Asthma 
ICAC Inner City Asthma Consortium 
ICF informed consent form 
ICS inhaled corticosteroid 
IMPACT IMProving Asthma Control Trial 
IOS Impulse oscillometry 
LABA long acting beta agonist 
MCG microgram 
MIST Maintenance and Intermittent inhaled corticoSteroids in wheezing 
Toddlers 
NAEPP National Asthma Education and Prevention Program 
NIH National Institutes of Health 
NHLBI National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
PACT Pediatric Asthma Controller Trial 
PEFR Peak Expiratory Flow Rate 
PRO patient reported outcome 
PFT pulmonary function test 
SABA short acting beta agonist 
SAE serious adverse event 
TREXA Treating EXacerbations of Asthma 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 5PROTOCOL SUMMARY: 
The objective of this study is to determine whether, in children receiving low-dose ICS, 
quintupling the dose of inhaled corticosteroids in the “yellow zone” based upon a symptom-
based action plan reduces the rate of severe asthma exacerbations treated with oral 
corticosteroids.  The study design is a double-blind, parallel-group trial, including a total of 250 
participants, ages 5-11 years, who meet NAEPP cr iteria for step 2 asthma treatment and have a 
history of at least 1 asthma exacerbation treated with oral corticosteroids in the prior year. 
Participants will undergo a 4-week run-in on low-dose ICS to assess adherence and adequate 
control (c-ACT>19). After randomization, participants will be treated for 48 weeks with open-
label fluticasone 44 mcg 2 puffs twice daily. During the 48-week treatment period, participants 
will receive blinded therapy for 7 days each time they enter the “yellow zone”. Yellow zone 
therapy will be fluticasone 44 or 220 mcg 2 puffs twice daily. 
  
The primary outcome is the rate of asthma exacerbations treated with oral corticosteroids.  
 
The estimated total study duration is approximately 24 months, which includes a 12-month recruitment/enrollment period for the 9 centers and associated participating sites, and a one-
year study period (4-week run-in plus 48-week treatment period).  
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 6 
I. BACKGROUND 
 
Asthma exacerbations are a major cause of morbidity in children with asthma and current therapeutic strategies are only of limited efficacy in exacerbation prevention. The NHLBI EPR-3 
guidelines recommend that patients be provided with a written asthma action plan for home management. However, there is limited evidence to guide clinicians in the selection and 
implementation of “yellow zone” strategies with in these guideline recommendations that are of 
proven benefit in exacerbation prevention ( i.e. preventing the patient from entering into the “red 
zone”)(1). While frequently utilized in clinical practice, doubling the dose of ICS has not been 
shown to reduce prednisone-requiring exacerbations(1). Quadrupling the dose has 
demonstrated potential efficacy in adult patients, but this step-up short term intervention 
strategy(2) has not been studied in children(3). This protocol is designed to determine whether 
step-up short-term ICS as a “yellow zone” strategy can prevent severe asthma exacerbations in 
children. It will address a critical gap in guideline-based care of children with asthma. 
 
A. ASTHMA POPULATION 
EPR-3 divides asthma assessment and treatment recommendations into 3 age groups: 0-4 
years, 5-11 years, and 12 year and above. Chil dren in the 0-4 year age group most often 
have episodic disease triggered by viral respiratory tract illnesses and tend to be completely well between episodes(4). During the early sc hool years (5-11 years), children tend to 
develop more persistent asthma symptoms, but asthma exacerbations remain a critical component of disease. Data from the Childhood Asthma Management Program (CAMP) 
clearly highlight that exacerbation frequency is much greater in this age group than in individuals 12 years and above(5). In addition to the significant morbidity and cost 
associated with exacerbations of asthma, ther e is growing evidence that exacerbations may 
lead to progressive loss of lung function(6, 7).   
Low-dose ICS monotherapy and low-dose ICS + LABA combination therapy have been 
shown to reduce exacerbations and improve asthma control in children in this age group; 
however, many children have exacerbations despite these therapies (8-10). Currently, the best predictor identified for the development of subsequent exacerbations is a prior history 
of exacerbations, and indeed, the rate of ex acerbations in the PACT(9) and BADGER(10) 
trials in children with a history of exacerbations at study entry was ~0.9 exacerbations/year despite daily step 2 or step 3 controller ther apy. Low-doses of intermittent rescue ICS added 
to daily ICS have not proven beneficial for exacerbation prevention in this age group(11). Budesonide/Formoterol as a single inhaler for both maintenance and reliever therapy has 
been shown to further reduce exacerbation risk in this age group(12); however, this 
approach is not FDA approved. Finally, omalizum ab (anti-IgE) as add-on therapy has also 
been shown to reduce severe exacerbations in this age group(13, 14), but high cost and 
lack of FDA approval for use in patients <12 year s of age currently limits its practical use in 
this age group. Thus, clinicians are in need of additional strategies for the treatment of 
children who have exacerbations despite daily low-dose ICS or low-dose ICS + LABA 
therapy.  
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 7B. INTERVENTION  
The intervention to be tested in this trial is quintupling the dose of ICS (fluticasone) at the 
onset of yellow-zone symptoms in patients treated with fluticasone 44 mcg 2 puffs twice 
daily. The intervention will be continued for 7 days each time the participant enters the yellow zone. This strategy will be compared in a blinded fashion to maintaining the 
participants’ low-dose ICS during the yellow zone. 
 
C. RATIONALE FOR THE STUDY 
The concept of stepping-up asthma therapy has recently been considered in at least three 
contexts (Figure 1).(2) First, if lack of control is persistent over long periods of time (e.g., 2-3 
weeks or longer), an increase in the overall medication regimen will be prescribed by moving 
up one or two steps as defined in the EPR-3 or GINA asthma guideline recommendations. This particular intervention has been termed “ step-up long-term (SLT) ”. This step-up in 
overall therapy is usually continued for 3-6 m onths to evaluate the ability and consistency of 
the new regimen to maintain adequate asthma control. At this point, consideration could be given to stepping down one absolute level with the stipulation that reevaluation should occur 
within the next 1-2 months to 
determine the consistency of 
control that this step-down 
regimen is able to maintain 
over time.  An example of a 
clinical trial in children that evaluated this step-up long-
term approach was the 
BADGER trial performed by 
the Childhood Asthma 
Research and Education 
(CARE) Network.(10)  
A second approach to step-up 
therapy may occur in relationship to an anticipated brief loss of control (days) or actual brief 
loss of control, such as at the onset of a viral respiratory tract illness(15) or as a 
consequence of an acute short term exposure (e.g., a furred pet) that has been known to 
induce a temporary loss of acceptable asthma control.(16) In most cases, this will entail a step-up in therapy consisting of more frequent short acting beta agonist (SABA) use and, 
potentially, an increase from baseline in the dose of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) aimed at 
preventing a more significant exacerbation requi ring oral corticosteroid treatment. This step-
up in therapy is usually discontinued in 3-10 days once asthma control has been satisfactorily achieved; at this point, a st ep-down to the baseline medication regimen is 
instituted. This particular intervention strategy has been termed “ step-up short-term 
(SST)”.(2) The SST strategy most closely represents what many clinicians label “yellow 
zone” treatment. Examples of clinical trials  that have evaluated this type of therapeutic 
approach include the IMPACT(17) trial in adults conducted by the Asthma Clinical Research 
Network (ACRN) and the AIMS(18) and MIST(19) tr ials in preschool ch ildren conducted by 
the CARE network. 
Figure 1
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 8Finally, for treating symptoms related to the va riability of asthma on a day-to-day basis, ICS 
used concomitantly and intermittently with a short acting beta agonist (SABA) or a long 
acting beta agonist (LABA) has been evaluated. While this type of therapy has been studied 
in clinical trials and approved for use in many par ts of the world, it is currently not approved 
in the United States. This particular intervention strategy has been termed “ step-up 
intermittent (SUI).” Interestingly, this approach has been used in clinical trials involving both LABAs(20, 21) and SABAs, with the SABA trials being performed by both CARE 
(TREXA(11)) and ACRN (BASALT(22)) NHLBI-funded networks, and others(23, 24). When 
applied in the 5-11 year age group in the TR EXA study, the step-up intermittent strategy 
added to daily therapy with low-dose ICS did not provide added benefit in children with mild asthma. 
In reviewing the data regarding these various step-up approaches that has been generated 
by CARE and ACRN, as well as other groups around the world, it became apparent that one 
very important concept has not been directly addressed by the protocols that have been conducted thus far. In the EPR-3 guidelines, the importance of the use of written asthma 
treatment plans is stressed. These treatment plans use the terms “green zone”, “yellow 
zone”, and “red zone”, with the yellow zone being defined as some type of step-up in 
treatment that will hopefully reestablish asthma  control and prevent the patient from entering 
the red zone, which in most cases involves some type of oral or parenteral corticosteroid 
intervention.  
Interestingly, guidelines as to what determines when a patient is entering or is in the yellow zone are never precisely defined due to lack of evidence to base precise recommendations 
upon. The examples that are used in the sample asthma action plan use peak expiratory 
flow rate (PEFR) values as one criterion, and symptoms consisting of wheezing, coughing 
and shortness of breath as another. As such, these plans have been labeled PEFR-based 
or symptom-based, respectively. In 2007, the expert panel felt that studies did not clearly show that a peak flow monitoring-based action plan was better than a symptom monitoring-
based plan in improving outcomes, but that it did show similar benefits. The committee felt 
that the plan should direct the patient to adjust medications in response to particular signs, 
symptoms, and peak flow measurements and should state when to seek medical help. The 
clinician should tailor the plan to the needs of individual patients. EPR-3 further states that 
the nature of the plan, whether it is based on symptoms or based on peak flow, is not the 
important issue; rather, it is having a plan in place versus not having one at all. 
Paradoxically, although action plans are a fi rm recommendation by the expert panel for 
asthma management, guidance to clinicians as to the specifics of how these plans should 
be formulated are not provided. For example, what level of symptom severity, rescue albuterol use, activity limitations etc. would warrant a step-up (short term or intermittent) in 
therapy into the yellow zone? While quantitative cut points for PEFR that would constitute 
being in the yellow zone are suggested (50-80% of the patient’s personal best), similar 
threshold guidelines for quantifying symptom severity are never specifically provided. 
Moreover, once a given threshold is reached, what therapeutic intervention should be 
recommended once the patient enters into the yellow zone? Higher than usual doses of 
inhaled corticosteroids? A burst of oral corticosteroids? Other or additional strategies? 
These gaps in the asthma guidelines, and a need to provide more evidence-based 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 9recommendations for yellow zone therapy were the major impetus for the design and 
development of the current protocol. 
 
II. OBJECTIVES & RE SEARCH HYPOTHESES 
 
A. PRIMARY 
 
Primary Objective 
The primary objective of this study is to determine whether in children receiving low-dose 
ICS therapy, quintupling the dose of inhaled corticosteroids in the “yellow zone” (at the onset 
of symptoms previously associated with upper respiratory illnesses and subsequent asthma exacerbations) reduces the rate of severe asthma exacerbations treated with oral 
corticosteroids.   
 
Primary Research Hypothesis 
The primary research hypothesis is that in ch ildren receiving low-dose ICS, quintupling the 
dose of inhaled corticosteroids in the yellow zone will reduce the rate of severe asthma exacerbations treated with oral corticosteroids. 
 
B. SECONDARY 
 
Secondary Objectives 
The secondary research objectives of this study include determining whether, in children 
receiving low-dose ICS, quintupling the dose of inhaled corticosteroids in the “yellow zone” 
leads to reductions in symptoms [assessed by area under the curve (AUC) for total daily symptoms(18) and the asthma index(25)] time to first asthma exacerbation, and rate of 
treatment failures. Additionally, we aim to a ssess overall corticosteroid exposure, and the 
potential for growth effects of increased ICS exposure.   
Secondary Research Hypotheses 
The secondary research hypothesis is that quintupling the dose of inhaled corticosteroids in 
the yellow zone will lead to reductions in symptoms [assessed by AUC for total daily 
symptoms and the asthma index] more rapidly than continuing on the same inhaled 
corticosteroid dose. We also hypothesize that quintupling the ICS dose in the yellow zone 
will lead to greater time to first asthma exacerbation and a lower rate of treatment failures. 
Further, we hypothesize that this intervention will reduce overall corticosteroid exposure, 
and will not lead to significant reductions in growth velocity over 1 year. 
 
C. EXPLORATORY OBJECTIVES 
Exploratory research objectives include comparing the timing of yellow zone initiation using 
a symptom-based action plan (STICS gold standard, appendix C) vs. a peak-flow based 
action plan by obtaining blinded peak flows throughout the duration of the STICS trial. 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 10Further, we will identify predictors of asthma exacerbations in this exacerbation-prone 
population and identify predictors of response to the study intervention and assess the cost-
effectiveness of the yellow zone strategies. 
 
 
III. STUDY DESIGN 
 
A. SUMMARY OF STUDY DESIGN 
 
This study is a double-blind, parallel group study with a 4-week run-in period to establish 
adequate control (c-ACT >19) and adherence followed by a 48-week treatment period. After 
randomization, participants will be treated for 48 weeks with open-label fluticasone 44 mcg 2 
puffs twice daily. During the 48-week treatm ent period, participants will receive blinded 
therapy for 7 days each time they enter the “yellow zone”. Yellow zone therapy will be fluticasone 44 or 220 mcg 2 puffs twice daily.  
 
 
1x ICS 1x ICS Green  Zone*  
*Discon nued  when  receiving  blinded  yellow  zone therapy  
  
 48 weeks  4 week  
Run‐in Period  
5x ICS 
 5x ICS 
 5x ICS 
1x ICS 
 1x ICS 
 1x ICS 
Randomiza on 
PC PC PC PC PC PC V1 
Wk 0 V3 
Wk 12 V4 
Wk 20 V5 
Wk 28 V6 
Wk 36 V7 
Wk 44 V8 
Wk 52 
Consent  
History  
c‐ACT 
PE 
Diary  
Spiro  
Max‐BD 
 
 
 Brief PE 
c‐ACT 
Diary  
Adherence  
FeNO  
Spiro  & IOS 
Methacholine  
Blood  draw 
Dispense  drug 
 Brief PE 
c‐ACT 
Diary  
Adherence  
FeNO  
Spiro  & IOS 
Dispense  drug 
 Brief PE 
c‐ACT 
Diary  
Adherence  
FeNO  
Spiro  & IOS 
Dispense  drug 
 Brief PE 
c‐ACT 
Diary  
Adherence  
FeNO  
Spiro  & IOS 
Dispense  drug 
 Brief PE 
c‐ACT 
Diary  
Adherence  
FeNO  
Spiro  & IOS 
Dispense  drug 
 Brief PE 
c‐ACT 
Diary  
Adherence  
FeNO  
Spiro  & IOS 
Dispense  drug 
 Brief PE 
c‐ACT 
Diary  
Adherence  
FeNO  
Spiro  & IOS 
Future  Care 
Exit Interview  
 V2 
Wk 4 
 
 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 11 
  
B. RATIONALE FOR THE STUDY DESIGN 
The STICS trial is designed to address 
an important clinical question: should 
clinicians recommend quintupling the 
dose of a patient’s ICS therapy at the 
onset of yellow zone symptoms in order 
to prevent progression to the red zone? 
As illustrated in Figure 2, the timing of 
the initiation of the yellow zone 
intervention likely should be at the point at which symptoms are just beginning to 
escalate in terms of them not 
responding in the usual way to rescue 
therapy (i.e., relief onset, duration, or 
need for repetition). Alternatively, some other change in asthma control measures could be 
considered to define this yellow zone threshold. This timing for beginning yellow zone 
therapy is likely a critical factor in altering subsequent outcomes. Indeed, a number of trials 
that have been unable to show efficacy with inhaled corticosteroid interventions have been 
criticized for the escalation in therapy being started too late.(26) However, starting an intervention too early may lead to overtreatment and potentially unnecessary side effects of 
medication. 
Studies performed by both the ACRN and CARE networks have explored some of these 
threshold definitions. In adults, the ACRN developed a symptom based action plan that was 
used in the IMPACT study as part of a step-up short-term yellow zone strategy. The 
participant was considered to be in the yellow zone when one of the following thresholds 
were met: awakening from asthma three or more times in a two-week period or on two 
consecutive nights; using albuterol for relief of symptoms four or more times/day for two or 
more consecutive days; albuterol relieved symptoms for less than four hours after each 
treatment over a 12-hour period; using albuterol  for relief of symptoms daily for seven days, 
and this use exceeded two times the weekly use of albuterol during the baseline period; or 
exercise induced unusual breathlessness.(17) If any of these criteria were met, the 
participant was instructed to use open-label budesonide, 800 mcg twice daily for 10 days.  
In children, the CARE network steering committee spent almost a year trying to develop a 
set of uniform criteria that could be used by parents of all preschool children enrolled in the 
AIMS trial to define when the treatment intervention (step-up short term or yellow zone 
medication) should be initiated. Interviews with parents eventually led the committee to 
realize that the threshold for initiation of the intervention needed to be individualized for each participant.(27) Thus, in preschool children, the criteria for beginning the yellow zone 
therapy differed among participants. Once these criteria were met, the children received 
scheduled albuterol, oral montelukast, or high dose nebulized budesonide (1 mg twice 
Days After the Start of a Cold Asthma Symptom Burden 
Symptoms 
resolve to 
baseline Time to start 
Step-up Short 
Term or 
Yellow Zone Symptoms 
begin Symptoms 
escalate Symptoms peak 
Figure 2 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 12daily). None of these three interventions reduc ed the use of oral prednisone (i.e., preventing 
escalation into the red zone). However, a subset of children with a positive modified asthma 
predictive index (mAPI)(28) (at high risk of subsequent asthma development) did experience 
a significant reduction in symptom burden when treated intermittently with high-dose ICS 
therapy during respiratory tract illness. The same criteria for yellow zone therapy were 
utilized in the CARE Network MIST trial which showed that intermittent high-dose 
budesonide was associated with a similar rate of severe exacerbations, when compared to 
daily, low-dose budesonide, used over the course of 1 year in preschool children with a 
positive mAPI(19). Another preschool study demonstrated some interesting results. The 
study examined the efficacy and safe ty of preemptive treatment with very high-dose 
fluticasone (750 mcg twice daily or placebo) in reducing the severity of recurrent virus-
induced wheezing in children 1 to 6 years of age(29).  Treatment was started at the onset of 
an upper respiratory tract infection and continued for a maximum of 10 days. The primary 
outcome was rescue oral corticosteroid use. Over a median period of 40 weeks, 8% of 
upper respiratory tract infections in the fluticasone group led to treatment with rescue 
systemic corticosteroids, as compared with 18% in the placebo group (odds ratio, 0.49; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 0.30 to 0.83). Importantly, treatment with this very high dose of 
fluticasone was associated with a smaller gain in height and weight. The authors concluded 
that, given the potential for overuse by initiation at the very first sign of a respiratory tract 
illness, this preventive approach should not be adopted in clinical practice until long-term adverse effects could be further clarified. 
Although the data generated in the above studies provide insight into timing of yellow zone 
strategies, it is important to point out that the age range for participants to be enrolled in the STICS protocol was not included in either of these three study populations. Additionally, 
these studies involved patients with intermittent or very mild persistent asthma. Nonetheless, 
based on these results and published studies, the steering committee developed the following criteria for defining the threshold for entering the yellow zone in the STICS 
protocol: 
 Rescue albuterol 2x (4 puffs) in 6 hours OR 
 Rescue albuterol 3x (6 puffs) in 24 hours OR 
 1 night-time awakening due to asthma that leads to albuterol use 
 
The specific medication and dose used to attenuate further symptom escalation is also likely 
an important element in achieving successful pr evention of exacerbations. In this regard, a 
number of strategies have been evaluated in both children and adults. Although very frequently utilized in clinical practice, doubling the dose of ICS in both adults(30-32) and children(33) has not been shown to be effective. However, it should be noted that these 
studies all had relatively small sample sizes and often delayed the yellow zone intervention 
until quite significant symptoms and/or reductions in PEFR were present(26). In contrast, 
preliminary data generated a number of years ago suggested that quadrupling the dose of 
an ICS for 7 days, starting at the first appearance of worsening symptoms, may prevent 
exacerbations requiring oral systemic corticosteroids.(34) These intriguing data were 
subsequently further evaluated in a trial specifically designed to ascertain the value of 
quadrupling the dose of ICS in reducing the need for subsequent oral corticosteroid 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 13administration. The primary outcome of this trial was progression of yellow zone symptoms 
to the point of being sufficient enough to warrant oral corticosteroid treatment.(3) Overall, 
the primary outcome was not significant. However, in a post hoc analysis of the data, 
reductions in prednisone use were significantly noted in those participants who initiated step-up therapy per protocol. The authors concluded that, although the primary outcome did 
not reach statistical significance, quadrupling the dose of inhaled corticosteroid when 
asthma control starts to deteriorate appears to reduce acute exacerbations of asthma and is 
deserving of further investigation. Further, in this study, the quadrupling of ICS dose 
occurred after significant symptoms had developed, and it therefore could be suggested that 
earlier institution of quadrupled ICS dosing may be more likely to prevent exacerbations 
successfully. Finally, this study included adults across a spectrum of asthma severity, but whether the participants’ baseline ICS dose or concomitant treatment with a LABA altered 
response to therapy was not reported. 
In summary, the current literature indicates that doubling the dose of ICS is not an effective 
strategy for attenuating and/or abrogating progression from the yellow zone into red zone 
therapy. However, in adult patients, quadrupling the dose may achieve these outcomes. Since the data in children to address this particular form of intervention are nonexistent, the 
steering committee felt it extremely relevant to design a trial in school-aged children (5-11 
years of age) that would provide evidence to guide therapy in this regard.  Based upon ICS 
dose preparations available, we have chosen a protocol in which step-up short term or 
“yellow zone” therapy consists of quintupling the dose of the participant’s “green zone” or 
baseline therapy. This gap in our evidence base is important in children treated with either 
low-dose ICS or low-dose ICS + LABA therapy, but due to the potential for interaction by 
baseline therapy, we will include only children treated with low-dose ICS in the STICS trial. 
 
C. OUTCOME MEASURES 
 
Primary outcome 
The primary outcome is the rate of severe exacerbations treated with oral corticosteroids 
(prednisone). Oral prednisone will be administered for the treatment of impending episodes 
of severe asthma when bronchodilator therapy is inadequate(35). The decision concerning 
the initiation or continuation of a course of oral prednisone will be at the physician’s 
discretion, based upon criteria previously published by the ICAC.(13) Prednisone should be 
prescribed if: 
 The participant used more than 3 nebulizer treatments with albuterol or comparable 
beta-agonist bronchodilator or 6 puffs of albuterol (3 treatments of 2 puffs each) in the 
prior 4 hours for relief of asthma symptoms OR 
 The participant used 12 or more puffs of albuterol in the last 24 hours for relief of asthma 
symptoms OR 
 The participant awakened due to cough, shortness of breath, chest tightness, or 
wheezing AND needed to use albuterol at least 2 of the previous 3 nights OR 
 The participant used 8 or more puffs of albuterol per day during 2 of the previous 3 days 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 14for relief of asthma symptoms. 
 
Secondary outcomes 
Specific secondary outcomes of particular interest to be obtained in this study include 
additional outcomes in domains of impairment and risk.  These secondary outcomes include 
the following: 
 
1. Time to first exacerbation treated with oral corticosteroids 
2. Treatment failures 3. Area under the curve (AUC) symptom scores(18) during the yellow zone 
episodes, including those that progress to red zone therapy 
4. Asthma Index(25) during the yellow zone episodes, including those that progress 
to red zone therapy 
5. Albuterol rescue inhaler use (# of puffs) during yellow zone episodes 
6. Unscheduled emergency department (ED) or urgent care visits for asthma 
7. Hospitalizations for asthma 8. Linear growth 
9. Total corticosteroid exposure (ICS + OCS) 
 
 
Exploratory analyses 
 
1. To identify predictors of exacerbations treated with oral corticosteroids 
a. Number of exacerbations in prior year 
b. Atopic characteristics (total IgE, allergen-specific in vitro  IgE [number of 
positive IgE tests, sum of IgE values, specific allergen sensitivity patterns, mono vs polysensitization]) 
c. IOS [R5-R20 and AX] at randomization (subset) 
d. FEV
1 at randomization 
e. FeNO at randomization f. Maximum bronchodilator reversibility at V1 
g. Methacholine responsiveness at randomization  
h. Atopic dermatitis 
i. Race/ethnicity 
j. Body-mass index (BMI) 
k. Gender l. Nasal samples during yellow zone episodes 
i. HRV species (A vs. B vs. C) 
ii. Virus positive vs. Virus negative episode 
iii. Bacteria positive vs. Bacteria negative episode 
 
2. To identify predictors of response to yellow zone therapy [same as in #1] 3. To compare yellow zone episode identification by symptom-based action plan 
[gold standard in STICS, appendix C] vs. a peak flow-based action plan [blinded peak flows]  
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 154. To compare rates of unscheduled emergency department (ED) or urgent care 
visits for asthma and hospitalizations between treatment groups 
5. To assess cost-effectiveness of the yellow zone strategies  
 
 
 
D. STUDY POPULATION  AND CONTROL GROUP 
 
This study will enroll children 5-11 years of age who meet criteria for treatment with long-
term, step 2 asthma controller therapy, as defined by the NAEPP EPR-3 guidelines. They 
must have had at least 1 asthma exacerbation treated with oral corticosteroids in the year prior to study enrollment. To ensure adequate representation, we will enroll at least 30% 
ethnic and racial minorities.  
 
E. PLAN FOR PA TIENT SAFETY 
Study specific risks 
 
Risks and benefits of study procedures 
 
Venipuncture:  Blood samples will be obtained by venipuncture of an antecubital vein to 
determine in vitro IgE levels, peripheral blood eosinophils, and for DNA extraction for future 
genotyping studies. 
 
Risks: The risks of venipuncture are minimal. The possible risks include bruising and/or 
infection at the site of the venipuncture and vasovagal episodes experienced by the blood 
donors. Pressure will be applied to the venipuncture site to prevent bruising. Aseptic 
technique will be used to prevent infection. Blood will be obtained while the participants are 
in a seated position and medical and nursing personnel will be available at the study sites to 
treat and manage vasovagal episodes.  
 
Benefits:  The DNA isolated for future genotyping studies will provide important insight into 
potential genetic modifiers of responses to therapy. 
The potential benefits justify the potential risks. 
 
Questionnaires.  
 Risks:  Answering questionnaires and daily diaries about asthma is of minimal risk.  If 
participants feel uncomfortable they are welc ome to discuss the questions with the study 
coordinator.   
 
Benefits:  There are no direct benefits to the participant. 
The potential benefits justify the potential risks. 
 
Pulmonary function testing (spirometry and impulse oscillometry) 
 Risks:  Spirometry will be performed to determine the participants’ pulmonary function. The 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 16risks of spirometry are minimal. The possible risks include precipitation of bronchospasm 
and light-headedness from repeated blowing attempts. Medical and nursing personnel and 
medications will be available at the study sites to treat and manage bronchospasm. 
Inhalation of a SABA (albuterol) will be used to assess maximum reversibility. The possible risks of inhaled beta-2 adrenergic agonists include tachycardia and hand tremors. These 
side effects are non-life threatening and are short-lived. Impulse oscillometry (IOS) will also 
be performed in a subset of participants. There are no significant risks associated with IOS. 
 
Benefits:  Spirometry with assessment of maximum reversibility to a SABA and IOS will be 
utilized to characterize the participants and to determine whether they are potential 
biomarkers to predict asthma exacerbations or response to therapy. 
The potential benefits justify the potential risks.  
Methacholine inhalation challenge :  
 
Risks:  The major risk of methacholine challenge is the induction of severe 
bronchoconstriction.  As a precaution, participants will not undergo methacholine challenge 
if their FEV
1 is less than 70% of predicted. Methacholine challenges have been performed 
with high levels of safety in children in both the Childhood Asthma Management Program (CAMP) and the Childhood Asthma Research & Education (CARE) Network. Medical and nursing personnel, medications and equipment will be available at the study sites to treat 
and manage any bronchoconstriction episodes.   
Benefits:  Methacholine challenge will be utilized to characterize the participants and to 
determine whether it is a potential biomarker to predict asthma exacerbations or response to 
therapy.  The potential benefits justify the potential risks. 
 
Exhaled nitric oxide:  This measures the amount of nitric oxide in the exhaled breath and is 
thought to increase when the lungs are irritated or inflamed.  
Risks: There are no known risks associated with this procedure. 
 
Benefits:  Participants may benefit from knowing the amount of inflammation in their airways 
as measured by FeNO. 
The potential benefits justify the potential risks. 
 Nasal blow for virus detection:  Respiratory viruses are the most common trigger of 
asthma exacerbations. Collecting samples at home during yellow zone episodes using 
methods included in prior AsthmaNet studies (April/Ocelot & Infant/Avica) will allow us to 
assess the pathogens involved in the yellow zone episodes and asthma exacerbations. 
 
Risks:  There is a small chance of lavage fluid going down the throat leading to an 
uncomfortable feeling.  Benefits:  Nasal sampling will allow investigators to identify pathogens involved in 
exacerbation episodes and determine whether illnesses caused by particular pathogens are 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 17more or less responsive to quintupling the ICS dose. 
The potential benefits justify the potential risks.  
 
 Risks and benefits of study drugs 
Fluticasone 
 
Risks:  Daily low-dose inhaled corticosteroids have been associated with a small, but 
statistically significant reduction in growth ve locity.(36) High-doses of inhaled corticosteroids 
used for prolonged periods of time have been associated with additional side effects, 
including hoarseness, sore throat, and thrush, adrenal gland suppression, weight gain, bruising of the skin, and diabetes. These side effects are not anticipated in STICS because 
of the 7-day yellow-zone treatment period and the maximum of 6 yellow zone courses per 
participant in the trial. We will monitor growth throughout the trial (see secondary outcomes). 
 
Benefits : The efficacy of fluticasone at low dosages has been well established in both adults 
and children(9, 37) In a meta-analysis of 71 randomized trials (14,602 adults and children) comparing fluticasone to budesonide or beclomethasone, at a dose ratio of 1:2, significant 
improvements in lung function (FEV
1, FEF 25-75) and morning peak expiratory flow were noted 
in the fluticasone-treated group(38). Low-dose ICS is the current preferred therapy for step 2 
treatment of asthma in children 5-11 years of age(1). Quadrupling the dose of ICS in the 
yellow zone may reduce oral steroid requiring exacerbations in adults(3). This study is 
designed to determine whether quintupling the dose of ICS in the yellow zone, an approach 
currently utilized in clinical practice, is efficacious in children 5-11 years of age. The design 
of the intervention, quadrupling versus quintupling the dose, is based upon currently 
available ICS inhaler dose escalation choices available in the United States.  The potential benefits justify the potential risks. 
 
Routine safety monitoring 
 
Fluticasone 
 Physical exams including assessment for oral candidiasis and measurement of linear growth 
will be performed at each study visit. 
 
Data Safety Monitoring Board 
 
A pre-specified stopping rule is not necessary for this trial, and a formal interim analysis of 
efficacy data is not planned. The AsthmaNet Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), however, will be monitoring all of the safety data throughout the course of the trial and will 
be notified within 72 hours of any serious adverse events (SAEs) that occur. 
 
F. ETHICAL ISSUES 
Participation of children 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 18Asthmatic participants ages 5-11 years of age will be included in this study. An IND will be 
required for the use of fluticasone MDI in this age group.  
 
Participation of females 
 
The target recruitment goal is at least 40% females, as approximately 60% of children in this age group with asthma are males.  
 
Participation of minority groups 
 
The target recruitment goal will be to enroll 30% minorities. Asthma affects African Americans more frequently and more severely than other ethnic groups. Some subsets of 
Hispanics (e.g., Puerto Ricans) have particularly frequent and severe asthma, while others 
(e.g., Mexican-Americans) do not. In the present study, we will classify race and ethnicity 
separately, in line with HHS guidelines, and allow individual participants to identify their 
racial category. The reporting of such data will allow for numbers of individuals who indicate 
more than one racial category insofar as it does not interfere with individual participant 
confidentiality.  Based on the demographics of our clinical research sites and our experience 
in other AsthmaNet studies, which up to this time have enrolled approximately 50% 
minorities, it is highly likely we will be able to meet our race/ethnicity targets. If individual 
AsthmaNet centers are unable to meet minority targets from initial recruitment efforts, they 
will redirect their recruitment strategies to use local newspaper and radio advertising that 
have more focused minority demographics. Other efforts that have been successfully used 
for minority recruitment include the targeting of clinics, work sites, schools, churches, and civic groups with high minority representation. 
 
G. STUDY ORGANIZATION 
Participating sites 
 
Nine AsthmaNet Clinical Center partnerships (and their associated satellites) will participate 
in the STICS trial.  Each partnership has recruitment and retention plans in place to 
maximize enrollment.  These nine partnerships include: 
 
1. Brigham & Women’s Hospital (Dr. Elliott Israel, PI), and Boston Children’s Hospital (Dr. 
Wanda Phipatanakul, PI), Boston, MA 
 
2. Chicago Metropolitan Asthma Consortium, Chicago, IL (Drs. Lewis Smith, Jacqueline 
Pongracic, Julian Solway, Jerry Krishnan, PIs) 
 
3. National Jewish Health, Denver, CO (Drs. E. Rand Sutherland and Stanley Szefler, PIs) 
and University of New Mexico in Albuquerque (Drs. W Kelly and H Haidarian-Raissy) 
 
4. University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI (Drs. Chris Sorkness and Robert Lemanske, PIs) 
 
5. University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA (Drs. Sally Wenzel and Fernando Holguin, PIs) 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 196. Washington University, St. Louis, MO (Drs. Mario Castro and Leonard Bacharier, PIs) 
 
7. University of California, San Francisco, CA (Drs. Homer Boushey and Michael Cabana, 
PIs) 
 
8. Duke University, Durham, NC (Dr. Monica Kraft, PI) and University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ (Dr. Fernando Martinez, PI) 
 
9. Wake Forest University, Winston Salem, NC (Dr. Stephen Peters, PI) and Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia (Dr. Anne Fitzpatrick, PI) 
 
Steering Committee 
 
The AsthmaNet Steering Committee is comprised of representatives from the nine clinical 
centers. All centers have participated in the decision to design and conduct this protocol. 
Any protocol amendments or administrative changes require Steering Committee approval 
as well as that of NHLBI (based upon recommendation from the Protocol Review Committee) and DSMB as appropriate. 
 
Vendors 
 
GlaxoSmithKline has preliminarily agreed to pr ovide fluticasone and albuterol for the STICS 
trial. 
 
Role of National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
 
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) of the NIH provides funding for 
AsthmaNet clinical trials as well as the network sites and DCC. Program Officers from 
NHLBI serve as members of the Steering Committee for oversight of the interests and 
priorities of the NIH as well as applicable regulations. 
 
H. COMPLIANCE 
 
This study will be conducted in Compliance with The Common Rule. Prior to the initiation of the study, study sites have current Office of Human Research Subjects Protection (OHRP) 
approved Federal Wide Assurance (FWA) and provide certification that an Institutional Review Board (IRB) registered under the specific Assurance has reviewed and approved the study. All investigators have documented completion of training on the protection of 
human research subjects. As the design, conduct, or reporting of this study is under a 
cooperative agreement with the NIH, investigators are required to be free from bias by any 
conflicting financial interest. 
 
IV. METHODS AND MATERIALS 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 20A. STUDY POPULATION 
Recruitment and selection of patients 
 
This study will enroll children ages 5-11 years of  age who meet criteria for treatment with 
long-term, Step 2 or 3 asthma controller therapy, as defined by the NAEPP EPR-3 guidelines.(1) To ensure adequate representation, we will enroll at least 30% racial minorities.  
  
Inclusion criteria 
1. Males and females, ages 5-11 years 2. All ethnicities/races eligible 
3. Physician-diagnosed asthma (at visit 1) 
4. At least 1 exacerbation treated with systemic (oral or injectable) corticosteroids in the 
past 12 months 
5. Able to perform reproducible spirometry 6. Current treatment with step 2 controller therapy [low-dose ICS, leukotriene receptor 
antagonist (LTRA)] OR current treatment with  step 3 controller therapy [low-dose ICS 
+ LABA, low-dose ICS + LTRA, or medium dose ICS] with a c-ACT score of >19 at 
enrollment, no more than 2 prednisone treated exacerbations in the past 6 months, 
prebronchodilator FEV 1 ≥ 80% predicted and willing to step down therapy OR 
controller naïve and qualifying for step 2 controller therapy per EPR3 guidelines [asthma symptoms or SABA use > 2 days per week or night-time awakenings due to asthma > 2 nights per month]  
7. Prebronchodilator FEV
1 ≥ 60% predicted at V1 
8. Ability to provide screening and baseline information at visits 1 and 2 
9. Ability and willingness to provide informed assent (age determined by local IRBs) 
and for parents to provide informed consent (ages 5-11 years) at visit 1 
10. For females of childbearing potential: not pregnant, non-lactating, and agree to 
practice an adequate birth control method (abstinence, combination barrier and spermicide, or hormonal) for the duration of the study (at visit 1) 
11. History of clinical varicella or varicella vaccine 
 
Exclusion criteria (at enrollment) 
1. Corticosteroid treatment for any condition within the following defined intervals prior to enrollment. 
a. Oral – Use within 2-week period of the screening visit 
b. Injectable – Use within 2-week period of the screening visit 
c. Nasal corticosteroids may be used at any time during this trial at the 
discretion of the study investigator or primary care physician 
2. Current or prior use of medications known to significantly interact with corticosteroid 
disposition (within a 2-week period of Visit 1), including but not limited to carbamazepine, erythromycin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin, and ketoconazole 
3. Presence of chronic or active lung disease other than asthma 
4. Significant medical illness other than asthma, including thyroid disease, diabetes mellitus, Cushing’s disease, Addison’s disease, hepatic disease, or concurrent medical problems that could require oral corticosteroids during the study 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 215. A history of cataracts, glaucoma, or any other medical disorder associated with an 
adverse effect to corticosteroids 
6. History of a life-threatening asthma exacerbation requiring intubation, mechanical ventilation, or resulting in a hypoxic seizure 
7. More than 5 prednisone treated exacerbations in the past 12 months 
8. More than 1 hospitalizations lasting >24 hours for asthma in the past 12 months 
9. Prematurity <35 weeks EGA 
10. Significant failure to thrive (< 2nd percentile) 
11. History of adverse reactions to ICS preparations or any of their ingredients 
12. Receiving hyposensitization therapy other than an established maintenance regimen (On maintenance regimen for ≥  3 months) 
13. Pregnancy or lactation 
14. If of child bearing potential, failure to practice abstinence or use of an acceptable birth control method 
15. Inability to perform study procedures 
16. Participation presently or in the past month in another investigational drug trial 
17. Evidence that the family may be unreliable or nonadherent, or may move from the clinical center area before trial completion 
 Exclusion criteria (at randomization) 
1. Inadequate adherence (< 75% of the electronic diary records completed, or < 75% of 
the expected medication doses taken) 
2. Asthma exacerbation requiring systemic cort icosteroids (may be re-enrolled at a later 
time if the subject was not hospitalized) 
3. c-ACT < 20 at V2 
4. Prebronchodilator FEV 1 < 80% predicted at V2  (May be re-enrolled at a later date if 
inclusion criteria are still met) 
5. Exclusion criteria assessed at V1 are no longer met 
 
B. STUDY INTERVENTION 
Description and frequency of drug/ modification 
 
For the purpose of this study, each participant will receive three study inhalers ( green zone  
= fluticasone 44 mcg, yellow zone = fluticasone 44 mcg or 220 mcg, SABA).  The green 
zone inhaler will contain fluticasone 44 mcg (not blinded) to be used as a daily controller (twice daily) throughout the trial, but stopped when the participant is in the yellow zone . 
The yellow zone  inhaler will contain fluticasone 44 mcg or 220 mcg. This medication will be 
double-blind and used twice daily for 7 days in place of the green zone inhaler when the 
patient meets yellow zone criteria. This yellow zone inhaler will be used for 7 days for each 
yellow zone course, and yellow zone courses must be separated by at least 7 days. The 
third inhaler will contain SABA and will not be blinded (90 mcg/inhalation of albuterol sulfate) 
and used as needed throughout the study.  
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 22Prednisone.   All participants will have access to prednisone (2 mg/kg/day for 2 days 
[maximum 60 mg/day], followed by 1 mg/kg/day  for 2 days [maximum 30 mg/day]) for 
treatment of an exacerbation.  
 
Promoting medication delivery 
 
Demonstrating medication delivery techniques at  each study visit will maximize delivery of 
the medications.  To minimize the variability in the dose, the patient’s medication technique 
will be reviewed at each study visit.  Objective feedback will be given to each participant to 
improve performance.  Participants will be instructed in proper valve holding chamber 
cleaning techniques, including air-drying. Instructional tools, memory aids, and electronic 
diary prompts will also be administered to participants to ensure proper medication delivery, 
safety monitoring, and adherence.  Additionally, we will review the asthma action plan at 
each study visit. Further, to help avoid confusion between green and yellow zone 
medications, we will color-code (green or yellow) the outside of the inhalers to match the action plan. 
 
Rescue therapy 
 
Participants will use open-label SABA as needed for symptoms throughout the study, 
regardless of treatment assignment.  All participants will be managed with rescue algorithms 
and/or short courses of prednisone for asthma exacerbations in a manner consistent with 
the NAEPP guidelines(1) and previous CARE Network & Inner City Asthma Consortium 
(ICAC) protocols(10, 11, 13).  If a participant experiences two exacerbations requiring oral 
corticosteroids in 6 months or three exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids in 12 
months, they will be terminated fr om the study.  For the purpose of this study, two courses of 
systemic corticosteroids must be separated by more than one week to count as two 
separate exacerbations. 
 
C. PERMITTED CONCOMITANT ME DICATIONS and INTERVENTIONS 
 
Medications used to treat asthma must remain constant after the screening visit and through 
completion of the study, with modifications permitted as needed when medically indicated. A 
list of the medications that cannot be taken and the period of exclusion are listed in the 
Appendix.  
In addition to the prohibitions in Table 1 of the Appendix, on the day of study visits after the 
screening visit, SABAs may not be used for at least 6 hours prior to the visit. After the 
screening visit, use of SABA within 6 hours should result in rescheduling of the visit, unless 
no other appointments are available. (After the screening visit and prior to randomization, 
the visit should be cancelled and if it cannot be rescheduled the patient must be excluded 
from the study.) At the screening visit, the most recent use of SABAs and LABAs should be noted, but spirometry may still be performed. 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 23D. STUDY ASSESSMENTS 
Description of assessments 
 
Overall, there are five types of scheduled study visits or contacts as follows.  These visits 
are illustrated in the study diagram shown previously: 
 
1. Screening (V1) 
 
2. Randomization visit (V2)  
 
3. Clinic visits to assess safety and efficacy (V3-V7) 
 
4. Treatment telephone calls between study visits 
 
5. Yellow zone phone calls 
 
6. Exacerbation (Red zone) phone calls 
 
7. Exacerbation (Red zone) clinic visit (optional) 
 
8. Study close-out visit (V8), 48 weeks after the randomization visit 
 
Order of assessments 
 
Ideally all visits for a given patient should be scheduled at the same time of day. The order 
of assessments may be flexible with the following exceptions: 
 Patient reported outcomes (PROs) should be completed before other assessments 
begin. 
 FeNO must be performed before spirometry 
 IOS (at selected sites) 
 Spirometry should be completed after FeNO and IOS, and following any PROs if there 
are any. 
 
Visit structure 
 
Enrollment/Screening (V1), Study Week 0  
 
1. Informed consent obtained 
 
2. Eligibility determined based upon inclusion and exclusion criteria; Childhood Asthma 
Control Test (c-ACT) is administered  
3. Medical history obtained 
 
4. Complete physical examination includi ng height and weight performed (see Appendix C) 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 245.  Spirometry with maximum reversibility  
 
6.  An Action Plan provided and explained, to include standard education about wheezing, 
use of the action plan, avoidance of allergens and irritants 
 
7.  Dispense open-label medications (SABA [albuterol], ICS, prednisone) 
 
8.  Dispense spacer  
 
9.  Dispense electronic diary and instruct in proper use, including peak flow measurement 
and establishing personal best value 
 10. Provide education for appropriate medication and spacer use 
 
11. Review current long-term asthma controller medication use and discontinue if 
appropriate, or dispense open-label study medication if criteria are met  
 
12. Urine pregnancy test for females who have had 1
st menses 
 
 
Randomization Visit (V2) Study Week 4 (± 5 day window) 
 
1. Electronic diary records reviewed and evaluated for adherence - participants must 
demonstrate at least 75% adherence to electronic diary 
 
2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria reviewed 
 
3. Asthma symptoms and medical history, including healthcare utilization reviewed 
 
4. c-ACT administered 
 
5. Brief physical exam including height and weight performed 
 
6. Exhaled nitric oxide meas urement (FeNO) performed 
 
7. IOS performed (at selected sites) 
 
8. Spirometry  
 
9. Methacholine challenge 
 
10. Blood sample drawn for in vitro IgE testing, total IgE, peripheral blood eosinophils; DNA 
banked for later genetic testing 
 
11. Action plan administered and reviewed 
 
12. Nasal sample will be collected 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 25 
13. Education provided for appropriate medication and spacer use 
 
14. Green zone open label ICS provided and blinded yellow zone medication provided 
 
15. Observe peak flow procedure 
 
16. Urine pregnancy test for females who have had 1st menses 
 
Clinic visits (V3-V7) to assess safety & efficacy:  
Weeks 12, 20, 28, 36, 44 (± 5 day window) 
 
1. Electronic diary records reviewed and evaluated for adherence   
 
2. Asthma symptoms and medical history, including healthcare utilization reviewed 
 
3. c-ACT administered 
 
4. Brief physical exam including height and weight performed 
 
5. Exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) performed 
 
6. IOS performed (at selected sites) 
 
7. Spirometry  
 
8. Action plan reviewed 
 
9. Education provided for appropriate medication, peak flow and spacer use 
 
10. Green zone open label ICS provided and blinded yellow zone medication provided 
 
Phone calls for safety: weeks 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48 ± 5 day window) 
 
1. Respiratory symptoms, albuterol use, healthcare utilization since previous visit assessed 
 
2. c-ACT administered 
 
3. Medical follow-up for symptoms or prior health care utilization if this has not already been 
done encouraged 
 
4. Electronic diary completion confirmed 
 
5. Study procedures, action plan, and medication adherence reviewed 
  
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 26Study close-out visit, (V8 – Study Week 52, ± 5 day window) 
 
1.  Electronic diary records reviewed 
 
2.  Asthma symptoms and medical history, including healthcare utilization reviewed 
 
3.  Brief physical exam including height and weight performed 
 
4.  Questionnaires administered (c-ACT) 
 
5. Exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) performed 
 
6. IOS performed (at selected sites) 
 
7. Spirometry  
 
8. Exit interview performed (critique of study  experience; permission to be contacted for   
future studies) 
 
9. Action plan reviewed 
 
10. Treatment recommendations given 
 
Yellow Zone Phone Calls 
Participant care-givers will be asked to notify the study site within 72 hours of initiating the 
yellow zone medication. During this call, the participant’s clinical status will be assessed and 
their action plan will be reviewed, including criteria for initiating red zone therapy. 
Additionally, participant care-givers will be asked to notify the study site if the participant 
continues to meet yellow zone criteria at the end of the 7 day yellow zone treatment period. 
In these cases, the participant’s clinical status will be assessed by the coordinator and 
discussed with the study clinician. The clinician will then decide whether to start prednisone 
by phone or have the participant be evaluated at the study site, where a decision would be 
made on whether to start prednisone, start an antibiotic (for sinusitis), or otherwise treat as 
medically indicated.   
 
Exacerbation (Red Zone) Phone Call (5 days after exacerbation onset ± 2 day window) 
This phone call will be initiated by the study coordinator for every participant who 
experiences an exacerbation treated with prednisone between regularly-scheduled study 
visits. This will be performed for safety purposes. If the participant is not improving on prednisone therapy, a follow-up phone call or study visit will be scheduled. 
 
Exacerbation (Red zone) Clinic Visit (optional)  
This visit will be performed if the participant experiences an exacerbation between 
scheduled study visits and needs to be seen at the c linical site. If this visit is necessary, the 
following will be performed: 
 
1. Electronic diary records reviewed 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 27 
2. Asthma symptoms and medical history, including healthcare utilization reviewed 
 
3. Spirometry 
 
4. Long physical exam 
 
5. Treatment recommendations given 
 
Description of Procedures 
 
Spirometry and Methacholine provocation testing.  All participants will undergo spirometry at 
each clinic visit. Spirometric studies are performed in accordance with ATS recommendations (American Thoracic Society, 1987) and AsthmaNet manuals of procedure 
(MOP). All participants will undergo methacholine bronchoprovocation at visit 2 in 
accordance with ATS recommendations (American Thoracic Society, 1999) and AsthmaNet 
MOP. A positive response is considered a drop in the FEV
1 from post-diluent FEV 1 ≥20%.  
 
Bronchodilator reversibility phenotype.  Participants will undergo spirometry with 
bronchodilator reversibility testing and maximal bronchodilation as defined by the maximal 
achievable FEV 1 after 4 puffs albuterol at visit 1. Participants will withhold medications as 
per the AsthmaNet MOP.  
 
Asthma symptoms and control. Asthma symptoms  will be assessed by diary recall of 
asthma-control days (ACD), days recorded in t he daily diary without any asthma symptoms 
or rescue albuterol use, at all visits. Asthma control will be assessed by the childhood 
Asthma Control Test (c-ACT)(39) at V1, randomization, regular visits and phone calls.  
 
Fraction of exhaled Nitric Oxide (FeNO ).  Levels of exhaled nitric  oxide (FeNO) are elevated 
in people with asthma. In addition, FeNO may be involved in airway inflammation.  The 
FeNO collection procedures should precede any pulmonary function testing procedures at a 
given visit.  FeNO will be performed at visits 2-8 using the Aerocrine NIOX MINO device. 
 
Impulse Oscillometry (IOS). IOS will be performed at a subset of study sites. Recent data 
suggests that IOS measurement may predict loss of asthma control in children(40). 
 
 
E. STATISTICAL METHODS 
Sample size determination 
 
The primary hypothesis for STICS will be evaluated by comparing the estimated 
exacerbation rates (expressed as number per year) in the two treatment groups.   A total 
sample size of 250 randomized participants will provide 90% power to detect a 40% 
difference in exacerbation rates, while allowing for up to 15% drop-out.  This is based on the 
assumption that the larger exacerbation rate of the two treatments is at least 0.9 
exacerbations per year.   
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 28 
Method of randomization and blinding 
 
Randomization 
Children between the ages of 5 and 11 years who satisfy all eligibility criteria during the run-
in period will be randomized to one of two treatment arms, 1xICS or 5xICS during yellow 
zone episodes, with clinical center serving as a stratifying factor.  Each of the nine clinical 
centers and their associated satellite sites is expected to randomize 28 participants.  
However, enrollment will not be constrained to require exactly 28 participants per clinical 
center.   
 
Blinding 
To minimize the bias due to possible knowledge of the sequence assignment, the study will 
be double-blinded.  Thus, the investigators and the participants will not know which 
treatments are being received. 
 
Assessment of treatment group comparability 
 
The run-in period is considered the baseline evaluation period.  The initial statistical analysis 
will focus on summarizing the baseline characteri stics of the study participants.  Descriptive 
statistics (means and standard deviations, or medians and inter-quartile ranges) will be 
calculated for continuous baseline measures such as current age and asthma symptom severity.  Frequency tables will be generated for categorical baseline measures such as sex 
and prior medication history.  
 
Efficacy analyses 
 
Primary analysis 
The primary outcome is the rate of exacerbations per year.  It is important to note that the 
primary clinical question is whether the strategy  of identifying yellow zones and then using 
either 5xICS or 1xICS during the yellow zone makes any difference on the rate of 
exacerbations over the course of the study.  The question is not whether treatment with 
either 1xICS or 5xICS during any particular yellow zone treatment makes a difference on the 
likelihood of an exacerbation occurring during that particular yellow zone.  That is, a patient 
who has no exacerbations and no yellow zone courses during the study is equivalent to a 
patient who has no exacerbations and 5 yellow zone courses during the study.   
 
Ideally, all participants would complete 48 weeks of follow-up and the exacerbation rate could be adequately estimated by modeling the number of observed exacerbations with the 
Poisson distribution and calculating the rate as the estimated mean number of 
exacerbations divided by the number of years of follow-up, which is just under 1.0 (48 
weeks/52 weeks).  However, estimates based on that model will be biased unless all 
participants complete the full 48 weeks of follow-up, which is unlikely under the STICS study 
design. When there is unequal follow-up time, better estimates can be obtained by including 
an ‘offset’ in the model, which is typically defined as the logarithm of the observed follow-up 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 29time.  Estimates from models incorporating follow-up time as an offset are generally 
unbiased as long as the follow-up time is independent of the outcome frequency.    
 
In STICS, however, follow-up time is not necessarily independent of exacerbation frequency.  Apart from the typical truncation of follow-up time due to early drop-out common 
in clinical trials, two additional aspects of ST ICS will likely contribute to truncated follow-up.  
As described below in section V.H., study participants will be withdrawn for safety reasons after the 6
th yellow zone course.  In addition, study participants will be withdrawn after the 
2nd exacerbation, if it occurs within the first 6 months, or after the 3rd exacerbation, if the 2nd 
didn’t occur within the first 6 months.  The second mechanism for early termination, based 
on exacerbations, induces dependence between follow-up time and exacerbation frequency.   The primary analysis will utilize maximum likelihood estimation based on the log-linear 
regression model for outcomes following the negative binomial distribution.  This model is a 
generalization of the Poisson-based model that can be adapted to incorporate follow-up 
times that are not independent of outcome frequency, as well as zero-count inflation and 
over-dispersion, which can be used to account for population heterogeneity.  
 Analyses of secondary outcomes 
Additional secondary analyses will examine the e ffect of study treatment on other outcomes.  
For outcome variables that are also measured as counts, such as number of unscheduled visits for acute wheezing episodes and number of days missed from daycare or parental 
work, a similar log-linear model maximum likelihood analysis will be applied.  Repeated measures ANOVA models will be applied for outcomes that are measured on a roughly 
continuous scale, such as area under the curve symptom scores, Asthma Index, albuterol 
use during the yellow zone episode, and linear growth.  For continuous outcomes that are 
do not exhibit an approximately normal distribution, appropriate transformations will be 
applied prior to ANOVA.  Outcome variables that are measured as time-to-event, such as 
time to first exacerbation and will be analyzed within the framework of proportional hazards 
regression.  This can be done incorporating treatment assignment as a fixed covariate, as opposed to a time-dependent covariate, which will result in a comparison of treatment 
strategies.    Exploratory analyses  
Exploratory analyses will examine possible effe cts of participant baseline characteristics the 
primary outcome.   Multivariable regression analyses, under the model framework described 
above, will be applied.  Characteristics to be explored include history of exacerbations in 
prior year, atopic characteristics, spirometric measures such as FEV
1, maximum 
bronchodilator reversibility, IOS, methacholine responsiveness, F ENO, atopic dermatitis, 
race/ethnicity, body-mass index and gender. 
 
Economic analyses will also be undertaken and will reflect the societal perspective for the 
yellow zone high-dose ICS approach for treatment of grade-school aged with persistent 
asthma.  There are several limitations for these analyses in this trial.  Most important are the 
potential lack of generalizability due to population selection and the fact that the protocol 
mandates closer monitoring of patients than would be expected in general practice.  However, major advantages of economic analysis in  the randomized, controlled clinical trials 
are that detailed assessments of prospectively defined resource utilization can be obtained 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 30and that treatment selection bias or confounding is eliminated by randomization.  Cost of 
treatment medication as well as rescue medications and prednisone used to treat 
exacerbations requiring systemic corticoste roids will be evaluated as wholesale costs.  
Costs of unscheduled physician or ED visits or other costs related to diagnosing and treating 
anticipated adverse events will be standardized across clinical centers.  The goal of the 
cost-effectiveness analysis will be to estimate the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio for study treatment.  Standard methods for cost-effect iveness analysis in clinical trials will be 
used.  Bootstrapping will be used to quantify the uncertainty of the ratio, and cost-effectiveness acceptability curves will be produced in order to determine the probability that 
the intervention in cost-effectives under a range of willingness-to-pay scenarios. 
 
Interim analyses 
 
The 250 children participating in STICS will be enrolled over a 12-month period and each participant will be followed for up to one year.  The study will be monitored by the 
AsthmaNet Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). The DSMB will receive reports of 
serious adverse events as they occur throughout the course of the trial and will meet semi-annually to review non-serious adverse event data and quality control reports. No formal 
interim analyses for futility/efficacy are planned because the length of follow-up is 
approximately the same length as the recruitment so that enrollment will be completed well 
before there is sufficient information to allow an efficient interim efficacy analysis.    A 
feasibility analysis will be performed after 50% of the participants have completed at least 6 months of follow-up.  The purpose of this analysis will be to check whether the assumptions 
regarding loss to follow-up, rate of yellow zone treatment initiation, and rate of treatment 
failure are being borne out.  If the assumptions are not borne out, additional power analyses 
will be conducted to examine study feasibility. The two treatment arms will be combined for 
this analysis.  Based on these results, the DSMB may recommend changes to the study 
design.  
 
F. DATA MANAGEMENT 
 
Data collection 
 
Recording of all data including informed consent and assent, history, physical examination, adverse events, confirmation of medication dispensation, and initial data entry will be done 
at each Clinical Center and forms will be forwarded to the Data Coordinating Center (DCC) 
for confirmatory entry.  Results from all tests and compliance will be transmitted 
electronically to the DCC where all data will be stored and analyzed. 
 
The DCC will be responsible for generating the data collection forms based on input from 
the clinical centers.  Once the data collection forms have been completed and reviewed, the 
Clinic Coordinator will log into the AsthmaNet Network web site and enter the data within 14 
days of the patient visit.  The advantage of this distributed data entry system is that the 
Clinic Coordinators will review the data a second  time as they are entering it, which serves 
as another level of quality control.  However, the Clinic Coordinators will not be able to query their own data.  The data base management sy stem will have range checks and validity 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 31checks programmed into it for a second level of quality control.  Forms will then be 
forwarded to the DCC for the second data entry and filing, which will be performed within 7 
days of receipt.   
 
Data integration 
 
Each Clinical Center will have a computer configuration that includes a PC, a printer, and a modem.  This will give each clinical center the capability of logging directly into the 
AsthmaNet web site with the modem as a back-up if the connection is not possible. Though this set-up is installed primarily to allow for distributed data entry into a centralized and 
secure database at the AsthmaNet web site, menu options will also include sending 
electronic mail, downloading study documents such as forms and reports, and viewing a 
calendar of AsthmaNet events.  A sophisticated security system will limit access to qualified 
personnel and prevent corruption of the study database. 
 
Data integrity and quality assurance 
 
The DCC will be responsible for identifying probl em data and resolving inconsistencies.  
Once the quality control procedures are complete, new study data will be integrated into the 
primary study database.   
 
Data disclosure 
 
AsthmaNet policies for the submission of data and forms to NHLBI for public use will be 
followed. 
 
Data retention 
 
Sites are required to follow the applicable guidelines of state and local regulations for 
keeping source data and case report forms. 
 
Anticipated Results 
 
We anticipate that quintupling the dose of ICS in the yellow zone will reduce the rate of 
severe exacerbations treated with oral corticosteroids in patients treated with daily low-dose 
ICS. We will additionally attempt to identify predictors of response to this intervention in 
order to provide more personalized approaches to therapy.  
 
V. SAFETY 
A. REPORTING PERIOD 
 
Participants are at risk of developing adverse events during study enrollment. The safety 
reporting period begins with the first study specific procedure and ends with completion of 
study participation with the exception of  SAEs potentially attributed to study 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 32drug/interventions. Throughout the reporting period all adverse events (AEs) related to study 
mandated procedures must be reported. Other AEs (not related to study procedures), which 
occur prior to study drug administration should not be reported (as AEs but may be reported 
as medical history). All serious adverse events (SAEs) from the first study specific procedure 
through study completion must be reported. Any SAE thought to be related to the study 
intervention or a study mandated procedure should be reported if the onset is within 30 days 
of study completion. 
 
B. ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
An adverse event is an unfavorable occurrence in a study participant that begins or worsens during the study (from the time of informed consent through study completion). The 
reporting of an adverse event does not imply a causal relationship between the event and 
study participation. Determination of the relationship between the event and study drug or a 
study mandated procedure must be made by the Investigator using the guidance provided in 
Section V.E.  
 
Eliciting adverse events should be spontaneous or in response to an open-ended question, 
such as “How are you?” or “Have you noticed any changes in your health since your last 
visit?” Directed questions may be used to follow up spontaneous reporting of events for 
clinically relevant details. All spontaneously re ported adverse events (in the judgment of the 
investigator) should be recorded. 
 
Scheduled outpatient procedures or hospitalizations for non-urgent interventions (e.g., 
cataract surgery or knee replacement surgery) should be reported in 
treatments/interventions. For example, cataracts should be included in the patient’s medical 
history prior to beginning treatment. The treatment (surgery) can be added with the 
indication of cataracts when appropriate. If there were worsening of vision in a patient with a 
history of cataracts during the study, that should be reported as an AE (as it represents worsening of a baseline condition) and the procedure can be reported in the treatment. 
The following conventions should be used for reporting AEs: 
 If a specific diagnosis is unclear at the time of reporting, descriptive terms should be 
used. For example, a patient with cough and a headache may later be diagnosed with influenza. Initially “cough” and “headache” may be reported and later changed to 
“influenza” after the diagnosis is evident. 
 Multiple symptoms or signs related to the same event should be reported as a single 
event, unless complications of the same event are considered medically relevant and 
not adequately captured in an existing AE. For example, the single AE ” influenza” 
should be reported rather than headache, cough, sore throat and myalgia if these 
symptoms are considered related to the infection. However, if the same patient 
develops renal failure due to severe dehydration with influenza, the renal failure should be reported as another AE. 
 The onset of the AE is the date of the first symptom or sign as noted by the patient or a 
care provider. For example, a patient ma y have a cough for several days followed by 
fever and shortness of breath before the diagnosis of pneumonia is made. The AE 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 33should be reported as “pneumonia”, with the onset being the date of the first symptom 
or sign (cough, in this case). 
 Worsening of pre-existing conditions should be reported with a description of the change 
in status. For example, “worsening allergic rhinitis” may be reported in a patient with a 
medical history that includes allergic rhinitis while reporting in “allergic rhinitis” in such 
an individual is not informative. 
 Lab or other test results outside the normal range should be reported as AEs if there are 
associated signs or symptoms or further evaluation or more frequent monitoring is 
required. Isolated lab findings may be reported as such (e.g., hypokalemia) if no 
diagnosis is apparent while lab abnormalities associated with a reported AE should not 
be reported unless they are of independent signifi cance. For example, leukocytosis in a 
patient with a diagnosis of pneumonia should not be reported whereas leukocytosis (to >60,000 cells/ml
3) in a patient with pneumonia and potential hematologic malignancy 
should be reported. 
 Adverse events are reported by the study team and may provide a diagnosis rather than the 
patient’s own words. Every effort should be made to report the patient’s description of an 
event, however clinical accuracy is paramount. For example, reporting “chest pain” with no 
treatment for the event on the case report form because the patient used the word “chest 
pain” but the physician ascribed the chest discomfort to gastroesophageal reflux for which 
the patient was already receiving treatment provides information that cannot be interpreted 
clinically. 
 Adverse events due to concurrent illnesses other than asthma may be grounds for 
withdrawal if the illness is considered signifi cant by the study investigator or if the 
participant is no longer able to effectively participate in the study. Participants experiencing minor intercurrent illnesses may continue in the study provided that the nature, severity, and 
duration of the illness are recorded and that any unscheduled medications required to treat 
the illness are also recorded. Examples of minor intercurrent illnesses include acute rhinitis, 
sinusitis, upper respiratory infections, urinary tract infections, and gastroenteritis. 
Medications are allowed for treatment of thes e conditions in accordance with the judgment 
of the responsible study physician. 
 
C. SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
An AE is serious if the event has had or may have any of the following outcomes:  
 Death 
o Any events that are life threatening, or would have resulted in death in the 
absence of an intervention, must be reported as SAEs in addition to events that 
result in death. 
 
 Hospitalization 
o Any events that occur during hospitalization and prolong the duration of the 
hospital stay should be reported as SAEs in addition to the SAE reported with the initial hospitalization.  
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 34o Events that are managed in an emergency room without resulting in hospital 
admission should be evaluated for other criteria for an SAE (e.g., life-threatening; 
required intervention to prevent permanent  impairment or damage; other serious 
medically important event) and reported as appropriate. 
 
 Disability or permanent damage 
o Any events that interfere with an individual’s ability to perform their usual 
functions or maintain their quality of life should be reported as SAEs. 
 
 Congenital anomaly or birth defect 
 
 Required an intervention to prevent disability or permanent damage 
 
 Medically important events 
o Events that do not meet any of the listed criteria for an SAE but are nevertheless 
medically significant should be reported as SAEs. A seizure or syncope may not 
require hospitalization or be life threatening but should be reported as SAE due 
to its medical significance. 
 
SAEs that are both unexpected (see Safety Plan section III.E above) and possibly related 
(see Section V.E. below) to study drug/intervention must be reported to the DCC 
expeditiously as described below. 
 
D. GRADING SEVERITY OF ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
The severity of AEs should be determined according to the following scale: 
Severity Characterized by: 
Mild Event imposes no limitations on indivi dual’s ability to perform usual activities 
Moderate Event interferes with ability to perform usual activities 
Severe Event prevents the individual from performing usual activities 
 
It should be noted that severity and seriousness of AEs are separate assessments.  
E. DETERMINING RELATEDNESS 
 
The investigator must determine if an AE is “possibly related” or “not related” to the study drug or a study mandated procedure. Determinations should be based on the biologic 
plausibility, the temporal relationship, and the presence or absence of an alternative 
explanation for an AE. Events thought to be related to study drug with a high degree of 
certainty (e.g., temporal correlation between the administration of the drug and the onset of 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 35the AE with resolution after withholding treatment and recurrence following a challenge) 
should be reported as possibly related. In the context of an alternative explanation (e.g., 
recent introduction of a concomitant medication known to be associated with the event, with 
resolution of the event after discontinuing the concomitant medication and continuing study drug), AEs should be reported as not related. In general, most events without an alternative 
explanation should be reported as “possibly related”. 
 
F. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
As with all study data, AEs should be reported in a timely fashion. Specific expedited safety reporting requirements are applicable as follows: 
 
 Any SAE which is both suspected of being related to study drug or a study mandated 
procedure and is unexpected must be reported to the DCC within 7 calendar days. 
 
 Any AE which is both suspected of being related to study drug or a study mandated 
procedure and suggests a level of risk to study participants that was previously 
unrecognized or unknown must be reported to the DCC within 30 calendar days. 
 
 Pregnancy requires expedited reporting within 7 calendar days 
 
G. REQUIRED FOLLOW UP OF ADVERSE EVENTS 
 
All adverse events must be followed (and documented on case report forms) until one of the 
following criteria is met: 
 
 Resolution 
 
 A documented plan for further evaluation and management, including the overseeing 
care provider, is provided. 
 
 The event is considered and documented to be stable and adequately managed, though 
ongoing. 
 
 
H. ADVERSE EVENTS RE LATED TO ASTHMA  
 
Asthma exacerbations 
Safety net procedures, including visits and frequent telephone contacts, are in place to 
identify participants who experience an asthma exacerbation during the study.  
 
Asthma exacerbations are severe episodes of acute worsening of asthma symptoms, 
defined by meeting one or more of the following: 
 
1. Oral/injectable corticosteroid due to asthma 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 362.   Need for emergency treatment at a medical facility that is related to, or complicated by, 
the participant’s asthma and which results in systemic corticosteroid treatment or 
hospitalization for an acute asthma exacerbation  
 
These episodes can be identified during routine phone follow up or study visits, or can be brought to the attention of the sites by the participants' action plans. 
 
Between in-person study visits (as described above), participants will be contacted by 
telephone at weeks 8, 16, 24, 32, 40 and 48 by the clinic coordinator to assure that they are 
continuing to participate appropriately in the study protocol, to answer any questions that 
may arise, and to assure that their asthma is under adequate control, as assessed by the participant and through completion of a c-ACT. The coordinator will attempt to determine 
whether the participant is showing signs of as thma exacerbation using criteria identified 
below.   
Adjustments of Trial Medications a nd Rescue Algorithms  during Asthma 
Exacerbations  
 Participants who develop an exacerbation during the run-in period (pre-randomization) will 
be terminated from study enrollment and managed as  clinically-indicated, with treatment 
based on clinical standard and initiated by/in accordance with the participant’s usual asthma care provider. Once the asthma exacerbation has resolved for at least four weeks, the participant may be rescreened for entry into the study once. 
 
For participants who meet criteria for an exacerbation during the post-randomization phases 
of the study, prednisone will be prescribed at a pre-specified burst at 2 mg/kg/day for 2 days 
[maximum 60 mg/day], followed by 1 mg/k g/day for 2 days [maximum 30 mg/day].  
 For those participants experiencing worsening control as demonstrated by the above 
criteria, the coordinator will contact the study  physician to determine if additional treatment, 
a clinic visit or follow up phone call is required. 
 
Prednisone Treatment   
Oral prednisone will be administered for the treatment of impending episodes of severe 
asthma when bronchodilator therapy is inadequate(35). The decision concerning the 
initiation or continuation of a course of oral prednisone will be at the physician’s discretion, 
based upon criteria previously published by th e ICAC.(13)  Prednisone should be prescribed 
if: 
 The participant used more than 3 nebulizer treatments with albuterol or comparable 
beta-agonist bronchodilator or 6 puffs of albuterol (3 treatments of 2 puffs each) in the 
prior 4 hours for relief of asthma symptoms OR 
 The participant used 12 or more puffs of albuterol in the last 24 hours for relief of asthma 
symptoms OR 
 The participant awakened due to cough, shortness of breath, chest tightness, or 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 37wheezing AND needed to use albuterol at least 2 of the previous 3 nights OR 
 The participant used 8 or more puffs of albuterol per day during 2 of the previous 3 days 
for relief of asthma symptoms. 
The recommended prednisone dose for acute exac erbations is 2 mg/kg/day (maximum 60 
mg) as a single morning dose for two days fo llowed by 1 mg/kg/day (maximum 30 mg) as a 
single morning dose for two days.   All adm inistered doses should be rounded down to the 
nearest 5 mg. 
In order to limit variability in prednisone prescribing habits across multiple clinicians in the 
various AsthmaNet partnerships,(41) all providers will be educated regarding the above 
criteria for prednisone use. They will additionally be provided with a wallet-sized card for 
easy reference. The DCC will track the reasons for prednisone administration, particularly 
clinician discretion outside of the above criteria. The DCC will report to the steering 
committee if excess variability is occurring among sites, and an open discussion regarding 
these discrepancies will be utilized. This proces s has successfully been implemented in the 
NIAID Inner City Asthma Consortium (ICAC). 
  
Asthma Rescue Plan Algorithm 
 
Rescue Algorithm for Acute Loss of Asthma Control 
The approach to rescue medications will be based on the consensus report presented in the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Guidelines(1).  Each patient will be given specific 
guidelines for decision-making and institution of rescue management (action plan).  Two 
medications, albuterol and/or oral prednis one, will be employed when increasing symptoms 
require treatment.  For a severe acute asthma exacerbation, patients will be medicated according to the best medical judgment of the treating physician (see above).  
Home care: 
Caretakers and patients will be educated to recognize the signs and symptoms of an asthma exacerbation early so that prompt rescue treatment may be instituted and morbidity 
decreased. The onset of an asthma exacerbation will be recognized by symptoms such as 
coughing, dyspnea, chest tightness and/or wheezing that either  become more severe 
despite the yellow zone plan being initiated previously, or they are severe enough on 
baseline therapy based on the following criteria. 
 
The threshold for defining entry into the red zone (i.e., exacerbation) will be determined 
based on the adequacy of the participant’s response to albuterol to treat these asthma 
symptoms. Patients who experience symptoms of cough, dyspnea, chest tightness, and/or 
wheeze, will initiate use of albuterol (2 pu ffs) by MDI every 20 minutes for up to 1 hour and 
then every 4 hours if necessary.  If the patient’s symptoms persist after 3 treatments, the study center should be contacted.  If the patient requires albuterol every 4 hours for 24 
hours for persistent symptoms, the study center should be  contacted.  At the time of study 
center contact, a clinic visit may be necessary.  The initiation of oral prednisone therapy will 
be based on specific guidelines and on physician discretion. 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 38If symptoms are severe, the child has re tractions, evidence of cyanosis based on 
saturations on room air of < 90% based on pulse  oximetry, has evidenc e of increased work 
of breathing, shortness of breath and/or “air hunger”, the patient must seek immediate 
medical care  and should contact the study center. 
Physician’s office or emergency room: 
In the primary physician’s office or emergency room, the patient with an acute asthma 
exacerbation will be treated with nebulized albuterol or high dose MDI albuterol (6-8 puffs 
every 20 minutes x three or more often if needed).  The dose of albuterol for the doctor-
supervised situation is 0.10 – 0.15 mg/kg up to 5 mg per treatment.  Albuterol can be 
delivered by nebulizer driven with oxygen, and treatments will be given every 20 minutes for 
up to 3 treatments. If after 3 treatments, the child is not stable as described below, the 
physician may use additional albuterol treatments or other medications as is in his/her best 
clinical judgment.  The child will be assessed for general level of activity, color, pulse rate, 
use of accessory muscles and airflow obstruction determined by auscultation, and FEV1 
and/or PEF before and after each bronchodilator treatment.  Measurement of oxygenation 
with a pulse oximeter may also be indicated for complete patient assessment during the 
acute exacerbation. The following assessments will also be made. 
 If the patient has a favorable response to initial albuterol nebulizer treatment (FEV1 
at least 80% predicted and/or PEF at least 80% post-randomization reference value), 
the patient will be observed for 1 hour prior to being discharged home with instructions to continue albuterol every 4 hours as needed and to report any decline in PEF and/or symptom fluctuation promptly. 
 If the patient does not improve (FEV1 less than 80% predicted or PEF less that 80% 
post-randomization reference value) after the initial albuterol nebulizer treatment, nebulized albuterol therapy will be continued for at least 2 more trials (for a total of 3 
times in 1 hour).  If the patient’s clinical symptoms are stabilized and FEV1 or PEF is 
between 50-80% of predicted or post-randomization reference value, the patient will be discharged home to continue use of albuterol (2 puffs every 4 hours) and to start a four-day course of oral prednisone. 
 If the patient’s FEV1 is less than 50% of predicted or PEF is less than 50% of post-
randomization reference value after 3 treatments with nebulized albuterol in 1 hour, the physician may use his/her best medical judgment to treat the patient.  Such 
clinical judgment may include the need for hospitalization and inpatient monitoring. 
 
 
Criteria for Study Withdrawal 
 
If a participant experiences 6 yellow zone courses in 12 months, they will be withdrawn from the study. Additionally, if a participant experiences 2 severe exacerbations treated with oral 
corticosteroids in 6 months or 3 within 12 months, they will be deemed a treatment failure 
and withdrawn from the study. Finally, if a participant is hospitalized for an asthma 
exacerbation >24 hours, they will be withdrawn from the study.  
 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 39I. UNBLINDING 
 
Unblinding to determine treatment group assignment in the event of medical necessity will 
be performed by center PI in consultation with study PI and the DCC PI.  
 
 
VI. STUDY COMPLETION 
 
Study completion is defined by enrollment, random ization, receipt of study drug/intervention 
and follow up through Visit 8. 
 
A. STUDY TREATMENT DISCONTINUATION 
 
Study treatment discontinuation occurs if the patient, Investigator, or Sponsor stop treatment 
prior to the last scheduled dose per protocol. Study treatment discontinuation does not 
necessarily result in early termination; a patient may continue study participation without 
receiving treatment if at least one dose/intervention has been received. 
 
B. EARLY TERMINATION 
 
Early termination occurs if the participant, Investigator, or the Sponsor does not permit the 
participant to complete the last scheduled study visit or assessment. By definition, early 
termination during the treatment period of the study will result in study treatment 
discontinuation.  
VII. STUDY SITES 
A. SITE RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
A single Principal Investigator must be designated and is responsible for study conduct at each site. 
 
B. INFORMED CONSENT 
 
The process of informed consent should be led by an individual qualified to understand and present the potential benefits and risks of a res earch study to potential participants. Ideally, 
someone who is not directly involved in the patient’s usual clinical care should lead informed 
consent. The informed consent process must be completed before any study procedures 
can be performed for the purpose of this protocol. Verbal assent and written assent will be 
obtained based on age determined by local IRBs. 
 
C. INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 
 
Each institution conducting research must have a federal wide assurance and an IRB registered with the Office of Human Research Subjects’ Protection prior to study 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 40participation. Individual IRB’s policies regarding reporting practices and communication must 
be adhered to throughout the conduct of the study. 
  
 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 41 
VIII. REFERENCES 
References 
 
1. Expert panel report 3: Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma. 2007 
wwwnhlbinihgov/guidelines/asthma/ . 
2. Thomas A, Lemanske RF, Jr., Jackson DJ. Approaches to stepping up and stepping 
down care in asthmatic patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;128:915-924. 
3. Oborne J, Mortimer K, Hubbard RB, Tattersfield AE, Harrison TW. Quadrupling the dose 
of inhaled corticosteroid to prevent asthma exacerbations: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009;180:598-602. 
4. Bacharier LB, Phillips BR, Bloomberg GR, Zeiger RS, Paul IM, Krawiec M, Guilbert T, 
Chinchilli VM, Strunk RC. Severe intermittent wheezing in preschool children: A distinct 
phenotype. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:604-610. 
5. Strunk RC, Sternberg AL, Szefler SJ, Zeiger RS, Bender B, Tonascia J. Long-term budesonide or nedocromil treatment, once discontinued, does not alter the course of mild to moderate asthma in children and adolescents. JPediatr 2009;154:682-687. 
6. O'Byrne PM, Pedersen S, Lamm CJ, Tan WC, Busse WW. Severe exacerbations and decline in lung function in asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009;179:19-24. 
7. O'Brian AL, Lemanske RF, Jr., Evans MD, Gangnon RE, Gern JE, Jackson DJ. Recurrent severe exacerbations in early life and reduced lung function at school age. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 2012;129:1162-1164. 8. Childhood Asthma Management Program Research G. Long-term effects of budesonide 
or nedocromil in children with asthma. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1054-1063. 
9. Sorkness CA, Lemanske RF, Jr., Mauger DT, Boehmer SJ, Chinchilli VM, Martinez FD, 
Strunk RC, Szefler SJ, Zeiger RS, Bacharier LB, Bloomberg GR, Covar RA, Guilbert TW, Heldt G, Larsen G, Mellon MH, Morgan WJ, Moss MH, Spahn JD, Taussig LM. Long-term comparison of 3 controller regimens for mild-moderate persistent childhood asthma: The pediatric asthma 
controller trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:64-72. 
10. Lemanske RF, Jr., Mauger DT, Sorkness CA, Jackson DJ, Boehmer SJ, Martinez FD, 
Strunk RC, Szefler SJ, Zeiger RS, Bacharier LB, Covar RA, Guilbert TW, Larsen G, Morgan WJ, Moss MH, Spahn JD, Taussig LM. Step-up therapy for children with uncontrolled asthma receiving inhaled corticosteroids. N Engl J Med 2010;362:975-985. 
11. Martinez FD, Chinchilli VM, Morgan WJ, Boehmer SJ, Lemanske RF, Jr., Mauger DT, 
Strunk RC, Szefler SJ, Zeiger RS, Bacharier LB, Bade E, Covar RA, Friedman NJ, Guilbert TW, Heidarian-Raissy H, Kelly HW, Malka-Rais J, Mellon MH, Sorkness CA, Taussig L. Use of beclomethasone dipropionate as rescue treatment for children with mild persistent asthma (trexa): A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2011;377:650-657. 
12. Bisgaard H, Le RP, Bjamer D, Dymek A, Vermeulen JH, Hultquist C. 
Budesonide/formoterol maintenance plus reliever therapy: A new strategy in pediatric asthma. 
Chest 2006;130:1733-1743. 13. Busse WW, Morgan WJ, Gergen PJ, Mitchell HE, Gern JE, Liu AH, Gruchalla RS, Kattan M, Teach SJ, Pongracic JA, Chmiel JF, Steinbach SF, Calatroni A, Togias A, Thompson KM, Szefler SJ, Sorkness CA. Randomized trial of omalizumab (anti-ige) for asthma in inner-city 
children. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1005-1015. 
14. Lanier B, Bridges T, Kulus M, Taylor AF, Berhane I, Vidaurre CF. Omalizumab for the treatment of exacerbations in children with inadequately controlled allergic (ige-mediated) asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009. 
15. Gern JE, Busse WW. Relationship of viral infections to wheezing illnesses and asthma. Nature RevImmunol 2002;2:132-138. 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 4216. Van Metre TE, Jr., Marsh DG, Adkinson NF, Jr., Fish JE, Kagey-Sobotka A, Norman PS, Radden EB, Jr., Rosenberg GL. Dose of cat (felis domesticus) allergen 1 (fel d 1) that induces 
asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1986;78:62-75. 
17. Boushey HA, Sorkness CA, King TS, Sulliv an SD, Fahy JV, Lazarus SC, Chinchilli VM, 
Craig TJ, Dimango EA, Deykin A, Fagan JK, Fish JE, Ford JG, Kraft M, Lemanske RF, Jr., Leone FT, Martin RJ, Mauger EA, Pesola GR, Peters SP, Rollings NJ, Szefler SJ, Wechsler ME, Israel E. Daily versus as-needed corticosteroids for mild persistent asthma. N Engl J Med 
2005;352:1519-1528. 18. Bacharier LB, Phillips BR, Zeiger RS, Szefler SJ, Martinez FD, Lemanske RF, Jr., Sorkness CA, Bloomberg GR, Morgan WJ, Paul IM, Guilbert T, Krawiec M, Covar R, Larsen G, Mellon M, Moss MH, Chinchilli VM, Taussig LM, Strunk RC. Episodic use of an inhaled corticosteroid or leukotriene receptor antagonist in preschool children with moderate-to-severe 
intermittent wheezing. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;122:1127-1135. 
19. Zeiger RS, Mauger D, Bacharier LB, Guilbert TW, Martinez FD, Lemanske RF, Jr., Strunk RC, Covar R, Szefler SJ, Boehmer S, Jackson DJ, Sorkness CA, Gern JE, Kelly HW, Friedman NJ, Mellon MH, Schatz M, Morgan WJ, Chinchilli VM, Raissy HH, Bade E, Malka-Rais J, Beigelman A, Taussig LM. Daily or intermittent budesonide in preschool children with 
recurrent wheezing. N Engl J Med 2011;365:1990-2001. 
20. O'Byrne PM, Bisgaard H, Godard PP, Pist olesi M, Palmqvist M, Zhu Y, Ekstrom T, 
Bateman ED. Budesonide/formoterol combination therapy as both maintenance and reliever 
medication in asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;171:129-136. 
21. Bousquet J, Boulet LP, Peters MJ, Magnussen H, Quiralte J, Martinez-Aguilar NE, Carlsheimer A. Budesonide/formoterol for maintenance and relief in uncontrolled asthma vs. 
High-dose salmeterol/fluticasone. RespirMed 2007;101:2437-2446. 
22. Baraldo S, Contoli M, Bazzan E, Turato G, Padovani A, Marku B, Calabrese F, Caramori 
G, Ballarin A, Snijders D, Barbato A, Saetta M, Papi A. Deficient antiviral immune responses in childhood: Distinct roles of atopy and asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:1307-1314. 
23. Papi A, Canonica GW, Maestrelli P, Paggiaro P, Olivieri D, Pozzi E, Crimi N, Vignola 
AM, Morelli P, Nicolini G, Fabbri LM. Rescue use of beclomethasone and albuterol in a single 
inhaler for mild asthma. N Engl J Med 2007;356:2040-2052. 
24. Papi A, Nicolini G, Baraldi E, Boner AL, Cutrera R, Rossi GA, Fabbri LM. Regular vs prn nebulized treatment in wheeze preschool children. Allergy 2009;64:1463-1471. 
25. Sorkness RL, Gonzalez-Fernandez G, Billmey er EE, Evans MD, Gern JE, Jarjour NN. 
The asthma index: A continuous variable to characterize exacerbations of asthma. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 2008;122:838-840. 
26. Busse WW, Lemanske RF, Jr. Management of asthma exacerbations. Thorax 
2004;59:545-546. 27. Rivera-Spoljaric K, Chinchilli VM, Camera LJ, Zeiger RS, Paul IM, Phillips BR, Taussig LM, Strunk RC, Bacharier LB. Signs and symptoms that precede wheezing in children with a 
pattern of moderate-to-severe intermittent wheezing. JPediatr 2009;154:877-881. 
28. Guilbert TW, Morgan WJ, Zeiger RS, Bacharier LB, Boehmer SJ, Krawiec M, Larsen G, 
Lemanske RF, Jr., Liu A, Mauger DT, Sorkness C, Szefler SJ, Strunk RC, Taussig LM, Martinez FD. Atopic characteristics of children with recurrent wheezing at high risk for the development of childhood asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;114:1282-1287. 
29. Ducharme FM, Lemire C, Noya FJD, Davis GM, Alos N, Leblond H, Savdie C, Collet JP, 
Khomenko L, Rivard G, Platt RW. Preemptive use of high-dose fluticasone for virus-induced 
wheezing in young children. N Engl J Med 2009;360:339-353. 
30. Fitzgerald JM, Becker A, Sears MR, Mink S, Chung K, Lee J. Doubling the dose of budesonide versus maintenance treatment in asthma exacerbations. Thorax 2004;59:550-556. 
31. Harrison TW, Oborne J, Newton S, Tattersfield AE. Doubling the dose of inhaled 
corticosteroid to prevent asthma exacerbations: Randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
2004;363:271-275. 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 4332. Rice-McDonald G, Bowler S, Staines G, Mitchell C. Doubling daily inhaled corticosteroid dose is ineffective in mild to moderately severe attacks of asthma in adults. InternMedJ 
2005;35:693-698. 
33. Garrett J, Williams S, Wong C, Holdaway D. Treatment of acute asthmatic exacerbations with an increased dose of inhaled steroid. ArchDisChild 1998;79:12-17. 
34. Foresi A, Morelli MC, Catena E. Low-dose budesonide with the addition of an increased dose during exacerbations is effective in long-term asthma control. On behalf of the italian study 
group. Chest Journal 2000;117:440-446. 
35. Harris JB, Weinberger MM, Nassif E, Smith G, Milavetz G, Stillerman A. Early 
intervention with short courses of prednisone to prevent progression of asthma in ambulatory patients incompletely responsive to bronchodilators. J Pediatr 1987;110:627-633. 
36. Kelly HW, Sternberg AL, Lescher R, Fuhlbrigge AL, Williams P, Zeiger RS, Raissy HH, 
Van Natta ML, Tonascia J, Strunk RC. Effect of inhaled glucocorticoids in childhood on adult 
height. N Engl J Med 2012. 37. Masoli M, Weatherall M, Holt S, Beasley R. Clinical dose-response relationship of fluticasone propionate in adults with asthma. Thorax 2004;59:16-20. 
38. Adams N, Lasserson T, Cates C, Jones P. Fluticasone versus beclomethasone or 
budesonide for chronic asthma in adults and children. CochraneDatabaseSystRev 
2007:CD002310. 
39. Liu AH, Zeiger R, Sorkness C, Mahr T, Ostrom N, Burgess S, Rosenzweig JC, Manjunath R. Development and cross-sectional validation of the childhood asthma control test. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:817-825. 
40. Shi Y, Aledia AS, Galant SP, George SC . Peripheral airway impairment measured by 
oscillometry predicts loss of asthma control in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:718-
723. 41. Fuhlbrigge AL, Lemanske RF, Jr., Rasouliyan L, Sorkness CA, Fish JE. Practice patterns for oral corticosteroid burst therapy in the outpatient management of acute asthma exacerbations. Allergy and asthma proceedings : the official journal of regional and state allergy 
societies 2012;33:82-89. 
 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 44  
IX. APPENDICES
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 45APPENDIX A:  TABLE OF VISIT STRUCTURE  
Visit V1 V2 T1 V3 T2 V4 T3 V5 T4 V6 T5 V7 T6 V8 VEXAC 
Visit type Enroll Random
-ization Phone 
f/u Clinic 
f/u Phone 
f/u Clinic 
f/u Phone 
f/u Clinic 
f/u Phone 
f/u Clinic 
f/u Phone 
f/u Clinic 
f/u Phone 
f/u Exit 
visit Exacer-
bation 
Study Week 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 PRN 
Window (days, reg/ext)   ±3/±5 ±3 /±5 ±3/±5 ±3/±5 ±3 /±5 ±3/±5 ±3/±5 ±3/±5 ±3/±5 ±3/±5 ±3 /±5 ±3/±5 ±3/±5  
Informed consent X                
Full medical history X                
Long physical exam X               X  
Partial physical exam  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
Height/Weight X X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
Exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO)  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
Spirometry X X  X  X  X  X  X  X X 
Impulse oscillometry (IOS)  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
Max-BD assessment X                
Methacholine challenge  X               
Case report forms X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Action plan dispensed X  X               
Action plan reviewed X X  X  X  X  X  X  X X 
Electronic diary dispensed X                
E-diary reviewed  X  X  X  X  X  X  X X 
Blood draw  X               
Urine pregnancy test X  X               
Nasal blow  X               
Dispense home nasal blow 
kit  X  X  X  X  X  X    
Dispense open-label study 
medications X X  X  X  X  X  X    
Dispense study medications  X  X  X  X  X  X    
Review medication 
technique X X  X  X  X  X  X    
Collect study medications              X   
Discuss future care              X   
Exit interview              X   
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 46APPENDIX B:  TABLE OF EXCLUDED CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS  
Table 1. Excluded concomitant medications 
Medication Period when medication may not be taken or modified 
Immunomodulatory 
medications 5 half-lives of the medication prior to screening visit – 3 month washout for Xolair 
Coumadin 2 weeks prior to screening 
Immunotherapy Stable dose and frequency for at least 90 days prior to the 
study and intended to remain stable throughout the study 
Theophylline 48 hrs prior to screening 
Beta blockers  48 hrs prior to screening 
Anti-psychotic medications 1 month prior to screening 
Cancer chemotherapies Ever 
Chronic antibiotics  2 weeks prior to screening 
Montelukast/zafirlukast  48 hrs prior to screening 
Daily NSAIDs 48 hrs prior to screening 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 47APPENDIX C:  STICS ACTIO N PLAN PATIENT HANDOUT 
 
 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 48APPENDIX D:  PROCEDURES FOR MEASURING HEIGHT  
Equipment and Standardization 
 
A Harpenden stadiometer, eit her wall-mounted (Holtain M odel #602VR) or portable 
(Holtain Model #603), will be used for hei ght measurements. M easurements will be 
in centimeters. The stadiometer will be calibrated daily. The wall-mounted stadiometer is calibrated 
by measuring the height of the metal ca libration bar that was included with your 
stadiometer and recording the exact length on the stadiometer. The portable 
stadiometer is calibrated by lowering the platform to its lowest position and setting 
the counter to the number  listed on the inner cove r of the stadiometer. 
The stadiometer is designed so that if so mething breaks, it will be the counter. At 
least one extra counter should be available at all times. The stadiometer platform 
should be moved slowly; moving it too fast could cause it to break. 
Height Measurement Procedure 
 
Height will be measured in all children.  The child should be barefoot or wearing thin 
socks for the height measurem ent. Follow the steps below to obtain standing height: 
1. Raise the platform of the stadiometer well above the child's head. 
2. Have the child stand erect, with his/her back against the stadiometer. 
3. In positioning the child for measurement, start at the child's feet and go upward. 
4. The heels should touch the back of the stadiometer, with the ankles and feet 
touching each other. 
5. The knees should be straight and locked. 6. The heels, buttocks and shoulders should be against the stadiometer. 7. The arms should hang freely by the sides of the trunk with the palms facing the 
thighs. 
8. The operator may need to push in on the child's abdomen slightly to minimize 
lordosis. 
9. The child should look straight ahead and not raise his/her chin. 10. The middle of the ear and the corner of the eye shoul d be in a straight line. 
11. When standing properly, the child should take a deep breath, hold it, and 
maintain a fully erect position for the measurement. 
12. To make the measurement, lower the pl atform to the child's head; the operator 
should be at eye level with the child's head. 
13. Record the height in centimeters. 
AsthmaNet STICS Protocol 
 
 4914. The platform is lifted and the child  steps away from the stadiometer. 
15. Repeat these steps twice to obtain 2 additional measurements. 
16. Repeat measurements until you have 3 measurements such that the maximum 
difference between any 2 measurements is 3 mm or less. 
 
Since using the above protocol will minimize the diurnal variation in height, there will 
not be any restriction on the time of day of the measurement, but the time of the 
measurement will be not ed on the data collection form.   
Girls should be instructed to not have their hair “high” since hair has to be flattened 
during the measurements. Younger children may need tw o operators (one can be a 
parent), with the second operator helping to hold the child's feet flat on the ground 
since some children tend to stand on their toes. 
 