UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Protocol Title: A Single -center Phase IIa Study Evaluating the Safety and Tolerability of Umbralisib  and 
Ibrutinib in Patients with Relapsed or Refractory Diffuse Large B -cell Lymphoma  
 
 
Sponsor/ Principal Investigator:    Matthew A. Lunning, D.O.       
     Assistant Professor of Medicine  
987680 Nebraska Medical Center  
Omaha, NE 68198 -7680  
Phone (402) 559 -5166  
FAX (402) 559 -6520  
    E-mail: mlunning@unmc.edu   
 
Secondary Investigators:   Julie M. Vose, M.D., M.B.A  
James O. Armitage, M.D.  
Philip J. Bierman, M.D.  
    R. Gregory Bociek, M.D.  
 
 
  
Pathology/Biospecimens:     
Matthew A. Lunning D.O. and Michael Green Ph.D.  
Email: mlunning@unmc.edu  and Mgreen@mdanderson.ed u  
Phone: 402 -559-5520 and  
 
Biostatistician:    Jane Meza, Ph.D.   jmeza@unmc.edu   402-559-6825  
Research Coordinator(s):  Maribeth Hohenstein / Susan Blumel  
 
Protocol Version Date:   Version 1.0  Dated  25Sep2015  
    Version 2.0  Dated  06Jun2016  
    Version 3.0  Dated 26Jan2017  
    Version 4.0  Dated 14 Jul2017  
    Version 4.1  Dated 30Jul2018  
Version 4.2  Dated 07Oct2019  
 
 
 
UNMC Investigator Initiated Project IND# 130989  Janssen study  Reference Number:   54179060LYM2010  
This protocol is being conducted as a translational clinical research project as part of the UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett 
(NCI) Cancer Center Support Grant #  P30 CA036727.  
DRUG REIMBURSEMENT / ACQUISITION:                                                                                   
Ibrutini b 560 mg orally daily  up to a year x 24 subjects supplied to investigators by Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC 
(Janssen)  
Umbralisib  orally daily up to a year x 24 subjects is an investigational agent supplied to investigators by TG 
Therapeutics  
Correlative Studies:  Covered by Janssen  Scientific LLC and TG Therapeutics  external funding. ( Pretreatment core 
guided biopsy of accessible lymph node: Core and FNA Fresh & FFPE;  Day 8 & at time of Progression of Disease 
(PD): US guided biopsy of accessib le lymph node, FNA Fresh & FFPE   Pathology processing and Flow  cytometry)  
Per Subject and Administrative Costs: Cost share between Janssen  Scientific LLC and  TG Therapeutics  
 
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
Protocol Format  
NIH designated Clinical Cancer Centers must conduct scientific peer review of clinical protocols. A standardized 
protocol format is used for the successful implementation of this process. All Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center 
Investigator -initiated Institutional and Multi -Institutional protocols developed  and sponsored by this institution 
involving clinical research must include the following elements or the equivalent:  
 
Title Page ……………………………………………………………………………………….  
 Abstract (no more than 250 words) ………………………………………………………..  
 Schema …………………………………………………………………………………….……  
 Section 1.0  Objectives ……………………………………………………………………  
 Section 2.0  Introduction, which includes background data and future aims ………..  
 Section 3.0  Eligibility criteria ……………… ……………………………………………..  
 Section 4.0  Randomization/registration procedures …………………………………..  
Section 5.0  Treatment plan or research design …………………………………….....  
 Section 6.0  Measurement of effect ………………………………………..…………….  
 Section 7.0  Study parameters …………………………………… ……...………………  
 Section 8.0  Drug formulation and procurement ………………………………………..  
 Section 9.0  Toxicity and adverse event reporting guidelines ………………………...  
 Section 10.0  Biostatistical considerations including stopping criteria ……..…….……  
 Section 11.0  Records to be kept …………………………………………… ……………  
 Section 12.0  Patient consent form statement …………………………… ……………..  
 Section 13.0  References ……………………………………………… ………………….  
Section 14.0  Data collection forms ……………………………………………………….  
  
1 
3 
4 
5 
5 
12 
14 
14 
23 
27 
28 
34 
43 
44 
45 
47 
48 
 
Appendices:  
Appendix A   Concomitant use of ibrutinib with other CYP3A inhibitors or inducers Cockroft -Gault   49  
Appendix B  Creatinine Clearance Calculation ……………………………… …………… ……………    49 
Appendix C   Performance Status Criteria………………………….………………………… ………..    50 
Appendix D     NEW YORK HEART ASSOCIATION (NYHA) HEART DISEASE CLASSIFICATION …..           50       
Appendix E      Eligibility checklist ……………………………………….………………………… ……………  51 
Appendix F Oral, Sublingual, and/or Buccal Route Medication Adherence Standard  
Procedure (V 1.0 11 -25-2013) ………………………………………………………………………..  56 
Appendix G  Blood and Tissue Sample Processing and Shipping …… ……………………… ……….   63 
Appendix H   FDA MEDWATCH form ……………………………………………………………… ………  65
                      Page 3 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
Abstract :  
Title:  A Single -center Phase IIa Study Evaluating the Safety and Tolerability of Umbralisib  and Ibrutinib in Patients with 
Relapsed or Refractory Diffuse Large B -cell Lymphoma: A Trial of the Lymphoma Precision Medicine Laboratory  
 
Lymphomagenesis is known to be  a result of a berrant signaling through the B -cell receptor (BCR ).  Several models 
have highlighted specific checkpoints that appear to be regulators of downstream signal propagation leading to 
abnormal  nuclear  transcription within the lymphocyte  leading t o either anti -apoptosis or a proliferative advantage.  A 
better understanding of the BCR signaling pathway in malignant lymphocytes has led to several small molecule 
inhibitors entering  clinical practice as single agents  for the treatment of non -Hodgkin ly mphoma (NHL) .  Two classes 
of BCR antagonists have shown strong activity in (NHL):  Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) and phosphoinositide -3-
kinase (PI3-K) delta inhibitors.  Ibrutinib  is a first generation selective  and irreversible inhibitor of BTK.   umbralisib 
(formerly known as TGR -1202)  is a PI3 -K delta inhibitor with a novel structure unlike other PI3K inhibitor s affording 
once daily dosing and to date a unique toxicity profile.  Attacking the aberrant BCR signaling pathway at separate 
nodes may be  an important mechanism to overcome chemorefractory NHL.  This is a single -center Phase IIa study 
evaluating the safety and tolerab ility of umbralisib  and Ibrutinib in patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B -
cell lymphoma (DLBCL). We plan to a ccrue 24 patients .  The primary endpoint in this phase IIa study is to consecutively 
monitor the safety  and tolerability of the oral doublet and allow a preliminary assessment of the efficacy of this novel 
combination to provide background for an appropria tely powered phase II or phase III study.  There will be 3 treatment 
groups given one year (12 months) of therapy, Group A (consented to optional biopsies; 6 patients):  umbralisib 800 
mg PO daily on Days 1 -8; then umbralisib  800 mg oral daily and Ibrutinib  560 mg oral daily; Group B (consented to 
optional biopsies; 6 patients): Ibrutinib 560 mg PO daily Days 1 -8; then umbralisib  800 mg PO daily and Ibrutinib 560 
mg PO daily; and Group C (deferred consent to optional biopsies or consented to optional biopsie s; 12 patients): 
umbralisib  800 mg PO daily and Ibrutinib 560 mg PO daily.   Secondary endpoints of the trial will be assessment of the 
overall response rate (ORR) defined as the sum of complete responses (CR) and partial responses (PR) and to 
determine the progres sion-free survival (P FS), time to response (TTR), and duration of response (DOR) in patients 
with rel apsed or refractory  DLBCL.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      Page 4 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
 
Schema :    
 
Title:  A Single -center Phase IIa Study Evaluating the Safety and Tolerability of Umbralisib and Ibrutinib in Patients with 
Relapsed or Refractory Diffuse Large B -cell Lymphoma  
 
 
Group A (consented to optional biopsies; 6 patients):  umbralisib  800 mg PO daily on Days 1 -8; then 
umbralisib  800 mg oral daily and Ibrutinib 560 mg oral daily  
Group B (consented to optional biopsies; 6 patients): Ibrutinib 560 mg PO daily Days 1 -8; then umbralisib  
800 mg PO daily and Ibrutinib 560 mg PO daily  
Group C (deferred consent to optional biopsies or consented to optional biopsies; 12 patients): umbralisib  
800 mg PO daily and Ibrutinib 560 mg PO daily  
Duration of therapy  
In the absence of treatment delays due to adverse event(s), treatment should continue unless one of the following 
criteria applies:  
• Disease progression or inter -current illness that prevents further treatment,  
• Patient decides to withdraw from the study, or changes in the pa tient's condition render the patient 
unacceptable for further treatment in the judgment of the investigator.  
• One year of therapy  
A cycle is 28 days of treatment with any oral agent regardless of group assignment.  The first efficacy assessment 
should be ap proximately 8 weeks after Cycle 1/Day 1 (+/ - 7 days).  Thereafter e fficacy assessment will occur 
approximately every two months until 6 months then every 3 months until completion of 12 months of treatment (+/ - 7 
days) .  After Month 12, efficacy assessment s should occur at the investigators discretion.  

                      Page 5 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
Section 1.0 Objectives :  
 
Primary obj ective:  
1. To determine the safety and tolerability of umbralisib  and ibrutinib in relapsed and refractory (rel/ref) DLBCL  
Secondary objectives:  
1.  To determine the overall response rate (ORR) defined as the sum of complete responses (CR) and 
partial responses (PR).  
2.   To determine the event -free survival (EFS), time to re sponse (TTR), and duration of response (DOR) in 
patients with rel/ref DLBCL.  
 
Exploratory objectives:  
1.  To evaluate molecular profiling of patient samples (optional lymph node biopsies) obtained at days 0 (pre -
treatmen t; core biopsy ), day 8 (fine needle asp iration) and end of treatment (progressive disease or end of 
study treatment —1 year; core biopsy) to evaluate the baseline characteristics and dynamic shifts in mutational 
landscape, transcriptional signatures and intracellular signaling cascades in primar y tumor cells.  
(i) Next generation sequencing to define the muta tional status of 384 genes that mutated in DLBCL , including 
CD79B, CARD11, and MYD88;  
(ii) Transcriptional profiling to evaluate signatures of B -cell receptor signaling and the back -up pathway of 
oxidative phosphorylation.  
(iii) Phospho -specific flow cytometry to measure the basal and induced level of activation of components within 
parallel signaling pathways downstream of the B -cell receptor.   
             (iiii) Monitor change s in T- cell characteristics in response to exposure to umbralisib  and ibrutinib     
2. To perform quantitative response evaluation by peripheral blood cell -free DNA sequencing at enrollment,  day 
8, 1 month, at every response assessment time  point compared to standard  radiographic response evaluation 
by PET/CT or CT  and end of treatment (progressive disease or end of study treatment —1 year) . After m onth 
12, efficacy assessments should occur at the investigators discretion with collection of a research blood sample 
only if feasible.    
3. To evaluate the  genetic profiling for drug resistance mutat ions 
4. To evaluate DLBCL subtype ana lysis by immunohistochemistry compared to Nanostring assessment  
 
Section 2.0 Introduction :  
2.1 Diffuse Large B -cell Lymphoma  
Diffuse large B -cell lymphoma (DLCBL) remains the most common non -Hodgkin lymphoma  (NHL)  diagnosed per 
annum  with an increasing prevalence , now noted to be approximately 500,000 individuals  
(http://seer.cancer.gov/stat/facts/html/leuks.html). Nearly 40% of  those individuals are older than 70  years of age .  
Patients with DLBCL presents most commonly with advanced stage disease and without treatment are  nearly uniformly 
lethal.  However current multiagent immunochemotherapy regimen s do provide a curative opti on for those able to 
receive treatment.  The most common c ombination chemo -immunotherapy is R-CHOP  (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, 
doxorubicin, vincristine,  prednisone) , which now cures nearly two -thirds of patients .(1) The prognosis is dependent on 
many patient sp ecific factors most accurately defined by the International Prognostic Index (IPI) and by recent disease 
specific characteristic s defined as molecular subtyping into either Ger minal Center B -cells (GCB) or Activated B -cell 
like (ABC) .(2, 3)     In the current treatment era the overwhelming majority of patients will be exposed to a rituximab  
containing induction regimen.  Despite aggressive up front treatment nearly one -third of patient s with DLBCL will have 
refractory  disease  or experience a  relapse  of DLBCL.  A  second chance a t cure is maintained with second line therapy 
in addition to high dose therapy and autologous stem cell rescue  (HDT -ASCR)  in those who are transplant eligible .  
However, only 1 in 4 patients  who undergo transplant will  achieve long -term disease control and subsequent 
chemotherapy regimens yield diminishing returns and often serve as a bridge towards allogeneic transplantation i f 
eligible and/or available. (4)  Patient s who are not considered transplant eligible suffer a dismal prognosis with no 
                      Page 6 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 standard of care to help guide treatment choices.  Therefore , a substantial number of highly chemoth erapy refractory 
patients remain in search of further therapy that can preserve the balance of quality and quantity of life.   
 2.2 B -cell receptor Pathway  
The B -cell receptor pathway is a complex network of enzymatic checks and balances that regulate B -cell maturation 
and subsequent migration. (5)  Many points of divergence exist within the netw ork creating parallel streams of potential 
reflexive regu lation.  Tonic stimulation of an enzymatic node by mutations within the protein can be a lymphoma 
generating event.  This has been further expounded by the molecular profiling of DLBCL.  The results h ave led to the 
defining of 3 different molecular subtypes  of DLBCL  in which the BCR pathway plays a significant role : 1) Ge rminal 
Center B -cell (GCB), 2) Ac tivated B -cell like (ABC), and 3) U nclassifiable. (3)  The GCB subtype is felt to be more 
attracted to the phosphoinositol -3 kinase pathway. (6) The ABC subtype of DLBCL appears to be addic ted towards the 
downstream pathway leading towards the Nfk -B stimulation and subs equent nuclear transcription. (7)  The GCB 
subtype  of DLBCL represents nearly two -thirds of all DLBCL cases and has a more favorable prognosis than ABC 
DLBCL.  These  downstream pathway s have  become clinicall y relevant  target s with several drugs attempting to inhibit 
these  process es.   
 2.3 Targeting the B -cell receptor pathway  
Success with small molecule inhibitors that abrogate the abnormal signaling through the BCR pathway has brought 
upon a n exciting paradigm shift in the management of B-cell NHL.  Several novel non -chemotherapeutic drugs now 
attack the malignant lymphocytes via mechanisms unperturbed or selected for by prior non -selective chemotherapy  or 
exposure to CD20 directed monoclonal a ntibodies  (Figure 1) .  Currently these drugs  are in the clinic as single agents  
or com bined with a CD20 monoclonal antibod y.  This 
include s but not limited to  the Bruton’s tyr osine kinase 
(BTK) inhibitor ib rutinib and the PI3-K inhibitor, Idelalisib.  
Both BTK and PI3 -K have several next generation 
antagonist s in clinical development.  Umbralisib  is a next 
generation PI3 -K delta inhibitor with a novel structure 
different than other PI3 -K inhibitor s in development.  This 
structure may lead to differential activity and toxicity profile 
than previously seen in other PI3 -K inhibitors.  Current data 
supports that BTK inhibitor s may provide selective activity 
towards the ABC subtype of DLBCL whereas PI3 -K 
inhibitors may provide selective activity to the GCB 
subtype of DLBCL. (8) 
 
Currently t argeted agents against the BCR have been 
primarily explored a s single agents or in combin ation with 
a CD20 monoclonal antibody.  Results have shown that as 
a single agent each  may be potent enough to achieve disease control in indolent NHL, like follicular lymphoma  (FL) 
and chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL) .(9)  However, treatment o f 
relapsed/refractory (rel/ref) DLBCL especially after HDT -ASCR or in transplant ineligible patients remains a difficult 
situation with a poor overall prognosis.  Combinations of novel agents that do not have cumulative toxicities are likely 
needed to over come the clonal complexity and aggressive biology that prevents durability in the rel/ref DLBCL.  The 
novel  chemo -free oral combination  of umbralisib  and Ibrutinib  may be an attractive combination for the treatment of 
this difficult to treat population.   
2.4 Rationale for a phase IIa design  
Both BTK and PI3 -K inhibitor s that are in  current practice have been developed under a  continuous dosing scheme in 
an attempt  to chronically antagonize the  BCR  pathway.  As drugs progress through phases of clinical trials i t is well 
established dogma that a maximum tolerated dose (MTD)  is the objective in phase I studies.  However, this only reports 

                      Page 7 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 dose limiting toxicities  (DLT)  during the initial cycle of therapy when f urther cumulative toxicities may be seen in 
subsequent cycles that limits the utility of a regimen.  Therefore, in paradigms were long -term safety and tolerability is 
paramount and needed to balance with objective responses phase IIa studies can be employe d to not only provide this 
tolerability signal but inform future studies that lead to appropriately powered and better informed phase II or phase III 
studies.   Therefore, we must balance efficacy while limiting cumulative toxicities  events (CTE) .  
 
2.1 Umbrali sib 
Umbralisib  (formerly known as TGR -1202 ) is a highly specific and orally available PI3K delta inhibitor with  high 
selectivity over the alpha, beta, and gamma isoforms  of PI3K .  The delta isoform of PI3K is highly expressed in cells of 
hematopoietic orig in, and strongly upregulated, and often mutated in NHL.  Umbralisib  has demonstrated safety in an 
ongoing Phase I clinical trial in patients with NHL and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) .(10)  umbralisib  is 
manufactured by Alembic Pharmaceuticals and  is being  supplied by TG Therapeutics, Inc.  
2.1.1  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    

                      Page 8 of 65            
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 2.1.3     
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.4 Clinical development  of TGR 1202 in hematologic malignancies  
 
2.1.4.1 Umbralisib  monotherapy  
 
Umbralisib  is being evaluated in multiple studies.  The first in human phase  I dose -escalation study  with expansi on 
cohorts in  rel/ref  hematologic  malignancies  patients has accrued  approximately 55 patients. Umbralisib  at doses 
ranging from  50 mg to the micronized 1800 mg QD  dose  has been tested . umbralisib  is ava ilable as 200 mg tablets, 
as this  study progressed to  higher dose levels this resulted in an unfavorable number of tablets for daily administration.  
In an effort to improve the oral bioavailability of umbralisib  and pill count, the particle size of the drug product was 
reduced through a microniz ation process. The  micronization process resulted  in greater absorption (approximately 3 
fold in a 24 patient healthy volunteer bioequivalence study).  
 
In this study a dverse events  (AEs)  have been manageable, with Grade 3/4 AEs occurring in >10% of patients consisting 
of the following (March 2015 ) regardless of attribution to  umbralisib :  neutropenia, rash, dyspnea, thrombocytopenia, 
and diarrhea.  Of note, a  Grade 3 AE of rash was reported in a patient in the  non-micronized  800 mg dose cohort who 
was on concomitant antibiotics .  This patient had a history of antibiotic related rash .  All medications were held until the 
rash resolved and  they were  re-challenged at the 80 0 mg dose of umbralisib  with no recurrence of rash.  However, t his 
event met the criteria for a DLT as stated in the protocol and subsequently 3 additional patients were treated at the 800 
mg dose, with no additional DLT’s reported.   

                      Page 9 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
On this study the s afety data has now been obtained on patients dosed with umbralisib  daily for over a year with no 
safety concerns recognized or reported as documented by the Study Chair and Medical Monitor for the trial up through 
the micronized 1200 mg QD  dose .  Dosing continues in  this study using the micronized formulation of umbralisib .   
 
2.1.4.2 Umbralisib  + anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, ublituximab  
 
Umbralisib  continues to be evaluated in the phase 1/1b dose escalation study with the glycoengineered anti -CD20 
monoclo nal antibody ublituximab (UTX). (10)  Fifty-seven  patients have been enrolled and  are evaluable for safety.  
AEs (AE; all causality) include: Day 1 infusion related reactions , neutropenia, diarrhea,  nausea .  To date, umbralisib  
related hepatotoxicity has not been reported  in this study .  No DLTs have occurred in the NHL cohort.  A poss ible dose -
response relationship has been observed between “lower” and “higher” umbralisib  doses.   A higher dose was defined 
as greater than 800 mg of the non -micronized umbralisib .  To date, 89% of pts (16/18) in the “high” dose cohorts remain 
on study pro gression free compared to 57% (8/14) in the “low” dose cohorts.  This study continues to enroll in expansion 
cohorts in NHL subtypes with umbralisib  at a micronized dose of 800 and 1200 mg  plus UTX.  
 
 
2.2 Ibrutinib  
Ibrutinib  is indicated for the treatment of: 1) patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) 2) patients with chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) with 17p deletion; 3) patients with mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) who have received at 
least one prior therapy (acceler ated approval was granted for this indication based on overall response rate, 
continued approval for this indication may be contingent upon verification of clinical benefit in confirmatory trials; 4) 
patients with Waldenström's macroglobulinemia (WM).  5) Chronic gra ft versus host disease (cGVHD) after failure of 
one or more lines of systemic therapy.  Ibrutinib is not approved in the disease state being studied here.  
 
2.2.1 Chemical structure and description of Ibrutinib  
Ibrutinib is 1 -[(3R) -3-[4-amino -3-(4-phenoxyphenyl) -1H-pyrazolo[3,4 -d] pyrimidin -1-yl]-1-piperidinyl] -2-propen -1-one 
and has a molecular weight of 440.50 g/mole (anhydrous basis).   Ibrutinib is a white to off -white crystalline solid. It has 
a single chiral center and is the  R-enantiomer. Th e investigational drug product, ibrutinib, is an oral formulation 
containing micronized ibrutinib.  Ibrutinib  is manufactured by Pharmacyclics, Inc. and is being supplied by Janssen 
Scientific Affairs, LLC . 
      
       2.2.2 In vitro  data of ibrutinib  
 
In vitro  studies have shown that ibrutinib binds covalently to a cysteine residue (Cys -481) in the BTK active site, leading 
to potent and irreversible inhibition of BTK enzymatic activity .(12) In cellular signal transduction assays with a B -cell 
lymphoma cell line, ibrutinib inhib ited autophosphorylation of both BT K and phosphorylation of BTK’s physiological 
substrate, phospholipase -C gamma (PLCγ) .22   In DLBCL cell lines ibrutinib i nhibited the proliferation at a median  
effective concentration of 1 to  2 nM. (13) 
 
2.2.3 Pharmacology/ Toxicology  
 
Ibrutinib’s bioavailability is relatively low and quite variable.  A mass -balance study (PCI -32765CLL1004) demonstrated 
that ibrutinib 140 mg (admixed with 14C -ibrutinib) showed approximately 90% of radioactive ibrutinib was excreted 
within 168 hours after  administration, with less than 10% accounted for in urine and the remainder in feces. A negligible 
fraction was excreted as unchanged drug.   
 
Ibrutinib is metabolized in the liver.  In a hepatic impairment study, data showed an increase in ibrutinib expo sure. 
Following single dose administration, the AUC of ibrutinib increased 2.7 -, 8.2- and 9.8 -fold in subjects with mild (Child  
                      Page 10 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 -Pugh class A), moderate (Child -Pugh class B), and severe (Child -Pugh class C) hepatic impairment compared to 
subjects with norm al liver function. The safety of ibrutinib has not been evaluated in patients with hepatic impairment.  
Monitor patients for signs of ibrutinib toxicity and follow dose modification guidance as needed. It is not  
recommended to administer ibrutinib to patients with moderate or severe hepatic  impairment (Child -Pugh classes B 
and C).  
 
Ibrutinib is  metabolized primarily by CYP3A.  Drug-drug interaction study has demonstrated th at when  ibrutinib was 
administered at a 1 20 mg dose in combination  with 40 mg of ketoconazole , a strong CYP3A inhibitor, the last 
concentration quantifiable (AUCO -last) was extended up to 29 times longer than without ketoconazole exposure.  
Termina l half -life was not increased. Therefore , use of strong CYP3A inhibitors is not allowed and g uidance on 
concomitant use of ibrutinib with  other  CYP3A inhibitors or inducers is provided  in the Appendix  A. 
 
Absorption   
Ibrutinib is absorbed after oral administration with a median Tmax of 1 to 2 hou rs. Ibrutinib exposure increases with 
doses up to 840 mg. The steady -state AUC (mean ± standard deviation) observed in patients at 560 mg is 953 ± 705 
ng⋅h/mL and in patients at 420 mg is 680 ± 517 ng ⋅h/mL. Administration with food increased ibrutinib Cmax and AUC 
by approximately 2 to 4 - and 2 -fold, respectively, compared with administration of ibrutinib after overnight fasting.  
 Distribution  
Reversible binding of ibrutinib to human plasma protein in vitro was 97.3% with no concentration dep endence in the 
range of 50 to 1000 ng/mL. The volume of distribution at steady state (Vd,ss) was 683 L, and the apparent volume of 
distribution at steady state (Vd,ss/F) was approximately 10000 L.  
Metabolism   
Metabolism is the main route of elimination fo r ibrutinib. It is metabolized to several metabolites primarily by 
cytochrome P450, CYP3A, and to a minoextent by CYP2D6. The active metabolite, PCI -45227, is a dihydrodiol 
metabolite with inhibitory activity towards BTK approximately 15 times lower than t hat of ibrutinib. The range of the 
mean metabolite to parent ratio for PCI -45227 at steady -state is 1 to 2.8  
 
Ibrutinib binds covalently and irreversibly to Cys -481 near the BTK active site and inhibits the enzymatic activity with a 
half maximal inhibitory  concentration (IC50) of 0.5 nM.  The binding site of Bruton's tyrosine kinase remained fully 
occupied by ibrutinib (≥90% occupancy) for at le ast 24 hours in subjects treated with  ibrutinib doses of ≥ 2.5mg/kg/day 
(≥ 175mg/day for average weight of 70kg . Although ibrutinib is rapidly eliminated from the plasma after oral 
administration, once daily dosing with ibrutinib is adequate to sustain maximal  pharmacodynamic activity for 24 hours 
post-dosing.  Therefore, 560 mg/day is adequate to achieve exposures yi elding full BTK active -site occupancy in most 
patients . 
 
2.2.3 Clinical activity and Safety of ibrutinib  
 
Ibrutinib was test ed in a phase I , multicenter, open -label, dose escalation study in patients with  recurrent NHL. (14) The 
objectives included studying the safety profile of ibrutinib, identifying the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and optimal 
dosing schedule, and characterizing efficacy, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics. A minimum of 6 subjects per 
cohort received 1 of 5 escalating dose levels of ibrutinib between 1.25 and 12.5 mg/kg for 28 consecutive days in a 35 -
day cycle.  There was a pre -specified objective of escalating 3 dose levels above that which achieved full BTK 
occupancy based on the fluorescent probe ass ay.  
 
A total of 66 patients were evaluated in this study.  Two additional cohorts received a continuous ibrutinib dose of 8.3 
mg/kg without a 7 -day rest and a fixed continuous dose of 560 mg/day.   Full BTK occu pancy was achieved with doses 
≥2.5 mg/kg/day.   A dose of  12.5 mg/kg/day was the highest dose cohort evaluated. There were 2 dose -limiting toxicities 
(DLTs) (Grade 2 neutropenia [2.5 mg/kg/day] and Grade 3 hy persensitivity [8.3 mg/kg/day]) in separate cohorts . The 
maximum tolerated dose (MTD)  of ibrut inib in subjects with B -cell malignancies was not established in this study.  Five 
of 15 subjects with DLBCL (33%) achieved objective responses, 2 CRs and 3 partial responses (PRs). The median 
                      Page 11 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 time on treatment was 8 weeks (range: 2 to 98 weeks). Median PF S was 2.5 months (range: 0.7 to 4.6 months) and 
the median follow -up time was 3.5 months (range: 0.8 to 22.5 months).  
 
A subsequent phase  I/II, multicenter, open -label, and single -arm stu dy in subjects with rel/ref  DLBCL  was performed . 
(15)In order to determine whethe r ibrutinib had subtype specificity subjects enrolled were  retrospectively analyzed  into 
cohorts by subtype, either  activated B -cell like ( ABC) versus germinal B -cell like ( GCB ).  Subtype analysis was 
performed by gene expression profiling (GEP) .  In this study a ll subjects received a starting dose of ibrutinib  at 560 
mg/day.  The objectives of this study included  the determining the safety of this dosing regimen and an assessment of  
efficacy of ibrutinib in DLBCL. Eighty  subjects were enrolled  and evaluable for response.  T he overall resp onse rate 
(ORR) was 25% (20/80  subjects). In the ABC subtype, ORR was  37% (14/38  subjects ; Only 1 PR (  5%) was observed 
in the  20 patients retrospectively determined to be of GCB subtypes . Thus, while the 2 subgroups were retrospectively 
assigned , ibrutinib  may be less active  in rel/ref DLBCL, GCB subtype.  
 
The most common adverse reactions (>=25%) in pts with B cell malignancies (MCL, CLL, WM) were 
thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, diarrhea, anemia, fatigue, musculoskeletal pain, bruising, nausea, upper respiratory 
tract infection and rash.  
 
2.3 Rationale for combination of Umbralisib  and Ibrutinib  
B-cell l ymphomagenesis is known to be  a result of aberrant signaling through the B -cell receptor (BCR).  Several 
models have highlighted specific checkpoints that appear to be regulators of downstream signal propagation leading 
to abnormal nuclear transcription within the lymphocyte leading to either anti -apoptosi s or a p roliferative advantage. (5)  
A better understanding of the BCR signaling pathway has led to sever al small molecule inhibitors entering  clinical 
practice as single agents.  As described above , umbralisib  and ibrutinib  have shown safety and activity in DLBCL .  Also 
important is the significant lack of evidence for cumulative toxicity as single agents to  date.  For umbralisib  it has been 
postulated that the  novel structure unlike other PI3K inhibitors has led to its lack of a significant toxicity profile  making 
it a pairable novel oral agent .  
 
.  We 
propose that a ttacking the aberrant BCR signaling pathway at separate nodes may 
be an important mechanism to overcome the chemorefractory DLBCL  regardless 
of cell of origin.   
Alterations in s ingle agent safety profiles can arise after an esta blished MTD and 
often lessen the enthusiasm for such novel combinations and again question the 
durability of a continuous  use paradigm.  Nevertheless, combinations of oral novel -
novel agents continue to emerge. (16)  However, an example of unforeseen 
toxicities was highlighted in a recent report  with lenalidomide, idelalisib (PI3 -K 
inhibitor) , and rituximab in patients with relapsed/refr actory CLL and i ndolent 
NHL. (17)  A sepsis -like syndrome was reported in 4 patients and  resulted in 
stopping of  these  early phase studies without achieving a maximal tolerated dose 
(MTD).   
It is well established dogma that a MTD is the objective in phase I studies.  
However, this only reports dose limiting toxicities during the initial cycle of therapy 
when furthe r cumulative toxicities may be seen in subsequent cycles that limits the 
utility of a regimen.  Therefore, in paradigms were long -term safety and tolerability is paramount and furthermore 
needed to balance with objective responses , a phase IIa study  can be  employed to not only provide this tolerability 
signal  or cumulative toxicity events (CTEs),  but be inform ative for  future studies that lead to appropriately powered and 
better informed phase II or phase III studies.  

                      Page 12 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 As discussed  above the  phase I/Ib study  (NCT # 02006485 ) with ublituximab and umbralisib  in rel/ref CLL and NHL  
continues to accrue.  An amendment to this protocol allowed for the addition of ibrutinib at 560 mg daily to UTX (fixed 
at 900 mg ) in addition to increasing doses of umbralisib .  To da te, safety data on umbralisib  is notable for no episodes 
of hepatotoxicity reported w ith umbralisib  as a single agent or in combination with ublituximab (doublet), or with ibrutinib 
(triplet) .(10, 16, 18)   In the 12 rel/ref DLBCL patients treate d with umbralisib  and UTX  whom were eligible for response 
5 patients had obtained a response and two had a PET/CT confirmed  complete response s.   Sixteen patients  have 
been enrolled into  the triplet regimen without a DLT in the NHL cohorts.  The 800 mg dose level of umbralisib  has been 
enrolled and completed without a DLT.  E arly responses have been seen in multiple  NHL subtypes.   
Given the safety of the umbralisib  as a single agent, in the doublet and the triplet cohorts in combination with the early 
efficacy signal reported we propose to further explore the safety and toler ability of an all oral regimen of ibrutinib and 
umbralisib  in patients with rel/ref DLBCL who have relapsed post -transplant or have been determined to be ineligible 
or unsuitable for transplant at the full doses of umbralisib  (800 mg) and Ibrutinib (560 mg ) in a single center open label 
phase IIa study.   
 
Section 3.0 Eligibility Criteria :  
3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
1. Histologically confirmed  Diffuse Large B -cell Lymphoma ( DLBCL ) or transformed DLBCL  
2. Disease status defined as:  
a. Patients with relapsed or refractory DLBCL that has relapsed post -transplant or that  has been 
determined to be ineligible or unsuitable for transplant .  Patients must have received at least one 
prior systemic therapy.  
3. Patients must have measurable  (> 1.5 c m) or evaluable disease . Baseline measurements and evaluations 
must be obtained within 21 days  of registration to the study. Abnormal PET scans will not constitute evaluable 
disease, unless verified by CT scan or other appropriate imaging. Measurable disea se must have at least one 
objective measurable disease parameter. A clearly defined, bi -dimensionally measurable defect or mass 
measuring at least 1.5 cm in diameter on a CT scan will constitute measurable disease. Proof of lymphoma 
in the liver is require d by a confirmation biopsy. Skin lesions can be used as measurable disease provided bi -
dimensional measurements are possible.  
4. Adequate organ system function, defined as follows:  
a. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1.0  x 109/L 
i. By automated or manual review, whichever is greatest  
b. Platelets ≥ 100 x 109/L: 
i. Unless  due to  bone marrow infiltration  then eligible if platelet s > 50 x 109/L) 
c. Total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 x upper normal limit if documented hepatic involvement with lymphoma, or ≤ 5 
x upper normal limit if history of Gilbert’s Disease.  
d. Alanine  aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) ≤2.5 x ULN if no liver 
involvement or ≤5 x the ULN if documented liver involvement  
e. Creatinine ≤2.0 mg/dL OR calculated creatinine clearance ≥50 mL/min (as calculated by the 
Cockcroft -Gault method , Appendix B ) 
5. ECOG performance status ≤2  or expected survival duration of > 2 months  (Appendix C) 
6. Patients must be ≥1 9 years of age  (the age of consent in Nebraska)  
7. Ability to swallow and retain oral medication  
8. Women must not be pregnant  or breast -feeding due to teratogenic effects of therapy.  
a. All female patients of child -bearing potential must have a negative serum pregnancy test within 2 
weeks prior to treatment to rule out pregnancy  
b. Pregnancy testing is not required for post -menopausal or surgically sterilized women . 
9. Male and female patients of reproductive potential must agree  to follow accepted birth control measures 
throughout the study period and for 30 days after the last dose of either study drug  for females and 3 months 
after the last dose of study drug for males.  
10. Patient must be able to a dhere to the study visit schedule and other protocol requirements . 
                      Page 13 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 11. Patient must be aware of the neoplastic nature of his/her disease and willingly sign (or their legally -acceptable 
representatives must sign) an informed consent document indicating that the y understand the purpose of and 
procedures required for the study, including biomarkers, and are willing to participate in the study.  
12. No serious disease or condition that, in the opinion of the investigator, would compromise the patient’s ability 
to participate in the study  
 
3.2 Exclusion  Criteria  
1. Currently receiving cancer therapy (i.e., chemotherapy, radiation therapy, immunotherapy, biologic therapy, 
hormonal therapy, and surgery  and/or tumor embolization) or any investigational drug within 7 days of Cycle 1/Day 
1, 14 days of Cycle 1/Day 1 for limited palliative radiation , and/or five half -live of an oral therapy . 
a. Corticosteroid therapy started at least 7 days prior to initiation of treatment  (prednisone ≤10 mg daily or 
equivalent) is allowed as cli nically warranted ).  Topical or inhaled corticosteroids are permitted.  
2. Major surgery or a wound that has not fully healed within 4  weeks of enrollment.  
3. History of stroke or intracranial hemorrhage within 6 months prior to enrollment.  
4. Requires anticoagulation with warfarin or equivalent vitamin K antagonists (eg,  phenprocoumon.  
5. Vaccinated with live, attenuated vaccines within 4 weeks of enrollment.  
6. Autologous hematologic stem cell transplant within 3 months of study entry.   
7. Allogeneic hematologic stem cell transplant within 12 months  of study entry .  
8. Active graft versus -host disease and must not be on immunosuppression.  
9. Wide field radiotherapy within 28 days of Cycle 1/Day 1 or active  side effects of such therapy  
10. Active Hepatitis B  (HBV ) or C (HCV)  infection (negative serology required  excluding those with are seropositive 
due to prior vaccination ) and/or known history of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV) 
11. Primary central nervous system involvement only  
12. Require  treatment with strong CYP3 A inhibitors  
13. Known history of drug -induced liver injury, alcoholic liver disease, primary biliary cirrhosis, ongoing extra -hepatic 
obstruction caused by stones, cirrhosis of the liver or portal hypertension  
14. Any life-threatening illness, severe and/or unco ntrolled medical condition, or organ system dysfunction , laboratory 
abnormality, psychiatric illness  or other condition which , in the Investigator’s opinion,  could compromise the 
subject’s safety, interfere with the absorption or metabolism of ibrutinib capsules, put the study outcomes at undue 
risk or affect their participation in the study such as:  
a. Symptomatic, or history of documented congestive heart failure N ew York Heart Association  (NYHA)  
functional classification III -IV (NYHA, Appendix D )  
b. QTc >470 msec (unless related to pacemaker)  on EKG within  21 days of initiation of treatment  
c. Angina not well -controlled by medication  
d. Poorly controlled or clinically signifi cant atherosclerotic vascular disease including cerebrovascular accident 
(CVA), transient ischemic attack (TIA), angioplasty, cardiac or vascular stenting within  6 months  prior to 
enrollment  
15. Prior malignancies within the past 1 years with exception of adeq uately treated basal cell, squamous cell skin 
cancer, or thyroid cancer; carcinoma in situ of the cervix or breast; prostate cancer of Gleason Grade 6 or less 
with stable PSA levels . 
16. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.  Women who agree to stop breastf eeding would be eligible  
17. Known hypersensitivity to either study drug ( umbralisib  or Ibrutinib)  
NOTE:  
All questions regarding eligibility for UNMC potential subjects  should be directed to the PI at 402 -559-7164 .  
 
NOTE: The eligibility checklist (Appendix E) may be used as source documentation if it has been reviewed, signed, 
and dated prior to registration by the treating physician. The eligibility checklist must be accompanied by all other 
source documents that evidence the subject’s eligibility (i.e., dictation, pathology, radiology, laboratory, etc.)   
                      Page 14 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
   
Section 4.0 Registration Procedure :  
All patients, with relapsed or refractory DLBCL that has relapsed post -transplant or that  has been determined to be 
ineligible or unsuitable for transplant  referred to The Nebraska Medical Center (TNMC), University of Nebraska Medical 
Center (UNMC), Bellevue Medical Cen ter (BMC), and Village  Point Cancer Center  may be eligible for this trial.  
Screening eligibility based on standard clinical care will be performed by the treating physician at the time of encounter. 
On initial presentation, a history and physical examinat ion are performed, laboratory data obtained, and performance 
status is assessed. Imaging studies obtained include PET and a high -resolution multi -detector computed tomography 
(CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis. Further imaging studies will be obtained a s clinically indicated. Pathology 
material must be reviewed, and a diagnosis of DLBCL confirmed by UNMC  pathology department (retrospective ). The 
patient’s primary oncologist will make the decision as to screened eligibility of the candidate based on the eligibility 
criteria listed above, prior to offering consent.  
If the patient is screened as potentially eligible, he/she will then be offered  the option to participate. An informed consent 
will be signed by the patient after thorough review of the study is completed by the physician and his/her designee.  
 
Some insurance carrier’s may decline to cover the costs of usual medical care if the pati ent is participating in a clinical 
trial. The patient will be provided assistance by the research nurse coordinator or designated staff in determining if the 
insurance carrier will decline coverage. Insurance carriers may or may not pay for study related e xpenses. The patient 
can then decide if they wish to participate.  
 
4.1  Eligibility Verification/Registration  
 
Before subjects are registered to the study, an eligibility checklist (Appendix E) must be completed to verify the subject 
meets the eligibilit y criteria and may be used as source documentation if it has been reviewed, signed, and dated prior 
to registration by the treating physician. The eligibility check list will be maintained in the study file.  
 
Date of Enrollment: Defined as the date of the start of study treatment / first study related intervention.  
  
Study personnel from UNMC will p rovide the UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center PRMS office (ZIP 6805) a 
copy of the signed and dated consent form for each UNMC s ubject enrolled in the protocol within 24 hours  that includes 
the following information:  
• Protocol Number  
• Patient Identification: Patient’s name UNMC/NMC medical record number  
• Patient demographics: gender, birth date (mm/dd/yyyy), race, ethnicity,  
• New CTRP reporting requirements: Patient zip code/country (if not USA) and primary method of 
payment information  
 
4.2  Pathology Requirements  
 
Pathological materials are to be submi tted and reviewed a t UNMC confirming a diagnosis of DLBCL or transformed 
DLBCL.   
 
4.3  Instructions for Patients Who Do Not Start Assigned Protocol Treatment  
 
If a consented patient does not receive any assigned protocol treatment, baseline data will  still be collected and must 
be submitted according to the instructions in the protocol. Document the reason for not starting protocol treatment on 
one of the baseline forms.  
 
Section 5.0 Treatment Plan of Research Design :  
                      Page 15 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 This is a single -center Phase IIa study evaluating the safety and tolerability of umbralisib  and Ibrutinib as well as the 
response and event free survival of this regimen  in patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B -cell lymphoma 
(DLBCL). There will be 3 treatment groups given  a maximum of one  year (12 months) of therapy.  
5.1   Pre-treatment Evaluations Standard of Care (SOC)  
 
Within 21 days  prior to the Date of Enrollment , date of the start of study treatment / first study related intervention  
(unless otherwise specified below).  No tests or procedures are conducted solely for the purposes of research to 
determine subject eligibility.  
• History and physical  
• Informed Consent  
• CBC, diff, pl atelets , CMET, LDH  
• Hepatitis B (HBV) or C (HCV) serology  
• Serum pregnancy test (if applicable) within 14 days  of first study -related treatment date . 
• Height and weight  
• Vital signs, including blood pressure  
• Performance Status  
• EKG  
• PET/CT baseline r adiologic evaluation ; NOTE for f/u if a Deauville  3 (CR) is achieved then CT chest, abdomen and 
pelvis with contrast may be used. Further PET/CT scans are optional at the investigators discretion.   
• Mandatory research p eripheral blood ( 20 mL) for cell free DNA assessment and T -cell characterization will be 
collected in an EDTA tube pretreatment (day of biopsy or initiation of treatment), day 8, 1 month (+/ - 3 days) and  10mL  
at subsequent radiographic response assessments, after cycle 2, 4, 6, 9, and 12.  (+/- 7 days).  After Month 12, efficacy 
assessments should occur at the investigators discretion with collection of a research blood sample only if feasible.  
Should the patient consent any leftover peripheral blood collected for research will be s tored at UNMC for future IHC 
and DNA  unspecified research use.  
•  
• Optional Research Samples  (Appendix G):  
o Should the patient consent, 3 additional o ptional lymph node biopsies  for m olecular profiling will be 
obtained at days 0 (pre -treatment ; core biopsy ), day 8  (FNA)  and end of treatment (pr ogressive disease , 
toxicity, or end of study —1 year ; core biopsy ) to evaluate the baseline characteristics and dynamic shifts 
in mutational landscape, transcriptional signatures and intr acellular signaling cascades in primary tumor 
cells as well as assessment of comparative serologic response to radiographic assessments of response.  
   
 
Specimens submitted, by patients who consent to the additional specimen collection, will be processed to maximize 
their utility for future  unspecified  research projects and may include, but not limited to, extraction of plasma, serum, 
DNA and RNA.    Specimens will be archived with appropriate safeguards to ensure an efficient system for the prompt 
linkage and retrieval of the stored samples with the subject’s study records.  
 
Specimens from patients who consented to allow their specimens to be used for future IRB, TG Therapeutics, and 
Janssen  Scientific LLC  approved research studies, including residuals from the currently defined resea rch studies, will 
be retained in an UNMC -designated central repository. If the patient agrees to let the samples be kept for future 
research, the samples will be kept until they are used up or destroyed. Most future research studies will focus on 
cancer, s ome research projects may also include other diseases, such as heart disease, diabetes or Alzheimer's 
disease. This may also include research on inherited traits.  All future IRB, TG Therapeutics, and  Janssen  Scientific 
LLC approved research studies  will b e conducted in accordance with the requirements set forth in the UNMC Human 
Tissue Use and Transfer Policy (policy #8013).   
 
                      Page 16 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 5.2 Treatment Grouping  and Dosing  
Medicare qualifying research related combination chemotherapy:  
Stratification will be performed on a 1:1:1 basis to Group A, B or C by willingness to consent to optional biopsies . The 
first 3 patients will be directly enrolled into cohort C regardless of decision to be included in the optional biopsy portion  
of the study.   
Group A (consent ed to optional biopsies ; 6 patients ): umbralisib  800 mg PO daily on  Days 1 -8; then 
umbralisib  800 mg oral daily  and Ibrutinib 560 mg oral daily  
Group B (consented to optional biopsies; 6 patients): Ibrutinib 560 mg PO daily Days 1 -8; then umbralisib  
800 mg  PO daily and Ibrutinib 560 mg PO daily  
Group C (deferred consent to optional biopsies or consented to optional biopsies; 12 patients): umbralisib  
800 mg PO daily and Ibrutinib 560 mg PO daily  
All subjects will receive a maximum of 52  weeks of oral (self -administered ) therapy. To provide a means of ensuring 
oral routes  of medication adherence of patients while participating in a clinical trial Appendix F “Oral, Sublingual, 
and/or Buccal Route Medication Adherence Standard Procedure (V 1.0 11 -25-2013)” will be followed.  
No routine prophylactic antiemetics or pre -medications should be given outside of protocol requirements.  However, 
these medications may b e administered for symptoms when they occur, and may be given prophylactically afterwards.  
Appropriate anti -emetic regimens should be based on the recommendations made by the NCCN guidelines (SOC). 
http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/PDF/antiemesis.pdf   
      5.2.1 Guidelines  for Administration of umbralisib  
• Method of Administration: Umbralisib  4 tablets each  200mg = 800mg will be administered orally once daily. 
Umbralisib  should be taken in the morning .  (NOTE : After cycle 2 if no CTE have been seen then the patient 
can have the option to take umbralisib  and Ibrutinib dosing together at the same time of day) . 
• Umbralisib  tablets should be  swallowed whole with a full glass (approximately 8  ounces) of water.  umbralisib  
tablets should NOT be crushed  or chewed.   
• Potential Drug Interactions :  No Drug Interact ions have been reported to date.  
• Pre-medications:  None  
Umbralisib  will be self -administered (by the patient).  Tablets should be taken at approximately the same time each 
morning with food.   Patients should be instructed to swallow the tablets whole and s hould not chew or crush them.  
If a dose of umbralisib  is missed, it should be taken as soon as possible on the same day.  If a dose  is missed,  it should 
not be replaced.  If vomiting occurs, no attempt should be made to replace the vomited dose.  Study  drug compliance 
should be reviewed with the patient at the beginning of each new treatment cycle.  Missed doses should be 
documented.  (Appendix  F “Oral, Sublingual, and/or Buccal Route Medication Adherence Standard Procedure (V 1.0 
11-25-2013)”  
 
      5.2.2 Guidelines for Administration of Ibrutinib  
• Method of Administration: Ibrutinib  4 capsules each  140mg  = 560mg  will be administered orally once daily . 
Ibrutinib should be taken in the evening. (NOTE:  After cycle 2 if no CTE have been seen then the patient 
can have the option to take umbralisib  and Ibrutinib dosing together at the same time of day) . 
• Ibrutinib capsu les should be swallowed whole with a full glass (approximately 8  ounces) of water. Ibrutinib 
capsules should not be opened, chewed or dissolved.   
• Potential Drug Interactions :   Avoid co -administration with strong or moderate CYP3A inhibitors and consider 
alternative agents with less CYP3A inhibition. Concomitant use of strong CYP3A inhibitors which would be 
taken chronically (e.g., ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, saquinavir, boceprevir, telaprevir, nefazodone) is not 
recommended. For short -term use (treatment for 7 days or less) of strong CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., antifungals 
                      Page 17 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 and anti biotics) consider interrupting ibrutinib  therapy until the CYP3A inhibitor is no longer needed [see Drug 
Interactions (7.1)]. Reduce ibrutinib dose to 140 mg if a mode rate CYP3A inhibitor must be used (e.g., 
fluconazole, darunavir, erythromycin, diltiazem, atazanavir, aprepitant, amprenavir, fosamprevir, crizotinib, 
imatinib, verapamil, and ciprofloxacin) [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]. Patients taking concomitant strong  or 
moderate CYP3A inhibitors should be monitored more closely for signs of ibrutinib  toxicity.  
• Also avoid grapefruit and Seville oranges during treatment, as these contain moderate inhibitors of CYP3A and 
can alter ibrutinib pharmacokinetics.  
• For patients  with mild liver impairment (Child -Pugh class A), the recommended dose is 140 mg daily (one 
capsule). Avoid the use of ibrutinib in patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh 
classes B and C) [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]  
• Pre-medications:  None  
Ibrutinib will be self -administered (by the patient).  Capsules  should be taken at approximately the same time each 
evening with  food.  Patients should be instructed to swallow the capsules  whole and should not chew , break  or crush 
them.  If a scheduled dose  of Ibrutinib  is missed  it should be taken as soon as possible on the same day  with a return 
to the normal schedule the following d ay.  Extra capsules of ibrutinib should not be taken to make up for the missed 
dose . If vomiting occurs, no attempt should be made to replace the vomited dose.  Study drug compliance should be 
reviewed with the patient at the beginning of each new treatment  cycle.  Missed doses should be documented.  
(Appendix F “Oral, Sublingual, and/or Buccal Route Medication Adherence Standard Procedure (V 1.0 11 -25-2013)”  
 
5.3 Supportive  medications and procedures  
 
The following treatments are prohibited while on clinical trial:  other investigational drug treatments or study 
participation, radiation therapy (except as described in section 3.2 Exclusion Criteria #1 ), hormonal therapy for cancer, 
cancer immunotherapy or other biologic therapy excluding trial drugs.  
• No glucocorticoids may be administered outside of protocol requirements for premedication or AE 
management, except low doses of steroids stabilized at < 10 mg per day of prednisone or equivalent, and 
started at least 7 days prior to study entry.  
Patients should receive full supportive care while on this study. This includes blood product support, antibiotic 
treatment, and treatment of other newly diagnose d or concurrent medical conditions. All blood products and supportive 
care concomitant medications such as antidiarrheals , analgesics, and/or antiemetics received from the first day of study 
treatment administration until 30 days after the final dose will be recorded in the medical records . 
Neutropenia:  Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G -CSF; filgrastim or pegfilgrastim) may be used during the course 
of the study at the investigator discretion.  The drug(s) should be used at a dose/schedule specified in the package 
insert.   
Antiemetics:  Umbralisib  and ibrutinib are considered to be of low emetogenic potential that may be adequately 
prevented with prochlorperazine.  Other antiemetics may be used at the discretion of the treating physician if nausea 
and/or vomiting is not adequately controlled/preven ted. Appropriate anti -emetic regimens should be based on the 
recommendations made by the NCCN guidelines (SOC). 
http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/PDF/antiemesi s.pdf   
Tumor Lysis Syndrome:   Subjects at risk for tumor lysis syndrome in the opinion of the treating investigator, prophylaxis 
with allopurinol or institutional standards should be considered.   Patient s felt to be at risk for tumor lysis syndrome 
by the treating investigator will be monitored at least for the first 3 days of cycle 1 of therapy.  
Pneumocystis Jiroveci Pneumonia (PCP) and Viral Infections :  Prophylact ic treatment with pneumocystis jiroveci 
pneumonia (PCP) and antiviral therapy should be considered.  Recommended a nti-viral prophylaxis  is with  Valtrex 500 
mg daily or Acyclovir 400 mg BID or equivalent.  Recommended PCP p rophylaxis  is with  Dapsone 100 mg daily.  Final 
choice of PCP and anti -viral prophylactic therapy is per investigator discretion.  If PCP or anti -viral therapy is not 
                      Page 18 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 tolerated, alternate to a different PCP or anti -viral therapy, discontinue, or reduce dose/schedule as per investigator 
discretion.   
Blood Product Support:  Blood products should be utilized as clinically warranted and following institutional policies and 
recommendations.  
5.4 Duration of therapy  
In the absence of treatment delays due to adverse event(s), treatment should continue unless one of the following 
criteria applies:  
• Disease progression or inter -current illness that prevents further treatment . 
• Patient decides to withdraw from the study, or changes in the patient's condition render the patient 
unacceptable for further treatment in the judgment of the investigator.  
• One year of therapy  
5.5 Follow -up Evaluations Course Assessment Schedule  
A cycle is 28 days of treatment with any oral agent regardless of group assignment.  Response assessment will be 
done after cycles 2, 4, 6, 9, and 12 (+/- 7 days).  After Month 12, efficacy ass essments should occur  at the investigator s 
discretion.  
We will continue to routinely monitor safety in regards to serious adverse events as well as for toxicity trends that may 
be of concern.  
The reason for study removal and the date the patient was removed must be documented in the Case Report Form.  
Patients who discontinue therapy due to an adverse event should be followed until disease progression.  
5. 6 Toxicity  Assessments and Dose modifications  
5.6.1  Definitions of Cumulative Toxicity Event  (CTE ) 
For this protocol, cumulative toxicity event (CTE)  will be defined as follows: an adverse event attributed (definitely, 
probably or possibly related) to the study tre atment and meeting following c riteria within cycles 1 to 4 . AE grading and 
assignment of attribution require documentation by medical personnel who are directly involved in the clinical care of 
protocol subjects.  
 
Toxicity  Definition  
Hematologic  Either:  
1. Grade 4 hematologic toxicities (attributed to either or both drugs) defined as:  
b. Grade 4 thrombocytopenia (platelets < 25 K/µL)  
c. Grade 4 neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count (ANC) < 0.5)  
2. Grade 3 thrombocytopenia or neutropenia that results in a > 7 day delay in either 
drug.  
Non-hematologic  Either:  
1. ≥ Grade 3 as per NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0 3* 
(attributed to either or both study drugs).  
2. One week or greater delay in initiating any cycle da y 1 due to continued drug -
related toxicity.  
 
*Grade 3 nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea with maximal supportive treatment(s) will be considered a CTE . Fatigue Grade 
>/= 3 considered to be due to treatment (definitely, probably, or possibly related) will be considered a CTE. 
 
Patients should be assessed clinically for toxicity at each visit using the NCI CTCAE v4.0 3 
(http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/CTCAE ) grading scale.  The study will be terminated if a cumulative toxicity event 
(CTE) occurs in: ≥2/first 4; ≥4/first 8; or if more than 12 patients when the last (24th) evaluable  patient   has completed 
                      Page 19 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 cycle 4.  If a patient has progression of disease or is removed from study not related to a CTE after completion of 2 
cycles but less than 4 cycles the patients safety evaluation will be included, but noted appropriately.  If the patient 
receives less than 2 cycles than the patient will not be included and noted, but will not be replaced.  
 
Dosing will occur only if a patient’s clinical assessment and laboratory test values are acceptable.   
Dose modification and or intervention with supportiv e care recommendations for umbralisib , and ibrutinib are provided 
below, however final discretion lies with the treating investigator in regards to more or less aggressive intervention, 
which specific investigational agent (or if both agents) needs to be reduced, and actual dose reductions, as well as the 
number of dose reductions.  
 
5.6.2 Treatment Initiation /Continuation : 
 
Starting  a new cycle or continuing  treatment after a CTE should be administered per protocol provided that:  
• Absolute neutrophil count ≥ 1000 /uL and platelet count ≥ 50,000/uL  
• Recovered from grade 3 -4 non -hematologic toxicity to grade 1 or baseline .  
• Treatment may be delayed to recover from toxicity or per investigator discretion.  
• No clinical or radiographic evidence of disease progressi on.  
 
5.7 Dose  modifications of Umbralisib  and Ibrutinib  for Adverse Reactions  
 
If cytopenias are deemed related to the underlying disease rather than either umbralisib  or ibrutinib, dose reductions 
are not required, or are per investigator discretion.  
 
 
 
Worst CTCAE Grade Toxicity  Action to be Taken  
Grade  Neutropenia  Management  
≤ Grade 1  No action required.  
Grade 2  No action required; consider growth factor support.  
Grade 3  or 4 first occurrence  
 Hold until < Grade 3.  Consider growth factor support . Recheck in at least 
1 week .  Re-challenge at same dose level . 
Grade 3 or 4  
subsequent Occurrences  Hold until < Grade 3, or at patient ’s previous baseline.  Recheck at least 
within 1 week.  Doses are reduced 1 dose level.  
Management of neutropenia is per institution guidelines and if in the opinion of treating investigator, are 
appropriate for patient care.  
 
Worst CTCAE Grade Toxicity  Action to be  Taken  
Grade  Thrombocytopenia Management  
≤ Grade 1  No action required.  
Grade 2  No action required.  
Grade 3 or 4  
1st Occurrence  Hold until < Grade 3, or at patient ’s previous baseline. Recheck at least 
within 1 week .  Re-challenge at same dose level.  
Grade 3 or 4  
subsequent Occurrences  Hold until < Grade 3, or at patient ’s previous baseline.  Recheck at least 
within 1 week.   Doses are reduced 1 dose level.  
Management of thrombocytopenia are per institution guidelines and if in the opinion of treating investigator, 
are appropriate for patient care.  
                      Page 20 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
Patients who experience an adverse event that occurs after the CTE assessment window (cycle 1 -6) will be allowed to 
delay umbralisib  or ibrutinib dosing in order to recover from the toxicity.   Patients may resume umbralisib  and ibrutinib , 
provided that the toxicity has resolved to Grade ≤  1 or baseline.  
 
5.8 Non -Hematologic Toxicity  
Grade 3 or 4 Non -Hematologic Toxicity  
 
The dose reduction guidelines for other Grade 3 -4 non-hematologic toxicities are shown below.  
NON -HEMATOLOGIC  Action to be Taken  
Renal  If serum creatinine >3 x baseline or >3 x ULN, hold dose until ≤  Grade 2 .   
Hepatic  For patients with mild liver impairment (Child -Pugh Class A) the recommended 
dose is 140mg daily (one capsule).  Avoid the use of IMBRUVICA in pts with 
moderate or severe hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh Class B and C).   
Cardiac  If a QTcF >500 msec has been demonstrated, hold dose:  
For all patients with a new QTcF >500 msec, occurring at any time during the 
study as identified by the investigator, an immediate evaluation of that ECG 
will be obtained and confirmed.    
All cardiac events should be treated as per the local standard of care and 
referral to a specialist if clinically indicated.  Any final decisions concerning 
dose modifications or permanently discontinuing the patient from study drug 
due to QTcF prolongation will occur after discussion between  the Invest \gator .  
 
Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter (range, 6 to 9%) have occurred in patients 
treated with IMBRUVICA, particularly in patients with cardiac risk factors, acute 
infections, and a previous history of atrial fibrillation. Periodically  monitor 
patients clinically for atrial fibrillation. Patients who develop arrhythmic 
symptoms (e.g., palpitations, lightheadedness) or new onset dyspnea should 
have an ECG performed. If atrial fibrillation persists, consider the risks and 
benefits of IMBR UVICA treatment and dose modification   
 
 
 
 
 
 Worst CTCAE Grade Toxicity  Action to be Taken  
                              Elevated Liver Enzymes  
Grade  Management  
≤ Grade 1  No action required.  
Grade 2  No action required.  
Grade 3 or 4  
1st Occurrence  Hold until < Grade 3, or at patient ’s previous baseline. Recheck at least 
within 1 week.  Re-challenge at same dose level.  
Grade 3 or 4  
subsequent Occurrences  Hold until < Grade 3, or at patient ’s previous baseline.  Recheck at least 
within 1 week.  Doses are reduced 1 dose level.  
Management of elevated liver enzymes are at the discretion of the investigator  
                      Page 21 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 OTHER NON -
HEMATOLOGIC  Recommended Action to be Taken   
Grade  1 or 2  None  
Grade 3 CTCAE  Hold dose until toxicity Grade ≤2 . Reduce 1 dose level.  
If toxicity remains grade 3 
toxicity for longer than 2 weeks  Reduce  by one dose level or discontinue treatment  
If grade 3 toxicity lasts 2 weeks 
and resolves to ≤ Grade 2  Hold dose until toxicity Grade ≤2 .  Reduce 1 dose level  
Recurrence of Grade 3 of  
toxicity  Consider reducing by one dose level  
Grade 4 CTCAE  Hold dose until toxicity Grade ≤2 , reduce 1 dose level.  
Recurrence of Grade 4 toxicity  Reduce by one dose level or discontinue study drug  
 
5.9 Dose Reduction Guidelines  of Umbralisib  and Ibrutinib  
 
If a hematologic toxicity is deemed to be related to the study combination both drugs will be reduced.  If a non -
hematologic AE occur s and is felt to be related to only one of the study drug, this drug can be dose reduced alone.  
 
Dose Modifications  Umbralisib  Ibrutinib  Day Route  
-1 600 mg  560mg  Day 1 -28 orally  
-2 400 mg   420mg  Day 1 -28 orally  
-3 200 mg   280mg  Day 1 -28 orally  
 
5.10  Assessments  
 
5.10.1  Disease Assessment Schedule  
A dedicated PET/CT Response assessment will be done after cycles 2, 4, 6, 9, and 12 (+/- 7 days).  After Month 12, 
efficacy assessments should occur at the investigators discretion.  If a PET/CT CR ( Deauville  3 or less) is seen then a 
CT of chest, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast can be substituted.  
 
A restaging bone marrow biopsy may be done if a staging bone marrow biopsy was previously positive or if symptoms 
suggest involvement.  
 
Patients with stable disease after 6 cycles can continue treatment if th e treating investigator  feels the subject is deriving 
benefit. Patients with progressive disease (PD) at any time are off study and will discontinue study treatment.  
 
Patients achieving PR/CR or stable disease that are felt by the investigator to be deriv ing a benefit may continue u ntil 
disease progression or for a maximum of 12 cycles (52 weeks of any treatment).  
 
5.10.2  Post Trial Assessments  
Patients who go off study treatment at any time during the trial will be followed for 30 days after the last day of treatment. 
For all patients, drug -related SAEs and AEs will be followed until baseline or ≤ grade 1 levels. Patients who responded 
or maintained stable disease during the study will be followed for date of disease progression. Patients may refu se to 
participate in the post -trial assessments.  
 
5.11  Biospecimens  
 
5.11.1  Mandatory Human Biologic Materials  
Pathology material s should be submitted and  reviewed  at UNMC confirm ing the diagnosis of DLBCL or transformed 
DLBCL.   
                      Page 22 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
Mandatory p eripheral blood ( 20 mL) for cell free DNA assessment and peripheral mononuclear cells will be collected 
in an EDTA tube pretreatment (day of biopsy or initiation of treatment), day 8, 1 month (+/ - 3 days) and 10 mL will be 
collected at subsequent radiograp hic response assessments, after cycle 2, 4, 6, 9, and 12.  (+/- 7 days).  After Month 
12, efficacy assessments should occur at the investigators discretion with collection of a research blood sample only if 
feasible.    
 
5.11.2 Somatic Mutations Affecting B -cell Receptor Signaling  
Prior studies have identified somatic mutations in genes that regulate or modify signaling downstream from the B -cell 
receptor and toll -like recep tor pathway, including CD79A,  CD79 B, CARD11, and MYD88 . In addition, these  mutations 
may be associated with the cl inical response to Ibrutinib . To account for the potential influence of these mutations on 
response, they will be assessed from pre -treatment biopsy specimens by next generation sequencing. To achieve this, 
DNA will be extracted from tumor specimens, genome -wide next generation sequencing libraries constructed, and 
hybrid capture utilized to isolate 386 genes that are recurrently mutated in B -cell lymphoma, including those listed 
above.  
 
 5.11.3 Quantitative Assessme nt of Kinetics and Depth of Response  
Tumor cells release DNA into the peripheral blood and it is detectable within the cell -free DNA (cfDNA) f raction isolated 
from plasma . Recent studies have shown that the burden of tumor specific cfDNA in the plasma corr elates  with 
metabolic tumor volume .(19, 20)  In order to quantitatively assess the magnitude and kinetics of response and 
association with radiographic response we will employ cfDNA sequencing by isolating cfDNA from  peripheral blood 
samples collected in a 20 ml EDTA tube pretreatment (day of biopsy or initiation of treatment), day 8, 1 month (+/ - 3 
days) and 10mL EDTA tube at subsequent radiographic response asse ssments, after cycle 2, 4, 6, 9, and 12.  (+/- 7 
days).  After Month 12, efficacy assessments should occur at the investigators discretion with 10ml EDTA peripheral 
blood samples obtained ONLY IF FEASIBLE.  We will create  next-generation sequencing libraries , and performing 
hybrid capture for genes with identified mutations from the tumor biopsy specimen as well as immunoglobulin genes. 
(Appendix G Blood  and Tissue Sample Processing and Shipping)  
 
This will allow multiple tumor -specific genetic markers to be followed in the peripheral blood, and quantitative 
assessment of response to be calculated by the change in allelic fraction of somatic mutations.  
 
 5.11.4 Cell Signaling Characteristics  
Malign ant B -cells have unique intracellular signaling characteristics that vary between patients .(21) We will assess the 
basal level of signaling downstream from the B -cell receptor in pre -treatment biopsies using intracellular phospho -
specific flow cytometry. Therein, tumor B -cells can be identified using surface markers and fixed and permeabilized 
cells interrogated using antibodies that are specific for activating phosphorylation markers on multiple proteins. Using 
fluorescent barcoding and 10 -color multiplexing, we will assess the activity of proximal B -cell receptor signaling 
components (Lyn, Syk, Btk , Blnk, Plcg2), phosphoinositol -3-kinase signaling molecules (Akt,  S6K) and  downstream 
targets of casein kinase signaling (EIF4E, Myc) ). This will provide a quantitative measure of the basal activation of 
these pathways within patient tumor biopsies prior  to treatment. Optional lymph node  biopsies will be  obtained via US  
or computer tomography (CT)  guided biopsy of accessible  lymph nodes at day 0 (pre -treatment; core biopsy), day 8 
(FNA) and end of treatment (progressive disease, toxicity, or end of study —1 year; core biopsy)  so as to assess the 
change in signaling resulting from treatment.   (Appendix G  Blood and Tissue Sample Processing and Shipping)  
 
 5.11.5 Peripheral T -cell Characteristics  
Ibrutinib and umbralisib  have been described to have secondary targets of Itk and CK1ε, respectively [PMID .(22, 23)  
These molecules play a role in T -helper cell d ifferentiation by promoting or inhibiting Th2 polarization, respectively. 
We will therefore monitor the change in T - cell characteristics using 10mL of peripheral blood  in EDTA from pre -
treatment and day 8  and 1 -month . This will include the interrogation of cytokines (IFN -γ, TNF -α, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, 
                      Page 23 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 IL10, IL -13), phenotypic markers (CD3, CD4, CD25, CD45RO, CCR6, CCR7, CD27, CD127, CXCR3, HLA -DR, 
CD38) and intracellular transcription factors (FoxP3, T -bet, GATA3).  
 
  
6.0 Measurement of Effect:  
 
6.1 Response to therapy :  
 
Response to therapy will be classified as complete response (CR), partial response (PR), stable disease (SD), 
progressive disease (PD), early death, or not evaluable. Response to therapy will be determined after cycle  2, 4, 6, 9, 
and 12  (+/- 7 days).  Afte r Month 12, efficacy assessments should occur at the investigators discretion .  
 
Patients with a global deterioration of health status requiring permanent discontinuation of study treatment (taken off 
study) without objective evidence of disease progressio n will be counted as progressive disease unless a prior CR or 
PR has been previously documented. Every effort should be made to document the objective progression even after 
discontinuation of treatment. Deaths will be counted as treatment failure.  
 
Patie nts will be analyzed with respect to overall survival (OS) and progression -free survival (PFS). Overall survival is 
defined as time from the first therapy administered on trial until death from any cause. For subjects who are still alive 
at the time of the  study analysis or are lost to follow -up, survival will be censored at the last recorded date that the 
subject was known to be alive. Progression -free survival is defined as time from therapy until relapse, progression, or 
death from any cause. Response wi ll be determined by the principal investigator or the co -principal investigators.  
 
CR can be achieved at any response evaluation of umbralisib  and ibrutinib.  
 
Definitions for clinical response for patients with lymphoma are from the Lugano  Response Criter ia for Malignant 
Lymphoma. (24) Lymph node measurements should be taken from CT or the CT portion of the PET/CT.  Measurement 
of lymphadenopathy will be determined by adding the sum of the products of the maximal perpendicular diameters of 
measured lesions (SDP).  Measurable extranodal disease should be assessed in a manner similar to that for nodal 
disease. For these recommendations, the spleen is considered nodal disease. Disease that is only assessable , such 
as diffuse  infiltration of an organ such as the stomach, bone marrow, periphe ral blood, liver, lungs, or bowel by 
lymphoma without a discrete mass would constitute assessable, but not measurable, disease  (eg, Lymph node or 
tumor mass greater than 1.5 cm in at least one dimension by physical exam, splenic enlargement, if the spleen is 
palpable, at least 3 cm below the left costal margin ) will be recorded as present or absent only, unless, while an 
abnormality is still noted by imaging studies or physical examination, it is found to be histologically negative.  
 
Response is based on PET/CT  (Deauville  3 or less) or  CT alone if CR is achieved by PET/CT.  
 
Response criteria, modified from the Lugano response criteria.  DLBCL is  considered FDG avid.  
 
Response 
Category  Definition  Nodal Masses  Spleen, liver  Bone Marrow  
CR Disappearance of 
all evidence of 
disease.  Mass of any size 
permitted if PET 
negative  
 Not palpable, 
nodules 
disappeared  Infiltrate cleared on 
repeat biopsy; if 
indeterminate by 
morphology, 
immunohistochemistry 
should be negative  
PR Regression of 
measurab le 50% decrease in 
SPD of up to 6 
largest dominant 50% decrease in 
SPD of nodules 
(for single nodule Irrelevant if positive prior 
to therapy; cell type 
should be specified  

                      Page 24 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 disease and no 
new sites  masses; no 
increase in size of 
other nodes  
and 
one or more PET 
positive at 
previously involved 
site in greatest 
transverse 
diameter); no 
increase in size of 
liver or spleen  
SD Failure to attain 
CR/PR or PD  PET positive at 
prior sites of 
disease and no new 
sites on CT or PET    
Relapse/  
Progressi ve 
disease  Any new lesion or 
increase by 50% 
of previously 
involved sites from 
nadir  Appearance of a 
new lesion(s) > 1.5 
cm in any axis, 
50% increase from 
nadir in SPD of 
more than one 
node, or 50% 
increase in longest 
diameter of a 
previously identified  
node > 1 cm in short 
axis. 
The lesions referred 
to above are 
required to be PET 
positive.  > 50% increase 
from nadir in the 
SPD of any 
previous lesions  New or recurrent 
involvement  
Abbreviations: CR, complete remission; FDG, [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose; PET, positron emission tomography; CT, 
computed tomography; PR, partial remission; SPD, sum of the product of the diameters; SD, stable disease; PD, 
progressive disease.  
 
6.2 Complete Response (CR) : 
 
6.2.1  Complete disappearance of all detectable clinical evidence of disease and definitely disease -related 
symptoms if present before therapy. 
 
6.2.2  DLBCL is a FDG -avid lymphoma :  when the PET scan was positive before therapy, a post-treatment 
residual mass of any size is permitted as long as it is PET negative.  
 
6.2.3  The spleen and/or liver, if considered enlarged before therapy on the basis of a physical examination 
or CT scan, should not be palpable on physical examination and should be considered normal size 
by imaging studies, and nodules related to lymphom a should disappear. However, determination of 
splenic involvement is not always reliable because a spleen considered normal in size may still 
contain lymphoma, whereas an enlarged spleen may reflect variation s in anatomy, blood volume, the 
use of hematopoietic growth factors, or causes other than lymphoma.  Similarly, other organs 
considered to be enlarged before therapy due to involvement by lymphoma, such as liver and 
kidneys, must have decreased in size.  
 
6.2.4 If the bone marrow was involved by lymphoma before treatment, the infiltrate must have cleared on 
repeat bone marrow biopsy. The biopsy sample on which this determination is made must be 

                      Page 25 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 adequate (with a goal of > 20 mm unilateral core). If the sample  is indeterminate by morphology, it 
should be negative by immunohistochemistry. A sample that is negative by immunohistochemistry 
but that demonstrates a small population of clonal lymphocytes by flow cytometry will be considered 
a CR until data become available demonstrating a clear difference in patient outcome.  
 
6.3 Criteria for Partial Response (PR). The designation of PR requires all of the following:  
 
 6.3.1  At least a 50% decrease in sum of the product of the diameters (SPD) of up to six of the largest 
dominant nodes or nodal masses. These nodes or masses should be selected according to all of the 
following:  
• they should be clearly measurable in at least 2 perpendicular dimensions  
• if possible they should be from disparate regions of the body  
• they should include mediastinal and retroperitoneal areas of disease whenever these 
sites are involved  
 
 6.3.2  No increase should be observed in the size of other nodes, liver, or spleen.  
 
 6.3.3  Splenic and hepatic nodules must regress by 50% in their SPD or, for single nodules, in the greatest 
transverse diameter.  
 6.3.4  With the exception of splenic and hepatic nodules, involvement of other organs is usually assessable 
and no measurable disease should be present.  
 
 6.3.5  Bone marrow assessment is irrelev ant for determination of a PR if the sample was positive before 
treatment. However, if positive, the cell type should be specified (eg, large -cell lymphoma or small 
neoplastic B cells). Patients who achieve a CR by the above criteria, but who have persiste nt 
morphologic bone marrow involvement will be considered partial responders.  
  
When the bone marrow was involved before therapy and a clinical CR was achieved, but with no 
bone marrow assessment after treatment, patients should be considered partial resp onders.  
 
 6.3.6  No new sites of disease should be observed.  
 
 6.3.7  For patients with PET scan was positive before therapy, the post-treatment PET should be positive 
in at least one previously involved site.  
 
6.4 Criteria for Stable Disease (SD) : 
6.4.1  A patient is considered to have SD when he or she fails to attain the criteria needed for a CR or PR 
(see above), but does not fulfill those for progressive disease (see below).  
6.4.2  The PET should be positive at prior sites of disease with no ne w areas of involvement on the post-
treatment CT or PET.  
6.5 Relapsed Disease (after CR)/Progressive Disease (after PR, SD):  
Lymph nodes should be considered abnormal if the long axis is more than 1.5 cm regardless of the short axis. 
If a lymph node has a  long axis of 1.1 to 1.5 cm, it should only be considered abnormal if its short axis is more 
than 1.0. Lymph nodes 1.0 x 1.0 cm will not be considered as abnormal for relapse or progressive disease.  
 
 6.5.1  Appearance of any new lesion more than 1.5 cm in any axis during or after completion of  therapy, 
even if other lesions are decreasing in size. Increased FDG uptake in a previously unaffected site 

                      Page 26 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 should only be considered relapsed or progressive disease after confirmation with other modalities. 
In patients with no prior history of pulmonary lymphoma, new lung nodules identified by CT are mostly 
benign. Thus, a therapeutic decision should not be made solely on the basis of the PET without 
histologic confirmation.  
 
 6.5.2  At least a 50% increase from nadir in the SPD of any previously involved nodes, or in a single involved 
node, or the size of other lesions (eg, splenic or hepatic nodules). To be considered progressive 
disease, a lymph node with a diameter of the short axis of less than 1.0 cm must increase by 50% 
and to a size of 1.5 x 1.5 cm or more than 1.5 cm in the long axis.  
  
 6.5.3      At least a 50% increase in the longest diameter of any single previously identified node more than 1 
cm in its short axis.  
 
6.5.4       Lesions should be PET positive if observed in a typical FDG -avid lymphoma or the lesion was PET positive 
before therapy unless the lesion is too small to be detected with current PET systems (< 1.5 cm in its long axis by CT). 

                      Page 27 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 7.0  STUDY PARAMETERS  - Test Schedule for cycle  1-12 
 
1 Physical Exam, Vital Signs, ECOG PS, Hematology and Serum Chemistry visit days have +/ - 3 day window in cycle 1  and +/ - 
7 day window during cycles 2 -12. 
2 To confirm negative HBV and HCV  
3 For women of child bearing potential completed w ithin 14  days prior to Day 1 of Cycle 1  
4Tumor evaluation must include a PET/CT; if a Deauville  3 (CR) is achieved then CT chest, abdomen and p elvis with contrast 
may be used . Further PET/CT scans are optional at the investigators discretion.   All tumor evaluations have +/ - 7 day window.  
5 Response evaluation will occur after cycle 2,  4, 6, 9, and 12 (+/ - 7 days) . After Month 12, efficacy assessments should occur 
at the investigators discretion.  
6 End of study will be the next visit following a cycle after study drug was administered .  If a patient has completed 12 cycles 
of treatment without evidence of P D the patient will be monitor for relapse or progression at the discretion of the treating 
investigator.  Follow up after 1 year of therapy will be per institutional guidelines.   Patient can be taken off study to proceed to 
allogeneic stem cell transplant.   Patients will be censored for EFS  and DOR, but will be available for OS assessment.  
7 The study will be terminated if a cumulative toxicity event (CTE) occurs in: ≥2/first 4; ≥4/first 8; or if more than 12 patients 
when the last (24th) evaluable patients has completed cycle 4.  If a patient has progression of disease or is removed from study 
not related to a CTE after completion of 2 cycles but less than 4 cycles the patient ’s safety evaluation will be included, but 
noted appropriately .  If less than 2 cycles than the patient will not be included and noted, but will not be replaced.  The stopping 
rule would be appropriately adjusted if this were to occur.  Cycle (C) = 28 days  Screening   
Cycle 1   CTE Period  
Cycles 2 -4  
Cycle 5 -12 End of 
Treatment6 
Procedure \ Days (D)  21-0 Day 1  
± 3days  Day 8  Day 
28 Day 17 Day 1   
Informed consent  Х       
Pathology confirmation of 
diagnosis of DLBCL or 
transformed DLBCL.  X    
   
Medical history  Х       
Physical examination1 Х X X  X X  
Vital signs (pulse  rate, BP, 
temperature)1 Х X   X X  
ECOG performance status1 Х X   X X  
Optional lymph node biopsy 8  X X    X 
Mandatory  Research 
peripheral blood samples 9   
X  
X  
X  
X9  
X9  
X 
EKG  Х       
Serology: HCV, HBV2 Х       
Umbralisib    Defined by Grouping (A,B,C)   Daily (1 -28) Daily (1 -28)  
Ibrutinib  Defined by Grouping (A,B,C)   Daily (1 -28) Daily (1 -28)  
Hematology1 X7 X X  X X  
Serum Chemistry1 X7 X X  X X  
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)  X  X  X X  
Serum Pregnancy test3 X       
Radiographic Tumor 
Evaluation4 X    X5 X5  
                      Page 28 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 8 Optional biops ies obtained via US or CT guided biopsy of accessible lymph node : Day 0 (pre -treatment; core biopsy) , day 8 
(fine needle aspiration) and end of treatment (progressive disease or end of study treatment —1 year; core biopsy) . At the 
discretion of the treating investigator, patient on non -coumadin based anticoagulation shoul d have anticoagulant held for 
biopsy.  
9 Mandatory  research peripheral blood samples will be collected in a 20 ml EDTA tube pretreatment (day of biopsy or initiation 
of treatment ; (+/- 3 days) ), day 8  (+/- 3 days) , 1 month (+/ - 3 days) and 10 mL at subsequent radiographic response 
assessments, after cycle 2, 4, 6, 9, and 12.  (+/- 7 days).  After Month 12, efficacy assessments should occur at the investigators 
discretion with 10m L EDTA peripheral blood samples obtained ONLY IF FEASIBLE. ] 
 
Section 8.0 Drug Formulation and Procurement:  
 
8.1 Umbralisib  
 
Classification:    Phosphatidylinositol -3-Kinase (PI3K) Delta Inhibitor  
Formulation:   See Investigator Brochure   
Mode of Action:   Irreversibly inhibits activity of the Class I Delta isoform of PI3K   
How Supplied:   umbralisib  (micronized): 200 mg tablets  
Storage:  Store at 25°C.  Excursions permitted 15°C to 30°C.  
Stability:  Retest dates will be provided periodically by Sponsor.  
Route :   Oral 
Packaging:  umbralisib  is provided in HDPE bottles each containing 30 tablets and a silica gel canister 
as a desiccant.  
Availability :  umbralisib  is available from TG Therapeutics.  
 
8.2 Ibrutinib  
 
Classification:   Irreversible inhibitor of Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase  
Formulation:   See Investigator Brochure  
Mode of action:   Irreversibility inhibits activity of Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase  
How Supplied:  Ibrutinib: 140 mg capsules (hard gelatin capsule).  Refer to the ibrutinib Investigator's 
Brochure for a list of excipient s. 
Storage:    Store at 20○C to 25○C  
Route:    Oral 
Availability:   Ibrutinib is  available from Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC.   
 
 
8.3 Administration of Umbralisib  and ibrutinib  
 
At each visit, patients will be dispensed sufficient umbralisib  and ibrutinib drug supplies until the next visit. Study drug 
compliance should be reviewed with the patient at the beginning of each new treatment cycle.  Missed doses should 
be documented.   
 
Umbralisib  and ibrutinib will be self -administered by the patients.  Umbralisib  (4 200mg tablets = 800mg) and ibrutinib  
(4 140mg tablets = 560mg)  will be administered orally once daily.  Umbralisib  should be taken in the morning .  Ibrutinib 
should be taken in the evening. (NOTE: After cycle 2 if no CTE have been seen then the patient can have the option 
to take umbralisib  and Ibrutinib dosing together at the same time of day.)  
 
Umbralisib  and ibrutinib tablets should be swallowed whole with a full glass (approximately 8  ounces) of water.  
Umbralisib  tablets should NOT be crushed/opened or chewed.  Ibrutinib capsules should not be opened, broken or 
chewed.   
                      Page 29 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
   
  
  
   
   
   
 
 
   
   
    
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
   
   

                      Page 30 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The following adverse events h ave been reported to occur in patients receiving similar PI3K inhibitors: increased 
ALT/AST, skin rash, enteritis, and pneumonia.  
 
Refer to the current Investigator Brochure for details of the risks associated with the use of umbralisib , and instructions 
on how to manage patients.  
 
Prohibitions and restrictions for ibrutinib:  
The following guidance should be applied during the perioperative period for subjects who require surgical intervention 
or an invasive procedure while receiving ibrutinib:  
• For any pl anned surgery or invasive procedure requiring sutures or staples for closure, ibrutinib should be held 
at least 7 days prior to the intervention and should be held at least 7  days after the procedure, and restarted at 
the discretion of the investigator whe n the surgical site is reasonably healed without serosanguineous drainage 
or the need for drainage tubes.   
• For planned minor procedures (such as a central line placement, needle biopsy, thoracentesis, or paracentesis) 
ibrutinib should be held for at least  3 days prior to the procedure and should not be restarted for at least 3 days 
after the procedure. For bone marrow biopsies that are performed while the subject is on ibrutinib, it is not 
necessary to hold ibrutinib for these procedures.  
• For emergency pro cedures, ibrutinib should be held after the procedure until the surgical site is reasonably 
healed, for at least 7 days after the urgent surgical procedure, or at the discretion of the investigator.  
 

                      Page 31 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
8.5 Ibrutinib Comprehensive Adverse Events and Potential Risks Lists (CAEPRs)  
 
The most common side effects, occurring in at least 1 of every 5 patients (  20%), have been:  
 
• Increase in frequency of loose or watery stools (Diarrhea)  
• Muscle and bone pain (Musculoskeletal pain)  
• Nausea  
• Low white blood cell count (cells that help fight infection) (Neutropenia)  
• Rash  
• Bruises  
 
Side effects that have been seen in at least 1 of every 10 (  10%) patients include:  
 
• Fever (Pyrexia)  
• Low platelet count (cells that help blood to clot) (Thrombocytopenia)  
• Com mon cold (Upper Respiratory Tract Infection)  
• Pneumonia  
• Constipation  
• Swelling of the hands or feet  (Oedema peripheral)   
• Muscle spasms  
• Vomiting  
• Joint aches (Arthralgia)  
• Sores in mouth (Stomatitis)  
• Headache  
• High Blood pressure (Hypertension)  
• Skin infection  
• Sinus infection (Sinusitis)  
 
Side effects that have been seen in at least 1 of every 100 (  1%) patients include:  
 
• Dizziness  
• Urinary tract infection  
• Noses bleed (Epistaxis)  
• Increased level of uric acid in the blood (Hyperuricemia)  
• Small red or p urple spots caused by bleeding under the skin (Petechiae)  
• Abnormal heart rhythm (Atrial fibrillation)  
• Non-melanoma skin cancer  
                       Type of non melanoma skin cancer (Basal cell carcinoma)  
                       Type of non melanoma skin c ancer (Squamous cell carcinoma)  
• Blurry vision (Vision blurred)  
• Low white blood cell counts with fever (Febrile neutropenia)  
• Severe infection throughout the body (Sepsis)  
• Redness of the skin (Erythema)  
• Increase in white blood cell counts (Leukocytosis)  
• Brea king of the nails (Onychoclasis)  
• Inflammation within the lungs that may lead to permanent damage (Interstitial lung disease)  
• Increase in lymphocyte count (Lymphocytosis)  
                      Page 32 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
Side effects that have been seen in at least 1 of every 1000 (<1%) patients include : 
 
• Unusual levels of chemicals in the blood caused by the fast breakdown of cancer cells, which may lead to 
changes in kidney function, abnormal heartbeat, or seizures. (Tumor lysis syndrome)  
• Itchy rash (Urticaria)  
• Bleeding around the brain (Subdural hematoma)  
• Swollen face, lip, mouth, tongue or throat (Angioedema)  
• High WBC count with abnormal clumping that can lead to bleeding (Leukostasis syndrome)  
• Severe rash with blisters and peeling skin, particularly around the mouth, nose, eyes and ge nitals (Stevens -
Johnson syndrome)  
• Liver failure (Hepatic failure)  
 
Hemorrhage  
Fatal bleeding events have occurred in patients treated with ibrutinib.  Grade 3 or higher bleeding events (subdural 
hematoma, gastrointestinal bleeding, hematuria and post procedural hemorrhage) have occurred in up to 6% of 
patients. Bleeding events of an y grade, including bruising and petechiae, occurred in approximately half of patients 
treated with ibrutinib.  
The mechanism for the bleeding events is not well understood.  
Ibrutinib may increase the risk of hemorrhage in patients receiving antiplatelet o r anticoagulant therapies.  
Consider the benefit -risk of withholding ibrutinib for at least 3 to 7 days pre and post -surgery depending upon the 
type of surgery and the risk of bleeding.   
Infections  
Fatal and non -fatal infections have occurred with ibrutin ib therapy. Grade 3 or greater infections occurred in 14% to 
26% of patients. Cases of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) have occurred in patients treated with 
ibrutinib. Monitor patients for fever and infections and evaluate promptly.  
 
A rare and usually fatal viral disease in the brain, Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy (PML), has been 
reported in patients treated with ibrutinib in combination with rituximab and in patients who were pre viously treated 
with rituximab.  
 
Cytopenias  
Treatment -emergent Grade 3 or 4 cytopenias including neutropenia (range, 19 to 29%), thrombocytopenia (range, 5 
to 17%), and anemia (range, 0 to 9%) occurred in patients treated with ibrutinib. Monitor complete blood counts 
monthly.  
Atrial Fibrillation  
Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter (range, 6 to 9%) have occurred in patients treated with ibrutinib, particularly in 
patients with cardiac risk factors, acute infections, and a previous history of atrial fibrillation. Periodically monitor 
patients clini cally for atrial fibrillation. Patients who develop arrhythmic symptoms (e.g., palpitations, lightheadedness) 
or new onset dyspnea should have an ECG performed. If atrial fibrillation persists, consider the risks and benefits of 
ibrutinib treatment and dos e modification.  
Hypertension  
Hypertension (range, 6 to 17%) has occurred in patients treated with ibrutinib with a median time to onset of 4.5 
months (rang, 0.03 to 18.40 months). Monitor patients for new onset hypertension or hypertension that is not 
                      Page 33 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 adequately controlled after starting ibrutinib. Adjust existing anti -hypertensive medications and/or initiate anti -
hypertensive treatments as appropriate.  
Second Primary Malignancies  
Other malignancies (range, 5 to 14%) including non -skin carcinomas (range, 1 to 3%) have occurred in patients 
treated with ibrutinib. The most frequent second primary malignancy was non -melanoma skin cancer (range, 4 to11 
%).  
Tumor Lysis Syndrome  
Tumor lysis syndrome has been reported with ibrutinib therapy. Monitor patients closely and take appropriate 
precautions in patients at risk for tumor lysis syndrome (e.g. high tumor burden).  
Embryo -Fetal Toxicity  
Based on findings in animals, ibrutinib can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. Ibrutinib 
caused malformations in rats at exposures 14 times those reported in patients with MCL and 20 times those reported 
in patients with CLL or WM, receiving the ibrutinib dose of 560 mg per day and 420 mg per day, respectively. 
Reduced fetal weights were observed at lower exposures. Advise women to avoid becoming pregnant while taking 
ibrutinib. If this drug is used during pregnancy or if the patient becomes pregnant while taking this drug, t he patient 
should be apprised of the potential hazard to a fetus.  
 
Allergic reactions  
 
Serious allergic reactions to ibrutinib, including  rash, difficulty breathing, wheezing, sudden low blood pressure with 
light-headedness, swelling around the mouth, thr oat or eyes, a racing heartbeat, and/or sweating  may occur .   
 
Rash  
 
A maculopapular rash (flat, red areas on the skin with small bumps) has been commonly reported in patients treated 
with ibrutinib alone or in combination with other drugs. Most rashes are  mild to moderate in severity and begin 2 to 3 
weeks or longer after starting ibrutinib.  
 
There have been rare reports of severe skin reactions (known as severe cutaneous adverse reaction or “SCAR”, 
involving more than 50% of the body) or rash with bliste rs and peeling skin, which may include open ulcers or sores 
in the mouth and other areas of the body (Stevens - Johnson syndrome). These skin rashes could be life -threatening.  
 
Lymphocytosis and leukostasis  
 
Lymphocytosis is an increase in the number of ly mphocytes, a type of white blood cell, in your blood . This may occur 
in the first few weeks of treatment and one should not assume that this increase in white blood cells means that the 
disease is worsening. This increase may last for several weeks to months. Increased number of white blood cells in 
the bloodstream may alter blood flow resulting in bleeding or clotting (leukostasis). Isolated cases of these events have 
been reported in p atients treated with ibrutinib.  
 
Liver Failure  
 
                      Page 34 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Rare cases of liver failure have been reported in patients treated with ibrutinib.  
 
Interstitial lung disease  
 
Lung abnormalities not associated with infections (e.g, bacteria, viruses, fungi) have been reported in patients treated 
with ibrutinib  
 
Interference with other drugs  
 
Some foods like grapefruit juice and Seville oranges, as well as some medications, may interfere with the way the body 
processes ibrutinib. This interference could cause the amoun t of ibrutinib in the body to be higher or lower than 
expected. It is also possible that taking the study drug with regular medications or supplements, including fish oil, 
Vitamin E, or other vitamins, may change how the  regular medications, or regular sup plements, work. It is very 
important that grapefruit juice and Seville oranges be avoided.  
 
9.0  Toxicity and Adverse Event Reporting Guidelines  
 
The reporting is only for TGR 1202 and Ibrutinib “study medications,” until 30 days after last administration of study 
medication.  
 
NOTE: Problems related to insurance coverage for UNMC potential subjects or enrolled subjects will be reported to 
the IRB a s they are encountered.  
 
This protocol will comply with monitoring and adverse event reporting requirements of the UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett 
Cancer Center Data Monitoring plan. The protocol will adhere to the institutional and FDA guidelines for the toxi city 
reporting.  
 
All patients will be closely followed for toxicity from the time of informed consent until 30 days after last administration 
of study medication. Adverse event and serious adverse events will be followed until baseline or ≤ grade 1 levels.  
Toxicity will be assessed using the revised NCI CTCAE version 4.02.   
 
All adverse events will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion. Serious adverse events should be followed until 
resolution, death, or until no further improvement is reasonably expect ed. Deaths occurring within 30 days of study 
treatment regardless of relationship will be reported to the UNMC DSMC.  
 
In addition to complying with all applicable regulatory reporting laws and regulations, all serious adverse events and 
toxicities will be reported to the University of Nebraska Medical Center, Institutional Review Board (IRB), participating 
sites own IRB a nd Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC).  
 
Definitions:  
 
Adverse Event  
An adverse event (AE) is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject 
administered a pharmaceuti cal product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment. 
An adverse event can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), 
symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not the 
event is considered causally related to the use of the product.  
 
An elective surgery or procedure that is scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an adverse event if 
the sur gery or procedure is being performed for a pre -existing condition and the surgery or procedure has been planned 
before study entry. However, if the pre -existing condition deteriorates unexpectedly during the study ( e.g., the surgery 
                      Page 35 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 is performed earlier th an planned), then the deterioration of the condition for which the elective surgery or procedure 
is being done will be considered an adverse event.  
 
An adverse event can result from use of the drug as stipulated in the protocol or labeling, as well as fro m accidental or 
intentional overdose, drug abuse, or drug withdrawal. Any worsening of a pre -existing condition or illness is considered 
an adverse event. Laboratory abnormalities and changes in vital signs are considered to be adverse events if they 
resul t in discontinuation from the study, necessitate therapeutic medical intervention, meet protocol specific criteria 
(see Section 5.0, Treatment Plan) and/or if the investigator considers them to be adverse events. In general, if a 
laboratory abnormality or change in vital sign is associated with a specific diagnosis that is being reported concurrently 
as an adverse event (e.g. elevated creatinine with renal failure or sinus tachycardia in febrile neutropenia) the findings 
that support the diagnosis do not ne ed to be reported as separate adverse events unless the investigator feels it is 
appropriate.  
 
Treatment -emergent Adverse Event  
 
Treatment -emergent adverse event is defined as any adverse event with onset or worsening from the time that the first 
dose of  study drug is administered until 30 days after the final dose of study drug is administered.  
 
Unexpected Adverse Event  
 
An unexpected adverse event is any adverse drug event that is not listed in the current labeling/Investigator’s Brochure. 
This includ es events that may be symptomatically and pathophysiologically related to an event listed in the labeling, 
but differ from the labeled event because of greater severity or specificity. For example, under this definition, hepatic 
necrosis would be unexpecte d (by virtue of greater severity) if the labeling only referred to elevated hepatic enzymes 
or hepatitis. Similarly, cerebral thromboembolism and cerebral vasculitis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater 
specificity) if the labeling only listed cerebra l vascular accidents. “Unexpected,” as used in this definition, refers to an 
adverse drug experience that has not been previously observed (i.e., included in the labeling) rather than from the 
perspective of such experience not being anticipated from the p harmacological properties of the pharmaceutical 
product.  
 
Serious Adverse Event  
 
A serious adverse event is one that at any dose (including overdose) and regardless of causality that:  
• Results in death  
• Is life -threatening1  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity2  
• Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• Is an important medical event3  
• Pregnancy  
1 “Life-threatening” means that the subject was at immediate risk of death at the time of the serious adverse 
event; it does not refer to a serious adverse event that hypothetically might have caused death if it were more 
severe.  
2 “Persistent or significant disability or incapacity” means that there i s a substantial disruption of a person’s 
ability to carry out normal life functions.  
3 Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited reporting is appropriate 
in situations where none of the outcomes listed above occurre d. Important medical events that may not be 
immediately life -threatening or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize the patient or may require 
intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the definition above should also usuall y be 
considered serious. Examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in 
                      Page 36 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, 
or the development of drug depend ency or drug abuse. A new diagnosis of cancer during the course of a 
treatment should be considered as medically important.  
 
9.1  Adverse Event Reporting and Definitions Per University of Nebraska Medical Center, IRB and Fred & 
Pamela Buffett Cancer Center  Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC)  
   
This protocol will adhere to all institutional guidelines for adverse event reporting. Adverse events will be 
evaluated using the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTC -AE) version 4.02.  
 
9.1.1  IRB REPORTING   
All internal serious adverse events (AE) must be reported to the local IRB promptly per institutional policy 
[UNMC – through the electronic Research Support System(s) (RSS) mechanism] and in no case later than 
two (2) business days following PI notificatio n that the event occurred if the principal investigator determines 
that conditions A, B, and C are met:  
 
a. The AE is unexpected, AND  
b. The AE is related to, or possibly related to, the drug, biologic, device, or other research intervention, AND  
c. The AE is more than minor in nature which is defined as requiring treatment from a health professional.  
 
All unexpected , internal, fatal AEs must be reported promptly to the local IRB per institutional policy [UNMC - 
through the electronic RSS mechanism], bu t no later than 24 hours following PI notification that the event 
occurred. If documentation is still pending, the IRB office must be notified by a telephone call or e -mail.  
 
All expected , internal, fatal AEs (i.e., due to progressive disease or which ref lect a risk currently found in the 
consent form) must be reported to the local IRB per institutional policy [UNMC - through the electronic RSS 
system] no later than ten (10) business days following PI notification that the event occurred.  
The UNMC RSS is accessed through a link on the UNMC IRB website ( http://unmc.edu/irb ). 
 
9.1.2  FRED & PAMELA BUFFETT CANCER CENTER DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING 
COMMITTEE (DSMC) REPORTING   
 
Per UNMC DSMC guidelines, the following must be reported:  
• All adverse events ≥ grade 3 (expected or unexpected, regardless of attribution) will be reported to 
the University of Nebraska Medical Center, Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Data and Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC).  
• All serious adverse events will be fully reported and reviewed by  the University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) .  
o The principal investigator is responsible for submitting a copy of the U NMC SAE 
Assessment Form along with a blinded co py of any related patient source documents  
o If additional information about the SAE is still being collected a preliminary report should 
be filed to the DSMC within seven (7) business days with final reporting when additional 
information is available.  
 
Attribution of AE: The likelihood of relationship of the AE to the study drugs will be determined by the 
investigator based on the following definitions:  
 
Not related: The subject was not exposed to the study treatment or another cause is obvious.  
 
Proba bly not related: The AE is most likely explained by another cause, and the time of occurrence of the 
AE is not reasonably related to the study treatment.  
                      Page 37 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
   
Possibly related: Study treatment administration and AE occurrence reasonably related in time, and t he AE 
is explained equally well by causes other than study treatment, or treatment administration and AE occurrence 
are not reasonably related in time, but the AE is not obviously a result of other causes.  
 
Probably related: Study treatment administration  and AE occurrence are reasonably related in time, and the 
AE is more likely explained by study treatment than by other mechanisms.  
 
Definitely related: There occurrence and timing of the AE are clearly attributable to the study treatment.  
 
Severity Grad e of AE. The severity of events reported on the AE case report form will be determined by the 
principal investigator according the NCI Common Toxicity Criteria (CTC version 4.02).  
 
AEs will be collected from the time the subject signs the consent form and  ending 30 days following the final 
chemotherapy. All AEs will be followed until resolution or a cause is identified. Prescription medication taken 
to relieve symptoms of the AE will be recorded in addition to the outcome.  
 
AEs judged by the investigator as not related or probably not related to the treatment will NOT be followed 
beyond the 30 days after the final chemotherapy.  
 
Copies of the SAE report will be submitted to the IRB as indicated in Section 9.1.1.  
 
Detailed policy and procedures for this s ection may be reviewed at: 
http://www.unmc.edu/cancercenter/clinical/prms.html  
9.1.3  FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) REPORTING   
 
It is the responsibility of the UNMC sponsor -investigator, Matthew Lunning, D.O., to submit to the FDA 
IND Safety Reports in accordance with 21 CFR 312.32. The SAE will be submitted to FDA if the PI 
determines 21CRF312.32 criteria are met.  
 
SAEs not meetin g expedited criteria will be made available to FDA by the sponsor -investigator via the annual 
report.  
 
The investigator will utilize the FDA MedWatch Form (Appendix H) for the reporting of serious adverse events 
and follow up information to those events. The form can be found at the following URL:  
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/ReportsManualsForms/Forms/UCM048334.pdf   
 
Additionally, serious adverse events will be reported to the IRB, SRC, Audit Committee and the Data Safety 
Monitoring Committee by the Investigator as described further within Section 9.0.  
 
9.1.4 Janssen Interventional Investigator Initiated Study  Requirements for  Safety Data Collection and R eporting  
   
Overview  
As the sponsor of the Study, PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR shall be solely responsible for complying, within the 
required timelines, any safety reporting obligation to competent Health Authoritie s, IRB/ECs and any 
participating (co or sub) investigators, as defined in applicable laws and regulations.  For the purposes of this  
section , safety data includes adverse events, product quality complaints (PQCs), and special situations including 
pregnancies.  
 
UNMC  and PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR will provide safety information to the Janssen  on adverse events, 
special situations including pregnancies and product quality complaints as defined within this Section . 
                      Page 38 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
Management of Safety Data  
This Study has been designated as an interventional study.  As such, all adverse events regardless of caus ality 
and special situations excluding those from subjects not exposed to a Janssen Medicinal Product  and product 
quality complaints with or without an adverse event as described in this section will be reported from the time a 
subject has signed and dated an Informed Consent Form (ICF) until completion of the subject’s last study -related 
procedure (which may include contact for follow -up safety).  Serious adverse events will be reported for 30 days 
after the last dose of study drug.  
 
For the purposes of this study, the Janssen medicinal product is: Ibrutinib (Imbruvica)  
 
Definitions  
Adverse Event (AE)  
An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical study subject administered a medicinal 
(investigational or non -investigational) produc t. An adverse event does not necessarily have a causal 
relationship with the treatment. An adverse event can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign 
(including an abnormal finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medic inal 
(investigational or non - investigational) product, whether or not related to that medicinal (investigational or non -
investigational) product.  
This includes any occurrence that is new in onset or aggravated in severity or frequency from the baseline 
condition, or abnormal results of diagnostic procedures, including laboratory test abnormalities.  
 
Adverse Events of Special Interest  
Adverse events of special interest are events that the Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC is actively monitoring 
as a result of a previously identified signal (even if non -serious). These adverse events are:  
• Major Hemorrhage  
Major hemorrhage is defined as any hemorrhagic event that is Grade 3 or greater in severity or that 
results in 1 of the following: intraocular bleeding caus ing loss of vision, the need for a transfusion of 
2 or more units of red cells or an equivalent amount of whole blood, hospitalization, or prolongation 
of hospitalization.  
• Intracranial Hemorrhage  
Any intracranial hemorrhage adverse event, including subdural hematoma/hemorrhage, epidural 
hematoma/hemorrhage and intracerebral hemorrhage, of any grade severity, will be captured as 
an event of special interest.  
• Other Malignancies  
In addition to all routine AE reporting, all new malignant tumor s, including solid tumors, skin 
malignancies and hematologic malignancies, are to be reported for the duration of study treatment 
and during any protocol -specified follow -up periods including post -progression follow -up for overall 
survival.  
 
Individual Cas e Safety Report (ICSR)  
A valid ICSR must contain the four minimum criteria required to meet regulatory reporting requirements.  
• an identifiable subject (but not disclosing personal information such as the subject’s name, initials or 
address)  
• an identifiable  reporter (investigational site)  
• a Janssen medicinal product  
• an adverse event, outcome, or certain special situations  
 
The minimum information required is:  
• suspected Janssen medicinal product (doses, indication)  
                      Page 39 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 • date of therapy (start and end date, if avai lable)  
• batch or lot number, if available  
• subject details (subject ID and country)  
• gender  
• age at AE onset  
• reporter ID  
• adverse event detail (AE verbatim in English), onset date, relatedness, causality, action taken, outcome, 
(if available)  
• Janssen protocol ID  
 
Product Quality Complaint (PQC)  
A product quality compliant is defined as any suspicion of a product defect  related to a potential quality 
issue during manufacturing, packaging, release testing, stability monitoring, dose preparation, storage or 
distribution of the product, or delivery system.  Not all PQCs involve a subject.  Lot and batch numbers are 
of high significance and need to be collected whenever available.  
 
Examples of PQC include but not limited to:  
• Functional Problem: e.g., altered delivery rate in a controlled release product  
• Physical Defect:  e.g. abnormal odor, broken or crushed tablets/capsules  
• Potential Dosing Device Malfunction: e.g., auto injector  button not working, needle detaching from 
syringe  
• Suspected Contamination  
• Suspected Counterfeit  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
A serious adverse event based on ICH and EU Guidelines on Pharmacovigilance for Medicinal Products for 
Human Use is any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose:  
 
• Results in death  
• Is life -threatening  
(The subject was at risk of death at the time of the event. It does not refer to an event that 
hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe.)  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
• Is a suspected tr ansmission of any infectious agent via a medicinal product  
• Is medically important*  
 
*Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited reporting is also 
appropriate in other situations, such as important medical events that may not be immediately life 
threatening or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize the subject or may require intervention to 
prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the definition above. These should usually be considered 
serious.  
 
NOTE:  DEATH FOR ANY REASON SHOULD BE REPORTED AS A SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT.  
 
Hospitalization  
For reports of hospitalization, it is the sign, symptom or diagnosis which led to the hospitalization that is the 
serious event for which details must be provided.  
                      Page 40 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
Any event requiring hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization that occurs during the study must be 
reported as a serious adverse event, except hospitalizations for the following:  
• Hospitalizations not intended to treat an acute illness o r adverse event (e.g., social reasons such as 
pending placement in long -term care facility)  
• Surgery or procedure planned before entry into the study. [Note: Hospitalizations that were planned 
before the start of data collection and where the underlying con dition for which the hospitalization 
was planned has not worsened will not be considered serious adverse events. Any adverse event 
that results in a prolongation of the originally planned hospitalization is to be reported as a new 
serious adverse event.]  
 
 
Life-Threatening Conditions  
Disease progression should not be recorded as an adverse event or serious adverse event term; instead, 
signs and symptoms of clinical sequelae resulting from disease progression/lack of efficacy will be reported 
if they fulfill  the serious adverse event definition.  
 
Unlisted (Unexpected) Adverse Event/Reference Safety Information  
An adverse event is considered unlisted if the nature or severity is not consistent with the applicable product 
reference safety information. For a med icinal product(s) with a marketing authorization, the expectedness of an 
adverse event will be determined by whether or not it is listed in the applicable product information.  
  
http://www.imbruvica.com/hcp/?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_camp aign=Imbruvica&utm_term=imbru
vica&utm_content=ibrutinib -+Exact|mkwid|ssjPpM0Gh_dc|pcrid|39412243694  
 
Special Reporting Situations   
Safety events of interest for a Janssen medicinal product that require expediting reporting and/or safety 
evaluation include, but are not limited to:  
• Drug exposure during pregnancy (maternal and paternal)  
• Overdose of a Janssen medicinal product  
• Exposure to a Janssen medicinal product from breastfeeding  
• Suspected abuse/misuse of a Janssen medicinal product  
• Inadvertent or accidental exposure to a Janssen medicinal product  
• Any failure of expected pharmacological action (i.e., lack of effect) of a Janssen medicinal product  
• Medication error involving a Janssen medicinal product (with or without patient exposure t o the Janssen 
medicinal product, e.g., name confusion)  
• Suspected transmission of any infectious agent via administration of a medicinal product  
• Unexpected therapeutic or clinical benefit from use of a Janssen medicinal product  
 
These safety events may not meet the definition of an adverse event; however, from  Janssen Scientific 
Affairs, LLC  and TG Therapeutics perspective, they are treated in the same manner as adverse events. 
Special situations should be recorded on the Adverse Event page of the CRF.  
 
Any special situation that meets the criteria of a serious adverse event should be recorded on a Serious 
Adverse Event Report Form and be reported to the Janssen Scientific Affairs  LLC and TG Therapeutics  
within  24 hours of becoming aware of the event.  
 
Pregnancy  
All initial reports of pregnancy must be reported to Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC  and TG Therapeutics  by the 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR within 24 hours of their knowledge of the event  using the Serious A dverse 
                      Page 41 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Event Form. Abnormal pregnancy outcomes (e.g. spontaneous abortion, fetal death, stillbirth, congenital 
anomaly, ectopic pregnancy) are considered serious adverse events and must be reported using the Serious 
Adverse Event Form.  
 
Any subject who becomes pregnant during the study must be promptly withdrawn from the study and discontinue 
further study treatment.  
 
Because the effect of the Janssen medicinal product on sperm is unknown,  pregnancies in partners of male 
subjects exposed to a Janssen med icinal product will be reported by the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR within 
24 hours of their knowledge of the event  using the Serious Adverse Event Form.  Depending on local 
legislation this may require prior consent of the partner.  
 
Follow -up information regard ing the outcome of the pregnancy and any postnatal sequelae in the infant will be 
required.  
 
Maintenance of Safety Information  
All safety data should be maintained in a clinical database in a retrievable format. The PRINCIPAL 
INVESTIGATOR shall provide all  adverse events, both serious and non -serious, in report format. However, in 
certain circumstances more frequent provision of safety data may be necessary, e.g. to fulfill a regulatory 
request, and as such the data shall be made available within a reasonab le timeframe at the Janssen ’s request.  
 
Procedures for Reporting Safety Data and Product Quality Complaints (PQCs) for Janssen Medicinal 
Products to  Janssen  
All adverse events and special situations  whether serious or non -serious, related or not related, following exposure 
to a Janssen medicinal product are to be documented by the investigator and recorded in the CRF and in the 
subject’s source records. Investigators must record in the CRF their opin ion concerning the relationship of the 
adverse event to a Janssen medicinal product.  
All (serious and non -serious) adverse events reported for a Janssen medicinal product should be followed -up in 
accordance with clinical practice.  
 
SAEs and Special Report ing Situations  
All serious adverse events that have not resolved by the end of the study, or that have not resolved upon 
discontinuation of the subject's participation in the study, must be followed until any of the following occurs:  
• The event resolves  
• The event stabilizes  
• The event returns to baseline, if a baseline value/status is available  
• The event can be attributed to agents other than the study drug or to factors unrelated to study conduct  
• It becomes unlikely that any additional informatio n can be obtained (subject or health care practitioner 
refusal to provide additional information, lost to follow -up after demonstration of due diligence with follow -
up efforts)  
 
The PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR) will transmit all SAEs and special situations foll owing exposure to a 
Janssen product under study in a form provided by Janssen Scientific Affairs  and TG Therapeutics  in 
accordance with Transmission  Methods, in English within 24 -hours of becoming aware of the event(s).  
 
 
All follow -up information for serious adverse events that are not resolved at the end of the study or by the 
time of patient withdrawal must be reported directly by the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR, within 24 hours 
becoming aware , to Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC using Janssen’s  Serious Adverse Event Report  
                      Page 42 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
All available clinical information relevant to the evaluation of a related SAE or special situation is required.  
• The  PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR is responsible for ensuring that these cases are complete and if  not 
are promptly followed -up. A safety report is not considered complete until all clinical details needed to 
interpret the case are received. Reporting of follow -up information should follow the same timeline as 
initial reports.  
 
• Copies of any and all re levant correspondences with regulatory authorities and ethics committees 
regarding any and all serious adverse events, irrespective of association with the Janssen Product under 
study, are to be provided to Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC  using a transmiss ion method listed below  
within  24 hours of such report or correspondence being sent to applicable health authorities.  
 
Non-Serious AEs  
All non -serious adverse events should be reported to Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC  and TG Therapeutics Y 
according to t he timeframe outlined in the Research Funding Agreement section entitled Reporting of Data.  
 
PQC Reporting  
A PQC may have an impact on the safety and efficacy of the product. Timely, accurate, and complete 
reporting and analysis of PQC information from studies are crucial for the protection of patients, 
investigators, and Janssen , and are mandated by regulatory  agencies worldwide. Janssen Scientific Affairs 
has established procedures in conformity with regulatory requirements worldwide to ensure appropriate 
reporting of PQC information. Lot and/or Batch #s shall be collected or any reports failure of expected 
pharmacological action (i.e., lack of effect). The product should be quarantined immediately and if possible, 
take a picture.  
 
All initial PQCs involving a Janssen medicinal product under study must be reported to Janssen Scientific 
Affairs, LLC  by the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR within 24 hours after being made aware of the event. 
The Janssen contact will provide additional informatio n/form to be completed.  
 
If the defect for a Janssen medicinal product under study is combined with either a serious adverse event or 
non-serious adverse event, the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR must report the PQC to Janssen  according to 
the serious adverse even t reporting timelines.  A sample of the suspected product should be maintained for 
further investigation if requested by Janssen . 
 
Reporting Procedures for Reporting Safety Data and Product Quality Complaints (PQCs) for Non -Janssen 
Medicinal Products  
For SAEs, special reporting situations and PQCs following exposure to a non -Janssen medicinal product under 
study, the PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR should notify the appropriate regulatory/competent authority or the 
manufacturer of that medicinal product (in the abs ence of appropriate local legislation) as soon as possible.  
 
Transmission Methods  
The following methods are acceptable for transmission of safety information to Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC : 
• Electronically via Janssen SECURE Email service (preferred)  
• For business continuity purposes, if SECURE Email is non -functional:  
o Facsimile (fax), receipt of which is evidenced in a successful fax transmission report  
• Telephone (if fax is non -functional).  
 
Please use the contact information and process information provided by Janssen Scientific Affairs.  
 
9.2 Auditing  
                      Page 43 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
The UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Scientific Review Committee (SRC) will review this protocol on at 
least an annual basis.  
 
This study will undergo audit on at least a quarterly basis by the UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Audit 
Commit tee.  
 
 
Detailed policy and procedures for this section may be reviewed at: 
http://www.unmc.edu/cancercenter/clinical/prms.html .  
 
 
Section 10.0 Statistical Considerations  
 
The phase IIa p ortion will further assess the safety and tolerability and allow a preliminary assessment of the efficacy 
of the novel combination to provide background for an appropriately powered phase II study.  We plan to accrue 24 
patients into the phase IIa portion at a micronized dose of 800 mg of umbralisib  and 560 mg of ibrutinib.  The 
assessment of toxicity and efficacy will be performed within the entire cohort. To consecutively monitor the safety 
primary endpoint in the phase IIa portion, we will employ a sequential probability stopping rule for the predefined portion 
of cycles 1 -4. This stopping rule specifies that the study will be terminated if a  cumulative toxicity event (CTE)  occurs 
in: ≥2/first 4; ≥4/first 8; or if more than 12 patients when the last (24th) evaluable patient has completed the trial have 
any CTE. This rule has the following stopping probability : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A CTE is defined as:  
• Grade ≥ 3 non -hematologic (attributed to either or both study drugs)  
• Grade 4 hematologic toxicities (attributed to either or both drugs) defined as:  
o Grade 4 thrombocytopenia (platelets < 25 K/µL)  
o Grade 4 neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count (ANC) < 0.5)  
• Grade 3 thrombocytopenia or neutropenia that results in a > 7 day delay in either drug.  
• One week or greater delay in initiating any cycle day 1 due to continued drug -related toxicity.  
 
 
If a patient has progression of disease  or is removed from study not related to a CTE after completion of 2 cycles but 
less than 4 cycles the patient ’s safety evaluation will be included, but noted appropriately.  If less than 2 cycles than 
the patient will not be included and noted, but will not be replaced.  The stopping rule would be appropriately adjusted 
if this were to occur.  
 
An efficacy -stopping rule is also in place for the combination.   After testing the combination on 12 patients, the trial will 
be terminated if </= 1 patients respond.   If the trial goes on to the second stage and not discontinued due to the CTE 
stopping rules prior to, a total of 24 patients will be studied. If the total  number responding is less than or equal to five, 
the regimen will be rejected.   This follow s a Simon two -stage design for efficacy following a minimax design with the 
following parameters:   overall response rate for a poor regimen of 0.01, overall response rate for a good regimen of 
0.31, a type I error of 0.20 and power of 80%.  True 
toxicity 
rate 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 50% 
Stopping 
prob.  0.000  0.000  0.001  0.004  0.016  0.056  0.118  0.243  0.632  
                      Page 44 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Efficacy measure s which will be determined include ORR,  TTR, DOR, and P FS.   ORR is defined as the percentage 
of patients achieving a best response of CR/CR, PR at any disease assessment time point.  TTR is defined as the time 
or number of cycles between study registratio n and documentation of first response (CR/Cru, or PR).  DOR is defined 
as the time or number of cycles between documentation of first response and progression, change of therapy, death, 
or date of last contact (if stil l alive without progression).  P FS is defined as the time between study registrat ion and 
documented progression or death if no progression was observed.  
 
 
11.0  RECORDS TO BE KEPT  
 
Information regarding the actual treatments, adverse effects, radiographic and laboratory information, and pathology 
are to be recorded on appropriate forms. See attached Data forms. Source documents which support data entered 
must be provided for centrali zed compliance monitoring. Serious adverse events, when noted, will be recorded on site 
via the standard serious adverse effects form.  
 
11.1 Quality assur ance   
Complete records must be maintained in a research chart on each patient treated on the protocol. These records 
should include primary documentation (e.g., lab. report slips, X -ray reports, scan reports, pathology reports, physician 
notes, etc.) which confi rm that:  
- The patient met the eligibility criteria.  
- Signed informed consent was obtained prior to treatment.  
- Treatment was given according to protocol (dated notes about doses given & reasons for any dose modifications).  
- Toxicity was assessed ac cording to protocol (laboratory report slips, etc.).  
- Response was assessed according to protocol (x -ray, scan, lab reports, dated notes on measurements & clinical 
assessment, as appropriate).  
 
11.2 Medidata Rave 5.6 Electronic Data Capturing (EDC) Syst em 
 
The UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center (NCI -designated cancer center) is a participant in the National Cancer 
Institute Cancer Biomedical Informatics Grid (CaBIG™) initiative.   
 
The NCI purchased software license for cancer centers use of Medida ta Rave 5.6 a web -based EDC application for 
managing clinical trial data across multiple cancer clinical trials.  Data will be stored electronically for this study on th e 
Rave secure server.  Data forms will not differ from the paper versions with the exce ption of an electronic format 
containing the UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center and Rave logo.  
 
Medidata Rave 5.6 provides for remote data collection that meets FDA 21 CFR Part 11 requirements as well as HIPAA 
and other regulatory requirements design ed to enhance data security and protect patient confidentiality. Authorized 
users log into Medidata Rave 5.6 through a secure connection and must provide a valid username, password, and 
database ID.  De -identified research data will be shared with the NCI and the CaBIG community.  This data may be 
made available to the public at large.  
 
RAVE Builder Contact Information  
University of Nebraska Medical Center  
Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center  
Att: Eugene “Gene” Sehi, M.S., CCRP  
986805 Nebraska Medical Center  
Omaha, NE 68198 -6805  
FAX: (402) 559 -5669 Ph: (402) 559 -8514  
Email: esehi@unmc.edu  
                      Page 45 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
12.0  PATIENT CONSENT   
 
12.1  Human Subjects Research Protection Training  
All personnel involved in this research project will have completed the OHRP -approved computer based 
training course on the Protection of Human Research Subjects. All clinical and correlative research included 
in this application will have approval by the institutional review board.  
 
12.2  Study Population  
Patients are from all socio -economic groups and will be entered into the study without bias with respect to 
gender or race. Attempts will be made to recruit minorities. No vulnerable subjects will be in cluded in the 
study.  
 
12.3  Sources of Material  
Pathology material (as stated in Section 5) must be reviewed, and the diagnosis confirmed by University of 
Nebraska Medical Center  pathology department (retrospectively) as outlined in the protocol.  
 
12.4  Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Patients with a history of relapsed or refractory DLBCL  for whom this therapy would be appropriate will be 
available for recruitment. These patients will be informed of the nature of this study, and will be asked to 
partic ipate on a voluntary basis after informing them of the possible risks and benefits of the study. A number 
of public registries may be accessible to health care providers and prospective subjects as listed below.  
National Library of Medicine - http://clini caltrials.gov (NCT 02874404 ) 
National Cancer Institute - http://www.cancer.gov (NCI -2016 -01082 )  
 
12.5  Subject Competency  
Subjects will be eligible to participate in the study only if they are competent to give informed consent. A 
subject that the investigators judges to be incompetent will not be enrolled.  
 
12.6  Process of Informed Consent  
If the patient chooses to be a participant in this study, informed consent will be obtained by the investigators. 
The study and procedures involved including the risks will be explained in detail to each subject. It will be 
clearly explained to the subject  that this is a research study and that participation is entirely on a voluntary 
basis. Subjects will be given the option to discuss the study with a family member, friend, counselor or, another 
physician. The participating investigators will be available to discuss the study with them.  
 
12.7  Subject/Representative Comprehension  
When the process of informed consent is completed, the subject will be asked to state in his/her own words, 
the purpose of the study, the procedures that will be carried out, pot ential risk, potential benefits to the subject, 
the alternatives and the right to withdraw from the study. If there is any indication that a given subject's 
comprehension is anything less than accurate, the points of confusion will be discussed and clarifi ed.  
 
12.8  Information Purposely Withheld.  
The results of the tests done solely for research purposes will not be disclosed to the subject. No other 
information will be purposely withheld from the subject.  
 
                      Page 46 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 12.9  Potential Benefits of the Proposed Resea rch to the Subjects  
It is hoped that the use of protocol therapy in this patient population may result in tumor shrinkage or 
stabilization of disease.  
 
12.10  Potential Benefits to Society.  
Information obtained from this study may help patients by Ident ifying safety and tolerability of umbralisib  and 
ibrutinib .  
 
12.11  Potential Risks  
Use of umbralisib  and ibrutinib  is associated with numerous potential risks. Combinations of novel targeted 
therapies are  considered to be a valid treatment option for pa tients with advanced malignancies. It is believed 
the treatment option outlined in the study will not pose significant additional risks compared to conventional 
treatment that might consist of other chemotherapy drugs given alone or in combination.  
 
12.12   Therapeutic Alternatives  
If patients choose not to participate in this study they may elect to receive standard salvage therapy as per 
their primary oncologist, which may include other chemotherapy drugs given alone or in combination.  
 
 
12.13  Risk/Benefit Relationship  
Although there are inherent risks involved because of the use of chemotherapy agents, the risk is considered 
to be acceptable in the setting of cancer.  
 
12.14  Consent Form Documents  
No information will be purposely withheld from the patients. The consen t document used in this study will 
include the adult consent document. (See attached consent form ) 
 
 
                      Page 47 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Section 13.0 References  
 
1. Habermann TM, Weller EA, Morrison VA, Gascoyne RD, Cassileth PA, Cohn JB, et al. Rituximab -CHOP 
versus CHOP alone or with maintenance rituximab in older patients with diffuse large B -cell lymphoma. Journal of 
clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2006 Jul 1;24(19):3121 -7. 
2. A predictive model for aggressive non -Hodgk in's lymphoma. The International Non -Hodgkin's Lymphoma 
Prognostic Factors Project. The New England journal of medicine. 1993 Sep 30;329(14):987 -94. 
3. Rosenwald A, Wright G, Chan WC, Connors JM, Campo E, Fisher RI, et al. The use of molecular profiling to  
predict survival after chemotherapy for diffuse large -B-cell lymphoma. The New England journal of medicine. 2002 
Jun 20;346(25):1937 -47. 
4. Philip T, Guglielmi C, Hagenbeek A, Somers R, Van der Lelie H, Bron D, et al. Autologous bone marrow 
transplantatio n as compared with salvage chemotherapy in relapses of chemotherapy -sensitive non -Hodgkin's 
lymphoma.[see comment]. New England Journal of Medicine. 1995;333(23):1540 -5. 
5. Young RM, Shaffer AL, 3rd, Phelan JD, Staudt LM. B -cell receptor signaling in diffu se large B -cell 
lymphoma. Seminars in hematology. 2015 Apr;52(2):77 -85. 
6. Chen L, Monti S, Juszczynski P, Ouyang J, Chapuy B, Neuberg D, et al. SYK inhibition modulates distinct 
PI3K/AKT - dependent survival pathways and cholesterol biosynthesis in diffuse  large B cell lymphomas. Cancer cell. 
2013 Jun 10;23(6):826 -38. 
7. Davis RE, Brown KD, Siebenlist U, Staudt LM. Constitutive nuclear factor kappaB activity is required for 
survival of activated B cell -like diffuse large B cell lymphoma cells. The Journal o f experimental medicine. 2001 Dec 
17;194(12):1861 -74. 
8. The ABC Subtype of Diffuse Large B -Cell Lymphoma Is Responsive to Ibrutinib. Cancer discovery. 2015 Jul 
30. 
9. Sanford DS, Wierda WG, Burger JA, Keating MJ, O'Brien SM. Three newly approved drugs for  chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia: incorporating ibrutinib, idelalisib, and obinutuzumab into clinical practice. Clinical lymphoma, 
myeloma & leukemia. 2015 Jul;15(7):385 -91. 
10. Burris HA PM, Fenske et al. A novel once daily PI3 -K delta inhibitor demonstrates  clinical actiivity and lack 
of hepatotoxicity in patients with CLL and B -cell NHL. Hematology/oncology clinics of North America. 2015;33:119.  
11. Prasanna R, Viswanadha S. PI3K delta enzyme assay.  Shamerrpet, India: Incozen therapeutics PVT LTD; 
2011 Apr il Protocol IVT -5264 -EAG -19 Sponsored by Rhizen Pharmaceutical S.A. Switzerland.  
12. Pan Z, Scheerens H, Li SJ, Schultz BE, Sprengeler PA, Burrill LC, et al. Discovery of selective irreversible 
inhibitors for Bruton's tyrosine kinase. ChemMedChem. 2007 Jan;2(1):58 -61. 
13. Inc. IBIP -VJP.  
14. Advani RH, Buggy JJ, Sharman JP, Smith SM, Boyd TE, Grant B, et al. Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
ibrutinib (PCI -32765) has significant activity in patients with relapsed/refractory B -cell maligna ncies. Journal of clinical 
oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013 Jan 1;31(1):88 -94. 
15. Wilson WH, Young RM, Schmitz R, Yang Y, Pittaluga S, Wright G, et al. Targeting B cell receptor signaling 
with ibrutinib in dif fuse large B cell lymphoma. Nature medicine. 2015 Aug;21(8):922 -6. 
16. Lunning MA VJ, Folwler NH et a. Ublituximab plus TGR -1202 activity and safety profile in 
relapsed/refractory B -cell NHL and high -risk CLL. Journal of clinical oncology : official journa l of the American Society 
of Clinical Oncology. 2015;33; Abstr 8548.  
17. Cheah CY, Nastoupil LJ, Neelapu SS, Forbes SG, Oki Y, Fowler NH. Lenalidomide, idelalisib, and rituximab 
are unacceptably toxic in patients with relapsed/refractory indolent lymphoma.  Blood. 2015 May 21;125(21):3357 -9. 
18. Fowler NH NL, Lunning MA et al. Safety and activity of the chemotherapy -free triplet of ublituximab, TGR -
1202, and ibrutinib in relapsed B -cell malignancies. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the Ame rican 
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2015;33; Abstr 8501.  
19. Roschewski M, Dunleavy K, Pittaluga S, Moorhead M, Pepin F, Kong K, et al. Circulating tumour DNA and 
CT monitoring in patients with untreated diffuse large B -cell lymphoma: a correlative biomark er study. The lancet 
oncology. 2015 May;16(5):541 -9. 
20. Kurtz DM, Green MR, Bratman SV, Scherer F, Liu CL, Kunder CA, et al. Noninvasive monitoring of diffuse 
large B -cell lymphoma by immunoglobulin high -throughput sequencing. Blood. 2015 Jun 11;125(24):3 679-87. 
                      Page 48 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 21. Krutzik PO, Nolan GP. Intracellular phospho -protein staining techniques for flow cytometry: monitoring 
single cell signaling events. Cytometry Part A : the journal of the International Society for Analytical Cytology. 2003 
Oct;55(2):61 -70. 
22. Deng C, Lipstein MR, Scotto L, Jirau Serrano XO, Mangone MA, Li S, et al. Silencing c -Myc translation as a 
therapeutic strategy through targeting PI3K delta and CK1 epsilon in hematological malignancies. Blood. 2016 Oct 
26. 
23. Dubovsky JA, Beckwith KA, Na tarajan G, Woyach JA, Jaglowski S, Zhong Y, et al. Ibrutinib is an irreversible 
molecular inhibitor of ITK driving a Th1 -selective pressure in T lymphocytes. Blood. 2013 Oct 10;122(15):2539 -49. 
24. Cheson BD. Recommendations for initial evaluation, staging , and response assessment of Hodgkin and 
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma: The Lugano Classification.  J Clin Oncol 2014 Sep; 32(27); 3059 -3067 . 
 
 
Section 14.0 Data Collection Forms  
Attached.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      Page 49 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Appendix A:  
Use of ibrutinib with other CYP3A inhibitors or inducers (per ibrutinib USPI)  
 
CYP3A Inhibitors :  
In healthy volunteers, co -administration of ketoconazole, a strong CYP3A inhibitor, increased Cmax and AUC of 
ibrutinib by 29 - and 24 -fold, respectively. The highest ibrutinib dose evaluated in clinical trials was 12.5 mg/kg (actual 
doses of 840 – 1400 mg) given for 28 days with single dose AUC values of 1445 ± 869 ng ⋅ hr/mL which is 
approximately 50% greater than steady state exposures seen a t the highest indicated dose (560 mg).  
 
Avoid co -administration with strong or moderate CYP3A inhibitors and consider alternative agents with less CYP3A 
inhibition. Concomitant use of strong CYP3A inhibitors which would be taken chronically (e.g., ritonav ir, indinavir, 
nelfinavir, saquinavir, boceprevir, telaprevir, nefazodone) is not recommended. For strong CYP3A inhibitors used 
short -term (e.g., antifungals and antibiotics treatment for 7 days or less  e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, 
voriconazole, posa conazole, clarithromycin, telithromycin)) consider interrupting ibrutinib therapy until the CYP3A 
inhibitor is no longer needed. Avoid strong CYP3A inhibitors that are needed chronically. If a moderate CYP3A 
inhibitor must be used, reduce ibrutinib dose to  140 mg (e.g., fluconazole, darunavir, erythromycin, diltiazem, 
atazanavir, aprepitant, amprenavir, fosamprevir, crizotinib, imatinib, verapamil, and ciprofloxacin).  Patients taking 
concomitant strong or moderate CYP3A inhibitors should be monitored more closely for signs of ibrutinib toxicity.  
 
Avoid grapefruit and Seville oranges during ibrutinib treatment, as these contain moderate  
inhibitors of CYP3A.  
 
CYP3A Inducers :  
Administration of ibrutinib with rifampin, a strong CYP3A inducer, decreased ibrut inib Cmax and AUC by 
approximately 13 - and 10 -fold, respectively.  
 
Avoid concomitant use of strong CYP3A inducers (e.g., carbamazepine, rifampin, phenytoin and St. John’s Wort). 
Consider alternative agents with less CYP3A induction.  
 
 
 
 
Appendix B:  
Cockroft -Gault  Creatinine Clearance Calculation  
 
Creatinine clearance (CrCl) can be calculated using the Cockroft -Gault equation as follows:  
 
CrCl (ml/min) = (140-age) (actual wt in kg) divided by 72 x serum creatinine (mg/dl)  
 
For females use 85% of calculated CrCl value.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      Page 50 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Appendix C 
Performance Status Criteria  
 
 
ECOG Performance Status Scale  
 
Grade  Descriptions  
0 Normal activity.  Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction.  
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory.  Restricted in physically strenuous activity, but ambulatory and 
able to carry out work of a light or sedentary nature (e.g., light housework, office work).  
2 In bed <50% of the time.  Ambulatory and capable of all self -care, but unable to carry out any 
work activities.  Up and about more than 50% of waking hours.  
3 In bed >50% of the time.  Capable of only limited self -care, confined to bed or chair more than 
50% of waking hours.  
4 100% bedridden.  Completely disabled.  Cannot carry on any self -care.  Totally confined to 
bed or chair.  
5 Dead.  
 
 
Appendix D       
NEW YORK HEART ASSOCIATION (NYHA) HEART DISEASE CLASSIFICATION  
 
Class   Definition  
 
I.  No limitation of physical activity.   Ordinary physical activity does not cause undue fatigue, 
or dyspnea.  
 
II.  Slight limitation of physical activity.  Comfortable at rest, but ordinary physical activity 
results in fatigue, or dyspnea.  
 
III.  Marked limitation of physical activit y.  Comfortable at rest, but less than ordinary activity 
causes fatigue, or dyspnea.  
 
IV.  Unable to carry on any physical activity without symptoms.  Symptoms are present even 
at rest.  If any physical activity is undertaken, symptoms are increased.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      Page 51 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Appendix E  
Eligibility Checklist  
 
Date Completed:  
 Institution:  Patient ID#:   Checklist Version # 3.0 
 Dated: 14Jul2017  
 
IRB# 345-15   Title: : A Single -center Phase IIa Study 
Evaluating the Safety and Tolerability of umbralisib  and 
Ibrutinib in Patients with Relapsed or Refractory Diffuse 
Large B -cell Lymphoma: A Trial of the Lymphoma 
Precision Medicine Laboratory   
Reference #:  
 
PI: Mathew Lunning, MD  Waiver #:  
Gender:  [  ] M  [  ] F  Race:  [  ] White  [  ] Black        [  ] Hispanic  [  ] Asian  
[  ] Native American  [  ] Other  [  ] Unknown  
Zip Code/country (if not 
USA):   
Primary method of payment information:  
Inclusion Criteria:  Response should be YES  Yes    No      N/A  
1. Histologically confirmed Diffuse Large B -cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) or 
transformed DLBCL  [  ]     [  ]   1. 
2.   
2. Disease status defined as Patients with relapsed or refractory DLBCL that 
has relapsed post -transplant or that has been determined to be ineligible or 
unsuitable for transplant .  Patients must have received at least one prior 
systemic therapy.  [  ]     [  ]  [  ] 
3. Patients must have measurable ( > 1.5 cm) or evaluable disease. Baseline 
measurements and evaluations must be obtained within 21 days  of 
registration to the study. Abnormal PET scans will not constitute evaluable 
disease, unless verified by CT scan or other appropriate imagin g. 
Measurable disease must have at least one objective measurable disease 
parameter. A clearly defined, bi -dimensionally measurable defect or mass 
measuring at least 1.5 cm in diameter on a CT scan will constitute 
measurable disease. Proof of lymphoma in t he liver is required by a 
confirmation biopsy. Skin lesions can be used as measurable disease 
provided bi -dimensional measurements are possible  [  ]     [  ]  
                      Page 52 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 4. Adequate organ system function, defined as follows : 
a. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1.0  x 109/L 
i. By automated or manual review, whichever is greatest  
b. Platelets ≥100 x 109/L: 
i. Unless due to bone marrow infiltration then eligible if 
platelets > 50 x 109/L) 
c. Total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 x upper normal limit if documented hepatic 
involvement with lymphoma, or ≤ 5 x upper normal limit if history of 
Gilbert’s Disease.  
d. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST) ≤2.5 x ULN if no liver involvement  or ≤5 x the ULN if 
documented liver involvement  
e. Creatinine ≤2.0 mg/dL OR calculated creatinine clearance ≥50 
mL/min (as calculated by the Cockcroft -Gault method, Appendix B)  
 [  ]     [  ]  
5. ECOG performance status ≤2 or expected survival duration of > 2  months  
(Appendix C)  
 [  ]     [  ]  
6. Patients must be ≥19 years of age (the age of consent in Nebraska)  
 [  ]     [  ]    
7. Ability to swallow and retain oral medicatio n  [  ]     [  ]    
8.  Women must not be pregnant or breast -feeding due to teratogenic 
effects of therapy  
All female patients of child -bearing potential must have a negative 
serum pregnancy test within 2 weeks prior to treatment to rule out 
pregnancy  
Pregnancy testing is not required for post -menopausal or surgically sterilized 
women  [  ]     [  ]        [  ]  
9. Male and female patients of reproductive potential must agree to follow 
accepted birth control measures throughout the study period and for 30 days 
after the last dose of either study drug for females and 3 months after the 
last dose of study drug for males  [  ]     [  ]    
 
10. Patient must be able to adhere to the study visit schedule and other protocol 
requirements  
 [  ]     [  ]   [  ] 
11. Patient must be aware of the neoplastic nature of his/her disease and 
willingly sign (or their legally -acceptable representatives must sign) an 
informed consent document indicating that they understand the purpose of 
and procedures required for the study, including biomarkers, and are willing 
to participate in the study  [  ]     [  ]   
                      Page 53 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 12. No serious disease or condition that, in the opinion of the investigator, would 
compromise the patient’s ability to participate in the study  
 [  ]     [  ]   
Exclusion Criteria: Response should be NO  Yes    No      N/A  
1.  Currently receiving cancer therapy (i.e., chemotherapy, radiation therapy, 
immunotherapy, biologic therapy, hormonal therapy, and surgery and/or 
tumor embolization) or any investigational drug within 7 days of Cycle 1/Day 
1, 14 days of Cycle 1/Day 1 for limited pall iative radiation, and/or five half -
live of an oral therapy  
Corticosteroid therapy started at least 7 days prior to initiation of treatment 
(prednisone ≤10 mg daily or equivalent) is allowed as clinically warranted).  
Topical or inhaled corticosteroids are permitted  [  ]     [  ]    
2.      Major surgery or a wound that has not fully healed within 4  weeks of 
enrollment  
 [  ]     [  ]    
3.    History of stroke or intracranial hemorrhage within 6 months prior to 
enrollment  [  ]     [  ]    
4.    Requires anticoagulation with warfarin or equivalent vitamin K antagonists 
(eg, phenprocoumon)  [  ]     [  ]    
5.    Vaccinated with live, attenuated vaccines within 4 weeks of enrollment  [  ]     [  ]    
6.    Autologous hematologic stem cell transplant within 3 months of study entry  [  ]     [  ]    
7.    Allogeneic hematologic stem cell transplant within 12 months of study entry  [  ]     [  ]    
8.     Active graft versus -host disease and must not be on immunosuppression  [  ]     [  ]   
9.    Wide field radiotherapy within 28 days of Cycle 1/Day 1 or active side effects 
of such therapy  [  ]     [  ]   
                      Page 54 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 10. Active Hepatitis B (HBV) or C (HCV) infection (negative serology required 
excluding those with are seropositive due to prior vaccination) and/or known history 
of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)  
 [  ]     [  ]      
11. Primary central nervous system  involvement only  [  ]     [  ]      
12. Require treatment with strong CYP3A inhibitors  
 [  ]     [  ]      
13.Known history of drug -induced liver injury, alcoholic liver disease, primary biliary 
cirrhosis, ongoing extra -hepatic obstruction caused by stones, cirrhosis of the liver or 
portal hypertension  [  ]     [  ]      
14. Any life -threatening illness, severe and/or uncontrolled medical condition, or 
organ system dysfunction, laboratory abnormality, psychiatric illness  or other 
condition which,  in the Investigator’s opinion,  could com promise the 
subject’s safety, interfere with the absorption or metabolism of ibrutinib 
capsules, put the study outcomes at undue risk or affect their participation 
in the study such as:  
a. Symptomatic, or history of documented congestive heart failure 
New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification III -IV 
(NYHA, Appendix D)  
b. QTc >470 msec (unless related to pacemaker) on EKG within 21 
days of initiation of treatment  
c. Angina not well-controlled by medication  
d. Poorly controlled or clinically significant atherosclerotic vascular 
disease including cerebrovascular accident (CVA), transient 
ischemic attack (TIA), angioplasty, cardiac or vascular stenting 
within 6 months prior to enrollm ent 
 [  ]     [  ]      
15. Prior malignancies within the past 1 years with exception of adequately treated 
basal cell, squamous cell skin cancer, or thyroid cancer; carcinoma in situ of the cervix 
or breast; prostate cancer of Gleason Grade 6 or less with stable PSA levels  [  ]     [  ]      
16. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.  Women who agree to stop 
breastfeeding would be eligibl e [  ]     [  ]      
17. Known hypersensitivity to either study drug ( umbralisib  or Ibrutinib)  [  ]     [  ]      
                      Page 55 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 NOTE: All questions regarding eligibility for potential subjects should be directed to the PI at 402 -559-5166 .   
 
Eligibility:  [  ] Patient satisfies all criteria    
                     [  ] Patient not formally eligible, but admitted to this study because (state reason):  
 
 
 
 
Patient Initials:  __________MR or Study ID#______________DOB ________  
 
ELIGIBILITY reviewed and confirmed.  
Consenting/Treating Investigator Signature _______________________Date_____________    
          Printed Name of Consenting/Treating Investigator:  __________________________   
 
 
 
 
                      Page 56 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Appendix F  
Oral, Sublingual, and/or Buccal Route  
Medication Adherence Standard Procedure  
(V 1.0 11 -25-2013)  
PURPOSE  
To provide a means of ensuring oral, sublingual and/or buccal routes of medication adherence to patients while 
participating in a clinical trial.  
1. A ph ysician’s order will be completed by study patients or representative for oral, sublingual and/or buccal 
administration per IRB approved protocol.  
2. To ensure the consistent and safe administration of medications not given under the direct supervision of 
study staff (at home), there will be a “Medication Information Sheet” and a calendar to document times of drug 
administration.  
3. To record medication adherence Study staff will document results of medication reconciliation and or 
medication return in the patien t’s chart.  
4. Maintain documentation of medications returned or sent to investigational pharmacy for destruction (if 
applicable).  
PROCEDURE  
1. Protocol specific information regarding the individual medication(s) should be listed on the form “Medication 
Informat ion Sheet” and given to the patient at the start of the study and throughout treatment if necessary to 
help ensure adherence. (See Form A)  
2. Name, dose and route of each medication should be listed under ‘How to take your Medication’ on the 
“Medication Infor mation Sheet”.  
3. Patients will be given a monthly “Medication Calendar”.  The calendar will have a place for the patient to 
record the time that the medication(s) were taken. (See Form B for example)  
4. The research nurse will review the patient’s “Medication C alendar” for adherence to the study regimen for oral 
medication administration. Adherence will be noted in the patient’s chart.  Medication reconciliation will be 
done and if there is medication to be returned/destroyed it will be sent to the Nebraska Medi cal Center 
Investigational Pharmacist for return/destruction in accordance to the Nebraska Medical Center Destruction 
of Investigational product, Policy #4.860.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      Page 57 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 Medication Information Sheet (Form A)   
 
IRB# 345 -16    Title of protocol: A Single -center Phase IIa Study Evaluating the Safety and 
Tolerability of umbralisib  (formerly known as TGR -1202 ) and Ibrutinib in Patients with Relapsed 
or Refractory Diffuse Large B -cell Lymphoma: A Trial of the Lymphoma Precision Medi cine 
Laboratory  
  
 
You have been enrolled into the following Dosing Group _______________.  
How to take your medication :   
Group A:   You will take umbralisib  800m g (4 tablets) Day 1 -8  
Starting day 9, you will take both umbralisib  800mg (4 tablets) and Ibrutinib 560m g (4 capsules) by mouth 
once a day with a full 8 ounce glass of water until your treating physician tells you to stop.  Follow your 
Medication Calendar that is provided to record your dosing.  
 
Group B:   You will take Ibrutin ib 560mg (4 capsules) Day 1 -8  
Starting day 9, you will take both umbralisib  800mg (4 tablets) and Ibrutinib  560 mg (4 capsules)  by mouth 
once a day with a full 8ounce glass of water until your treating physician tells you to stop.  Follow your 
Medication Calendar that is provided to record your dosing.  
 
Group C:   You will take both umbralisib  800mg (4 tablets) and Ibrutinib  560 mg (4 capsules) by mouth once 
a day with a full 8ounce glass of water until your treating physician tells you to stop.  Follow you r Medication 
Calendar that is provided to record your dosing.  
 
• Umbralisib  should be taken in the AM.  (NOTE : After cycle 2 if no side effects have been seen you 
can have the option to take umbralisib  and Ibrutinib dosing together at the same time of day.)  
• Ibrutinib should be taken in the evening. (NOTE:  After cycle 2 if no side effects have been seen 
you can ha ve the option to take umbralisib  and Ibrutinib dosing together at the same time of day.)  
 
Things to know about your medication :  
1. The dose of the study medications will remain the same during your entire treatment, unless your 
doctor informs you of a change .   
2. If your doctor modifies the dose of either medication for any reason, please record the change on 
your Medication Calendar (Form B).  
3. You should take your medications at the same time each day with food.   
4. You should avoid grapefruit and Seville oranges  (Known as “Chinese Bitter Orange”, bitter orange, 
sour orange, bigarade orange, or marmalade orange. The Seville orange variety is used in the 
production of marmalade/cooking) during treatment, as these can alter the absorption of the 
medications.  
5. You sho uld swallow the tablets and capsules as a whole, do not chew or crush them.  
6. If you miss a dose of your medications, it should be taken as soon as possible on the same day.  If 
it is missed for the entire day, it should not be made up.  If a dose is missed make sure to mark it on 
your Medication Calendar (Form B).  
7. If vomiting occurs, no attempt should be made to replace the vomited doses.  

                      Page 58 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
Your Doctor  is:  ___________________________ Contact  Phone  # _______________   
Your Research N urse is:  ___________________________ Contact Phone  # _______________   
After hours, nights, weekends and holidays please call 402 -559-5600 and ask for the Oncologist on call.  
 
 
 
Medication Diary (Form B)  Template  
 

                      Page 59 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
 
 
 

                      Page 60 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
 
 

                      Page 61 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
 

                      Page 62 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
 
 
 
 

                      Page 63 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
Appendix G 
Blood and Tissue Sample Processing and Shipping  
Description of Sample Collection:  
No therapeutic intervention will be undertaken and the results of these studies will not have any influence on the medical 
management of the subjects.  
 
Lymph Node Biopsy G uidelines:  
Day 1 – pretreatment and END OF TREATMENT or Progression  
CORE NEEDLE BIOPSY  
 STANDARD path review  
               Plus  2 cores requested for research.    
Per Dr McBride, it is standard for them to use an 18 gauge. Sample size is approx. 2cm per each core.  
 
Day 8 – cycle 1 of treatment  
FINE NEEDLE ASPIRATE  
 Sample ONLY FOR RESEARCH.   
No path review needed.   
              Collect sample per the IR standard.     Per Dr.  McBride, it is standard to use a 22g or 25g needle.   They 
determine what size is best, based on the patient.   They will provide aspirate per their standard process.  Typically, 
four passes for collection of FNA.    
 
 
Facility  Sample  Contact Person(s)  Date  and Time Points  
    
UNMC 
Designated 
Repository  
Laboratory   
 Optional Lymph Node 
Pathology material:  
Lymph node biopsies 
obtained via US guided 
biopsy of accessible  lymph 
node at day 0 (pre -
treatment; core biopsy ), 
day 8 (fine needle 
aspiration) and end of 
treatment (progressive 
disease or end of study 
treatment —1 year; core 
biopsy)  Keenan Hartert  Phone: 402 -
559 7921 Email: 
keenan.hartert@unmc.edu    Baseline day 0 (pre -
treatment; core biopsy )  
Date: ___/___/____  
 
 Day 8 (fine needle 
aspiration)  
Date: ___/___/____  
 
 End of treatment 
(progressive disease or 
end of study treatment —1 
year; core biopsy)  
Date: ___/___/____  
 
UNMC 
Designated 
Repository  
Laboratory   
 Mandatory Research blood 
specimen:  
20 ml EDTA tube 
pretreatment (day of 
biopsy or initiation of 
treatment), day 8 , 1 month 
(+/- 3 days) and  10ml 
EDTA  at subsequent 
radiographic response 
assessments, after cycle 
2, 4, 6, 9, and 12.  (+/- 7 Keenan Hartert Phone: 402 -
559-7921  
Email:  
keenan.hartert@unmc.edu   
 
Location:  
UNMC Designated Repository  
Laboratory   
F&PBCC, 4th floor, Room 379  
 
  Baseline Blood  
      Sample  
 (pretreatment = day of 
biopsy or initiation of 
treatment)  
Date: ___/___/____  
 
 Day 8 Blood  
      Sample  
Date: ___/___/____  
 
                      Page 64 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
 days).  After Month 12, 
efficacy assessment s 
should occur at the 
investigators discretion 
with 10ml EDTA 
peripheral blood samples 
obtained ONLY IF 
FEASIBLE.  
Additional  
  Optional: Please  
Check the box  if patient 
consented to the storing of 
any leftover peripheral 
blood for future unspecified 
research use)  
 
  1 month (+/ - 3 days)  
Blood Sample  
Date: ___/___/____  
 
 
                     Page 1 of 2  
  Re-staging  Blood 
Sample after cycle 2 
(+/- 7 days).   
Date: ___/___/____  
 
  Re-staging  Blood 
Sample  after cycle 4  
(+/- 7 days).   
Date: ___/___/____  
  Re-staging  Blood 
Sample after cycle 6  
(+/- 7 days).   
Date: ___/___/____  
  Re-staging  Blood 
Sample  after cycle 9  
(+/- 7 days).   
Date: ___/___/____  
  Re-staging  Blood 
Sample  after cycle 12  
(+/- 7 days)   
Date: ___/___/____  
 
After Month 12, efficacy 
assessments should 
occur at the 
investigators discretion 
peripheral blood 
samples obtained ONLY 
IF FEASIBLE.  
  Re-staging  Blood 
Sample  
Date: ___/___/____  
 
  Re-staging  Blood 
Sample  
Date: ___/___/____  
 
  Re-staging  Blood 
Sample  
Date: ___/___/____  
                      Page 65 of 65            
 
 
 
UNMC IRB# 345-16 Protocol Version 4.2 Dated  07Oct2019   
  
  Re-staging  Blood 
Sample  
Date: ___/___/____  
 
  
 
 
Appendix H  
FDA MEDWATCH form  
 
Available on -line at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/ReportsManualsForms/Forms/UCM048334.pdf   
 
 