Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Registry -Based, Prospective, Single -Blind, Randomized Controlled Trial:   
Robotic  vs. Laparoscopic  Ventral Hernia Repair with Intraperitoneal Onlay Mesh (IPOM)  
PI: Ajita Prabhu, MD FACS  
  
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 Despite the adoption of the robotic platform for ven tral hernia repair, there is still a 
paucity of literature to speak to the benefits of this approach .  Potential benefits are currently 
being investigated.   A report prepared for the Centers for Medic are and Medicaid Services 
(CMS) recently defined benefit  to be defined in terms of improved service quality and in creased 
financial performance (1 ).  Service quality, as measured by the Hospital Consumer Assessment 
of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) survey, encompasses pain  (2).  Decreased pain 
contro l has been associated with lower HCAHPS scores.  The discussion concerning robotic 
ventral hernia repair must include a detailed analysis of surgical outcomes and cost.  
In our recently -published propensity score analysis comparing laparoscopic and robotic  
ventral hernia repairs with intraperitoneal onlay mesh  (IPOM)  (3), we showed a 1-day decrease 
in hospital length of stay (LOS) with the robotic versus laparoscopic  platform  for laparoscopic 
ventral hernia repair with IPOM .  The reasons for this de crease i n stay remain unknown.  
While multiple papers have described postoperative pain following laparoscopic ventral 
hernia repair  (4-10), scant data exists  evaluating postoperative pain following robotic ventral 
hernia repair  (11).  The few published papers  currently available suggest that patients experience 
decreased pain following robotic repair.  Tayar  et al. assess ed 11 patients and found that their 
average pain rating on postoperative day  1 following robotic ventral hernia repair was 3  (on a 
scale of 0 to 10) (11).  In contrast , previous publications have suggested that patients have a  
score of 5 -6 following lapar oscopic ventral hernia repair (4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 ).   Waite et al. have 
also compared robotic and laparoscopic inguinal transabdominal preperiton eal (TAPP)  repair and 
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
detected postoperative day 1 pain scores of 2.5 versus 3.8  (12).  These findings in sum, albeit 
from heterogeneous studies, suggest that patients experience decreased pain levels  following 
robotic,  versus  laparoscopic, hernia repair .     
Literature  on cost analysis of robotic ventral hernia repair also remains sparse  (13).  
Previous authors have posited that the robot is more expensive for other high -volume minimally 
invasive procedures, including TAPP  inguinal hernia repair (12, 14 ).  Mehaffey et al. performed 
a financial analysis showing higher median hospital costs of $1124 per case for robotic ventral 
hernia repair  and high er associated fixed costs  versus that of laparoscopic cases (15).  These 
figures largely resulted from increase d operative time  for robotic procedures .  Their analysis did  
not include a consideration of other variable  costs of the surgery .  In addition, n o high -quality 
literature exists concerning long-term recurrence rates following robotic ventral hernia repair  (3).   
Our hypotheses  are multiple : 1) Patients with ventral hernias undergoing robotic IPOM 
will experience a 30% decrease  in pain  scores  by postoperative day 1 compared to patients 
undergoing laparoscopic IPOM ; 2) Robotic IPOM will be associated with high er median direct 
costs per  case versus laparoscopic IPOM , and 3) Robotic IPOM will be associated with 
equivalent 1-year hernia recurrence rates versus laparoscopic IPOM.  
To help determine if the robotic platform  has an impact on postoperative pain, cost an d 
hernia recurren ce, we propose a registry -based , randomized c linical trial (RCT)  through the 
Americas Hernia Society Quality Collaborative ( AHSQC ). The AHSQC is a multicenter, 
nationwide quality improvement effort with a mission to improve value in hernia  care. Data are 
collected prospectively in the routine care of hernia patients for quality improvement purposes. 
The information collected in the AHSQC offers a natural repository of information that can be 
used for research, in addition to its quality imp rovement purpose.  
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
STUDY DESIGN  
This will be a prospective,  registry -based,  single -blind, randomized controlled trial with a 
1:1 allocation ratio.  No important changes to the methods are anticipated.  This will be  a single -
institutional study performed at t he Cleveland Clinic Foundation in Cle veland, Ohio from 2017 
to 2019 , and the AHSQC will serve as our platform.  All enrollments and surgeries in this study 
will take place at the Cleveland Clinic Comprehensive Hernia Center.  Specific i nclusion criteria  
are all patients of at least 18 years of age , primary ventral or incisional hernia defects , with an 
expected hernia width equal or less than 7 centimeters, presenting for an elective ventral hernia 
repair and who are considered eligible to undergo the operati on throug h a minimally invasive 
approach ( either laparoscopic or robotic) . Patients should be able to give consent form and 
tolerate general anesthesia to take part in this study.  Exclusion criteria will be defects greater 
than 7 centimeters, hernia defec ts requiring an open approach, and patients who are not able to 
understand and sign a written consent form.  
The study will consist of 2 interventions: laparoscopic IPOM or robotic IPOM.   The 
surgical technique is further descri bed in the following section  entitled “Surgical Technique ”. 
A computer -generated randomization scheme will be built by a CCF statistician  (who is 
listed in this protocol) . Randomization  will take place on the Research Electronic Data Capture 
(REDCap®) database program . Patients will be randomized to laparoscopic IPOM or robotic 
IPOM at the moment of enrollment, during preoperative evaluation.  
Primary outcome measure is  early  postoperative  pain.   Secondary outcome measures are  
cost and hernia recurrence.  We will also collect outcomes  pertaining to  abdominal wall -specific 
quality of life, and 30-day wound events . No changes to  trial outcomes are anticipated , and n o 
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
interim analyses will be performed.  No stopping guidelines are needed, as both the laparoscopic 
and robotic platforms rep resent current standards of care for ventral hernia repair , and both 
approaches are currently offered at Cleveland Clinic Comprehensive Hernia Center.  
Subjects  will be blinded to the intervention.  An equal number of identical bandages will 
be applied to the abdomen  in similar locations following each intervention.  We are unable to 
blind the operating surgeon to the intervention arm.   We are unable to blind  the data collector, 
the research fellow, to the patients within each intervention arm.   However, by  utilizing data 
largely  determined from the patients themselves, who will not be informed of the op eration that 
they have received until after study completion, we believe that we are presenting an accurate 
data with limited bias.  No subgroup analyses will  be performed.  Patients will be excluded from 
analysis if they are lost to follow -up.   
OUTCOMES TO BE INVESTIGATED  
 Outcomes to be investigated are based on the aforementioned study  hypotheses  and are 
listed below:  
Specific Aim #1: To determine if patie nts with ventral hernias undergoing robotic IPOM 
experience a 30% decrease  in pain  scores  by postoperative day 1 compared to patients 
undergoing laparoscopic  IPOM .   
The p rimary  outcome is early  postoperative pain.  Pain will be assessed by Patient -
Report ed Outcome Measurement Information System (PROMIS)  Pain Intensity 3a survey and 
the Num eric Pain Rating Scale (NRS -11). The PROMIS pain intensity  3a survey  is a National 
Institutes  of Health  developed  a validated  tool that focuses on patient -reported outco mes of pain 
characteristics (17).  The NRS -11 is a frequently utilized  pain assessment that consists of an 
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
easily administered 0 to 10 Likert scale, in which higher scores  reflect greater pain intensity (16). 
PROMIS Pain Intensity 3a survey pain scores  will be assessed  at baseline (at th e time of 
enrollment), at 30 (± 15) and 365 (± 90)  days. NRS -11 scores, often used to measure acute pain, 
will be obtained in the post -anesthesia care unit, and on postoperative days 1 (± 1 days), 7 (± 3 
days) and 30(±15 days ).  The NRS -11 scores will be obtained either in person while the patients 
are hospitalized, or by telephone interviews following their hospital discharge.  Postoperative 
narcotic requirements, converted into morphine equivalents, will also be obtained  for the first 24 
hours postoperative ly through review of the patient medical records .  
Specific Aim #2: To determine if robotic IPOM is associated with higher direct costs 
versus laparoscopic IPOM.    
A secondary outcome is direct cost  at the index admission su rgery and at 30 days and 365 
days after surgery.  Cost data will be obtained from the Cleveland Clinic financial department 
and will include direct costs.  Direct costs for the index operation will include operating room 
supply and time, intensive care uni t, anesthesia, floor care, laboratory tests, radiology and 
endoscopy, pharmacy, and in -hospital rehabilitation therapies.  The operating room supply direct 
costs for index surgeries will be further categorized into the following groups: mesh and general 
supply costs.  Indirect costs and total charges will be excluded.  This analysis is in keeping with 
that previously performed by one of our principal investigators ( 18).  Capital costs, including the 
robotic system, laparoscopic towers, and non-disposable  equipment, will not be included.      
 
 
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Specific Aim #3: To determine if robotic IPOM is associated with equivalent  one-year 
recurrence  rates  versus laparoscopic IPOM.  
Hernia r ecurrence will be assessed with the Ventral Hernia Recurrence Inventory survey 
(VHRI) at 365 (± 90) days.  The VHRI, which uses patient -reported outcomes to detect hernia 
recurrence,  is a validated tool that  has been shown to  detect ventral hernia recurrence with a 
sensitivity of 85% and a specificity of 81 %.(19) 
Additional outcomes in clude abdominal wall -specific quality of life  and 30 -day wound 
events .  Abdominal  wall-specific quality of life will be determined by the HerQLes  
questionnaire. HerQLes  is a 12 -question hernia -specific survey that has been previously 
validated in patients undergoing ventral hernia repair (20).  This will be assessed at baseline , at 
30 days (± 15 days) and at 365 days (±  90 days) . Wound events  are defined as surgical site 
infection (SSI), surgical site occurrence (SSO) and surgical site occurrences  requiring procedural 
intervention (SSOPI), as defined by the Ventral Hernia Working Group (21 ,22). Wound events 
will be assessed by a physical exam at 30(± 15) days and 365 (± 90) days. This information is 
already routinely collected for all patients included in the  AHSQC . 
SURGICAL PROCEDURE  
In both groups , patients will  be positioned  in supine  position, with both arms tucked .  All 
operations will be performed under gener al anesthesia. A ntibiotic prophylaxis , prophylaxis of 
venous thromboembolic events , skin preparat ion and hair removal , will be performed per 
Surgical Care Improvement Project  protocol .   
Our surgical approach to laparoscopic IPOM is as follows:  Initial access is perfo rmed in 
the left upper quadrant , at Palmer’s point.  Optical access into the peritone al cavity is achieved  
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
using a 5mm optical  troca r. Insufflation  of CO 2 is performed with a pressure of 15mmHg, under 
direct laparoscopic  visualization .  Two additional trocars are placed on the left side, along  the 
anterior  axillary line ( usually one 12mm t rocar and another 5mm  trocar ).  If deemed necessary 
by the attending surgeon, an auxiliary 5mm port is placed on the right side.  When present, 
hernia contents are reduced using gentle traction with atraumatic graspers. Adhesions between 
intra-abdominal co ntents and the ant erior abdominal wall are lysed using cold, sharp dissection.  
The hernia defect is identified and measured internall y with a sterile plastic ruler with the 
abdomen insufflated . Defect closure is performed with t ransfascial sutures of numb er 1, 
monofilament, nonabsorbable  suture . This is accomplished with the aid of a Carter -Thomason  
suture passer.  Mesh repair is performed using a  standard piece  of polypropylene mesh with an  
absorbable  hydrogel barrier.  A number 0 absorbable suture will be  placed in the center of the 
mesh.   The size  of the mesh will be defined by the attending surgeon to achieve a minimum 3 to 
5-centimeter  overlap  from the edges of the closed defect .  Mesh is rolled and introduced into the 
cavity through a 12mm port. Inside  the abdomen, the mesh  is unrolled and adequate positi oning 
is confirmed. Using the Carter -Thomason  suture passer , the previously placed absorbable sutures 
in the mesh are pulled outside the cavity and tied, positioning mesh again st the anterior 
abdominal wall.  Using the double crown technique , mesh edges are fixed  circumferentially to  
the anterior abdominal wall with permanent tacks . Four additional  monofilament , nonabsorbable 
sutures are placed in the cardinal points of the mesh using the Carter -Thomason  suture passer.  
The entire cavity is assessed , and ad equate hemostasis is confirmed.  Ports  will be removed 
under direct visualization,  and the abdomen will be  desufflated .  The anterior  fascia of the 12mm  
port is closed with absorbable sutures. Skin and subcutaneous tissue are closed with absorbable 
sutures. Surgical skin glue will be applied.  
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 Our surgical approach to robotic -assisted  IPOM is as follows:  The da Vinci® Surgical 
System robotic platform  (Intuitiv e Surgical, Inc.) will be used.  Initial acc ess is performed in the 
left uppe r quadrant, at Palmer’s point.  Optical access into the peritoneal cavity is achieved using 
a 5mm optical trocar. Insufflation  of CO 2 is performed with a pressure of 15mmHg, under direct 
laparoscope  visualization .  A 12mm a nd an 8mm  robotic port are placed on the left side along the 
anterior axillary line.  A 12 mm assistant port is placed on the right side of the abdomen under 
direct laparoscopic visualization .  The left upper quadrant access port is upsized to a 8 mm 
robot ic port.   The robot is docked .  When present, hernia contents are reduced using gentle 
traction with atraumatic graspers.  Adhesions between intra -abdominal contents and the ant erior 
abdominal wall are lysed using cold, sharp dissection.  The hernia defect  is identified and 
measured internall y with a sterile plastic ruler with the abdomen insufflated .  Defect closur e is 
performed intracorporeally  with 3-0 absorbable  barbed  suture. Mesh repair is p erformed  using a 
standard piece of polypropylene mesh with an  absorbable hydrogel barrier.  A number 0 
absorbable suture will be placed in the center of the mesh.   The size  of the mesh will be defined 
by the attending surgeon to achieve a minimum 3-5-centimeter  overlap.  Mesh is rolled and 
introduced into the cavity through a 12mm port. Inside the abdomen, the mesh  is unrolled and 
adequate positi oning is confirmed. Using the Carter -Thomason  suture passer, the previously -
placed absorbable sutures in the mesh are pulled outside the cavity and tied, positioning the mesh 
again st the anterior abdominal wall.  Mesh edges are fixed circumferentially  using running, 3-0 
absorbable  barbed suture .  The entire cavity is reviewed, and ad equate hemostasis is confirmed.  
Ports  will be removed under direct visualization,  and the abdom en desufflated .  Anterior  fascia 
of the 12mm  and 8mm ports  are closed with absorbable sutures.  Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
are closed with absorbable sutures.   Surgical skin glue is applied.  
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
ANTICIPATED TIME FRAME  
 Estim ated patient accrual time is two  years with data collection to occur over one 
year from the last enrolled patient. Data analysis and manuscript production will occur within six 
months of completion of data collection.  
PATIENT RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 As with any surgical procedure, patients  may experience pain, bleeding, and discomfort.  
Possible morbidities  following hernia repair by either the laparoscopic or robotic platform 
include seroma, hematoma, inflammation, wound dehiscence, and infection .  As both platforms 
represent current stand ards of care, patients in neither intervention are expected to incur unusual  
risk of harm.   
PATIENT BENEFITS  
 There are no direct benefits to subjects for participation in this study. Subject 
participation will, however, help physicians and hospital admini strators better understand the 
pain outcomes and costs associated with the robotic versus laparoscopic platforms for ventral 
hernia repair.  
COSTS TO THE SUBJECTS  
 There are no extra costs to the subjects  associated with this research endeavor  other than 
the minimal amount of time (less than 1 minute) required to answer  the NRS -11 surveys at 1  and 
7 days postoperative .  The remaining  surveys  and physical exams  will be performed at routine 
postoperative visits.  If the patient is contacted by phone for routine  follow up and the 
questionnaires are answered, data including physical exam and CT results from any subsequent 
office visits in the defined study window, will be collected for analysis.    
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Procedures related to preoperative evaluation, hernia repair, and postoperative monitoring are 
considered standard of care and will be billed to the subject or  the subject’s insurance company.  
ALTERNATIVES TO PARTICIPATION  
 Patients are under no obligation to participate in this study.  The principal investigator  
will di scuss all available surgical options with patients.  It will be emphasized that refusal to 
participate in this study will not impact any patie nt’s ability to receive care or to undergo ventral 
hernia repair  at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation.  
 
PAYMENTS TO SUBJECTS  
 There will be no direct payments or financial benefit to the subjects. Participation will be 
voluntary.  
PLAN FOR OBTAINING INFORMED CONSENT  
 For each subject, written informed consent will be obtained prior to any protocol -related 
activities.  As  part of the informed consent procedure, the principal investigator, surgeon co -
investigato r, or one of the approved study coordinators will explain verbally and in writing the 
nature, duration, and purpose of the study in such a manner that the subject is  aware of potential 
risks, inconveniences, or ad verse effects that may occur.  Subjects will be informed  that they 
may withdraw from the study at any time and will receive all information required by federal 
regulations.  
   Following identification of a po tential study participant, the investigator or co-
investigator  will be responsible for instituting the informed consent process in a face -to-face 
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
manner.  Before starting any study procedures, the investigator will discuss the proposed 
research study in de tail with the potential subject during the office visit to discuss treatment 
options.  The subject will be allowed ample time to read and review the informed consent 
document and to ask questions.  The informed consent document will be reviewed with the 
subject in depth by the participating investigator or by a designated member of the research team 
to ensure that the potential participant has a thorough understanding of the study protocol and 
understands the potential risks and benefits of study participat ion and his or her rights as a study 
participant.  The investigators will be available by phone or office visit to answer any questions 
that the participant may have.  After consideration, the subject may return if necessary for 
another visit with the inve stigator and ask additional questions before signing the informed 
consent document to participate in this study.  
 After the subject has read and reviewed the informed consent document and has agreed to 
participate, he/she will be asked to sign and date the  document.  The study member obtaining 
consent will also sign and date the form, and documentation of the informed consent process will 
be included in the research file ( i.e., the person who obtained consent, where and when consent 
was obtained, and who wa s present during the process).  A copy of the consent form will be 
given to the subject for  his/her  records.  
PROVISIONS FOR SUBJECTS FROM VULNERABLE POPULATIONS  
 The population to be studied includes adults of at least 18 years of age.  Children, 
cognitive ly-impair ed persons, pregnant women, students and house staff under the direct 
supervision of the investigator are considered vulnerable populations and will, therefore,  be 
excluded from participation.  If a Cleveland Clinic Foundation staff member or empl oyee is a 
potential candidate for the study, the subject will be informed during the consent process that 
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
his/her participation or refusal to participate will not influence grades, employment, or 
subsequent recommendations.   
 If a subject cannot read a con sent form due to illiteracy or blindness, a member of the 
research study staff will read and explain the consent form to the participant or  to the 
participant’s legally-authorized  representative.   A witness who will sign and date the consent 
form must be p resent during this encounter.  
SUBJECT PRIVACY AND DATA CONFIDENTIALITY  
     Subject anonymity and data confidentiality will be mai ntained throughout this study .  
Every effort will be made to maintain the confidentiality of documents that identify the subje ct 
by name ( e.g., signed informed consent documents, clinic charts), except to the extent necessary 
to allow monitoring by the Office of Research Compliance at the Cleveland Clinic or by other 
regulatory authorities.  
 All of the  information collected, such  as name or medical record number, will be stored 
in the Americas Hernia Society Quality Collaborative ( AHSQC ) and on REDCap®. The 
AHSQC is  a secure database that is used nationally to track clinical outcomes in patients who 
undergo hernia repair. Randomiz ation will occur with the use of a customized REDCap®  
database program, a secure network/firewall -protected electronic database for which only the 
investigator and the designated members of the study team will have access using an 
individually -assigned log in and password.  Only approved study members listed on the IRB 
protocol will have access to the separately -stored master list.  Only the Principal Investigator, 
Lead Research Coordinators, and B iostatistician s will be granted access to retrieve patient da ta 
for data quality assessment and data analysis.  All electronic records pertaining to the clinical 
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
study will be password -protected  and only approved study members listed on the IRB protocol 
will have password access.  
SAMPLE SIZE / POWER CALCULATION  
 Power calculation was performed with G*Power 3 software for Windows  (Faul, 
Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007) . The s ample  size was determined by the primary outcome  of 
interest , the change in  NRS -11 pain score at postoperative day 1. We hypothesize that the ro botic 
approach will be associated with a 30% decrease in NRS -11 pain score at postoperative day 1. 
The 30% reduction used for power calculations was determined from clinical judgment, as little 
literature exists evaluating the minimal clinically important difference of the NRS -11 scale  for 
ventral hernia repair . Mean NRS -11 pain score (4.76) and standard deviation (1.975) with the 
laparoscopic approach (control group) was determined from previo usly published manuscripts 
[7].  Assuming an alpha of 0.05, a be ta of 0.20,  we will need a total sample size of 62 patients 
(31 per arm).  Considering  and a 20% drop -out ra te to occur in each arm , we will need 
approximately 74 patients ( 37 patients per arm ). This sample size and power calculation were 
reviewed by the D DSI statistician listed in this protocol.  
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
Descriptive statistics, including means, standard deviations, and/or percentages, will be 
calculated for demographic and baseline variables.   Categorical variables will be reported using 
proportions.  Continuous variables will be reported using  either means and standard deviations 
for normally distributed data or  median and interquartile range for non-parametric  data.   
Specific Aim #1: Pain scores will be compared between intervention arms a t each time 
point using either a Student’s t-test (normal distribution) or a Kruskal -Wallis test  (nonparametric 
distribution) .  Differences in PRO MIS scores between baseline, 30 and 365 days, respectively, 
will be assessed via Wilcoxon signed -rank test.    
Specific Aim #2 : A univariate analysis of cost will be conducted in which costs will be 
logarithmically transformed to offset the effects of outliers and then analyzed with a Student’s t-
test.   
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Specific Aim #3: Recurrence rates will be compared between in tervention arms via 
Pearson’s chi -square.  
Additional outcomes : Abdominal wall -specific quality of life scores will be compared 
between intervention arms via Kruskal -Wallis test.   Wound events will be compared between 
intervention arms via Pearson’s chi -square. 
R software will be used for all analyses.  A two -tailed p-value  <0.05 will be considered 
statistically significant.    
 
 
DATA SAFETY MONITORING BOARD  
 A data safety monitoring board comprised of surgeons and statisticians from the 
Cleveland Clinic Fou ndation will oversee the progress of this trial.  This will be a group of 2 
DDSI surgeons and 1 statistician. This group of individuals will meet at regular intervals to 
monitor the safety and progress of this trial.  
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE/INNOVATION  
 Scant data exist  evaluating pain following and cost asso ciated with robotic  ventral hernia , 
in addition to long-term (1 year) outcomes following robotic repair .  Our study is among the first 
high-quality initiatives to investigate these aspects of a new surgical  platform whose merits are 
constantly debated.   Our findings will contribute to hospital administrators’ decisions on whether 
to purchase expensive robotic equipment  and subsequently, surgeons’  initiative in further 
developing their operative skills on thi s platform.   
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
REFERENCES  
1) https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality -Initiatives -Patient -Assessment -
Instrume nts/HospitalQualityInits/downloads/HCAHPSCostsBenefits200512.pdf  
2) Thiels  CA, Hanson KT, Yost KJ, et al. Achieving a 5 -star rating: Analysis of Hospital 
Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) scores among 
patients undergoing electi ve colorectal operations. Surgery 2016 Oct;160(4):902 -14. 
3) Prabhu AS, Dickens EO, Copper CM, et al. Laparoscopic vs robotic intraperitoneal mesh 
repair for incisional hernia : An Americas Hernia Society Quality Collaborative Analysis. 
J Am Coll Surg 2017 Apr  24. 
4) Eker HH, Hansson BM, Buunen M, et al. Laparoscopic vs. open incisional hernia repair: 
A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg 2013 Mar;148(3):259 -263. 
5) Rosen MJ, Duperier T, Marks J, et al. Prospective randomized double -blind placebo -
controlled trial of  postoperative elastomeric pain pump devices used after laparoscopic 
ventral hernia repair. Surg Endosc 2009 Dec;23(12):2637 -2645.  
6) Rogmark P, Petersson U, Bringman S, et al. Short -term outcomes for open and 
laparoscopic midline incisional hernia repair: A randomized multicenter controlled trial: 
The ProLOVE (prospective randomized trial on open versus laparoscopic operation of 
ventral  eventrations) trial. Ann Surg 2013 Jul;258(1):37 -45. 
7) Asencio F, Ag uilo J, Peiro S, et al. Open randomized clinical trial of laparoscopic versus 
open incisional hernia repair. Surg Endosc 2009 Jul;23(7):1441 -8. 
8) Barbaros U, Asoglu O, Seven R, et al. The comparison of laparoscopic and open ventral 
hernia repairs: A prospective randomized study. Hernia  2007 Feb;11(1):51 -6. 
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
9) Misra MC , Bansal VK, Kulkarni MP, et al. Comparison of laparoscopic and open repair 
of incisional and primary ventral hernia: Results of a prospective randomized study. Surg 
Endosc 2006;20(12):1839 -45. 
10) Pring  CM, Tran V O’Rourke N, et al. Laproscopic versus open ve ntral hernia repair: A 
randomized controlled trial. Australian N Z J Surg  2008 ;78(10):903 -6. 
11) Tayar  C, Karoui M, Cherqui D, et al. Robot -assisted laparoscopic mesh repair of 
incisional hernias with exclusive intracorporeal suturing: A pilot study. Surg Endo sc 
2007 Oct;21(10):1786 -9.  
12) Waite  KE, Herman MA, Doyle PJ, et al. Comparison of robotic versus laparoscopic 
transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) inguinal hernia repair. J Robot Surg 2016 
Sep;10(3):239 -244. 
13) Stoikes  N, Webb D, Voeller G. Robotic hernia repair . Surg Technol Int 2016 Oct 
26;XXIX:119 -122. 
14) Schwaitzerg  SD. Financial modeling of current  surgical robotic system in outpatient 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy: How should we think about the expense? Surg Endosc 
2016 May;30(5):2082 -2085.  
15) Mehaffey JH, Michael  AD, Mullen MG, et al. Adoption of robotics in a general surgery 
residency program: At what cost? J Surg Res 2017 Jun 1;213:269 -273. 
16) Beilin Y, Hossain S, Bodian CA. The numeric rating scale and labor epidural analgesia. 
Anesth Analg 2003 Jun;96(6):1794 -8. 
17) Broderick JE, Schneider S, Junghaenel DU, et al. Validity and reliability of patient -
reported outcomes measurement information system instruments in osteoarthritis. 
Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2013 Oct;65(10):1625 -33. 
Version 3 – 02/08/2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
18) Harth KC, Rose J, Delaney CP, et al. Open versus endoscopic component separation: A 
cost comparison. Surg Endosc 2011 Sep;25(9):2865 -70. 
19) Baucom RB, Ousley J, Feurer ID, et al. Patient reported  outcomes after incisional hernia 
repair -Establishing the ventral hernia recurrence inventory. Am J S urg 2016 
Jul;212(1):81 -8.  
20) Krpata DM, Schmotzer BJ, Flocke S, et al. Design and initial implementation of 
HerQLes : A hernia -related quality -of-life survey to assess abdominal wall function. J Am 
of Surg 2012 Nov;215(5):635 -42. 
21) Kanters AE, Krpata DM, Blatni k JA, et al. Modified hernia grading scale to stratify 
surgical site occurrence after open ventral hernia repairs. J Am Coll Surg 2012 
Dec;215(6):787 -93.  
22) Ventral Hernia Working Group, Breunig K, Butler CE, Ferzoco S, Franz M, Hultman CS, 
Kilbridge JF, Ros en M, Silverman RP, Vargo D. Incisional ventral hernias: review  of the 
literature and recommendations regarding the grading and technique of repair. Surgery 
2010 Sep;148(3):544 -58.  
 