Protocol Version: 1/5/15   
 
Title: Combined effects of rTMS and botulinum toxin in benign essential b lepharospasm: A novel approach  
 
 
NCT0237087 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Version 08/10/2015  2  
 
BACKGROUND:  
 
Benign essential blepharospasm (BEB) is a foca l dystonia characterized by excessive involuntary closure of the 
eyelids.1 BEB is a functionally disabling disorder with significant impact on the quality of life.2 Due to repeated 
involuntary closure of eyes , in severe cases , patients become functionally blind despite a normal visual acuity. 
Chemodenervation with botulinum neurotoxin  (BoNT)  injections administered every 12 weeks has emerged as  
an effective  first-line therapy for the treatment of BEB . However, the treatment is purely symptomatic and does 
not modify the disease pathophysiology.3 Importantly, the clinical benefits are temporary  with m ost patients 
report ing benefits lasting only about 8-10 weeks.4, 5 We conducted a retrospective analysis of BEB  patients  at our 
movement disorders center that has followed over 250 patients (manuscript submitted ) and  found  that the average 
duration of benefit s from  BoNT injections  was about 9.5 weeks  which is consistent with other studies.   Thus  
BoN T therapy although a first-line therapy for BEB  shows  suboptimal benefits in many patien ts. Therefore, there  
is a clear  merit in exploring  other options that can potentiate and possibly prolong the  effects of BoNT injections . 
 
 
rTMS refers to application of repetitious t ranscra nial magnetic stimulation (TMS)  pulses to a specific brain target 
at predefined stimulation parameters . We propose a novel approach  of combining  rTMS therapy  with BoNT 
injections  in BEB . The primary goal  of this study is to compare the standard treatment with BoNT versus BoNT 
combined with  a two week course of rTMS  therapy. The central hypothesis  is that rTMS therapy potentiates and 
prolongs the  effects of BoNT therapy  in BEB .  rTMS therapy has shown beneficial results in many neurological 
and psychiatric conditions.6,7 rTMS therapy is noninvasive and is FDA approved for treatment of medication 
refractory depression  when delivered to the prefrontal cortex .8 In our study we  will select the anterior cingulate 
cortex (ACC) as the target of stimulation . ACC  has been proposed by many studies as the main site s of pathology 
in BEB . Anatomically  in monkey studies, the ACC has been shown to have clear projections to the upper facial 
muscles.9 In BEB patients, PET study  has shown there is an increased glucose uptake in the ACC .10,11 fMRI study 
has also shown an increased  brain activity in the rostral ACC  in relation to the eye -closure .12, 13 Kranz et al in 
collaboration with Dr Hallett’s lab tested the effects of rTMS of the ACC in BEB. So far to date this is the only 
rTMS study  that is  available for review in literature. These investigators found that  a single session of low 
frequency rTMS delivered to the ACC had positive clinical benefits though lasting only  for about one hour .14 
 
 
The fundamental mechanism of action for rTMS is modulation of brain excitability .15 rTMS at frequencies of 5 -
Hz and higher has been found to transiently enhance the excitability,16  whereas rTMS at frequencies of 1 -Hz and 
lower has been found to depress the cortical excitability.17 Many rTMS  studies have also shown that  repeated 
sessions of rTMS therapy results in  cumulative persistent benefits that can last several  weeks.  For example, in a 
recent double blind randomized controlled study, low frequency rTMS delivered over eight weeks to Parkinson’s 
disease patients showed  positive clinical benefits that lasted 12 we eks beyond the last rTMS session .18 In this 
proposal we  plan to employ a two week cou rse of rTMS therapy to achieve sustained benefits . With standard  
BoNT  treatment, the peak -dose benefits are seen at about 4 -6 weeks after the administration of injections. We 
plan to introduce rTMS during  this peak -dose period ( about 6 weeks after BoNT or T1). We will examine the 
effects of combined therapy at about 10 week s after BoNT injections (T2) and at about 12 weeks after BoNT 
injections ( T3). We will also measure the physiological effects at these time points.  We will use the blink reflex 
recovery (BRR) curve  that reflects the brain stem excitability. An increased B RR indicates  that there is increased 
excitability of facial moto r neurons and bulbar interneurons.  BRR  has been shown to be increased in a significant 
proportion of patients with BEB.19,20 According to the animal model of blepharospasm, o ne of the underlying 
mechanisms for increased BRR is that a  loss of dopamine -containing neurons in the substantia n igra pars 
compacta causes  a decreased inhibition in the blink circui t.21 
 
In summary, BEB is a functionally disabling focal dystonia. BoNT therapy is suboptimal in many BEB patients. 
rTMS therapy is a promising noninvasive therapy and has shown positive benefits in BEB. rTMS  therapy can be 
 
 
Protocol Version 08/10/2015  3 easily combined with  BoNT injections to enhance the effects of BoNT in BEB . We plan to collect pilot data on 
this novel approach in this one year application. The specific aims for the proposal are:   
 
Aim 1: Clinical impact of rTMS therapy in BEB .  
We will  determine the clinical effects  of 0.2 Hz rTMS therapy  of the ACC  when combined with  BoNT  injections  
in BEB . Comparisons will be drawn between the T1, T2 ( about 10 weeks after BoNT) and T3 ( about 12 weeks 
after BoNT) assessments in the c linical scoring of BEB symptoms and patient rati ng of quality of life . We 
hypothesize that in comparison  to T1  assessment;  there will be an increased control of BEB symptoms and patient 
rating of quality of life  at T2 follow -up. These benefits will remain sustained at T3 follow -up though to a lesser 
extent.  
 
 
Aim 2: Physiological impact of rTMS therapy in BEB  
 
Aim 2a: We will  determine the physiological effects  of 0.2 Hz rTMS therapy  of the ACC  when combined with 
BoNT injections  in BEB . We will record the time course of effects on BRR  at T1, T2 and T3 assessments . We 
hypothesize that in comparison to T1 assessment , BRR will be reduced and reach physiological levels at T2 
follow -up. BRR will continue to remain at physiological levels at T3 follow -up though to a lesser extent than at 
T2. 
 
Aim 2b: We will  determine if the effects  of 0.2 Hz rTMS therapy  on BRR will correlate with clinical scoring of 
BEB symptoms. We hypothesiz e that the change in BRR at T2 and T3  will show positive correla tion with the 
improvement in BEB  symptoms at these time points.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1:  
A shows the schedule for rTMS intervention and monitoring of clinical and physiological outcomes    
B shows the target in the brain for rTMS intervention  
 A B 
rTMS will be delivered over the ACC with a figure -
of-eight coil.  
 
 
Protocol Version 08/10/2015  4 METHODS  
 
Study design : We propose a blinded control study of real and sham rTMS with a goal of enrolling about eight 
subjects  (age range 21–80 years)  in each treatment arm  and ten healthy control subjects for normative 
physiological data  (total 26 16). Subjects diagnosed with blepharospasm or cranio -cervical dystonia  who receive 
BoNT  therapy at our center  will be approached . The BoNT clinic at our center  follows more than 250 subjects 
with dystonia. Subjects followed at our center regularly fill out a self -reported form to document if they have 
responded to BoNT and the duration of benefits perceived  with BoN T therapy. We will enroll only those subjects 
who report experiencing positive benefits with BoNT but lasting about 10 weeks or less . We will exclude subjects 
if they report  1) pregnancy; 2) active seizure disorder ; 3) significant cognitive impairment ; 4) exposure to 
neuroleptics ; and 5) presence  of a metallic body such as pacemaker, implants, prosthesis, artificial limb or joint, 
shunt, metal rods and hearing aid.14 We will enroll about 10 healthy age and sex -matched subjects controls for 
normative electrophysiological data.  Controls will be recruited  through fliers placed across the campus.  All 
controls will be examined by Dr. Wagle Shukla to ensure that they are neurologically healthy.  
 
We will invite all e ligible subjects  to an introductory sessi on. During this session  the procedures outlined for the 
study  will be explained in detail . We will then obtain an IRB approved informed consent. We will perform  medical 
history and neurological examination using the NINDS Common Data Elements.  Each subject  will be 
randomized to receive either real or  sham stimulation . We will record the demographics and  severity of BEB 
using the blepharospasm severity scale .22  The BEB subjects  followed at our center are scheduled for BoNT  
treatment  about  every 12 weeks  as per the standard of care . We will start rTMS therapy at about 6 weeks  after 
they have received the BoNT injec tions. We have chosen this time frame to coincide the rTMS therapy with the 
peak -dose effects of the  BoNT injections. We will do our best to make sure that the patients are accompanied  to 
the laboratory facility by a friend, relative, or spouse, or we will arrange transportation.  Although the physician 
administering TMS will be aware of the status of the subject in terms of real TMS versus sham -TMS, this 
physician will play no role in any of the outcome measures, and will not be present during any of the outcome 
measure assessments . Similarly, the investigators who perform the outcome measures will not be present during 
any of the TMS sessions, and therefore will remain blinded to the status of the patients with respect to real-TMS 
versus sham -TMS.   
 
Outcome measures:  The primary clinical outcome will be  the percentage change in physician rating of BEB 
symptoms. We will record  5 minute videos of eye blinks  for the eye blink rate, number of sustained blinks, and 
time of eye closure.  These videos will be scored by a blinded rater . We will then use the Jankovic rating scale and 
blepharospasm disability index to rate the improvements. We have IRB approved  consent to obtain videos of 
most  patients presenting to our center  but the ICF will include a video consent section .  The secondary  outcome  
for the study will include the subjective rating by the patients. We will record  blink re flex recovery (BRR) as the  
physiological outcome of rTMS . We will determine the time course effects of rTMS on physiological outcome . 
We will also determine i f the physiological effects correlate  with the clinical outcome  measures.  
 
Clinical measures:  
 
Physician rating:  We will score the  eye blink rate, number of sustained blinks, and time of eye closure.   An eye 
blink w ill be  defined as any visible, bilateral, and synchronous contraction of the orbicularis oculi ( OO muscle ), 
causing eyelid drop. Blink rate will be  expressed as blinks per minute. Sustai ned spasms of the OO muscle will  
not be considered blinks and will be  counte d separately. The  time (seconds) of eye closure whenever blinks cause  
prolonged eye closure (eyes shut > 2 seconds)  will be recorded with a stopwatch .14  
 
Patient rating:  We will administer the Craniocervical  Dystonia Questionnaire Description for quality of life  
assessment . The Craniocervical Dystonia Questionnaire (CDQ -24) is a patient -rated health  related quality of life 
(HR-QoL) measure for craniocervical  dystonia.  It was developed  based on issues that are  relevant to patients  
with BEB . It has been  validated  for use in clinical  research.  The CDQ -24 measures the impact of C raniocervical  
 
 
Protocol Version 08/10/2015  5 Dystonia on 5 HR -QoL domains. It is composed  of 24 items, forming 5 subscales: stigma, emotional  well-
being, pain, activiti es of daily living, and social/  family life. Items are rated on a 5 -point scale.23 Each item 
consists of five statements representing increasing  severity of impairment, scored from 0 to 4. Subjects will be  
instructed to indicate how they have felt during the past two  weeks because of dystonia by selecting one of the 
five statements for each item . Subjects will also rate their symptoms before and  after stimulation using  a 7-point 
nomin al scale: 1) excellent, 2) very good, 3) good, 4) average, 5) sl ightly worse than usual, 6) bad or  7) very 
bad. 
 
Physiological Measure : 
 
Blink reflex recover:  We will record  surface EMG recordings for both eyes separately from the orbicularis oculi 
(OO) muscle using Ag -AgCl  surface electrodes. The EMG signals will be amplified using D360 amplifiers 
(Digitimer, Wel wyn, UK), band pass filtered (5 –2,500 Hz), analog -to-digital -converted using a 1401 AD 
converter (CED, Cambridge, UK) at a sample rate of 5,000 Hz, and will be coll ected on a computer. Electrical 
stimulation will be applied to the supraorbital nerve in the supraorbital notch with a bipolar stimulating electrode 
and a constant  current generator (Digitimer). Single and paired electrical stimuli (conditioning and test) will be 
delivered and EMG amplitudes will be recorded from the OO muscle. All stimuli will be 0.2 msec in duration 
and stimulus intensity will be set at 3 times the R2 threshold (lowest intensity that gives an R2 response in at least 
5 out of 10 trials). S ubjects will be studied at rest, with eyes gently closed. The blink reflex in response to paired 
stimulation will be assessed at multiple inter stimulus intervals of about 200 ms ec (6 trials of test and paired 
stimulus each, pseudo randomized .). Pairs of s timuli will be separated by varying time intervals of 20 –40 seconds 
to minimize habituation. Trials with excessive EMG artifact will be rejected online. Data will be analyzed offline 
using Signal software (Cambridge Electronic Design, UK). The raw blink re cordings will be DC -corrected, 
rectified, and averaged. The onset latency and duration of R1 and R2 responses will be determined by manual 
cursor marking of the beginning and end of responses. Peak amplitude of R2 will be calculated within a window 
from 30  to 60 msec to avoid stimulation artifacts. We will obtain R2 recovery values by dividing the size of R2 -
test [R2T] by the size of conditioning response [R2C ]. 19 
 
rTMS  therapy:  
 
Real stimulation:  rTMS  will be delivered over each anterior cingulate cortex , using a figure -of-eight  coil 
connected to a Magstim  machi ne (Magstim Company, Dyfed, UK). We will apply  rTMS with 0.2 Hz  frequency  
to the ACC . We will deliver  180 stimuli  (around 15 min) with a stimulator output of 100% active motor threshold 
(AMT). AMT will be  assessed at the tibialis anterior muscle with the figure -of-eight  coil. The A MT will be 
defined as the lowest stimulation intensity required to evoke a 150 μV potential in the  targe t muscle . To determine 
the stimulation site for ACC, the figure -of-eight /double cone  coil will be  placed over Fz and then moved over the 
midline of the brain in 0.5 -cm steps anteriorly, until the point of maximum motor evoked potential in the 
orbicularis o culi (OO) muscle (with a latency of 6 –8 msec) is reached (about 3.5 cm medi al and 5.5 cm anterior 
to motor cortex ).14 The coil position will be  marked on the skin.  Constant coil position will be  continuously 
monitored during the experiment.  These rTMS sessions will be repeated on a daily basis over 10 days . During 
rTMS, all patients will wear ear plugs in order to  protect the ears from the acoustic artefact associated  with the 
discharge of the stimulation coil.  
 
Sham Stimulation:  During sham rTMS, subjects  will undergo the same procedure for identifying stimulus 
location as used in patients receiving real rTMS. Sham  rTMS will be administered using the same Magstim coil 
as used in real stimulation. This coil will be placed on the patient’s head in an identical manner howeve r will not 
be connected to the M agstim device. Instead another coil will be  connected to provide stimulation sound . In each 
stimulation co ndition, the Magstim will be placed behind the patient and not visible to him or her.  Placebo sham  
coil which produce s discharge noise and vibration similar to a real coil without s timulating the cerebral cortex.  
During rTMS, all patients will  continue to wear ear plugs as instructed during the real stimulation sessio ns. 
 
 
Protocol Version 08/10/2015  6  
Safety of rTMS : Repetitive TMS can have undesired s ide effects.  Guidelines for the safe use of rTMS were 
formulated  at the 1st International Work shop on the Safety of TMS.24  These were  adopted by the International 
Federation for Clinical Neurophysiology  and subsequently updated .25 The proposed study will use TMS  
parameters well within the published sa fety guidelines. We will conduct c areful monitori ng of the participants 
and follow all recommended precautions for the app lication of TMS .  Subjects will have a urine pregnancy test 
done on the first day of the scheduled rTMS visit before rTMS is done.   
There will be a potential for direct benefit if the study stimulation helps subject’s blephar ospasm symptoms. Risks 
include a neck ache or headache. The study procedure may also cause the nearby scalp muscles to twitch.  
Although TMS has been used for over 20 years, the re is a possibility of unknown risks due to TMS.  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
The principal investigator monitors the patient safety and data collection of each  study visit.  If she feels there is 
possible harm to subject safety or the possibility of,  any harm due to something new that was learned during the 
study , she will convene a multi -disciplinary committee of at least 2 health professionals to perform a thorough 
review of the study details.  
 
Patient Stipends  
 
Payments for mileage reimbursement w ill be paid to study subjects  with blepharospasm . If a hotel visit is required, 
the study team will make the hotel arrangements for the subjects and the cost will be pre-paid.  
 
Control subjects will be paid a flat rate of $20 or can be paid for mileage, whichever is greater.  If you are paid  
more than $75 , we will need to collect your social security number.  
 
SAMPLE SIZE, EXPECTED OUTCOME AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS :  With an expected difference 
of 30% in the primary outcome measure14 between before  (T0) and after rTMS therapy  (T1), a standard deviation 
of 20%, type I error of 5% and power of 80%, the necessary sample size for each group has been determined . In 
this one year pilot study we propose to enroll a total of 16 BEB subjects  with eight  subjects  in each treatment arm  
and 16 healthy controls for normative physiological data . Descriptive statistics w ill be used for the demographic 
data. Data will be presented as mean (SD) unless otherwise indicated.  We will examine each of t he dependent 
measure separately. These include the eye blink rate, number of sustained blinks, the time of eye closure, patient 
rating of blepharospasm and the BRR cycle. For Aim 1 and Aim2a, each dependent measure will be examined 
using the follo wing statistical approach.  We will conduct a mixed model analysis using time and stimulation arm 
as repeated factors adjusted for baseline values, and subjects as the random factor. The model will include 2 
within -subject factors: treatment (2 levels: act ive vs sham) and time (3 levels: T1, T1, and T3).  If the interaction 
effects between stimulation arm and time are found as non-significant, they will be dropped. In case of significant 
main effects, post hoc pairwise comparisons will be corrected using Fi sher least significant difference procedure 
in accordance with the closed test principle; i.e.,  post hoc comparisons will be declared non -significant if the 
global p value of the main effect (testing equality of all 2 stimulation arms simultaneously) are n on-significant, 
but will be carried out without further correction in case of a significant global main effect. SPSS version 15.0 
for Windows will be used for statistical computations. The 2 -tailed significance level will be set at 0.05 . For Aim 
2b, we wil l use Spearman correlation test to determine the relation between the change in BRR  and change in 
clinical scores  at T2 compared to T1 and at T3 compared to T1.  
 
 
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS  
 
 
 
Protocol Version 08/10/2015  7 1. Subjects may not meet the criteria, may not tolerate the rTMS therapy or drop out of the study. We will 
factor in these considerations during  recruitment. We propose a sample size of eight  subjects in each 
treatment arm  (total 16 ). We have an IRB approved database of patients followed at our center.  In order 
to meet our target sample , while conducting the  retrospective analysis we preemptive ly identified the BEB  
subjects  that receive suboptimal benefits ( 36 subjects ). 
2. Quality assurance (QA) on the Magstim machine will be constantly monitored.  
3. Quality  of EMG recordings: The EMG recordings (Delsys, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts) are reliable with 
high signal -to-noise ratio. We will reduce the noise of the EMG signals by cleanin g and lightly abrading 
the skin.  
 
The University of Florida nor the Principal Investigator hold a patent or license for any material, object or process 
used in this study.  There is no license pending or under consideration  or is there any intention to file a patent 
application at a later dat e.  
 
Computer -based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study through the use of access 
privileges, passwords and encryption.  Passwords and encryption are used to ensure that the electronic data is 
secure  and housed in a locked room .   
 
References  
1. Hallett M, Evinger C, Jankovic J, Stacy M, BEBRF International Workshop. Update on blepharospasm: 
Report from the BEBRF international workshop. Neurology 2008;71:1275 -1282.  
2. Wenzel T, Schnider P, Griengl H, Birner P, Nepp J, Auff E. Psychiatric disorders in patients with 
blepharospasm - a reactive pattern? J Psychosom Res 2000;48:589 -591.  
3. Costa J, Espirito -Santo C, Borges A, et al. Botulinum toxin type A therapy for blepharospasm. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2005;(1 ):CD004900.  
4. Ainsworth JR, Kraft SP. Long -term changes in duration of relief with botulinum toxin treatment of essential 
blepharospasm and hemifacial spasm. Ophthalmology 1995;102:2036 -2040.  
5. Streitova H, Bares M. Long -term therapy of benign essentia l blepharospasm and facial hemispasm with 
botulinum toxin A: Retrospective assessment of the clinical and quality of life impact in patients treated for 
more than 15 years. Acta Neurol Belg 2014.  
 
 
Protocol Version 08/10/2015  8 6. Gironell A, Kulisevsky J, Lorenzo J, Barbanoj M, Pascual -Sedano B, Otermin P. Transcranial magnetic 
stimulation of the cerebellum in essential tremor: A controlled study. Arch Neurol 2002;59:413 -417.  
7. Hallett M. Transcranial magnetic stimulation: A primer. Neuron 2007;55:187 -199.  
8. Lefaucheur JP, Andre -Obadia N, Antal A, et al. Evidence -based guidelines on the therapeutic use of 
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). Clin Neurophysiol 2014.  
9. Morecraft RJ, Louie JL, Herrick JL, Stilwell -Morecraft KS. Cortical innervation of the facial nucleu s in the 
non-human primate: A new interpretation of the effects of stroke and related subtotal brain trauma on the 
muscles of facial expression. Brain 2001;124:176 -208.  
10. Kerrison JB, Lancaster JL, Zamarripa FE, et al. Positron emission tomography scann ing in essential 
blepharospasm. Am J Ophthalmol 2003;136:846 -852.  
11. Ceballos -Baumann AO, Sheean G, Passingham RE, Marsden CD, Brooks DJ. Botulinum toxin does not 
reverse the cortical dysfunction associated with writer's cramp. A PET study. Brain 1997;12 0 ( Pt 4):571 -582.  
12. Hanakawa T, Dimyan MA, Hallett M. The representation of blinking movement in cingulate motor areas: A 
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Cereb Cortex 2008;18:930 -937.  
13. Dresel C, Haslinger B, Castrop F, Wohlschlaeger AM , Ceballos -Baumann AO. Silent event -related fMRI 
reveals deficient motor and enhanced somatosensory activation in orofacial dystonia. Brain 2006;129:36 -46.  
14. Kranz G, Shamim EA, Lin PT, Kranz GS, Hallett M. Transcranial magnetic brain stimulation modula tes 
blepharospasm: A randomized controlled study. Neurology 2010;75:1465 -1471.  
 
 
Protocol Version 08/10/2015  9 15. Wagle Shukla A, Vaillancourt DE. Treatment and physiology in parkinson's disease and dystonia: Using 
transcranial magnetic stimulation to uncover the mechanisms of action. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2014;14:449 -
014-0449 -5.  
16. Pascual -Leone A, Valls -Sole J, Wassermann EM, Hallett M. Responses to rapid -rate transcranial magnetic 
stimulation of the human motor cortex. Brain 1994;117 ( Pt 4):847 -858.  
17. Chen R, Classen J, Gerl off C, et al. Depression of motor cortex excitability by low -frequency transcranial 
magnetic stimulation. Neurology 1997;48:1398 -1403.  
18. Shirota Y, Ohtsu H, Hamada M, Enomoto H, Ugawa Y, Research Committee on rTMS Treatment of 
Parkinson's Disease. Suppl ementary motor area stimulation for parkinson disease: A randomized controlled 
study. Neurology 2013;80:1400 -1405.  
19. Quartarone A, Sant'Angelo A, Battaglia F, et al. Enhanced long -term potentiation -like plasticity of the 
trigeminal blink reflex circuit in blepharospasm. J Neurosci 2006;26:716 -721.  
20. Eekhof JL, Aramideh M, Bour LJ, Hilgevoord AA, Speelman HD, Ongerboer de Visser BW. Blink reflex 
recovery curves in blepharospasm, torticollis spasmodica, and hemifacial spasm. Muscle Nerve 1996;19:10 -15.  
21. Schicatano EJ, Basso MA, Evinger C. Animal model explains the origins of the cranial dystonia benign 
essential blepharospasm. J Neurophysiol 1997;77:2842 -2846.  
22. Lindeboom R, De Haan R, Aramideh M, Speelman JD. The blepharospasm disability scale: An instrument 
for the assessment of functional health in blepharospasm. Mov Disord 1995;10:444 -449.  
23. Jankovic J, Kenney C, Grafe S, Goertelmeyer R, Comes G. Relati onship between various clinical outcome 
assessments in patients with blepharospasm. Mov Disord 2009;24:407 -413.  
 
 
Protocol Version 08/10/2015  10 24. Wassermann EM. Risk and safety of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation: Report and suggested 
guidelines from the international work shop on the safety of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, june 5 -
7, 1996. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1998;108:1 -16.  
25. Rossi S, Hallett M, Rossini PM, Pascual -Leone A, Safety of TMS Consensus Group. Safety, ethical 
considerations, and  application guidelines for the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation in clinical practice 
and research. Clin Neurophysiol 2009;120:2008 -2039.  
 