1 Bruno  Roseguini,  Ph.D.   
  
 
 
 
Heat therapy for Intermittent Claudication  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: April 10, 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Bruno  Roseguini,  Ph.D.   
  
Study protocol: We will conduct a randomized, controlled trial to evaluate the benefits of participating for 8 
weeks  in a home -based  daily treatment  with HT or a thermoneutral  control  intervention,  as assessed  by vascular 
function,  walking  tolerance  and quality  of life. The treatment  duration  (8 weeks)  was chosen  based  on the recent 
report of Brunt and co -workers that the improvement in endothelium function promoted by repeated HT in 
sedentary individuals peaks at 8 weeks following the onset of treatment (Brunt et a l., 2016b). Men and women 
with a history of stable IC and resting ankle -brachial index (ABI) of <0.9 but >0.4 in at least one leg, will be 
recruited  to participate  in this study.  The exclusion  criteria  are: (1) uncontrolled  diabetes  (HbA1C  > 8.5 measured 
within 3 months prior to date of consent), (2) heart failure, (3) chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),  
(4) critical limb ischemia (ischemic rest pain or ischemia -related, non -healing wounds or tissue loss, (5) prior 
amputation, (6) exercise -limiting comorbidity (i.e., angina, dyspnea or arthritis), (7) recent (<3 months) 
infrainguinal  revascularization  (surgery or endovascular  revascularization),  (8) plans  to change  medical  therapy 
during  the duration  of the study,  (9) active  cancer,  (10) chronic  kidney  disease  (eGFR  <30 by MDRD  or Mayo  or 
Cockcroft -Gault  formula), (11) HIV  positive, active  HBV or HCV  diseas e, (12) presence of any  clinical  condition 
that in the opinion of the principal investigator makes the patient not suitable to participate in the trial, (13) 
peripheral  neuropathy,  numbness,  or paresthesia  in the legs,  (14) class  2 or 3 obesity  (BMI  ≥ 35 kg/m2)  or unable 
to fit into water -circulating pants, and (15) contraindications to MRI (Levine et al., 2007). Participants will be 
asked to report to the laboratory for a total of 9 experimental visits throughout the study as, detailed below in 
Table  1. After providing  written  informed  consent,  patients  will be familiarized  with the treadmill  cardiopulmonary 
exercise  test and the 6-min walk test. At least  72 hrs after the familiarization  visit, subjects  will be asked  to return 
for the first experimental  session,  during  which  they will undergo:  (1) a resting  blood  draw,  (2) ABI measurement, 
and (3) a symptom -limited, treadmill exercise test. The second experimental session will be conducted at least 
48 hrs after the first session,  and will encompass  the following  measurements:  (1) calf reactive  hyperemia  using 
arterial spin labeling MRI, (2) cutaneous microvascular reactivity of the leg using a local heat challenge, (3) 
maximal walking distance on a 6 -min walk test, and (4) QOL testing using  the VascuQol and SF36 
questionnaires.  After  baseline  characteristics  are established,  patients  will be randomized  into one of two groups 
as detailed below. Outcomes will be reassessed at the halfway point (end of week 4), at the completion of the 
interven tion (end of week 8) and at a follow -up visit, 4 weeks after the end of the intervention (week 12). To 
ensure  that the chronic  rather  than the acute  effects  of HT are investigated,  participants  will be asked  to interrupt 
the treatment 48 hrs prior to the outcome sessions. The primary outcome will be the change in 6 -min walk 
distance at 4 and 8 weeks relative to baseline.  
 
Visit # Time  point Procedures  
1 Baseline  Consenting  and familiarization  with treadmill  test and 6-min walk test 
2 Baseline  Blood  draw,  ABI measurement,  treadmill  test 
3 Baseline  Calf MRI,  cutaneous  microvascular  reactivity,  QOL,  6-min walk test 
4 Mid-treatment  (week  4) Blood  draw,  ABI measurement,  treadmill  test 
5 Mid-treatment  (week  4) Calf MRI,  cutaneous  microvascular  reactivity,  QOL,  6-min walk test 
6 End of treatment  (week  8) Blood  draw,  ABI measurement,  treadmill  test 
7 End of treatment  (week  8) Calf MRI,  cutaneous  microvascular  reactivity,  QOL,  6-min walk test 
8 Follow -up (week  12) Blood  draw,  ABI measurement,  treadmill  test 
9 Follow -up (week  12) Calf MRI,  cutaneous  microvascular  reactivity,  QOL,  6-min walk test 
 
Table  1: Study  timeline  and experimental  procedures  that will be performed  on each  session  
 
Study  Groups  and Randomization : A total of 32 patients  will be recruited  by Dr. Raghu  Motaganahalli  from the 
stable vascular disease clinic at the Richard L. Roudebush VA Medical Center and at the Indiana University 
Methodist Hospital, as well as by the staff from the Indiana CTSI Research Networks  office. After the initial 
outcome measurements are collected, patients will be randomized (blocked and stratified by sex), using SAS 
Version 9.4, into  one of two groups: those  receiving HT (n=16) or those  receiving thermoneutral control  (n=16). 
Patients i n both groups will be provided with identical water -circulating trousers and a portable heating pump 
(HTP -1500, Adroit Medical Systems), and will be instructed on how to operate the equipment. The  pump given 
to participants in the HT group will be adjusted  to circulate water at 48ºC through the trousers, while the pump 
given to patients in the thermoneutral control group will circulate water at 33ºC to maintain skin temperature at 
baseline levels (Neff et al., 2016). We will ask subjects to apply the therap y daily for 90 min while seated or in 
3 Bruno  Roseguini,  Ph.D.   
 the supine  position.  This treatment  duration  was chosen  based  on our recent  findings  that leg blood  flow 
increases  progressively  during  exposure  to HT, attaining  peak  levels  at 80 min (Neff  et al., 2016).  A built-in timer 
inside the pumps and inaccessible to patients, will provide an estimate of patient compliance with the therapy. 
Patients in both groups  will also receive weekly telephone calls from the  study coordinator to verify compliance 
and will receive  a logbook to record their sessions. Throughout the course of the study, daily walking will be 
monitored using a step activity monitor attached to the ankle of the most symptomatic leg (StepWatch3, Ortho 
Innovations).  Participants  will be asked  to wear  the monitor  during  waking  hours  and to remove  it before  sleeping 
and while showering. The step activity monitor continuously records the number of steps per minute and the 
number  of minutes  spent  walking  each  day, for up to 50 days.  Data  will be downloaded  from the monitor  on week 
4, on week 8 and at the follow -up visit at week 12.  
 
Outcome  Measures:  
6-min Walking Test (Primary outcome) : Participants will receive standardized instructions and will be asked to 
walk the greatest distance possible by  walking back and forth along a 100 -ft corridor for 6 min. We recently 
reported that the distance covered in 2 tests conducted 10 min apart in patients with symptomatic PAD is 
remarkably similar (Neff  et al., 2016). This observation lends support to  the co ncept that test -retest reliability of 
the 6 -min walk test is excellent in this patient population (McDermott et al., 2014).  
Treadmill  Exercise  Test: Participants  will perform  a graded,  symptom -limited  exercise  test on a treadmill  following 
the Gardner prot ocol (treadmill speed of 2 mph, 0% grade with increments of 2% every 2 min), as described 
previously by our group (Roseguini et al., 2014). During the test, the microvascular oxygenation status of the 
gastrocnemius muscle of the most symptomatic leg will b e continuously monitored using a near -infrared 
spectrometer (NIRS) (Roseguini et al., 2014).  
Calf Reactive Hyperemia : Peak hyperemic perfusion of the calf muscles will be assessed using pulsed arterial 
spin labeling  (PASL)  MRI (Lopez  et al., 2015).  MRI scans will be performed  on a Siemens  3 Tesla  (T) Magnetom  
Prisma scanner (Siemens AG Healthcare Sector, Erlangen, Germany). Subjects will have a transmit/receive 
knee coil placed around  the most symptomatic leg. Initially, baseline perfusion images will be acquired after 30 
min of rest. Next, a blood pressure cu ff firmly wrapped around the lower thigh will be inflated to suprasystolic 
values (>75 mmHg above systolic blood pressure) for 5 min. Hyperemic flow will be measured for 5 min after 
cuff deflation. Regions of interest (ROIs) for each muscle group in the ca lf will be drawn to obtain perfusion 
measurements in ml/min -100 g (Lopez et al., 2015).  
Cutaneous Microvascular Function : Laser -Doppler flowmetry probes, seated in the center of local skin heaters 
(Moor  Instruments,  UK), will be used  to measure  red blood  cell flux, an index  of skin blood  flow (SkBF).  Baseline 
SkBF will be recorded for 10 min, after which local skin temperature will be increased to 39°C (0.1°C/s) and 
maintained at this level for 40 min. Next, to induce maximal vasodilation, the local skin te mperature will be 
elevated to 43°C. Cutaneous vascular conductance (CVC) will be calculated as laser -Doppler flux divided by 
mean arterial pressure (MAP),  measured throughout the study via brachial artery oscillation, and  normalized to 
maximal vasodilation  (% CVCmax) (Wong and Fieger, 2010, Wong and Minson, 2011).  
Quality  of Life: QOL  will be assessed  by responses  to VascuQol  (Regensteiner et  al., 1996)  and SF36  (Ware  et 
al., 1996) questionnaires.  
 
Statistical Analysis and Sample Size: Baseline differences in demographics and clinical characteristics 
between groups will be determined using independent two -sample t -tests. Linear mixed effects models will be 
used  to model  all outcomes  with baseline  outcome  treated  as a covariate.  Sex will also be included  as a covariate 
since several outcomes are known to differ by sex (Gardner et al., 2010, Gardner et al., 2014b); however, 
treatment effects are not expected to differ by sex (McDermott et al., 2014) so we have not powered the study 
to test for sex interactions. The sample size (n=32; 16 per group) is based on the ability to detect a clinically 
significant change in 6 -min walk distance (from baseline) over 8 weeks (primary outcome) in the HT -treated 
group  as compared  to the control  group.  The studies  of McDermott  and co-workers  (McDermott  et al., 2013)  and 
Gardner and co -workers (Gardner et al., 2014a), in which the benefits of home -based exercise training on 
walking  tolerance  in patients  with IC were  investigated,  were  used  as a reference  for the sample  size calculations. 
We estimated  the standard  deviation  of change  in 6-min walk distance  to be 48.69  meters,  based  on the standard 
deviation  of the change  scores  observed  in Table  3 of Gardner  et al (Gardner  et al., 2014a).  Since  investigators 
in both studies reported a non -significant change in 6 -min walk in the attention -control group [95% confidence 
interval for McDermott's study (health education control group, 6 month follow -up) is ( -25.4 to 3.2)  and for 
Gardner's study (light resistance training control group, 12 week follow -up) is ( -6.33 to 14.33)], we hypothesize 
that the change  in 6-min walk in the control  group  in our study  will be non-significant (0  on average).  As pointed  
4 Bruno  Roseguini,  Ph.D.   
 out by Perera et al (Perera et al., 2006), a change of 50 meters in the 6 -min walk test is considered substantial 
and clinically meaningful in elderly subjects. Using this effect size ((50 -0)/48.42=1.03),  we determined that 16 
subjects per group  will be needed  to detect a  clinically meaningful improvement by  HT therapy, with a power of 
80% and based on a two -sided, two -sample t -test with significance level 0.05. Power will be improved through 
our linear mixed models approach. Based on our expected enrollment rate of 2 patients/month, we  will be able 
to complete a ccrual in 16 months.  
 
REFERENCES  
 
Gardner,  A. W., Parker,  D. E., Montgomery,  P. S. & Blevins,  S. M. 2014a.  Step-monitored  home  exercise 
improves ambulation, vascular function, and inflammation in symptomatic patients with peripheral artery 
disease: a rando mized controlled trial. J Am Heart Assoc, 3, e001107.  
Gardner, A. W., Parker, D. E., Montgomery, P. S., Khurana, A., Ritti -Dias, R. M. & Blevins, S. M. 2010. 
Gender  differences  in daily ambulatory  activity  patterns  in patients  with intermittent  claudicatio n. J Vasc 
Surg, 52, 1204 -10. 
McDermott,  M. M., Guralnik,  J. M., Criqui,  M. H., Liu, K., Kibbe,  M. R. & Ferrucci,  L. 2014.  Six-minute  walk 
is a better outcome measure than treadmill walking tests in therapeutic trials of patients with peripheral 
artery disease. Circulation, 130, 61 -8. 
Perera,  S., Mody,  S. H., Woodman,  R. C. & Studenski,  S. A. 2006.  Meaningful  change  and responsive - 
ness in common physical performance measures in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc, 54, 743 -9. 