Protocol Version #: 2.1   1 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022   
 
 
  
 
Improving CarE for Community Acquired Pneumonia (ICE -CAP)  
 
Phase 1: Antibiotic Decision Support  
Phase 2: Prognostic Decision Support  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator  
Derek J. Williams, MD, MPH  
Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
 
Co-Investigators  
Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
Kathryn M. Edwards, MD  
Carlos G. Grijalva, MD, MPH  
Yuwei Zhu, MD, MS  
Frank Harrell, Jr., PhD  
Asli Weitkamp, PhD  
Matthew Weinger, MS, MD  
Jason Slagle, PhD  
Don Arnold, MD, MPH  
 
University of Pittsburgh/Ch ildren’s Hospital of Pittsburgh  
Judith M. Martin, MD  
 Srinivasan Suresh, MD  
 Robert Hickey, MD  
Rafael Ceschin, MS  
 
 
  
 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   2 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022   
 
 
 
Table of Contents:  
 
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Study Phases  
3.0 Previous Human Studies  
4.0 Study Design and Randomization  
5.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
6.0 Screening/Enrollment  
7.0 Study Procedures  
8.0 Statistical Considerations  
9.0 Risks to Participants  
10.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
11.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems in volving Risk to Participants  
12.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
13.0 Follow -Up and Record Retention  
14.0 References  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   3 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  Protocol Summary:  
 
Children with pneumonia presenting to the ED at Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt or 
Children’s Hospital  Pittsburgh at the University of Pittsburgh  will be potentially eligible for study. During 
intervention periods, providers caring for enrolled children will be presented with a detailed decision 
support strategy that emphasizes management in accordance wit h national guideline recommendations. 
The anticipated study duration is 18 months for Phase  1 (P1)  and 24 months for Phase 2 (P2). As this 
study does not include direct contact with enrolled subjects, there is no anticipated follow up.  
 Protocol Versions  
Version  Date of Approval  Major Changes from Prior Version  
1.0 Jul 15, 2018  - 
2.0 Feb 8, 2019 Update study site; minor edits for clarity  
2.1 Oct 26, 2022  Update study design designation  
  
  
1.0 Background  
 
Pneumonia is the most common serious infection in childhood. In the United States (US), pneumonia 
accounts for 1 -4% of all emergency department (ED) visits in children (3- 28 per 1,000 US children per 
year)
1 and ranks among the top 3 reasons for pediatric hospitalization with >100,000 hospitalizations per 
year (15- 22 per 100,000 US children per year)2-5. Pneumonia also accounts for more days of antibiotic use 
in US children’s hospitals than any other condition.6   
 Safely reduci ng inappropriate antibiotic use is critical to slow the progression of antimicrobial resistance, 
and childhood pneumonia is a key area where substantial improvements can be made. In the 2011 Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society/Infectious Diseases Society  of America (PIDS/IDSA) pneumonia 
guideline, appropriate use of antibiotics was an important area of emphasis.
7 For presumed bacterial 
pneumonia, recommendations emphasize the use of a single, narrow -spectrum antibiotic (i.e. amoxicillin 
or ampicillin). In children <6 years of age treated in the outpatient setting, the guideline recommended 
considering withholding antibiotics, recognizing that pneumonia in this population is most often caused 
by viruses. Both of these recommendations were graded as strong and supported by high- quality 
evidence.8-10 Nonetheless, in a large database study we conducted just prior to release of the 2011 
guideline, use of broad- spectrum ant ibiotics was very common among children hospitalized with 
pneumonia, with substantial differences in antibiotic selection patterns among the various hospitals.11 In 
that study, use of narrow -spectrum ampicillin was rare (<5%). High rates of broad -spectrum antibiotic use 
were also noted in a study of children with pneumonia treated and released from US EDs, with <30% of 
children receiving narrow -spectrum  therapy.12 
 
Emergency care for childhood pneumonia, including hospitalization rates, varies widely across the nation. 
A study examining hospital admission rates at 35 US chil dren’s hospitals from 2009 -12 showed marked 
differences in severity -adjusted pneumonia hospital admission rate s (median 31%; range 19 -69%)13. 
Extending these findings, Florin et al. detected great hospital -level variation in the use of diagnostic tests 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   4 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  for children presenting to the E D with pneumonia.14 They reported that high test -utilizing hospitals had a 
nearly 2- fold greater odds of hospitalization compared with low test -utilizing hospitals.14 Using the same 
database as Florin et al., we previously reported similar institutional variation in diagnostic test utilization 
in children hospitalized with pneumonia. The range across hospitals for even the most common diagnostic 
tests was very wide with some hospitals performing specific tests in <30% of children and others performing those same tests in >75% of children. We also demonstrated an association betwee n high test -
utilizing hospitals and increased average hospital length of stay.
11  
 Provider preferences and inaccurate risk perceptions contribute to differences in hospitalization rates. Within the Intermountain Healthcare System in Utah, Dean et al. exposed large differences in admission 
rates (range 38 -79%) among 18 individual ED providers providing care for >2,000 adults with 
pneumonia.
15 Differences were not explained by patient characteristics or illness severity and higher rates 
of hospitalization did not reduce hospital readmissions or mortality. In another multicenter study of 472 
adults with pneumonia at <4% risk of 30- day morta lity estimated using objective severity scores, 
providers overestimated the risk of mortality in 5% of outpatients (range across institutions 0- 12%) and 
41% of inpatients (range across institutions 36- 48%).16 These studies suggest that risk perceptions are 
often inaccurate, and potentially lead to unnecessary or prolonged hospitalizations and intensive therapies. Similar studies have not been performed in children because no valid prognostic tools exist to reliably predict pediatric pneumonia severity.  
 2.0 Rationale and Study Phases  
 Extensive variation in both antibiotic use and hospitalization decisions is evident among clinicians caring 
for children with pneumonia, with high potential for avoidable harm. In our prior study, one -third of 
children were hospitalized for less than 48 hours and nearly 10% less than 24 hours. Some of these hospitalizations were likely unnecessary. Most of these children also received broad -spectrum antibiotic 
therapy instead of the narrow -spectrum agents recommended by the national guideline. Conversely, one -
third of children admitted to intens ive care were initially managed on a general ward —earlier transfer for 
more intensive therapy may have improved outcomes for some of these children. New strategies to inform decision making are needed, and the combination of risk stratification using objec tive tools and clinical 
decision support in the ED setting are innovative and promising approaches to achieve this goal.  
 Phase 1 : To test the hypothesis that electronic antibiotic decision support increases guideline -concordant 
antibiotic use compared with usual care in the ED.  
 
The primary outcome is the proportion of children exclusively receiving guideline -concordant 1st line 
antibiotic therapy during the first 24 hours of care (Table 1). Secondary outcomes include exclusive use 
of concordant antibiotic therapy for the entire episode, any use of concordant antibiotic therapy during the 
first 24 hours of care and for the entire episode, and ED revisits and hospitalizations within 72 hours and 
7 days of the index discharge.   
 
Phase 2 : To test the hypothesis that the delivery of severity information generated by our prognostic tool 
leads to more appropriate site of care disposition compared to usual care.  
 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   5 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  The primary outcome is appropriate site of care disposition (Table 2). Surveillance for su bsequent ED 
visits and hospitalizations to our institutions as well as escalation to higher levels of care will be captured 
within the EHR data extracted by the decision support application. Secondary efficacy and safety 
outcomes include the overall site o f care disposition (ED discharge, ward, ICU), and ED revisits and 
hospitalizations within 72 hours and 7 days of the index discharge.  
 
In these studies, conducted at two experienced academic centers, we will implement and evaluate an 
EHR -based clinical decision support application to promote antibiotic use in concordance with the 2011 
PIDS/IDSA guideline in a pragmatic, cluster -randomized  trial ( P1). Next, we will incorporate risk 
stratification using a previously developed prognostic tool into a second EHR -based decision support 
application, testing its impact on site of care disposition compared to usual care in a pragmatic randomized trial ( P2). In both studies, a ll subjects will receive standard of care. Decisions regarding 
management, includin g antibiotic selection and site of care, will be at the discretion of the treating 
provider and will not be restricted or altered in any way. Thus, this study poses no greater than minimal risks to participants. Due to the nature of the research, we will seek a waiver of informed consent as has been done in similar pragmatic studies at our institutions.
17-21 
 
3.0 Previous Studies  
 
From 2010 to 2012, our research team at Vanderbilt collaborated with two other sites to conduct the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) funded Etiology of Pneumonia in the Community 
(EPIC) Study, a prospective, population- based surveillance study of community- acquired pneumonia 
hospitalizations in children and adults.2,22 We enrolled >2600 children, making EPIC the largest 
prospective study of pneumonia hospitalizations ever conducted in US children.  Over 70% of children 
enrolled in EPIC had a viral pathogen detected whereas bacterial pathogens were identified in only 15% 
of children. Nevertheless, nearly 90% of children received antibiotic s. In most cases, antibiotic treatment 
was discordant with the national guideline and broad- spectrum antibiotic use was common.23 We have 
also evaluated the impact of the 2011 PIDS/IDSA guideline on antibiotic selection for children with 
pneumonia enrolled in EPIC, demonstrating only a modest reduction in the use of broad- spectrum 
antibiotics following publication of the guideline. Guideline -concordant use of narrow -spectrum 
aminopenicillins remained <20% by the end of the study, indicating a clear opportunity for further 
improvement.23  
 
We also  used data from the EPIC study to develop a prognostic tool for assessing pneumonia disease 
severity in children. Prognostic tools use statistical modeling to combine inputs, such as demographics, 
clinical variables, and results of diagnostic tests, to pro duce reliable and unbiased risk estimates for a 
specified outcome. For our prognostic tool, we focused on acute in- hospital outcomes, organized into an 
ordinal severity scale consisting of 3 levels: severe, moderate, and mild. Our modeling strategy, ordina l 
logistic regression, offers increased statistical power and precision compared to binary/multinomial logistic regression, and the resulting output allows one to simultaneously estimate probabilities for each 
level on the outcome scale or in combination ( e.g., probability of moderate to severe and probability of 
severe outcomes). Predictor variables for our prognostic tool were selected a priori and also informed by clinical expertise and literature review. We focused on objectively defined variables with strong hypothesized associations with the outcome that could be rapidly ascertained at presentation in the 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   6 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  clinical setting. This process resulted in a pool of 20 predictors . We also created a separate, more 
parsimonious model restricted to 9 predictors commonly available within electronic health records 
(EHR).  
 Both models accurately identified risk for moderate or severe pneumonia, indicating strong potential to 
improve risk stratification . Model discrimination, which measures the degree of concordance b etween 
observed and predicted outcomes, was excellent with a c- index ranging from 0.78- 0.81. Differences in 
model fit and quality were considered negligible, and results from the internal bootstrap validation were 
comparable to the primary models. In the f ull model, PaO
2:FiO 2 ratio (PF ratio, estimated from the 
SaO 2FiO 2 ratio),24 age, heart and respiratory rates, altered ment al status, temperature, chest indrawing, 
infiltrate pattern, and systolic blood pressure were the strongest predictors, contributing 96% of the explainable outcome variation. The EHR model retained most of these predictors (omitting altered mental 
status, chest indrawing, and infiltrate pattern). Nonetheless, predictive performance of the EHR model 
equaled that of the full model. For the full  model, the median predicted risk for moderate or severe 
pneumonia was 18% (IQR 9- 32%) and for severe pneumonia 5% (3- 11%).  
 
Prognostic tools used in adults with pneumonia improve risk stratification and clinical decision making, 
but these tools are underutilized, indicating a need for improved implementation strategies. A number of prognostic tools have been developed t o assist providers caring for adults with pneumonia,
25-31 and most 
have undergone external validation.26,32- 42 The two best studied tools are the PSI and CURB -65,30,31 which 
were designed to predict 30 -day mo rtality. Newer tools (e.g., SMART -COP and SCAP)26,27 have also 
been developed to predict acute in- hospital outcomes, including mechanical ventilation and shock. These 
tools have been used to safely increas e the number of low -risk patients treated in the outpatient setting 
and improve guideline -concordant antibiotic management.43-47 As a result, their use in the management of 
adults with pneumonia in outpatient and inpatient settings i s strongly recommended.25 Nonetheless, 
several studies indicate these tools are often applied incorrectly or not used at all.15,48- 50 Major barriers to 
clinical use include tool complexity (inability to recall parameters and inaccurate scoring or 
interp retation) and disruptions to provider workflow (suspension of patient care to calculate risk by hand 
or use of an electronic application outside of routine care).51 Failure to validate new tools and assess their 
impact in new populations are also major impediments to clinical use. Each of these barriers must be 
carefully addressed to ensure effective implementation of  new prognostic tools.  
 
Effective decision support facilitates the adoption of new evidence into practice and helps standardize 
management to improve care and optimize outcomes. Clinical decision support is intended to directly impact provider decision -making to improve the quality, safety, effectiveness, and efficiency of care by 
steering behavior toward evidence -based care and away from unnecessary or unproven practices. The 
availability of comprehensive EHRs has allowed for the development of increasingl y complex decision 
support applications, including risk stratification using real -time electronic capture of patient 
demographics, physiologic data, and diagnostic testing results.
17,52 In a randomized trial conducted in 
primary care settings comparing decision support integrated with 2 prognostic tools vs. usual care without 
decision support, McGinn and colleagues showed a 25% reduction in antibiotic use overall and a 50% reduction in broad- spectrum antibioti c use in adults with possible bacterial pharyngitis or pneumonia 
when using the decision support application.
52 The application was triggered on chief complaint and 
incorporated a risk calculator, which used automated and user -supplied inputs to identify risk for bacterial 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   7 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  pharyngitis or pneumonia, along w ith evidence -based treatment guidelines and order sets. In another 
study of adults with pneumonia presenting for emergency care within the Intermountain Healthcare 
System, Dean et al. showed increased guideline concordant care and reduced mortality in four  different 
EDs using clinical decision support that included CURB -65 severity assessment and tailored 
recommendations for site of care, diagnostic testing, and antibiotic use compared to 3 usual care EDs.17 
These successful examples highlight the potential for EHR -based decision support to improve care by 
providing useful, evidence -based guidance at the point of care as management d ecisions are being made.  
 
Both Vanderbilt and the University of Pittsburgh have extensive experience leveraging EHR data for 
decision support and research purposes. As an example of such capabilities, in the EPIC study, a decision support tool used in adul ts with pneumonia was adapted for use as a screening tool.
17 The tool used 
natural language processing to identify concepts suggestive of pneumonia in radiology “wet” reads in 
real-time and required a provider -confirmation of a pneumonia diagnosis . For EPIC, we adapted this tool 
to deliver electronic alerts to our e nrollment teams. Importantly, a similar tool was used to identify 
pneumonia in the study by Dean et al. described in the preceding paragraph. A second example highly 
relevant to this proposal was developed by our co- investigator, Dr. Weitkamp, and involves  antibiotic 
decision support to reduce inappropriate use of antibiotics in critically ill neonates. Importantly, the 
algorithm was followed in >70% of infants and led to significant reductions in antibiotic exposure.53  
Additionally, our co- investigators, Drs. Weinger and Slagle, experts in human factors engineering and 
user-interface design of health information technology, possess extensive experience designing and 
evaluating decision support applications that maximize utility and minimize potential for human error.54-63 
These examples highlight that the investigators at Vanderbilt and the University of Pittsburgh possess the 
necessary skills, expertise, and institutional resources to develop and implement effective decision 
support applications.  
 
4.0 Study Design and Randomization  
 
4.1 Study Design and Randomization ( P1, EHR -based antibiotic decision support)  
Effectiveness of the EHR -based antibiotic decision support application for promoting guideline -
concordant antibiotic prescribing in children presenting for emergency care will be evaluated in a 
pragmatic, cluster -randomized study conducted over a period of 18 months t hat includes two respiratory 
seasons. Our institutions possess demonstrated experience in the execution of these pragmatic designs. 17-
21 Assignments to control or intervention arms will occur in 4- week periods using a randomly determined 
sequence within each hospital. To ensure balanced representation of each arm in periods of both low and 
high pneumonia prevalence, randomization will occur in 3 permuted blocks (size=6).  The antibiotic 
decision support application will be provided to those randomized to the intervention arm, whereas the 
control arm will receive usual care. Due to the nature of the intervention, blinding of treating providers will not be possible. Importantly, since this is a trial focused on provider behavior, all children will 
receiv e standard of care management. All treatment decisions will be made by the clinical providers and 
will not be restricted or altered in any way.  
 
4.2 Study Design and Randomization ( P2, EHR -based risk stratification )  
We will conduct a randomized controlled trial comparing our prognostic tool (intervention arm) to usual 
care (control arm) over a period of 24 months. Randomization will occur at the patient level. Allocation to 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   8 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  intervention or control will be based on med ical record number (even vs. odd) or similar strategy and will 
be assigned automatically once a provider confirms the diagnosis of pneumonia. Importantly, all standard 
of care treatment options will be available and decision -making will not be restricted in any way in either 
group. A similar randomized trial that predicts readmission risk among all hospitalized adults using EHR inputs is currently ongoing at Vanderbilt. In that study, every adult admitted to Vanderbilt University 
Hospital is enrolled (under  waiver of consent). Readmission risk is calculated automatically for all 
patients, but only displayed for a random half to determine if providing this additional information 
improves outcomes compared to usual care.  
 
5.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria (Phases  1 and 2)  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Six months to <18 years of age  
2. Radiographic evidence of pneumonia in ED  
3. Provider -confirmed diagnosis of pneumonia  
 
Exclusion Criteria
 (Provider query and/or automated data abstraction ) 
1. Children with tracheostomy, cystic fibrosis, immunosuppression  
2. Inter -hospital transfers  
3. Hospitalization within preceding 7 days  
4. Previously enrolled within preceding 28 days  
5. Provider preference for any reason  
 6.0 Screening and Enrollment  
 
6.1 Screening and Enrollment ( P1) 
Children with pneumonia presenting to the ED at Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt or Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh will be potentially eligible for study. The pneumonia radiology alert tool will be used to identify potentially eligible children in a systematic and efficient manner using natural language processing (NLP) . Those who screen positive according to the radiology NLP algorithm  will 
trigger a Best Practice Alert (BPA)  or similar within the EHR which queries the provider to con firm the 
diagnosis of pneumonia and assesses for study inclusion/exclusion criteria. In instances where a chest radiograph is not captured via the NLP algorithm (e.g. a radiograph obtained at an outside facility), an alternative pathway is available to tri gger the subsequent BPAs leading to enrollment. Due to the nature 
of the research, we will seek a waiver of informed consent as has been done in similar pragmatic studies 
at our institutions.
17-21 Thus, a t this point, el igible children will be considered enrolled. During 
intervention periods, providers caring for enrolled children will be presented with a detailed decision 
support strategy that emphasizes management in accordance with national guideline recommendations. 
During control periods, no additional decision support will be provided.   
 6.2 Screening and Enrollment  (P2) 
Screening and enrollment procedures for P2  will be identical to P1. For children randomized to the 
intervention arm, providers will be presented with prognostic information regarding risk for severe disease outcomes via an EHR -based decision support strategy that emphasizes management in accordance 
Protocol Version #: 2.1  9 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  with national guidelin e recommendations. During control periods, no additional decision support will be 
provided.   
 
7.0 Study Procedures  
 
7.1 EHR -based Antibiotic Decision Support (P1 ) 
For enrolled subjects assigned to the decision support arm, providers will receive antibiotic 
recomm endations in accordance with the 2011 PIDS/IDSA guideline , tailored to site of care and illness 
severity . For instance, in young children with mild illness being discharged from the ED, the support tool 
will offer guidance regarding when a strategy of watchful waiting might be favored over empiric 
amoxicillin (e.g., fully immunized toddler with upper respiratory tract symptoms). Similarly, in those being admitted to a general ward, the tool will advise consideration of oral therapy in children with good 
oral intake, or when to consider adjunctive therapy with a macrolide or anti- staphylococcal antibiotic. 
Importantly, the tool will offer treatment recommendations only and will not proscribe a specific 
treatment plan. If a provider chooses to prescribe therapy not in accordance with the national guideline, the tool will query providers regarding reasons for discrepant prescribing for later analysis.   
 7.2 Outcomes ( P1) 
The primary outcome is the proportion of children exclusively receiving guideline-concordant 1st 
line antibiotic therapy during the 
first 24 hours of care (Table 1) . For 
patients discharged from the ED, this will include antibiotics received in the ED as w ell as antibiotic 
prescriptions provided at discharge. For hospitalized patients, this will include therapy received during the first 24 hours of care beginning with ED triage. A patient following treatment according to table 1 will be considered as concordant, whereas deviations from these treatments will be considered discordant.  
 Secondary outcomes include exclusive use of concordant antibiotic therapy for the entire episode, any use 
of concordant antibiotic therapy during the first 24 hours of care and for the entire episode , and ED 
revisits and hospitalizations within 72 hours and 7 days of the index discharge.  Index visit is defined as 
the enrollment ED visit or hospitalization through discharge.   
 
Exploratory outcomes include time to first antibiotic, lack of antibiotics during the first 24 hours of care 
and for the entire episode, and changes in antibiotics after 72 hours, and death, and for hospitalized 
children, delayed ICU transfer, defined as >24 hours following hospitalization.   7.3 Data Collection/Management ( P1) 
Data collection will be triggered by the pneumonia BPA and will be acquired directly from the EHR and 
stored securely for later analysis. Prior to study initiation, support analysts will conduct detailed requirement explorations to identify necessary data elements and associated data flows, validate accuracy, and evaluate for missing data. Data to be collected includes decision support usage statistics, visit details (e.g., admission and discharge date and time, site of care, ED revisits or hospital readmissions), patient Table 1. Concordant Use Definitions for 1st Line Antibiotics1 
Disposition  <6 Years  of Age  ≥6 Years  of Age  
Home care   No antibiotics or amoxicillin  Amoxicillin  
Inpatient, ward   Ampicillin/amoxicillin  Ampicillin/amoxicillin  
Inpatient, ICU or 
complicated disease2 Ampicillin or ceftriaxone  
+/- anti-staphylococcal  
+/- macrolide Ampicillin or ceftriaxone  
+/- anti-staphylococcal  
+/- macrolide 
ICU, intensive care unit 1Unless specific pathogen identified or known drug 
allergy 2eg, empyema 
Protocol Version #: 2.1  10 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  demographics (e.g., age, sex, race, insurance), medication orders and prescriptions (dose, frequency, 
route, and duration), laboratory testing and results, radiologic studies, and data elements from the decision support applications.  
 
7.4 EHR -based Prognostic Decision Support ( P2) 
For enrolled subjects assigned to the decision support arm, providers will receive prognostic information derived using our previously validated and best performing model.  The decision support application will 
automatically calculate predicted risk for moderate (intensive care) and severe (respiratory failure or 
shock) outcomes using the parameters derived from the prognostic tool’s regression equation. Outcome probabilities will be integrated into the decision support application and displayed within the EHR. The support application will also report any objective criteria necessitating hospitalization (e.g., hypoxia) or potential intensive care (e.g., hypotension, SpO
2<92% despite FiO 2≥ 50%) to further inform site of care 
decisions. The application will also query providers regarding factors influencing site of care decisions to inform analyses describing discrepancies between risk assessments and decision -making (e.g., 
hospitalization of low risk children) and provider variation in risk tolerance. Importantly, the tool will offer prognostic 
information only and will 
not proscribe a specific site of care or management plan. All site of care decisions will 
remain at the discretion of 
the treating provider.  
 7.5 Outcomes  (P2) 
The primary outcome is appropriate site of care disposition  (Table 2) . Surveillance for subsequent ED 
visits and hospitalizations to our institutions as well as escalation to higher levels of care will be captured within the EHR data extracted by the decision support application. To adjudicate the appropriateness of brief h ospitalizations and ICU stays (<24 hours), an investigator in both Nashville and Pittsburgh  will 
review all hospitalizations meeting these criteria, blinded to intervention assignment.  
 Secondary efficacy and safety outcomes  include the  overall site of care disposition (ED discharge, ward, 
ICU), and ED revisits and hospitalizations within 72 hours and 7 days of the index discharge.  Exploratory outcomes include death, and for those hospitalized at the index visit, hospital length of stay. 
 
7.6 Data Collection/Management ( P2) 
See Section 7.3  
8.0 Statistical Considerations  
 
8.1 Power and Sample Size  (P1) 
Based on ED and hospitalization data from our hospitals during the conduct of the EPIC study, we anticipate nearly 2000 total children with pneumonia will be evaluated annually during the conduct of Table 2. Appropriate Site of Care Definitions  
Disposition  Appropriate if:  
Home care  No subsequent hospitalization within 24h  
Inpatient, ward  Hospital length of stay ≥ 24h; or hospital length of stay < 24h but 
objective criteria for admission present (eg, need for supplemental 
oxygen); and no subsequent transfer to ICU within 24h  
Inpatient, ICU  ICU length of stay ≥ 24h; or ICU length of stay < 24h but objective 
criteria for ICU admission present (eg, respiratory failure)  
h, hours; ICU, intensive care unit  
Protocol Version #: 2.1   11 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  these studies. Assuming conservatively that data for 750 children are enrolled in each arm, and 30% 
guideline -concordant antibiotic use in the usual care arm (based on our prior study of antibiotic use in the 
EPIC cohor t)23, we will be able to detect an absolute difference of ≥6.8% in guideline -concordant  
prescribing at an alpha level of 0.05 with 80% power. Effective sample size may be reduced due to the 
cluster randomized nature of the study (a conservative estimate for effective sample size would be around 500 children in each arm).  
 8.2 Analysis  (P1) 
Analy zing data from cluster randomized trials requires accounting for correlations within clusters and 
time periods. As outlined by Turner et al.,
21 we will use a hierarchical and mixed effects logistic 
regression model , a complex analytic a pproach which offers  flexibility regarding model assumptions and 
incorporation of cluster -level and individual- level covariates. We will also use a weighted, cluster -level 
logistic regression to compare guideline- concordant antibiotic prescribing between groups. In this 
analysis, data for each cluster are collapsed into a single summary measure, and the summary measures are then analyzed as if they were raw data, facilitating simple data reporting and interpretation. 
21Important baseline covariates (e.g., ag e, sex, race, site of care, frequency of bacteremia and other 
pneumonia -related complications) will also be assessed and included as model covariates. Similar 
analyses will be conducted for the proposed secondary and exploratory outcomes using hierarchical  and 
mixed effects logistic regression models for binary  outcomes and frailty models  for time to first antibiotic .  
 An important consideration in our analysis is the possibility of contamination effects in the usual care arm 
related to changes in provider behavior due to past exposures and awareness of the intervention. Such 
contamination would be expected to bias towar d the null hypothesis. We posit that such effects will be of 
minor concern since 1) guideline -concordant prescribing at our institutions remains low despite the 
presence of both national and local practice guidelines and order sets for several years; 2) th e ED is a 
busy environment with many providers (e.g., 40+ ED faculty plus mid- level providers and 
fellows/residents at Vanderbilt alone), such that repeated exposure to the intervention by any one provider would be infrequent, particularly early during the  study period and during times of low pneumonia 
prevalence; and 3) resident physicians, the providers responsible for the majority of order entry and thus directly exposed to the intervention, rotate on a monthly schedule and only work in the ED once each year. We have designed our monthly randomization periods around these important considerations. 
Nevertheless, we acknowledge the potential for contamination, and we will formally evaluate for such 
effects in a secondary analysis by modeling the monthly proportions of guideline -concordant prescribing 
in each arm over the duration of the study period. We will then compare prescribing trends in both arms with a historical trend estimated from monthly proportions of guideline -concordant prescribing in the year 
prior to study initiation. By comparing prescribing trends in each arm to this historical trend, we will estimate both the degree of potential contamination as well as the independent impact of the intervention.  
 8.3 Potential Limitations and Alternative Appro aches ( P1) 
We do not anticipate major difficulties designing or implementing our antibiotic decision support application. If challenges arise, our experienced team possesses the necessary expertise, past experience, and institutional resources to address and overcome them. Design challenges will be addressed by our 
usability and decision support experts to troubleshoot and develop effective solutions prior to and 
following implementation. Alternative analytic approaches were considered, including quasi -expe rimental 
Protocol Version #: 2.1  12 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  step wedge designs and randomization at the provider or patient level. The chosen design was selected 
since it is less subject to temporal bias (compared to the step wedge approach) and minimizes problems with contamination in the usual care arm ( compared to provider or patient- level randomization) as 
outlined above. In addition to the analyses outlined above, if we fail to demonstrate meaningful outcome differences between the two arms, we will conduct exploratory analyses to elucidate reasons for  lack of 
intervention effectiveness.  
8.4 Power and Sample Size (P2 ) 
As outlined in P1 , we anticipate nearly 2000 children with pneumonia will be evaluated annually during 
the conduct of these studies. Assuming conservatively that data for 2000 children (1000 in each arm) are 
captured during the two-year study period, and 90% appropriate site of care disposition in the usual care 
arm (based on data from the EPIC cohort)
23, we will be able to detect an absolute difference of ≥3.4% in 
appropriate care disposition at an alpha level of 0.05 with 80% power. 
 8.5 Analysis ( P2) 
Logistic regression models will be performed to compare appropriate site of care disposition between the 
two study arms, controlling for important baseline covariates (e.g., age, season, provider type) to maximize power. Robust standard errors will be calculated to account for hospital clus tering effects. We 
will also perform analyses to assess for interactions between two study arms and predicted risk for severe 
outcomes, age, provider type, and initial site of care, to identify subgroups in whom decision support may 
be most useful. Similar  analyses will be conducted for the proposed secondary and exploratory outcomes 
along with cox regression model for hospital length of stay outcome.  8.6 Potential Limitations and Alternative Approaches (P2 ) 
In contrast to our studies of antibiotic decision support, we chose to randomize at the individual level rather than monthly periods since potential for contamination effects is minimal (i.e. risk estimates are 
unique to each individual’s set of circumstances and linked to a complex algebraic equation). Alt hough 
we hypothesize that supplying providers with objective prognostic information will improve care 
decisions, this information could lead to unintended outcomes, such as increased hospitalizations in low 
risk children. This would be an important finding in itself, as it contrasts with prior studies in adults highlighting the usefulness of adult pneumonia severity tools, and provides valuable data regarding how risk information is interpreted and applied.  
 
9.0 Risks to Participants  
 
All study subjects will receive standard of care. All decisions regarding management, including antibiotic 
use and site of care disposition, will be at the discretion of the treating provider and will not be restricted or altered in any way by the study. This study does not involve an investigational intervention given or 
administered directly to patients (i.e. no treatment assignments will be made). Therefore, this study poses 
no greater than minimal risk to study participants. Vanderbilt is at the forefront of these pragmat ic, 
minimal risk clinical trial designs, and our study team benefits greatly from the experiences and expertise of our colleagues who have completed similar studies under waiver of informed consent. The potential 
benefit of this study would come through mo re effective therapy.  
 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   13 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  The study coordinator, with PI oversight, is responsible for ensuring protocol compliance, data integrity, 
and participant safety. This protocol presents minimal risks to participants and adverse events or other 
problems are not ant icipated. In the unlikely event that such events occur, unanticipated problems 
involving risks to subjects or others will be reported immediately to the PI and responsible IRBs, and in writing within 5 days to the IRB and any appropriate funding and regula tory agencies. The PI will apprise 
fellow investigators and study personnel of all adverse events that occur during the conduct of this research project through regular study meetings. Annual reports will be submitted to the responsible IRBs 
summarizing st udy progress, adverse events, complaints about the research or withdrawals, and any 
protocol violations.  
 
Although the study poses no greater than minimal risk to human subjects, we have  appoint ed an 
independent data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) due  to the inclusion of children and the multi -
center nature of the study. The DSMB is comprised of  three individuals with expertise relevant to the 
study, including biostatistics, and prior experience serving in this capacity. The DSMB will be independent of  the study team and will conduct formal data and safety evaluations at least every six 
months. During these meetings, the DSMB will assess study progress, including subject accrual and 
retention, data quality, and subject safety in a confidential manner. T he DSMB will make 
recommendations regarding whether the study should continue unchanged or  require 
modification/amendment . Based on the findings of the data and safety monitor’s reports, the PI, 
associated IRBs, and any other appropriate funding or regulat ory agencies have the authority to stop or 
suspend the study or require modifications.  
 
10.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
Privacy and confidentiality is  of the highest priority, and all efforts will be made to keep personal 
information and research records private throughout these studies.  Records and documents pertaining to 
the conduct of this study will be kept in HIPPA -compliant, secure, password prot ected databases or in 
locked files accessible only by a limited number of study personnel. All patient data will be coded using a 
unique study ID. No PHI will be shared outside of the key study personnel at each institution and no PHI 
will be shared betwee n institutions. The information from the research study may be published using 
aggregate results; however, no individual subject will be identified.  
 11.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants  
 The PI is responsible for monitoring the data, assuring protocol compliance, and conducting safety 
reviews. Adverse events or other problems are not anticipated. In the unlikely event that such events occur, unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or othe rs will be reported immediately to the PI 
and responsible IRBs, and in writing within 5 days to the IRB and any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies. The PI will apprise fellow investigators and study personnel of all adverse events that occur 
durin g the conduct of this research project through regular study meetings. Annual reports will be 
submitted to the responsible IRBs summarizing study progress, adverse events, complaints about the 
research or withdrawals, and any protocol violations.  
 12.0 Study Wi thdrawal/Discontinuation  
Protocol Version #: 2.1   14 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022   
The investigators may choose to withdraw a subject if it is judged to be in the participant’s best interest, 
or if the subject no longer meets eligibility criteria (see Section 5. 0). Due to the observational nature of 
the study, t here are no formal interim analyses or planned halting criteria.  
 13.0 Follow -Up and Record Retention  
 
The anticipated study duration is 24 months  for P1  and 24 months for P2 . As this study does not include 
direct contact with enrolled subjects, there is no anticipated follow up. Records will be maintained in accordance with IRB, institutional, and sponsor policies. 
  
Protocol Version #: 2.1  15 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  14.0 References  
 
1. Self WH, Grijalva CG, Zhu Y, et al. Rates of emergency department visits due to 
pneumonia in the United States, July 2006-June 2009. Acad Emerg Med. 2013;20(9):957-
960. 
2. Jain S, Williams DJ, Arnold SR, et al. Community -acquired pneumonia requiring 
hospitalization among U.S. children. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(9):835-845. 
3. Lee GE, Lorch SA, Sheffler -Collins S, Kronman MP, Shah SS. National hospitalization 
trends for pediatric pneumonia and associated complications. Pediatrics. 2010;126(2):204-213. 
4. AHRQ. National Estimates on Use of Hospitals by Children from the HCUP Kids' Inpatient Database (KID). 2012; http://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/
. Accessed Jan 12, 2014. 
5. Keren R, Luan X, Localio R, et al. Prioritization of comparative effectiveness research 
topics in hospital pediatrics. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 2012;166(12):1155-1164. 
6. Gerber JS, Kronman MP, Ross RK, et al. Identifying targets for antimicrobial 
stewardship in children's hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2013;34(12):1252-
1258. 
7. Bradley JS, Byington CL, Shah SS, et al. The management of community-acquired 
pneumonia in infants and children older than 3 months of age: clinical practice guidelines by the pediatric infectious diseases society and the infectious diseases society of ame rica. 
Clin Infect Dis. 2011;53(7):e25-76. 
8. Michelow IC, Olsen K, Lozano J, et al. Epidemiology and clinical characteristics of 
community -acquired pneumonia in hospitalized children. Pediatrics. 2004;113(4):701-
707. 
9. Juven T, Mertsola J, Waris M, et al. Etiology of community-acquired pneumonia in 254 
hospitalized children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2000;19(4):293-298. 
10. Heiskanen -Kosma T, Korppi M, Jokinen C, et al. Etiology of childhood pneumonia: 
serologic results of a prospective, population-based study. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998;17(11):986-991. 
11. Brogan TV, Hall M, Williams DJ, et al. Variability in processes of care and outcomes among children hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2012;31(10):1036-1041. 
12. Neuman MI,  Shah SS, Shapiro DJ, Hersh AL. Emergency department management of 
childhood pneumonia in the United States prior to publication of national guidelines. Acad Emerg Med. 2013;20(3):240-246. 
13. Bourgeois FT, Monuteaux MC, Stack AM, Neuman MI. Variation in e mergency 
department admission rates in US children's hospitals. Pediatrics. 2014;134(3):539-545. 
14. Florin TA, French B, Zorc JJ, Alpern ER, Shah SS. Variation in emergency department 
diagnostic testing and disposition outcomes in pneumonia. Pediatrics. 2013;132(2):237-244. 
15. Dean NC, Jones JP, Aronsky D, et al. Hospital admission decision for patients with 
community -acquired pneumonia: variability among physicians in an emergency 
department. Ann Emerg Med. 2012;59(1):35-41. 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   16 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  16. Fine MJ, Hough LJ, Medsge r AR, et al. The hospital admission decision for patients with 
community -acquired pneumonia. Results from the pneumonia Patient Outcomes 
Research Team cohort study. Arch Intern Med. 1997;157(1):36- 44. 
17. Dean NC, Jones BE, Jones JP, et al. Impact of an El ectronic Clinical Decision Support 
Tool for Emergency Department Patients With Pneumonia. Ann Emerg Med. 2015. 
18. Noto MJ, Domenico HJ, Byrne DW, et al. Chlorhexidine bathing and health care -
associated infections: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;313(4):369- 378. 
19. Semler MW, Weavind L, Hooper MH, et al. An Electronic Tool for the Evaluation and 
Treatment of Sepsis in the ICU: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Crit Care Med. 
2015;43(8):1595- 1602.  
20. Hooper MH, Weavind L, Wheeler AP, et al. Randomized trial of automated, electronic monitoring to facilitate early detection of sepsis in the intensive care unit*. Crit Care 
Med. 2012;40(7):2096- 2101. 
21. Semler MW, Janz DR, Lentz RJ, et al. Randomized Trial of Apneic Oxygenation during 
Endotracheal Intubat ion of the Critically Ill. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2016;193(3):273- 280. 
22. Jain S, Self WH, Wunderink RG, et al. Community- Acquired Pneumonia Requiring 
Hospitalization among U.S. Adults. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(5):415- 427. 
23. Williams DJ, Edwards KM, S elf WH, et al. Antibiotic Choice for Children Hospitalized 
With Pneumonia and Adherence to National Guidelines. Pediatrics. 2015;136(1):44- 52. 
24. Pandharipande PP, Shintani AK, Hagerman HE, et al. Derivation and validation of 
Spo2/Fio2 ratio to impute for  Pao2/Fio2 ratio in the respiratory component of the 
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score. Crit Care Med. 2009;37(4):1317- 1321. 
25. Mandell LA, Wunderink RG, Anzueto A, et al. Infectious Diseases Society of 
America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the management of 
community -acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect Dis. 2007;44 Suppl 2:S27- 72. 
26. Charles PG, Wolfe R, Whitby M, et al. SMART -COP: a tool for predicting the need for 
intensive respiratory or vasopressor support in communi ty-acquired pneumonia. Clin 
Infect Dis. 2008;47(3):375- 384. 
27. Espana PP, Capelastegui A, Gorordo I, et al. Development and validation of a clinical 
prediction rule for severe community- acquired pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2006;174(11):1249- 1256 . 
28. Rello J, Rodriguez A, Lisboa T, Gallego M, Lujan M, Wunderink R. PIRO score for 
community -acquired pneumonia: a new prediction rule for assessment of severity in 
intensive care unit patients with community -acquired pneumonia. Crit Care Med. 
2009;37(2):456- 462. 
29. Renaud B, Labarere J, Coma E, et al. Risk stratification of early admission to the 
intensive care unit of patients with no major criteria of severe community -acquired 
pneumonia: development of an international prediction rule. Crit Care. 2009;13(2):R54. 
30. Fine MJ, Auble TE, Yealy DM, et al. A prediction rule to identify low -risk patients with 
community -acquired pneumonia. N Engl J Med. 1997;336(4):243- 250. 
31. Lim WS, van der Eerden MM, Laing R, et al. Defining community acquired pneumonia severity on presentation to hospital: an international derivation and validation study. 
Thorax. 2003;58(5):377- 382. 
32. Phua J, See KC, Chan YH, et al. Validation and clinical implications of the IDSA/ATS minor criteria for severe community -acquired pne umonia. Thorax. 2009;64(7):598- 603. 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   17 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  33. Brown SM, Jones BE, Jephson AR, Dean NC. Validation of the Infectious Disease 
Society of America/American Thoracic Society 2007 guidelines for severe community-
acquired pneumonia. Crit Care Med. 2009;37(12):3010- 3016. 
34. Yandiola PP, Capelastegui A, Quintana J, et al. Prospective comparison of severity scores for predicting clinically relevant outcomes for patients hospitalized with community -
acquired pneumonia. Chest. 2009;135(6):1572- 1579. 
35. Marras TK, Gutierrez C, Chan CK. Applying a prediction rule to identify low -risk 
patients with community -acquired pneumonia. Chest. 2000;118(5):1339- 1343. 
36. Liapikou A, Ferrer M, Polverino E, et al. Severe community- acquired pneumonia: 
validation of the Infectious Diseases S ociety of America/American Thoracic Society 
guidelines to predict an intensive care unit admission. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;48(4):377-385. 
37. Kontou P, Kuti JL, Nicolau DP. Validation of the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America/American Thoracic Society c riteria to predict severe community -acquired 
pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. Am J Emerg Med. 2009;27(8):968- 974. 
38. Espana PP, Capelastegui A, Quintana JM, et al. Validation and comparison of SCAP as a 
predictive score for identifying low -risk patients in community -acquired pneumonia. J 
Infect. 2010;60(2):106- 113. 
39. Ewig S, Ruiz M, Mensa J, et al. Severe community- acquired pneumonia. Assessment of 
severity criteria. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998;158(4):1102- 1108.  
40. Ewig S, de Roux A, Ba uer T, et al. Validation of predictive rules and indices of severity 
for community acquired pneumonia. Thorax. 2004;59(5):421- 427. 
41. Lim WS, Lewis S, Macfarlane JT. Severity prediction rules in community acquired pneumonia: a validation study. Thorax. 2000;55(3):219- 223. 
42. Chalmers JD, Singanayagam A, Hill AT. Predicting the need for mechanical ventilation 
and/or inotropic support for young adults admitted to the hospital with community-
acquired pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis. 2008;47(12):1571- 1574. 
43. Renaud B, Coma E, Labarere J, et al. Routine use of the Pneumonia Severity Index for 
guiding the site -of-treatment decision of patients with pneumonia in the emergency 
department: a multicenter, prospective, observational, controlled cohort study. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2007;44(1):41- 49. 
44. Jo S, Kim K, Jung K, et al. The effects of incorporating a pneumonia severity index into the admission protocol for community- acquired pneumonia. J Emerg Med. 
2012;42(2):133- 138. 
45. Atlas SJ, Benzer TI, Borowsky LH, et al. Safe ly increasing the proportion of patients 
with community -acquired pneumonia treated as outpatients: an interventional trial. Arch 
Intern Med. 1998;158(12):1350- 1356. 
46. Marrie TJ, Lau CY, Wheeler SL, Wong CJ, Vandervoort MK, Feagan BG. A controlled 
trial o f a critical pathway for treatment of community -acquired pneumonia. CAPITAL 
Study Investigators. Community- Acquired Pneumonia Intervention Trial Assessing 
Levofloxacin. JAMA. 2000;283(6):749- 755. 
47. Chalmers JD, Singanayagam A, Akram AR, Choudhury G, Mandal P, Hill AT. Safety 
and efficacy of CURB65 -guided antibiotic therapy in community- acquired pneumonia. J 
Antimicrob Chemother. 2010. 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   18 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  48. Barlow G, Nathwani D, Myers E, et al. Identifying barriers to the rapid administration of 
appropriate antibiotics in c ommunity -acquired pneumonia. J Antimicrob Chemother. 
2008;61(2):442- 451. 
49. Lee RW, Lindstrom ST. A teaching hospital's experience applying the Pneumonia 
Severity Index and antibiotic guidelines in the management of community- acquired 
pneumonia. Respirology. 2007;12(5):754- 758. 
50. Nadarajan P, Wilson L, Mohammed B, Connor M, Lane SJ. Compliance in the 
measurement of CURB -65 in patients with community acquired pneumonia and potential 
implications for early discharge. Ir Med J. 2008;101(5):144- 146. 
51. Kars h BT, Weinger MB, Abbott PA, Wears RL. Health information technology: Fallacies 
and sober realities. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2010;17(6):617- 623. 
52. McGinn TG, McCullagh L, Kannry J, et al. Efficacy of an evidence -based clinical 
decision support in primary care practices: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med. 
2013;173(17):1584- 1591. 
53. Coggins SA, Wynn JL, Hill ML, et al. Use of a computerized C -reactive protein (CRP) 
based sepsis evaluation in very low birth weight (VLBW) infants: a five -year experience. 
PLoS One. 2013;8(11):e78602. 
54. Anders S, Albert R, Miller A, et al. Evaluation of an integrated graphical display to 
promote acute change d etection in ICU patients. Int J Med Inform. 2012;81(12):842- 851. 
55. Anders S, Miller A, Joseph P, et al. Blood product positive patient identification: 
Comparative simulation -based usability test of two commercial products. Transfusion. 
2011;51(11):2311- 2318.  
56. Slagle JM, Gordon JS, Harris C, et al. MyMediHealth – Designing a Next Generation 
System for Child -centered Medication Management. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 
2010;43(5):S27- S31. 
57. Unertl K, Weinger M, Johnson K, Lorenzi N. Describing and modeling workflow and 
information flow in chronic disease care. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2009;16(6):826- 836. 
58. Weinger M, Wiklund M, Gardner -Bonneau D. Handbook of Human Factors in Medical 
Device Design. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor Francis; 2011.  
59. Weinger M, Pantiskas C, Wiklund M, Carstensen P. Incorporating human factors into the 
design of medical devices. JAMA. 1998;280(17):1484. 
60. Syroid ND, Agutter J, Drews FA, et al. Development and e valuation of a graphical 
anesthesia drug display. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(3):565- 575. 
61. Wachter SB, Agutter J, Syroid N, Drews F, Weinger MB, Westenskow D. The 
employment of an iterative design process to develop a pulmonary graphical display. JAMIA. 2003;10:363- 372. 
62. Xie M, Weinger M, Gregg W, Johnson K. Presenting multiple drug alerts in an 
ambulatory electronic prescribing system: a usability study of novel prototypes. Appl Clin 
Inform. 2014;5(2):334- 348. 
63. Knab JH, Wallace MS, Wagner RL, Tsoukato s J, Weinger MB. The use of a computer -
based decision support system facilitates primary care physicians' management of chronic 
pain. Anesth Analg. 2001;93(3):712- 720. 
64. Gesteland PH, Wagner MM, Chapman WW, et al. Rapid deployment of an electronic diseas e surveillance system in the state of Utah for the 2002 Olympic Winter Games. 
Proc AMIA Symp. 2002:285- 289. 
Protocol Version #: 2.1   19 
Protocol Date: October 26, 2022  65. Wagner MM, Espino J, Tsui FC, et al. Syndrome and outbreak detection using chief -
complaint data --experience of the Real -Time Outbreak and Diseas e Surveillance project. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2004;53 Suppl:28- 31. 
66. Gesteland PH, Samore MH, Pavia AT, et al. Informing the front line about common 
respiratory viral epidemics. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2007:274- 278. 
67. Reich NGM, A. M. Improving Effic iency in Cluster -Randomized Study Design and 
Implementation: Taking Advantage of a Crossover. Open Access Journal of Clinical 
Trials. 2013(6):11- 15. 
68. Turner RM, White IR, Croudace T, Group PIPS. Analysis of cluster randomized cross -
over trial data: a co mparison of methods. Stat Med. 2007;26(2):274- 289. 
 