Identifiers:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   Unique Protocol ID: IIR 15 -298  
Brief Title:  Improving Outcomes Among Medical/Surgical Inpatients With Alcohol Use 
Disorders  
 
IIR 15-298 
Improving  Outcomes  among  Medical/Surgical  Inpatients  with Alcohol  Use Disorders  
Christine Timko PhD  and Mark A Ilgen PhD    
VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA ; VA Ann Arbor Health Care System, Ann Arbor, MI  
 
Last update/approval: February 1, 2022  
  
02a. Research Plan: A. Background and Significance  
A.1 AUDs are common in  medical-surgical  inpatients . About 24%-36% of persons admitted to general 
hospitals have AUDs or are being treate d for drinking consequences .6,7 Over 75%  of medical inpatien ts who 
drink risky amounts o f alcohol are alcohol -dependent.8 In FY14, 57,281 Veteran s receiving VHA inpatient 
medical -surgical services (excluding psychiatry and addiction treatment settings) had diagnosed AUDs  in the 
medical record .1 This likely  underrepresents the prevalence  of AUDs among  Veteran  medical -surgical 
inpatients  because these disorder s often go undiagnosed during hospital stays.2  
A.2 AUDs and medical  conditions are interrelated . Three primary pathways explain how AUDs contribute to 
poorer outcomes  in treated medical conditions .3 First, AUDs may be a causal factor in the development of a 
medical condition . Alcohol use is a common cause of liver disease, upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, and 
pancreatitis .9 Among Veteran s, more severe AUDs were associated with increa sed risk of GI10 and traumatic 
injury11 hospitalizations. Secondly, AUDs  may exacerbate health conditions that developed apart from  drinking, 
such as  diabetes.  Large amounts of acute or long -term alcohol ingestion increase insuli n resistance, 
triglyceride levels, blood pressure, and all -cause mortali ty.3 Severe al cohol use wa s independently associated 
with poorer outcomes among patients with acute lung injury.12 In the third pathway, AUDs complicate effective 
management of existing medical conditions . They are associated with poor illness control via poor adherence 
to diet , no-smoking,  and physical activity recommendations and medications .13,14 Findings underscore the 
importance of identifying and tre ating AUDs in medical -surgical  inpatient s to improve  health . 
A.3 AUDs with medical -surgical  conditions increase  costly health services  use.  Unhealthy a lcohol use by 
surgical patients i s common and linked to increased risk of complications.  Among Veteran s having major 
surgery , more severe drinking  up to a year before , and immediately prior to , surgery , was  associa ted with 
increased post -op complications and health care utilization, i.e., return to the operating room, longer post -op 
hospital length of stay, more intensive care unit days, hospital readmission .15,16 Unhealthy a lcohol use was also 
related to complications following total joint arthroplasty among Veteran s.17 In one study, medical inpatients 
were 1.6 times more likely to be readmitted within 30 days of discharge when they had an AUD than when they 
did not.7  Alcohol -related complications are among the top four reasons for readmission.7  
A.4 Hospitalization is an opportunity to address AUDs . Not onl y are AUDs common among medical -surgical 
inpatients, but the majority of medical -surgical inpatients with unhealthy alcohol use continue to drink and have 
negative alcohol -related  outcomes following hospital discharge.18 Hospitalization for medical problems 
represents a teachable moment to prevent the negative consequences of AUDs and an opportunity to conduct  
interventions to initiate addiction treatment when needed.19 Intervening related to alcohol during a medical stay 
has the potential to facilitate treatment for AUDs by increasing recognition of the need to reduce drinking, intent 
to do so, and awareness that engaging in alcohol treatment post -hospitalization is needed to  reduce drinking .18 
Brief Int erventions ( BIs; 1-2 counseling sessions of up to 30 minutes each, reviewing personalized feedback on 
normative comparisons of alcohol use, self -reported consequences of use, and motivation to change alcohol 
use) are effective for patients at risk of developing AUDs.3 However , randomized trials have revealed that BIs 
lack efficacy , and consistent and sustained benefit , to alcohol, medical, and treatment utilization (initiation, 
engagement) outcomes  among hospitalized patients with AUDs.6,20,21  In addition, referrals to behavi oral 
counseling or social services are insufficient to ensure safe discharge and treat AUDs among inpatients.7 
Overall, des pite the potential promise of the  inpatient setting for delivering AUD -focused BIs  or simple 
treatment referrals , studies have not found compelling evidence for these approaches. One likely reason is the 
lack of a link between efforts to help patient s realize that alcohol is problematic for them , with concrete and 
balanced discussions about realistic treatment options that fit with pati ents’ preferences , combined with lack of 
support for AUD -specific goals following discharge . 
A clear opportunity exists to develop and test new approaches to address the pressing need regarding 
AUD treatment in the context of in patient medical -surgical care. In VA, on ly 4% of 10,384 ambulatory care 
patients with AUDIT -C scores of ≥8 ( VHA guidelines recommend AUD treatment for all patients with an AUDIT -
C score of ≥8 ) rece ived addiction treatment in following  year.22 Among older medical inpatients with alcohol 
problems, only 18 % attended a treatment placement evaluation session post -discharge;23 of those attending 
the session, only 50 % initiated treatment.24 Yet, those who attended treatment had better 6 -month drinking 
outcomes than those who did not.25 Informing patients about the full menu of available evidence -based help 
options should increase the proportion of medical -surgical inpatients engaged in such help for their AUDs.  In a 
pilot program at a private hospital, inpatients wit h hazardous or harmful alcohol use  received assessment, 
Motivational Interviewing  (MI), and facilitated referral to addiction treatment by a patient engagement specialist. 
These patients showed a 33% -58% (depending on the study cohort) pre-post decrease in inpatient medical 
admissions, a 13% -38% decrease in emergency visits,  and an increase of 32% -42% in AUD treatment 
initiation; 43% of patients entered AUD treatment after hospital discharge.26 Similarly, implementation of a 
discharge planning  protocol to improve the treatment of alcohol dep endence with inpatients , consisting of MI to 
discuss alcohol use and treatment preferences, screening for naltrexone eligibility, providing prescriptions, and 
arranging follow -ups, found pre to post increases in naltrexone prescribing, and decreases in 30 -day 
readmiss ions and emergency  visits.7 These small studies support an integrated motivational -decision aid-
monitoring approach to bridging the gap in care for medical -AUD inpatients.   
A.5 DO-MoST  may improve outcomes . Having noted the lack of evidence -based strategies  to improve AU D 
treatment utilization (initiation, engagement) and outcomes (less or no drinking; better health) among medical -
surgical  inpatients with AUDs, w e hypothesize that VHA may benefit from a patient -centered approach  in the 
real-world clinical situation of medical -surgical inpatients having inadequate treatment  of their AUDs. This 
approach is “Drinking Options  - Motivate, Shared Decisions,  Telemonitor ” (DO-MoST). We hypothesize (Figure 
1) that DO-MoST , begun during the inpatient episode,  will facilitate the transition to AUD help that is evidence -
based (i.e., behavioral and/or pharmacological  treatment , mutual -help groups ) and improve outcomes .4,27 DO-
MoST  has 3 components: MI to motivate patients to change drinking and initiate  help; 2. Use of a Decision Aid 
for patients to choose the type of evidence -based help they prefer and need ; and 3. Telem onitoring  (TM) to 
support and monitor patients’ initiation of and en gagement in  their preferred modality of  help; or, for patients 
not motivated to change drinking and initiate  help, TM  to continue to engage in MI . MI is a patient -centered 
counseling approach for beh avior  change , used typically when p atients feel  ambivalent , allowing counselors  to 
have goal s for counseling while acknowledging and exploring variation s in ind ividual s’ commitment to , and 
interest in , changing behavior. MI has evidence of efficacy in treating addictions  in other  settings .28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual model of Drinking Options  - Motivate, Shared Decisions, Telemonitor  (DO-MoST ). 
 
Do-MoST introduces  the Decision Aid when MI has  readied  patient s to make decision s about help.  Decision 
aids have been used by providers and patients to make decisions together using the best a vailable evidence; 
they encourage patients  to consider available treatment options and the likely benefits and harms of each.29 
Providers, such as decision coaches  (trained to support patient in volvement in decisions ), help patients 
become well -informed and develop personal preferences for availab le options, and offer professional 
guidance. Deciding about treatment options i s a dynamic process , with information exchange between health 
care staff and patients . Historically, most Decision Aids have been employed in situations without a clear , 
“best” treatment option; instead, the goal is to help patients make decision s that are satisfying to them. In the 
case of medical -surgical inpatients with AUD, evidence is c lear that outcomes would likely be better if the 
individual reduced alcohol consumpt ion with treatment engagement. DO-MoST , capitalizing on patients’ 
motivation to change,  will share this evidence with patients, but discussions will focus on choosing the h elp 
option that is best from the patient’s perspective.  Existing empiricall y-based options for AUD inclu de 
medication treatments (3 types: disulfiram, acamprosate, and naltrexone, approved by the FD A), behavioral 
treatments (4 types: cognitive -behavioral, motivational enhancement, behavioral couples, and twelve -step 
facilitation  therapy , which are equivalent in terms of outc omes), and mutual -help groups. The goal of the 
Decision Aid component is to present AUD patients with the pros an d cons of each option and engage them in 
a discussion of which option might be best for them if they choos e to pursue some form of help.  
A Decision Aid for AUD treatment may be particularly effective because individuals with AUD are often 
unaware of the ra nge of available options in terms of tr eatment modality and outcomes. Even Veterans 
receiving detoxification and other psychiatry services for their substance use disorders are unaware of the 
range of evidence -based treatment options available for AUDs, su ch as pharmacotherapy or outpatient 
treatment.30 Patients often believe that the 28 -day residential treatment model is the main one available and 
recommended.31,32 Further, patients often do not view providers as open to discussion of the goal of cutting 
Telemonitor  
Motivational 
Interviewing  
Drinking Options: 
abstain, reduce, or 
maintain  
“Yes” to help; 
Decision Aid  to 
choose type  
Monitor and 
support help -
initiation and 
engagement  
Outcomes  
Alcohol u se 
Medical  
Health s ervices  
During Hospitalization  
 Post -Discharge  
 Follow -Ups 
“No” to help  
 
Continue MI  
 

down rather than abstaining,33,34 even though abstinence is not considered a desirable go al by large 
proportions (39% -53%) of alcohol -dependent treatment -seekers .35,36 Patient -driven goals other than 
abstinence may help reduce alcohol -related harm and impr ove quality of life.37 For patients with AUDs seen in 
medical -surgical inpatient settings, an intervention to increase engagement in evidence -based AUD help needs 
to, in addition to explicitly targeting motivation to change alcohol use and engage with reso urces for help, 
explicitly dis cuss treatment options in a decision aid approach and be monitored.  
 TM is needed to continue change  processes begun during the in -person se ssion with the Decision 
Coach. AUD is a chronic condition, often developed and exi sting over a long period , such that brief 
conversations during a hospitalization are unlikely to have sustained impact without follow -up reinforcement. 
Some inpatients with unhealthy alcohol use may be especially receptive to intervention when recovering f rom a 
medical illness. VA and non -VA medical -surgical inpatients are often accepting of discussing alcohol use 
during the stay.26,38 -40  However, o ther m edical -surgical inpatients may see  their hospitalization as unrelated to 
their history of alcohol use, view their unhealthy alcohol use as secondary to their current health concerns , or 
be distracted by these concerns , fatigued,  or in pain. E ven when inpatients welcome discussion of their alcohol 
use during hospitalization, perceived ben efits of changing drinking by initiating  help may fade. Insights from an 
inpatient intervention may not be learned or retained well enough to yield behavior change and help-initiation  
post-discharge. Inpatient intervention s are often seen as necessitating  continued discussions  of alcohol use 
and help -initiation  at later points, after the hospitalization has been resolve d and patients are able to be more 
receptive. Such  considerations have led to recommendation s that multi -contact interventions  be provided via 
phone.41 Post-discharge TM remind s patients of the during -hospitalization discussion about alcohol use, 
encourage s and reinforce s commitment to change  drinking , explore s barriers patients  may have encountered 
in changing drinking and initiating help, and reinforce s putting  help-initiation  into action. This may be especially 
needed  because  there is often a delay from referral and/or intake , to entry , in many VA AUD treatment 
programs. In the planned study, for patients who do not  want to change drinking or initiate  help, TM serves the 
purpose of  providing ongoing contact with a counselor during the post -hospitalization period. The MI -consistent 
stance of the Coach  delivering TM will ensure that patie nts feel supported and know  they can reach out to VA if 
and when they want further assistance reducing their drinking . Procedures will be conducted while avoiding 
any direct confrontation that would build resistance or diminish participant s’ engagement in this type of care.  
 Randomized trials have compared intervening with medical patients with unhealthy alcohol use using a  
one-time in -person  session to address drinking, to  the session plus subsequent “booster” sessions. Patients in 
booster conditions had significantly better alcohol outcomes than patients without boosters, e.g., reductions in 
alcohol -related negative consequences such as injuries. However, these studies were conducted mainly  with 
hazardous or harmful drinkers.42 Another study  of medical inpatients identified as unhealthy alcohol users 
(including alcohol dependence) in Taiwan comparing UC to intervention (in-person session during  
hospitalization, plus up to 2  booster sessions) , found that intervention patients had better 1 -year alcohol 
outcomes  (reduced consumption, drinking days, heavy drinking episodes ), and that, w ithin the intervention 
group, the more sessions attended , the mo re likely patients were to seek treatment and improve on alcohol 
outcomes .43 Benefits of alcohol intervention s during hospitalization are more likely to persist if intervention s 
extend  post-discharge . A systematic review of interventions for heavy drinking inpatients found that multi -
session, but not sin gle-session, BIs  were associated with reduced drinking up to one year later.44 In addition, 
telephone -monitored addiction patients were more likely to report abstinence on days they made calls than o n 
those they did not , and less likely to increase on drinking days per week than controls .45,46 Post-discharge 
monitoring sessions for 3 months are well -attended by patients and associated with better substance use 
outcomes  partly via patients’ greater self -efficacy for avoiding substance use in the monitoring condition  that 
offers cumulative support and encouragement.47 The n umber of monitoring sessions  for the present study  is 
designed to enhance the intervention’s effect while keeping the intervention brief  enough to be practical.  
A.6 Significance . The numbers of VHA patients with AUDs diagnosed in the medical record  are high and 
increasi ng (from 267,982  to 331,635  in a 3 -year span ).48 The population of VHA patients treated for substance 
use and other mental health diagnoses increased by  38% in a 4 -year span .49 Among Veteran s who received 
VHA services for at least one of five substance use and other mental health diagnoses (N=836,699 ), the 
majority of their healt h services use an d costs was not  attributable to  services associated with these 
diagnoses , but rather to their non -substance use and non -mental health  conditions , e.g., diabetes , 
cardiovascular conditions .49 Of the study population, 50% had at least one serious physical health co-morbidity  
(21% had ≥2), and 20% were hospitalized during the study period  of one year .49 Thus, t he co-occurrence of 
AUDs and medical -surgical conditions is associated with poor patient outcomes and substantia l costs to VHA , 
underscoring  the need for coordinated, p atient -centered care across providers and conditions. A medical -
surgical inpatient episode presents a unique opportunity to address co -occurring AUDs , but prior research has 
not found support for existing approaches (BIs). Drawing on the large, interrelated MI , Decision Aid, and T M 
literatures, t he proposed stu dy will test a 3-pronged strategy  among  medical -surgical inpatients with AUDs on 
alcohol, medi cal, and treatment utilization  outcomes over one year.  
 This proposal advances the VHA  Blueprint for Excellence ’s Theme o f healthcare innovation for 
Veteran s and the country by using Strategy Six : “Advance health care that is personalized, proactive, and 
patient -driven, and engages and inspires Veteran s to their highest possible level of health and well -being. ” This 
theme suggests the need for greater coordination of VHA services, while embracing the balance between 
patient self -determination and a system that seeks to provide care in  the manner that the Veteran  desires, 
based on his or her health conditions, motivation, values, and goals. Strategy Six objectives include VHA 
partnering with each Veteran  to create a personalized, proactive plan to  optimize health and well -being  while 
providing state -of-the-art disease or disorder management. We propose an innovativ e approach to meeting 
this objective. Specifically, MI respects and works with patients’ ambivalence about changing drinking, the 
Decision Aid informs patients about the evidence behind different help sources so that they can choose the 
help source they p refer based on their needs , and TM continues to work with ambivalence as needed and 
provide support for patients’ choices. This proposal also addresses HSR&D priorities in the cross -cutting area 
of mental and behavioral health, in that it requires  cross -service collaboration among medicine, surger y, and 
mental health -addiction services to enhance the continuum of care.  
In this regard, evidence is growing that AUDs negatively impact readmission, length of stay, and 
postoperative outcomes  among medical -surgical in patients .49,50 The Joint Commission’s recommendation of 
screening for unhealthy alcohol use in all hospitalized patients is grounded in the recognition that AUDs are a 
major determinant of hospitalized patients’ health. Better outcomes and cost savings are associated with 
intervening with AUDs among medical -surgical inpatients. AUD treatments reduce long -term comorbidities 
such as liver failure and lung cancer .51 More generally, treatment of AUDs is associated with a decrease in 
total health care utilization and thus produces marked economic benefits for the treatment options of 
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy.52 These findings highlight the need for studies focused on identifying 
and facilitating AUD treatment entry among medical -surgical  inpatients, thereby improving continuity of care 
and successful transitions to needed health care components.53,54   
As recently presented by Dr. Bradley (Consultant) and Dr. Kivlahan (operations partner in V A Mental 
Health Services , now WOC, due to VA retirement in 2016  [Dr. Drexler, in Dr. Kivlahan’s former VA position, 
also supports this project - see letter ]),4 patient -centered care incorporating informed decisions about drinking 
options and help initiation  is essential for the delivery of effective AUD  help. Making informed  decisions 
involves a dialog  between patients and decision coaches to assist  patients to better understand their condition s 
and the need to make help  decisions; provide information about benefits and adverse effects of help options; 
and support patients while they clarify their values and preferences and make and implement decisions . 
Implement ing informed  decisions for AUD in  medical settings  involves  assess ing AUD severity, medical and 
mental health comorbidities, previous help for drinking, reasons patients want to cha nge or not change 
drinking, and  help they want to do so. Using MI, d iscuss ions should cover  ambivalence about change, goals 
(abstain, decrease drinking, stay the same), and help preferences ( medications, behavioral treatments, 12-step 
groups, combinations)  and settings (e.g., residential ; individua l or group outpatient ). However, current 
approac hes to managing AUDs stand in stark contrast to these con cepts .4 Although patient -centered care with 
informed decisions is not a new conc ept, it is not currently the routine approach to management of AUD in 
medical -surgical  settings . Rather, at best, referral to specialty addiction care may be offered  (or even made 
without the patient’s knowledge) , with no or little discussion of the patient’s preferences related to care . Lack of 
discussion of patient  preferences regarding type of he lp holds even when inpatient providers follow the Joint 
Commission’s Inpatient ORYX Program, which asks simply if the patient agrees to further treatment (yes or 
no). Rates of treatment initiation following usual referrals are very low, highlighting the need for more patient -
centered decision making.4 A new meta -analysis and commentary by the PIs and colleagues found no 
evide nce that BIs  in medical settings hav e any efﬁcacy for increasing  receipt of  alcohol -related services.55,56 
The proposed project is highly innovative because it is the first to develop a nd test a strategy  that is 
designed to increase Veterans’ AUD help utilizatio n that (1) is intensive enough to produce change yet feasible 
to use in busy clinical settings with already too much demand for too few staff; and (2) draw s on approaches 
that are evidence -based but have never been used together  in an integrated approach . The strategy  should 
improve  patients’ understanding of the array of available evidence -support ed AUD help options  rather than  
presenting treatment as  one undifferentiated choice . To facilitate discussions, the proposed project integrat es 
MI to increase the likelihood that participants will be open to pursuing at least one type of AUD help. The 
decision making literatur e highlights the helpful ness of conveying , with a decision a id, that there is more than 
one reasonable option for a treatment decision  when no o ne option has a clear advantage, and that different 
people choose different option s for different reasons . Finally, and also innovative, the proposed study will 
involve follow -up calls to help solidify motivation, and continue c onversation s about the decision of if, how, and 
where to seek AUD care. Although quite novel, this approach  is consistent with the MI approach to AUD 
treatment presented  by Bradley and Kivlahan  (and Elwyn et al.27), which outlines a strate gy for engaging AUD 
patients in decisions  to improve treatment initiation and engagement and AUD outcomes.4 It concurs with the 
VA/DoD guide on engaging patients in shared decision making , using MI and d ecision t ools as key elements.57   
In summary, there is a pressing need to ad dress AUDs during medical -surgical hospital stays , but prior 
work has not found support for e xisting strategies during this critical time period. We propose to help medical -
surgical inpatients with AUDs understand the benefits of reducing or abstaining from drinking, and of different 
types of AUD help , and to initiate and engage with  the type of care  decided upon . The 2010 Affordable Care 
Act include d provisions to foster ado ption of decision aids and governmental support for their expansion.58 As 
required by the VHA Blueprint for Excellence t hat every research proposal clear ly state s how it will benefit 
Veteran s and society, we ant icipate that DO-MoST  will increase AUD -positive medical -surgical inpatients’ 
utilization of evidence -based AUD  help, improve AUD and medical outcomes, decrease use of acute 
care services, and thereby decrease societal  harm s and costs due to  untreated AUDs . 
A.7 Preliminary Studies . The research team has a lon gstanding history of high-impact research on VHA 
addictions trea tment and mutual -help use and on Veterans’ help-related  decision -making . Most relevant to the 
current proposal, the PIs complet ed a randomized trial (HSR&D IAC 09 -055) of a MI intervention (in-person 
session, followed by weekly phone calls for 3 months) versus UC with psychiatry inpatients diagnosed with 
dual mental health  and substance u se disorders, to increase post-discharge use of specialty addiction 
treatment to improve outcomes. Of patients in the MI condition, 93% participa ted in the TM component of the 
intervention . Preliminary findings are that , at 1-year follo w-up, compared to patients in UC (controlling for 
baseline  drinking ), patients in the MI condition reported significantly fewer drinking days in the past 90  days , 
and a lower percentage of days on which they drank . In addition, the number of consecutive days of 
abstinence was higher , and the number of consecutive drinking days was lower, for the MI group. These 
results suggest that telephone -based MI  is a feasible , practical method of achieving clinically -meaningful 
improvements in alcohol -related outcomes among VHA dually diagnosed p sychiatry inpatients. The 1-year 
follow-up rate exceed ed 80%, consistent with our other projects  (e.g., HSR&D IAC 09 -047, Dr. Ilgen, PI ). 
In an other  IIR project ( HSR&D CRE 12 -010), the PIs conduct ed a Hybrid Type 1 study to facil itate the 
use of addiction  treatment and improve outcomes among detoxifi cation psychiatry inpatients . Detox  provides 
medically -supervised withdrawal from a substance of dependence so that the severity of withdrawal symptoms 
and serious medical complications, which may be f atal, are reduced. The project compare d MI techniques 
used during TM to UC. The proposed project differs from our previous projects becaus e inpatients in medical -
surgical  settings (compared to dually diagnosed and detox psychiatry  inpatients ) require more extensive efforts 
to facilitate drinking behavior change, and their use of post -discharge addiction treatment services. Medical -
surgical inp atients may not be aware that they have AUD, in contrast to dually diagnosed and detox i npatients  
who are hospitalized because of their substance use and mental health disorders. This project also differs  from 
our previous projects because it reflects more recent scientific advancements recognizing the benefits of not 
only MI, but patient -determined decisions about drinking and help options, and of extended support and 
monitoring of decisions over time, in terms of improved outcomes.  
B. Research Design and Methods  
B.1 Overview . A goal of this study is to make available a validated decision aid to enable providers to assist 
medical -surgical inpatients with AUD to make decisions about AUD help (Aim 1). Another goal is t o determine 
whether adding DO-MoST  (which incorporates MI, use of this decision aid, and TM ) to usual inpatient  medical -
surgical care for Veteran  inpatients with AUD , increases participation in A UD help (Aim 2, Hypothesis 1), 
improves alcohol  use and medical  outcomes (Aim 2, Hypothesis 2 ), and reduces subsequent acute  care 
utilization (Aim 2, Hypothesis 3). Patients will be followed at 3 months (end o f intervention for those in DO -
MoST), and 6 and 12 months  post-discharge . The project will also conduct a qualitative process evaluation to 
inform the future implementatio n of DO-MoST  beyond the two sites in this project (Aim 3 ).  
B.2 Aim 1: Adapt an AUD Decision A id. We will adapt a Decision A id currently being used  with AUD patients in 
primary care settings  so that it is applicable for Veteran s with AUDs in medical -surgical inpatient settings.  The 
existing Decision A id meets International Patient Decision Aid Standards ,59 i.e., provides in formation about 
options and probable effects of taking each option (including course of disorder if no actio n is taken); presents 
the lates t scientific evidence and options in a balanced way ; uses plain language; support s the patient to clarify 
and express values related to the decision; uses patients’ personal histories to communicate options and 
model val ues clarification; provides guidance in patients’ deliberations and communicatio n of concerns or 
decisions; enables disclosure of conflicts of interest.  Decision a ids are tools to help health care consumers 
understand and clarify their choices and preferences in regard to a discrete decision . They list possible 
interventions, outcomes that might occur, and the likelihood of these outcomes.27,29 Decision a ids are offered in 
a variety of forms ; this one is on paper . Decision a ids improve patients’ knowledge of treatment options , 
realistic expectations of treatment outcomes, comfort with choices, and agreement between values and 
choices, and decrease patients’ decisional uncertainty .60,61 
Using recommended methods (e.g., updated systematic review of the most recent literature on the 
efficacy and risks of evidence -based addiction treatments) and sample sizes ,62-64 with the prototype, at each 
site we will conduct alpha testing (face-to-face semi -structured interviews) with 5 medical -surgical in patients  
with AUDs , and  4 providers  (physicians, nurses, and social workers ), in the same units in which the RCT will 
be conducted.  We will also observe (5 per site) inpatient nurses and social workers as they administer alcohol 
screening and brief intervention (ORYX procedures required by the Joint Commission). Provider recruitment  
will follow procedures used successfully in our other  projects interviewing  treatment providers (e.g., QUERI 
RRP 12 -525, which recruited 100% [N= 30] of th e target sample size ). (Recruitment of non -providers  is in 
Section B.3.4 .) At each  site, the PIs will contact by email  each inpatient unit staff member to be interviewed  to 
briefly explain the purpose of the project and invite the individual to participate. Emails will be followed  with a 
phone call to answer any questions the staff member may have and sch edule a n interview  time.  If emails fail at 
contact , we will make phone calls  or visit the inpatient unit in person . Staff members will provide informed 
consent  prior to interview . Providers (prohibited by VA rules from receiving remuneration) will be interviewed in 
person while on or off duty, as they prefer .  
Alpha test ing will determine the ease and d ifficulty of understanding the Decision A id (whether it needs 
to be even less complex ) and the extent to which it is complete and applicable  to the specific target population. 
Using  cognitive  “think -aloud s,” interviewee s will be asked for  their thoughts about the Decision A id while 
reviewing the cont ents, e.g., parts that are hard to understand, extent to which patients would be sufficiently 
informed and supported, places needing more information. Think -alouds will include reactions about reading 
levels, use of technical terms and acronyms , and layout . Based on feedback during alpha testing, the study 
team will adapt the Decision Aid. The D ecision Aid will then be piloted with 5 patients (not in the alpha test) and 
4 providers  (in and not in the alpha test) at each site for finalizing  it before use in the RCT . 
B.3 Aim 2 : RCT of Drinking Options: Motivate, Shared Decisions, Telemonitor ( DO-MoST) vs Usual Care  (UC)  
B.3.1 Power analysis . Based on previous research  using MI or SDM approaches with inpatients to improve 
addiction treatment rates and outcomes , we expect to observe at least a medium effect size (.50) between the 
UC and DO-MoST groups in AUD help initiation and duration and alcohol use outcomes , e.g., percent of heavy 
drinking days , an FDA -recommended outcome , on which differences should be clinically meaningful .65-67 (For 
example, among treated AUD patients, the mean percent of heavy drinking days in the past 90 days 
decreased from 66% at baseline to 17%  at 4-month follow -up.68) We expect a smaller effect size in endpoi nt 
rehospitalizat ion rates .26 We are planning  to recruit a total sa mple of 156 patients ( 78 in each condition) , which 
account s for expected attrition . The sample will be stratified by site such that 78 patients will be recruited from 
VA Palo Alto, and 78 from VA Ann Arbor ; at each site, 39 patients will enter each of the 2 conditions (UC or  
DO-MoST). These two sites were selected for this project  because t hey have a high volume of medical -
surgical  inpatients  with AUD  (B.3.3 ) and differ geographically , and the two HSR&D COINs  and PIs  have a 
strong record of productive collaboration . In our recent joint project, rates of  recruitment and follow -up were 
similar between  sites. 
B.3.2. Study population . Demographic characteristics of Veteran s at the two site s are quite similar to those of  
Veteran  medical -surgical in patients nationwide.15,16,71 We expect that about 94% of participants will be male , 
and their mean age will be 60 years old  (24% <50, 27% 50 -64, 41% 65 -79, 7% >79 years old) . At Palo Alto, 
about 76% will be White, 9% Black,  and 16% Hispanic ; at Ann Arbor, about 86% will be white, 11% Black, and 
2% Hispanic. Nationally, Veteran s are mainly W hite (82%), with 12%  Black, and 7% Hispanic.   
B.3.3. Eligibility criteria  for patients’ study participation are (1) in a current  episode of inpatient  medical -surgical 
care, (2) meet  DSM 5 criteria for an AUD  (moderate or severe) , (3) no specialty addiction treatment or weekly 
mutual -help group attendance within 60 days prior to the inpatient episode ,22,72 (4) no restricted access due to 
infection control requirements (e.g., TB, MRSA, C. diff), (5) no significant cognitive impairment , (6) ongoing 
access to a cell or landline telephone, (7) at least one contact who will continue to know the patient’s contact 
information , and (8) not having participated in an interview for Aim 1 . In FY14, 469  unique p atients at VA Palo 
Alto, and 453  unique patients at VA Ann Arbor, had an inpa tient medical -surgical stay, an AUD diagnosis , and 
no specialty addiction trea tment within the 60 day period  preceding the stay .1 In our HSR&D project s on 
Veteran s in inpatient psychiatry , 14% of p otential participants were ineligible due to infection control 
restrictions, cognitive impairment , lack  of ongoing phone access , and/or lack of at least one contact. Excluding 
up to 15 % of inpatients  with AUD  due to ineligibility leaves 399 and 385 eligible patient s per year at VA Palo 
Alto and VA  Ann Arbor , respectively.  Of patients who meet eligibility  criteria, we expect (based on  our current 
project , achieving a 78% consent rate ) that at least 75%  will agree to participate - a minimum of 299 patients 
per year at VA Palo Alto, and 289 patients per  year at VA  Ann Arbor . Therefore, our plan to recruit the sample 
of participants over 1.5 years is  clearly feasible.  Because we are successfully  recruiting  participants at a similar 
rate in our ongoing HSR&D project  on inpatient detox , we are confident that we will achieve rec ruitment goals 
for this study. Although we could enroll patients at a faster rate, we plan to recruit at the proposed pace 
because a faster rate would overload Decision Coaches providing the intervention, and research assistants 
conducting intak e and follow -up assessments.  
B.3.4.  Procedure . During study recruitment, all medical -surgical inp atients in  VA Palo Alto or Ann Arbor will 
receive UC , that is, receive ORYX alcohol procedures in which the admitting nurse  administers the AUDIT -C. 
Men scoring ≥4, and women scoring ≥3 , on the AUDIT -C (i.e., positive screen) , with no restricted access due 
to infection control requirements , will be asked if they are willing to b e contacted about the project. Patients 
who agree  will be approached in person by project staff. To ensure recruitment of female participants, we will 
emphasize that every eligible female patient who has agreed should be approached about the study. Nursing 
staff will provide study personnel with a list o f potential participants each weekday. We are confident that they 
will refer patients to the study because we have successfully used such procedures involving screening and 
referral in other HSR&D studies (both Palo Alto and Ann Arbor), and inpatient medic al-surgical directors at 
Palo Alto and Ann Arbor concur with this planned procedure. If the number of patients referred to the study 
exceeds recruitment goals, we will randomly select as many patients as needed (first, by days for recruitment, 
and then by patients if there are still too many). The research assistant will confirm eligibility based on DSM 5 
criteria ( 2-3 symptoms out of 11 indicating mild AUD; 4-5 indicating moderate AUD; ≥6 indicating severe AUD ), 
determine eligibility on the remaining criteria ( cognitive function, no past -60 days AUD treatment or weekly 
mutual -help, phone access, available contact , non -participation in Aim 1 ), explain the study to potential 
participants, and obtain informed consen t. Cognitive impairment will be assessed with the Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment’s section on Orientation.73 Patients n ot able to correctly answer Orientation (date, location) items 
will be deemed ineligible (too cogniti vely impaired to understand study  procedures and interviews). Consented 
patients will be randomly assigned to UC or DO -MoST using random numbers generated by randomizer.org. 
The mean VHA length of hospi talization for surgery is 9 days, and of medical stays 4 days;74,75 these are 
slightly long er than inpatient psychiat ry and detox  stays, for which we have successfully used similar 
procedures as planned for this study.  
 Number and length of the project ’s in-person and phone  sessions will not be matched  between 
conditions. An important component of DO-MoST is its supporti ve nature , apart from specific content. It wo uld 
be quite difficult to match  time and attention DO-MoST and UC groups receive without also equating support.  
UC. All patients, regardless of condition, will receive usual inpatient care at the Palo Alto or Ann Arbor VA. At 
both sites, implementation of ORYX measures requires that, under usual care , when a patient screens positive 
on the AUDIT -C administered at intake , a provider ( social worker, nurse) provides  BI, i.e., tells the patient that 
problems are associated with alcohol use , and  about rec ommended drinking limits; notes the patient  as ready 
to change drinking or not,  and as agreeing to treatment or not.  If the patient agrees to treatment, specialty 
addiction services are notified.  Both sites have addiction outpatient and  residential specialty care offering 
behavioral therapies (the 4 targeted in this study) , pharmacotherapy  (the 3 targeted in this study) , and 12-step 
meetings, and Patient Aligned Care Teams within primary care . 
DO-MoST. Patients assigned to the DO-MoST condition will receive usual care  plus the DO-MoST 
intervention. They will attend one 50 -minute individual session dur ing their inpatient stay  with a Decision Coach 
(a trained clinical provider , e.g., MSW ). Patients in DO-MoST will also attend  6 biweek ly 15-minute telephone 
sessions from the same Decision Coach. In our current H SR&D project with detox  inpatients, 100%  of patients 
completing  a baselin e interview also participated in  the inpatient session with the TeleCoach . 
At the initial session, the Decisio n Coach and patient will engage in MI  to discuss the patient’s medical 
condition and need to make decisions about drinking goals, and their benefits and adverse effects, i.e., 
abstinence vs. moderation vs. no change . MI components include empathy when giving personalized feedback 
(Engage); conveying the patient’s responsibility for change (Focus); and support of the patient’s self -efficacy to 
make changes (Evoke, Plan). MI includes review ing patients’ values (e.g., good health and relationships) and 
substance use patterns and their consequences. The discrepancy between patients’ substance u se and ability 
to meet values, and the use of a “change plan,” such as engaging in addiction treatment, mutual -help, and 
other health care appointments, are discussed. If the patient’s preference is to reduce or abstain from drinking 
and the patient i s willing to consider obtaining help, the Decision Aid will be employed to present  evidence -
based help options (3 medications; 4 behavioral therapies; mutual -help) and their benefits , adverse effects, 
and settings (primary care, specialty care [residential, out patient] , community , combination ).4,31 The Decision 
Aid will not consider other potential help sources such as enlisting the aid of family, friends, or religious 
counselors, or using online resources , to change drinking, because evidence is lacking for these and measures 
of their quality and amount are not sta ndardized. At the end of this session, patients will complete a brief 
measure of their drinking and help preferences.4 If the patient is ready, a printed list that includes the location 
and contact number for each potential selected source of help  will be used , to make concrete the next step in 
obtaining AUD help . 
Telephone sessions (in Appendix) will be adapted from our current manualized protocol using MI with 
detox  inpatients after an  in-person session; the  in-person session helps overcome the potential barrier of being 
less likely to engage in phone calls with a provider patients have never met .76 Patients in DO-MoST will be 
expected to complete one 15 -minute phone call every 2 week s for 12 weeks  by answer ing calls at 
predetermined times. When patient s fail to answer a call, the Decisi on Coach will make at least 2 more 
attempts to contact the patient for that scheduled contact, and when successful, the initial failure will be 
discussed.  During each telephone s ession, patients will complete the Progress  Assessment Worksheet77 which 
includes  drinking and help preferences , and questions about recent substance use , treatment and mutual -help.  
TM when “no” to help. Patients indicating during the inpatient session that they do not want to change drinking 
or initiate help will receive MI during the biweekly telephone calls. We expect that patients who choose not to 
initiate help wi ll participate in TM  because experience in our own projects agrees with the research literature 
that even medical patients who report they are doing well are more satisfied with their care when providers 
continue to monitor and support them.78 Decision Coaches will be trained  to use  phone calls as part of  DO-
MoST to positively reinforce even small steps toward recovery and to react non -judgmentally t o set -backs. 
Guidelines for phone sessions state that the patient’s status should be considered in  how to proceed. T he 
Decision C oach will expl ain the overall approach ( not trying to change the patient), elicit self -motivational 
statements, and use reflection. Elicited will be the perceived possible benefits of help and likely negative 
consequences of not obtaining help for alcohol use. Decision Coaches will seek to obtain whatever 
commitment to obtaining help that is possible. They will focus on patients’ views of negative aspects of using 
alcohol by eliciting patients’ personal goals, helping the patient assess how drinking hinders  progress toward 
those goals, and giving personalized feedback on the hazards and risks of drinking. To foster commitment to 
change drinking behaviors, Decision Coaches will use the techniques of developing the discrepancy between 
current behaviors and val ues. As sessions progress, Decision Coaches will help patients reassess their 
drinking -related behaviors and the effectiveness of aspects of their plans. Later telephone sessions (guided by 
patients’ progress) will focus on continuing to build patients’ su ccesses at achieving values, supported and 
assisted by the Decision Coach.  Importantly, in our  prior work using TM  following an inpatient psychiatry stay 
for those with dual diagnoses, we were successful in retaining individuals who were abstinent and thos e who 
relapsed.  Some patients who initially do not prefer to initiate help may subsequently choose help initiation  
(Figure 1) , in which case the protocol immediately below will be used.   
TM when “yes” to help . Among patients indicating, during the inpatient session, willing ness  to initiate help, t he 
extension of DO-MoST over time via the biweekly phone calls is necessary because patients coping with a 
medical -surgical hospitalization and with chronic conditions such as AUD need more support in the treatment 
decision making process to move to decision implementation.79 Phone calls will be used to make sure patients 
understand the help options available, and the consequences  in terms o f benef its and risks of each . They will 
ensure that patients have enough time to consider and digest the available options  in the post -discharge 
period , and that patients are clear on the specific next step needed to pursue the selected help option.  Further, 
TM will provide support when help is obtained, and problem -solving  on barriers to help -initiation, or dislike of  
help obtained. For example, Coaches will help patients work through the potential situation that an AUD 
treatment provider suggests a different treatment option than the one the patient has selected.  TM will suppo rt 
patients in moving from help -initiation to help -engagement.  
B.3.5. Decision Coaches’ training and supervision . Having two Decision Coaches, on e at each site , increase s 
confidence in the generalizability of findings and manage s logistical issues (fill ing in for each other on the 
phone when taking  leave). Because Coaches will not have contact with patients in UC , contamination between 
the DO-MoST and UC conditions should not occur.  Nevertheless, avoiding contamination (which would occur 
by giving intervention -related in -person and phone sessions to patients in the UC condition) will be stressed in 
training and ongoing supervision.  A 2-day training in Palo Alto for the Decision Coache s on the DO-MoST 
protocol  will be led mainly by Dr.  Blonigen , assisted by  other study team members ; Dr. Blonigen will also 
provide  ongo ing supervision of the Coaches. T raining will begin with the rationale for the present study, a 
review of the uniqu e needs and challenges of medical -surgical inpatients  with AUD , and a summary of the 
literature on the impact of MI, Decision Aids , and TM. This will be followed by m ore specific training on the DO-
MoST intervention protocol. Exercises for using the Decision  Aid will include observation , discussion , and 
roleplays . The specifics of the phone sessions will be reviewed : structure, how to review status with the 
progress  assessment method, use of MI-adherent behaviors to boost problem recognition and motivation to 
make decisions regarding help participation  (for patients initially choosing to maintain drinking and not initiating 
help) , and help-support and problem -solving (for patients choosing to reduce or abstain from drinking and 
initiate help ). Coaches will role play in-person and phone sessions that will be audiotaped, coded fo r fidelity , 
and reviewed with supervision and feedback.  After t raining, we will ensure the Coaches’ readines s to deliver 
DO-MoST with a start-up pract ice phase during which Coaches will deliver DO-MoST to patients enrolled and 
assigned to the DO-MoST condition, but these patients will be considered training cases and not included in 
analys es. When Dr. Blonigen  agrees that Coaches are consistently fol lowing the DO-MoST protocol, they will 
be certified to begin conducting sessions with non -practice participants.  
B.3.6  Baseline m easures . Research assistants will collect baseline self -report data from pati ents in person 
during their inpatient stay when they are stable. In our projects w ith psychiatry and detox  inpatients, we 
collect ed baseline data from 98 % of consented patients during the inpatient stay, even though stays we re often 
quite brief  (2-3 days ). Areas assessed will include demographics (gender, age, race, ethnicity, education, 
employment, income, marital status, living situation); drinking and help preferences; substance use and 
medical status;  related functioning; and VA and non -VA treatme nt history . The intake  assessment will take 
about 1 hour (as shown by pretesting) . If patients tire, it will be broken down into segments . Information on 
recent VA health services utilization will also be collected via patient records.  Reviews of s tudies with medical 
patients that targeted alcohol and other drug use have not found an assessment reactivity effect.80  
Preferences . We will measure patients’ preferences regarding drinking and help using the same 
measure used in the in -person session with the Decision Coach.  
Substance use  and medical  outcomes . We will use the Timeline Follow -Back (TLFB )81,82 to assess 
substa nce use during the 30 and 90 days preceding baseline. The TLFB is a widely u sed, standardized, 
calendar -based retrospective self -report assessment to  quantify daily substance use. For alcohol, we will 
examine the primary outcomes of abstinence, percent of drinking days, and percent of heavy drinking days , 
i.e., ≥4  standard  drinks per day for women, ≥5  for men . The TLFB also measures the  most consecutive days of 
drinking, and mo st consecutive days abstinent. For the secondary outcome of drug use, we will examine 
percent using days, most consecutive days of using, an d most consecutive days abstinent. T he TLFB yields 
high temporal stability, validity, and agreement between self -reports and biological tests, collateral repor ts, and 
official records ( from hospitalizations, jail stays).  To assess medical status , we will u se the Veteran s SF-12, a 
12-item self -report questionnaire  that has been widely used  and documented as a reliable and valid measure 
of the functional effect s of il lness  in VHA patients.83 SF-12 responses are aggregated into a physical 
component summary (PCS) score , constituting a primary outcome  that reflect s overall physical  health  status . 
Lower summary scores indicate worse health, an d Veteran s’ SF-12 scores are related predictably to 
differences in morbidity, he althcare needs, and healthcare expenditures .84-86 
Help utilization . We will use the TLFB to assess patients’ use of VA and non -VA help for alcohol and 
drug use ( type and amount of pharmacotherap ies, behavioral treatment s, mutual -help groups ), including 
setting ( inpatient, residential , outpatient, primary care, e.g.,  BIs). Primary outcomes for alcohol are any help 
use (yes/ no for initiation) and duration of use (engagement) . The primary outcome for engagement will be 
duration (not completion ) of treatment because  the duration and continuity of care are more closely related to 
outcome s than is treatment completion ;87 and our operations partners stated that in light of adaptive 
treatments, treatment completion is not cut -and-dried among AUD patients , such that duration is more reliable 
and meaningful . In addition, recommendations (e.g., from NIH) are that help be obtained f or at least 1 -2 years 
when beginning recovery from AUD ;88 such sustained help is needed to “retrain brains” affected by chronic 
alcohol use.  We will also use the Addiction Severity Index ( ASI)89 to assess the participant’s VA and non -VA 
history of lifetime treatment use including addict ion, mental health, and medical -surgical  care (outpatient, 
inpatient, residential, emergency ). Data on non -VA health services use will be collected at baseline and follow -
ups to help determine whether the two condition arms are balanced and ensure that any observed changes in 
VHA services use are not due simply to changes in non -VA care.  
Related functioning . We will use selected portions of the ASI to fi ll in inform ation missing from the TLFB 
and Veteran s SF-12. The ASI , used to monitor VHA addiction  patients’ outcomes systemwide and in our 
projects , is a structured, clinical research interview that assesses 4 problem areas  in addition to substance use 
and medical status: psychiatric, family/social, legal, and employment . In each area, a composite score is 
produced from i tems that ar e standardized and summed to provide an internally consistent evaluation  of 
patient status in the past 30 days .89 Scores range from 0 to 1, with higher scores indicating poorer outcomes.  
 Motivation, comm itment, and self -efficacy . Motivation to change substance use will be assessed with 
the Readiness Ruler.90 Used extensively across treatment settings, this method asks patients  about motivation , 
for alcohol and drugs separately, on a scale of 1 (less – not ready to change) to 10 (more – trying to change).  
Patients will also complete the Commitment to Abstinence scale.91 It has five summed items (e.g., I should 
never use any alcohol and drugs again) on  which patients note extent of agreement. The scale has good 
validity, sensitivity to treatment -related change, and internal consistency across treatment settings an d 
substance type.91 Self-efficacy will be assessed with the Brief Situational Confidence Questionnaire.92  Eight 
items ask patients to rate their confidence in resistin g drinking and using drugs in different  situations (e.g., 
physical discomfort ), and then responses are averaged so  that higher scores indicate more self -efficacy.  
Decisional c onflict . Decisional c onflict, experienced by a patient who is uncertain about the best course 
of action, is a key outcome of Decision Aid use  because high levels are associated with distress that interferes 
with effective decision making.27,29 We will use the self-report Decisional Conflict Scale, which is frequently 
used to assess Veterans’ decision certainty and comfort .93,94 The scale’s 16 i tems yield five subscales 
(Informed; Values Clarity; Support; Uncertainty; and Effectiv e Decision) and a total score.  
B.3.7  During -treatment assessments . The start-up period in which Decision Coaches are trained will be 
important to establishing  the fidelity with which DO-MoST is delivered. To assess the  integrity of the DO-MoST 
condition throughout the study, sessions will be evaluated against a protocol checklist (adapted from Drs. 
Bradley and Hawley’s Decision A id studies, and from the PIs’ previous  and ongoing MI -TM studies with 
psychiatry and detox  inpatient s). All phone sessions will be audiotaped (with ap propriate consent). Phone 
sessions will be evaluated by Dr.  Blonigen  (assisted by  the PIs ) under the following schedule: (1) the fi rst 15 
phone calls for each Decision Coach will be assessed for protocol fidelity , and the C oach will be provided 
corrective feedback, and (2) eight calls will be reviewed at random each month to ensure ongoing  fidelity of the 
intervention. No problems with adherence or responding appropriately to feedback were noted previous ly. 
B.3.8  Follow -up assessments . Patients’ follow -up data  will come from administrative data  in the VA Corporate 
Data Warehouse (CDW) , and patient self -report . CDW data will cover behavioral health provided with in 
primary care and addiction specialty care encounter s, i.e., entry into addiction treatment,  and types, timings, 
and durations of trea tments . Self-report data will include  drinking and help preferences; use of alcohol (and 
other drugs ); medical  status ; help participation; other functioning; and potential explanatory mechanisms 
linking help to outcomes, i.e., motivation, commitment, and se lf-efficacy to ch ange alcohol -relate d behaviors ; 
decisional conflict  about  help. 
 Research assistant s, blinded to patients’ condition assignment, will collect self -report data by telephone 
at 3 months, which will be upon completion of the inter vention for the group in the DO-MoST condition, and 
then 6  and 12 months post -baseline . We will use an intent -to-treat design and so will follow patients who do not 
complete the intervention. Six months is a necessary follow -up point because most (60% -80%)  patients treated 
for A UDs who relapse do so within this interval. Twelve month s is a necessary follow -up point because the 6  
months preceding that time point continue to be of high risk for relapse.  Follow -up assessments will be 
conducted by telephone  because patients may not reside in close geographical prox imity to the Palo Alto or 
Ann Arbor  VA. As noted  (A.7), we have succes sfully used telephone interviews to collect follow -up data in 
HSR&D studies with in patients. Follow -up interviews will tak e approximately one hour each. Patients will have 
the option of completing the interview in shorter sessions, with break s, due t o sche duling needs or fatigue.  
 We will measure patients’ drinking and help preferences  using the same measure with the Decision 
Coach  at baseline.  We will use the AUDIT -C, DSM 5 for alcohol diagnoses, TLFB, and SF -12 to measure 
substance use and medical status  at follow -ups, supplemented by portions of the ASI . The TLFB (covering the 
period since  the prior interview at each follow -up) will assess the same primary alcohol outcomes (abstinence, 
percent of drinking days, of heavy drinking days)  and other substance use indices ass essed at baseline. The 
ASI will provide recent (past 30 days) alcohol and drug use composite  scores . The TLFB and ASI are valid and 
reliable when given by telephone.86,92 We will be able to compute d ichotomous scores regarding abstinence 
from alcohol, drugs, and both alcohol and drugs  over the assessed periods . The SF -12 will yield the primary 
outcome reflecting  overall physical health status.  
 The TLFB will also be used to measure self -reported VA and non -VA alcohol -related, mental health, 
and medical help (treatment  types, amounts, and settings)  since the previous  interview . Primary o utcomes will 
be any use of alcohol  help, and duration (weeks) of help. The ASI ’s selected portions  on functioning  will 
produce  psychiatric, family/social, legal, and employment  composite scores , and assess housing status.  We 
will use measures used at baseline to asses s motivation  to change alcohol  use, commitment  to abstinenc e, 
self-efficacy  to resist drinking , and  Decisional Conflict  with regard to drinking help options at foll ow-ups. 
B.3.9 Procedures to Locate and Follow Patients . To ensure high follow -up rates, we will adhere to well -
established procedures for locating and following substance use disorder , psychiatry , and medical  patients in 
longitudinal studies. We have extensive experience in retaining research participants using proactive retention 
strategies, tracking protocols, and interviewer training procedures. Our Centers have conducted  long-term 
studi es with extremely high follow -up rates, e.g., 80% among individuals with AUDs followed for 16 years, 80% 
among depressed patients and  controls followed for 23 years;  92% fo r addiction patients  at 1 year, and 84% 
for dual diagnosis patients  at 2 years . Our retention strategies include (1) research assistant interview ers are 
comfortable with the population  under study and trained to establish rapport, (2) maintain toll -free telephone 
numbers for participants to report contact information changes  (especial ly useful for patients who may lose 
their ongoing access to a telephone during the study ), (3) obtain and verify in -depth locator and tracking 
information at intake, and update records at each interview and between interviews , (4) maintain consistent 
conta ct between  interviews (e.g., thank you cards to enh ance rapport and verify addresses ), (5) keep detailed 
records of every contact and contact attempt, and (6) use the internet for tracking (e.g., Department of 
Corrections websites). We will use these procedures to targe t follow -up rates of at least 70 %. 
B.3.10 Measuring Use of V HA Health Care Services . We will collect data on participants’ use of V HA health 
care, including services from behavioral health providers in primary care, and addiction , mental  health , and 
medical -surgical services.95 These data will be used to address the  hypothesis that patients in DO-MoST, 
compared to patients in UC, will be more likely to enter alcohol treatment and attend treatment for a longer 
duration, and have fewer and delayed (i.e., greater number of days until) acute ca re episodes (Aim 2 , 
Hypotheses 1 and 3). The data source  for V HA health care utilization will be the CDW for V HA-provided 
inpat ient, residential, and outpatient care, pharmacy services , and  primary care behavioral health . We will also 
search the Fee Basis fil es for all records for study  participants.  
To measure the utilization of V HA care, we will obtain all r ecords for study participants for all health 
care enco unters that occur in the one-year period  prior to, and ending one year  after, stud y enrollment (i.e., 
one year  post-index hospital ization ). Variables extracted from records of inpatient  or residential  care will 
include patient ID (SCRSSN), station, treating specialty (bedsection),  date of service, diagnosis and proced ure 
codes, and length of stay. Variables extracted from records of outpatient care will include patient ID, station, 
clinic stop code, date of service, diagnosis and procedure codes , and numbers of visits . Variables ex tracted 
from records of primary care encounters will include patient ID, station, date of service, and procedure codes 
indicating  behavioral health care provision . We will classify V HA care as pertaining to addiction , psychiatry , or 
medical -surgical  cond itions based on stop code  or trea ting specialty code . Fee Basis care will also be 
classified by setting and purpose of visit . 
 To assign hospital stays with multiple bedsections to a single category , we will classify inpatient stays 
to addiction if there is such a  bedsection segment, to psychia try if there is a psychiatry  bedsection seg ment , 
and to medical -surgical otherwise . Outpatien t care will be classified as addiction, psychiatry,  or medical -
surgic al based on clinic stop codes. Emergency Department visits will be identif ied through clinic stop codes. 
Prescription drugs will be classifie d as AUD , medication -assisted treatment for opioid use disorder, psychiatr y, 
or medical -surgical  based on the V HA drug class.  
B.3.11  Analysis Plan: Overview . In the RCT  (Aim 2) , primary hypotheses are that patients in DO-MoST, 
compared to those in UC, will be more likely to (1 ) enter addiction treatment  or mutual -help (initiate) , and 
attend it for a long er duration  (engage) ; (2) have better alcohol use and medic al outcomes; and (3 ) have fewer 
and delayed (greater number of days until ) acute care episodes. To address these hypotheses, preliminary to 
regression modeling, we will check the distribution of the o utcome and predictor variables, detect and adjust for 
missing data ,96 and examine the  baseline equivalence of the DO-MoST and UC groups . We will then  evaluate 
the effect of the DO-MoST intervention on primary ( addiction  help utilization , alcohol and  medical  outcomes , 
acute care utilization ) as well as  secondary  related outcomes, using generalized mixed -effects regression 
models (GLMM) appropriate for the distribution of the outcome variable and error term, and examine 
mechanisms of effects (the reasons DO-MoST is effective , and for whom ). 
Compare DO-MoST and UC condition s. We will use GLMM regression analys es to compare the UC with the 
DO-MoST condition on help utilization (e.g., any, and duration of, alcohol  help; type of  help), alcohol outcomes 
(e.g., abstinence, percent of heavy drinking days ), medical status , and related outcomes, and acute care 
utilization (rehospitalization, emergency department visits) over the 1 -year follow -up period. Advantages of 
GLMM regression are that it permits regression modeling of repeated -measures data; does not require that all 
participants be measured at all time points to be included in analyses; and applies to continuous, dichotomous 
(e.g., any  addiction help , abstinence, hospitalization), and Poisson -distributed outcomes (e.g., number of 
outpatient visits or inpatient day s). 
In the regression model, we will take into account that the repeated measures over the four  time points 
are clustered within each individual by treating tim e as a single repeated factor. As part of model building , we 
will examine error distributions to assess whether random effects meet the assumptions of normality and 
homoscedasticity, an d adjust models as needed. Specifically, we will first specify the appropriate distribution of 
the outcome variable in the regression model (e.g., norm al, binomial, Poisson) and choose the appropriat e link 
and variance functions. The main factor of interest is condition (UC, DO-MoST). For each dependent variable, 
a linear trajectory for each patient will be estimated. The intercept is the estimate of the patient’s score at 
intake. The slope is the estimate of the linear response trajectory , and the error represents how well the linear 
model fits the patient’s data. For each outcome, three among -person parameters will be estimated: (a) the 
average basel ine score for each group (UC, DO-MoST); (b) the average sl opes over time for the UC and DO-
MoST groups; and (c) the interactio n effect of condition by site. We will employ full maximum likelihood 
estimation. In combination with random effects, we will examine further constraints on covariance structure 
(e.g., auto -regressive) and choose that which yields the best fit by standard goodness -of-fit measures (e.g., 
Akaike’s Information Criterion). This method will yield es timates of the effects of the DO-MoST condition on 
addiction help, alcohol , medical,  and related outcomes, and V HA or non -VHA acute care services utilization. 
Specifically, w e will ex amine whether patients in DO-MoST have fewer and delayed acute care episodes 
(rehospitalization, emergency de partment visits) compared to patients in UC. We will use t he GLMM 
regression model in analy sis of number of episodes. Time until episodes will be re gressed on condition (UC, 
DO-MoST), site (Ann Arbor , Palo Alto), and patient demographic characteristic s using Cox regression models.  
Because DO-MoST will be standardized and monitored for fidelity (with correction if there is drift), we 
do not expect variations in o utcomes associated with the Decision Coach. However, to be safe, we will speci fy 
a model where random effects of patients will be n ested within random effects of C oaches. If the fit of the 
model is similar  to one without nesting within C oaches, we will not continue to control for it.97 
B.3.12 Examine mechanisms (reasons DO-MoST is effective) . Alcohol help initiation and engagement will be 
examined as mediators between condition and outcomes.98,99 We will conduct a series of regression models 
(controlling for covariates, e.g., baseline value of the dependent variable) that corres pond to a hypothesi zed 
causal sequence among (1) DO-MoST, (2) alcohol  help utilization , and (3) better alcohol and medical 
outcomes.  First, the du mmy variable representing DO-MoST is the independent variable and the dependent 
variabl e is the outcome (e.g., abstinence, percent of heavy drinking days ). In the second regression , DO-MoST 
is the independent variable and the dependent variable is the potential mediator ( e.g., duration of  alcohol 
outpatient help ). In the third regression the potential mediator is the independent variable and the dependent 
variable is the ou tcome. If the coefficient for DO-MoST or potential mediator is significant in all cases, we will 
proceed. In the final regression, DO-MoST is entered simultaneously with the utilization variable as predictors 
of the outcome. If the coefficient for utilization is significan t and the coefficient for DO-MoST on the outcome is 
reduced, then we will conclud e that a mediating effect of utilization  is suppor ted, and evaluate whether the 
indirect effect of DO-MoST on the  outcome via treatment is significant.100  
We will also determine if increases in treatment  utilization associated with DO-MoST are mediated by 
the mechanisms of reduced decisional conflict and increased motivation, commitment, and self-efficacy.  We 
will conduct a series of regression models that correspond to a hypothesi zed causal sequence among (1) DO-
MoST (vs. UC), (2) the pote ntial mechanisms, and (3) use of alcohol treatment, and control for covariates.  
Analyses will use the same general linear model approach descri bed in the previous paragraph. We will 
conduct regression analyses (covariates controlle d) to examine associatio ns of DO-MoST dose (number of 
phone sessions completed) with patients’ outcomes at follow -ups, using  methods (e.g., instrumental variables) 
to account for possible problems associated with endogeneity.101  We will explore  whether less intensive (e.g., 
3-session) doses of DO-MoST are as effective as the full, 6-session dose.  
Additional analyses will ex plore  patients’ baseline level of AUD  (moderate or severe ) as a moderator of 
condition -outcome association s; the needed interaction term ( condition by diagnosis ) will be added to the 
GLMM regressions. Results will indicate, for example, whether DO-MoST has a stronger association with  
patient s’ improved drinking w hen AUD symptoms are more severe . We will also examine patient age ( e.g., 
<50, 50 -64, >64 years old) , race  (e.g., white, not white), and homelessness as potential moderators; for 
example, DO -MoST may be more effective when veteran patients are homeless.102 Although we will attempt to 
enroll every eligible female patient in to the study, we are still unlikely to have enough women to conduct 
gender -related analyses. This will require examining DO -MoST at additional numbers of sites in subsequent 
studies to yield larger numbers of women  who are medical -surgical inpatients with AUD . 
B.4 Aim 3: Process Evaluation of DO-MoST. We will conduct a process evaluation to document critical factors 
at the system -, provider -, and patient -levels th at affect the likelihood that DO-MoST could be implemented and 
sustained in VA, and the extent to which it needs to be adapted to b e most effective with specific Veteran  
groups, such as patients with co -occurring  mental health disorders ( PTSD), women, and OEF/OIF /OND  
Veteran s. We will use the RE -AIM Planning Tool5 to conduct semi -structured interviews with Key Informants, 
that is, providers of services to medical -surgical  inpatients  with AUDs , and patients with AUDs receiving  
medical -surgical inpatient care . The RE -AIM framework highlights i nformation needed to evaluate an 
intervention’s potential for impleme ntation and widespread impact , including  its Reach  (how to reach the target 
population with DO-MoST: number, percent of target patients, and representativeness of patien ts who agree to 
DO-MoST), Effectiveness  (how to know DO-MoST is effective: change in outcomes), adoption  (organizational 
support: number, percent, and representativeness of target settings and providers who partici pate in 
implementation), Implementation  (fidelity of DO-MoST’s delivery; its time, costs), and Maintenance  
(sustainability). The RE -AIM Planning Tool asks questions of providers and patients within each framework 
domain  regarding key issues that should be considered when planning implement ation, for e xample : 
Reach : How to en sure that all medical -surgical  inpatients with AUD acce pt DO-MoST; confidence  that DO-
MoST will attract all such inpatients despite mental health (PTSD), demographic (gender), and other factors.  
Effectiveness : Strengths of, and benefi ts anticipate d from, DO-MoST; unintended negative consequences . 
Adoption : Greatest barriers to inpatient medical -surgical  units adopting DO-MoST and system s for overcoming 
them; sources of potential staff resistance to DO-MOST ; develop ment of  organizational support .  
Implementation:  Ensure DO-MoST is delivered properly  despite customization  to facilities . 
Maintenance : Incorporate DO-MOST  locally so that it is delivered over the long term , integrated into the regular 
practice of VA  facilities.  Distribute ownership for implementing DO -MoST among inpatient medical -surgical, 
addiction, and other (primary care,  social work, nursing) services.  
Interviews will help explain barriers to setting, provider,  and patient participation in DO-MoST and how to 
address them; provider and patient perceptions about why DO-MoST is successful at  achieving better 
outcomes; barriers to implementation of DO-MoST – site specific, and general -- and how to address them; 
and perceived value of, and how to sustain, DO-MoST in the absence of a funded project. They w ill also help 
plan i f and how DO-MoST should be adjusted to appeal to and help subpopulations  (female , OEF/OIF /OND ). 
The PIs will prepare a draft interview guide and finalize it with feedback from the project team (having 
had QUERI funding for similar evaluations) and pre -testing with 2 medical -surgical  inpatient uni t staff 
(physician , nurse).  Recruitment and interview procedures for providers will be similar  to those for Aim 1. 
Interviews will be conducted by the project’s senior staff and research assistants who will be trained in carrying 
out such inte rviews  (we have successfully conducted trainings  before ). We will interview 12 staff members at 
each of the 2 sites, including  medical -surgical  units’ director s, other physicians, nurse s, social worker s, and 
administrator s. Providers who participated in Aim 1 interviews will not be excluded from Aim 3 interviews 
because the Aims  are related but do not overlap;  the same staff members, such as unit directors, would 
provide crucial input for both Aims; and there will be a sizeab le time gap between interviews.  We will also 
interview addi ction treatment  providers  within specialty and primary care  teams at each site . Further, we will 
conduct interviews with 12  patients at each site; one -half will have received the intervention, and one -half will 
be in UC . Individuals cannot represent entire groups, but we will include Veteran s from different groups based 
on mental health diagnosis, age, gender, and other factors . Interviews will be audiotaped when consent  is 
given,  conducted in person when possible and by phone otherwise , and  last 30 -60 minutes.  
B.4.1 Analysis Plan . Using rapid analysis methodology,103 the PIs will listen to the interview  transcripts  and 
take detailed notes using the structure of the interview guide questions. We will focus on the components of 
the RE -AIM model to optimize the potential for implementatio n and sustainable adoption of DO -MoST across 
VA facilities, by creating  table s reg arding DO-MoST that will then be reviewed by the Co -Investigators. T ables 
will summarize and categorize barriers and facilitators by the patient, provider, and system levels and include 
potential solutions and potential -to-leverage columns that contain evidence -based implementation tools to be 
considered  for more widespread usage of DO-MoST. Such factors will be used to inform interpretation of 
project findings and optimize su bsequent implementation plans.  In conjunction with the tables, we will develop 
a small set of key themes in each RE -AIM component that signify triangulated findings. We will identify factors 
facilitating and  maintaining unit s’ use of DO-MoST to reach medical -surgical  inpatients with AUD and help 
them effectively transition from inpatient care to AUD treatment, while doing so in a way that fits within the 
clinical and administrative i nfrastructure of the facility. We will also focus on further s teps that would bridge the 
medical -surgical  inpatient -addiction treatment gap even more effectively, how these might be accomplished, 
and bar riers to their accomplishment. The proce ss will yield facilitators of DO-MoST implementation and 
modifiable barriers with associated action plans.  Even if, unexpectedly, Aim 2’s (the RCT) hypotheses are not 
supported, the process evaluation will help guide our operations partners’ plans for DO-MoST approache s to 
be used to benefit medical -surgical inpatients with AUD.   
B.5 Project time line  and management plan . The project will take 4  years. The first  8 months will be  used for  
Aim 1, adapting the Decision Aid . Set-up for the RCT will occur in Months 9 -12. Beginnin g Month 13, and 
lasting for 18  months, 156 patients will enter the project; follow -ups will start 3 months after the first baseline 
assessme nt (Month 16) and end in Month 42 . The process evaluation will ta ke place mainly during Months 31 -
42 (draft, pretest, and finalize the interview guide; interv iew staff and patients; analyze and summarize the 
data) . The last 6  months will be used to conduct analyses on the full quantitative and qualitative data sets, 
write reports, and  disseminate findings . 
Task  Month  
0     3     6     9     12     15     18     21     24     27     30     33     36     39     42     45     
48 
Continue partnerships with Mental Health and Medical 
Services  
  
Aim 1. Adapt Decision Aid ($25 per patient interview)   
 
Aim 2 . RCT;  Set up : Train Coaches and Assistants, 
arrange and practice recruitment with medical units   
 
     Recruitment, baseline interviews  ($25 per interview)   
 
     3, 6, 12 month follow -ups ($25 per interview)   
 
     Data checking, entry, set up for analyses   
 
Aim 3. Process E valuation  ($25 per patient interview)   
 
Progress reports, analyses, dissemination   
 
 Dr. Timko (non-clinician expert on RCTs facilitating  treatment transitions ) and Dr. Ilgen (clinician expert 
on subpopulations of AUD patients) will co-lead (e.g., at their own site , train and supervis e research assistants 
by insuring compliance  with project protocols and human subjects and data security regulations; check in 
regularly with the inpatient unit to ens ure that recruitment, assessments, and the intervention are conducted in 
an effective and unobtrusive manner) all aspects of the project  (we have had a standing twice -a-month call for 
about 4 years) , assisted by Dr. Blonigen (primary Decision Coach trainer and supervisor), Dr. Hawley  (primary 
Decision Aid adaptor  and implementer), and Dr. Sox -Harris (primary expert in AUD pharmacotherapy , 
statistics , and implementation science ). These key staff will aid in interpretation and dissemination of findings, 
and be supported by research assistant s (primary recruiter s and data collector s) and Decision Coach es 
(primary intervention delivery) , who  will prepare written monthly reports on their progress that will be shared 
with other project staff. The project team across both sites will meet by phone e very two weeks to ensure we 
are achieving the timeline for stu dy goals, with more frequent in -person meetings among staff at each site, and 
phone and email contacts across sites , as needed.  
B.5 Dissemination plan . To plan and resubmit this proposal, we worked closely with partners in VA Mental 
Health Services (MHS) and Operations (MHO) (Dr. Drexler, Dr. Kivlahan  [now WOC] , Dr. Trafton), and local 
Medical Services (Dr. Goldstein,  Dr. Saint ). We will continue to work with these key decisionmakers  to ensure 
that pol icies and procedures  propose d based on the findings will lead to high -value care fo r Veteran inpatients 
with AUD. Dissemination of study fin dings will take advantage of s enior study team members ’ well-established 
formal and informal connections  to leaders of  VA MHO, MHS , and Medical Service . We have an established 
format and schedule for reporting study progress and findings to  our operations partners  due to our HSR&D 
CREATE projects; we will continue this dissemination method.  This consists of written quarterly reports 
summarizing project progress  (deliverables, dissemination, problems, and partnership activities ), followed by 
phone calls to discus s implications for VACO initiati ves and priorities.   