INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 i TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1 SYNOPSIS  ........................................................................................................1  
2 BACKGROUND AND RATIO NALE  .................................................................3  
3 METHODOLOGY  ..............................................................................................4  
3.1 Study Design .................................................................................................... 4 
3.2 Study Objectives .............................................................................................. 4 
3.3 Endpoints  .......................................................................................................... 5 
3.4 Sample Size  ...................................................................................................... 5 
3.5 Participant Selection  ........................................................................................ 7 
3.5.1  Inclusion Criteria  .................................................................................... 7 
3.5.2  Exclusion Criteria  ................................................................................... 7 
3.5.3  Study Sites  ............................................................................................ 7 
3.6 Study Plan  ......................................................................................................... 7 
3.7 Study Withdrawal  ........................................................................................... 12 
4 EVALUATION  ................................................................................................ 12 
4.1 Data Analysis .................................................................................................. 12 
4.2 Data Monitoring .............................................................................................. 13 
5 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS & OTHER ETHICAL 
CONSIDERATIONS  ............................................................................................ 13 
5.1 Risks of Participation  ..................................................................................... 13 
5.2 Local Review of Protocol and Informed Consent  ........................................ 13 
5.3 Ethical Conduct of the Study  ........................................................................ 13 
5.4 Informed Consent of Study Participants  ...................................................... 13 
5.5 Confidentiality of Study Participa nts ............................................................ 14 
6 OTHER IMPORTANT DOCUMENTS AND POLICIES  ................................. 14 
6.1 Reference Documents.................................................................................... 14 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 ii 6.2 Data Collection and Monitoring  .................................................................... 14 
6.3 Storage and Use of Specimens  ..................................................................... 14 
6.4 Record Retention  ........................................................................................... 14 
6.5 Publications and Presentations  .................................................................... 15 
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 iii APPENDICES  
 
A. Sample Informed Consent Form  
B. Time and Events Schedule  
C. INSIGHT 011  Protocol Team  
D. References on INSIGHT Website  
E. List of Acronyms  
F. Specimen Collection Substudy  
  
 
REFERENCES  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 1 
 1 Synopsis  
Purpose  
SARS- CoV-2 is a coronavirus that emerged in China in late 2019  causing a novel 
Co
 rona- Virus Induced Disease (COVID -19).  COVID -19 is spreading rapidly 
throughout the world.   While a proportion of people with COVID -19 have sufficiently 
severe symptoms to require hospitali zation at the time of initial symptom onset, in 
others  the disease may remain mild, and in some cases  there has been observed a 
worsening of symptoms a few days after initial presentation with relatively mild 
symptoms.  T here is an urgent need for understanding the progression of disease for 
individuals with SARS- CoV-2 infection/ COVID -19 who do not requir e immediate 
hospitalization.    
This is a n international, observational cohort study  of adults  with SARS -CoV-2 
infection/COVID -19 managed as outpatients (not hospitalised) .  This study will also be 
a platform for the enrolment of outpatients  for randomized trials  that will be  conducted 
by the INSIGHT group.    
Those with confirmed SARS -CoV-2 infection  will form an observational cohort study 
and be followed for 28 days.  Procedures and data collection have been streamlined to 
facilitate the enrolment of a large number of adults at INSIGHT sites around the world.      
 
The general aim of this study is to estimate the rate of disease progression for adults  
testing positive f or SARS -CoV-2.  The primary endpoint for this study and the basis for 
sample size is hospitalization or death during the 28 day follow -up period.  In some 
locations s pecial facilities are being built/utilized for quarantine/public health reasons for 
those who are SARS -CoV-2 positive.  Hospitalization is defined as a stay for at least 18 
hours , irrespective of reason,  at a hospital or one of these special facilities after study 
enrolment . 
 Secondary outcomes include participant -reported health status and change in severity 
of dyspnoea.  
 As the understanding of the natural history of COVID -19 improves based on this and 
other studies, inclusion criteria and the data collection plan, including the outcomes assessed in  this protocol , may be modified.   
 Study Obj ectives 
The two primary objectives of this observational study are:  
 Among participants testing positive  for SARS- CoV-2: 
 
1. Estimate the rate of hospitalization or death during the 28 day follow -up period.  
2. Identify risk factors for hospitalization or death.   
 
Other objectives are:  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 2 
  
1. Compare characteristics, including  demographics,  co-morbid conditions or 
immunosuppression, and other risk factors for disease progression,  including 
hospitalization or death,  for the global cohort and by geographic region between 
those who have a positive test for th e SARS -CoV-2 virus versus those who 
have a negative  test.  
 
2. Among those positive  for SARS- CoV-2: 
 
a. Evaluate health status and the percentage re porting  excellent or very 
good health status during follow -up. 
 
b. Deter mine the percentage reporting a return to premorbid health status 
during follow -up. 
 
c. Evaluate change in severity of dyspnoea  using a standardized 
questionnaire during follow -up.  
 
3. In a substudy involving selected sites, establish a repository of baseline upper 
respiratory  and blood samples for future studies .  These s tudies will be aimed 
at molecular characteriz ation of SARS -CoV-2, and the measurement of 
biomarkers  that predict progression of disease.  Among participants co- enroling 
in INSIGHT 004: Genomic s, DNA will be extracted for studies of host genetics 
to investigate the pathophysiology and host -viral interactions of COVID -19. 
 4. Use the  data collected to inform  the design of future randomized intervention 
studies aimed at  reducing the rate of  disease progression and morbidity .   
 Participant Selection  
To be eligible for enrolment participants must be ≥ 18 years of age, not be hospitalized 
(outpatients ), and have a signed informed consent .  Participants with SARS- CoV-2 
infection will be followed for 28  days  from enrolment .  
 
 Study Plan  
Participants who consent for the study and have SARS- CoV-2 infection/ COVID -19, will 
be followed for 28 days in an observational cohort study .   
 Procedures and data collection have been streamlined to facilitate the enrolment of a large number of adults at INSIGHT sites around the world.   
 The general aim of this study is to identify risk factors for disease progression, e.g., hospitalization or death.  This information will be used to plan and rapidly enrol 
randomized trials of treatments for COVID -19.  Protocols which are developed for the 
randomized trials by INSIGHT will be separate from this protocol.  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 3 
 2 Background and Rationale  
In December 2019, the Wuhan Municipal Health Committee identified an outbreak of 
viral pneumonia cases of unknown cause.  A novel coronavirus was rapidly identified by 
sequencing and named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus  2 (SARS- CoV-
2), and the illness caused by infection with SARS -CoV-2 has been named Corona Virus 
Induced Disease 2019 (COVID -19).  By February 2020 sustained community 
transmission outside China was apparent, and as of March 27 there are more than 
500,000 cases reported in over 100 countries , with over 25,000 deaths .  The World 
Health Organization declared the outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International 
Concern on 30 January 2020 and subsequently stated that the outbreak could be 
characterized as a pandemic on March 11, 2020 .1,2
   
Over the course of the past several weeks there have been several reports describing the clinical manifestations of SARS -CoV-2 infection and factors associated with greater 
disease severity, mainly in hospitalized patients .
3-16  While COVID-
 19 may have a 
lower fatality rate than previous coronaviruses like MERS and SARS -CoV-1, it is more 
contagious .5  Current estimates of the fatality rate range from 0.5 to 3.5% overall 
(versus 0.1% for seasonal influenza), and are likely higher in key risk groups including 
the immunocompr omised.  
Reports to date have focussed largely on hospitalized patients and included descriptive 
information on the patients as well as estimates of associations between those characteristics and disease severity.  Older age has been found to be strongly related to greater severity and poorer outcome,
7,12,17
5 as have the presence of conditions such as 
hypertension, diabetes and coronary heart  disease.,7,14  Patients with underlying 
cardiovascular disease who have elevated troponin T levels are at increased risk of death compared to those without elevated troponin T levels.
18
7  Other risk factors 
identified include cigarette smoking,12,19 10 and raised BMI .,16  Gender has not shown a 
consistent relationship with disease severity .4,7  Specific symptoms at presentation that 
have notably been associated with greater likelihood of progression to more severe disease include shortness of breath and elevated body  temperature .
7,9   
 Data on the relationship between the use of routine medications for chronic conditi ons 
and COVID -19 outcomes are limited.  It has been hypothesized that since the tissue 
receptor for SARS- CoV-2 is angiotensin- converting enzyme 2 ( ACE2 ), and higher  levels 
of ACE2 can protect against acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS), that the 
angiotensin receptor blockers and statins  upregulate ACE2 and that these might be 
used to treat COVID -19.
20  On the other hand, it has also been suggested that 
treatment with  ACE2 -stimulating drugs in people with diabetes  and hypertension could 
increase the risk of developing severe and fatal  COVID -19.21
10  One small study has 
found no association between use of an angiotensin- converting enzyme inhibitor or 
angiotensin II receptor blocker  and risk of death in COVID -19.     
 There is currently little data available in people with COVID -19 who are managed as 
outpatients .  It would be useful to identify risk  factors  associated with progression of 
COVID -19 in non-hospitali zed individuals leading them to require hospitalization and/or 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 4 
 treatment for COVID -19.  This will provide critical information for clinical service 
planning, and further inform the development of novel therapeutics.   
 
INSIGHT is currently enr olling hospitalized patients with COVID -19 in the INSIGHT FLU 
003 Plus observational study.  This observational study of outpatients with COVID -19 
will complement FLU 003 Plus and address gaps in our knowledge about risk factors for disease progression that lead to hospitalization or death.  
 Recogni zing the critical importance of maintaining front -line clinical services in 
responding to COVID -19 and protect ing health care workers, this study is designed with 
minimal data collection requirements with careful attention to management of the risks 
of service diversion and onward disease transmission.  To that end, w e consider ed the 
literature reviewed above and developed a streamlined data collection plan for 
collect ion of baseline and follow -up data for  adults who test positive for SARS -CoV-2.  
Throughout this document when referring to testing for SARS -CoV-2, this refers to  a 
test that directly detect s SARS- CoV-2 i.e. a nucleic acid test that detect the presence of 
viral RNA , typically a PCR test, or a viral antigen test , not an antibody test.  
 The data from this cohort study will be regularly summarized and may be modified 
based on interim results or the finding s from other studies.  Plans are underway for 
potential extension of follow -up through 5 yea rs for the purpose of assessing long -term 
complications and durability of antibody response.   These plans will be developed under 
a separate protocol  or an extension to this protocol, with existing participants invited to 
participate.  
3 Methodology  
3.1 Study  Design 
This is a n observational cohort study of outpatients with  COVID -19.  Enrolment will 
begin in June 2020 and is expected to continue for at least 12 months.  Follow -up will 
be 28 days  from enrolment  in those who are positive. Those with a  negative test will 
not be follow ed after enrolment  or disclosure of a negative result .  
3.2 Study Objectives  
The two primary objectives of this observational study are:  
 Among those who are positive for  SARS- CoV-2: 
 
1. Estimate the rate of hospitalization or death during the 2 8 day follow -up period.  
 
2. Identify risk factors for hospitalization or death.   
 
Other objectives are:  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 5 
 1. Compare characteristics, including demographics, co -morbid conditions  or 
immunosuppression, and other risk factors for disease progression,  including 
hospitalization or death,  for the global cohort and by geographic region between 
those who test positive for the SARS -CoV-2 virus versus those who test 
negative.  
 
2. Among those who are positive  for SARS- CoV-2 
 
a. Evaluate health status and the percentage re porting  excellent or very 
good health status during follow -up. 
 
b. Determine the percentage reporting a return to premorbid health status 
during follow -up. 
 
c. Evaluate change in severity of dyspnoea  using a standardized 
questionnaire22
  during follow -up.  
3. In a substudy  involving selected sites, establish a repository of baseline upper 
respiratory  and blood  samples for future studies .  These studies will be aimed 
at molecular characterization of SARS -CoV-2, and the measurement of 
biomarkers that predict progression of di sease.  Among participants co- enroling 
in INSIGHT 004: Genomics, DNA will be extracted for studies of host genetics to investigate the pathophysiology and host -viral interactions of COVID -19. 
 
4. Use the data collected to inform the design of future randomized intervention studies aimed at reducing the rate of disease progression and morbidity . 
3.3 Endpoints  
The primary endpoint is hospitalization or death during the 28 day follow -up period.  
Special facilities are being built for the care of COVID -19 patients requiring medical 
care.  Hospitalization is defined as  a stay for at least 18 hours , irrespective of reason,  
at a hospital or one of these special  facilit ies after study enrolment .  
 Key secondary outcomes include:  
• Participant -reported evaluation of health status  
• Change in severity of dyspnoea.  
3.4 Sample Size  
Sample size is open- ended for this observational study.  We estimate that several 
hundred sites will participate and will enrol approximately  10,000 adults with SARS-
CoV-2 infection.  Sites in diverse geographic locations on several continents will 
participate.  
 For participants with C OVID -19, statistical considerations are summarized below.  
Information on rates of a composite outcome of hospitalization or death for the target 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 6 
 population is scarce, and rates are expected to vary across geographic locations, and 
possibly over time.  Therefore, initial analyses will be descriptive, and sample size 
estimates will be updated based on the observed event rates, prevalence of risk factors, and newly emerging r esearch questions.  
 For power calculations, we conservatively assume that 500 out of 10,000 (5%) participants will experience the composite outcome of hospitalization or death by day 
28.  This is based on the expectation that persons with mild symptoms wil l be 
discouraged from seeking SARS -CoV-2 testing at the height of the pandemic, while 
persons presenting with severe symptoms would not be eligible for this protocol.  
 Table 1 below summarizes the sizes of the associations of risk factors (dichotomized) with hospitalization or death (odds ratios) that can be detected with 80% and 90% 
power, using 2- sided tests with significance level of 0.05, assuming 500 or 100 events. 
For example, with 500 events, an odds ratio of 1.51 can be detected with 80% power for a risk factor with 10% prevalence.  For analyses within subgroups, e.g., by age, 
event numbers may be smaller.  With 100 events, an odds ratio of 2.32 can be 
detected with 80% power  for a risk factor with 10% prevalence .  
 
Prevalence 
of Risk 
Factor  500 even ts 100 events  
80% Power  90% Power  80% Power  90% Power  
5% 1.73 1.85 2.99 3.31 
10% 1.51 1.59 2.32 2.55 
25% 1.34 1.40 1.86 2.02 
50% 1.30 1.35 1.76 1.93 
 Table 1.  Odds ratios that can be detected with 80% and 90% power, assuming 500 or 
100 persons are hospitalized or die.  
 For continuous risk factors, odds ratios are expressed per unit increase in the risk factor.  Table 2 summarizes the odds ratios per 1 standard deviation higher levels of 
the risk factor that can be detected with power of 80% or 90% i f the association with 
outcomes is positive (odds ratio > 1) or negative (odds ratio < 1).  For example, with 
500 events, an odds ratio of 1.17 per 1 standard deviation higher levels of the risk factor can be detected with 9 0% power.  Calculations assume t hat the risk factor has a 
normal distribution.  
 
Association  500 events  100 events  
80% 
Power  90% Power  80% Power  90% Power  
Positive (OR>1)  1.14 1.17 1.33 1.39 
Negative (OR<1)  0.88 0.85 0.75 0.72 
 Table 2 . Odds ratios per 1 SD higher levels of a continuous risk factor that can be 
detected with 80% and 90% power, assuming 500 or 100 events.  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 7 
 3.5 Participant Selection  
This study intends to target enrolment at research sites that can recruit a large number 
of individuals  with SARS- CoV-2.  Thus, e ach participating site will be asked to 
describe the approach they plan to take for enroling individuals.  Site s may be asked 
to change their approach to enrolment if the expected percentage positive for SARS -
CoV-2 is too low.   Enrollm ent at registered sites may be paused if there are too few 
positive individuals being enroled . 
 
The inclusion and exclusion criteria for enrolment are given below.       
3.5.1  Inclusion Criteria  
• > 18 years of age 
• Not hospitalized 
• Signed informed consent.  
3.5.2  Exclusion Criteria  
• Persons with a known positive SARS -CoV-2 test > 28 days ago.  
 Those w ho are  negative for SARS -CoV-2 at enrolment  will not be followed further in  
the observational cohort .  If the test result is indeterminate, re- testing  may be carried 
out according to local standards.   
 Individuals who have previously been tested Individuals with a previous positive test for SARS -CoV-2 within 3 days of enrollment 
may be enrol led without the need for a repeat test at enrollment. If the positive test 
was >  3 days and <  28 days before enrollment the test will need to be repeated at 
enrollment.  
3.5.3  Study Sites  
This study will be conducted in geographic locations where the incidence of COVID -19 
is high.  To avoid enrolling  a large number of individuals testing neg ative to SARS -
CoV-2, participation of sites that are registered to conduct this study may be paused 
depending on the prevalence of positive test results for SARS -CoV-2 in their area.  
 
Since the handling of clinical specimens may be problematic at many test ing locations, 
the collection of study specimens will be limited to a substudy involving selected sites (see Appendix F).  
3.6 Study Plan  
The study plan is depicted in Figure 1.  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 8 
 Figure 1 : Study plan for participants undergoing SARS -CoV-2 testing and consenting  to 
participation in this observational study.  
 
 
 Outpatient adults 18+ years tested for  SARS -CoV-2   
Informed consent  
 
Data collection  at enrolment  
• Demographics  
• Symptoms  and health status ¥ 
• Co-morbidities  
• Targeted medications  
Specimen Collection  (substudy at selected sites)  
• Upper respiratory tract swab s 
• Blood for serum storage  
 
 
Test negative  
• No further follow -up 
 Test positive * 
 
 
Day 14  
• Vital and hospitalization status  
• Symptoms  and health status ¥ 
• Targeted medications  
 
Day 28  
• Vital and hospitalization status  
• Symptom s and health status ¥ 
• Targeted medications  
 Day 7  
• Vital and hospitalization status  
• Symptoms  and health status ¥ 
• Targeted medications  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 9 
 Footnote  
*on the day of enrolment  or test done within 3 day s before enrolment  
¥ includes COVID -19 related out -patient treatments  
 
Outpatient testing for SARS -CoV-2 may be performed in a variety of ways  and for a 
variety of reasons .  To avoid risk to health care workers, in many locations, special 
facilities are b eing identified for rapid identification of those with COVID -19.  We refer to 
these as “testing stations”.  Since the testing stations are likely to be overwhelmed with 
people seeking testing, we anticipate that separate areas will have to be identified to consent participants for this research study and to collect the required data.  We refer to these as “research stations”.  Collaborations between the testing and research stations will be important.    Enrolment  
 For participants who consent to the study, permission to release medical records will be sought and reasons for hospitalization and events during hospitalization will be requested.   Information regarding demographics; medical history, including co-
morbidities; onset date of symptoms; targeted sympto ms, including difficulty breathing ; 
smoking; and targeted medications will be obtained.  Contact information for one or two 
persons who know (s) the participant ’s whereabouts will also be recorded.   
 At the time of enrolment , selected sites participating in a substudy (see Appendix F) will 
be asked to obtain separate consent  for the swabs from the upper respiratory tract and 
a blood sample sufficient for 4mL of serum to be shipped to a central repository for 
future respiratory virus research; and 2) co-enrolment  in the INSIGHT Genomics Study 
(INSIGHT 004)  where a blood sample sufficient for obtaining 6 mL whole blood  will be 
collected  and stored.   These specimens will be sent to a central repository in the United 
States for storage.  
 Proposed research uti lizing store d specimens collected per this protocol will be 
reviewed and approved by the Protocol Team, the INSIGHT Scientific Steering Committee, and NIAID.  
Participants already known SARS -CoV-2 positive within  28 days of enrollment are 
eligible. If the documented positive test was within 3 days of enrolment they do not need 
to be retested at enrolment, and will be followed for 28 days.  For others being tested at 
enrolment , results may not be available on the day of enrolment .  When the test results 
become available, participants will be contacted with the test result. If positive for 
SARS- CoV-2, these participants will be followed for 28 day s.  Disclosure of SARS -CoV-2 Test Result  
   Participants who do not have a positive test result for SARS -CoV-2 at enrolment  will not 
be followed.   Repeat testing can be carried out following local guidelines.    
 
Follow -up of SARS- CoV-2 positive participants  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 10 
 During the follow -up period, the status of each participant will be assessed at 7, 14 and 
28 days  following enrolment .  Status may be checked by telephone or by means other 
than face- to-face visits (e.g., text messages).   
 
Follow -up assessments at 7, 14 and 28 days  will include:  
 
• Vital status  
• Hospitalization  status  
• Specific  symptoms , including difficulty breathing  
• General health status  
• COVID -19 related out -patient treatments  
• Targeted medications   
 
Participant s hospitalized during the 28 day follow -up period may be invited to participate 
in FLU 003 Plus , if the location of their hospitalization i s a FLU 003 Plus site.  
 In summary, there are 4 time points at which data are collected for this observational 
study:  
 1) enrolment (in person) ,  
2) at day 7 (may be by telephone or other means ), 
3) at day 14 (may be by telephone or other means ) and  
4) at day 28 (may be by telephone or other means ). 
 Follow -up will continue through day 28 for all participants regardless of enrolment in 
other studies or hospitalization prior to day 28.  
 Figure 2 illustrates how information from the observational cohort study could be used 
to identify  participants for an INSIGHT  clinical trial or for  FLU 003  Plus. 
   
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 11 
  
Figure 2 : Study plan for participants in this observational study who may co- enrol in 
other protocols. Note: participants in this observational study with SARS -CoV-2 
infection will be followed for 28 days regardless of participation in other protocols.  
   
 
 Outpatients Participating in Observational Study  
 
Eligible for Outpatient Trial?  
 
 no 
Enrol in 
Outpatient Trial   yes 
Hospitalized?  
 
 yes  no 
Eligible for Inpatient Trial?  
 yes   no 
Enrol in 
Inpatient 
Trial  Enrol in 
FLU 003  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 12 
 3.7 Study Withdrawal  
Participants may withdraw from this observational study at any time at their request.  
4 Evaluation  
4.1 Data  Analysis 
Simple descriptive statistics will be used to describe all participants enrol led, as well 
as those w ith and without a positive test for SARS -CoV-2.  Participant characteristics 
at enrolment will be summarized by geographic  region, and by calendar time within 
geographic region.  Participant characteristics will be compared for those with and 
without a positive test for SARS -CoV-2. 
 
Symptoms, including s everity of dyspnoea,  will be summarized , and determinates of a 
positive t est will be identified using logistic regression models.  Factors other than 
symptoms include, for example, age, sex, co- morbidities , and time since onset of 
symptoms . 
 For participants who tested positive for SARS -CoV-2, follow -up data will be collected 
at days 7, 14, and 28.  Disease severity at each time point will be summarized in an 
ordinal outcome that considers death, hospitalization, and general health status.  
 Risk factors for the outcomes  (e.g., hospitalization, worsening of general health status) 
at 7, 14, and 28 days after enrolment will be examined using logistic regression models.  Reasons for hospitalization  will also be considered and analyses for specific 
reasons for hospitalization will be pursued.   Risk factors will include demographic 
factors (e.g., age, sex, geographical region), clinical factors (e.g., co- morbidities, 
smoking status), symptoms and severity of dyspnoea at enrolment, and calendar time 
(to assess the influence of s eason, or a change in disease severity in the study 
population over time).   
  
In addition to describing disease status at fixed time points, Kaplan- Meier estimates 
will be used to describe time to the composite outcome of hospitalization or deat h, 
overall  and within subgroups.  Factors associated with time to hospitalization or death 
will be investigated using Cox proportional hazards models.  
 All statistical models will be stratified by geographic region, unless the event numbers are too low.  We will consider other stratifying models that include stratification by 
geographic region and calendar time if event numbers are sufficient.  
 As new data on COVID -19 become available, from this and other studies, data 
collection and analysis may change to address emerging research questions.   Further 
details on the proposed data analysis will be provided in a Statistical Analysis Plan.   
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 13 
 4.2 Data Monitoring 
This observational study will be conducted under the direction of the INSIGHT 011 
Protocol Team, the INSIGHT Scientific Steering Committee, and INSIGHT leadership.  Members of the protocol team are given in Appendix C.    Interim data summaries will be reviewed at regular intervals , and as previously noted, 
data collection may be modified based on these summaries and findings from other 
studies.  
5 Protection of Human Subjects & Other Ethical 
Considerations  
5.1 Risks of Participation  
There are minimal risks associated with study procedures .  There may be discomfort 
associated with obtaining the upper respiratory tract swabs , but these are routine tests 
for determining if someone has a respiratory virus . Risk of testing may include false 
positive or false negative test results.  
 
For those consenting to collection and storage of specimens, t he risks of having blood 
taken include transient pain, bleeding, bruising, lightheadedness, fainting and , rarely , 
infection or a blood clot where the needle enters the body.  If any adverse events occur that result from the blood draw or the upper respiratory  swabs, sites should follow local 
IRB/IEC procedures for reporting.  
5.2 Local Review of Protocol and Informed Consent  
This study will be conducted by major medical centers participating in INSIGHT.  Prior to the initiation of the study at each clinical researc h site, the protocol, informed consent 
form, and the participant information materials will be submitted to and approved by each site’s overseeing IRB/EC .  Any future amendments to the study protocol , informed 
consent, or participant information materials will be submitted and approved by each site’s overseeing IRB/EC .  After IRB/EC approval, sites must register for the protocol 
before enroling potential participants and must register for any protocol amendments.   
5.3 Ethical Conduct of the Study  
The study wi ll be conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki; the requirements 
of Good Clinical Practice (GCP) as defined in Guidelines, EU Clinical Trials Directive, and EU GCP Directive; Human Subject Protection and Data Protection Acts; the US Office for Hu man Research Protections (OHRP); or with the local law and regul ation, 
whichever affords greatest  protection of human subjects.  
5.4 Informed Consent of Study Participants  
All study participants must sign the IRB/EC approved informed consent form prior to any study -related procedures.  See sample informed consent, Appendix A.  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 14 
 5.5 Confidentiality of Study Participants  
The confidentiality of all study participants will be protected in accordance with GCP 
Guidelines and national regulations.  
6 Other Important Documents a nd Policies  
6.1 Reference Documents  
Study procedures and case report forms are found on the INSIGHT study website.  
6.2 Data Collection and Monitoring  
Study data will be collected on standardized  case report forms.  Data will be collected 
during participant visits to health- care providers, via telephone, text, or other electronic 
communication, and possibly by chart abstraction.  In some instances, i t may be 
necessary to obtain and abstract records from another clinic, hospital or healthcare facility .  Written permi ssion for this is generally required and should be obtained at the 
time of enrolment  when study consent  is obtained.  Study data and case report forms 
will be made available to site monitoring personnel.  
6.3 Storage and Use of Specimens  
Proposed research utilizing stored samples will be reviewed and approved by the Protocol team, the INSIGHT Scientific Steering Committee (SSC), and NIAID. Samples will not be sold to third parties or used directly to produce commercial products.  
 If a participant requests that his/her  specimens collected to date be destroyed, this will 
be honored.  Upon being informed that a participant has withdrawn consent for 
storage of specimens, the study database will be updated to indicate this, the specimen repository will be notified, and every effort will be made to have the 
specimens destroyed.  Any data already generated from the use of specimens will be 
retained.  
6.4 Record Retention  
The investigator is responsible for retaining all essential documents list ed in the ICH 
GCP  Guideline.   Records should be maintained in compliance with IRB/EC , local , and 
national  medical records retention requirements, whichever is longest.  All stored 
records are to be kept confidential to the extent required by national , stat e, and local 
law.  
 Should the investigator wish to assign the study records to another party and/or move them to another location, the investigator must provide written notification of such intent to the sponsor  with the name of the person who will accept  responsibility for the 
transferred records and/or their new location.  The sponsor  must be notified in writing 
and written permission must be received by the site prior to destruction or relocation of research records.  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 15 
 6.5 Publications and Presentations  
Publi cations and presentations related to data obtained from this study will adhere to 
the INSIGHT Publications and Presentations Policy found on the INSIGHT website 
(www.insight -trials.org).  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 A-1 APPENDIX A:  SAMPLE INFORMED CONS ENT FORM  
 
CONSENT FOR PARTICIPATING IN AN NIH- FUNDED RESEARCH STUDY  
SITE INVESTIGATOR: ________________________________ PHONE: 
__________  
 
An International Observational Study of Outpatients with SARS -CoV -2 
Infection  
 Short Title:  INSIGHT 011: International SARS -CoV-2 Infection Observational 
Study
 (ICOS)  
Sponsored by:  The University of Minnesota  
Funded by:  National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, US National 
Institutes of Health  
 
A Multicenter Study of the International Network for Strategic Initiatives in 
Global HIV Trials (INSIGHT)   
 
 This is a research study to find out what might predict whether people who test positive for COVID -19 get sick enough to be admitted to the hospital.  You are being 
asked to participate because you have either very recently tested positive for COVID -
19, or are being tested for the virus that causes COVID -19.  It is your choice whether 
to be in this study or not. If you haven’t yet had your test for COVID -19, y ou will still 
get that test  in the usual way, whether or not you agree to be in this study.  
 This study does not provide any treatment for COVID -19.  You do not have to be in 
this study if you do not want to be.  If you agree to be in the study, you can stop at any time.  Your decision about whether to be in this study or to stop the study will not affect OHRP Requirements to be read by the sites: ( remove this text box from your site -
specific consent)  
 
PLEASE NOTE THAT THIS SAMPLE LANGUAGE DOES NOT  PREEMPT OR REPLACE LOCAL 
IRB/EC REVIEW AND APPROVAL.  INVESTIGATORS ARE REQUIRED TO PROVIDE THE 
LOCAL IRB/EC WITH A COPY OF THIS SAMPLE LANGUAGE ALONG WITH THE LANGUAGE INTENDED FOR LOCAL USE.  LOCAL IRBs/ECs ARE REQUIRED TO WEIGH THE UNIQUE 
RISKS, CONSTR AINTS, AND POPULATION CONSIDERATIONS AS A CONDITION OF ANY 
APPROVAL.  ANY DELETION OR SUBSTANTIVE CHANGE OF INFORMATION CONCERNING 
RISKS OR ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT MUST BE JUSTIFIED BY THE INVESTIGATOR, 
APPROVED BY THE LOCAL IRB/EC, AND NOTED IN THE IRB/EC M INUTES.  JUSTIFICATION 
AND IRB/EC APPROVAL OF SUCH CHANGES MUST BE FORWARDED TO THE INTERNATIONAL COORDINATING CENTER.
  SPONSOR -APPROVED CHANGES IN THE 
PROTOCOL MUST BE APPROVED BY THE LOCAL IRB/EC BEFORE USE UNLESS INTENDED 
FOR THE ELIMINATION OF APPARENT  IMMEDIATE HAZARD.  NEW INFORMATION SHALL 
BE SHARED WITH EXISTING SUBJECTS AT NEXT ENCOUNTER, WITH ALL NEW SUBJECTS 
PRIOR TO INVOLVEMENT, OR AS THE LOCAL IRB/EC MAY OTHERWISE ADDITIONALLY 
REQUIRE.  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 A-2 your usual medical care or any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  There is 
no cost to you for being in this study, and you will not be paid for being in the study.  
 We are doing this study in many countries around the world.  We hope to have 
thousands of people with COVID -19 be in this study.   
[The following text box is required for sites in the US, in accordance with the 2018 Common Rule.]  
 
 What do you have to do in the study?  
If you agree to be in this study, we will ask you about what other medical conditions you have, what symptoms you are having, whether you smoke, a nd what medicines 
you are taking.  We will ask you to give us contact information for one or two people who will know how to reach you if we cannot reach you to follow your medical 
progress .   
 
[The next sentence should only be included for  sites consentin g participants for blood 
collection and storage.  See specimen consent in Appendix F. ] 
We will ask if you are willing to have some blood taken and 1-2 extra swabs of your 
nose and /or throat done; this will be described in a separate consent form. For peopl e 
having a nose or throat swab for COVID -19 at the same time as enrolling into this 
study, you will go home to wait for your test results.  We will call you to let you know 
the results of your test for COVID -19.  If your test is negative, you do not have to do 
anything else for the study.  We will keep the information you have already given us.  
 
If you  already have a COVID -19 positive test when you join the study, or if you test for 
positive for COVID -19 at enrolment in the study , we will follow you for a total of 28 
days .  We will contact you t hree more times by phone, e- mail, text, or some other way 
that you have agreed to at about 7,  14 and 28 days after you joined the study .  At each 
contact, w e will ask about how you are feeling , your prescribed medica tion and 
treatments,  and whether you have been admitted to the hospital or returned to your KEY INFORMATION  
• You can join the study if you have already tested COVID -19 positive 
within the last 3 days or if you are being tested on the day of joining the 
study.  
• If you are positive for COVID -19, we will call you at 7, 14, and 28 days 
after you enroll to see how you are doing.  
• If you are negative, you won’t be followed after the enrolment v isit, but 
you will be told your result.  
• There are no risks or direct benefits to you from being in this study.  You will help us learn more about how COVID -19 affects people like 
you.  You may have the chance to join other studies about COVID -19. 
• This stud y does not include any treatments apart from your usual care.  
You and your doctor will decide how to treat your COVID -19. 
• You do not have to be in this study.  You can stop being in the study at 
any time.  This will not change your medical care or other benefits.  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 A-3 normal activities.  If you are hospitalized, study medical staff will ask you for your 
permission to obtain medical records from the hospital.  If we are not able t o reach 
you, we will try to contact the other people you named to find out how you are doing.  After the third  contact at 28 days, you are finished with this study.  
 If you join this study, we will also seek your permission to contact you again at a later date. If you gave your permission to be contacted again you could be invited to join either an extension to this study or a new study to collect long -term data on how 
people who joined this study are doing. You can still take part in this study even if you 
don’t want to be contacted about a future study . 
 What are the risks and benefits of being in this study?  
There are no risks to you to be in this research study.  You will not get any direct benefit from being in this study, but it may help others in the future if we can get a 
better understanding of how COVID -19 affects different people.  Y ou may have the 
opportunity to participate in other studies about COVID -19. 
 How is your privacy protected? We will take  every reasonable step to keep your information private and to prevent 
misuse of it.  You will not be identified by name, or in any other way, in anything published about this study.  You will be identified only by a code.  We will not release information from your records without your written permission.  
 
[The following paragraph is for sites outside the US only]  
We will do everything we can to keep your personal information private, but we cannot 
guarantee that nobody will get it.  We may have to release your personal information if required by law.  
 
[The following is for all sites]  
These people may see your medical and research information:  
• the [insert the name of the site]  ethics committee (institutional review board, IRB);  
• the research staff and monitors and people they designate as helping with the 
study ; 
• US and other participating countries’ health and regulatory agencies.  
All of these people are committed to protect your privacy.    
As the research staff at [insert the name of the site] , we are required to make sure that 
people not involved wit h this study cannot see your research and medical information 
while collecting personal information about you.  We will keep your information in a safe 
place and will handle your personal information very carefully.    Your study data are sent electronical ly to the University of Minnesota (UMN) in the US 
through a secure application.  By signing this consent, you agree to having your data sent to UMN.  No information that could directly identify you is sent to UMN.  In this 
information, you are identified only by a code number, your year of birth, and a 3- letter 
code that you or the study staff choose.   This is called “pseudonymized data”.  Access 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 A-4 to the data at UMN is limited through security measures, and no data breach or 
unauthorized access has ever occurred in this system.  After the study is over, the data will be stored securely for the period required by law.  
 UMN may share your data with other people who study COVID -19.  UMN will remove 
the code number, year of birth, and 3- letter code from your data before sharing.  This 
is called “anonymizing the data” and makes it impossible for anyone to link the data back to you.  We will not ask you for additional consent for this sharing.  UMN will only share data for research projects that are approved by INSI GHT.  
 This study has a Certificate of Confidentiality from the US Federal government.  This means that UMN cannot share any data it has about you with national, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other authorities unless you s pecifically 
allow us to share it.  
 
[Note for US sites: Because each institution typically has requirements for specific 
HIPAA language in the consent or in a separate document, none is provided in this template.   Follow your institutions’ requi rements for  informing potential parti cipants of 
their rights under HIPAA. ] 
 
[The following section (up to “What if you are hurt as part of this research?”) is for 
countries subject to the GDPR or similar legislation requiring this information.  It 
should only be included in consents for sites subject to such legislation.  It will vary 
from place to place whether it must be in this consent document, a separate consent 
document, or an information sheet that does not require signature.  The amount of 
information provided may be reduced as long as it still meets  requirements of the  
particular country (e.g., not all countries/ECs require an enumeration of all of a data subject’s rights).]  
 What are your rights regarding your data? UMN  is a public research university, and this study is funded primarily by the US 
Federal government.   The State of Minnesota  and the US Federal government require 
UMN  to follow regulations and policies that are meant to protect your privacy.   UMN is 
also required to comply wi th the General Data Protection Regulation ( GDPR) , because 
it processes data obtained from European residents.   
 There is no  specific independent supervisory authority overseeing the processing of 
data in the US.   Any complaint you might have about the use of your data would be 
made to your national data protection authority.  
 The GDPR gives you additional rights which we would like to inform you about below.  
 Right to Information  
You have the right to know what data about you is being processed.  You can also get 
a free copy of this data.  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 A-5 Right to Correction  
You have the right to correct any information about you which is incorrect or had 
become incorrect.  
 Right to Erasure/Anonymization  
The sponsor is required under both EU and US law to retain data from  research 
studies such as this one for many years.   However, you have the right to request that 
your personal data be completely anonymized.  This is done by destroying the 
information at your study center that links your identity to the pseudonymized data held by UMN .  This means that no one would ever be able to link the data held by 
UMN  to you personally.  
 Right to Restriction of processing  
Under certain conditions, you have the right to demand processing restrictions, i.e. the data may then only be stored, not processed.  You must apply for this.  Please contact 
your study doctor  or the data protection officer of the study center if you want to do so.   
This right may be limited if the restriction would affect the reliability of the study results.  
 Right  to Data portability  
You have the right to receive the personal data that you have provided to the study center.  This will allow you to request that this information be transmitted either to you 
or, where technically possible, to another agency designated by you.  
 Right to Contradiction  
You have the right to object at any time to any specific decision or action taken to process your personal data.   This right is limited for data that have already been 
processed and may be limited if your objection would a ffect the reliability of the study 
results.  
 Right to Withdrawal of this consent  
You may withdraw your consent at any time with effect for future data collection.  This 
withdrawal may be in an informal or verbal communication to your study doctor .  If you 
withdraw your consent this will not affect the lawfulness of the data processing that has been or will be done with data collected until you withdraw consent.   Data already 
collected will be anonymized.  
 If you would like to use one of these rights , please first contact the person responsible 
for the data collection at your study center:  
Person responsible for data collection  at the study center:  
Name:   
Address:   
Phone:   
Email   
 For concerns about data processing and compliance with data protection requirements  
you can also contact the data protection officer responsible for the study center:  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 A-6 Data protection officer responsible  for the study center:  
Name:   
Address:   
Phone:   
Email   
 
In addition, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the competent authority  if you 
believe that the processing of personal data concerning you is contrary to the GDPR:  
Data protection authority  responsible  for the study center:  
Name:   
Address:   
Phone:   
Email   
 What if you are hurt as part of this research? We will provide treatment right away if you are hurt because of the research.  The costs may be charged to you or your insurance company.  We will give you information about where you can get additional treatment.  You do not give up any of your legal rig hts by signing this form.  
     
 
 
 
What if you have questions? If you have questions about this study, or about the storage or use of your data, or if 
you are hurt by bei ng in the study, you can contact (site PI and contact information).  If 
you have questions about your rights as a research participant, you can contact (name 
and contact information).  
  Site Instruction:  
If the information above is not correct for your country/site, please revise the information to inform the subject of the following:  1. what treatment will be provided to the subject; 2. who will pay for the treatment; 3. if there is any plan 
for compensation for research- related injury issues, such as lost wages, etc.  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 A-7 SIGNATURE PAGE FOR CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN THE INSIGHT 011 
STUDY (ICOS)  
I have read the consent or have had it explained to me.  I am satisfied that I 
understand the information.  By signing this consent, I am stating that I want to join this study.  I understand that I do not waive any of my legal rights as a study participant by signing this consent.  I understand that I will receive a copy of the signed and dated consent.  
 OPTIONAL  
I agree to being re- contacted by the study staff if this study is extended or if there is 
another INSIGHT COVID -19 study gathering information about long -term follow -up.  
          Check here to indicate willingness to be informed about a future study of long -   
         term follow -up. 
           ________________________________________________________  
Name of staff member conducting consent process (typed or printed)  
  ____________________________________________________  ______________  
Staff member’s signature Date  
   
________________________________________________________  
*Witness’s name (typed or printed)  
 
 ____________________________________________________  ______________  
Witness’s signature  Date  
*A witness to the participant’s sig nature is strongly encouraged.  
 NOTE: This consent form, with the original signatures, MUST be retained on file by the Investigator of Record.  A copy of the signed and dated consent must be  
  _________________________  ______________________________  __________  
Participant’s name      Participant’s signature                             Date  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 A-8 given to the participant.  A copy should be placed in the partic ipant’s medical 
record, if applicable.  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
B-1 APPENDIX B:  TIME AND EVENTS SCHEDULE  
 
 
Study Requirement  Enrolment  Follow -up Visits:  
Day 7, 14 and 28 a)  
Informed consent  X  
Document ation of results of SARS -CoV-2 
test X  
Demographics  X  
Targeted medications  X  
Co-morbidities  X  
Upper respiratory tract swabs b) X  
Serum specimen b) X  
Health status assessment  X X 
Targeted symptoms  X X 
Dyspnoea  severity  X X 
Targetted COVID -19 treatments and 
medications  X X 
Vital and  hospitalization status   X 
a) only participants with a  positive test for SARS- CoV-2 at enrolment  
b) only for participants of the specimen collection sub- study 
 
 
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
C-1  
APPENDIX C:  INSIGHT 011  PROTOCOL TEAM  
 
 
To oversee the implementation of this observational study , membership on the 
protocol team will include:  
 
• Protocol co- chair(s) 
• NIAID , Division of Clinical Research  representatives  
• INSIGHT University of Minnesota representatives  
• INSIGHT International Coordinating Center representatives  
• Collaborating laboratory representatives  
• Site investigators  
• Study biostatisticians  
• Community representative  
 
A core team consisting of the co- chair(s), ICC leaders , NIAID representatives, study 
statisticians and other r epresentatives and the INSIGHT PI will also regularly convene to 
review study progress and address  study conduct and administrative issues that arise.  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 D-1 APPENDIX D:  REFERENCES ON THE INSIGHT WEBSITE  
 
The INSIGHT website ( www.insight -trials.org ) will maintain updated links to the 
following documents referenced in the INSIGHT 011  protocol and to other information 
pertinent to the study:  
 
• INSIGHT Publications and Presentations Policy  
 
• CDC guidance on how to handle COVID -19 cases   
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 E-1 APPENDIX E:  LIST OF ACRONYMS  
 
ACE2 Angiotensin Converting  Enzyme  2 
ARDS  Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome  
CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (U.S.)  
COVID -19 Corona- Virus-Induced Disease 2019  
EC Ethics Committee  
EU European Union  
DNA  Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation  
ICC International Coordinating Center  
ICH The International Council for Harmoni zation of Technical Requirements  
for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use  
IEC Institutional Ethics Committee  
INSIGHT  International Network for Strategic Initiatives in Global HIV Trials  
IRB Institutional Review Board 
mL Milliliter  
mm Millimeter  
NIAID  National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH (U.S.)  
NIH National Institutes of Health (U.S.)  
OHRP  Office for Human Research Protections (U.S.)  
RNA  Ribonucleic Acid  
SARS- CoV-2 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 
SSC Scientific Steering Committee (INSIGHT)  
UMN  University of Minnesota 
U.S. United States of America 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 F-1 APPENDIX F:   SPECIMEN COLLECTION SUBSTUDY  
 
Objective 
The objective of the sub- study is to:  
1. Establish a repository of upper respiratory tract  and blood samples for future 
research.  
These specimens  will be used for future research  aimed at molecularly characterizing 
the virus, including genetic analysis, and the measurement of biomarkers that predict 
progression of disease.  For those who sign an additional consent for the INSIGHT Genomics Study (INSIGHT 004), DNA will be extracted for studies of host genetics to investigate the pathophysiology of COVID -19. 
 Rationale  
This sub- study will run alongside the main study but will additionally include  the 
collection of baseline upper respiratory tract  swabs and blood samples . To avoid the 
collection of a large number of stored samples from SARS -CoV-2 negative 
participants , selected sites participating in this sub- study will be activated  when a 
relative ly large number of those enroled are positive  or enrolment strategies permit 
enrolment of large numbers of individuals who are positive.   
 Methodology  
At the time of enrolment , alongside consent for the main study sites participating in the 
sub-study will be asked to obtain separate consents for : 
 
1) Upper respiratory tract swabs and serum to be shipped to a central repository for 
future research on COVID; and  
 
2) at those sites registered for the INSIGHT Genomics Study (INSIGHT 004), a whole 
blood  sample .   
 
These specimens will be sent to a central repository in the United States for storage.  
  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 F-2 SAMPLE INFORMED CONS ENT FORM FOR SPECIME NS 
 
CONSENT FOR PARTICIPATING IN AN NIH- FUNDED RESEARCH STUDY  
SITE INVESTIGATOR: ________________________________ PHONE: 
__________  
 
Specimen Collection and Storage for An International Observational 
Study of Outpatients with SARS -CoV -2 Infection  
 
Sponsored by:  The University of Minnesota  
Funded by:  National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, US National Institutes of Health  
 A Multicenter Study of the International Network for Strategic Initiatives in Global HIV Trials (INSIGHT)   
We are asking you to allow us to collect and store samples to use for future studies 
about the virus that causes COVID -19.  You are being asked to give samples because 
you are being tested or have been tested for the virus that causes COVID -19 and 
have agreed to be in the COVID -19 Observation study.  It is your choice whether to 
give these extra samples . You can still be in the COVID- 19 Observation study, 
whether or not you agree to give the se extra samples.  
 
You do not have to give these extra samples if you do not want to.  You can ask later to have your samples destroyed if you decide you do not want them to be stored or used.  Your decision about samples will not affect your usual medical  care or any 
benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  There is no cost to you for giving your samples, and you will not be paid for it.  
 OHRP Requirements to be read by the sites: ( remove this text box from your site -
specific consent)  
 
PLEASE NOTE THAT THIS SAMPLE LANGUAGE DOES NOT PREEMPT OR REPLACE LOCAL 
IRB/EC REVIEW AND APPROVAL.  INVESTIGATORS ARE REQUIRED TO PROVIDE THE LOCAL 
IRB/EC WITH A COPY OF THIS SAMPLE LANGUAGE ALONG WITH THE LANGUAGE INTENDED 
FOR LOCAL USE.  LOCAL IRBs/ECs ARE REQUIRED TO WEIGH THE UNIQUE RISKS, CONSTRAINTS, AND POPULATION CONSIDERATIONS AS A CONDITION OF ANY APPROVAL.  
ANY DELETION OR SUBSTANTIVE CHANGE OF INFORMATION CONCERNING RISKS OR 
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT MUST BE JUSTIFIED BY THE INVESTIGATOR, APPROVED BY 
THE LOCAL IRB/EC, AND NOTED IN THE IRB/EC MINUTES.  JUSTIFICATION AND IRB/EC APPROVAL OF SUCH CHANGES MUST BE FORWARDED TO THE INTERNATIONAL 
COORDINATING CENTER.   SPONSOR -APPROVED CHANGES IN THE PROTOCOL MUST BE 
APPROVED BY THE LOCAL IRB/EC BEFORE USE U NLESS INTENDED FOR THE ELIMINATION 
OF APPARENT IMMEDIATE HAZARD.  NEW INFORMATION SHALL BE SHARED WITH EXISTING SUBJECTS AT NEXT ENCOUNTER, WITH ALL NEW SUBJECTS PRIOR TO 
INVOLVEMENT, OR AS THE LOCAL IRB/EC MAY OTHERWISE ADDITIONALLY REQUIRE.  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 F-3 We are collecting samples from people in many countries around the world.  We hope 
to have thousands of people wi th COVID -19 give their samples for future study about 
COVID -19.   
 
[The following text box is required for sites in the US, in accordance with the 2018 
Common Rule.]  
 
 
 What do you have to do in the study?  
If you agree, we will swab your nose and/ or throat . If you are also being tested for 
COVID -19 when you join the study, this would mean you have up to 3 nose and/or 
throat swabs. We will also take blood from a vein in your arm using a needle.  We will 
take about 2 -4 teaspoons  of blood.  We will store the blo od with the swab samples .  
We will not do any tests on these  samples right now.  
 What are the risks or discomforts of having samples taken?  
We will insert a new, clean needle into a vein in your arm to take blood.  You may feel a pinch when the needle goes through your skin.  You may get a bruise where the 
needle was put in.  You may also have swelling, and the area may be sore.  These 
things are common and should go away in a couple of days.  There is a very small 
chance of an infection where blood is drawn.  An infection could be treated with 
antibiotics.  
 Having your nose and/ or throat swab sample s taken will be uncomfortable.  It may 
cause you to gag  or sneeze.  KEY INFORMATION  
• If you have agreed to be in the COVID -19 Observation study and agree 
to have 1- 2 additional swab samples, and a blood sample taken, you 
can be in this study.  
• Once you have given your samples, you are done with this study.  You will still be followed in the COVID- 19 Observation study.  
• Your samples will be sent to a laborator y in the United States for 
storage.  They will be used in the future to learn more about COVID -19 
and the virus that causes it.  
• There is no direct benefit to you from being in this study.  You will help us learn more about how COVID -19 affects people like you.  
• The extra swab samples can be taken from the nose and/or throat. Both types of swab can be a little uncomfortable but only for a short time. Also, the throat swab may make you gag. The nose swab may make you sneeze. The blood sample will be taken from  your arm using a 
needle.  This will hurt a little bit and may leave a bruise where the needle goes in.  
• You do not have to be in this study.  If you agree to be in this study, you can decide at any time to ask that your samples be destroyed.  This will 
not change your medical care or other benefits.  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 F-4  
What are the benefits of having samples taken?  
There  is no benefit to you of having samples taken.  These samples may help us learn 
more about COVID -19 and SARS -CoV-2 and how it affects people, which may help 
other people in the future.  
 What will happen to your samples?  
Your  stored samples will be marked  with your study code and not with your name. 
Only research investigators at the site where you are receiving care can link the code 
to your name.  
 Your samples will be kept at your site for now  and periodically  shipped to a specimen 
repository  in the United  States.  They will be kept there for an indefinite amount of time 
to be used for research in the future.  
 No human  genetic testing will be done on your samples.  Your samples  will not be 
sold.  You will not be paid for any products that might result from this research.  
 The only risk of allowing us to store your samples would be an accidental release of 
your identity . 
 Some of the samples will be used along with your information collected in the COVID-
19 Observation study (identified only by your study  code) for future research.  You will 
not be told about the future research.   Future  research with your samples may help us 
understand how the SARS -CoV-2 virus works  in your body , study other infections or 
diseases, or develop treatments.  The types of res earch may include development of 
new laboratory tests to better understand how people respon d to infection or for 
studies to better understand virus infections, including the SARS -CoV-2 infection.  
 We plan to keep the samples indefinitely.   You can chang e your mind about the use of your samples for future  research and 
withdraw consent for the storage and use of your samples at any time.  You will need 
to contact the study doctor using the contact information listed on page 1 of this form.  
We will do our best to follow your wishes but cannot promise that we will always be 
able to destroy your samples.  For example, if your samples  were  already used, we 
would not be able to destroy them, and we would keep any information that had already been taken from the samples.  
 How will your privacy be protected?  
In the consent form you signed for the COVID -19 Observation study, we told you about 
your rights regarding your information.  We told you how your information is kept private and identified with a code number instead of your name.  Your samples will be stored with only that code number on them.  The laboratory in the US where they will be stored will not have any information about you and will only see that code number on your 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 F-5 samples.  Any laboratories that do tests on your samples will also not have any 
information about you.   
 
INSIGHT, the group that is doing this study, may share your information and samples with other people who study COVID -19 and SARS -CoV-2.  Your study code will be 
removed before sharing  your data.  This is called “anonymizing the data” .  We will not 
ask you for additional consent for this sharing.  Information and samples will only be shared for research projects that are approved by INSIGHT.   
 What if you are hurt as part of this research?  
We do not expect any harm from giving samples.    
 What if you have questions? If you have questions about this study, or about the storage or use of your samples, 
you can contact (site PI and contact information).  If you have questions about your 
rights as a research participant, you can contact (name and contact information).  
  
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 F-6 SIGNATURE PAGE FOR CONSENT TO GIVE EXTRA SAMPLES IN THE INSIGHT 
011 STUDY ( ICOS )  
I have read this  consent or have had it explained to me.  I am satisfied that I 
understand the information.  By signing this consent, I am stating that I am willing to 
give an extra 1 -2 swab samples and a blood sample for future research, and to have 
these samples stored at a laboratory in the United States.  I understand that I do not waive any of my legal rights as a study participant by signing this consent.  I 
understand that I will receive a copy of the signed and dated consent.  
          ________________________________________________________  
Name of staff member conducting consent process (typed or printed)  
  ____________________________________________________  ______________  
Staff member’s signature Date  
   ________________________________________________________  
*Witness’s name (typed or printed)  
  ____________________________________________________  ______________  
Witness’s signature  Date  
*A witness to the participant’s signature is strongly encouraged.  
 NOTE: This consent form, with the original signatures, MUST be retained on file by the Investigator of Record.  A copy of the signed and dated consent must be given to the participant.  A copy should be placed in the participant’s medical record, if applicable. 
  _________________________  ______________________________  __________  
Participant’s name      Participant’s signature                             Date  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 Reference -1 REFERENCES  
 
                                            
 
1 Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, et al. A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in 
China, 2019. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:727- 723. 
 
2 World Health Or ganization. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19): situation report – 
37. February 25, 2020.  
 
3 Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel 
corona virus in Wuhan, China. Lancet 2020; 395:497- 506.  
   
4 Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 
cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study.  Lancet 2020; 395:507- 513.   
 
5 Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, et al. Clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with 
2019 coronavirus -infected pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA 2020;  323:1061- 1069.  
 
6 Yang X, Yu Y, Xu J, et al . Clinical course and outcomes of critically ill patients with 
SARS- CoV-2 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a singe- centered, retrospective, 
observational study. Lancet Respir Med 2020; doi:10 .1016.  
 
7 Guan W, Ni Z, Hu Y, et al. Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 China.  
N Engl J Med 2020; doi: 10.1056.  
 
8 Zhang JJ, Dong X, Cao YY, et al. Clinical characteristics of  140 patients infected by 
SARS- CoV-2 in Wuhan, China. Allergy 2020;  doi: 10.1111.  
 
9 Wu C, Chen X, Cai Y, et al. Risk factors associated with acute respiratory distress 
syndrome and death in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 pneumonia in Wuhan, China.  JAMA Intern Med 2020; doi: 10.1001.  
 
10 Peng Y, Meng K, Guan HQ, et al. Clinical features and outcomes of 112 p atients with 
cardiovascular disease infected with n ew coronavirus. Chinese Journal of 
Cardiovascular Diseases 2020; doi:  10.3760.  
 
11 Li B, Yang J, Zhao F, et al. Prevalence and impact of cardiovascular metabolic 
diseases on COVID -19 in China. Clin Res  Cardiol  2020; doi: 10.1007 . 
 
12 Liu W, Tao ZW, Lei W , et al.  Analysis of factors associated with disease outcomes in 
hospitalized patients with 2019 novel coronavirus. Chin Med J 2020; doi: 10.1097.  
 
INSIGHT 0 11: COVID -19 Observational Study  Version 2.0 
   16 August 2020 
 Reference -2                                                                                                                                           
 
13 Yang J, Zheng Y, Gou X, et al. Prevalence of comorbidities in the novel Wuhan 
coronavirus (COVID -19) infection: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Int J Infect 
Dis 2020; doi: 10.1016.  
 
14 Shi Y, Yu X, Zhao H, et al.  Host susceptibility to severe COVID -19 and establishment 
of a host risk score: findings of 487 cases outside Wuhan. Crit Care  2020; 24(1):108.  
 
15 Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adul t 
inpatients with COVID -19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study . Lancet  2020; 
doi: 10.1016.  
 
16 Liu M, He P, Liu HG, et al. Clinical characteristics of 30 medical workers infected with 
new coronavirus pneumonia. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi  2020; 43(3):209- 214. 
 
17 Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I, et al. Estimates of the severity of COVID -19 disease.  
medRxiv preprint, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.09.20033357 . 
 
18 Guo T, Fan Y, Chen M, et al. Cardiovascular implications of fatal outcomes of patients 
with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19). JAMA Cardiol  2020 ; doi: 10.1001.  
 
19 Vardavas CI, Nikitara K. COVID -19 and smoking: A systematic review of the 
evidence. Tob Induc Dis 2020;  18:20.  
 
20 Fedson DS, Opal SM, Rordam OM. Hiding in plain sight: an approach to  
treating patients with severe COVID -19 infection. mBio 2020; 11:e00398- 20; doi: 
10.1028 . 
 
21 Fang L, Karakiulakis G, Roth M . Are patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus 
at increased risk for COVID -19 infection? Lancet Respir Med 2020; doi: 10.1016.  
 
22 Borg GA. Psychophysical bases of perceived exertion. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1982; 
14:377- 381. 
 