CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL
Title: A Phase 3, double-blind, randomized study of RVT-101 versus 
placebo when added to existing stable donepezil treatment in 
subjects with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease
Sponsor Axovant Sciences Ltd.
Compound Name: RVT-101
Protocol Number RVT-101-3001
Indication Treatment of mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease in patients on 
stable therapy with donepezil
Development Phase 3
IND # 78,094
Version/
Date:3.0
13 April 2016
Axovant Sciences 
Study DirectorIlise Lombardo, MD
Telephone: 646-495-8197
Email: ilise.lombardo@axovant.com
Medical Monitor Meera Jessani, MD
Telephone:  610-964-2012
Mobile:  310-728-5684
Email: Meera.jessani@wwctrials.com
Confidentiality Statement
The information contained in this document, particularly unpublished data, is the property or 
under control of Axovant Sciences Ltd., and is provided to you in confidence as an investigator, 
potential investigator, or consultant, for review by you, your staff, and an applicable Institutional 
Review Board or Independent Ethics Committee. The information is only to be used by you in 
connection with authorized clinical studies of the investigational product described in the 
protocol. You will not disclose any of the information to others without written authorization 
from Axovant Sciences Ltd., except to the extent necessary to obtain informed consent from 
those persons to whom the investigational product may be administered.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALMEDICAL MONITOR/SPONSOR INFORMATION PAGE
Medical Monitor/Serious Adverse Event Contact Information:
Role and 
Region NameDaytime Phone Number and 
Email AddressAfter-Hours 
Phone/Cell/
Pager Number Fax NumberWCT Site 
AddressPrimary Medical Monitor
AmericasMeera 
Jessani, 
MD+1 610 964 2012 
Meerra.jessani@wwctrials.com+1 310 728 5684 +1 610 225 00501000 
Continental 
Drive, King 
of Prussia, PA 
19406, USA
Secondary Medical Monitors
Western and 
Central 
EuropeManolo 
Beelke, 
MD, PhD+49 (0) 89 8905 8422 
manolo.beelke@wwctrials.com+49 (0) 17 3618 9707 +49 (0) 89 8905 8423Landsberger 
Str.
63A, 82110 
Germering, 
Germany
Eastern 
Europe and 
Asia PacificOlga 
Kolotilina, 
MD+7 384 245 46 70 
olga.kolotilina@wwctrials.com+7 906 925 18 12 +7 384 245 46 73536, 12, N. 
Ostrovskogo 
Str., 
Kemerovo, 
650000, 
Russia
SAE 
Contact
InformationContact Medical Monitor as shown above.
For SAE reporting information, see Study Reference Manual.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALStudy Sponsor
This study is sponsored by Axovant Sciences Ltd.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. Registered Address:
Clarendon House
2 Church Street
Hamilton HM11
Bermuda
US Agent and Regulatory Contact:
Axovant Sciences, Inc.
320 West 37thStreet, 5thFloor
New York, NY  10018
USA
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALINVESTIGATOR STATEMENT
I agree to conduct the study in compliance with the protocol.
I acknowledge that I am responsible for overall study conduct. I agree to personally conduct 
or supervise the described study.
I agree to ensure that all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of 
the study are informed about and fulfil their obligations. Mechanisms are in place to ensure 
that site staff receives the appropriate information throughout the study.
______________________________________ __________________________________
Principal Investigator Name (Printed) Signature
______________________________________ __________________________________
Date Site
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALTABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALLIST OF TABLES
PAGE
  
  
  
  
 
 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALLIST OF FIGURES
PAGE
  
  
  
  
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL1. ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviation Definition
5HT 6 5-hydroxytryptamine sub-type 6
ACh acetylcholine
AChE acetylcholinesterase
AChEI acetylcholinesterase inhibitor
AD Alzheimer’s disease
ADAS-Cog Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale – Cognitive Subscale
ADAS-Cog-11 Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale – Cognitive Subscale-
11 items
ADAS-Cog-13 Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale – Cognitive Subscale-
13 items (ADAS-Cog-11 plus delayed word recall and total
digit cancellation tests)
ADCS-ADL Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study – Activities of Daily 
Living
AE adverse event
ALT alanine aminotransferase
ANCOVA analysis of covariance
AST aspartate aminotransferase
ATC Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical
AUC area under the concentration-time curve at steady state
BUN blood urea nitrogen
CDR-SB Clinical Dementia Rating – Sum of Boxes
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CI confidence interval
CIBIC+ Clinician’s Interview-Based Impression of Change – plus 
caregiver interview
CIBIS Clinician’s Interview-Based Impression of Severity
Cmax peak concentration
Cmax-ss peak concentration at steady state
Cmin minimum (trough) concentration
Cmin-ss minimum (trough) concentration at steady state
CNS central nervous system
C-SSRS Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale
CT computed tomography
DS Dependence Scale
ECG electrocardiogram
eCRF electronic case report form
EQ-5D EuroQOL 5 dimensions questionnaire
EQ-VAS EuroQOL visual analogue scale
FDA Food and Drug Administration
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GGT gamma glutamyltransferase
HBsAg hepatitis B surface antigen
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALAbbreviation Definition
hCG human chorionic gonadotropin
ICF informed consent form
ICH International Conference on Harmonisation
IEC Independent Ethics Committee
IRB Institutional Review Board
ITT intent-to-treat
IVRS interactive voice response system
IWRS interactive web response system
MAO monoamine oxidase 
MCH mean corpuscular hemoglobin
MCV mean corpuscular volume
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MMRM mixed model for repeated measures
MMSE Mini Mental State Examination
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
NMDA N-methyl-D-aspartate
NPI Neuropsychiatric Inventory
Pgp permeability glycoprotein
PK pharmacokinetic(s)
PP per protocol
PSA-NCAM polysialylated form of the neural cell adhesion molecule
QTc corrected QT (interval)
RBANS Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological 
Status
RBC red blood cell
RUD Lite Resource Utilization in Dementia Lite
SAE serious adverse event
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan
SD standard deviation
SMC Safety Monitoring Committee
SOC System Organ Class
TEAE treatment-emergent adverse event
TSH thyroid stimulating hormone
ULN upper limit of normal
WBC white blood cell
WCT Worldwide Clinical Trials
WHO World Health Organization
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL2. PROTOCOL SUMMARY
Study Title A Phase 3, double-blind, randomized study of RVT-101 versus 
placebo when added to existing stable donepezil treatment in subjects 
with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease
Objectives Primary
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus placebo as adjuncts to 
stable donepezil therapy on cognitive function as measured by the 
Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale – Cognitive Subscale 11 
items (ADAS-Cog-11) after 24 weeks of treatment
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus placebo as adjuncts to 
stable donepezil therapy on activities of daily living as measured 
by the Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study - Activities of 
Daily Living (ADCS-ADL) scale after 24 weeks of treatment
Secondary
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus placebo as adjuncts to 
stable donepezil therapy on cognition as measured by the 
ADAS-Cog-13 (ADAS-Cog-11 plus delayed word recall and total 
digit cancellation tests) after 24 weeks of treatment
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus placebo as adjuncts to 
stable donepezil therapy on global clinical assessment of change 
as measured by Clinician’s Interview-Based Impression of 
Change – plus caregiver interview (CIBIC+) after 24 weeks of 
treatmentTo assess how baseline Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE)
score severity affects efficacy outcome measures after 24 weeks 
of treatment.
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus placebo as adjuncts to 
stable donepezil therapy on neuropsychiatric symptoms as
measured by the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) after 24 weeks 
of treatment
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus placebo as adjuncts to 
stable donepezil therapy on an analysis of responders based on 
prespecified efficacy evaluations
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus placebo as adjuncts to 
stable donepezil therapy on subject dependency as measured by 
the Dependence Scale (DS) 
To measure RVT-101 plasma concentrations and donepezil 
plasma concentrations in study subjects
To estimate the pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of RVT-101
and donepezil and explore relationships to efficacy or safety 
endpoints, as appropriate
To assess the safety and tolerability of RVT-101 as an adjunct 
therapy to stable donepezil treatment
Tertiary
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus placebo as adjuncts to 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALstable donepezil therapy on healthcare utilization as measured by 
the Resource Utilization in Dementia Lite (RUD Lite)
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus placebo as adjuncts to 
stable donepezil therapy on quality of life as measured by the 
EuroQOL 5 dimensions questionnaire (EQ-5D)
Study Phase Phase 3
Target Population Adult subjects aged 50 to 85, inclusive, with mild to moderate 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Subjects will be stratified by baseline 
MMSE score into 3 groups by severity.
Number of Subjects 
PlannedApproximately 1150 randomized subjects:
RVT-101: 575 subjects
Placebo:  575 subjects
Number of Study 
Centers PlannedApproximately 185
Study Design This is a multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, 
parallel-group study in patients with mild to moderate AD who are on 
stable donepezil therapy.  The efficacy and safety of RVT-101 at a 
dose of 35 mg daily when used as an adjunct treatment to stable 
donepezil therapy will be evaluated over a 24-week treatment period.
All subjects will remain on stable doses of donepezil for the duration 
of the study.  The randomization ratio will be 1:1 (RVT-101:placebo) 
and will be stratified by baseline MMSE score into 3 groups of 
severity.
Duration of Treatment Study participation will last approximately 33 weeks:  0 to 28 days
for Screening, a 3-week Single-Blind Run-In Period to evaluate 
baseline status, a 24-week randomized Double-Blind Treatment 
Period, and a 2-week Follow-Up Period (for subjects who do not 
enter the open-label extension study RVT-101-3002).
Criteria for Evaluation Primary efficacy measures: The primary efficacy response will be an 
assessment of change at 24 weeks from baseline in cognition and 
activities of daily living.  Cognition will be measured by the 
ADAS-Cog-11 and activities of daily living will be measured by the 
ADCS-ADL.
Secondary efficacy measures: An additional measure of cognition 
will be the ADAS-Cog-13. Global assessment of change will be 
measured by the CIBIC+. Neuropsychiatric symptoms and 
psychopathology will be measured by the NPI. Subject dependency 
will be measured by the DS.
Tertiary efficacy measures: Healthcare resource utilization, and quality of life will be assessed by the RUD Lite, and the EQ-5D.
Pharmacokinetic evaluation: Plasma levels of RVT-101 and donepezil will be measured, and standard population PK parameters 
will be calculated for RVT-101.
Safety evaluation: Safety will be based on adverse events (AEs),
changes in physical examinations, vital signs, electrocardiograms 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL(ECGs), suicidality (via the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale 
[C-SSRS]) and routine clinical laboratory assessments.
Statistical Methods Efficacy:  Treatment comparisons between the RVT-101 and placebo 
groups in ADAS-Cog-11 and ADCS-ADL scores change from 
baseline at Week 24 will be analyzed using a mixed model for 
repeated measures (MMRM) with restricted maximum likelihood 
estimation.
Additional analyses for the change from baseline at Week 24 
endpoints including ADAS-Cog-13, CIBIC+, NPI, and DS will be
analyzed using the same method as that for the primary endpoints.
The CIBIC+ will also be analyzed using the 
Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test.
Treatment comparisons between the RVT-101 and placebo groups for 
the responder endpoints will be analyzed using logistic regression and 
compared using the Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel test.
The RUD Lite, and the EQ-5D will be summarized descriptively by 
treatment. Treatment comparisons between RVT-101 and placebo 
will be analyzed using an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) model.
Pharmacokinetic: Plasma concentrations for RVT-101 and donepezil 
will be measured.  RVT-101 PK parameters (area under the 
concentration-time curve at steady state [AUC ], peak concentration 
at steady state [C max-ss], and minimum (trough) concentration at steady 
state [C min-ss]) for each subject will be estimated via a population PK 
model using nonlinear mixed effect analysis.
Safety:  Safety will be assessed by summarizing and analyzing AEs, 
laboratory analytes, vital signs, physical examination, C-SSRS, and 
ECG parameters.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL3. INTRODUCTION
3.1. Background
3.1.1. Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by 
deterioration of memory and other aspects of cognition, progressive impairment of activities of 
daily living, and a variety of behavioral disturbances (Cummings, 2004). An estimated 
5.2 million American’s have AD (Alzheimer’s Association, 2013). In 2010, approximately
503,400 deaths in Americans aged 75 years and older were attributable to AD dementia
(James et al, 2014), and the incidence is increasing as the global population ages 
(Cummings et al, 2014). Between 2000 and 2010, the proportion of deaths resulting from heart 
disease, stroke, and prostate cancer decreased 16%, 23%, and 8%, respectively, whereas the 
proportion of deaths resulting from AD increased 68% (Alzheimer’s Association, 2013).
The first drug specifically approved for the treatment of AD was tacrine, an acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitor (AChEI).  AChEIs increase levels of acetylcholine (ACh), a key neurotransmitter for 
cognitive processes.  Although approved in many countries, tacrine was not widely used, most 
likely because it is associated with liver toxicity and because of an inconvenient dosing regimen.  
Soon after the approval of tacrine, donepezil, another AChEI, was approved and became the 
most widely used drug to treat AD, likely due to its lack of liver toxicity and once-daily dose 
regimen (Aricept®[donepezil] Package Insert, 2013).  Two other AChEIs were approved 
subsequently, resulting in a total of 4 marketed drugs of this class.  Memantine, the only other 
drug approved for the treatment of AD, is an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist
and is only approved to treat moderate to severe AD.
Although the approved agents produce a modest improvement in cognition in the short term,
they do not prevent progression of the disease, and patients continue to show decline in cognitive 
performance and inexorable progressive loss of function despite currently available treatments.
There is a lack of treatment options available for patients once the initial effectiveness of the 
AChEI starts to wane, and there are no treatments currently approved for adjunct therapy to 
AChEIs in subjects with mild to moderate AD. No new chemical entities for AD have been 
approved in more than 10 years.  Thus, there is an urgent need to identify new drugs for the 
treatment of AD.
5-Hydroxytryptamine sub-type 6 (5HT 6) receptors are widely distributed in regions of the brain 
that are associated with cognition. 5HT 6receptor antagonists have a modulatory effect on 
cholinergic, and other neurotransmitter systems, a profile that is clearly distinct from that of the 
AChEIs (Mitchell and Neumaier, 2005). In addition, 5HT 6receptor antagonists have been 
reported to cause increases in the polysialylated form of the neural cell adhesion molecule 
(PSA-NCAM) in the hippocampal and medial temporal regions of the brain during a learning 
task (Seki and Arai, 1993; Kiss et al, 2001). PSA-NCAM increases have been correlated with 
increases in synaptic plasticity in areas such as the hypothalamus, olfactory bulb, and 
hippocampus of the adult nervous system (Seki and Arai, 1993; Kiss et al, 2001).
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL3.1.2. RVT-101
RVT-101, previously known as SB742457, is a potent and selective 5HT 6receptor antagonist, 
which is being developed as an oral treatment for subjects with mild to moderate AD.
Pharmacology predicts central nervous system (CNS) effects on ACh for both donepezil and 
RVT-101. However, the mechanisms by which this is achieved by each treatment are clearly 
distinct. Donepezil exerts its effect by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase (AChE), thus inhibiting 
the hydrolysis of ACh, which results in increased ACh levels. This can be associated with 
systemic cholinergic side effects, principally gastrointestinal in nature, but these events can be 
mitigated by slow titration. RVT-101 causes a release of neurotransmitters primarily localized in 
the CNS through its antagonism at the 5HT 6receptor. The potential increase in ACh following 
the addition of RVT-101 is expected to augment that already achieved with donepezil, and thus 
may result in an adjunctive treatment benefit (Benhamu et al, 2014).
RVT-101 has previously been investigated as monotherapy in subjects with mild to moderate 
AD in 3 multinational Phase 2 studies, Study AZ3100603, Study AZ3106242, and 
Study AZ3110865. Studies AZ100603 and Study AZ3110865 compared the efficacy of 
RVT-101 to placebo or donepezil on the co-primary endpoints of cognition (Alzheimer’s Disease 
Assessment Scale – Cognitive Subscale [ADAS-Cog]) and global function (Clinician’s
Interview-Based Impression of Change – plus caregiver interview [CIBIC+]) after 24 weeks of 
treatment. Study AZ3100603 demonstrated dose-related effects of RVT-101 on cognition
(ADAS-Cog) with a 1.28-point treatment difference from placebo (p=0.135) at a dose of 35 mg 
and a statistically significant benefit on global function (CIBIC+) (p=0.047). Of note, there was 
no evidence of a placebo decline in this study. Study AZ3110865 did not show a statistically 
significant effect of either donepezil or RVT-101 on ADAS-Cog or CIBIC+.  This study also 
failed to show a decline in the placebo arm.
A third monotherapy study, AZ3106242, was initiated with the aim of investigating whether the 
historical efficacy of donepezil (i.e., approximately 3-point difference from a declining placebo 
group on ADAS-Cog after 24 weeks), could be repeated against non-declining placebo groups,
such as those seen in Studies AZ3100603 and AZ3110865. It has become increasingly common 
in recent trials of potential agents for the treatment of AD to be unable to show the same 3-point 
difference from placebo on ADAS-Cog that was observed in these early studies with AChEIs 
(Panisset, 2002). In addition, the study allowed the effect of RVT-101 to be benchmarked 
against a current, rather than historical, donepezil effect. This exploratory study was not 
powered for formal statistical comparison of RVT-101 and donepezil. For ADAS-Cog and 
CIBIC+, neither RVT-101 nor donepezil showed a statistically significant difference from 
placebo. A post-hoc analysis estimated that the effect of both treatments was larger among 
subjects with moderate AD (Mini Mental State Exam [MMSE] less than or equal to 18) than 
among mild subjects, with ADAS-Cog treatment effects of -2.9 (90% confidence interval [CI]: -
5.5, -0.2) and -4.5 (90% CI: -7.1, -1.9) for the RVT-101 and donepezil groups, respectively.
Study AZ3110866 was a 48-week, Phase 2b study that randomized 684 subjects in a 1:1:1 ratio 
to receive placebo, 15 mg RVT-101, or 35 mg RVT-101 as an adjunct to stable donepezil 
treatment.  The study utilized co-primary cognitive endpoints at Week 24 (ADAS-Cog and 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALClinical Dementia Rating – Sum of Boxes [CDR-SB]). The Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative 
Study – Activities of Daily Living (ADCS-ADL) was also included as a secondary endpoint to 
assess the activities of daily living.  When compared to placebo, a statistically significant 
difference of 1.5 points in ADAS-Cog was observed for the 35-mg RVT-101 group versus the 
placebo group at Week 24 (p=0.012). Statistically significant benefit versus placebo was also 
demonstrated at Week 12 (-1.3, p=0.006) and at Week 48 (-1.64, p=0.024).  There was a strong 
trend for statistically significant benefit at Week 36 (-1.21, p=0.057) versus placebo.  The change 
from baseline for the CDR-SB for the 35-mg group was numerically superior to placebo at all 
post-baseline visits.  This difference was statistically significant at Week 12. There were no 
statistically significant differences between the 15-mg group and placebo for either co-primary 
endpoint although the 15-mg group was generally numerically superior to placebo. The 
ADSC-ADL also showed a statistically significant effect for 35 mg RVT-101 compared to 
placebo at Weeks 12 (1.72, p=0.019), 24 (2.0, p=0.024), and 36 (1.93, p=0.038), with a 
continued trend at Week 48 (1.94, p=0.088).  Additional secondary endpoints included the
Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS), and MMSE.  
There was no statistically significant effect of RVT-101 on RBANS for either dose over placebo, 
but some degree of separation did appear at later visits for the 35-mg group.  No statistically 
significant difference for either group was seen on the MMSE at Weeks 24 or 48.
Details of all the preclinical and clinical investigations with RVT-101 are contained in the 
current version of the RVT-101 Investigator’s Brochure.
3.2. Study Rationale
The effects of RVT-101 on cognition and activities of daily living observed in the AZ3110866 
study provide a strong rationale for the continued development of RVT-101 as an adjunctive 
therapy to donepezil for the treatment of patients with AD.  This Phase 3 study seeks to confirm 
the previous study results that demonstrated a treatment effect of RVT-101 on both cognition and 
activities of daily living when added to stable donepezil treatment when compared to treatment 
with donepezil alone.  This study will also provide further information on the safety and 
tolerability of the 35-mg dose of RVT-101 when used in combination with donepezil. The 
primary objective of this study is to assess the effects of a 35-mg dose of RVT-101 compared 
with placebo when added to stable treatment with donepezil on the co-primary endpoints of 
cognition as measured by ADAS-Cog 11 item subscale (ADAS-Cog-11; Rosen et al, 1984) and 
activities of daily living as measured by ADCS-ADL (Galasko et al, 1997) after 24 weeks of 
double-blind treatment.  The ADAS-Cog is a widely recognized scale for the assessment of 
cognition in clinical trials with subjects with AD, and the ADCS-ADL is similarly widely used 
for the assessment of function and activities of daily living.  Both scales have established 
psychometric properties and have been employed in previous AD studies, supporting their 
inclusion as primary endpoints in this study.
3.3. Dose Rationale
A daily dose of 35 mg RVT-101 was selected for use in this study based on the results of the 
AZ3110866 study.  This dose, administered in addition to donepezil, was shown to be well 
tolerated and when added to stable donepezil treatment demonstrated efficacy on measures of 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALcognition and activities of daily living that were statistically significant when compared to 
placebo treatment.  Additional receptor occupancy and pharmacokinetic (PK) studies further 
support the dose selection.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL4. OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
Objectives Endpoints
Primary
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus 
placebo as adjuncts to stable donepezil therapy 
on cognitive function as measured by the
ADAS-Cog-11 after 24 weeks of treatmentADAS-Cog-11 score change from baseline to 
Week 24
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus 
placebo as adjuncts to stable donepezil therapy 
on activities of daily living as measured by 
ADCS-ADL scale after 24 weeks of treatmentADCS-ADL score change from baseline to 
Week 24
Secondary
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus 
placebo as adjuncts to stable donepezil therapy
on cognition as measured by the ADAS-Cog-13
(ADAS-Cog-11 plus delayed recall and total 
digit cancellation) after 24 weeks of treatmentADAS-Cog-13 score change from baseline to 
Week 24
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus 
placebo as adjuncts to stable donepezil therapy 
on global clinical assessment of change as 
measured by CIBIC+ after 24 weeks of
treatmentCIBIC+ score at Week 24
To assess how baseline MMSE score affects 
efficacy outcome measures after 24 weeks of 
treatmentADAS-Cog score change from baseline;
ADCS-ADL score change from baseline;
CIBIC+ score; all assessed by MMSE baseline 
score
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus 
placebo as adjuncts to stable donepezil therapy 
on neuropsychiatric symptoms as measured by 
the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) after 24 
weeks of treatmentNPI score change from baseline to Week 24
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus 
placebo as adjuncts to stable donepezil therapy 
on an analysis of responders based on 
prespecified efficacy evaluationsAnalysis of responders defined as improvement 
of at least 3 points on ADAS-Cog-11 from 
baseline AND at least no worsening on
ADCS-ADL from baseline AND no worsening 
on CIBIC+ at 24 weeks
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALTo assess the effects of RVT-101 versus 
placebo as adjuncts to stable donepezil therapy
on subject dependency as measured by the 
Dependence Scale (DS)DS score change from baseline to Week 24
To measure RVT-101 plasma concentrations 
and donepezil plasma concentrations in study 
subjectsMeasurement of concentrations of RVT-101
and donepezil in plasma
To estimate the PK parameters of RVT-101 and 
explore relationships to efficacy or safety 
endpoints, as appropriateSteady state area under the concentration-time 
curve (AUC ), peak concentration (C max-ss), 
and minimum concentration (C min-ss) of RVT-
101 in plasma
To assess the safety and tolerability of RVT-
101 as an adjunct therapy to stable donepezil 
treatmentOccurrence of adverse events (AEs) and 
changes in physical examinations, vital signs 
measurements, electrocardiograms (ECGs),
routine laboratory assessments, and Columbia 
Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS)
Tertiary
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus 
placebo as adjuncts to stable donepezil therapy
on healthcare utilization as measured by the 
Resource Utilization in Dementia Lite (RUD 
Lite)RUD Lite score change from baseline to 
Week 24
To assess the effects of RVT-101 versus 
placebo as adjuncts to stable donepezil therapy
on quality of life as measured by the EuroQOL 
5 dimensions questionnaire (EQ-5D)EQ-5D score change from baseline to Week 24
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL5. STUDY DESIGN
5.1. Overall Design
This is a multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study in 
patients with mild to moderate AD who are on stable donepezil therapy.  The efficacy and safety 
of RVT-101 at a dose of 35 mg will be evaluated over a 24-week treatment period.
Approximately 1150 subjects will be enrolled.  The randomization ratio will be 1:1 
(RVT-101:placebo) and will be stratified by baseline MMSE score.  The primary endpoints will 
be measured after 24 weeks of treatment.  Study participation will last approximately 33 weeks:  
0 to 4 weeks for Screening, a 3-week Single-Blind Run-In Period to evaluate baseline status, a 
24-week randomized Double-Blind Treatment Period, and a 2-week Follow-Up Period (for 
subjects who do not enter the open-label extension study RVT-101-3002).
5.2. Study Schematic
The design of the study is illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1 Study Design
Abbreviations:  qd = daily; V = visit; WK = week.
1. If a greater than 3 point difference between the Screening and Baseline MMSE score is in the opinion of the 
investigator due to recent changes in AD medication, the Run-In period may be extended for an additional 3 
weeks after discussion with the Medical Monitor, during which time MMSE stability defined as less than or 
equal to 3 point change over 3 weeks must be observed.

Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL6. SUBJECT POPULATION
6.1. Type and Number of Subjects
Approximately 1150 subjects with mild to moderate AD who are on stable donepezil therapy 
will be enrolled.
In order to manage the total study enrollment, Axovant Sciences may suspend screening and/or 
enrollment at any site or study-wide at any time.
6.2. Inclusion Criteria
Subjects eligible for enrollment in the study must meet all of the following criteria:
1. Male or female subject with a clinical diagnosis of AD in accordance with the 
recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association 
workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for AD (McKhann et al, 2011).
2. Subject has a documented history of at least 4 months of ongoing donepezil therapy for AD,
with stable dosing of 5 or 10 mg/day for at least the last 2 months and with no intent to 
change for the duration of the study.
3. Subject has an MMSE score 12 to 24 inclusive at Screening and a Baseline MMSE score 
10 to 26 inclusive. The difference between the Screening and Baseline MMSE score is less 
than or equal to 3 points. If a greater than 3-point difference between the Screening and 
Baseline MMSE score is in the opinion of the investigator due to recent changes in AD 
medication, the Run-In period may be extended for an additional 3 weeks after discussion 
with the Medical Monitor, during which time MMSE stability, defined as less than or equal 
to 3-point change over 3 weeks, must be observed.
4. Subject has a Hachinski Ischaemia score less than or equal to 4 at Screening.
5. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) scan performed within
12 months before screening with findings consistent with the diagnosis of dementia due to 
AD without any other clinically significant pathologies.  If an MRI (preferred) or CT scan is 
unavailable or was performed longer than 12 months prior to Screening, one must be 
performed during the Screening Period (prior to Run-In).
6. Age greater than or equal to 50 years to less than or equal to 85 years at the time of 
Screening.
7. If female, subject must be:
a. Of non-childbearing potential (i.e., any female who is post-menopausal [greater than
1 year without menstrual period in the absence of hormone replacement therapy]) or 
surgically sterile; or,
b. If pre-menopausal or menopausal for 1 year or less, must have a negative pregnancy test 
and must not be lactating at the Screening and Baseline Visits. Female subjects of 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALchildbearing potential and who are sexually active are required to practice adequate 
methods of birth control. Female subjects for whom menopausal status is in doubt in the 
opinion of the investigator will be required to use an adequate form of birth control.
Acceptable, adequate form of birth control is defined as consistent use of combined 
effective methods of contraception including at least 1 barrier method.
Male subjects who are sexually active will also be required to use an adequate form of birth 
control as described above.
8. Subject has the ability to comply with procedures for cognitive and other testing in the 
opinion of the investigator.
9. Subject must be able to ingest pills (in tablet form) whole. 
10. Subject lives with (or has substantial periods of contact with) a regular caregiver who is 
willing to attend visits, oversee the subject’s compliance with protocol-specified procedures 
and study medication, and report on subject’s status, and who has substantial contact with 
the subject. If the caregiver does not cohabitate with the subject, he/she ideally should have 
a minimum of 10 hours total and at least 3 days contact with the subject per week.  Prior to 
randomization, study representatives will review eligibility of non-cohabitating caregivers.
Every effort should be made to have the same caregiver throughout the study.
11. Subject has provided full written informed consent prior to the performance of any 
protocol-specified procedure; or if unable to provide informed consent due to cognitive 
status, subject has provided assent and a legally acceptable representative has provided full 
written informed consent on behalf of the subject.
12. Caregiver has provided full written informed consent on his/her own behalf prior to the 
performance of any protocol-specified procedure.
13. General health status is acceptable for participation in a 24-week study.
6.3. Exclusion Criteria
A subject will not be eligible for inclusion in this study if any of the following criteria apply:
Other Causes for Dementia
1. Diagnosis of possible, probable, or definite vascular dementia in accordance with National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke-Association Internationale pour la Recherche 
l’Enseignement en Neurosciences criteria.
2. History and/or evidence (including CT or MRI scan performed within the past 12 months or 
at Screening) of any other CNS disorder that could be interpreted as a cause of dementia (in 
the opinion of the investigator), e.g., cerebrovascular disease (transient ischemic attack,
stroke, hemorrhage); structural or developmental abnormality; epilepsy; infectious, 
degenerative, or inflammatory/demyelinating CNS conditions; or Parkinson’s disease.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL3. Evidence of the following disorders where this is thought to be the cause of, or to contribute 
to the severity of, the subject’s dementia: current vitamin B 12deficiency, hypothyroidism, 
neurosyphilis, or Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
4. Focal findings on the neurological exam (excluding changes attributable to peripheral 
injury) that are inconsistent with a primary diagnosis of AD.
5. History of existing negative amyloid positron emission tomography scan or similar brain 
amyloid imaging, or Screen Failure from research trial due to negative amyloid imaging
within 5 years. Note: amyloid scan is not required for participation in this study.
6. Atypical clinical features or clinical course of dementia that would lead the investigator to 
conclude symptoms are more likely due to an alternate dementia diagnosis including, but not 
limited to, frontotemporal dementia, Lewy body dementia, or others.
Confounding Medical Conditions
7. History of significant psychiatric illness such as schizophrenia or bipolar affective disorder 
or any other significant psychiatric illness that in the opinion of the investigator would 
interfere with participation in the study; history of major depressive disorder in the past year, 
or current major depressive episode.
8. Significant suicide risk as defined by (1) suicidal ideation as endorsed on items 4 or 5 on the 
C-SSRS within the past year, at Screening or at Baseline, or; (2) suicidal behaviors within 
the past year, or; (3) clinical assessment of significant suicidal risk during subject interview.
9. Current psychosis that in the opinion of the investigator would interfere with the subject’s 
ability to participate in this study.
10. History of epilepsy or unexplained seizure in the past 5 years, unexplained recent loss of 
consciousness, or history of significant head trauma with loss of consciousness.
11. History of malignancy during the 5 years before Screening. History of basal cell carcinoma 
and melanoma in situ are permitted. History of other cancers currently in a non-active state 
may be acceptable after review with the Medical Monitor.
12. Any clinically relevant concomitant disease including progressive liver or kidney 
dysfunction, history of myocardial infarction or unstable angina within 6 months of 
Screening, history of more than 1 myocardial infarction within 5 years of Screening, history 
of clinically significant stroke, or any other medical or psychiatric condition, which, in the 
opinion of the investigator, makes the subject unsuitable for inclusion in the study.
13. History of alcohol use disorder or other substance abuse disorder (excluding tobacco use),
according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition, criteria 
in the past 10 years.
14. History of Down syndrome or Intellectual Development Disorder.
Concomitant Medications15. Participation in another investigational drug or device study in AD during the 60 days prior 
to the Screening Visit (Visit 1), or within 5 half-lives of use of the investigational drug prior 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALto the Screening Visit, whichever is longer.  In addition, subjects who were previously 
screened for another study in AD but failed the entry criteria for that study may be screened 
with no time delay prior to the Screening Visit, provided that, in the opinion of the 
investigator, and after review with the Medical Monitor, there is a realistic possibility that 
the subject would be eligible. However, Screen Failures due to negative amyloid imaging 
within 5 years will not be eligible for enrollment (see exclusion criterion 5).
16. Treatment with any concomitant medications as detailed in Table 1 . Memantine and other 
treatments for dementia including AChEIs other than donepezil must have been
discontinued 30 days prior to entry into the Single-Blind Run-In Period.  Other prohibited 
medications as outlined in Table 1 , unless otherwise specified, need to have been 
discontinued for 5 half-lives prior to screening and assessed as no longer clinically necessary 
for the subject. Subjects taking memantine or other agents to treat cognitive impairment 
associated with AD at the time of Screening will be considered Screen Failures.  However, 
subjects with recent discontinuation prior to Screening of memantine or other agents to treat 
cognitive impairment who will have been discontinued for 30 days prior to the Single-Blind 
Run-In Period may continue.  Subjects who screen fail may be rescreened once (see 
Section 6.5).
Unacceptable Test/Laboratory Values17. Postural hypotension (fall in systolic blood pressure of greater than 30 mmHg or fall in 
diastolic blood pressure of greater than 20 mmHg on standing compared to sitting) at the 
time of screening. Subjects who present at the time of screening with postural hypotension 
yet have no known history of postural hypotension, nor underlying medical condition related 
to hypotension, may be rescreened.
18. Persistent or recurrent liver enzyme elevations, alanine transaminase (ALT) and/or aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) greater than or equal to 2.0 times upper limit of normal (ULN).
19. Total bilirubin over 1.5 x ULN except due to documented Gilbert’s disease.
20. Calculated creatinine clearance less than 40 mL/min (Cockroft-Gault formula) at Screening:
Adult males: [(140 – age in years) × (weight in kg)] ÷ 72 × serum creatinine*
Adult females: 0.85 × [((140 – age in years) × (weight in kg)) ÷ 72 × serum creatinine*]
* in mg/dL
21. Positive hepatitis B surface antigen or hepatitis C antibody test.
22. Confirmed corrected QT interval (QTc) value greater than or equal to 450 msec for males or 
greater than or equal to 470 msec for females. Subjects with a QRS value greater than
120 msec and subjects with a QTc value less than 500 msec may be eligible following 
discussion with the Medical Monitor.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALOther
23. Previous exposure to RVT-101 or SB742457.
24. Subject is unable to take study medication as prescribed throughout the study (with 
assistance is acceptable), has a significant history of non-compliance with prescribed 
medication, or is at risk of non-compliance with study medication or procedures.
25. Subject or caregiver is an immediate family member or employee of the participating 
investigator, any of the participating site staff, or of the sponsor study staff.
26. Subject was prescribed cognitive tasks for cognitive rehabilitation performed under medical 
supervision in the 3 months prior to Screening or plans to participate in cognitive 
rehabilitation during the study.
27. Subject has participated in a program of neurostimulation in the past 3 months or plans to 
participate in a program of neurostimulation during the course of the study.
6.4. Other Eligibility Criteria Considerations
To assess any potential impact on subject eligibility with regard to safety, the investigator must 
refer to the following document(s) for detailed information regarding warnings, precautions, 
contraindications, AEs, and other significant data pertaining to the investigational product(s) 
being used in this study:
RVT-101 Investigator’s Brochure
Package insert/label for donepezil hydrochloride.
6.5. Screening Failures
Screen Failures are defined as subjects who sign an informed consent form (ICF) for 
RVT-101-3001 but are never subsequently randomized and who do not enter the Single-Blind 
Run-In Phase. A minimal set of screen failure information is required including demography,
screen failure details, eligibility criteria, and any serious adverse events (SAEs).
Subjects who are Screen Failures may be rescreened once only after approval by the study 
Medical Monitor.
6.6. Withdrawal Criteria
6.6.1. Reasons for Withdrawal
A withdrawal from the study is defined as withdrawing any time after entering the Single-Blind 
Run-In Phase and before completion of the Week 24 Visit (Visit 8).  Subjects who permanently 
discontinue use of investigational product will be considered to be withdrawn from the study.  
Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason.  The investigator (or 
designee) must document the reason for withdrawal in the appropriate section of the electronic 
case report form (eCRF). Information related to AEs will continue to be collected as per usual 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALprocedures on subjects who have discontinued investigational product. Withdrawn subjects will 
not be replaced.  The reasons for subject withdrawal will be recorded and may include, but are 
not limited to:
Any clinical AE, laboratory abnormality, or other medical condition or situation occurs 
such that continued participation in the study would not be in the best interest of the 
subject in the opinion of the investigator
Pregnancy of female subject (discontinuation of treatment, but will be followed until the 
outcome of pregnancy is known)
Significant protocol violation
Subject requests to discontinue for any reason; it is important to determine whether the 
withdrawal of consent is primarily due to an AE, lack of efficacy, or other reason
The above reasons do not automatically lead to withdrawal from the study in all cases. The final 
decision will be based on consultation between the principal investigator and the study Medical 
Monitor, with the ultimate decision by the principal investigator or subject. Subjects may 
discontinue from treatment with study investigational product but may agree to continue to be 
followed for additional safety evaluation.
If a subject meets discontinuation criteria during treatment, an Early Termination Visit will be 
required (Section 6.6.2 ).
6.6.2. Subject Withdrawal Procedures
If a subject is prematurely discontinued from treatment with the investigational product, the 
investigator must make every effort to perform the evaluations scheduled for the Early 
Termination Visit ( Table 2 ).  In the case where the subject permanently discontinues study 
medication between scheduled clinic visits, he/she should be recalled to the clinic as soon as 
possible and preferably within 7 days of stopping study medication for the Early Termination 
Visit.
Lost to follow-up: If a subject is lost to follow-up, every effort must be made by study center 
personnel to contact the subject, inquire about the reason for discontinuation/withdrawal, and 
follow up with any unresolved AEs/SAEs.  A minimum of 3 attempts at contact should be made 
with 1 contact being by certified letter.  All measures taken to contact the subject and 
information received during those attempts must be documented.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL7. STUDY TREATMENT
7.1. Investigational Product and Other Study Treatment
Investigational product in this study is defined as RVT-101 tablets and its matching placebo, and
will be provided by Axovant Sciences.  RVT-101 and placebo tablets will be indistinguishable 
from each other.
Investigational product for the Single-Blind Run-In Period (Weeks -3 to 0) will be supplied as 
single individual bottles, each bottle containing 50 tablets which is sufficient medication for 
3 weeks plus 29 days overage.  Investigational product for the Double-Blind Treatment Period 
(Weeks 0 to 24) will be supplied at Visits 3, 5, 6, and 7 as a single individual bottle containing 
50 tablets, which is sufficient for 6 weeks plus 8 days overage. A new bottle of investigational 
product will be dispensed at each visit except at Visit 4, where no drug is dispensed.  In the event 
that the Single-Blind Run-In period is extended to repeat the MMSE, no new investigational 
product will be dispensed.  Drug accountability will be checked, and subjects will be redispensed 
the study medication bottles they received at Visit 2.
Subjects enrolled in this study will have been on donepezil for at least 4 months and on a stable 
dose of 5 or 10 mg/day for at least 2 months prior to enrollment and will continue this regimen 
unchanged for the duration of the study.  Axovant Sciences will supply donepezil tablets in this 
study at the stable clinical dose for each subject.  Study-dispensed donepezil will start in the 
Single-Blind Run-In Period. Subjects should be clearly instructed to take only study-dispensed donepezil during the duration of this study until V8, and to discontinue their clinical supply of 
donepezil provided by their personal physician. Subjects should be instructed to take their study-
supplied donepezil exactly as they had been taking their clinically prescribed donepezil during 
the previous 2 months, including at the same time of day.  Compliance with study-dispensed 
donepezil should be assessed at each visit. Confirmation of discontinuation of clinically supplied 
donepezil from subject and caregiver should be obtained at Visit 4 (Week 3) and re-confirmed 
thereafter as needed. Subjects will need to re-start their clinical supply of donepezil (clinically 
prescribed by the Investigator or treating physician) after V8; subjects not entering the open-
label extension study RVT-101-3002 will remain at the same stable dose until V9.
Study-supplied donepezil will be supplied throughout the study as single individual bottles that 
contain 90 tablets.  This is sufficient to cover all visit intervals plus windows as allowed by the 
protocol.  A new bottle of donepezil will be dispensed according to the Time and Events 
Schedule in Table 2. In the event that the Single-Blind Run-In period is extended to repeat the 
MMSE subjects will be redispensed the medication they received at Visit 2.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALCharacteristic Investigational Product
Product name: RVT-101 Placebo
Formulation description: Pink film-coated round 
tabletsPink film-coated round 
tablets
Dosage form: 35-mg tablet Placebo tablet
Unit dose strength(s)/
Dosage level(s):35 mg
(1 tablet per dose)N/A
(1 tablet per dose)
Route of administration:
Duration (Run-in Period):
Duration (Treatment 
Period):Oral 
N/A
24 weeksOral
3 weeks
24 weeks
Dosing instructions: Take 1 tablet orally each 
morning without regard to 
foodTake 1 tablet orally each 
morning without regard to 
food
Clinical Supplier Catalent Pharma Solutions, 
Kansas City, MO USACatalent Pharma Solutions, 
Kansas City, MO USA
Characteristic Study-Dispensed Donepezil
Product name: Donepezil hydrochloride 
(5 mg and 10 mg tablets)
Formulation description: 5 mg tablets:  white to off white film-coated, round tablets 
debossed with ML89 on one side
10 mg tablets:  yellow film-coated round tablets debossed 
with ML88 on one side
Dosage form: Tablet
Unit dose strength(s)/
Dosage level(s):5 mg (1 tablet per dose) and 10 mg (1 tablet per dose)
Route of administration:
Duration (Run-in Period):
Duration (Treatment 
Period):Oral
3 weeks
24 weeks
Dosing instructions: Take 1 tablet orally as prescribed
Clinical Supplier Catalent Pharma Solutions, Kansas City, MO USA
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL7.2. Randomization/Treatment Assignment
Subjects will be assigned to receive RVT-101 or placebo as adjunct therapy to existing stable 
donepezil therapy in accordance with the randomization schedule, prior to the start of the 
Double-Blind Treatment Period, using validated software.
Following confirmation of eligibility at Visit 3 (end of Single-Blind Run-In Period), subjects will 
be randomized to placebo or RVT-101 in a 1:1 ratio. Randomization will be stratified according 
to subjects’ baseline MMSE scores, so as not to exceed the limits described in Section 10.2.
7.3. Blinding
This will be a double-blind study. The study will include a 3-week Single-Blind Run-In Period 
during which investigators will know that the subject is taking placebo but the subject and 
caregiver will not.  This will be followed by a 24-week Double-Blind Treatment Period when 
neither subjects nor their caregivers nor investigators will know which of the 2 treatments the 
subject is receiving.  Subjects will be informed that they will receive placebo at some point 
during the study but they will not know when this will be.  Subjects will not be informed of 
transition from the Single-Blind Run-In Period to the Double-Blind Treatment Period. RVT-101
and placebo will be provided as tablets that are indistinguishable in appearance, smell, and taste.  
Donepezil will be supplied at the start of the Run-In Period and will be clearly marked 
throughout the study in an unblinded fashion.
The following will apply:
The investigator or treating physician may unblind a subject’s treatment assignment. Such a 
measure should be taken only in the case of an emergency OR in the event of a serious 
medical condition when knowledge of the investigational product is essential for the 
appropriate clinical management or welfare of the subject as judged by the investigator.
In the event that a medical emergency or condition requires knowledge of the subject’s 
treatment assignment, the investigator will contact the Medical Monitor to discuss the 
potential need for unblinding.  Unblinding will be done through the interactive voice 
response system (IVRS)/interactive web response system (IWRS).  The procedure of 
unblinding for a specific subject is provided in the Study Reference Manual.
If, for safety reasons, the investigator determines that the subject’s treatment must be 
immediately unblinded to provide adequate medical treatment, the investigator must inform 
the Medical Monitor about the unblinding as soon as possible, but without revealing the 
treatment assignment of the unblinded subject. 
The sponsor will be informed without delay of the decision to unblind any subject and will 
determine whether any additional measures need to be taken for the safety of subjects 
currently in the study.
Any other requests to reveal a subject’s treatment identity must be requested of, and 
approved by, Axovant Sciences.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALA subject will be withdrawn from the study if his or her treatment code is unblinded by the 
investigator or treating physician. The date, time, and reason for the unblinding must be 
fully documented in the eCRF.
Axovant Sciences or their designee may unblind the treatment assignment for any subject if this 
is required to fulfill regulatory reporting obligations, such as expedited SAE reporting.
7.4. Packaging and Labeling
RVT-101 35-mg tablets and matching placebo tablets will be packaged in high-density 
polyethylene bottles.  Labels for RVT-101 and placebo bottles will meet all applicable 
requirements of the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and Annex 13 of Good 
Manufacturing Practices: Manufacture of investigational medicinal products (July 2010) and/or 
other local regulations as applicable.
A sample of the information included in the label for investigational product is provided in
Figure 2 and for study-supplied donepezil in Figure 3 (5 mg tablets) and Figure 4
(10 mg tablets).
Figure 2 RVT-101 35 mg or placebo
Protocol RVT-101-3001                                                       Subject Number:
Lot number: #####/#####                                                 
Bottle ID No: xxxxx                                                                                          
Contains RVT-101 35 mg tablets or Placebo tablets
Quantity: 50 Tablets/Bottle
Dosing Directions: Take one tablet orally each morning with or without food. Do not cut or crush.
Store at room temperature (59-86 F; 15-30 C).  Protect from light.
Caution: New Drug—Limited by Federal law to investigational use.
Keep out of reach of children.
Sponsor: Axovant Sciences Ltd.  
Phone # +1 (646) 495-8197
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALFigure 3 Donepezil Hydrochloride 5 mg
Protocol RVT-101-3001 Subject Number:                              
Lot number: #####                                      
Bottle ID No: xxxxx                      Expiry date: MMMYYYY
Contains: Donepezil Hydrochloride 5 mg 
Quantity: 90 Tablets/Bottle
Dosing Directions:  Take one tablet orally as prescribed.
Store at room temperature (59-86 F; 15-30 C).  Protect from light.
For Clinical Trial Use only. Keep out of reach of children.
Sponsor: Axovant Sciences Ltd.
Phone # +1 (646) 495-8197
Figure 4 Donepezil Hydrochloride 10 mg
Protocol RVT-101-3001 Subject Number:
Lot number: #####                                      
Bottle ID No: xxxxx                      Expiry date: MMMYYYY
Contains: Donepezil Hydrochloride 10 mg 
Quantity: 90 Tablets/Bottle
Dosing Directions:  Take one tablet orally as prescribed.
Store at room temperature (59-86 F; 15-30 C).  Protect from light.
For Clinical Trial Use only. Keep out of reach of children.
Sponsor: Axovant Sciences Ltd.
Phone # +1 (646) 495-8197
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL7.5. Preparation/Handling/Storage/Accountability
No special preparation of investigational product is required. Investigational product will be 
stored at up to 30°C and protected from light.
Only subjects enrolled in the study may receive investigational product and only authorized 
site staff may supply or administer investigational product.  All investigational product must 
be stored in a secure, environmentally controlled and monitored (manual or automated) area 
in accordance with the labelled storage conditions, with access limited to the investigator 
and authorized site staff.
The investigator, institution, or the head of the medical institution (where applicable) is 
responsible for investigational product accountability, reconciliation, and record 
maintenance (i.e., receipt, reconciliation, and final disposition records).
Site staff will record the subject number on the packaging label for both investigational 
product and study-supplied donepezil for each bottle dispensed. 
Further guidance and information for final disposition of unused investigational product are 
provided in the Study Reference Manual.
Under normal conditions of handling and administration, investigational product is not 
expected to pose significant safety risks to site staff.  In the case of unintentional 
occupational exposure, notify the study monitor, Medical Monitor, and/or the Axovant
Sciences study contact.
A Material Safety Data Sheet/equivalent document describing occupational hazards and 
recommended handling precautions either will be provided to the investigator, where this is 
required by local laws, or is available upon request from Axovant Sciences.
7.6. Compliance with Investigational Product and Study-Supplied 
Donepezil Administration
When subjects are dosed at the site, they will receive investigational product directly from the 
investigator or designee, under medical supervision.  The date and time of each dose 
administered in the clinic will be recorded in the source documents.  The dose of investigational 
product and study subject identification will be confirmed at the time of dosing by a member of 
the study site staff other than the person administering the investigational product.
Every effort should be made to encourage subject compliance with the dosage regimen as per 
protocol for both investigational product and continued treatment with study-supplied donepezil.
The investigator is responsible for discussing methods to ensure high treatment compliance with 
subjects and caregivers before randomization.  All subjects and their caregivers should be 
instructed to return medication bottles with any unused drug at each visit to the investigator. A
record of the supplies dispensed, taken, and returned at each visit will be made in the eCRF. The 
investigator or designee is responsible for reconciling the number of tablets returned with the 
expected number of tablets to be taken by a study subject and accounting for any discrepancies.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALSubjects should be withdrawn from the study where there has been a failure to take blinded 
investigational product or donepezil for a period exceeding 7 consecutive days.  While 
interruptions in investigational product administration should be avoided wherever possible, 
short-term interruptions (less than or equal to 7 days) due to forgetfulness; caregiver illness or 
absence; a pause in investigational product administration required during an intervention, 
hospitalization, or while a subject considers the study continuation; or for any other reason are 
not grounds for automatic withdrawal but should be assessed by the investigator.
Other major protocol violations as well as use of prohibited drugs (see Section 7.9.2 ) may be 
cause for discontinuation of investigational product or withdrawal from the study.
7.7. Treatment of Investigational Product Overdose
Any dose of RVT-101 greater than 100 mg within a 24-hour time period will be considered an 
overdose.
No data are available with regard to overdose of RVT-101 in humans.  There is no specific 
treatment to be used in the event of overdose with RVT-101.  Investigators should use their 
clinical judgment in treating cases of overdose as dictated by the subject’s clinical status.
In the event of an overdose the investigator or treating physician should:
Contact the Medical Monitor immediately,
Closely monitor the subject for AEs/SAEs and laboratory abnormalities and ensure 
appropriate clinical management. Overdose in the absence of other AEs will not be reported 
as an AE in its own right.
Obtain a plasma sample for PK analysis within 2 days of the overdose of investigational 
product, if requested by the Medical Monitor (determined on a case-by-case basis), and
Document the quantity of the excess dose as well as the time of administration of the 
overdose in the eCRF.
It is not necessarily required that the investigator unblind a subject who has taken an overdose.  
As noted in Section 7.3, unblinding should only be done in the case of an emergency OR in the 
event of a serious medical condition when knowledge of the investigational product is essential 
for the appropriate clinical management or welfare of the subject, as judged by the investigator.
Decisions regarding dose interruptions will be made by the investigator in consultation with the 
Medical Monitor based on the clinical evaluation of the subject.
7.8. Treatment after the End of the Study
The investigator is responsible for ensuring that consideration has been given to the post-study 
care of the subject’s medical condition.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALAfter completion of Visit 8, the subject may be considered for enrollment in the open-label 
extension study RVT-101-3002. Only subjects who do not enroll in the extension study will 
complete the Follow-up Visit (Visit 9).
7.9. Concomitant Medications and Non-Drug Therapies
7.9.1. Permitted Medications and Non-Drug Therapies
All current concomitant medications and those taken within the 6 months prior to Screening,
including over-the-counter and herbal remedies, will be recorded in the eCRF. Non-medication 
therapies related to the subject’s AD (neurostimulation, cognitive rehabilitation) that have 
occurred in the 12 months prior to Screening must also be recorded.  The name of the drug, the 
dose, indication and route of administration as well as the dates administered should be 
documented; the minimum requirement is to record the drug name and dates of administration.  
Any medication not specified in the list of prohibited and conditional medications provided in 
Table 1 is permitted during the study.
7.9.2. Prohibited Medications and Non-Drug Therapies
Subjects who begin treatment during the study with any prohibited medication, or begin 
cognitive tasks for cognitive rehabilitation performed under medical supervision or 
neurostimulation should be withdrawn from the study.  However, where such treatment has been 
for less than or equal to 7 days, termination of the prohibited medication or treatment and 
continuation in the study may be considered by the investigator in discussion with the Medical 
Monitor, based on subject safety and the perceived need for the prohibited treatment.  If
treatment with a conditional medication is initiated during the study and will be prescribed 
chronically, the investigator should discuss this with the Medical Monitor before determining 
whether to continue the subject in the study.  Use of prohibited and conditional medications and 
treatments must be documented in the Concomitant Medications section of the eCRF. Prohibited
and conditional medications are listed in Table 1 .
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALTable 1. List of Prohibited and Conditional Medications
Prohibited Medications:
Not allowed during the 
study or within 5 half-lives 
prior to ScreeningProhibited Medications:
Not allowed during the 
study or within 30 days 
prior to Single-Blind Run-
In PeriodConditional Medications:
Not allowed unless 
prescribed at a stable dose 
for at least 2 months prior 
to Screening; dose during 
the study should be stable, 
if possible
Selegiline
Butyrophenones, 
phenothiazines, and other 
“conventional” 
antipsychotics
Barbiturates
MAO inhibitors
Any investigational drug
Substrates of CYP2C91
with narrow therapeutic 
indices: warfarin, 
phenytoin and 
(R)-acenocoumarol
(active component of 
some non-warfarin 
anticoagulants)
Potent CYP3A42
inhibitors/inducers such 
as ketoconazole, 
itraconazole, 
erythromycin, rifampicin, 
phenytoin and 
carbamazepine
Known potent Pgp 
inhibitors3(itraconazole, 
ketoconazole, 
cyclosporin, diltiazem, 
verapamil, quinidine, and 
carvedilol)Acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors other than 
donepezil 
(i.e., galantamine, 
rivastigmine, tacrine)
Memantine
Axona®(caprylidene)Antidepressants (other 
than MAO inhibitors)
Thyroid hormones
Atypical antipsychotics 
(e.g., risperidone)
Benzodiazepines and 
other sedatives/hypnotics 
Note: Benzodiazepines 
or other 
sedatives/hypnotics 
(including antihistamines) 
with half-life less than 
6 hours can be taken on 
an as-needed basis but 
must not be taken within 
5 half-lives prior to 
cognitive testing.
Abbreviations:  CNS = central nervous system; MAO = monoamine oxidase; Pgp = permeability glycoprotein. 
Notes: 
1RVT-101 affects CYP2C9 substrates.
2CYP3A4 is a major enzyme involved with the metabolism of RVT-101.
3Pgp inhibition may affect CNS levels of RVT-101.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL7.10. Lifestyle and/or Dietary Restrictions
7.10.1. Meals and Dietary Restrictions
Subjects should refrain from consumption of grapefruit or grapefruit juice due to the potential to 
raise RVT-101 concentrations.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL8. STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES
Protocol waivers or exemptions are not allowed, with the exception of immediate safety 
concerns. Therefore, adherence to the study design requirements, including those specified 
in the Time and Events Table, are essential and required for study conduct.
8.1. Time and Events
The Time and Events Schedule ( Table 2 ) displays each study assessment and procedure along 
with the time of occurrence.  All study assessments should be conducted by the investigator, 
and/or a suitably qualified designee approved and documented for this study. All raters will be 
trained and certified to perform the specific rating scales in this study.
For Visit 2 there is a visit window of + 5 days.  In the event the Single-Blind Run-In period is 
extended to repeat the MMSE, the new Visit 2 window will be + 3 days.  For Visits 4 and 5 there 
is a visit window of ± 3 days; for all other post-randomization visits, there is a visit window of 
± 5 days. It is important that all visits should be scheduled relative to the baseline visit, except 
for Visit 9 which should be scheduled relative to the last dose of IP. If the visit window is used, 
the subsequent visit should remain according to the planned visit schedule (i.e., the subsequent 
visit date should not be re-calculated from the date of the previous visit but should remain 
relative to baseline).
Information will be recorded in the source documents and, where appropriate, the eCRF.
Every effort should be made to administer the ADAS-Cog within ±1 hour of the time of day of 
the baseline administration on subsequent visits for each subject due to the potential for circadian 
fluctuation in scores.
The order of rating scales should, when possible, be held constant, with the ADAS-Cog given to 
the subject first at each visit. The ADCS-ADL should be the first rating scale given to caregivers
when possible at each visit.
If medical assessments are scheduled for the same nominal time, then the assessments should be 
given after the cognitive testing and occur in the following order whenever possible:
12-lead ECG
Vital signs
Blood draws
Screening Period (up to 28 days before Visit 2): Subjects will be screened for eligibility 
during the Screening Period. Subjects who do not qualify for the study during this period will be 
considered Screen Failures. An ICF will be signed by each subject, if he or she is able, or by the 
caregiver with subject assent.  An ICF will also be signed by the caregiver before any 
study-specific procedures are performed.  Subjects will be screened according to study 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  This Screening Period may be extended for up to an additional 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL14 days if needed to complete assessment activities after approval by the study Medical Monitor.
Subjects who are Screen Failures during the Screening Period may be rescreened after discussion 
with the Medical Monitor. Note: Subjects who are Screen Failures may be rescreened only 
once.
Single-Blind Run-In Period (21 + 5 days before Visit 3): At Visit 2, subjects who meet all 
study screening criteria will enter a Single-Blind Run-In Period.  Investigational product will be 
dispensed.  Subjects will be instructed to take the investigational product once daily in the 
morning.  Subjects will be instructed to take the first Single-Blind Run-In investigational product
(single-blind placebo) during the study visit.  Study-supplied donepezil matching the subject’s 
stable clinical dose will also be dispensed.  Subjects and caregivers should be instructed that 
subjects are to take study-supplied donepezil throughout the course of the study and to 
discontinue any clinically dispensed donepezil prescribed by subjects’ personal physician.  
Visit 2 assessments will be performed according to Table 2 below.  To qualify for randomization 
at Baseline (Visit 3) subjects must return unused study medication, be considered capable of 
completing study assessments, remain within study-specified criteria for MMSE, and meet all 
other eligibility requirements.
The Single-Blind Run-In Period may be extended for 3 weeks after discussion with the Medical 
Monitor for subjects who do not meet MMSE stability criterion for randomization in the event 
that the change in MMSE is seen in the setting of recent change in AD therapy. Subjects who 
require this run-in extension period will have a new baseline visit window of no more than 21 to 
24 days after the originally intended baseline. This subsequent visit will then serve as the 
subject’s baseline if randomization criteria are met.  No new investigational product or 
study-supplied donepezil will be dispensed for the additional run-in period; subjects should be 
instructed to continue taking blinded investigational product and study-supplied donepezil 
dispensed at Visit 2.
The ADAS-Cog assessment should be the first assessment performed, followed by the MMSE.  
If the MMSE score does not meet the stability criterion for randomization, no other assessments 
should be performed.  If after discussion with the Medical Monitor it is determined that the 
Single-Blind Run-In Period may be extended by 3 weeks per the criterion above, the subject 
should be scheduled to return to the clinic in 3 weeks’ time (+ 3 days), and all baseline 
assessments should be performed at this repeat visit.
Baseline (Visit 3) and Double-blind Treatment (Visit 4 through Visit 8): At Visit 3(Baseline), prior to ingestion of double-blind investigational product, Baseline assessments will 
be performed to determine subject eligibility.  Eligible subjects will be randomized to 1 of 2 
groups, RVT-101 or placebo, for the 24 weeks of double-blind treatment assessment.  
Double-blind investigational product and study-supplied donepezil will be dispensed at Visits 3,
5, 6, and 7.  At the Baseline visit, subjects will ingest the first dose of investigational product in 
the clinic in the presence of study center personnel; this may cause dosing to not occur in the 
morning on this visit according to the timing of the subject’s visit schedule.  All additional doses 
will be ingested as outpatients, except for the Visit 6 dose, which should occur in the clinic after 
the PK sample collection. At each visit, subjects will be reminded to take 1 tablet of blinded 
investigational product each morning, and to take study-provided donepezil in accordance with
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 v3.0
CONFIDENTIALtheir previously prescribed treatment regimen. Discontinuation of donepezil prescribed by 
subjects’ personal physician should be confirmed at Visit 3 (Baseline + 5 days). As needed, 
subjects should be reminded to maintain discontinuation of clinically prescribed donepezil while 
taking study-supplied donepezil. Note: no investigational product or study-supplied donepezil 
will be dispensed at Visit 4 (Week 3); subjects will be redispensed the medication that they 
received at Visit 3 after drug accountability has been performed. Compliance with 
investigational product and study-supplied donepezil should be assessed at Visit 4, and study 
bottles returned to subjects to continue until Visit 5 (Day 42 ± 3 days) when the next bottles will 
be dispensed.
Throughout the Baseline and Double-Blind Treatment Periods, all clinic visits will be scheduled 
according to specified visit windows, and all specified assessments will be completed (Table 2).
The administration of the ADAS-Cog should be kept within a ± 1-hour window of the time of 
day of the Baseline assessment for each subject to diminish the potential impact of circadian 
fluctuations in cognition.  This should be taken into consideration when scheduling and 
performing baseline ADAS-Cog assessments.
The order of assessments should remain consistent during the Double-Blind Treatment Period,
and when possible, the ADAS-Cog should be given to the subject first, followed by the other 
efficacy endpoint scales.  If possible, other assessments, including ECG, vital signs, and blood 
draws, should be performed after cognitive testing and other endpoint scales. When possible 
ADCS-ADL should be given as the first assessment to the caregiver followed by other endpoint 
scales.
Although caregiver and subject visits are recommended to be on the same day, this is not 
required so long as they are each kept within the specified visit window. However, every effort 
should be made to have the same caregiver throughout the study.
Subjects who prematurely discontinue double-blind investigational product should be 
encouraged to return to the clinic for an Early Termination Visit, and the early termination 
procedures should be performed as indicated in the time and events schedule.
Safety Follow-Up: All subjects who complete the Double-Blind Treatment Period and do not enter the open-label extension study RVT-101-3002 will be required to attend a Safety Follow-
Up clinic visit (Visit 9) 14 to 19 days after the last day of treatment.  
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL 42 73Table 2. Time and Events Schedule
Study Period: Screening Run-in Baseline TreatmentFollow -
up11 ET
Study Visit Number: V1 V2 V31 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8 V9 ET
Study Week: W(-7) W(-3) W0 W3 W6 W12 W18 W24 W26
Study Day:
relative to Baseline 
unless specifiedUp to 28
days before 
V221 + 5
days1,2
before V30 21 ± 3 42 ± 3 84 ± 5 126 ± 5 168 ± 514 to 19 
days after 
last dose of 
IP
Informed consent X
Inclusion and exclusion criteria X X
Demography X
Medical history X
Concomitant medications review X X X X X X X X X X
Urine drug screen X
C-SSRS X X X X X X X X X
Randomization X
Dispense investigational product3 X X X X X
Dispense study -supplied donepezil3 X X X X X
Assess investigational product and 
study-supplied donepezil complianceX X X X X XX
Physical exam/
current medical conditions 4X X X X X X X X X X
Complete neurological exam X X X X
MRI or CT 5 X
12-lead ECG X X X X X X X X X X
Vital signs 6 X X X X X X X X X X
Review adverse events X X X X X X X X X
Serum OR urine pregnancy test 7 X X X
Hep B, and Hep C screen 8 X
TSH, vitamin B 12, syphilis serology 9 X
Serum chemistry X X X X X X X X X X
Hematology X X X X X X X X X X
Urinalysis X X X X X X X X X X
Blood alcohol content X X X X X X X X
RVT-101 level10 X X X X
Donepezil level10 X X X
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL 43 73Study Period: Screening Run-in Baseline TreatmentFollow -
up11 ET
Study Visit Number: V1 V2 V31 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8 V9 ET
Study Week: W(-7) W(-3) W0 W3 W6 W12 W18 W24 W26
Study Day:
relative to Baseline 
unless specifiedUp to 28
days before 
V221 + 5
days1,2
before V30 21 ± 3 42 ± 3 84 ± 5 126 ± 5 168 ± 514 to 19 
days after 
last dose of 
IP
Hachinski Ischaemia Scale X
ADAS -Cog X X X X X X X
MMSE X X
ADCS -ADL X X X X X X X
CIBIS X
CIBIC+ X X X
NPI X X X X
DS X X
RUD Lite X X
EQ-5D X X
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0
CONFIDENTIAL 44 73Abbreviations:  ADAS -Cog = Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale –cognitive subscale; ADCS -ADL = Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study Group –
Activities of Daily Living Inventory; CIBIC+ = Clinician’s Interview-Based Impression of Change Plus caregiver Interview; CIBIS = Clinician’s 
Interview-Based Impression of Severity; C-SSRS = Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale; CT = computed tomography; DS = Dependence Scale; ECG = 
electrocardiogram; ET = early termination; EQ-5D = EuroQOL 5 dimensions questionnaire; Hep = hepatitis; MMSE = mini-mental state examination; MRI =
magnetic resonance imaging; NPI = Neuropsychiatric Inventory; RUD Lite = Resource Utilization in Dementia Lite; TSH = thyroid stimulating hormone; V = visit; W = week.
Notes: 
1. The Single-Blind Run-In Period may be extended for 3 weeks after discussion with the Medical Monitor for subjects who do not meet MMSE stability 
criterion for randomization in the event that the change in MMSE is seen in the setting of recent change in AD therapy.  Subjects requiring this run-in 
extension period will have a new baseline visit window of no more than 21 to 24 days after the originally intended baseline.  This subsequent visit will then 
serve as the subject’s baseline if randomization criteria are met.  No new study drug or study-supply donepezil will be dispensed for the additional run-in period; subjects should be instructed to continue taking blinded investigational product and study supply donepezil dispensed at Visit 2.
2. The ADAS-Cog assessment will be the first assessment performed, followed by the MMSE.  If the MMSE score does not meet the stability criterion for 
randomization, no other assessments should be performed.  If after discussion with the Medical Monitor it is determined that the Single-Blind Run-In Period may be extended by 3 weeks per the criterion above, the subject should be scheduled to return to the clinic in 3 weeks’ time, and all baseline 
assessments should be performed at this repeat visit (refer to footnote 1).
3. No new drug will be dispensed at V4.  The bottles and pill count should be checked for compliance at V4 , but no new medication will be dispensed at that 
visit.
4. Physical examinations at Screening and V8 will be full examinations; at all other study visits, an abbreviated physical examination is required.  
5. MRI or CT scan will be performed between V1 and V2 if no scan has been performed within the previous 12 months.  These scan findings must be 
consistent with the diagnosis of dementia due to AD without any other clinically significant pathologies.
6. Vital signs will include systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature, and body weight at each visit and height 
at screening. Postural changes in blood pressure will be assessed at screening.
7. Required only for women of child bearing potential.
8. If these tests were performed within 3 months prior to the planned first dose of investigational product, testing is not required. Records must be present in 
the subject’s source documents.
9. If these tests were performed within 12 months prior to the planned first dose of investigational product, testing is not required. Records must be present in 
the subject’s source documents.
10. All PK blood samples should be taken after cognitive testing, ECG, and vital signs measurements have been performed except for the Week 12 (V6) 
sample, which should be taken prior to dosing in the clinic.
11. Required only for subjects who do not enter the open-label extension study RVT-101-3002.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL8.2. Critical Baseline Assessments
Those subjects whose MMSE at Baseline (Visit 3) has changed significantly (more than 3 points) 
from Screening (Visit 1) and/or those subjects whose MMSE at Baseline changes such that it 
falls outside the range 10-26 will not be randomized. The purpose of this is to exclude subjects 
whose baseline is so variable that any drug effect may not be clearly observable and also to 
exclude subjects whose baseline improves under placebo to the level of very mild, or whose 
baseline worsens to borderline severe, making effects of treatment intervention difficult to 
observe with the assessments included in this study. If a greater than 3-point difference between 
the Screening and Baseline MMSE score is in the setting of recent changes in AD medication, 
Single-Blind Run-In may be extended for an additional 3 weeks after discussion with the 
Medical Monitor, during which time MMSE stability defined as less than or equal to 3-point 
change over 3 weeks must be observed.
8.3. Study Assessments and Procedures
8.3.1. Efficacy Assessments
All study assessments should be conducted by the investigator, and/or a suitably qualified 
designee, all of whom will be trained and certified to administer these measures for this study.
Every effort should be made for the same person to conduct specific assessments on each 
individual subject at each study visit. Assessments will be monitored for quality. Screening 
assessments along with accompanying data will be reviewed to insure that subjects meet the 
inclusion criteria.  Other assessments will be monitored by using data collected. Additional 
information regarding the method of quality monitoring of efficacy assessments is provided in 
the Study Reference Manual.
8.3.1.1. Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)
The MMSE (Folstein et al, 1975) consists of 11 tests of orientation, memory (recent and 
immediate), concentration, language, and praxis.  Scores range from 0 to 30, with lower scores 
indicating greater cognitive impairment.  It is based on the performance of the subject and takes 
approximately 5 to 10 minutes to administer.
8.3.1.2. Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale – Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog)
The 11-item and 13-item ADAS-Cog (Rosen et al, 1984; Mohs et al, 1997) assesses a range of 
cognitive abilities including memory, comprehension, orientation in time and place, and 
spontaneous speech.  Most items are evaluated by tests, but some are dependent on clinician 
ratings on a 5-point scale.  The ADAS-Cog-11 total score range is from 0 to 70, with a higher 
score indicating more severe cognitive impairment.  The ADAS-Cog-13 is the ADAS-Cog-11
with 2 additional items: delayed word recall and total digit cancellation.  Scores for the ADAS-
Cog-13 range from 0 to 85 with higher scores indicating greater dysfunction.  The scale takes 
approximately 30 to 40 minutes to administer.  During the study visits where the ADAS-Cog is 
performed, the full ADAS-Cog-13 test items will be collected.  The primary analysis will be of 
the ADAS-Cog-11 subset of tests from that battery and the full ADAS-Cog-13 will be analyzed
as a secondary endpoint.  When possible, the ADAS-Cog should always be the first assessment 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALconducted and should be administered, if possible, within ±1 hour of the time of baseline 
administration at all subsequent visits to control for potential impact of circadian variation in 
performance.
8.3.1.3. Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study - Activities of Daily Living
(ADCS-ADL)
The ADCS-ADL scale (Galasko et al, 1997) measures functional impairment in terms of 
activities of daily living. The ADCS-ADL is an interviewer-administered, informant-based scale 
where the informant (caregiver) responds to 23 activities of daily living questions about the 
subject.  The questions range from basic to instrumental activities of daily living and take 
approximately 20 minutes to complete.  The score ranges from 0 to 78; the lower the score, the 
greater the impairment.
8.3.1.4. Clinician’s Interview-Based Impression of Change Plus Caregiver Interview
(CIBIC+)
The CIBIC+ assessment (Schneider et al, 1997) measures the global functioning of the subject 
through structured interviews by an investigator with both the subject and caregiver.  The CIBIS 
(Clinician’s Interview-Based Impression of Severity) will be administered at Baseline and the 
CIBIC+ will be administered at subsequent study visits.  The change from baseline is recorded 
on a 7-point scale with a score of 4 indicating no change, scores above 4 indicating worsening, 
and scores below 4 indicating improvement. This scale will be administered by a rater 
independent of the ADAS-Cog, who will be trained and certified for this study.
8.3.1.5. Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI)
The NPI (Cummings et al, 1994) is a behavior rating scale composed of a 12-item structured 
interview of the caregiver that is scored from 0 to 144 (the higher the score, the greater the 
psychiatric disturbance).  It assesses 12 behavioral disturbances occurring in dementia patients: 
delusions, hallucinations, agitation, dysphoria, anxiety, apathy, irritability, euphoria, 
disinhibition, aberrant motor activity, night-time behavior disturbances, and eating disturbances.
Both the frequency and the severity of each behavior are determined.  
8.3.1.6. Resource Utilization in Dementia Lite (RUD Lite)
The RUD scale (Wimo et al, 1998) is designed to assess caregiver burden and provide 
pharmacoeconomic data related to AD.  The RUD Lite 3.3 includes both baseline and follow-up
questions.  Caregiver-related questions include a description of the caregiver for demographic 
information and time spent caring for the subject and changes in work status.  Subject-related 
questions include residential status and healthcare resource utilization.  In the event that a subject
changes caregiver during the course of the study, the new caregiver must complete a baseline 
questionnaire at the earliest possible visit.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL8.3.1.7. Dependence Scale
The DSmeasures the amount of assistance patients with dementia require in performing daily 
activities (Brickman et al, 2002).  The caregiver answers questions about the dependency of the 
subject.  The scale consists of 13 items, representing a range of severity from mild to severe
levels of dependency. The score range is from 0 to 15 with higher scores indicating greater 
dependency.
8.3.1.8. EuroQol-5D
The EQ-5D is a standardized measure of health status that provides a measure of health-related 
quality of life that is widely used in clinical trials (Rabin and deCharro, 2001).  For this study the 
EQ-5D will be a caregiver proxy assessment.  The assessment will be completed by the caregiver 
and will assess the caregiver’s impressions of how the subject would rate his/her own quality of 
life.  The EQ-5D questionnaire consists of 2 components: the EQ-5D descriptive system and the 
EQ visual analogue scale (EQ-VAS).  The EQ-5D descriptive system includes 5 dimensions: 
mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort, and anxiety/depression.  The EQ-VAS 
records overall health status on a 20-cm vertical line with a score of 0 (worst health one can 
imagine) to 100 (best health one can imagine).
8.3.2. Safety and Screening Assessments
8.3.2.1. Adverse Events
The investigator or site staff is responsible for detecting, documenting, and reporting events that 
meet the definition of an AE or SAE.
8.3.2.1.1. Definition of Adverse Events
An AE is any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in humans, whether 
or not considered drug related.  Therefore an AE can be ANY unfavorable and unintended sign 
(including an abnormal laboratory finding or vital sign measurement), symptom, or disease 
temporally associated with the use of a medicinal product, without any judgment about causality.
AEs are recorded from the time that informed consent is signed, including those that occur 
during the Single-Blind Run-in Period.  Treatment emergent adverse events are defined as those 
that occur on or after the date of the first dose of double-blind investigational product.
Events meeting the definition of an AE include :
Exacerbation of a chronic or intermittent pre-existing condition including either an increase 
in frequency and/or intensity of the condition.
New conditions detected or diagnosed after investigational product administration even 
though it may have been present prior to the start of the study.
Signs, symptoms, or the clinical sequelae of a suspected drug interaction.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALSigns, symptoms, or the clinical sequelae of a suspected overdose of either investigational 
product or a concomitant medication.
Clinically significant abnormal findings (laboratory test results, vital signs, physical 
examination findings, ECGs, radiologic exams, or other studies) should be recorded as AEs.
A “clinically significant” finding is one that affects clinical management, including
additional visits, monitoring or referrals, diagnostic tests, or alteration of treatment, or that is 
considered clinically significant by the investigator.  A clinically significant finding may be 
a change in a test that has previously been abnormal but now requires additional action.
When a medical or surgical procedure is performed, the condition that leads to the procedure 
should be recorded as the AE.
Events that do not meet the definition of an AE include:
Anticipated day-to-day fluctuations or expected progression of pre-existing disease(s) or 
condition(s) present or detected at the start of the study unless judged by investigator to be 
more severe than expected for the subject’s underlying condition.
Abnormal laboratory, ECG, or vital sign measurements that are not labelled clinically 
significant (see definition above).
Situations where an untoward medical occurrence did not occur (social and/or convenience 
admission to a hospital).
Overdose in the absence of other AEs will not be reported as an AE in its own right.
Changes in C-SSRS during the course of the study indicating worsening should be evaluated 
by the investigator for clinical significance, and if clinically significant (e.g., alteration in 
medical care or intervention is required), an associated AE should be recorded, if present.  
The AE should be the primary underlying clinical manifestation assessed as clinically 
significant, and not the change in score itself.
8.3.2.1.2. Definition of Serious Adverse Event
An AE is considered serious if, in the view of either investigator or sponsor, it results in any of 
the following outcomes:
Death,
A life-threatening AE,
An AE is considered “life-threatening” if, in the view of either the investigator or 
sponsor, its occurrence places the patient or subject at immediate risk of death.  It does 
not include an AE that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.  
The determination of whether an AE is life-threatening can be based on the opinion of 
either the investigator or sponsor.  Thus, if either believes that it meets the definition of 
life-threatening, it must be considered life-threatening for reporting purposes.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALInpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization,
A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct 
normal life functions, or
A congenital anomaly/birth defect.
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they 
may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent 
one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  Examples of such medical events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias 
or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug 
dependency or drug abuse.
This definition of an SAE permits either the sponsor or the investigator to decide if an event is 
serious.  Because SAEs are critically important for the identification of significant safety 
problems, FDA believes taking into account both the investigator’s and the sponsor’s assessment 
is important.  For example, the investigator’s perspective may be informed by having actually 
observed the event, and the sponsor is likely to have broader knowledge of the drug and its 
effects to inform its evaluation of the significance of the event.  If either the sponsor or 
investigator believes that the event is serious, the event must be considered serious and evaluated 
by the sponsor for possible expedited reporting.
8.3.2.1.3. Time Period and Frequency for Collecting Adverse Event and Serious Adverse 
Event Information
Collection of AEs and SAEs will begin at the time a subject signs informed consent and 
continues until the follow-up contact. SAEs that are spontaneously reported by the subject or 
subject representative or discovered by the investigator or designee after the follow-up visit and 
up to 30 days after the last dose of investigational product must be collected and reported.
All SAEs will be recorded and reported to Worldwide Clinical Trials or Axovant Sciences within 
24 hours of the investigator becoming aware of the SAE.
Investigators are not obligated to actively seek AEs or SAEs in former study subjects. However, 
if the investigator learns of any SAE, including a death, at any time after a subject has been 
discharged from the study, and he/she considers the event reasonably related to the 
investigational product or study participation, the investigator must promptly notify the sponsor 
or sponsor representative.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL8.3.2.1.4. Assessment of Adverse Events
The severity of each AE will be assessed by the investigator, or designee approved and 
documented for this study, as mild, moderate, or severe based on the below definitions:
Mild: Event that is usually transient and may require only minimal treatment or 
therapeutic intervention.  The event does not generally interfere with usual activities of 
daily living
Moderate: Event that is usually alleviated with additional specific therapeutic 
intervention.  The event interferes with usual activities of daily living, causing 
discomfort, but poses no significant or permanent risk of harm to the subject.
Severe: Event that interrupts usual activities of daily living or significantly affects clinical 
status, or may require intensive therapeutic intervention.
Note that severity is not the same as “seriousness,” which is defined in Section 8.3.2.1.2 .
Outcome will be assessed using the following categories: recovered/resolved, not recovered/not 
resolved, recovered/resolved with sequelae, fatal, or unknown.
Instructions for assessing causality are provided in the Study Reference Manual.
8.3.2.1.5. Method of Detecting Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
Care will be taken not to introduce bias when detecting AEs and/or SAEs. Open-ended and 
non-leading verbal questioning is the preferred method to inquire about AE occurrence.  
Appropriate questions include:
“How are you feeling?”
“Have you had any (other) medical problems since your last visit/contact?”
“Have you taken any new medicines, other than those provided in this study, since your last 
visit/contact?”
8.3.2.1.6. Follow-up of Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
After the initial AE/SAE report, the investigator is required to proactively follow each subject at 
subsequent visits/contacts.  All AEs and SAEs will be followed until resolution, until the 
condition stabilizes, until the event is otherwise explained, or until the subject is lost to 
follow-up.
8.3.2.1.7. Reporting of Serious Adverse Events
All new SAEs must be reported in English to the study sponsor or sponsor’s representatives 
within 24 hours of the investigators first knowledge of the event using the sponsor-supplied 
Serious Adverse Event Form regardless of relationship to the study procedures or investigational 
product. All deaths must be reported within 24 hours of the investigator’s first knowledge of the 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALevent. It is recognized that complete information may not be available at the time of the initial 
SAE report.  Additional information should be supplied on subsequent Serious Adverse Event
Forms as it becomes available.
For the initial SAE notification report, the investigator must provide, at minimum, basic 
information such as the protocol number, subject’s date of birth, subject identification number, 
period of investigational product intake, event term, nature of the event, the seriousness criteria,
and the investigator’s attribution regarding relatedness to investigational product.  In addition, 
the initial SAE report should include all pertinent known information about the SAE and the 
affected subject. In addition, the investigator should provide a narrative to describe the course of 
events including any treatments or relevant procedures.  Follow-up information, which may 
include copies of relevant subject records and other documents not available at the initial SAE 
report must be sent to Worldwide Clinical Trials as soon as available.  Follow-up SAE reports 
may describe the evolution of the reported event and any new assessment of outcome and/or 
relationship to investigational product.  Full supporting documentation should be solicited by the 
investigative site even if the SAE occurred at another institution.  Such documentation may 
include copies of relevant medical/hospital records, pathology, or autopsy reports.
Additional instructions regarding SAE reporting are provided in the Study Reference Manual.
8.3.2.1.8. Regulatory Reporting Requirements for Serious Adverse Events
Prompt notification by the investigator to the sponsor or sponsor representative of all SAEs and 
non-serious AEs occurring during a clinical trial is essential so that legal obligations and ethical 
responsibilities towards the safety of subjects and the safety of a product under clinical 
investigation are met.
Axovant Sciences has a legal responsibility to notify both the local regulatory authority and other 
regulatory agencies about the safety of a product under clinical investigation.  Axovant Sciences
will comply with country-specific regulatory requirements relating to safety reporting to the 
regulatory authority, Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee (IEC) and 
investigators.
Investigator safety reports are prepared for suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions (those 
not listed in the Investigator Brochure) according to local regulatory requirements and Axovant
Sciences policy and are forwarded to investigators as necessary.
An investigator who receives an investigator safety report describing an SAE(s) or other specific 
safety information (e.g., summary or listing of SAEs) from Axovant Sciences will file it with the 
Investigator Brochure and will notify the IRB/IEC, if appropriate according to local 
requirements.
8.3.2.2. Safety Monitoring Committee
An independent Safety Monitoring Committee (SMC) will be established by the sponsor to 
review accumulating study data to monitor the safety of all subjects enrolled in RVT-101-3001
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALon an ongoing basis.  Members of the committee will include clinicians and a biostatistician who 
are experienced in the conduct and monitoring of clinical studies.  No Axovant Sciences 
employee or investigator involved in the RVT-101-3001 study will be a member of the SMC or 
participate in closed SMC sessions.  However, representatives from Axovant Sciences may 
attend open meeting sessions and will be available to provide additional information to the SMC
as requested.
The SMC will evaluate potential safety and tolerability issues during periodic scheduled reviews 
of the safety data accrued during the conduct of the study.  The content and format of the safety 
data provided will be in agreement with requests by the SMC members and will contain blinded 
interim safety data.  However, the SMC will be provided unblinded treatment codes for these 
studies if a significant safety concern is identified.  Ad hoc SMC meetings may be held as 
necessary.
After reviewing the interim safety data from RVT-101-3001, the SMC may make a 
recommendation to Axovant Sciences to continue the study with or without modification or to 
terminate the study. All SMC meetings will be properly documented in a SMC report to the 
sponsor.
SMC membership and responsibilities will be further outlined in the SMC Charter, which will be 
maintained separately from the protocol.
8.3.2.3. Physical Examinations
Physical examinations will be performed as indicated in Table 2. A complete physical 
examination will include, at a minimum, assessment of the cardiovascular, respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and neurological systems. Neurological examinations will include assessment 
of gait, balance, coordination, cranial nerves and motor and sensory systems.  A brief,
symptoms-directed physical examination will include, at a minimum, assessments of the lungs, 
cardiovascular system, and abdomen (liver and spleen). Physical examinations at Screening and 
Visit 8 will be full examinations; at all other study visits, an abbreviated physical examination is 
required.
8.3.2.4. Vital Signs
Vital signs will be measured after the subject has been in the seated position for 5 minutes and 
will include temperature, systolic and diastolic blood pressures, pulse rate, and respiratory rate.
Postural changes will be measured within 3 minutes of appropriate body position change.  Body 
weight will also be recorded at each visit and height will be recorded at Screening.
8.3.2.5. Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Single 12-lead ECGs will be obtained at each time point during the study using an ECG machine 
that automatically calculates the heart rate and measures PR, QRS, QT, and QTc intervals with 
the subject in the supine position. The investigator or designated qualified physician at the site 
will evaluate the Screening ECG for any abnormalities that should exclude the subject from the 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALstudy or require acute additional evaluation or intervention.  They should also evaluate the ECG 
printouts for all subsequent visits for any new abnormalities. Any abnormality should include a 
determination of clinical significance. A clinically significant ECG finding is one that requires 
additional medical evaluation or treatment.
8.3.2.6. Clinical Safety Laboratory Assessments
All protocol-required laboratory assessments, as defined in Table 3 , must be conducted in 
accordance with the Study Reference Manual and Protocol Time and Events Schedule ( Table 2 ).
Laboratory requisition forms must be completed and samples must be clearly labelled with the 
subject number, protocol number, site/center number, and visit date. Details for the preparation 
and shipment of samples will be provided by the laboratory and are detailed in the Study 
Reference Manual. Reference ranges for all safety parameters will be provided to the site by the 
laboratory responsible for the assessments.
Abnormal laboratory tests that are clinically significant should also be recorded as AEs on the 
eCRF. Clinically significant means that the confirmed abnormal test result has an impact on
patient management, including additional monitoring or diagnostic tests, or changes in treatment.
The same standard applies to additional non-protocol specified laboratory assessments that are 
performed at the institution’s local laboratory and result in a change in subject management (i.e.,
monitoring, diagnostic tests, or any alteration in treatment).
Refer to the Study Reference Manual for appropriate processing and handling of samples to 
avoid duplicate and/or additional blood draws.
Hematology, clinical chemistry, urinalysis, and other screening laboratory parameters to be 
tested are listed in Table 3 .
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALTable 3. Protocol-Required Screening and Safety Laboratory Assessments
Laboratory 
Assessments Parameters
Hematology Platelet count
RBC count
Hemoglobin
HematocritRBC Indices
MCV
MCHWBC Count with 
Differential
Neutrophils
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
Clinical 
ChemistryBUN
Creatinine
GlucosePotassium
Sodium
Calcium
Chloride
BicarbonateAST
ALT
Alkaline phosphatase
Total and direct 
bilirubin
Total protein
Albumin
GGT
Every Visit
through the 
End of 
Double-Blind 
TreatmentBlood alcohol content
Routine 
UrinalysisSpecific gravity
pH, glucose, protein, blood, and ketones by dipstick
Microscopic examination (if blood or protein is abnormal)
Screening
Tests OnlyHBsAg
Hepatitis C antibody
TSH
Vitamin B 12
Syphilis serology
Serum or urine hCG pregnancy test (as needed for women of child 
bearing potential, including at follow-up/early termination)
Drug screen
Abbreviations:  ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase; BUN = blood urea nitrogen; 
GGT = gamma glutamyltransferase; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; hCG = human chorionic 
gonadotropin; MCH = mean corpuscular hemoglobin; MCV = mean corpuscular volume; RBC = red blood cell;
TSH = thyroid stimulating hormone; WBC = white blood cell.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALAll laboratory tests with values that are considered clinically significantly abnormal during 
participation in the study or at the follow-up visit should be repeated until the values return to 
normal or baseline or until the value stabilizes.  If such values do not return to normal within a 
period judged reasonable by the investigator, the etiology should be identified and the Medical 
Monitor notified.
8.3.2.7. Assessment of Suicidality
Subjects will be assessed for suicidality before and during the study using the Columbia Suicide 
Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS).  Subjects considered to be at significant risk will be excluded 
from the study.  The C-SSRS is a brief measure which is designed to assess severity and change 
of suicidality by integrating both behavior and ideation.  It assesses intensity of ideation (a 
potentially important marker of severity), specifically asking about frequency, duration, 
controllability, deterrents, and reasons for the ideation which was most severe during the 
respectively assessed timeframe.  Suicidal behavior is also assessed by asking further questions 
to categorize the behaviors into actual, interrupted, or aborted attempts; as well as preparatory 
and non-suicidal self-injurious behavior. The C-SSRS will be completed by a rater trained and 
certified to administer this scale.  Any change in C-SSRS score indicating the presence of 
suicidality should be evaluated by the investigator for clinical significance to determine 
continued study eligibility (Section 6.3) and appropriate clinical actions (including but not 
limited to a referral to a mental health professional).
Clinically meaningful suicidal ideation, suicidal behavior and completed suicide should be 
recorded as AEs.
8.3.2.8. Pregnancy
Details of all pregnancies in female subjects will be collected after the start of dosing and until 
30 days after the last dose of investigational product. If a pregnancy is reported, then the 
investigator should inform the Medical Monitor within 24 hours of learning of the pregnancy.
The pregnancy must be followed up to determine outcome (including premature termination) and 
status of mother and child.  Pregnancy complications and elective terminations for medical 
reasons must be reported as an AE or SAE. Spontaneous abortions must be reported as an SAE.
Any SAE occurring in association with a pregnancy brought to the investigator’s attention after 
the subject has completed the study and considered by the investigator as possibly related to the 
investigational product must be promptly reported to the sponsor or the sponsor’s representative.
The investigator must attempt to collect pregnancy information on any female partners of male 
study subjects who become pregnant while the subject is enrolled in the study.  Pregnancy 
information must be reported to the sponsor or the sponsor’s representative as described above. 
The partner will also be followed to determine the outcome of the pregnancy. Information on the 
status of the mother and child will be forwarded to the sponsor or the sponsor’s representative.
Generally, follow-up will be no longer than 6 to 8 weeks following the estimated delivery date. 
Any premature termination of the pregnancy will be reported.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL8.3.3. Pharmacokinetics
Blood samples for PK analysis of RVT-101 and donepezil will be collected in a subset of 
patients at selected sites during the study visits indicated in Section 8.1.  The actual date and time 
of each blood sample collection will be recorded, as well as the date and time of the previous 
dose of double-blind IP and/or donepezil administration. The timing of PK samples may be 
altered and/or PK samples may be obtained at additional time points to ensure thorough PK 
monitoring.
Five PK samples per subject will be taken for the purpose of assessing plasma concentrations of 
RVT-101 and donepezil at the following specific time points:
At Baseline (Visit 3), the PK blood sample should be taken after cognitive testing, ECG, 
and vital signs measurements have been performed, and the date and time of the previous
dose of donepezil will be recorded.  The actual date and time of sample collection will be 
recorded.At Visit 5 (Week 6), the PK blood sample should be taken after cognitive testing, ECG, 
and vital signs measurements have been performed, and the time of the last dose of 
double-blind IP will be recorded.  The actual date and time of sample collection will be 
recorded.
At Visit 6 (Week 12) subjects will be instructed not to take their dose of double-blind IP
in the morning but wait until in the clinic, after 1 PK sample is collected (before dosing,
but after cognitive testing, ECG, and vital signs measurements have been performed). 
Donepezil can be taken on the regular schedule. The date and time of the previous 
double-blind IP and donepezil doses will be recorded along with the actual date and time 
of the pre-dose sample collection at Visit 6.
At Visit 7 (Week 18), the PK blood sample should be taken after cognitive testing, ECG,
and vital signs measurements have been performed, and the time of the last dose of 
double-blind IP will be recorded.  The actual date and time of sample collection will be 
recorded.
At Visit 8 (Week 24), 1 PK blood sample will be collected after cognitive testing, ECG, 
and vital signs measurements have been performed. The date and time of the previous 
donepezil and double-blind IP doses will be recorded along with the actual date and time 
of sample collection.
Unscheduled PK samples may be requested by Axovant Sciences or the Medical Monitor 
after discussion with investigators (e.g., in cases of suspected drug reactions).
The samples will be centrifuged and the resulting plasma stored.  Further details with regard to 
shipping, collection, and processing of samples are provided in the Study Reference Manual.
Plasma analysis will be performed under the control of Axovant Sciences, the details of which 
will be included in the Study Reference Manual .Concentrations of RVT-101, RVT-101
metabolites, and donepezil will be determined in plasma samples using the currently approved 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALbioanalytical methodology. Raw data will be archived at the bioanalytical site (detailed in the 
Study Reference Manual).
Once the plasma has been analyzed for RVT-101 and/or donepezil, any remaining plasma may 
be analyzed for other compound-related metabolites and the results reported under a separate 
protocol.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL9. DATA MANAGEMENT
For this study, subject data will be entered into Axovant Sciences defined eCRFs, transmitted 
electronically to Axovant Sciences or designee, and combined with data provided from other 
sources in a validated data system.
Management of clinical data will be performed in accordance with applicable Axovant Sciences
standards and data cleaning procedures to ensure the integrity of the data, e.g., correcting errors 
and inconsistencies in the data.
AEs and medical history terms will be coded using an agreed version of the Medical Dictionary 
for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA), using WCT coding conventions .
Concomitant medications will be coded using the World Health Organization (WHO)
Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification 
(http://www.whocc.no/filearchive/publications/1_2013guidelines.pdf).
The eCRFs (including queries and audit trails) will be retained by Axovant Sciences, and copies 
will be sent to the investigator to maintain as the investigator copy.  
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL10. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND DATA ANALYSES
10.1. Hypotheses
The primary statistical framework will be to demonstrate superiority of RVT-101 over placebo 
based on the ADAS-Cog-11 and ADCS-ADL change from baseline to Week 24.
The first null hypothesis is that there is no difference between RVT-101 and placebo, when 
added to stable donepezil, in the change from baseline in total ADAS-Cog-11 score at Week 24
in the Intent-to-Treat (ITT) Population. The first alternative hypothesis is that there is a 
difference between RVT-101 and placebo, when added to stable donepezil, in the change from 
baseline to Week 24 total ADAS-Cog-11 score in the ITT Population.
The second null hypothesis is that that there is no difference between RVT-101 and placebo, 
when added to stable donepezil, in the change from baseline in total ADCS-ADL score at 
Week 24 in the ITT Population. The second alternative hypothesis is that there is a difference 
between RVT-101 and placebo, when added to stable donepezil, in the change from baseline to 
Week 24 of ADCS-ADL score in the ITT Population.
The primary comparisons of interest will be performed at the 5% level of significance. All 
hypothesis tests will be 2-sided, with no correction for multiple comparisons.
10.2. Sample Size Considerations
The primary comparisons of interest are to compare RVT-101 to placebo at Week 24 for change 
from baseline in both ADAS-Cog-11 and ADCS-ADL. A sample size of 435 subjects per 
treatment group will allow a difference of 1.6 points between placebo and active treatment in the 
change from baseline in ADAS-Cog score to be detected with 95% power and a 0.05 
significance level assuming an underlying standard deviation (SD) of 6.5.
This sample size will also allow a difference of 2 points between placebo and active treatment in 
the change from baseline in ADCS-ADL score to be detected with 90% power and a 0.05 
significance level assuming an underlying SD of 9. Sample size estimates were based on data 
from study AZ3110866. 
Both endpoints need to achieve a significance level of 0.05 to maintain an overall 5% 
significance level. Hence, the multiplicity issue associated with the trial having 2 primary 
endpoints is addressed as efficacy will only be concluded if both endpoints are significant.
Assuming a drop-out and missing data rate of approximately 25% up to Week 24, a total of 
approximately 1150 subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to RVT-101 or placebo.
The impact of baseline severity and possible sub-populations of milder and more moderate 
subjects is an important consideration of this study. Hence, a stratified randomization will be 
used to enroll subjects according to their baseline MMSE score in the groupings of 10-15 points, 
16-20 points, and 21-26 points.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALTwo subgroups using MMSE score at baseline will be examined: moderate 10-20 and mild 16-26. 
The thresholds for randomization presented in Table 4 will be enforced.
Table 4. Baseline Mini Mental State Examination Stratification
Baseline MMSE Score 10-15 16-20 21-26
Target for recruited population ;20% ;40% ;20%
The purpose of this ratio is to ensure that approximately 70% of the recruited population will 
contribute data to a data-defined subgroup analysis of either milder or more moderate subjects on 
ADAS-Cog-11 and/or ADCS-ADL. It is estimated that a difference from placebo of 1.6 points 
in ADAS-Cog-11 and 2.0 points in ADCS-ADL will be observable with approximately 80% 
power in a subgroup, which includes approximately 70% of subjects.
10.2.1. Sample Size Sensitivity
Based on study AZ3110866, the observed range of standard deviations for ADAS-Cog changes 
from baseline score was 6.13 to 6.37, and the range of observed standard deviations for 
ADCS-ADL changes from baseline was 8.84 to 9.36.  The sample size calculation for this study 
used the SD of 6.5 for the ADCS-Cog endpoint and SD of 9 for the ADCS-ADL endpoint.
The robustness of the sample size calculations have been considered in order to assess the impact 
on the power of the study. Table 5 below shows the sensitivity of the required sample size to the 
assumptions used in the sample size calculation.
Table 5. Sample Size Estimates with Varying Expected Treatment Differences and
Standard Deviations
Expected 
Difference 
(RVT-101 vs. 
Placebo) SDSample Size to 
have at least 
90% PowerSample Size to 
have at least 
80% PowerPower with
N=435
ADAS-Cog-11 1.6 6 297 222 97.5
1.6 6.5 348 261 95.2
1.6 7 403 302 92.1
ADCS-ADL 1.8 8.5 469 351 87.7
1.8 9 526 393 83.9
1.8 9.5 586 438 79.8
2 8.5 380 285 93.4
2 9 426 318 90.6
2 9.5 475 355 87.4
Abbreviations:  ADAS-Cog-11 = Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale – Cognitive Subscale-11;
ADCS-ADL = Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study - activities of daily living; SD = standard deviation.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL10.2.2. Sample Size Re-estimation or Adjustment
No sample size re-estimation is planned.
10.3. Data Analysis Considerations
10.3.1. Analysis Populations
The ITT Population will consist of all subjects randomized to treatment who have taken at least 1
dose of investigational product and who have at least 1 post-baseline assessment.  This will be 
the primary population used for the efficacy analysis.
The Per-Protocol (PP) Population will consist of those members of the ITT Population who have 
no major protocol violations.  The PP Population will not be analyzed if this population 
comprises more than 95% or less than 50% of the ITT Population.  This population will be used 
for confirmatory analysis of the 2 primary efficacy variables and other cognitive and functioning 
endpoints. The PP Population will be identified prior to breaking the study blind.
The primary population for safety analyses will be the Safety Population, which will consist of 
all subjects who were randomized and took at least 1 dose of investigational product.
10.3.2. Interim Analysis
No interim efficacy analyses are planned.
10.4. Key Elements of Analysis Plan
All hypothesis tests and confidence intervals will be 2-sided at an alpha level of 5%.
For statistical analysis, center information will be pooled by geographical region or size. The 
method of grouping by center will be agreed upon prior to unblinding the study and outlined in 
the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).
All efficacy and safety measures over the course of the study will be presented. Continuous data 
will be summarized by means, SDs, medians, maximum, minimum, and number of subjects. 
Categorical data will be summarized by counts and percentages.
10.4.1. Primary Efficacy Analyses
The primary analyses will be based on the ITT Population.  In addition, analyses of the PP 
Population will be used to support the primary efficacy analysis.
Treatment comparisons between the RVT-101 and placebo groups in ADAS-Cog-11 and 
ADCS-ADL scores change from baseline at Week 24 will be analyzed using a mixed model for 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALrepeated measures (MMRM) with restricted maximum likelihood estimation.  This model 
corrects for dropout and accounts for the fact that measurements taken on the same subject over 
time tend to be correlated, by using all available information on subjects within the same 
covariate set to come up with an estimate of the treatment effect for a dropout-free population.  
No imputation of the missing values will be made or required and the data used in the analysis 
will be the actual observed responses at each visit. The statistical model will be fitted with terms 
for treatment group, visit, treatment by visit interaction, baseline score, baseline MMSE, and 
pooled center. 
The interaction terms of baseline MMSE by visit will be evaluated and will be included in the 
model if appropriate.  Details will be provided in the RVT-101 3001 SAP.
Primary inferences will be drawn from treatment differences for the changes from baseline 
derived from the MMRM models at Week 24. As additional supportive information, treatment 
differences for each post baseline visit will also be derived using the MMRM models. The 
estimated treatment difference for at each visit will be displayed in the summary of statistical 
analysis together with the 95% confidence interval and the associated p-value.
The nature of missing data will be explored and the extent of missing data will be summarized.  
Sensitivity analysis will be conducted to support the MMRM analysis.  This will include analysis 
based on completer, and analyses based on complete datasets for Week 24 derived via 
imputation techniques using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). Details on covariates for 
ANCOVA and missing data imputations will be provided in the SAP.
The relationship between ADAS-Cog-11, ADCS-ADL, and baseline severity will be
investigated.
The primary comparisons will be performed separately by moderate (Baseline MMSE 10-20) 
and mild (Baseline MMSE 16-26) using the same MMRM model.  Additional subgroups 
including gender, demographic, and other baseline characteristics may be performed.  Further 
details will be given in the SAP.
10.4.2. Secondary Efficacy Analyses
Cognition and other efficacy endpoints:
ADAS-Cog-13 scores change from baseline at Week 24
CIBIC+ scores at Week 24
NPI scores change from baseline at Week 24
The DS change from baseline at Week 24
Comparison of RVT-101 versus placebo for the above endpoints will be performed using 
a mixed model for repeated measures or analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), similar to 
the models described for the primary endpoint.
The relationship between endpoints and demographics/baseline characteristics will be 
investigated.  The comparisons may be repeated by selected subgroups of interest, i.e., gender, 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALbaseline severity based on MMSE score, and other baseline characteristics.  Further details will 
be given in the SAP.
In addition, the between treatment comparisons on CIBIC+ based on the Week 24 Observed 
Case (OC) and Week 24 LOCF datasets using Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test will be performed.  
The number and percentage of subjects in each category of CIBIC+ will also be summarized by 
visit for each treatment group.
10.4.3. Tertiary Efficacy Measures
The RUD Lite and the EQ-5D will be summarized descriptively by treatment. Treatment 
comparisons between RVT-101 and placebo will be analyzed using an analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA) model. Details will be provided in the SAP.
10.4.4. Responder Analysis
In this trial the following responder definitions will be presented:
1. ADAS-Cog-11: Improvement by at least 3 points from baseline at Week 24
2. ADCS-ADL: No change or improvement from baseline at Week 24
3. CIBIC+: No change or improvement at Week 24
4. ADAS-Cog-11 composite: Simultaneously meeting the criteria for ADAS-Cog-11,
CIBIC+, and ADCS-ADL
Alternative composite endpoints and definitions of responders may be explored.  The percentage of 
responders and the difference in proportions compared to placebo will be presented. This data will 
be analyzed using logistic regression or Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel test. Further details will be 
given in the SAP.
10.4.5. Pharmacokinetic Analyses
Plasma concentrations will be listed and summarized by study visit and treatment group.
Pharmacokinetic parameters for RVT-101 (AUC ,Cmax-ss and C min-ss) for each subject will be 
estimated via nonlinear mixed effect modeling using a population PK model based on data from 
previous studies.
No population PK analysis is planned for donepezil. Donepezil concentrations will be visually 
compared to literature steady state values (mean ± SD) (Tiseo et al, 1998):
5 mg C min= 21.4 ± 3.8 and C max= 34.1 ± 7.3 ng/mL
10 mg C min= 38.5 ± 8.6 and C max= 60.5 ± 10.0 ng/mL,
where C minis the minimum (trough) concentration and C maxis the peak concentration
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL10.4.6. Pharmacokinetic / Pharmacodynamic Analyses
Relationships between RVT-101 PK parameters and measures of safety and efficacy will be 
explored.
10.4.7. Safety Analyses
The safety analyses will be based on the Safety Population.
Safety will be assessed by summarizing and analyzing AEs, laboratory analytes, vital signs, ECG 
parameters, physical examination findings, C-SSRS scores, and concomitant medications.
10.4.7.1. Adverse Events
AEs will be considered treatment-emergent (TEAEs) if they start or worsen after first dose of the 
double-blinded treatment.  If an AE begins or worsens on the first day of investigational product
administration, a CRF and source data note will be provided to clarify whether it occurred prior 
to or after investigational product administration.  TEAEs, SAEs including deaths, AEs that lead 
to discontinuation of investigational product, and AEs by maximum severity and relationship to 
investigational product will be summarized by MedDRA system organ class (SOC) and preferred 
term.  TEAEs will also be summarized by preferred term, sorted by decreasing frequency within 
SOC.  AEs will be summarized separately for the Single-Blind Run-In Period, the Double-Blind 
Treatment Period, and the Follow-up Period.
10.4.7.2. Clinical Laboratory Tests
Summaries of clinical laboratory data will be provided for subjects in the Safety Population.  No 
inferential statistics will be provided.
Quantitative values and change from baseline in quantitative values will be summarized by 
planned nominal time and treatment for each quantitative laboratory value.  Listings of all 
laboratory results and reference ranges will be provided.  For multiple lab assessments at the 
same time point, the worst value will be used for the data summaries.
Laboratory values that fall outside of the reference range will be flagged as H=High or L=low.
A lab shift table may be provided to show the baseline to the worst post value. Laboratory 
values that do not meet the laboratory abnormalities will be assigned N=normal in the shift table.
10.4.7.3. Vital Signs, Electrocardiograms, Physical Findings, and Other Safety 
Evaluations
Descriptive summaries of medical history, vital signs, weight, and ECG parameters will be 
presented separately for each study visit and treatment group. Clinically significant abnormal 
morphological ECG findings will be summarized by study visit.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALAbnormal physical examination findings will be summarized to include the number and 
percentage of subjects experiencing each treatment-emergent abnormal physical finding.
Concomitant medications will be coded using the WHO ATC classification 
(http://www.whocc.no/filearchive/publications/1_2013guidelines.pdf).
These data will be summarized by treatment group.
10.4.7.4. Suicidality
A subject data listing of all answers of the C-SSRS questionnaire will be presented. The number 
and percentage of subjects reporting suicidal ideation and behavior will be summarized. 
Additional summaries may be provided if data warrant. Details will be provided in the SAP.
10.4.8. Subgroup Analyses
The efficacy analyses will be performed for the following subgroups:
Milder Population (Baseline MMSE 16-26)
Moderate Population (Baseline MMSE 10-20)
Female
Male
Analyses of additional subgroups based on demographics and baseline characteristics will be 
described in the SAP.
10.4.9. Other Analyses
Additional analyses of the data may be conducted as deemed appropriate and will be detailed in 
the SAP. Further analyses of the data not specified in the SAP may be undertaken as post-hoc 
analyses after completion of the study. Results of all study assessments will be included in an
appendix to the study report.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL11. RESPONSIBILITIES
11.1. Investigator Responsibilities
11.1.1. Good Clinical Practice
The investigator will ensure that this study is conducted in accordance with the principles of the 
“Declaration of Helsinki” (as amended in Edinburgh, Tokyo, Venice, Hong Kong, and South 
Africa), International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines, or with the laws and 
regulations of the country in which the research is conducted, whichever affords the greater 
protection to the study subject. The investigator will ensure that the basic principles of “Good 
Clinical Practice,” as outlined in 21 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 312, subpart D, 
“Responsibilities of Sponsors and Investigators,” 21 CFR, part 50, 1998, and 21 CFR, part 56, 
1998, are adhered to. These standards are consistent with the requirements of the European 
Community Directive 2001/20/EC, which shall be adhered to.
Since this is a “covered” clinical trial, the investigator will ensure that 21 CFR, Part 54, 1998, is 
adhered to; a “covered” clinical trial is any “study of a drug or device in humans submitted in a 
marketing application or reclassification petition subject to this part that the applicant or FDA 
relies on to establish that the product is effective (including studies that show equivalence to an 
effective product) or that make a significant contribution to the demonstration of safety.” This 
requires that investigators and all sub-investigators must provide documentation of their financial 
interest or arrangements with Axovant Sciences, or proprietary interests in the drug being 
studied. This documentation must be provided before participation of the investigator and any 
sub-investigator. The investigator and sub-investigator agree to notify Axovant Sciences of any 
change reportable interests during the study and for 1 year following completion of the study. 
Study completion is defined as the date that the last subject has completed the protocol defined 
activities.
This study is also subject to and will be conducted in accordance with 21 CFR, part 320, 1993, 
“Retention of Bioavailability and Bioequivalence Testing Samples.”
11.1.2. Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics Committee Approval
This protocol and any accompanying material to be provided to the subject and caregiver (such 
as advertisements, subject information sheets, or descriptions of the study used to obtain
informed consent) will be submitted by the investigator to an IRB or IEC. Approval from the
IRB or IEC must be obtained before starting the study and should be documented in a letter to 
the investigator specifying the protocol number, protocol version, protocol date, documents 
reviewed, and date on which the committee met and granted the approval.
Any modifications made to the protocol or other documents described in the above paragraph 
after receipt of IRB or IEC approval must also be submitted to the IRB or IEC for approval 
before implementation.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL11.1.3. Informed Consent
The investigator is responsible for obtaining written informed consent from each individual 
participating in this study after adequate explanation of the aims, methods, objectives, and
potential hazards of the study and before undertaking any study-related procedures. The
investigator must utilize an IRB- or IEC-approved consent form for documenting written
informed consent. Each informed consent will be appropriately signed and dated by the subject
or the subject’s legally authorized representative and the person obtaining consent. Consent 
from both the caregiver representative and subject will be obtained.
11.1.4. Confidentiality
The investigator must assure that subjects’ anonymity will be strictly maintained and that their 
identities are protected from unauthorized parties. Only subject initials, date of birth, and an 
identification code (i.e., not names) should be recorded, if permitted by national regulation, on
any form or biological sample submitted to the sponsor, IRB or IEC, or laboratory. The 
investigator must keep a screening log showing codes, names, and addresses for all subjects 
screened and for all subjects enrolled in the trial.
The investigator agrees that all information received from Axovant Sciences, including but not
limited to the Investigator’s Brochure, this protocol, eCRFs, the investigational new drug, and
any other study information, remain the sole and exclusive property of Axovant Sciences during 
the conduct of the study and thereafter. This information is not to be disclosed to any third party 
(except employees or agents directly involved in the conduct of the study or as required by law) 
without prior written consent from Axovant Sciences. The investigator further agrees to take all 
reasonable precautions to prevent the disclosure by any employee or agent of the study site to 
any third party or otherwise into the public domain.
11.1.5. Study Files and Retention of Records
The investigator must maintain adequate and accurate records to enable the conduct of the study 
to be fully documented and the study data to be subsequently verified. These documents should 
be classified into at least the following 2 categories: (1) investigator’s study file, and (2) subject 
clinical source documents.
The investigator’s study file will contain the protocol/amendments, eCRF and query forms, IRB 
or IEC and governmental approval with correspondence, informed consent, drug records, staff 
curriculum vitae and authorization forms, and other appropriate documents and correspondence.
The required source data are listed in the Source Data Verification Plan, and should include 
sequential notes containing at least the following information for each subject:
Documentation that subject meets eligibility criteria, i.e., history, physical examination,
and confirmation of diagnosis (to support inclusion and exclusion criteria);
Participation in trial (including trial number);
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALTrial discussed and date of informed consent;
Dates of all visits;
Documentation that protocol specific procedures were performed;
Results of efficacy parameters, as required by the protocol;
Start and end date (including dose regimen) of trial medication (preferably drug 
dispensing and return should be documented as well);
Record of all AEs and other safety parameters (start and end date, and preferably
including causality and intensity);
Concomitant medication (including start and end date, dose if relevant, and dose 
changes);
Date of trial completion and reason for early discontinuation, if applicable.
All clinical study documents must be retained by the investigator until at least 2 years after the 
last approval of a marketing application in an ICH region (i.e., United States, Europe, or Japan) 
and until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications in an ICH region; or, if no 
application is filed or if the application is not approved for such indication, until 10 years after 
the investigation is discontinued and regulatory authorities have been notified. Investigators may 
be required to retain documents longer if required by applicable regulatory requirements, by 
local regulations, or by an agreement with Axovant Sciences. The investigator must notify 
Axovant Sciences before destroying any clinical study records.
Should the investigator wish to assign the study records to another party or move them to another 
location, Axovant Sciences must be notified in advance.
If the investigator cannot guarantee this archiving requirement at the study site for any or all of 
the documents, special arrangements must be made between the investigator and Axovant
Sciences to store these in sealed containers outside of the site so that they can be returned sealed 
to the investigator in case of a regulatory audit. When source documents are required for the 
continued care of the subject, appropriate copies should be made for storage outside of the site.
Biological samples at the conclusion of this study may be retained in storage by the sponsor for a 
period up to 15 years for purposes of this study.
11.1.6. Electronic Case Report Forms
For each subject enrolled, an eCRF must be completed and signed by the principal investigator 
or sub-investigator (as appropriate) within a reasonable time period after data collection. This 
also applies to records for those subjects who fail to complete the study (even during a 
pre-randomization screening period if an eCRF was initiated). If a subject withdraws from the 
study, the reason must be noted on the eCRF. If a subject is withdrawn from the study because 
of a treatment-limiting AE, thorough efforts should be made to clearly document the outcome.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL11.1.7. Drug Accountability
The investigator or designee (i.e., pharmacist) is responsible for ensuring adequate accountability 
of all used and unused investigational product. This includes acknowledgment of receipt of each 
shipment of investigational product (quantity and condition), subject dispensing records, and 
returned or destroyed investigational product. Dispensing records will document quantities 
received from Axovant Sciences and quantities dispensed to subjects, including lot number, date 
dispensed, subject identifier number, subject initials, and the initials of the person dispensing the 
investigational product, in accordance with national regulation.
The investigator or his/her designee will be responsible for maintaining accurate records of 
investigational product dispensing and collection and for returning all unused investigational 
product to Axovant Sciences or its designee at the end of the study.  Detailed instructions for 
return of investigational product will be provided in the Study Reference Manual.
All drug supplies and associated documentation will be periodically reviewed and verified by the 
study monitor over the course of the study.
11.1.8. Inspections
The investigator should understand that source documents for this trial should be made available 
to appropriately qualified personnel from Axovant Sciences or its representatives, to IRBs or 
IECs, or to regulatory authority or health authority inspectors.
11.1.9. Protocol Compliance
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the study is conducted in accordance with the 
procedures and evaluations described in this protocol.
11.2. Sponsor Responsibilities
11.2.1. Protocol Modifications
Protocol modifications, except those intended to reduce immediate risk to study subjects, may be 
made only by Axovant Sciences. All protocol modifications must be submitted to the IRB or 
IEC in accordance with local requirements. Approval must be obtained before changes can be 
implemented.
11.2.2. Study Report and Publications
A clinical study report will be prepared and provided to the regulatory agency(ies). Axovant
Sciences will ensure that the report meets the standards set out in the ICH Guideline for Structure 
and Content of Clinical Study Reports (ICH E3). Note that an abbreviated report may be 
prepared in certain cases.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALAfter conclusion of the study and without prior written approval from Axovant Sciences, 
investigators in this study may communicate, orally present, or publish in scientific journals or 
other scholarly media only after the following conditions have been met:
the results of the study in their entirety have been publicly disclosed by or with the
consent of Axovant Sciences in an abstract, manuscript, or presentation form; or
the study has been completed at all study sites for at least 5 years.
No such communication, presentation, or publication will include Axovant Sciences’ 
confidential information (see Section 11.1.3 ).
The investigator will submit any proposed publication or presentation along with the respective 
scientific journal or presentation forum at least 30 days before submission of the publication or 
presentation. The investigator will comply with Axovant Sciences’ request to delete references
to its confidential information (other than the study results) in any paper or presentation and 
agrees to withhold publication or presentation for an additional 60 days in order to obtain patent 
protection if deemed necessary.
11.2.3. Posting of Information on Publicly Available Clinical Trial Registers
Study information from this protocol will be posted on publicly available clinical trial registers 
before enrollment of subjects begins. Results will be posted as required.
11.3. Joint Investigator/Sponsor Responsibilities
11.3.1. Access to Information for Monitoring
In accordance with ICH Good Clinical Practice (ICH GCP) guidelines, the study monitor must 
have direct access to the investigator’s source documentation in order to verify the data recorded 
in the eCRFs for consistency.
The monitor is responsible for routine review of the eCRFs at regular intervals throughout the 
study to verify adherence to the protocol and the completeness, consistency, and accuracy of the 
data being entered on them. The monitor should have access to any subject records needed to 
verify the entries on the eCRFs. The investigator agrees to cooperate with the study monitors to 
ensure that any problems detected in the course of these monitoring visits are resolved.
11.3.2. Access to Information for Auditing or Inspections
Representatives of regulatory authorities or of Axovant Sciences may conduct inspections or 
audits of the clinical study. If the investigator is notified of an inspection by a regulatory
authority the investigator agrees to notify the Axovant Sciences Medical Monitor immediately.
The investigator agrees to provide to representatives of a regulatory agency or Axovant Sciences 
access to records, facilities, and personnel for the effective conduct of any inspection or audit.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL11.3.3. Study Discontinuation
The sponsor reserves the right to terminate the study at any time. Should this be necessary, both 
parties will arrange discontinuation procedures and notify the appropriate regulatory 
authority(ies), IRBs, and IECs. In terminating the study, Axovant Sciences and the investigator 
will assure that adequate consideration is given to the protection of the subjects’ interests. The 
investigator may discontinue participation in the study at any time.  However, the obligations to 
provide study results for completed subjects and reports to ethics committees shall continue as 
required by this protocol and applicable laws and regulations.
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIAL12. REFERENCES
Alzheimer’s Association. 2013 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement .
2013;9(2):208-245.
Aricept (donepezil hydrochloride) Package Insert. Woodcliff Lake, NJ: Eisai Inc.; 2013.
Benhamu B, Martin-Fontecha M, Vazquez-Villa H, et al. Serotonin 5-HT6 receptor antagonists 
for the treatment of cognitive deficiency in Alzheimer’s disease. J Med Chem .
2014;57(17):7160-7181.
Brickman AM, Riba A, Bell K, et al.. Longitudinal assessment of patient dependence in 
Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol . 2002;59(8):1304-1308.
Cummings JL. Alzheimer’s Disease. N Engl J Med . 2004;351:56-67.
Cummings JL, Mega M, Gray K, Rosenberg-Thompson S, et al. The Neuropsychiatric 
Inventory: comprehensive assessment of psychopathology in dementia. Neurology .
1994;44:2308-2314.
Cummings JL, Morstorf T, Zhong K. Alzheimer’s disease drug-development pipeline: few 
candidates, frequent failures. Alzheimers Res Ther . 2014;6:37.
Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. “Mini-Mental State”: A practical method for grading the 
cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatry Res . 1975;12:189-198.
Galasko D, Bennett D, Sano M, et al. An inventory to assess activities of daily living for clinical 
trials in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord . 1997;Suppl 2:S33-39.
James BD, Leurgans SE, Hebert LE, et al. Contribution of Alzheimer disease to mortality in the 
United States. Neurology . 2014;82:1045-50.
Kiss JZ, Tonsoco E, Djebbara Z, et al. The role of neural cell adhesion molecules in plasticity 
and repair. Brain Res Brain Res Rev . 2001;36:175-184.
McKhann GM, Knopman DS, Chertkow H, et al. The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s 
disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging- Alzheimer’s Association 
workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement .
2011;7(3):263-269.
Mitchell ES, Neumaier JF. 5-HT6 receptors: a novel target for cognitive enhancement. 
Pharmacol Ther . 2005;108:320-333.Mohs RC, Knopman D, Petersen RC, et al. Development of cognitive instruments for use in 
clinical trials of antidementia drugs: additions to the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale that 
Axovant Sciences Ltd. RVT-101-3001 Protocol v3.0 
CONFIDENTIALbroaden its scope. The Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study. Alzheimer Dis Assoc 
Disord . 1997;11(Suppl 2):S13–21.
Panisset M, Gauthier S, Moessler H, Windisch M, The Cerebrolysin Study Group. Cerebrolysin 
in Alzheimer’s disease: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with a neurotropic 
agent. J Neural Transm . 2002;109:1089-1104.
Rabin R, deCharro F. EQ-5D: a measure of health status from the EuroQol Group. Ann Med .
2001;33(5):337-343.
Rosen WG, Mohs RC, Davis KL. A new rating scale for Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Psychiatry .
1984;141:1356-1364.
Schneider L, Olin J, Doody R, et al. and the ADCS. Validity and reliability of the Alzheimer’s 
disease cooperative study -clinical global impression of change. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord .
1997;11(2):S22 -S32.
Seki T, Arai Y. Distribution and possible roles of the polysialylated neural cell adhesion 
molecule (NCAM-H) in the developing and adult central nervous system. Neurosci Res .
1993;17:265-290.
Tiseo PJ, Rogers SL, Friedhoff LT. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics profile of donepezil 
HCl following evening administration . Br J Clin Pharm . 1998;46:Suppl 1:13-18.
Wimo A, Wetterholm AL, Mastey V, Winblad B. Evaluation of the resource utilization and 
caregiver time in Anti-dementia drug trials - a quantitative battery. In: Wimo A, Jonsson B, 
Karlsson G, Winblad B, editors. The Health Economics of dementia. London: John Wiley & 
Sons; 1998. Pp1. 465-499.