 
 
MEmbranous Nephropathy 
Trial O f Rituximab (MENTOR)  
 
NCT# 01180036 
 
June  17, 2014 
 0             
  
 
STUDY TITLE:  
 
MEmbranous N ephropathy T rial O f Rituximab (MENTOR) 
 
A Multi -Center Randomized Controlled Trial of Rituximab versus Cyclosporine in the 
Treatment of Idiopathic Membranous Nephropathy (IMN)  
 
Study Drugs  
Rituximab and Cyclosporine 
 
Funding  
Fulk Foundation 
Genentech, Incorporated 
 
Study Drug Support Provided By  
Genentech, Incorporated 
 
Sponsor Investigator 
F.C. Fervenza (PI) – Mayo Clinic Rochester  
D.C. Cattran (Co -PI) – University of Toronto 
 
Executive Committee  
F.C. Fervenza (PI)  
D.C. Cattran (Co -PI) 
D. Gipson (Co- I) 
J. Appel (Co- I) 
M. Kretzler (Co -I) 
B. Rovin (Co -I) 
K. Thorpe (Co- I) 
 
Data Management and Coordinating Center 
Applied Health Research Center, St Michael’s Hospital/University of Toronto 
 
Food and Drug Administration IND  Exemption  
Number: 109567 
 
NEPTUNE6804  
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Protocol Number:   10.0  
Protocol Version Date:  17 June 2014  
 Name: Fernando C. Fervenza (PI)  
Institution: Mayo Clinic – Division of Nephrology and Hypertension 
Address: 200 First Street, SW  
Phone: 507-266- 1045 Fax: 507-538-3388 
Email: fervenza.fernando@mayo.edu 
 1  
 
1.1 Overview  
 
This prospective, randomized, controlled phase III nephrology study will determine 
whether rituximab is non-inferior to cyclosporine in inducing long- term remission of 
proteinuria in patients with idiopathic membranous nephropathy (IMN.)  Subjects are randomized to open-label courses of treatment: IV rituximab (RTX), 1000 mg (2 infusions, 14 days apart), or oral cyclosporine (CSA) 3.5 to 5 mg/kg/day.  S ubjects are 
evaluated at 6 months; those that meet treatment response criteria will continue study medication and receive either 2 further infusions of RTX or a further 6 months of daily CSA treatment.  Throughout the study period, laboratory and safety pa rameters will be 
collected and documented.    Study Hypothesis: B cell targeting with Rituximab is non -inferior to Cyclosporine in 
inducing long- term remission of proteinuria.  
 Comparison(s): IV rituximab (RTX), 1000 mg (2 infusions, 14 days apart; repeated at 6 months if a substantial reduction in proteinuria (equal to or >25%) is seen at 6 months) or oral cyclosporine (CSA) 3.5 to 5 mg/kg/day for 6 months (continued for another 6 months if a substantial reduction in proteinuria (equal to or >25%) is seen at 6 months). 
 
 2  
SPECIFIC AIMS:  
 
The specific aims of this Phase III trial are to test the hypothesis;   1. That B cell targeting with Rituximab is non- inferior to Cyclosporine in inducing long-
term  remission  (complete or partial) of proteinuria in patient s with IMN.  
2. That B cell targeting with Rituximab  reduces the number of relapses (efficacy in 
sustaining remission) and increases the time to relapse when compared with 
treatment with Cyclosporine. 
3. That B cell targeting with Rituximab is as effective as Cyclosporine  in inducing 
complete or partial remission of proteinuria in patients with IMN during the active treatment phase.  
4. That B cell targeting with Rituximab has a better side effect profile and improved quality of life when compared with treatment with Cyclosporine in patients with IMN. 
 
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
IMN is a common immune -mediated glomerular disease and remains the leading cause of 
Nephrotic Syndrome (NS) in Caucasian adults.
1  Although in most patients the disease 
progresses relatively slowly, approximately 40% of patients eventuall y develop End 
Stage Renal Disease (ESRD).2 Becau se of its frequency, it remains the 2nd or 3rd cause of 
a primary glomerulopathy leading to ESRD.3  Patients with I MN who remain nephrotic 
are at an increased risk for thromb oembolic4 and cardiovascular (CV) events.5, 6  
Available immunosuppressive therapies including corticosteroids, alkylating agents, and calcineurin inhibitors (Cyclosporine), appear to be at least partially successful in reducing proteinuria in IMN, but their use is controversial and is associated with a number of adverse effects and a high relapse rate, thus tempering their use in IMN. (reviewed in 
7)  
The significant risks associated with current immunosuppressive therapies are important 
in a disease where up to 30% of IMN patients are said to achieve spontaneous remission 
of proteinuria, enjoy long -term renal survival and, should not be treated with 
immunosuppressive therapy.  This information is, however, misleading, since the percentage of patients that undergo spo ntaneous remission is much lower when patients 
are selected with higher grades of proteinuria at presentation e.g. proteinuria >8g/24h.
8 
Similarly, although Schieppati et al. reported a 72% renal survival at eight years for 100 untreated patients with IMN, in this study, 37% of patients were non- nephrotic; a cohort 
well known to rarely progress to renal failure and hence a built -in bias towards a better 
outcome.  Indeed the overall proteinuria was relatively low (56% of patients had proteinuria <5g/24h), and the median follow -up was only 39 months.  The follow -up time 
is an important issue given that the natural history of the disease process tends to be slow even in the worst cases.  The final limitation was that all deaths were excluded from the analysis.
9 However d espite the favorable elements of this cohort, 25% reached ESRD by 
the end of 8 years. One approach to this has been to provide immunosuppression treatment only to those subjects identified as being at higher risk of progression: males, severe proteinuria, impaired renal function, a high prevalence of secondary lesions of focal and segmental sclerosis, and prominent tubulointerstitial damage on renal biopsy. Our experience, and others, however, suggests this approach is seriously flawed.
10  There 
is a substantial fraction of patients, who progress to chronic kidney disease (CKD), that are not identified by these predictors and are thus unjustifiably excluded from therapy.  A second approach has been to treat only those patients who are exhibiting deteriorating 
kidney function.
11, 12 These trials have been deemed successful because proteinuria and 
 3 azotemia were diminished.11-13 Careful review of the data however, shows that reversal of 
azotemia is almost always incomplete and often transient suggesting that the decline in 
GFR is merely attenuated and not arrested.  In addition, we believe that a prolonged run-
in (i.e., treatment -free) period of 12 or more months would be required to prospectively 
confirm this type of truly progressive IMN, but that this in turn would result in a 
significant and probable irreversible loss of nephrons and ultrafiltration capacity .14  This 
can be illustrated by the study of Polanco et al.8  These authors suggested that patients 
that were treated conservatively and who did not go into spontaneous remission had final creatinine = 2.4 ± 2.2 mg/dL, and eGFR 53 ± 35 ml/min.
8 However, we believe this 
information is inaccurate. Taking into cons ideration that the mean age at presentation was 
51 years and the mean follow up was 69 months (making these patients ~56 years at follow- up) the eGFR should be ~30 ml/min if male and ~22 ml/min if female, indicating 
a significant loss of function with just waiting. The paper further underestimates chronic 
kidney disease because their end point was restricted to the absence of chronic dialysis or need for renal transplantation.  If we add loss of kidney function (as measured by change in GFR) their disease c ourse would indicate a significantly higher incidence of CKD over 
time supporting our contention that prolonging the wait time for spontaneous remission results in patients paying a heavy price.   
      Why do so many patients still progress to ESRD? There  is growing evidence implicating 
proteinuria as a major player in the development of progressive tubular injury, interstitial fibrosis, and GFR loss. T he higher the sustained levels of proteinuria, the faster the 
decline in renal function,
15 a relationship that is true not only for patients with IMN but 
for other proteinuric renal diseases including FSGS and diabetic nephropathy.16-19 The 
reverse appears also to be true.  There is strong evidence to support that remission of proteinuria (either complete or partial remission) is a valid surrogate end point for both improved renal survival and slower rate of progression of renal disease, and that this reduction is an important therapeutic target for the clinician. This view is in line with the position statement of the NKF and NIDDKD indicating that proteinuria can be used as a surrogate marker and principal endpoint in clinical trials in proteinuric renal disease where GFR -based declines in function take too long to be of practical use.
20 Proteinuria is 
also a marker for CV risk.5, 21-24  Recent post -hoc analyses of the diabetic trials 
RENAAL, IDNT and others, have shown that proteinuria determines renal outcome25, 26 
and CV outcome.27-29 The link between chronic renal failure (CRF) and CV disease is so 
strong that over 40% of patients starting dialysis already have evidence of CV disease.30, 
31 This information is important in the present study since all patients will have high 
grade proteinuria >5g/24h, a scenario almost universally associated with marked abnormalities in their lipid profile (high total cholesterol, normal or low levels of HDL and increased LDL).
5, 6  Apart from hyperlipemia, patients with IMN and nephrotic 
syndrome (NS) are also at risk for thromboembolic events, with prevalence rate as high as 50% and a mortality rate within this group as high as 42%.
4, 32  These data serve to 
emphasize the importance of other common life -defining sequelae of membranous 
nephropathy in these patients, in addition to their risk of renal failure.   
 There is no standard specific treatment for IMN. Initial therapy should be supportive and involves restricting dietary protein intake, controlling blood pressure, hyperlipidemia, and edema.  The ideal target for blood pressure  is not fir mly established but current 
recommendations suggest that 130/80 mm Hg should be the treatme nt goal. There are 
only limited data to support a lower target of 125/75 mm Hg if there is proteinuria >1 g/d .    
Reducing protein intake to about 0.6-0.8 g/kg ideal body weight per day also tends to 
 4 decrease proteinuria.33  ACEi and/or ARBs are effective anti -hypertensive agents th at 
may also reduce proteinuria in both diabetic and non- diabetic chronic nephropathy 
patients and slow progression of renal disease independent of blood pressure control.34 
This is the rationale for making these drugs the preferred agents to treat hypertension in 
proteinuric renal diseases.  However, evidence that such therapy is beneficial in IMN is weak, largely inferential, and  the following issues need to be considered: 1) The degree 
of renal protection is related to the degree of proteinuria reduction and if proteinuria is 
not lowered, the benefit is substantially attenuated.
35, 36 In the RENAAL trial the renal 
protective effect of angiotensin II blockade in patients with diabetic nephropathy was nearly fully explained by its anti -proteinuric effect.
26  2) In patients with IMN, the anti -
proteinuric effect is modest ( <30% decrease) and is more significant in patients with 
lower levels of proteinuria.37-39  3) Thus, in contrast to diabetic renal diseases, ACEi may 
not offer  the same degree of renal protection to patients with IMN.40  In fa ct, studies by 
du Buf -Vereijken et al.41 and in a review by Troyanov et al.,42 the use of ACEi or ARBs 
by multivariate analysis did not show an independent value in determining the prognosis of patients with IMN. More recently, Praga et al. showed additional evidence that in patients with NS, (the majority with IMN), ACEi were ineffective in reducing proteinuria, and that this failure to respond in IMN patients was associated with poor renal function outcomes.
43, 44  4) In patients in which a significant anti -proteinuric 
response is observed, the effect is usually seen within 2 months of initiation of angiotensin II blocka de therapy.
37  Although a relative reduction of proteinuria is always 
a positive result, the  aim of anti -proteinuric therapy is to reduce it as close as possible to 
normal levels (complete remission (CR)). Reaching this goal in patients with proteinuria > 5g/24 using conservative treatment with ACEi or ARBs seems unrealistic, even when these drugs are used at the highest dose. Taken all together, in the past decade relatively little progress has been made in the treatment of patients with IMN, and up to 40% of the patients will still progress to end stage renal failure.  Agents that result in a higher response and lower relapse rates, as well as fewer adverse effects, are truly needed.  
 
Current conservative therapy  
Initial therapy should be supportive and involves restricting dietary protein intake, controlling blood pressure, hyperlipidemia and e dema (see above).  In patients that do 
have an anti -proteinuric response to angiotensin II blockade therapy, the effect is usually 
seen within 2 months of initiation of the medication and tends to be modest.
37  Although 
a relative reduction of proteinuria is an important effect, the aim of anti -proteinuric 
therapy is to reduce as close as possibl e to normal levels (complete remission).  Reaching 
this goal in patients with sustained proteinuria > 5g/24 using conservative treatment with ACEi and/or ARBs is unlikely, even when these drugs are used at the highest dose.  The role of immunosuppressive a gents in the management of patients with IMN thus remains 
a critical issue.  Our immunosuppressive treatment armamentarium in this regard has evolved but is still limited.  Agents that result in a higher response rate with a lower relapse rate and fewer ad verse effects are truly needed and thus the focus for our 
proposed randomized controlled trial.   
Current Options for Immunosuppression in IMN  
 
Cyclosporine (CSA)  
Cyclosporine is a calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) that exerts its immunosuppressive effect by blocking the production of IL -2, IL -3 and IFN -γ, resulting in a reduction of T -
lymphocyte helpers/inducers and cytotoxic cell function.
45 This immunosuppressive 
 5 effect is probably not the only anti -proteinuric effect of CSA since it is known to have 
both hemodynamic effects and to act on the podocyte structure. The latter effect has been 
demonstrated in vitro  to alter glomerular permeability46 by a direct effect on the actin 
cytoskeleton (and therefore the shape) of podocytes.47 This is postulated to protect 
podocytes from immune injury and may be part of the explanation behind the observation of its significant benefit in certain immunologic glomerular disorders such as in IMN and 
minimal change despite significantly less exposure compared to solid organ transplant recipients. Cyclosporine has been extensively used in the treatment of proteinuric glomerular diseases and has been proven to be effective in inducing remission of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in children and adults.
48 It has been used successfully in 
patients with IMN and nephrotic syndrome resistant to corticosteroids and/or cytotoxic 
drugs and has been tried in some of the glomerular disorders even before exposure to cytotoxic therapy because of its significantly different side effect profile.
39, 49-55 
 In the most relevant randomized controlled trial, 51 patients with steroid- resistant 
nephrotic syndrome  and preserved renal function (creatinine clearance [CrCl] > 42 
ml/min/1.73m
2) were randomized to CSA or placebo treatment, with both groups also 
receiving low -dose prednisone (0.15 mg/kg/day).51 The duration of treatment was 26 
weeks followed by a tapering off period over 4 weeks.  At 26 weeks a significantly higher remission rate was observed in patients treated with CSA - compared to placebo - 
(75 % versus 22%, P. <0.001). Among the CSA -treated patients with remission, 90% 
showed partial remission and 10% complete remission.  Twelve months after discontinuing the drug a significant percentage of the CSA treated patients remained in remission (39%) compared to the placebo treated patients (39 versus 13%; p = 0.007).
51  
 The effectiveness of a more prolonged course of CSA in inducing remission of proteinuria has been recently  documented in a study where CSA was given for 12 months 
and an 80% remission in proteinuria (complete plus partial) was observed.
55  It was 
indicated in this paper that CSA combined with prednisone is more effective than CSA monotherapy in maintaining remission in IMN.
55  However careful review of their data 
suggests that the group that remained in remission following tapering of the CSA had substantially higher trough levels, both in the monotherapy and in the combined CSA plus prednisone group, compared to the relapse group suggesting that this may have been the reason for the more sustained remission.  This would support our trial proposal i.e. CSA alone (no prednisone is required) .  In earlier studies
51 low dose prednisone was 
added to CSA because historical data in patients with MCD/FSGS had suggested higher remission rates with combination therapy and that perhaps the combination would reduce the nephrotoxicity of CSA. A recent review of these early studies and the more current ones suggest that this combination is not necessary.
48  Further support that CNI 
monotherapy is effective is illustrated in the recent RCT in MN using Tacrolimus. This study showed virtually identical remission rates in proteinuria as in the original CSA plus prednisone trial (see above) using Tacrolimus monotherapy.  Their entry criteria required the presence of nephrotic syndrome resistant to ACE inhibitor therapy, steroids or the combination of steroids with cytotoxic drugs. Their relapse rate following discontinuation of the drug was similar to that of the RCT with CSA.
56 CSA has also been shown to be of 
benefit in inducing remission of nephrotic syndrome and preserving renal function in patients with I MN associated with progressive renal failure. In a prospective randomized 
controlled trial, 64 patients were placed on a restricted protein diet and followed closely for 12 months. Patients that demonstrated significant progression of their disease during this observation period (n = 17) determined by an absolute loss in CrCl > 8 ml/min/year 
 6 and persistent nephrotic range proteinuria were randomly assigned to either CSA 3.5 
mg/kg/day or placebo for 12 months.57 A significant reduction of proteinuria was 
observed only in CSA -treated patients and the remission was sustained in 75% of these 
patients followed on average for 21 months.57  
 
Thus, CSA represents an effective therapy for inducing remission of nephrotic syndrome in patients with IMN.  It leads to remission of proteinuria in the majority of n ephrotic 
patients with IMN but with less potential serious toxicity compared to the use of cytotoxic/alkylating agents.  There is also more experience with CSA (versus other CNI) in the US and Canada and for these reasons it has been chosen as the comparat or arm for 
our study.    Patients with IMN that do progress do so over years and follow -up in RCTs with CNI 
therapy have not been of sufficient duration to illustrate improvements in renal survival. However there is well documented recent data that indicat es that both complete and 
partial remission in proteinuria is associated with improved renal survival.  Complete remission was associated with a 100% 10- year survival and partial remission (defined as 
more than a 50% decrease from baseline and attaining a urine protein level of <3.5 g per day) was associated with a 90% 10 year renal survival compared to 50% kidney survival in those that fail to remit.  In addition, in this same study PR as measured by slope of CCR, resulted in a slowing of progression rate of  >80 % compared to non- remitters.
42 
 
Toxicity of cyclosporine 
Cyclosporine is a potent immunosuppressive age nt and is associated with significant risk 
of both short and long -term toxicity.  In the majority of cases these adverse effects are 
associated with both total daily dose and total exposure.  Precise incidences of these toxicities are hard to ascertain from the literature given the rarity of studies where these agents are used as monotherapy and their use for a limited duration as proposed in this trial.  There is however undoubtedly an acute effect on filtration function and delayed effects on renal vasculature that have been well documented and a recent review summarized both short and long -term toxicities associated with this agent.
58  
Hypertension, overgrowth of body hair and gingiva hyperplasia, mild tremor, infections, elevated bilirubin levels and mild nausea represent the most frequently observed short -
term adverse effects related to CSA.
58 These are seen in up to 20 to 30% of the treated 
population but are usually tolerated and/or treatable with additional agents (such as additional anti-hypertension drugs) or by dose reduction.
48   
 
Cyclophosphamide (CYC)  
In IMN, experimental data suggests that B cells are involved in the pathogenesis of the 
disease.59  To date, the best proven long -term therapy for patients with IMN consists of 
the combined use of corticosteroids and CYC, the Ponticelli’s protocol.  However, the potential s ide effects with the use of 9g of methylprednisolone mandated by this protocol 
as well as the potential risk of other serious side effects associated with the use of cytotoxic agents (such as bone marrow toxicity, severe infections, gonadal dysfunction) combined with the long- term risk of malignancy associated with CYC has left many 
physicians reluctant to use this regimen. It should also be remembered  that IMN is a 
relapsing and remitting disease and even with the use of this therapy, relapse rates remain high.  In Ponticelli et al.’s r andomized 6 month study in patients with IMN comparing 
methylprednisolone plus chlorambucil versus  methylprednisolone plus CYC the overall 
relapse rate was 24% (21/87) and similar in both arms.  These relapses occurred betwee n 
 7 6 and 30 months post treatment, with the majority within 18 months.60  An additional 
~10% of patients had to stop treatment and were discontinued from the st udy because of 
adverse effects.  The risk of malignancy with CYC is substantial with the hazard of 
neoplasia roughly correlated to the cumulative dose and duration of cytotoxic therapy.61-
63 Faurschou et al. recently investigated the incidence of malignancies associated with 
CYC exposure in a cohort of 293 patients with Wegener's granulomatosis.64 The risk of 
malignancy was not increased for patients who never received CYC or for patients treated with cumulative CYC doses ≤ 36 g.
64 In contrast, high risks of leukemia (SIR 
59.0, 95% CI 12 -172) and bladder cancer (SIR 9.5, 95% CI 2.6 -24) were observed for 
patients treated with cumulative CYC doses >36 g.  These data would suggest that a patient who weighs 80kg and is treated with CYC at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg/day would exceed this threshold after 2 standard courses of the Ponticelli’s protocol. Since IMN is a remitting and relapsing disease with the potential for significant cumulative CYC dosing, there is a substantial risk of late -occurring, serious malignancies. The other major 
concern limiting CYC utility is related to its gonadal toxicity.  Data indicates that ovarian failure is seen in female patients of any age receiving a cumulative dose of as little as 28 g of CYC.  In addition, these authors found that age at the onset of therapy was an additional independent factor associated with sterility.
65, 66  Although male infertility is 
harder to assess, studies have demonstrated that doses above 7.5 g/m2 of CYC can result 
in permanent oligospermia.67 For these reasons, the majority of the academic centers in 
the US have considered CYC treatments too toxic and relegated the use of Ponticelli’s protocol to rescue therapy in patients who have failed less toxic immunosuppressive therapies.   
   
INNOVATION 
 
A new approach to therapy:  the case for targeting B cells:   I
n IMN, experimental 
data suggest that B cells are involved in the pathogenesis of the disease.59  To date, the 
best proven therapy for patients with IMN consists of the combined use of corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide (CYC).  The mechanism of action of CYC includes suppression of various stages of the B cell cycle including B cell activation, proliferation, and 
differentiation and inhibition of immunoglobulin secretion, supporting the hypothesis that B cell abnormalities are involved in the pathogenesis of IMN.
68, 69  Given the key role of 
IgG antibodies in IMN70, it is reasonable to postulate that suppression of antibody 
production that targets glomerular antigens by depleting B cells may improve or even resolve the glomerular pathology. This approach of stopping the initiating pathogenic event could potentially result in resolution of the disease process. This is the theory 
underlying the application of selective B ce ll targeting with Rituximab (RTX) in 
IMN.  Our hypothesis is that it will prove at least equal to, or even superior to 
current therapies, both in the production of short term and long term control of the NS and be safer than any of the other current regimens used to treat IMN.  
 PRELIMINARY STUDIES  
Based on this rationale, we conducted a pilot trial in 15 newly -biopsied patients (<3 
years) with IMN and proteinuria >5g/24h despite ACEi/ARB use for >3months and systolic BP <130mmHg.
71 Mean baseline creatinine was 1.4 mg/dl. Thirteen males and 2 
females, median age 47 (range 33 -63), were treated with RTX (1g) on days 1 and 15. At 
six months, patients who remained wit h proteinuria >3g/24 received a second identical 
 8 
course of RTX. Baseline proteinuria of 13.0±5.7g/24h (range 8.4- 23.5) decreased to 
6.0±7.0 g/24h (range 0.2- 20) at 12 months 
(mean ± SD) (Figure 1).  In the fourteen 
patients who completed 12 months follow -up 
complete remission (proteinuria <0.3g/24h) was achieved in 2 patients and partial remission (<3g/24h) in 7 patients. The mean drop in proteinuria from baseline to 12 months was 6.2± 5.1g (p=.002, paired t -test).  
In 5 of these 7 patients, proteinuria was  
<1.5g/24h.  At 18 months follow up 3 of these 7 PR patients achieved CR of their proteinuria.     (Figure 1)    
Five patients did not respond. There were a limited number of minor side -effects (see 
below).   
            Initial CD20+ B cell depletion was seen in all patients. However, at 3 months, CD20+ B cells were starting to recover with five patients demonstrating >35 cells/µl (range 35 -
152).
71 These data co ntrast with previous work by Ruggenenti et al. using  the lymphoma 
regimen where RTX is given weekly (375 mg/m2) for 4 weeks.2 Using that regimen, B 
cell depletion was maintained up to 12 months post treatment and their proteinuria reduction was more rapid and complete. Similarly our studies using this standard lymphoma protocol in patients with ANCA vasculitis demonstrated that peripheral blood B-cell depletion was consistently achieved and maintained for at least six months. 
Pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis had showed that RTX levels in our original 2-dos e 
regimen were 50% lower compared to studies in non- proteinuric conditions.  This could 
potentially result in undertreatment. Based on these results, we conducted an additional study based on the premise that  in patients with MN, 4 weekly doses of RTX woul d 
result in more effective B cell depletion, a higher remission rate while still maintaining the same safety profile as patients treated with RTX dosed at 1g x 2. Twenty patients (including 11 patients that had failed alternative immunosuppressive therapy)  with IMN 
and proteinuria >5g/24h received RTX (375mg/m
2 x 4), with retreatment at 6 months 
regardless of proteinuria response. A detailed pharmacokinetics study was conducted in concert with immunological analyses of the adaptive immune compartment (T and B 
cells) to ascertain the impact of RTX on lymphocyte subpopulations.  Baseline proteinuria of 11.9±4.9g/24h decreased to 4.2±3.8g/24h and 2.0±1.7g/24h at 12 and 24 months, respectively (p<0.001) while creatinine clearance increased from 72.4±33 at baseli ne to 88.4
 ±31.5 ml/min /1.73m2 at 24 months (p=0.02) (Figure 2A/B).  
 
 9 
 
Figure 2.  A. Box plots of urine protein by months since start of RTX therapy. The top 
and bottom of the box are the estimated 75th and 25th percentiles, respectively. The intermediate horizontal line and "+" sign represent the median and mean urine protein, respectively. The vertical lines extend to the largest (smallest) data point that is within 1.5 times the inter quartile range (75th -25th percentile) above the 75th percentile (or below 
the 25th). The square symbol identifies points outside of this range. The number of patients with follow -up at 0, 1, 3, 6, 9 12, 18, and 24 months are: 20, 20, 20, 19, 18, and 
18, respectively. * P<0.05, ** P<0.001; B. Longitudinal effect of RTX on proteinuria 
(log transformed).  
 Of 18 patients who completed 24- months follow up, 4 are in complete remission, 12 are 
in partial remission (CR + PR = 80%), 1 had a limited response (>50% drop in P but >3.5g/24h) and 1 patient relapsed from a partial remission. When interpreting these results we should take into account that >50% of these patients had failed previous immunosuppressive therapy. This study also emphasizes that proteinuria is reduced gradually and that it may take several months to reach its nad ir. This observation is in 
agreement with previous reports in patients with IMN treated with prednisone in combination with a cytotoxic agent, but was seen without the short -term toxicity 
observed with alkylating agents.
60  Kidney function remained stable or improved in all 
patients. These results were observed despite the fact that in patients with nephrotic syndrome (NS), serum albumin levels influence tubular  creatinine secretion resulting in 
an endogenous creatinine clearance that overestimates GFR in NS.
72  In addition,  
previous investigators have indicated that the onset of IMN is accompanied by a severe depression in hydraulic permeability of the glomerular capillary wall. This is partiall y 
offset by enhancement of filtration surface area and by profound depression of glomerular oncotic pressure. This can result in the GFR initially remaining in the normal range or at worst, depressed by <50% in moderate IMN. In severe IMN these investigato rs found this mechanism was significantly worsened by a marked reduction in 
functional glomerular number and a GFR depression of >50%.   These abnormalities were 
presumably reversed with RTX treatment and resolution of the NS. However, an additional explanation could have been that a number of patients had their angiotensin II blockade reduced or discontinued with time, altering the renal hemodynamics and thereby contributing to the significant increase in creatinine clearance. The important summary point in  this regard is this type of GFR improvement by reduced RASS 
blockade would not be accompanied by a decrease in proteinuria.  RTX therapy represents a substantial advantage versus the risk for nephrotoxicity and other short -term 
toxicities associated with the use of calcineurin inhibitors (CNI). In addition RTX treatment assures patient adherence (since it is given by IV infusions). This is in contrast to the necessary monitoring required during the treatment with Cyclosporine.  This makes 
 10 RTX an easier opt ion from the perspective of physician management and potentially 
offers a better quality -of-life for the patient. Cost estimates are also worth addressing. 
Although RTX is more expensive upfront the annual treatment costs compared to 
Cyclosporine are similar.  Perhaps most importantly, the effect of RTX appears to be sustained as only 1 patient in our recent pilot (5%) relapsed within the 2 year follow up period. A similar long term preservation of proteinuria reduction was observed in our first study
71 with only 1 patient relapsing at 36 months. Thus, in the 35 patients included in 
our 2 studies, only 2 relapses occurred, and in one case proteinuria relapsed into the sub 
nephrotic range. These results (2/35 = 6% relapse) are similar if not better than those reported by Ponticelli et al. (21/87=24%) (63), and are substantially better than those reported with CNI treatment.  In addition they are significantly better  than the most 
recently suggested IMN treatment option of prednisone combined with MMF.  In these studies a >40% relapse rate has been reported shortly after discontinuing therapy.
51, 56, 74 
 Serum RTX levels using the four dose regimen were similar to those obtained with 2 doses of RTX. Four doses of RTX did r esult in more effective B cell depletion but 
proteinuria reduction was basically identical to the results obtained using RTX 1000mg on days 1 and 15. Thus, we believe that the two dose regimen with retreatment at 6 months should be used in a randomized- control trial comparing RTX to Cyclosporine 
(the standard of care for IMN in the US). We believe that RTX will prove equal or superior to Cyclosporine in the treatment of MN and could represent the new standard of care for patients with this disease.  
 
Toxicity of Rituximab 
No dose -limiting effects were observed in our two Phase I/II studies evaluating safety 
and efficacy of RTX in IMN. The most commonly observed side effects were infusion related (flu -like symptoms, chills/rigors, fever, fatigue, headache, hypotension, nausea, 
leukopenia, angioedema and pruritus) and typically responded to an interruption of the infusion and resumption at a slower rate.
71 Other side  effects included: 1) serum sickness -
like syndrome (n=1); hair loss and thinning (n=2); one case of community acquired pneumonia three months after the first infusion that resolved with oral antibiotic treatment (this patient was retreated without complications); 4) herpes zoster reactivation (n=1) treated with oral antiviral drugs with full recovery. Similar to the study by Ruggenenti et al., no patient had a major drug- related adverse event.
2 
 
Anti PLA2R levels and response to treatment  
RTX offers an advantage in MN over nonselective immunosuppressive agents such as CYC since it primarily targets B cells. However, changes in CD20+ B cell number in general have not consistently paralleled the response in terms of either reduction in proteinuria or improvement in the clinical phenotype of the nephrotic sy ndrome.
71, 75 This 
variation strongly suggests that the monitoring of the CD 20 count will not prove to be the ideal instrument for determining treatment dose and/or duration.  It would be substantially better if we could monitor the specific effect of immunosuppressive therapy 
on the pathogenic antibodies in IMN. A recent discovery indicates that autoantibodies to 
the M -type phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) may represent such a specific marker of 
IMN.  This autoantibody has been found in greater than 70% of IMN patients.
76  When 
the analysis is limited to new -onset, nephrotic patients with IMN, this sensitivity 
increases even further.  These investigators have shown that PLA2R is a transmembrane constituent of the human podocyte  (the most likely target cell in MN) and anti- PLA2R 
antibodies are predominantly of the IgG4 subclass and co- localize with IgG4 in the sub-
 11 epithelial deposits which are pathognomonic of the disease.  In their observations, the 
presence of anti -PLA2R correl ates well with disease activity, disappearing with a 
spontaneous or treatment-induced remission, and reappearing with a relapse of IMN.  
 We also have studied whether the immunologic changes in serum anti -PLA2R levels 
parallel the clinical reduction in pro teinuria in response to RTX in patients with MN. 
Serial serum samples from our 2 cohorts of MN patients treated with RTX (cohort 1 treated with 1 g of RTX at d.1 and d.15) and cohort 2 (treated with 4 weekly doses of 375 mg RTX), were assayed for anti -PLA2 R antibodies.
77  Ten out of 15 (67%) patients in 
cohort 1 and 16/20 (80%) in cohort 2 had anti -PLA2R reactivity in their baseline serum 
samples. When the 2 cohorts were combined, the baseline distribution of cases with anti -
PLA2R positivity was not significantly different when compared to the final clinical groupings of complete remission (CR), partial (PR) limited or no remission (NR), (p=0.61). However, an anti -PLA 2R level below 500 arbitrary units at 9- 12 months after 
initiation of treatment was significantly different among these groups: in the complete remission (CR) group 100% had a reduction to this level, in the PR group 88% had reduction to this level but in the limited response (LR) group only 50% had a reduction and in those with no response only 17% had a reduction to this level. (p=0.006). Median proteinuria at 9, 12, and 15- 18 months was consistently lower in those subjects with 
undetectable or very low anti- PLA2R levels versus those with higher levels. In the group 
in which anti -PLA
2R disappeared, 86% were in complete or partial remission at the final 
time point: 4 complete remissions (CR), 14 partial remissions (PR), 1 limited remission (LR), and one non- responder (NR).  Perhaps most relevant was, in those patients with 
decreases in anti -PLA2R, the decline almost always preceded the reduction in proteinuria 
by months.  In addition, 1 patient who had attained remission and who had become anti -
PLA2R negative following RTX became antibody positive at the time of his relapse. Thus, in at least these two cohorts of MN patients with anti -PLA2R antibodies at the start 
of treatment, post -RTX anti -PLA2R levels correlated with and seemed to precede clinical 
response to RTX (Figure 3).  These results suggest that monitoring anti -PLA2R 
autoantibody levels may provide a window onto the immunologic effects of treatment on the course of IMN, and allow a more specific and an earlier means of determining treatment effectiveness compared to the clinical response of decreasing proteinuria. This observation is understandable given the nature of the deposits and proposed pathophysiology of IMN. Even if the B cells producing anti -PLA2R were completely 
eliminated and all circulating anti-PLA2R removed, the immune deposits would persist in the subepithelial space until cleared.  Supportive evidence of this was seen in repeat kidney biopsies performed in RTX -treated IMN patients after they had entered complete 
clinical remission.
78  There are other important implications to the antibody story to 
consider if they truly parallel immunologic disease activity.  Secondary chronic changes in IM N such as focal sclerosis or interstitial damage from prolonged disease activity may 
lead to indefinite persistence of low -level proteinuria, despite full clearance of immune 
deposits. This is the case seen in kidneys made proteinuric in the Heymann nephri tis 
model and subsequently transplanted into naïve hosts.
79 This may explain our observation 
that not only does the decline in proteinuria lag behind that of anti -PLA2R, but also that 
the median proteinuria never reaches zero even by 24 months. It may also explain why most clinical responses are partial remissions (rather than co mplete) in the group that 
cleared anti -PLA2R. It will be important to see whether these patients will continue to 
have a further slow decline in proteinuria with further follow -up, similar to patients with 
IMN who undergo spontaneous remission.
8 It may also help to explain why even patien ts 
with only partial remissions are still associated with good long term outcomes, i.e. in 
 12 these cases the residual proteinuria may be explained by the residual kidney scars rather 
than the persistence of the immunologic disease.42 
 
 
 
Figure 3.   Representative plots of anti -PLA2R (gray squares) and proteinuria (black 
diamonds) versus time following initial RTX tre atment. Values are plotted as percent of 
baseline value.  Panel A and B depicts the typical reduction and disappearance of anti -
PLA2R followed by resolution of proteinuria exhibited by the majority of patients. Panel 
C is representative of patients in whom  anti-PLA2R did not substantially decline 
following treatment and the associated with persistence of proteinuria. Panel D depicts the single patient whose anti -PLA2R level returned with relapse of his disease after 
having initially disappeared.  This incom plete mirroring of immunological improvement by clinical status is an 
important issue. As mentioned, proteinuria could remain at a sub- nephrotic level in spite 
of the absence of immunological disease activity. In this situation, further immunosuppression would have no benefit but would have continued toxicity risk. In contrast, at a similar level of proteinuria, immunological activity, as detected by the continuing presence of circulating anti -PLA2R could be ongoing. In this setting, an 
increase or change i n immunosuppressive regimen may be the best strategy.  Ultimately, 
if confirmed anti -PLA2R levels may become an important surrogate assessment of 
disease activity and of treatment outcome. We propose to expand these observations by measuring anti -PLA2R lev els in all patients enrolled into the current trial. This in itself 
will be a major innovation for the results of these studies have the potential to create a new paradigm for monitoring and treatment in patients with IMN.  If confirmed, the 
 13 autoantibody l evel can be added to predictive algorithms and have the potential to 
influence future treatment protocols and lead to improved care of patients with IMN. 
  
OVERALL RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS:  
The goal of this proposal is to conduct a prospective randomized controlled phase III 
study comparing Rituximab (RTX) to Cyclosporine (CSA) in the treatment of patients with IMN.  Once a patient with IMN and proteinuria ≥5g/24h is identified, meets other 
entry criteria and consents to the study, he/she will receive a m inimum of 3 months of 
conservative therapy aimed at maximizing Angiotensin II blockade (run -in phase). If at 
the end of this period the patient still meets entry criteria he/she will be randomized into a 12-month treatment period, and a subsequent follow -up of 12 months. Efficacy of 
treatment will be assessed by remission status (based on changes in proteinuria) at 24 months from randomization. Patient safety will be assessed via collection of adverse event data and evaluation of pre- and post- treatment lab oratory data. At the 6-month post-
randomization visit, patients who have been randomized to either CSA or RTX but who do not have a reduction in proteinuria ≥25% (confirmed on repeat measurements within 2 weeks) will be considered treatment failures and ex it the study. Data from that point 
onward will be censored. Patients in the RTX group who have a reduction in proteinuria of equal to or >25% at 6 months will be given another identical course of RTX (1g x 2).  This treatment regimen was chosen given our initial data that suggested a percentage of our cohort appeared to respond to an additional course of therapy. Data from our 2 pilot studies showed that RTX is out of the circulation by month 2 in the majority of patients and B cells have recovered by month 3 in patients treated with RTX 1g x 2 (the regimen 
chosen for the study). Thus, at 6 months, patients in the RTX arm are completely, at least as best as we can measure, free of immunosuppression, and hence the second course should not be associated with additive toxicity. The same definition of response will apply to the CSA arm at 6 months. An equal to or >25% reduction in proteinuria will dictate continuation of the CSA for an additional 6 months (total of 12 months of full dose CSA). This assessment at six months allows a balance between risk -benefit in both 
arms. The protocol provides similar exposure to immunosuppression in both arms and allows an early exit for patients related to safety issues by providing a lack of efficacy (futility) end point at 6  months. 
 
Primary endpoint  
CR or PR (defined as per table 1) at 24 months after randomization will be the primary endpoint. This will be assessed in an intention to treat (ITT) analysis.    
Secondary endpoints  
1. Relapse state at month 24 after randomizati on (Urine Protein (UP) > 3.5 g/24h after 
earlier CR or PR)  
2. Anti- PLA2R levels  
3. Quality of life as measured by modified KDQOL 4. Adverse events 5. ESRD 6. CR or PR, and CR alone at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months after randomization 7. Time to CR or PR 8. Effe ct of treatment on renal function, as assessed by slope of creatinine clearance from 
baseline to 24 months. 
 14 Table 1.  Definition of remission status  
Remission status  Proteinuria (UP g/24 hours) after treatment  
Complete remission (CR)  UP ≤ 0.3 g/24h and serum albumin ≥ 3.5g/dl  
Partial remission (PR)  Reduction in baseline UP of ≥ 50% plus final UP ≤ 3.5 g/24h 
but > 0.3 g/24h  
Non-response (NR)  Reduction in baseline UP of < 25% (includes increase in UP)  
Relapse  Development of nephrotic range proteinuria following CR or 
PR, i.e. > 3.5g/24h  
 
Patient recruitment  
The study population will be comprised of individuals with biopsy -proven idiopathic MN. 
Total study size will be 126 patients, enrolled among up to 25 participating sites.   
Potent ial candidates for the study will be identified by the investigators using existing 
databases and clinical trial networks.  The P.I. or the study coordinator will contact these potential candidates and if the preliminary interview indicates their willingne ss to 
participate, a consent form will be reviewed with the patient.  If a potential candidate remains interested, the consent form will be signed, and the patient enrolled in the study.  The institutional review board at each participating site will appro ve the recruitment 
process and consent forms.  The Mayo Nephrology Collaborative Group (MNCG) will post information on its web site describing the study and identifying local contacts at the collaborating centers.   Each site involved may have their own me thods of informing and 
recruiting potentially eligible patients but in all cases will have IRB approval before embarking on this process.  Each site will be expected to randomize approximately 6 -10 
patients over the recruitment period.  If, based on site e stimates of the IMN population 
that would be eligible for this study, we enroll approximately 30% of the annual population in a single year our recruitment will be complete.  We have assembled a consortium for this trial with a population that well exceeds  the enrollment needs based 
upon the multi- year enrollment plan for this trial.     
  
Recruitment strategy  
Potential candidates for the study will be identified by the P.I. at each site using existing research and clinical databases and clinical trial netw orks. With local IRB approval, 
electronic health records and pathology clinical data bases will be used for cohort discovery at each institution. Study investigators will also contact local research volunteer registries and local patient advocacy groups and request they provide information about this trial to their participants/members. Each participating site will be encouraged to accept referrals of study patients identified from national patient volunteer registries such as researchmatch.org and the Office of Rare Disease Research sponsored patient contact registry. Regional advertising will also be carried out via our ongoing 
participation in the NEPTUNE trial (sponsored by the NIDDK/ODR.) through its collaborative network of 18 academic centers in North  America. The P.I. or the study 
coordinator will contact potential study candidates and if the preliminary  interview 
indicates their willingness to participate, a consent form will be reviewed with the patient. If a potential candidate remains interested, the consent form will be signed, and the patient enrolled in the study.  According to our site estimates, only 18% of the available population will need to be eligible and willing to participate in the trial to achieve the target sample size.  
  
 15 Potential Challenges and Solutions  
Patient recruitment is often slower than anticipated in clinical studies.  The team of 
clinical centers engaged in this trial, including the primary Mayo Clinic site, has significant experience in recruitment and conduct of clinica l trials. Past recruitment 
success at Mayo into phase I and II trials of RTX in adults with IMN is documented by the enrollment of 15 patients in less than 6 months and 20 patients in 11 months.
71, 75  At 
Mayo Clinic alone, an average of 50 cases of MN a y ear have been diagnosed for the past 
5 years based on kidney biopsy registry. The projected available population is > 200% of the recruitment goal.   If enrollment at some of the involved clinical sites is slower than expected, we have the option to recrui t additional patients from the other participating sites or add, for example,  
additional sites from the Neptune Consortium to our trial.   
 
Inclusion Criteria  
• Idiopathic MN diagnosed by renal biopsy (original biopsy needs to include light, 
immunofluorescence and electron microscopy); pathology report must be adjudicated by a study PI (Dr. Fervenza or Dr. Cattran, or documented delegate) prior to 
randomization.  
• Age 18-80 years inclusive 
• If female, must be post -menopausal, surgically sterile or practicing a medically 
approved method of contraception (with exception of no birth- control pill given the 
potential for increased risk of thromboembolism in the nephrotic setting). 
• Patient must be off prednisone or mycophenolate mofetil for >1 month and alkylating agents for >6 months. The rationale is to minimize the potential confounding effect of 
delayed benefits from previous immunosuppressive agents and to reduce the risk of too much immunosuppression from the combined previous drug exposure plus trial drug exposure, e.g. infections. 
• Treatment with an ACEi and/or ARB, for ≥3 months prior to randomization and 
adequate blood pressure control (target BP is <130/80 mm Hg in >75% of the readings, 
but subjects with BP <140/80 mmHg in >75% of the readings will be eligible).   
OR 
If patient is intolerant to even a very low dose of either ACEi or ARB therapy, approval 
for participation in the trial has been obtained from the study PI(s) prior to randomization.
 
Patients with documented evidence of ≥3 months treatment with maximal angiotensin II blockade, on an HMG -CoA reductase inhibitor, and BP control (BP <140/80 mm Hg 
in >75% of the readings) who remain with proteinuria ≥5g/24h and meet the other eligibility criteria (as confirmed at the Time 0 visit by the central lab results) may enter the treatment phase of the study and be randomized to RTX/CSA without the need of the run- in/conservative phase of the study.  However, in addition these patients must 
have a documented <50%  reduction in proteinuria compared to previous 24 hr proteinuria or Uprot/Ucrea ratio estimates during  this p eriod of  ACEi and/or ARB 
treatment otherwise they must fulfill the run -in requirement.  
o  (Please refer to manual of operation for clarification of tests mandated for patients who are randomized without the run-in period)   
 16 • Proteinuria ≥5g/24h using the average from two 24- hour urine collections collected 
within 14 days of each other despite Ang II blockade for ≥3 months as described above.  
• Estimated GFR ≥40 ml/min/1.73m2 while taking ACEi/ARB therapy OR quantified 
endogenous creatinine clearance ≥40 ml/min based on a 24 hour urine collection.  The 
GFR will be estimated using the 4 variable MDRD equation as published in the NKF -
CKD guidelines.81 This approach is adopted, rather than the much more expensive and 
more invasive techniques (e.g. inulin or iothalamate clearance) since the likelihood of 
detecting significant changes in GFR in this short term study is remote regardless of which method is chosen. At entry into the study and at set time points thereafter patients will also have a 24h urine collection for calculation of CrCl and proteinuria.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• Patients with presence of active infection or a secondary cause of IMN (e.g. hepatitis B, 
SLE, medications, malignancies). Testing for HIV, Hepatitis B and C should have 
occurred <2 years prior to enrollment into the study. Screening for malignancy should be carried out according to standard guideline recommendations.  
• Type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus: to exclude proteinuria secondary to diabetic nephropathy.  
Patients who have recent history of steroid induced diabetes but no evi dence on renal 
biopsy performed within 6 months of entry into the study are eligible for enrollment. 
• Pregnancy or breast feeding (for safety reasons).  
• History of resistance to CSA (or other calcineurin inhibitors, e.g. tacrolimus), RTX or alkylating agents  (e.g. Cytoxan). Patients who previously responded to CSA/CNI, RTX 
or alkylating agents with either a CR or PR but relapsed off CSA/CNI after 3 months, 
or relapsed off RTX or alkylating agent after 6 months, are eligible.  
 
Randomized Treatment Groups : Onc e all entry criteria have been satisfied and 
confirmed, patients will be randomized  to treatment with Rituximab or Cyclosporine.   
Randomization will be performed by study site staff through the electronic case report form (eCRF.) The randomization list will be stratified by site, and generated by the Data Management and Coordinating Center (DMCC) using random permuted blocks of variable size.
  
 
Rituximab:  Patients randomized to the RTX arm will receive 1000 mg IV on Days 1 and 
15. Patients who achieve complete remission at 6 months will not be retreated. A second course of RTX 1000 mg IV will be administered at study month 6 for individuals who have not achieved a complete remission, but have achieved at least a ≥ 25% reduction compared to their central laboratory (Mayo Clinic Rochester) baseline (Time 0) proteinuria (but not a CR). Dosing at study month 6 will be independent of CD19/20+ B cell count. The rationale for retreating patients who have had an equal to or > 25% reduction in proteinuria at 6 months is based on our experience in our pilot studies (first study using 1000 mg on Days 1 and 15 and second study using 4 weekly doses of 375mg/m
2) where an increase in the proteinuria remission rate was achieved after a 
second course of treatment.  In our 2 studies repeated courses of RTX were not associated with additive adverse effects in comparison to their first course. If after six months the reduction in proteinuria is less than 25% compared to baseline the RTX treatment will not be repeated, the patient will exit from the study and will be considered a failure of therapy.  
 Dosage and Administration of Rituximab:
 The first infusion of both courses (Day 1 
and Day 181) of RTX will be administered IV at an initial rate of 50 mg/hr. All patients 
 17 will be preme dicated with acetaminophen (1g) and diphenhydramine HCl (50 mg) by 
mouth from 30 to 60 minutes prior to the start of an infusion.  Premedication with 
steroids (100 mg methylprednisolone IV) will also be given 30 minutes prior to the first infusion of each series of RTX (Day 1 and Day 181). If a hypersensitivity or infusion-related reaction does not occur, the infusion rate will be escalated by 50 mg/hr increments every 30 minutes, to a maximum of 400 mg/hr.  If a hypersensitivity (non- IgE-mediated) 
or infusion-related reaction develops, the infusion will be temporarily slowed or interrupted. Treatment of infusion- related symptoms with additional diphenhydramine 
and acetaminophen will be recommended. Additional treatment with bronchodilators or IV saline may be indicated. The infusion may be continued at one-half the previous infusion rate upon improvement of the patient’s symptoms.  If the infusion was well tolerated, subsequent infusions (Day 15 and Day 195) may be administered at an initial rate of 100 mg/hr and increased by 100 mg/hr increments at 30- minute intervals, to a 
maximum of 400 mg/hr as tolerated.  If the first infusion was not tolerated, the guidelines for the first infusion should be followed for all subsequent infusions.  Patients administered an antihistamine for treatment or prevention of infusion related reactions will be given appropriate warnings about drowsiness and impairment of driving ability 
prior to discharge.  Participants will be observed for 1 hour post infusion.  Although most study visits have a window of +/- 10 days, the 2
nd infusion in each series 
(i.e., Day 15 and Day 195) will have a more restricted window of +/- 3 days. Specifically, the 2
nd infusion in each series should occur 14 days +/- 3 days from the time of the 1st 
infusion in the series.  The window is to account for weekends, holidays, and scheduling 
conflicts.   
   
Monitoring of Rituximab Effects 
The numbers of CD19/20+ B cells in the peripheral blood will be quantified by flow 
cytometry using peripheral blood leukocy tes. Flow cytometry will be performed pre - 
RTX treatment and at regular intervals following administration of RTX (see Table 2b: Test Schedule and Monitoring for Rituximab Treatment Arm).  These assays will allow us to follow the level of B -cell depletion,  kinetics of B -cell reconstitution and the 
composition of cells that re -populate the B -cell pool after treatment with RTX as well as 
helping to ensure dosing adequacy in these patients.    
Cyclosporine:  Neoral brand (Novartis) is the preferred Cyclosporine  product for this 
trial. Participating sites must contact the DMCC prior  to dispensing any other brand to 
study participants as not all brands of Cyclosporine are bio- equivalent. Patients 
randomized to the Cyclosporine arm will be started at a dose of CSA = 3.5 mg/kg/day 
p.o. divided into 2 equal doses given at 12 hour intervals. Target trough CSA blood levels, as determined in whole blood by HPLC, are 125 to 175 ng/ml. Patients will have their doses adjusted according to their blood levels of CSA as monitored every 2 weeks +/- 3 days until the target trough level is reached.  After reaching target, CSA trough 
levels will continue to be checked as per the visit schedule (Table 2a).  If a complete remission is achieved by six months, CSA will be tapered by ap proximately 1/3 of the 
maintenance dose monthly and hence discontinued after two months. If there has been at least an equal to or >25% reduction compared to their central laboratory (Mayo Clinic Rochester) baseline (Time 0) proteinuria (but not complete r emission) the CSA will be 
continued for an additional six months. A persistent and otherwise unexplained increase in serum creatinine >30% will prompt an approximate 25% dose reduction of CSA, aiming for a corresponding 25% reduction in CSA trough level (for example, if trough 
 18 CSA was 175 ng/ml the goal would be to reduce it to 130 ng/ml by reducing the dose by 
approximately 25% - dose reduction is approximate because CSA is only available in 
specific dose strengths (25mg, 100mg) and therefore some rounding  may be required).  If 
with this dose reduction the creatinine does not return to within 30% of baseline levels 
within 3 weeks, then a second dose reduction of approximately 25% with a similar reduction in CSA trough level (e.g. if CSA trough level was 100 ng/ml, reduce to 75 
ng/ml) will be used.  If the creatinine does not fall to within 30% of baseline values with this second dose reduction, the drug will be discontinued.  If after six months the reduction in proteinuria is less than 25% compared to baseline the drug will be discontinued, the patient will exit from the study and be considered a failure of therapy.  At the end of 12 months, Cyclosporine will be tapered by 1/3 of the maintenance dose 
monthly and hence discontinued after 2 months. Serum potas sium and serum creatinine 
levels will be checked at the initiation of Cyclosporine in conjunction with blood draw for CSA level. If Cyclosporine dose is changed during treatment, potassium, creatinine and CSA levels will be rechecked every two weeks +/ - 3 days post increase/decrease in 
CSA dosage until levels are stable and at target.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Schematic representation of the study design.  
   
Blinding  
This will be an open- label study with neither patients nor physicians blinded. Blinding, 
for this study, was considered difficult and unnecessary and would significantly add to the cost of the study. The need to provide RTX intravenously would require that the CSA arm patients would have to receive an IV infusion of saline which seems unjustifiable from th e scientific and budgetary points of view. Furthermore, with the exception of 
 19 quality of life measures, all endpoints are based on objective (laboratory) criteria. Having 
the physicians in the study blinded to CSA level also introduces a potential risk fac tor 
that’s unnecessary in our estimation. Documentation of cyclosporine levels will ensure 
that patients are taking the drug at the appropriate time and achieving the prescribed levels indicated in the protocol.  
 
Pharmaceutical logistics  
RTX will be provided by Genentech.  Although Cyclosporine is recognized by insurance 
service providers as standard treatment for patients with IMN, participants randomized to the cyclosporine arm will receive the drug free of charge.  Neoral brand (Novartis) is the preferred Cyclosporine product for this trial.  If it is not possible to source Neoral from the local hospital pharmacy, please contact the DMCC prior to dispensing any study drug as not all brands of Cyclosporine are bio-equivalent.  Appropriate quantities of the medication will be supplied to the individual from the individual sites following randomization and again at months 3, 6, 9, and 12 and may also be supplied at other time points should dose adjustments be required.   
Screening visit  
The Screening visit will consist of meeting with any potential candidate for the study, reviewing eligibility criteria, including laboratory requirements (as outlined below and in Tables 2a and 2b), and reviewing and signing the informed consent form.    Candidates who have not yet been exposed to conservative therapy will be started on 
the initial step of the protocol, i.e. maximize angiotensin II blockade as described in the run-in phase below. If any of the exams, tests or procedures involved in this visit were 
completed as  routine standard of care within 30 days of screening, participants do not 
need to repeat them. It will be up to the study doctor to review and consider if the previous findings are appropriate/adequate to use otherwise they will be repeated.  In addition to data from this screening visit, retrospective data from at least one additional 
time point within the previous year will be collected whenever possible.  Retrospective data collection needs to include proteinuria, urine creatinine, creatinine clearance,  
Uprot/Ucrea ratio, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, serum creatinine, and serum albumin values.  
Candidates who have already been on conservative therapy for 3 months or more  
without a documented decrease in proteinuria of >50% as compar ed to a value from 
within the last 3 to 12 months do not need to fulfill the run- in requirement as long as their 
local labs indicate that proteinuria remains ≥5g/24h. These individuals should proceed 
directly to full screening as part of the Time 0 visit a nd do not require a formal screening 
visit. Review of the eligibility criteria, lab requirements, and the review and signing of the informed consent form will take place at the Time 0 visit for these individuals. However, retrospective data from at least t wo previous time points (approximately 3 
months prior to obtaining consent plus one more time point within the previous year) will still be collected whenever possible.  Retrospective data collection needs to include proteinuria, urine creatinine, creatini ne clearance, Uprot/Ucrea ratio, systolic blood 
pressure, diastolic blood pressure, serum creatinine, and serum albumin values. 
 
Patient monitoring and evaluation  
Patients will be followed for 2 years following randomization to monitor for the 
occurrence of adverse events, late remissions, relapses, GFR changes and development of 
 20 end stage renal disease.  The first 12 months of the study will be considered as the 
treatment period while the remaining 12 months will be considered as an observational 
period including the period of tapering to discontinuation in the Cyclosporine arm.  In addition, as described later in the protocol (see ancillary studies) we will seek permission to follow the remission cohort (i.e., those in PR or CR at 12 months or CR at 6 months as well as those who are not in remission but have a ≥50% reduction in proteinuria from baseline by month 12) for an additional 12 months of observation beyond the previous end point of observation of 24 months to monitor for relapses and changes in PLA2R.    For those patients in the Cyclosporine arm, Cyc losporine trough  level measurements 
will be done every 2 weeks +/ - 3 days after initiation of Cyclosporine until levels are 
stable and at target. Potassium and creatinine will also be checked in conjunction with CSA level. If Cyclosporine dose is changed d uring treatment, potassium, 
creatinine and CSA level will be rechecked every 2 weeks +/ - 3 days until levels are 
stable and at target. Cyclosporine levels will also be assessed whenever serum 
creatinine rises by >30% without a recognizable reason such as v olume depletion, 
additional drugs, sepsis, etc.  Patients who cannot tolerate the medications and/or who are treatment failures at 6 months will exit the study at 6 months (i.e., the 6 month visit and accompanying data collection should still occur).  Pati ents who go in to complete 
remission will discontinue study drug but will continue with full visit follow -ups until 
month 24 as scheduled.  However, the therapeutic/management plan for these patients will be solely at the discretion of the managing nephrologist although while in CR no further immunosuppressive therapy is recommended.  Likewise, patients who relapse from either a partial or complete remission or who are not in partial or complete remission by the end of the treatment period (i.e., 12 months)  will continue with the visit 
schedule, but the therapeutic/management plan will be solely at the discretion of the managing nephrologist. Finally, for patients who temporarily stop taking Cyclosporine, there are three possible scenarios:  
1. Patients who discontinue Cyclosporine for < 2 weeks may simply be restarted on the study drug and continue to fully participate in the trial.  The treatment is to be restarted at its former dose and the patient returned to the regularly scheduled follow- ups including the periodic sampling for assessing potassium, creatinine 
and CSA trough levels. 
2. Patients who discontinue Cyclosporine for ≥2 weeks, but < 4 weeks may also be restarted on the study drug at its former dose and fully participate in the trial, but the temporary discontinuance will be logged as a protocol deviation and the missed treatmen t days will be made up at the end of month 12.  This is to ensure 
that all patients receive approximately 12 months of treatment with study drug.  
3. Patients who discontinue Cyclosporine for ≥ 4 weeks will not be restarted on study drug, but will continue with full visit follow -ups until month 24 as 
scheduled.  The therapeutic/management plan will be solely at the discretion of the managing nephrologist. 
 
Laboratory testing  
In order to contain costs all clinical tests will be carried out locally at the recruiting centers.  However, at critical time points: Time 0, and 6, 12, 18, and 24 months from start of treatment, recruiting centers will ship to Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 2 blood samples and 2 urine samples (aliquots obtained from two 24h urine collections) for determination of serum creatinines, serum albumins and urinary protein/creatinine ratios.  Blood and urine kits will be provided by Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, for these 
 21 samples along with shipping costs (see Lab Manual).  The Central L ab results (Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN) will be used for statistical purposes since this will ensure a 
standard methodology is applied to the critical (for the trial analysis) laboratory assessments. By measuring the volume of the 24 -hour urine collection we will also be 
able to calculate both clearance and the 24 -hour urine protein from the aliquot. 
Proteinuria results at Time 0, 6, 12, 18 and 24 months will be taken as the mean of two 24-hour urine collections done back to back (within 14 days of each other), and the mean 
of these 2 collections will be used to determine CR, PR, or NR.  In order to control for the possibility of under collection or over collection of urine, a maximum 20% variation in total 24h urine creatinine (mg/specimen) will be allowed between the two urine collections required at Time 0, 6  months, 12 months, 18 months, and 24 months.  A difference of greater than 20% will necessitate a third urine collection  
(also to be sent to the central lab) , with the values from one of the two previous 
collections being discarded. We will use the subject’s weight to approximate the expected total urine creatinine (mg/kg) to determine which of the previous collections is closest to the truth and which should be discarded.  It is anticipated that a 3
rd urine collection will 
be needed in <10% of cases.  Proteinuria will be calculated as the mean of these two 24 -
hour urine collections.  In all patients, CBC with differential, serum creatinine, electrolytes, albumin, urinalysis, 24-hour Uprot/Ucrea ratio, and creatinine clearance will be evaluated as noted in Tables 
2a and 2b.  In patients receiving RTX, additional tests will include: quantification of lymphocyte subsets by flow cytometry, serum immunoglobulin levels, and determination of humanized anti -chimeric antibodies (HACA) at study visits Day 1, 6 months, and 9 
months. HACA will be performed free of charge by Genentech using established techniques.    
Anti -PLA2R Assay  
Recent evidence suggests that the presence of auto -antibodies to the M -type 
phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) is a specific marker of idiopathic MN, found in 
greater than 70% of patients.
76 When the analysi s is limited to new -onset, nephrotic 
patients with idiopathic MN, this sensitivity increases further. The presence of anti -
PLA2R correlates well with disease activity, disappearing with a spontaneous or treatment -induced remission, and reappearing with a relapse of MN.  
 We intend to explore the correlation of anti -PLA2R and disease activity by carefully 
looking at anti -PLA2R titer in response to RTX/CSA and the achievement of partial or 
complete remission. In those patients that have no remission from thei r disease in 
response to RTX/CSA, we will determine if circulating anti- PLA2R is still present which 
might suggest the need for a second course of RTX, continued treatment with CSA, or alternate immunosuppressive therapy.  Furthermore, in those patients that are in complete remission at 6 months, partial or complete remission at 12 months, , or have a ≥50% reduction in proteinuria from baseline by 12 months (i.e., the MENTOR remission cohort), we intend to explore the following critically important questions:  
1. The relationship between the rate of increase of anti -PLA2R titer and patient 
relapse  
2. The relationship between the absolute change in anti -PLA2R titer (from 
baseline/remission point) and clinical phenotype (i.e., response/relapse time) 
 22 3. The predictive capacity of changes in anti -PLA2R titer with regard to relapse 
and/or durability of remission 
4. The timing between changes in anti -PLA2R titer and any subsequent clinical 
relapse  
  
Serum samples from all 126 subjects will be collected at the Screening visit (w hen 
applicable), Time 0, and months 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, and 24. Serum samples will be collected at the individual sites by the study coordinator and stored in a dedicated -20° freezer until 
a point when they can be shipped in bulk to Dr. Fervenza at Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.  Mayo Clinic will then send the samples in bulk to Dr. Paul Brenchley at the 
Manchester Royal Infirmary in the UK .  The sera will be tested in batches for reactivity 
toward immobilized recombinant PLA2R by ELISA, with appropriate positive and negative controls. Upon completion of the study, we will correlate response to treatment in each group to the baseline presence and/or titer of anti -PLA2R. A major hypothesis to 
be addressed is whether there is a difference in treatment response between those subjects who are initially anti- PLA2R negative versus those who possess circulating anti -PLA2R. 
In those subjects who are initially positive for anti- PLA2R, we will also correlate the 
primary endpoint (remission status) to anti -PLA2R titer s throughout and at the end of the 
study.  
 For those in the remission cohort (see ancillary studies), additional serum samples will be collected from those that achieve partial or complete remission or ≥ 50% reduction in proteinuria by 12 months at additional time points as follows:   
• For patients in the CSA arm that are in partial or complete remission or ≥ 50% 
reduction in proteinuria at 12 months additional samples will be collected at 
months 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 22, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, and 36; for those who achieve complete remission at 6 months additional samples will be collected at  months 7, 8, 10, and 11 then at 14, 16, 20, 22, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, and 36.    
• For patients in the RTX arm that achieve partial or complete remission
 or ≥ 50% 
reduction in proteinuria at 12 months additional samples will be collected  at 
months 14, 16, 20, 22, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, and 36; for those in the RTX arm that have achieved complete remission at 6 months, additional samples will be collected at  months  10, 14, 16, 20, 22, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, and 36.    
Whole blood for these particular serum samples may be collected at a peripheral lab and 
shipped to the individual study site within 48 hours for processing and storage in a -20° 
freezer as described in the ancillary  studies section later in this protocol.  
 Investigators in the study will be blind to the results of anti -PLA2R antibodies until the 
study is completed.  The rationale is to avoid bias in the treatment of these patients.  Although ideally patients would be stratified to the different arms based on the results of their initial anti-PLA2R test in order to avoid potential imbalance this will not be possible for practical and financial reasons.  Given the relatively small number expected to be negative, it is unlikely this will bias the balance between positive and negative patients at randomization.  
Histopathology 
 23 Prior to randomization, a report documenting the results of the histology review 
including, light microscopy, immunofluorescence and electron microscopy results, as 
well as percentage of global and segmental glomerular sclerosis, tubulo -interstitial index, 
and immunofluorescence findings will be submitted to the DMCC and reviewed by the study P.I.   Following randomization, biopsy slides will be centrally reviewed on an on- going basis 
(but as soon as possible following randomization) by the Pathology Department at Mayo Clinic Rochester and/or the Pathology Department at the University Hospital Network, Toronto. 
 
 
Quality of life measures  
Psychosocial  response to illness and its treatment may play an important role in overall 
adjustment and illness management. Research from a variety of chronic illness 
populations, including steroid resistant FSGS and chronic kidney disease (CKD), has consistently link ed physical and psychosocial variables with health outcomes. These 
findings highlight the significant burden experienced by adults with uncontrolled nephrotic syndrome. Little is known about the impact of MN or its treatment on patient reported outcomes. Due to the severity of this disease and the potential risk for progression in these patients, psychosocial factors may play an important role in understanding their response to treatment.  In addition to evaluating the safety and efficacy of RTX and CSA, it  is essential to assess the individual's perception of his/her 
quality of life relative to disease status and therapeutic response.  Quality of life will be assessed by patient self -report using the modified KDQOL questionnaire form at Time 0, 
6, 12 and 24 months.    
 24 Tabl e 2a: Test Schedule and Monitoring for Cyclosporine Treatment Arm  
1. Potassium, Cr checked at 2 weeks +/ - 3 days post Cyclosporine initiation. If Cyclosporine is increased or decreased during treatment, potassium, Cr and CSA will b e rechecked after 2 weeks  +/- 3 days  
†Patient will have blood levels of CSA monitored every 2 weeks +/ - 3 days until target is reached and then as per above schedule. 
a Only for participants who continue on CSA at 6 months  
b Telephone or in -clinic visit to confirm successful down -titration of CSA for patients who continue on medication to 12 months (if by phone, medication should be returned at 18 month  visit)  Tests/Assessments   Screen  T0 Day 
15 Day 
28 Day 
90/ 
3m Day 
180/ 
6m Day 
210/ 
7m Day 
240/ 
8m Day 
270/ 
9m Day 
300/ 
10m Day 
330/ 
11m Day 
365/ 
12m Day 
395/ 
13m Day 
425/ 
14m Day 
455/ 
15m Day 
485/ 
16m Day 
515/ 
17m Day 
545/ 
18m Day 
605/ 
20m Day 
665/ 
22m Day 
730/ 
24m Day 
790/ 
26m Day 
850/ 
28m Day 
910/ 
30m Day 
970/ 
32m Day 
1030/  
34m Day 
1095/36m  
Randomization   X                          
History/Exam  X X   X X   X   X      X   X       
CBC with 
differential  X X   X X   X   X      X   X       
BUN, Cr, Ly tes, 
Albumin 
(including 
potassium)  X X   X X   X   X      X   X       
CPK    X  X                       
CSA level  †   X X X X   X   X                
Lipid panel   X    X      X         X       
Serum Pregnancy  X X    X                      
Anti-PLA2R 
antibodies  X X   X X Xd Xd X Xd Xd X Xc Xc,d Xc Xc,d Xc X Xc,d Xc,d X Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d 
DNA sample   X                          
Gene Expression   X          X         X       
Potassium and Cr 
1   X X                        
UA X X    X      X         X       
Uprot/Ucrea 24h  X XX   X XX   X   XX      XX   XX       
Uprot/Ucrea (spot 
urine)        Xd Xd  Xd Xd  Xc Xc,d Xc Xc,d Xc  Xc,d Xc,d  Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d 
24h creatinine for 
CrCl  X X    X      X         X       
24h urine urea   X    X      X         X       
24h urinary Na+   X    X      X         X       
Quality of life -
KDQOL   X     X      X         X       
Adverse Events    X X X X   X   X  X    X   X       
Dispense/Return 
Medication   X X X X X   Xa   Xa Xa Xa,b              
 25 c For participants in the MENTOR remission cohort who are in PR or CR at 12 months or have a ≥50% reduction in proteinuria from  baseline by 12 months  
d For participants in the MENTOR remission cohort who are in CR at 6 months 
 26 Table 2b: Test Schedule and Monitoring for Rituximab Treatment Arm 
Tests/Assessments  
 Screen  T0 Day 
1 Day 
15 Day 
28 Day 
90/ 
3m Day 
180/ 
6m Day 
181 Day 
195 Day 
270/ 
9m Day 
300/ 
10m Day 
365/ 
12m Day 
425/
14m Day 
485/
16m Day 
545/ 
18m Day 
605/
20m Day 
665/
22m Day 
730/ 
24m Day 
790/ 
26m Day 
850/
28m Day 
910/ 
30m Day 
970/ 
32m Day 
1030/  
34m Day 
1095/ 
36m 
Randomization   X                       
History/Exam  X X    X X   X  X   X   X       
CBC with differential  X X    X X   X  X   X   X       
BUN, Cr, Lytes 
(including potassium) / 
Albumin  X X    X X   X  X   X   X       
PBFC1    X  X  X     X3             
Serum IgG, IgA and 
IgM   X    X     X      X       
Lipid panel   X     X     X      X       
HACA2   X    X   X               
Serum Pregnancy  X X     X                  
Urine Pregnancy    X X    X X                
Anti-PLA2R 
antibodies  X X    X X   X Xd X Xc,d Xc,d X Xc,d Xc,d X Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d 
DNA Sample   X                       
Gene Expression   X          X      X       
UA X X     X     X      X       
Uprot/Ucrea 24h  X XX    X XX   X  XX   XX   XX       
Uprot/Ucrea (spot 
urine)            Xd  Xc,d Xc,d  Xc,d Xc,d  Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d Xc,d 
24h creatinine for CrCl  X X     X     X      X       
24h urine urea   X     X     X      X       
24h urinary Na+   X     X     X      X       
Pre-infusion 
medication  
(i.e.Tylenol, Benadryl)    X X    X X          
 
       
Pre-infusion 
medication (i.e. 
methylprednisolone)    X     X                 
Rituximab Infusion    X X    X X                
Quality of life -
KDQOL   X     X     X      X       
Adverse Events    X X X X X X X X  X   X   X       
1. PBFC: Peripheral blood flow cytometry. Quantitate B and T cell subsets;  
2. HACA: human anti -chimeric antibodies; pre- infusion on Days 1 and at 6 months and 9 months.  
3. In the rare case where B cells (CD19/20+) are not replete at Month 12, PBFC will be repeated at Month 18  
C For participants in the MENTOR remission cohort who are in PR or CR at 12 months or have a ≥50% reduction in proteinuria from baseline by 12 months  
d For participants in the MENTOR remission cohort who are in CR at 6 months  
 27 Run In Phase – Common Therapy for Both Arms 
The purpose of the run- in phase is to determine if an individual’s IMN can be adequately 
controlled through conservative, non-immunosuppressive treatment.  If proteinuria can be 
brought below 5g/24h after 3 months or more of conservative therapy, the individual will not be randomized to one of the study’s treatment arms.  In the rar e case where a patient 
is intolerant to even a very low dose of ACEi or ARB therapy, participation in the randomized treatment component of the trial may still be possible (provided the patient still fulfills the other entry criteria), but will require rev iew and approval by the study 
PI(s) prior to randomization. . 
 
Blood pressure control and angiotensin II blockade : The target blood pressure 
(<130/80mmHg in >75% of the readings; but not <100 mmHg systolic) is chosen based 
on recent recommendations by the JNC VII.82 The first step will be the introduction of an 
ACE Inhibitor (ACEi). Because this part of the study aims to maximize Ang II blockade, ACEi dose will be increased every 2 weeks until the maximum tolerated/FDA approved dose is achieved or until intolerable side effects occur (e.g. development of postural hypotension, light headed, hyperkalemia, etc). Once ACEi dose has been maximized and there are no obs ervable side -effects and/or blood pressure is not at target, a long acting 
ARB will be added.  The ARB dose will be increased every 2 weeks to achieve the maximum tolerated or maximum approved dosage.   For patients whose blood pressure control is still not at target, it is recommended that they receive additional medications in the following order: a loop diuretic, a cardioselective β -blocker, a non- dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (CCB), and 
clonidine.  The selection of these drugs adheres to the recommendations of the JNC VII.
82 
The choice of a non -dihydropyridine CCB was made because of concerns that 
dihydropyridine- type CCB may obscure the anti -protei nuric effects of the above therapy. 
In order to further ensure that any potential adverse effect is minimized we have limited CCB to be used as a fifth agent, and to be used only when the combination of an ARB/ACEi, a diuretic, and a β -blocker have failed to bring BP to target level. Recent 
data have shown that an aldosterone or renin antagonist have significant antiproteinuric effects. The reason we do not include these agents as part of the treatment protocol is out of concern for th e development of severe hyperkalemia when all (ACEi, ARB, a direct 
renin inhibitor and aldosterone antagonist) these agents are used in combination. This side effect is likely to be further accentuated in the Cyclosporine group and we want to avoid an imbalance of RAS blockade between the arms of the study.  
 
Concomitant Treatment  
At the start of the run -in/conservative phase of the study (or at the start of the treatment 
phase of the study for those patients who are run- in exempt) and as part of the standard of 
care for patients with nephrotic syndrome and significant hyperlipidemia, patients will be started on atorvastatin 10 mg a day (or its equivalent with the exception of rosuvastatin  
(Crestor) which is to be avoided given the associated marked increase in the area under 
the curve (AUC) when used in conjunction with CSA). Patients who are currently taking rosuvastatin (Crestor) and are randomized to the CSA treatment arm will need to be changed to atorvastatin or its equivalent prior to or at the time of  starting the 
 28 cyclosporine .  If tolerated clinically and, as evidenced by the lack of persistent elevation 
of liver transaminase >3x upper limit of normal or high CK, or clinical rhabdomyolysis, 
the dose will be increased according to the recently publishe d KDOQI -dyslipidemia 
guidelines.83 The dose should not be increased above the maximum of 40 mg/day. T he 
rationale for not using a higher statin dose is because of the risk of developing proteinuria with the use of statins at high doses, and the added risk of rhabdomyolysis in the CSA group. Patients will remain at the highest tolerated dose for the entire  duration of the 
study. Serum lipids will be measured at Time 0 and every 3 months thereafter. High sodium intake (e.g. >200 mm Na/d or 4.6 g sodium/d) can significantly impair the beneficial effects of Ang II blockade.
84 Therefore patients will be instructed to fol low a 
low salt diet (2 -3g/day). Patients will also receive dietary counseling at enrollment as part 
of their standard of care. Patients will be advised of a dietary protein target intake of 0.8-1.0 g/kg ideal body weight/day of high quality protein and will be encouraged to maintain the same diet throughout the duration of the study. Patients with proteinuria >10g/24h and serum albumin <2g/dl should be considered for prophylactic anticoagulation.    Patients randomized to receive Rituximab should be started  on single strength Bactrim 
one a day (or its equivalent) for pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis. This treatment will continue until the end of the study treatment phase (12 months) and the B cells (CD19/20+) have been repleted (>15 cells/microliter on peripheral blood flow cytometry).  B cells (CD19/20+) are expected to be replete by Month 12.  In the rare event that B cells (CD19/20+) are not replete by Month 12, flow cytometry should be repeated at Month 18 (see table 2b) and Bactrim (or its equivalent)  continued to that 
point of repletion.  
Stopping points for medications:  
1. For Cyclosporine: At 6 months, patients in complete remission (as previously defined) 
will have CSA dose tapered and discontinued while those who fail therapy will have CSA discontinued immediately (no need to taper the dose).  After 12 months of therapy, regardless of the degree of proteinuria, Cyclosporine will be tapered and discontinued as described above. 2. Patients in the RTX arm who have either failed therapy or are in compl ete remission at 
6 months (as previously defined) will not have a repeat treatment course.  After the second course of RTX therapy at six months they will have no further RTX therapy regardless of their proteinuria level  
3. Significant potential life threatening infection.  
4. Persistent elevation of liver enzymes >2 x normal (despite CSA arm dose reduction). 5. Persistent elevation of serum potassium >6.0 mEq/l despite diet changes, ACEi/ARB reduction, diuretic dose increase (and in the CSA arm dose reduction). 6. A rise in serum creatinine by >30% above baseline that persists in the absence of secondary causes such as volume depletion or use of potential nephrotoxic agents (and despite adjustments in the CSA dose) 7. Persistent hypertension in either arm, i.e. supine blood pressure >160 mmHg systolic or >90 mmHg diastolic, despite institution of maximum antihypertensive therapy (and despite adjustments of CSA dose) 
 29 8. Other clinically relevant adverse effects not resolved by reduction in dosage of test 
medic ations. 
9. Development of any malignancy or lymphoproliferative disorder. 10. Pregnancy. 11. The appearance of an independent disease whose standard therapy requires continuous administration of significant amounts of corticosteroids, other immunosuppressi ve agents or plasma exchange therapy.  
12. Serious concomitant disease with an expected survival of less than 4 years. 13. At the wish of the patient. 14. The study will be placed on hold if 3 of the first 5 patients enrolled and treated with RTX or CSA dev elop severe opportunistic infections, or experience Grade 3-4 
SAEs.   Patients who choose to discontinue study medication or are withdrawn because of adverse events will be strongly encouraged to continue follow up examination to the study termination.  
 
Ancillary studies:  
 
1. DNA Testing  
Recent data show that in patients with membranous nephropathy, mutations in HLA -
DQA1 and PLA2R1 alleles are associated with an increased risk for developing membranous nephropathy.
80  One of these alleles, the PLA2R1, is in fact the gene for the 
PLA2 receptor.  In our pilot studies, ~70% of the patients with membranous nephropathy had antibodies present in circulation against PLA2 re ceptor.
77  Thus we would like to 
evaluate a linkage between the presence of these antibodies and potential genetic mutations in this group of patients.  We will ask  for the patients consent to further 
evaluate this linkage by collecting samples of blood to perform additional testing as part of their informed consent form (ICF).  
2. Quantitative gene expression analysis 
Quantitative gene expression analysis using real -time PCR and Microarray technology in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells:  There is little information on global gene expression changes that occur during active nephrotic syndrome secondary to IMN and subsequent to remission of this disease.  Furthermore, t here is limited information on how Rituximab 
and Cyclosporine affects gene expression of potentially pathogenic genes.  As part of this study, peripheral blood will be collected at Time 0, 12 and 24 months after therapy.  Following treatment with Rituximab  and Cyclosporine administration, B -cell-specific 
genes will be assessed to track the extent of treatment in the B -cell pool gene expression.  
Both quantitative TaqMan real -time polymerase chain reaction and gene microarray 
(Affymetrix U133 chips) will be used to evaluate gene expression profiles.  Real -time 
PCR will be used only to confirm the findings of the gene chip for genes with statistical significance.   
 
3. Staining original renal biopsy for CD20 + B cells 
 30 We will obtain each patient’s permission to re view renal biopsy slides and to obtain 3 
unstained slides, 3 microns thick for staining with antibody against CD20 positive cells 
and anti -APL2R.  The purpose is to stain sections from biopsy tissue with an antibody 
against CD20 positive cells and to look for receptor density to APL2R.  These may be the same cells that are in circulation and that are depleted by Rituximab. We want to examine the hypothesis that there is a correlation between the number of CD20 positive B cells infiltrating the kidney and th e patient’s response to therapy.  Preliminary results suggest 
that staining for CD20 and APL2R antibodies are increased in kidney biopsy of patients with MN. All patients by this juncture will have completed the therapeutic part of the study and will have already received rituximab or CSA treatment as part of study so this ancillary project will have no therapeutic or management implications.  
 
Immunohistochemistry methods  
Immunohistochemical staining will be performed at the Department of Pathology, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, by Dr. Sanjeev Sethi and/or by Dr. Carmen Avila -Casado 
at University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario.  Formalin- fixed, paraffin embedded 
sections will be cut onto coated glass slides. Slides will be incubated with monoclonal anti-CD20 and APL2R primary antibody at 1:1000 dilution (DAKO).  Heat induced 
antigen retrieval will be used. Sections will be incubated at 20C overnight and rinsed.  Endogenous peroxidase activity will be prevented by pretreating all sections with 3% hydro gen peroxide.  Sections will be incubated with a secondary rabbit anti -mouse 
antibody linked with avidin- biotin
 complex.  Sections will be counterstained with 
hematoxylin.  CD20 positive cells (B -cells) will be counted and the density of positive 
cells per  area of renal cortex will be calculated utilizing Image Pro Plus (Media 
Cybernetics) computer image analysis software.  
 
4. The MENTOR Remission Cohort  
Participation in this ancillary study will be restricted to patients in the MENTOR cohort who respond to immunosuppression with partial or complete remission at month 12 (as defined in Table 1), complete remission at 6 months, or ≥50% reduction in proteinuria from baseline by month 12. At the completion of the immunosuppression treatment component of the protocol, the expectation is that 70% of all randomized IMN cases (N=126 x 70%= 88 patients) will experience both a clinical (complete or partial proteinuria remission) and immunological remission.  The immunologic remission is expected to be documented by anti -PLA2R levels significantly reduced from baseline 
with most levels in the normal range (less than 40U).  This population is estimated to be 75% of the initial PLA2R + cohort (75% x 88 = 66 patients).  The great percentage of these patients will reach this r emission at the 12 month study point.  There will be rare 
cases of CR by 6 months.  Our anticipated/expected rate of proteinuria relapse will be between 30% and 50% between month 12 and month 36 (20- 30% in those with CR at 6 
months).  Although the clinical  proteinuria remission status at 24 months remains the 
main determinant of the RCT, the remission cohort (with an extension up to month 36 for periodic sampling of anti -PLA2R titer and urinary protein/creatinine ratios only) will 
provide a unique and probably one -time only opportunity in which to study a number of 
biomarkers of the immunological mechanism as predictors of clinical relapse.  Patients will be followed as per protocol for at least 12 months of observation (i.e., to month 24) 
 31 after achieving pr oteinuria remission or ≥50% proteinuria reduction, but for those in the 
remission cohort we will extend this up to month 36 (a maximum observation time of 24 
months post treatment phase) in those that remain in CR or PR.  Those who relapse between months 24 and 36 will only be followed until their relapse which is defined as development of nephrotic range proteinuria (> 3.5g/day) following CR or PR.  In addition, we are now able to measure other components of the immunological elements of primary/idiopathic MN activity and are no w better able to more precisely 
define the remission state when combining these additional biomarkers of the immune remission state with PLA2R titres. These additional biomarkers include soluble PLA2R.  A detectable level of soluble PLA2R antigen (sPLA2R) is present in normal serum as a result of specific secretion of PLA2R and likely cleavage of the extracellular membrane receptor, and is likely to be a characteristic of the normal, remission state of patients with idiopathic MN. We hypothesize that as pat ients experience immunological relapse, their 
biomarker status will change from sPLA2R +ve, anti -PLA2R –ve to sPLA2R –ve , anti -
PLA2R+ve. The timeframe of this change needs to be established and our remission cohort provides a unique opportunity to study this hypothesis.  This change could vary over weeks dependent on the level of sPLA2R and the rate of production of anti -PLA2R. 
In addition, there may be a distinct phase of soluble circulating immune complexes where the patient is apparently seronegative for both free sPLA2R and free anti -PLA2R until 
excess of anti -PLA2R antibodies dominate. This MENTOR Remission cohort offers a 
unique opportunity to investigate: 
a) the transition from immunological remission to relapse  
b) the link between immunological relapse a nd clinical relapse (proteinuria)  
c) additional biomarkers of relapse.  
The benefit of this study will be the improved capacity to predict those patients at high risk of clinical relapse and the potential to institute therapy potentially in advance of clinic al relapse.  It may also allow us to  determine if  the changing immunologic profile 
can predict  the  severity of relapse and  provide the opportunity to  consider, in the future, matching this profile to  preventive strategies  and/or early and less aggr essive 
immunosuppressive interventions and/or gauge when risk- benefit favours reducing 
immunosuppressive therapy.   We will obtain each patient’s permission to obtain 5mL of blood at designated time points (up to a maximum of 13 extra samples in total) up until month 36 or until relapse (see Tables 2a and 2b for visit schedule) to be used for PLA2R and sPLA2R testing.  In addition, a urine sample will be collected to determine relapse by measuring urine protein/creatinine ratios.  Samples may be collected a t a peripheral lab where possible in 
order to minimize the demands on patient travel time, but blood will need to be sent to study sites for processing and storage ( -20 degrees C) within 48 hours of being drawn.   
Serum samples will be kept in a dedicated f reezer until a point when they can be shipped 
in bulk to Dr. Fervenza at Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.  Mayo Clinic will then send the samples in bulk to Dr. Paul Brenchley at the Manchester Royal Infirmary in the 
UK.    
 
 32  
Statistical Methods and Anal ysis:  
 
Sample size estimation :  The primary study goal is to compare the long -term efficacy of 
RTX (given at baseline and repeated at 6 months) with CSA (12 months treatment + 2 
months taper) using proteinuria response 24 months after randomization. Protei nuria 
positive response will be defined as attaining and maintaining CR or PR at 24 months 
after randomization. We propose to establish that the RTX treatment is non -inferior to the 
CSA. RTX will be considered non- inferior to CSA if the response rate of the RTX arm is 
at most 15% worse than that of CSA arm. In addition we will compare the quality of life (QOL) and adverse event (AE) profile over the course of the treatment period. The preliminary data has indicated that CSA is effective in inducing a CR/PR of proteinuria in 
between 60 and 75% of MN cases.
48, 51 However, nephrotic syndrome (NS) relapses may 
be as high as 50% once CSA is discontinued.85 Thus, we estimate a CR/PR rate in 
patients treated with CSA of 30 -50% at 24 months after randomization.85 Similar 
remission and relapse rates with the use of Tacrolimus (another calcineurin inhibitor) have been reported by Praga et al.
56 In this latter study, almost half of the MN patients 
had a relapse of the nephrotic syndrome after tacrolimus was discontinued.56  On the 
other hand, based on the long term follow up on the 35 patients treated with  RTX from 
our 2 studies, we estimate the relapse rate to be <10% at 24 months.71, 75  We observed a  
CR/PR rate at 12 months, very similar to the rate for calcineurin inhibitors i.e. 60%, and 
in our second study completed recently, we observed an 80% CR/PR rate at 24 months, implying that RTX had a ~20% failure rate with 95% (CI 6% to 44%). To be conservative for the sample size estimation, we considered a maintained CR/PR rate at 
the low end of our previous experience, 55% CR/PR for RTX at 24 months and at the high end of our experience with CSA (CNI therapy) CR/PR for CSA of 45%. We propose a non- inferiority trial with non- inferiority margin 
δ =15%, with the null hypothesis of 
πRTX  – πcyclosprine < δ, where πRTX  and πcyclosprine are the proportions of patients 
with CR/PR at 24 months in treatment arms of RTX and CSA, respectively. Under these assumptions, and a one sided alpha of 0.025, enroll ment of 63 evaluable patients per 
study arm is required to achieve 80% power to show that the RTX is not inferior. For the intent to treat (ITT) analysis we will consider all patients lost to follow up to be non -
responders so no correction to the sample size is needed for dropouts. With 63 patients per arm we will have 80% power to detect moderate differences of .6 standard deviations for continuous measures or around .25 for proportions for the comparisons of the QOL and AEs. 
 
 
Statistical and Analytical P lan: All demographics and entry laboratory data will be 
summarized by treatment group. Frequency distributions will be used to describe 
categorical values and basic summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, median, and inter-quartile range) will be use d to describe continuous values.  To provide more reliable 
estimates and minimize the “regression to the mean effect” duplicate urine measurements obtained at baseline (Time 0), 6, 12, 18 and 24 months will be averaged.   The chi -square 
test and logistic r egression will also be used to compare the percent of patients with 
remission at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months adjusting for treatment center and the baseline 
 33 proteinuria (UP<8g/24h vs >=8g/24h).  Odds ratios and associated 95% confidence 
intervals will be estimated.  The formal test for the primary endpoint will be based on the significance of the treatment group factor in the logistic regression model for UP failure at month 24. The Wilcoxon rank- sum test and ordinal logistic regression will be used to 
compare the ordered remission status outcome (1=CR, 2=PR, 3=NR) between treatment 
groups.  Longitudinal methods for categorical outcomes (e.g. generalized estimating equation or GEE models) will be used to compare remission status profiles between treatment arms.  Unless otherwise noted, all tests will be two -sided with alpha level 0.05.   
 For repeated measures such as urine protein, individual rates of change will be estimated using within -patient linear regression analyses (including data from all visits). Becau se of 
the non- linearity of the changes in proteinuria log transformation estimates will be used. 
Renal function readings will be censored at initiation of dialysis or renal transplant.  Additionally, mixed effects models, assuming a random center effect, and a random slope of creatinine clearance and/or reciprocal of creatinine and intercept for each patient will be fit using data from all visits.  These models allow comparison of the average slope between groups, while taking into account that each patient’s slope may be based on a variable number of readings.  Treatment group comparisons regarding quality -of-life 
scales will be done using repeated measures analyses and mixed effects models.  
 Adverse events (both patient and event counts) will be tabulated by body system, severity and, for each severity, by investigator -assessed relationship to study drug.  Group 
comparisons for adverse events with 4 or more occurrences will be done using chi -square 
or Fisher’s exact test.  The last RTX injection is at 6 mon ths and the tapering of 
Cyclosporine will be completed by the end of month 14.  Hence, the adverse events analyses will focus on events through month 18, allowing these additional months for potential lingering Cyclosporine or RTX complications.  
 The analy sis of the primary endpoint (urine protein failure at month 24) will be intent -to-
treat (ITT), and will include all randomized subjects in the analysis.  For those without a 24 month visit, the 18 month visit results will be used if available, otherwise they will be assumed to have failed at 24 months.  Per protocol (PP) analyses will also be done including only those subjects who receive a full course of study medication and who have a 24 month visit.   Interim analyses :  No interim analyses for efficacy w ill be performed during the trial, 
however safety data will be compiled and reviewed approximately every six months or at the request of the Data and Safety Monitoring Board.    
Investigator and Coordinator Training: In order to make efficient use of fundi ng, 
annual investigator and coordinator meetings will be coordinated with national nephrology meetings where possible.  It is expected that the majority of the training will occur through web- based technology and will be coordinated through the data 
manage ment and coordinating Center.  
 
 34 The Data Management and Coordinating Center (DMCC) is located at the Applied 
Health Research Center (AHRC) at St. Michael’s Hospital/University of Toronto. The 
DMCC will be responsible for facilitating all aspects of the stu dy planning, training, 
implementation, data collection and analysis.  
 The clinical information collected for this study will be stored at the DMCC at the Applied Health Research Centre of St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto, ON, Canada and also sent to a federal data repository held by the Office of Rare Diseases Research (ORDR) and located at the University of South Florida (USF) in Tampa, FL.   The DMCC database and the USF database use several layers of protection for the clinical data stored there. These databases meet all of the local and federal security requirements for research datacenters. Participant information is stored only using a study ID.
 
 Data management and quality assurance :  Study data, including enrollment and 
monitoring data, will be maintained on a secure password protected database accessible to all study centers from the world -wide -web. Each center will enter data for their 
patients.  Quality control will be ensured by oversight by the AHRC  coordinating center, 
who will review the electronic files of all patients on a regular basis for completeness.   Quality and completeness of data entry will be monitored on a weekly basis during the initial 6 months of study enrollment and biweekly thereafter.  Data quality reports will be generated monthly for review by the study Data Quality Assurance Committee, St. 
Michael’s Hospital/University of Toronto. Data queries generated by identification of incomplete or inconsistent data will be raised directly within the electronic eCRF and should be resolved by the study coordinator or PI in a timely manner. Corrections or changes in the data management system are tracked with the retention of the original data and the corrected data with the date of data entry and submitting personnel. Sites with persis tent delays or difficulties in data capture will be provided additional study based 
training. Study data will be stored within the data centre of St. Michael’s Hospital/University of Toronto with an off- site daily back -up system. 
 Analysis of the primary and secondary outcomes will be conducted at the DMCC. Additional analyses requested by ancillary investigators will be conducted when feasible within the scope of this trial funding. The DMCC will implement the trial policy for data sharing and ancillary st udies. A fee structure will be established for ancillary studies that 
are beyond the scope of this trial.     
Data security:  
All clinical data will be processed in a secure electronic environment that includes virus protection, and restricted access. Elect ronically stored data are subject to extensive 
security measures including virus detection, and restricted access.  Security measures in place for the database management system proposed for this study include: browser security, firewall protection, user name/password protection, user re -authentication, and 
 35 inactivity time -out.  The database will not contain study participant name, address or 
medical record number.  Patient data will be identified only by study code. Study data, 
including enrollment and monitoring data, will be maintained on a secure password protected database. Quality control will take place at time of data entry (range, consistency checks) and will be ensured by oversight by the P.I. and Quality Assurance and Clinical Management Workgroup  which will review the files of all patients on a 
regular basis for completeness.  
 
Registration of participants on this protocol will employ an interactive data system in 
which the clinical site will attest to the participant’s eligibility as per protocol criteria and 
obtain appropriate informed consent. IRB approval for the protocol must be on file at the 
DMCC and the University of South Florida before accrual can occur from the clinical 
site. 
 
Demographic and adverse event data collected as part of this t rial will be transferred to 
the USF on a monthly basis throughout the trial, and uploaded into the data repository 
dbGaP (database of Genotypes and Phenotypes) .  
 
A system of coded identifiers will be used to protect participant confidentiality and 
safety.   Each participant enrolled will be assigned a local subject identifier by the DMCC 
which is a combination of the site location code and a serial accession number.  Only the 
registering site will have access to the linkage between this number and the personal 
identifier of the subject.   When the participant data is sent to the USF, the system will 
assign a participant ID number.   Thus each participant will have two codes: the local code 
used to identify the patient in the eCRF and in source documentation and which is linked 
to personal identifiers, and a second code assigned by the USF.  For all data transfers to 
the USF both numbers will be required to uniquely identify the subject.  In this fashion, it 
is possible to protect against data keying errors, dig it transposition or other mistakes 
when identifying a participant for data entry since the numbers should match to properly 
identify the participant.   In this fashion, no personal identifiers would be accessible to the 
USF.  
 
 
PROTECTION FOR HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
This clinical trial will be conducted in accordance with the ethical principles that have 
their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki, and that are consistent with Good Clinical Practice and all applicable regulatory requirements.  
 The study protocol will be reviewed and approved by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) before submission to individual center IRBs for approval.  Participant enrollment may only begin with IRB approved consent forms.
 
 
One hundred and twenty -six patients with IMN will participate in the study. Their 
participation will consist of up to 13 visits over a 2- year period. The only clinical 
specimens obtained will be blood and urine. The age range for participation is 18-80 
 36 years. RTX will be provided to the study participants by Genentech and the cyclosporine 
will be provided to that arm free of charge as per protocol.    
Protection of human subjects:  
 
1. Informed consent process.  Patients who are candidates for the study will review and 
sign an informed consent form, to allow review of their history and physical exam 
including blood pressure estimates, as well as serum/urinary chemistries and medication history.   Written informed consent will be obtained from each participant before any study-specific procedures or assessments ar e done and after the aims, methods, anticipated 
benefits, and potential hazards are explained.  The participant’s willingness to participate in the study will be documented in writing in a consent form, which will be signed by the participant with the date  of that signature indicated.  The investigator will keep the 
original consent forms and signed copies will be given to the participants.  It will also be explained to the participants that they are free to refuse entry into the study and free to withdraw from the study at any time without prejudice to future treatment.  Written and/or oral information about the study in a language understandable by the participant will be given to all participants.  
  
2. Measures to reduce risks and discomforts associated w ith study drug.  
RTX infusions will be administered at centers with the following patient safety 
equipment and supplies: oxygen, oral and endotracheal airways and intubation equipment, epinephrine 1:1000 solution for intravenous or endotracheal injection, antihistamines, corticosteroids, intravenous infusion solutions, tubing, catheters, tape, and defibrillator with electrocardiogram monitor.  Patients will be pre -medicated with 
acetaminophen (1g) and diphenhydramine HCl (50 mg) by mouth from 30 to 60 minut es 
prior to the start of an infusion. Premedication with steroids (100 mg methylprednisolone IV) will also be given 30 minutes prior to the first infusion of each series of RTX (Day 1 and Day 181). Patients administered an antihistamine for the treatment o r prevention of 
infusion- related reactions will be given appropriate warnings about drowsiness and 
impairment of driving ability prior to discharge.  Patients will be instructed how and when to take their cyclosporine, taught about the most common drug interactions and to contact their coordinator/study physician about potential interaction with over -the-
counter medications and / or intercurrent illnesses requiring additional treatment prescribed by others. They will also be informed about the need to maintain the proper time interval prior to assessment of their cyclosporine drug levels
. 
 3. Adverse event reporting.  Each site’s Principal Investigator and their research team (co-Investigators, research nurses, clinical trial coordinators, and data managers)  are 
responsible for identifying adverse events. Aggregate report - detailed by severity, 
attribution (expected or unexpected), and relationship to the study drug/study procedures – will be available from the DMCC for site review.  Adverse events will be re viewed at 
 37 least every 6 months by the research team.  The research team will then evaluate whether 
the protocol or informed consent document requires revision based on the reports.  An adverse event is defined as:  “…an unfavorable and unintended sign, symptom or disease associated with a participant’s participation in the study.”  
 Serious adverse events include those events that:  “result in death; are life- threatening; 
require inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization; create persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defects.”  
 An unexpected adverse event is defined as any adverse experience…the specificity or severity of which is not consistent with the risks of information described in the protocol or product monograph.   Expected adverse events are those that are identified in the research protocol or product monograph as having been previously associated with or having the potential to arise as a consequence of participation in the study.  All adverse events that occur between Time 0 and study termination will be reported.  All reported adverse events will be classified using the current version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) developed and maintained by CTEP at National Cancer Institute.  
 
• Within 24 hours  (of learning of the event), investigators must report any Serious 
Adverse Event (SAE) that: 
o Is considered life-threatening/disabling or results in death of subject 
-OR- 
o Is Unexpected/Unanticipated  
• Investigators must report all other SAEs within 5 working days  (of learning of the 
event).  
• All other AEs must be reported to the DMCC within 20 working days  of the 
notification of the event or of the site becoming aware of the event. 
 
Local institutional reporting requirements to IRBs, any GCRC oversight committee and 
the FDA, if appropriate, remain the responsibility of the treating physician. 
 
 
As part of the reporting structure, SAEs will be reported to Health Canada, Genentech Drug Safety and the Genentech medical  science liaison. An adverse event summary form 
will be completed and will be summarized for each IRB and Health Canada annually.    Sites will enter all Adverse Event data into the  study eCRF.   Upon entry of a serious 
adverse event, the system will notify the DMCC by email.  The DMCC will in turn notify the study PIs, the designated medical monitor and any other designated personnel by email. The medical monitor will then review the SAE data to determine causality (definitely not related, probably not related, possibly related, probably related, definitely 
 38 related) of the serious adverse event. The medical monitor [and, if applicable, sponsor] 
may request further information if necessary and possibly request changes to the protocol or consent form as a consequence of the serious adverse event. A back-up notification system is in place so that any delays in review by the medical monitor beyond a specified period of time are forwarded to a secondary reviewer. The eCRF maintains audit trails and stores data (an d data updated) related to any adverse event in the study.  
 
 
Study Discontinuation  
The Study Sponsor, DSMB and local IRBs (at their local site) have the authority to stop or suspend this trial at any time. This study may be suspended or closed if: 
• Accrual has been met  
• The study objectives have been met  
• The Study Investigators believe it is not safe for the study to continue 
• The DSMB suspends or closes the trial   
Subject Discontinuation 
An intent to treat approach will be used. All data acquired prior to termination for the 
reasons outlined below will be included in the primary analysis unless patient withdraws consent. Every effort will be made to conduct a final study visit with the participant and participants will be followed clinically until, if applicable, all adverse events resolve. Reasons for subject discontinuation include: 
 
• Withdrawal of consent 
• Withdrawal by the participant 
• Withdrawal by the investigator  
• Intercurrent illness or event that precludes further visits to the study site   
 
Regulatory i ssues:  
1.  Inclusion of women: Women make up approximately 30- 50% of the population of 
patients with IMN and are expected to be enrolled in numbers in proportion to this 
normal distribution.  
2.  Inclusion of minorities : Individuals of all races and ethnic ities are at risk for MN.  
Based on the ethnic composition of the patients followed at, and referred to the Mayo Clinic the population served will include African- Americans, Asian, and Hispanic 
subjects proportional to that in the general US and Canadian population. This will ensure adequate enrollment within the different racial groups.  
3.  Inclusion of children:  It is desirable to include children whenever possible in clinical 
research studies. The rationale to exclude children in this trial is that: a) the disease is rare in children; b) there are no published natural history studies in children but the general impression is that the disease is benign in this patient population; c) no studies on specific immunosuppressive treatment in this age group have  been 
published, d) many cases of MN in children are secondary to SLE and positive laboratory markers are often delayed beyond the point of clinical presentation. We do not want this possibility to contaminate and confound the study population. In the 
 39 absence of safety and efficacy data we would not like to expose children to an 
unproven therapy. 
 
Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB):  The DSMB will include 1 chair person, 
clinical experts in nephrology, epidemiology and trial design, and a biostatistician.  We will develop a charter for the DSMB and the board will be responsible for evaluating the study design and progress of the study.  The board will be provided data on a regular basis to monitor patient safety.  Meetings will be conducted on a semi- annual schedule by 
conference call.  
 
Benefits:  
 Patients might expect to gain the following benefit from study participation: an opportunity to be exposed to experimental medicine that may be effective for their kidney disease.  Patients will be made aware of th e possibility of adverse events known to be 
associated with RTX (and CSA) and the possibility of previously unrecognized adverse events.  All patients will benefit from close follow -up and monitoring of their disease 
process in terms of both efficacy and safety in both arms of the study.    
Data sharing plan: 
 
Results from the study will be published in both abstract and in manuscript form as soon 
as feasible. Three years after completion of the study, data and remaining samples will be made available to the research community for appropriate and well -designed post hoc 
studies.  Proposals for research projects will be reviewed by the Operations committee and presented to all the study investigators for approval. 
 
ESTIMATED DURATION OF THE STUDY 
The estimated  duration of the study, given a 24- month enrollment period, a 2- year 
follow- up for each patient, and 1 year for data analysis is approximately 60 months.  For 
those patients in the MENTOR remission cohort, their participation will be extended up 
to 3-years  follow-up from thefirst day of study drug.  
 
ANTICIPATED RESULTS  
We believe RTX will be as effective as Cyclosporine in inducing complete and partial 
remissions in this patient population with membranous nephropathy.  
 
PUBLICATION POLICY 
A policy similar to the NIH policy on publication of study results will apply to this study. 
Details regarding policy statements may be found on the website at http://www1.od.nih.gov/oma/manualchapters
. Any abstract or manuscript must be 
submitted to Genentech four weeks prior to submission as per contract. 
 
 40  
REFERENCES  
 
 1. Medawar W, Green A, Campbell E , et al. Clinical and histopathologic findings in 
adults with the nephrotic syndrome. Irish Journal of Medical Science  1990; 159: 
137-140. 
 2. Ruggenenti P, Chiurchiu C, Brusegan V , et al. Rituximab in idiopathic 
membranous nephropathy: a one -year prospective study. Journal of the American 
Society of Nephrology  2003; 14: 1851-1857. 
 3. Cattran DC . Membranous nephropathy: quo vadis?[comment]. Kidney 
international  2002; 61: 349 -350. 
 4. Wagoner RD, Stanson AW, Holley KE , et al. Renal vein thrombosis in idiopathic 
membranous glomerulopathy and nephrotic syndrome: incidence and significance. Kidney in ternational  1983; 23: 368-374. 
 5. Ordonez JD, Hiatt RA, Killebrew EJ , et al.  The increased risk of coronary heart 
disease associated with nephrotic syndrome. Kidney international  1993; 44: 638-
642. 
 6. Wheeler DC, Bernard DB. Lipid abnormalities in the nephrotic syndrome: causes, consequences, and treatment. American Journal of Kidney Diseases  1994; 23: 
331-346. 
 7. Fervenza FC, Sethi S, Specks U. Idiopathic membranous nephropathy: diagnosis and treatment. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol  2008; 3: 905-919. 
 8. Polanc o N, Gutierrez E, Covarsi A , et al. Spontaneous Remission of Nephrotic 
Syndrome in Idiopathic Membranous Nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol  2010. 
 9. Schieppati A, Mosconi L, Perna A , et al.  Prognosis of untreated patients with 
idiopathic membranous nephropathy .[comment]. New England Journal of 
Medicine 1993; 329: 85-89. 
 10. Safai -Infanger M MB. Management of membranous nephropathy. Nephrology 
Rounds - Stanford University  2000; 3: 1-5. 
 11. Bruns FJ, Adler S, Fraley DS , et al. Sustained remission of membranous 
glomerulonephritis after cyclophosphamide and prednisone. Annals of Internal Medicine 1991; 114: 725-730. 
 12. Jindal K, West M, Bear R , et al. Long -term benefits of therapy with 
cyclophosphamide and prednisone in patients with membranous 
 41 glomerulonephriti s and impaired renal function.[comment]. American Journal of 
Kidney Diseases  1992; 19: 61-67. 
 
13. D'Amico G, Ferrario F. Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis. J Am Soc Nephrol  
1992; 2: S159-166. 
 14. Squarer A, Lemley KV, Ambalavanan S , et al. Mechanisms of progressive 
glomerular injury in membranous nephropathy. Journal of the American Society 
of Nephrology  1998; 9: 1389-1398. 
 15. Zandi- Nejad K EA, Glassock RJ, Brenner BM. Why is proteinuria an ominous 
biomarker of progressive kidney disease? Kidney inte rnational  2004; 66: S76-
S89. 
 16. Chun MJ, Korbet SM, Schwartz MM , et al. Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
in nephrotic adults: presentation, prognosis, and response to therapy of the histologic variants. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology  2004; 15: 
2169-2177. 
 17. Ponticelli C, Villa M, Banfi G , et al. Can prolonged treatment improve the 
prognosis in adults with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis? American Journal of Kidney Diseases  1999; 34: 618-625. 
 18. Cattran DC, Rao P. Long -term outcome in children and adults with classic focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis. American Journal of Kidney Diseases  1998; 32: 
72-79. 
 19. Hovind P TL, Rossing P, Carstensen B, Parvin H-H. Improved survival in patients 
obtaining remission of nephrotic range albuminuria in diabetic nephropathy. Kidney international  2004; 66: 1180-1186. 
 20. Eknoyan G, Hostetter T, Bakris GL , et al. Proteinuria and other markers of 
chronic kidney disease: a position statement of the national kidney foundation (NKF) and the national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases (NIDDK). American Journal of Kidney Diseases  2003; 42: 617-622. 
 21. De Zeeuw D. Albuminuria, not only a cardiovascular/renal risk marker, but also a target for treatment? Kidney international  2004; 66: S2 -S6. 
 22. Kannel WB, Stampfer MJ, Castelli WP , et al.  The prognostic significance of 
proteinuria: the Framingham study. American Heart Journal  1984; 108: 1347-
1352. 
 23. Hillege HL, Fidler V, Diercks GF , et al. Urinary albumin excretion predicts 
cardiov ascular and noncardiovascular mortality in general population.[see 
comment]. Circulation  2002; 106: 1777-1782. 
 42  
24. Roodnat JI, Mulder PG, Rischen- Vos J , et al. Proteinuria after renal 
transplantation affects not only graft survival but also patient survival. Transplantation 2001; 72: 438-444. 
 25. De Zeeuw D RG, Parving HH, Keane WF, Zhang Z, Shahinfar S, Snapinn S, Cooper ME, Mitch WE, Brenner BM. Proteinuria, a target for renoprotection in patients with type 2 diabetic nephropathy: Lessons from RENAL. Kidney 
international  2004; 65: 2309-2320. 
 26. Keane WF, Brenner BM, de Zeeuw D , et al. The risk of developing end- stage 
renal disease in patients with type 2 diabetes and nephropathy: the RENAAL study. Kidney international  2003; 63: 1499-1507. 
 27. De Zeeuw  D RG, Parving HH, Keane WF, Zhang Z, Shahinfar S, Snapinn S, 
Cooper ME, Mitch WE, Brenner BM. Albuminuria, a therapeutic target for cardiovascular protection in type 2 diabetic patients with nephropathy. Circulation  2004; 110: 921 -927. 
 28. Hunsicker LG, Atkins, R. C. Impact of irbesartan, blood pressure control, and proteinuria on renal outcomes in the Irbesartan Diabetic Nephropathy Trial. Kidney international  2004; 66: 99-101. 
 29. Anavekar NS GD, Berl T, Rohde RD, Cooper W, Bhaumik A, Hunsicker LG, Rouleau J -L, Lewis JB, Rosendorff C, Porush JG, Drury PL, Esmatjes E, Raz I, 
Vanhille P, Locatelli F, Goldhaber S, Lewis EJ. Predictors of cardiovascular events in patients with type 2 diabetic nephropathy and hypertension: A case for albuminuria. Kidney international  2004; 66: S50-S55. 
 30. Manjunath G, Tighiouart H, Ibrahim H , et al.  Level of kidney function as a risk 
factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular outcomes in the community. Journal of 
the American College of Cardiology  2003; 41: 47-55. 
 31. USRDS -renal disease. wwwusrdsorg/adrhtm  2002. 
 32. Bellomo R, Wood C, Wagner I , et al. Idiopathic membranous nephropathy in an 
Australian population: the incidence of thromboembolism and its impact on the natural history. Nephron 1993; 63: 240-241. 
 33. Giordano M, De Feo P, Lucidi P , et al. Effects of dietary protein restriction on 
fibrinogen and albumin metabolism in nephrotic patients. Kidney international  
2001; 60: 235-242. 
 34. Jafar TH, Stark PC, Schmid CH , et al. Progression of chronic kidney disease: the  
role of blood pressure control, proteinuria, and angiotensin- converting enzyme 
 43 inhibition: a patient -level meta -analysis.[see comment]. Annals of Internal 
Medicine 2003; 139: 244-252. 
 
35. Apperloo AJ, de Zeeuw D, de Jong PE. Short- term antiproteinuric re sponse to 
antihypertensive treatment predicts long -term GFR decline in patients with non -
diabetic renal disease. Kidney International - Supplement  1994; 45: S174-178. 
 36. Rossing P, Hommel E, Smidt UM , et al. Reduction in albuminuria predicts 
diminished progression in diabetic nephropathy. Kidney International - Supplement  1994; 45: S145-149. 
 37. Gansevoort RT, Heeg JE, Vriesendorp R , et al. Antiproteinuric drugs in patients 
with idiopathic membranous glomerulopathy. Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation 1992; 7 Suppl 1: 91-96. 
 38. Ruggenenti P, Mosconi L, Vendramin G , et al. ACE inhibition improves 
glomerular size selectivity in patients with idiopathic membranous nephropathy and persistent nephrotic syndrome. American Journal of Kidney Diseases  2000; 
35: 381-391. 
 39. Ambalavanan S, Fauvel JP, Sibley RK , et al. Mechanism of the antiproteinuric 
effect of cyclosporine in membranous nephropathy. Journal of the American 
Society of Nephrology  1996; 7: 290-298. 
 40. Rostoker G, Ben Maadi A, Remy P , et al. Low-dose angiotensin -converting-
enzyme inhibitor captopril to reduce proteinuria in adult idiopathic membranous nephropathy: a prospective study of long- term treatment.[see comment]. 
Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation 1995; 10: 25 -29. 
 41. du Buf -Vereijken PW, Branten AJ, Wetzels JF. Idiopathic membranous 
nephropathy: outline and rationale of a treatment strategy. Am J Kidney Dis  2005; 
46: 1012-1029. 
 42. Troyanov S WC, Miller JA, Scholey JW, Cattran DC. Idiopathic membranous nephropathy: definition and relevanc e of a partial remission. Kidney international  
2004; 66: 1199-1205. 
 43. Praga M, Borstein B, Andres A , et al. Nephrotic proteinuria without 
hypoalbuminemia: clinical characteristics and response to angiotensin -converting 
enzyme inhibition. American Journal of Kidney Diseases  1991; 17: 330-338. 
 44. Praga M, Hernandez E, Montoyo C , et al. Long- term beneficial effects of 
angiotensin- converting enzyme inhibition in patients with nephrotic proteinuria. 
American Journal of Kidney Diseases  1992; 20: 240-248. 
 
 44 45. Kshirsagar AV, Nachman PH, Falk RJ. Alternative therapies and future 
intervention for treatment of membranous nephropathy. Semin Nephrol  2003; 23: 
362-372. 
 46. Radhakrishnan J, Halevy D. Cyclosporin treatment of glomerular diseases. Exper t 
Opin Investig Drugs  2000; 9: 1053-1063. 
 47. Faul C, Donnelly M, Merscher -Gomez S , et al.  The actin cytoskeleton of kidney 
podocytes is a direct target of the antiproteinuric effect of cyclosporine A. Nature 
medicine 2008; 14: 931-938. 
 48. Cattran DC, A lexopoulos E, Heering P , et al. Cyclosporin in idiopathic 
glomerular disease associated with the nephrotic syndrome : workshop recommendations. Kidney international  2007; 72: 1429-1447. 
 49. Rostoker G, Belghiti D, Ben Maadi A , et al. Long -term cyclosporin  A therapy for 
severe idiopathic membranous nephropathy. Nephron 1993; 63: 335-341. 
 50. Cattran DC, Appel GB, Hebert LA , et al. A randomized trial of cyclosporine in 
patients with steroid -resistant focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. North America 
Nephrotic Syndrome Study Group. Kidney international  1999; 56: 2220-2226. 
 51. Cattran DC, Appel GB, Hebert LA , et al. Cyclosporine in patients with steroid -
resistant membranous nephropathy: a randomized trial. Kidney international  
2001; 59: 1484-1490. 
 52. Guasch A, Suranyi M, Newton L , et al.  Short- term responsiveness of 
membranous glomerulopathy to cyclosporine.[comment]. American Journal of 
Kidney Diseases  1992; 20: 472-481. 
 53. Yao X, Chen H, Wang Q , et al. Cyclosporin A treatment for idiopathic 
membranous nephropathy. Chin Med J (Engl)  2001; 114: 1305-1308. 
 54. Goumenos DS, Kalliakmani P, Tsakas S , et al.  The remission of nephrotic 
syndrome with cyclosporin treatment does not attenuate the progression of idiopathic membranous nephropathy. Clinical nephrology  2004; 61: 17-24. 
 55. Alexopoulos E, Papagianni A, Tsamelashvili M , et al. Induction and long -term 
treatment with cyclosporine in membranous nephropathy with the nephrotic syndrome. Nephrol Dial Transplant  2006; 21: 3127-3132. 
 56. Praga M, Barrio V, Juarez GF , et al.  Tacrolimus monotherapy in membranous 
nephropathy: a randomized controlled trial. Kidney international  2007; 71: 924-
930. 
 
 45 57. Cattran DC, Greenwood C, Ritchie S , et al. A controlled trial of cyclosporine in 
patients with progressive membrano us nephropathy. Canadian 
Glomerulonephritis Study Group. Kidney international  1995; 47: 1130-1135. 
 
58. Goumenos DS. What have we learned from the use of ciclosporin A in the treatment of nephrotic patients with idiopathic membranous nephropathy? Expert Opin Pharmacother  2008; 9: 1695-1704. 
 59. Kerjaschki D, Neale TJ. Molecular mechanisms of glomerular injury in rat experimental membranous nephropathy (Heymann nephritis). Journal of the American Society of Nephrology  1996; 7: 2518-2526. 
 60. Ponticelli C, Altieri P, Scolari F , et al. A randomized study comparing 
methylprednisolone plus chlorambucil versus methylprednisolone plus cyclophosphamide in idiopathic membranous nephropathy. Journal of the 
American Society of Nephrology  1998; 9: 444-450. 
 61. Baltus  JA, Boersma JW, Hartman AP , et al. The occurrence of malignancies in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with cyclophosphamide: a controlled retrospective follow -up. Ann Rheum Dis  1983; 42: 368-373. 
 62. Grunwald HW, Rosner F. Acute leukemia and immunosupressive drug use: a review of patients undergoing immunosuppressive therapy for non- neoplastic 
diseases. Arch Intern Med 1979; 139: 461-466. 
 63. Smith AG, Prentice AG, Lucie NP , et al. Acute myelogenous leukaemia 
following cytotoxic therapy: five c ases and a review. Q J Med  1982; 51: 227-240. 
 64. Faurschou M, Sorensen IJ, Mellemkjaer L , et al. Malignancies in Wegener's 
granulomatosis: incidence and relation to cyclophosphamide therapy in a cohort of 293 patients. The Journal of rheumatology  2008; 35: 100-105. 
 65. Mok CC, Ying KY, Ng WL , et al. Long -term outcome of diffuse proliferative 
lupus glomerulonephritis treated with cyclophosphamide. The American journal of medicine  2006; 119: 355 e325-333. 
 66. Pendse S, Ginsburg E, Singh AK. Strategies for  preservation of ovarian and 
testicular function after immunosuppression. Am J Kidney Dis  2004; 43: 772-781. 
 67. Meistrich ML, Parchuri N, Wilson G , et al.  Hormonal protection from 
cyclophosphamide- induced inactivation of rat stem spermatogonia. J Androl  
1995; 16: 334-341. 
 68. Cupps TR, Edgar LC, Fauci AS. Suppression of human B lymphocyte function by cyclophosphamide. J Immunol  1982; 128: 2453-2457. 
 
 46 69. Zhu LP, Cupps TR, Whalen G , et al. Selective effects of cyclophosphamide 
therapy on activation, proliferation, and differentiation of human B cells. The 
Journal of clinical investigation 1987; 79: 1082-1090. 
 70. Beck LH, Jr., Bonegio RG, Lambeau G , et al. M- type phospholipase A2 receptor 
as target antigen in idiopathic membranous nephropathy. The New Eng land 
journal of medicine  2009; 361: 11-21. 
 71. Fervenza FC, Cosio FG, Erickson SB , et al. Rituximab treatment of idiopathic 
membranous nephropathy. Kidney international  2008; 73: 117-125. 
 72. Branten AJ, Vervoort G, Wetzels JF. Serum creatinine is a poor  marker of GFR in 
nephrotic syndrome. Nephrol Dial Transplant  2005; 20: 707-711. 
 73. Hladunewich MA, Lemley KV, Blouch KL , et al.  Determinants of GFR 
depression in early membranous nephropathy. American Journal of Physiology - Renal Fluid & Electrolyte Ph ysiology  2003; 284: F1014-1022. 
 74. Branten AJ, du Buf -Vereijken PW, Vervloet M , et al.  Mycophenolate mofetil in 
idiopathic membranous nephropathy: a clinical trial with comparison to a historic control group treated with cyclophosphamide. Am J Kidney Dis  2007; 50: 248-
256. 
 75. Fervenza FC, Abraham RS, Erickson SB , et al. Rituximab therapy in idiopathic 
membranous nephropathy: a 2- year study. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol  2010; 5: 2188-
2198. 
 76. Beck LH BR, Lambeau G, Powell DW, Cummins TD, Klein JB, Salant DJ. (ed). Discovery of the phospholipase A2 receptor as the target antigen in idiopathic membranous nephropathy . Proceedings of he Conference Name; Date Year of 
Conference; Conference Location|. Publisher|: Place Published|, Year Published|. 
 77. Beck LH, Jr., Fervenza FC, Beck DM , et al. Rituximab -induced depletion of anti -
PLA2R autoantibodies predicts response in membranous nephropathy. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology : JASN  2011; 22: 1543-1550. 
 78. Ruggenenti P, Cravedi P, Sghirlanzoni MC , et al. Effects of rituximab on 
morphofunctional abnormalities of membranous glomerulopathy. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol  2008; 3: 1652-1659. 
 79. Makker SP, Kanalas JJ. Course of transplanted Heymann nephritis kidney in normal host. Implications for mechanism of proteinuria in membranous glomerulonephropathy. J Immunol  1989; 142: 3406-3410. 
 
 47 80. Stanescu HC, Arcos -Burgos M, Medlar A , et al. Risk HLA -DQA1 and PLA(2)R1 
alleles in idiopathic membranous nephropathy. The New England journal of 
medicine 2011; 364: 616-626. 
 81. Clinical Practice Guidelines for Chronic Kidney Disease: Evaluation, Classification, and Stratification. American Journal of Kidney Diseases  2002; 39. 
 82. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR , et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint 
National Committee o n Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High 
Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report.[see comment][erratum appears in JAMA. 2003 Jul 9;290(2):197]. JAMA  2003; 289: 2560-2572. 
 83. Clinical Practice Guidelines for Treatment of Dyslipidemia. In American Journal of Kidney Diseases  (vol 41), 2003 
 84. Wilmer WA, Rovin BH, Hebert CJ , et al. Management of glomerular proteinuria: 
a commentary.[see comment]. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology  
2003; 14: 3217-3232. 
 85. Cattran DC. Idiopathic membranous glomerulonephritis. Kidney international  
2001; 59: 1983-1994. 
   
 
 