 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 1 of 17 
 Responses in Tongue Morphology and Pharyngeal Patency to Lingual Muscle Stimulation  
 
 
Principal Investigator  Raj C. Dedhia, MD MSCR 
Dept. of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery 
3400 Spruce St., 5 Silverstein, Philadelphia, PA 19104 
215-360-0379 
Raj.Dedhia@Pennmedicine.upenn.edu 
 
Co-Investigator  Alan R. Schwartz, MD 
Dept. of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery 
3400 Spruce St., 5 Silverstein, Philadelphia, PA 19104 
443-838-4345 
aschwar02@gmail.com 
 
Research Coordinator Everett Seay 
(215) 615-8777 
Everett.Seay@pennmedicine.upenn.edu 
Regulatory Sponsor Richard J. Schwab, MD  
Penn Sleep Center 
3624 Market St., Suite 205, Philadelphia, PA 19104 
215-662-7772 
rschwab@mail.med.upenn.edu 
 
Funding Sponsor 
 National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute 
Building 31 
31 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892 
301-435-0199 
 
IRB Protocol Number  833511 
Initial version 05/30/2019 
Amended 06/19/2019 
Amended 07/01/2019 
Amended  02/11/2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 2 of 17 
 Study Summary 
 
Title Responses in Tongue Morphology and Pharyngeal Patency to Lingual Muscle 
Stimulation  
Short Title Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
IRB Number 833511 
Methodology Prospective, single cohort  
Study Duration 3 years 
Study Center University of Pennsylvania 
Objectives  To assess effects of stimulating specific lingual muscles on upper airway 
patency during sleep and on tongue morphology during wakefulness  
 To correlate improvements in upper airway patency during sleep with 
stimulation to alterations in tongue shape and position when stimulating during 
wakefulness. 
 To assess whether craniofacial morphology predicts improvements in 
pharyngeal patency during sleep with stimulation.  
Number of Subjects  50 
Main Inclusion and 
Exclusion Criteria Inclusion Criteria:  
 Adults (≥ 22yrs) 
 Moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea (AHI ≥ 20) 
 No underlying cardiac disease 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 Significant cardiac disease, unstable or recent cardiac events 
 Active pulmonary, liver, or renal disease 
 Uncontrolled hypertension (BP>160/100) 
 Neuromuscular disease 
 Major psychiatric disease 
 Lifestyle considerations by the use of excessive alcohol, tobacco, or 
drugs and involvement in shift work occupations that preclude study in 
the laboratory 
 Pregnancy 
 Anticoagulation therapy (e.g. Coumadin, Dabigatran)  
 MRI contraindications (claustrophobia, ferromagnetic implants/foreign 
bodies, etc.)  
Statistical 
Methodology ANOVA to compare responses in physiologic measures of upper airway patency to 
separate and combined lingual protrudor and retractor stimulation. 
Data and Safety 
Monitoring Plan  Principal Investigator will monitor study data and subject safety. 
 
 
 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 3 of 17 
 1. Abstract 
 
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by recurrent upper airway obstruction due to inadequate 
muscle tone during sleep leading to nocturnal hypercapnia, repeated oxyhemoglobin desaturations and 
arousals.  CPAP is the therapeutic mainstay for OSA, but adherence remains poor.  The loss of motor input to 
the tongue during sleep has been implicated as a cause for upper airway collapse.  Activation of tongue muscles 
with implanted hypoglossal nerve stimulators is an effective therapy for some OSA patients.  Nevertheless, 
approximately 1/3 of OSA patients did not respond to hypoglossal nerve stimulation despite rigorous selection 
criteria, leaving large segments of CPAP intolerant patients at risk for OSA-related morbidity.  Thus, there is a 
critical knowledge gap in the role of lingual muscle activity in the maintenance of airway patency.  
 
The current study is designed to examine underlying mechanisms of action of lingual muscles in the 
maintenance of airway patency during sleep.  Our major hypothesis is that specific tongue muscles are 
responsible for relieving upper airway obstruction during sleep.   To address this hypothesis, we will (1) 
selectively stimulate specific lingual muscle groups (viz., protrudors and retractors) and measure effects on 
airway patency during Drug Induced Sleep Endoscopy (DISE).  We will also (2) correlate responses in patency 
to alterations in tongue morphology (as assessed with ultrasound imaging).  A final goal is to (3) examine the 
impact of anatomic factors (e.g., the size of the maxillo-mandibular enclosure) on airway responses to 
stimulation.  
 
 
2. Objectives (include all primary and secondary objectives)  
 
a) To assess effects of stimulating specific lingual muscles on upper airway patency during DISE and on 
tongue morphology.  
We hypothesize  that stimulation will lead to improvements in upper airway patency during DISE 
when tongue protrudors are stimulated, and that concomitant stimulation of retractors will augment 
this response.  
 
b) To correlate improvements in upper airway patency during sleep with stimulation to alterations in 
tongue shape and position when stimulating during DISE. 
We hypothesize  that the restoration of airway patency during sleep will be associated with anterior 
tongue movement and preservation of tongue shape when stimulated during DISE.  
 
c) To assess whether craniofacial morphology predicts improvements in pharyngeal patency during 
DISE with stimulation.  
We hypothesize  that maxillo-mandibular restriction will be associated with diminished responses in 
airway patency to stimulation during DISE.  
 
 
3. Background  
 
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by recurrent upper airway obstructions due to inadequate 
muscle tone during sleep, leading to nocturnal hypercapnia, repeated oxyhemoglobin desaturations and 
arousals.  The prevalence of OSA is 24-27% in middle-aged men, 40-45% in older men, 9% in middle-aged 
women, and 25-30% in older women.  OSA is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in Western society and 
contributes significantly to the development and progression of neurocognitive, metabolic, cardiovascular, and 
oncologic diseases.  One of the major determinants of upper airway patency is the tone of muscles in the 
tongue.  Our central hypothesis is that activating specific lingual muscles – both the protrudors and retractors 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 4 of 17 
 – are required to best restore pharyngeal patency during sleep.  To address this hypothesis, we will stimulate 
specific lingual muscles in participants with moderate to severe OSA.  Apneic patients will undergo selective 
transoral fine wire stimulation, as previously described1,2.  We will determine the effects on stimulating lingual 
protrudors with and without retractors on upper airway patency during sleep, and determine anatomic 
correlates of these responses.  
 
It is well recognized that lingual muscle neuromuscular activity plays a major role in the maintenance of 
pharyngeal patency during sleep.  Several lines of evidence suggest that a fundamental defect in neuromuscular 
control is required for the pathogenesis of upper airway obstruction in OSA3,4.  The genioglossus can prevent 
the tongue from prolapsing into the pharynx and occluding the airway.  Additional studies in rodents, however, 
suggested that other lingual muscles work in concert with the genioglossus to stabilize airway patency.  
Specifically, Fuller et al. demonstrated marked increases in tongue protrudor (genioglossus) and retractor 
(stylo- and hyoglossus) muscles during hypercapneic stimulation of the airway musculature, suggesting that 
both muscle groups play a role in stabilizing tongue structures when ventilatory drive is high5.  In humans, 
Dotan et al. documented markedly different activation patterns between sleep and wakefulness6 with 
concomitant increases in both protrudor and retractor activity during wakefulness, but only isolated protrudor 
activity with, and a loss of retractor activity during sleep6.  Combined electrical stimulation of protrudors and 
retractors during sleep led to greater reductions in pharyngeal collapsibility than did stimulating the protrudors 
alone7.  The findings suggest that synergistic effects of lingual protrudors and retractors can restore airway 
patency during sleep. 
 
OSA is associated with distinct craniofacial characteristics which can compromise pharyngeal patency during 
sleep8.  Nonetheless, the impact of these craniofacial features on responses to tongue muscle stimulation has 
not been examined.  Another aim of this research is to characterize the effects of lingual muscles required to 
overcome specific defects in upper airway anatomic and neuromotor control of pharyngeal patency in apneic 
patients. 
 
 
4. Study Procedures  
a. Study design, including the sequence and timing of study procedures   
 
Patients with moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea will be recruited from social media, flyers, 
and/or from existing clinic patients.  Research participants who have already consented to be 
contacted for research and/or already have a professional relationship with the study team 
physicians will also be recruited.  Any recruitment flyers or social media advertisements will be 
submitted for IRB review prior to use. 
 
Patients with obstructive sleep apnea who are referred to the PI for clinical evaluation with DISE will 
be recruited for this protocol.  Medical records of these referrals will be assessed preemptively or at 
the time of the clinic or procedure visit for eligibility for this protocol.  The patients will be asked 
whether they are interested in participating in the protocol, at which point informed consent will be 
obtained for those willing and eligible to enroll.  Participants will also complete a standard MRI 
screening form to assess eligibility for MRI, including potential claustrophobia. 
 
Design (see Study Flow below)   
 
Participants will initially be consented and screened for this study with a brief medical history and 
physical exam.  The diagnosis of moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea will be confirmed from 
prior sleep study reports.  If such reports are not available, the subject will undergo an overnight 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 5 of 17 
 home sleep study.  Once all inclusion criteria have been met, participants will continue with 3 
assessments.  
 
Eligible participants will have an initial assessment (Assessment #1), where they will undergo an in 
lab baseline sleep study.  This will be a full standard polysomnography study where brain activity, 
body movements, modified EKG, respiratory parameters, and oxygenation will be monitored 
according to gold standard AASM guidelines.  
 
Participants will then undergo an Assessment #2, where craniofacial morphology will be assessed 
with photographs and MRI measurements.   
 
Thereafter, responses to stimulation will be assessed during DISE with ultrasound measurements of 
tongue morphology and with measurements of pharyngeal patency during DISE (Assessment #3).  
Responses in pharyngeal patency will be assessed with video endoscopy and tidal airflow monitoring 
while briefly stimulating each electrode during DISE.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each of the specific study procedures shown in the Study Design are described immediately below.  
Baseline Questionnaires:  Standard screening questionnaires will be administered initially at the time 
subjects are screened and consented.  These questionnaires will assess several demographic, 
anthropometric, and physical health domains (see attached questionnaires).   
Recruits for Lingual 
 Study Flow
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Assessment #2
 
Assessment 
 #3 
DISE STUDY  
• 
Craniofacial Morphology
(MRI) 
*
 

with/without 
Stimulation
* 
Baseline  
Assessment #1  
BASELINE SLEEP STUDY
•
Pharyngeal 
 Videoendoscopy
  
•
Tidal Airflow Monitoring and 
Lingual Ultrasound   
  
 
 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 6 of 17 
 History & Physical Exam:  Each research participant will undergo a brief history and physical exam to 
confirm inclusion criteria.  A screening medical history and medications questionnaire will be 
completed on each participant.  Metrics of regional adiposity (neck, waist, and hip circumferences) 
will be assessed on intake. 
Baseline Home Sleep Study:  Some participants may be asked to take home a portable home sleep 
testing (HST) device in order to confirm inclusion criteria.  Recordings will be archived on an 
institutionally secured and managed network drive.  Recordings will be accessed via a HIPAA secured 
web portal for scoring by registered polysomnographic technologists and for reviewing by project 
personnel.  Routine scoring and analysis will provide indices of nocturnal hypoxemia and sleep apnea 
severity. 
Ultrasound procedures:  Ultrasound (SonoSite Edge: 
https://www.providianmedical.com/ultrasound-machines/sonosite/sonosite-edge/) will be 
performed in each study participant during wakefulness.  Measurements during DISE will take 
about 30 minutes.  Images will be acquired with and without stimulation of tongue protrudors and 
retractors separately and combined.  
Craniofacial Morphology with Magnetic Resonance Imaging:  MRI will be performed to quantify 
tongue and maxillo-mandibular enclosure volumes.  High-resolution 3D images will be acquired at 
high magnetic field strength (3T Siemens Verio, Ehrlangen, Germany).  Our imaging protocol consists 
of T1 Spin echo, 3D CISS, 3D STIR SPACE and 3D VIBE sequences with parameters optimized for high-
resolution 3D imaging.  Our approach has several advantages over standard neck imaging techniques 
as follows.  (1) Acquisition of high spatial resolution isotropic data within an acceptable time frame 
will allow us to evaluate the pharynx in its entirety.  (2) Isotropic voxel dimensions will facilitate 
reconstruction of the axially acquired images in all planes without loss of image quality, thus 
supporting highly accurate linear measurement resistant to asymmetric positioning and/or poorly 
visualized oblique structures in a single orthogonal plane.  (3) 3D images provide for linear 
mandibular, maxillary, and airway measurements with the highest degree of accuracy.  In addition, 
we will perform Dixon imaging to measure tongue fat and cine (MRI - fast gradient echo) to measure 
dynamic upper airway images. 
 
Sleep study monitoring (polysomnography):  Standard monitoring of sleep will occur during 
Assessment #1.  This will include monitoring of EEG, submental EMG, EOG, S pO2, tidal airflow, 
thoraco-abdominal efforts, and body position.  Overnight nocturnal recordings will be performed in 
our sleep laboratory.  Recordings will be archived on an institutionally secured and managed network 
drive and accessible only to study personnel.  Recordings will be accessed via a HIPAA secured web 
portal.  
 
Supraglottic Manometry:  In addition to standard sleep monitoring during Assessment #3, a 7 French 
Millar catheter (Houston, TX) marked at regular intervals will be passed perinasally to monitor 
supraglottic pressure swings and will be used subsequently as an internal calibration marker for 
measurements of pharyngeal cross-sectional area on videoendoscopy images during sleep 
studies9,10.  To facilitate this process, we will administer 2% Viscous Lidocaine perinasally before 
passing the catheter. 
 
Drug Induced Sleep Endoscopy (DISE):  During Assessment #3, patients will be moderately sedated 
with Propofol (2.5mg/kg load followed by continuous drip of 6 – 12 mg/kg/hr). A fiberoptic scope 
will be passed through an airtight seal in the nasal mask through the nose into the pharynx. Nasal 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 7 of 17 
 pressure will be maintained at an elevated holding pressure at which airflow obstruction is abolished, 
and then dropped step-wise for several breaths to pressures that induce inspiratory flow limitation 
and complete obstruction. Electrical stimulation will be applied in 4s bursts to protrudors with and 
without retractors for single breaths at each pressure level while acquiring separate sets of video-
endoscopic images in both the velo- and oropharynx.  
 
Tidal Airflow Monitoring:  During Assessment #3, subjects will be fitted with a nasal mask through 
which tidal airflow will be monitored to assess dynamic changes in airway patency with stimulation.  
The nasal mask will be connected to a variable pressure source.  The nasal pressure will be 
manipulated to measure pharyngeal cross-sectional area at various levels of upper airway patency, 
as previously described11–33.   
 
Lingual Muscle Stimulation:  
Insertion and stimulation methods:  
Fine-wire stimulating electrodes (0.36mm diameter, 1.5”, Natus Medical, Pleasanton, CA) will be 
utilized for intramuscular lingual stimulation. These wires will be connected to an EMG 
stimulation system (Nicolet EDX, Natus Medical)( https://neuro.natus.com/products-
services/nicolet-edx-emg-ncs-ep-iom-system ).  The muscles will be stimulated with a pulse width 
of 40 μS, a frequency of 30Hz, and 1s burst duration.  In our extensive experience using 
stimulation devices to stimulate tongue muscles, we have not encountered any significant 
adverse events1,7.  The current level will then be increased stepwise.  The capture threshold will 
be determined to be the lowest current level at which stimulation elicited tongue movement.  If 
patients report discomfort at any point during stimulation at the capture threshold, the electrode 
pair will be removed and other electrodes will be inserted in another position.  As stimulation 
current is increased further, tongue movement is expected to occur.  At still higher current levels, 
stimulation can produce discomfort.  The electrode pair that results in the greatest tongue 
movement without discomfort will then be utilized during DISE. 
Protocol: 
A transoral approach will be utilized to stimulate the lingual protrudors with and without 
retractors intramuscularly.  Each muscle group will be stimulated with two fine-wire Teflon-
coated steel electrodes (as described below).  As many as four electrodes will be placed. 
Stimulation during wakefulness: 
a. Retractor Muscles: electrodes will be placed under topical anesthesia (2% lidocaine gel) 
in the posterior gingivolabial sulcus.  Single-hook wire electrodes will be directed 
inferoposteriorly ~2 cm below the oral mucosa under local anesthesia.  Stimulating 
retractors will lead to tongue deviation toward the stimulated side (ipsilateral tongue 
deviation).  The investigators have published previously utilizing such methods for 
selective stimulation during sleep1,2. 
b. Protrudor muscles: single-hook wire electrodes will be placed just lateral to the frenulum 
and directed inferiorly ~2 cm below the oral mucosa under topical anesthesia (2% 
lidocaine gel).  Protrudor stimulation will be confirmed by forward tongue movement and 
contralateral deviation1,2. 
Stimulation during DISE:  
During DISE, the lingual musculature will be stimulated during the inspiratory phase of the 
respiratory cycle.  The current level will then be increased stepwise to maximize the effect of 
electrical stimulation on inspiratory airflow without arousing the patient from sedation.  Results 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 8 of 17 
 obtained at the highest level of electrical stimulation that does not arouse patients will be 
utilized.  
  
Procedures to Access and Store Research Data:  The results of clinically relevant tests (baseline sleep 
study) will be sent to the participants; urgent results and/or incidental findings will also be sent to 
the participant’s physician.  All the data being used for research will be entered into a database by 
study identification number only.  Research charts will be kept in locked cabinets.  Access to research 
information including personal health information will only be provided to study team members.  
 
Data Confidentiality:  Data which include identifiable personal health information (PHI) will be 
collected during patient encounters using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture).  The REDCap 
system contains robust data integrity features and as well as nightly backups.  It has excellent security 
and privacy features, with extensive audit logging.  REDCap will also be used to store electronically 
generated data from overnight polysomnography (PSG) and calculated measurements from 
magnetic resonance imagining (MRI) analysis.  
 
PHI will be stored in accordance with HIPAA regulations and local policies and practices.  This includes 
the storage of PHI in locked cabinets or rooms, limited access to secure data areas by certified 
participating study personnel, password protection for electronic medical records, and explanation 
of HIPAA regulations on the study consent form.  Data such as laboratory studies that are collected 
as part of this study may be transmitted to the participants’ treating physicians with the consent of 
the participant.  Participants are informed in the consent that PHI may also be disclosed for auditing 
purposes by the FDA or other regulatory bodies and is subject to subpoena.  PHI is not transmitted 
to the coordinating center or central laboratory in that all data is identified only by an anonymous 
study ID, and other identifying information such as birthdate is not entered into the central study 
database.  Source records that are transmitted to the coordinating center for data quality audits have 
identifying information redacted. 
 
b. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participants. 
 
Each participant will be asked to participate for the duration of Assessment 1 (baseline overnight 
sleep study), Assessment 2 (up to 1 half day for imaging procedures), and Assessment 3 (1 half day 
for DISE procedure).  Prior to Assessment #1, some participants may be asked to have a baseline 
home sleep study (1 overnight) to confirm inclusion criteria if they are unable to provide documented 
confirmation of their AHI.  Successful placement of the fine wire stimulating electrodes will be 
necessary in order to obtain usable data for analysis.  We anticipate that approximately 20% of 
participants will not be able to complete these Assessments.  Participants’ participation in these 
assessments will remain completely voluntary.  
 
We estimate that it will take us about 3 years to collect, process, and fully analyze the ultrasound 
and DISE study data.  
 
c. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable. 
 
There is no blinding of subjects.  Investigators will be blinded before measurement of acquired 
images to avoid observer confirmation bias.  
 
d. Justification of why participants will not receive routine care or will have current therapy 
stopped. 
 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 9 of 17 
 Each subject’s medical therapy will continue unaffected by this study with the addition of 
submandibular ultrasound examination and of one unscheduled polysomnography.  
 
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
 Adult patients (≥ 22 yrs) willing and capable of providing informed consent 
 Moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea (AHI ≥ 20) 
 No underlying cardiac disease 
o Clinical history of coronary artery disease (myocardial infarction, angina) arrhythmia, 
valvular heart disease, heart failure, or pulmonary hypertension with exacerbation or up-
titration of related medications over the last 3 months before study enrollment 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 Significant cardiac disease, unstable or recent cardiac events 
 Active pulmonary, liver, or renal disease 
 Uncontrolled hypertension (BP>160/100) 
 Neuromuscular disease 
 Major psychiatric disease 
 Lifestyle considerations by the use of excessive alcohol, tobacco, or drugs, and involvement in 
shift work occupations that preclude study in the laboratory 
 Pregnancy 
o We had not planned for subjects to take a pregnancy test, and will not require that 
contraception be utilized during subjects’ participation in the protocol.  This approach is 
justified by the fact that there is no risk of overnight sleep studies in pregnancy, and that 
the drug-induced sleep endoscopy procedure will already be undertaken for clinical 
purposes.  The research study will add an estimated extra 10 minutes to the DISE 
procedure, and DISE will be provided for clinical indications. 
o If a patient becomes pregnant between the time of enrollment and study procedures 
(sleep study and DISE), participation in DISE will be governed by clinical indications for this 
procedure.  The probability of enrolling pregnant or even pre-menopausal women into 
our protocol is low since the prevalence of clinically significant obstructive sleep apnea 
increases markedly after the menopause. In the unlikely event that pregnancy occurs, the 
study team will notify IRB. 
 Anticoagulation therapy (e.g., Coumadin, Dabigatran) 
 MRI contraindications (e.g., claustrophobia, presence of a ferromagnetic/MRI-contraindicated 
implant or foreign body, etc.) 
 
 
6. Drugs/Substances/Devices 
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be used. 
 
We will administer propofol, which is routinely given for DISE procedures.  The rationale for choosing 
this drug is based on its reliability, well-established tolerability, safety, and low muscle-relaxant 
profile.   
 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 10 of 17 
 Lidocaine jelly (~2 mL) will be squirted into each nostril prior to passing the supraglottic catheter and 
endoscope.  Lidocaine will also be used during the application of the lingual fine wires to participants’ 
tongue muscles. 
 
A Natus Nicolet EDX UltraPro S100 unit will be used to stimulate lingual muscles with a pulse width 
of 40 μS, a frequency of 30Hz, and 1s burst duration.  Fine wire insulated stimulating electrodes (27 
g hook wire electrodes, Natus Inc.) will be inserted into lingual muscles and connected to the EDX 
unit.  This stimulus regmen has been utilized in previous studies by investigators with no significant 
adverse event1,7. 
 
WatchPAT 300 (Itamar Medical) will be used to screen patients with suspected obstructive sleep 
apnea for this disorder.  This instrument consists of a sensor array that is worn on the finger, wrist, 
and manubrium.  It records physiologic signals non-invasively that detect apneic episodes and 
characterize sleep/wake state. 
 
b. Drug and device management 
Propofol and equipment for conducting drug-induced sleep endoscopy will be procured and 
administered by trained endoscopy/operating room staff.  The WatchPAT device will be dispensed 
by the sleep research staff, and nocturnal recordings will be handled and scored in accordance with 
best clinical practice.  The EDX stimulator device will be stored and operated by trained research 
staff for the DISE procedure.  
 
 
7. Study Statistics 
 
Our primary independent variables are stimulation electrode and intensity.  Additional predictors of 
responses to stimulation will include measurements of tongue and craniofacial morphology.   
 
a. The impact of these independent variables will be examined on the following primary outcome 
variables: 
 
o Tidal airflow and related flow-surrogates for upper airway collapsibility 
o Pharyngeal cross-sectional area in the velo- and oropharynx 
 
b. Secondary outcome variables: 
 
N/A 
 
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and interim data analysis: 
 
Using an ANOVA framework for estimating sample size for a 1x3 factorial design (Specific Aim A: 
protrudor and retractor stimulation, each isolated and combined), we calculate the sample required 
to detect within-subject changes in upper airway function (e.g., the severity of upper airway 
obstruction during DISE as reflected by measurements of pharyngeal collapsibility, P CRIT), based on 
published data demonstrating decreases in pharyngeal collapsibility (P CRIT) of ~3.5±2.0 cmH 2O during 
stimulation 2.  This response accounts for ~24% of the total variance (η2), which yields an effect size 
(f) of ~0.40.  Our data also demonstrate within-subject correlations of at least 0.5 for repeated P CRIT 
measurements 34,35.  Using these parameters, we calculated that 15 subjects would be required to 
detect significant differences in responses between electrodes with an alpha of 0.05 and a power of 
90%.  To account for measurements in both sexes, subject attrition, and incomplete measurements, 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 11 of 17 
 we propose an ‘n’ of 30 subjects to complete the protocol.  This sample size will allow us sufficient 
power to detect substantial effects of stimulation on tongue morphology (Specific Aim B) and effects 
of craniofacial structures on tidal airflow and markers of airway collapsibility (Specific Aim C).  
 
d. Early stopping rules. 
 
This is a low-risk study designed to examine underlying mechanisms of action of lingual and 
hypoglossal nerve stimulation treatment in patients with obstructive sleep apnea.  This protocol is 
not a clinical trial per se, since we will examine acute effects of stimulating single breaths on markers 
of upper airway patency and tongue morphology.  Hence, we do not anticipate a need for any 
stopping rules, and we have not defined any such rules.  We also recognize and inform each subject 
of his/her right to withdraw from the clinical study at any time.  
 
 
8. Risks 
a. Medical risks, listing all procedures, their major and minor risks and expected frequency.  
 
Baseline Questionnaires:   These surveys acquire information that is routinely collected in the process 
of enrolling participants in clinical studies.  There are not any significant physical risks with these 
procedures.  As with all medical information, there is always the risk of psychological distress if 
personal health information is not held confidential.   In order to minimize this risk, electronic PHI 
will be stored in a password-protected database (REDCap), and written information will be stored in 
locked files or file-rooms when not attended by study personnel.   
 
Baseline Home Sleep Testing:  There is very little medical risk involved with deploying these devices, 
which are FDA approved for this indication.  There is a small risk of inconvenience to the participant 
should the device malfunction and the study need repeating. 
 
Ultrasound procedure for tongue imaging:  Ultrasound is a non-invasive, inexpensive, and easy way 
to examine the morphology of the tongue and its response to stimulation.  There is minimal 
discomfort associated with examination. 
 
Craniofacial Morphology with Magnetic Resonance Imaging: The only risks posed by MRI relate to 
claustrophobia that is occasionally experienced by subjects when they lie in the scanner, metal 
objects or implantable devices that might interfere with the scanning procedure, and metal objects 
flying into the magnet.  Participants with claustrophobia or implanted metallic devices incompatible 
with MRI will be excluded from study.  These risks will be mitigated by screening subjects for these 
potential risks, and through the use of personnel specifically trained to work safely with patients in 
the MRI environment.  All personnel involved in the protocol will be certified through compliance 
training to work in the MRI scanner.  
 
Sleep study monitoring (polysomnography):  The risks during sleep studies are minimal and confined 
to minor skin irritation from the placement of adhesive electrodes.  It is known that participants with 
sleep disordered breathing and/or severe nocturnal oxygen desaturation are at increased risk for 
sudden death during sleep from their underlying breathing disorder.  Nevertheless, we have 
excluded severely ill participants with underlying cardiopulmonary disease, who would ordinarily be 
at greatest risk for this occurrence.  Participants’ oxygenation will be assessed in these nocturnal 
recordings and they will be notified if sustained periods of marked hypoxemia (SaO 2 < 90%) develop.  
Those with severe nocturnal oxyhemoglobin desaturations and/or recurrent sleep disordered 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 12 of 17 
 breathing events will be notified of these abnormalities, and recommended for referral to their 
primary care provider for an AHI > 30 episodes/hr or if the cumulative time spent with an SaO 2<90% 
is >5% of total recording time.  Additionally, emergency resuscitative equipment is immediately 
available in the laboratory.  Full-night sleep studies will be conducted by technicians who are trained 
not only in basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation but in the analysis of the EEG and ECG which are 
being continuously monitored throughout the study.   
 
Propofol administration:  Propofol will be given intravenously during the sedated sleep procedure 
under the care of a skilled airway team (anesthesiologist and head & neck surgeon) in a fully-enabled 
endoscopy suite.  There will be a trained rapid response team available to respond to medical 
emergencies in the sleep lab. 
 
Risks of Propofol (Diprivan®): 
•  Common: fast or slow heart rate, low blood pressure, burning/stinging or infection at injection 
site, apnea, rash, and itching.  
•  Serious, yet rare: seizure.  
 
Pharyngeal manometry and videoendoscopy:  This procedure is a minimally invasive outpatient 
procedure and can be associated with mild discomfort.  The thin nasal catheter and 
nasopharyngoscope are passed through one nostril into the pharynx.  Passing the scope through the 
nostril may result in mild nasal irritation or epistaxis as well as minor gagging.  The catheter will be 
lubricated with topical lidocaine.  Patients usually acclimatize to the sensation within 5 minutes.  
 
Any incidental finding on videoendoscopy will be evaluated, and an official report will be generated 
and included in the patient’s medical record.  The subject will be notified of the incidental finding.  
Depending on the type of incidental finding, referral may be suggested for evaluation by an 
appropriate physician (e.g., ENT).  We will also discuss the incidental finding with the participant so 
as to alleviate any anxiety that might ensue and inform the participant about clinical resources 
available to address any clinical concerns about the finding.   
 
Tidal airflow monitoring and nasal pressure alterations:  The risks of monitoring tidal airflow with a 
nasal mask are minimal and consist of claustrophobia.  Exposure to alterations nasal pressure applied 
to the mask are also of minimal risk.  Precautions will be taken to exclude patients with underlying 
cardiopulmonary disease, who might be susceptible to pneumothorax or hemodynamic compromise 
with alterations in airway pressure.  In our previous experience, we have not had any complication 
resulting from negative nasal pressure administration in the ranges proposed9–31. 
 
Topical Lidocaine:  The risks are minimal since we will inquire beforehand about lidocaine sensitivity.  
Subjects may feel an initial slight burning sensation in their nostrils and an urge to swallow.  
 
Lingual Muscle Stimulation:  Each electrode will be tested during wakefulness to determine the 
capture threshold and submaximal stimulation level.  In brief, therapy settings for each electrode, 
which have resulted in sufficient airflow and a decrease in sleep disordered breathing events on prior 
testing without evidence of causing arousal from sleep, will be selected for testing during sleep and 
wakefulness.  
 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 13 of 17 
 Participants may experience discomfort while the fine wire electrodes are inserted into lingual 
muscles. Lidocaine will be used to ease any potential discomfort.  Additionally, although rare, there 
is a risk of: 
 Transient paresthesia or tingling when stimulation is applied 
 Transient pain or discomfort during stimulation  
 Transient paresis (weakness of the tongue) when stimulation is applied 
 Transient dysarthria (difficulty speaking) when stimulation is applied 
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent:  There is risk that recruitment and consent practices will not 
comply with standard regulations and may, as a result, compromise the rights and privacy of 
potential study participants.  
The study team will work diligently to ensure study recruitment will be handled with sensitivity and 
in compliance with all regulations. 
Men and women will be recruited from flyers, and/or from existing clinic patients and research 
participants who have already consented to be contacted for research and/or already have a 
professional relationship with the PI.  Participants recruited from the general population using online 
advertising will be directed to the REDCap study landing webpage to learn more about the study, 
answer basic inclusion/exclusion criteria questions, and provide contact information, so they may be 
contacted by a study coordinator.  All ads and flyers used for recruitment purposes will be IRB 
approved and an IRB-approved telephone script will be used to pre-screen participants for inclusion 
criteria. 
All study recruits will be informed of: 1) why the research is being conducted, 2) why they are being 
contacted, 3) the protocol, and 4) the voluntary nature of their participation.  If they are interested 
in participation in the current protocol, they will be scheduled for a face-to-face encounter in which 
they will be able to ask questions about participation in the trial from the research coordinator 
and/or study doctor. 
It will be made clear that all participation in the study is completely voluntary.  Informed consent will 
be obtained in person, after an interview with each participant by the investigators and/or study 
coordinators responsible for this specific protocol who will fully explain the research protocol, risks 
and possible benefits.  The signed consent form will also contain specific explanations of the possible 
risks in layman’s terms.  Patients will have the opportunity to ask questions prior to signing the 
consent form and will be told that they are under no obligation and may withdraw without 
compromising their care.  
 
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks: 
 
To minimize risk of confidentiality all data will be stored in a REDCap database and/or on an 
institutionally secured and managed network drive.  Subjects will be assigned a study ID and their 
data will be attached to that ID. 
 
c. Data Safety and Monitoring Plan:   
 
The plan for collection, description, monitoring, and analysis of adverse events is presented in 
accordance with guidelines for adverse event reporting to the IRB. 
  
We will use the following definitions and grading scales for monitoring purposes: 
 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 14 of 17 
 Definition of adverse event (AE)/adverse device effect (ADE): any unfavorable and unintended sign 
(including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporarily associated with the use 
of a medical treatment or procedure, regardless of whether it is considered related to the medical 
treatment or procedure. 
 
Definition of serious adverse event (SAE): any event that is fatal or life-threatening, that is 
permanently disabling, requires or extends hospitalization of the subject, represents a significant 
overdose or breach of protocol, suggests that a drug, device, or procedure used in a research 
protocol has produced a congenital anomaly or cancer, or in the opinion of the investigator, 
represents other significant hazards or potentially serious harm to the research subject or others. 
 
Definition of unanticipated adverse device effect (UADE): A UADE is any serious adverse effect on 
health or safety, or any life-threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if 
that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence 
in the investigational plan or application, or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with 
a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects. 
 
Adverse events will be graded as (a) mild (adverse event of little clinical significance), (b) moderate 
(adverse event between mild and severe – causing some limitation of usual activities), or (c) severe 
(an event that results in death, is life-threatening, requires or prolongs hospitalization, causes 
persistent or significant disability/incapacity, represents a significant overdose or breach of protocol, 
results in congenital anomalies/birth defects or produces cancer, or in the opinion of the investigator, 
represents other significant hazards or potentially serious harm to the research subject or others), 
and their attribution will be classified as (a) not related (clearly not related), (b) possible (may be 
related), (c) probable (likely related), (d) definite (clearly related), or (e) unable to assess.  
 
The Data Safety and Monitoring Plan for this project is designed in accordance with NIH guidelines 
published in http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/not98-084.html . Adverse events and 
deviations will be reported to the regulatory sponsor, and to IRB as applicable.  Serious adverse 
events will be reported to the regulatory sponsor and to IRB in accordance with institutional 
reporting requirements.  It is our intention to make any serious adverse event known to these entities 
within 24 hours with follow-up information as it is acquired. Additional safeguards for research 
subjects will ultimately accrue from our approach to data sharing.  Our first approach is the 
traditional one of publishing results in peer-reviewed scientific journals.  The growing use of 
computerized data repositories in association with scientific publications permits the storage and 
public access of much more detailed and extensive information than has previously been available, 
and we plan to make use of such venues.  Final versions of these manuscripts will be furnished to the 
public through the NIH repository for manuscripts in accordance with current policy. 
(http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-05-045.html )  We also will provide data 
tables of de-identified data (limited dataset) to other scientists for their independent analyses with 
completion of a data-use agreement that is compliant with HIPAA guidelines.  We will make data 
from this study public after publication of primary results. 
 
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with breach of confidentiality: 
 
Breach of confidentiality would result in unauthorized individuals having access to information about 
the participant’s medical history.  Therefore, all research staff selected to participate in this study 
are highly qualified and board certified, when applicable.  They are all fully aware of HIPAA 
regulations regarding patient confidentiality.  To prevent unauthorized access:  
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 15 of 17 
 (1) Data collected will be kept strictly confidential; this information will be used only for completing 
the study objectives and in an anonymous form for statistical analyses 
(2) All digital files will be stored on a password secured REDCap database and/or on an institutionally 
secured and managed network drive and restricted to study investigators and associated staff, on a 
need-to-know basis 
(3) Subject data will be stored with unique identifiers and will be password protected.   All computers 
will require log-on passwords. 
 
 
9. Benefits 
 
Participant Benefits :  No direct benefit to participants is anticipated.  
 
Societal Benefits:  This study promises to develop personalized approaches for selecting patients for 
hypoglossal nerve stimulation therapy for sleep apnea.  In characterizing factors linked to enhanced responses 
in upper airway patency with stimulation, we hope to elucidate impact of lingual stimulation on airway 
biomechanical properties that mediate improvements in airway patency.  The proposed research should help 
determine the subgroup of patients for whom hypoglossal stimulation is indicated in the future.  
 
Overall Risk-Benefit Analysis:   The risks of this protocol are outweighed by the benefits as follows.  This protocol 
is designed to improved therapeutic responses to lingual muscle stimulation for patients who cannot tolerate 
usual care with nasal CPAP.  CPAP intolerant patients who are planning to undergo routine drug-induced sleep 
endoscopy as part of their clinical evaluation to qualify them for implantation of an Inspire Hypoglossal Nerve 
stimulating system will be recruited for this protocol.  The risks of adding an estimated 5 to 10 minutes to 
routine, already-indicated clinical nasopharyngoscopy are minimal.  The benefit will be significant in improving 
our understanding of upper airway anatomy and physiology for apneic patients, and in predicting responses to 
the Inspire Upper Airway Stimulation therapy.  This protocol will potentially improve our ability to deliver 
maximally efficient, effective care for such patients. 
 
 
10. Payment and Remuneration 
 
Volunteers will receive $75 for completing baseline polysomnography (Assessment #1), $50 for completing 
intake (Assessment #2), and $200 for completing the DISE (Assessment #3).  If they are asked to repeat 
Assessment # 3, they will be paid an additional $200.  Some volunteers may be asked to have a home sleep 
study to confirm inclusion criteria.  These volunteers will be compensated $25 to cover travel expenses.  
Payment will be issued at the completion of the study, via check or ClinCard, and will be prorated if applicable. 
 
 
11. Costs 
 
There are no costs to subjects for participation in this study.  
 
 
12. References 
 
1. Schwartz, A. R. et al. Electrical stimulation of the lingual musculature in obstructive sleep apnea. 
Journal of Applied Physiology  81, 643–652 (1996). 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 16 of 17 
 2. Oliven, A. et al. Upper airway response to electrical stimulation of the genioglossus in obstructive sleep 
apnea. Journal of Applied Physiology  95, 2023–2029 (2003). 
3. Eckert, D. J. & Malhotra, A. Pathophysiology of Adult Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Proc Am Thorac Soc  
5, 144–153 (2008). 
4. Punjabi, N. M. et al. Sleep-disordered breathing and mortality: a prospective cohort study. PLoS Med  6, 
e1000132 (2009). 
5. Fuller, D., Williams, J. S., Janssen, P. L. & Fregosi, R. F. Effect of co-activation of tongue protrudor and 
retractor muscles on tongue movements and pharyngeal airflow mechanics in the rat. Journal of Physiology  519 
Pt 2:601–13 , 601–613 (1999). 
6. Dotan, Y., Pillar, G., Schwartz, A. R. & Oliven, A. Asynchrony of lingual muscle recruitment during 
sleep in obstructive sleep apnea. J. Appl. Physiol.  118, 1516–1524 (2015). 
7. Oliven, A. et al. Effect of co-activation of tongue protrusor and retractor muscles on pharyngeal lumen 
and airflow in sleep apnea patients. Journal of Applied Physiology  103, 1662–1668 (2007). 
8. Chi, L. et al. Identification of craniofacial risk factors for obstructive sleep apnoea using three-
dimensional MRI. European Respiratory Journal  38, 348–358 (2011). 
9. Oliven, A. et al. Effect of coactivation of tongue protrusor and retractor muscles on pharyngeal lumen 
and airflow in sleep apnea patients. J.Appl.Physiol (1985.)  103, 1662–1668 (2007). 
10. Oliven, A. et al. Effect of genioglossus contraction on pharyngeal lumen and airflow in sleep apnoea 
patients. European Respiratory Journal  30, 748–758 (2007). 
11. Schwartz, A. R. et al. The hypotonic upper airway in obstructive sleep apnea: role of structures and 
neuromuscular activity. American Journal of Respiratory & Critical Care Medicine  157, 1051–1057 (1998). 
12. Kirkness, J. P. et al. Contribution of male sex, age, and obesity to mechanical instability of the upper 
airway during sleep. Journal of Applied Physiololgy  104, 1618–24 (2008). 
13. Chin, C. H. et al. Compensatory responses to upper airway obstruction in obese apneic men and women. 
Journal of Applied Physiology  112, 403–410 (2012). 
14. Shapiro, S. D. et al. Leptin and the control of pharyngeal patency during sleep in severe obesity. Journal 
of Applied Physiology  116, 1334–41 (2014). 
15. Eastwood, P. R., Szollosi, I., Platt, P. R. & Hillman, D. R. Collapsibility of the upper airway during 
anesthesia with isoflurane. Anesthesiology  97, 786–793 (2002). 
16. Eastwood, P. R., Platt, P. R., Shepherd, K., Maddison, K. & Hillman, D. R. Collapsibility of the upper 
airway at different concentrations of propofol anesthesia. Anesthesiology  103, 470–477 (2005). 
17. Walsh, J. H. et al. Effect of body posture on pharyngeal shape and size in adults with and without 
obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep 31, 1543–1549 (2008). 
18. Isono, S. et al. Anatomy of the pharynx in patients with obstructive sleep apnea and in normal subjects. 
Journal of Applied Physiology  82, 1319–1326 (1997). 
19. Isono, S., Tanaka, A., Tagaito, Y., Sho, Y. & Nishino, T. Pharyngeal patency in response to 
advancement of the mandible in obese anesthetized persons. Anesthesiology  87, 1055–1062 (1997). 
20. Ayuse, T. et al. Mouth-opening increases upper-airway collapsibility without changing resistance during 
midazolam sedation. J.Dent.Res.  83, 718–722 (2004). 
21. Ayuse, T. et al. A pilot study of quantitative assessment of mandible advancement using pressure-flow 
relationship during midazolam sedation. J Oral Rehabil.  33, 813–819 (2006). 
22. Ikeda, H., Ayuse, T. & Oi, K. The effects of head and body positioning on upper airway collapsibility in 
normal subjects who received midazolam sedation. J Clin Anesth  18, 185–193 (2006). 
23. Ayuse, T. et al. The effect of gender on compensatory neuromuscular response to upper airway 
obstruction in normal subjects under midazolam general anesthesia. Anesth.Analg.  109, 1209–1218 (2009). 
24. Hoshino, Y. et al. The compensatory responses to upper airway obstruction in normal subjects under 
propofol anesthesia. Respir.Physiol Neurobiol.  166, 24–31 (2009). 
25. Kobayashi, M. et al. Effect of head elevation on passive upper airway collapsibility in normal subjects 
during propofol anesthesia. Anesthesiology.  115, 273–281 (2011). 
26. Hoshino, Y. et al. The effects of hormonal status on upper airway patency in normal female subjects 
during propofol anesthesia. J.Clin.Anesth.  23, 527–533 (2011). 
 
 
Tongue Stimulation on Upper Airway Patency 
Version: 02/11/2020            Page 17 of 17 
 27. Jordan, A. S. et al. Mechanisms used to restore ventilation after partial upper airway collapse during 
sleep in humans. Thorax. 62, 861–867 (2007). 
28. Wellman, A. et al. Ventilatory control and airway anatomy in obstructive sleep apnea. American Journal 
of Respiratory & Critical Care Medicine  170, 1225–1232 (2004). 
29. Owens, R. L. et al. Upper airway collapsibility and patterns of flow limitation at constant end-expiratory 
lung volume. Journal of Applied Physiology  113, 691–699 (2012). 
30. Edwards, B. A. et al. Upper-Airway Collapsibility and Loop Gain Predict the Response to Oral 
Appliance Therapy in Patients with Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med  194, 1413–1422 
(2016). 
31. Eckert, D. J., White, D. P., Jordan, A. S., Malhotra, A. & Wellman, A. Defining phenotypic causes of 
obstructive sleep apnea. Identification of novel therapeutic targets. American Journal of Respiratory & Critical 
Care Medicine  188, 996–1004 (2013). 
32. Patil, S. P. et al. A simplified method for measuring critical pressures during sleep in the clinical setting. 
American Journal of Respiratory & Critical Care Medicine  170, 86–93 (2004). 
33. Patil, S. P. et al. Neuromechanical control of upper airway patency during sleep. Journal of Applied 
Physiology  102, 547–556 (2007). 
34. Schwartz, A. R. et al. Effect of uvulopalatopharyngoplasty on upper airway collapsibility in obstructive 
sleep apnea. American Review of Respiratory Disease  145, 527–532 (1992). 
35. Schwartz, A. R. et al. Effect of weight loss on upper airway collapsibility in obstructive sleep apnea. 
American Review of Respiratory Disease  144, 494–498 (1991). 
 