Page 1 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wearable lower extremity exoskeleton to promote walking in persons with multiple sclerosis  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 09/27/2016  
  
Page 2 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016    
Protocol Title: Wearable lower extremity exoskeleton to promote walking in persons 
with multiple sclerosis 
 
Principal 
Investigator:  
Shuo-Hsiu Chang, PT, PhD 
 
Co-Investigators:  
John Lincoln, MD, Shih-Chiao Tseng, PT, PhD (TWU), 
 
Study Coordinator:  
Ruta Paranjape, Marcie Kern (TIRR) 
 
Population:  
15 human subjects 
 
Numb er of Sites:  
UT Health Motor Recovery Lab at TIRR Memorial Hermann 
 
Study Duration:  
1 years 
 
Subject Duration:  
4 weeks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Information 
Walking impairment is a significant consequence of multiple sclerosis (MS) resulting in substantial limitations of 
daily activities and co mpromis ed quality of life. Energy expenditure of walking is elevated and may contribute 
to fatigue, which cou ld further lead to a sedentary life style and secon dary health deterioration. Thus, 
developing effective and  efficient strategies to promote walking in this population is esse ntial. Recently, 
wearable lower extremity  exoskeleton has been developed to restore ambulation in p aralyzed or  weak 
individuals with spinal cord  injuries. These exoskeleton robotic devices u tilize the us er's movements, such  as 
body sway, to initiate externally powered gait and may reduce ph ysical d emands required for walking and 
provide great opportunity for persons with various conditions such  as MS to walk independently. Therefore, the 
purpose of this pilot study is to investigate whether using exoskeleton could promote recovery of walking in 
persons with MS. individuals with MS. Overall, we expect these findings to supp ort that exoskeleton will 
demonstrate greater efficacy to facilitate walking and can be  applied extensively to imp rove quality of life in 
MS. 
 
 
Background Information 
The impaired ability to walk independently is a significant consequence of multiple sclerosis (MS) resulting in 
substantial limitation in mobility and performance of daily activities, thus restricting full participation and home 
and community re-integration [1, 2]. Moreover, the ene rgy expenditure of walking is increased [3]. This 
additional metabo lic demand con tributes to fatigue, which promotes a sedentary life style that pred isposes to 
secondary health deterioration and  compromised quality of life. Gait training/restoration in MS is necessary but 
often limited due to the progress and severity of the disease and  limitations of traditional strengthening 
exercis es. Thus, developing novel strategies to promote independent walking in this population is essential for 
health promotion. Recently, wearable lower extremity robotic exoskeletons (exoskeleton) h ave been developed 
to restore ambulation in paralyzed or  weak individuals with spinal cord  injuries. Different from bodyweight 
supported robotic-assistance locomotion device integrated into a treadmill (such  as Lokomat)[4], exoskeletons 
are designed to utilize the us er's residual active movemen ts, such as  body forward and lateral sway, to initiate 
Page 3 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016   externally powered stepping for over ground walking and climbing stairs. Most importantly, the ass istance 
provided by wearable robotic exoskeletons may reduce e nergy expenditure during walking and allow persons 
with MS to recover some  degree of independent walking that is more efficient. Needless to say, this can h ave a 
profound impact on quality of life. Therefore, the purpose of this pilot study is to investigate whether using 
exoskeleton could promote recovery of walking in persons with MS. We hypothesize that participants will be 
able to walk with exoskeleton and with minimal to moderate trainer ass istance after training (Aim1). We also 
plan to determine and compare physical a nd cognitive demands du ring over ground walking with and without 
exoskeleton (Aim2). We hypothesize that physical a nd cognitive demands will reduce (i.e. decrease oxygen 
cost and shorter reaction time) during over ground walking with exoskeleton and esp ecially after training. The 
reduced physical a nd cognitive demands will promote energy conservation and prevent/delay fatigue in over 
ground walking in this population. The innovation of this study is this wearable exoske leton provides a unique 
opportunity not only to assist a sustained upright posture but also facilitate walking with better energy efficiency 
in individuals with MS. Overall, we expect these findings to support that exoskeleton will demonstrate greater 
efficacy to facilitate walking and can  be applied extensively to improve quality of life in MS. 
 
Objectives 
The purpose of this pilot study is to investigate whether using exoskeleton could promote recovery of walking 
in persons with MS. We hypothesize that participants will be a ble to walk with exoskeleton and with minimal to 
moderate trainer ass istance after training (Aim1). We also plan to determine and compare physical a nd 
cognitive deman ds during over ground walking with and  without exoskeleton (Aim2). We hypothesize that 
physical a nd cognitive demands will reduce (i.e. decrease oxygen cost and sho rter reaction time) during over 
ground walking with exoskeleton and especially after training. The reduced physical a nd cognitive demands 
will promote energy conservation and p revent/delay fatigue in overground walking in this population. The 
wearable exoskeleton will be us ed in this study is Ekso®, by  Ekso Bionics, formerly known as eLEGS ®. 
 
Study Population 
We will enroll 15 human subjects who have a diagnosis of MS confirmed by a neuro logist. Potential su bjects 
will be referred and recruited from affiliated MS neurology clinics, support group and  other community 
neurologists. We will enroll persons with MS regardless of phenotype without evidence of clinical d eterioration 
for at least 4 months pri or to study entry. 
Subjects will be e nrolled if they meet the following inclusion criteria: 
 Age 18 years or older 
 Male or non-pregnant female 
 Ambulatory with ass istive devices (Ambulation status will be d etermined by the EDSS sco re) 
 With an Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS ) score  [5] between 6 and 7.5 inclusive 
 Height and weight are between 160 and 188  cm (5’2’’ to 6’2’’), and less than 100 kg (220 lb), respectively 
(per exoskeleton manufacturer) 
 Able to follow simple 3 step co mmends 
 Able to und erstand the study proced ure and  consent form 
 
Subjects will be e xcluded if they have any  of the following exclusion criteria: 
 History of severe neurologic injuries other than MS (SCI, CP, ALS, TBI, CVA, etc.) 
 Severe como rbidities: active infections, heart, lung, or circulatory conditions, pressure ulcers 
 Documented severe osteoporosis affecting the hip and spine 
 Severe spasticity in the lower extremiti es (Modified Ashworth ≥ 3) or uncontrolled clonus 
 Unhealed limb or p elvic fractures 
 Skin issues that would prevent wearing the device 
Page 4 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016    Range of motion restrictions that would prevent subject from achieving a normal, reciprocal gait pattern, or 
would restrict a su bject from completing normal sit to stand or stand to sit transitions. 
 Upper extremity strength deficits that limit ability to balance with a front rolling walker or crutches. 
 Heterotopic ossification that resists functional range of motion in lower extremiti es 
 Contractures (>15 degrees at the hips or >20  degrees  at the knees) 
 Psychiatric or cognitive comorbidities resulting in motor planning or impulsivity concerns  
 Colostomy 
 Non-English spe aking 
 
 
Study Design and Procedures  
This study is designed to investigate whether using exoskeleton co uld promote recovery of walking in persons 
with MS. A total of 15 individuals with MS will be recruited for the study. Screening, assessment and treatment 
sessions will be h eld at TIRR, Memorial Hermann. Approximately 18 visits over a 1-month period will be 
required. 
 
Detailed sch edule of assessme nts is shown in Table. 
 
Assessment Pre 
Screening/ 
Screening  Baseline Exoskeleton Training  
5 session/week, 3 weeks, 
total 15 sessions Post-treatment 
(Within  a week) 
 Visit 1 Visit 2 Visit 3-17 Visit 18 
ICF X    
I/E Criteria X    
Demographics X    
Medical History X    
Mini Mental State Exam  X  X 
Muscle strength  X  X 
Range of motion  X  X 
Barthel Index  X  X 
Modified Ashworth 
Scale  X  X 
Quality of life  X  X 
Berg Balance Scale  X  X 
Timed Up & Go Test  X  X 
6-min walk test  X  X 
Physical Demand 
Measure  X  X 
Cognitive Demand 
Measure  X  X 
Timed 25 Feet Walk 
Test  X  X 
Physical Demand 
Measure  X  X 
Cognitive Demand 
Measure  X  X 
Exoskeleton training   X  
Page 5 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016    
Borg Rating of 
Perceived Exertion 
Scale   X  
Pain scale   X  
Exoskeleton User 
Feedback    X 
 
 
Recruitment: 
Potential su bjects will be referred and recruited from TIRR Memorial Hermann hosp ital and UT Multiple 
Sclerosis clinic (Dr. John Lincoln, co-investigator) during regularly scheduled appointments.  Recruitment will 
also take place through flyers (see attached) posted at  the TIRR Memorial Hermann facilities and the Greater 
Houston Metropolitan area. We will also post  traditional and electrical a dvertiseme nt on newspapers, the PI 
website, electronic bulletin board s, research ce nter social media and list-serves. We will also pe rform targeted 
recruitment (for participants with MS) at TIRR Memorial Hermann hospital and UT Multiple Sclerosis clinic (Dr. 
John Lincoln, co-investigator). 
Patients will be sc reened to determine potential eligibility and interest in participation. 
 
Pre-screening: 
Potential su bjects will be screened over the telephone or  in person using a survey form which includes a)  
demographic data; b) basic physical status; c) basic neurological h istory.  The initial telephone or  in person 
screening process will improve the efficiency of the study since it reduces the likelihood of unsuitable 
participants (i.e., participants meeting exclusion criteria) having to und ergo a full screening before being 
excluded. 
 
If the subject p asses the pre-screening, the details of the study specific procedures will be reviewed with the 
subject.  Subjects will be given an o pportunity to review the information and ask questions.  Once they have 
decided they are interested in participating in the study, they will sign the informed co nsent.  Once informed 
consent is obtained, a letter to request approval to participate in the study will then be sent to the subject’s 
physician (either neurologist or primary care  physician). The su bject’s physician will verify the following 
medical status of the subject: subject’s Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS ) score, absence of clinical 
deterioration during the previous 4 months, non-pregnancy status of all females.  After the research team 
receives the approval letter, the subject will be e nrolled and base line sess ion will be sch eduled. Each en rolled 
subject will be a ssigned an identification number. 
 
Screening 
Once p hysician clearance has  been obtained, a screening visit will be sc heduled.  The screening visit will 
include an assessment of subject’s flexibility in their arms and legs (range of motion), tension or resistance 
movement (spasticity) in arms and legs, strength in arms and legs, and physical measurements of hips and 
legs to ensure subject is able to safely fit into the robotic de vice. This visit will last about 30-45 minutes.  
 
Baseline Functional Assessme nt: 
After being medically cleared, screening visit completed and subject meets all inclusion criteria, the subject will 
be co ntacted to schedule an appointment for functional evaluations to quantify their motor impairment levels 
prior to training. 
 
Outcome Measures  
Subjects will perform the following measures before exoskeleton training and after training: 
 
1.  Barthel Index: This test measures  the ability of a person with a neuromuscular or musculoskeletal 
disorder to care for him/herself. It is a 10-item questionnaire wherein each item is rated based on  the 
Page 6 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016   level of assistance required to comp lete the activity/item (with higher scores representing more 
functional independence). 
 
2.  Mini Mental State Examination: Folstein Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) provides information 
about orientation, attention, learning, calculation, delayed recall, and con struction. 
 
 
3.  Muscular Strength test: we will measure lower extremity muscle strength using force gauge such  as 
handheld dynamometer. Subjects will lie down or sit on an  examination table during testing based on 
the tasks. Subject will be asked to produce  force to against the force gage at their maximal efforts for 
few times. Verbal e ncouragement will be pro vided for motivation. One minute or more resting time will 
be pro vided between trials. 
 
4.  Range of Motion: we will measure range of joint motion of bilateral hip, knee and a nkle joints. Subject 
will lie down on an examination table. We will move the joint in the desired directions (flexion-extension, 
abduction-adduction, internal -external rotation) and we will measure the angle between start and stop 
position. 
 
5.  Modified Ashworth scale for spasticity: This test measures  spasticity in patients with lesions of the 
Central Nervous System by  testing resistance to passive movement  about a joint with varying degrees 
of velocity. Scores  range from 0-4, with 6 choices (i.e., 0, 1, 1+, 2, 3, 4), with 0 indicating normal muscle 
tone, and 4 indicating very high spasticity. This test has good reliability for determining sp asticity levels 
in lower limbs after MS. During this test, subject will sit or lie down on a examination table. The 
examiner will move the tested  joint several times. 
 
 
 
6.  Quality of Life Questionnaire: subject will fill out Multiple Sclerosis Quality of Life-54 (MSQOL-54). 
MSQOL-54 is a self-report questionnaire and a multi-dimensional health-related quality of life measure 
that includes the Health Status Questionnaire (SF-36) and 18 items for MS-specific issues such  as 
fatigue and cognitive function. 
 
7.  Berg Balance Sca le: A 14-item objective measure designed to ass ess static balance and  fall risk in 
adult populations, with maximum summed score  of 56 (higher scores represent better functional 
outcome). This task will be formed without using exoskeleton at pre-assessment and post-assessment. 
 
8.  Timed Up and  Go Test: this task involves sub ject to stand from the standard cha ir, walk straight for 3 
meters, turn around, walk back to the chair and sit down with shoes and assistive devices if  any.  A 
standard chair with arm rests will be p lace at  the start of the testing cou rse. A mark will be p laced on 
the floor at the 3 meter distance. Subject will be as ked to perform the task as fast as possible without 
losing their balance. One research member will stand next to the subject to monitor the subject 
performance to prevent falls.  The time to complete the task will be measured and recorded. Subjects 
will also ha ve recording of electromyography in the lower limbs i.e ., sensors will be p laced on the skin 
of the legs and thighs (4 on each leg) to non -invasively record muscle activity during walking. Additional 
sensors i.e., goniometers will be p laced on the skin to non -invasively record joint angles of the hip, 
knee and ankle on each leg. These will be at tached to the skin using hypoallergenic tape. This task will 
be formed without using exoskeleton at pre-assessment and with and  without exoskeleton at post- 
assessment. 
Page 6 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016   9.  6-minute walk test: Subjects will be a sked to walk back and forth in a  hallway with or without assistive 
device (consistent amo ng asses sment visits) for 6 minutes. The objective is to cover as much space as 
possible in 6  minutes. Subjects can slow down or stop to rest if they feel like, but should start walking 
when they feel they are able. Electromyography sensors will also be  placed on  the skin of the leg and 
trunk muscles to measure muscle activity.  A research team member will walk behind the subject to 
prevent loss of balance during the test. This task will be formed without using exoskeleton at pre- 
assessment and with and without exoskeleton at post-assessment.  In this tasks, we will measure 
physical d emands and cognitive demand in sep arate trials or sess ions: 
 
A.   Physical d emands measures:  Physical d emands during walking with and without EKSO will be 
determined by oxygen cost. Oxygen cost will be calculated from oxygen consump tion as the product of 
gait speed and body weight [10]. Oxygen co nsumption will be co llected  on a breath-by-breath basis 
measured  by a portable metabo lic system (K4 b2 Cosme d). Prior to the testing, the system will be 
calibrated us ing room air and reference gas mixture [11]. During the testing, the su bject will wear a face 
mask and a heart rate monitor at all times and will be a sked to breathe normally. The portable device 
will be car ried by  the subject at where it will not interfere with the walking (i.e. upper back or waist). 
 
B.   Cognitive demands measure: Cognitive demands during walking with and  without exoskeleton will be 
determined by reaction time using a dual-task paradigm [12]. Dual-task paradigm is commonly used to 
quantify the cognitive (i.e. attentional) resources allocated during a motor task such  as walking and 
usually entails reciting the alphabet or counting backwards [13]. However, this specific measurement is 
limited by  structural issues involving respiration, vocal responses or motor action of the upper limb 
(push a button) for which there are shared execution pathways with locomotion [14, 15] could interfere 
with the primary motor task , despite not being caused by comp eting demands for limited attentional 
resources. Thus, we chose a  simple reaction task (RT), in which the response will be b iting on a 
pressure  sensor to make the response pathways as independent as po ssible from the motor pathways 
of locomotion [12]. Subjects will with and without EKSO (use same assistive device) at their preferred 
speed. The secondary RT task consists of biting a pressure transducer placed in the mouth in response 
to an unpredictable sen sory (will not cause pain) electrical stimulation applied by  an electrode on the 
back of the neck [12] without changing walking speed and pattern. The stimulation intens ity will be 
adjusted  for each individual before data collection. Shorter RT indicates  that reduced amount of 
attentional resources are required. 
 
10. Timed 25 Feet Walk Test (T25-FW): this task will ask the subject to walk for 25 feet at comfortable 
pace. Subjects will wear their exercise or walking shoes and are allowed to use  assistive device such 
as cane or walker if necessary. The start and finish line of the 25 feet test course will be marked with 
tape on the floor. Additional 5 feet at the end of start and finish will be us ed for subject to turn around. A 
chair will be pro vided next to the start area  so the subject may rest. During the test, the subject will walk 
at his/her comfortable pace without losing balance followed by walking at maximal pace. Resting 
periods will be pro vided between trials. One trial for each pace will be p erformed. Trial will be repeated 
if subject cannot finish the task due to fatigue or loss of balance. A research team member will walk 
next to the subject for safety. The time to complete the tasks will be recorded. We will place markers on 
the skin of the legs and trunk and the marker data will be recorded by motion ca pture system. 
Electromyography sensors will also be  placed on the skin of the leg and trunk muscles to measure 
muscle activity. This task will be formed without using exoskeleton at pre-assessment and with and 
without exoskeleton at post-assessment.   A research team member will walk behind the subject to 
prevent loss of balance during the test. This task will be formed without using exoskeleton at pre- 
assessment and with and without exoskeleton at post-assessment.  In this tasks, we will measure 
physical d emands and cognitive demand in sep arate trials: 
 
A.   Physical d emands measures:  Physical d emands during walking with and  without EKSO will be 
determined by oxygen cost. Oxygen cost will be calculated from oxygen consump tion as the product of 
gait speed and body weight [10]. Oxygen co nsumption will be co llected  on a breath-by-breath basis 
Page 7 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016   measured  by a portable metabo lic system (K4 b2 Cosme d). Prior to the testing, the system will be 
calibrated us ing room air and reference gas mixture [11]. During the testing, the su bject will wear a face 
mask and a heart rate monitor at all times and will be a sked to breathe normally. The portable device 
will be car ried by  the subject at where it will not interfere with the walking (i.e. upper back or waist). 
 
B.   Cognitive demands measure: Cognitive demands during walking with and  without exoskeleton will be 
determined by reaction time using a dual-task paradigm [12]. Dual-task paradigm is commonly used to 
quantify the cognitive (i.e. attentional) resources allocated during a motor task such  as walking and 
usually entails reciting the alphabet or counting backwards [13]. However, this specific measurement is 
limited by  structural issues involving respiration, vocal responses or motor action of the upper limb 
(push a button) for which there are shared execution pathways with locomotion [14, 15] could interfere 
with the primary motor task , despite not being caused by comp eting demands for limited attentional 
resources. Thus, we chose a  simple reaction task (RT), in which the response will be b iting on a 
pressure  sensor to make the response pathways as independent as po ssible from the motor pathways 
of locomotion [12]. Subjects will with and without EKSO (use same assistive device) at their preferred 
speed. The secondary RT task consists of biting a pressure transducer placed in the mouth in response 
to an unpredictable sen sory (will not cause pain) electrical stimulation applied by  an electrode on the 
back of the neck [12] without changing walking speed and pattern. The stimulation intensity will be 
adjusted  for each individual before data collection. Shorter RT indicates  that reduced amount of 
attentional resources are required. 
 
11. Exoskeleton satisfaction questionnaire: After completion of exoskeleton training sessions subjects will 
comp lete a survey of 9 questions regarding their experience with the exoskeleton and any feedback 
they would like to provide. 
 
 
 
Exoskeleton Training 
Subjects will participate in individualized training sessions using Ekso®. Each training sess ion will last up to 60 
minutes, 5 days per week for 3 weeks, for a total of 15 sessions. 
 
During the training, subjects will wear a lower extremity  exoskeleton robotic walking device.  Subjects will 
participate in individualized treatment sess ions which may include: sit to stand, static and dynamic standing 
balance, weight sh ifting, walking, turning, and stand to sit. Each training session will last up to 90 minutes (60 
minutes of training with 30 minutes for setup, don/doff of device) and training will be h eld 5 days per week for 3 
weeks with a total of 15 sessions. 
 
The training intensity and frequency is adapted from our ongoing research protocol for Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) 
robotic e xoskeleton locomotion training (unpublished data, HMSC-13-0536 ). These SCI participants with 
paraplegia (either motor incomplete or comp lete SCI) can stand and  walk with ass istance devices (walker or 
canes) prior to the training and are able to walk with exoskeleton with moderate trainer assistance for at least 
100 meters on a level su rface at the end of 15 training sessions. Therefore we think this training intensity and 
duration will apply in individuals with MS who can s tand and walk with ass istance de vices. Initial training will be 
focused on  static and dynamic standing balance and weight shift training with EKSO. This will progress to 
more difficult activities, such as  transitioning form sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit, walking, and turning depending 
on each su bject’s capability. A trainer will always be prese nt during the training sessions to provide varying 
levels of assistance. As a sub ject's skill with the powered exoskeleton improves, the need for trainer 
assistance will be propo rtionately reduced. The level of assistance will be quantified by  4 categories of trainer- 
assisted efforts: (1) maximal ass istance – both hands on the pelvic band of the device for significant and 
frequent weight shift and balance supp ort to the participant; (2) moderate assistance–both hands on the pelvic 
band or  other part of the device for occasional weight shift and/or balance support to the participant; (3) 
minimal ass istance–one hand on the device for infrequent balance support; and (4) close contact guard/no 
assistance–no hand on the device, but is near enough to be able to provide ass istance if necessary [6]. To 
monitor safety and fatigue, we will ask a ll subjects periodically during training sess ions about their perceived 
Page 8 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016   exertion us ing Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion Scale (RPES ) [7]. Training will be s topped if a subject reports 
a level of 17 or grea ter, and will only be resumed after rest. 
 
Assessme nt of participant status after each training sess ion: 
Additionally, for every session, participant's physical co mfort will be monitored for docume ntation of safety. 
Pain, discomfort, fatigue will be ass essed at the start and end  of each experimental session on  a 11-point 
visual ana logue sca le ranging from 0 (none) to 10 (worst). Physical a nd cognitive demand assessment data 
will be recorded as well.  The progress note will also doc ument experimental sess ion details (e.g., task 
performed, date, time etc.). The data collected  through this survey will help monitor safety and comfort of using 
device on  a sess ion-by-session basis throughout the training period. 
All collected  assessment data forms will be d e-identified and only include the co ded-name for each participant. 
 
Photography and Videotaping: 
A por tion of the assessment and training sess ions will be p hotographed and videotaped  for scientific 
publications and presentations. Subjects’ consent will be required to perform any photography  and videotaping. 
Subject identity will be pro tected  in any  published photography and videotaping placing a black square across 
subject’s face. 
 
 
 
Data and Safety Monitoring 
We will use  following strategies to prevent some expected events for this study: 
1)  Loss of confidentiality or privacy 
Information obtained for this study will be kept private to the extent allowed by  law.  However, research 
information may be sh ared with the University  of Texas Health Science Center at Houston Institutional Review 
Board (IRB), the research physician investigator, the research staff and others who are  responsible for 
ensuring compliance with laws and regulations related to research. 
The study will be p erformed at The Institute for Rehabilitation and R esearch (TIRR) Memorial Hermann in the 
physical therapy gym.  All data collection records will be locked in the Study Coordinator’s office in  a locked file 
cabinet. The only data entered electronically will be de-identified data.  All comp uters are pass word protected 
and therefore, only authorized persons have the access  to the electronic files sa ved in computers and will 
adhere to TIRR MEMORIAL HERMANN standards. 
 
2)  Loss of saved electronic data after a computer crash 
All original data will be maintained on paper data collection forms.  De-identified data may be entered into 
compu ter for data ana lysis.  A standard proced ure of electronic file backup is e stablished and e nforced by  the 
PI. All file backups are routinely performed in the local hard drive. 
 
However, if there are other unanticipated problems which occur  during and after data collection: the original 
paper version of the data will be maintained in the locked file cabinet. 
3)  Muscular soreness or fatigue 
Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion Scale (Borg) will be a dministrated periodically throughout the intervention 
sessions. Subject will be pro vided with rest period as nee ded, in particular if BORG rating ≥ 17. 
 
 
4)  Loss of balance or fall from testing 
One research team member will remain next to the sub ject as l ong as the subject is donned in the exoskeleton 
robot to prevent loss of balance or fall whether sitting or standing. If a fall or significant loss of balance occ urs, 
one staff physician will be notified immediately.  All adverse events will be reported per CPH S protocol. 
5)  Possible skin irritation 
Page 9 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016   Local irritation, bruising, swelling, or temporary discomfort following wearing of the exoskeleton may occur. 
Prior to don ning the exoskeleton subject’s skin will be inspected by  a licensed Physical Therapist for baseline, 
and compared after doffing.  Any differences will be recorded and  followed up with the study physician 
accordingly.  All adverse events will be reported per CPH S protocol. 
 
6)  Bone Fracture 
Subjects will be ass essed us ing the SCI Bone Health Scree n, their scor es will be reviewed with the subject and 
an informed consent will be signed.  All subjects will be c leared by  study physician pri or to enrollment in the 
study. The risk of fracture to the subject is no greater with the use  of exoskeleton than conventional weight 
bearing and walking therapy. 
 
Statistics 
Descri ptive ana lyses w ill be us ed for Aim 1. For Aim 2, outcome measures will be a nalyzed us ing separate 
paired t-test (exoskeleton vs. no-exoskeleton walking). We also plan to plot the trend at pre-and post- training 
for all outcome measures for each subject (without exoskeleton). Significant level will be set  at .05. 
 
This is a pilot study therefore no data is available to calculate sample size. The reason to enroll 15 subjects is 
based on  the limited funds awarded to this project. We anticipate that the data from this study will allow for 
performance of power analysis to determine effect size and sa mple size for future studies. 
 
Ethics 
The study will be p erformed under the prevue and in acc ordance with the rules set by the Committee for the 
Protection of Human  Subjects (UT IRB).  Potential su bjects will be identified by  physiatrists working in the 
outpatient clinic and/or on the inpatient wards at The Institute for Rehabilitation and Research (TIRR) Memorial 
Hermann. Once identified, the potential su bjects will be a pproach ed and  asked if they wish to discuss a study 
utilizing exoskeletons (Robotic su its worn on the outside of the body) to help peo ple with incomp lete spinal 
cord injury achieve a better gait pattern (better walking). It will also be  explained that choosing not to inquire 
further about the study will in no way jeopardize the relationship with anyone at TIRR or in the Memorial 
Hermann system. Once the potential su bject agrees he /she will be introduced to either the Principal 
Investigator or the Study Coordinator.  Once the potential su bject agrees to discuss  the study, the individual 
and anyone that the potential subject wishes to accompany  him/her will go into a private room to discuss the 
contents of the co nsent form with either the Principal Investigator or the Study Coordinator.  After the co nsent 
is reviewed in its entirety, and after allowing ample time for questions, either the Principal Investigator or the 
Study Coordinator will give the potential su bject time to discuss the study with whomever the potential su bject 
cares  to discuss the study with.  If the subject agrees to enroll in the study, the Study Coordinator or Principal 
Investigator will review the informed consent form with the subject in its entirety. 
 
Data handling and record keeping 
The subject’s name and demographic information will be co llected  prior to testing. Each subject will be 
assigned an identification number which will be us ed from this point forward. All measurements will be stored 
according to the identification number. The Study Coordinator’s locked office con tains a locked file cabinet in 
which research materials are kept.  All comp uters are password protected and only authorized persons have 
the acc ess to the electronic files sa ved in computers. Paper data will be s tored in the Study Coordinator’s 
office in  a locked file cab inet. Access  to the file cabinet will be given to the Primary Investigator and authorized 
team members. All electronic data stored on  the hard drive of the desktop machine will be p assword protected 
and available only to the authorized research team members. Identifiable data will be s tored for 5 years after 
Page 10 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016   the study is completed.  Stored files will be d eleted from the portable hard drive after 5 years as well. 
Identifiable data will be shredd ed at the end of 5 years after the comp letion of the study. 
 
Quality control and assurance 
To ensure research integrity, standard written procedures for all tests will be estab lished by the Principle 
Investigator and the Study Coordinator who will then assess  each team member’s comp etence for research 
conduction on  a regular basis. Therefore, the testing protocol  will be co nsistent throughout the entire data 
collection for this study. All outcome  measures (pre and  post-test) will be p erformed by a single masked 
investigator to ensure consistency with performance of the outcome  measures and to maintain an un-biased 
perspective. 
 
Publication Plan 
 
 
The results of this study will be us ed for presentation at  national co nferences and pub lications in peer-reviewed 
journals. The publications will be pro vided without cost to the study participants. 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
1.  Physician clearness letter 
2.  Phone Screening Form 
3.  Case Report Forms (pre and post-test outcome measures)  
4.  Barthel Index 
5.  MMSE 
6.  Quality of life measure 
7.  Berg Balance Sca le 
8.  BORG Rate of Perceived Exertion Scale 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENC ES 
 
 
1. Motl, R.W., Ambulation and multiple sclerosis. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am, 2013. 24(2): p. 325-36. 
 
2. Sandroff, B.M., J.J. Sosnoff, and R.W. Motl, Physical fitness, walking performance, and gait in multiple 
sclerosis. J Neurol Sci, 2013. 328(1-2): p. 70-6. 
 
3. Motl, R.W., et al., Energy cost of walking and its association with gait parameters, daily activity, and 
fatigue in persons with mild multiple sclerosis. Neurorehabil Neural Repair, 2012. 26(8): p. 1015-21. 
 
4. Lo, A.C., Clinical d esigns of recent robot rehabilitation trials. Am J Phys Med Rehabil, 2012. 91(11 
Suppl 3):  p. S204-16. 
 
5. Kurtzke, J.F., Rating neurologic impairment in multiple sclerosis: an expanded disability status scale 
(EDSS ). Neurology, 1983. 33(11): p. 1444-52. 
 
6. Fineberg, D.B., et al., Vertical gro und reaction force-based a nalysis of powered exoskeleton-assisted 
walking in persons with motor-complete paraplegia. J Spinal Cord Med, 2013. 36(4): p. 313-21. 
Page 11 of 11 
UT Houston Protocol Template 
Adapt ed from NIH protocol template and ICH Guid elines IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-15-0278  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/27/2016   7. Thickbroom, G.W., et al., Central motor drive  and perception of effort during fatigue in multiple 
sclerosis. J Neurol, 2006. 253(8): p. 1048-53. 
 
8. Pilutti, L.A., et al., Gait and six-minute walk performance in  persons with multiple sclerosis. J Neurol 
Sci, 2013. 334(1-2): p. 72-6. 
 
9. Zeilig, G., et al., Safety and tolerance  of the ReWalk exoskeleton suit for ambulation by people with 
comp lete spinal cord  injury: a p ilot study. J Spinal Cord Med, 2012. 35(2): p. 96-101. 
 
10. Boyd, R., et al., High- or low- technology measurements of energy expenditure in clinical g ait analysis? 
Dev Med Child Neurol, 1999. 41(10): p. 676-82. 
 
11. Hornby, T.G., et al., Kinematic, muscular, and metabolic responses during exoskeletal-, elliptical-, or 
therapist-assisted stepping in peo ple with incomplete spinal cord  injury. Phys Ther, 2012. 92(10): p. 
1278 -91. 
 
12. Regnaux, J.P., et al., Human  treadmill walking needs attention. J Neuroeng Rehabil, 2006. 3: p. 19. 
 
13. Woollacott, M. and A. Shumway-Cook, Attention and the control of posture and ga it: a review of  an 
emerging area of research. Gait Posture, 2002. 16(1): p. 1-14. 
 
14. Dault, M.C., et a l., Postural co ntrol and cognitive task pe rformance in hea lthy pa rticipants while 
balancing on d ifferent support-surface configurations. Gait Posture, 2001. 14(3): p. 248-55. 
 
15. Yardley, L., et  al., Effect of articulatory and mental tasks on postural co ntrol. Neuroreport, 1999. 10(2): 
p. 215-9. 